



Right Honourable:
I Suppose it was the de∣sign of God to shew un∣to Jacob in his Vision of the Ladder, that speciall care his wise providence took of him;Gen. 28. that Ladder being a most lively draught of Gods faithfull conduct concerning Jacob, and of the universall government of the world which is in the hands of God: infinite are the bounds and limits of this Empire; his Scepter extending
 it self both over the Heavens and over all the earth. The two sides of the Ladder (as one saith) represent power and sweetness,Caus. Hist. sacr. which are as the two hands of the divine provi∣dence, which by divers steps goes mounting from earth to Heaven, and thence descendeth to the earth again, acting and walking a thou∣sand wayes at once, through which the world is insensibly led to the pe∣riods appointed to it. God resteth himself on the top of this Ladder, and from thence sendeth forth his holy Angels,Greg. Moral. which are (as Grego∣ry saith) the Ministers of divine providence, and sent forth to mini∣ster for them that are the heirs of salvation.
God continueth this great world by a continuall vicissitude, the day chang∣ing into night, the spring into sum∣mer, summer into harvest, harvest into winter, winter into the spring: one day is not in every point like ano∣ther; some hot, some cold, some wet,
 some dry, some clear and Sun-shiny, some dark and gloomy; that giveth a great beauty to the Universe. Even so it is with Man, who being an Epi∣tome of the great world, is alwayes eb∣bing and flowing into a perpetuall di∣versity of motions; sometime lifted up in hopes, by and by cast down in fears, sometime on the Mount of pro∣sperity, and straightway in the Valley of Bochim.Tùnc est ten∣tatio finienda quando finitur & pugna, & tùnc finienda est pugna, quando post hanc vitam succedit pug∣nae secura vi∣ctoria. Prsper. l. 5. de cont. vitae. The life of man (saith Prosper) is a War without truce, neither is peace to be expected long but in the Tomb. Never a one of mans dayes are like another of them, to teach us to have our hearts unchan∣geable in the great inequalities and ac∣cidents that befall us; and though all things are full of turning and variati∣on about us, yet should we remain im∣moveable, earnestly breathing and longing after God. Let the Ship run out East or West, North or South; and let the Wind blow where and when it listeth, yet the Needle will still look toward the Pole: so let things go how
 they will; let the soul be glad or sad, in joy or heaviness, in light or dark∣nss, in temptation or repose; let the Sun scorch, or the dew cool, the drought or the frost consume; yet the point of our heart [our spirit] and our will (which is our needle) must continu∣ally turn and look to God our only so∣veraign good;Rom. 8.38. and if once we firmly resolve never to forsake God and his wayes; and that neither tribulation, nor distress, (such straits wherein Christians may be shut up, that they can see no issue out of it) nor persecu∣tion, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor perils and dangers occasioned by these, nor sword, nor fire, nor any other in∣strument of cruelty, nor death that is so dreadfull to nature, nor life which many times is more dangerous to the people of God than death, [life] that is attended with so many cares and casualties, and maketh men for the preservation thereof to forget their latter end; no nor Angels, nor prin∣cipalities and powers, not evil An∣gels,
 nor spirituall wickednesses in high places, no nor good Angels,, are put to signifie Magi∣strates. Luk. 12.11. Luk. 20.20. Tit. 3.1. But , do promis∣cuously signifie either good An∣gels, Col. 1.16. & 2.20. Eph. 1.21. or evil An∣gels, 1 Cor. 15.24. Eph 6.12. (if they should go about to hinder our sal∣vation) shall separate us from the love that is founded in Christ; this will serve as a counterpoize to hold our hearts in a holy tranquillity, among all the unequall motions of this life; in all these things we shall do more than conquer, not only overcome, but take the spoils of them, and reap advan∣tage by them.
Gods providence is a Sun that pe∣netrateth every where, and is alwayes in his high noon, the motions where∣of though they seem oblique, go al∣wayes strait, and will (sooner or la∣ter) bring the people of God to their desired Haven, taking them by the hand, and leading them in all their pilgrimages, and both frequently and insensibly diverting them from the abysses, into which the pride and ma∣lice of their enemies would have often hurried them, who shall at last be dri∣ven to confess, that innocence and
 truth are so dear to God, that whoso∣ever shall offend them, shall find Hea∣ven arming it self in their defence, and that the Almighty God hath invi∣sible bands, which the stoutest opposers of his providence cannot break, and that divine vengeance which is inex∣orable, will (first or last) inflict on them the punishments they have de∣served, that it may appear that God in his government of the world, hath respect to the poorest Christian, and meanest Artizan, (who no lesse enjoyeth this munificence of his boun∣tifull Creator) than the highest Prince or greatest Potentate in the world.
Thrice happy are they that live under the favour of divine provi∣dence; every footstep thereof is a speaking to them in particular, that God will never leave them nor forsake them. Great peace may the soul have, when God is the primum mobile, and first mover of all his actions: what comfort may he take, when he consi∣dereth
 that he walketh in the way his uncreated wisdome hath marked out for him with his own hand? this con∣sideration well digested, is sufficient (when things at any time seem to go cross to our desires, and Gods pro∣vidences seem also to contradict his promises) to banish from us those dis∣quiets and discontents, which extort from us that acquiescence and confi∣dence, which we ought at all times to have in God, and to make us to resign our hopes, our joyes, our desires, our designs and interests into the bosome of his providence. How indulgent is God to his children? He spreadeth abroad his wings like the Eagle,Deut. 32.11, 12 stretcheth them out to cover each of his young ones, who are kept as it were in a nest: none are so safely kept as Gods ltttle ones, who have a nest under them, and a God over them. All Gods benefits are for their good, every feather in his wings helpeth to cover them, his wings reach to the ends of the earth; be a Christian then
 where he will, God hath a wing of grace or a feather of mercy to reach him: and therefore when at any time we feel the touches of that wise hand that manageth our greatest affairs; this may comfort us, that he will lay no more upon us, than he will give us a way out of, seeing he layeth them on us not as an angry Judge, but as a loving Father;Tam pius ne∣mo; tam pater nemo. Tertul. none so much af∣fectionate as he, none so much a Father as he, saith Tertullian. When it raineth, we cannot see the end why God sendeth it through the thick Cloud, but when the storm ceaseth, we perceive presently that it hath been profitable, and done good to the earth: so while Gods hand is upon us, we of∣ten see not the benefit of it, but after∣ward we feel it to our comfort, Psal. 119.71. The Saints are beautifull in the fire of afflictions: In the dark night of afflictions many glorious lights appear, which lye hidden in the Sun-shine of prosperity, saith Lactantius.

Many men deal with God as Joab did with Absalom, who being often sent for, refused to come; at length when Absalom hath caused his barley fields to be set on fire by his servants, then he cometh to him, 2 Sam. 14.30. So many times when we are in prospe∣rity, God cannot be acquainted with us, nor are we at leasure to serve him,De nido pec∣cati rostro fla∣gelli percutit. Hieron. but when he rouzeth us out of the nest of sin by the bill of afflictions, as Hierom speaketh, then we run unto him, and call upon him. God hovers none in this evil nest, nor nourisheth any in their sins; if we expect comfort from him, we must be carried on his wings from this pit of corruption. When we are naked, God brings us into the nest of afflicti∣ons, to warm and ripen us there, and to feather the wings of our prayers, that we may soar aloft, and fly to the Throne of his grace.—Therefore when men at any time are the instru∣ments of our sufferings, let us not consider whether we have deserved
 thus to be dealt with by them, no meditate on revenge, thinking how t pay them again in their own coyn but let us look (not after the stone▪ but to the hurler, not to the staff, bu to the striker; considering that t make opposition against God, were but to strive against the stream; a he did that threw fetters into the Sea, to make it his prisoner, or as another (as wise as the former) that went out with a bag to catch the wind. It is great wickedness and extream folly, with Job's wife to think we should bless God in prosperity, and blaspheme him in adversity; this were intolera∣ble ingratitude in the highest degree, and with the Persians, to worship the rising Sun in the morning for a God, and to curse him at night (being ready to go down) for a Devil, for∣getting the benefit they had of his for∣mer presence, and not considering the benefit they should reap at his next ap∣pearing. Just so do many men, they neither look backwards to Gods by-past
 benefits, nor yet forward to his future favours, but like Beasts look only downwards upon their present estate, never praising God for the benefits they have received, nor praying to him for such as they want, and yet may receive.
Afflictions be the beaten path and road that lead to Heaven, trodden and trackt by all the holy Patriarcks and Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, that have gone before us, and that must bet rodden by all the Saints and professors that must come after us; therefore we must not look for a pecu∣liar estate above all our brethren, but seeing it is the lot and portion of all Gods children, we must prepare our selves to bear our parts with patience. That gold must be much beaten and fi∣led, and tried in the fire, that must bear the image of the King: the Church is Gods image, which being decayed by Adam, is to be renewed by our conformity to Christ. Ber∣nard saith, Christ our Head was
 crowned with thorns, his members must not think to crown themselves with Rose-buds.
And now Right Honourable, I here humbly present unto you this Trea∣tise of Providence, who have observ∣ed the various operations of divine providence, and have seen the flux and reflux of a thousand accidents in these our dayes: and certainly! God cannot conceal his thoughts, designs, and loving kindness, from those that observe his doings, who admire his sage providences, and the miraculous conduct of his designs. The best im∣provement of all occurrences, is to consider all things spiritually, turning them to spirituall ends and uses: the living Christian layes things to his heart; his searching spirit (like the Chymick pots) can refine all that is cast into it; knowing that all things whatsoever; all accidents and events fall directly, and as it were perpen∣dicularly under the counsell of Gods providence; to the guidance where∣of
 I leave you, praying that the Lord who blessed the house of Obed-Edom, for lodging the Ark of his Covenant, will bless you with all spirituall bles∣sings in heavenly things in Christ. Thus committing your Estates to the protection of the Highest; my labours to your favourable censures, and my self to your commands, I am
My Lord, and Madam,

May 26. 1662.
