



NOt to make too wide Gates to my little Myndus; lest some rayling Zoylus, carping Momus, barking Diogenes, criticall, and censorious Aristarchus, having eies more quick, and piercing then Lynceus, the Eagle, Crocodile, or Epidaurian serpent; should except, and maunder at this my poore innocent, and first borne infant; that it was of monstrous, and deformed shape: much like to Martial's monster, having the daring, and outfacing head of Hector, but the spiny, puny spider legs of Astianax; or just like to a child sick of the rickets, whose head swels, and growes too big for the body: I esteem, and reckon it my bounden duty, to give your Worship an account of two things: First concer∣ning the occasion of my writing this Treatise: Secondly
concerning the cause of the Dedication.
The occasion was this: Being at a certain time in company with one of my Parishioners; he by chance, pro more, & amore, inter discumbendum, inter discurren∣dum, put the question to me; whether or no, Christ was the first that with flesh and blood, entred into the Kingdone of Heaven. To which question I answered Affirmatively; yea, and fortified my Answer, for the time present, with some positive Texts, and Testimo∣nies of Scripture: but so it was, that upon that mean occasion, I could find no rest in my thoughts, till I had given way, and scope to my meditations, to dilate, and enlarge themselves, and take a contemplative ramble, and vagary, thorough the spacious, and pleasant fields of the sacred Scriptures; there to discover, and gather what flowers I could, for the making up of this my mean garland, or rather posie; and the enlergement and improvement of my former Answer.
And that, that prov'd another spur to me, to under∣take this Taske, was for that no man, as ever I heard or read of, purposely, & ex industriâ traced this ground, and undertook this Argument before me: why you'l say? because no man yet e're doubted of the truth of the assertion. But this objection is much to be doubt∣ed: because as there wanted not some who endeavoured to rob our Saviour of the prerogative of his Divinitie: as Carpocrates, Cerinthus, Ebion, Theodosian, Photinus, Arius, that Arrant Heretique; who pretended, that he had 42. Texts of Scripture to prove that Christ was not true and perfect God. And as there have not wanted
others who have attempted to dispoile, and rob him of his Humanitie, as Marcian of Pontus, Saturninus of Antioch, Basilides, Valentinus, Apelles with his minion Philumela, Apollinares, and others. And as there hath not been wanting others; who have attempted to rob him of the integrity, and singularity of his person, as Nestorius, who did Dichotomize, cut him asunder, and make two Christs of him; the one Divine, the other Humane: so questionlesse there have not wanted some who have attēpted to deprive him of this Preeminence of his humanity; of its first ascēt, & entrance into heaven; let Marcion stand for instance, who taught that Christ had but , the meer resemblance & appa∣rition of man; & Eutiches too, who affirmed that Christ's Humanitie was quite Absorpt, swallowed up, and annihi∣lated by his Divinity, and so deprived of all bodily ascent, & consequently of the first ascent into Heaven.
But no true believer, you'l say, ever doubted hereof. Answ: Though it may be granted, that the better, and most learned sort of believers, whom the Apostle, Heb: 5.12. termes men of full age, who by reason of use, have their senses exercised to discern both good, and evill: ne∣ver doubted hereof, yet it is to be feared; that the un∣lettered sort, and those endowed with mean knowledge have doubted thereof, or not firmly, and sedledly be∣lieved it, witnesse the question put to mee that must needs proceed from doubting or unbelief thereof.
But be it granted, that none yet ever doubted of our Saviours first bodily ascent into Heaven, yet this dis∣course, for the proofe and confirmation thereof is not (especially in these times) unseasonable, unnecessary:
and that Physitian is not to be blamed, that gives an Antidote as well for the prevention, as the removall of a disease. and such is the counter-position of this Thesis; a botch, a bile, a disease in the Church, if it happen to be entertained, and take place, and quite contrary to sound Doctrine. They that hold that any man before Christ bodily ascended into Heaven, do in a manner, and after a sort Un-Christ our Saviour, which thus I prove:
They that rob, and deprive Christ of All, or Any of his Offices, do in a manner un-Christ him, for from his unction, and inauguration into his Offices, of King, of Priest, of Prophet: he hath the title, or denomination of Messias, or Christ.
But that man that holds, that any man before Christ, bodily ascended into Heaven, doth as much as in him lies, strip, and rob Christ of his office of Priesthood, of being our High Priest, it being proper, and peculiar to his Priesthood, to enter first into the holy place: viz: the Kingdom of heaven, There to make intercession for us. As the High Priest of the Leviticall Law, first of all, and in∣steed of all, after he had ended his Sacrifice without, entred with the blood thereof within the vail, to sprinkle it before the Mercie seat, and to make intercession for the people, whereas the people stood without; Luk: 1.10. As the Apostle plainly teacheth, Heb: 9. v 7, 11, 12. by a comparison between Christ, and the High Priest of the Levitical Law; and therefore I conclude, that they that hold, that any man before Christ, bodily ascended into Heaven, do in a manner, and after a for Un-Christ
our Saviour, and so grate upon the foundation. The Thesis therefore that I have fortified, in this Discourse may be received without fear; refused it cannot be with∣out danger. I am perswaded that this my Infant, as it is an Infant, and speakes like an Infant; so will it behave it self as an Infant in the world; that is innocently; if it can do no good, I am confident it will do no wrong.
This my poore Tractate such as it is, whether blind, or lame, or maimed, or withered, or any, or every way defective, do I presume to present, and dedicate to your worship, but why and wherefore, which is the second thing whereof I am to render an account. No other cause, scope, end, or fetch have I, but your innate vertue, goodnesse, kindnesse, courtesie polished, and embelish∣ed by grace, celebrated in the months of All in general, and experienc'd by my self in particular, drawing mee with a kind, of magnetical vertue, inviting, and citing mee.
It is observed by a learned, and grave Divine of our Church, that God hath depictured, and characterized, those refulgent, and eminent vertues, and graces, where∣with he endued some men in their names. The golden eloquence of Chrisostome; the milkie vein of Lactantius, the immortall fame of Athanasius, that grand Ariano∣mastix; the golden wit, & most great, & profound judg∣ment of Aurelius Augustinus; the peaceable disposition of Irenaeus; the Divine fruitfulness of Policarpus, are inti∣mated in the names: the same lot hath befaln you, Phoe∣bei Lampadis instar; for what is Lamplough, but as if it should be said, : as having your name deriv'd from a Lamp; thereby to
intimate, that like the Baptist, you are a burning light in your life and conversation. Sir, I flatter you not; flattery is a bribe, that I am as unable to give, as you to receive, I give you no more then your due; and all that know you will most willingly afford you so much.
The bare, and naked consideration of this your goodnesse, both by nature and grace, hath strongly, and irresistibly importun'd mee, and prevail'd over mee; and kindled, and enflamed my affection, and desire, and made it to burne (like those ancient Olibian fires, which An∣tiquitie (as I remember) dedicated to the remembrance of their deceased Hero's, and Benefactors) with zeal to serve you constantly, & perpetually, , as Homer, till death us do part, and in expression thereof to dedicate to you this poor Pamphlet, which I intreat you to accept: this is both the profession, and protesta∣tion together with the subscription of him who is
Sir,

