


My Lord!
GOD hath inflicted many Judgments upon this great City, and kindled many Dreadful Fires among us, which have at seve∣ral times overthrown and consumed many Thousand Dwel∣lings, and yet most People are regardless of this Judgment.
There be three Duties to be done in respect of God's Judgments.
1. When they fall out, there must be special Notice taken of them: They must be observed, Marked, and Commented upon both in our Meditations and Conferences, Psalm 9.16. The Lord is known by the Judgments which He executeth, or the Lord maketh Himself known by His Judgments, what a Just and Powerful God He is. God complains of some, Isa. 5.12. That they regard not the Work of the Lord, nor consider the Operation of His Hands. And Psalm 64.9. All Men shall fear, and declare the Works of God, for they shall wisely consider of His doings.
2. God's Works of Justice must be magnified, and God magnified in them. Job 36. Remember that thou magnifie His Work which Men behold. Every Man may see it, and behold it afar off. It is one thing to see God's Work which a Man cannot avoid if his Eyes be open; another thing so as to see and agnize God's Greatness in them; so as to cry out, as Moses and the Children of Israel did, when God drowned Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea, Exod. 15.11. Who is like unto Thee, O Lord among the Gods, glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, and in doing Wonders? We must observe and glo∣rifie the Justice of God, especially considering how His Judgments are many times sutable to Mens Sins.
3. God's Works of Justice must be remembred, Psalm 111.4. He hath made His wonderful Works to be remembred: Therefore we ought always to keep them in mind, Remember Lot's Wife, &c.

Obj. But is it not an easie thing to remember any strange Judg∣ment, that a Man hath tasted of, seen, or heard of. Who is there that doth not remember such things?
Resp. The Remembrance that God calls for, is not a bare Historical Remembrance, It is common and easy enough to remember the Story of Lot's Wife, or any other on whom God's Judgments have been Execu∣ted. The Remembrance that is required of us is an Operative and Practical Remembrance, so to remember them as to be warned by them, and to take heed of the same or such like Sins as such Judgments came for, so to remember them as to be quickned to the Fear of God, and to Obedience to His Precepts, and to glorifie His Name in His fiery Dispensations towards us. God hath not wrought such great things in the World, whether respecting Persons or Nations, nor kindled so many Fires in this City, that we should write them upon the Water, or in the Sand, which the next blast of Wind defaceth and blows out. But He hath made such wonderful Works of His to be re∣membred. He will have them written in Brass as it were with the Pen of Iron, and the Point of a Diamond: And indeed all God's Works are so made, that they are worthy to be remembred by us.
My Lord, I humbly dedicate this ensuing Sermon to Your Lordship, and present it to the touch and test of Your Judgment. My utmost Ambition in this mean Tender is no more than that Persians was, who having nothing to present the King Artaxerxes with, ran to the Ri∣ver and brought him his handful of Water. I hope this poor Present shall find acceptance with You, and that my good Intentions stamped upon it, may advance the Price of it, as the poor Widows Charitable Mind in the Gospel did raise the Value of her Mite: The Lord Di∣rect and Assist You in all Your weighty Affairs in the Government of this City: And so recommending You to the Rich Grace of God, I humbly take my leave, and remain,
September 13. 1688.

