


May it please Your Highness,
TO admit a Centurion of yours into Your Presence, without his Sword by his side, of which he is most joyfully dis∣armed by this blessed change of Peace; which he hopes no threats of murmuring Malecontents will be ever able to interrupt. It is long since I waited upon your Highnesse after the Surren∣der

of Oxford, unto the Town of Uxbridge, where I took my leave of as much Happiness as could be left.
Your Royall Father of ever Blessed Memory, was then alive, a Confessor Royal, and soon after Martyr, for the Protestant Religion, the Pri∣viledge of Parliaments, the Liberty of the Subject, and the Lawes of the Land. All which no man ever defended so unto Blood as Himself, nor indeed could any man: For He was butteres∣sed up by especial Grace, high Undestanding, the Pen of a ready Writer and invincible Pa∣tience.
Not long after His bloody Exit off the Stage of this World, with the general Plaudit of good Men and Angels, your Highnesse made an happy escape from St. Iames's, where you now are at more Liberty (God be thanked) then before. I have lov'd the Play of Hide and Seek ever since, and with just regard ho∣nour those Gentlemen, who from the Royall Bo-peep were grand Instruments to metamor∣phize the Pyrocles of their Land into a Philo∣clea.
Who would not take this History for a Romance, were it not that the truth thereof is

undeniable? How did the Red Rose blush, adorn'd in a Silk Gown and Sattin Petticoat? with what Art and cover of Handkerchiefs or Gloves did you imitate Virgin smiles, even to the beguiling those who knew of your dis∣guise? the Pilot and Master of the Ship ne∣ver carried such a noble Fraight, which was his Barques protection and tutelary power: Not a Tar-paulin but would have throwne his cap at you, while the enamour'd winds followed your Ship with all speed, more to salute the Royal Passenger, then to forward the sailes.
Credentne posteri? Posterity will stagger in belief of the future Annals, and Credulity it self will stand awhile dubious, when it shall be wrote, That two such High descended Bro∣thers, should be preserved, the one in standing, the other in swimming Oak. Properly from hence shall our Ships be called The walls of this Nation, which kept safe such a Royal Deposi∣tum and Charge.
Sacra Iovi Quercus.
The Oak is a Tree dedicate to Iupiter, and no doubt it was never more divine then in those

two Services. The Oak, as it is in it selfe free from Thunder-stroaks, so it prov'd to all in its protection, and loyally secured your Roy∣al Persons from the roarings and thunderings of our late Bull-Rampant, who rag'd like Hercules furens in his poisoned shirt at your Highness his Escape, and never recovered his spirits after His Majesty's Deliverance from him and his Blood-hounds. For though he died not presently upon the effugium, yet, as Queen Mary said of the losse of Callice, you might find the sad impressions of that miscarriage imprinted in her heart. Let a new Dodona's Grove be revived upon this Royal Tree, which crushed the spreading growth of that luxuri∣ant Bramble, which had like to have over∣spred all the lesser Trees of the Forest, which hath over-topped the neighbour Vine, and the remoter Olive, and brought the Willow to a just subjection.
Sacred be that Oak, whereby we Shrubs of the Myrtle and the Lawrel Grove doe shoot up again, more then cropt and brouz'd by the Vermine of those dayes. For all that while your Captain was in a Brown study in the City, and at many a dangerous Forrage in the Coun∣trey.

In which solitudes these ensuing Medita∣tions were wrote, and did visit some friends abroad, when the Author durst not. Now as Gentlemen who keep Hounds, send a couple to some friend, and a couple to another, until there be a free time for game: So I (the liber∣ty of Studies being restor'd in Caesar onely) have called home these dispersed Poems, and brought them to hunt in a narrow compasse. I am sure they do not run Counter, nor are at a fault, but all follow upon the right scent, and open in good musick, and go along in harmony (pardon the Metaphor) with the Uni∣forme Pack.
I humbly present these Fancies (Royal Sir) to Your Highness protection, which is a Goord too good for their shelter; yet the amplitude of your extended favour may shroud at once a Captain, a Physitian, and a small Poet. In all or any of which Capacities, it is my desire to be ever esteemed (though at a most mannerly di∣stance)
SIR,

