



Honoured Sirs,
THe Heathen Philosophers discoursed much of true blessedness, yet never knew they what it meant, nor wherein it consisted. Varro,Varro, lib. 19. Au∣gust. de Civ. Dei cap. 1. Cicer. de finib. lib. 1. and out of him, S. Au∣gustine saith, they were divided into 288 opi∣nions about this one point, yet not one true mong them all. They ran all of them toward his mark, but not as they that run in a race; hey had several Goals, but none of them obtained he Crown. Some of them would have it consist a pleasure; so Epicurus thought variety of leasure was the only summum bonum, the only hief good of man; but as the Orator said well f him; it was vox pecudis, non hominis, the oice of a beast, not of a man: that this was the
 opinion of the Epicureans, is no wonder; seeing they acknowledged not the immortality of the soul, but thought that the soul died together with the body; therefore they placed blessedness in bodily pleasures. But the Mahumetans acknow∣ledge the resurrection of the body, and after the resurrection the immortality of the Soul, and a life that shall never end; therefore it is the more to be wondered at, that they should place the chiefest good of the life to come in bodily plea∣sure. The Turks in scorn are wont to call Chri∣stians dogs; but more truely and more justly they may be called Dogs and Swine, whose God is their belly, and whose chiefest good lieth in eat∣ing and drinking, and in fleshly delights and pleasures: but even Salust.In regno volup∣tatis virtuti non est locus. Salust. could say, that in the Kingdom of pleasure vertue hath no place: and the wisest Philosophers have called sensitive pleasures the poison of the mind; of the which we must the more carefully beware, for that these pleasures are accompanied with a cer∣tain sweetness, which flatters the Soul at its first approach, surprizeth our judgement, and char∣meth it in such sort, as it helpeth to deceive it self. These pleasures put out the eye of reason, and smother all the seeds of Wisdom and Vertue in man, the which they effect more powerfully, when they are most violent: wherefore a wise man was wont to say, that he had rather fall into frenzy, than suffer himself to be surprized with
 pleasures; for, said he, Physicians may cure madness by purging the brain with Hellebore,Coesset. tabu. Human. pas∣sion. whereas brutish pleasures do deprive man of his judgement without hope of remedy for his in∣firmity. Some again have made blessedness to consist in Honours, Dignities, Superiorities, po∣pular Acclamations, and all sorts of preferments; but happiness consisteth not in these things; these are all very empty things: a bladder when it is blown, seems to be full, when it hath nothing in it but a little thin air, a small pin is sufficient to pierce it, and empty it of all that is in it: so it is with those that love popularity and the praise of men more than the praise of God, and receive honour from men, themselves in the mean time being strangers to God: many of them seem to be full, but they are but as bladders full of wind, full of vanity; a slight occasion is enough to empty them of all their happiness.
Others would have it consist in wealth and riches: So Antisthenes said, that he onely was happy, that died in the affluence of worldly prosperity: but when a man expecteth happiness and satisfaction from these things, he findeth no∣thing less. Solomon tells us, he made him great works, builded houses, planted Vine-yards, got him Servants and Maidens, and had great posses∣sions of great and small Cattel, above all that were in Jerusalem before him, that he gathered to him Silver and Gold, and the peculiar treasure
 of Kings, and of the Provinces, &c. so he became great, and increased more than all that were be∣fore him, Eccles. 2. from v. 4. to 11. Now v. 11. he looks back on all the work and labour of his hands, and behold all was vanity and vexation of spirit, and ver. 17. he hated life it self, be∣cause the work that was wrought under the Sun was grievous to him; and ver. 18. he hated all his labour which he had taken under the Sun: therefore these things were far from giving him sound contentment; they did rather increase the Disease, and make the Soul more restless than before. Now if such a one as Solomon, that had interest in God, did thus far lose that sweet con∣tent he had in God by an eager pursuit of these perishing things, then much more impossible is it, that the soul that never had interest in God, should find happiness and contentment in the creature: it is impossible for those that neglect the fountain of living waters, to quench their thirst at a broken cistern; nor can man be made happy by any thing inferiour to himself: now all earthly creatures are inferiour to the reasonable soul of man, and the substance and faculties thereof doth far surpass all the riches and honours of the world; and if man cannot find sound contentment and true happiness in himself, it will be in vain to seek it in these things.
Others there were (that came nearest to the point) that would have blessedness to consist in
 vertue; and yet alas! there were none, even of the wiser Heathens, that ever knew what true vertue meant; and consequently what true blessedness meant. They wrote much of some that were excellent among them, men renowned and famous for vertue: it was said of Cato, that he was vertues true image, Qui nunquam recte fecit, ut facere videretur, sed quia aliter facere non potuit; who never did any thing well that he might seem to do it, but because he could not do otherwise: it was also said of him, that he was suae fortunae Faber; let him live in any time or common-wealth, he would make shift for one: of Fabritius it is all spoken, that you might sooner have turn'd the Sun out of his course, than him from his integrity and upright∣ness. Yet the best of them were but guilded pot∣sherds, and the fairest vertues they talkt of were but painted rags; they never knew what God or Christ was, what Heaven or Hell were. Blessedness is a thing that every man hath in his eye, it is the mark that every one shoots at, a thing that every man desireth: blessedness is that estate that every man co∣veteth & boni & mali, both good and bad men, saith S. Augustine.August. in Psal. 119. Serm. 1. Good men do therefore labour to be good, yet that is no wonder; but even wicked men also do there∣fore labour to be wicked, that they may be hap∣py; there is some appearance of good in it unto them, they aim at a kind of blessedness even in
 the pursuit of wickedness; and many there are that have Heaven and happiness at their tongues end, that have the earth continually at their fingers end.
O curas hominum! O quantum est in rebus inane!
Alas! Mans cares, how full of pain?
Alas! Mans wayes, how vile and vain?
But though blessedness be in every man's heart, yet many men are strangers to it: Many things are subject to the eye; but of blessedness we may say, eye hath not seen it: other comforts and good things are taken in by the ear; but we may say of blessedness, ear hath not heard it, nor is it possible to enter into the heart of man to conceive, how great that good is that is compri∣sed in blessedness.
The blessed man is defined by some to be one, Qui habet omnia quae vult, & nihil patitur quae non vult; that hath every thing he would have, and suffereth nothing he would not suffer: so that it is an estate to be considered privatively and positively: Privatively, in respect of what must be wanting; Positively, in respect of what must be had. 1. There must be an ab∣sence of all that is evil, whatsoever is in any degree evil, or whatsoever a man in his own understanding doth apprehend to be evil, or conceit to be evil, that he must want, and be without: for if there be any evil at all that he
 either feels or feareth, so long as he is in that estate he cannot be in a blessed estate; yea though it be but an imaginary evil; his own fears, imaginations and apprehensions are to him a kind of unhappiness: while man is under the apprehension, fear or imagination of any evil, he is vexed, disquieted, tormented, and cannot be truly happy. 2. On the other side as there must be an absence of all that is evil, so there must be an affluence of whatsoever things are good: every good thing the heart can wish, a man must enjoy: for look how much of any good thing he wanteth, so much of his blessedness he wanteth. Therefore the word in the Hebrew that signifies blessedness is a plurall word, and never found in the singular number: Some give this reason for it, because it is not hoc aut illud, unum aut aliud; it is not this or that, one or the other good thing that can make a man's estate blessed: but he that will be in a blessed estate must omnibus bonis affluere, abound with all good things, and no good that he can desire must be wanting to him. Blessedness is the enjoyment of good correspondent to all the desires of a Christian, it is both the first and last good of a Christian, the first and last of things to be desired; the first for excellency, the last for en∣joyment; it is the spring of all good; when blessedness cometh, all good cometh along with it; it comprehendeth all good whatsoever: Moreover, blessedness is the Crown and remu∣neration
 of all good; though God doth endue men with several gifts and graces, and albeit as there are several gifts and employments of men, so there shall be several rewards; yet the reward of all is but one blessedness. And hereunto I will add one thing more, viz. that blessedness hath ever perpetuity annexed to it; and that same perpetuity of happiness addeth all in all to the perfection of it;Non est ista beati∣tudo, de cujus aeternitate dubi∣tatur. for there is no perfection of felicity, where there is no assurance of per∣petuity; which perpetuity doth neither depend upon the nature of the thing it self, nor proceed from any natural necessity, that our souls should so exercise themselves for ever in beholding and loving God; but from the will of God which doth freely per∣fect our nature in so high a degree, and con∣tinue it so perfected.
From hence this conclusion will follow, that the blessed estate being such an estate as we have spoken of, it is not to be attained in this life. The blessedness of man in this life is but like the girding on of the Sword be∣fore the fighting of the Battel; till the battel be fought the victory cannot be judged, nor the Crown given. Alas! in this life there are many good things wanting to us that our Souls do desire, many evils present with us from which we would fain be delivered: we have now health, and anon sickness; now plenty, anon
 want; now peace, anon trouble; but in Heaven there is all joy and no sorrow: in the world there are reciprocal vicissitudes of joy and sor∣row: joy and sorrow be as it were the in∣terchanging sails of the worlds wind-mill, it is therefore the hand of death that must open the door for us to an happy life, according to that of the Poet.
—ultima semper
Expectanda dies homini, dici{que} beatus
Ante obitum nemo suprema{que} funera debet.Ov. M. lib. 3.
Our lives last day must be expected, when
By death we shall be happy; not till then.
Thus EpiphaniusEpiphan. Haeres. 6. brings in Methodius dispu∣ting against Proclus the Originist, that God as the true Physitian, hath appointed death as a Medicinable purgation for the utter rooting out and putting away of sin, that we may be made happy and unblameable; and that as a goodly golden Image, sightly and seemly in all parts; if it be broken and defaced by any means, must be new cast, and framed again, for the taking away the blemishes and disgraces of it: Even so Man (the Image of God) being maimed and disgraced by sin, for the putting away these blemishes, and the repairing his ruines and decayes, must by death be dissolved into the earth, thence to be raised up again in a state of perfection and blessedness.

How should the consideration hereof wean us from the love of this life? why should our love be there set, where no blessedness is to be had? the things of this life are of that nature, Quae possessa onerant, amata inquinant, amissa cruciant; as Bernard speaketh; things, which while we possess, they burthen us; while we love, they defile us; when we foregoe, they torment us; and therefore better a great deal that we honourably contemn, what we cannot but sorrowfully lose: blessedness is not to be attained on earth, but to be hoped for in Heaven; and this should stir us up to the seek∣ing after a better life, for that condition where we may be blessed for ever.
The fruition of eternal glory is a future good, there is difficulty to attain it; it is no easie entrance into Heaven; God hath made viam lacteam in coelis, not ad coelum; God hath made a milky way in Heaven paved with stars, but not to Heaven; no, the way to Heaven is paved with sundry difficulties; the way is narrow, the gate is strait, many seek and cannot find it: Yet although Heaven be difficult to obtain, there is a fair possibility for any man to win the crown of eternal glory: There was never a Saint that lived and fought this Christian warfare, but when they had finished their course, they received Palmes, the Ensign of triumph, and the Crown of righteousness which Christ the righteous Judge
 hath laid up for them. Laertius writeth of one that had been thirty and three years travel∣ing to seek out the natures of Bees: indeed Bees are excellent creatures, and there is ex∣cellent use of the honey that they make; but here is that which is sweeter than Honey and the Honey-comb: they that take pains for temporal things, it is not bread that they labour for, it is not that which will satisfie; now if it bring no satisfaction with it, it can bring no blessedness with it; but everlasting glory and blessedness is the bread that will satisfie; this will be as marrow and fatness to our souls; let us labour for this, and our soul shall live.
Now much honoured in the Lord!
I have written this Tract of the glory of Heaven and of eternal blessedness (which I humbly dedicate to you) partly that I might feed my own mind with this Heavenly contempla∣tion, and partly that I might stir you up to the more serious consideration of the same things: there is nothing will make us more contemn the world, and kindle in us an earnest desire and longing after Heaven, than the fre∣quent and diligent meditation on the glory of Heaven, and the blessedness of the Saints in the world to come will do: Oh did we fre∣quently consider what pure and unmixt de∣ights lye for ever on those everlasting Hills
 and Gardens of Spices, that are alwayes green and flourishing, how should we rouze up our selves, and say, what do we here? Oh why do we weary our selves like the bird that toileth to gather a few sticks together to build a nest in the spring time, which after a little time will be pulled down and for∣saken? Remember I beseech you, that blessed∣ness is not to be had here, but in Heaven; in Heaven where life eternal is, there, and there only, true and perfect blessedness is; as this ensuing Treatise will fully demonstrate.
Therefore let no temptation of Satan at any time overcome you; let not the love of any sin possess you, let no evil example of the world seduce you, let no evil advan∣tages or pleasures steal away your heart from you: go on still in making you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, and great profit shall thereby come unto you. You may not think (saith Chry∣sostomeChrysost. Homil. in Luc. 16.) that God made the rich for the profit of the poor, but the poor for the profit of the rich, when they make them friends of the riches of iniquity: as if rich men should one day find that the poor were their best friends; for when they come to be received into everlasting habitations, God seems to make his poor Saints the Porters of Heaven. God will then remember all the kindnesses you have shewed to any of his
 distressed servants, and abundantly reward them; yea he will recompense a cup of cold water given to a Disciple of Christ in the name of a Disciple, with the whole fountain of the water of life; and two mites, with the whole treasure in the Temple: there for Gold you shall have Glory; for earthly Mannours, heavenly Mansions; for Silver that perisheth, solace without end; Mirth without measure, pleasure without pain; there you shall be clothed in white, which is the innocence of the Saints; have palmes in your hands, in token of victory; and be Crowned with a Diadem of pure Gold, which is immortality: your happiness then will be for God to make you of his Court, though here you are not of his Council.
Finally, let me excite you to raise your thoughts and meditations beyond these sublu∣nary things, and lift them up to those that are above, settle your affections upon them, exercise your study in them, feed your desires and hopes with them; and ever think of one thing, that all the Kingdoms in the world are not to be compared with the poorest Man∣sion in Heaven; there onely is the centre and seat of blessedness, for there (as an An∣cient saith) Quicquid amabitur, aderit,August. Me∣dit. nec desiderabitur quod non aderit: whatsoever is to be loved shall be there, and there shall be nothing wanting that is to be desired; there shall be all that good is, even our
 greatest God who is our greatest good: we shall have him with us there, or rather he indeed shall have us there with him, in whom we shall be perfectly blessed, and with whom our blessed∣ness shall be perpetually established. Now I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them that are san∣ctified. The Lord deliver you from every evil work, and preserve you unto his Heavenly King∣dome; So prayeth

