



SIR,
BEcause I have found your imme∣rited and superabounding fa∣vours for these sundry years past: therefore it is that I have now presumed (in dedicating this Book to your name) to the intent that I might ingenuously make some acknow∣ledgment of my humble thankfulness before the world. It is known to some, and hoped by all, that you love the Truth. The truth not only of divine mysteries; but even of humane Sciences. And withall hate falshood. The falshood not in Religion only, but of Arts also. Especially of all such arts, as are ut∣terly inconsistent with the very fundamental truths of Religion. Of which sort (I dare bold∣ly aver) is this fictitious art of Magicall Astro∣logie. And whether I have (by Gods mer∣cifull

enablement) here so proved it: that I humbly refer to be judged of by your own prudence; and the most truly discerning a∣mong Christian professours. First it began as a Religion, amongst the vilest of Heathe∣nish Idolatours. Then the Jewish Apostates Idolized with it, and by it, to the unre∣deemable prejudice of their own Religion. But after the Christian Religion came to be graciously promulged, this Darkness durst not now set up it self for a Religion before that Light: only then it pretended to an art; and under that masked notion (through some kind of Christianizers) sought craf∣tily to insinuate into the Church, as law∣full; Till Christian Conventions of Coun∣cils, Synods, Senates, and Parliaments tru∣ly examined it, and so justly condemned it for unlawfull. Since that, this Black Aart lurkt only in obscure corners; and durst never appear in publick: Save only in trou∣bled times, to their further distraction. Because it then presumed Religion, and Laws to be at a loss; or (at least) not at leasure to examine and suppress it. And so it took

confidence to ominate alwaies most envi∣ously against the Church. For, that being clouded, it then presumed, that Planetarian Edicts might the more easily be imposed upon a people: yea and Starry, Laws and Ordinances, soon after that, given, even to a State it self. And in truth Sir! it was the imposing upon the peoples faiths by them of this way (late start up amongst us, with unsufferable peremptoriness and impudence) that urged me not a little to employ some spare time from my other studies, upon this enterprize. For it was notorious both in City, and Country, (and not only so, but greatly scandalous) how that they began to look into, and commune of their Alma∣nacks, before the Bible: and to make them∣selves more infallibly assured of a Progno∣stication (as touching the government of the world, and of the Church also) than either of a prophecy, or a promise. Only their gross hallucinating in their prodigi∣ous portending upon the last Eclipse; hath proved not a little to Eclipse their credit with them. And I hope all true measuring and

sober Astronomers, will detest, Distinguish, and detect these mad ominating Astrolo∣gers: which none indeed can doe so exactly (as concerning their pedanticall cantings, and mysterious juglings) as can they. For my part, I know, I must expect the utmost of their malice, and malignity: else it would fare better with me than with others that have opposed them in all ages. But I hear∣tily believe, that God will bless me from their imprecating malefice, And I humbly be∣seech you to bless me from their conspiring violence, And the Church (I trust) will bless me against their cursed calumny, And then let me alone to bless my self against the fallacie of their art, or artifice. So (maugre all their malice) I shall live by Gods grace and blessing) a Minister of Christ, a Prea∣cher of the word, a teacher of truth, a pur∣suer of peace, a refeller of falshood; minding herein the glory of my God; and the edi∣fication of my Brethren. In all which, I shall greatly rejoyce to be approved

