


IT must be granted, That the Publick
have been just in the kind Reception
they have given to the LETTERS
of Dr. Burnet, now the Right Reverend Bishop
of Salisbury, concerning his Voyage to Italy.
The Truth of his Relations hath been own'd
by all those who have had the Curiosity to
Visit those Countries, and given occasion to
the Learned, to make curious Reflections
upon them. But above all I have observed,
That the Passages He hath inserted by the
By (about some of their Religious Practices)
have particularly pleased the English Nation,
who (above all) abominate Popery. 'Tis this
Consideration at first, that begat a Desire in
me to publish many other Particulars on this
Subject, especially upon the Lives and Pra∣ctices
of Romish Priests and Monks, which

were known to me, as having been a Secular
Priest of the same Church, and could not
come so easily to the Knowledge of others.
The Reason why I was so Inquisitive, is
set down at the Beginning of my First
LETTER: I shall only add, That those
who are acquainted with the Spirit of Rome,
will find no difficulty to believe the Matters
of Fact here related, and much less to ven∣ture
their Credit in denying them, since
they are still expos'd to Publick View; and
as many as go thither, may be so many Wit∣nesses
of them.
If at any time I make use of some Ex∣pressions
which may seem to have too much
Lightness in them, I desire my Reader, to
attribute this to the Subject; and to consider,
That as Serious Things ought not to be ex∣prest
in a Jocular Style; so neither is it possi∣ble,
to utter Ridiculous Matters with a Be∣coming
Gravity.
Nor do I believe, That the Papists will
have any reason to Complain of me, as they
commonly do of those that Leave them;
saying, That they make it their chief business,
to Expose them without Bounds or Measure.
For the Truth is, I have still Matter enough

in store, to fill another Volume as big as
this, which might serve for a Second Part:
But I choose to stop here, and give them an
occasion rather of Commending my Mode∣ration,
than of Complaining of my doing
Too much.
Lastly, Forasmuch as those Observations
made in my Travels, have much conduced
to the Change of my Religion; so (I trust in
God) the Publication of them will have a
good effect upon others, by Opening the
Eyes of the People of the Roman Church;
by Discouraging those that Seduce them;
and by putting Protestants upon Rendring
hearty Thanks to God, for having delivered
them from so Miserable a Slavery.
This (Candid Reader) is the principal Aim
I had in Publishing this Book. Farewel.

