



SINGULAR MADAM,
UNto none more properly doth the Dedi∣cation of this Book belong, then to your excelling Self, who (being by Birth first, then Accomplishments, then Marriage, the unenvied Paragon of two great Counties, that of Norfolk by your Originals, this of Suffolk by your Nuptials, in honour to those Counties that are proud of you, and the rest that contend for you) should be continued to as much duration, as the Art of Physick is able to contrive. It ought to be the labour of a Colledge of Physiti∣ans (not of one pitifull Pretender) to advance the preservation of such a person, which if lost, the fol∣lowing age must faintly hope to re-example. In the

want therefore, or failings of Physical Counsels be your own Lessius, be to your self a Cornara, since it hath so providentially faln out, all other outward embellishments being abundantly bestowed upon you, that you need not spend any time to adorn, or trick up your self, but only to express your thank∣fulness to the gracious Opificer of so rare a piece, & employ some hours (as is your practise) that your Countrey, Family, and Friends may be happy in the long possession of you. For really your own Practise (Madam) will out-do all my Precepts, your Gardens and Parks out-vie the Physick-Gar∣dens; your Closet is as considerable as the Coun∣tess of Kent's with her Powder in it. At Henham-Hall (the Seat of your Noble Husbands Ancestors) what is wanting to Satiety? yet your Deer out∣live the ages of their Neighbour-commoners, and their Parks too; 'tis possible to find a Stag as an∣cient as that of Caesar's: nor is this done by the di∣et of your Keeper, or your keeping your Deer from being your Diet, but by a successive spend∣ing of your Park, not destroying it, by letting us eat Venison, but not to such excess, as if your Guests were to feed themselves into Elkes. Your Deer fall (as our Colledge-copices should do) at so many years growth, that so the succeeding scholars may have wood of their own, & not expect Coals from New-castle. Your Table is Mezentian in this re∣spect; for alive Deer look in at your windows, and see their dead Brother in a Coffin. So rare is your Cookery, it makes slaughter amiable, and the

Heard desire to be wounded, that they may be so dress'd. I have seen your Table furnished with more Dishes then my Book hath Chapters in it, and yet the Temperance did exceed the Dishes, so that if ever Abstinence was paramount, and in its Zenith it was at Henham, where Self-deniall (so much spoke of) was truly visible, even in the ful∣ness of the Creature, and your Guests din'd Philo∣sophically, at a City Feast.
This is true Tem∣perance (Madam) to refraine where there is variety of temptation to excess; to stint the sto∣mack, in full view of the game of Luxury, other∣wise it is Penance, not Abstinence, and the Mind and Appetite not commanded, but a string tied about the throat, which is Cormorant sobriety, for which the Fowl wishes him hang'd that throtled him.
Having thus commended (Madam) your Diet, 'tis not with any Stratagem to get Applause to my own, which is too course for your Palate, and scarce fit for your Servants. But as you sometimes are pleased to leave the Rarities of your own Table and Caresse in a Cottage, where the Earthen Platter, the Barley Pudding, the Fool, and the plain Countrey Houswife, are both Meat and Sport, and delight and nourish beyond the wis∣dome of multiplied Cookery. So let it fare (best Lady) with this slender treatment of your Ser∣vant, which is not a Present, but a Debt of a long Promise, and not in that kind paid that it was pro∣mised. I did intend you a Grace, some Divine

Poems, but present you with all manner of Diet, for fear being without Grace, it might be sup∣posed all of Oysters, or Melons. The Book is a Hieroglyphick salt, not that with the head of Mortifi∣cation on it, which is melancholy, or a Charing-cross-trencher salt, which is impious; but this is a pillar of Salt, or rather of Temperance, which is healthful (and at least in wish) Festivous, the Motto as it may be translated,
Poets should alwayes write,
To profit, and delight.
And calls to mind the ancient frugality of our pre∣decessors, which were wise, valiant, and abstemious, three habits much advanced, if not begot by Diaete∣tick Rules. To the moderate observance whereof, in the pursuance of your Honoured Husbands, and your Ladiships and Families health, this Rythmi∣call Tract invites you, untill I can face to face, and vivâ voce wish your double healths (as a Physitian ought to do) in your celebrious Goblet at Hen∣ham-Hall. Till then, and ever, I am

