



Much Honoured Sir,
THough the great re∣spect, which you have been pleased to vouchsafeme, might be engagement suf∣ficient to this Scholastical grati∣tude; Yet the suitableness of the subject, added much to my incli∣nation, in this way, to let the world know, that I am in the number of those, who are grateful
honourers of your Learning, and Godliness. The Book I present to you, is Polemical; But the in∣tention of my contention is Ireni∣cal. As it is Polemical, your learn∣ing renders you able to judg of it. As it is Irenical, your piety (which bears the old stamp) will incline you to imbrace it; for all that know you throughly, will give you testimony, to be a lover of peace, as it is a thing commanded of God, not as it is popular, and pleasing to men; And that you have been a perswader of it; not for private, but publique in∣terest; not because it is easie, but holy; having had as deep a sence, as any, of the sad sufferings of your dear Countrey, in her honour, strength, wealth, and Religion,
by the present unnatural War.
Sr, In this Paper-Combat, I have met with such an Adversa∣ry, as makes me need, not onely candor, but succour; yet not a∣gainst his subtilties, but calum∣nies; Neither this, to those that know me, but to strangers: for his personal criminations, are such gross mistakes, that they will ren∣der him ridiculous, to all that un∣derstand my judgment and car∣riage in these present distractions. But yet they may make me odi∣ous, where I am unknown; as I am to most of those of qua∣lity, whom this Reply should sa∣tisfie. Sir, If your name and testi∣mony, free my person from pre∣judice with such, that they may ponder the Argument in an equal
ballance, I have enough; for I never desire more from any Rea∣der, then what the weight of un∣prejudic'd Reason inclines him to give. Controversies are of them∣selves troublesome; especially when they come to Replies, and Rejoynders. Therefore, that I may not add to your trouble, with a long Epistle, praying for an in∣crease of your graces, and blessing on your self, yours, and all your good endeavors, especially those, for an happy Peace; I take leave, and remain
 Sir, From my Study in Ivy-Lane, Sept. 18. 1648.

