










.




Most High Born PRINCE,
THey that aspire to the Attainment of Wis∣dom, do not content themselves with the Accurate Search of sublime objects, but also conde∣scend to enquire into lower matters. In like manner, the renowned Bri∣tains do not confine their contem∣plations to their own homes, or to

their neighbour Nations; but en∣large their prospect unto the most remote Countries, and with a piercing Eye, diligently pursue the exact discovery of their state and condition. To which purpose, many persons of honour, and of curiosity, have importun'd me to give some description of the Coasts of Ionia, and the Aegaean Islands; and to declare the present Condi∣tion of those great objects of Pity and Protection, the Greeks, now under the cruel Tyranny of the Wicked and Barbarous Hagarens. The desire I had to gratifie their learned curiosity, whose Judge∣ments I had reason highly to esteem, prevail'd with me to undertake a Description of some Isles of the Archipebago, namely, Samos, Ni∣caria, Patmos, and Mount Athos, now called The Holy Mount. But because this Work may seem to want that Elegance, or depth of learning, re∣quisite for a Book that must appear upon the Stage of England, it stands in need of shelter and protection.

Which put me upon the bold neces∣sity of flying to the Shadow of your Royal Highness's Patronage, to escape the scorchings of Contempt, and with all humble Reverence, to shelter it under the umbrage of your Royal Highness's propitious Name. And I most humbly offer it, not as a thing of any merit; but as a mani∣festation of my devoir and gratitude, for those great Obligations, which I, and in me all the Greek Nation has received. I therefore most humbly beseech your Highness, that as you have thought me worthy of your Bounty, so to continue the same fa∣vourable aspect, in accepting this small demonstration of my Grati∣tude, and by your gracious Patro∣nage, to secure it from their censure, who are not so forward to imitate our well intended pains, as to ex∣pose our defects. For which unde∣served Favour, we can make Retri∣bution only in our daily Prayers to Almighty God for your Highness's Health and Prosperity in this World, and Eternal Happiness in the World to come.

