



IF any, (my honoured friends and re∣verend brethren in Christ,) will ac∣commodate Plato's definition of Phi∣losophy (That it is the meditation of death) unto the true divine doctrine of Christianity; in so doing, I think, he will not go against truth, seeing in a manner the All of it consists in a meditation of death. But by Death I understand, as well Christ's death as our own. The death of Christ and his suffering is the summ of Christianity:
1 Cor. 2.2. thence the Apostle judged, that among his Corin∣thians he would know nothing save Christ
crucified and dead. By Christ's death is made an expiation of our sins, a destructi∣on of Satan's power, a confirmation of the new covenant, and a lessening of those terrours that are wont to accompany our death: The meditation of the death of Christ therefore ought never to depart out of our memory. But neither in any time of our life let us forget our own death: As death awaits us every day, so let us on the other hand expect it every day.
Hieron. Epist. ad Paulin. He that every day re∣members he shall dye, easily slighteth all worldly things, prepares himself for a happy death by a true and serious conversion, labours after sincere godliness, patiently endures adversity, and heartily burns with an ardent desire of eternal life. Teach us O Lord,
Psal. 90.12. to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wis∣dom, was Moses his prayer: a great part therefore of Christian wisdom consists in a constant meditation of death. We must long learn that, which that it be once done well, concerns our eternal salvation. It is appointed for all men to dye: but to dye godly, to dye in Christ, to dye happi∣ly, is not every ones lot: therefore the
mind is be prepared to that blessed immor∣tality, and to be guarded with the shield of the word and prayer. For if at any time, sure∣ly in that last time of our life doth our trea∣cherous and subtile enemy lay wait for our salvation, and with all his might endeavou to deprive us of the possession of it: where∣fore some of the ancients say that the infer∣nal serpent is said especially to bite the heel: for he knows very well that all is sure on our part, if he be overcome by us in that last conflict: but on the contrary that it will be to our everlasting disgrace and damage, if all the other parts of our life, as of a Comedy, having been well acted, we behave our selves uncomely and cowardly in this last Catastrophe. Hence are those various temptations, wherewith as with battering Rams he assaults our heart in sickness and in the agony of death: hence those fiery darts, which he casts at us with all his strength: hence that horrour and anxiety which we feel when we approch the gates of death. Blessed is he that overcometh here, blessed is he that is faithful unto death,
Rev. 2.3. he shall he partaker of all those good things which are promised in the Revela∣tions to the stout Souldiers of Christ.


What is this life? 'tis death: death life doth end,
Our life and death do both the same way tend.
But Christ of life's the Captain and the door,
Our death doth conquer'd lye by his deaths power:
On him alone His hope ought to relie,
That would not of eternal deaths wound dye.
But this our hope most bitter storms do drive,
When in the confines of death we arrive.
This is the toil, these storms to overcome,
Lest that instead of life, death be our doom.

Wherefore seeing some while ago I have endeavoured by an explication of the History of the passion and death of Christ to instill into the minds of the Godly the meditation of Christ's death; I thought it would be worth the while, if to such per∣sons I should also propound the meditation of our death: for which end I writ these divine consolations to be opposed to the terrors of death and to temptations in the agony of death for my own private use only; for I carry about a sickly body, a brittle vessel, and besides, death not long ago made a lamentable destruction in my own house, and there are many reasons for which I fear my own life will not be long; there∣fore I would betimes prepare and fence my mind for this last agony; and being
incompassed with so many domestick evils I bestow'd some days on the pious medita∣tion of this little book: which meditati∣ons of mine seeing perhaps they may be useful to others also, I was not unwilling to publish them. But this I would advise in the beginning of this Treatise, that I writ not for secure, impenitent and hard hearts, but for contrite, broken and bleeding consciences: Exhortations to true godliness belong to another place; this discourse is wholly spent in consolations to be opposed to death and temptations in death. Whosoever therefore desires to receive this oil of consolation, let him bring the vessel of a contrite heart: for what doth comfort belong to him, that is not yet contrite and made sad?
And I have dedicated this Manual unto you, most dear friends and reverend bre∣thren in Christ, to give a publick testimony of that near friendship and brotherhood we are linked together in. And you your selves also carry about you a body subject to diseases, and there cannot but daily arise in your minds the remembrance of death: I do not at all therefore doubt, although your faith needeth not these props, which for my own and others use I have collected in
this little book; but that notwithstand∣ing, the reading of it will not be unpleasant to you, epecially seeing it comes from a friendly and candid mind. I pray our Lord Jesus will every where bless us and the labours of our ministry by his grace and spirit.

