


MEn that study nought but to carp at all, will per∣chance pretend, that I should not Present a Discourse con∣cerning Building to a King of Arms, but rather a Treaty concer∣ning the Antiquity and Origine of Herauldry: That the Romans be∣fore Marius had in their Banners (to distinguish them in Romulus time, from other Nations) no more then a bundle of Hay, to which suc∣ceeded a Hand, and a bundle of leaves, with the Motto on their Ban∣ner.



S. P. Q. R. Godefrey de Bullon put on the Coat or Mantle which he did wear over his defen∣sive Armour, three white Eagles shot through with an Arrow, the Motto, Soit Dieu, soit le hazard; and said, That he would wear no Crown of Gold, because the Sa∣viour of the World had but one of Thorns.
But to return to the first Ro∣mans, that Constantine the great did Coat a double-headed-Eagle, for having made a Seat at Constanti∣nople, and kept also that at Rome, that the Coat was afterwards chan∣ged, because the Empire was divi∣ded into two.
And as for the French, that they reckon their descent from Fran∣cion, second Son to Hector, who did Coat a Lion, gul, field Or.
That the black Toades were ta∣ken up by Marcomir, second King



of the Sicambres, who had van∣quisht a Walon King whose Coat was three Toades, Sable field Or.
That Clovis (who became a Chri∣stian) did Coat number of Flour∣de-lis, because (as the fable saith) an Angel (by the hand of an Her∣mite of Journal) did give them; Others, that he had obtained a Victory in a Field, wherein great quantity of yellow Lilies did grow; and that finally Charles the Sixth, the fifty fourth French King, did reduce them to three on the perswa∣sion of his Herauld, who had told him, Qui plus a moins porte.
But should Time and Paper be spent to relate what is so well, and particularly known by you, it would savour of Vanity, and therefore I shall say no more, but that if you, or your friends do affect Building, this Counsel and Advise may perhaps



be seasonable, neither will so dis∣creet a person (by all men) highly praised and beloved for his Integri∣ty, and real good disposition to ob∣lige all men, misconster the respects of him who, professeth to be,
Honoured Sir,

