



Honoured Sir,
NOt only your acquaintance with the
Sciences Mathematical, and the ma∣ny
profitable Labors of the Industri∣ous
Person, whose Life I here pub∣lish,
but your known affection to all
the friends of ƲRANIA, hath in∣vited
me to this address: As also to return my
humble thanks, for that you were pleased lately
in a Company of Giant-like, yet ignorant oppo∣sers,
as well Nobly to favour the Truths of A∣strology,
as courteously to own me and my meaner
Arguments in its behalf. In which contest, by
your prevailing and sinnewey Reasons, you so far
wrought upon their Passion and Prejudice (little
than a Miracle;) that at length those angry Op∣ponents
(although some of them were men other∣wise
learned, and Elderly too) began ingeniously
to acknowledge, that they had never heard so
much discourse of Astrology in all their Lives;
and therewithal frankly engaged to enquire into
the grounds of that Science, before they believed
any more reports against it. A good president
for all that are Enemies to any truth upon the bare
hear-say of others; or, because the ignorant Mul∣titude
(as taught by the superciliousI mean only the Angry  Who of all men most e∣mulates Astro∣logy; and yet huggs an opi∣nion an 100 times more ri∣diculous than any one prin∣ciple thereof; nay, directly untrue; Viz. that of Praede∣stination in the most terrifing sence. Man in
Black) have declaimed, or rather snarl'd against

it. Vox Populi is not alwaies Vox Dei; And
Truth is too Coy to be courted by the Rabble-rout;
She hath select Favourites to whom she dispenceth
her Graces.
In your acceptance of this Dedication, you will
help to preserve to posterity a true Son of Science;
One, whose Industry was such that Ages will
scarcely Equal. And yet (Sir) not so much pro∣tect
him, as that mean Piece, I have in, the fol∣lowing
History drawn of him, scarce to the Life I
confess. My numbers are too immusical to sound
forth his worth; And my Colours (now like his
Ghost) too pale and lifeless, to express his great
Deservings. Mr. Wing was his own best He∣rald;
And his Fame will live for ever, in his
own works. What I have done, is only to pay a
grateful respect to his Ashes, as he was my friend
that future times may find, he had some who
were contemporary with him, that knew how to
value him and his merits. If therefore (Sir) you
will vouchsafe me but a corner of the Mantle of
your Nobler Reputation and Favour, for my de∣fence,
you will thereby, at once, keep Mr. Wing
warm in his Coffin, and cover the many imper∣fections
of him, who (thus endeavours to embalm
his memory, against the Flesh-flies of Envy and
Detraction; and) esteems it one of his greatest
Felicities, that he hath an opportunity to entitle
himself,
Honoured Sir
From my study in Brick-Court
by the Deans-Yard
Westminster.
Your real Servant
and Honourer,

