




Right Honourable,
I Have placed you here in the Frontispiece of my Dedicatory, first be∣cause
you have a chiefe place in my affections as one whom God hath
graced with a more than ordinary portion of his Image, for (to speak
without Flattery) what Grace? what Vertue? what endowment, ei∣ther
of body, mind, or fortune? Finally, what Perfection or Excel∣lency
can make men truly Honourable on Earth, and eternally happy
in Heaven, which doth not shine in your Lordship, in the fullest lustre,
so farre as your condition and yeares can be capable of? insomuch that
if it please the Lord, to addc yeares unto your life, as hee hath gifts
unto your person, a starre more radiant then your selfe, I conceive, in
our age will scarcely appeare in our Brittish Firmament: moreover,
your Lordship may justly challenge the first fruit of my publike la∣bors,
because I had the first encouragement tomy ministerial studies in
your Honourable Familie, under your Right Honourable, most pious,
& never without much Reverence to bee mentioned, Grandmother,
Magdalen, Ladie Bruce, where I have beene an eye-witnesse of your
vertuous education ab imis, as I may say, incunabulis, from your
very infancy, and where I have often observed, the most vigilant and
religious care of your Right Honourable Parents, in your vertuous
education, which to this day doth most spectably appeare, as a pattern
of imitation to all the Nobles in the Land.

Goe on therefore most Noble and hopefull Lord, good luck have
you with your Honour, continue that course, in these paths of Vertue,
wich you have begun to tread, especially seeing you have already made
so good a progresse, for Dimidium facti, qui bene coepit, habet.
And you shall find, that although the way bee thorny, yet the end
shall be Honourable, that paines which you now take, and have taken
to please and serve God, and your right Honourable Parents, shall
produce unto you at length, not onely the favour of God, the love of
your Soveraign, ōmendation of your equals, & praise of all good men,
but also contentment to your mind, peace unto your conscience, pro∣tection
to your person, a blessing unto your estate, and a sweet relish to
all the houours, wealth, and pleasures which you shall afterwards en∣joy.
Which that you may doe, I shall never be wanting in my best devo∣tion,
to implore the gracious assistance of that Father of lights, the
Watchman of Israel, to double his spirit upon you, and wheresoever you
goe, for good to be present with you, to guard you by his Providence,
guide you by his counsell, and when he hath here satiated your Lord∣ship
with honours and pleasures temporall, bring you at length unto
ioyes and happinesse eternall. So prayeth he, who desireth to bee repu∣ted
as he is

From my Study in St. Mary-Axe,
this 8. Decemb. 1641.
