



My Lord,
I Have been Perswaded by some Private Friends, that
the Publication of the following Discourse is not at
this time of day to be declin'd. Some People will,
doubtless, be angry, that their foul Play is brought upon
the Stage, and thus openly taxt. For this reason, I am bold
to engage Your Lordship in my Interests, and to shelter
my self under Your Great and Honourable Name. Your
Honour will (I hope) the more easily pardon me herein,
since Your own Interest also is not a little concern'd. It is
not my Disposition to expose any Mans Mistake, whilst it
keeps in doors, and contains its self within any bounds of
Modesty and Privacy. In this case, certainly 'tis better to
mourn for it in secret, at most to rebuke it in a Corner. But
when 'tis made Notorious; when it boldly stares us in the
Face and is avow'd for Truth, when an Error, which one
would have hop'd was an unwilling One, is Supported by a∣nother,
which must be Confest and Believ'd a wilful One:
That is, when the Presbyterian Government (or Congre∣gational,

I can't tell which) is publickly maintain'd by a Text
of Scripture manifestly Corrupted, surely 'tis high time then
to make the World Sensible of the Artifice. I had some Years
before Discover'd the False Reading here spoken of, but held
my peace. At length, wben I found that the Corruption, like
a Gangren, had spread its self into several Editions of the
Bible here in England, and, God knows, how many in Scot∣land,
and there vouch't for Good, I could not prevail with
my self to be silent any longer, and I hope the same Good
Zeal will Inspire Your Honour with a Resolution to Dis∣countenance
such Injuries Offer'd unto the Holy Word of
God. Nor is this the only Instance of the kind. In the Dis∣senters
Petition for Peace above years since, Acts 15.
18. v. is thus cited—To lay upon you no greater
burden than necessary things, that small word these
being cunningly left out meerly to support their Proposition,
Mr. B—who drew up the Petition,Champ. Chal. ac∣cepted by Dr. Hook late Vi∣car of Halifax. and since has been pub∣lickly
charg'd for thus abusing the Scripture, tho' he forgot
not to Acquaint us with the most trivial, yea ridiculous, Pas∣sages
of his Life, yet had not the Ingenuity to confess his
Errror, nor yet the Courage to Paliate it with any Excuse.
My Lord, I have now done, after I shall have made a pub∣lick
Acknowledgment, as I now do, of the many great sin∣gular
Favours receiv'd from Your Honour thro' the Course
of allmost thirty years Service, and have also farther as∣sur'd
You, that I am as in Duty bound,
Right Honourable,
Your Lordships, Most Humble,
and Most Obedient Servant, and
Chaplain,

