



Honour'd Sir,
I am so far from being Apprehen∣sive of the Censure of any think∣ing Man, for Dedicating a Book of this Nature to a Man of your Stati∣on, that I'm satisfyed I shou'd have in∣jur'd your Merit in choosing any o∣ther

Patron for That, in which the Glo∣ry of the ENGLISH NATION is in some Degree defended: for tho' I confess the States Man (according to our Modern Notion) has little to do with the ensuing Discourses; yet I'm very sure the TRUE ENGLISH MAN (a Name I know you far more value) must extreamly interest you in them; for the Patriots Zeal ought to ex∣tend to the Glory, as well as Happy∣ness of his Country: so that you must be pleas'd to shelter with your Pro∣tection, a Piece that aims at a Vindi∣cation of our known RIGHT and HONOUR, which are impiously in∣vaded, and as weakly, as ignobly be∣tray'd to a Foreign People, by a big∣gotted Veneration for a former Age. But Poetry, Sir, will appear from the following Essays, to be a Prize we ought no more to surrender to Foreign

Nations than our Courage or Liberty. For Greece and Rome, who have gi∣ven us the noblest Examples of the Latter, have been the most famous for the Former. And as we are not inferior to either of those Common-Wealths, in the Honor of Arms, or the Wisdom of our Laws, so I can never yield them the precedence in Poetry.
Nor is this Glory I plead for, a meer Noitionary Fantout, which affords no Benefit to the Public, as is evident from its very Nature and Design, as well as the Authority of the Wisest Nations, who have Esteem'd POETS very necessary, as well as very Hon∣ourable Members of the Common-Wealth. This Athens thought, when on the loss of Eupolis in a Sea Fight, she decreed that no Poet shou'd for the future, ever venture himself in the

War, least by one Fatal Blow, a Treasure should be lost, an Age cou'd not repair, for POETS were not born ev'ry Day.
But this Veneration which Greece paid the Poets, is built on the innate Excellence of their Art. Pleasure is the Sovereign Aim of all Men, 'tis that which the Soul naturally and justly desires, and for which 'tis made, and what the greatest Stoic persues; for 'tis impossible for any Man to desire Pain. Now Poetry do's not only make Pleasure, its Medium but its Aim, and so employs the surest Means to obtain the noblest End. Majestic and delightful Numbers, surprizing and noble Thoughts, and Charming Expressions, awake all the Faculties of the Soul, to receive the Mighty Les∣sons it imparts, which all terminate in the most Solid, and Rational Pleasure.

For they either establish some Virtue by a great Example, or by the same, punish some Vice, or redicule, and lash some Folly, that may be injuri∣ous to our Happyness; the Establish∣ment of which on the Basis of Virtue and Wisdom, fixes us in the sweet Enjoyment of the Greatest and most la∣sting of Pleasures.
As a farther Proof of Poetry's, be∣ing a Friend to, and promoter of Vir∣tue; and an Enemy to Vice, 'tis obser∣vable, that all the Heroes and Men of Virtue of Antiquity lov'd and encou∣rag'd Poetry, and that the worst of Princes, and greatest TYRANTS al∣ways persecuted, and hated the Poets, as their known and most dangerous E∣nemies, for they wou'd spare no Vice in the most powerful Offenders. Lucan fear'd not in the time of the greatest Tyrant of the Caesars, to extoll Cato

the most obstinate Stickler for his Countrys Liberty against the first of 'em; and he chooses rather to condemn Providence for the success, the destroy∣ers of the Liberty of Rome met with, than not praise Cato for dying with his falling Country. Victrix causa dijs placuit, sed Victa Catoni. The POETS indeed have been the bold Persecutors of Vice in all Ages, and have ever re∣warded Virtue with Immortality. They are beneficial to Posterity, by conveying to it the most prevailing Motives Illustrious Examples, so that he that is a generous Patron of the MUSES, is a Benefactor to Ages to come, as well as to the Present.
Carmen amat quisquis, Carmine Digna gerit. is a certain Truth; For the very Mo∣tives for performing Vertuous Actions, hold for the care of those that make them eternal, viz. the good of Others,

the public Benefit. To which Sir, your whole Life and Endeavours ha∣ving been zealously applyed, I cannot doubt but you will by your patronizing Poetry, compleat the noble end of your Honourable Ambition. Then may Po∣sterity see in YOU, Sir, such a pattern of Fortitude, Temperance, Wisdom, Ju∣stice, Bounty, and all other Virtues that make a Man truly Great, that co∣pying You alone, wou'd make e'm all Happy and Good. I'm too unskilful a Dawber to dare to venture on drawing so noble an Image, as both your private and public Life compose. I can ne∣ver reach up to that Generous Constan∣cy to your Friends i the midst of your Sufferings, which has to my knowledge rais'd some to Wealth, if not Content. How can I ever hope to give the least Idea of your present Character, when your Love for the Public Good trans∣ports you from private Repose to Bu∣siness,

and the fatigues of State, that more, than those only, whom youknow, may share in the Blessings of your Ad∣ministration.
An ungenerous Self-interest, separate from the Public Good, has been ob∣serv'd to prevail over most Statesmen, which made the World put su st distinction betwixt the S and the Patriot, as to mak  ci∣leable; but You, Sir,  ge∣neral an Observatio  we all , that in you the Patriot and Statesman are eminently united. Your Soul is too Large, too Noble, to be wretchedly con∣fin'd to so narrow a Game, as the Chase of your own privte Happiness, with∣out regard to the public; or rather you are so True an English-man, that you cannot be Happy, unless your Country be so too; and 'tis not your own pri∣vate Stores, but the Public that gives you Content; for your Goodness is

exalted so near to Perfection, that it cannot but be communicative; we are so sensible of this, that we unanimously wish your Power to do Good, were as boundless, as we know your Will. We might then hope a long wish'd Union in those Minds, whose Variance with each other has produc'd a common Mi∣sery; and till that be effected, we have alass! but little Hopes of any settl'd Happiness. But what is worst, there is but small prospect of that, till Men have learn'd your Virtue, Sir, of sacri∣ficing all private Designs and Int'rests to the public Good.
But I have unawares faln into a Con∣emplation of your Virtus, which I dare not persue; but as the Painter, who after he had given to the several Figures of his Picture, the various forms and expressions of Grief, drew a Vil over the Father's Face, as unable to express his: So, Sir, ought I, having gi∣ven

a View of some part of your Me∣rits, to leave the rest to the Imagination of the Reader, better inform'd by your known Reputation. I have said enough to make all Men admire, and love you, that do not know you; and it must be the Defect of my Abilities, if they stop on this side the highest and most Aw∣ful Veneration. However I have this Comfort, that I have rais'd the first Py∣ramid (tho' a very poor o to your desert, to which greater Artists will in time build up more Glorious Monu∣ments, when you shall declare your self, the Patron of the Poetic Glory of England, as you have been of her In∣t'rest. And these Hopes makes me pre∣sume to Dedicate not only this small Book to you, but also my self, and all the Endeavours of, Sir,
  
