



Honoured Sir,
NOt so much for your Countenance and Encouragement to Me, (though that's a favour I shall ever covet) as to the TRUTH, do I at this time appear be∣fore you, and pray your Iudgement in a Cause, (which against my will) I am made a PARTY to, by a Learned, yet unknown AD∣VERSARY. I am (Learned Sir) for the Truth's sake as∣saulted! And I cannot but with an humble security pro∣mise my self, where I have ever found (even in Ardu∣ous Cases) a Refuge, that Divine URANIA can never fail of finding her ASYLUM. It is not I therefore, but TRUTH that seeks your Noble PATRONAGE at this Time.
My ADVERSARY seems to be a Benefic'd Man, though not the Poor One he Stiles himself; (that I look

on only as Complement to my Lord Bishop) and gives us to understand that he can by the Canon, wear a ShortGown: (I hope he intends not to Lengthen his Garment by Plow∣ing Furrows upon the Back of my Reputation; I never did him wrong: I do not know him.) But, as for Me, (Learned Sir) I have not the Honour of either Benefice, or Gown to boast of. Yet, when I consider I have your Favour, I esteem that every whit as Great, and as Dear to Me.
The Great Doctor of the Gentiles tells us as Truly, as Eloquently,— That all are not Israel, that are of Israel. And I find a Man may be in Orders and Benefic'd too, and yet have somewhat of the Salamander in him, which may make even the Flames of Contention his Delight. I could willingly hope better of my Learned Adversary, though, all things consider'd, I have but little Reason. For, I believe I am the First Man, that have been questio∣ned for matter of Fact in Art, after Twenty Four years time; (and I think my Antagonist is the First CLERGIMAN that ever serv'd any Man so) whereas if either the Divine or Moral Law had been valuable with Him in this matter, a Seven years space must have Limited us both, and cover'd my Imperfections (had I been guilty) with an AMNESTIA, or a JUBILEE.
It is my great unhappiness not to be acquainted with that most Noble Lord and Excellent PRELATE before whom my Adversary hath Arraigned me, that I might have presumed to entrust my Cause with Him: For I am fully perswaded He would do me Iustice, as Fame tells me He doth to the whole World. But I have an Humble Sign Ascending at my Birth, and dare not be

Confident, but where I am thoroughly Known. And that is another Reason (most Honour'd Sir) why I implore your Worthy Iudgement between Me and my Opponent.
I have had, and ever shall have, an Honour and Re∣verence for the Church, and all the Worthy Dignitories thereof, esteeming them the Lawful Ambassadors of the Blessed Iesus. And, could I be Reasonably perswaded that either my STUDY or PRACTICE of ASTRO∣LOGY were UNLAWFUL, and prejudicial to Either, I would never Set a FIGURE, or make an ALMANACK more. So much unwilling am I (Sir) to Offend those I ought to Obey; So far should I be from Opposing the truly Venerable Persons of that Sacred Order.
But, (Learned Sir) when I know that many of our best Authors in ASTROLOGY have been DIVINES, who have not only largely Cultivated, but liberally De∣fended the ART, I cannot believe that I ERR in pursu∣ing so Harmless, so Useful, so Veritable a STUDY, Sed, sub Iudice lis est.
The Matter is before you (Honour'd Sir) and your Noble Iudgement is Prayed in the Case. I will not be af∣fraid, or troubled at whatsoever CENSURE you shall please to Pass; For I am well assured that your Know∣ledge in Art is such, as renders you a most Proper and Capable JUDGE in this Affair: and I dare believe, That (like Soloman) you will Judge Righteous Iudgement: Let the Mothers of both Children (or Arguments) Plead, (as animated by their Passions) never so waywardly, or in Favour of their own Cause, or Issue.
Let the TRUTHS of ASTROLOGY Rise, and Shine under your Favour and Protection; and, the ERRORS

pretended to belong thereunto, be ever Banish'd, and Disown'd, as by your Honour'd Self, so, by All that shall dare to profess themselves Subjects of URANIA. Thus begging your Pardon for my presumption in this bold Address: (which I can almost promise my self, from your Noble Nature, the occasion consider'd.) give me leave hereby to Thank you for all your Manifold Favours; chiefly those afforded me in the time of my greatest Distress, when you so Generously interposed on my behalf, and helped to stop the Mouths of LYONS, that were then opened against Me:) and heartily wishing both to You, and to your most Excellent and ever Virtuous LADY, all Happiness both here, and here∣after,— I remain,
(Most Honour'd Sir) 
