


Reverend Brethren,
WHat your Commands have wrested from me (for of that force and preva∣lency with me are your desires) I new lay it at your feet. If I could have prevailed with you to have al∣tered your vote, or (after you had passed it) durst have resisted; this had gone no further then your own hearing. But when you would not be perswaded, I endeavoured to conform my self to those Christians in Act. 21.14. and took up with that which put a stop to their intreaties, The will of the Lord be done,
remembring that speech of Antoninus Pius to his Councel, Aequius est, ut ego tot talium amicorum consilium sequar, quam, ut tot tales amici meam unius sequantur volunta∣tem.
Well! you have saved me the labour of an Apology, and, having adopted this issue for your own, you must expect not onely to bear a share with me in the censures which may be occasioned by its deformity; but must wholly by your selves bear all the blame of troubling the world with it: and if it should be raised (above its own deserts) to be of any use in the Church by the hand of him who worketh mightily (sometimes) by unlikely means (though I cannot discover within kenning any ground for such an expectation, but this, That it was the reso∣lute, solemn intreaty and order of such, and so serious a company:) yet, if it should be thus blessed, I am willing (for my part) that, next to God, the thanks be wholly yours.
Among the many favours which God hath bestowed upon us, and the County where we live; this is none of the least, That God hath poured upon us some measure of his Spirit of peace, and hath blessed us thus far in it; the blessed fruits of concord which we have al∣ready tasted (if we should never see more) together with the sweetness of the testimony of Conscience (thus far acquitting us from the guilt of Church-murther) are a sufficient recompence for all the trouble it hath given us. Great are the advantages that we and our people have from hence; united Counsels promise more safety, and justly challenge a greater respect and reverence to our proceedings: our joint concurrence in what we pra∣ctice puts us in a better posture of mutual communica∣tion of gifts, graces, strength and assistance (stones in conjunction as in an arch, will support one another and
bear up the weight of the whole Fabrick, which, being divi∣ded and scattered, they cannot do) besides, it may do much to cure that itch after novelties, that intemperancy of roaving, doubting and scepticism in Christians about Government, when they see their leaders unanimous, and not so wedded to their opinions as to undo the Church for Punctilios; and that which is more, while others are toiling in the sweat & dust of disputations, and as fruitlesly wear∣ing themselves as the Grammarians in Erasmus about find∣ing out the meaning of Anticomarita; we have happily gained an opportunity of pressing and practising the great things of Gods Law. Disputings often drown the voice of truth by their noise and clamour, they prodigally la∣vish out the spirits and affections of men on smaller mat∣ters which should be reserved for higher objects; and, though they have their fruits, yet are they like trees growing upon a rocky precipice, where the fruit cannot be gathered by all, and not by any without difficulty and hazard.
Brethren, Tou have put your hands to this work,2 John 8. Now look to your selves, that you loose not those things which ye have wrought, but that ye receive a full re∣ward; do not think (now that the work is upon the wheels) that you may slacken your diligence, or abate any thing of your watchfulness against temptations, or of the jea∣lousies and suspicions over your own hearts. There is yet much to do, and if there were not;Ʋirum o∣porteret jam metae vicinum cursum re∣mittere? An magis intendere? yet (as Diogenes an∣swered the man that perswaded him to give over study, be∣cause he was grown old) the nearer you come to the mark you should put forth more strength, & run the faster. Dream not of ease in an imployment of this nature, God, Angels and men have their eyes upon you to see how you will bestir your selves; it is your duty and not a matter of unnecessary courtesy, which you may give or hold back at your pleasure:1 Tim. 4.15. he that hath commanded you  to give your selves
up wholly to these things; will not take himself to be be∣holden to you when you have done your best: neither is it any disparagement to you to become even servants to any; so that you may but gain them, and forward Christs work; they that think it below them to trouble themselves so much with Catechizing, reproof, admonition, &c. are of Pro∣lemaeus his mind, who changed the title of Heraclides his book from , to ; as if laborious∣ness were nothing but an Ass-like dulness, making a man crouch under every burthen; but God having made the ox which treads out the corn to be the Hieroglyphick of your imployment; he doth thereby teach you that labour and patience are so far from being a disgrace to you, that they are necessary qualifications for the calling of the Mini∣stry.
Opposition, (I suppose) you all expect, and partly find already, can any man think otherwise but that they who are like bullocks, unaccustomed to the yoke will struggle? is it a wonder if they think all bonds to be fetters? every re∣straint to be cruelty, and the dressing of their wounds (though in order to their cure and Salvation) to be unsuf∣ferable tyranny? but what then! is the worke ever the worse for that? hath not God called you out to oppose the Carnall interests and desires of men? the Critick before mentioned (when he thrust into the theatre against the throng of people coming out; (being asked the reason, gives this account of it, hoc in omni vita facere studio: He thought it was the perfection of Phylosophy to go contrary to the Generality of men, and the likeliest way to find out Vertue; and Plato, shewing himselfe courteous to all, was thus censured, quid illi tribuendum est, qui tot annos in philosophia versatus, nullum hactenus dolore affecit; you know how to apply it, what a shame would it be that we who have better instructions, greater obligations, and sure
promises of helpe should give off with the excuse of the sluggard? Oh there is a Lion in the way! let us not fear, difficulties there will be, but they are onely or mostly diffi∣culties to the fearfull and unbelieving, which do their work negligently and by halves; be couragious and faithfull, and God will make the rough wayes plain before you.
As for the design of peace it selfe, though it may be se∣cretly maligned and whispered against, yet I do not expect to see any so hardy as to take up Armes against it publick∣ly; it hath such a glory and majesty in it as will keep off such attempts; except peradventure some mans ignorant zeale or vain-glory put him upon, seeking a name, (as he did who burnt Diana's Temple) by blemishing something of more then ordinary worth. I perceive by Mr. Firmius late book of Scisme, &c. that some upon their own misun∣derstanding have privately excepted against the first rule in our book of association, p. 3. Wherein we say, That in the exercise of Discipline it is not only the most safe course, but also most conducing to brotherly union and satisfaction, that particular Churches carry on as much of their work with joynt and mutuall assistance, as they can with conveniency and edification, and as little as may be in their actings, to stand distinctly by themselves, and apart from each other: he indeed hath answered for us (and for the kindnesse, I shall take the boldnesse to return him thanks in your names,) and hath hit our sence right enough; the truth is, the thing is so plain, that I wonder any body (let his prejudice be as strong as it may be) should misse it: he might have seen that we intend not to cut off the liberty of particular Congregations by the middle, by that Principle. 1. The words conveniency and edifica∣tion, would have told them as much; they stand not there for Cyphers. 2. The whole book (if he had diligently considered it,) would have taken that exception off; for
what we build upon that bottom is there expressed: now, what article or line can be find which may bear that charge? 3. Our Practise speaks for us, let him or others enquire, and then accuse if they have cause; but I see men speak in their hast: tis now so common for men to write against books before they understand them; that this fault may well be pardoned by the courtesy of England. Pardon this prolixity and plainness, and go on yet to be more diligent and peaceful. Warn the unruly, support the weak, be patient towards all men; be ensamples to the flock. And, when the chief Sepherd shall appear, you shall receive a Crown of Glory that fadeth not away.
Graistock, Aug. 1. 1658.

