



Mr. Sheriff,
WHen you first engaged me to
preach the Assize-Sermon, I
little thought, but that when
the Pulpit-work was done, my Notes
might have gone quietly to sleep among
their Fellows. I never dreamt of my
Lord the Judge his Invitation, nor
your Injunction, nor the Desires of
many others, to have them made
Publique, i. e. to expose both my self
and them to Censure. Nor am I ig∣norant
of the disadvantages that a plain
Sermon receives by the Press. There's

many an ordinary Face, that at a
glance appears lovely, and hath some∣thing
in it that pleases; but when it
is gazed upon, and exactly pryed in∣to,
discovers its own disproportions:
So it is with many Printed Sermons;
they may please in the Pulpit, but are
more laid open to view by the Press. I
suppose, this will be one of them But
this is my Comfort, that though I was
never so fond upon it, as to think it a
Beauty; yet I am satisfied, that it is
very honest. And some ingenuous dis∣positions
may like it for that, for its
simplicity and well-meaning; and o∣thers
that are more censorious, may
yet, for its moderation and general
aim, not be so rude as to fall foul upon a
harmless Creature, which intended no
more hurt, but only to perswade men to
Peace, and (according to its little

strength) endeavour a Reconciliation,
at least a Mitigation of our never e∣nough
to be lamented Divisions. And
so being protected by its own Innocen∣cy,
(as harmless Children are in less
Danger in a Fray than quarrelling
Ruffians,) I hope, it may quietly go up
and down the World a little while, (I
am sure it cannot be long), and at last dy
in Peace. However it speed, you see I
have at your Request overcome those
difficulties, which made me loath to ven∣ture
it abroad. And since you would not
be denyed my Notes, I have made
choice of this way to transmit them to
you, rather than deliver them over to the
Tormentors, I mean, Unskilful
Scribes;. of whom St. Hierom once
complained, that they did write Non
quod inveniunt, sed quod intelligunt;
& dum alienos errores emendare ni∣tuntur,

ostendunt suos. I confess, I was
loath to have my Notes mangled by ma∣ny
written Copies, and therefore had
rather trust to the Curtesie of one Press
than many Pens. If it may tend in the
least to God's glory, the Churche's
Peace, and the Satisfaction of your self,
and other worthy Persons that set me
upon it; I have all I aim at, and shall
remain
Sir,

