




Most DREAD Soveraign,
AFTER Your Majesties Miraculous Access to
the Imperial Crown of these Realms, in Peace
and Awful Silence; After your Glorious En∣deavours
to Illustrate your Crown and King∣dom,
and make the English NAME Legible to all our
Gazing Friends and Neighbour Nations; it needs an Apo∣logy
to interrupt your Great Tendencies and Designs with
a Piece of Paper-Skill, of any pretended Treatises of Sci∣ence.
But Great SIR, our Argument is as High as the
Outward Courts of Heaven, and Noble withal, since the
Greatest Princes Coats of Arms are emblazoned by our
Planets. These Papers, like your Majesties Royal Mind,
are not confin'd within the Limits of the Britannick Shore;
but to shew their Usefulness, they are bound for the East,
for the West, for the South, and for the Frozen Sea.
They aim at the account of a Fair Wind, and a Storm,
a Thundring Tempest, and a Resistless Hurricane, and
this, all the World over. They inquire into the Nature
of Vulcano's, Flaming Mountains, which being accompa∣nyed

often with Earthquakes, are as so many Sea-Marks,
to warn the Mariner that he comes not Ashore. So the Sub∣ject
may not be Unworthy of your Majesties Able Com∣manders,
that they may bring and re-bring their Cargo's
safe to their desired Port. Specially since we adventure to
search the Nature of Currents at Sea, that they may be
no longer Impediments un-accounted for; When the delu∣ded
Vessel shall find she's stolen back so many Leagues of
her Voyage, maugre a stiff Gale at her Stern. What tends
to Navigation, leads to Empire, or to Fame at least, and
Remark; in case your Undaunted Royal Spirit shall be con∣tent
with the Hereditary Dominions of your Crown. This
I reflect on with Comfort, that this Essay, I cannot say,
bask'd in the Sunshine; but, when time was, it had the
Glorious Fate to be enlivened by a Glance at least of your
Royal Brother of most happpy Memory. Nor can I
be diffident of your Majesties Sweetness and good Liking,
when according to my Low Station, under, and with
your Royal Scepter, I aim at the Publick Good, Praying
the God of Heaven, whom you Religiously and Devout∣ly
Worship, to impart the Blessings of Heaven, the
Blessings of Earth, and the Blessings of the Deep on
your State and Dignity Temporal, and after a Long and
Happy Reign amongst your Loyal Subjects, who only
understand the Blessings of Monarchy, to re-Crown your
Royal Head, in the Temple not made with Hands, his
Eternal Kingdom. So Prayeth your Majesties most
Humbly Devoted Subject, and Daily Orator,

