


Learned Sir,
HAving perused your Miscellanea and Character: both which
you diminish in your title page, by naming them an Essaie. I fell
upon the consideration of Country Gentlemen semblable to the three
Regions of the Air. In the middle, Clouds and Vapours and Me∣teors
apt to condense into plagues; or drie and fiery Exhalations which
unrestrain'd by providence divine, fall down in oppressions, and vio∣lences.
Among these we may rank divers of our dull Grands, who
lapping warm their Dura Maters, in a fat velume of some old colledge
or Cathedrall leases, or later easier purchases; like Mushrooms, or
Fuzzes of noisome earth, grow able to dimme both learned Witts and
nobler Originalls.
In a lower Region, we discern some, that having contented themselves
for a dozen months to wear a gaudy gown in the Ʋniversity, and only
to play with a few books finely strung and guilded, return with that
Library, whence streams of learning flow up to their lips, and clust∣ers
of choise sentences hang dangling ore their beds and shelves, while
they like Tantalus, so set, cannot sip, nor reach what is in∣deed
above their heads. Who oft in their estates of Land become the
prey of Sycophants, or crafty Servants, and their Souls hardly esca∣ping
the book and thraldome, either of our professors, or the popish
confessors, are frighted out of their old witts by new Illuminists, or
by that Bull of Ecclesia Catholica Romana, so charm'd, that
they dare not leap that pale out of which they are made to believe, that
God hath no Dear, nor they any hope of Salvation.
But (Sir,) As in the supreme Region is Limpid Air, and calm and

pure Serenity preservd. So have we some beaux esprits, rare and ele∣vated
Souls, who having tasted profoundly the fountains both of mo∣rall
aud divine knowledges, cannot rest till from their own full thoughts
they impart (as the Sun his raies) a fostering and blessed contagion to
the Souls of their darker brethren.
Here I would willingly exemplifie in words at length, and tell the
happinesse of Chesh. in their pious, noble, and learned Sr. G. B: Of
Lincoln the like, in Sr I. M. And of Northam. in Sr. I. I.
my most honoured Maecenas; and I am hardly withheld from mentio∣ning
our famous and learned countryman, Dr. T. N. Physitian, on
whom might worthily be bestowed the Panegyrick or Pindarickodes, e∣ven
of that incomparable Poet of Leicest. Mr. I. Cl.
But as the well-known modesty of these, so yours also imbars encmi∣ons:
other wise I might justly boast a Bee of generous race and extracti∣on.
From Bee Bee in this County, who by industrious draughts from
various Flowers in divers languag'd books, hath fram'd a composure of
Nectarian sweets, and imparts them thus, not only to that voisinage
(whereof he is a double ornament in learning and in conversation) but
with enlarged Beneficence (the crown of good mens actions) exposes
his laborious collections to the use of all that are able to understand him.
Wherein I professe (for fear of sacriledge) I dare not use my Deleatur
nor what you call for, an Index expurgatory. Believe me, Sir, when I
say as Trebatius to his Horace, Equidem nihil hinc diffindere
possim, and adde, nec ausim, and yet will boldly affix this short charm
to your most observant Readers
This page, right set, should be the last behind;
In this are all th' Errata they can find.
Leicest. Janu. 19th 58.

