


I Am not solicitous to give the World any other account of the publishing of this Sermon, but only this, That it was Preached at your Motion, and is now prin∣ted at your Request; which was (it seems) animated by others of my then Auditors, who desired to see what they had heard, and to have that in their hands, which otherwise was too apt to slip through their ears. What Censures I may undergo for this my compliance with your and their desires, I am not able to divine; if it be from Wise men, remember you are either to bear the Blame, or to make my Apology; if from others, I hope I shall be able to bear the weight of their displeasure my self, and to requite their censures with neglect. For the Sermon, I have only this to say of it, That it was intended to upbraid none but the guilty, and among them none but the impenitent; and even to them the onely harm intended was

but this, to set before them, as in a Glass, the hei∣nousness of their sin, that it might be a means (with Gods blessing) to accelerate their conversion, and rouze them up from that Lethargy of a dead and dedolent disposition of heart, in which the most of them lie yet sleeping; If God per adventure will giveEph. 4. 19. them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the De∣vil, who are taken captive by him at his will, 2 Tim. 2. 25, 26. Of the Principals, I must confess, I think there is but little hope; but for the Accessaries, I hope they have not all sinned the sin unto death; and therefore for them I shall put up S. Austines prayer (upon that passage of the Psalmist, Let them be ashamed and confounded, &c. Ps. 70. 2.) Sic confun∣danturAug. Enarr. in Psal. 69. ut convertantur, quia converti non possunt, nisi confusi fuerint; let them so be ashamed and con∣founded, that they may be amended and converted; because they cannot be converted, unless they be so confounded. If this Sermon should prove instru∣mental to do any such good upon any one of their souls, I should look upon it as a great blessing both to them and me. But leaving the success of that to God, I shall content my self at present with this demonstration of my readiness to serve you, and so remain,
Sir, 
