



SIR,
TIs likely you will no lesse wonder at this unexpected sally of my pen; than at my ha∣ving presixt your name to a Trifle, that owns no Au∣thour. Of the former, you

will receive an account in the Preface. And the lat∣ter, if the considerations following; are not of weight, to attone for; I know you have goodness enough to pardon, what I have not reason sufficient to excuse, or vindicate. Well meaning intentions are Apology enough, where candour, and ingenuity are the Judges. I was not induced then to this Ad∣dresse, because I thought I could oblige you; Worth

describes it self in the fair∣est Character. But refle∣cting upon that delight & satisfaction, that I have received in discoursing with you on such matters; and knowing that your noble genius is gratified by such kind of speculati∣ons; I thought I could not make more suitable payment for my content, or better acknowledge the favour I receive in your acquaintance, then by pre∣senting you a Discourse a∣bout

Praeexistence; & giving you a peculiar interest in it, as you have in its Au∣thour. Not that I would sug∣gest, that you are a Favour∣er of any strange opinions, or hold any thing in this particular, or any other, that is fit to be discounte∣nanc'd. But I know you love to be dealing in high and generous Theo∣ries, even where your self are a dissenter. Nor is it the least evidence of the greatnesse and heroick

nobleness of your spi∣rit; that amidst the flowing aboundance of the world's blessings with which you are encircled, you can yet dedicate your self to your belo∣ved contemplations; and look upon the furniture and accomplishments of the mind, as better riches, than the largest doals of fortune, and the wealth and Revenues of an am∣ple inheritance. And me∣thinks vvhile most others

at the best, do but use the Donatives of Providence; you enjoy them. And by a nobler kind of chymistry extract from them a pleasure, that is not to be met with in all the trivial sports of empty Gallantry. To be review∣ing the Recesses of Nature, & the beauteous inside of the universe, is a more man∣ly, yea angelick felicity, then the highest gratifications of the senses; an happinesse, that is common to the youthful Epicure, with his

Hounds and Horses, yea your ends are more Au∣gust and generous, then to terminate in the private pleasure you take, even in those Philosophical Research∣es; For you are meditating a more general good, in those careful & profound inquiries you are making into Animals, & other con∣cerning affairs of nature, which I hope one day the world will be advantag'd by. But I must not ingage in an Encomium, in which

I cannot be just, but I must be troublesome. For your modesty is no more able to bear it, then my Pen can reach. Wherefore I shall dismisse your eyes from this tyresome Atten∣dance; and only begge, that you would assure your self that no man is more your servant, then
The Authour of Lux Orientalis.
