



MY LORD,
I That in our late dangerous,
dismall, deadly dayes of War
was a man of peace, am now
prest; And therefore I must
not only expect, but in pru∣dence
prepare to encounter
with such enemies as are re∣solved
and prepared to charge me both with sword
and Pistol, censure and detraction. With the
first, for presuming to set up my dim candle amidst 
such shining Tapers, whose every where diffused

brightnesse is sufficient to dispel a midnight, yea an
Aegyptian darknesse, without the assistance or con∣tribution
of my faint Ray. Yet whether the light,
warmth, influence of some of those flaming torches
do most resemble the beautifull, comfortable suns,
or a blasting, mischievous, dreadful, prodigious
comets we are at this day sadly able to determine.
For not a few Books▪ are diseases rather then medi∣cines,
and of so infectious, so venimous a nature
thatHeylin. Geo. p. 717. like the people called Psylli, they are able
to poyson Serpents, to corrupt those and to render
them much worse who are too erroneous already.
Besides, instead of affording solid, safe, and good
nourishment, they do too often fill the readers
stomachs with hurtfull crudities, and their heads
with aiery, false, abstruse, turbulent, truculent, yea
blasphemous notions, principles, and opinions, ei∣ther
not fit to be published, ventilated, and
Dispudanti pruritus est ec∣clesiarum sca∣bies. Wotto ad Reg. controverted; or else not only unprofitable,
but also very dangerous if not mortall to be imbra∣ced;
since by wofull experience we find that poy∣soned
instead of wholesome pils, are too frequently
and greedily swallowed, because they are either ro∣led
up in, and covered with the pap of Flesh-plea∣sing
delights, or else because they are guilded
with gain, learning, eloquence, or seeming piety.

Whereas the innocent ends of my unpolished papers
are to level the high, to blunt the keen, to recti∣fie
the erring, and to straighten the crooked thoughts
which too many have of pleasure, honour, profit, the
worldly mans onlyHaec tria pro trino numine mundus habet. And yet an Heathen could say of them, omnia ista bona quae nos speci∣osa sed fallaci voluptate delectant, pe∣cunia, dgnitas, potentia aliaque complu∣ra ad quae generis humani caeca cupide∣tas obstupscit, cum labore possidentur, cum invidia conspiciuntur, osquè ipsos quos exoant & premt, plus minan∣tur quam prosunt: lubrica & incerta sunt, nunquam bene tenentur, nam ut nihil de tempore futuro timeatur, ipsa tamen magnae felicitatis tucla sollicita est. enec: de Brevit. vit. Ad Paunum. Trinity,
to unedge their teeth, to shar∣pen
their appetites, and to in∣flame
their cold desires after the
best things, that so they may no
longer feed upon Husks, or de∣light
in dung, but that they may
hunger and thirst after the bread
and water of Life, and by a ju∣stifying
Faith both feast, fill, and
fat their empty, lean, yea almost famished Souls
with the Manna of divine promises: And lastly to
perswade Christians not only to store, inrich, and a∣dorn
their understandings with knowledge, but
also to turn and digest their knowledge into practise,
without which Christian care, and pious both
indeavour and resolution, the noblest, wisest, ri∣chest,
greatest persons in the world are but living
Tombs possessed with evill spirits, glorious, stately,
beautiful shines, and walking Sepulchres carrying
dead souls up and down in them. For wilfull ig∣norance,
and learned profanenesse are the Scilla and

Charybdis of the Soul. The one leads men hood∣wink't,
seiled, tamely, and securely unto Hell:
The other makes them walk, or rather run, and
leap with their eyes wide open into the bottomlesse
pit of eternal destruction.
 2 I am sure also to be shot at with the pistol of
detraction, because nothing hath the happiness to
be approved, much lesse then the favour, or Crown
to be applauded that doth not please. And amongst
all those things which are most offensive, none are
either so sowr, or so distasteful to almost all, as the
speaking or writing of truth to them, and the de∣crying,
undervaluing, contemning, or endeavouring
to take away their Diana from them, since a sin∣cere
love of Holinesse, a pious contempt of the in∣fatuating,
deluding world, self-denyall, and
mortification are both the hardest rules, and the
harshest Lessons in all the Grammar of Christiani∣ty
to like, learn, and practise. Besides, it's a
custome no lesse common then both unreasonable,
and unjust, to condemn the work-man if the work
be innocent, and when they cannot deservedly
accuse the picture, to blemish, bespatter,
and reproach the painter. For it's not only the
bloudy policy of Satan to perswade, but tis also
the desperate madness of sinners to think, and

strive to ward and guard themselves, and their
Dalilah's against the down-right blows of truth,
by sleighting, reviling them that speak it: And
(like ignorant, or impudent Sophisters) when they
cannot answer the arguments of their opponents,
with their wicked wit to jeer or slander them, as if
their wisdome, safety, and felicity consisted in e∣vasions,
detraction, or a wilfull opposition of
truth. And as if Davids Harp were not sweet
compared with the murdering melody of the Si∣rens'
tongue of sin, or error; The Honesty and
Lawfulnesse of my designs are such, that as I am
assured they will not only Alarum but exasperate
and multiply my adversaries (or rather the ene∣mies
of plain-dealing and godlinesse) into an enra∣ged,
numerous Army against me: The most be∣ing
ready and resolved to run unto that standard
which is set up against honesty, vertue, sancti∣ty,
heavenly mindednesse, contempt of the world and
all it's vanished vexing, vanishing ensnaring, de∣ceiving,
destroying vanities: So I am fully perswaded
that the best will both favour, own, assist me. And
amongst all them I have resolved to fly only to
your Honour for relief, and safety; well know∣ing
that your Lord-ships entertaining of me and
siding with me will be not only my security, in∣couragement,

honour, but also an hopeful, smi∣ling
presage of a prosperous victorious issue in these
my weak, yet wel-meant undertakings. For true∣ly
my Lord it's my own as well as others Joy, and
wonder that your Lordships dawning is a serene Me∣ridian.
That you came out of the Mine refined gold,
and a polished Jewel from the Rock; That your
equally amiable graces, and eminent accomplish∣ments
do honour your honour, and ennoble
your Nobility; That your green years and
blooming youth have those gray hairs snowed up∣on
them, which are at once the Ornament, Com∣fort,
Crown, and Glory of venerable age,
I mean Learning, Wisdome, and Vertue;
That these equally beautifull, and fragrant
flowers should be full blown in your Lordships
January, when they scarce peep out, but are ve∣ry
rarely udded in the May of others; and
that you are not only fair, and flourishing, but
also both sweet and ripe in the very Blossome,
when the most are either foul or blasted, de∣formed,
or withered, or both, with ignorance,
and vices in their youth. This I say being re∣ally
true, and without an Hyperbole, Flatte∣ry,
or fram'd Idea of what might or should
be in a Christian, or a Person nobly descen∣ded,
'tis both an happy Prodigie and a most

auspicious Omen, that your Lordship will
grow up, prosper, rise, shine, and live to be
the Glory of your Noble Family, the honour
of your Nation, the darling, happinesse,
and triumph of your Countrey; and, like
the Sun, a great, choyse blessing to all those that
do or shall live under your cherishing, comfor∣ting,
reviving influence; by being so happy as to
have any relation unto, or dependance upon, your
Honour. My Lord, that is the right, the true
Nobility indeed, that is inlaid with vertue and pi∣ety;
for he is the Noblest peer in the World,
that is sincere religious. There is no creature
on this side Heaven either so glorious, or excel∣lent,
as a Godly great man. The purest Gold
is but shining clay, the most precious and re∣splendent
Gemms are but common and dush∣kish
Stones, all the sparkling stars are but
dim candles set in dark Lanthorns, and the reful∣gent
eye of Heaven is but a glimmering Gloworm
or Taper; compared with his worth, and bright∣nesse.
He's a Phaenix whom the other Birds
of Honour cannot but applaud, esteem, and ad∣mire,
though they will not imitate him; A Ti∣tus
Vespasian, the love and delight of mankind,

the Loadstone, joy, and jewel, of all honest, gra∣cious
hearts: He's one of Gods most honourable
Privy Counsellours: A Prince of the most
truly Royall bloud, the richest Heir, and the
greatest, the happiest Monarch in the World,
for Heaven is his Inheritance, and Kingdome.
These, these my Lord are the prerogatives, pri∣viledges,
and portion of those that are great,
and good. My Lord, its a custome in some
places, when a Tenant dyes, for the next that
injoies the lease of the deceased to pay his
Land-lord an Harriot, viz. The best of all
his quick goods, and Cattle. My Fore-fathers
who for an hundred years were Tenants to your
Lordships noble Progenitors, lye all of them
in their beds of dust: I succeed them in that Rela∣tion
they had to your Honorable Family. I hum∣bly
hope therefore that it will not be interpreted
a breach of Covenants though I pay that service
in lieu of a Harriot to your Lordship which I
confesse I doe most justly owe, and therefore in
Duty, and Gratitude, ought also to pay unto that
mirrour, and honour of her Sex, Family, and
Name, your Lordships truly noble Mother. But
yet I dare not tender this Homage to your Ho∣nour

without this most humble Supplication; That
your Lordship will be pleased to pardon my very
high & criminal presumption in thus daring to setan
orient Jewel in a leaden Ring; to stamp your Lord∣ships
beautiful image upon a copper medal; and in
offering to pay or rather to acknowledge a little of
my great debt, in leather instead of silver. But tru∣ly
my Lord besides a faithful heart and fervent pray∣ers
for your felicity, this is the best of all my goods,
and the chiefest of all my treasures that I have to lay
at your Lordships feet. And this is also the liveliest
the truest portraiture that I am able to draw: Ei∣ther 
of your Honours merits, which to expresse ful∣ly
or to speak elegantly silence is both the best Orator
and the most eloquent Panegyrick: Or of your Ho∣nourable 
Family's favours, Nobleness, and Goodness
to their Tenants; who did both know and consi∣der
that the faint and sickly sweats, the naked
backs, empty bellies, crying wants, complaining
sufferings, and the inevitable beggery of Tenants
and their Families impoverished, famished, and un∣done
by being unmercifully racked in their rents
were both bloudy gain, sinful providence, cruel
thrift, and also a sure way to canker, and lessen, yea to
consume their estates. And therefore your Lord∣ships

Noble Progenitors so far as I do either know
or could ever hear, have carefully, wisely, constant∣ly
shunned, scorned, and abhorred those fatal shelvs
of oppression, and exaction, upon which so many
great, avaritious, worldly greedy Land-lords have
wrack't and ruin'd their estates, honour, consciences,
and posterities.
Lastly, this is the exactest draught that I can
make of my own thankfulnesse, and obligations. Be
pleased therefore, my most Noble Lord, once more
I earnestly beseech you to pardon both my uncivil pro∣lixity,
and my unmannerly injurious boldnesse in pre∣suming
to beg of your Lordship not only that you
would condescend so much below your self as to a∣light
and stay in so mean a Fabrick, but also that
you would deign to lodg in such Sheets as are both
very course and black. This honour and favour if
your Lordship will vouchsafe to confer upon me,
then these rough-hewn stones which I have set up as
columns of my faithfulnesse, duty, gratitude, will be∣come
and continue (in spite of the iron teeth, and the
insatiable appetite of devouring time, that eats and
consumes without fulnesse, surfeiting, or satisfacti∣on,
even flinty pillars, as well as feeble persons) a
double monument of your Lordships noblenesse, and

goodnesse to succeeding ages. These, these my Lord
are the Forces and weapons wherewith you have, do,
and will, easily, certainly, gloriously, not only con∣quer,
but indear all reall, vertuous hearts. These are
the fetters too, wherewith they will be not only chai∣ned
most strongly, and kept most securely, but also
wherein they will be both willing, joyful, and am∣bitious
to follow the Triumphal Chariot of your
transcendent worth. And amongst all those happy
Captives who thus adorn your Lordships victories,
none will or can more cordially honour you then he
who (with his most ardent prayers for the temporal,
Spiritual, and eternal prosperity, Felicity and glory
both of your Honour, and your Noble relations on
earth, and in Heaven) takes the boldnesse to sub∣scribe
himself,
My LORD,

