


MY LORD,
WHat is the state and condition of this Land, and how lamented by serious men your Lord∣ship knows full well. If I appear an unwor∣thy means of contributing some Charisma toward the setling or healing of my Country, I should reach the highest of my ambition. Your Lordship perceives that all could not be said which was requisite in the abstract of an hour. The greatest argument that staves off some good minded people is, the pretence of dissolute life; which if perfectly true, were an inconsequence, seeing 'tis exprest by our Lord, that the Rabbies which say, and do not, as long as they sit in Moses's Chair ought to be heard. Howbeit, we hope we can exhibite not a few who shall set an example to them in all true piety of conversation, provided that affectation of sanctity and turbulency carry not away the name. My Lord, Either they are Decei∣vers or we; and because 'tis so, I thought I could not acquit my self better, then by publishing the Churches principles to all the World, whereby She
will discover, yea and anathematize the contrary Heresie. All that I have asserted is, our Reason, our Faith, and our Order, that men may be in some way of using their Bibles toward Truth and Edification, Spiritual Growth in Duty and Charity, not toward Offences and Divisions, which by me (by the Grace of God) shall not come in to the Church. 'Tis good to have a care of the Woe through whom—The A∣postle that bids us hold fast what is good, in the Text bids us hold fast our Creed, the  and our Di∣scipline Apostolick . And this I reckon was not casual. It is a prodigious thing when the unlearn∣ed and unstable cannot endure to hear that the Scri∣pture may be wrested, when they are the only men that do it, and that (Lord open their eyes!) to their own damnation. 'Tis a brave thing this self-conceit, being illuminate in our own eyes; true knowledge is ready to puffe up, false knowledge puf∣feth up more. Let Truth arise, and let Error vanish from our Cities: Let the unity of the Spirit find a Dwelling amongst us that would be spiritual. Ʋp∣on the prudent pursuance of which we shall pray for the Governors of the Church, and amongst them for your Lordship, as your Lordships most humbly de∣voted,

