




John Gobert Minister of the Word, wisheth increase of Grace and Happinesse here and hereafter.

Right Honeurable,
THe holy Apostle, exhorting to Christi∣an duties, among other important Ex∣hortations, hath this one, viz. That we ought to be alwayes ready to give an an∣swer to every one that asketh a reason of the hope that is in us, with meeknesse and reverence, 1 Pet. 3. 15. If in the performance of this duty, we are obli∣ged to one, much more to many; if to such as have not Power to Examine, much sooner to such as have: And although your suppliant not being cald upon to

give an answer, might in this particular justly plead Exemption, as one, who in this boldnesse, might seem rather to Create a businesse to himselfe, than to performe any task imposed: Yet, as often as he con∣fidereth, first, the condition of his Calling, being both a Minister of the Gospel, & a Member of the Commonwealth. Secondly, the condition of the present Times, being (in some respects) the Worst, as they are the Last, wherein Sathan, and all his malignant Instruments, do by all wayes and means, seek what they can, to ob∣struct and retard (at least) if not utterly to overthrow, that blessed work of Reformation so happily begun by you. Thirdly, reflecting upon those (too just∣ly grounded Feares and Jealousies which your Ho∣nours yet have) lest the people of this Nation, chief∣ly those of our Calling, should be over-much want∣ting to themselves, in not joyning with you in your Endeavours to promote the Churches good. I say, from these; and the like considerations, your Sup∣pliant could not but presume, that it would not be al∣together unwelcome, or ill taken, if a poore Minister of the Gospel, in a matter of such deepe Concern∣ment, upon which, the whole Fabrick of this bles∣sed Reformation, as upon its proper Hinge, turneth; but hath also, as farre as concerneth an Externall Church-communion, an influence into the Rights and Priviledges of all the Faithfull. Do chuse for this once, and in this so weighty a Matter, to deliver his judgment, not that he attributeth any thing to this weake and light skirmish which he hath set upon; or that this most Excellent Cause, should from the Authors handling it, seeme to receive any Grace or

Lustre: He is farre from conceiving any such impro∣bability; His only Aime and Designe in this under∣taking, was partly to give an occasion to the Reader, from the light which doe so manifestly breake forth in this briefe Polemicall discourse, to give occasion to thinke how great good might (in this Subject-mat∣ter) to the Churches further Edification be done. If some one of stronger Gifts, or greater Abilities, would undertke it, partly being as a Spectator, induced to be∣hold the frut of Rebecca, finding two contrary births to struggle in her wombe, I meane the blessed is∣sue of all thse Church-agonies which these latter times have afforded, I could not, but in the Spirit admire with Moses at this great sight, and to become an humble Suitor to all your Honours, that since this Zara, which in the Primitive times did even then put forth his hand to become the First borne, and yet, for causes best knowne to the Divine Majesty, hath puld back his hand againe in that; for most of the Ages since the Churches Infancy, this Zara, for the scarlet thread of Light and Truth, which Divine Provi∣dence, like Tamars Midwife, did even (as it were) hn put about his hand, hath made all the Spectators since that time, rather to looke and wish for Zara's birth, than to see it; but loe now this Zara is come: Phaes the first borne, I mean, the party-coloured, or exter∣nally-spotted Church-Member, hah already acted his part, too well knowne to all spectators, o the many fearfull breaches, which to others scandall, and his owne greater losse and disparagement he hath made in the Wombe of the Church. Loe now his brother Zara is borne, to be knowne to all that are spirtually

sighted, by the scarlet thread of Light and Truth a∣bout him. Receive him therefore, I most humbly be∣seech your Honours: He calleth upon, and cryeth to God, as his Father; and upon your Honours, as both Midwife and Nurse. Therefore, as you have in the provision of the sincere Milke of the Word, shewed your tender care of this younger Brothers inward Man; you would also vouchsafe every Zara your Protection from the wrong and violence of his Mo∣thers children, who would faigne make him Keeper of their Vineyard.
My meaning is, that according to the Place and Power God hath set you in, you would be Patrons and Pro∣tectors of the Sonnes of Peace, that Ministers, or Peo∣ple, might not dash themselves one against another, with severitie, and austeritie, for matters Circumstan∣tiall, whiles both hold the Head, Christ. So shall you oblige thousands, and my selfe among the rest, with much love in the Lord Christ to serve you.

