


Dear SIR,
I Have at length so far befriended my self as to read over your seri∣ous
and savoury Meditations: wherein me-thinks elegance and piety
like friendly rivals strive for mastery; and that with such equall skill
and strength that either both (which is not lawfull) or neither (which is
pity since both deserve it) must have the Crown Sir, the honour of
the work (if youle be so benign to the churlish ungrateful world, to
make it publque) will be your own, the profit and pleasure the Rea∣ders.
For exruditione fructus, ex elegantia voluptas, et
ex authoritate summus honos conciliatur. You have done many
Heathen Authors the honour to make them speak like Christians, and
youle make those whom you vouchsafe to favour with the Reading of
your papers to live as such if they be read with the same spirit, they
were written; if they find not the reader good, theyle make him good: as
was said of Plato; philosophia Platonem non accepit nobilem,
sed fecit Sir, I received them when I was in a hurrey of businesse
and could but cast an eye upon them: but at a little more leisure review∣ing
them, I see if I could but take in a little more, and digest what as
yet I have but tasted, I should be forc't to say more, without danger of
being taxed by malice it self of flattery, rashnesse, or ignorance, (for
nec irrisio in istos moresnec adlatio cdat) then your mo∣desty
will bear. Who minde what he reads, will see your mind, in what
you have written, to be well composed and gathered up within it self; and

I wish both mine and yours too, could keep under the command of those
apprehensions you had when you so well imployed your self. Were they
to be publique, I would desire Cyprian to spare that Ornament for
you, to be put into the Epistle to your Book which Erasmus bestowed on
him, viz. Pectus ardet evangelica pietate, & pectori respon∣det
oratio; loquitur diserta, sed magis fortia quàm diserta.
And I would (not so much to commend as engage you to it) say, neque
tam fortia loquitur quàm vivit. Sir, in vouchsafing me a sight of
your Papers, you have both done me honour, and laid a very acceptable
and pleasing obligation upon me, the more to thank you for your Love,
and the better to esteem you for your Worth. I beseech you, Sir, conceive
no displeasure against me for deteining your papers so long; for till with∣in
these 3 or 4 daies I had but just looked on them: And, Non satis
est vidisse semel, juvat usq morari; Ter pulchrum est quod ter
lectum placet. I confesse my own judgment condemns me for keeping
it so long and minding it no more, as doing an act that should belye my
respects and mis-report that true love and esteem, which I doe and have
so much cause, both to pay and owe you. At my next meeting with you,
I will submit my self to your charitable censure, and in the mean time
pray that you and I may coppy out your papers in our lives. Live and
be happy, and if you can, continne to love
June, 4th,
165.

.
