



SIR,
I Dare not approach so much knowledge, as you are owner of, but in the dress of an humble ignorance. The lesser Sporades must vail their light in the presence of the Monarch Lu∣minary; and to appear before you, with any confidence of Science, were an unpardonable piece of Dogma∣tizing. Therefore whatever be thought of the Discourse it self, it cannot be censur'd in this application; And

though the Pedant may be angry with me, for shaking his indear'd Opini∣ons; yet he cannot but approve of this appeal to one, whose very name would reduce a Sceptick. If you give your vote against Dogmati∣zing: 'tis time for the opinionative world, to lay down their proud pre∣tensions: and if such known accom∣plishments acknowledge ignorance; confidence will be out of countenance; and the Sciolist will write on his most presumed certainty; This is al∣so vanity. Whatever in this Dis∣course is less consonant to your seve∣rer apprehensions, I begge it may be the object of your charity, and can∣dor. I betake my self to the protecti∣on of your ingenuity, from the pur∣suits of your judicious censure. And were there not a benign warmth, as

well as light attended you, 'twere a bold venture to come within your Beams. Could I divine wherein you differ from me; I should be strongly induced to note that with a Deleatur; and revenge the presumption, by differ∣ing from my present self. If any thing seem to you to savour too much of the Pyrrhonian: I hope you'l consider, that Scepticism is less reprehensible in enquiring years, and no crime in a Juvenile exercitation. But I have no design against Science: my indea∣vour is to promote it. Confidence in uncertainties, is the greatest enemy to what is certain; and were I a Sceptick, I'de plead for Dogmati∣zing: For the way to bring men to stick to nothing, is confidently to perswade them to swallow all things.
The Treatise in your hands is a

fortuitous, undesigned abortive; and an aequivocal effect of a very diverse intention: For having writ a Dis∣course, which formerly I let you know of, of the Soul's Immortality: I design'd a preface to it, as a Corre∣ctive of Enthusiasm, in a Vindicati∣on of the use of Reason in matters of Religion: and my considerations on that Subject, which I thought a sheet would have comprised, grew so volumi∣nous, as to fill fourteen: which, being too much for a Preface; I was ad∣vised to print apart. And there∣fore reassuming my Pen, to annex some Additional Inlargements to the beginning; where I had been most curt and sparing: my thoughts ran out into this Discourse, which now beggs your Patronage: while the two former were remanded into the obscu∣rity

of my private Papers: The latter being rendred less necessary by his Ma∣jesties much desired, and seasonable arrival; and the former by the maturer undertakings of the accomplisht Dr. H. More.
I have no Apologie to make for my lapses, but what would need a new one. To say they are the Errata's of one that hath not by some years reach't his fourth, Climacterical, would excuse indeed the poverty of my judgement, but criminate the boldness of this Address. Nor can I avoid this latter imputation, but by being more criminal: and to shun this respectful presumption, I must do violence to my gratitude. Since therefore your Obligations have made my fault, my duty; I hope the same goodness, that gave birth to my crime, will remit it. Hereby you'l further in∣dear

your other favours: and make me as much an admirer of your vertues, as I am a debtor to your civilities: which since I cannot do them right in an ac∣knowledgement; I'le acknowledge, by signifying that the greatness of them hath disabled me from doing so: an im∣potence, which a little charity will render venial; since it speaks your self its Au∣thor. These your indearments will ne∣cessitate me to a self-contradiction; and I must profess my self Dogmatical in this, that I am,
SIR,

Cecill house in the Strand, March 1. 1660.
