


May it please Your Majesty,
THIS Discourse, which first came to life in Your
Royal Brother's, his late Majesty's Reign, (of most
happy memory to these Nations) being now of
Age to appear abroad, doth humbly prostrate it self at Your
Majesty's Feet; not doubting Your most gracious Acceptance,
if but for the End and Design it proposes and carries with it:
Which is no other, than to stir up and provoke Your Majesty's
Subjects Abroad, (and even at Home also) to use at least
some endeavours for the propagation of Christianity
among their domestick Slaves and Vassals; (together with the
other numerous Heathen in Your Majesty's Colonies) who for
the general are most ambitious thereof, were their Desires se∣conded
by suitable Inclinations in their Owners, so as to afford
it to them. A Duty most certainly so indispensibly necessary,
and absolutely incumbent upon all, but especially the most re∣formed
and refined Christians, that it may justly seem a Mat∣ter
of greatest admiration and astonishment, to but observe
that it has hitherto been so much neglected; yea, and not only
neglected, but (I cannot express it without shame and horror!)
even scoffe at and opposed by them. An impiety, which tho be∣fore
not wholly unknown to Your Majesty, (as having been,
by a very reverend and worthy Person, of near Relation to
Your Majesty, some time since represented to Your Majesty)

is yet but newly arrived within Your Power to remedy. But
for the which we have the greatest assurance, to wit, Your Ma∣jesty's
Royal Word then passed upon that Your first notice
thereof. Your Majesty being thereupon pleased, not only to
testify Your highest resentment and abhorrence of so prophane
an Abuse, but withal giving most manifest Indications of
Your Desires for its reformation and redress. And like a
most religious Assertor, and zealous Patron of the Faith once
delivered to the Saints; Your Majesty declaring it most rea∣sonable,
that all Men should be made to partake of the Grace
of God, so freely in Christ tendred unto them; and that
none should be debarred of the common Salvation, especi∣ally
such who do so much hunger and thirst after it. And at
the same instant, no less admiring, that any pretence of Reason
should by Christians (and those too of the best sort) be offered
to the contrary; much less so resolutely, and with so much
pertinacy be defended and persisted in. And when in refutati∣on
of that no less impudent than most impious Assertion, of the
Impracticableness thereof, at least in those Parts; it was an∣swered
and urged, that it could not possibly be less practicable
to us, than to other Nations; particularly to the French, who
in the Island of St. Christophers, (half whereof is peopled
by that Nation, but the rest possessed by your Majesty's Sub∣jects)
without finding any either mischief or inconvenience
consequent thereupon, are known to confer Baptism upon all
that sort of People: Whilst the English upon the same Spot,
do most sacrilegiously reject and give it up for impossible:
Upon the hearing whereof, Your Majesty being fully convinced

and satisfied, was pleased to allow the Argument for un∣answerable;
and withal to add, That if ever it should
happen to fall in Your way, Your Majesty would fur∣ther
it all you could. The due performance whereof, no
one that understands Your Veracity and Zeal, will in the least
suspect.
As for this so absurd an Impiety, their pretence is, the
advance of Trade and Commerce, which they are not ashamed
to set up in opposition to Christ and Religion. But Your Ma∣jesty
cannot but know how unworthy (even at the best) this
Plea is of a Christian Nation: and withal, how incongruous
and mean it is that for Trade (even allowing the Pretence
for good) the Work of God should be destroyed;Rom. 14. 15, 20. and
those Myriads of Souls be made to perish, for whom
Christ died, no less than for the residue of Mankind.
It would be also considered, as we doubt not but Your Ma∣jesty
will, what returns, after so long possession, we have made,
or rather, what despite to the Spirit of Grace we have
done, in hindring those poor Heathens Salvation, which we
ought with our utmost Zeal and Industry, to have promoted;
The very end, as must be piously supposed, for which it at first
pleased Almighty God to discover to us, and to possess us of
those many large and fruitful Countries: Whilst we prefer our
Trade and our Mammon before it, as of the greater value.
And when all other Religions, even to the very Turks and
New-England-men, do compass Sea and Land to create
Proselites; we only do seem to fetch the same compass to
continue them Heathens. An abomination which both threa∣tens

and calls aloud for Vengeance from Heaven upon the
most wicked Authors: Unless Your Majesty's extraordinary
Piety and Goodness shall suddenly interpose, and so at once
put a stop to the Sin and to the Judgment. And who
knows whether Your Majesty be not come to the
Kingdom for such a Time as this?Esther 4. 14.
I shall only be bold to detain Your Majesty with a short
but pious Speech of a certain great Prince, one of the late
Kings of Spain, uttered to Your Majesty's blessed Father, of
most glorious memory, whilst residing in that Kingdom;
Who indiscourse, taking occasion to magnify that King's spa∣cious
Dominions; He, in answer thereto, was pleased to reply,
That 'twas true,Howell's Fam. Letters Vol. 1. §. 3. Lett. 33. God had entrusted him with divers
Nations and Countries; but that his Advantage there∣by
was, to have opportunity to propagate Christian
Religion. It is to be presumed, that as Your Majesty's
Dominions, in the Parts we speak of, are in extent not much
short of, perhaps a great deal larger, than that Princes: So
your Majesty's Piety will not suffer You to be wanting to Your
Self and People, in reaping the like blessed and glorious Ad∣vantage
thereby. So prayeth,

