



Right Hon:
SENECA writeth of one Harpastes, a woman as foolish as blind, who wold commonly put the fault in the House she dwelt in. Ait domum tenebrosam esse. She saith the house is dark, as if she could see well enough. Even so our Sectaries, and false Prophets, although in very deed, they be blind, men of Corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the
 Faith, (as the Apostle hath it of the Enemies of the truth) 2. Tim. 3.8. Yet they usually complaine of the Times, and say, that the Mini∣sters of God (though Orthodox and godly Learned men formerly) and now, lived, and doe live in darkness and ignorance; and so cry them downe as wicked and Antichristlan, to the great dishonour of Almigh∣ty God, the distraction of his Peo∣ple, and no small advantage to the Enemies of GOD to blaspheme. Whereupon, being (though unwor∣thy) called to be a Minister of the Gospel; J thought it my Duty (according to my poor Talent) to endeavour to stop the mouthes of these railing Rabshakeh's and to ad∣monish the People (as they tender the good of their Soules) not to follow these Strangers, neither know Ioh. 10.5. their voyce, but flie from them? I have not published this ensuing Treatise, in hatred to any mans per∣son,
 or purposely to shew their na∣kedness, but to warne them and the world of their dangerous Errours and tenents which they hold, and (unheard of Ptesumption) without any lawfull Call, or warrant from God to take upon them the Sacred function of a Minister, and to feed God's people with Poyson in stead of Bread, and so (without the mer∣cy of God) giving 2 Tim. 2.25. them Repen∣tance to the acknowledging of the Truth: incurre damnation to their Soules.
I am bold to present this poore and unpolished worke unto your Honour, as to a Religious Obadiah, who have ever fed the Lords Pro∣phets with bread and water, and as to a Noble Maecenas, favouring Learning and Learned men. I hum∣bly desire your Honours favourable acceptance and Patronage, that through Your hands it may find the better entertainment in the
 world. Thus craving pardon for my presumption; wishing to your Hon.rs and your whole Family, all happiness, both externall, internall, and Eternall; I rest in the Lord,

