


ABout Christmas last, while, full weary of anxious, and in the end not much avai∣ling Solicitude, I endeavoured to render my mind serene, and free from that Eclipse; I addressed my self to that Eminent Person, the chiefest Glory and Ornament of our Colledge, Doctor Harvey, at that time resi∣ding not far from the City: and found Him very intent upon the per∣scrutation of Natures Works, and with a Countenance as cheerful, as Mind imperturbed, Democritus like, deep∣ly

searching into the Causes of natu∣ral things. I then instantly saluted Him, with, Are all Affaires well, and right?
How can they, He gravely answe∣red, when the Common-wealth is sur∣rounded with intestine troubles; and I my self as yet far from land, tost in that tempestuous Ocean? And, un∣feignedly (added He) if the comfort of my Studies, and the remembrance of many things, long since fallen un∣der my observation, were not some re∣freshment to my Mind; I know not what could prevaile upon me, to de∣sire to survive the present. So it hath happened, that this umbratile kind of life, and vacation from publique Cares, which commonly causeth a Sadness of Mind in others, hath pro∣ved a Sovereign Remedy to mine.
Here I answering, said, Sir, I shall soon afford you the Reason of that happy Event; which is this: While

the greatest number of men flatter themselves with thoughts of growing wise, by the notions of others Brains, and (without any addition, unless the deceitful Gloss of different Phrase, and new Method) with ostentation obtrude upon the World the Traditi∣ons of the Ancients; it hath been al∣ways your choice, about the secrets of Nature, to consult Nature Her selfe. And this kind of Study ever hath as less of Fallacy, so more of Delight: in regard, that frequently, while you are fixt upon the indagation of some one thing, many others offer them∣selves to your observation; and such, perhaps, of which you had no thought to enquire. For, your self (I well remember) was pleased once to tell me, that you never yet Dissected any Animal (and, indeed, you have dis∣sected very many) but you found in it somewhat beyond your expectation, and which you never so much as thought of before.

'Tis true, replied He; it hath e∣ver been the delight of my Genius, to make strict Inspection into Animals themselves: And I have constantly been of opinion, that from thence we might acquire not only the knowledge of those less considerable Secrets of Na∣ture; but even a certain Adumbra∣tion of that Supreme Essence, the Creator. And, though I was ever ready to acknowledge; that many things have been discovered by Lear∣ned Men of former times: Yet do I still believe, that the number of those things which remain yet concealed in the darkness of Impervestigable Na∣ture, is incomparably greater: nay, I cannot forbear frequently to wonder, and sometimes smile at those, who perswade themselves, that all things were so consummatly and absolutely delivered by Aristotle, Galen, or some other great Name, as that no∣thing was left to the superaddition of

any, that succeeded. Nature, tru∣ly, is Her self the most faithful In∣terpreter of Her own secrets: and what she exhibits, either more brief∣ly, or more obscurely, in one kind, the same she explains more largely and openly, in another. No man doubtless, hath ever rightly deter∣mined of the Use, or Office of any Part; who hath not in many Ani∣mals, beheld, and with himself di∣ligently considered the Fabrick, Si∣tuation, annexed Vessels, and other Accidents thereof. Those Ancient Oracles of Wisdom did terminate the knowledge, as of all Countries, so also of all Animals, Plants, and o∣ther things whatever, allmost with the narrow limits of Greece alone: But, to Us the whole Theatre of the World is now open, and, by the Se∣dulity of Travellers, we well know, not only the Place, Habits, and Man∣ners of its Inhabitants; but also,

what Animals, what Vegetables, what Minerals every Region is fur∣nished withal. Nor is there any Na∣tion so Barbarous, which hath not either by chance, or the constraint of some inevitable necessity, found out something for the common use and benefit of Mankind, which hath esca∣ped the invention of other Nations more Civilized. And shal we think that nothing of Commodity can accrue to the stock of Sciences, from these Helps and Advantages: but that all the Fountains of Wisdom were drawn dry by the First Ages? Certainly, this Fault is to be imputed to our own de∣fect of Industry; not at all to Na∣ture.
To this, another Evil hath adjoi∣ned it self; which is, that many, wanting the Experimental cognition of things, from the formerly concei∣ved verisimilitude of some Opinion, afterwards boldly broach a positive

Judgment thereupon, as if it were certainly known: whereupon it fol∣lows, that they are not only grossly deluded themselves, but seduce o∣thers also (who are not sufficiently circumspect) into Error.
These, and other Discourses of the like importance; flowing from the Doctor, with admirable readiness, as is customary with Him; I inter∣rupted Him, saying: Sir, How free you are from all culpability in this kind, all, who know you, sufficiently understand: and that's the reason, why many Learned and Judicious Men, who are acquainted with your Unwearied Industry, in the advance∣ment of Philosophy, greedily expect the Communication of your further Experiments.
And would you then advise me, (smilingly replies the Doctor) to quit the tranquillity of this Haven, where∣in I now calmly spend my days: and

again commit my self to the unfaith∣ful Ocean? You are not ignorant, how great troubles my Lucubrations, formerly published, have raised. Bet∣ter it is, certainly, at some times, to endeavour to grow wise at home in private; then by the hasty divulga∣tion of such things, to the knowledge whereof you have attained with vast labour, to stirr up Tempests, that may deprive you of your Leasure and Qui∣et for the future.
Yea but (answered I) to deserve well, and receive ill, is the usuall reward of Virtue: And the Winds, which raised those your troubles, have, like the Wind Caecias, drawn mischief upon themselves. With that, He shewed me His Exercitati∣ons, touching the Generation of Animals, A work framed, and po∣lished with very great pains. At sight whereof, I instantly rejoicing, said, I now have obtained what I

earnestly desired: and must tell you, that, unless you impart these Exerci∣tations to the World, you will both be wanting to your own Honour, and en∣vy the Utility of others. Nor shall you sustain any further trouble in the Business; for, whatever of Care is requisite to the oversight of the Press, I shall willingly take wholly upon my self. To this He condescended with much adoe, at first urging, among many other Disswasive Arguments, that this His Tractate would be im∣perfect, without the conjunction of the History of the Generation of Insects. In a word; at length I pre∣vailed: and He said, Loe, I resign these my Writings freely into your hands, with absolute power, either suddainly to publish, or for a while to suppress them, as you shall think convenient. Having returned Him very many thanks for so high a fa∣vour; I took my leave, and depar∣ted

as another Jason, enriched with the Golden Fleece. And when, up∣on my return home, I had surveyed the Book; I could not but admire that so vast a Treasure had laien so long concealed: And that, while o∣ther men arrogate so highly to them∣selves, onely for the entertainment of their nanseating Readers, with Trifles and Toies, and Dishes twice (yea, an hundred times) brought to the Table before; the Modesty of this Gentleman should be such, as to set so small a value upon these His Ex∣cellent Observations. And truly, when ever He hath been pleased to give any of his own Inventions leave to see the light, He hath not depor∣ted Himself with Ostentation, or su∣perciliousness, after the custome of many, as if an Oak had spoken, or he had deserved a draught of Hen's-Milk: but, His Dictates were Ora∣culous, and Merits above the reach

of Elogie, or Reward: but, with exceeding Modesty, as if onely casu∣ally, or without any difficultie of in∣quest, he had fallen upon the Disco∣very of those Mysteries, which, indeed, he long searched into with profest di∣ligence, and study indefatigable.
And this also is an Argument of e∣minent Candour in Him; that he ne∣ver inwades the reputation of any Au∣thor, but every where delivers his own judgement, in mild and friendly language. For, with him it is Prover∣bial, that That Cause is worthy to be suspected for scarcely good and profitable, which its Author con∣tends for with brawling and fierce∣ness: But Truth can want no Patron.
And when it was easie to him, to have woven this whole Web, from materials of his own; such was his care, for the prevention of Envy, that he yet chose to follow the clue of Ari∣stotle and Aquapendens, as if he

had contributed thereunto no more then meerly the Woofe. Of Him I shall speak no more, lest I appear to praise to his face a Person, whose Worth hath advanced Him infinitely above my praises; especially to You, to whom his Virtue, Candor, and In∣genie, are long since very well known. But, of My selfe, I shall adde onely thus much; that in this great Busi∣ness I have performed no more then the meer office of a Midwife: producing into the light this noble Issue of His Brain, in all its parts and linements perfect and consummate, as it is now presented to your View; but staying long in the Birth, & fearing, perhaps, some injurious Blast of Envy or De∣traction. To speak more plainly, I made it my Province to oversee and correct the Press; and because the Author writes so obscure a Hand (A thing, as we say, common to learned men (as that scarce any man, but who hath bin

accustomed thereto, can read it with∣out difficulty, I used all diligence to provide against the Errors of the Com∣positor, that might be occasioned there∣by; which I observed, not to have been duly prevented in the Impressi∣on of a small Treatise of the Doctors, not long since set forth.
And thus, most Learned Sirs, have I rendered you the Reason of this my Writing to you; which is, to let you know, that our HARVEY hath Sacrificed to the Benefit of the Com∣monwealth of Learning, to the Dig∣nity of our Colledge, and to His own Eternal Honour.
Farewel, and Prosper.
