



RIGHT Honourable, and Virtuous Ladies, when I pitched upon this Subject, I had You in my Thoughts: my Ambition was to beg your Patronage. As Your Fortunes, so are Your Virtues parallel; and, like the Gemini in the Zodiack, embrace each other. Your Titles of Honour are remote, and di∣stinct, opposite to other: but, as the
needle in the Compass, You ever tend to one star; and, with the King's Daughter, are both glorious within. I shall present to Your view a Tragi-Comedy: the Actours be all Women, though their parts differ. Here You have Virtue, and Vice display∣ed; both brought upon the Stage in lively Colours. To attract Your attention, the Several Scenes are Sa∣cred; for each Theme is drawn from Holy Writ: an no Water, but that, which flows from the pure Foun∣tains of the Scriptures. Your Ho∣nours must not expect any Plot, or Aenigmatical passages, to puzzle rather, then please the Spectatours; neither look for sublime, and high expres∣sions; for, the Subject being feminine,
the matter must not speak big. Here Your Ladiships shall see plain dealing, and every woman's praise, or dispraise, as she deserves. If any one's mouth open, they bark not at me; but God; for I have spoken nothing, but that, which the Holy Ghost thought fit to Record. The ultimate end is God's Glory, the next an holy imitation, and detestation either of Vice, or Virtue. As Contraries put together do illustrate each other: So Sanctitie, and Impiete, oppositely placed, will by far, seem more lovely, or loathsom. Should we, at once, behold a glorious Sun at one hand brightly shining, in a serence, and clear day, with no Cloud interpo∣sing; and, on the other hand, the
Moon totally eclipsed with thick, and black Clouds, o'respreading the whole face of the Heavens, from whence proceeded fearfull Thunder∣ings, and Lightnings, with impetu∣ous Storms, and Tempest, threatning another deluge of Waters to drown this great World again: how dreadfull would the one, and how amiable, and delightfull would the other seem? Grace of it self is lovely; but, com∣pared with sin, will look more lovely. So a gracious Woman, compar'd with one tht is graceless, how transcen∣dent? I humbly desire Your Honours acception, and pardon, and rest

