



Right Honourable,
THat  of favour which I have received from you, bindes me in a strong obligation to return a thankful acknowledgement. Some in these sad times have voted Chari∣ty an Heretick; a Sect whose Faith is in the full, their Charity in the wayne: it is their belief they are for Heaven, their works say, they are for Hell; these call them∣selves young Saints, but are old Devils; they profess much, practise nothing; full of science, but make no conscience of their wayes: these have a Bush at the door, no
Wine within. A generation of Vipers who cry up Christ, and Crucifie his Members.
My Lord, here you have in full view these Arch Hereticks, enemies to young and old; all the young Infants in the Land, and all the old Ministers of the Gospel. We at this time in comparision, ane as few as Gi∣deons Lappers; yet with those few sound∣ing Trumpets, the Lord, I trust, will throw down the Walls of Jerico to the ground. Our Church much resembles the sweet waters of Hypanis, through which a Well of incredible bitterness runs; that as Heroditus and Solinus do affirm, none of those sweet waters admit of any of the bit∣ter waters to lodge within their source. Here we live together as in the Ark, clean and unclean, incorrigible Hereticks and de∣vout Conformists; yet no hereticall brinish waters do we suffer to intermix with the waters that issue out under the threshold of the Temple.
Phideas his Picture was so made, that it all appeared in every part of Minerva's Im ge; but the Picture of Heresie, God of his mercy hath kept from appearing in the face, or dwelling in the tongue of us so much despised Divines. There is yet a
Sibboleth, Shiboleth, by which your Honour may discover who is the Gileadite, who the Ephraimite; who are the Sons of God, who are of their Father the Devil.
My Lord, it is no small comfort to us, The Seers of Israel, to behold such tall Ce∣dars as your Honour, standing upright in this our Lebanon; who for all the storms of Schismes and Heresies hold fast to the Faith of Christ Crucified, to the Doctrine of his Apostles, to the practice of the Primi∣tive Church. It's well known how you ap∣prove of the Ministerial Office as the highest calling, as also Infants Baptisme; and yet in these latter dayes, perillous men are start up, who debar yong Children from the Font, and shut the Church doors upon us called to officiate; their malice reaches from the Font to the Pulpit, from the Pul∣pit to our Persons. Their Germane Massa∣cre makes us fear a second Parisian Mat∣tens, or else the Cicilian Evening-Song; where they predominate they are most bloo∣dy, none talk more, and less reason; they are ever questioning, but never satisfied. And thus I have taken to task unreasonable men, whom, though we inform, they will never reform. The Sun-beams makes clay
the harder, and the Beams of Gospel Ad∣monitions makes these more obdurate; a just judgement for their Capital crime: their sin was against the Head, and God gives them over to be headstrong Hereticks.
And now my Noble Lord, since I have to do with such sons of Belial, and so ill-opi∣niated, I crave the shrowding my Manuel under the benigne shrine of your protection; your gracious compliance shall oblige me to pray for your health here, and happiness in heaven, which is the Christian engagement, My Lord, of

