



May it please your Majesty,
AS there is no Science, Art, or Faculty, so much improved of late, as that of Physic; so I am certain there is no Prince in the World ever gave so great Incouragement to the Promoters of this Faculty, as your Sacred Majesty. For what greater Reward can a
dilligent Enquirer into Na∣tures Mysteries be ambiti∣ous of, than the Smiles and Candid Aspect of so graci∣ous a Soveraign upon his painful Endeavours?
Among the many Aspi∣rers after some noble At∣tainment in the Medic Fa∣culty, whom your Majesty hath graciously vouchasafed to take notice of, I the un∣worthiest of your Majesties Subjects do here (with all due Submission and Thank∣fulness to your Majesty) reckon my selfone. For no sooner did the rumour of my success in Curing Con∣sumptive Persons by a new
and differing Method, ar∣rive to your Majesties Ears, but your Majesty resolved to satisfie your Royal Cu∣riosity in the truth of it: whereupon your Majesty Ordered me to endeavour the Cure of Mr. Kenedy Obri∣an, which was accordingly performed to your Maje∣sties great satisfaction; since which several other Cures have been Effected in Cases of the like Nature. The deplorable Condition Mr. Obrian was in, when I first undertook him, your Ma∣jesty well remembers.
Now the sense of your Majesties Candor and Be∣nevolence
toward me in this thing, hath incouraged me to prefix your Majesties Name to his small unpo∣lish'd Tract; Presuming that I have already (tho un∣deservedly) obtained so great a measure of your Majesties Favour, as to im∣plore your Royal Patronage.
Withal, I cannot but humbly acquaint your Ma∣jesty, that altho your Majesties Candor towards me, next to that Divine Providence, which makes my Endeavours successful, hath been my greatest En∣couragement; yet my E∣nemies abroad have been
almost indefatigable of dis∣courage me; Envy and Ma∣levolence have so predomi∣nated in the hearts of some, that they have made a ran∣devouz of all their Strength and Forces, those mischie∣vous Machines and En∣gines of Malice, Hatred, Ob∣loquy, Prejudice, Lies, Back∣bitings, and uncharitable Censures to blast and ruin me. So that it is easie to con∣jecture how this Innocent Partus will be received by the hands of those cruel Cen∣surists, who so malign its Author: It is not hard to phansie how it will be kick'd about and buffeted, hiss'd at
and derided, dam'd and o∣braided by their desperate Tongues. It is impossible such a pitiful, helpless Infant should survive the successive Clamours of those whose Interests it is to hate and back-bite me; unless so Gra∣cious and Compassionate a Patron as your Majesty, will deign to cherish it? It is just now going to run the Gantlet, and 'twill certainly perish and be knock'd down to the ground by the innu∣merous thumps and blows of those Malevolent Persons that stand prepared to strike it, unless it be cloathed and defended by the Coat-Ar∣mour
of your Royal Favour.
It is therefore, Great Sir, with all possible Submission and Reverence, that I lay this Treatise at the Feet of your Gracious Majesty, humbly assuring your Majesty that altho it be already Printed, yet it shall never be pub∣lished to the Eyes of the World, unless your Maje∣sty will first signifie your gracious Acceptance of it. The Copies that are now Printed shall either lie dor∣mant till they are eaten by Worms, or else be given to the Flames, as unworthy of humance Inspection, if your Majesty refuse to re∣ceive
and countenance it.
But I have already so far Ex∣perienced your Royal Candor, as that I cannot now despair of your Gracious Clemency. That your Majesty may live for ever, that your Royal Blood may e∣ternally Circulate in its proper Vessels, that every part of your Sacred Body may regularly per∣form their proper Functions to Perpetuity, that your Health and Wealth may be Adequate to your Grace and Goodness, and that a Crown of Glory may be your everlasting Portion; is the real desire of

November 13th 1682.
