



Gentlemen,
WHen first I design'd to Publish this small Treatise, I thought no Per∣sons so fit to dedicate it to, as such, on whose Judgment and Capacities the World might rely; upon which account it is that I make no scruple to prefix your names here.
I cannot likewise but promise to my self encouragment from Others, acquainted with this Art, in that not only your selves, but many besides, of the most Ingenious, seem to desie an Essay of this Nature· For as for the Modern preparations I know their usefulness cannot but be inviting; in that they have been made use of by diverse of the greatest Persons of the times; and One in Particular, by that discerning Monarch K. Charles the II.
Gentlemen, I know Experimentally the unvaluable good producible from our Art;

and I need not blush to say, that were it brought to perfection, (of which I cannot but despair upon the Grounds that some Chymists proceed) it would prove of the Greatest and most Noble benefit to Mankind. I am satisfi'd that the Ordinary Methods of Physick cannot cure so expeditiously, as some Medicines I have heard off, that were produced from the Noble Art of Pyrotech∣ny, and I may without boast aver, that my Modern discovery contains some of that Nature.
And this I Assert to a Physician, who himself has given me encouragment suf∣ficient for this Publication; who as he was Physician to the Prince above mention'd, so he may well be presum'd to be a Consi∣derable Judge in the matter.
Nor can I imagin, but that a Person, who wants only the name and practice of a Phy∣sician, does likewise approve of this asser∣tion; because he well knows, all Arts and Sciences, (how ever inprov'd by the Pre∣sent Age) are as yet impart imperfect; and I believe, we may take his Judgment in a greater matter, then either what I Publish, or what I assert in relation to the excellency of our Art.
I cannot indeed assert a possibility of finding out such Compendious ways, as would cure all kinds of Diseases, which were much to be wish∣ed, but I verily think, if any humane Art or Science could work such Miracles, Chymistry would Effect it: But as for several Distempers, which the Common Method of Physick are slow in, Chymistry has done More than is yet Publick.
I cannot hope ever to see those of this Art to be Incorporated, for were they so, and a due encouragement added to it, as likewise due care taken of them and their Medicines, I cannot but think, it would be the greatest blessing to Mankind.
But I shall not insist on this Topick here, tho' I suppose all good Men; and particular the most ingenious Physicians, will joyn issue with me; because 'tis the most desirable of all others. All that can be objected is, that I have added Paracelsus, which makes up so conciderable apart of the Book; but no ingenious Man can dislike that Author, as here Methodiz'd; since were he duely followed by other Chymists of this Age, it would much better the Art.
You will excuse me, Gentlemen, for this harangue for our Art, & veniam prolaude peto; tho' I know not, whether you will think it necessary, since it may prove a defensatory preven∣tion against all Cavils, that may be made to this Essay: How∣ever it will justify my design for the Publick good in this Publication, and You in accepting of it from, Gentlemen,

