



SIR,
THAT which gave the Occasion of my thoughts pitch∣ing upon this subject matter, viz. Christ's Manhood in Heaven, was that Dispute betwixt Mr. Hicks, and Mr. Pen, at London, concerning the same. I being there present, am satisfied by the Quakers fallacious management of that Discourse, that they deny the same Numerical true and real Manhood of Christ in Heaven, as a place remote from us. Since that I have had Discourse with a Neighbour Quaker, William Bates, who frequently said, He did not believe that the Humane Nature, that which was taken by Christ of the Virgin, had now any being. I have three Witnesses of this, whom I can produce if need be.
Sir, I may boldly say, That neither you, I, nor thousands more of Christians in this Nation, ever thought that we should live to see that day, wherein so many thousands, pretending to Christi∣anity, in this Nation, should be so Brazen-foreheaded as to dis∣own Jesus of Nazareth to be the Messiah; yet so it is. O Tempora, O Mores! The Ends of the World are come upon us. My Spirit being stirred within me at the hearing of this grand Fundament al Errour, I thought it my duty to the
Lord Jesus Christ, to Antidote the poor Country, as much as in me lieth, against these damnable Delusions; it made him speak that was dumb before, when he saw his Fathers Life in danger. So what Babe, what Novice will want a Mouth, a Tongue to speak, a Hand, a Pen to write, when the Man Christ is struck at by ungodly Seducers? Therefore I, though the least and most unfit of my Brethren, have Printed my Notes, Preached (you know) at Hartford, and humbly present them to you, Sir, as to one whom I know to be a sincere lover of the One Me∣diator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, and of his Evangelical Truths. Pray, Sir, vouchsafe to read them, and candidly bear with what may not be so congruously worded in so sublime a Mystery. The Lord by his Spirit establish, settle, strengthen you, in this and every Truth, and preserve you and your Elect Lady, both as Vessels of Honour, to his heavenly Kingdom, there to behold the Man Jesus Christ in his Glory, which is best of all.

