




IN this Relation which follows, you may see some of the Quakers rotten Opinions. You may remember how joyful we were when the Lord cast this Young-man unexpectedly amongst us; how our hearts were refreshed in the speaking forth of these ensuing things: And whereas we had mourned that some had gone out from our Meet∣ings to them, in this one instance the Lord hath abundantly made it up to us, let Christ have the glory. None of those that went out from us were properly of us, had received the Gospel that we believe; No, it's not possible for any to receive it truly, and forsake it: But this young Man was fully of their Way, Spirit, Faith, and Principle, (as any may see by reading this little Book.) Though he made not such an open Profession as others of them, yet went farther than most of them towards that which they call Perfection: yea, he was, as Luther said of himself before his Conversion, an honest Monk, so an honest Quaker, true to his perswasion. I have thought it meet, by the advice of my worthy Brethren in the Ministry, to expose this Narrative to the open view, although the meanness of the Person's Education, and the little time he hath had for proficiency in the knowledg of the Gospel, might dis∣courage in this matter on the one hand; yet on the other hand, the profit that we hope may be reaped (through the Lord's Blessing) by ma∣ny, especially at Hartford, in the reading of it, both as to the re∣ducing some from them, and preventing some staggering ones, con∣firming also others in the Faith of the Gospel, hath prevailed with me to print it. And indeed, Instances of this nature are so famous and rare, VIZ. For any to be recovered from this Betwitching; and this In∣stance
none of the least, that I could in Conscience do no other. This withal being an experience that the Lord in rich Mercy gave him, I hope will take the deeper impression upon the Minds of People: For my own part I see such clear, distinct, sound Gospel, knowledg in it, that I dare say confidently it is no other than the Finger, the eminent Finger of God upon his dear elect Child: And the more remarkable is it, in that be was a stranger to us all, conversed with none of us, most of these things were taught him alone in the reading of the Scrip∣tures. Flesh and Blood hath not revealed this to thee, may we tru∣ly say, but our Father which is in Heaven; the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the Mystery of the Father and the Son hath been upon him. O that every one of you (my dear Brethren) and every one in Hart∣ford had the knowledg of Christ thus distinctly formed in you! till which thing be, the Soul of him, to whom Christ hath committed you as his charge, shall travail in birth, and be in pain: Blessing the Lord that his poor Labours have not altogether been in vain as to this matter. O that it might please Christ to direct my faithful Brethren in the Mi∣nistry, in their respective places where they are cast in the Countreys, to open and insist more on the great New-Testament fundamental Truths in the Blood of Christ! My daily Prayer to Christ is, that we all may he made able Ministers of the New-Testament: We have but Law and Gospel to preach, let us keep them distinctly in their places; the Law for the knowledg and conviction of Sin, yea of first evil Mo∣tions to be sin. The Law is spiritual, Rom. 7. and requires perfect and perpetual Obedience of every one that will be justified by it, and ad∣mits of no Repentance at all in case of any failure. Now the Law is weak through the flesh, Rom. 8. Man is breaking it every moment by his crooked thoughts: this would let a Man see his Sins to be mounta∣nous and innumerable, and so bring down every high thought, and lay him low, giving him to see the need of the Righteousness of another, not being able to answer the requirements of the Law; thus the Law is our Schoolmaster to Christ. Then the Gospel, the Balm of the Doctrine of the free Justification of a Sinner in the Blood of Christ; for the Wound, this Oile to be poured into the Gashes of Conscience, how would it Heal, Settle, Confirm, Comfort; and the Soul thus find∣ing a Saviour and Sweetness in Christ, this would be as new Wine, and be would soon discern all poisonous drinks. Whoever bath tasted that the Lord is Gracious, never takes up with the Quakers Christ. O that the Gospel were studied by us, and preached by us more!

These things that follow have established me in the Preaching of it.
1. That the Parity and Holiness of God's Majesty is such, that no∣thing is accepted of him but what is every Way perfect and compleat. We are very prone to measure God by the rule of our own Imagination; and to think that what appears to be Righteousness with us, is so with Him: Whereas we are to conceive of God according as the Scriptures set Him forth to us, and to bring our Righteousness to the Bar of his Tribunal, and see whether it will bear the Tryal, see whether it will hold out to justify in his sight; when as Job 5.15. The Heavens are not clean in his sight. Job 4.18. He chargeth his Angels with Folly; which is too little to speak of the bad Angels.
2. None of the Sons of Men since Adam's Fall (that was no more than Man) hath ever brought, neither can any of them bring this per∣fect and compleat Righteousness to God: Look to the best Men that e∣ver were sanctified, and that eminently by the Holy Ghost, yea some of the Prophets, Patriarchs, and Penmen of the Holy Scriptures, see what they say of themselves, and what is said of them. Abraham had Righteousness, he had Works; yet Rom. 4.2. these were not to be gloried in before God, only in the sight of Men: David, Psal. 143.2. prayeth to God in this manner, Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy sight, &c. Therefore Psal. 32.1. he placeth the Blessedness of Man in the Forgiveness of Sins; Blessed is he whose Sin is covered, &c. which is mentioned in Rom. 4. Isiah c. 6.5. I am a Man of unclean lips, Chap. 64.6. We are all as an unclean thing, and all our Righteousness, &c. Hear Job, called a perfect Man c. 9.30. If I wash my self with Snow-water, and make my Hands never so clean, v. 31. Yet shalt thou plunge me in the Ditch, and mine own Cloaths shall abhor me. Let us look at Da∣niel, so much beloved of God, how he confesseth Sin, as well for him∣self as the People, Dan. 9.7. Ezra likewise c. 9.15. Paul in Rom. 3.9, 10. tells us, That all, both Jews and Gentiles, of whom the World consisted, were under Sin, and not one righteous. Ver. 23. All fallen short of the Glory of God. 1 Job. 1.8. If we say we have no sin, we lye, &c. He writes to those that were called, and sanctified, and takes in himself with them, and all Saints that ever were, or ever should be. And its but a lie to rest so in any Righteous∣ness, as to take us off from Confession of Sin. This is spoken to make them prize the more, Forgiveness of Sin by Christ's Blood.

3. Jesus Christ of Nazareth that was born at Bethelem, that was of the Seed of David according to the Flesh, brought this Righteous∣ness. He was called the Holy One, and the Just; in Daniel he is called the most Holy; in Jeremiah, the Righteous Branch: in Peter, A lamb without Spot and Blemish: in 2 Cor. 5. ult. Knew no Sin.
Now this came to pass,
1. In that He was born of a Virgin in an extraordinary Way. Luke 1.34. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the Highest shall over shadow thee; therefore that Holy Thing that shall be born of thee, &c. Thus there was no Original Sin in him, or upon him.
2. He who brought this Righteousness, was the Holy One, in that being the Anointed, having the Spirit without measure, by his Active Obedience in his Life absolutely and compleatly fulfilled the Law of God in all things, and at all times; Rom. 8.4. That the Righteous∣ness of the Law might be fulfilled in us. How can that be, but on∣ly as Christ in our nature fulfilled it for us by his Holy Life? Mat. 5. He came to fulfil the Law: I come to do thy Will, O God, in Hebr. 10.7. Now this was required in the Sanction of the Law, viz. Do this and live, either we must, or another for us, otherwise no Life: We could not, through Weakness in the Fall, therefore Christ came and did all in our place and stead.
3. By laying down a Full Price for the Sin of his People by the Sa∣crifice of himself, suffering Death on the Cross without the Gates at Jerusalem. Therefore this his giving himself to Death, is called , a Satisfactory Price of Redemption in the room, and place, and stead of another. That God hath Justice in him, the very Light of Nature sheweth, Rom. 1. ult. it's said of the Heathens, who knowing the Judgment of God, i. e. his vindictive Justice; The bar∣barous People, Acts 28.4. could say, Vengeance would not suffer Paul to live, when they saw the Viper upon his Hand, apprehending him to be a Murderer. They saw this in the Deity, viz. A Ven∣geance ready to punish Sin. Now this is as dear to Him as his Mer∣cy, it being himself, it must therefore be satisfied, being wronged by the Sin of Man; and He cannot deny himself. And if it should rest upon those that had sinned, it would have burned to the lowest Hell, and, and so the Lord would have been deprived of all Worship and Service from his People: But now this way it is satisfied, viz. the
Father poured out all his Wrath upon his Son Jesus Christ, upon whom the Guilt of his People was charged; Isa. 53. All our Iniquities met upon him; and therefore it's said in that 53d Chapter, He was bruised, striken of God. In Gal. 3.13. Made a Curse. Zach. 13. Awake, O Sword, against thy Shepherd, against the Man my Fellow, smite the Shepherd: And now He being God as well as Man, his Fellow, Co-equal, bare up under this Wrath.
4. This Righteousness of Jesus Christ, becomes ours by Imputati∣on; it is reckoned ours, and accounted ours by the Father's Act: As if we had thus done and suffered, these Scriptures speak thus much, viz. Rom. 5.19. By the Obedience of One, many are [made] righteous. 2 Cor. 5. ult. That we might be made the Righteousness of God in Him. Now we are made Righteousness in the same way as He was made Sin, for these two are set in con∣tradiction to one another; but he was not made Sin by Inhesion, for He knew no Sin; therefore this way, viz. by Imputation. Jer. 23.6. He shall be called (i. e. He shall really be) Jehovah Tsidkenu, The Lord our Righteousness; he had spoke of him as the Righteous Branch, springing up from David, as being made Flesh in the 5th Verse, and here, as Jehovah. Here is both his Manhood and God∣head, and as thus He is our Righteousness. This cannot be spoken of the Light that every Man hath: For, is that the Branch from Da∣vid? Or, is that Jehovah, God that gives being to all things? Nor of the Spirit, that cannot be called the Branch. Nor of Faith, nor of Works, of what sort soever; but only of Jesus Christ, that He is our Righteousness: not only giveth Righteousness, but He is our Righteousness by Imputation.
The Doctrine of Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, (though W. Pen, in his Serious Apology, pag. 148. blasphemously calls it, A Doctrine of Devils) is very rational to them that are taught of God.
1. If the Guilt of Adam's first Transgression was ours by Imputa∣tion, which cannot be denied, from Rom. 5.12. In whom all have finned: If that first Sin, so many thousand Years since; why not the Righteousness of Christ sixteen hundred Years since? If that to all his Seed and Children, why not this to Christ's Seed and Chil∣dren?
2. If Christ Jesus had the Guilt of Sin really charged upon him, and imputed, when as He had no Sin inherent, what else is to be under∣stood
by that, 2 Cor. 5. ult. He was made Sin? If, as some would have it, only the punishment of Sin, in being offered and sacrificed. Punishment hath always respect to Sin, otherwise it is not poena, but must change its Name, then the Guilt of the Sin of his People must be imputed to him. And this was plainly sigured in the Sacrifices under the Law, when all the Sins of Israel were confessed over the Heads of the Beasts, and so offered and slain: If this be true, why not then Christ's Righteousness to become ours the same way, viz. by Imputa∣tion.
3. Was not Christ the Second Adam, and so a common Head and Representative? Now what such an one doth, is as much as if they did it that are represented. Christ was a Surety, Heb. 7.22. Why then, his Paiment is ours; what he had, did and suffered, was not so much for Himself, as for his Members.
Fifthly, There is much difference betwixt this Righteousness of Christ, and that which the Apostle Paul calls his own, in Phil. 3.9. in which he saith, he would not be found in the Day of Judgment to be justified by in the sight of God: There be makes a plain difference betwixt those two Righteousnesses, viz. his own, which he calls the Righteousness of the Law, and that which is through the Faith of Christ, which he calls the Righteousness of God.
1. Our own Righteousness is within us, inhering in our Souls. It consists in those Gifts and Vertues that the Spirit of God works in our Minds, and we express these outwardly in the observation of the Mo∣ral Law in our walkings amongst Men: Now that this is properly our own Righteousness, though it is effected by the Spirit in us. 1. See how the Scripture speaks of it; Faith is called your Faith, and Love is called your Love, Col. 1.4. In Deut. 6.25. It shall be our Righteousness if we keep his Commandments. Job 27.6. My Righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go. Matth. 5.20. Except your Righteousness exceed, &c. 2. Our Souls are the Subjects of this Righteousness; it is really in our Minds, therefore ours. 3. We put forth the Actions wherein this Righteousness consists, both Internal and External: Is it not we that believe, and we that repent, though the Spirit works Faith in us? God is said to work in us to will, Phil. 2. yet we will, to do, yet we act, and we perform: Are not we said to pray, though the Spirit works Prayer in our hearts? 4. Was not Adam's grace which was concreated with him, properly his own? Yes surely, Then this is our own Righteousness, though
wrought in us by the Spirit. But that Righteousness of Faith, by which we are justified, is wholly without us in the Person of Christ: It was wrought out Six Hundred Years since: And not one Act, either of our Bodies or Minds, contributes any thing to it, our Faith is no part of it; only by Faith we receive, and view, and apprehend that which justifies us. And whereas it is said, Abraham believed, and it was accounted to him for Righte∣ousness: Not the Action of bebelieving, but that which he rested upon by Faith justified, and was his Righteousness: One then is Christ's personal Obedience, the other is our personal Obedience; one that which Christ wrought, the other that which we work; one is given of God from Heaven, and rests upon Faith, the other is here upon Earth, by Works: Our Righteousness is but the Righteousness of meer Man; the other, the Righteousness of Him that was God as well as Man; otherwise we ought not to trust unto it; for, Cursed is every one that trusteth in the Arm of Flesh: One is perfect and compleat, the other is faulty, imper∣fect, incompleat as to degree.
6. This Righteousness thus opened, is marvellously well-pleasing to the Father; Mat. 3. This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased; This is spoke of Christ as Mediator, repre∣senting all his People; the Father looks through Him at all his Members, and is well-pleased with them: The Father's Love from Christ the Son is diffused to all the Elect; this Voice came for our sakes. Ephes. 5.2. An Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling Savour; The Father's Heart is at rest in this, it perfumes all the Church with its Odour: 2 Cor. 5. ult. it is called the Righteousness of God, (i. e.) the Righ∣teousness which he approves highly of; because the Righteousness which he in his infinite Wisdom contrived, and the Righteousness of his own Son, that is of the same Nature with the Father, in this our Persons are accepted; Ephes. 1.6. We are accepted in the Beloved, and our Prayers and Works. 1 Pet. 2.5. Spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. Heb. 11.4. By Faith Abel offered a more acceptable Sacrifice; and with∣out this it's not possible to please God.
This Righteousness we have to offer to Sinners in the preaching of the Gospel; and by preaching it thus, we do not make void, but
establish the Law: We see by this, how we are saved by the Law, viz. Christ keeping it for us, by a Covenant of Works; Christ be∣ing made under the Law, He fulfilled it: Here is a sweet Harmo∣ny between Law and Gospel, now they kiss each other in Christ, so far from being one against the other. The poor, heavy, laden Soul, will thankfully receive this Righteousness, and rejoice and glory in it; the Sick, this Cordial; the starved Prodigal, this which is Bread indeed: But the proud Pharisee, the Self-righteous One, the rich Justiciary, he that is whole. The Quaker goes about to make his own Righteousness to stand, and will not submit to this, but despiseth it; and what will be the issue, but to wonder and pe∣rish?
Give me leave to say, That want of inculcating these things in our Ministry, hath been the cause that so many have been led a∣way with the Error of the Quakers; and that Professors are not out of danger, till they be made more skilful in the Word of Righ∣teousness. Who sees not (by reading these following Lines) but this young Lad may now engage (without any peril) any Quaker in England in Discourse.
I likewise humbly entreat, that our Brethren would use more diligence and pains in going up and down the dark Countries, taking Examples from these Foxes, who with unwearied travel compass Sea and Land, spoiling the Vines that have tender Grapes, many a young Lamb is torn by them.
My Brethren, Let us be greatly encouraged in this Instance, waiting upon the same Spirit, in reducing others to the Faith in the same manner: And let me engage you, Night and Day, to pray to Christ for the poor Town of Hartford, which now for a long time hath a been a Nest of Error, where Satan hath had his Seat; that now having begun to fall, he might fall as Lightning from Heaven. It's matter of Grief to us, (as you kuow) that many in the Town, that made a fair shew once, have turned their Backs upon us, and sunk into Formality, discouraging of us all they can; The Lord give them Repentance unto Life. Others the same in Faith with us, through Childishness, make a Schism in smaller matters Controversial: but most of all, that these Sedu∣cers have caught so many simple Hearts in their Nets, and keep
them in perfect Popish Slavery and Bondage. O let your Cry go up to Heaven for them! some of his Elect peradventure may be among them; My Bowels, my Bowels for that dark divided Town of Hartford. O cry and pray, That as He hath now in Mercy built us a Tabernacle there, the residue of the People might seek af∣ter the Lord, and the Quakers be undeceived.
As for you, my Brethren, let me exhort you to stedsastness in the Faith you have received, and yet more Zeal and Boldness for the Truth. We have to do with a very impudent Enemy, yet re∣member and believe it; Stronger is he that is with us, than those that are against us. O let not those poor deluded Ones, that have trod under-foot the Blood of Christ, and so left them∣selves no more Sacrifice for Sin to trust unto; let them not out-strip you in their Zeal they have, but not according to knowledg: And be you not afraid of them, tho you be but a very little Flock, and they swarm as Locusts about you: As High as Heaven is above the Earth, so far is that Spirit of the Faith of Jesus in you, a∣bove the Spirit of Antichrist that is in them: And yet a little while, and Christ shall bruise Satan under your Feet. Amen.
Hold on your way, grow stronger and stronger, quit your selves like Men, walk in Wisdom, and in Love; keep the Unity of the Spirit; abound yet more and more in all Judgment and Experience. Jesus Christ is amongst us (as we all can witness) in his Institu∣tions, that are so much despised by this dark People; He walketh among the Golden Candlesticks. We see a Glory in a crucified Jesus, though they see no Beauty or Comeliness in Him, for which they should desire Him. We eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood; He dwelleth in us, and we in Him: We have both Christ within and without, we have both Word and Spirit, and so we have the better of them that divide these. Let us with one Shoulder carry on Christ's Interest in that place, and Christ will add to us such as shall be saved, and he will build us up, and finish that good Work that He hath begun among us; and he will throw all Babels down to the Ground, and not leave one Stone upon another. There begins to be a Confusion amongst them already; wait a while, Da∣gon will fall before the Ark. I testify from the Lord, having
tried this People many a time, and in the Light of the Spirit of Christ, to my utmost (being willing to receive any Truth from any hand) that the Quakers Spirit is, A Spirit of Delusion, and their Doctrine is Antichristian, in diametrical opposition to the Doctrine delivered by the Apostles of Jesus Christ. I testify in the Lord, and I have with me herein the concurrence of many ten thousand faithful Ones in the Land, That if ever Satan trans∣form'd himself into an Angel of Light, it is in this People, coming forth with such a fair pretence of strict Mortisication and Self∣denial, speaking of Light, Spirit, and Power; therefore let all rake head and beware of them. O how dreadful to deny the Man∣hood of Christ, the Holy Scriptures (save only what they think serves their turns) to be Saviours to themselves, to say, Christ came and died in vain, and to no purpose, &c. which necessarily follows upon their Doctrine. My Soul weeps in secret to remember what a dumpish, dark, sowr, Pharisaical, confused, slavish Spi∣rit we have found some in, whom they have lately caught, and yet withal infinitely proud and self conceited; the Lord have Mercy upon them.
I now recommend these following Lines to you, keep them by you as a Treasure; they are rich Spoils obtained in a Spiritual Warfare, and dedicated to you, a Temple of the Lord. In this you have the Doctrines which I (who am the least) have been preaching to you, taught me by the Holy Ghost, through manifold Tossings, Trials, Temptations, Desertions, Sadnesses, Buffettings, where∣withal I have been exercised these Fifteen Years, the Lord is my Witness. And I am willing and ready (through the Grace of Christ) to seal them with my Blood against all Adversaries what∣soever. It comforts me that I can say, I have preached none other things than what is written by the Prophets and Apostles, and how pleasant (as here you see) when the Spirit of Truth in one, ec∣choes to the Spirit it self in another: It is the self-same Spirit that worketh these things in us, and for us all, 1 Cor. 12.
In this you have, 1. the Spirituality of the Law of God spo∣ken of.
2. Our Weakness to keep the Law.
3. God's insinite Wisdom and Goodness to provide a Surety in our room.

4. Christ's great Love in undertaking.
5. Man's great blindness by Nature, cannot see this of himself.
6. His backwardness to receive this Righteousness, till he be brought to utter distress, as the Prodigal was.
7. His proneness to be his own Saviour.
8. God's distinguishing Love and Grace, in enlightning his, and revealing Truth to them by his Spirit drawing of them.
9. The blessed Fruits of Faith; viz. Peace, and Joy, and Love to Christ.
10. The ineffectualness of any other thing, but Faith on Christ to bring the Soul to rest.
11. How the Light within every One, and Obedience there∣unto, will not do it.
12. You may see herein the benefit of reading the Holy Scriptures.
13. You may see that the Doctrine of Free Grace, is not a Do∣ctrine tending to Licentiousness, but Holiness.
14. Yet it excludes all manner of Works in the point of Justifi∣cation.
15. Tho Compleatness of Justification, viz. from all Sin. These, with more that might be enumerated.
And now I will boldly say, The Gates of Hell, Power and Poli∣cy thereof, shall never prevail against these Truths. Notwith∣standing the rage and subtilty of Adversaries, we will say, Tho an Host encamp against the Church, Isa. 37.22. The Virgin Daughter of Zion hath despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn; the Daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her Head at thee.
I conclude with this, Remember how you have heard and re∣ceived, and hold fast, Rev. 3.3.1 John 2. Read the 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, and this is the 24th, Let that therefore abide in you which you have heard from the beginning: If that which ye have heard from the beginning remain in you, ye shall also continue in the Son, and in the Father. Amen.

