



SIR,
I Took so great satisfaction in the reading of those your Reflections up∣on the Roman Clergy, that I have thought I could not better employ my time, than illustrating them with a large Comment; and though sometimes I improvs upon your judgement, and make bold to push on somewhat farther than you are pleased to go, yet shall you not find that I have gloss'd upon your discourse, as some Monks have done on the Bible, for I have faithfully confirm'd your Opinion by the History of our France, and by the wise sayings of the best Authors. And if by their help I let you see that your Maxims carry you to much higher enterprises than your Counsels aim at, this is not to Contradict, but to Assist you, and per adventure to say for rou; what you would have been content to have said

your self. After having thus fought under your Banners, the interest of my Party, which in your Fifth Chapter you are so hard upon, obliges me to engage in their defence. And I know you are too generous, Sir, to take this ill. But I bestow not above a Third part of this Discourse on that Sub∣ject, that you may clearly perceive I have more than double the pleasure in following your steps, than I find in opposing you. To return then to my chief design, which is, to espouse your quarrel, and take your part against the Ʋsurpations of Rome, I will shew you what more remains to be said on that occasion, there is a pretty Book called An Examination of the Powers of Car∣dinal Chigi, then when he came in the qua∣lity of Leg at to His Majesty. A Book furnish'd with invincible Reasons, and a profound knowledge of Antiquity, especially for what concerns our France. And from thence I acknowledge to have received some of the Authorities that I alledge. As in those two Chapters, where you speak against two contrary Parties, you consider not Re∣ligion otherwise than as it affects the Po∣licy of France, I likewise have confin'd my self within the same bounds, and have not examin'd this, or the other Religion, and the Professors, farther than the State

has or may have damage or benefit by them in Temporals. I shall throughout this Dis∣course forbear to say what I now only men∣tion at parting, viz. That the Interest of God ought to be dearer to us than that of the State; and that these two Interests ac∣cord so well, that where Truth and Piety Reign, Peace, Justice, and the State can ne∣ver fail to Flourish. God of his Goodness grant such happy times to France, this is the Prayer of

