


Dread Soveraign,
THe following Sheets were written before the Death of Your Majesties Royal Brother King Charles the Second, (of ever Blessed Memory) And I had a de∣sign then, to shew to His Majesty, that several Jews to whom His Majesty had been Graciously pleased to Grant Letters Patents of Denization, with a Clause inserted, That they should pay no more Custom than English, (non ob∣stante the Statutes,) Had Owned and Coloured the Goods of other Jews that had not such a Clause in their Patents, and of some Jews who had no Patents at all; By means whereof their own Pattents were at His Majesties Pleasure.
But while I was preparing Arguments and Proofs thereof, it pleased God to put a period to His Majesties days, and the Act of Tonnage and Poundage, with the Articles annexed, which Granted the Alien or Petty Custom to His Majesty, re∣ceived also there by its determination.
A few days after, Your most Excellent Majesty sending forth Your Royal Proclamation for the continuation of the Receipt
of Your Majesties Customs, and declaring Your speedy calling of a Parliament; I forbore the exposing my Sentiments to publick view, till God should permit Your Majesties meeting with them.
And now, that being most Happily Accomplished, and the Act of Tonnage and Poundage, with the Articles annexed, being past, for and during Your Majesties Life; I humbly pre∣sume to aver, that the aforesaid Clause inserted in those Jews Patents, had an end with the said late King, and that the pre∣sent Act Grants to Your Majesty the Alien or Petty Customs in as full manner, as if that Clause had never been Inserted.
I therefore humbly beg Your Majesty to direct, that all Jews, from the 6th. day of February last, do pay the Alien Duty, as by Law they ought to do; which will not only be many Thou∣sands per Annum advance to Your Majesty in Your Customs, but also be extream grateful to all Your Majesties fair dealing English Merchants.
Nor can I forbear to assert, that the greater any persons Possessions are in England, the more is their loss by the Ille∣gal Trading of the Jews in Your Majesties Plantations in America: For the larger their Lands are, the more is their Growth and Product, and the Advantagious Vendition there∣of, depends much on the Consumption the Plantations make of them. Whereas the Jews here, together with other Jews their Co-partners living in Holland, making their Outward Cargoes at Holland, thereby lessen the Consumption of the English Growth and Manufacture, which not only Affects Your Majesty, but also all Your Subjects of what degree or quality soever in the whole Nation.
My Endeavours (however) have not been for a total Ex∣tirpation of the Jews, or their Trade here, (as some have aimed) but only to oblige them to pay Your Majesties Customs, and act according to Law, that thereby the English Merchants might be Enabled to Sell as Cheap as themselves.

Which design only being (as the Jews conceived) of Grand Disadvantage to them, they consulted (as I have reason to believe) their firm Friends at Custom-house, how to deal with me; and from thence proceeded the Offers of large Bribes to me, on one hand; which being rejected, a Torrent of Threats followed on the other, viz. Perpetual Imprisonment, Rotting and Dying there; and (which they thought most prevalent) Starving to Death: They not knowing (it seems) that my most Noble Friend, the Honnourable Collonel Strangways loved me too well to suffer that, to whom only, on all emergent Occasions, I wrote for Supply, and never failed of speedy and suitable Returns.
As soon as Your Majesty shall be pleased to demand Alien Duty from those Jews having Patents with the aforesaid Clause, Your Majesty will find that they will fall in with some of Your Majesties Subjects in London, as well as in the Out-Ports, to cover their Trade: I cannot so much blame the Jews as the English in this matter; For to one, 'tis Natural, to the other Ʋn-natural and a great Shame and Reproach to the Na∣tion: Also I am certain their Old Friends at Custom-house, dare not leave them, though (considering Your Majesties Pay, together with the Oaths and Sacraments they take the more firmly to tye them to their Duty) in them it be Diabolical; some whereof I have been forced for Truths-sake to Name; And if it displeases any one of them, I beg a fair Hearing; whereon I am sure to let them know I have not been yet as Sa∣tyrical as I might, or as their base Actions deserve.
The grand thing then for the future will be, how to distinguish Jews Goods from English, and Settle it so, that no further Cheats be put on Your Majesty in Your Customes, Your Subjects in their Staple, and the Merchants in their Trade.
'Tis much easier to prevent future Frauds, than discover past: However, I still affirm, that I can make good my Pro∣posals Fol. 29. (including London too, by the way of future
prevention.) And besides that, make it appear that of late years the wholesom Acts of Navigation, Frauds, &c. Are like a Nose of Wax turned at the Pleasure of some now at Helm, who pretend a small Duty taken contrary to Law, is more grateful to Your Majesty, than the due Execution of those Beneficial Statutes.
My Sufferings both in Body and Purse have been solely for my Zeal in the Service of my King and Country; and no opportunity (in my thoughts) did ever happen, since it began, till now, to express the Truth of it so, that it might with Power repel the fury of my Enemies. But now, (that God having seated Your Majesty on the Throne of Your Ancestors that the Laws recover Life, that all my Actions have been Legal, that I have not made one false step in my Duty; and that the Substance of this Discourse hath relation to the benefit of Your Majesty and the whole Nation.) I have great hopes of Your Majesties Favour and Pardon for my Boldness in making this publick Address; and that Your Majesty will believe, I will never Swerve from my constant practice of Loyalty to the Crown, and Obedience to the Establish'd Laws both in Church and State, whatever my future Condition may happen to be. For I am
Fleet London May 29th. 1685. Sacred SIR, 
