



My Lord,
AS I have long had an Am∣bition of presenting some ssay to Your Grace's Patronage,  was likewise sensible that no erformance (which was entirely y own) could, without Pre∣mption, aspire to that Honour: ut this Address comes Arm'd with a double Apology; not on∣ the fix'd Reputation of the

Work in the Original, but on ac∣count of the Translation it self, being half perform'd by a Person of Quality and Judgement. By whose untimely Death we were deny'd the Happiness of his far∣ther Progress, and I was prevail'd with to think that the World would rather dispense with my course finishing of the Piece, than lose the part which he had so well begun. Beside the Testimonies of the Learned for my Author it is yet to be added, That he was not only the First who attempted this way of Writing, but the Best The Casandra and Cleopatra o the French were Scions from thi Stock, nor shall we envy them the Reputation which those Authors

seem'd chiefly to deign, the diver∣sion of the Ladies. Heliodorus has as well contriv'd for their fa∣vour, yet so as to make the A∣mour subordinate to Instruction, and every where an occasion of dspensing that Learning and Ex∣perience, with which he was so wonderfully furnished. The Phi∣losophy and Politicks deliver'd in the Romance of Barclay have ren∣der'd it worthy the perusal of the greatest Stratesmen; yet, on the first view, we shall find the Arge∣nis to be but a Copy of Chariclea. But after all his maxims of Con∣duct, and Examples of Vertue, methinks I see the Authors Geni∣us tremble to come under your Graces Inspection, who have in

Practice so far excell'd the most perfect Images that he could feign. Of what Importance your unsha∣ken Loyalty, Industry, and Prudent Management, has always been to∣wards the Happiness of this Na∣tion, is best known to persons of your own high Sphere, where your Grace is placed a Star of the first Magnitude. But Your more immediate Influence for the pub∣lick Safety, in the late season of our Extremity, was so manifest, that thousands were Spectators of its Operation. The proud Inva∣der himself acknowledg'd his measures to be broken in their Foundation, by your presence in Bristol, the main Fortress of his Hopes; from which he was ob∣structed

by Your Grace's match∣less Interest and Conduct. For a Parallel to this Service, we must run up to your own great Ance∣stor, whose Name shall be Sacred to Posterity as long as Marquess of Worcester's Seat, last Garrison held out for King Charles I. Rag∣land Castle shall have one Stone left upon another.
I have too just a sense of Your Grace's Character to attempt your Panegyrick; yet, in Gratitude, I am obliged to say, That while Your Grace is blest with Qualifi∣cations to adorn the Noblest Court, it is Your peculiar Glory to have Magnificence and Conde∣scension to charm all Mankind. That Clemency I must make my Sanctuary for this Address, and

leave Your Encomium to some more able Genius, while the height of my Ambition is to sub∣scribe my self

