



IF the mystery of iniquity did Login to work in the Apostles time? 2 Thes. 2.7 2. Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. if there were false Apostles, deceitfull work∣ers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ? If there were the Ministers of Satan? who were trans∣formed as the Ministers of righteousnesse, whose end should be according to their works? And if we are exhorted to try the Spirits whether they are of God, 1 Joh. 4.1. (upon this accompt) because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. Then no marvell is it, that the factors and agents for Antichrist are so encreased, and the Mystery of Iniquity grown to such maturity and ripenesse; nay (may we not rather say) to such boldnesse and impudency, that they are not ashamed to open their pack of Romish Trumpery (we meane) their unwritten Traditions and humane Constituti∣ons in the sight and view of the whole world, and these their musty and putrified wares, for sound and substantiall commodities, would they force upon tender consciences, whom God hath inlightned to
discover the slights and cunning craftinesse of these grand Impostors, Eph. 4.14. whereby they lye in wait to de∣ceive. One piece of which their Merchantable stuffe most cunningly and artificially woven together, with Scriptures absurdly applied, and others as lamenta∣bly perverted, is here presented unto your view, whose eyes the Lord hath annoynted with his eye-salve to discern the wiles and workings of Satan in these men. Rev. 3.18. And although evill men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, 2 Tim. 3.13. deceiving, and being de∣ceived, yet the righteous shall hold on his way, and he that hath clean hands shall be stronger and strong∣er: Job. 17.9 And although many deceivers are entred into the world, 2 John 7. who confesse not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, (and such are all they, who would bring us back again unto Moses, and presse the Observation of Leviticall Rites and Ceremonies upon the consci∣ence, which are altogether abolished and done away by the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh) And al∣though Antichrist by his Sorceries hath deceived the Nations, Rev. 8.22. & 19.20. Esa. 44.20 and a deceived heart hath turned many a∣side, that they cannot deliver their soul, nor say, Is ot a lye in my right hand? yet it is not possi∣e, Mat. 24.4. that the Elect shall be deceived by them. Belo∣ved you are those who are taught of God, Esa. 54.13.1 Iohn 2.21. those to whom he hath revealed his secrets, Psal. 25.14. who have the gift of trying and discerning the Spirits, 1 Iohn 4.1. and therefore we could not but recommend unto you this ensuing Treatise, wherein we hope we have discovered the grosse absurdity of that Proposition, and have vin∣dicated the truth from that error and darknesse which
the Proposer hath clouded it withall; and truly our consciences do beare us witnesse, that it was not out of any prejudice to the person of the Proposer, but the love which we beare unto Truth, that did stir up our spirits to this undertaking; and the rather, so that the Author of the said paper, who being a chief man of the Presbyterian Sect, and pretends himself a Mi∣nister of the Gospell, hath said such high accusati∣ons against the most conscientious people, charging them with sin in the highest aggravations thereof, with temporall and spirituall judgements accompa∣nying it, threatning also no lesse then eternall death against them in a case where no Law is transgressed. And to inforce his accusation and charge of sin and judgement, how notoriously hath he wrested and perverted the Scriptures? dishonoring the Lord, and falsifying his truth, which was so great a trouble un∣to our spirits, that we could not be silent. Nor would we be thought to be disobedient to that authority which God hath set over us, and under which we live, and through his blessing do enjoy much free∣dome, protection, and preservation.
We professe our subjction to Magistracy in all law∣full things that are commanded by them, only in the matters of God, and of his Christ our Lord and Sa∣viour, and wherin the glory of God is so highly con∣cerned, it is our desire to keep our consciences pure and undefiled, remembring alwayes, that the Laws of God must have the preheminence, and all hu∣mane Lawes and Ordinances must and ought to be subordinate thereunto. And in reference unto his House, which is spirituall, we can acknowledge no
other King or Law-giver save Christ alone: We look not to receive honour from men, Joh. 5 44. but we seek the honour that cometh from God onely. And if the Lord will vouchsafe to honour his Truth by such poor and unworthy Instruments as we are, we shall account it honour enough.

