


THou remembrest, that the Illustrious Lord, Lord Wer∣ner Spies of Bullensheim, Provincial Commendator of the Teutonick Order of the Confluence of Baillive, and Commendator of the House of Pitzenburg of Mecheline, Lord in Elsen and Herrn-Mulheim, &c. of late thy Uncle, the most favourable of my Friends, three dayes before his Death, sent his Horse-litter for me, because he lay sick of a cruel Tertian Ague; and when I came unto him, that he as yet saluted me with his Head, and offered to embrace me in both his Arms: I was willing presently to succour the same man, because an intermitting pulse bad me to make haste; but that his Friends deferred the promised help, till the afternoon, that the Physitians might be present: Who when they had explained their own endeavour, and that now in 13 dayes, they had cut a Vein twice, and as often purged him; but that they had nourished him with Broaths and Whey; Lastly, that they had strengthened him with the Confections, Alkermes, and De Hyacintho; and there∣fore, that they must proceed in the same path, except, that at length, his Legs and Arms were to be Ulccrated by Cantharides: But that I answered; Ye see, oh my men Friends, how much hope these same Remedies have afforded, increas∣ed, and left: Wherefore if ye proceed on in the same way, to morrow will yield horrors and the agony of Death, for a conclusion of the Tragedy. I pray you let five hours at least, be granted unto me, and it will as yet appear, whether that famous man commanded me, his most loving Friend, to be sent for yesterday in vain.
They readily consented, except one Fonseca, perhaps, because he was a Por∣tugal, who despised Chymical Remedies, as being fiery, and that they poured Oyl on the Fire. And so by the Vote of one Physitian, that Knight underwent

Death. For although Priests, his Friends, stood by, also Noble Persons of his houshold; yet they more hoped in the accustomed Remedies, and the Votes of many, than in, as yet, unknown Medicines. Therefore he began to be left by good ones, because thou wert absent, when these things happened: For as just Indignation brings forth a Song, so I being provoked by the unskilful, determined to set forth a Little Book of an Unheard of Doctrine concerning Fevers: And it fitly fell out, that Cardinal Ferdinandus, our Kings Brother, is killed by Portugals his chief Physitians, through an immoderate exhausting of his Blood, and inordinate cooling: But that that would so come to pass, I had foretold in my Writings, unto Carmelita his Confessor.
But forthwith after his Death, that thing was disputed by a controversal right: Fortunatus Vopiscus Plempius, a Dutch-man, very well learned, and Professor at Lovaine, was Victor in the Controversie. But I have prefixed a Verse to my Book, whereby not so much the Malice, as the Bruitish and unpunished Block∣ishness of those Physitians might be manifested. Therefore I have added, that none was ever made free from a Fever by the method of Galen, as neither that he who otherwise laboured with a more grievous sickness, did escape, but whom the strength of Nature did the more timely snatch out of their hands: Because that in the Schools, as well Fevers essentially, as the Remedies of the same, were hitherto unknown.
Therefore I set forth a Book which might confirm that thing; but bespat∣tered with so many faults on every side, that I blushed to acknowledge it for my own: But however it was such, yet by reason of the novelty of the matter, it began soon after its birth, to be desired, because it was wanting or not to be had.
For I shew that a Fever is unknown: That its Remedies are unknown: And likewise, that a Quaternary or Fourfold number of Humors, are old Wives Trifles, whereby credulous mortals do as yet to this day, fat the places of Buri∣al. Therefore let it be a Probleme; to wit, that I have altogether erred there∣in, or not indeed I, but the Humorists have erred: And the whole School of the Huniourists hath gone to the Wall; Because now, the Hinge whereupon the posts of Healing are supported, doth lye on the ground.
That matter, since it toucheth the Life, the Common-wealth, and most Families; I intreat the Christian World, that from Charity, it would take good heed to the deciding of a difficult Question, so unthought of, and of so great moment.
I in like manner, adde a Book wherein I have demonstrated, That the Causes, Remedies and also the Manner of making the Stone in Man, have been constantly unknown hitherto. That the Pest also, Apoplexie, Palsie, Leprosie, Lethargy, Convulsion, and that sort of Diseases, are as yet alike unknown in the Schools.
But I have written these Paradoxes, for a Pledge of a bigger Section promi∣sed; wherein I will lay open the Beginnings of Natural Phylosophy, and new Maxims of Healing, for a publick good; To wit, that the Schools may learn, and repent.
Let them learn indeed, not of me (who otherwise, have always despised all vain glory) but from the Giver of all Good. But I have endeavoured so to ma∣nifest my Talent received, for the profit of my Neighbour, that hereafter any one of a sound mind, ought to confess whether he will or nay, that very dark∣ness it self, hath hitherto banished Truth out of the Schools of the Gentiles.
And since I wish my Labours may speak to the whole World; therefore I decreed to dedicate the same unto thee, for a Pledge of Friendship; because

thou wert a Patron of the Muses, and a Favourer of the Art of the Fire. For I have never dedicated my Books unto chief men, that I might represent their famous deeds, and the pictures and pedigrees of their Ancestors: Indeed I would not seem, to have been willing by flattery, to corrupt their integrity. I know also, that whatsoever is of flatterers, doth no less displease thee than my self.
Lastly, neither do I offer my Writings, that they may be fenced under thy authority: Far also, be such stupidity, which knows not, that Kings them∣selves are unfit for such Protection: Nor that any thing can subsist, which hath not obtained its Patronage from God.
I give therefore, (O Illustrious Man) and dedicate these my Labours un∣to thee, with a naked title, that thou mayest proceed to love me, thy most lo∣ving Friend; who intreateth God, that he would preserve thee in health! In the mean time, Enjoy thou, Rejoyce, and Farewel, as thy Friend
Bruxels, the 6th. of the Kalends of October, 1643.


