



MADAM,
IT was not my intention, when I Preached this Ensuing Sermon, that it should spread further then the Pulpit; I thought indeed, being Your grief hindered You from the hearing of it, You might perchance request a Copy of it for Your Closet, but never dreamed You would have been so Importunate with me for the Press. But if it may be any Allay of Your Sorrow for Your great Loss, or of any use to the Publick, I shall not Re∣pent of gratifying your desires, though of it self, the expressi∣ons being so home-span, and the Notions so common, I cannot
 thy to come forth  when I seriously considered my many  to lf, and Family, and the Comforts  I have  from You; since I first knew you, and Lived amongst you; I thought I was bound to Exhibit a Testimonial of that Service, and Respect, which I dived unto You, and therefore had rather Hazard my own Reputation, if I may Advance the Edification of others, and adventure once more the Censures of the world, rather then have my own heart Censure me for Unthankfulness.
I do therefore most humbly offer it into Your Ladyship's Hands; and if You think it Unworthy of that Honour, cast it at Your Feet; only let me Entreat You for Her sake, who was the Occasion of it, to cast a favourable Ey upon it now, and then, and Graciously receive it into Your Pre∣sence, and it will Reckon it self highly graced, and Digni∣fyed, and not Ambitiously desire any other Patronage.
MADAM, I know you are Sensible enough of the Af∣flictions of Your Family, more Paticularly, of this great Loss, You have lately sustained; the God of Patience, and Consolation grant You to Study a quiet Submission un∣ and an Holy Improvement of this his Afflicting hand. If You do but Commune seriously with Your own Heart, You will see Cause enough for this Holy silence, and submission. How pretious so ever this Jewel was in. Your Ey (and indeed she was very Pretious) yet you see, it  of a Brittle Nature. All the Sons, and Daughters of
Adam, are Mortal Creatures; and why should You be trou∣bled to see a Mortal Creature Dy.
To make complaint, that our Relations are dead is to complain, That they were Mortal; good MADAM, I beseech You look upon the hand of God that hath done what is done, and this (if any thing) will quiet your Spirit, because the stroke was given by God him self: Remember, that a Dear Childe is far better in the bosom of Christ, then in the Bosom of the greatest Earthly Monarch. Though You want her company, yet she wants not yours you shall go to her, (if you dy as she did) but she can never come back to you: Though she was an Obedient Childe to you, and did Honour her Parents whilst she lived; yet God did not break his Promise with her, because he did not grant her a long life here, as long as he translated her to life Eternal; therefore I would have you Sensible as you are indeed of God's Afflicting Providences; but I hope, you will not Murmure under them; for (as one saies wel) He, that sees not God's hand in his severest Dispensations, disowns his Sove∣reignty, but he, or she, that Repines, denies his Righ∣teousness.
MADAM I beseech you Excuse my Boldness, that I use this freedom with you: give me leave in three words to Counsel you, as well as Comfort you, and I shall trouble you no further.
First, I beg, that you would Meditate much on your own End; you have lived a great many Years already, and 'tis
not Probable you can live so many more; Certainly Death comes near the Mother, when it lays hold upon the Childe; when your Dear Daughter departed this Life, She left you this Memento, that you must shortly follow.
Secondly, Confider how uncertain all wordly things are: Children, the best of worldly Comforts, yet they are but dy∣ing Comforts: the loss of worldy Contentments (Me thinks) should make us love the world the less: God grant it may work this Effect in you.
Lastly, Study more to make out Your Spititual Re∣lation to Christ; this Relation can never be Dissolved, though your Children, your Husband, your Friends, may be taken from you, yet this Union, this Relation cannot be Obliterated.
Now the good Lord of Heaven, and Earth, grant you an Assurance of this Relation before you go hence, and be seen no more. And thus (dear MADAM) begging your Par∣don, I commend your self, and all your excellent Relations, to the Protection, and Blessing of Almighty God; beseech∣ing him (it it be his blessed will) for a Continuing of the Re∣maining Comforts to you here, and a full Consummation of per∣fect joy, and Happiness, with themh ereafter: Which shall be the constant Prayers of,
MADAM,

May 3d. 1661.
