



IT will not, my Brethren, it will not concern you to know the particular occasion of these Letters; nor am I Licens'd to Publish his Name who gave the occasion; but this I will say, That he did very Fairly, and very Ingenuously, and as it became a wise Man and a good Christian to do: For he did not (as some have indiscreetly and loosely done) listen with both his Ears to the Objections against Infant-Bap∣tism, and so rashly condemn it without any more a-do; No, but he was very Concernedly desirous and for∣ward to hear what could be said in the Defence of it too.
As I remember I have read of that fam'd Conque∣ror Alexander the Great, that when a Friend of his was Complain'd of to him, he stopt one of his Ears; he lent but one Ear to the Complaint that was made against his Friend, and kept the other to hear what his Friend cou'd Reply in Answer to it.

And thus should we constantly do in the Case of Religion; when ever any Point or Doctrine of our Religion is call'd in Question, we should always re∣serve one Ear to hear what may be said in its Vindica∣tion and Defence.
And indeed the greatest, and plainest Truths are li∣able to be spoken against, and even Jesuits, Socini∣ans, Antinomians, and the other Adversaries of our Faith, will raise such Objections against the clear∣est Articles of it, as are not to be Answer'd by every one amongst us at the first hearing.
It was a Witty Fiction of Old, that once upon a time Truth came down to this Earth from Heaven; but here among the Sons of Men, being but coldly received, and finding no very welcome entertainment, she e'en took wing and was flying to Heaven again; but in her flight she chanc'd to drop down her Mantle, which Error immediately finding, took up and put on, and has worn it ever since. This is the Fable, and the Moral of it is, That no Error does ever appear in the World but 'tis clad in Truth's Mantle, and the dis∣guise is not always so thin, or so easily and readily to be seen through, as never to escape a discovery.
No, But indeed my Brethren, you ought to think more Modestly, than to think every Objection unan∣swerable which you cannot Answer; it is not expected from you, that you should be able to Defend every point of your Religion against all Gain-sayers.
But then, Will you presently Condemn what you cannot Defend? Or immediately let go a Truth be∣cause of an Objection which you cannot Answer? Will
 any one among you part with an Acre of Land upon the same account, Namely because he is not himself able to Defend his Title to it?
And shall we not hold the profession of our Faith as fast as we do a clod of Earth? shall we not take advice and counsel before we be perswaded to quit any part of our Religion, as well as we shall be sure to do before we be perswaded to quit our Interest in the least parcel of an Estate?
But how then will they answer it to God, and to their Consciences, who in the great and weighty Cause of Religion, have taken the Advice only of her Adversaries? And without any further Exami∣nation or Tryal, have forthwith condemn'd what∣soever it has pleased these Adversaries to pass their Sentence upon? Was this fair Dealing? Was it to judge righteous Judgment? Or does it look like Sin∣cerity or any real concern for Religion, when the bare accusation of an Enemy has been taken for good proof against her?
My Brethren, I doubt not but our Adversaries have told you that the Baptism which you receiv'd in your Infancy was no Baptism; because Baby-Sprink∣ling (as they vainly term it) is no Baptism; but pray be so just to your selves, as to enquire of them whe∣ther any Person who has been twice Baptiz'd be not a perfect Anabaptist? Nay, be plain, be plain and ask them if you have not Sinn'd by your second Baptism, if it be prov'd that your Infant-Baptism was a right Baptism? if they dare to confess the Truth they must tell you that you have, and that you ought to Re∣pent
 of that Sin, of that second Baptism, if your first Baptism was rightly administer'd. Well, but then certainly you ought to have been very sure that your Infant-Baptism was no Baptism, before you had run the hazard of Sinning by Anabaptism, or by your being Baptized a second time.
I have some hopes and earnest desires that (if you will give these following Letters a fair reading) you may Consider what you have done, and what you ought to have done, and what you ought now to do.
But I forbear, because I would not here be thought to reflect too much upon any Person or Persons a∣mong us, no more than I have done in the following Letters. God is my Witness, that I bear ill-will to none of their Persons, whose opinions I have here oppos'd; to confess the Truth, I have no cause: Nay, but I will take this opportunity publickly to ac∣knowledge that I have found very great respect and civilities from the most and the best of them that I know.
Besides I always endeavour to bear in mind the Apologue of the Sun and the Wind contending for the Travellers Cloak. The Wind made a great blu∣ster and would have forc'd it from him. But this mad way of contending was so notoriously in vain, that the stronger the Wind blew, it made the Man but hold his Garment the faster. But then the Sun shone forth and Saluted him with a chearful Ray, and warm'd him with a gentle Gleam, and so indeed was the Man prevail'd upon to suffer his Garment to fall from him. And thus the Sun did, by fair
 means, what the Wind with all it's Bustle and Rage could not. The meaning is, That Men will sooner be perswaded out of their Mistakes and Errors by Candidness and fair Respects, than hector'd out of them with Noise and Roughness.
I have not, I hope, been Guilty of any such Rough∣ness or Clamour, or Bitterness, or Evil-speaking in these Papers, I have been careful not to give any such offence.
And let me add that I have studi'd to speak plain too; Yea, I will not be ashamed to confess that it is for their plainness only that I have been perswaded to make these Letters publick; I have not so much as made the Style gawdy with any high-flown Strains. Ornament and Rhetoric was none of my aim, but Sincerely, Faithfully, and to the utmost of my mean Abilities to shew the naked truth. and whether I have hit or miss'd my Aim, you may now be pleas'd to examine and Judge. I am
(My very good Friends and Brethren) 
From March, 7 Aug. 1699.
