



My LORD,
I Would not contradict the purpose of my Sermon, in disputing your Commands for the Printing of it. Whatever it is in it self, you have render'd it con∣siderable by making it your own, and Publishing it as the Expression of your Gratitude and Praise to God up∣on so great an Occasion.
For my self, I am not much concern'd, nor greatly care what Interpretation, some make of this Discourse. I have the Innocency of my own Thoughts to acquit me, which I regard more, then a Thousand Censures from unthinking Men. I am sure I meant well, and am not Sensible of having Trans∣gressed any of the great Measures of the Gospel, and therefore apprehend no Cause of being troubled at any thing, but that I failed (I Fear) of Corresponding with the other great Solemnities of that August Festival. And yet in that you are pleased to Releive me, by your Favo∣rable, and kind acceptance of my Endeavours.
I do not know, that I ought to Apollogize for the plain∣ness, or (as some I hear are pleased to speak) the sharp∣ness of the Discourse.
My Lord, This is a time that requires and warrants plain dealing. Our Adversaries have been pleased to pull off their Visors, appear bare-faced, and tell us in plain English, what they would be at, and I think it high time for us to be plain with them, and Mince the matter no longer, they have superceeded a great deal of Pains, that we were at before, in perswading Men what their Doctrines and Principles are. They have outdone us in this them∣selves, and exposed both, beyond all Arts of Concealment or Disguise.

I have no By-Designs of Passion or Revenge in any thing I have said, much less to Incense Authority against any Mens Persons; But I think I can never be too severe in Re∣flecting upon, or too earnest in cautioning against such Prin∣ciples and Practises, as are so directly destructive to our Peace; So greatly dangerous to our King; So Dishonou∣rable to the Reformed Religion, and so Fatal to every thing that can be dear to Christian Men.
But my Lord, While I approve my self to your Lord∣ship and your Honourable Brethren, I know not that I ought much to regard Men so far below you, from whom I expect no kind Treatment, when I consider how they Treat those so far above me, and Ridicule the whole Service of the Day as Hipocrisie and Trick.
I Heartily Pray for the Happiness of this City, and of your Lordship, and your great Brethren, that have so happily steer'd it through its late Storms, to its present Measure of Peace and Order. I Congratulate the Honour that it begins to regain, by its Loyalty and Love to so good a King. I rejoyce, and Bless God for your great Care, and unwearied Pains in Roting out the Seminaries of Sedition, in Suppressing Irreligion and Profaneness, and doing what lies in Men, to the recovering Ʋnity and Concord once more among us. In which worthy deeds, that you may ever proceed, and be succeeded by the Blessing and Concourse of the Divine Providence, is, and shall be the Daily Prayer of,

