


Daughter,
I Have forborn to set your name on the fore head of these Aphorisms; not that I am ashamed either of them, or you: but because your E∣nemy and his Son, have done so be∣fore me. And such old men as these I accept against, as a generation of decrepit and withered understand∣ings: People whose Minds, could they be looked into, would prove in∣finitely more monstrous then their Bodies; and such as like Monkies, having either gnawed away or lost their tayles, read Lectures and Ad∣vices to young ones to cut theirs too.
First, we give to all the Vertues the habits and visages of Women: and of all the Vertues Truth is the best; (for Truth is the mother of Just∣ice,

and Justice (they say) compre∣hends them all: Yet she is naked, though she love the publike, and hate Corners: And is it not very fit that all the Sex should imitate such an excellent Pattern and Mistress? In this light humour I am in, I think we can do no greater right to Wo∣men, then to bring them to be Judg∣ed by one rule. And since every Woman Judges her self the fairest; shee that would be backward to this Arbitriment, would be diffident of her self; and consequently a Ren∣negade from her Sex.
Next, take care of the subtle de∣vices of Men: and consider their designes, which may be more Loving to your Portion, then your Person: All people having not the same Con∣ceptions of beauty; which is as hate∣full to an Ethiopian, as Black is to us: not considering that Women

uncloathed are all alike; and the Conceptions about the harmony and measures of her Body differ not.
Yet I advise you not to follow the example of a Princess appearing in a Lawn smock, to be veiwed by Em∣bassadours, as towards a Marriage said, she would put off that too, if there were any necessity. But custome hath made Cloaths decent. The deeds of our Ancestors, are not to be slighted; for they left them for our example; and used in their days abundance of cheaper Artifici∣all Ornaments, from Shels, Fea∣thers, and Stones. Behold the Sun and Moon, and all the Glorious Batalia of Heaven; and they ap∣pear as the Great God and Nature made them; to which God and Nature, I am Servant and Secre∣tary.
This will not produce such infinite

provocations and incitements to lust as the Advice to a Son fondly con∣ceives. But I say not. For I dare say, that what by Painting, what by the Looseness and Change of Gar∣ments, what by these gaudy inventi∣ons of dressings, that flexure and fracture of gate, the deformity is hidden: unless to a very nice eye, there is much more fuell added, then if all went with no more Mantles, Scarfes, Gowns, and Hoods, then Nature thrust them into the World with, viz. Hair hanging loosely down, or else carelesly gathered up in a Fillet; and perhaps some little kind of Cover, that might restrain, the Virginall flower, from being too much gazed at, and blown upon. Follow not (Daughter) their fashion that uncover the parts of their chief∣est Beauty, as their Face, Neck, Breasts and Hand, as the Index to

the more secret object; which without a signe may be by the guide of hu∣mane Nature sound out: So that Wo∣men do endeavour in part to break that restraint which bides the rest of their Glory, and to set forth their delicate Dresses, plaited and wea∣ved with such variety, their Ivory Necks, their Harmonious Faces, their Milkie Spherical Breasts, and their Melting Hands: my advice is to shew All, or Nothing. Daughter though some Crazy igno∣rant old welch Owens, with powder dried bones, fit to be burnt, with dis∣eases, hath endeavoured to deceive you from the same Species, with Men; and one madder then they, denie you Souls; and so have many others: yet when we shall oppose Holy Scripture, which makes Man the Consummation of the Crea∣tion; and you the Consummation of

Man: if I should but instance those particular indulgencies of Nature which John Heydon reckons unto you, and those peculiar advantages of composition and understanding he ascribes to you; or if I should men∣tion that of Eugenius Theodi∣dactus, that friend to the Fraterni∣ty of the Rosie Cross, and beleeved to be inspired, and so thought a Ro∣sie Crusian; he (I say) calls you Fountains and perfections of Good∣ness: Whom (Daughter) can we imagine to be so insensible as not to be presently touched with the delicate Composure and Symmetry of Wo∣mens Bodies? The sweetness and killing Languors of their eyes? The mestange and harmony of their Colours? The happiness and spiri∣tuallity of their Countenance? The Charms and allurements of their mind? The Air and Command of

their smiles? Men are meerly rough cast, bristly, and made up of tough Materials: and if they ap∣proach any thing near Beauty, do so much degenerate from what they are.
How generall is the affection of old Men to Women? some I have known of three score to Marry Girles of sixteen. Soloman was no fool; and it is well known, how your sex tempted him; that his power Com∣manded you to fulfill his desires. And I only advise you to Wisdome and Vertue. And if any Clumsy old doting Wittall, blinded with Ig∣norance, and by his own Wofull Ex∣perience shall protest against the Sufficiency of these, or any thing else I have written, or shall write for your better instructions, that may perhaps hereafter be made publike; He wilfully goes about to Councel his

Master; and adventures to make the Sun stand still; and to run ano∣ther race. For your sake I set Pen to Paper, to teach you how to live; that to Die you need not fear.
The World is full of deceit: trust not therefore the hot love of a Stranger: for if you will expose your self to all, you are Slighted: and a Common Wife is hated.
Beauty affords Contentment; Riches are meanes to cure a weak Estate: Honour illustrates all comes nigh it. If you Marry thus, you are happy; And then to find Worth, Carriage Gesture and Grace, in your choyce, it perfects felicity.
These things in this Book are written for your instruction; hopeing you will excuse my faults; which through hast and other infirmity are Committed. A more Leasure time may perfect what is here Charactered

in Water Colours: And you may easily perceive, that I consulted not at all with advantaging my Name, or wooing publike esteem by what I now write. I know there was much of Naked Truth in it; And is a Caution given to you, from

March 26 1658.
