



Much Honoured SIR.
I Here trouble you with a short discourse; It is no Laboured peece, and indeed no fit Present; But I beg your acceptance. The first time I ever saw the Advice to a Son, was the last day of Hillary Term; I read it, and found it full of bitterness against Women; And indeed they were shamefully Wronged and Abused. I shuff'd up this Answer in sixteen dayes, for

your spare hours; in which you may ma your self Merry fur it was born this last Vcation, when I did not so much Labour, as Play. I found him a Nameless over-worn Wittal, that five times before I espied him, had adulterated the Press, and abused Ladies and Gentlewomen; And no Man durst answer him: for so he reported. I will see what, and who, this diseased Maccabee is; This (as yet) unconquered enemy of Wo∣men; and defie him: and prove his discourse, and hard censure of La∣dies and Gentlewomen like the blasts of Rams horns before the walls of Jericho; that throwes down the Reputation of Ladies at one utterance.
I know you are Great; but yet there is a better title, you are Good. I might have fixed this peece to a Pinacle, made the Dedication

High; But to what purpose? Great∣ness is a thing I cannot admire in others; because I desire it not in my self: It is a proud folly, a Cere∣monious Fancy: There is nothing necessary in it: for most men live without it: And I may not apply to that which my Reason declines, as∣well as my Fortune. The truth is, I know no use of Hooghen Mooghens, and Tituladoes: if they are in a humour to give, I am no Begger to receive: I look not for any thing, Sir, but what the Lear∣ned are inriched withall, Judge∣ment and Candor: you are a true friend to both, and to my third self. And for my present boldness, you may thank your self; you taught me this familiarity, and you may see what unprofitable affections you have purchased. I propose nothing for your instruction; Nature hath

done her part; and I would make you my Judge, not my Pupill: if therefore amongst your serious and more dear Retirements, you can al∣low this trifle but some few minutes, and think them not lost; you will perfect my ambition, you will place me (Sir) at my full height; and though it were like that of Statius amongst Gods and Stars; I shall quickly find the Earth again, and with the least opportunity present my self,
SIR,

March 26. 1658.
