



Dear Friend,
THE Conception and Birth of these Two Sermons was short and sudden, as the Tydings of the Death of your Dear Brother, my Cordial Friend, was surpri∣zing to me; and the Transcribing of these Notes an unexpected Motion, managed something preposterously, with a slight Hand, snatchd from my many other pressing Occasions, and now sent to you, upon the Request of some Relations to you and your dear deceased Brother, by his very weak unworthy Pastor, who had the Knowledge of him, and Inspection over him, many Years, and can testifie to the Comfort of his surviving Friends, that he was a Man of good Ʋnderstanding, solid Judgment, savory Spirit, and blameless Conversation; of good use in the Society where he was a Member, beloved of all that knew him, and very imitable in his modest, humble, chaste Conversation, in a single Condition; his Contempt of the World, Mortifiedness to Pleasures and Honours, Diligence in both general and particular Calling, studying the Word of God, reading good Books, constant Attendance on Ordinances, writing Sermons, ingenuous asking Cases of Conscience; his Abilities in Prayer, Discourse, seriousness in the practick part of Reli∣gion;
to which Many will bear their Testimony, and are con∣cerned for the loss of him. These things I write to you, not as informing you, nor flattering him, which cannot at all add to his present Happiness, but to quicken us in our Dili∣gence, and as a Memorial of the Dead that dye in the Lord; for God hath said, The Memory of the Just is blessed, and such as have obtained a good Report thro' Faith,
Prov. 10 7. eb. 1.39. may be presented to surviving Generations, for their imi∣tation, especially since our dead Friend left us Posterity to bear up his Name.
Notwithstanding his even Carriage, yet his Heavenly Father thought fit to exercise him towards the latter end of his days with Severe Afflictions, both in his Body and Spi∣rit: His Body was a meer Skeleton, worn away, decrepit; and tho' he had been very active and agile, yet had much ado to go upon Crutches, thro' a violent Rheumatism sei∣zing his lower parts: His Mind was much disquieted with the sense of his own guiltiness great unprofitableness under Means of Grace, much Ʋnbelief, Hypocrisie, which oft gave him occasion to call his state into question; so that he told me he had great Fears upon him about his Sincerity, and questioned how matters would prove at last, and Satan set in with his violent Temptations, and GOD also suspended the Light if his Countenance and Sealings of his Spirit; so that he walk'd in darkness for a considerable time: Yet before he dyed, the Lord scattered his Fears, erected his Hopes, and shined upon his Soul with the Beams of his Love, and the Lord carried him off the Stage comfortably, honou∣rably, yea, triumphantly. He slept in the Lord July the Fifth, and was interred at Hallifax July the Eighth, 1695.
The Spiritual Legacies he left were, 1. Advice to his Friends; 2. This Text.
1. He had given several weighty pieces of his Counsel to several of his Friends and Relations formerly; near his End he said to a Young Man that came to visit him, Oh
Friend! now, by the Grace of God I am ready; come Lord Jesus: Oh, be sure you get ready for this dying hour; see to the getting of the Spirit of God, in what you do, you may pump for Expressions and Affections, but see you get the Spirit of God, for where the Spirit is, there is Liberty. Several things besides he said, but the Distemper going up into his Head, and he not seeping of a long time, was not so sensible and capable of Discourse as he had been.
2. The other Legacy he left was this Text. A Relation of his apprehending danger of his Death, asked him what he would have me to do for him (he having given an hint of his Mind before) he answered, He would desire me to preach a Funeral Sermon out of those words, Job 10.7, There is none that can deliver out of thine hand. I had notice of it when I was abroad, and at my return preached on Lord's Day, July 14. 1695, on that second part, accor∣ding to Order, but have prefixed something to it on the for∣mer part of the Text, because I knew it was, first, proper to him, secondly, profitable to us all; and wish from my Soul we could all appeal thus sincerely to the Heart-searching God, who then would transmit our afflicted Souls and Bodies out of the hands of Justice into the hands of Mercy.
There's none of the Servants of God, but they meet with a severe Purgatory in this Life, and pass through Seas of Trouble to the Haven of Rest, which make them Sea-sick, and did not our blessed Pilot secure them,
Psal. 42. they would split upon dangerous Rocks of Presumption or Despair: sometimes Deep calls to Deep, which imports,
Dr. Horton, in loc. (as a learned Exposi∣tor observes) 1. Variety or plurality of Evils, and Evil in one kind to an Evil in another; Troubles of Body, Mind, estate, manifold Temptations; without Fightings,
2 Pet. 1.6.2 Cor. 7.. with∣in Fears. 2. Conjunction of Evils, one Evil within ano∣ther; not as in a Channel where Water runs, and lessens in running, but divers Waters meeting, make a vast Flood;
not successively,
Job 16.14. but breach upon breach, all at once.
Yea, 3. A Connexion or dependance of one Evil upon another; one Calamity invites another, as if God pursued us till he make an end of us, proceeding in Punishments. This was the Conception of this good Man, that had God's Hand on his Body, Soul, as is Earth, Heaven, and Hell conspired to make him every way miserable; Desertions from God, Temptations from Satan; for that cursed Coward sets on God's Children where they are weakest: God orders this for wise and gracious Ends, partly to try our Spirits, exercise Graces, prevent worse Evils, keep us humble, con∣form us to Christ, teach us to live by Faith, to long for Christ and Heaven, and prepare us for divine Cordials. To be sure, God's great care is to secure the main Stake in his Children; He will not suffer their Souls to miscarry; He would rather his Children should go to Heaven maim∣ed, than go to Hell with all their Limbs; yea, it may be they will march on faster lame, or see Heavenly Things bet∣ter when bodily blind, or hear God's Voice better when cor∣porally deaf, than otherwise: And our Blessed Saviour saith, It's better want any Member than be damned.
Mat. 5.29.32. Strong Humors must have strong Physick to work them out, but bit∣ter Pills bring sweet Health; and the Almighty God sup∣ports, sanctistes, and at last satisfies the afflicted, tempted Soul, that all this was but needful. It was a fine Saying of Luther's concerning Satan, by whom he was so often buffered, [Eso, Diabolis magnipotens, nunquam erit omnipotens]. The Devil is mighty, never Almighty; he may foil us, but never our Captain; the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah hath conquered the roaring Lyon.
We little know what shocks and batteries we may meet with from GOD, Satan, World, our own Conscience: if we be Graceless, Christless, wee to us. How dreadful is the case of a poor Sinner when Death arrests, Conscience accuseth, the Devil roars, Hell gapes, GOD frowns, and Vengeance
pursues him, and he hath no Burrough to flee to! he never thought of such a day, never made provision, took no care to get furnish'd for such a Storm, and now, Sinners, shall go into the holes of the rock,
Isa. 2.19, 21. and into the caves of the Earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty, when He ariseth to shake terribly the earth. How little will Cap and Knee from Men, or many Thousands a Year, or wallowing in sensual Pleasures, avail in such a day! Beds of Ivory, numerous Attendants, pompous Fune∣rals, rhetorical Panegyricks profit not the tormented Soul of poor Dives in Hell, of whom it may be said as once of Aristotle, [Laudatur ubi non est, Cruciatur ubi est;] "He is Praised where he is not, but Tormented where he is.
Oh that the variety of Instances of our Mortality might alarm our Souls to a preparation for that last Encounter, for go we must, ready or unready, when God calls Heaven and Hell are before us; when Breath goes out of our Bodies, our Souls lanch into the vast Ocean of Eternity, to be crowned or confoun∣ded. No doubt but the worst of Men, from a principle of Self-preservation, would be happy at death;
Numb. 23.10. a Balaam will be content to dye the death of the righteous; as 'tis storied of the young Gallant, with his swaggering Companion, when standing by dying Ambrose, seeing his carriage, hearing him sweetly welcome Death, he said to his Companion, Oh, that I might live with thee, and dye with Ambrose! Alas, vain Fools, think to reap Wheat when they sowed Tares, and find a Pearl that laid up Dirt: Men may cheat themselves, but cannot mock GOD;
Gal. 6.7. Heb. 12.14. Such as Men sow such shall they reap; without Holiness no man shall see God. Certainly God knows his own, and will not take the wicked by the Hand, to lead them into his glorious Mansions when they have sinned as long as they can, and confronted his glo∣rious Majesty with their Rebellions. Alas, how carelesly do most men live, keeping vain company, talking idly, mispending precious Time, neglecting God's Worship in Fa∣mily,
in Secret, heedless in their dealings with Men, li∣ving at large, heed not which end goes forward, wondering at and censuring others for their niceness, zeal, and tender∣ness, yet hope to go to Heaven as well as the best of them all: Oh, what a disappointment will these wretched Souls meet with, when gracious and industrious Saints are saved with so much difficulty!
1 Pet. 4.18.
I do humbly tender this short and mean Discourse to you, begging your kind acceptance of it, and profit by it. Ʋse it as you please, so it may answer my Ends: It's full of good will, both as a Testimony of my due resentment of the Memory of my dear deceased Friend, and earnest desires of your Soul's Health and Happiness here and hereafter; for whom, and the rest of Relations, I am bound to conti∣nue my poor Prayers, That we may meet before the Throne, cloathed with the Wedding-garment,
Mat. 22.11. that fine Linnen, clean and white,
Rev. 19.8. which is the Righteousness of the Saints, having the Blessed JESƲS to speak for us as our Advocate; to whose Hands I commit You and Yours, whilst I am

Aug. 8. 1695.
