



IT may seem strange unto your Lordship to see a name sub∣scribed to this Dedication, which neither hath an Interesse in your Noble and illustrious Family, nor any relations to your Person. But when I have acquainted you with the reasons of it, I hope those reasons will not only justifie, but indear my Confidence. My large Cosmography having been Dedicated in the first Delineations and Essay thereof, to one of the greatest Princes in the Christian world; could not descend, with any Fitnesse, to a lower Patronage, after so many Additions, and so great Improvements. And for such other Books of mine as have seen the light, they were in justice and congruity, to be Inscribed to him alone, or to some of His, by whose Appointment they were written, and from whose service I was fain to borrow the greatest part of the time which I spent about them. But being now (unhappily) at my own disposing, and left unto the liberty of presenting

the ensuing work, as my own Genius should di∣rect me; I look upon your Lordship as a Person fitted with the best Capacities to receive this Pre∣sent at my hands. The Eminent zeal wherewith your Lordship stood so firmely, for the establi∣shed Doctrines and Devotions of the Church of England, when there appeared so great a readinesse in too-many others to give them up as an Oblati∣on or Peace-offering for their own security; in the first place, Entituleth you to the best performan∣ces in which the Orthodoxies of that Church and the Conformity thereof, to the antient patterns, are declared and vindicated. To this as Seconds, may come in, your Lordships Interesse in that Vniversity where I had my breeding, and more particularly in that Colledge, whereof I had the happinesse to be once a Member; your studi∣ousnesse in the wayes of learning; the faire esteem you hold of those which pretend unto it; and the Incouragements you have given to the advance∣ment of good letters, in forwarding with a boun∣tifull and liberall hand the new Impression of the holy Bible in so many Languages; A work of such transcendent profit, and so many advantages above all others of that kind, as will not only redound to the honour of the Vn∣dertakers, but to the glory of the Furtherers and Promoters of it.
These are the motives which on your Lord∣ships part have prompted me to this Dedication; and there are reasons for it on my own part also. Your Lordship cannot but remember what great

cries were made At, and before the beginning of the late long Parliament, concerning a designe to bring in Popery; the Bishops generally defamed as the chief Contrivers; the regular and established Clergy (my self as much if not more, then any of my rank and quality) traduced in publick Pamphlets as sub∣survient Instruments. And this was unicum eorum crimen qui crimine vacabant, in the words of Taci∣tus; the only Crimination laid upon those men, who hitherto have been convicted of no crime at all How wrongfully accused even in that parti∣cular, time which brings all things unto light, hath now clearly evidenced. For which is there of all the Bishops, how few of all the Sequestred and ex∣auctorated Clergy, who notwithstanding all the provocations of want and scorn (greater then which were never laid on generous and ingenuous Spirits) have fallen off to Popery? So few in all (to the Eternall honour of both Orders be it spoken here) that were the rekoning or account to be made in Greek, it hardly would amount to a plurall num∣ber. And for my self, how free I am, and have been alwayes, from any Inclinations of that kind; in my Epistle to the Reader I have shewn at large, and manifested more particularly in this present work. It had been else too great a folly (or a frensie ra∣ther) to present any thing of mine to your Lord∣ships sight, of whose sincerity in the true Protestant Religion here by Law established, neither the jealousie nor malice of these last and worst times, hath raised any suspicion. And this I hope will be a full acquitment to me from all future cla∣mours;

for where a Person of such eminent and known Integrity makes good the Entrance, who dares suspect that any thing Popish or Profane, is either harborred in the work, or the Author of it? And if I gain this point, I have gained my purpose.
These are (my Lord) the principall Impulsions which have put me upon this Adventure. And these I hope will be of so great prevalency with your Lordship also, as to procure a favoura∣ble Entertainment to the following work; that others may afford it the like fair Reception, when they shall find it Owned and Countenanced by your Lordships name. Which honour if your Lord∣ship shall vouchsafe unto It, the work shall have a sublunary Immortality beyond the Author; who whatsoever he is now, or shall be hereafter, is and shall be at all times, and on all occasions, redeuable to your Lordship for so great a favour, as best becomes
My LORD

Lacies Court in Abingdon;
Iune . 1654.
