



My dearly Beloved;
TWO Sorts of Doctrine I have always judg∣ed necessary, and very seasonable; 1. What concerns the Person, Natures, Offices, and Undertakings of our Lord Jesus Christ, in all his mediatory Latitude: 2. That which relates to a saving Internal Work of Grace upon the hearts of Men, which is the Spring of all External Motions: These are as standing Dishes requisite in every Feast, and to the pursuit whereof, my Heart hath been much inclined: the former I have largely treated upon, from 1 Tim. 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save Sin∣ners, of whom I am chief. Which contains the Summ and Substance of our Christian Faith, the Marrow of the Gospel, the Quintescence of our Hap∣piness: nor doth any Minister need to be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the Power of God to Salvation,  every one that believeth, Rom. 1.16. And though this may seem to be out of fashion amongst some that would be esteemed ra∣tional Preachers, and think treating of Christ, as but a conceited Canting, (though the great Apostle of the Gentiles mentions the Name of Christ nine se∣veral times in his Ten first Verses of 1 Cor. 1. and
in his Epistles some hundreds of times; yea, and glo∣ries in it, and professeth, 1 Cor. 2 2. I deter∣mined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified.) But I wave this Subject for the present. 2. That which hath respect to the inner Man, especially the New Man, a sa∣ving Work in the Soul, is the Subject before us; which my Heart hath been much set upon; and af∣ter my Pilgrimage and Travels amongst you above Forty Four Years, in many Difficulties, not without some success of my poor Labours, knowing that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle 2 Pet. 1.14. I was willing to leave one Legacy more be∣hind me, as a standing Testimony to surviving Po∣sterity, of my ancient endeared Love to your precious Souls, and a mean of your spiritual good, when my Mouth is stop'd with Dust: And having lately treated on this Subject, some of you desired me to Print it, which I was the more willing to do, upon these Motives; 1. Because I am sure the Subject is of daily, impor∣tant, and universal use: 2. I have not seen any full Treatise upon this Subject: 3. Most need it: 4. Some were greatly alarm'd in hearing it; and who knows what good the presenting it to the Eye, as well as to the Ear may do? It's true, it is simply and plain∣ly drest, not with Ornaments of Art or Rhetorical Flourishes to set it off to the Learned, being calculated in intelligible Language to vulgar Capacities, and possibly it may prove more profitable to Country Hea∣rers: nor ought it to offend any, that much of this Treatise is in Scripture dialect in words, The Holy Ghost teacheth, 1 Cor. 2.13. which the Spiritu∣al Man cannot but approve, and Love.
And now, my dear Neighbours and Friends, God
knows, and you know, From the first day that I came to you, after what manner I have been with you at all Seasons, Acts 20.18. My Tears, Temptations, Banishment, Imprisonment, Confisca∣tions, Night Travels, and Preachings, Fastings, Watchings, Incouragements, Discouragements: and I may truly appeal to the Searcher of Hearts, wha the same Apostle said of his Galatians, My little Children, of whom I travail in Birth again, un∣til Christ be formed in you, Gal. 4.19. Alas, what are you better for having Christ revealed to you, unless he be revealed in you, Gal. 1.16. Oh! wo will be to you, if you prove Christless, af∣ter your hearing so much of Christ. Words signifie little without a Work: every work will not serve turn, but what is genuine, and accompany Salva∣tion. I will say to you, as Dr. Harris to his Chil∣dren in his last Will and Testament;
Think how you and I shall endure the Sight, the Thought one of another at the Last Day, if you ap∣pear in the Old Adam; much less shall you stand before Christ, unless you shew the Image of Christ in you; and therefore ne∣ver cease till you be made New Creatures, and study well what that is. Thus he.
Alas! Sirs, you may make a shift to pass through this world unsuspected; many Moralists, yea, Chri∣stians, may subscribe their Names to your Testimo∣nial, and give you the Right Hand of fellowship in this world, when you must be set at the Left in th next: Things will not then be carried as they are now. Deal faithfully with God and your own Souls; see you have the Root of the Matter, the Life of Grace: you may herd amongst the Sheep now, and
be found amongst Goats at last. A King will give his Subjects liberty to travel into another King's Dominions, reserving their Loyalty to their own King: Papists in Queen Elizabeth's days, being commanded to go to Church, or be punished, sent to the Pope for a Resolution of this Case of Conscience: His Answer was, They might comply; but Fili, da mihi cor, My Son, give me thy Heart: Thus the Devil will give you leave to read, pray, hear, receive, attend on Ordinances; but as long as he hath you fast by the Heart-strings, you are still his Slaves, none of God's Servants: for the Soul is the Man: As a man thinketh in his Heart, so is he, Prov. 23.7. As a man's Principles are stated, so he receives his denomination, a good or a bad, a Jew, or an Heathen; a Saint or a Bruit. If you have a Beast's Heart in the shape of a Man, God will esteem you no better than a Beast. And it's an usual Saying, It is better be a Beast, than be like a Beast. It is the Saying of a Learned Man. Some make the Image of the Living God hewn out of the Stock of a dead Tree: But the New Creature is not such a lifeless thing as many ima∣gine: It is the Spirit of power, of love, and of a sound mind,
Baxter's Life of Faith, pag. 122. 2 Tim. 17. This Text, (saith a good Divine) doth express the three parts of God's Image in the New Creature, , certainly this vital Principle hath strong and vigorous motions God-wards, and against Sin; Its an holy Spark, working upwards to God, and forwards streight for Heaven: Most Professors are mistaken in this great Work; though Ministers are oft calling on you Sinners to look about
you, we tell you, there's a Cheat in the case, Satan is busie to lay his Brats in God's Bed. Counterfeit Coin is common; our Warnings now will be thought of, these frequent Summons will ring in your Ears, our Sermons will have a Repetition in this, or in another world: Conscience will gall you, and you cannot plead Ignorance, or say, [non putâram] I thought not of such a day. How often do we tell you of the danger of dying in your old state, and of that Sul∣phurous Lake, that thousands are scolded in that once lived as securely as you now do, and they are in an hopeless, helpless Eternity; and how can you tell but this may be the last day? the last warning or overture of Grace, the last knock at your Door? God may say, Away, be gone out of my sight, take him, Devil, I will no more be troubled with such a Miscreant. But if after all this, you be senceless, and lie still while you are nailed in your Coffin, you are dead, twice dead; and this Security is a confutation of that Principle, that Adam and his Posterity by the Fall, is not dead, but sleepeth, or only in a swound and languor, but life is in him: No, no, this sad Stupor or Spiritual Lethargy, shews it's not an excitation of a principle, but an infusion of new Life: all our shouting, and rubbing, and prick∣ing, will not recover Sinners; we must leave them to a creating Power, and to him that can raise the Dead.
But let me rather persuade you to look after this New-Creation-Work, from the Advantage it will be to all sorts of Persons, of every Age and Relation.
Oh! you Old Persons, that are going off the Stage of the World, dropping into the Grave and Eternity, that have been long, and not yet lived, begin at last to turn over a new leaf, seek a New Life, that you may have Comfort, and not terrour in your expiring
Pangs: yet there is hope, God still waits to be gra∣cious, and stands knocking at your Door; rise out of your Bed of sloth, put back the Barr, admit him with all his Graces; make out for this Change, against your last Change.
You Young People, that have lately step'd into the World, and slip'd thus far before you know where you are, it may be, young in Years, old in Sin, you are entring into a wicked world, with wicked hearts, Oh! look after this blessed Antidote, that may prevent Infection; be sure of a Pilot that may row you through this boisterous Sea safe to the Haven: without new hearts you will make this bad World worse, and be worse by it; rather seek to amend it.
You that are entring into Callings, or for changing Conditions, you will be fit for nothing without this; you will bring a Curse into every Relation, and Vo∣cation without this: but this will make you fit for any thing, and you will be attended with God's Bles∣sing, in all you set about.
You Married Persons, I recommend this New Creature to you, that you be sure to marry in the Lord, then you will be Heirs together of the Grace of Life: and pray, praise God together, have this sweet Relation perfum'd, and meet in Glory.
You Rich Persons are Beggars without this; this will make you rich and honourable, the excellent in the Earth, God's Jewels, Favourites of Heaven. And you poor, that cannot get daily Bread, this will make you rich in Faith, Heirs of a Kingdom: Oh what a Treasure is this fear of the Lord!
You poor Athenians, that are always inquiring after News, new Opinions, new Inventions, new Fashions, here's a brave and blessed piece of Novelty for you; this New Creature will stand you
in stead, not so much to please your itching Ears, as to profit your Languishing Souls.
Well, I have done my poor Endeavour, to effect this work upon your Hearts. When we have said and done all we can, we have done nothing at all, except the Eternal Jehovah strike with the great Hammer: O thou infinite Almighty God, that hast made the Earth by thy Power, hast established the World by thy Wisdom, and stretched out the Heavens by thy discretion, Jer. 10.12. Look into the Hearts of Sinners, see what a Chaos of Confusion is by Sin, brought upon the noble Soul; go o're thy Work again, mend what Sin hath marred, put Light in the Understanding, Power into the Will, Rectitude into the Affections, make Conscience do its office. O that Corruption may be mortified, Satan cast out, a sound Principle introduced, the Soul redintegrated, and everlastingly saved.
I commend these my poor Labours into the Hands of God, to use them as he sees good; and to you that heard these Sermons, and to others that shall take the pains to read them, having delivered my Con∣science, in some measure of Uprightness, whether the Effect answer my Pains and Aims, or no: And in this labour of Love, I am willing to take my Leave of the World, as to troubling it any fur∣ther in this kind, and commend you, my Bre∣thren, to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is able to [renew your hearts, and] build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them which are sanctified; Acts 20.32. which is the daily Prayer of

May, 3. 95.
