



Most Dread Soveraign,
YOƲR Majesties most Christian care to suppress those rigours which some in maintenance of their Sabbath-Doctrines, had pressed upon this Church in these latter days, justly deserves to be recorded amongst the principal Monuments of your Zeal and Piety. Of the two great and publick Enemies of Gods holy Worship, although Prophaneness in it self, be the more offensive; yet Superstition is more spreading, and more quick of growth. In such a Church as this, so setled in a constant practice of Religious Offices, and so confirmed by godly Canons, for the performance of the same; there was no fear that ever the Lords Day (the day appointed by Gods Church for his publick Service) would have been over-run by the Prophane neglect of any pious duties on that day required. Rather the danger was, lest by the violent torrent of some mens affections it might have been o're-flown by those Superstitions; wherewith, in imitation of the Jews, they be∣gan to charge it, and thereby made it far more burdensome to their Christian Brethren than was the Sabbath to the Israelites, by the Law of MOSES. Nor know we where they would have staid, had not your Majesty been pleased, out of a tender care of the Churches safety, to give a check to their proceedings, in Licencing on that day those Law∣ful Pastimes, which some, without Authority from Gods Word, or from the practice of Gods Church, had of late restrained. Yet so it is, your Majesties most Pious and most Christian purpose hath not found an∣swerable entertainment; especially amongst those men who have so long dreamt of a Sabbath day, that now they will not be persuaded that it is a Dream. For the awakening of the which, and their reduction to more sound and sensible Counsels, (next to my duty to Gods Church, and your Sacred Majesty) have I applied my self to compose this Story, wherein I doubt not but to shew them how much they have deceived both themselves and others, in making the old Jewish Sabbath of equal age and observation with the Law of Nature; and preaching their new Sabbath-Doctrines in the Church of Christ, with which the Church hath no acquaintance; wherein I doubt not but to shew them, that by their obstinate resolution, not to make Publication of your Majesties plea∣sure,
they tacitely condemn, not only all the Fathers of the Primitive times; the Learned Writers of all Ages, many most godly Kings and Princes of the former days, and not few Councils of chief note, and of faith unquestionable; but even all states of Men, Nations, and Churches at this present, whom they most esteem. This makes your Majesties in∣terest so particular in this present History, that were I not obliged unto your Majesty in any nearer bond than that of every common Subject, it could not be devoted unto any other with so just propriety. But being it is the work of your Majesties Servant, and in part fashioned at those times, which by your Majesties leave were borrowed from Attendance on your Sacred Person; your Majesty hath also all the rights unto it of a Lord and Master.Institut. l. 1. tit. 8. §. 1. So that according to that Maxim of the Civil Laws, Quodcunque per servum acquiritur, id domino acquirit suo; your Majesty hath as absolute power to dispose thereof as of the Author; who is,
Dread Soveraign, 
