




My Lord,
THe concernedness your Lordship, hath for the worthy Branches of your Noble Family, is demon∣strated to all whom you esteem Friends, by the constant subscription with your own hand [Remember me and my Fa∣mily in your Prayers,] by which your Lordship at once testifies your natural Affection and true Piety: Your earnest de∣sire of the best good, and the means by which that must come from God, even duon the wings of a believing Prayer.
 Your Lordships request hath the force of a command; the obligations laid upon many hundreds of both Ministers and People, extort from us, in point of Gratitude, both many thanksgivings to God, and renewed supplications for your Lordship, that the blessing of Abraham, may successively continue in your Noble Family, to be blessed, and be a blessing. Oh happy Family! where the precious Pearl of Covenant grace Enamels the Gold-ring of worldly honour! 'Tis true, the Divine Oracles say, Not many Migh∣ty, not many Noble are called. A good Lady added, Blessed be God, that it saith not [not any.] Once at last God will have an Emperour [a Constantine] saved. Augustine saith wittily, a poor Lazarus is laid in rich Abrahams bosom. Sacred Writ records a Noble Theophilus, and an Elect Lady: And Ecclesiastical History furnisheth us with a large Catalogue of Illustrious Branches of Noble Families, planted in the House of the Lord, and, like fixed Stars of the first Magnitude, have shined bright in their proper Orb, and conveyed great Influence to their Inferiours. In which rank God hath placed your Honour; whose Morning
 Star of early Piety continues still shining bright to a good old Age, and hath cast many resplendent Beams of favour upon Indigent Persons, to spread the favour of Divine Knowledg amongst ignorant souls in the Country; for which the loyns of the Poor, and souls of the In∣structed will bless you in this, and the other world. I doubt not, my Lord, but your gracious spirit Eccho's to the dying speech of holy David, to whom a succession of Piety in his seed was more Eligible than of Royalty and large Re∣venues. What can be compared to this one comprehensive promise, [I will be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee:] Yet this is the rich priviledg of Gods Covenanted Servants: Mines of Gold, Mountains of Pearl, can bear no proportion to this one word [My God:] This is light in darkness, life in death, an heaven in the midst of hell. The sense of this is the only Cordial to the fainting Spirits of Gods afflicted Chil∣dren. Yea, saith one, if but one little drop of Divine Love, should fall into a Damned Soul in Hell, it would sweeten or swallow up those bitter Torments. And next to the priviledg of Gods be∣ing
 our God; His being our Childrens God claims the Preeminence: For Pa∣rents anxious thoughts run out for their Childrens well-doing in this and the o∣ther world. If God help us to own him, he will not forsake us or ours. It's true Grace comes not by succession, yet oft in succession. The Line of Covenant-love reacheth to many Generations; and the more numerous pious Predecessours are, the greater is the shower of Blessings. So a Learned man reads that paternal benediction of Jacob to Joseph,Gen. 49.26. The bles∣sings of thy Fathers are strong with the blessings of my Progenitours: As the more waters run into one Channel, the dee∣per it grows. Your Lordship then may hope for multiplied, accumulative bles∣sings on your Noble Progeny. If that be found Divinty, which was a Ma∣xime amongst the Jewish Rabbies, That the Divine Glory rests on Noble Stemms; however beams of love reflect with great∣est lustre when descending on honou∣rable Personages. Therefore should we pray, most ardently, for those of highest rank, as in the greatest capacity of do∣ing most good; and a godly man, or Minister, must not only, with David,
 serve his own generation by the will of God,Acts 13.36. but with the blessed Apostle Peter,2 Pet. 1.15. En∣deavour that posterity may be able after their decease to have Divine Truths al∣ways in remembrance. This, my Lord, hath been the great care of your Ho∣nour; and as natural motions are quick∣est towards the end, so the nearer your Lordship approacheth to your center, and Haven, the more sedulous and active are you to lay a foundation of Religion in future Generations; thereby also lay∣ing up in store for your self a good foun∣dation for time to come,2 Tim. 4.19. so laying hold on Eternal Life, for the accomplishing of this great End. A poor inconsiderable worm casts his Mite into my Lords Trea∣sury and prostrates himself at your Lord∣ships Feet, in this Dedication, in testi∣mony of my real gratitude for your un∣parallel'd kindness and condescention to so ignoble a person. Withal recommend∣ing this small Treatise to your Lordship, to encourage your heart, and strengthen your hands in God, under the smarting breaches in your Noble Family; ven∣turing it into a critical world under your Lordships auspicious Name: not doubting a pardon of this boldness, and
 a candid acceptance following it, with my poor Prayers, that it may obtain its desired success upon the rising Genera∣tion, and provoking Parents to improve this blessed Covenant; hoping that when your Lordship hath filled up your days with Grace, and tranplanted your Soul into the Coelestial Paradise; some of your Seed shall rise up in your room as Plants of Renown, to bear your Image and Name, and follow your gracious Ex∣ample while Sun and Moon endure: Which is the daily Prayer of
My Lord,

