


Honourable Sir,
THere is no inducement in the World could have possibly raised my Ambition so high, as to shelter so mean a Piece under so great a Name, but that I was well as∣sured, the scope and intent of this Discourse, Honesty and Loyalty, would be acceptable; those Gems being always justly valued by you, in whatever rugged Shells they are found. Loyalty is that which you have always kept near your Heart, the mark not only of your self, but of your Family for many Genera∣tions,

that Vestal Fire which hath never gone out, but hath cherished an inextinguishable zeal for your King and Country.
Blessed be God for Victory! we live now in a time when Loyalty is in fashion, it swims quietly down the Stream without any oppositi∣on, and every one will venture out to Sea in Halcyon days. But you shew'd undeniable proof of yours in the greatest Storms of Rage and Fury. Loyalty indeed is a Jewel in all times and persons; 'tis the spirit and life of all Vertues, without which they become hurtful to the owners and the Publick; but in ill times it is truly valuable, 'tis then a Diamond that shines best in the dark.
Such a true ancient uninteressed Loyalty is that which fills your breast, not grounded upon Design

and Advantage, but too generous to be warp'd to Interest; such a Loyalty as stuck close to the side of an injured Prince, stem'd the Tide of popular Fury, scorn'd the Mena∣ces of the Vulgar, and the feavou∣rish Heat of a misled Parliament, that was undaunted at the madness of the People, and the rage of the Sea; and when that merciless Ele∣ment threatned to devour that Prince, that had been, and was to be the Darling of Providence, a sacred blessing for our happy Land, was seen toucht with no fear but that of your Princes safety. Such a Loyalty as in a dangerous Intestine Rebellion spar'd not, for your King and Coun∣tries good; an only Son, the sole re∣maining Branch of a Great and An∣cient Family, but expos'd his ten∣der years to hardship and danger, and the fury of the worst of men,

even those that were below con∣tempt. Such a Loyalty as was not lately took up, as that of others, and aukwardly manag'd, but was de∣scended from a long series of An∣cestors, was elevated and purified by their successive practices, and in you sublim'd to the highest pitch; so that what in others is Passion or Interest, in you is your very Essence. And that Loyalty in you might not seem a thing of chance, it is become the Genius of your house, your ho∣nourable Lady & hopeful Son have a magnificent proportion. The for∣mer, though a tender and indulgent Mother, yet, when the good of her King and Country requir'd it, for∣got even Nature, laid aside Affe∣ction, and with a generosity and greatness of mind worthy her Illu∣strious Name & Family with a mag∣nanimity beyond her Sex, not only

consented to, but encourag'd an onely Son to War; a deed beyond the spirit of a Spartan Matron so much renowned in History.
Nor did the son of two such Pa∣rents frustrate the expectation that was justly had of him, but, prefer∣ring the duty he ow'd his King and Country to all other considerati∣ons, with a willing and chearful Loyalty, & a Courage superiour to his Age, he took upon him the toil and labour of the Camp, his Coun∣tries good being above all other in∣vitations, more attractive than the splendor and glory of the Court, even than the charms of a young beautiful and beloved Bride; he not allowing himself that Priviledge which God indulg'd the Jews, when married, one Year to abstain from Warfare to live with the Wife of their Youth. Such great acts in the

early Spring of Age give an hope∣ful prospect of what the growing Harvest will be. In each there is matter of surprize and wonder, something above Example that en∣forces Respect and Honour: so that where such a Constellation of Loy∣al Vertues meet, Loyalty cannot fear to obtain a Patron, which will be look'd on as the greatest honour could possibly be conferred on,
Honourable Sir,

