



Sir,
I Have read your History of the Reign of King CHARLES, and am sorry I had not so muh ac∣quaintance with you, as to see your Papers, before you put them to the Presse: which had I done, I should have advertised you of many things, wherein I finde, that either your intelligence, or your diligence failed you, or your judgment is not well informed, or that you have been byassed from the mark of truth, by the excesse and transport of your own affections. But be∣ing as it is, I beseech you to accept with a friendly hand, that which with ingenuity mixed with free∣dome, is here offered to you, and hope you will not be offended, if your History is become the text of so free a Commentary. I know full well quam facile sit in∣ventis addere, how easie a thing it is to adde to an∣other mans indeavours, and raise a superstructure upon that foundation, which hath been layed without

our trouble; but I am not ignorant withall, that many times the pains of the Commentator, are grea∣ter than their were whom he doth illustrate. Without which helps to guide us to the understanding of most antient Writers, how many of them had been thrown aside with disdain and scorn (as S. Ambrose is repor∣ted to have dealt with the Satyrs of Perseus) because no easily intelligible even to Learned men. I doubt not but it was your purpose, faithfully and impar∣tially to inform your Reader in the truth of things; in which if you have failed by reason of any of the respects before recited, these following Observations, will serve both as a Supplement, to make good some points wherein. I finde your Booke defective, and a Correction of some other passages, in which I finde you are mistaken. Between us both the History will be made more perfect, and consequently the Reader will be better satisfied: which makes me somewhat confident, that these few Notes, will be so farre from making your History lesse vendible than it was be∣fore, that they will very much advantage and pro∣mote the sale. And if I can doe good to all, without wrong to any, I ope no man can be offended with my pains and industry. For my own part, as I first un∣dertook this businesse with a minde free from love, or hatred, or any of those other affections, which pre∣ingagements in a party doe possesse men with, so I have carried it all along with such impartiality and confidence, as may witnesse for me that I preferre Truth before Interesse; and that none of Hugh Peters

his three great Gyants, that is to say, Gyant-Fear, Gyant-Selfe, and Gyant-Relations, (which com∣monly obstruct the passage to all good intendments) have been able to prevaile upon me. And for your self, I desire you would please to know, that I have your parts and person in an high esteem, and have not took this task in hand, to detract any thing from those just honours which you have acquired, but onely to rectifie your judgments, and lay before you and your Reader the true state of things. That modest free∣dome I have used, in these Observations (especially the first and last) many perhaps at the first sight seem unpleasing to you. And yet so farre I am from dspair of pardon, that I conceive my ingenuity at the last may deserve your thanks: it being ordinary with most men, who are under the hands of the Chirurgi∣on, to be impatient with him, and exclaim against him whilst their Wounds are dressed, and yet to honour and commend him when the Cure is wrought; howso∣ever you will gain this by it, that if you doe proceed to the end of the Story, as you somewhere intimate, you will be hereby made more carefull of the grounds you go on, and render the Second Part lesse capable of such Animadversions than the First hath been: which I more earnestly desire, than to engage my self in a second trouble, to which I hope you either will give no occasion, or pardon me if I doe.
October 8.
