



Most Gracious Sovereign,
IT was an usual Saying of King JAMES
(Your Majestie's most Learned Grand-Fa∣ther)
of Blessed Memory, that, Of all the
Churches in the World, He knew not any
which came nearer to the Primitive Pat∣tern,
for Doctrine, Government, and Wor∣ship,
then the Reformed Church of England.
A Saying, which He built not upon Fancy, and Affection onely;
but on such Just, and Solid Reasons, as might sufficiently endear
it to all Knowing Men. The Truth, and Certainty whereof, will be
made apparent by the following History, which here, in all Hu∣mility,
is offered to Your Majestie's View. It is (Dread Sir) an
History of the Reformation of the Church of ENGLAND,
with all the Various Fortunes, and Successes of it, from the first
Agitations in Religion under HENRY the Eight (which
served for a Preamble thereunto) until the Legal Settling, and
Establishment of it by the great Queen ELIZABETH, of Happy
Memory. A Piece not to be Dedicated to any other, then Your
Sacred Majesty; who, being rais'd by God, to be a Nursing-Father
to this part of His Church, may possibly discharge that

Duty with the Greater Tenderness, when You shall finde upon
what Rules of Piety, and Christian Prudence, the Work was
carryed on by the first Reformers. Which being once found, it
will be no hard matter to determine of such Means, and Coun∣sels,
whereby the Church may be restored to her Peace, and Pu∣rity;
from which She is most miserably fallen by our late Distra∣ctions.
It cannot be denyed, but that some Tares grew up almost
immediatly with the Wheat it self; and seem'd so specious to
the Eye, in the Blade, or Stalk, that they were taken by some
Credulous, and Confiding Men, for the better Grain. But
still they were no more then Tares, distinguished easily in the
Fruits (the Fruits of Errour, and False Doctrine; of Facti∣on,
Schism, Disorder, and perhaps Sedition) from the LORD'S
good Seed. And, being of an ater sowing (a Supersemina∣tion,
as the Vulgar reads it) and sown on purpose by a Cunning,
and Industrious Enemy, to raise an Harvest to himself, they
neither can pretend to the same Antiquity, and much less to the
Purity of that Sacred Seed, with which the Field was sown, at
first, by the Heavenly Husband-man. I leave the Application
of this Parable to the following History, and shall conclude with
this Address to Almighty God; That, as He hath restored
Your Majesty to the Throne of Your Father, and done it in so
strange a manner, as makes it seem a Miracle in the Eyes of
Christendom; so He would settle You in the same, on so sure
a Bottom, that no Design of Mischievous, and Unquiet Men
may disturb Your Peace, or detract any thing from those Felici∣ties,
which You have acquired. So prayeth,
Dread Sovereign,

