



May it please your Grace,
TO take this occasion to Blazon and Pub∣lish your Virtues, would be an employ, as needless as his, that Lighted a Candle to the Sun: And if I should here declare how much I am Obliged to your Grace, and how good an Opinion you have had of my Endeavours in this kind, Envy perhaps would Construe it (in me) Ambition rather than Gratitude: And if by the Formality of a Dedication, I should
thus engage you to Countenance, or perhaps blush for my escapes, it would not only be a Presumption but a Trappan.
None of these were Motives to perswade to this address; but the Truth is, Religion in this Age is so much out of Fashion amongst the Men, (some of them at least) looking upon all Reli∣gion, but as the needless Parenthesis of Life; that if I take all occasions to give your Grace opportunities to encourage any Loyal and Religi∣ous attempts, 'tis the greatest honour I can do you, or can be done to you.
For which cause (no doubt) St. John De∣dicated one of his Epistles to the Elect Lady. And with the same, or the like methods, the Apostles did so Court the great Ladies in the Court of Rome, that they Proselyted to Vir∣tue and Christianity, of Honourable Women not a few.

 Nor can I better evidence my Devotion to your Grace, or more approve my own Judg∣ment to the World, than (by this Dedicati∣on) in making Choice of such a Protecto∣ress to favour that Loyalty and Religion (that is Retrieved in this Sermon from a Text by the perverse Interpretations of some Men) almost lost and forlorn.
Religion (I say) and Loyalty; (I put them together,) for they are Twins, that in our Christian Kingdom, are born, and Live and Dye together.
 Man in England at this day can be  Religious, that is not truly Loyal; nor any Man truly Loyal that is not truly Re∣ligious: Not only, (I mean) in the Sence of that great and good German Emperour, that turned away his Prophane Servants with these words—How can he be faithful to me, that is not faithful to his God?
But chiefly, because true Loyalty, as well as true Religion, are nothing else but an Obedi∣ence to God and the King, in the Observance of the Christian Laws of the Land.
Any other account of Religion is Superstiti∣tious, and any other account of Loyalty is Fa∣ctious or Parasitical.
In our Age no Rebells ever disturbed the Government, and England's Peace,  such as marcht in a Religious Dress, and y Masquerade; and therefore the most dange∣rous. And though I cannot but have great Com∣passion for misguided Zeal, yet I have (some∣times) in this following Sermon followed St. Paul's advice (against my natural tenderness and inclination) in reproving them sharply, and giving the Devil his due.
None was so mild and compassionate to Pub∣licans and Sinners, as our Blessed Saviour, yet
when he had to do with Scribes, Pharisees and Hypocrites, he denounc't as many Woo's, as Verses, against them, and called Judas the Traitour (plain) Devil.
But to enlarge this Epistle would but aggravate the trouble of this interruption, I shall therefore now (as I daily do) Conclude with my earnest Prayers for the Temporal and Eternal Prosperity of you and yours, as the bounden Duty of
Illustrious Madam,

Colchester, May 14.1680.
