


My Lord,
I Have a singular veneration for your Lordship, and the Court, which makes me submit my Judgment to yours, and publish this Discourse, to comply with your joint request, which I think as obliging as any Com∣mand. Your Authority, more than all the interest I have in it, will recommend it to the World, and if it be but read with as much satisfaction, as your Honours heard it, it will answer the ends of its Publication, and prove as useful, as it is suitable to the necessities of the age. 'Tis a sad thing to consider, that there should be an occasion for such a Discourse as this, and nothing reflects more dishonour upon the Gospel, or more grieves and dishear∣tens the Ministers thereof, then to see themselves con∣strain'd by Mens extravagant Opinions, to Preach up
those Truths, they ought to presuppose. But so, my Lord, it is, that Mens Errors and Vices give us sub∣jects for Sermons, as the sometimes give our Law-givers matter for their Laws, and particularly Scepticisme, which is nothing but Infidelity in several dresses and de∣grees, so possesses the Minds of Men, that instead of Preaching up Practical Divinity, we are often constrain'd to insist upon Doctrinal Points. Instead of perswading Men to the Love of God, we are fain now and then to prove that he is, instead of urging them to have a care of their Souls, we are forc'd to prove, that their Souls are beings worthy of their care, and instead of pres∣sing them to resist all manner of Temptations, and Pray for the Grace of God, we sometimes find it needful, first to convince then, that they have power to resist them, and that his Grace is a real thing. This bitter root of unbelief is the Reason, why the Gospel hath no better success in the World, and one of the true causes, why so many Men have a secret ill-will for the Ministers of it, because they are an Order of Men set aside to maintain the everlasting Truths of God, and oppose themselves to those impious Opinions, by which they are willing to Damn their Souls. But were other Men, my Lord, as Or∣thodox, and understood their Religion as well as you, there would be no occasions for such Discourses as this, but we should wholly set our selves to press home upon Mens Consciences the practical Duties of Religion, and by that means make the Preaching part of Divinity more
delightful to our selves, and much more profitable to the Church of God. We should not then complain so much of the unsuccessfulness of our labours, but see more of the travel of our Souls, when the work of our Lord did prosper in our hands.
But whether we Preach Practically, or whether we Preach about Speculative Truths, we do the Work of him that sent us; by the former, we reform Mens Vices, by the latter, we confute their Errors, by both we keep their Consciences awake, and make it impossi∣ble for them to live without remorse, or dye in their Sins without fear. So that the Ministerial Function, were it meerly Humane, must needs be confessed to be an excellent Institution, and its greatest Enemies can∣not but acknowledge, that the Pulpit conduces as much as the Bench, to preserve Civil Order, and restrain the exorbitant Passions of Men. In particular, my Lord, were it not for us, this populous City, which is now so happy in your Government, would be far more Wicked than it is, and both your Honour, and all other Ministers of Criminal Justice, would have much more Employment for their Axes and Rods. As for you, my Lord, your Honour, by your diligent and impar∣tial Administration of Justice hath testified to the World, that you bear not the Sword in vain. For ever since it was put into your hands, you have severely Punished Vice, and reform'd more disorders, and disorderly Persons, than I have opportunity here to
relate. The World sees, and the City feels the effects of your good Government: Good Men Honour you, bad Men Fear you, God will Bless you, and Posterity will mention your Name with Praise. In particular, none Honours your more for your private and political Virtues, than,
My Lord,

