


My LORD,
AS in the primitive ages of Christianity much harm and dishonour happened unto the Christian Religion by . Dial. cum Tryph. & in Apol. 2. Atheists, Here∣ticks and False-teachers, who were called Christi∣ans, and under that glorious denomination taught
 ungodly, blasphemous, unrighteous, and absurd things: So in this unhappy Age, wherein we live, the Protestant, which is but another name for the Primitive Christian Religion, hath been much damnified, and disgraced, by Atheistical, Heretical, and other Seducing teachers; who un∣der the name of Protestants have taught the World, wicked, absurd and unchristian Doctrines, contrary to the true Protestant Religion, and so have disgraced the Protestant, as Justin Martyr complained, the others did the Christian Name.
Among these we have great reason to reckon all those who have taught the People the unchristian doctrines of Disobedience, Treason and Rebelli∣on, of whom I may say, as that Father said of the foresaid Christians, that although they be [] called Protestants, yet they are not [] Orthodox and compleat Protestants, indeed no more, than the Sadducees, and other Jewish Sectaries, which he mentions, by way of comparison, were truly Orthodox Jews.
In this following Discourse I have set the pre∣cepts of the Gospel, and the principles, and prac∣tice of the primitive Christians against the prin∣ciples and practices of these men, observing the same method, that a learned Divine did before me in the same Audience upon the next words be∣fore
 my Text, on the 5th. of 1680. De∣dicated to Sir Patience Ward. November; and one would think, that what passed for true, and seasonable Divinity then, should not be misliked, and condemned now.
But yet, My Lord, so it happens, for some men, I hear, who like the preaching of this Doc∣trine one way, do not like it another, when it is charged home upon the culpable Parties; to which, it is to be feared, they have too strong an incli∣nation: Otherwise I cannot well imagine why they should so publickly, and plainly suggest that I pretended I could name a great many Authors, and some yet living, for the dangerous principles, which I recited, when I had none to name.
This Reflexion, My Lord, made me send back for the sheets from the Press, that I might for my own Justification cite the Authors by their Names, and if I have disobliged any by doing so, they must not blame me, because it was not my first intention, but those, who constrained me to be so plain.
I could have been far more numerous both in reciting their principles, and in citing the Au∣thors of them too; for since I made this Discourse, which was a year ago for my Parish, Dissenters Sayings in 2 Parts. new Col∣lections have been made out of their Writings, but I have added very little, contenting my self with what I had before provided out of their
 Originals, and out of the Collections, which were then to be had; and as the Passages, and Au∣thors which I have cited are not the tenth of what hath been Printed; so all that they have printed themselves, or others have printed out of them, is not the tenth, nor perhaps the hundredth part of what men have taught and preached.
So much, My Lord, hath the contagion of the Popish principles of Rebellion over-run these Pro∣testant Kingdoms; and if what I have said in the following discourse may prove as an Antidote to expell them out of the Soul of any one man, that is infected with them, I shall not value what the incurable and impenitent sort say of me, but re∣joice when they shall revile me, and persecute me, and say all manner of evil against me falsly upon that account.
I hope I have said nothing neither as to the mat∣ter nor manner of Expression which the Subject and the Day will not excuse, but if any think that any Passage in it is too keen, let him not be offended, but first consider the merits of the Crime, and then imagine with himself what any of the Fathers or Apostles whom I have cited in the first part, particularly what the Author of the 13th. of the Romans, if he had Preached upon that occasion, would have said thereupon.

It hath formerly been laid with much accep∣tance to some Parties upon the Papists, who un∣doubtedly had a considerable share in the execra∣ble Tragedy, and therefore I hope I shall not in∣cur their displeasure by laying it upon Popish principles, by which the Papists have debauched so many Protestants from their Allegiance; and if upon the dismall view of the whole I have used some warm and sharp Expressions, it was no more than was necessary upon that occasion, to shew my just Resentments for such a Crying Abomination, and the deadly Blow which the Protestant Religion hath received thereby.
I know your Lordship is very sensible of all this, as every good Protestant ought to be; I know your Loyalty is part of your Religion, and that, as St. In Ps. 124. Augustin speaks, you faithfully serve and obey your temporal for the sake of your Eter∣nal Lord. The sense of your duty, as a Christian, makes you a most obedient Subject, and faithfull Magistrate under your Soveraign; and also a most gratefull Citizen to such a mighty Benefac∣tor to this Illustrious City, and as all truly conscien∣tious loyal men now love and praise you for these and your other exemplary vertues; so they will hereafter honour your Memory for them when you shall be translated from this, into the City of God.

I pray God assist you under the burthen of your present Magistracy in these difficult times, and bless you with long Life and Prosperity after you shall retire from it, and I am sure there are great numbers in this City who will heartily join in this Prayer with

