



SIR,
IN this Treatise your Grace will find somewhat suitable to you, in the Case of Nectarius (not Arch-Bishop, for that name was not then invented, but which did Tatamount) Patri∣arch of the Arch-See of Constantinople.
Elected thereunto per saltum, or, rather vaulting and skipping into the Holy-See or uppermost Seat in the Church, over the heads of all (not only his equals, but by many de∣grees his) Superiors, contrary to the Canon-Law of Holy-Church, himself also being (then) but a Lay man (nay) and unbap∣tized.
To show us, that it is not the first time that the Church has crack't a Com∣mandment to dispense with rigour, and summum jus, in favour of great (and not vulgar) merit.
For many reasons, therefore, (as well as for this great and concern'd example of Lenity against the strict Rules of Law) does this little Tract in all lowliness expect (as well as flie so high as) your Patronage and Protection.
And Published, not so much in mine own behalf (for I need not your favour, but impartial and equal Justice) as in the behalf of the many Dissenters and Nonconformists to the strict Rules of the Act for Ʋniformity.
With which, if you cannot dispense or grant Indulgences, it concerns me as little (or less) than your self, or, those Clergy-men that are here prov'd to be Non-Conformists when they too frequently practise Illegal Ceremonies, in defiance of the Acts for Uniformity, that enjoyns those (few) Ceremonies in the Common-Prayer-Book, and no other, (mark that) no other Ceremonies, which (other Ceremonies are therefore Illegal Superstitions, in enjoyning the Surplice, and yet forbearing the Cope (wherein none but Popish Priests are Conformists, or arayed (that I know of) at this day, and yet the Cope is as much commanded as the Surplice.
And, besides, in bowing at the Holy Name of Jesus, (the impertinence (at least) whereof, I have in all humility undeniably evinc't, in my Naked-Truth, the second Part, except we also bow at the Holy Name of God, and the Holy-Ghost (names equally venerable) so often as we hear them; or also bow at the Name of Jesus, every time a Blasphemer (which is too usual) swears by the Name of Jesus; and yet no man dops the head, much less bows the knee there-at, no, not in Sermon-time, when we hear the Minister 100 times in an hour name Jesus.

 Or, as impertinent as that illegal and idle Superstition or Ceremony (in de∣fiance of the Act of Uniformity) so generally practis'd by bowing to the Altar, setting insignificant and unlighted Candles thereon, and bowing to the East.
Nay, some have been so sillily and ridiculously Superstitious, as to ruine a hand∣som Pile and Fabrick, (to their own impoverishment, so far as to need or get the Charity of others) only by rebuilding it worse, to make it face to the left, and directly East and West; That so Men might bow to the Altar, and to the East also, with one single Nod; Oh! most incomparable Atchievement, and (no doubt) meritorious.
Whereas Astronomy tells us (infallibly) that there is no such thing (really) as East and West, but meer imaginary Points, and fictitious, (as the Figures of the heavenly Dog and Bear) that being West to some others, which is East to us; and East to others, which is West to us.
But besides the Folly, (so it may well be called) it is hereafter prov'd to be a sin against the Act of Uniformity, to bow to the East or Altar; and not only a Peccadillo, but so great, as to make us (except we repent, and reform that wicked Error) to forfeit all our spiritual Promotions.
The tender Consideration whereof will (I hope) make us tender against Nonconformists for our own sakes, (it had been better tho' for Charities sake) to take off our keen and fiery edge against Dissenters, and Breakers of some Branch of the Act of Uniformity, lest we pronounce our own Suspension and Anathema, with the same mouth, and for the same Cause for which we censure and sentence others.
I have here (modestly I hope) search'd into the Nature, and try'd the mettal and mettle of your great and onely Weapon in your Arch-Court, or Court of Arches, (but always under Correction, and with submission to better Judgments and the Laws) Excommunication:
So often let flie in your Name, in that Court, though you seldom or never come there to hear the Merit of the Cause, and the Witnesses viva voce, and face to face; no wonder then if you make many Random-shots, and wide and beside the mark; if you trust with implicite Faith in and to Registers, Notaries and Advocates (those spiritual Hucksters of Souls) that live by Fees from sinners, whose Purses they take upon the Highway to Heaven or Hell; and no Repentance will serve the turn, except those motley, Ecclesiastical-Lay Merchants for Souls be first pleas'd, that is, paid their Demands, ungodly, illegal Demands, upon sight; at our utmost peril.
'Tis a pretty Trade indeed, invented by the Pope and the Devil; delivering to Satan by Excommunication, and delivering from Satan by Absolution, but not with∣out money in the Case. Thus precious Souls, for whom Christ dyed, are truck't for, bought and sold, by these Ecclesiastical Merchant-Adventurers; a gain∣ful Trade it is too, if the Naked-Truth do not spoil the Market, (which is more than probable.)
And if you would imitate our blessed Saviour, (how well would so Gospel a work become you to your Eternal Honour in this and succeeding Ages, name∣ly) to whip these Buyers and Sellers of Souls out of the Temple, though you can make a Whip (as he did) but of small Cords, to slash and lash out these Silver-Smiths of Diana, that coin Heaven and Hell, by that abominable craft getting their wealth, making merchandize of Souls, to their own, as well as others de∣struction.
Away with this Foppery out of the Church, and Spiritual Wickedness in High places; I hate the Folly thereof, (discern'd now by every Peasant, and derided) as much as the Hypocriste of it: which you, in sober sadness, must confess and lament as much as (nay, more than) others; sitting so high at the Helm, God guide your hand.
I hope you will not draw your spiritual weapons upon me (tho') for this Honesty and Plain-dealing, instead of slashing the said Chequer-work black and white, motley-colour'd Hucksters of Souls, and so disparage the Title—Vestra Clementia— usually given to your Predecessors;

 If you do, and I over-live you, do not speak to me to write your Epitaph to Posterity.
And be not angry that I claim Kindred, spiritual Kindred and Alliance with you, a Man so much above me, but of the same Order and Function.
There are none but bloated, big-swollen and imboss'd Ʋpstarts, that are asham'd of their Kindred and Relations, because they are poor and low in the world.
And 'tis below me to tell you how equal and alike we were, when we were both Fellows of Colledges together, (in the days of Oliver) in the University of Cambridge: yet I never took the Covenant, or any (State-Oath) in my life, ex∣cept that of Allegiance and Supremacy.
Therefore for the Sameness of our Function, and your own Coat, do not sit un∣concern'd, and patiently look on, whil'st the men of Doctors-Commons seem to make you a Property and a Colour, by your great Name and Authority, to abuse me, (as they have done) and so crush me by Proxy, in your Court of Arches, This should not be amongst Brethren.
I grant, you are Rich and I am Poor, What then? Do not take part with my great Adversary the Bishop of London, (whom I never offended but by telling Truth) because he is rich, great and powerful; but (as the Wiseman counsels you, Prov. 22.22.) Rob not the poor, because he is poor: neither oppress the afflict∣ed in the gate.
But open thy mouth, (Prov. 31.9.) judge righteously, and plead the cause of the poor and needy; and (God-like) deliver the poor from him that is too strong for him; the poor and needy from him that spoileth him, Psal. 35.10.
The wicked in the pride of his heart (Psal. 10.2, 9, 11.) doth persecute the poor; let them be taken in the devices that they have imagined: his mouth is full of cursing, (Anathematizing) and deceit and fraud, under his tongue is mischief and vanity; he lieth in wait to catch the poor, he doth man-catch the poor, when he draweth him into his net. He hath said in his heart, God hath forgotten, he hideth his face, he will never see it.
The Church-doors in Popish Countries, and also the Chappel-doors in Mo∣nasteries, stand open all the day long, to let in, to the Altar, all those that com∣mit Murder (of which (there are more than a good many) make a Trade, and their onely Livelihood and Vocation.)
But to see (as I have seen) what rejoycing there was by the Parish Priests, or the Monasteries, (whose luck hapned to be best, and nearest to the place where the Murder was committed) how they would Joy, Huzzah, and Hallou, (as) at a Prize—A Prize—
For if the Murderer have got 20 Doubloones (the common price for a Mur∣der) the Altar-keepers will be sure to make him divide, share and go Snips; And then—The Proudest He in Portugal, or Spain, or Italy, dare not touch the Mur∣derer for three days together (the time allowed for his Escape) no, not the King himself can fetch him from Holy Church; for he also is afraid of the In∣quisition-men.
But what Conscience is there, that a poor Whore should be excluded the Church and Sacraments, and yet the Church-doors open, and the Altar ready to receive a Barabbas, a Robber and a Murderer? A meer gore-blood Religion sure, that a man must part with his Humanity, before he can be proselyted or perverted thereto!—
Indeed, the Tolerated and Publick Stews, makes the Whores and the unmar∣ried Priests some amends, but they cannot play the Whore and Rogue there nei∣ther, (tho') by Authority, 'till they get a Licence, which must be paid for too, I know it.
And can we think, but that it is a hard world for some sinners to be excluded the Church and Sacraments, by greater Villains than themselves? And does not all the world know, that not only gray hairs, five or six Caps more than needs, Rheums, Coughs, and distempers of Body, but diseases of Soul too, by the Simony of Flattery, and looking (through the fingers) at sin, are the best lifts to Pre∣ferment, and helps to Government, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Jurisdiction of the Holy-Chair (at Rome.)

 Whither the Arch-Priest is no sooner crept by those old Serpentine and Pimp∣ing Arts, but he writes himself (by strange contradiction) the Prince of the Apostles, (who, Good Men! never had a Prince amongst them) but also he stiles himself—Arch-slave—also, or Slave of Slaves, Servant of Servants: And (there) he says true; for none but the vilest of Slaves will so unman (as well as unchristen themselves) to pimp to other Mens Lusts, thereby to gratifie their own Lusts of Avarice and Pride, to which they are first enslav'd. Arch-slave, or Servant of Servants? His Holiness is in the right on't, (I profess) and therein, Infallible, whether his Worship considers it or no.
But I wonder not at his Greatness and Monstrous Ecclesiasticalship: For when the Antichristian Clergy had once made the Silly-Bigotted World believe, that they, their Commissaries, Registers and Sumners, were the onely Buyers and Sellers in the Temple, and, What do you lack? Would Men have Estates Real or Personal, in Heaven, for ever; or, in Purgatory, for a certain term of years for a less Sum, or be freed from Hell for Ever and Aye? Here's your Men, (quoth the Popish Priests) Chapmen, What do you lack? What do you buy?
Then, then, and not till then, they got the whipping-hand of the superstitious world; for he that has got a hank over other Mens Souls and Consciences, their Bodies and Estates (consequently) are, without dispute, at his Service and De∣votion.
And when a Priest can make a poor Lady believe, that he can damn her, or absolve her, and has the Keys, and something else under his Girdle, and can let her into (or shut her out from) the Church and Sacraments, so that she will but shew him all her Secrets, and unbosome her self in Auricular Confession: (Ca∣jol'd thereunto superstitiously, and bug-bear'd by many lying Miracles (in the Legend) of many that dyed, and got as far as Heaven-gates, but were glad to return (a long and weary Journey) to earth again, to be confest by a Priest, before they could be let in, dying unshriv'd or unhousled) can such a Priest (that has got the Lock and Key of a Ladies Closet and Secrets) have far to go before he come at her heart?
And I have therefore wondred, that the jealous Italians, Spaniards and Portu∣gueze (that will not suffer any man (scarce a Brother) to see their Wives face) should yet permit them to go to secret and auricular Confession, to a young, vigo∣rous, unguelt piece of Sanctity! (I had almost said, Hypocrisie!).
I could not but wonder ('till now of late) to find—St. Ambrosie, Ora pro no∣bis, in the Popish Letany or Mass? For what merit? Oh! Captain St. Ambrose was the first Ecclesiastical-Hector, or Spiritual-Bravo, that in defiance of God and the King, durst as malapartly, as barbarously and insultingly, (some say) Trai∣terously shut the doors of the Church against his Prince and Emperor Theodosius the elder, not admitting him to the Sacrament nor Divine Service, 'till the Em∣peror submitted to the proud insulting Priest, and promis'd (upon his knees) that for the future he would be rul'd; and so, he and the Priest became Friends again.
Well, I see St. James (the Author (the Papists say of their Liturgy and Mass) though he was none of the Twelve Apostles, yet was a Bishop and a Pro∣phet too, if he could so early insert (into the Churches Common-Prayer Book) stout Captain St. Ambrose, and make him pray for himself and all Christen-Souls, 400 years before he was born.
Oh! the merit of some mens Ecclesiastical Insolence!
But if Captain Ambrose was Canoniz'd and Sainted for shutting the Church-doors, and debarring a great Sinner from Divine Service and Sacraments, Will not the men of the same Leaven Anathematize me, for opening the Church-doors thus to Sinners, great Sinners, and small Sinners, and shut me out?
But it is better far, to eat with Publicans and Sinners, (as our blessed Saviour did) than to partake with Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites, to whom he denoun∣ced Wo, Wo, Wo.
Thus have I known School-Boys (taught in the Church, but better fed than taught) to barr out their Masters (and be Masters of Mis-rule) upon pre∣tence
of Christmas and a Holy-time; and with a Brazen-face make Declamati∣ons and Verses in praise of that precious Ecclesiastical Discipline.
But, if I come, I'le open the Church Doors again, and spread the Arms of Mercy wide open and outstretched to as great a Latitude and Comprehension, (as our Blessed Saviour did) even to Publicans and Sinners, they shall eat with me; let the Hypocrites eat alone, and (as fittest) by themselves, if they will not vouchsafe to eat with Sinners; let them cringe and bow, and face to the Left, to the Left—to the East—the East.
Sinners, (look you) Sinners, though they despise Sinners so much, in nomine Domini, Sinners are the best Gryst that comes to their Mills: If it were not for Sinners, the Bench (Ecclesiastical at least) would not be so scarlet as it is; their Holinesses might sit alone, as well as a cold, if it were not for Sinners, and look as lean as an Easter-Offering.
Sinners? quoth a; Who is this that despises Sinners, which our Blessed Re∣deemer did not despise? by God's help, this little Book shall open the Church-Doors to let in Sinners, in spight of the most self-conceited Hypocrite, as far as the Old and New Testament will go; (I say) ipse dixi.
What? shall sin walk barefac't, magisterial, in open Court, and unrebuk't? And shall the Naked-Truth be glad to hide its Head? Ha? shall the wicked Extortioners of Doctors-Commons sin, and will you make me suffer? and be whipt (for their faults) upon their Backs whilst they hold me up to you, Sir? look you, my Lord, Is there any Conscience in this?
Look you, Sir, look you, (I am got into the Modern Rhetorical Phraze entail'd on some seats of Eloquence) can it be Justice (look you, my Lord) that I should suffer because they sin, and I only wish and endeavour their amendment?
Just thus, does the unjust World abuse the poor Cuckolds, when (the Naked-Truth on't is) the great and only fault is in the Cuckold-makers, the Whore and Rogue.
And must he not have a face of Brass (look you) and a conscience of Steel, my Lord, that shall vindicate that domineering (Popishly invented) Prelacy, which the Holy Scriptures, and our Blessed Redeemer condemns, making all his Disciples Spiritual-Levellers? Luke 22. Whose Disciples then are the Popish Prelates? that in defiance of Christ, will domineer over the Clergy, their Bre∣thren, and vex them with Law-Suits, having great Interest, and great Power, and withal, Purse-proud, to defend, in spight of Christ, that Antichristian Lord∣liness and Clergical Tyranny over their Brethren, calling it as the Pope (contra∣dictione adjecto) first call'd it, Hierarchy, or the Holy Rule; But how can that be Holy that the Holy Scriptures and the Holy Jesus decries and condemns? and it was first Enacted and made a Law in England, when the Pope did what he list both with King and People. They had, and we have a happy time on't; yet most of these Popish Hierarchical Laws are abolished, and that was stoutly at∣tack't, though it still stands, and let it stand: I said, in my Naked-Truth, Rome (was not built, and) cannot be destroyed in one day; it crumbles a pace.
If you be for Discipline and Spiritual Weapons, rather Draw upon the Adulte∣rers and Adulteresses, the Extortioners, impudent Extortioners in your Spi∣ritual-Courts, in Probates, Administrations, Visitations, Ordinations, grant∣ing Licences to Preach, Institutions, Inductions, Procurations; and, if you have power to Anathematize and Curse, Curse the Cursers and Blasphemers of the unparallel'd Age we live in.
In all the Reign of Edw. 6. I find no man taken upon the Writ de Excommuni∣cato capiendo, nor 'till the fifth of Queen Elizabeth, nor any legal Cursing or Com∣mination save that in the Common-Prayer-Book, denouncing of Gods Anger and Judgments against Sinners, Cursed is he that smiteth his neighbour secretly, and Cursed is he that lyeth with his neighbours wife, &c. and all the people shall say, Amen.
Cursed is he that taketh a reward to slay an innocent person, Deut. 27.25. (that is) in plain English—Cursed is the Suborner, that promises or threatens a Re∣ward, or Advancement (for there are two sorts of Advancements, or Rewards belike, the Learned say) and Cursed is the Suborned, namely, Cursed is the Man∣catcher,
and his Mate, or—Comrogue; those two Judasses that give or take a Reward to slay an innocent person: and all the people shall say, Amen.
Nay, if men be for Cursing, they may have their belly full, in Curses that are not money-matters, nor causeless, and therefore shall come to pass.
For though the Curse causeless shall not come, Prov. 26.2. Yet the Curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked, Prov. 3.33.
Indeed, the Rubrick does bewail that we have not the godly Discipline of the Primitive-Church, where Sinners were punish't in this World (by delivering to Satan) for never any man in the New Testament escap't death when the Apo∣stles had deliver'd them over, for the destruction of the flesh (that must be death) that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.
No, alas, alas! we cannot kill men with a word, as did St. Peter and St. Paul, upon great and terrible occasions to make an example of notorious Sinners.
The Pope therefore made the silly Bigot-Magistrate do, (what the Devil us'd to do in the Apostles times) in killing and burning Hereticks, and entituling the Magistrate to the blood and odium, as well as to the honour of being the surrogate of the Priests Revenge; the Magistrate had a happy employment on't; but he durst do no other, lest upon his contempt of Canons of Holy-Church, Holy-Church had serv'd him with the same sawce.
In my Travels, in Popish Countries, as Portugal, Spain, &c. (whose Laws-municipal are the Canon-Laws and Civil-Law) I have observ'd, that in the grand business of the Inquisition, and Excommunication, the Lay-Doctors, the Civi∣lians do the business, but always under the Name and Authority of some Bishop or Bishops.
Who, well knowing the way to the Wood, and that to be led gently by the nose by those Lay-Doctors, is the shortest cut to Preferment, and to be an easie Soul, or a tame Property, is a meritorious qualification in a Candidate for the Holy See; it would make a man smile (if it were lawful to smile on so sad an occa∣sion) to see an old Nidget put on his Spectacles to write his Name under the Sen∣tence for burning a Heretick, which the Lay-Chancellors, and Officials bring to him ready for his Wisdom's Subscription; though (poor old heart!) he knew nothing of the matter, nor heard one Witness viva voce in the Cause.
Nay, they would be very angry, if he makes the least scruple or hesitation, or enquiry; What? not trust his Delegates? his Lay-Vicars? not trust publick Notaries and Proctors? Advocates and Surrogates? that would not be guilty of an Extortion or Wrong (I'le warrant) for any thing in the World, except money.
And truly (my Lord) you could not have troubled me worse than you did the last Term, by the answer you gave me to my Letter, sent by a Gentleman my Sollicitor, saying, You knew nothing of the matter, nothing of my cause, or the merit of it, for that you left all to your Ʋnder-Officers.
Your under Officers? Why? they are the sort of men of Doctors-Commons, that hitherto have seem'd to Cite me, upon pretended Articles of Barretry (of which neither you nor they are competent Judges; but you run the hazard (all of you) of a Praemunire, if you take upon you to hale matters into your Courts that belong only to the Jurisdiction of the Courts of our Lord the King) as if they design'd only under colour of a Process, to get me in amongst them to affront, abuse me, squeeze and crush me; they have done their utmost.
And, do what you will, I will never again appear at Doctors-Commons in your Court, except you will secure me from affronts, and keep the Peace, that you will be personally present there, and hear my defence, and be an ear-witness, as well as a Judg, how I'le baffle them all.
Leave me to your Ʋnder-Officers? Are you in Earnest? have a care your under Officers, in meditating their Revenge on me, hit not you home, by bringing you within the Statutes of Provisors, and Praemunire; if you with implicite faith trust to them, they are in a fair way to't. But no Subject, how high so ever, is too great for the Law, and Truth: they must, they must, (read all Chro∣nicles,) they always did buckle, and submit their sturdy necks to the Law, or the Block.

 Leave me to your Ʋnder-Officers? Do you say so still? God defend: No, Sir, no, leave me not in the hands of mine Enemies, and give me not over to the will of mine Enemies, that hate me without a cause, without good cause, and only for telling truth of their vile Extortions, and viler Merchandize of precious Souls.
Leave me to your Ʋnder-Officers? nay, then I am well help't up; I am like to have a hopeful time on't: Why? these men of Doctors-Commons, as you'l see hereafter in this little Book, they are flesh't upon me already, upon my Soul, and upon my Purse too; Leave me to them? and they'l bring you a Sentence for you to suspend me, stop my mouth, silence me, or, perhaps Excommunicate me; but throw away your Pen when you come to subscribe it: let me advise you for once, trust them not with a power Legantine; what care they what inconve∣nience they bring upon you or the Church? they shoot securely under the covert of your great Name and Authority, whilst your Delegates do indeed by such Proxy Sentence but make you a Surrogate of their private spleen, malice and re∣venge; you cannot have a worse employment.
I know, my Lord, that you and many others that do not know me, will wonder both at what I have written, and that I (durst) write what follows; but 'tis because they do not know me, for those that do, will wonder at neither. Common-talk or fame is seldom a good Limner, or Pourtrays any man true; besides, it is so various too, (now) as of old, some said he was a good man, others said, nay, but he deceiveth the people.
My own Cause in your Court (you'll see) needs not ten Lines to answer all; no, but I take willingly the occasion here given to search into your mysteries: for, how can I, or any honest English-man or Christian, sit unconcern'd, when we view such havock made of Christian Souls? bought and sold, sent to Satan, and thence redeem'd, but not without Money, Money.
Fye upon't, Fye upon't, 'tis a burning shame it should be suffered; 'tis against Conscience, Reason, Law, Equity and Religion. And shall these fellows (bold and old in sin) be cherish't, and I accounted too bold to tell them of their wick∣edness? And shall they have more of your countenance than I? do your plea∣sure. But you ought not to judg re inaudita, and hearing but of one ear, reserve but one for me, unstufft with prejudice, and if you had never so lawful a Court, I neither need nor require a greater or other favour from you, whilst I live: But to leave me to them? you shall not leave me to them; I'le wash my hands of them, God bless me from them: I tell you here, I'le not come at them.
And I would have told you so at Lambeth, but I dare not come there neither, without your Order and Permission; and when I writ to you, and the Gentle∣man (I sent) ask't you, If you would have me to attend you? you said, No, you left all to your under Officers; so that I have no other way but this publick way to approach your hand or ear: which is, I hope, a sufficient Apology for this Humble Address, of which I trust you will not be an Abhorrer.
'Tis true, these Ʋncivil-Civilians that make Markets of Souls, do but (I know) truckle under the Clergy for a Livelihood; yet they are as petulant to the Clergy, as if they were only their Sport or May-game, or poor tame Asses, fit for nothing so much, as to be the Objects of their Wrath, and the Subjects of their Affronts and Scorn.
Thus have I known wanton Jades kick the Hand that fed them, and made them fat, nay, and throw their Masters too, when Provant prick't them.
I Prophesie (tho') that I have taken off the keen edge of their onely Toole, these Ecclesiastical Fellows work (for money) with, viz. Excommunication, with a poor Formality-Priest standing Surrogating in black, like—at their right hand, to see Livery and Seizin given of the Excommunicate Person that is de∣livered to Satan, they shall fight hereafter, but with rebated Weapons, they are so cruel in their Fulminations, and for such Trifles too.
That ever a Kingdom of Christians should be so long bewitch'd to believe, that any can damn them, or forgive sins, save God onely; or, that any man has power on earth given him from God, to keep others from the Ordinances, the means of
Grace, the Sacraments, the Food of Souls, and the Bread of Life, because they are Sinners; Sinners? Why there should need no Ordinances, nor Sacraments, if it were not for Sinners; nor did ever any man receive the blessed Sacrament, but Sinners all, except our Saviour onely.
The Soul is sick, 'tis granted, more need of Physick and Food: The whole have no need of a Physician.
Nay, the first that ever partook of the Blessed Supper, if they were Penitents, they were soon relaps't: For in Luke 22. in the 20th Verse, they took it, and in the 24th Verse, they were no sooner come out from the Holy Feast, but they fell a quarrelling and justling for the place, and striving (it runs in the kind perhaps) which of them should be the greatest.
But the crafty Popish Priests finding that Sinners found the goodness and sweet∣ness of the Blessed Sacrament, and long'd for it, and they were the onely Stewards of those Mysteries, they resolved to make the best benefit of the Stewards place.
And indeed I have observ'd, in some Countries, where I have been, that when (once) the Clergy have perceiv'd that their Office was found so mighty neces∣sary, they resolve to take the occasion, and make their best advantage of it.
Did the People find comfort in the Bread of Life, and also were made to be∣lieve that none could Consecrate it but a Priest, or Popish Priest: Ay, (quoth the Popish Priest) Sinner, Do you see? Do you see here what I have got in my hands? Would you not be glad to have some? Nay, Hold—Stand off—Here is the Bread of Life, but not a Bit upon a march, not a Bit upon the great march and High-way to Heaven, though it would save your Soul, except you be obe∣dient to your Diocesan, nay, and swear Obedience to Canons and Laws of Ho∣ly Church though you starve and dye for a Bit.
He therefore that can make a Sacrament, and debarr (ad libitum) sinners from it, may well take the wall of all other Men in Christendom.
But there is no Scripture in the Old or New Testament (that ever I found) that ever gave power to any Man, Men, or Church, to debar any Man from the Sacraments, that is pleased to come to them; for such as were deliver'd to Satan in the Apostles days, were therewith kill'd, their Flesh was destroyed.
'Tis true, an impenitent Sinner he comes at his own peril, if he venture to eat unworthily; but 'tis not a greater sin to eat unworthily, than not to eat at all; rejecting of the Ordinance is certain damnation, whereas he that eats unwor∣thily, makes a hopeful Assay of Obedience to Christ; and as he said, Lord, I be∣lieve, help my Ʋnbelief; so it is acceptable worthiness, to say, Lord, I endeavor to eat and drink worthily, help my unworthiness.
And as he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damna∣tion; so he that prays, preaches, or hears unworthily, preaches, hears and prays damnation to himself.
Nor, need I tell you my Lord, that the world is generally mistaken in the meaning of the word , unworthily, better Translated unbecomingly, or un∣suitably (namely) to the Institution; as when Men make the Sacrament of Christ, or take the Sacrament of Christ, for no other Cause than a Test, or State-Sacrament only, making it the Sacrament of a Corporation, or, of Prefer∣ment only to get into a Ship, or a Fort, or on the Bench.
And this Construction of the word , we have in Ephes. 4.1. Col. 1.10. Phil. 1.27. 1 Thess. 2.12. Rom. 16.2. , as becometh Saints, for there is none but Papists that plead the merit of Condignity, or, that any man is worthy of God, or worthy the Gospel, otherwise than as endeavouring to walk be∣comingly and suitably thereto.
And to back this Interpretation, I have the great Le Groot, or Grotius on my side, a Name that with me out-weighs all the Popish Priests put together.
We are all Sinners, and the Sacrament's made on purpose for us, and none but those that have the gift of God of discerning of spirits infallibly by the Holy Ghost (as the Primitive Christians had) can judge of the truth of any mans Repentance, or consequently setch power from the Scriptures to debar men from the holy Ordinances, or shut the Church-doors against them.

 I know, Priests have made a gainful Trade on't, but, abating that, By what Au∣thority Divine do they these things, and who gave them that Authority, (I al∣ways except the Rubrick in the Common-Prayer Book?)
Sacramenta non sunt Vaenalia, Sacraments are too holy to be made Vendible Commodities; And if my Child shall not be baptiz'd, 'till I have compounded with the Priest, whose Religion is—No Penny, No Pater-noster; Nor if I must not come into the Church, but be barr'd out, 'till I have pleas'd, that is, paid the Sumner, the Register, the Proctor, and the Court-Fees, Good Lord deliver us.
I know many People think 'tis a hard world since the Inquisition and High-Commission-Court were dissolved, now that Curst Cows have short Horns; yet let them comfort themselves with Excommunication, and the Writ de Excommuni∣cato Capiendo; for though the Writ de Heretico comburendo be burnt, and we cannot burn an Heretick for our Lives, yet the Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo shall imprison the Heretick, and bury him alive in a Jayl, and what would men have? Methinks that should content them, Enough, Enough in all Conscience, a man would think, if they have any Conscience in them. What would they be at? Do they know? Do they not know when they are well? Will nothing serve— but Hang the Rogue, burn the Heretick, or crop the Roundhead in a Pillory?
Time was—Ay, Ay, Time was, when a bold Fellow that durst speak the Na∣ked-Truth, or, tell Rich men of their Roguery, he had as good have eat his Ears in the merry days of the Inquisition and High-Commission, But who can help the thing that will away?
Truly, my Lord, I daily expect the Effects of the Fury and Rage of the Devil, and devilish men, that rage so much the more, as foreseeing their time is short.
But (blessed be God) my shoulders are as big and large (of the largest size) as the most of Mortals, and can bear as much; I doubt not but they'll try my strength: A whole Legion of Sell-Souls will fall upon me for this little Book, bet∣ter make one Back crack, than not load the Wretch that takes away the Trade of the Higlers and Retailers of Heaven and Hell, by which they have liv'd so long and so plentifully.
But—I believe in God—not without some Faith and Hope (sure I have some grounds for it) in your Grace and Clemency: And for all your sayings, that yet you will alter your word, and not leave me to your Under-Officers; Alas! I am in their Clutches already, they have begun to squeeze me already, When shall I get out of their hands, can you tell me?
How well will it become your Lordship, to heal the Breaches, and not stretch the Wounds wider, they gape, and are ghastly enough already, and all that I have hitherto writ (I told them so before but they would not believe) is but an Ear∣nest-penny of what I have at their service; And, to serve you and the Church, I have much more in my head and heart.
I am scarce yet warm in my work (extorted from me too) and I do but play a little about the skirts of the business, though some, perhaps, could wish me warm in Smithfield (their Christian requital for my great pains) if they might have leave to carry me and the Fagots thither.
But those days are not (yet) come. To confute the Naked-Truth with the Arguments of Bloody Bonner, a Bone-fire or a Jayl, a Dungeon and a Pillory.
Here's enough, in all Reason, for a Letter, writ Raptim and in Haste, I dare say, your Grace never had such another Letter (for length) in your life.
And take it not in dudgeon, that in memory of our mutual and spiritual Alli∣ance, I make bold to subscribe my self,
MY LORD, 
COLCHESTER, Decemb. 4. 1681.
