



Illustrious, Right Honourable, and Honourable,
FOr as much as you are Esteemed (by the whole Body of the People) the wisest and honestest, and therefore the most able and proper) Healers of our present Breaches and Distractions, so you cannot bet∣ter approve your selves such, than by the best Testi∣monal thereof (that Possibly can be, viz.) Moderation: For no Extreams last long.
When Passion, Pride, and Self-Interest (the boldest and worst of Usurpers) do come to be the Domineering and Pre∣vailing-Party, then Right Reason (and consequently true Re∣ligion and Justice) are depos'd and dethron'd, and then comes Confusion and every evill work.
There never can be (nor ever were) more than two sorts of Polititians in Christendom: The one thinks Justice, Piety, and Honesty the best Policy, as our blessed Saviour, the Apo∣stles, and all Christians that follow their steps.
The other makes use of Justice and Religion too (some∣times) but no further than they serve his Politick turn, his worldly greatness and glory; (which if Justice and Christian Religion will not bring to him, then he tries what Oppression and Superstition will do: For this Brute (as if he had the Soul of a Beast, and not an Immortal Soul) never looks up to Hea∣ven, nor takes his measures from him that Made and Rules the World and the Kingdom of men, and giveth it to whom∣soever he will; but calculates all his Plots to the Glory of this World, and terminates them in this life: And if his Plots and the Devil ail him, like Achitophet, he does (or is ready to) hang himself; or like that Brute, the King (Ne∣bucadnezzar) driven from his People, and turned to Grass,
like a Brute as he was, until he knew that the Most High R∣leth in the Kingdoms of men, and and giveth them to whom∣soever he will.
Our Saviour says his Kingdom is not of this World; when therefore we pray, Thy Kingdom come, we ought not to wish, much less endeavour, that Antichrist's Kingdom should come. But in carrying on True and Pure Religion and the Gospel, we ought to content our selves with such Engines wherewith Christ and the Apostles propagated the same, all the World over, three hundred years before Constantine was born.
Nor ought we to follow the Antichristian steps of the Pope or Turk. For Antichrist, or the man of Sin, are surely nouns of multitude, accumulative words, and signifie those that carry on a Superstition contrary to Christ's Religion; they are An∣tichrist, or against Christ; and they that sit in the Temple of God, (God's Throne) commanding Souls and Consciences, as if they were Gods; they are limbs of that man of sin; which shall fall, by the Finger of God.
Which Finger of God was never more apparently and mira∣culously seen, than in this late Revolution, which is like a Re∣surrection from the Dead; Dead, I say, (for both we, and our irreconcileable Adversaries had past the Sentence of Death upon us, unreprievable without a Miracle;) And whoever treads in the Antichristian steps and Policies of the Man of Sin, by Propagating the Gospel with force of Arms, can they expect other than to stand or fall with such ill Company? But as our Riders are chang'd, we hope also to have our heavy Burdens, and unrea∣sonable Loads taken off. For, by force chiefly Antichristian Ma∣homet made Converts, with his Alcoran (or Bible) in one hand, and his Sword in the other, (with this motto) If one will not do, the other shall.
And thus the Most Christian Turk makes Converts, with Constables, Hangmen, Jaylors, Penal Laws, Tests, and Troops of Dragoons. Will the bolder English never be wiser than to follow French-Fashions? Shall nothing be the mode here, (no, not in Re∣ligion neither,) but what is A-la-mode de Francois?

Never had any Englishmen a greater Trust put upon them, nor a greater Power put into their hands, than is put into yours this day, in this extraordinary, rare, necessary (and therefore) Just Convention.
You have virtually in you, the power of all the Laws, and all the Kings and Parliaments that ever were, or ever shall be again in England to the worlds End; because, it is in your Breasts, to save, destroy, continue or abrogate them, or any of them, arbitrarily at your good pleasure.
It becomes not me to determine positively, whether the Mo∣narchy be dissolv'd by the Kings dparture, throwing up the Reynes of Government, and will Guide no longer, quitting the Helm of Empire, and leaving the ship (once more) to the mercy of the Waves, to sink or Swim; refusing to call Parliaments (the only Scourge of Evil Courcellors) and in whom jonytly, with himself, was lodg'd the Ligisla∣tive Power: Or, Whether the General Revolt had taken from him the Power of Guidance, forfeited by Male-Administra∣tion of the Executive Power of the Laws: Or, whether also the Invading of the Legislative Power by erecting a Dispen∣sing Power, which seems, in effect, but a New Name for a New Legislative Power.
The Executive Power of our Laws was (by our late Con∣stitution) lodg'd in the King alone, (as the Sole Power of the Militia, making Alliances, Judges, Sheriffs, &c.) a Burden (thought to be) too heavy for any single Shoulder, and has oc∣casion'd two or three general Revolts, and Expulsions of the Monarchs in the three last Raigns; for the Males Administra∣tion thereof (as was at least pretended) together with other sad Consequences, too dismal to be remembred here, and too lately done to be forgot; nor need we mention the many and general Revolts in our Fore-Fathers times, during all the Ʋnhappy Raigns since William the First; all of them arising from the same occasion.
Yet, will it not well become your Wisdoms, quaerere vias an∣tiquas, to keep to the old frame of Government, Monarchical;
(with what limits of the Executive Power you shall please;) and (as near as may be with any convenience) to the old line too, and next Heir?
Not only, because a more awful Deference and Veneration is paid to (what is anciently) the Royal Family; than to any Ʋpstart Family; but because the Finger of God seems to point out, and direct to that Incomparable and Blessed Branch (thereof) which God has made so strong for his own Self; and the chief Instrument in the Hand of the Almighty, for our Sal∣vation from Popery and Slavery.
Nothing (here hinted at) is to inform your Wiser Judgments, that knows much more of this already, (far be such Vanity from me!) But to stir up your Affections, and to be One of your Humble Remembrancers.
For every man is now (or never) concern'd to put to his helping Hand at this Dead Life, and you concern'd to accept kindly the Service (even of the Weakest) at least, surely the least you can do, is to thank them for their Love and good Will, though no otherwise serviceable unto you.
Besides, A Slip now may be fatal; or (at best) not so cure∣able hereafter as now; and as is more particularly insisted on in the Conclusion of this Treatise.
I well know, that in this Crisis, every Politick Noddle is pregnant with Projects, & never at rest, till it be delivered of his Minerva, which perhaps proves a Maggot. Yet, if what is now said, be evidenc'd beyond all Contradiction and Confuta∣tion other than (the old Antichristian Engine) a Jayl be pleased to protect the Author from such Ʋnchristian, Ʋn-Scholar-like, & Ʋn∣reasonable Confutation, until these Inquiries be oppugned with the only proper weapons, in Spiritual matters, Holy Scripture and Right Reason.
My Lords (the present Bishops, for the generality of them) have approved themselves (in this juncture) not only most ex∣cellent Englishmen, but excellent Christians, notwithstanding the Now-Church-of-England's-Doctrine of Passive Obedience; (without exception) and the only Weapon-salve of
Prayers and Tears (a good Doctrine for him indeed that is up∣permost right or wrog); and finding the necessity of Recant∣ing the same; some of them (at least) have in good time betaken themselves to a keener weapon; and the rest (and those) the best of them, are willing to come to a temper.
Whereby they do by Implication confess a too feavourish and hot distemper (that has been) 'tis now time, to come to the cooler and milder Galaxye (or milkye way) the only Way to Heaven.
And if any thing, in these modest Inquiries, may tend to our Cure, no moderate Church of England-man can possibly be offended, except they are past cure and past 'mending; to such we have nothing to say, but to write, Lord have mercy —upon their Doors.
Not only the welbeing, but the being of these Nations, de∣pend much upon the success of this most August, and most Ho∣nourable Convention, which has so many (and those so great) Friends and Enemies.
And is it not now high time to enlarge our Interest, and widen the Church of England's Pale, and not exclude (out of the Church and the Priviledges of it) the better half of the Nation? Is not this Piety? Nay, Is not this true wisdom and honest Po∣licy? Now, (now I say) when the Irreconcileable Enemies of our Holy Religion are (by cruel and bloody Confederacy) bandied and knotted together, to destroy us and our Religion Root and Branch?
Brittain was never conquer'd but by her self. How? By her divided Parties, saith Tacitus, (the best Roman Historian of the Romish Conquest over Britain) smiling, Dum singuli pugnabant, omnes victi.
Is it not now therefore time to open the Church-doors as wide as Christ and his Holy Apostles opened them? Shall Filthy∣luere, Pride or Malice shut them up, whilst monopolized to a few that share all the Gains, though the Poor Dissenter must partake the hazzard and the Pains, in our Common Defence? Even Private Soldiers fight coldly, without any Pay, or any hopes of Reward, in the Booty, after Victory.

Very excellent men (as it happens, which seldom happens in such a Constitution of a Church) are now uppermost. But surely we are not obliged to believe all that they say who happen to be uppermost, only because they are uppermost.
For, though at present we have (for the generality of our Fathers in the Church) at this time very good men, yet some∣times the very Froth and Skum may be uppermost.
And therefore if some errors in our Church, both peradven∣ture in Doctrine as well as Discipline, be humbly inquired into, (if they appear upon moderate deliberation to be Errors) must we continue in them, or curse our selves to an eternal conti∣nuance therein, or (as in the Office of Commination in the Common-Prayer-Book) say, Amen, still, (so be it Amen,) Is it not better to say, Amend, Amend?
For this Cause the Author humbly hopes that you will par∣don the nice formality of Printing this without an Imprimatur, which cannot in any likelyhood be obtained from the present Licen∣sers, if any thing here thwart their Interest, and spoil their Trade.
To your Unbyassed and Impartial Reasons therefore, the Au∣thor humbly appeals; And what Book or Author would desire to live, if cast and condemn'd by such Judges? And who dare condemn, whom your better Judgments think meet to save?
These following Essays are most seasonable, as to the sub∣ject matter inquired into: But, if for want of dexterity, they be ill handled, yet be pleased not to discourage this well-meant and humble attempt (here laid at your Feet) since (at worst) it may serve for a Prompter to put better Heads in mind, and to set better Tongues at work to discourse the point more accurately within your Walls, which is now only A Speech without-Doors, by

