



Courteous Reader,
THou art not, we presume, ignorant that
Dr. Heylin hath lately writ a History▪ of
the Reformation of the Church of Eng∣land.
His Learned name is of such
great credit, that it doth not only invite▪
but bespeak his Readers approbation and
acceptance. The love we bear to the Reformation of the
Church of England, and an earnest desire to be satisfied
about it, led us forth to the view and consideration of that
History; wherein we labored to follow our Reason more
then our Fancy; and the truth of the Story, more then the
cry of Fame; as not being willing to have any mans per∣son
in admiration. All that the learned Doctor hath
storied about the Reformation in many parts and parcels of
his Book, having interwoven it with variety of civil Oc∣currences
both Forraign and Domestick, thou wilt finde
here Methodically put together, and shalt have a full view
of it at once; which by several skips and leaps thou wilt be
put to search for in the Doctors History.
We could heartily wish, the Doctor would have saved us
this trouble, and put together the parts of this goodly
Building (as he is pleased to call it) that we might at once
have gone round about it, and viewed the Towers and
strength thereof. This thou shalt finde faithfully done to
thy hand, wherein thy patience is intreated to stay and
consider the several particulars, lest by overmuch haste,
thou lose the fruit of these few lines.
We have here laid before thee the Evidence the Doctor

brings for the Reformation, with some Observations out
of his own Book, Reverend Jewel, and others of our own
upon it, and the judgement is left to thy own breast. We
can assure thee, thou art candidly dealt withal in all that
we alleadge; either out of the Doctors Book or any other.
His Printer hath mis-numbred some Pages, & thou mayst
be at some loss (if thou compare some of these quotations
with the Doctors Book) through the neglect of Printing;
but otherwise thou shalt finde the Page, the words many
times as they lie, or at least the substance of the Doctors
sense faithfully communicated to thee. We suppose, the
Doctor cannot desire a fairer way of Tryal in the particu∣lar
of the Churches Reformation, then when himself in his
Book, and the testimonies he brings, be upon the matter
constituted Iudges of it, we hereby conceive, that any
person, not byassed by interst, will conclude from the
Doctors premises, that Englands Reformation is sadly
defective.
There was a time, when there was no Smith found in
Israel, and the Israelites went down to the Philistims to
sharpen their Weapons. We contend not for Victory, but
for Truth; and if in this contest something may be laid
hold on, even in the Tents of an Adversary, for the ad∣vantage
and advancement of it, we shall not scruple to
undergo the shame of our own weakness, and the discredit
of our own poverty, as being fain to borrow both the shop
and tools of an Adversary to vindicate it, and support it.
Reader, we leave these few sheets with thee, desiring thy
prayers for the Churches through-Reformation, which is
their sole desing.
