



YOU will wonder, I am sure (considering my profession) to see me become a Poet. And indeed I do almost mar∣vel at my self, knowing my self to want the two principal furtherances of Poetry; the one is Na∣tures instinct, They say, Poeta noscitur If a man be not as it were a Poet born, he shall never prove excel∣lent in that faculty. which God in his holy providence hath denyed me: the other is, A certain retired free∣dom from all such businesses which may breed destraction; Carmina secessum scri∣bentis & otia quae unt. Ovid. de. Trist. which my publick calling, besides private encomberances, will not afford me. Yet notwithstanding, upon this present occasion, I have even forced my self to this straitr course of verse-making; though I know, that for my own ease (having to deal in such a distempered and unruly subject) that less limited, and freer kind of discourse, which Prose alloweth, had been more convenient, because the Rules of Cadence & number (to which our English Poetry specially is confined) do many times so streighten an unaccustomed Practitioner, that he is in hazard, either of obscuring the sence (which in a matter of this na∣ture were something dangerous) or of marring the Verse (which to the apprehension of every common conceit, were very ridiculous.) But howsoever I have erred in the carriage of this Verse, I hope, to you and to others, whose favour, either because of their judgement, or their honesty, I desire, this shall excuse me; that meeting with our common Adversary (who appeareth sometime in shape of a States∣man, debating of Titles, and common-wealth affairs, Witness the Quodli∣bets, &c. sometime as a Petitioner to the King and Parliament, At the Kings first coming, and now since the Parliament. sometime as a plausible Perswader, Bistows Motives, and Books of that nature. sometime as a restorer of the holy Text, to the native purity thereof Rhem. Test. & Grego. Martin. sometime as a man of a very tender conscience, giving reasons why he cannot come to our Assemblies, Howlet. sometime as a Raylor at our Government, and an approver of our open enemies The ward-word. Quo te∣neam vultus mutantem, Proted nodo? that I say, meeting with this time-serving Proteus, in the fashion of a Rimer or Balladins, and crept in (as the manner of false Bre∣thren 1 is) Galat. 2.4. Similes habet labra lactucas. into oth the ha and  simple sedu∣ced; I have endeavoured to make  like the Lips (as the Proverb is) sing, to  I am sure (without wilful forsaking the plain truth of God,  I shall 
The service it  here  by , He confes∣eth he  Protestant. is  though  say the truth it  through  yet set forth after any good or  but it is even  of certain egations (as to there the avings and scraps of  other  order or proof  word of  than Or. Belike, the rough for those for whom it was provided, as  it is for those which turn their ears from the Truth, and are given unto fables: 2 Tim. 4.4 and by some, upon my knowledge (to whom  me, God hath sent strong delusions, that they should believe ) . The. 2.11. it is highly magnified, as a special preservative against supposed Heresie, and as a well-framed Sconce, which none of us all is able to overthrow.
In regard whereof, knowing my self  others, to con∣tend earnestly for the maintainance ; Iude. 3.2 1 I have un∣dertaken this which you here see, For my desire and true intent there∣in, it is best known to him which seeth in , Ma.  and in his due time will make the counsels of all hearts manifest. 1 Cor. 4.
Touching the thing it self, how it is, and how well it is, I submit it to the sensure of the godly-wise, praying them, that with their fa∣vourable (if not allowance, yet at least) connivance, it may pass to the use of those, to whom it is intended: And among others, I have di∣rected it especially to you, in part of recompence for a great deal of kindness intreating you to entertain  with the like measure of Love; wherein it is offered. And so ching God to fill you with the fruits of Righteousness Phil. 1.11., I command you to his grace in Christ Jesus.

Modbury, Aug. 20. 1604.
