



Dear Sir,
THough Vertue it self find but cold En∣tertainment in the World, yet 'tis to be hoped that the Theory of it may be a more acceptable Guest. Men love to study the Geography of those rough Countries, which they will not be at the trouble to travail in. But whatever re∣ception this Treatise of Morality meet with elsewhere, I dare as∣sure my self 'twill be highly wel∣come to you, whose Breast is the

Hospitable Retreat of all the Ver∣tues. In you they shine as per∣fectly as in their own Ideas; nay, Morality seems so far adopted in∣to your very Nature, and so much one with your Self, that to embrace it would be a kind of Self-love. As you therefore have entirely Devoted your self to the Vertues, so are they now as entirely Dedicated to you. And as when seated in your di∣vine Breast, like Jewels richly set, they invite Beholders; so now the Inscription of your Name will procure them Value and Es∣teem among all men, and the pre∣cious Metal will become a Coin.
And now I begin to fear lest what I intended as a Monument of my Gratitude, should be in∣terpreted as an Argument of my Ambition, and I should be thought

kind only to my self in choosing such a Patron.
But (Sir) the Devotional Ad∣dresses which the Pious Votary makes to Heaven, are never the less accepted, though in so do∣ing he persues his own greatest in∣terest and happiness. If the same Altar to which I bring my Obla∣tion, prove also a Sanctuary, 'tis my good Fortune rather than my principal Design. That is purely to serve and pleasure you, as disinte∣rested as Platonick Love, as unmer∣cenary as the Devotion of those Heroes who could be eminently Religious without a Heaven.
I desire your Pardon for draw∣ing you out of your belov'd Pri∣vacy by making your Name publick, the peculiar Indearments of your Friendship call'd for some gratefull Acknowledgment; and

I could not think of a more sutable Return, than to present you with this excellent Moral Tract, since your exemplary Conversation has been a living System of Ethicks to me.
I find my self here under a great temptation of speaking high things of you, but your in∣comparable Modesty will not give me leave, and your other Vertues come so near to absolute Perfection, that they exceed all the Characters of Panegyrick, and like a Deity would be disparaged by a Representation.
'Tis no more in my power to Commend you, than 'tis to Imitate you, I can only love and admire you, and therein I dare challenge any one to out-doe him, who is,
SIR,

