



Noble Sir,
WHere Virtue shall bee found in conjunction with Noblity in such black, the last and worst times, it no lesse invites and amazes the eyes and hearts of be∣holders,

holders, then some new Star or blazing Comet: but with this difference; the one is cause of their fear, the other gives life to their hopes and joy. You have, Sir, so inricht your tender years with such choice principles of the best sorts, and even to admiration mana∣ged them to the greatest ad∣vantage; that you stand both a pattern and wonder to our Nobility and Gentry: who in these past times many of them have so spent their precious Minutes, that they are scarce able to account for one, or spend an hour but in vice: that cannot brook Virtue, because it is not born with them; that

hate all things that must be obtained by industry. Who most degenerately intrusting their wits as well as fortunes with their inferiours, have made them Master of both; a sad forerunner (I will not say Author) of these sadder times.
But you have made a better and far nobler choice, you have not thought your blood and descent debased, because mar∣ried to the Arts. You stick not to trace Nature in her most intricate paths, to tor∣ture her to a confession; though with your own sweat and trea∣sure obtained. Being ravisht, Sir, with these considerations of your worth and candor, I

shall not fear to throw these Papers into the bosom of your protection; from whom as I cannot misse a judicious cen∣sure, so I shall hope for a can∣did reception. They are Dis∣courses which have busied the Heads and Pens of many judi∣cious and learned, amongst whom our noble Author hath not deserved the lowest esteem. I shall not presume to these phansies with their maturer births. Yet perhaps something may here be found, that may encourage others to a farther search. I shall not despair of your own, which may give a better account and a ple∣nary satisfaction, if it may be,

in these so labyrinthean works of Nature, which is all I have laboured for, and shall still be, (as likewise for the preservati∣on of your health) the prayer of
Sherborne, May 15. 1651

