



Honoured Sir,
I Here present you with A Loyal Looking-Glass, which disco∣vers what you and I, and all good Sub∣jects should be to their Royal So∣vereign. I have taken the bold∣ness to engrave your name on the cover of it, if you please to open

it, to present your self before it, and examine your actions by it, so far as they relate to what is di∣rected in it; you will see your self the very same what others, o∣verlooking you, have known and acknowledged you to be a Loyal Subject, which makes both for your credit and your comfort, although it hath bin heretofore laid in your dish as your crime, by those who maligned you for it, and sought your ruine by it. But God be thanked, who gave you not over as a prey unto their teeth; that snare was long since broken, and you happily delivered.
It is not my intent by the De∣dication of this Treatise to court you to its Patronage, which were in vain, and to no purpose; for if ever a Discourse, for its subject-matter, could promise acceptance

to its self, and security to its Au∣thor, this one would think might do it to the highest pitch of confi∣dence, in that it treats of the Higher Powers, yea the highest both in Heaven and Earth, God and the King; calling upon us to fear the first for himself, because he is so; and his Vice-gerent (if not for his own personal merits yet) for his sake that made him so. From the least and lowest of these I might expect in equity (but in all humility) that while I defend his Royalties with my Pen, he should protect my person with his Sword: and the rather,Periculosum est in eum scribere qui potest proscribere. because whatever blows are made imme∣diately at me, will in some sense reach himself.
It hath been experimented that a Bullet piercing through a solid body, hath made the wound the

more dangerous, and its cure the more difficult, by reason of those ragged pieces, and noxious splin∣ters which it hath forced along be∣fore it. I should willingly inter∣pose my carkass between my King and danger, but it would grieve me more for him then for my self, if it should pass through me and lodge it self in that Royal Breast; more yet if that wound should prove the more hazardous, as being made upon Majesty, through the despi∣cable sides of such an inconsidera∣ble piece of mortality.
But however I may flatter my self, I have cause to fear that these my hopes may fail me, sith neither Majesty nor Innocency it self, can be a sufficient shield against the envenomed Arrows of malicious Tongues; yet notwithstanding one would think, that although

some may be so fool-hardy as not to fear the King, who may kill the body, but can do no more; yet none could be so sottishly stupid as to cast off all fear of God, who can kill both body and soul,Mat. 10.28. Job 9.4. and cast both into Hell; sith never any one as yet hardned himself against him and prospered. In reference to the one I look upon my self as an inferiour Subject; under the other I am imployed by virtue of my Calling in a place of no ordi∣nary trust, being Gods Embassa∣dour; and may expect indemni∣ty by the Law of Nations. If any daring Hanuns, in the faithful execution of my Office shall de∣fame me, as he deformed Davids servants, shaving off their Beards by halfs, and curtailing their Garments to expose their naked∣ness to publick view;2 Sam. 10.4. they may

well expect that God, whose Mini∣ster I am, should resent the affront as offered unto himself, and se∣verely revenge it, by wounding the heads of such provoking ene∣mies, and the hairy scalp of such incorrigible ones as are resolved to go on still in their wickedness. So that if the one fail me because he cannot, I am sure the other can, yea I have it under his hand that he will protect me; he hath made me a firm promise that he will be with me, and having that, I nei∣ther care nor fear who they are that shall appear against me.
And yet for all this, we have lived in an Age in which that cor∣rupt Judge hath some Fellows, and many more Followers; who nei∣ther fear God, nor reverence man. Which gives me a sufficient Item to provide against those storms

which others have met with, who have embarqued themselves in the same bottom; who for their cha∣ritable endeavours to cleanse and heal mens festered sores, have re∣ceived the common Fee of galled backt Jades, a malicious and un∣grateful kick. While they have sought to reduce unruly Swine in∣to a better order, they have raised a cry, and brought the whole Herd about their ears which have af∣fronted them with their stubborn Biristles, and injured them as much as they could with their mischie∣vous teeth. And have I any hopes of speeding better?Ostendo illi lu∣tum & aspergit me luto, ostendo illi speculum & allidit parieti. but that when I hold before them my Glass they should dash it against the Walls; and when I offer them water to wash their defiled faces, they should cast dirt into mine. And it is sad to consider what Advo∣cates

such find among men of parts, who might do God and their King better service, then by pal∣liating other mens guilt, and so consequently hardning them in those sinful courses, from which they are bound by the Law of Christian Love to do their utmost to reduce them, which would gain them more of love from God, and of respect from all good men; whereas they cannot reproach themselves more, then by raking in the Chanel (as some have done) for the blackest dirt to bespatter the reputation of pious and well-meaning persons, who have sought to inform them better.
If any shall have that in design against me, I shall save him the pains of a private scrutiny by a free and publick confession, that I am the greatest of sinners;

and am so far from sheltring my self in the Croud, or extenuating my sins with the usual plea, I am not alone, there are as many sinners as men, because there is no man lives and sins not; that I could heartily more then hopefully wish, that there were none so beside my self in the world. And if this will not satisfie, could I in the least think it would conduce to their good, or prove but a pro∣bable means to make them better, I would shame my self yet more;Fit plerumque ut dum iniqui in se mala defen∣dere nequeaut vitia contra vitam corripien∣tis exquirunt, & eo se crimi∣nosos non existi∣mant si criminae aliis imponant; qui cum verae invenire ne∣queant fingunt ut ipsi quoque habeant, quod non impari ju∣stitia increpare videantur. Greg. Mor. 10 make my greatest Adversary my Confessor, and give him an exact Catalogue of all my particular fai∣lings, so far as my frail memory would serve me, and after all this do Penance in the largest sheet that either Pen can fill, or Penny pur∣chase. For my part I never durst look on anothers errour as an ex∣cuse for my sin; and if any do upon

mine for theirs, I fear they will find themselves mistaken in that day, when every man shall give an account of himself unto God, and every indi∣vidual offender shall be adjudged to bear his own burden. Others may think my Nails too long, and to deserve a paring to the quick, be∣cause I have made so large an use of them; but these consider not what an old overgrown thick skin∣ed Witch I have to deal with; and if I have scratcht her so deep as to make her bleed, it is not upon su∣spition by way of trial, but upon sufficient conviction, and in a way of revenge. She stands upon Re∣cord for one of old,1 Sam. 15.23. and hath given us fresh instances to assure us that she is as deeply in league with Bel∣zebub as ever, and is not in the least reformed; but hath within these few years exercised her devillish

art in bewitching many thousands of our fellow-subjects. It is her de∣struction and their cure that put me upon this project.
But last of all, and that which troubles me not least of all, is the thoughts that I may hereby expose my self to the censure, if not to the envy of my elder Brethren; who perhaps will impute it to pride and vain-glory, that such a Stripling as I should conceive any hopes with my sling to prostrate that great Go∣liah, who hath wrought so strange a consternation in the whole Army of Israel. But I dare appeal for my integrity to God, the searcher of all hearts, who is my witness that these Notes had never seen the light, had I in all my reading met with any Author in so great a surfeit of Books of all sorts, who hath handled this subject in our

Native Language so fully as it de∣serves, and as that great opposition which this Doctrine hath found in a few years both at home and a∣broad, hath rendred necessary. Neither have I published this as a Supersedeas to any mans good de∣sign and intention;—Si quid no∣visti rectius istis candidus imperti, si non bis utere mecum. but rather to excite them, being conscious to my self, that there are very many can do it better few worse.
And so, good Sir, I return to you, whom I have held in a long suspense, as to the chief ground of this Dedication; which is to revive the memory of your former fa∣vours to the unworthy Author, who owns and honours you as his loving and most obliging Patron: and hath given you this publick acknowledgment under his hand; so that if he should at any time fail to answer them to the utmost of his

power, you may have an ex ore tuo to stop his mouth, while you make use of this as a rod of his own making to shame him to the world, and to scourge him the more severely for his ingratitude.
I confess I have exceeded the li∣mits of an Epistle, but by its more then usual length, I have saved the labour of a Preface. I shall there∣fore with-hold you no longer from the sight of the Glass, wherein you will see Loyalty (so far as my poor skill would serve me) drawn to the life, and that old deformed Hell-hag Rebellion arraigned, con∣victed, cast, and condemned. And while a multitude of her advocates are crouding about her at the Bar, pleading hard for her pardon or reprieve, methinks I see you, and all loyal hearts upon the Bench, ap∣proving the sentence, and importu∣ning

her speedy execution. I have, I hope, without offence to the Higher Powers concerned in the Text, taken upon me the Office of an Ordinary; and if that God who hath deservedly the first place in it, shall so far succeed my endea∣vours, that in the discharge of it I may see her safely out of the World, I have attained to the highest step of my ambition. And believe it, Sir, the very next is to approve my self, what your mul∣tiplied obligations have so highly merited,

