


Right dearely beloved Children,
THe Great God of Heaven and Earth, who is wisdome it selfe, and all perfections, did not thinke fit to bestow you on me as the fruit of my Youth, and the Quintessence of my strength: But in my Old Age, and when I was a dry stick he made me Bud, Bloome Blossomes, and bring forth such pleasant Al∣monds as indeed you are. Your bodies are ve∣ry deare to me, I desire your soules may be much more precious. The preservation of your Naturall lives is my duty to take care af∣ter, in a way of subordination to God: But the seeking of the good of your soules (as an Instrument under God) in this life in the state

of grace, and as the way leading to glory and blisse hereafter is that which I am bound to re∣gard in a more singular and speciall manner. My deare hearts, I desire Naturall Affection may not so far carry me forth towards you; as spirituall and Ardent desires transport me with much enlargednesse of heart and spirit to seeke there all good both of your Bodies and Soules to all Eternity through free grace in Jesus Christ. It is said, Israel loved Joseph more than all his Children, because he was the Son of his old Age, and he made him a Coat of ma∣ny colours, Gen. 37.3. Now, if because Joseph was the Son of his Fathers old Age was a good Argument to Israel to love him with such a large love; Then (for ought I know) I am not to be blamed if I manifest my love to you in an extraordinary manner, having the same reason for it as before exprest. True it is, I cannot cloath you with Garments of many colours, (I meane in a rich and costly manner) yet I desire to blesse the Lord that not one of you hitherto have known want; Ah my soule desires you may be like the Kings Daughter, Psalm. 15.13. Even all glorious within, that your hearts may be beautified with saving grace, and cloathed with the Righteousnesse of Jesus Christ. My deare Children, I cannot out looke upon you as poore fatherlesse babes; for  lesse the time of my departing is at hand, (so far as can be thought in all probabili∣) for I have the sentence of death within me, I finding Nature spending and wasting

peace, and divers symptomes of short life; Therefore as Isaac desired to bless Esau before his death: So I desire (yet not as having a spi∣rit of Prediction, as Isaac had, Gen▪ 27.4.) to blesse you before I dye, viz. to communicate some Counsell to you from the Word of God, that you in following the same may be both blessed here, and for ever. Now herein I shall proceed (by the Lords assistance) for the ge∣nerall in a sententiall way, desiring you to make them the matter of your Meditations, that so they may be amplified and enlarged in your own thoughts. (My dearly beloved ones) let me in the first place lay to you, and to every one of you as David said to his Son Solomon, 1 Chron. 28.9. My Children know you the God of your Fathers, and serve him with per∣fect hearts, and with willing minds: This is your duty in generall. But to come to some particulars (yet in an abstractive way:) Take them as followeth, that is, labour to make God the object of your love, and the chiefe of all your desires, Psal. 73.15. Ibid. 31.23. Marke 12, 30. Seeke to have the feare of God con∣tinually in your hearts, Psalm. 86.11. Psal. 34 9. but be carefull that it be filiall and Child-like, (not servile and slavish.) Remember your Creator in the daies of your youth, Eccl. 12.1. Begin your spirituall Race betimes, Psa. 63.1. Prov. 8.17. And strive to hold out to the end, 1 Cor. 9.24. Mark. 13.13. Mind your own mortality, Heb. 9.27. Ioh. 9.4. Psal. 6.5. Put not off working in Gods Vineyard till the Ele∣venth

houre, Mat. 20.6. Your Sun may set at Noone, (as spoken in another case,) Amos 8.9. Improve all your Talents to the glory of God, Mat. 25.20. Mind the account you must pass, for you are but stewards, Luk. 16.2. Forget not the day of Judgement, Eccl. 11.9. Chap. 12. ult. Mat. 12.38. Be very strict in the observation of the Sabbath, Exod. 28.10, 11. Isa. 56.2. Chap. 58.13. Prize the meanes of grace, Psal. 119, 70, 97. Frequent the Assembly of the Saints, Hebrewes 12.25. But mi∣stake not the Sheepfold, Cant. 1.28. Labour to live a life of faith against, and above sense, Gal. 2.10. Hab. 2.4. Chap. 3.17, 18. Labour for an humble spirit, Micah 6.8. James 4.6. Pra∣ctice all knowne truths, Joh. 13.17. Hold forth the power of godlinesse in your lives, 1 Cor. 4.20. 2 Tim. 3.5. Keep your hearts al∣waies waking, Cant. 5.2. for the Times are evill, Eph. 5.16. Labour for found principles, Tit. 1.13. And stability in them, 1 Tim. 4.1. James 5.8. 2 Pet. 1.12. Study to be quiet, and to do your own businesse, 1 Thes. 4.12. Keepe within the limits of your Callings, 1 Cor. 7.24. Labour to be approved to God, 2 Cor. 10. ult. Passe not for the judgement of men, 1 Cor. 4.3. Yet beware of giving just offence to any, Mat. 18.7. 1 Cor. 10.32. Shun all occasions of sin∣ning, Prov. 5.8. Gal. 5.13. Abstaine from all appearance of evill, 1 Thes. 5.22. Do not think you can be too strickt in a holy life, Eph. 5.15. But alwaies walke by a just Rule, Gal. 6.16. Be upright in heart: hate hypocrisie, Ps. 26.1, 2.

Ioh. 1.47. Follow not a multitude to do evill, Exod. 23.2. Be not partakers of other mens sins, keep your selves pue, 1 Tim. 5.22. Be∣ware of diversity of opinions, and divers Do∣ctrines, Heb. 13.9. 1 Tim. 4.1, 2. Rom. 16. Cha. 17.18. 2 Tim. 4.3, 4 For these various waies are but meere figments and fruits of Addle braines, though varnished with some splendent gilt of holiness, and denominated New Lights, and Divine Revelations. I say beware of these, for they are but the Devill peeping with a white Vizard to cover his all-silthy and defor∣med face; stand upon your watch-Tower, look out sharply lest you be led away by the error of the Wicked, 2 Pet. 2.17. My deare Children, la∣bour to arme your selves against the croking Frogs of these last and worst times; you are borne in an houre of Temptation you had great need to labour to trie the spirits. 1 Ioh. 4.1. which that you may do, you must follow the Counsell of Christ that is, you must daily search the Scriptures, Iohn 5.39. Imitate also the example of the Bereans, who would not be∣lieve Paul and Sylas, untill by searching the Scriptures they found the truth of what they delivered, Acts 17 11. And the Holy Ghost commends and honours them for the same; and this duty God did command his people of Old, Isa. 8.20. Leane not on your own under∣standing, Pro. 3 5. Be not high minded, but feare, Rom. 11.20. Let him (saith the Apostle) that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. For there is a way that seemeth

right, but the end thereof are the waies of death, Prov. 16.25. Beware of other mens sins and punishments, Iudg. 4.7. Still walke with God as Enoch did Gen. 5.24. Graspe fast hold on Christ as the Church did, and leane upon him, Cant. 8.5. You are safe if Christ put forth his hand to you in your times of danger, as he did to Peter, Mat. 14.31. Endeavour to keepe a good conscience in your whole life, Acts 23.1. which will be to you a continuall feast, Pro. 15.15. (so the Geneva Translation renders it) Therefore hearken unto the Checks and Ad∣monitions of it. Sympathize with the Church and every particular Member therein in the times of Affliction, Neh. 1.1, 2, 3, 4. Amos 6.6. Rom. 12.15. Spend much time in the peru∣sall of Orthodoxe Writers, both Ancient and Moderne; for next unto the Scriptures (in both the Old And New Testament) you shall find the most glorious beames and araies of light and truth shining from them, to enlighten you in the way of truth, and to heat and quicken your Affections to walke in the way that is called Holy. I even beseech you to labour to gaine, and to maintaine in your dae hearts an inva∣luable and incomparable esteem of these Au∣thors here mentioned, and  as they, (who are indeed all Reverend and sound Divines, viz. Mr Perkins, Bishop Hall, Bishop Usher, (and in particular his body of Divinity,) Dr Preston, Dr Sibbs, Mr Nicholas Eyfield, Mr Robert Bouton, Mr Ieremy, and Mr Dani∣el Dike, Mr Symonds on the case and cure of a

deserted soule, Mr Smith on the Great Assize, and Ursinus on the Sum of Christian Reli∣gion, &c.
But on the contrary, take notice it is your duty, both to God and your own soules, to la∣bour to abhor, with a kind of infinite detestati∣on, all hereticall and schismaticall, (yea) all fanaticall and whimsicall Pamphlets, Treatises, and their Authors, how specious soever Fron∣tispieces and deluding Titles be for all such are but the Devils Factors, Agents, and Engins to seduce and poyson the judgements of poore ignorant soules, that they may run with a full careere to the pit of hell, to the high dishonour of God, and their own inevitable destruction both of body and soule, unlesse infinite mercy prevent; these Vermine ae like the Locusts, Rev. 9.7.8. if not the same, who have Crowns like Gold, (not Gold though they glister) faces like men, and haire like women, but teeth like Lions. These are Clouds without water, &c. and wandring stars, &c. Jude 12, 13. These are they whose words fet like a Canker, 2 Tim. 2.16, 17. These trouble Coasts you may know them by their fruit, they still oppugne the faith∣full Ministers of Jesus Christ, and spit out of their black mouths many opprobrious, false, and diabolicall calumniations against them (but their tongues and pens can be no slanders to them, nor cast them out of the hearts of the reall godly party,) that thereby they may heave them out of the Ministry, and make roome for their uncall'd and ungifted fraternity to possess

their places if they can bring their cursed de∣signes to passe; and by this hellish meanes hinder the propagation of the Gospell, and Gospell Ordinances, and so foyst in their owne hell-bred inventions. These (my deare Chil∣dren) are such nonsensicall Ignoramus's, and so full of blockish stupidity, that they are many degrees worse than those Babel builders, Gen. 11. from ver. 1. to the end of ver. 8. For they did desist from their worke of confusion when God had confounded their Language: But these Impostors, though the Lord have divided their tongues (and so hath answered the Pro∣phet Davids Imprecation, Psa. 55.9.) that they speak not the same things: yea, and their hearts too, that they walke in contradictory waies one from the other, (and all from the Rule of truth:) yet most pertinaciously with browes of brasse they proceed to bring paultry trash, and filthy Rubbish to patch up their tottering structure (founded on the sand) to be a habita∣tion for dolefull Creatures, &c. Isa. 13.21. And for such as the Holy Ghost mentions in Rev. 18.2. But downe must their Chaos go, Mat. 7.26, 27. And all their vile plants must be pluck'd up, Mat. 15.13. But to conclude this particu∣lar, these Sons of Belial are false Meteors, and can metamorphose a reall Saint into a Devill, and a Devill incarnate into a Saint. These per∣sons are good Arithmeticians, for they are well vers'd in the rules of Addition and Substracti∣on, (nay, and in the black art of Detraction too;) and whether they are acute both in the

Theory and Practique part of Division or not, let all moralized men, much more reall Christi∣ans judge. These persons can, and do put dark∣nesse for light, and light for darknesse, &c. In one word, their aime is to extinguish the power of godlinesse, and to procure liberty for all li∣centiousnesse, which God prevent. But to pro∣ceed onward. Set not your Affections on things beneath, but on things above, Col. 3.2. For the love of the world, and worldly things is an enemy both to God and your own soules, Iames 4.4. 1 Tim. 6.9, 10. But cast your selves (in the use of lawfull meanes) upon God for all outward things, for he careth for you, 1 Pet. 5.7. And be content to be at his allow∣ance, and with your present condition, Phil. 4.12. 1 Tim. 6.8. Heb. 13.5. In all your Afflicti∣ons exercise much patience, Pro. 24.10. Iames 5.10. Heb. 12.1.2. Yet be much in Prayer for deliverance, Psal. 50.15. Also mind for this purpose the Title immediately before Psa. 102. (As touching your duties to your Parents I omit the hinting at them here, but refer you to that part of the ensuing Treatise, where there is something spoken more at large of them.) Deale uprightly and justly with all men, as in the presence of God, 1 Thes. 4.6. And as you would have others deale with you so deale with all men, Mat. 7.12. You must prefer the good and safety of Church and State before your owne, this may be deduced from the Mes∣sage Mordecai sent to Queen Hester when she was fearfull to put forth her selfe for the safety

of the Jewes in their extreame exigency, Hest. 4. the latter part of vr. 14. Rom. 12.11. Not sloathfull to do service (for so the Geneva hath it.) Now my deare Children, I beseech you in the Name of God (and I hope your heavenly Father) to labour to maintaine the life and heate of love, unity, Amity, sweet Ac∣cord and Concord betweene your selves. Con∣sider for this purpose, that it is a speciall duty God requires of you all to be performed each to other, 1 Pet. 3.8. And the Lord hates and abominates such as low discord between Bre∣thren, Pro. 6. ver. 16. compared with ver. 19. Gen. 45.24. And well worth your observation for your encouragement to performe this duty here urged, is that which the Spirit of God laies downe, Psal. 133.1. Behold (saith the Psalmist) how good and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in unity, which in the remaining verses is amplified by two choice similitudes, and with a comfortable conclusion. Nature hath Characterized this so strongly upon the hearts of Men, that some have taken revenge upon such as have done wrong to Brethren or Sisters. Simeon and Le∣vi slew all the Inhabitants of a whole City for the wrong that Shechem the son of Hamor had done to their Sister Dinah, Gen. 34.25, 26, 27, 31. Gideon put Zebah and Zalmunna to death for their slaying his Brethren, Judg. 8.19, 21. Abner slew Asahel the Brother of Joab, 2 Sam. 2.23. but Joab slayes Abner for it, 2 Sam. 3.27. Amnon deflowrs Tamar the

sister of Absalom, 2 Sam. 13.14. but Absalom did cause him to lose his life for it, ver. 28, 29. Now these things (my deare Children) I men∣tion, not to put you upon such courses, for they were Acts of murther in those that did them, and that in a high degree, and you have not, nor cannot have any warrant to do such vile things; all you can do in such cases is to go to God by prayer, and to the Civill Magistrate by complaint for the security of each one of you. But I make use of these Instances to convince you, that if you love not one another you sin even against Nature, how much more then against God. And truly, you sin also against your selves, for by unbrotherly breaches you weaken your owne strength; The uniting of Brethren and Sisters together by love fortifies them against the danger of oppo∣sitions. The earth will with more ease swal∣low up one single drop of water than many drops and buckets-full met together in one. A threefold Cord is not quickly broken. Eccl. 4.12. Most excellent to this purpose is the story of the old dying man, who having many Chil∣dren, and desiring they might be all united to∣gether in love, he was ambitious to leave som∣thing upon their hearts and spirits as an Im∣pression not easily to be forgotten, but that might remaine for the end beforesaid: Who having them all present before him, cals for a sheafe of Arrowes, which when brought he gives to divers of his Children a single Arrow and bids them break them, which with great

case they did: But then he takes all the rest of them and with a cord he binds them in one bundle, and then bids them breake them if they could, which they aslaying to do could not so much as bend them. Then he applies himselfe to them by way of counsell, and tels them, that if they were divided one from another in affe∣ction they would expose themselves to ruine: But if they were all firmely conjoyn'd toge∣ther as one, they might be able to preserve themselves, and one another. (Ah) my deare hearts, it is the desire and prayer of your poore Father for you unto the Blessed, and for ever blessed Trinity, who are three in Per∣sons, and but one in Essence, that you all might have but one heart, and one soule in re∣lation one to another, that thereby God might be glorified, others edified, and your selves for ever comforted by your mutuall love, and sweet deportment one to another.
Thus, my much endeared Children, I have laboured to give you an Epitome of particu∣lar duties you owe unto God, to his Church, and to your own soules and bodies. Now to all the advice I have given you in particular, I shall in the Apostles owne words adde this in generall, only changing the Appellation; Fi∣nally my Children, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; If there be any ver∣tue, and if there be any praise, thinke on these

things; And the God of peace shall be with you, Phil. 4.8. and the latter end of ver. 9.
Now my deare Children, because I am con∣vinced that it is the duty of a Father to seeke the compleat happinesse of his Children, both Internall and Externall, and though chiefly the good of their soules, in relation to a better life: Yet in a second place, the good also of their bodies, and their outward comfortable enjoy∣ments in this Terrestiall World. I cannot therefore omit, in order to your well-being here, to communicate unto you some advise, in reference to the change of your conditions by Marriage, if the Lord be pleased to bring you to such a time for seasonablenesse, and to give you opportunities to embrace the same; Let me tell you, that for you to enjoy meet helpers in that estate, you may reckon to be one of the greatest out ward favours that God doth be∣stow on his Children to sweeten their condi∣tion otherwise mixt with divers Afflictions in this life. But in the discharge of this last duty I shall be very concise, because you may meet with variety of directions this way in the en∣suing lines, and body of the discourse, all which I beseech you to mind in your reading of them, and much more in your practice in walking up to them; but I shall here take the liberty to adde in generall this one thing, (viz.) That it is a Rule, Case, and Maxime in Divinity, that whatsoever Action any one is call'd to per∣forme, which is of high concernment, (espe∣cially to Gods glory,) and relates to the good

of man, and but once (in probability) to be done in his whole life, and which being done is unalterable, and remaines like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, Dan. 5.8.12. There is required more than ordinary caution and cir∣cumspection in the undertaking and managing of the same. Now the entring into the Marri∣age Estate is an Action of the same nature be∣fore exprest; nay, to speake properly, it is that Action, and none but it that fully answers the description beforesaid; And if so, then judge you what singular care should fill your hearts and heads when you mind Marriage, and use the meanes conducible for that end.
Deare hearts, I cannot but thinke it neces∣sary to acquaint you concerning this poore piece ensuing, which is denominated Conju∣gall Counsell, that the Originall Copy of it was compil'd sixe and twenty yeares since, which being then brought into a compendious way, (and truly it is little more now) I did present it, not only to very intelligible private Christians, but to three very Orthodoxe Di∣vines for their Approbation of it, (it being then in my intentions to make it publique,) which approbation of theirs I had, and coun∣sell from one of them to print the Booke, who did also put me in a faire way to accomplish the same, and it had been extant, but that those times did obstruct it, since which time it hath laine even as dead and buried; But (my choise∣ly beloved ones,) Now God having (in the riches of his grace) bestowed you on me, (who

are as deare to me as my own soule,) what could I do lesse than seeke your compleat hap∣pinesse? And I apprehending this poore work might contribut a small mite thereto (by the blessing of God) I could not be so unjust to detaine it from you. Truly, (next the seeking the glory of God) I have chiefly for your sakes made it obvious to publike view; I must confesse, the good of all poore soules I desire to prize; and if any receive benefit by this my poore paines, I desire to take it as a very large engagement to my poore soule to praise the Lord for his infinite goodnesse and grace here∣in; Further I must acquaint you, that I have in some things altered this from the first Copy, and I hope it is not for the worst, but for the better; And now my poore hearts, on whom can I so properly bestow it as on you, who are bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh? I have two speciall reasons, amongst many, to write this Epistle Dedicatory to you: First, to manifest my Cordiall love to your soules. Se∣condly, that hereby I may oblige you to en∣deare it the more, and to make it your Rule to walke by.
Now if either you or any others should marvell I should make my selfe so pupiller as to make use of your names at the beginning, and my owne at the end of this Epistle: And secondly, that I should affix my Effigies at the Front of this Booke, to both I shall give a can∣did answer. But first I must tell you, that it was not to gaine popular applause; for first, I

know nothing in it that can advance so course an end. Secondly, I do professe I desire with my soule to abominate all popularity: I can with much comfort averre that my sincere de∣signe is to avoid it, for nothing is more contra∣ry to my mind than to set so much as halfe a foot on the stage of this world. But to give you a briefe, but reall positive answer of the first, It was that it might take the deeper, and more kindly impression on the hearts of you my poore Children, that you may looke on all contained both in this Epistle, and in the Trea∣tise as the Counsell of your own deare Father. That you may say, this Counsell, these directi∣ons, these reproofes, &c. were directed to us from our Father, and they were all evidences that we were deare to him, and we plainely see he loved our poore soules, which I hope (by the grace of God) will be to you as a spur to quicken you to practice all. But for my Effi∣gies, I have desired that should stand in the place beforesaid, to be a meanes to preserve the memory of my selfe alwaies fresh upon your hearts who are my Children. For I am not ashamed to confesse (if it were before all the world) that I desire my Children in yeares to come (if God see it good) may be able to take notice what kind of man their Father was even in person; I care not who bury me in oblivion so my Children do not; But these things being only circumstantials, let them passe without more said to them.
Now if you (my deare Children,) or any

other should be unsatisfied in relation to the uncouth Method of the following directions in reference to the duties of Superiours and Inferiours each to others, it being contrary to the order, not only of the way of all Elaborate Writers on such a Subject, but also to the way of the Holy Ghost, to lay down the duties of Superiours in the first place, and then of Infe∣riours. I desire to passe this account for it; You may be pleased to mind what is my chiefe aime in the foresaid discourse, Truly, it is to provoke such as desire to enter into the Marri∣age estate, not only to mind their Call unto the same, and to informe them in the way they must walke in, and the meanes they must use tending to atchieving their desires, but also to put them upon an earnest endeavour to be acquainted with the duties that their conscien∣ces will then be bound to the performance of. Now it is clearely necessary, that every Christi∣an man should first learne what his own duties are that he may discharge them; and then the duties of others, that within his place and Calling he must teach, and stir them up to per∣forme the same, Thou that teachest another, teachest thou not thy selfe? Rom. 2.21. He that reproveth another had need to be unreprova∣ble, our Saviour teacheth as much, Mat. 7 3.
Much endeared Children, you cannot but remember that I have acquainted you, that I cannot but conceive my abode here with you is short, and I may truly say, my desire is to depart this life and to be with Christ, which

for me is best of all, yet to remaine in the flesh is more profitable for you, Phil. 1.23, 24. But however the Lord be pleased to deale with me I hope your Mother will discharge her duties toward you both for soule and body, and will endeavour to walke before you in good exam∣ples, and that may prove to you all matter of joy and singular comfort.
But you my deare Son, I must here take the liberty to tell you, (and I cannot do lesse,) that you are descended from the Loynes of a most choice and precious Mother (who by divine providence lost her naturall life in being a meanes to bring you forth to live in this World.) Truly, I might here dip a golden Pen in Odoriferous Oyle, and therewith write an Encomium of her, both of her life, and of her death. She was indeed a Margaret by Name, and much more by sweetnesse of Na∣ture; But above all, by the super-abundant grace of God toward her, and in her, she was of a most transcendent, exemplary, and holy life. She did (through the grace of God) walke sweetly with her Saviour in all pious waies; she did highly prize the meanes of grace; She did really hold forth the power of godlinesse in an unblameable Conversation; She was frequent in secret prayer; and let me tell you (to your comfort) she hath lodg'd in the bosome of God (by the assistance of the Holy Spirit, and in the Mediation of her deare Saviour) many an ardent and most affectio∣nate prayer for your poore soule while she

was here in the flesh; which I doubt not but the Lord will returne answer of (through his free grace) upon your head and heart, upon your body and upon your soule. She was full of the overflowings of love to her most un∣worthy (yet much endeared) Consort. She was of a very peaceable and amiable life to∣ward all persons. She did live much in a little time; And as she was of an exact life (in comparison of most,) so through the infi∣nite grace of God) she ended her daies in the peace of a good conscience, and did enjoy peace with God which passeth understanding, Phil. 4.7. Psalm. 37.37. God gave her the white stone, and therein the new Name written, which none knew but her selfe who received it, Rev. 2.17. She was full of hea∣venly Raptures, and Divine manifestations of the love of God to her soule on her death-bed. She went not out by death like the snuffe of a stinking Candle, leaving an ill savour be∣hind, but like Jumper, or the choicest sweet Perfumes. Dyed Abner as a foole? 2 Sam. 3.33. No. Or dyed this precious Christian as a Daughter of Belial? No. (The thoughts thereof in the least measure is to be abhorr'd with a kind of infinite detestation;) it may be truly affirmed, that she lived like a Saint, and dyed like a Daughter of the most High God. To her to live was Christ, and her death was her gaine, Phil. 1.21. And to her infinite gaine she hath found it, for she doth now rest in the bosome of her sweet and pre∣cious

Saviour, and shall to all Eternity. I dare not say, many Daughters have done vertuously, and that this glorious Saint hath excell'd them all, Pro. 31.29. But this I will be bold to say, that though many Daughters have done ver∣tuously, yet that not one of them did ever excell her. I could do no lesse than present you my deare Son with the knowledge of these things, both for your Imitation, and Consola∣tion. And since Divine providence hath given me such an opportunity as this, to attest before all the World the reall super-eminency of such a Saint, so nearely related to you my Son, much more to me, I darst not omit it; certainely if the Righteous should be had in everlasting re∣membrance, Psa. 12.6. it must be then as much my duty to endeavour it as the duty of any: Nay more my duty, in reference to this glorifi∣ed soul, than the duty of any other in the world.
My very deare and choicely beloved Chil∣dren, I have been somewhat longer in this Epistle Dedicatory than I intended at the first, but the strength of my Affections to your souls hath carried me forth in this way. Truly, the good of those precious soules of yours I desire to seek as the good of my own. I know to my griefe and sorrow that there hath been a world of evill infused into your whole man by, and from me. (O) that God would honour me in making me an instrument under his blessed selfe of plucking you out of the mire of your corruptions, Iude ver. 23. And God doth know that in all these lines I have had an aime, and

very ardent desires and sincere endeavours to contribute something this way. But to draw toward a close let me say (in some sense) as Solomon, Prov. 22.20 I have written to you excellent things in Counsell and Knowledge, yet not as they flow from me, (for out of me who am but an empty and darke creature can no such things come,) but as God hath enabled me (through his grace) to gather them toge∣ther as so many precious flowers springing in the Garden of his own word. Deare hearts, it is said of Abel, that whilst he is dead he yet speaketh, Heb. 11.4. (Ah) let me tell you, that by these lines of mine I shall speake to you when I shall have no eares to heare you, nor eyes to see you. Now I beseech you for the Lords sake, and for your precious soules sake, that you would seriously mind what I have presented to you, and be carefull to practice the same, and whatsoever else the Lord shall be pleased to provide for your instruction to further you in a holy life; for else let me plain∣ly tell you, that these eyes of mine shall see you, and these eares of mine shall hear you arraign∣ed, sentenced, and condemned at the Bar of Gods Tribunall Seat to everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2 Thes. 1.9. And then I shall want an heart to mourn over you. And yet if not only my selfe, but men and Angels should melt away by teares of sorrow unto nothing in sympathizing and condoling your most exceeding sad and dolorous conditions, it

could not contribute to ease you of so much as one sigh, sob groane, or cry unto Eternity. (Ah) my poore soule, shall it ever be said that I have begotten Children to be made Companions for Devils. (Ah, Deare God I beseech thee for the Lord Jesus Christs sake forbid it.) But I blesse God I hope better things of you (my sweet Children,) and such as concerne salva∣tion, though I thus speake, Heb. 6.9. Or else I should go mourning, and powring forth flouds of salt teares unto my goanes, and never in this world see one happy day more. But if the Lord shall be graciously pleased to adde a span of time to my daies here, I trust he will give me a tender heart towards you, and that (through his abundant grace) I shall labour to improve time, gifts, and opportunities, to seek by all meanes (and in speciall by humble ad∣dresses, and earnest prayers to the God of all grace to give you all all-saving grace) your reall Tranquillity, and true felicity here, (and so grant me to see reall and royall demonstra∣tions of his free grace upon, and in your soules, discovering on your hearts, and in your lives the spots of his Children, Deut. 32.5.) And your Eternall happinesse and blisse in the life to come, in, through, and for the only merits of Jesus Christ your blessed, and for ever bles∣sed Saviour. Now unto him who is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultlesse be∣fore the presence of his glory with exceeding joy; To the only wise God our Saviour, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever,

Iude 24, 25. verses. Thus my deare, sweet, and precious Children I take my leave of you in this kind, and Subscribe my selfe what I am, and desire to remaine (by the grace of God) to the end of my life, (viz.)

