



Madam,
THe Subject matter upon which the Genius of this Discourse doth spend it selfe, is (within very few daies) of as great Antiquity as Time it selfe, Gen. 2.24. compared with Chap. 1.27. and shall continue till the extirpa∣tion of Time againe in this Terrestiall World, Luke 17.26, 27, 30. Very conspicuous it is (bles∣sed be God) that on this Theame there are many Learned and Elaborate Treatises now, and of long time since Extant, unto all which this may serve only as a darke colour to set them forth the more Illustriously. And truly, but upon the maine consideration, exprest in the other Dedi∣catory Epistle, this should have been stifled as

an Abortive Child, never to have seen the Sun. But since Divine Providence will have it expo∣sed to open view (and that in a Criticall Age,) My desire hath been to take a faithfull witnesse (instead of Witnesses) to Record. Yet to deno∣minate it by some other name than Mahcr-shal-al-hash-baz, Isa. 8.2, 3.
Madam, I beseech your Ladiship to excuse my boldness in making use of your Name for the end before hinted at. I am able to affirme it as a truth, that I have not thus done in a rash and inconsiderate way, but upon advised and ma∣ture deliberation, and serious consideration; two motives I shall make hold to insert, which have been prevalent with me this way, viz.
First, that by long and comfortable experi∣ence I have found in your Ladiship both the Theory and Practique part of Religion, The forme and power of Godlinesse, Orthodox Prin∣ciples in relation to faith, and zealous endea∣vours to walke up to them in holinesse of life. Truly, I have great ground and confidence (and do therefore believe) that God hath been plea∣sed to honour your Ladiship in keeping your heart upright with him, and keeping you from deviating from the Rule of truth both in faith and life in this houre of Temptation which is come upon all, so on your selfe, to try you whe∣ther you are Gold, yea, refined Gold, or impure, filthy, and abominable drosse, or not, 1 Pet. 1.7. Doubtlesse Madam, you are none of them the Spirit speaketh expresly of, 1 Tim. 4.1. It is a most choice expression of our Lord Jesus Christ,

Luke 5. ult. (which by way of allusion too I desire to make use of, (and I am confident may be ap∣plicable to your Ladiship,) No man (saith he) having drunke Old Wine straight way desi∣reth to drinke New▪ for he saith, the Old is better.
Madam, It is well known unto, and confest by the Learned, that in Scripture-language that by Wine and strong drinke many times Errours are intended. And that by drunkennesse, staggering, and vomiting, the intosticated braines of false Prophets, Heretiques, and Seducers are pointed out, Isa. 28.78. Chap. 29.9, 10. Ah doubtlesse should God plague the drunkards of this Nation, both in a corporall and spirituall sence, there are (and that of the latter sort) more than a good many would lye under the lash of Divine ven∣geance; but is Gods patience their priviledge? Yea, it is so if well improv'd: else none at all, 2 Pet. 2 1, 2, 3. Truly, there are many of these persons, who do not only paddle at the Swine, Trough, but swll till they swell, and then vomit out their filth to the dishonour of God, and the detriment of many poore ignorant soules.
Madam, these are bad (and therefore sad) Times; For reall Christians (every where) may too too palpably see many formerly seeming tall and well rooted Cedars green and flourishing, now blown up by the roots, & all their fruit & leaves blasted, withered, and fallen off, and nothing re∣maining but vaine Notions, and high swolne conceits (not for want of Ignorance) such as the Prophet speakes of, Isa. 65.5. What Agur also

speakes, Prov. 30 12. is worth our observation; neither must we forget what Jude affirmes in verse 19. of his Epistle.
Madam, there are some are so impudent as to averre that none do so much hate the Power of Godlinesse as the old English Puritan, (but it is well observed by the most intelligible that their tongues can slander no man.) But it is a truth that the old English Puritans do abhor such power of Godlinesse as too many of these men hold forth, which is eminently taken notice of to be Pride,Experien∣tia docet. Malice, Selfe-Interest, Designes to exalt themselves to high places, Partiality, Un∣charitable censuring such as are more unblame∣able than themselves, and fashioning themselves according to this world, both in antique attire and manners. &c.
But if any say to me as the Lawyer did to our Lord and Saviour, Luk. 11 45. I will not answer as Christ did 46. yet let him that readeth con∣sider it, (as Christ also said in another case, Mat. 24.15.) But this I will say, the Lord grant them sound Conviction, and through Conversi∣on, the fruit of which is newesse of heart and life, and then doubtlesse all that are the reall god∣ly party will give them not only the right hand of fellowship, Gal. 2.9 but also their very hearts and soules for the Gospell sake. Ah, what need have all Christians to labour for humility and selfe-deniall, and to walke close with God accor∣ding to Divine prescriptions, which will be a very choise and effectuall meanes to prevent apostatizing.
Madam, In that God hath been pleased to be so gracious to you as to keepe you from defiling your garments by walking in by-waies; It is a very cleare demonstration that the ground-work of your Profession hath been laid on the Rock of Ages. And hence it is that your structure stands firme and unshaken in these stormy times of di∣versity of opinions (especially in relation to fun∣damentall truths, (for in points meerely circum∣stantial Christians ought to beare one with ano∣ther, and not to be disjoyn'd in affections to each other, they agreeing in the maine. And hence it is in the first place, that I have gathered up some encouragement to presume thus upon your Lady∣ship by this bold Intrusion. But
Secondly, When I weigh with my selfe the many and ponderous favours (which so undeser∣vedly on my part) I have received (under God) at your Ladships hands, I stand convinced that all possible gratitude is due from me unto you. But that this presumption of mine may (even in the least measure) be esteemed of to such an end it only rests in your Ladiships Candid Accepta∣tion of it. Which Acceptation of Yours I most humbly beg, for without it I am at an exceeding great stand in this particular.
Madam, be pleased therefore I beseech you so far to deny your selfe as to cast a favourable aspect upon this poore ensuing peece, which (un∣der God) will be some supportation to it; for tru∣ly it is a weake and poore Babe. But how can it be otherwise, when the worthlesse Author of it is not only full of Imbecillity, but is weakenesse it

selfe? Yet God can make this foresaid Babe a fruitfull Mother of many Children in this our Israel, who may both blesse the Lord for it, and for your selfe, worthy Madam, for accepting, and to your power Patronizing the same.
Now our Lord Jesus Christ himselfe, and God even our Father which hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting Consolation, and good hope through Grace comfort your heart, and establish you in every good word, and worke: Thus prayeth he who is,

