



Fathers and Brethren.
YOu will a little wonder to see mee in print, more wonder to see mee medling with a subject somewhat remote from practice, most of all wonder to find mee engaging with an adversary, who drinketh up scorning like Water, and knows not how to mention the worthiest man alive, if of a differing judgment, without con∣tempt. Nor would you cease won∣dring, if I should tell you, that the mere importunity of friends (which is now made the common vouchee for publications) did put me upon this undertaking, nay, though Solo∣mon
 hath told us that a good name is better than a pretious ointment; yet if Mr. P. had contented himself to give mee alone ill names, you would never think it any part of my duty, to scribble so many sheets in my own vindication: but when as I have found a wanton wit doing by all the honest Presbyterians and Puritanes as did the heathen persecutors by the pri∣mitive Christians, putting them in∣to beasts skins, abusing them with all the odious epithets and aspersions he could scrape together, the one half whereof if they should deserve, they were not worthy to live, and when as I have heard that some are too apt to believe those things real which are the mere chimaera's of his brain, you will not count it an idle expence of time, if I bestow some paines (and very little will serve) to shew the World that he who is so fierce in charging others with blasphemy, doth maintain an opinion on which ne∣cessarily
 and unavoideably follows the worst of blasphemies Gods being the Author of sin, and that the privative∣nesse of morall evill is not a mon∣ster hatched under the wings of a few disciplinarian zealots; not a perfect phantasie, a mere Schola∣sticall notion as Dr. Hammond is pleased to call it, fundam. Pag 178. But the undoubted opinion of the Fa∣thers and of moderne Divines as well Lutheran as Calvinistical, yea and that in the way which some angry Di∣vines now with extream bitternesse call Calvinisme the ancient Epis∣copall Divines worshipped the God of their Fathers. Two Artifices I have observed some violent Spirits of late to make much use of, in order to the drawing away of persons from the opinions in which they have been e∣ducated. 1. to perswade them that the opinions they have embraced are but the crude indigested notions of some Presbyterians, so Dr. Jer. Taylor in the
 book which should have been called Pe∣lagius, or Socinus Iustificatus, would bear us in hand that he quarrelleth onely with the Presbyterian notion of Original sin; and yet to that tract the Stationer hath unluckily joyned another, in which he labours to give as good an account, and make as fair an Apology for his tenet as he can, to an Eminent Prelate of our own Nation, who can as little digest that Chapter in the unum necessarium, as the most rigidly Scotized Presbyterian. And I hope none of our old Prote∣stants will be caught with such chaffe. A 2. Stratagem is this, after they have fathered the assertions against which they declaime, upon Mr. Calvin, and his followers, then to Burthen them with such horrible consequences, as cannot by any true rules of reason be deduced from them, as if they were contrary to the Holinesse, Mercy, Justice of God, as if they introdu∣ced fatall necessity, and opened a
 gap to all manner of Licentious∣nesse, as in the first design they do unwittingly befriend the Presbyte∣rians, by giving the people occasion to think that they onely are the men, who will contend for the faith once delivered to the saints; so in the latter they do (whether wittingly, or unwittingly they best know) be∣friend the Synagogue of Rome; for as B. Carleton, saith well: Pag. 62. What greater pleasure can a man procure to the Enemies of the truth, than to speak evill and odiously of those men whose ser∣vice God hath used, and made them excellent instruments to make the truth known unto us? Some take it for a sign of such as are looking towards Popery, when they offer such a service to the Pa∣pists, as to speak evill of them who have been the greatest Enemies to Popery, the greatest propagators of the truth. I have took occasion to
 as far as my Antagonist offered it to make bare both these two fallacies, and to that end have scarse made use of any testimony, but such as he dare not call Presbyterian. If at any time I seeme to depart from that meek∣nesse of Spirit, which is required in a Minister, I shall desire it may be con∣sidered not onely what is fit for mee to speak, but what is meet for him to hear. If I were to mention their fact, who took the reliques of Peter Mar∣tyr's wifes carkase out of the grave, and after buried them in a dunghill, would you not allow mee to call it, unchristian, and inhumane? And shall I be permitted to put no vine∣ger in my Pen, when I am to write of one, who hath taken the far greater part of our Protestant writers out of those beds of honour, in which the Church hath laid them, and made their graves amongst blashpemers are the keenest words to keen for a re∣formed Bolsec? an English Feuar∣dentius?
 And hath not Mr. P. shew∣ed himself such? Come out of your dust yee ancient records, and shew us if you can, since Mr. Mountagues Appeale, any peece written by a Pro∣testant Divine, so full of bitter girds, and scurrilous gibes, against the great instruments of our Reforma∣tion, as the late  and  are: But I know how hard it is for one who hath been so coursely and undecently dealt with as I have been, not to exceed bounds; if you find me so to have done, be not so cruelly mercifull as not to call me to repentance. And for your selves, Let your moderation be known to all men, the Lord is at hand. The reproaches where with you are reproached, are no other than such as the old Puritanes (of whom the world was not worthy) were exerci∣sed with. Let me also mind you of the grave, and seasonable counsell, which Galba gave to Piso. Nero a pessi∣mo
 quoque desiderabitur, mihi & tibi providendum est, ne etiam à bonis desideretur: The Episcopal go∣vernement, as it was exercised in your County, will be desired by the bad, let not the good wish it restored also, for any Church Governement is better than no Church Government, a promiscuous admission to the Sacra∣ment is more desireable than a totall disuse of that most blessed ordinance. If you will but put in practice the rules you pitched upon when you were first about to enter into an association with your Brethren, you shall as little need to fear the spleen of him who calleth your ordinations Prankes, as the clamour of those who call your Churches Antichristian: That the word of the Lord may run and be glo∣rified among you: That God would open unto you a door of utterance, to speak the Mystery of Christ, for which you endure contradiction of
 sinners, and that when your work is done in this life you may enter into your Masters glory is the prayers of

Magd. Colledg.
Nov. 22th. 1658.
