



MADAM,
THE satisfaction you were pleased to express on the perusal of some Sheets of this History, hath emboldened me to present you with the whole. Nor could I put it into better hands than yours, who
so exactly Harmonize with its i lustrious subject, in the best par of her Character. And if a Co∣formity in Dispositions, be the Groun and Cement of ffection, I know noe with whom she may find  surer protection or a better Welcom than with you. I cofess, Madam the Dress in which the following H∣story is cloathed, and some. Passage in it, have somewhat of the Air of a Romance, and I may possibly be censured for busying my self i Translating, as its Author was fo Composing a Piece of such a Na∣ture; but as this was my Imploy∣ment or rather Diversion, during an undesirable Leisure from more serious Work, so, had I not been well assured of the truth of the most material and substantial passa∣ges
in it, I should never have been induced to have taken pains about it, much less have presum'd to pre∣sent you with it. Its Author is a Person that hath gotten some re∣putation by his Writings, which I can hardly perswade my self he would willingly Hazard, by Impo∣sing Fictions on the World: And that Sincerity he hath discovered in his other Works (by which he hath Exposed himself, not only to the Rage of a Party, as malicious as powerfull, but to the displeasure of his Friends, by that just seve∣rity and Freedom he useth in re∣proving their Miscarriages,) may suf∣ficiently secure us, against the Ap∣prehensions of Falshood in this. The Author indeed confesseth he hath made use of Feigned Names,
which he was obliged to doe, be∣cause some of the Persons concern'd had resolved a Journey into Erance incognito, to recover if possible somewhat of their Estates, which had been ravisht from them by the unparallel'd Tyranny of their King, and his bloody Counsellors the Jefuits, and of which they had chosen to make shipwrack, rather than of a good Conscience.
Having given this account of the Piece it self, I beg the Liberty to Give you, and by you, others, an account of the Motive that Induced me to make it publick in our own Language: Besides the earnest Re∣quests of some Friends at whose desire I first translated it, the Con∣sideration of the good Effect it had
whilest in Manuscript, in opening the Hearts and Purses of many to the bounteous Relief of those poor but Generous Confessors of Christ, the French Refugies (whereof I could produce several Witnesses in this City,) hath been my chief En∣couragement. If it hath the same Effect from the Press, I shall judge ny self abundantly recompensed for the pains I have taken in it: How∣ever this Advantage I shall have by its publication, an opportunity to de∣clare my ardent Vows for the Blessing of God on your self and Family, and to assure you that I am,
Exon. Sept. 15th. 1690.
MADAM, 
