



I Never delighted in Pulpit Apologies, else I might have prefaced with an ex∣cuse from the extreame shortnesse of the warning to performe this solemne ser∣vice. Your Christian attention in hea∣ring, and candide acceptance of my meane endeavours, hath now likewise prevented my Apologizing Epistle. Let rather my pen second my tongue in provoking you and my selfe to blesse the Lord, who invites poore sinners to seeke to him in the day of trouble.Psal. 50.15. Now (will blasphemers say) they are glad to runne to their prayers, we are indeed; desiring humbly to rejoyce that we have such precious promises, sealed with the bloud of such a Mediator, in whose Name we may boldly



seeke our heavenly Fathers face, even when he hath a rod, a sword in his hand. We would shame our selves for our many sinnes, and justifie God who is glorious in holinesse, in all the judgements that lie upon us. If this be to be vile, we will with David (when Gods hand cals for it) be more vile then thus.2 Sam. 6.22. Let stupid Atheists take that portion, Isa. 26.11. Lord when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see and be ashamed for their envie toward thy people. If God stile himselfe a God hearing prayers,Psal. 65.2. good reason we should runne unto him as a people making prayers.
Let us now therefore approve our selves Christians indeed, not multiply groundlesse jealousies, which are almost as trouble∣some in the State as unsound opinions in the Church, not quarrell discontentedly with the defects of second causes, but meekly improve the hand whereby the first cause disposes all events. Nothing comes to passe in time, but what was de∣creed from Eternity.Luke 12.6, 7. If a few Sparrowes cannot fall to the ground, then surely Armies, Cities, Countries, cannot be lost without his providence. If he condescend to number his childrens haires, then certainely much more their heads. He who hath a bottle for their teares, a booke of remembrance for their words and thoughts upon his Name, will not forget his owne promises unto them:Mal. 3.16.18. but when discriminating times come, then shall ye returne and discerne between the righte∣ous and the wicked, betweene him that serveth God, and him that serveth him not.
There are now many veines opened in England, it is in the body Politick, as in the Naturall, much bad bloud can∣not be let out,Isa. 23.9. but we shall lose some good. The Lord of Hoasts hath purposed to staine the pride of all our glory. Much honourable bloud hath beene shed amongst us since these sad troubles began. When the judgement comes by Famine or Pe∣stilence, ordinarily most great persons escape, the vulgar sort of people fall by such Arrowes. God hath now sent a sword,



which hath done execution upon divers of our Nobles, and ma∣ny of our Gentry. The good Lord helpe you▪ and all whom it most concernes, to heare what this rod, this sword saith, and who hath appointed it.Micah 6.9. We all acknowledge it was drawne for the sinnes of this Nation; and will it be sheathed againe without repentance?
It was a strange prophesie of Robert Grosthead, that great Bishop of Lincolne in H. 3. time, who prying much into the abominations and spirit of Popery, said a little before his death, The Church shall not be delivered from the servitude of Egypt, but by violence and force,Nec liberabitur Ecclesia ab E∣gyptiaca servitu∣te nisi in ore gla∣dii cruentandi, Matth. Paris. See Foxe Mar∣tyrolog. and with the bloudy sword. We have found this too true as well as other Churches. Is there not a generation amongst us, who, rather then they will have Christ raigne over them, rather then Doctrine, Wor∣ship, Government, and Discipline, should be reduced to the simplicity that is in Christ, will hazzard King and King∣domes, involving one after another in bloudy troubles.
Me thinkes we may heare groaning England speaking the language of the woman of Tekoah, 2 Sam. 14.4. Helpe O King, and upon her ground; her two sonnes strove together in the field, and there was none to part them, but the one smote the other and slew him, v. 6. It will be your High Honour (O Noble Worthies) to be so faithfull to your Saviour, and to your Soveraigne, as to put hereunto your helping Heads and Hearts, Counsels and Prayers. When God suffered his Church to be brought very low, to be a flocke of slaughter,Zach. 11.7. yet then he took unto him two staves, the one he called Beauty, and the other he called Bands, and he fed the flock. Be plea∣sed to improve your utmost now as good followers of the Lambe. Call for the helpe of the Reverend Assembly, who will study to advise you according to the Testimony of Jesus. Church-Reformation may prove a compendious way to compose State-commotions; Hereby poore distra∣cted England may yet finde two supporting Staves, Beauty

and Bands, a Beautifull union established in Church and State.
The Lord delight to imploy you to these happy purposes; so shall our mourning be turned into Hallelujahs.

