



AS when King Solomon built his Tem∣ple,
which was Typical to Christ and his
Church,1 King. 7. 21. there were two Pillars which
did both adorn and strengthen it:Jachin and Boaz. When Zacha∣ry
speaks Prophetically of the Government of
that Church, he tells you of two Staves,
Beauty and Bands:Zach. 11. 10, 14. And when Paul writes
Apostolically of the building up, and beautifying
the Churches of Christ, he commends to
you Truth and Love. And if an Apocryphal
Book may be heard (as why not, in the in∣struction
of maners, and things of this na∣ture)

amongst three things of strength, Wine,
Women and Truth, Truth carries it away as most
potent.
And as for the power of Love,Cant. 8. 6. Solomon
will tell you it is as strong as death; the power∣ful
workings whereof, are most emphatically
represented by Paul to the Corinthians,1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. Charity
suffereth long, and is kinde; charity envieth not;
charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up; doth
not behave her self unseemly, seeketh not her
own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil, re∣joyceth
not in iniquity, but rejoyceth in the truth; omnia tegit. Beza.
covereth all (so I am bold to render the
Greek word, rather then beareth, because you
have even the same in the end of that verse,
endureth all things.
And surely never was there more need of
such an union in England, as Truth and Love
would make up amongst Saints, then now,
when the disaffected in all the Three Kingdoms
are like to make a Prey upon the people, by
reason of their unkinde and most unbrotherly
Divisions. This is like to be our sad Motto,
Whilest we dash one against another,Dum colli∣dimur fran∣gimur. we are both
like to be broken in pieces.
If these differences were about Fundamen∣tals,

or any matters of Faith, God forbid but
we should zealously, and resolutely appear in it:
even they who are most moderate in their
Opinions about externals and circumstantials (I
speak knowingly, for my self and many of
my moderate Brethren) when it comes to Sub∣satials
of Faith and Worship, will answer as
B. Andrews did, being asked at the first coming
over of the Archbishop of Spalato, Whether
he though the were a Protestant, or no? he answer∣ed,
Truly,Fr. L. Veru∣lam. Apo∣theg. 241. I know not; but he is a detestant of di∣vers
Opinions of Rome: So I am confident do
we abhor, not onely Romish, Arminian, and
Socinian Opinions, and whatever is unsound,
and contrary to the Doctrine according unto
godliness;1 Tim. 6. 3. Onely we believe about all matters
of Church-Government, which are neither
so clear in Scripture, nor of such concernment to
salvation, there had need be some Melancthons
as well as Luthers; there must be morter to
binde the bricks together, some soft Spirits; if
all be rugged, we shall have no Spiritual
building.
This is the scope of this plain Sermon,
which now you have been pleased to make
more yours, by your order for the publishing of

it, intending (I hope) by your desires to have
it repeated to your eyes, that you may the better
repeat it in your practices.
Durandus tells us Paul was pictured with a
Sword,Paulus eum ense & libro pingitur, mu∣cro furor Pauli, liber est conversio Sauli. Dur. l. 1. C. 3. and with a Book; intimating by the sword,
what he was before his Conversion; by the Book,
what after, when he so much minded the edification
of the Churches of Christ.
O that we Ministers and Brethren who
differ,Potest mibi atiquid videri alteri aliud, sed neq ego quod dixero praescribo al∣teri, nee ille mihi. Aug. in Psal. 16. might lay aside our swords, and seri∣ously
try what faith and love will do to com∣pose
our unhappy and most unseasonable Controver∣sies, which
doubtless need not so divide us,
neither should we in things of this nature, pre∣scribe
or impose one upon another.
There were three Fellows of Merton Col∣ledge
in Oxford, the one a Thomist, the other a
Scotist, the third an Occamist,This learned Bishop Mor∣ton applies to the Papists, who all con∣cur in having Transub∣stantiation, but whether per productio∣nem or per e∣ductionem, &c. cannot agree. that going to
Woodstock to petition the King that they
might have a door out of Merton Colledge
for their conveniency; they all agreed to desire
to have a door, but could not agree upon the ma∣ner
of the Petition; one was for Habeamus os∣tium,
the other thought that too general, and
therefore would have it Ostium fieri, but then
the question was, Who should make it, or

where; the third Vt ostium factum sit, yet that
pleased not. We all would have a Government,
but cannot agree upon the maner, divers forms being
in view: O that Truth and Love might be
the Vmpire!
This I have for divers years endeavored,
according to my measure, and still shall, what
ever others say of me, as being confident, Mo∣derate
Counsels conduce much more to an happy settle∣ment,
then such as are high and rigid; And I rest
assured, that sober moderate Spirits are much
better friends to Presbyterial Government (which
I desire may besettled here) then they who drive
so furiously. Its true, I believe the abounding
of Heretical Opinions, and Schismatical Practices,
have begotten many Malignants amongst us,
but withal I fear, the severity of some Pres∣byterians
gives too much advantage to Hete∣rodox
and Schismatical spirits. I cannot believe
it, though I have often heard, That some of
my Brethren were angry at this Discourse,
because so moderate; surely, it is either because
they are guilty, and too much ingaged in a
party, whereas I being uningaged, can with
freedom of spirit (which liberty, I highly value)
unpartially oppose what is amiss in any, and imbrace

what is good where ever I finde it. Solomon saith,
A man of understanding is of a cool spirit:Prov. 17. 27. The
Lord make us such, which will express a
more full conformity to Christ, and a sweet re∣semblance
of his spirit, which will be the beauty
of Ministers and other Saints.
My Lord, Be pleased with my humble
and hearty acknowledgement of the many
Respects of this Renowned City to me, to ac∣cept
my Desires and Endeavors, to approve
my self,
From my Lodging in
Westminster, May 8.
1648. 
