



My Lord!
THese following Ser∣mons treat of ju∣stice, and judgment: who therefore can lay a better claime to them then your selfe? who are so famous for both; since you have been advanc't to be an Eminent Ruler in our Israel. The first is yours by right of primogeni∣ture, being first preacht unto your honour, and the first ven∣turous Essay that ever the prea∣cher made in this kind. In the second, your Interest is greater,
then you are aware. The truth is; the Materialls are yours: the stones came from your quar∣ry: the beames, and rafters from your forrest; and if I have not bin a Bezaleel skilfull e∣nough, to hew, polish, and com∣pact them into a Fabrike worth your owning; let that be set up∣on my account; who knew not how to weld, and mannage such rich Notions, as you suggested, by putting them into a dresse sui∣table to the degree of their ex∣cellency.
My Lord! when I applied my selfe withall diligence (I had almost said curiosity) to observe your acute examinations of the Felons, and offendours conven∣ted before you; I noted, how by your searching questions; your dextrous, and sudden Replies, you brought their hidden works of darknesse to light, in spite of
all their subterfuges, and all the webbs of their fained pre∣tences. So that I could not but conclude —that certainly you were extraordinarily assisted, by some divine intelligence, whilst you were in Cathedrâ, upon the Bench, about such weighty imployments; and whilst I was thus museing: behold! that of David came into my mind. GodPsal. 82.1. standeth in the Congre∣gation of the mighty; he judg∣eth among the gods; So that being importun'd to preach at the next Solemnity of that kind, I chose those words for the sub∣ject of my discourse.
It is not my designe, to blazon your worth, or write a panegy∣rike of your praises; though here is field-roome enough to make an oratour. Yet such an Enterprize, as 'tis no way suita∣ble to your Christian Moderati∣on,
. Bas. p. 239. who had rather act, then heare gloriously: so the dimen∣sions of your honour would be in as great danger to suffer by the low, and narrow veines of my Rhetorick, as I should be from the imputation of Malevolent Censures, who grudg at all the tribute of respect (though ne∣ver so due) which is paid to great personages, as if it pro∣ceeded from a spirit of Flatte∣ry, or tended to a Courting of their Fortunes, or blowing them up with ambition. I shall dawb with no such mortar; But what is said of theRev. 2.15. Nicolaitans doctrine, the same say I of such dealing, , which things I hate. My intention is more sincere, viz. to make out clea∣rer yet your title, not only to what followes here, but to what∣ever shall owne me for an un∣worthy Authour hereafter; As
he that is sav'd from drowning, or redeem'd from bondage, owes all his future endeavours to his deliverer, & in all justice ought toExo. 21.6. naile his eares to his doore. This is the very bot∣tome of a Christians devoting, and Consecrating himselfe to Christ alone; because he hath rescued us from our spirituall Pharaoh, the Devill, and ab∣solved us from the guilt of sin in our Justification,1 Cor. 6.20. Ro. 12.1. 2 Cor. 5.15. glo∣rify God in your body, and in your spirit, for ye were bought with a price.
But if I have hitherto bin in the Clouds, and left your Lord∣ship under the intanglement of a Riddle; I shall come downe in the next part of this Narrative, and lend your Honour a Clue to wind your selfe out of that La∣byrinth.
My Lord! when providence
brought you, and me together at Reading: my mind did scarce move upon its owne hinges: For but a little before; TheCant. 5.7. watchmen had wounded me, and the Keepers of the wall had taken away my vaile from me; and as if a single, Civill death had not bin sufficient; I mean, in respect of Tempo∣ralls: in the first place, and in order thereunto, like that vestall virgin, I was to be ravisht of my most pretious Repositum, my only joy, and glory, my In∣terest in Jesus Christ, the only Rock of my salvation, degra∣ded from godlinesse; devestèd of grace; Separated (had it bin possible for any principali∣ties, and powers) from that life, which is hid with Christ in God, and sent a grazing (pudet haec &c.) withNos uti∣nam vani &c. Hea∣thens, and Pagans, so that for
a time, I saw little but theWhen those that have an in∣terest in God, Say there is no peace to thee it should make ones heart to quake. M. Burroughs Mo. Ch. p. 224. dark side of the Cloud; and I had no rest in my spirit, lest I should be like the builders of Noahs Arke: lest I should1 Co. 9.27. Preach salvation to others, yet I my selfe should be , a Castaway. I began also to question my ministeriall call, and as Luther used to do, I trem∣bled to ascend the Pulpit. My thoughts were, missusne ego? am I not an usurper, going upon my owne Arrant? one of them that run's, and was never sent? quis me Constituit? who made me a preacher? yet I have lear∣ned, that the. 1 Cor. 4.3. Aliter in Coelo, quā Norim∣bergae hoc de negotio erat con∣clusum. Luther. resolves of men, are not alwaies the Deter∣minations of God: for whilst I was hot upon this dispute, be∣hold! Elias-like, you stept in to solve all these doubts, as if you had bin sent from Heaven to heale the broken-hearted,
and to preach deliverance to the Captive. A good Sama∣ritane indeed, to power wine, and oyle into such wounds. Reading to me was2 Sam. 10.4, 5. Jeri∣cho: for there my beard grew out: and instead of my vaile, there I was clothed with the gar∣ments of praise, out of the war∣drope of your Charity. I was not only incourag'd by your re∣ligious, exemplary, awefull, and thirsty attention: dictat audi∣tor, such a Hearer, listening with both eares to the sermon, puts life into the preacher, but as he told Domitian,Val. Mart. in Lib. octa. tu famam, (i. e.) vitam dedisti, you did even animate, and confirme me in my office, by that incense you were pleased to sprinkle upon me in your charge, and that in the face (I hope I may adde too) with the approbation of my Coun∣trey. The sweet spices of yours
were not like the meale cast up∣on the head of the sacrifice, or theMat. 26.12. womans oyntment upon Christ, for my death, and buriall; but for my life, and re∣surrection. This was a Conso∣lation, and it shall be for a Consolation.
It is not my drift, in the least to reflect, or glance upon those watchmen mention'd before: for I have gain'd by that losse; and I amParum abfuit quin calamitati gratias ha beam. Naz Orat. 25. beholding to that af∣fliction. I have gather'd grapes of those thornes, and honey out of that rock. My God hath so sanctified, and order'd that crosse-dispensation, that I read in it the Returne of my own prayers. I have seen the out∣goings of God in the Cloud; and the Lord hath walk't a turne or two in the wildernesse with me, that he might the better speak unto my heart. Had I sate at
the sterne, or had the reines of affaires bin in my owne hands, I could not have contain'd them better. Glory be to God on high! and in the next place, on earth Thanksgiving to your selfe!
Now my Lord! some sacri∣fice their labours to great Mecae∣nas's, that they may be aton'd, to sheild them from potent An∣tagonists: these sermons being the truths of God; I hope need no arme but his. Others dedi∣cate books to their Patrons, and Benefactors; to whom they owe, some parcells of their estate, or some common favours, I owe more to you, that is myPhi∣lemon, v. 9. selfe; I meane, in restoring my mind to its wonted calme; there∣fore what Aeschines said to So∣crates, the same say I to you; I have nothing to offer unto you, which may beare a pro∣portion
to your desert,. Laert. l. 2. p. 111. or my ingagement; but I give you my selfe back againe in any service I am able; or if that be not worth acceptance, one thing you shall not refuse, by all your power, and oratory; and that is, the constant prayers, My Lord! of your most ingaged, and Humbly devoted servant.

