


YOu may justly wonder (and it may be will blameme) that I should be so forward to appear (especially at this time being weakened by a quartane Ague of above seven Moneths continuance) in so Dedecus Medicorum. publike a Dresse, which, (what ever little warmth of Spirit may (by the good hand of God arise to my self in the preparation of it) yet will have very little beauty in the eyes of others, when it comes abroad. But (so farre as I understand my own deceitfull heart) I can truly say, I have reckoned this one of the most smarting twigges in this Rodde, They onely live to the publike who can act for the pub∣like. that by my long sicknesse, I have been so much dead to the publike; and therefore whereas I might have preached many Sermons (had the Lord been pleased to continue my health, to one Congregation, I may now in this way communicate one plain Sermon to many Con∣gregations.
And withall I can ingeniously say, I have watched for an opportuni∣ty publikely to congratulate your most advantageous improvement for the Churches service, in the continuance of your peaceable Gospel imployment so happily begun in these Morning Exercises in West∣minster Alii dolant lapides vos verò Archi∣tectos. Acts 19. 23, 26. Abbey where you preach to Builders of Church and State, and the rather because I believe at first we all thought who were designed to that service, there would be no small stir about this way, as Paul said in the Acts, being Demetrius and his Company were like to have their Trade marred in preparing for their great Diana, by the light and power of Gospel Truth. But I hope we shall all the more confident∣ly trust God whilest we live for the subduing of opposite Spirits, in the midst of any threatning Difficulties, when he leads us forth into his worke, by the experience of his good hand upon us here.

And I conceive I have as much reason with humble thankefulnesse to the God of Peace to congratulate that sweet, harmonious (I had al∣most Frō March 1643. till Febr. 1645, when I left it being sent down to Cambridge. 3 Iohn 9. said unparalleld) Union amongst you, of which I was a joyfull witnesse for well nigh two yeares together, whereas so many other Le∣ctures have been shattered by Envy, and the spirit of Diotrephes some one amongst them affecting the preheminence. As also that visible successe in the fruit of your paines, and the general acceptance you have, manifested by the numerous and almost uniforme frequency of the Au∣ditours in Winter as well as Summer, whereas the Peoples comming with respect of persons hath broken the necke of many other good Le∣ctures. Onely herein my joy is somewhat damped, that I was not more usefull a  when I was engaged in that honourable service with you: blessed be the Lord of the Harvest, who hath in mercy thrust forth such a faithfull Labourer into this large Field, who may supply Mr. Strong. my defects in being more helpfull unto you. The Lord Iesus who hath promised not onely to drop but powre out his Spirit as a pretious fruit of his ascension, give you as able a Teacher in the place of that Man of God, Mr. Palmer, who now in Heaven inherits the sweet fruit of his sincere and indefatigable paines in the worke of the Lord, whose Name will (I hope) be pretious in Westminster for ever.
The mighty Spirit of the Lord Iesus worke in you, for you, and by you powerfully, and grant you may go forth conquering to con∣quer, rescuing many poor captive soules from under the power of the Devil: Be faithfull in his service unto the death, and he wil give you the Crown of life. Rev. 2. 10. Farewell in Him.

From my lodging in Westminster, May. 1. 1648.
