


SIR,
AS I gave you no provocation to such unhandsome reflexions, with which you have bespattered me, so 'tis the Opinion of wise and learned Men, that you are to be neg∣lected as incurably rude, and disingenuous. And I truly am so far of their Opinion, that I ought not to answer you according to your Folly, lest I become like unto you. But as little regard as is due to the Voice of the Slanderer, the Cause of Truth, and the Con∣sciences offended by involved Prejudices, de∣serve a tender Deference and Care.
On which consideration I have throughly traversed all that seems pertinent in your Letters, and some M. S. Reflexions sent me (I suppose) from some other Hand. And not only so; but I have examined some of the most exquisite Discourses and Principles of your greatest Authors in this Controver∣sie, as well as those of your greatest Oppo∣nents; And I hope in all my Determinati∣ons, between you and them, I have done impartial Justice; if not, I have exposed
my self unto public, just, and severe Corre∣ction.
Of all your criminal Imputations there is but one that seems to deserve any notice, viz. that which taxes me for giving the Di∣alogists in Solomon and Abiathar, those tech∣nical Names and Characters. Upon which your Complaint being not only loud, but in some Degree specious, does indeed oblige me to account herein. Nor shall I decline whatsoever is reasonable. whereupon I sincerely protest, that I took the Names from the known Sense, each Party has of the others Temper. For the Conformists to the present State, thinking the Recusants thereof too hard and untractable, I from that Notion, name my Recufant Dyscheres; And the Recusants thinking the others too easie and yielding, I from that Apprehensi∣on call my Conformist Eucheres.
And Eucheres has the Character of a Con∣formist for conforming to the present Con∣stitution, and Dyscheres of a Recusant for refusing this particular Conformity. And no Man of Sense can really imagine, that I had any worse Intention, since no Man can think that I would expose the Deprived as Fanatic's, and in the Person of Dyscheres, I introduce them making a professed Renun∣ciation of Popery in several Places, with which they are never charged by my Con∣formist.
And now if there be any Grains of Can∣dor and Human Tenderness left in you, can
you imagine that you used a proper Method to heal, or settle my distressed and doubtful Spirit, who after several unanswered Let∣ters written to some of the greatest Doctors on both sides of the Division, and others of middle Temper, was at last upon their neg∣lect forced to turn a Publick Supplicant to the learned World for succour and satis∣faction? If this be the way of handling ten∣der Consciences, if this be the Oyl you pour into their Wounds, the good God have more Mercy on the Patient, and put him under gentler Hands.
But if you had judged me an improper Ob∣ject of your Humanity, yet a due concern for the Reputation of your Cause should have influenced you unto more Decency. For a good Cause needs no Supplies from a Sca∣venger's Cart, and ill Language ever sup∣plies and discovers Defect of Reason as well as of good Nature, and never proselites a calm and thinking Man, but rather seals up the Offended in their former Perswasi∣ons, and alienates mild Tempers from such sower Communion: When you have well considered the following Debate, you will have occasion for second Thoughts, to which in the Interim I leave you, and subscribe,

