



Right Honourable,
HE that was both anEccl. 1.1. Ecclesiastes, and a King (Salomon) both in the Pulpet and the Throne, as Preacher and a King preferresEccl. 7.1. a good name to pretious Oyntment, and holds itPro. 22.1. rather to be Chosen then the greatest riches: the foundation of which structure (as appeares by severall Hi∣stories, both Holy and Humane) is not laid in greatnesse, but in goodnesse. For by this theHe. 11.2.39. Elders both of former and latter times, obtained a good report: hence came1 Chro. 49.8, 9: labez to be more honorable than his brethren, be∣cause he called upon the God of Israel. The
Bereans to be more noble than those of Thes∣salonica, Acts 17.11 because they were more ready in hearing, more diligent in examining the Scriptures, than the others were: And from hence was this of theAgesilaus. Spartan King to one that extold the magnificence of the Persian, wherein (says he) is he greater than I, ex∣cept hee be more just than I? But there are too many that like1 Sam. 15 24 Saul and2 Sam 15.6 Absolon, do float upon anotherRev. 4.6 glassie Sea, and fill their sailes with the wind of vanity, and being re∣gardlesse of true honour, hunt too eagerly after popular applause, to make their names great, only in the eyes and mouths of men; forgetting that precept and principle of our Saviour, toLuke 10.20 Rejoyce rather that their names are written in Heaven, where onely both names and Honours are out of danger of defacing; but1 Sam. 15 28. these like those, what they least feare they soonest feel: and which they most seeke they seldom'st finde. For as their Fraught is but Folly, and their TRAFICKE in this Voyage is but2 Sam. 18 14. Pride and Vanity: So is their gaine no∣thing but shame, sorrow and infamy, a Re∣turne in Saint Pauls Ro. 2.8, 0 Rom. 6.23 Heb. 2.2. opinion very sutable to such an adventure, wages and recompences very answerable to such services. The way amongst the AncientPlutarch. Romans to the Tem∣ple
of Honour, was through the Temple of Vertue; and that hangs upon the File of1 Sam. 2.30 Eternity, would be remembred in every House as well as in Elies House; that those that honour God, God will honour them, when such as doe despise Him by preferring theIohn 12.43 praise of men before the praise of God, shall be despised.
And now who knoweth said Mordecay to Esther, Esther. 4.7 nay who knoweth not (my much ho∣noured Lord) that knowes your Lordship; But that you have come to this height of Honour and have advanced your name and Family, that you have (as the Prophet ofsay 2.23 Eliakim) beene for a glorious Throne to the house of your Fathers; and all this, and more then this, by the better & more excel∣lent way, by adding goodnes to Greatnesse; to Highnesse Holinesse; by adding know∣ledge to your yeares, Grace to your know∣ledge, (Practise to both,) by1 chr. 17.8 25. building and beautifying of Gods House, who both hath and will build and beautifie yours. For the furtherance of which I shall not on∣ly withZach. 4.7. Zacharies Angel, Bring forth the head Wherein is engraven in golden CharactorsEgo Tibi, tu mihi Domū. Stone, and crie Grace Grace unto it; But as that other to Gideon [shall wish you the wishes of your dedication, and say]Iudg. 6.12. Iehova est tecum, valentissime robore, The Lord be
with thee thou mighty man of Valour. And for the continuance of which Exemplary acts and fruites of Piety and honour, I do offer here to your Lordships protection and acceptance these following Lines and Labours, which containe the Holy Life and happy Death of One who in his time was one of thevid. title page, Lords worthies, one who had attaind to this honour to bee a blessing to himselfe and to others also, to bee a good man, and to have aPsa. 32.10. prov. 10.7. good name well wor∣thy that honourable mention and Elogie wherewith the Iewish Rabbins were wont to speake of their best and chiefest Authors, A man of blessed memorie, whole blessed and Sacred memoriall, I humbly crave (right Honourable) may finde a Shield and shelter under your Wings; so shall it bee borne from the Egypt of detraction and calumnie, (as once was Gods Israel, quasi sub alis a∣quilarum) as uponExo. 19.4 Eagles wings.
My Lord, he is in some sortLuk. 7, 4.5. worthy for whom you should doe this, for hee hath loved (while he lived) our nation, and hath built though not a materiall, yet a Spi∣rituall House of God, amongst them with whom he lived, and that in such a way as may multiply honour to your Lordship, by manifesting your good affection to his ver∣tues
and your resolution to preserve his me∣mory. The booke hath need of a high Pa∣tronage, and flies toAlterius sic altera poscitopem, Hor: yours. Vouchsafe it then Right Honourable, though you need not it, yet (as the Reverend Bishop Histeward complaining of extraordi∣nary expn∣ces occasi∣on'd through multitude of servants, he cals for a catalogue of their names and seeing who were serviceable, & who use∣lesse, said, these I will keepe be∣cause Inced them, and those be∣cause they need me. Alonso Car∣tilio to his servant) because it needs you.
I know ther's no analogie in state or place, in imployments, or indowments, betwixt your Lordship and this Gentleman, who was Inferioris Subsellij, of a farre inferiour rancke and quality: yet may your Honour, if you please to stoope so1 Sam: 25 30 31, 32, 33, 34 2 King 5.13.14. Iob 31.13, 14 low as to looke to his example, find many things worthy of your observation, and not a few worthy of imitation also.
But I feare that like the Ambassadors of Samos, I shall offend in Prolixitie. I will there∣fore now with Plutarchs Cranes in their flight over mountIn Sicily where they stop their mouths with stones. V.M.A.p.H, O. Taurus, stop my mouth, lest by too much noyse I awaken and disturbe the Eagle (I flye to) and so become a prey: to prevent which, I love onely the posture and Language of the Getulian captive to the Lyon, Indigna sum ejus gloria Apuila hon capit muscas. praeda, I am not worthy of your anger, yet feare to pro∣voke it, but shall not neede while I become as best becomes me, anCorpora∣magna nimo fatis est pro∣trasse Leoni. humble suppliant to your Lordship as well for pardon, as for Patronage, and to the Protector of Princes
for hisPro. 3.16. right and left hand blessings, to bee ever multiplyed upon you and yours, that your honour may long continue like Elia∣kim, Velut. Esa. 22.23. Paxillum in loco firmo, that you may live in your selfe, your illustrious Lady, your numerous and their honoured off-spring, and in all that have relation to your Lordship in the direct line or collaterall; to emulate and outstrip the best and bra∣vest of your glorious Ancestors, that succeeding Ages may never close the An∣nalls of your Princely Family with a
Hift. chro. Degenerem{que}, Neoptolemum.
But with that rather wherewith the Del∣phick Pl. cher. O racle honored that King of Sparta,
Ultimus heroum Cleomenes Astypalaeus. The God of all happinesse and blessing mul∣tiply all 38 graces and honours to you and yours,Ios. 19.15 in this life, by guiding you with his counsell, and in the next by receiving you all into His Glory, which shall bee the continued prayer of him who by many Ob∣ligations stands bound to acknowledge and subscribe himselfe in all humility and ob∣servance,
My Lord,

