


MY LORD,
YOur Lordship was then in the Archi-Episcopal Throne when I was in the Pulpit preaching the following Sermon, and be∣came the Grand Exemplar of Attention to that great Confluence both of Clergie and Laity then present; What was then (though with much weakness) offered to Your Ear, is now with all becoming and imaginable Humility presented to Your Eye. I make my Address to Your Lordship at this time Instar Omnium, be∣cause at that time Your Lordship was more
then Your Self, and in all Capacities fitter to Patronize what now flies to Your Ʋmbrage for Shelter.
In the ensuing Tract, Your Lordship will finde I have ransack't Gods dreadfull Artillery, and planted many rending and roaring Cannons a∣gainst spiritual Wickedness then reigning and ra∣ging in High Places. None I hope will say, (as Laertius of the Writings of Chrysippus) I have taken up all that came in my way, since the Mar∣gin is able to make good the Text, and declare I have medled with nothing but what was Analo∣gical and Suitable to it; and yet with so much, that as Apollodorus the Athenian said of the same Chrysippus his Writings, If (the ) all were taken out that was not mine own, there would be much blanck in this little Sermon.
If the good People of the Land shall be bet∣ter'd in their Devotion by the perusal of it, O well is me and happy shall I be! If any shall shuffle themselves out, because I have left them out in the Application, as unwilling either Pul∣pit or Press should remonstrate (I hope) their Forgiven Crimes both in Religion and Loyaltie, I have but the same success the Prophet Isaiah compained of, Domine quis credidit Auditui
nostro? Lord, who hath believed our Re∣port, or to whom is the Arm of the Lord re∣vealed? But, did I say Forgiven Crimes? I could wish it were so, even now when I labour under a godly Jealousie that it may be otherwise; Because the Whoredoms of their Mother Jeza∣bel and their Witchcrafts are yet so many, The Lowing of the Oxen and the the Bleating of the Sheep is as loud as ever, Their Murmurings and Complottings against David on the Throne, and Abiathar at the Altar declare it; The very shew of their Countenances witness against them, Their Illegal and Schismatical Conventions publish it; Yea, their publick and profest Disobedience to most Laws and Sanctiòns, holy and humane, do proclaim a Nolumus hunc regnare against their King, and a Nolumus scientiam Viarum tua∣rum against their God. We endeavour to draw them (as the Prophet Hosea sayes) with the Cords of a man, and the bands of Love, but our Cords are to weak, they snap them in pieces, as Sampson did the Cords of the Philistims; nor must we ever exspect a better return from the best of them, then Olympias had for Eurydice, who presented her with a Treble choice of a Sword, a Haltar, or a Cup of Poyson. By Your Lordships leave, I declare to the world a
known Truth, that I can shew under the hand of a great Sectarie, in a Letter written to my self, then going Commissioner to the Isle of Man;Anno 1661. in the behalf of some of them in that Island, that they call themselves, The elect and pretious People of God, The Stone cut out of the Mountains, The same Stone which the Buil∣ders refused, with many such blasphemous Inter∣jections in that Paper. Yet three of these were then presented in the Ecclesiastical Court (I being then Judg) two for Adultery, and one for For∣nication. When Democritus had declared his opinion of a sort of men, that they were Good, and Just, and Sober, a By-stander said, Heu me mi∣serum, quod nec uno quidem adhuc sum poti∣tus! So for my part I could never finde wherein lay the excellency of these People that so much and so loudly sound forth their own praises. This I do, that no Obligation will binde, no Friendship oblige them: The Friendship of Zenocrates was not to be purchased by Alexander; Amicitiam emere vero voluit, Philosophus vendere nolu∣it. They are not unlike Phaonius in Plutarch, Bold and Barbarous. Take measure of them by their Loyaltie to their KING their Nursing-Father, and among thousands you will not finde a Crate∣rus, or an Hephaestion, ,
that loves either the King in His Person, or the King in His Government, but are as ready as ever to slander the Foot-steps of the Lords Anointed. And if you measure them by their Obedience to the CHƲRCH their Aged Mother, Malitia eorum excaecavit eos; their Hatred towards Her is like the Vestal Fires, inexstinguishable: For to set up a Capitol of their own Imaginations, they would destroy all the Chur∣ches of God in the Land.
Inter haec quid agamus? Among all these Re∣volted Schismaticks, what can the poor Ministers do, whose Flocks are (like Adonis Gardens) beset and hedg'd with these Thorns and Bryars of Con∣tention? Only pray, That God would still the rage∣ing of this Sea and madness of this People; and in the mean time flie as I do now to a Gospel Remedy, Dic Ecclesiae.
The Great and Good God put it into the hearts of that Great Renowned Assembly to provide some seasonable Remedy against the growth of this pesti∣lent Contagion, —Ne pars sincera trahatur. And the same God subdue these incorrigible People to himself in Obedience, to themselvs in Humility, to their King (Our Most Gracious Sovereign) in Loyaltie, to the Church in Duty, to the World in Peace and Ʋnity; that that may be true of them
which Livy sayes of Val.Flaccus, Quantum prius Luxuriae exemplum fuerat, tantum postea Modestiae & Sanctitatis specimen evasit: And as they have given up their members instruments of unrigh∣teousness unto sin; so they may give up them∣selves instruments of Righteousness unto Holi∣ness.
My LORD, I have transgrest the Rule of Phocion's Orator Verborum paucitate, being carried away (as with a violent and rapid Tide) Rerum magnitudine. Much being said in a little room, as to the Thing; and too much (I fear) only as to Your Lordships Concerns: For which (as before I crav'd Your Patronage, so now) I most humbly crave Your Lordships Pardon; and (for∣asmuch as the Less is blessed of the Greater) Your Blessing and Benediction upon
(My LORD)

From my Study in Dover, May 8. 1663.
