




Worthy SIR!
YOU may justly won∣der to see any thing come from mee, ha∣bited in this dresse, and wearing these colours: me∣thinks I read your thoughts, Hac sunt vestimenta? are these the garments of my late Schol∣lar? what do's such a stripling mean to creep abroad into the Camp? How dare any but Eagles now venture into the light, and fly abroad in the o∣pen Sun-shine? Is not a Cell safest in a criticall age? and will not prudent men keep silence
in that time?A. 5.13. It's not enough for the bells of Aaron to sound within the wals of the Temple? Are not Sermons likely to do most effectuall executi∣on upon the soules of men, when they have the advantage of a Arist. Rhet. l. 3. c. 7. Auditores accipiet affectum queuscun{que} orator in∣duerit. Ta∣cit. de Or. warming, vigrous elo∣cution, and are conveied to the heart thorow a silver Trumpet, or upon the wings of a power∣full utterance? Are not the same Sermons in a book, as bels without clappers, as fishes on dry land, very carkasses, sine succo & sanguine, without life or heat? Is it not as easie to draw forth an Eccho to the life, as to print a Sermon in it's full grace, and lustre? nay, has not this bin the means to make more preachers than Schollars,
— picdsque docuit
verba nostra conari?
Sir, I cannot deny, but many
of these Notions have bin mine heretofore; and if yours now, I will not enter the lists of di∣spute with you, who are such a Master of that Art. Besides, there is so much awe upon my spirit, since I was among the Children of the Prophets, under the excellent discipline of your Government, that me-thinks I dare no more reply upon you, than the Schollers upon Pythagoras, as if you spake no∣thing but principles, or were the highest Court in the Com∣mon-wealth of learning, from whence there lyes no appeale.
But since I have considered your excellencie in severall sci∣ences, especially in that which you professe, my thoughts are sadded with melancholy, that our age should be so improvi∣dent of posterity, as to suffer such a considerableJudg. 21.3. Tribe to
be lacking in our Israel: to suf∣fer such a branch to be broken off from the tree of knowledge. I mean for want of Encourage∣ment, to permit that ancient and usefull Law of Nations (the profession of the Civil Law) so famous beyond the Seas, so helpfull an handmaid to Divi∣nity, to fall to the ground, and as it were to die with your selfe. What the Jewish Church spake long since of the Gentiles, Cant. 8.8. upon this occasion hath often run in my mind: We have a little sister, and she hath no breasts: what shall we do for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for? But I am trans∣ported beyond my scope, which is to give you some account of the publication, and dedication of what followes.
First, these Sermons come not to you, as if they set forth
any Art; or could conferre any further degree of understan∣ding upon Schollars, in the points handled therein: you cannot expect that, from theQuis aut egenus divitibus, aut peregri∣nus civibus, aut agre∣stis & ignarus studiosis conferat? Chrysol. Ser. CCXXXVIII. meannesse of my parts, and the tumults of daily imployments. No, they are plain, and tend to the edification of the meanest capacitie:
—Et Coenae fercula nostrae.
Mallem convivis, quàm placu∣isse cocis. Neither is here any humouring of parties, by holding up the cudgels, or haling at the saw of controversies. Happy were it for our Jerusalem, if it were a quiet Habitation, free from the noise of axes and hammers; if it were in the Lew, safe from stormes and tempests; if the waters of the Sanctuary ran softly, like those of Siloam;
divinity become a foot-ball, and tossed up and downe accor∣ding to the strength of the assertors. Enter not thou my soule into the secrets and pra∣ctises of such Ishmaelites, whose hands are against every man, andGen. 16.12. every mans hand against them. More expert at theNehe∣miah, 4 17. sword then the trowell: very Salamanders that delight in the fiery elements of conten∣tion: as if Religion consisted in the froth of arguing, censu∣ring, starting of novelties; in aëry,Valen∣tiniani suos hhebant Atones, & Bythos, tota in adytis divinitas; per ambi∣guitates bi∣lingucs. Tert. pag. 316. Cum Fami∣lia amoris ex Hollan∣dia damna∣tas harcses Ecclesia Anglicanoe instillaverit, portento so, & novo loquendi genre utebatur, quod homines magis mirarentur quam intelligerent. Cambden. Eliza. p. 301. Cabbalistical notions; inNon est convellndum temerè, quod à pluribus statu∣tum est; quippe ub hoc fit, periculum est, ne omnia perver∣sad innovandi libido. Cunaeus. p. 308. receding from received truths, and the forme of sound words, in casting forth the dirt and mire of reproaches into
each others faces; which hath even extorted from me a sub∣scription to that of Tertullian, Plus togae laesêre Rempublicam, quàm loricae.
But hitherto I have been in the negative, and I have shew'd what my designe is not. Now Sir, give me leave to tell you what it is.
I have observed, with in∣dignation, shall I say? or griefe? how in our daies, the grace of God hath bin sleighted by proud Naturallists on the one hand, and turned into wanton∣nesse, by loose libertines on the other. I have observ'd (Heare O ye heavens, and be astonisht) how the God of all grace hath suffer'd in his Glory, Attri∣butes, and Providence; would to God I might not say in his very essence and being; by a generation of men, who are
without God in the World; Swarmes of Atheists arising daily from the bottomlesse pit. In this case who can be silent? nay, who is not bound to bring his bucket, though never so shallow, to extinguish this flame? and to conferre something to prevent such a dangerous torrent of Atheism, about to breake in upon us like a flood; though with Cur∣tius that noble Roman, it were with the sacrifice of one's selfe.
Secondly, As for the Dedi∣cation; It is but your due, and my debt. The streams do but run back to the fountain from whence they flow'd at first. My studies do but returne home to pay some publique homage to him that first set them up: that put life into them by the influ∣ence, and warmth of encou∣ragement; and hath handed
them up from their very infan∣cie. Sir, since I set the first step into your Hall, I found you a faithfull friend, a kind Patron; I had almost said a tender Father: And as if kindnesse and bounty knew not how to go backward, but you still delighted to see the first seeds of your love to thrive andSeneca de Beneficiis. prosper, you have fol∣lowed mee with a continued tyde of kindnesse, as if you would over-whelme me with the cataracts of love. OBernar∣dus epist. CCLXV ad Petrum Clumiacen∣sem Abba∣tem. bea∣tum quòd diligor à te, quòd di∣ligo te; quanquam non video in me unde tantum diligi merue∣rim, prefertim à tanto. Yet these favours have been sweet∣ned to mee, as I looke higher, and have seen them coming towards mee from the good hand of providence, by way of answer unto prayer: And that
you may see how subservient you have bin to Heaven here∣in, give me leave to lay before you the whole golden chaine of such like mercifull dispensa∣tions. The linkes cannot well be view'd apart, nor the flowers of this garland separated. My Apologie shall be that of Da∣vid to Eliab, Is1 Sam. 17.29. there not a cause?
By the blessing of God, I was borne of, and educated by religious parents, Pater erat  mater , as Nazianzene said of his, which extraction to me is better than from a long series of Caesars. Though grace be not extraduce, entail'd: Thirsitae similem producat Achilles. He∣zekiah may have a Manasseh, as Amon may have a Josiah; yet to charitable persons 'tis a Topicall Argument of hope,
untill the contrary appeare.  am2 Tim. 1.5. perswaded, said Paul to Timothy, that the unfaigned faith, which dwelt in thy Grand∣mother Lois, and Mother Eunice, is in thee also.
My next advance, was to the race of a pious, and lear∣nedM. Josiah Packwood. Schoolmaster, who read me, as I did my bookes: untill he acquainted himselfe so well with my genius, and inclinati∣on, that when some freinds and allies would have trans∣lated me to a more thriving profession, he wrote his ear∣nest and effectual letters, to be∣feech them still to continue me in the way of learning: and that he did this by divine suggesti∣on, I am the rather convinc't, because of the bent of my soule that way, and because, in those dayes of my minority, I had wrestled with God frequently,
even unto teares, that he would so dispose of me, that I might wait at his Altar, and serve him in a more immediate manner in the great congregation.
In order thereunto, I came almost miraculously to Naïoth: my journey was something like to Abrahams faith, who a∣gainst hope, believing in hope: yet God will bringe about his own ends, though we behold not the meanes. By the way, I met with a deareM. Wi Eales mi∣nister of Hatford in Berkes. kinsman, as faithfull he was to me, as Jo∣nathan to David; as if I had been his own bowels. He was to me the valley of Achor, the first dore of hope, that opened to me, and let me into that fa∣mous University, and put me into that healing pool of Bethes∣da. As he was a burning and shining light in his generation, so is he now , a starre
of a great magnitude in the fir∣mament of Heaven-Nobile per∣petuâ caput amplectente coronâ. Well: now the Lord raised me up whole Clouds of Freinds, as he brought Daniel into favour in Babylon, and gave Joseph fa∣vour in the sight of Pharaoh in Aegypt. I was delivered there, as Moses by Pharaohs Daugh∣ter, into the armes of a Mo∣ther indeed. MyDr. Fran∣cis Cheynel Tutour was such a Gamaliel, that I could gladly have sate under his feet, untill this very day; of whom to speake, either but aDe Car∣thagine filere prae∣stat, quàm pauca dice∣re. litle, or in the language of my orato∣ry, would but detract from his worth. Basil. p. 239. And to complete all, I had your Countenance, Counsell, and assistance all a∣long, which was as dew upon the herbes. Now Sr. if I have been either vaine, or indis∣creet, pardon me this once;
and let the blame be upon a ve∣hement impulse within, which would not be smoothered: If guilty of boasting; I can say in some sense with the Apostle, I have been compelled. The pri∣mitive Christians wrote theirNeglige∣re quid de se quisque sentiat non solum arre∣gantis est, sed etiam omnino dis∣soluti. Cicero. Quid prodest quòd vivunt homines, & occisi sunt honores; valent quidem membris, sed ere∣pta portant funera dignitatis. Opta. l. 2. p. 68. Apologies; and none ought to bemore tender of their cal∣ling, and fame, then theQui infamiam suam injustam negligit, cum alie∣rum scandalo, is non tam patiens babendus est quàm prodigus & crudelis, nee potest fama contimni, nisi virtus etiam contemnatur. Amesi. de Cas. Consci. p. 311. 312. See. Dr. Sanderson Ser. of the first Edition. pag. 47. of his latter the 5. pag. 95. Mini∣sters of the Gospel; This con∣duces much to the Honour of their Master, & the winning of soules, as Alexanders very name, and the report of his va∣lour procured him many a vi∣ctory. 
. Basil. The dignity and integrity of the Preacher makes the do∣ctrine passe the more currant; as sayles to make it swifter; and as the head of the arrow to peirce the deeper. Therefore the Apostles were careful  to looke out, and or∣daine men of good, and ho∣nest report, men approved by testimony, Acts. 6.3. 1 Tim. 3.7.
I am not ignorant, that all this while, I have been arguing, and plunging my selfe into a deeper ingage∣ment unto God and men. The cords ofJosh. 23.8, 9. 1 Sam. 12.24. love should draw with the greatest force; Therefore (by the assistance of the Spirit of Grace) I shall strive to lay my selfe forth the more, both in the service of the Tabernacle, the
the Church of God in gene∣rall; and in particular to your selfe; and so shall remaine your Faithful Servant to be commanded in the Lord


