


THis first Section of the Elements of Philosophy, the Monument of my Service, & your Lordships bounty, though (after the third Section published) long deferred, yet at last finished, I now present (my most Excellent Lord) and dedicate to your Lordship. A little Book▪ but full; and great enough, if men count well for great; and to an attentive Reader versed in the Demonstrations of Mathema∣ticians that is, to your Lordship  & easy to un∣derstand; and almost new througho▪ without any of∣fensive Novelty. I know that that part of Philoso∣phy wherein are considered Lines and Figures, has been delivered to us notably improved by the Anci∣ents;

and withall a most perfect pattern of the Lo∣gique by which they were enabled to finde out and demonstrate such excellent Theoremes as they have done. I know also that the Hypothesis of the Earths Diurnal Motion was the invention of the Anci∣ents; but that both it, and Astronomy (that is, Coe∣lestial Physiques) springing up together with it, were by succeeding Philosophers strangled with the snares of Words. And therefore the beginning of Astronomy (except Observations) I think is not to be derived from farther time then from Nicolaus Copernicus; who in the Age next preceding the pre∣sent, revived the opinion of Pythagoras, Aristar∣chus & Philolaus. After him, the Doctrine of the Motion of the Earth being now received, & a difficult Question thereupon arising concerning the Descent of Heavy Bodies, Galilaeus in our time striving with that difficulty, was the first that ope∣ned to us the  Natural Philosophy Universal, which is the knowledge of the Nature of Motion. So that neither can the Age of Natural Philosophy be reckoned higher then to him. Lastly, the Science of Mans Body, the most profitable part of Natu∣ral

Science, was first discovered with admirable sa∣gacity by our Countryman Doctor Harvey, principal Physician to King James and King Charles, in his Books of the Motion of the Blood and of the Generation of Living Creatures; who is the onely man I know, that conquering envy, hath established a new Doctrine in his life time. Before these, there was nothing certain in Natural Philosophy but every mans Experiments to himself, and the Natural Hi∣stories, if they may be called certain, that are no certainer then Civil Histories▪ But since these, A∣stronomy & Natural Philosophy in general have for so little time been extraordinarily advanced by Jo∣annes Keplerus, Petrus Gassendus, & Marinus Mersennus; & the Science of Humane Bodies in special by the wit & industry of Physicians (the onely true Natural Philosophers) especially of our most Learned Men of the Colledge of Physicians in London. Natural Philosophy is therefore but young; but Civil Philosophy yet much younger, as being no older (I say it provoked, & that my Detra∣ctors may know how little they have wrought upon me) then my own Book de Cive. But what? Were there no Philosophers Natural nor Civil among the

ancient Greeks? There were men so called; Wit∣ness Lucian, by whom they are derided; Wit∣ness divers Cities, from which they have been often by publique Edicts banished. But it follows not that there was Philosophy. There walked in old Greece a certain Phantasme, for superficial gravity (though full within of fraud & filth) a little like Philosophy; which unwary men thinking to be it, adhered to the Professors of it, some to one, some to another (though they disagreed among themselves) and with great Salary put their child∣ren to them to be taught, in stead of Wisdome, no∣thing but to dispute; & neglecting the Laws, to determine every Question▪ according to their own fancies. The first Doctors of the Church next the Apostles, born in those times, whilest they endea∣vored to defend the Christian Faith against the Gentiles by Natural Reason, began also to make use of Philosophy, & with the Decrees of Holy Scripture to mingle the Sentences of Heathen Phi∣losophers; & first some harmless ones of Plato; but afterwards also many foolish & false ones out of the Physicks & Metaphysicks of Aristotle; & bring∣ing in the Enemies betrayed unto them the Cittadel of Christianity From that time, in stead of the Wor∣ship of God, there entred a thing called School-Di∣vinity,

walking on one foot firmly, which is the Holy Scripture, but halted on the other rotten foot, which the Apostle Paul called Vain, & might have called Pernicious Philosophy; for it hath raised an infi∣nite number of Controversies in the Christian World concerning Religion, & from those Controversies Wars. It is like that Empusa in the Athenian Co∣mick Poet, which was taken in Athens for a Ghost that changed shapes, having one brazenleg, but the other was the leg of an Ass, & was sent (as was be∣lieved) by Hecate, as a signe of some approaching e∣vil fortune. Against this Empusa I think there can∣not be invented a better Exorcisme, then to disting∣uish between the Rules of Religion, that is, the Rules of Honoring God, which we have from the Laws, and the Rules of Philosophy, that is, the Opinions of private men; & to yeild what is due to Religion to the Holy Scripture, and what is due to Philosophy to Natural Reason. And this I shall do, if I but handle the Elements of Philosophy truly & clearly▪ as I endevour to do. Therefore having in the d Section wch I have published & dedica∣ted to your Lordship long since▪ reduced all Power Ecclesiastical and Civil by strong Arguen of Reason, without repugnance to Gods Word, to one and the same Soveraign Authority; I intend now,

by putting into a clear Method the true Foun∣dations of Natural Philosophy, to fright and drive away this Metaphysical Empusa; not by skirmish, but by letting in the light upon her. For I am confi∣dent (if any confidence of a Writing can proceed from the Writers fear, circumspection & diffidence) that in the three former parts of this Book, all that I have said is sufficiently demonstrated from Definitions; & all in the fourth part, from Suppositions not absurd. But if there appear to your Lordship any thing less fully demonstrated then to satisfie every Reader, the cause was this, that I professed to write not all to all, but some things to Geometricians onely. But that your Lordship will be satisfied J cannot doubt.
There remains the second Section, which is con∣cerning Man. That part thereof where J handle the Optiques, contayning six Chapters, together with the Tables of the Figures belonging to them, I have already written & engravenlying by me a∣bove these six years. The rest shall, as soon as J can, be added to it; though by the contumelies & petty injuries of some unskilful men, I know already by experience how much greater thanks will be due, then payed me, for telling Men the truth of what

Men are. But the burthen I have taken on me I mean to carry through; not striving to appease, but rather to revenge my self of Envy, by encreasing it. For it contents me that I have your Lord∣ships favour; which, (being all you require) J acknowledge; and for which, with my prayers to Almighty God for your Lordships safety, J shall (to my power) be always thankefull.
London, April 23, 1655.

