



My most Honoured Lord,
FRom the principal parts of Nature, Reason and Passi∣on, have proceeded two kinds of Learning, Mathe∣matical and Dogmatical: the former is

free from Controversie and Dispute, because it consisteth in comparing Figure and Motion only; in which things, Truth, and the Interest of Men, oppose not each other: but in the other there is nothing un∣disputable, because it compareth Men, and medleth with their Right and Profit; in which, as oft as Reason is against a Man, so oft will a Man be against Reason. And from hence it cometh, that they who have written of Justice and Policy in General, do all in∣vade each other and themselves with Contradictions. To reduce this Doctrine to the Rules and In∣fallibility of Reason, there is no way but, first, put such Princi∣ples down for a Foundation, as Passion, not mistrusting, may not seek to displace; and afterwards to

build thereon the Truth of Cases in the Law of Nature (which hither∣to have been built in the Air) by degrees, till the whole have been inexpugnable. Now, my Lord, the Principles fit for such a Foun∣dation, are those which heretofore I have acquainted your Lordship withal in private Discourse, and which by your Command I have here put into a Method. To exa∣mine Cases thereby between Sove∣raign and Soveraign, or between So∣veraign and Subject, I leave to them that shall find Leasure and Encou∣ragement thereto: For my part, I present this to your Lordship for the true and only Foundation of such Science. For the Stile, it is there∣fore the worse, because, whilest I was writing, I consulted more with Logick than with Rhetorick: But

for the Doctrine, it is not slight∣ly proved; and the Conclusions thereof of such Nature, as, for want of them. Government and Peace have been nothing else, to this day, but mutual Fears: And it would be an incomparable benefit to Commonwealth, that every one held the Opinion concerning Law and Policy here delivered. The am∣bition therefore of this Book, in seeking by your Lordships counte∣nance to insinuate it self with those whom the matter it containeth most nearly concerneth, is to be excused. For my self, I desire no greater honour than I enjoy already in your Lordship's favour, unless it be that you would be pleased, in Continuance thereof, to give me more Exercise in your commands; which, as I am bound by your ma∣ny

great Favours, I shall obey, being,
My most honoured Lord,

May 9. 1640.
