



To the most Noble Lord S. Odoardo Gomez, my ever Honoured Lord.
MANY years ago two Writers, searching into Ancient Histories, made choice of two Noble Cavaliers, and their Deeds, on that Subject, to compose a small Manual. Some time after which a Chronicler of France, for the satisfaction of a Friend (who begged of him that he would give him to read some War∣like

Exploits, and Amorous Intrigues and Adventures) translated this Sto∣ry of Olivaires of Castile, and Ar∣thur of Dalgarve, from the Ori∣ginal Latine into his own Native Language the French: And as all better Writ Books are wont, it generally took: Wherefore disper∣sing all over, it got also into Spain, and was received as a Choice and Delicate Novel. So from the French Tongue it was taught to speak the Castilian, and that most elegantly; and there ob∣tain'd withal additional Bulk, by many new, fine, and curious things inserted. And for as much as we who breathe Italian Air, have there∣with suck'd in from our Infancy a natural inclination to such sort of smooth and shining Composures of

whatever Climate; I did, for the pleasure of those who are most de∣lighted with them, undertake the Task to turn this into the Stile of Tusca∣ny: And with the light of such kind Stars I writ, that, by reason of an Ancient Original of a Third Edition which came, though with difficulty, to my hands, I had opportunity of a tho∣row view, whence such Adventures, and Exploits, and Amours, were ex∣tracted, and well enough discern'd, how those Excellent Writers had se∣parated the best and fairest of the History. From that Old Story then; from the Latine, the French, and the Spanish, I also have deduced, and compiled, and so methodiz'd this Work, that it appears to me (with∣out flattering my self, or it) to equal, if not excel all the other. Wherefore

knowing Your Lordship has oft read over the Spanish Original of Mine, I the willinger present this to Your view, which has more of the Truth, according to the Relation of the Hi∣story, and less of the Additional Lyes and Fictions that Transcribers have mix'd therewith. I shall be highly proud if Your Lordship's Incomparable Judgment can give Approbation to what I have done; and my Self, and Service, do I intirely dedicate to Your Lordship's Acceptance and Favour.
From Venice, March 3. 1552.
My LORD,

