


Honor'd Sir,
YOur most worthy Brother Mr Sidney Godolphin, when he lived, was pleas'd to think my studies something, and other∣wise to oblige me, as you know, with reall testimonies of his good opinion, great in themselves, and the grea∣ter for the worthinesse of his person. For there is not any vertue that disposeth a man, either to the service of God, or to the service of his Country, to Civill Society, or private Friendship, that did not manifest∣ly appear in his conversation, not as acqui∣red by necessity, or affected upon occasion, but inhaerent, and shining in a generous con∣stitution of his nature. Therefore in honour and gratitude to him, and with devotion to your selfe, I humbly Dedicate unto you this my discourse of Common-wealth. I know not how the world will receive it, nor how it may reflect on those that shall seem to favour it. For in a way beset with those that contend, on one side for too great Liberty, and on the other side for too much

Authority, 'tis hard to passe between the points of both unwounded. But yet, me thinks, the endeavour to advance the Civill Power, should not be by the Civill Power condemned; nor private men, by reprehend∣ing it, declare they think that Power too great. Besides, I speak not of the men, but (in the Abstract) of the Seat of Power, (like to those simple and unpartiall creatures in the Roman Capitol, that with their noyse de∣fended those within it, not because they were they, but there,) offending none, I think, but those without, or such within (if there be a∣ny such) as favour them. That which per∣haps may most offend, are certain Texts of Holy Scripture, alledged by me to other pur∣pose than ordinarily they use to be by o∣thers. But I have done it with due submissi∣on, and also (in order to my Subject) neces∣sarily; for they are the Outworks of the Ene∣my, from whence they impugne the Civill Power. If notwithstanding this, you find my labour generally decryed, you may be plea∣sed to excuse your selfe, and say I am a man that love my own opinions, and think all true I say, that I honoured your Brother, and ho∣nour you, and have presum'd on that, to as∣sume the Title (without your knowledge) of being, as I am,
SIR, 
Paris. Aprill 15/25. 1651.
