





VAst Bodies of Philosophy
I oft have seen and read;
But all are Bodies dead,
Or Bodies by Art fashioned.
I never yet the Living Soul could see,
But in thy Books and Thee.
'Tis onely God can know
Whether the fair Idea Thou dost show
Agree entirely with his own or no.
This I dare boldly tell,
'Tis so like Truth 'twill serve our turn as well.
Just, as in Nature Thy Proportions be,
As full of Concord their Varietie,
As firm the parts upon their Center rest,
And all so Solid re, that they at least
As much as Nature, Emptiness detest.



Long did the mighty Stagirite retain
The universal intellctual reign,
Saw his own Countries sho-liv'd Lopard slain:
The stronger man Eagle dd ut-fly,
Oftener renew'd , Age, and saw that dy.
Mba it self, in spight of Mahumet possest,
And chas'd by a wild Deluge from the East,

His Monarchy new planted in the West.
But as in time each great Imperial Race
Degenerates, and gives some new one place:
So did this noble Empire wast,
Sunk by degrees from Glories past,
And in the Schoolmens hands it perisht quite at last.
Then nought but words it gre,
And those all Barb'rou too.
I perisht, and it vaist there:
The ife and Sal breath'd out, became but empty Air.



The  which answer'd well the Acients Plo,
 out worn return no harvest now,
In baen Ae wild and unglorious lie,
And boast of past Fertility,
The  relief of present Poverty.
Fod and Fruit we now must want,
 Lands we plant.
We  p  with sacrilegious hands;
Od Rubbis we remove;
To walk in , like vain Ghosts, we love.
And  ond Diviuing Wads.
We search among the Dead
 buried.
 the liberal Earth does hold
So  of undiscover'd Gold.



The , and the Caspian,
And  Mediterranean,

Seem narrow Creeks to Thee, and onely sit
For th or wretched Fisher-ats of Wit.
Thy nobler Vessel the  Ocean tres,
nd nothing sees but Seas and Skies,
T unknown Regions ,
Thou great Columbus of the golden Lands of
new Philosophies.
Thy task was harder much than his;
For thy learn'd America is
Not onely found out st by Thee,
And rudely left to Future industrie▪
But thy Eloquence and thy Wit,
Has planted, peopled, built, and civiliz'd it.



I little thought before,
(Nor being my own self so poor,
Could comprehend so vast a store)
That all the Wardrobe of ch Eloquence
Could have afforded half ,
Of bright, of new, and lasting stuff,
To cloath  mighty limbs of thy Gigantic sense.
Thy solid Reason like the Shield from Heaven
To the  given,
Too strong to take mrk from any mortal dart,
Yet shines with Gold and Gems in every part,
And Wonders on it grav'd by the learn'd hand of Art;
A Shield that gives delight
Even to the Enemies sight,
Then when they're sure to lose the Combat by't.




Nor can the Snow which now cold Age does shed
Upon Thy reverend head,
Quench o allay the noble Fire within;
But all which Thou hast bi,
And all that youth can be, Thou't yet;
So fully still dost Thou
Enjoy the Manhood and the Bloom of Wit,
And all the natural heat, but not the Fever too.
So Contraries on Aetna's top conspire;
Here hoary Frosts, and by them breaks out fire.
A secure peace the faithful neighbours keep,
Th'emboldned snow next to the flame does sleep.
And if we weigh, like Thee,
Nature, and Causes, we shall see
That thus it needs must be;
To things Immortal, Time can do no wrong;
And that which never is to die, for ever must be Young.


