



SIR,
I Here humbly present to you, and under your Name and Patro∣nage publish to the World two Sermons, the one concerning the primitive Goodness of the Creatures as they first came out of God's hand; the other, of the righteous Man's goodness, kind∣ness, and mercy to the Creatures, which God hath put into his hand, or under his feet. If any question me for preaching on the first Sub∣ject, saying, wherefore is this loss? My answer is, that God himself,Psal. 8. who is infinitely wise, did preach on the Creatures goodness and ex∣cellency unto Job, and thereby brought him on his knees,See Job. Ch. 38, 39, 40, 41. even to ab∣hor himself in dust and ashes. That Solomon, the wisest of Men since Adam, shewed his Wisdom not in Metaphysical Speculations or No∣tions, not in Logical Sophisms or Terms of Art, not in Philological Criticisms: But in that he spake of Trees, from the Cedar-tree that is in Libanon unto the Hyssop that springeth out of the Wall; he spake also of Beasts, and of Fowls,1 Kings. 4.33. &c. and of creeping Things, and of Fishes. And I have heard of Mr. Wheatly of Banbury, an eloquent and a famous Preacher, that he made a whole Sermon in commendation of a Horse. And truly where God gives a Text, and preaches on it himself, his Ministers have a sufficient war∣rant to make a Sermon. As for my choice of the subject of the second Sermon and my Discourse thereon; my apology is, if it need one, that it hath often grieved my Soul, to see how the poor bruit Beasts have been used, or abused rather, by their inhumane, merciless, absurd, & unreasonable cruel Masters, who having no understanding be∣came worse than the Beast that perisheth. And I would, if it was possible, put a stop to the rage of brutish Men, and however hear testimony to the truth, namely, that 'tis a good Character of a good Man to be merciful to his Beast.
As for this Address to you; I may say that of all Men living of quality that I have known, you are most free from this fault. You are

like the good Man in the Text, you do regard the life of your Beast. And I wish all your Servants may be like their Master, or like Elea∣zir,Gen. 24. Abraham's Steward, that had such a care of his Masters Ca∣mels. Further, SIR, give me leave to tell you that I have read a Treatise of Monsieur de la Chambre, to prove that Beasts have reason;B. M. and that one of the Ancients saith, that Canis is Logicus, Ethicus, Theologus. Now, if so it be, that Dogs make Syllogisms, and that they do discurrere as well as currere, discourse as well as course, I presume you may know as well as most Gentleman in Eng∣land. Honoured SIR, although I never did preach to those ir∣rational Animals (as the Book of Conformities tells us S. Francis did to the Wolf, and the Birds,) to teach them their duty to God or Man; nor do I pretend to preach in these Sermons to stir up Men's Devo∣tions from what is reported of the great Reverence which S. Anthony's Mule,V. D. S. 2. D. p. 502. S. Francis his Sheep, and the Cook of Lisbon's Dog shew'd to the Sacrament; yet I may and must profess to learn Gratitude to my Benefactours, and particularly to your Worthy self from Patroclus his Lyon, who fawned on him when thrown to him in the Theatre at Rome to be devoured by him,A. G. l. 5. c. 14. and all this for a good turn the Man had formerly done him in Africa by pulling something out of the Lyons foot that hurt him. SIR, I shall not hold you long in the porch by prefixing a large Epistle to so small a Piece; I shall only add one hum∣ble and hearty Request unto all Gentlemen who delight in Hunting, who shall read these Sermons, if any such shall happen to cast their eyes in them: That they would often think of Amedeus, Duke of Savoy, who was chosen Pope, but too good to hold it, who shewing a Company of poor People nourished by him, said these were the Hounds wherewithal he did hunt after the Kingdom of Heaven. And how∣ever never to take the Childrens bread to cast it to the Dogs; I mean, to provide always that the Poor may not fare the worse, because their Hounds fare so well. And so I conclude with my humble and hearty Request to the Almighty GOD for you, that he would be pleased long to continue you a Lover, Practiser, and Countenancer of the true Protestant Religion, a loyal Subject to his Majesty, a worthy Patriot, a Son of Peace, and like that great and good Man your Father (when he was Ambassadour in Holland remonstrated against Vorstius) a Lover of the Truth, and a Lover of good Men. So wishing you, and your virtuous and religious Consort, all happiness, I rest as in duty bound,

May the 12th. 1675.
