



SIR,
SHould I be blamed for Printing this single Sermon, I desire the great and Universall concernment of the Sub∣ject here treated on, the seasonable∣nesse of it at all times, especially in these sickly times, after the observation of three generall Fasts for the diseases and mortality in seve∣rall parts of the Nation, together with the eminen∣cy of the Auditory, to which for the main, it hath been Preached, namely, the two Universities succes∣sively, may be my Apology for adventuring it to the presse. And if you should admire my confidence in this manner of addresse to you, I pray you be pleased in part to charge it upon your own account, and to assure your selfe, that your late civilities and favours to me, and respects for me, have encouraged me to this undertaking.

And if the observation hold good elsewhere, which I lately heard from a Neighbour Mr Wilde of Ayno. Minister at a Funerall Sermon, namely, that God in this visita∣tion seemed especially to levell at aged persons, having taken away 10 persons of his parish in one yeer, all of them about or above threescore yeers old; when you shall number your own daies, and behold your own face in a glasse, and see how the fields are al∣ready white unto the harvest, and consider how the very streets you walke in might in some measure be paved with the skuls of those, who have dyed since you first lived in the City, though you should censure the Preacher as impertinent, yet may you judge the Sermon here presented not altogether im∣proper. Tis true indeed, the mention of Death is an unpleasing note in the eares of those usually, who are full of the comforts of this life: I have heard or read of a King, who upon pain of death forbad any to mention Death in his presence; and of a great Queen, who was highly displeased with a favourite, for preaching a Sermon minding her how age had furrowed her face, and besprinckled her haire with its meal: but I hope you have better learned Christ, and sure I am, dare talke of death, and touch this harsh key your selfe; and will not therefore (I perswade my selfe) judge me your enemy, meerly because I tell you the truth.
Now Sir, whilst I preface this Sermon to you, I desire I may Preach to my selfe, and to all that read this Epistle, whether old men or maidens, young men
 or children. Let us get oyle in out lamps before the Bridegroome comes; and all things ready for death before death comes: for who now so young, so strong, so good, but there are younger, and stron∣ger, and better already in their graves? The Jewes have a proverb, there are skulls of all sizes in Golgo∣tha: and the Apostle John tells us, he saw the dead small and great stand before God, Rev. 20.11, 12. Let us not then put farre from us the evill day; but consider, that some sudden blast may blow out the Candle, as well as it may goe out in the socket. Physitians say there are 300 diseases incident to the body of man: but if we escape all other diseases, old age, that incurable disease, reckoned one of the three messingers of Death, will creep upon us ere we are aware, if we do not think of it. Oh! that we could as we dye daily, so get our selves more ready for death daily. Let us meditate often how the two axes of time, day and night, are continually chopping at the root of the tree of every mans life; and how some fruits are blown off the tree, whilst in the bud or green, aswell as some others fall off, when they are ripe; and how some flowers of the field are trod down or crop'd by man or beast, aswell as others stand and wi∣ther till they be cut down.
1 Let us know that death is the wages of sin: and forasmuch as all have sinned, it is a Statute enacted by the Parliament of Heaven, that all must dye once, so tis ordinarily: for it is thought, Lazarus dyed twice; and those who shall be found alive at the day
 of judgment, shall not dye at all, but be changed. Now if death be our wages, let us Consider, that wages may be payd in any lawfull coyne, gold, sil∣ver, or brasse; in any place, the house, street, or field; at any houre of the day, or watch of the night, as the master pleaseth: and so Death may be inflict∣ed diverse wayes and manners, at any time, and in any place. Further, know we, that tis a solemn thing to dye, because after death the Iudgment: Eternity treads on the heels of death; so that theres no place here for a second Error.
2 Let us often think of Death. Tis observed that Beasts cannot think of dying: lets shew our selves therefore men, meditate of it, not put far from us the day of Death, that may be a meanes to make us secure: for we read that the wise virgins slumberd as well as the foolish, whilst the bridegroom delayed his coming; and tis observed, that God therefore keeps secret from us the day of death and judgment, that men should watch alway, and be ever prepared.
3 Though we think of death, which the beasts cannot doe, yet let us not slavishly feare it, but therein endeavour to be as the Angels of heaven, who though they understand Death, yet doe not feare it, being out of the reach of it. Consider we may, that the sting of Death, which is sin, is taken out, and our death is the Death of Death to us; that out of this eater comes meat, and out of the strong, out of the bitter, comes sweetnes. Indeed if we looke
 upon death as the punishment of sin, as the dissolu∣tion of the most excellent creature on earth, as the parting of two old friends and intimate acquaintance, the soul and the body, as an end and period of ser∣vice to God and man in the Church and comonwealth on earth, so tis rather terrible than desirable: yet again, if we consider that tis a period to sin and sor∣row, an inlet to glory, a dark entry to a lightsome palace, no other than the Portall or entry into the house of God, and the gate of heaven to the godly, and that death is ours, for our benefit and advantage, as well as life; that our death is precious in Gods eyes; and that when we are dead, and our vile bodies in the dust, when the wormes are spread under them, and the wormes cover them, even then are we Gods Jewels; when we are dissolved, then are we like gold melted in the furnace, precious in the eyes of the owner thereof. Lets consider that we goe to our friends and acquaintance, who are gone before us to heaven; yea we goe to God, Christ, and the holy Angels, and all the company of heaven; and though our body and soul part, yet the mysticall union be∣twixt us and Christ the Head, continues firme and indissoluble, and we are still members of his body; that death is a sleep after our labour and travell here, and who feares to put off his clothes to goe to sleep in his bed? that Christ our Lord dyed to free us from the slavish feare of death: I say if we consider all these things, we shall not need to be al∣way
 way in bondage through feare of death. Though death was odious and accounted an enemy to the  Hesio. . Gods of the Heathen, yet it hath been welcomed and entertained as a friend by godly Christians: I have heard or read of a godly man, who rejoyced exceed∣ingly when he saw the plague spots upon his arme, looking on them as certain signes of his approching dissolution; and of a gracious Gentlewoman, who, being told by a friend, that her change probably was not far off, brake out after such a manner, saying, Now blesse the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me blesse His Holy Name; I would not goe back again for a world, or to the like effect.
And 4ly, that we may not feare the approach of Death, lets prepare and provide daily for his comming; put on the whole armour of God, especially the shield of Faith, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God:Cant. 4.4. this is like the Armory of Solomon, wherein hung a thousand shields, even the shields of the mighty; Keep close to our Captaine Christ, who leads us, and loves us, and laid down his life for us, and ever lives in heaven to make intercession for us; through him we shall doe valiantly, through him we shall tread down our enemies, and be more then Conque∣rors over Sin, Death, and the Divel. Lets take heed of every Sin; get and grow in, and act (as we have op∣portunity) every grace; labour to be abundantly fruitfull in every good thought, word, and worke; and be sure to be found upon our watch, and upon
 our guard when death comes.
And now Sir, to return unto you: having never preached to you from the Pulpit, accept I pray this Sermon from the Presse. You who feare God, do not you feare Death: Let not such a man as you seek to flee; but rather stand in your tent door, ready to meet him, when he comes. To this end be rich in Faith, and rich in good Works: let your own eyes be your Overseers, and your own hands in some good measure your Executors. Be eyes to the blind, feet to the lame; deale your bread to the hungry, cloath the naked, shew your faith by your works. Thus whilst others may be compared to Dives, or to the rich fool in the Gospell, we shall behold you as the wise Merchant in the Parable, who, though you have indeed a great portion in the things of the world, yet are not contented to have the world for your portion: and though you have had your share of the treasures hid in the sands, yet not satisfied therewith, lay up for your selfe treasures in Heaven.
Thus returning you hearty thanks for the favours and respects you have been pleased to doe me, ho∣ping since you are reputed a lover of Ministers, you will give a Minister leave still to love and honour you; I shall conclude, praying for you, that when you shall have served your Generation according to the will of God, and fall asleepe, your soule may be received up into Heaven, and your body rest in the Lord; so that when you shall awake in the mor∣ning
 of the resurrection, and your body and soule be reunited, you may be still and ever with the Lord, which is best of all.
Sir,

Souldern, Decemb. 23. 1658.
