



Sir,
GOD having multiplied your dayes to Foure∣score yeares and upwards, and your Seed to above an hundred, and in both respects ho∣nored you; Give me leave I pray you, (who under God, had my being from you at first, and many blessings since) according to my bounden duty; to Endeavour (so far as I am able) to honour You before the people. The truth is this Text I design∣ed to have preached upon to your ears; but that purpose miscarrying, I am bold to present it here into your hands. And because, through distance of place and other Impedi∣ments, I cannot hope to Preach often to you, or speak with you face to face; I shall not content my selfe with the bare tender of one single Sermon to your eyes; But shall take up∣on me, with your favour, to direct you how to Preach to your selfe dayly, when other preachers are absent, or silent, or cannot through your age be heard; And how to Commune with your own heart, and speak to your self, when you have none else with whom you may converse, or when your self may be speechlesse. To this purpose, that the Preacher in your bosome (your own conscience) may never want a seasona∣ble Text, and matter for a soul-saving Sermon, let me Com∣mend
 to your most serious study and dayly meditation espe∣cially three Scripture-Dialogues, or Conferences, & two pre∣cious promises. The Conferences are these.
1. That which you read in the 2. of Samuel: 19:34, 35, 36. which was betwixt King David and Barzillai; wherein you may see the vanity of all earthly delights, espe∣cially in old age.
2. That of Christ, & Nicodemus a master in Israel Iohn: 3.4, 5, 6, 7. vers: Wherein is taught the necessity of regenerati∣on to all, old and young, before they can enter into the King∣dome of heaven; and where is made good that other saying, which is written 2. Corinth: 5.17. If any man (whether young or old) be in Christ he is a new creature.
3. That betwixt our Saviour and Martha concern∣ing her brother Lazarus: Iohn 11:21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. where we find, that beleeving in the Lord Iesus (which in Ioh: 7:37, 38. is expounded to be a coming unto him) is the only way to attain to life in and after death, even to attain to the resurrection of the dead.
The Promises are First, that which is recorded Esaiah: 46:4, 5. which although it be propounded to the house of Iacob in generall, yet it truly and particularly belongs to e∣very one that is an Israelite indeed: Hearken unto me, O house of Iacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel, which are born by me from the belly, which are carried from the womb, and even to your old age I am he, and even to hoarie haires will I carry you: I have made, and I will bear, even I will carrie, and I will deli∣ver you.
The other is written Hos: 13.14. I will ransome them from the power of the grave: I will redeem them from death: O death I will be thy plagues: O grave I will be thy destruction. I know 'tis true, that it is ap∣pointed to men once to dye, Heb. 9.27. Notwith∣standing
 this promise. Yet the blessed Apostle Paul assures us that at last, This corruptible must put on incor∣ruption, and this mortall must put on immortality, and that the time will come whē shal be brought to passe, the saying that is written, death is swallowed up in victory.1 Cor. 15.53, 54. These two promises, laid hold on by faith, may serve as two staves, and both of them staves of beauty, wherewith to support your old age, and to stay you when you walk through the valley of the shaddow of death, and near the mouth of the pit, that you fall not. I shall no further preach to you, but leave the application to the Preacher within you a∣bove mentioned. Yet I shall not let you goe till I pray for you, and blesse you. 'Tis more usuall for Parents to lay up prayers and blessings for their Children, then Children for their Parents: Yet I remember that Melchizedech, the Preist of the High-God, blessed Abraham the father of the faithfull: And consider that it is one part of the Preists of∣fice to blesse the people; And therefore I hope, that (being a preacher descended from your own loynes, and having in this Epistle and Sermon thus taken upon me to preach to you) I shall not be offensive, if herein I come unto you too, as a minister, in the fulnesse of the blessings of the Gospel of Christ, if I blesse you also, O my father. The Lord convince you more and more of the need of a Saviour, of the worth of Jesus: The Lord help you to roll your self living and dying upon the mercies of God & the merits of Christ: You have a double Crown already, that of a hoary head, and that of a Grand-father, (for Childrens Children are the Crown of old men: Prov: 17:6. But both these are Corruptible: Oh that you may have a Crown of righteousnesse, that Crown of Glory which fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you: May your Gray haires never come with sorrow to the grave: but that after God hath added to your dayes (if it be his will) many more years, your good old
 age (in which, Solomon saith, we shall say, we have no plea∣sure) may be swallowed up in a happy and blessed Eterni∣ty: And that you may for ever there in joy God our and your first and last father, and live with him; In whose pre∣sence is fulnesse, of Ioy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore.

Novemb. 23: 1652.
