



My most Noble Lord,
NOt knowing on my own part any cause of the favour your Lordship has been pleased to express towards me, unless it be the Principles, Method, and Man∣ners you have observed and approved in my Wri∣tings; and seeing these have all been very much reprehended by men to whom the name of Publique Professors hath procured reputation in the University of Oxford; I thought it would be a forfeiture of your Lordships good opinion, not to ju∣stifie my self in publique also against them. Which, whether I have sufficiently performed or not in the six following Lessons addressed to the same Professors, I humbly pray your Lordship to consider. The volume it self is too small to be offered to you as a Present; but to be brought before you as a Controversie it is perhaps the better for being short. Of Arts, some are demon∣strable, others indemonstrable; and demonstrable are those the construction of the Subject whereof is in the power of the Artist himself; who in his demonstration does no more but deduce the Consequences of his own operation. The reason whereof is this, that the Science of every Subject is derived from a praecognition of the Causes, Generation, and Construction of the same; and consequently where the Causes are known, there is place for De∣monstration; but not where the Causes are to seek for. Geome∣try therefore is demonstrable; for the Lines and Figures from which we reason are drawn and described by our selves; and Ci∣vill

Philosophy is , we make the Common∣wealth our selves. But because of Naturall Bodies we know not the Construction, but seek it from the Effects, there lyes no demonstration of what the Causes be we seek for, but onely of what they may be.
And where there is place for Demonstration, if the first Prin∣ciples, that is to say, the Definitions contain not the Generation of the Subject; there can be nothing demonstrated as it ought to be. And this in the three first Definitions of Euclide suffici∣ently appeareth. For seeing he maketh not, nor could make any use of them in his Demonstrations, they ought not to be numbered among the Principles of Geometry. And Sextus Em∣piricis maketh use of them (misunderstood, yet so understood as the said Professors understand them) to the overthrow of that so much renouned Evidence of Geometry. In that part therefore of my Book where I treat of Geometry, I thought it necessary in my Definitions to express those Motions by which Lines, Su∣perficies, Solids and Figures were drawn and described; little expecting that any Professor of Geometry should finde fault therewith; but on the contrary supposing I might thereby not only avoid the Cavils of the Scepticks, but also demonstrate di∣vers Propositions which on other Principles are indemonstrable. And truly, if you shall finde those my Principles of Motion made good, you shall find also that I have added something to that which was formerly extant in Geometry.
For first from the seventh Chapter of my Book de Corpere to the thirteenth, I have rectified and explained the Principles of the Science, id est, I have done that business for which Doctor Wallis receives the wages. In the seventh, I have exhibited and demonstrated the proportion of the Parabola and Parabo∣lasters to the Parallelograms of the same height and base; which (though some of the propositions were extant without their demonstration) were never before demonstrated, nor are by any other then this method demonstrable.
In the eighteenth, (as it is now in English) I have demonstra∣ted the (for any thing I yet perceive) Equation between the crook∣ed line of a Parabola or any Parabolaster and a straight line.

In the twenty-third, I have exhibited the Center of Gravity of any Sector of a Sphere.
Lastly, the twenty-fourth, (which is of the nature of Refracti∣and Reflexion) is almost all new.
But your Lordship will ask me what I have done in the twen∣tieth, about the Quadrature of the Circle. Truely, my Lord, not much more then before. I have let stand there that which I did before condemn, not that I think it exact, but partly because the Division of Angles may be more exactly performed by it then by any organicall way whatsoever; and I have attempted the same by another Method, which seemeth to me very naturall, but of calculation difficult and slippery. I call them only Aggres∣sions, retaining nevertheless the formall manner of Assertion used in Demonstration. For I dare not use such a doubtfull word as Videtur, because the Professors are presently ready to oppose me with a Videtur quod non. Nor am I willing to leave those Ag∣gressions out, but rather to try if it may be made pass for law∣full (in spight of them that seek honour not from their own per∣formances but from other mens failings) amongst many difficult undertakings carryed through at once) to leave one and the great∣est for a time behind; and partly because the method is such as may hereafter give further light to the finding out of the exact truth.
But the Principles of the Professors that reprehend these of mine, are some of them so void of sense, that a man at the first hearing, whether Geometrician or not Geometrician must abhor them. As for example;

1. That two equall Proportions are not double to one of the same Proportions.
2. That a Proportion is double, triple, &c. of a Number, but not of a Proportion.
3. That the same Body, without adding to it, or taking from it, is sometimes Greater, and sometimes less.
4. That a Quantity may grow less and less Eternally, so as at last to be equall to another Quantity; or (which is all one) that there is a Last in Eternity.
5. That the nature of an Angle consisteth in that which lyes

between the lines that comprehend the Angle in the very point of their concourse; that is to say, An Angle is the Superficies which lyes between the two Points which touch, or (as they un∣derstand a Point) the Superficies that lyes between the two No∣things which touch.
6. That the Quoient is the Proportion of the Division to the Dividend.

Upon these and some such other Principles is grounded all that Doctor Wallis has said not onely in his Elenchus of my Geometry, but also in his Treatises of the Angle of Con∣tact, and in his Arithmetica Infinitorum; which two last I have Fere in two or three leaves wholly and cleerly confuted. And I verily believe that since the beginning of the world there has not been, nor ever shall be so much absurdity written in Geometry, as is to be found in those books of his; with which there is so much presumption joyned, that an  of the like conjunction cannot be expected in less then a Platonick year. The cause whereof I imagine to be this, that he mistook the study of Sym∣boles for the study of Geometry, and thought Symbolicall wri∣ting to be a new kinde of Method, and other mens Demonstra∣tions set down in Symboles new Demonstrations. The way of Analysis by Squares, Cubes, &c. is very anti∣ent, and usefull for the finding out whatsoever is contained in the nature and generation of rectangled Plains (which also may be found without it) and was at the highest in Vieta; but I never saw any thing added thereby to the Science of Geometry, as be∣ing a way wherein men go round from the Equality of rectan∣gled Plains to the Equality of Proportion, and thence again to the Equality of rectangled Plains; wherein the Symboles serve only to make men go faster about, as greater Winde to a Winde-mill.
It is in Sciences as in Plants; Growth and Branching is but the Generation of the Root continued; nor is the Invention of Theoremes any thing else but the knowledge of the Constructi∣on of the Subject prosecuted. The unsoundness of the Bran∣ches are no prejudice to the Roots; nor the Faults of Theoremes to the Principles. And active Principles will correct false Theo∣remes

if the Reasoning be good; but no Logique in the world is good enough to draw evidence out of false or unactive Princi∣ples. But I detain your Lordship too long. For all this will be much more manifest in the following Discourses: wherein I have not onely explained and rectified many of the most important Principles of Geometry: but also by the examples of those er∣rors which have been committed by my Reprehenders, made manifest the evil Consequence of the Principles they now pro∣ceed on. So that it is not only my own Defence that I here bring before you, but also a positive doctrine concerning the true Grounds, or rather Atomes of Geometry: which I dare only say are very singular: but whether they be very good or not, I submit to your Lordships judgement. And seeing you have been pleased to bestow so much time (with great success) in the read∣ing of what has been written by other men in all kindes of Learn∣ing. I humbly pray your Lordship to bestow also a little time upon the reading of these few and short Lessons; and if your Lordship finde them agreeable to your Reason and Judgement, let me (notwithstanding the clamour of my Adversaries) be con∣tinued in your good opinion, and still retain the honour of being
My most Noble Lord,
London, Iune 10. 1656.

