



Beloved in the Lord,
1. IT hath been my grea∣test care, and constant endeavour, ever since by Gods providence I was called to be your Pastour, how I might withstand, and hinder the growth of sinnes,
Prov. 14.34. Ioh. 17.3. which are a reproach to any People: and how to build you up in the saving know∣ledge of Iesus Christ, which is eternall life. To which purpose in the ordi∣nary
course of my Ministry, as you know, I have gone over the princi∣ples of Religion, by way of Catechi∣zing more then once, that so I might, with the Lords assistance and bles∣sing upon my labours, lay a sure and a sound foundation, in the tender hearts of the yonger sort of people, who are so sweetly exhorted by So∣lomon,
ccles. 12. to know and to remember their Creator now in the daies of their youth.
2. It hath of late much troubled my spirit, what good course I might take in these evill and unsetled times, to settle and establish you in the Truth of the Gospell,
evel. 3.1. to hold fast that which you have received, that no man may take your Crowne: and how to Preach the Word unto you, that all may profit, and upon my seeking of God in private to direct mee, and after much selfe-disputing, I resol∣ved at last, to look beyond all dis∣couragements, and frivolous excep∣tions of persons disaffected to Truth
and Holinesse, and in the integrity and simplicity of my heart, to ad∣venture upon this plaine and easy way.
First to Compose and Print a short Catechise, containing the funda∣mentalls of our Christian Religion, which being known and understood, will enable you to give an account to every man,
1 Pet. 3.15. that shall aske you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meeknes and feare. Sermons without the knowledge and understanding of fundamentall Truths, are as if you should set a Browne Loafe and a Cheese,
Heb. 5.13.14. before Infants that call for Milke.
Secondly, for as much as it is a sad thing to consider, how many heare Gods word, it may be every Lords day, yet understand little and re∣member lesse, having never been ac∣quainted with the Historicall part of the Scripture to any purpose, I have therefore very briefely contracted, and set downe the most memorable
Historicall passages thereof, the knowledge whereof, will, I am con∣fident, be very helpfull unto you, to understand Gods mind, delivered in those comfortable Doctrines, which upon the explication of any Text, are by worthy Ministers of Christ commended unto you.
Thirdly, because without the Lords blessing nothing can doe us good, I have therefore in the latter end of this little Manuall, set downe a short direction for younger Chri∣stians to pray by.
There are Foure holy duties, which I heartily commend unto you, and intreat you to practice.
1. To read Gods word much in private, and to pray with your Fami∣lies, the blessing of God is upon such Families.
2. To take heed of prophaning the Lords Day, and instead of unne∣cessary worldly works, or sinfull re∣creations, to call your Children and Servants after Dinner together be∣fore
the second Sermon, to give you an account of some part of the Cate∣chise, and of the History of the Bi∣ble, which will put yours and their hearts into a holy posture for the publique exercises of the Church.
3. I would intreat you to exa∣mine all your Doctrines you heare, by the Word of God, it is a way very pleasing to God, as we see in the Ex∣ample of the Noble Bereans.
4. I would desire you to search after, and to be well setled in the Doctrine of justification, and of the Sacraments. Other duties there are, I should speake of, but I would wil∣lingly be as short as I could. Now the Lord Jesus blesse you and yours, and so appeare upon you, and my la∣bours amongst you, that in the day of judgement we may not be asha∣med but stand with comfort before the Tribunall seat of Christ, and re∣ceive an Fuge well done good and faithfull servants, enter into your
Masters joy; Which shall be the dai∣ly prayer of

From my study at Wotton Feb. 16. 1653.
