



SIR,
THe Argument of this small Treatise is so great, that I presume I need not Apologize for it: 'Tis Marriage, the Ordinance and Institution of God himself; that which the Church of Rome holds a Sacrament, and the Church of England, with other Reformed Churches, a Mystery. 'Tis that which our Blessed Lord and Saviour, Emmanuel, honoured, by being born, though of a Virgin, yet of one that was married to a Husband; by his presence at, and by working his first Miracle, of turning water into Wine,
at the Celebration of a Marriage at Cana in Galilee. 'Tis that which the Holy, Ghost in the Scriptures honours, by com∣paring therein the joys of Heaven to a Marriage-Feast; and by making the Bo∣som of Abraham, a married person, and the Father of the Faithful, the Recepta∣cle of all Saints in Heaven, whether they were married or single on earth. 'Tis a subject, of which that great Scholar Eras∣mus hath written, namely, both de Lau∣dibus, and de Institutione Matrimonii; as has also Ludovicus Vives de Conjugii Ori∣gine & utilitate. 'Tis that which the zea∣lous Martyr Dr. Taylor blessed God for, and in commendation of which that Saint of the Lord, (which one calls that An∣gel of God) Mr. Bradford, who when he was in Prison, and there being some hopes of his deliverance and freedom, being asked what he would do in case he should be released. Answered, he would marry; being, I question not, of that holy Bi∣shop Paphnutius his mind, who at the Council of Nice declar'd, That the so∣ciety
of man and wife was a holy chastity. 'Tis the shame of this Generation, that so many men and women live in common, as if they understood that noted saying, All things are common amongst Friends, of a Community of Women and of Wives also, as of other goods. My wish therefore is, and it shall be my pray∣er, that the uncleanness and filthiness of this age, may not be punished with a Deluge of Popery; I mean, by God's gi∣ving us over to Spiritual Adultery, or the Idolatry of the Church of Rome. And now having mentioned that Church, give me leave to say, that she is justly branded with the name of, The Mother of Fornications, and those too Corporal as well as Spiritual. What other Church in the world allows of publick Stews and Brothel-houses? where, but amongst her Sons, was it pleaded in their excuse, that they are as necessary as a Pump in a ship, and a Sink in a house, to keep all clean, And although they would make us be∣lieve, that their Church is pure and clean,
yea, both Militant and Triumphant in their holy Societies of Monks and Nuns, that these are like the Nazarites, whiter than the snow: Yet if we may give cre∣dit to their own Authors, such as Poly∣dore Virgil, Book 7. cap. 5. de Inventoribus rerum, speaking of their Orders of Monks, he saith, That it were behoveful that those dregs of men were cut off and burnt, and that with their filth they should no longer defile God's service. And N. de Clemangis, a Do∣ctor of Paris, who in his Book de Corrupto statu Ecclesiae, c. 21. saith of the Nuns; Shame forbiddeth me to speak of them, lest I should mention a company of Virgins de∣dicated to God, but stewed, deceitful, im∣pudent Whores, with their Fornications and Incestuous works: For what, I pray, are Nunneries now adays, but the execrable Brothel-houses of Venus, the Harbours of wanton young Women, where they satisfie their lust? that now the vailing of a Nun, is all one, as if you prostituted her openly to be a whore. So he. I say, if we may believe these and other their own
Authors; our Church, who hath none of these Convents for single persons, and who allows of the married life of the Clergy, is more holy and honorable than Rome. And I doubt not, but our Mini∣sters, though married, multitudes of them will present themselves, and their mo∣dest, chaste and pious Consorts, with innumerable others of their Congregati∣ons, as chaste Virgins to Christ. And whereas the Papists tell us, there are three special Crowns in Heaven, one for them that overcome the World, another for them that overcome the Flesh, and a third for them that overcome the Devil: If so, I dare promise many of our Doctors, though married, to each of them three Crowns in Heaven, far beyond the Popes Triple Crown on Earth; namely, to our Learned and Laborious Doctors, who by their Writings overcome the Devil; to our married Doctors, who by their chaste Wedlock overcome the Flesh; to our couragious Doctors, who are ready, if God call them, to Martyrdom; to ascend
to Heaven, like Elijah, in a fiery Cha∣riot, and so overcome the world: I say, to these I dare promise three Crowns in Heaven, besides a fourth to them and their Religious, Modest and Chaste Consorts, viz. The Crown of Righteousness, which is laid up in Heaven for all them that love the appearance of Jesus Christ.
Sir, Although neither the subject I treat on in the following Discourse, viz. Marriage, nor the Church of England her Doctrine in the 32 Article of Re∣ligion, which I defend, allowing persons in holy Orders to marry, need any Apo∣logy; yet I humbly beg your pardon for any weakness or miscarriage you may find in my manner of treating of these things. And I humbly present this small Piece to you, coming into the World from, as it were, under your roof; and beg your excuse at least, if not your Approbation and Patronage of it. If any of our Romish Adversaries should quarrel the Doctrine of our Church on this occasion, you have such Learned
Friends and Acquaintance, and those who have opportunities, advantages, and courage sufficient to defend their chaste Mother, the Church of England, and their own chaste Wives, against the great∣est Goliah amongst the Romish Phi∣listines.
Sir, I humbly thank you for your fa∣vours to me, and your care of the wel∣fare of our Society; and shall, accord∣ing as my duty binds me, pray for you, and for your good, your pious & charita∣ble Consort, that God would crown you with all the blessings of this and the other World.
Sir, I have one thing more to intreat of you both, which I am confident nei∣ther of you, being such good friends to our Church and Clergy, will deny, that is, to joyn with me in my prayers for the Tribe of Levi, Let thy Urim and thy Thummim be with thy holy One, let the sound of Aarons bells be ever heard, and the smell of his Pomegranates always per∣fume the Church of God, and let there be
found at last, of the Tribe of Levi amongst us, as of other Tribes, twelve thousand sealed ones. And that there may never want a supply of able and good men for the work of the Ministry, Let the Rod of Aa∣ron, I mean the Universities, ever flourish, and yearly bud, blossom and bring forth ripe Almonds.

July 1. 1673.
