



Sr,
A double account may possibly be expected from me, name∣ly, of the following Treatise and of the present Applica∣tion. A threefold exception may perhaps be made to that, that tis a Ca∣techisme, that tis an Elenchtical Catechism or a Catechetical confutation of Errors, and that 'tis such a Scripture Catechisme, or the Answers to the Questions mostly the very letter of the Scripture. If any blame
 me, saying 'tis below a Preacher to publish a Catechisme now in these dayes wherein even some of the people are got up above the highest Ordinances. My An∣swer is, that as I have not been asha∣med to practise the despised duty of Catechizing at home in my own Congre∣gation, so I shall not blush to countenance and avouch it to the world. I know and consider that our Lord and Master, the great Shepheard and Bishop of soules, gave in charge to the Apostle Peter to feed his Lambes as well as his sheep, and that 'tis the part of a faithfull Steward or dispen∣cer in God's family not as the Papists say to dispense with, but to dispense or administer the Ordinances of God, and to provide for every one of the family his por∣tion in due season, to see that the Babes have Milk as well as Strong men Meat. I doe not here set before Christ's little ones whole sheep or whole joints, as is done in large Tracts or Volumes of such subjects, but these dishes cut up and carv'd out, and it may be minc'd too, that very chil∣dren or Babes in knowledge may feed themselves.

Besides, I dare say that there is even in these times but need of Catechizing: for want of laying this Foundation how ma∣ny foolish Builders have fondly built Castles in the aire to no purpose: for want of this Ballast how many have been tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine: And now if we would Regulate mens foolish high-towring fan∣cies, one way sure, is to lay, not to raze Foundations. If we would make an e∣verlasting Separation 'twixt these fond lovers and their new-fangled Errours, one way is, to Reconcile and bring them home againe to, and in love with their old first and best Principles.
For the second exception, that 'tis a Catecheticall confutation of Er∣rours; I say, such an Enemy as Er∣ror is, may lawfully be driven out a∣ny way: and that 'tis but reasona∣ble to use the same method to con∣fute error, that others have done to confirme it. I shall herein imitate the skillfull Physitian, who endeavours to expell the poyson out of the body
 the same way by which it was first taken in.
And now if any be dissatisfied that 'tis a Scripture-Catechisme; I say, the Ene∣my hath in a sort compelled us: have they Scripture in their Catechismes seemingly for them, so have we really for us: have they appealed unto Scripture, unto Scri∣pture shall they goe. They say the Scri∣ptures are theirs, and we say nay; but the Scriptures are ours: what then? is the Scri∣pture neither ours, nor theirs, but is it di∣vided partly for us and partly for them? or have we ten parts in it, and they two? I answer, No in no wise, ther's no such matter, It is all ours, it is our owne and not Strangers, not our enemies with us. I confesse such hath been the Injustice and violence of erroneous Persons, as to take away sundry Scriptures by force to put them upon the racke and torture them, and lay to their charge things they know not, to make them confesse against them∣selves, and the truth, and us. But if this witnesse may be permitted to speak for it selfe, to speak freely and fully, to speak out, to speak all it will say, it will testi∣fy
 only to the truth, and when the Scri∣pture hath so spoken, Errour must either stop it's eares or stop it's mouth. For the Scriptures may then say as Paul, we can doe nothing against the truth, but for the truth: or that may be the language of the written word which was of the Essenti∣all Word of God, I came to beare witnesse of the Truth.
Now, if it was an honourable atchieve∣ment in Abraham to rescue his Nephew Lot, and in David to rescue the men of Ziklag out of the hands of them who had carried them captive; I hope such an At∣tempt as this to rescue so many Scriptures out of the hands of them who have carried them captive and spoiled them, and set them some of them in the front of the bat∣tell against the truth and us, shall have the countenance, good-will, and good wishes of them that love the truth.
For my part whether the world smile or frown, commend or condemne, I resolve to goe out against, set upon, and grapple with this great Goliah of Errour, I de∣sire to goe out against him in the name of
 the Lord of Hosts, endeavouring to sling these smooth stones (chosen out of this christall brook the holy Scriptures) so, as to smite this Philistine in the forehead and cause him to fall.
And Sr, if I may be a champion for truth, and by the sword of the Spirit de∣fend the crowne upon the head of it a∣gainst that Arch Rebel and Traytor, Er∣ror, which would depose it from it's throne and Soveraignty, I shall (I hope) therein rejoyce and triumph although the world should laugh at and trample upon the un∣dertaking.
I doe not professe my selfe the first or only discoverer of these Monsters,D. Owen. D. Bailye. nor that dared to fight with these beasts I have two eminent Captaines and Cham∣pions who have gone before and entred the lists, one in a like, and the other in the same quarrel, to both which I acknow∣ledge my selfe indebted, and although I doe not pay the one in the same coine (his Treatise being latine) yet I hope in plaine English (in part at least) to satisfie my en∣gagement to them both: For (as one well
 saith) the Scriptures are a Mine where there will be ever found some oare so long as there is any to digge: or like the Widdow's oyle which never ceased running so long as there was ever an empty vessell to receive it.
I dare not say I have found out any new truths, yet perhaps have made some further hue and cry after new Er∣rors. And if 'tis a commendable thing to discover a new Island or Continent, let me not be censured if I point out other Rocks, shelves, or Sands, togeither with a passage to avoid them; I mean new found Errors, so as to prevent my own & others making shipwrack of Faith and a good Conscience by them.
Now if in any place I have given, in answer to an objection from Scri∣pture, another text of Scripture only, I would not be thought to endeavour to set the Scriptures together by the eares, but to compare them, to bring them together face to face, and by a friendly enterview and conference to reconcile them, though when they are asunder they seem
 to be at odds and difference, yet when they are brought together and we heare both speak they may easily be reconciled: They seeme obscure perhaps single, but set toge∣ther they give light to each other. So true is that Rule, Scripture is the best Interpreter of Scripture.
And Farther, as the seed of the Serpent the Generation of Vipers, Heretickes and seducers have learn't of the Divel that old Serpent to urge Scripture against Scri∣pture, that is, the letter of Scripture a∣gainst the true sense, scope and meaning of it. So may the children of Abraham learne of Christ the seed of the Woman to answer Scripture with Scripture, and therefore when they plead and object as the Divel did, It is written; we may an∣swer or reply as our Saviour did. It is written againe. Math. 4 6, 7.
Sr, Amongst other Errours that I con∣test withall both ancient and moderne, at home and abroad, there is one, I hope, you will not censure me for ingaging a∣gainst, because in my own defence, and that
 is the Error of those who would extirpate Ministry root and branch, that say of such men and their maintenance, wherefore is this losse; when they cry out upon us as Priests of Baal, 'tis high time for us to prove our selves the Ministers of Christ, & when they say of us or to us as Pharaoh to the Israelites, ye are idle, ye are idle; tis but our duty to busy our selvs with both hands, to build with the one and strive with the other to hold a sword in one hand, & a trow∣el in the other. Ne. 4.17, 18. Can builders, Souldiers, husband-men, labourers in har∣vest, workers & Fellow workers together with God be justly taxed and censured for idle Persons or men of no calling? And yet such are the Ministers of the Gospel: a lazie Monk may indeed have good cause to aban∣don his profession, because if his Cowle doe not, his calling will not, or is not like to make him sweat; Yet that Preacher who puts his hand to God's plough and followes it hard therewith to break up the fallow ground of his own and others hard hearts, will make furrowes in his own face.

I know the pretence and practise is to undermine the maintenance, but the plot is to blow up the Ministry. The glorious lamps of our Tabernacles are not like to burn long if the golden oyle be presently ta∣ken away. I know we may say that the hand of Joab is in all this, and 'tis this wicked Haman which hath done it, the Divell or the Pope is the Father of this Monster: They know that the Ministers are the Cha∣riots and horsemen of Israel, and that if these be discomfited, the Infantry are in danger to be scattered.
Oh that men were so wise as to consider the designes of these enemies. The Popish Emissaries would exclude us, that you might affect them; would diet or starve us, that they might fill, if not surfet them∣selves. The Devill would allow the false Prophet Balaam to ride with his two men, and yet would force the true Prophets to goe afoot. Antichrist would have his own Priests many of them Princes, but the Ministers of Christ all of them the meanest and lowest of the people.

But what godly heart should without sorrow see Christs witnesses prophesy in sackcloth, when the Priests of Anti-Christ russell and rant it in sattin.In Italy besides the tem∣porall estate of the Popes of Rome the Clergy are concei∣ved to have in some places a third part of the whole; but in most a moyetie. In Spaine the certaine rents of the Arch-Bishoprick of Toledo are said to be no lesse than 300000 crownes per annum, which is far more than all the Bishops, Deanes and Prebendaries doe pos∣sesse in England. Treleinie of tythes pag. 12.13. In France the Ecclesiasticks alone possesse one third part of the total Revenue of the Kingdom. v. State of France. pag. 69. The Nobles and Commons Assembled in Parliament signifyed to King Henry the fourth, that the temporal possessions of Abbots, Priors &c. would suffice to find and sustaine 150 Earles, 1500 Knights 6200 Esquires, 100 Hospitals more than there were. Ful. Ch. History lib. 6. pag. 302.
For my own part, I would much ra∣ther chuse (if my heart deceive me not) to live and dye a poore Minister, than a rich man or Grandee, whose ayme and endeavour should be to make the Ministry poore. Be not deceived, God is not mocked.
If they that Ministred under Mo∣ses
 Law were feastedSuch and so ma∣ny Allowances had the Priests and Levites, that setting by the tithes of their corne and cattell & of all manner of increase, their maintenance had far excee∣ded that of the English Clergy, and adding unto these the Tithes of all Creatures tithable, it doth more than double it. Treleinie▪ of tythes. pag. 4. 5. If a Hus∣band-man amongst the Jewes had 6000 bushels grow∣ing in a yeer when all sorts of tythes and dues were paid there remained to him but 4779. vid. Weems Chri∣stian Synag. pag. 154. ex Scalig. opusc. he would not have the Preachers of his Sons Gospell famished.
If David took it so ill that his Embas∣sadors were evill intreated by Hanun, 2 Sam. 10.4. when their garments were cut off by the halves, God will not take it well to have his Ministers his Embassadors of peace cut short of their maintenance.
And now Sr, if I should for want of other matter be indited and arraigned for want of an exact Artificiall method, my hope is, that either every ordinary Jurie will not be able to find me guilty, or if I be found, that an Ingenious Judge perhaps may pro∣cure my pardon when he considers that it is in part confessed already, and againe that such an exact and curious chaine of me∣thod
 might possibly more credit the Au∣thor then profit the ordinary Reader, or be a greater ornament than advantage to the book, and yet painfull to the Compiler. And wise men may consider that pearles are pearles although they be not curiously strung or made up into bracelets and chaines, and that gold in the oare or coine is not to be thrown away, because 'tis not formed into a chaine of so many curious and equall linkes. And Sr, As for this present Addresse unto you, those who know and consider what a friend you have been to Religion, what a Father to your Country, what a Patron to Ministers, what a Bene∣factor to Scholars, and to my selfe in par∣ticular, may rather wonder that I did it no sooner than that I have done it now. And my hope is, that you will not think your selfe slighted or disparaged to have your name inscribed or prefixed to a book of this nature. I am perswaded Sr, you preferre old truths before new Errors, and old founda∣tions before new fancies, and that you de∣light rather to walke on a rock, than to dance upon ropes, and therefore that these
 old and great truths of this new and small piece will not be to your palate as dead drink, nor in your eares as stale newes, nor to your eyes as an old Diurnall or Al∣manack out of date.
And Sr, since I had my Birth and Ba∣ptisme in Cotherstock, let me not be con∣demned for making this confession of Faith, or profession of my Principles to you there.
It remaines only that I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and powre out my soule for you, your Religious Consort, and deare Son, at the throne of Grace, that God would blesse you with all spirituall blessings in heavenly things in Christ, and recompence into your bosome seven fold all the kindnesse that you have shewed to his Ministers, and particular∣ly to
Sr, 
