



THat which I do here most humbly present to Your Sacred Majesty, is the best Part of my Medi∣tations upon the Natural Causes of Events, both of such as are commonly known, and of such as have been of late artificially exhi∣bited by the Curious.
They are ranged under seven Heads. 1. Problems of Gravity. 2. Problems of Tides. 3. Problems of Vacuum. 4. Problems of Heat. 5. Problems of Hard and Soft. 6. Problems of Wind and Weather. 7. Problems of Motion Perpendicular, and Ob∣lique,

&c. To which I have added, Two Propositions of Geometry; One is, The Duplication of the Cube, hitherto sought in vain; The other, A Detection of the absurd Use of Arithmetick, as it is now applied to Geometry.
The Doctrine of Natural Causes hath not infallible and evident Principles. For there is no Effect which the Power of God cannot produce by many several ways.
But seeing all Effects are produced by Motion, he that supposing some one or more Motions can derive from them the necessity of that Effect whose Cause is re∣quired, has done all that is to be expected from Natural Reason. And though he prove not that the thing was thus produ∣ced, yet he proves that thus it may be pro∣duced, when the Materials, and the power of Moving is in our hands; which is as useful as if the Causes themselves were known. And notwithstanding the absence

of rigorous Demonstration, this Contem∣plation of Nature (if not rendred obscure by empty terms) is the most Noble Im∣ployment of the Mind that can be, to such as are at leisure from their necessary Bu∣siness.
This that I have done I know is an un∣worthy Present to be offered to a KING, though considered (as God considers Offe∣rings) together with the Mind and For∣tune of the Offerer, I hope will not be to Your Majesty unacceptable.
But that which I chiefly consider in it is, that my Writing should be tryed by Your Majesties Excellent Reason untain∣ted with the Language that has been in∣vented or made use of by Men when they were puzzled; and who is acquainted with all the Experiments of the time; and whose approbation (if I have the good Fortune to obtain it) will protect my reasoning from the Contempt of my Ad∣versaries.
I will not break the custom of joyning to my Offering a Prayer; And it is, That Your Majesty will be pleased to pardon this following short Apo∣logy for my Leviathan. Not that I rely upon Apologies, but upon Your Maje∣sties most Gracious General Pardon.
That which is in it of Theology, con∣trary to the general Current of Divines, is not put there as my Opinion, but pro∣pounded with submission to those that have the Power Ecclesiastical.
I did never after, either in Writing or Discourse, maintain it.
There is nothing in it against Episco∣pacy; I cannot therefore imagine what reason any Episcopal-man can have to speak of me (as I hear some of them do) as of an Atheist, or man of no Religion, unless it be for making the Authority of the Church wholly upon the Regal Power; which I hope Your Majesty will think is neither Atheism nor Heresie.
But what had I to do to meddle with matters of that nature, seeing Religion is not Philosophy, but Law?
It was written in a time when the pre∣tence of Christ's Kingdom was made use of for the most horrid Actions that can be imagined; And it was in just Indignation of that, that I desired to see the bottom of that Doctrine of the Kingdom of Christ, which divers Ministers then Preached for a Pretence to their Rebellion; which may reasonably extenuate, though not ex∣cuse the writing of it.
There is therefore no ground for so great a Calamny in my writing. There is no sign of it in my Life; and for my Re∣ligion, when I was at the point of Death at St. Germains, the Bishop of Durham can bear witness of it, if he be asked. Therefore, I most humbly beseech Your Sacred Majesty not to believe so ill of me upon reports, that proceed often (and may do so now) from the displeasure which commonly ariseth from difference in Opi∣nion;

nor to think the worse of me, if snatching up all the Weapons to fight against Your Enemies, I lighted upon one that had a double edge.

