


SIR,
YOu remember how George Hammonds Books were spread in my Parish: was it not time for me to look to my people? I took his Book, and (by way of preaching) answered and confuted its errours: when, I remember, you took notes, covetous to enform your own spirit of the truth; What you once heard preached, you have here printed by your timely encouragement. And indeed, though I owe more then my self to many friends in and about Sutton (as to your noble Cousen Mr. Edward Taylor, of Holling∣born; to my ingenious Friend, M. Edw. Knatchbull of Sutton; to my bountiful Friend, Mr. Tho: Tyndall; to my Cordiall Friend, Mr. James Lamb of Sutton) yet this Book owes its self to you (next to my self) of all men under Heaven. For it lay by me as a dead thing, forgotten, till you revived my muse, and your encouragements gave life to my Book. When Satibarzanes (who revolted from Alexander the great) challenged any of his Souldiers to fight, (as George Hammon almost doth the Clergy); E∣rignis an old, but spirited man, accepted the Challenge, with that expression: What Souldiers Alexander once had, Il'e shew you; and at the first On-set, slew him. 'Tis a folly to think to conquer an Anabaptist, persuadebis & non persuaseris, such will take no answer. If I can
strengthen my own people, I am well enough: for, my thinks, har Motis (in Erasmus) saying, that to go about to confute Hammon is but  to measure the sand, &c. when I consider the many; errours in his Book, I am thinking how he might have excused all with that jest in Lipsius, si vera dico agnoscite (those are rare); si fal∣sa ignoscite, (that's most of four Book.) He much speaks against learning, & Oxford and Cambridge-knowledg: 'tis wisht he had more of their knowledge, that his book might have had fewer errours; but in that, he is but . I finde errours of moment in his book not tolerable in a Common-wealth.R. Answ. in the Book. As that Adams sin brought on him, and all in his loyns but temporall death, &c. Hence no Children eternally lost, or need Baptisme: (yet the Apostle sayes,) One mans offence brought condemna∣tion on all, Rom. 5. were we not by nature Sons of wrath? twice dead? by nature, and otherwise? Jude 12. Nay, born altogether in sins? , John 9. notwith∣standing, the Pharisees obrayding the blind man. How the whole man was infected, is some difficulty: but as the blind man said, John 9.25. this one thing I know, I was blind, and now I see, and we did once see (in Adam) and now are naturally, miserable, poor, blind and waked, Rev. 3. I con∣fesse, all in Adam sinned onely against the first Covenant; but that the breach of that Covenant merited no more then temporall death, I deny, because of Rom. 5.18. That the souls of Adams Progeny were in Adam, according to subsistence, I have proved, not according to essence. When the souls were created in disposed bodies, is contro∣verted,Tract. 4. de Anim. rat. Quest. 1. Pag. 327. yet Eustachius concludes in maribus circa di∣em a conceptu quadragesimum, in foeminis circa octogesimum; only excepts our Saviours body, whose con∣ception was extraordinary. Another errour is, holding that actuall sins onely,Sum of Relig: Pag. 92. make men Vessels of dishonour, p. 22. Dr. Usher denies sin to be the cause of Reprobation (and
that truly) onely the means to bring it about. Gods de∣cree to be glorified in mercy and justice, is the first cause of all. Were not some fore-ordained to condemnation? Jude 4. read Exod. 9.16. Prov. 16.4. ƲƲicked made for the day of destruction. God raised up Pharaoh for temporall ruine; but why not for eternall? it seems he hated him, nay hardened first his heart, Exod. 7.3. so persons are re∣probated by the means of sin, and thousands for onely A∣dams; being by nature Children of wrath, and dying out of Christ. Again he denies Hell in being at present,See Answ. in the Book. or any in glory as yet, contrary to 2 Pet. 2.8. Indeed such an O∣pinion was once, as appears by Revel. 14.13. but Refor∣mation cryed it down, vers. 6. The great Humanist Dr. Fotherbey in his learned book against Atheists (given me by a good Friend) proves that Atheists are much tormen∣ted with fear at their dying hour.Mr. Tho: Barber of Char. l. 2. c. 13. because of hell. And are not all souls of Saints alive unto God, Luke 20.38? vvhere are souls departed? asleep for so many thousand of years? did not Moses and Elias talk with Jesus? Matth. 17. I thought Peter knew not what he said: it seems it was Moses and Elias, who talked in their sleep to Jesus. Why did God command a reward at Even to be payd to labouring men? Mat. 24.14. since those who labour unto the death for him, have no reward till day of judgement? I will not much longer trouble you (Mr. Taylor) but refer you to the book:Ep. Ded. to Sr. Tho: Moore. jamque tuum non meum (in the words of Erasmus): only when George Hammond, or any of that judgement say,De vol. Dei. that God would save more then he doth, believe them not, though Matth. 23.37. speak that Language at first sight. Lombard or Moulin will enform you, that Christ did gather all or∣dained to life out of Jerusalem (ipsis sacerdotibus no∣lentibus) though the Scribes and Pharisees were unwilling to have it so. Who can hinder Gods work? Isay 53.13.
But to end, I fear my studying to be brief, makes me too ob∣scure. I passe by George Hammonds jeeres, as telling Mr. Rutton, that Hell was under his Coat: I could tell him, that except he repent of his errours, I would not be in his Coat one day, for—And 'tis well (though he call him∣selfe Pastor) if Cyprians words may not be made good of him and such,Lib. 1. Ep. 7. Non fidei duces sed persidiae magistri, Nam pastores sunt impostores — but farewell Sir,— You know I am making haste for Ireland, and 'tis well if my friends salute me not with the Poets vvords,Hom. ; having been ab∣sent from them above a dozen years. Pray God make this poor pains of mine beneficiall to his people. Sir, I am your loving Friend and Servant.
Sutton-valence Febr. 3. 1655.

