


Madam,
THE Defence of Good and Innocent Men, and the Vindicating of their Memories, from those base and barbarous Aspersions they are many times loaden withal, (by men under whose tongues is the poyson of Asps) are Employments every way becoming those who are Disciples of the HOLY JESUS, and have solemnly promised to follow His Example, and which I am certain will speak Peace and Comfort to them, when others who give themselves the liberty to detract and defame, to scandalize and ill-report the Best of Men, will sink at last under the Load of their own Guilt, and the Terrours of their angry and discontented Minds.
The sense of which has been a very great support to my self, ever since I have undertaken the Vindication of the Name and Memory of King CHARLES I. and has enabled me in some good sort, to scorn and live above all those Reproaches, that by a certain
Faction, have been without Truth or Modesty so freely fastned upon me, and I am so far from being wea∣ry of the Task I have engaged in, that I thank God, every fresh Provocation gives me the Pleasure, as well as Advantage of knowing and understanding the incomparable Merits of that Great Man better, and the Courage to communicate them to others: And a∣mongst many other things that have come to my hand, since I began the Defence of this Great PRINCE, This, for the sake of which I make bold to give Your Ladyship this Trouble at present, is one of the great∣est and fullest that I ever saw, and no doubt will be satisfactory to all sorts of Men, because of the Person who was the Author of it; Namely, The chief Person of the Presbyterian Party in Scot∣land, and the most employed by them for setting up and Vindicating their Kirk-Discipline. I have shewn it, since I had it, to several Persons of great Names, and at great Posts in our Church, who were all, as mightily taken with it, so desirous it should be Re∣printed, that the World might see how unjustly this Great Persons Name is dealt withal, by too great a Number of many Bad Men of this Age; which, as soon as I resolved to Reprint, I at the same time re∣solved, it should, with Your Ladyships Leave, come out under Your Honours Umbrage and Protection, which You have a Right to, not onely upon the score
of Your own Zeal for that Great Prince's Memory and Vertues, but also upon the Account of the Faith∣fulness and Integrity, the Loyalty and Steadiness of Your Ancestors to the CROWN and Dignity thereof; for it is well known, That Your Noble Grandfather lost his Life, as General of His Ma∣jesties Forces at the first Fight against the Rebels at Edgelvill, for his Great Master's Just and Righ∣teous Cause, and that Your as Noble Father, was at the same time imprison'd, for his steady Adherence to the Royal Interest, and that both of them, as they ventured their Lives, so they greatly impaired a vast Estate.
But however that in the mean time, they Acted becoming Good Men, Good Christians, and True Lavers of the Religion and Laws of their Country, which includes their being Good Subjects, and conse∣quently took the better and more Justifiable Part; this ensuing Narrative, I am sure, will make good and clear, to all Men who are not resolved (let what will be said) to continue their base and ill designed Prejudices.
The Declaration is this.




VVHereas the greatest part of the distempered Peo∣ple of these miserable distracted Kingdoms, have been and are; wofully abused and misled with ma∣licious
misinformations against his sacred Majesty, espe∣cially in point of Religion and moral-Wisdom; where∣of, I confess with great grief of heart, my self to have been (amongst many moe of my coat) none of the least; who out of Imaginary fears and jealousies, were made real Instruments to advance this un-natural War, wherein so much Innocent Protestant Blood hath been shed, and so much downright Robbery committed, without fear, or shame of sin; to the scandal of the true Reformed Religion, as cannot but draw down hea∣vy Judgements from Heaven upon these infatuated Na∣tions, and more particularly upon Us who should have instructed them in the way of Truth, Peace, and Obe∣dience.
I conceived it the duty of a good Christian, especially one of my profession, and in the condition that I lie, expecting God Almighty's Call, not only to acknow∣ledge to the All-merciful God, with a humble sincere remorse of Conscience, the greatness of this offence; which being done in simplicity of Spirit, I hope with the Apostle Paul to obtain Mercy, because I did it through Ignorance: But also, for the better satisfaction of all others, to publish this Declaration to the view of the World; to the intent, that all those (especially of the Ministery) who have been deluded with me, may by God's Grace, and my example (though a weak and mean Instrument) not only be undeceived themselves, but also stirred up to undeceive others, with more ala∣critie and facilitie; that the scandal may be removed from our Religion and Profession, and the good King re∣stored to his just Rights, and truly honoured and obey∣ed as God's Anointed and Vicegerent upon Earth; and the poor distressed Subjects freed from those intollera∣ble Burdens and Oppressions which they lye groaning
under, piercing Heaven with their Tears and Cries; and a solid Peace settled both in Kirk and Common∣wealth, throughout all His Majesties Dominions, to the Glory of God, and of our blessed Mediator and Saviour the Lord Christ.
I do therefore Declare before God and the World, That since I had the Honour and Happiness to Con∣verse and Confer with His Majesty, with all sort of freedom; especially in Matters of Religion, whether in relation to the Kirk or State, (which like Hypo∣crates Twins are lynked together) that I found him the most intelligent Man that ever I spoke with; as far beyond my Epression, as Expectation, grounded upon the Information that was given me (before I knew him) by such as I thought should have known him. I profess that I was oft-times astonish'd with the solidity and quickness of his Reasons and Replies; wondred how he, spending his Time so much in Sports and Recreations, could have attained to so great Knowledge, and must confess ingenuously, that I was convinc'd in Conscience, and knew not how to give him any reasonable Satisfaction; yet, the sweetness of his Disposition is such, that whatsoever I said was well taken; I must say, that I never met with any Disputant (let be a King, and in Matters of so high Concernment) of that mild and calm Temper, which convinced me the more, and made me think that such Wisdom and Moderation, could not be without an ex∣traordinary measure of divine grace: I had heard much of his carriage towards the Priests in Spain, and that King James told the Duke of Buckingham upon his going thither, that he durst venture his Son Charles with all the Jesuits in the World, he knew him to be so well grounded in the Protestant Religion, but could ne∣ver believe it before.

 I observed all his actions, more particularly those of devotion, which I must truly say, are more than ordinary; I informed my self of others who had served him from his Infancy, and they all assured me that there was nothing new or much enlarged in re∣gard of his troubles, either in his private, or pub∣lique way of exercise; twice a day constantly, mor∣ning and evening for an hours space in private; twice a day before dinner and supper in publick, besides preachings upon Sundays, Tuesdays, and other ex∣traordinary times; and no business though never so weighty and urgent can make him forget, or neglect this his tribute and duty to Almighty God. O that those who sit now at the helm of these weather bea∣ten Kingdoms had but one half of his true piety and wisdom I dare say that the poor oppressed Subject should not be plunged into so deep Gulfs of impiety, and misery without compassion or pity; I dare say, if his advice had been followed, all the blood that is shed, and all the repair that is committed, should have been prevented.
If I should speak of his Justice, Magnanimity, Cha∣rity, Sobriety, Chastity, Patience; Humility, and of all his both Christian and Moral Vertues, I should run my self into a Panegy rick, and seem to flatter him to such as do not know him, if the present condition that I lye in did not exeem me from any such suspition of worldly ends, when I expect every hour to be called from all transitory vanities to E∣ternal Felicity; and the discharging of my consci∣ence before God and men; did not oblige me to de∣clare the truth simply and nakedly, in satisfaction of that which I have done ignorantly, though not al∣together innocently.

 If I should relate what I have received from good hands, and partly can witness of my own knowledge since these unhappy troubles began, I should inlarge my self into a History: Let these brief Characters suffice. No man can say, that there is conspicuous∣ly any predominant vice in him, a rare thing in a Man, but far rarer in a King: Never man saw him passionately angry, or extraordinarily moved, either with prosperity, or adversity, having had as great Tryals as ever any King had: Never man heard him curse, or given to swearing; Never man heard him complain, or bemoan his condiction, in the greatest durance of War and confinement; When he was se∣parated from his dearest Consort, and deprived of the comfort of his Innocent Children, the hopefullest Princes that ever were in these ingrate Kingdoms; when he was denuded of this Counsellors and dome∣stick Servants; No man can complain of the Viola∣tion of his Wife or Daughters, though he hath had too many temptations in the prime of his age, by the inforced absence of his Wife, which would be hardly taken by the meanest of his Subjects: and (which is beyond all admiration) being stript of all counsel and help of man, and used so harshly as would have stupified any other man, then did his undaunted courage, and transcendent Wisdom shew it self more clearly, and vindicate him from the ob∣loquy of former times, to the astonishment of his greatest Enemies: I confess this did so take me, that I could not but see the hand of God in it, and which will render His name glorious, and (I greatly fear) ours ignominious to all posterity; he stands fast to his grounds, and doth not rise and fall with success, the brittle square of humane actions, and is ever rea∣dy
to forgive all by-past injuries to settle a present solid Peace, and future tranquility, for the good of his Subjects; nay, for their cause he is content to forgoe so many of his own known, undoubted Just Rights; as may stand with their safety as Salus populi est Spurema Lex, so, & si parendum est patri in eo ta∣men non parendum quo efficitur ut non sit Pater. [Se∣neca.]
I confess that I could have wished an establish∣ment of our Presbyterial Government, in the Kirke of England, for the better Union between them and us, but I find the constitution of that Kingdom, and disposition of that Nation so generally opposite, that it is not to be expected: They are a people natural∣ly inclined to freedom, and so bred in Riches and Plenty, that they can hardly be induced to embrace any Discipline that may any ways abridge their Li∣berty and Pleasures. That which we esteem a God∣ly Kirk policy, instituted by the Lord Christ, and his Apostles, is no better to them than a kind of slavery, and some do not stick to call it worse than the Spa∣nish Inquisition: Nay, even the greatest part of those who invited us to assist them in it, and sent hither their Commissioners to induce us to enter into a so∣lemn national covenant for that effect, having served their turn of us, to throw down the King and the Prelatical Party, and to possess themselves with the supreame Government both of Kirke and State; are now Inventing evasions to be rid of us, and to de∣lude it, some of them publishing openly, in Pulpits and Print: That the sacred Covenant was never in∣tended for the godly, but only as a trap to ensnare the Malignants, which cannot but bring heavy Judg∣ments from Heaven, and I am afraid, make a greater
dis-union between these Nations, than ever was be∣fore: Like unto that bellum Gallicum, quod sexcentis foederibus compositum, semper renovabatur [Canon. lib. 3. Chron in here. 5. an. dom. 1118.] with a deluge of Christian blood, and almost ruine of both Parties; or like unto that bellum Rusticanum in Germania, in quo supra centena millia Rasticorum occubuerunt. [idem an. dom. 1524.] Or most of all, both in manner and Sub∣ject, resembling that of John of Leydon, Munser and Knoperduling, [idem an. 1534.] which took its rise from the former; so many different Sects spring up daily more and more amongst them, which all like Ephraim and Manasses, Herod and Pilate, conspire against the Lord's-Anoynted, and the true Protestant Religion.
The City of London that was so forward in the beginning of this glorious Reformation, surpasses now Amsterdam in number of Sects, and may be com∣pared to old Rome, quae cum omnibus pene gentibus dom∣maretur omnium gentium erroribus serviebat, & magnam sibi videbatur assumpsisse Religionem quia nullam respue∣bat falsitatem. [Leo in Serm. de Petro & Paulo. app.] their transgressions are like to bring them to that confusion of the Israelites when they had no King, [Judg. 21.] every one did what seemed good in his own eyes, because they feared not the Lord; [Jhos. 10.] they said, What should a King do to us? The young men presumed to be wiser than the elder, [Isai. 3.] the viler sort despised the honourable, [Lament, ult.] and the very serving men ruled over them.
I profess, when I saw these things so clearly, I could not blame the King to be so backward in giving his assent to the settling of our Presbyterial discipline in
that Kirke, for the great inconveniences that might follow thereupon, to Him and his Posterity, there being so many strong Corporations in that Kingdom to lead on a Popular government, such a number of people that have either no, or broken estates, who are ready to drive on any alteration, and so weak and powerless a Nobility to hinder it. Multos dulcedo proedarum, plures Res angustoe veb ambiguoe domi alios scelerum Conscientia stimulabat. [C. Tacit.]



And now, Madam, I hope those Men, who have, of late, so boldly ventured to throw the most Stic∣king Dirt in the Face of this Great Prince, and Pa∣tient Martyr, will, by Repentance, give glory to God, and do so no more; in hopes of which, I, after my Prayers, and Earnest Wishes, for the Preservation of your Ladyship, and whole Family, and particular∣ly for the long life, and health, of your Noble Lord; to whose good Counsels, and indefatigable Labours we of the Church of England owe so much, do take leave of your Ladyship, and subscribe my self,
MADAM, 
