



ROYALL SIR;
DID not Reason teach, that the Foot is Instru∣mentall to the Head, I should have Judg'd it not Duty but Intrusion, to present my Service, though most Humble, unto Majesty. But at pre∣sent seeing Zeale a Mistaking Peace-breaker,
I thought it as Necessary, as Seasonable, to set forth the nature of Loyalty and Rebellion; the one from the Gentlenesse of Nature and the Blessing of Ʋnity; the other from the Arts of Darknesse and Subtilty. As Remedies these were Imployd in the Late Times, and may now be made more usefull, by being made more Publique. What Speech can be too Just, what Diligence too much in the defence of our Su∣preme Father and Country? Was not such the Practice of the Greeke Oratour against the In∣sidiating Macedonian? Was not such the Heat of the Roman Oratour against the Inso∣lence of Marc Antony? Witnesse their Im∣mortall Philippiques, the Defence and Evi∣dence of their Loyalty; patterns even to the Christian, though of a Higher Intitution? And a Blessing, a blessing of Peace it were, if these Endeavours for the Amendment of these Times, might prove Christian Philippiques; and, as a wise Glasse reflect to some their deformities; or as the sight of a Lacede∣monian servant defil'd with Wine, which pre∣serv'd the Children from the Defilement. And
for such as had rather be the Sonnes of Wis∣dome, then of Belial, they may purify their Pas∣sions by their Judgement, if they will lay aside Perswasions taken up in Ignorance, and not Blush to be Amended. 'Twas the remarkable censure, upon Obstinate Ignorance, of that Great Reporter of our English Cases,L Coke. lib. 5. in Caudries case.Miserable is his case and worthy of Pitty, that has been Perswaded before he was Instructed, and now will refuse to be Instructed, because bee will not be Perswaded. Has it not been the Outcrie of late Zelots, The present Government must be Obeyd? And is not now their Out-crie, their Conviction? Doe they Obey, what they Professe should be Obeyd? Or, will they make the Royall mercy, by the Increase of it, and their Abuse of it, the Increase of their Guilt? When they shall see, what a Prince's Right may Re∣quire, and what his Gentlenesse is ready to mi∣tigate, in the Ceremonies practised even in pa∣rest Times of the Church (without which Ce∣remonies the Worship it selfe might soon faile,
as the fruit without the coate, though but a pa∣ring) shall they not acknowledge any remission Favour? when the Bounty of our Fore-fathers endowd the Church with wealth and Honour, shall any be so unadvised, as to Reject the Piety and Bounty? shall any be more dangerous and vaine, then the Old Roman People, that once fell off from their Nobility, for not sharing with them in some Honours in that Common∣wealth? And shall they here in a Kingdome be Offer'd & Despis'd? Would they have us be∣lieve, they are so farre from Pride and Ava∣rice? They must prove it by better testimony, then their Pretence or Actions yet have done. When God commanded his people under the Law to repaire on the Sabbath to his Publique Worship, or be cut off from his People, shall a∣ny under the Gospell dare a Separation, and be Innocent? Or, think the Jew had more reason to serve God, then the Christian? Or, shall wee under the Liberty and Light of the Gospell live in a voluntary obscurity, as the Old Chri∣stians in a Necessary Secrecy, under the Perse∣cuting Heathen? shall any think they Imitate
our Saviour, that Pretend Truth, but seek Cor∣ners; after the Mode of Ignorance or Deceit? Or shall any put out the Sunne, and Light up a Gandle? Or, be lead into the way of an Ignis Fa∣tuus? Or, shall any believe the Translation of Scripture, & not the Translator? The Prophet said, The lips of the Priest shall preserve know∣ledge: and shall every one now have an Interest in the Office? May we not see the Turkish So∣cinian invading Christianity, in the great Do∣ctrines of the Glorious Trinity, of the Grace and Godhead of Christ our Redeemer, of the Godhead of the Holy Ghost our Comforter, of the blessed Sacraments, the Seals of our Salva∣tion, briefly, of all Government and safety a∣mongst men? And is it not then Wisdome and Holinesse for Princes with Speed and Zeale to reforme such Reformers? When the Dove was sent forth of the Arke, shee did returne, till the Earth was in part purified: when the Raven went forth, he returnd but rather Towards the Arke then into it. The Dove was a clean bird; shee found no rest in the Flood: the Raven lighted on the outside of the Arke, and on Car∣casses
floating in the waters, and was content to stay and feed on the carrion. Oh, that all, who have fled from the Arke of the Church, would with the Dove, in a flood of Heresies, re∣turne and be taken-in to the Rest, to the Safety to the Joy, to the Miraculous Change, and Just Thankefulnesse, under your Majesties Wisdome and Mercy. Would they but see the late Bles∣sed Parliament, the Parliament of Peace, pur∣suing Peace: Would they but see the Generall Concord of Your People, the Glory of Your Ver∣tues; then should there not be found in the same breast a heart and a heart. But not to make Duty a Trespasse, by too Long an Accesse, with my Prayers for such mens Change, and for Your Majesties Ʋnchangeable Goodnesse and Pro∣sperity, I shall ever rest

