



NOBLE SIR,
TO be a Favourer of Know∣ledge is from a Bounty of Goodnesse; yet the Ho∣nour of many: to be a Favourite of Knowledge is from a Bounty of Na∣ture; yet the Honour of few: Each in it selfe is Happinesse; Both in your selfe a Double Happi∣nesse. The first of which being in the effects of it, as Freely, as Ʋnexpectedly deriv'd of late unto my selfe, by that providence which workes by man and for him: I cannot but behold it as from God's Favour yours, and therefore with reverent proportion indeavour an Imi∣tation of our Gratitude to God; to whom we must be
thankfull and speak Good of his Name. In which pur∣suite I may not forget your happy Education for Arts in the Ʋniversity; for farther Prudence in the studies of Our Law, I may improve the Expression of that Edu∣cation by your improvement of that Education in Forraine Travaile, not only in Language, but in Wise∣dome; learning from the French his Learning with∣out his Vanity; learning from the Spaniard his Gravity without his Arrogance; learning from the Italian his Civility without his Impurity. I may not forget your more happy Retreat from the Dangers of Travaile, rescuing your selfe to your selfe in a retir'd Eminency, and becomming by Vertue your own Memo∣riall. Nor may I forget your most happy choise of Marriage and the Blessing of that choise, your Noble Consort, in whom the Ornaments of Nature portray the Ornaments of Grace, and by Fame present them beyond the reflexe of Art. Your singular Goodnesse at the In∣terring of a provident and Loving Father, blazon'd not more your Birth, than your Love: This was his Funerall, and his Funerall will be your Epitaph. I should not insist on these particulars, were they not extracted from Grati∣tude by your Merits, as Fruitfullnesse from Earth Enlivened by the Sunne. This makes me present some∣thing like Thankes and Life. Life indeed it is, a Chri∣stian Life; which as it is man's Duty, should be his
Study; From a practicall Life then I here present the Christian's Feare and Sorrow and Strife. I present his Obedience to the Husbandry of God; though he Sotle, him and Plough him: The Puritie of Mind he must attaine, or not attaine Heaven, though this be not pure in God's sight, and yet nothing shall enter into it that is impure: The Meeknesse he must Imitate and Injoy, or not Injoy Him, in whose mouth was no reproach, though reproach'd: The Innocent Prudence he must practice towards God and Man, that would exactly be a man of God: The Covenant he must remember, when he became a visible Christian, and make the Per∣formance of it no lesse visible: The Mysticall Food he must delight in, it being delightfull, though food and Physique: lastly, The Love due for such Love, as made Christ Our Jesus; whose Innocency could not deliver him to the Curse of the Law; whose Love would not de∣liver him from the Curse of the Law. The Meditations upon which Ojects, though to some they will seem Life∣lesse, as the dead bones of the Prophet; yet I shall wish they may prove, not Miraculously but Spiritually, of power to raise up some to newnesse of Life. In which Desire and Hope, Noble Sir, I shall allwayes rest.

