



BEloved and much honoured Brother, though the Lord Jesus to whom all things are made subject, hath separated us by the great Deep, yet I have you oft in remembrance, and cannot forget our alli∣ance, and indeered love and acquaintance that hath been between us from our childhood, both in the Country, and in the City of London.
You have a great Family, and like to have, through the Lords blessing, a numerous posterity, and my desire is to shew that I have some interest in them, being also my bone and my flesh, as Laban said to Jacob: and I suppose you will be well pleased, if I endeavour in any thing to further them in the knowledge of the Son of God. This I now present unto you and them, was done many years ago for the most part, as I think, you may remember, and then I made some marginal notes to attend upon the several answers to the seve∣ral questions that are propounded in the two first parts: some things I have since added concerning the Covenant of God in Christ, made with our Fathers in Gen 3.15 and Gen. 9. and Gen 12.1, 2, 3. and in Gen. 17. This I did because of the errors that get quickning in these times, and for the same cause I have affixed divers other weighty and profitable points in the third part of this Treatise.
I hope the whole will be a means to shew, that the Covenant of God in Christ, is one and the same in all ages, though the outward administration differ, and that the Covenant to Israel of old was not onely in the carnal, and fleshly promise and covenant, but also in the spiritual promise and Covenant, even the same that is now made with us in the new Testament of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God. Dear Brother, and Nephews, you have known my manner of life, studies, and endeavours, and I blesse the Lord, I have had comforta∣ble experience of that course of study which I have followed: I mean
chiefly of the book called the Consent of Scripture. And let me speak as I think, If men would use that course of study, together with the blessed Scriptures, it would settle in us and in our posterity, the true knowledge of religion, and the certainty of everlasting salvation.
The whole Scripture and all learning should be contrived unto Christ, as Gods servant did in the Consent of Scripture, and so Ste∣phen did; he drew all the holy story to Christ in Acts 7. and so the Apostle Paul, he drew all the Law to Christ, as Rom. 10 doth make it evident, being conferred with Deut. 30.
Some in New England have seen this frame of mine, and have de∣sired that it might be made more common by printing, and indeed I cannot write so many Copies, as to communicate it to you and to that generation, except it be by Printing. It may be you will marvel I dare be so bold as to Print it in this evil time, but indeed I dare not but do it, and I believe this labour of mine will talk with many sorts of spirits, and I hope that Gods people will judge the best of this my undertaking: other things I have, if the Lords providence please so to order it, that must be made more publick, because I have a great desire thereby to provoke others to the diligent study of the blessed Scriptures.
Dear Brother, and much honoured Nephews, as Salus populi is the care of Magistracy; so the edification of the Churches ought to be the painfull care of godly Teachers: and we ought to know that Fa∣milies are little Churches and Common-weals, and the Seminaries of greater Corporations; & that Parents are intrusted with children and servants: it is not a small honour that Christ hath conferred this trust on them: and verily, if Families be neglected, the Churches will fail. Let us with all godly industry make this promise good to our selves and posterity, in Isa 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, saith Jehovah, my spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, saith Jehovah, from henceforth, and for ever: and that this promise and covenant may be conferred on you, and on your posterities for ever, is the affecti∣onate prayer of.

