


My good Friends and Parishioners,
THere is a certain bold Libeller, who has been pleased under the Name of Ludlow a Regicide, to load me with a great ma∣ny reproaches and false Stories in several lewd Pamphlets, in order to prejudice you against my Person, and thereby to hinder the success of my Ministry amongst you; which, thanks be to God, has had very little effect as yet, and I hope ne∣ver will: for I must say thus much, that I have found the Love and Respects of abundance of You rather encrease than diminish, ever since I undertook the honest and just Defence of King Charles the First into my hands; but however that You may not repent of standing by me in this good Cause, I think it very necessary to take this
occasion to defend my self against an Imputation of this bad Man's, to wit, of Forgery, a Sin of which if I thought, or knew my self guilty, I should Blush, nay Tremble, ever to come into a Pulpit, to Preach the Doctrines of the Gospel either to You, or any other persons whatsoever; and there∣fore, I shall with all freedom and unreservedness let You into the Knowledge of this thing, which he calls Forgery.
Being the last Summer at my Lord Bishop of London's, I accidentally met with the Reve∣rend Mr. Lamplugh Son to the late Archbi∣shop of York, who was pleased, knowing that I was engaged in the Cause of King Charles the First, to shew me Mr. Henderson's Death-bed Declaration, which he found in his Father's stu∣dy, and upon my request, to lend it me, which after I had read, and found so very Honest, so plain and hearty a Character, and so agreeable to what by an uninterrupted Tradition had been de∣livered down to us of this Age, both by English and Scotchmen, namely, that Mr. Henderson after a thorow acquaintance and conversation with King Charles the First at Newcastle, went a∣way perfectly changed as to his Opinion of that King's Sanctity, Learning and profound Judg∣ment; and with great grief that he had been
instrumental to the Miseries that Good Man was brought to, at that time: I say, it being so agree∣able to what was so generally said of Mr. Hen∣derson, I, after I had shewed it to many Per∣sons of great Character and Consideration in Our Church, and by them encouraged to make it more publick resolved to Re-print it, that the World might see how much that Great and Good Man was abused by this Libeller, who so impudently brands him with the Name of Nimrod, Pha∣raoh, and unaccountable Tyrant, which Chara∣cter, as it wonderfully pleased all that wish well to our English Monarchy; so it had the contrary effect upon our Commonwealths men, and there∣fore in half a Years time this Scribler makes a shift to get Two pretended Papers to Prove this a Forgery: The First is, as he tells you, a Letter from a grave and worthy Gentleman who lived in Scotland about that time, and was very conver∣sant in the great Affairs of that Kingdom: And what says this grave and knowing Gentleman to this affair? why he tells him, he never heard of this Declaration neither there nor here, and that had it been true, to wit, that there was such a one, the World would have been full of it. Strange, that this Man so conversant in the great Affairs of Scotland at that time, should not hear of a
Declaration of the General Assembly, as to the Falshood and Forgery of that Book; and there∣fore this very thing must make any Man, not prejudiced, call in question the Truth of the As∣semblies Declaration, especially considering this bold Man puts it out, without any attestation from any Publick Notary, or any other Creditable Witnesses, whom he might have employed to search the Records, and therefore I believe upon this account the World will lay the Forgery at his Door, and not at mine; especially when I tell him this Story, that I have from a great and undoubted hand: That Mr. Henderson when he came from Newcastle to Edinburgh, did design to unbosome himself in the great Church at Edinburgh, as to the Vertues of that great King, and the Reasons of the Change of his Opinion of Him; which was understood by some great Leaders in the Assembly, and there∣fore they hindred his Preaching; after which he fell Sick and Dyed, and no doubt to unburthen and ease his Mind, drew up in this Declara∣tion what he intended to Preach, had he been permitted. And now, I think, my Good Neigh∣bours, You will say I have sufficiently defen∣ded my self from the base Imputation of a For∣gerer.

The other things I shall trouble you with the account of, are some Papers said lately to be found, which plainly, as they say, make it out that King Charles I. was not the Author of that Book, which for forty odd Years has gone in his Name. These Papers, by the kindness of the Gentleman in whose hands they are, I have exa∣mined twice, and I am very sorry, for Dr. Gau∣den's Memory sake, that they have been so much exposed, because in my Remarks upon them, some things must fall very hard upon that Prelate, which I should be very averse to, was not the Name, Honour, Religion and Learning of King Charles concerned, which, I hope, will excuse me amongst all Men that understand the diffe∣rence of Persons, especially of a King and a Subject.
The first Paper I shall take notice of, is a Pe∣tition to the King for the Bishoprick of Win∣chester, which, indeed, for his Memory's sake, ought by no means to have been exposed to view; it is so Romantick, so childishly cracking and boasting of his Heroick and Secret Service, that a Man would think the poor Man had utterly forgot and lost all the impressions of common Po∣licy and Prudence, and was resolved to provoke the King to command him out of White-Hall;
as a Man not fit to be a Countrey Curate, much less preferred to the wealthiest Bishoprick in Eng∣land: But the best of it is, though he had the vanity to draw it up, he was yet so wise as not to present it, which is plain from his own mouth; for Page 5 of Dr. Walker, we have this Story, That the last time Dr. Walker saw him, which was after he was Lord Bishop of Worcester E∣lect, he asked him whether King Charles II. knew that he wrote the Book? He gave him this answer; That I cannot positively and cer∣tainly say he doth, because he was never pleased to take express notice of it to me: The truth of it is, when I consider that Dr. Walker says, That Dr. Gauden took the Covenant; and that when Mr. Zach. Crofton charges Dr. Gauden as one of the number of Covenanters: And Dr. Gauden denies all, Page 275. of Anti-Baal, and says, That Mr. Crofton reckons without his Host, when he made him one of the number of Cove∣nanters, and positively assures the World, that he never took any Oaths but those appointed by Law, no League nor Vow, and that if he had done it, he must have had no peace 'till he had publickly repented, and recanted such Dissimulation, which he abhors as Hell. I say, when I read this, I wonder at, nay, I believe, nothing that Dr. Gau∣den
either said or did, in order to get a fat Bi∣shoprick: but before I leave this Paper, give me leave to say, that the Style is so like to all his other Writings, and so altogether unlike the King's Book, that I will as soon believe that Mr. Ralph Venning, who Writ two Books, called Milk and Honey, and Orthodox Paradoxes, or that Mr. William Seckar, who Writ the fulsom Ser∣mon, called the Wedding Ring, could have Writ the Whole Duty of Man, or Mr. Baxter's Saints Everlasting Rest, as that Dr. Gauden could Write the Eicon.
The next Paper is a Letter to my Lord Chan∣cellour Hide, still for the Bishoprick of Win∣chester: And the Truth of it is, here he dis∣plays himself to the full, and shews his Virtues all at once; and how far the World ought to give credit to his pretences, for he down-right offers to commit the sin of Simony, and bids one half of the Bishoprick of Winchester to get the other; a fit Man indeed, to Write such Holy and Divine Meditations as are contained in the King's Book; who rather than miss his Ambitious Aims, will en∣ter in at the door of Perjury, and, I am sure he that will forswear himself, will not fail to tell a falsehood, when Covetousness and Pride have the Ascendant of him.

The next and last Paper I shall take notice of, is a long Narrative of Mrs. Gauden's, all which depends upon her Husband's Truth, and which will not hold together when it comes strictly to be examined. She tells you of an intercourse be∣twixt King Charles the Second and Dr. Gauden, about the Book, and the King upon satisfaction that he wrote it, promised him the Reversion of the Bishoprick of Winchester; and yet as by the former Story appears, the King, even after he was Elect of Worcester, never said word to him of any such thing. She further positively asserts, that her Husband sent the Manuscript to the King at the Isle of Wight, and that the King re∣ceived it, and sent Bishop Duppa to give Dr. Gau∣den an account of it: and yet, pag. 5. of Dr. Wal∣ker, he asking Dr. Gauden whether the King had ever seen the Book, he gave him this Answer, I know it certainly no more than you; but I used my best endeavours that he might, for I delivered a Copy of it to the Marquess of Hartford, when he went to the Treaty at the Isle of Wight, and intreated his Lordship, if he could obtain any pri∣vate opportunity he would deliver it to his Ma∣jesty, and humbly desire to know his Majesty's pleasure concerning it. But the Violence which threatned the King, hastning so fast, he ventured
to Print it, and never knew what was the issue of sending it. Here is brave work, my Masters, Dr. Gauden, by Dr. Walker, down-right giving Mrs. Gauden the lye. She tells you in another place, that it was some few days after the King's Murder, that her Husband got the Book, Prin∣ted it: whereas it is well known, the Book was Printed off before the King's Murder.
But commend me to the last positive assertion of this Lady, for she tells you, that some of the Rump-Parliaments Friends took the very Manuscript her Husband sent to his Majesty, and appointed a private Committee, to find out the business. This had been brave for Mr. Milton, and I am sure we should have heard of it again and again, in his Answer to the King's Book; and no doubt that Remnant of the House that sat and were so grie∣ved at this Book, and lost so much ground through∣out the Kingdom, by Vertue of this Book, would have sent this news all over the Nation: but not one word of all this, but the Book passed, as it ought to do, for above 12. Years together, as the King's own. And so I take my leave of Mrs. Gau∣den, but not without expressing my hearty sorrow, that I am absolutely necessitated to these Remarks and Reflections upon Dr. Gauden and his Wife; for I take no pleasure neither in speaking ill of,
nor doing ill to any Man or Woman whatsoever.
But it may be some will say, pray why did my Lord Chancellour Hide seem to believe it: I an∣swer, that he was perfectly imposed upon, by Dr. Gau∣den, and knew nothing of the matter it self; for he never saw the King's face after he left Ox∣ford, being always excepted out of Pardon by the Parliament, and so became wholly a stranger to the King's private Transactions.
And now, my good Friends and Neighbours, I shall only trouble you, by asking you whether those are not very credulous Men, and have Throats that will swallow Mountains, that make these vain contradictory Papers weigh down the evi∣dence of Major Huntington; who after Nazeby fight, procured so much of the King's Book as was then drawn up from Fairfax the General, and delivered the Papers with his own hand to the King, who received them with great joy, and told him, that he esteemed them more than all the Jewels he had lost in his Cabinet, which was at∣tested to me by Mr. Cave Becke, a Reverend, Pious and Learned Minister, now living in Ip∣swich, from the mouth of the Major, in a Letter under his own hand: and also by Mr. Ric. Duke of Devon, and several others in the same County to Mr. Read, Archdeacon of Barnstaple, who all
had it from the Major himself; or will weigh down the Evidence of that holy, humble, modest and admirable learned Man Dr. Dillingham, sometimes Fellow and Master of Emanuel Col∣lege in Cambridge, who declared to his Son, which I have formerly Printed from a Letter writ by himself to a Reverend Minister in Lon∣don, That his Father read in the King's Closet at Holdenby, presently after he came from Newcastle, several Sentences newly writ, as he supposed, by the King's own hand, which he af∣terwards found exactly in a Chapter of the King's Book; the Truth of which Story has been very lately confirmed to me by the Reverend Mr. Saunderson, late Fellow of Emanuel College, to whom that learned Doctor did tell it more than once: Or, further, Whether these vain and unaccountable Papers will weigh down the Evi∣dence of Sir John Brattle, lately deceased, who has declared a hundred and a hundred times, within this last year, to my self and others, That he assisted his Father in methodizing the King's loose Papers, which made up the greatest part of this Book in the Year 1647. and which were brought to his Father by the King's Order, by Bi∣shop Juxon for that purpose; or weigh down the credit of that holy, honest and couragious Sufferer
Mr. Simmonds: All which Characters will appear in a few Weeks to be true of him, by his Book cal∣led, The Vindication of King Charles the First, which was Printed in 48. and now Re-printed again by my self, who all along in his Sickness, and to his last Breath, declared it to be the King's own Book, and none others, whose only fault was in the trust reposed in him by the King to Print and Correct this Book, that he showed it to Dr. Gauden, and let him too much into the knowledge of it, who thereupon, Mr. Simmonds being dead, and the Marquess of Worcester too, who, if living, could have dis∣proved, to his shame, all his Pretences, in order to serve his ambitious ends, sets up for the Au∣thor of the Book. Or lastly, weigh down the Evi∣dence of the Reverend Mr. Long, who so sacredly has declared, that he heard Dr. Gauden declare, and often affirm, that he was fully convinced, that the Book was entirely that King's Work. I now, my good Friends, appeal to you all, to judge be∣twixt these so much cryed-up Papers, and the Evi∣dence against them for that great and good King; and I leave my self in your hands, and the hands of all the dis-interested and unprejudiced part of the Kingdom, to judge whether I am guilty of Forgery, that great sin a late Barbarous Libeller lays to my charge.

I shall detain you no longer than to tell you, That the reason of my Zeal and Labour in the Vindication of this King, next to my satisfaction in his Personal Vertues, it, that the Principles by which this King was Murdered, and by which his Murder is now justified, will, if they prevail once more, destroy our English Ancient Monar∣chy, and tear up by the Roots again, the best constituted Church in the World; and by the Grace of God, as I will never contribute to such a Design, so according to my small Ability, I will in my place endeavour to prevent it, let what will come of Me and Mine. My good Neigh∣bours, praying for your Health and Happiness, and thanking of you for your continued kindness to me, I am your hearty loving Friend and Mi∣nister.

