



SIR,
NOw I have by Gods blessing
obtained (that which you
can witnesse I have seriously
laboured after) a thrice se∣ven
yeares experience in this despicable,
but comfortable employment of teaching
Schoole; I think it not amisse to disco∣ver
to the world, what method I have
hitherto used, and which I resolve to
continue, so long as God shall enable me
to undergoe this profession of a Schoole-Master,
which at first I undertook, and
have ever since persisted in, by your
encouragement.
How far this New Discovery is
improved, since I made it at Rother∣ham,
and afterwards writ it out at lit∣tle
Humbie, whilest I lived more reti∣redly
in the house of that Noble Knight,
Sir William Brownelwoe, (whom I

think my self ever bound to honour for
for his singular and undeserved favours
to me in many particulars) I refer it to
you to consider. For as you sometimes
then perused it in Manuscript, so I hope
you will (at your leisure) look upon it
now in print, and not like it much worse,
then formerly.
For I may truly say, that besides what
I have observed by reading sundry Au∣thours
treating of this subjest, or gained
by frequent and familiar converse with
men of known abilities, both in City
and Country. I have profited most in this
Art of teaching, by my Scholars; who
have been my daily instructers, how to
suit my method to their several capaci∣ties.
And of all that ever I have taught
either in publick Schoole, or in my own,
or others houses, in more private manner,
I have been beholding most to my Lon∣don
Scholars, who as they are generally
quick-spirited, and forward to learn,
where the way is easy to them; so are
they soon apt to flag and be discouraged,
when any difficulties appeare in their

way. For their sakes therefore, (who by
reason of many Schooles were sometimes
occasioned to remove from one to ano∣ther)
I was enforced to facilitate the
most common way of teaching, according
to what you see, I have here endeavoured
in these small Treatises.
In the publishing whereof I beseech
you, that I may not offend in making use
of your name, as well as my Masters; for
as I was instructed by him at the School,
so I was by your means sent, and provi∣ded
for in the Vniversity; and though I
can never be able to requite your care and
pains on my behalf, yet I have long desired,
even whilest you are both living, to testify
to the world, that I am not forgetful al∣together
of your great benefits. If what I
have here done be liking to your selfe, I
shall lesse need to care how others censure
me, or it; Forasmuch as you have known
me since my first studies, and are suffici∣ently
able to judge of a way to come by
learning, as having been your self well
methodized in your youth, and attained
to that perfection in all kinde of know∣ledge,

which many do much admire, but
few can hope to exceed. But I know to
whom I write, and therefore I will not
adventure into an Ocean of what may be
said of your demerits, especially to mee
wards, onely I commend this little work
to your acceptance, as a Testimony of
that unfeigned respect, which I think my
self ever bound to shew towards you and
yours; And I beseech God (that hath been
pleased to exercise me in School-teach∣ing,
whilst you have been put upon exer∣cises
in School-Divinity, and so order∣ed
that something of what we have each
done, is now labouring at the presse; to
continue our earnest endeavours to serve
him whilst we live, that when we dye,
we may partake of that blessed reward,
which is reserved in heaven for all those
that attend the coming of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ; to whose Grace I
commend you and all yours, and rest
 London,
Dec. 24.
1659.
