



SIR,
IT may be happily guest I am Planet-struck, and deeply in love with some red and white rarity; I confesse Beautie is a de∣lectable philtre, especially when the glan∣ces of the eyes are amorous; I know love is both Febris Diaria and Hectica: but I thank

my Starres, I never as yet felt those Ephe∣merical Fevers; I have had as few fits, and as gentle Paroxysmes of such hearty Agues, as it is possible for flesh and blood in the like tempes to conceive; I am neither A∣theistical nor Superstitious, neither hot nor cold: I give the world leave to con∣clude me tepid and luke-warm, and shall take the like freedome in conjectures of my next neighbours constitution and motions: But say I were wounded, and Cupids shast struck fast in my liver, I should think my self in no respect blameable, but that I stood in the way, and this may passe for a childes fault: Besides, Amanda is more tempting then ordinary, and (as much as her sexe admits) like your selfe, good and beautiful; I mean not the issue of my fancie, for then I should not only basely fall in love with my own off spring, but commit a Soloecism, worse then that of Incest, in the comparison of things, which make no more approach to an equality of

strength, then taplash and the best Ne∣ctar of the Grape; It is Amanda my Dear Mistris, that bright lamp of beauty and goodnesse, which vies perfections with the best constellated goddesse, that ever was deified by the most amorous Enthusiast, and beyond all, with the admi∣rable Idea of your person. She it is, in whom I love and worship your picture, in whose likenesse I adore you. And in truth, I think my Religion in this tran∣scendently reasonable to that of the common Catholique, whose best devoti∣ons have not more zeal, but lesse sense, and not half so lively a resemblance of a Seraphical being. Had I Vandikes pen∣cil, I durst not give a draught of your person, I must of necessity forbear that to keep the best and most chaste Madams from longing; As for your high-borne soul, we can only see the Sunne in the water by some reflexe beames, it is too gloriously resplendent, and dazles our

weak eyes, if we gaze on it in its fi∣ery chariot, whose horses are flames trapped with rayes, whose wheeles are lightning without ratlings of thunder, and whose driver is a bright Angelical Intelligence, ever darting irresistible flash∣es of Beautie: I will not undertake to sound a Triumph of your Vertues, un∣lesse my trumpet were silver, and I my self more blab-check't, that the report and Echo of your name, which hereafter I am confident wil run mazes in the mean∣ders of mens ears, might be clearer, strong∣er and more lasting. Yet as short-winded as I am, I cannot but venture at one blast, and I dare sound it boldly. Nei∣ther is your Honour nor Estate, (though you stand richly possest of both) equiva∣lent to your Beautie, nor the incompa∣rable Fabrick of your body, (from which a Tytian might learn proportion) sufficiently answerable to the complex∣ion of your soul, which the best Prin∣cesse,

might securely take for her tutelar genius, and the most religious Zealot for his good Angel. And if this be not a publick and more general Confession, the world hath not eyes enough to e∣steem you at your worth. It is no matter whether I call it want of judge∣ment or over-sight; those fine sober things which the world termes discreet, may be a little guiltie of both.
But to give you the main reason of this present to your Honour, beside the many private obligations, which enforce me; I know none a more competent Judge in Poesie then your self. You have surveyed more ground in the sweet Tempe of the Muses, and to better purpose, then many who have walk't Parnassus, as often as Duke Humphreys spider-catchers do Pauls, only to tell steps, and take the height of a cob-web fancie. You might better have writ man at fif∣teen, then not a few; (and those of no

mean thoughts,) who have half doubled your age; At those yeares when others do usually ride Hobbies, and swagger a∣stride broomsticks: Your Honour was mounting the great horse, and learn∣ing to manage the noble swift-winged Courser. Me thinks I see the best wits strive to be your Lackeys, as if you on∣ly could create Laureats, which is no small preferment, for every Poet is A∣pollo's footman, and consequently Wor∣shipful, and an Esquire by his place. You differ as much from an ordinary Poet, as a Traveller srom a Map-Geographer, who by the help of old Ortelius, or Iohn Speed our English Mercator, hath gone beyond sea, and rid post over the Alpes in his chamber. Thalia is proud you admit your self her Familiar, your hands must be kist, when others stand aloof, bare-headed like her waiting Gentlemen; you carouse with the srolique Lady at the Fountain, and sip Helicon in gold goblets,

while poor vulgar Students only refresh their temples with? wet finger, and beg rithmes in a night-cap. Had you liv'd sooner at Sucklings Sessions, you had sav'd Sir W. Davenant an oath, and wi∣ser Apollo would have known better where to bestow his Laurel, and given more content to the lesser wits. I assure you, it is seldome the Muses Nag findes such good pasture amongst Noblemens horses; for most commonly a Gentle∣mans Pegasus is as ill favour'd as Pha∣raohs lean Cowes, not pamper'd, plump and faire buttock't, like the Asse his Ma∣ster, and yet feeds upon thistles. You are borne to that which others must ditch and hedge for, and yet come short, as if Poëta nascitur were your birth-right; For my part, if your Honour shall but smile on Amanda, and entertaine the chaste Girle as your Handmaid. I shall think her better adopted, then if she had brave old Ben, or some pregnant fa∣mous

Court-wit for her father.
Sir, though my sweet Amanda dare not venture abroad to see her friends without you, and your presence be the best of any I know, to make way for a Lady, yet she presumes not to take so Honourable a personage for a Gentleman-Usher, or one with broad shoulders to thrust aside the croudes and throngs of censures she shall meet with in her walks; But being yet childish, and not able to go alone, she humbly kisses the hands of her most noble Guardian, in whose armes the little Moppet loves to be dand∣led, and shewn out at the window. In∣deed she is so much an Infant, that were not the face of a Godfather, in these Ana∣baptistical Antichristian times, worn quite out of fashion, I should have made bold to call your Honour to the Font; Many a poor man hath had (witnesse Charles Murrey the Cripple) his Majestie the King himself, (some would have said, God blesse him good

man) for his Gossip. But I most of all wish the Sponsalia were at hand, you might affiance and betroth my Dearest, (I know whom) to him who never knowes suffici∣ently how to expresse himselfe, what he is ever ambitious to be

