


SIR,
IF there be any thing new under the Sun, it is that Bird of Paradise, that is sti∣led
the New Creature. This is such a No∣veltie of such an hetero∣geneous nature from the old world, that it gazeth on him as a piteous Changeling, and ex∣plodes him as an ill-favoured Monster. Alas (sayes Marcus Antoninus) those Gra∣ces which the Deitie sent down as so many Pillars to stay up Hu∣mane
Societies, Faith and Modestie, Justice and Veritie, they found such cold entertain∣ment here below, that they are fled backe to Heaven. And for all that I perceive, it is as great a Raritie to meet with one that ownes them, as it is with a white Moore or black Swan: that if any were of the humour of that
old Philosopher,(Pittacus) , to let flie an arrow at everie viti∣ous man he sees, a thou∣sand to one that he mis∣ses, shoot where he will. They are all gone out of the way,(Psalm) 14.4. there is none that doth good, ,. no not one (sayes the Prophet.) No (sayes Plutarch) there is not one that is sober to Vertue, but they
are all runne not onely shamefully out of the way, but unhappily out of their wits; such a Vertigo there is in their brain, and turn∣ing round, by the spi∣rit of Giddiness. Nay, and (saith Julian) they are all inflamed to an height of Fren∣zie,. (Iuli∣an. Imp.) by the Furies of Hell; nay, and many (saith Isidor) by the
furie of their owne Lusts: so that they dare do that which the Devils themselves dare not,, (Isid. Pe∣lus.) such acts that the very transcendencies of their horriblenesse ma∣keth them incredi∣ble to Posteritie. And yet  peradventure (sayes Iulian) it may be no Paradox,, (Iulian.) that amongst myriads of bad ones there may be found
one good; and he giveth two eminent instances; Deioces among the Medes, and Anachar∣sis amongst the Scy∣thians.
Sir, I am overjoyed that I can see one Star shining amidst this our so crooked and umbra∣tile Generation,Quidam adeo um∣bratiles sunt, ut quicquid in turbido est, in luce esse putent. (Seneca.) that knoweth not how to di∣stinguish betwixt oblique and straight, betwixt
Light and Darknesse, nay, that extinguish∣eth the one by the o∣ther, that breatheth forth nothing but Spears and Swords, (Sapient. 2.11.) Ius est in ar∣mis (Sen.) and mea∣sures all rights by the length of their Weapons. I am glad I have met with one of an heroick spirit, that dares love Christ, when nothing sooner exposeth to ha∣tred; nay, when Christ
himself, , very God, (1 Iohn 5.20. (blessed God for ever (Rom. 9.5.) is exposed, (and that not by lewes, but by Christi∣ans, nay,. by multitudes of them, as blasphemous Arrius boasted) to that cursed croaking of that Atheisticall Toad, which Hell it self durst not belch forth,; (Theodo retus.) and which I cannot express with∣out
horrour, , that grand Impostor hung upon a Gibbet. For do not they all in effect speake the same, who deny his God-head? Nay, yet, which is worse,, (Epi∣phan.) if Epiphani∣us be not mistaken, scarce one of the many thousands who with their mouths deifie him,(Tit. 1.16.) but by their abominable
actions defie and denie him.(Rom. 1.21.)
Sir, I am glad I have met with one, in whose heart the love of him is fixt, who was crucified for us; one noble Eagle that can , gaze upon that glorious Sun with an irretort eye, when others are either like Moales starke∣blinde,, (Clem. Alex.) or like Owles
pur-blinde,, (2 Per. 1.9.) and cannot see at any distance; one that looks upon all other things as Dung in com∣parison of the superex∣cellent Excellencie of Iesus Christ; one of whom I could say more, but that I should expose, what? your Honour to the tongue of Envie? or my Reputation to a jealousie of Adulation? nay, but rather your
Modestie to violence, which useth to blush at its owne Perfections; otherwise I should not much fear the imputa∣tion of Flattery, where all Hyperboler are but Diminutions.
When once a soul is pregnant by the Deitie (saith Plotinus) oh what lovely off-springs will it produce?, (Plo∣tin.) it bringeth forth Beau∣tie,
it bringeth forth Righteousness; that is, (if I may interpret as a Divine) Love to God, and Charitie to all that bear his Im∣press: for so I finde in the sacred Dialect, Love to God, (2 Cor. 3.18.) such a Beautie as transformes into the Image of him who is the Brightness of Glorie;(1 Iohn 4.16.) which there∣fore must needs ennoble
the Soul, because it is of such a near cogna∣tion with God; and Charitie to Man is in express tearmes stiled  Righteousness, (Psalme 112.9.) He that giveth to the poor his righteousness re∣maineth for ever. And that this is the very re∣semblance of that Hea∣venly Father, not onely Christ hath said it,(Matth. 5.44.) but
an Heathen Empe∣rour. (Marcus tonin.)
Which are the rea∣sons that heightned me to this boldness, to present this charme of Divine Love to your Honour. First, because there is no such lovely Musick in your eares: which I do more then conjecture, by your candid accep∣tation of a verie incompo sed susurration thereof,
in the presence of that good Knight,Sir Ro∣bert Cook for whom I could have died: and Secondly, be∣cause I could doe no∣thing lesse by way of gratitude for my many Engagements to that noble Hand of Chari∣tie,, (S. Chrysost.) so often reached out to me readie to sink: which, as it is ,(Philip. 4.18) a sacrifice that a∣scends in such odorife∣rous
flames, that God is delighted therewith; so (I doubt not) will descend in abundance of blessings upon you, and your vertu∣ous Lady, and noble Relations here, & shall be crowned with a Dia∣deme of Glory hereafter: which shall be the hearty Prayer of,



