



May it Please your Grace,
THE Poet in Addressing your Ladyship feels all the Poet's ra∣vishment and transport; Your every Charm Fires every Thought so fast, the labouring fancy struggles for a Passage. Your Youth, your Beauty, Affability and Wit, when seperately consider'd, seem each to be the greatest Excellence, 'tis impossible any Writer can determine which of those Rivals boast the Preference; but every Writer may thus far be certain, that all of them excel. Shall I say (and yet speak properly) I am lost in a Cloud of Beauty? But 'tis a Glorious, 'tis a Golden Cloud, made Lustrous by the Soul which shines within. Can I, without growing old be∣fore my task's Accomplish'd, undertake to

describe your Youth in its full Springing Bloom? Should I not grow proud of my own Performance, could I display you at the height to which you rise by your Cour∣teous, Condescending Affability? Or shall I dare to think that I have Wit enough to venture on the praise of yours? No, Madam, all my Muses can perform no Works like these. Thinking on your Grace's Endowments, I find my self be∣wilder'd in a maze of Vertues; lost, like fam'd Theseus, in a Labyrinth; a La∣byrinth, whence no thread of thought can free my wand'ring sense. Strange! that Perfection should seem as intricate as Er∣rour! But Night with over-shadowing Darkness scarce blinds the Eyes so much, as an insufferable Flood of Light. With all submission, Madam, I must own I in∣cline voluntarily, (tho' guiltless) to make a Confession, which yet no guilty Poet ever made. I would flatter your Ladyship, if possibly I could, and boast the Glory of a Work so exquisitely difficult; but 'tis impossible: All Art falls  short of

Nature here: Were it not so, the ravishing Charms which Fire me now to think I should attempt it, would then seem less, and Consequently cool me from the En∣terprize. Long may your Grace stand thus sublimely Admirable, Long may your Vertues soar beyond the tow'ring Muses reach, — Long, till at last, (and may it then be late) they mount yet higher, to their Native Skies, and shine a Con∣stellation there.

