



Infandum Regina jubes renovare dolorem.

A Modern Wit, (so swift his Notions ran)
Describ'd the Patron first, then nam'd the Man,
Whose wide spread Character high rais'd in Fame,
Did the great Dorset to the World proclaim.
Here I, my Lord, might diff'rent Tracks pursue,
And praise as great a Dorset—but by naming you.
Let others—for poor Gain the first resign,
And seek new Patrons, you alone are mine.
My Muse feels native Pride, and flatters none,
But once enjoying you, she's yours alone.
Yours—for 'tis you, my Lord, she dares to boast,
The most a Courtier, yet above it most.
Thus, well distinguish'd from the rest of Men,
You slight the Feather, but command the Pen,
With this my willing Temper does comply;
Wholly my Patron, you, as much your Poet, I.
Strait would my Genius flag, nor could I raise
To Undesert a Pile of sordid Praise.
I cannot bend too low my suppliant Mould,
Nor flatter Fortune's Sons for servile Gold:
Unaw'd, my Muse, to seek your Favour flies,
Resolv'd to perish, or resolv'd to rise.
Blest is her Choice, grown conscious now of You,
At once our Horace and Mecaenas too.
'Tis here, her firm Allegiance she assures,
No proud Superiour your Desert endures,
The Field of Wit, as well as War is yours.
Whilst you protect me, who shall dare de∣stroy!
Not the Palladium better guarded Troy.
I fear no Force illnatur'd Criticks raise,
I have their Envy, and despise their Praise,
What here I offer, you alone can claim,
An Angel couch'd in Florimena's Name,
And sure 'tis yours, to guard your Lady's Fame.
To you alone her Character is due,
As she alive belong'd alone to you.
But no one Sphere has Phoebus Rays confin'd;
Her radiant Lustre shone on all Mankind.
Her Fame from Flatt'ry, my chast Muse se∣cures,
She was what Woman could be— she was yours.
This, to end all Debates, of force may serve,
Who could charm CUTTS, indeed must all deserve.
She must be more—tho' to a wonder fair;
Possest of double Pow'rs, who conquers there.
Forgive, my Lord, the transports of my Mind,
This you would pardon, could you search be∣hind.
I give but little from so vast a store,
All I can keep, I do; but that ran ore,
And 'tis with racking Pain I must refrain from more.
You and your Merits dash the Poet's Hand,
You slight our Praise, yet those our Praise command.
Take then, this Gift alone; you can't refuse,
But grant the Suit,—'tis Florimena sues.
Verse is the Muses Present; free, receive,
Tho'I, my Lord, thus unexpected give.
My humble Genius no great State assumes,
Nor sends to tell she will, before she comes.
My Visit now your Presence dares demand,
I bring your bright lov'd Charmer in my Hand.
Your Florimena sure will welcome grow,
She would indeed, could she be truly so.
O could my Verse the Nymph from Shades retrieve,
And give her Life, who makes my Num∣bers live!
Then should my Muse all charming to you fly,
Could she boast truly that she should not dye.
Hower', my candid Patron, gracious take,
And prize the Picture for the Person's sake.
In this, my Lord, my purpos'd End I find;
I slight all Censures, if your Iudgment's kind.
My Muse courts you alone, and here assures
At once the Poem, and the Poet —

Yours.
