



MADAM,
SHall I be guilty of Tautologies? Shall I Name Grafton first, and say she's Beautiful? Or shall I say your Ladyship is most Beautiful, and need I then Name Grafton?
What is it I feel inspiring me, while I address you? What is it Transports my Senses and my Soul with Ravishment? 'Tis Grafton; 'tis the Dutchess of Grafton, Love's Goddess, and the Queen of Beauty.
I see your Ladyship in Idea, but ev'n the Idea represents not any form so Amiable.
The fancyful Poet's Mistress in imagi∣nation wears Charms Divinely shining, wears Beauties gloriously Aerial, yet far inferiour.

To whom but to your Grace should I present Amasia? To you, the Mistress, the Amasia of the World.
O Paris! O happy Son of Royal Priam! Who saw three Goddesses at once, three Graftons! Not Hellena, made both the bribe and the reward for the Golden prize which he decreed to Venus, knew any Charms, like Grafton's: Not Hellena; Not Venus self; no, not the three God∣desses could make up, with Charms united, Glories so exquisitely Celestial.
Had your Grace on Ida's Mount ap∣pear'd,  you stood there a Candidate; in vain, had Wisdom, in vain had Empire too, and the Fair, Fatal Charming Beauty  all in vain been offer'd; Justice had prevail'd o'er all.
O Grafton! 'Tis almost Impious for a Poet to approach you, not in Verse; where is the incense I should offer at the Shrine of Beauty? Where is the Praise, through which the Poet claims his Priviledge to a∣dore? Where are the Flights, the Raptures

of Extatick Poetry? Why soar they not? Why? 'Tis because they Flag beneath you.
I cannot Praise you; I will not then attempt it; I have not Venus's sufficiently Divine, before me, to draw this Venus by. Scarce other Beauties are bright e∣nough to be the shadows of your Picture; I shall therefore resist the Torrents of my fancy, and withhold my Artless, my una∣ble Pencil.
If sorrow in the Face of the Graecian Chief could be no otherwise exprest than by a Curtain drawn to vail it, how shall I pre∣sume to hope that the Superlative excess of Beauty can be describ'd which blooms in yours! I too must draw the Curtain here, and rather choose to hide the Charming ob∣ject, than, by exposing it in a faint, glimmering Light, to darken, and obscure it more.
'Tis Elyzium, 'tis the Kingdom of Love, which Courts your Grace's presence; both Sylvius and Amasia Joyn'd (but in a fancyful enjoyment,) claim in this Poem

the Tenant's right of doing Homage to your Ladyship, both Court your Grace to give a visit to their humble Groves, to that Elyzium which we can possess only in your Grace's Smiles, for wheresoe'er your Grace appears, Love sways, and fixes his unal∣terable Kingdom there.

