



Sir,
WEre You one of that sort of men, who value themselves by the Bag, or the Acre; it might possibly be thought ra∣ther an Affront, than a

Dedication, to prefix your Name to this Trea∣tise. For since it is purposely intended to beat down the price of the World, and to ex∣pose its admired Vani∣ties to publick contempt, those sordid Spirits, who have no other worth to commend them, but what is summ'd up in their yearly Revenues, would interpret such an Address, not so much

a tender of respect and service, as a design to undo and begger them. But Sir to you, whom God hath doubly blest with a large Estate, and a larger heart, I doubt not but this Piece will be very accepta∣ble; if upon no other accompt, yet at least as the perusal of it may be helpful to you to strip off, and as it were to se∣quester all your worldly

advantages, that you may the better take an Estimate of your self according to your Na∣tive and Genuine worth, both as a man, and as a Christian.
I am not so much a Cynick, as to plead for affected Poverty, and a disdainful rejecting the gifts of Divine Providence. Such a morose and sowre pride I judg worthy to be

chastis'd not onely with the censure of Vanity, but Impiety. We need not shelter our selves under any Monastick vow; nor flie to De∣serts, and Solitudes to hide us from the Al∣lurements of the World: This is to run away from that Enemy, whom we ought to con∣quer. Certainly Re∣ligion allows us the pos∣session of earthly Com∣forts;

onely it regulates the Ʋse, and forbids the inordinate Love of them. We may prize them as Comforts, but not as Treasures: And while we imploy a due part of our abundance, in the works of a gene∣rous Charity, and true Piety, we may well look upon what is left, as a Salary that God gives us for being faithful Stewards of

the rest. Thus to use the World for the Inte∣rests of Heaven, to make its enjoyments tributary to Gods Glo∣ry, it is to convert and proselite it; and turn that into an Offring, which others make an Idol. By this we give Earth a Translation; and in a nobler sence than the new Systeme of Astronomy teacheth, advance it to be a Star,

and a Celestial body. And by this Method, we change those helps that Vice had to make it self prodigious and infamous, into the most serviceable Instru∣ments that Vertue can have to make it self con∣spicuous and exempla∣ry. For Wealth and Honour in a vertuous person, are like the well setting of a Jem, which, though it makes

it not more pretious, makes it more sparkling.
But Sir, I forget my self, and instead of writing a Letter, am writing a Tract. I shall make no other A∣pology for it, but that the Book being de∣signed against Vanity, I would not have the Dedication of it guilty of that common and no∣torious one, to be fil'd onely with Comple∣ments.

And I hope you will not think it any thing of that strain, when I shall assure you that my prayers to God for you are, that you may still enjoy all ad∣vantages of doing good here on Earth, and hereafter receive the reward of it in Hea∣ven.
Exon.
Feb. 1. 1668.


