



Dear Friends,
I Have you may see (though with some reluctancy as being conscious to my self of my own weakness, in speaking to the great things of God and Christ) ac∣complished your desires, for publishing what was upon my thoughts; and (as to some Heads thereof) was spoken to, and in the Family of your Deceased Mo∣ther, by occasion of her Death and Burial. I pray God add his blessing with it, that it may provoke some at least, yea all that read it, if it may be, to consider their ways, whether they be good and righteous, and what the end toward which they tend: so that they that be∣lieve and live amiss, may be there-through awakened to repentance, and to seek after righteousness; even the righteousness which is of God by Faith: not resting with Balaam in good Wishes and Desires, or rather in Wishes and Desires of Good, so as to miss as he did, of the good they wish; but that awakening from sin to righteousnesse and following after it, in seeking the Lord, they may both desire and attain what is truly good: and that they that are in the way of righteous∣ness, may through the consideration of its good and glo∣rious end and reward, hold on their way to the end: So should my labour herein be well bestowed. And oh that both I and you may our selves do what we desire and have herein, in some measure, endeavoured for others! that
 while we seek their good, we also minding the good way, may share with all that are good, or get good here∣by, in the reward. This briefly in General. Besides which I would adde a word to either of you, Severally. And
First to you Mr. Daniel, let me say, Remember the good and grave counsel and advice of your Dear deceas∣ed Mother; especially her dying farewell, and endea∣vour so to seek after the Lord, read and mind his good word, believe his love and grace toward mankind in his Son, and yield up your self to obey and follow his hea∣venly Counsels, preferring the Gospel (as your good Mother advised you) not onely above the pleasures of sin for a season, and what vain Companions, sports and pastimes can afford, or vain persons entice you to, but also above your worldly estate; and so adhere to the good advice of such as be sober, staid, and godly friends, that she may at least reap the fruit of all her serious wishes, desires prayers and tears for your good, and of all her tender affectionate love to you, in her receiving you in the resurrection of the just, at the comming of the Lord, in the lot and state of the righteous and holy Saints and servants of God. You are young, and need help and direction. I would have you think so and be so∣ber minded: not thinking your self so wise as that you may chuse for your self your ways, and need none to guide and counsel you; mind Solomons saying, Prov. 27.10. And thine own friend and thy Mothers friend forsake thou not. Not taking any for your friends that would flatter you into vain courses, to follow your will and pleasures to your ruine; in all things mind Gods word, and call upon him for his grace and blessing in and through Christ Jesus, and he will bless you and do you good. Seriously peruse also this Treatise, and let its contents be ever with you. And the Lord bless it to you, That's all I shall say to you at present.

As for thee, Dear Sister, thou hast cause to bless God for the good he hath done to you, and the mercy and grace he hath shewed you, both in your self and in your Dear deceased Mother. Oh let not his goodness ever be forgotten by you, or slip out of your heart: follow yet on after righteousness, and seek the Lord: the prize is be∣fore you, and ascertained in Christ to you in following after it: onely watch and take heed of what may divert or subvert you from it, especially of knowing your self in what you know, and in the gifts God hath bestowed on you, and so of being puffed up with any spiritual pride. Though not of that only, but also of every way of the world, or sinful temptation by which the ad∣versary will not be wanting to endeavour your harm, and whereof this Treatise also affords some notice and warning; but that's one main temptation he uses against such as are going on the right way, to make them reflect so upon their own beauty, put upon them by Christ as there-through to adulterate from Christ, as in Ezek. 16.14, 15, 16, 17, &c. It was probably the way he fell him∣self, the looking upon and falling in love with his own created excellencies: and thence lifting up himself to desire that that was proper to the Creator, and its the way he sets upon many persons (knowing persons espe∣cially) to corrupt them from the simplicity of Christ, and an humble faithful dependance on him and walk∣ing in the f of God through him, in whom all their fulness and safety is. But I hope, he that hath called you by, and into his grace will keep you through his grace from that and every other evil thing; and so cleanse, sanctifie, and make you perfect in every good thing, as that you shall without fail attain to the glory and glori∣ous kingdom that he hath prepared for, and promised to them that love him. And in that hope and perswasion for you, I commit you to him and to his blessing. And
 so taking my leave of you both, and desiring that this treatise may further both your happinesses,

From my House in Lin Regis.
Jan. 6. 1667.
