



Madam,
BEauty, as it is both the Theme, and Inspirer of Poetry, so it ought to be the Patroness too;

and a Poem of Love should in Justice be sacred to none but the lovelyest: it would therefore be adoring a false Deity, should I offer up this at any Shrine but Yours.
As it is the best I can do, and writ on the most pleasing Subject, I was resolv'd to lay it at the Feet of the most Beautiful, and had I been my self at a loss where to fix, the Universal Opinion of the World would have di∣rected me, and pointed out your Grace for the Patro∣ness; while the Poem shall last, (and a Poem of Love ought to last longer than any other) succeeding Ages

shall read, that your Grace was the Ornament of this Age.
'Tis an innocent and harm∣less Ambition in Poets, whose only design in all they do, is the pleasing others, and in doing that, please themselves best; and as Beauty is the chief Object they bend their Studies to delight; all Poets ought to aspire to please your Grace in particular.
That Ambition, is the best Excuse I can make for my presumption in this Dedi∣cation; since I am unknown to your Grace, and perhaps, even unheard of yet; but what is my Crime, is at the

same time my Plea for Par∣don; or rather it is my Me∣rit. The Athenians, when they Dedicated an Altar to the unknown God, shew'd more Devotion, and directed their Devotion to a truer Deity, than when they Adored the many they knew.
That I might be sure of something Acceptable in this Offering, and not fail to Delight in a Poem of Love, where all ought to be de∣lightful, I have taken all the most moving tender Things, that Ovid and Tibullus said to their Mistresses, to say to Mine; nor will I allow it to be a Theft, since I doubt

not, as it was their Love that inspir'd them with those Thoughts, Mine would have infus'd the same into me; and no man that thinks na∣turally of Love, can avoid running into the same Thoughts with them.
I have borrow'd the Ex∣amples to every Passion, from those Stories which I thought the most pleasing in Ovid, where certainly the most pleasing were to be met with: Some few places in every Story I have Trans∣lated, but for the most part, I have only kept him in View; I have gone on with him, and left him, where I

thought it proper, and by that means have avoided the Absurdities of his Metamor∣phoses; save only that of Pig∣malion's Statue, but that was a Metamorphoses that pleas'd me.
It was a delightful Sur∣prize, to see Life breath'd into an inanimate Beauty, as it would be a killing Afflicti∣on to see it taken away from one already animated: It would occasion as much Joy and Wonder, to have a Dutchess of GRAFTON made by Art, (if Art could do it) as it would cause Conster∣nation to have the Gods un∣make one. But those Mira∣cles

of Art are now ceas'd; and none but the Heavenly Artist could have Drawn You, who has Drawn You so, that he has left the Pain∣ter, and the Poet at a loss to Copy You.
As to the Succcess of this POEM, I hope I am secure, since it is Sacred in general to the Fair Sex, and commit∣ted in particular to the Pro∣tection of the Fairest; if they are once pleas'd, who will dare to find fault? or dis∣oblige them, by disliking what they approve? Under the shelter of your Graces Patronage, I shall stand, like Aeneas, guarded by the God∣dess

of Love, and no Dio∣medes shall be found as de∣sperate as the first to Wound me thro' You. Thus, as all Dedicating Poets, who write more to raise their own Re∣putation than their Patrons, I have taken the most ef∣fectual means to Establish mine; and doubt not to make a strong Party, since every Lover will defend what is sacred to the Lovely.
Your Graces
most Devoted,
most Humble Servant,
Charles Hopkins.
