



May it please Your Grace,
THE Dedicating Poet has but one only Plea, whereby to Vindicate his Presumption against the various Censures of the World; and that I justly Claim, while I Address your Grace.
The Acknowledging Favours receiv'd, can never be imputed to me as a Crime, since the very loosest Sense of Gratitude obliges all to pay it as a Duty.
A Duty it must be confess'd in those, whose Merits and whose Services seem to Engage them; but in me, it were the utmost Baseness not to re∣turn my humblest Thanks; in me, who have been in a singular manner greatly favour'd by your Grace, to whom, I have not yet had the Honour to be Personally known.
But indeed, whom is it your Grace inclines not to oblige? Your Good∣ness stoops as universally to the Wants of Mankind, as your Greatness soars above them. And unbyass'd by the Customary Opinion of the World, Your Grace is so far from believing a Man undeserving, because unfortu∣nate, that his very Indigence in a great measure entitles him to your Pro∣tection. Vertue is often Ragged, tho' 'tis the true Nobility; yet so well, so justly your Grace distinguishes between Man and Man, that while I ac∣knowledge your Grace's Favour to me, in that Acknowledgment I boast a seeming Merit.
This is your Grace's Character, and I'll be hold to say your Grace draws thence as true Nobility, as from your Illustrious Birth: Or, to run higher still, from your yet more Illustrious Actions. Your Grace's Vertues can be shown by no Comparison but of themselves: They stand a full created Orb of real Grandeur, and poiz'd by their own centring parts, there needs no Pen, no Pillar to be rais'd to prop them. Cou'd Poetry display your Grace, Great as you are, and generously Good, and truly Noble; tho' your trans∣cendent Excellencies are universally acknowledg'd and admir'd; and it grows
thence impossible I should be thought to dare attempt mean Flattery; yet 'tis not for me to undertake so great a Draught, for me, whose very Name stands with an Infamous Brand, as long as Letters live, accurst in Verse.
Hence I grow still more sensible of my presumptuous Acknowledgments, and fear my very Gratitude may render me the more Ingrateful.
But t whom should the Fame of Royal Nassaw e most dear, but to your Grace▪ for whose Glorious Intrests one has ventur'd mre; and inded, one had more to venture.
I shall only now beg leave to assure your Grace, you are not, you cannot be, more faithfully your King's, than I am

