




Infandum, Regina, jubes renovare dolorem.

AMASIA,
ONly Amasia; for a Name is all of you that lives; O racking thought! Sufficient to destroy the Power of thinking. But why do I repine? for you were never more to me.
AMASIA!
That Name is all; Elyzium, Paradise, and almost Heaven, are in the sound. How I have lov'd you, how I love you still, your Death, (for that involves mine too) will testify; I Pine, I Languish, and shall meet you, e'er 'tis long, somewhere, I know not where, but I am sure that I shall meet you. Your Soul was surely made for

mine, for mine was made for yours, and wheresoe'er they Join, the place must be in earnest, more than a Fictitious Heaven, more than a Poet's fancy can Create; and such, as a Poet and a Lover too must be most ravish'd in, with Rapture Exquisitely Charming.
How, Orpheus, shall I call to Mind thy turn of fate? O Poet happy, and accurst! You knew, when you had lost the last short sight of your Eurydice, you knew, you saw a glimpse of what I suffer. Despair and Hell are diff'rent but in Name.
To thee, Amasia, to thy Memory, which still must Charm me, The Friend∣ship of Love is Dedicated: The perusal of some Letters written to Acquaintance gave me the Occasion of the Title; the word Friendship is wholly Titular, for I had never any Friend but thee; O no, I never had so great an Enemy; the Bane, and the Destroyer of my Hopes and Life! And yet I Love thee; living I Lov'd thee, and revere thee Dead. O that the Lover might be Happy at the Poet's loss! O that

Fame might be a Sacrifice to Love! O that thy very Name and Memory might die! O Laethe! I'll Court the Streams of thy forgetful Fountain, and Celebrate thy dull Oblivion beyond the inspiration of the Muses Helicon. Farewel — my Friend, for I can boast a real Friend, shall now be my Amasia: I hope he wont disdain me but for being his, as you have done, when yours. Farewel — give me but leave to assure you, no second Beauty (for all Beau∣ty will to your's be second) shall deface your Image from my Soul. Once more Adieu — and yet, methinks I cannot leave thy Me∣mory, E'en Death wants Power to part us. O Laethe! Where are now thy Streams? Thou River, not of the Vnhappy, but the blest. Farewel — yet Men are very loath to die — Farewel —

