



MADAM,
AFter having been a considerable time in Town, deficient all the while in my duty of waiting on your Ladyship; like a true Poet, I flatter my self, that I may make my Book my excuse; not presuming to think it worthy to be cal∣led a Present. How this may pass with your Ladyship, I know not, but am apt to fear, it will, at best, be thought but a Poe∣tical excuse for so great an Omission. How∣ever,

if it may be allow'd to be truly Poe∣tical, some hopes of your Ladyship's Par∣don must still remain, when I consider you, as you are, a Favourer of Poetry. While the Muse introduces me to your Ladyship, I pass securely, like AEneas conducted by the Sybil, to Elyzium. The Golden Bough, that Hero brandish'd, intitled him to visit all the shady Groves, but here my Pen must fail, and I shall perhaps, be left without a Guide in Darkness, since I can hardly boast That for a Golden Branch. But to ascend more to the light; part of the Muses Works, Madam, are lay'd here at your Ladyship's Feet; and I am sensible, such is your quick, and Judici∣ous Penetration, you need not be at pains to stoop, to take them up; scarce can they be read so fast, as your Ladyship can both find their Beauties, (if they have any) and their faults; but so fustly your Can∣dour Rivals your Judgment, 'twill be hard to determine, whether you will see the for∣mer

more readily, than you will Wink at the latter. Your Ladyship's Father, the late Earl of Radnor, when Governour of Ireland, was the kind Patron to mine, he rais'd him to the first steps, by which he af∣terwards ascended to the Dignities he bore, to those, which render'd his Labours more conspicuous, and set, in a more advanta∣gious light, those living Merits, which now make his Memory belov'd. These, and yet greater Temporal Honours, your Family heap'd on him, by making, even me, in some sort related, and ally'd to you, by his Inter-Marriage with your Sister, the Lady Araminta. How imprudent a Vanity is it in me to boasts a Father so Meritorious! How may I be asham'd to prove my self his Son, by Poetry, that on∣ly qualification, which he so much excell'd in, but yet esteem'd no Excellence. I bring but a bad proof of Birth, laying my claim in that only thing he would not own. These are, however, Madam, but the Pro∣ducts

of Immaturer Years; and riper Age, may, I hope, bring forth more solid Works. In the mean time, such as they are, they Court your Ladyship's Ac∣ceptance.

