




LOrd I would dedicate this work to Thee,
For its materials are mainly thine;
And those endowments too, thou gav'st to me,
Through exercise whereof it became mine;
But yet that exercise of mine's so short
Of what ought t' have been, that thou mayst abhor't.



I do confess that unto Thee I owe,
My self, and all that I am, or can do;
For all that's good in me Thou did bestow,
And in my wants it is to Thee I go:
Therefore 'tis meet, that I devote to Thee,
My self, my works, and all that is in me.



But I'm a very sinful dirty thing,
So much defil'd in heart, mind, head and hand;
That I no offring meet for Thee can bring;
Nought that before Thee thou mayst bear to stand:
If Thou do'st look upon it with pure eye,
And mark its many swervings narrowly.



O wash me in the fountain of that blood,
Which thy most blessed Son for me hath shed:
Renew me with thy grace, that can make good
And clean, both heart, and mind; both hand and head.
Then shall I better offrings bring to Thee,
Than either I, or this my work now be.




The spring whence flowed out those streams, which here
Together gathered I have by study:
Is with what flows therefrom, both pure and clear,
But ah! the channel they ran through is muddy.
Thy words are all most pure, but in my mind
While they received are, there dirt they find.



Mistakes, and earthiness, carnal desires,
And selfish ends, therein so frequent are;
That what results therefrom, greatly bemires
The heav'nly liquor, and it almost marres:
Yet Lord let not thy wine be thrown away,
Though of the cask something it rellish may.



But let the Readers such good strainers find,
Of piercing judgment, as to seperate
What's mine from thine, so as what's thine to mind,
And nothing thereof for my sake to hate;
Yea, what in them or me thou seest amiss,
Pard'ning and purging, to us both it bliss.



Oh cause both me, and them who read or hear,
Of what's here writ of thy beloved Son;
The truth thereof behold so bright and clear,
As unto him at all times we may run:
And unto him resolve so fast to cleave,
As him by no means we may ever leave.



And O might all the musings of my mind,
And words, or writings, which from thence proceed;
Be such as may with Thee acceptance find,
And useful be, to who them hear or read:
To what's good therefore, Thou my strength, Lord be,
And from what ill inthrals me set me free.

