



MADAM,
AS your Great Father Reign'd our Monarch in Wit throughout all its Spacious Regions, but Resided most in the most Flowry Fields of Poetry, I, who am a Tenant, (tho' a Poor one) of the Muses land he sway'd, claim thence a Subject's right of throwing my self into your Ladyship's Protection. And as there is no Salique Law impos'd the Throne of Wit, permit me to salute your Ladyship the Muses Queen; the Crown is yours by

True Descent, and Just Succession; but why should I, rais'd to no Eminency in Verse, pretend to make the Declaration, when the World already has Proclaim'd you so. Your Ladyship's Character of Wit sits Crown'd by the Universal Admiration, as well as the Universal Consent of Man∣kind. And had not this noble Empire of the Soul devolv'd on your Ladyship by Birth, Succession must have been excluded, and by Election you had been courted to receive the Scepter. But 'tis your Ladyship's by Descent, as well as by Desert; so equal∣ly by both, I find my self at a loss to de∣termine, whether your Ladyship receives more glory by the World's acknowledging the late, and ever admirable Earl of Rochester, your Father; or his Memory, by the World's boasting the incomparable Lady Sandwich his Daughter.
Thus, Madam, your Ladyship and your Father become Rivals in Fame: And indeed, none besides, can without Arrogance

pretend any Claim, where such a Candi∣date as your Ladyship appears. Your Fa∣ther sway'd the Heaven of Poetry, at once the awful and the Youthful Jove, his Judge∣ment, and his Fancy, were the Light'ning and the Thunder which he brandish'd. Thus great he rul'd, — and all his Attributes are yours. Your Ladyship lives the Mi∣nerva, and seems the charming Off-spring of the very brain of Jove. 'Tis your La∣dyship's to be beauteous, but yet to be a∣bove it. Your Ladyship's Soul transcends all outward form, your Wit's the truest Venus; not like the light, fictitious God∣dess, sprung from froth, but from the no∣blest Fountain, the very Helicon of Poesy. Your Ladyship thus deriv'd, I would in∣sinuate thence the freedom of this Address, and turn my presumption to a Duty; for every Poet stands oblig'd to approach, and to revere the Streams which flow imme∣diate from the Muses Spring. 'Tis part of the Muses Works I here presume to pre∣sent

your Ladyship, and if there shall be any offence to be conceiv'd at the pre∣sent, it cannot be because I offer this, but because I withhold the rest, for all the Works of every Muse are yours. The Mistress of Love lies a suppliant at your Ladyship's Feet, at the Feet of the Mi∣stress, and the Queen of Wit; and, (ever fond of his inseperable Amasia,) with her, lies prostrate too,
MADAM,

