



MY LORD,
WHilst others Mourn in Silence the Loss of the Deceased Saint, I must beg leave to make a Publick Declaration of my Grief, tho it must fall short of a true Sympathy with Your Lorship's; who, being Related to her in the stri∣ctest Alliance, best knew the value of her while Living, must sensibly perceive the want of her now Dead.
This, my Lord, would Naturally draw on a Consolatory Discourse, were I not fully assur'd of the Presumption of such an Attempt. Your Lord∣ship is furnish'd with better Arguments than I can give; the happy effects of which, appear in that true settlement and composure of your Spirits.
I that saw Your Lorship's demeanour at the most Melancholy Juncture, with what Christian Cou∣rage and Constancy you receiv'd the News of My Lady's Death, how Glorious you rose above the Billows which threaten'd you, cannot doubt but the same Principles which fortify'd you at that time, have since confirm'd you beyond a possibility of falling. Such exemplary Conduct, My Lord, was highly requisite to secure the Interest of Reli∣gion; for had Your Lordship fail'd in that great Point of Resignation, Hundreds that stood beneath your Shade, might have stagger'd in their Belief, when they had seen so Tall a Cedar shatter'd and broke by the assaults of Fate. But still Your Lord∣ship's Grief was comely, your Lamentations well-temper'd: All the Tenderness and Passion that could be fairly allow'd, Your Lordship express'd; yet, at the lowest ebb, never betray'd a Sorrow with∣out Hope. This was truly Great, and Rational; for, as a Philosopher of old observes, It is not Benevolence, but Weakness, that prompts a Man to continual Grief, and makes those only fear whom Reason has not sufficiently arm'd a∣gainst Contingencies.
And here I cannot but Congratulate Your Lord∣ship upon bearing the Stroke so well: For none can
imagine how near a touch Nature gives, how pier∣cing the Sufferings of one's Blood are, but those whose tender Bowels feel the Smart; and I dare affirm no Person, of such quick Resentments as Your Lordship is Master of, could have set bounds to their Passion: None besides your Lordship but must have fainted under the Load. In fine, No Person that had once enjoy'd so voluable a Consort, but would have courted Solitude for ever. But Your Lordship has bravely Surmounted the busy En∣croacments of Nature, and wisely considered that this Inestimable Prize was snatch'd from as by the special designation of Providence. Vertue has no security from the Grave; Death riots on the spoil of the best as well as the worst, Cato enquires of the Gods why Pompey should be vanquished by Caesar, who had much the bet∣ter cause. We may likewise wonder, but with more Modesty, Why the Rightous Perish, and the wicked Survive and Prosper. No doubt the Almighty has great reason for such severe dispen∣sations, either that we are not worthy of them, or that me prize them too much: In this late sor∣rowful Instance, I hope, I shall not exceed the bounds of Modesty, if I ascribe the former to our selves, the latter to Your Lordship; For Your Lordship
must own, you Lov'd her, Lov'd her dearly; nay, Lov'd her passionately. This God saw, and, per∣haps, deprived Your Lordship of so great a Blessing on purpose to draw of your Thoughts from all Sub∣lunary things. This is the result of his boundless Knowledge, who foresees what is best for us, and mingles ill with the good things of this Life, Fears with our Hopes, Crosses with our greatest Pleasures, least we should set too great a value upon any thing here below, and abandon Heaven for present Frui∣tion. The Spirit is apt to yield in Prosperity, and we grow too frequently upon the liberal Distributions of Providence, till God humbles us by Affliction, recalls our wandring. Thoughts, and out of these Clouds creates a Glorious Day. As to these follow∣ing Pages, I have little to offer in their behalf, and therefore must beg Your Lordship's Protection, both for them and my self. The first Essays, in any kind, are hazardous, but Attempts of this Nature are al∣most desperate. For upon such occasions we are un∣avoidably exposed to one of these two Censures, either of saying too little, or too much: The latter of which Imputations does no ways concern me; For how pre∣valent soever the Malice of the World may be, I will venture to affirm, that I have not, neither was I in a possibility of doing Justice to My Lady; For those
Characters I have drawn are only Sketches of her Life; but could I have been led into her Retirements, I do not question but there might have been form'd one of the compleatest Models that has been exhibited to the World for some Ages past. Indeed, those scat∣ter'd Pieces of her Life, ought to have been toucht by a more masterly Hand, but I had no power to dispute Your Lordship's Command, which will, in some mea∣sure, I hope, attone or the Defects. Here I must not forget to acquaint the World what repeated Hints. I receiv'd from Your Lordship to avoid all artificial Strains, false Colourings, and suspicious Glosses. These I have strictly obey'd; nay, I have went so far as to lay asido even common Ornaments that I might not endanger the truth of the Character. And now, My Lord, it's time to ask Pardon for this trouble, but, at the same time, must beg Your Lord∣ship to indulge one Plea (if it may be admitted as such) That the miscarriages of Young Adventurers are more excusable than others; especially where neither Rashness or Ambition has any hand in the Attempt. From these Crimes I can safely absolve my self; and if Your Lordship will be pleas'd to for∣give the rest, it will be a mighty Encouragement to the green Enterprizes of,

