



THat I have made bold to take up again, and revive with your ho∣nourable Patronage this small work, by this time well nigh dead and buried, exposing it to publique view; we hope, will by you be esteemed neither unbeseeming your honour, nor beneath our duty.
Your noble favor and patience, whose sweet company carried me on with plea∣sure through the burdens of that office you were once pleased to honor me with, and which cheared the delivery of these
rugged Notions, sets me in the debt of infinite obligations; which till I can discharge, be pleas'd to accept this scroll of paper as a Bond.
And truly, while I was thus meditate∣ing thankfulnesse; the report, that these essayes, and my self were by some ad∣judged both hereticall, added vigour to my first resolution; seeing I must needs esteem their opinion, onely a defect of memory and advertency, whom that I might fully satisfie with all well-mean∣ing men, I have set Pen to Paper, and published them in the same dresse my memory did then suggest them to my tongue.
Now, of the matter let the learned judge: For what concernes my selfe, I wonder those good men did not perceive, First, That I set before them anothers Philosophy, not mine owne; Secondly, That my selfe likewise stood aloofe from peremptory assent to some of those things that were delivered; Thirdly, well∣knowing in what uneven way I tra∣velled, nor sufficiently confiding in the support of mine owne judgement, I beg∣ged,
and I hope obtained pardon of all mine errours; which lest I should faile of in the publication, I have adjoyn∣ed the Epilogue then used, which I doubt not but will be successefull to both.
And certainly if pardon belong to a∣ny, it is to the silent, solemn Sceptick, whose opinions are not brought forth as the onely heires-male to all humane as∣sent, invading the worlds freedom with fire, faggot, and thunder.
And may I be in the bed-route of those Seekers, that distrusting the known and experienced deceits of their owne reason, walk unfetterr'd in the quest of truth, with an easie suspitious gate, not hunting those poore soules with Dogge and Speare, whose dimme sight hath led them into desert and un∣beaten paths.
Certainly, more soules have crept to the throne of Wisdome; with the thin-spun clew of Right-opinion, then ere have drawne her downe with the stiffe cart-rope of irresragable Syllo∣gismes.

This supposed certain science of what is good and right, believe me, (O you noble Athenians) is the true ignis fa∣tuus, whose smal glimmering expires in palpable darknesse.
Would you saile in the Philosophers Ocean; know that two Ilands there are of exceeding danger, yet built upon and inhabited, and defended, as part of the main continent of Truth: The first is called, I believe as the Church be∣lieveth. Happy men, whom so easie la∣bour hath set on the shore of wisdome! And happy that narrow point, that hath devoured so large a circumference! The other is called, Whatsoever the Church believes, that will not I believe. And here they think they are safe: These, if all the old Heresies were translated into the Churches Canon; they would leave them, and embrace our relinquish' t faith, crying it up as their great Diana.
Both these rocks I have alwayes stu∣diously avoided: The Decrees of the Church, that is, (if I may speak freely) the prevailing part of the present Age, were never my Hercules his pillars, that
I thought it unlawfull to look beyond them. I have often read and smil'd, and smiled and read Mirandula, Gas∣sendus, and other famous wits of the latter Age, delivering their choice no∣tions diametrically opposite to the decrees of that Age, with this civil comple∣ment, Of submission to the Church of Rome, (which it seems) disproves not a reputed Heresie, so she wait upon her in the garb of an handmaid.
Notwithstanding, though I doe not a∣dore the unanimous consent of good and pious men; yet I receive it with much reverence, especially in a sacred matters 'tis neither my fetter, nor my scandal.
I professe, I am not of those that think the mysteries of Religion may be rudely unraveled, or its publique Professors bespatter'd with every Parrots tongue; for mine own particular, the studies of the divinest Philosophy have suckt me in from my childe-hood; and for such an one, I never esteem'd it unlawfull, or dis∣approved by any sober man, modestly to to dispute, and discusse even the highest matters, especially in a learned Audito∣ry.

As for these notions with which you are presented, you have them not from me as Sibilline Oracles, such as I ei∣ther know or fully believe to be true, nor perhaps ever shall, till convinced with the same light that illuminated the Divine Author: however let them sit among Probables, till He come that shall come.
I deny not but that much may be ob∣jected against them, and that not easily answered; but 'twill befit him that un∣dertakes this taske, likewise to set forth another scheme of the infinite Eternity, and delineation of the Ʋni∣verse, in which is no contradictory in∣consonancy, and neerlier agreeing with the ancientest Philosophy and sacred Scripture.
I speake plainly what I at this pre∣sent thinke.
Whatsoever the Thrice-great Hermes deliver'd as Oracles from his Propheti∣call Tripos, or Pythagoras spake by authority, or Socrates debated, or Ari∣stotle
affirmed; yea, whatever divine Plato prophesied, or Plotinus proved; this, and all this, or a far higher and profounder Philosophy is (I think) con∣tained in the Teutonicks writings. And if there be any friendly medium which can possibly reconcile those ancient dif∣ferences between the Nobler Wisdom which hath fixt her Palace in Holy writ, and her stubborn hand-maid, Naturall Reason; this happy marriage of the Spi∣rit and the Soul, this wonderfull con∣cent of discords in one harmony, we owe in great measure to Teutonicus his skill.
Onely let not the non or misunder∣standing even of the most rationall Rea∣der (if not a little sublim'd above the sphere of common reason) be imputed as a fault to this elevated Philosopher, no more then 'twas to the divine Plotine, whose highest notions many even of his owne School, after much study, were not able to reach.
And with this proviso, I doubt not but the height of what I here pro∣mise, will be abundantly performed by
the Authors Book of the Three Prin∣ciples, which as I am informed is now at Schoole, and will in few moneths be taught our language.This Book was published Ann. 1648. In the mean time may your noble favour accept my poor pains in taking off the dark style of the Authors magick language from these abstruse Notions, attiring them in a garbe as sutable to the common eye, as their strange proportion would be are.
And you the renowned Youth of both the Schools, the darlings of your times, whose learning, modesty, and piety, mi∣raculously unproportioned to your Age, will be an ensample to future generati∣ons; it was for your cause chiefly, that for one night or two, I bade sweet sleep and ease adieu (both at other times very acceptable) that under the protection of the silent Moon, I might lead you into the inmost recesses of the more sacred Phi∣losophy: To you my dearest fellow-stu∣dents (your high merit challenging no lesse) is this Enchiridion principally de∣dicated.

Had I found your minds and man∣ners disingenuous, and uncivil, I had sufficient provision of Entelechia's and Haecceities proportionable to such rustick dispositions; but the sweet unspotted hu∣mane Genius which I have experienced to be in you, made me, as for my choisest Friends, broach this my best vessel of Di∣vine Nectar; which
Enjoy, and Farewell.
