



SIR,
THE following Discourse being the substance
of several Sermons, Preach'd at your desire,
and incouragement, before the Monthly Sa∣craments,
though I am ignorant who you are, and what
part of the City or Country you live in, yet I thought it
my Duty, to let the Publick know, that there is such a
Man in the World, who is desirous to do good, and loves
not to be known. This Treatise you have a proper Title
too, not only as one, whose Hearts desire is to see the
Church of England flourish, but as a Benefactor too;
and to have Dedicated it to any other Person, had been
injurious to your Character.
You were sensible how backward the generality are to
come to the Holy Communion, how much ground the
Church, and Christianity it self, loses by this stupid
negligence of it's pretended Votaries, and how, not a
few absent themselves, for want of understanding the true
nature and design of this Blessed Sacrament, and
therefore justly thought, that if, by a previous Monthly
Sermon, Mens Hearts were warm'd into consideration
of the Use and Necessity of this Ordinance, the Mists,

which hitherto have clouded their Vnderstandings,
would be dispell'd, and they become acquainted with
their Duy, which was the cause of your exciting me to
this Publick Service.
Your Judgment hath not fail'd you, for since these
Religious Exercises have been among us, abundance of
Persons, who before look'd upon their coming to the
Holy Table, either as indifferent, or unnecessary, or
unseasonable, have, through the Blessing of God, be∣thought
themselves, considered the Obligations, that
the mighty Work of Redemption lays upon them, and
conscientiously applyed themselves to the frequent Use of
this Universal Medicine. And all I can tell you
for your incouragement, is this, That as we owe the
beginning, and progress of these Monthly Sermons,
to your Zeal and Influence, so you will have a share,
both in the good that's done by them, and in the Re∣wards
of those, who are thereby brought to a serious
sense of the wonderful Love of God in Christ Jesus. It
was a publick good you design'd by your munificence;
and that which makes the Pious Work the greater, is,
that you do not care your left hand should know what your
right hand doth.
The Almighty hath enrich'd your Heart with the
Noblest Charity, even with that to the Souls of Men,
an Emplyment which God himself disdains not to
travel in; and what are all the Angels of Heaven,
but Ministring Spirits, sent forth to be helpful unto
those that shall be Heirs of Salvation?
Nothing is more pleasing to God, than to be instru∣mental
in bringing many Sons unto Glory, and
though you are no publick Orator, yet you help towards
Mens Conversion, and in employing others to rouze
them from their Spiritual slumber, your Self have a

hand in their Reformation; And by that means Preach,
though you be not in Orders, yet without offence to the
Law, and at the same time observe the Canons of the
Church, and win Souls, without being engaged in the
Sacred Function. Some Criticks think, that S. Paul,
in his Address to the Athenians, doth not find fault
with, but commends them for Erecting an Altar To
the unknown God, and if so, I hope none will
blame me for raising this Monument, To an unknown
Benefactor.
Good Works are the sweetest Incense that can be
laid upon God's Altar; and though some, that have
concealed their Names, have been discover'd by the
Charitable Deeds done by them, yet yours are so order'd,
that, though for some time you have thus generously
employ'd part of your means, to advance this publick
Good, yet still you are a stranger to me; and in that,
happier than the Roman Senator, who
hiding himself in the time of Proscription,L. Plotius.
his Perfumes betrayed him.
May the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who hath already touch'd your Heart with a sense of his
Glory, enrich you with all Spiritual Blessings, and make
you to abound more and more in Faith, in Love, and
in all Goodness. May that Great Shepherd of Souls en∣lighten
your Understanding with greater brightness,
raise your Soul above this transitory World, teach you to
despise the things that are seen, and fill you with earnest
longings, after those which are not seen; that after ha∣ving
serv'd your Generation here, your Immortal part
may be admitted to the Enjoyment and Embraces of the
Holy Trinity, the Festivals of Seraphim, to Mount
Sion, to the City of the Living God, to the innume∣rable
Company of Angels, to the general Assembly of

the First-born, which are written in Heaven, to the
Spirits of Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Me∣diator
of the New Testament, whose Blood speaks better
things than that of Abel. So wishes,
SIR,

