



THough I intend you a larger
Treatise upon the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, by the
Name and Title of THE CRUCIFIED
JESUS; Yet I was willing to let
these Directions come forth, to prepare
your Hearts for those larger Meditati∣ons;
not but that there are Books enough
already Writ upon this Subject, and by
abler Pens too; but you having for



some years past known my Conversation,
my Temper, my Exhortations, and my
manner of Speaking, and Writing; I
thought something of this nature might
be more useful to you, then other more
elaborate Lucubrations. There is no∣thing
I am more afraid of, then that the
generality of you, both young and old,
either have not, or will not have right
apprehensions of that Christian Religion,
you profess, some being apt to place it in
a careless, customary Belief of the Do∣ctrine;
some in leaving a few notorious
Sins; Others in saying their Prayers;
Others in doing no body wrong; Others
again in having good desires, and pious
inlinations; all which Opinions are no∣torious
mistakes of the nature and temper
of Christianity, which imports a change
of Nature, Disposition, and Acting con∣trary
to the Humours, Passions, Manners,
Customs, and Deportment of the World;
and this is it I must see, and perceive in
you, before I can conclude, that my pains,
and labours among you, have not been in
vain.


Brethren, My Hearts Desire and
Prayer to God for you, is, That you
may be Saved. I will assure you, this is
no Compliment, no form of Speech, no
Words in course, but the ardent wish of
my Soul; and my fervent Prayers day
and night; This is the desire of my soul
in private, and in publick; for this I fill
my Mouth with Arguments to that God,
who heareth Prayers, even then when you
do not think of me; For this I study,
and take pains, and am willing to spend
my self, and to be spent; and your Sal∣vation
is the great object of my care; for
this end I venture your Anger, and caress
yonr Love; For this end I walk blame∣less
among you, and am tender of your
welfare; For this end I reprove, and
exhort, and intreat you, and run, and
spend my breath, and all, that you may
be saved.
I am not ignorant of the Divels de∣vices,
I am sensible of the nature of sin,
how apt it is to deceive you, and though



I am not with you in all places, I see by
the effects, how the enemy of your Souls
deals with you, and what will be the is∣sue
of a careless Life. I consider the
shrieks of the damn'd in Hell, and would
fain keep you from that dangerous gulph.
I see you stand upon the brink of destru∣ction,
and cannot forbear calling to you,
O do your selves no harm. The great∣est
kindness you can do me, the greatest
gratitude you can express, the greatest
civility and respect you can shew me, is
to do according to the wholsome Coun∣sels,
I do give you, whatever constructions
some of you may put upon these adjurati∣ons;
The searcher of all hearts knows
this to be true, that I would rejoyce in
nothing so much, as in your obedience to
the Gospel.
I would fain rejoyce with you in the
great day of the Lord Jesus; I would
fain see you Glorious Saints in the Ever∣lasting
Mansions; I would fain see you
shine as Stars in the Firmament of Hea∣ven.
I would see you triumph with An∣gels,



sing with Cherubim, and joyn the
Celestial Quire in Eternal Praises. Think
what a dismal sight it will be in that day
to see some of your friends in the burning
Lake, that might have feasted with the
Son of God, in his Fathers Kingdom;
We that meet together in the Church-Mi∣litant
here, What a happy, What a Glo∣rious
fight would it be to meet all in the
Church-triumphant, when these Bodies
do drop from us!
It is no small grief to me, to see some
of you, who have lived for some years un∣der
my Ministry, given to the same sins,
and inordinate desires, as Drunkenness,
Swearing, Lying, Cheating, Dissembling,
Malice, Wrath, Hatred, Passion, Care∣lesness,
and neglect of the Lords Supper,
Quarrelling, foolish Jesting, filthy Talk,
Frothiness, Pride, Vncleanness, &c.
they were formerly enamoured with;
certainly this must be an argument
against you in that day, when God shall
judge the secrets of Men, by the Ever∣lasting
Gospel. O let's not be forced to



complain of you, that we would have
healed you, and you would not be healed
To this end I beseech you,
1. To make the Rules in the following
Treatise familiar to you. There is nothing
in it, but what you'l find exactly agree∣able
to that Word, on which you build
your Faith. By making them familiar
to you, I do not only mean getting them
by Heart, but applying your selves to the
serious practice of them, till you get a
habit of those Virtues. A single act now
and then when you are in a Religious hu∣mour
will do no good; but you must la∣bour
at them so long, till they come to
be incorporated with your Spirits, and
mingle with your Complexion, and Con∣stitution.
To oblige your Children, and Ser∣vants
to learn these Rules without Book,
and to admonish them to try, and see,
whether they observe them in their Beha∣viour,
and Conversation; to ask them
often, Whether their Actions are agreea∣ble



to these Rules, and whether they are
not afraid of losing Gods favour, by neg∣lecting
so great a Salvation.
But then you must shew them a good
example; for all your Exhortations, will
be but Wind, while you do not express
the possibility of living up to these Rules,
in your own Lives. Your example will
make these Christian Virtues amiable,
and your practice must shew, that you
believe them necessary. And oh! how
comfortable will it be upon your Death-beds,
and what joy will this testimony
of your Conscience Cause, that in Godly
Simplicity and Sincerity, not according
to fleshly Wisdom, but according to the
Grace of God, you have had your Con∣versation
in the World; God will love
you, even he, whose loving kindness is
better then life it self. His Love will
close your Eyes, His Love will whis∣per
the glad tidings of Happiness in
your Ears. His Love will be your guide
through the shadow and valley of Death,
and this Love will see you safe within



the Gates of a Blessed Eternity; which
Love, that it may become your Portion,
and Inheritance, is, and shall be the
hearty Wish, and Prayer of

