



Right Worshipfull, and much Honoured in Christ,
BEing requested by the Friends of this worthy Citizen, and Brother of your Company now lately deceased, to put this Sermon in to print, which was preach'd at his interrment, I knew not to whom more properly to dedicate and intitle it, then to your selves; who being made the Trustees for that Bounty which he hath left behind him, might be also the Witnesses of those Truths which are asserted of Him, and applyed unto Him.
The Scripture which is here handled, I con∣ceived to be every way suitable and agreeable to the present Occasion: which first being a Fune∣ral, hath therefore in it the seasonable remem∣brances of Death and final dissolution, and pre∣parations for another World. And then being the Funeral of a person whom God had blest with a very fair & plentifull Estate, hath likewise in it the pertinent mention of this worldly and earthly Mammon, and the Riches of this present
life. And lastly, being the Funeral of a Bounti∣full and Liberal Person, and of one that had dis∣posed of his Estate in a Charitable Improve∣ment, hath accordingly in it Directions to make Friends of this Mammon of unrighteousness to the best and most desirable Advantage.
Now the main scope and end of such Dis∣courses as these are, is that those who are ac∣quainted with them might in some sort be Con∣formable to them, and have them wrought as it were into themselves. This I look upon as that which is more particularly Your Opportunity, from that Work wherein you are ingaged for the managing of this Persons Liberality. I know not how it comes to pass, but mens spirits doe usu∣ally, and for the most part partake of their Im∣ployment. Those, who are taken up in low and meaner services, they have commonly a low∣ness of Spirit ingendred & contracted by them. Whereas Noble and Generous Performances beget noble and Generous Affections, and trans∣form the Persons which are interested & concern∣ed in them into the very nature of the things themselves. Upon which account it is much to be hoped, that as many of you as God hath fur∣nished with abilities answerable thereunto, in
this discharge of a Trust for another, you will your selves be unawares drawn into a comply∣ance with so good an example, as is here set be∣for you. At least, that you will so order and dis∣pose of this Charity of His, as in a manner to make it your own, & thereby to make to your selves so many Friends of this Mammon of Righteousness, which you may do at the second hand.
The Heart of man by nature is so desperately treacherous & deceitfull, where it is not rectified by the Grace of God, and a special watchfulness o∣ver it self, as that from hence there are great mis∣takes and miscarriages oftentimes in the world in such matters as these are; both for the perform∣ing of the works of Charity in men's own parti∣cular Persons, as also for the Executing of the cha∣rity of other men; which yet is no disparagement at all to the works themselves simply consider'd being still the same in their own nature, nor yet any reflexion upon such persons as are really con∣scionable in them who shall notwithstanding reap the fruit of their own Integrity. But it is that which may awaken all men very narrowly to look into themselves, and to examine their own soules in this particular. Because othervvise they may give not onely half but all their Goods
to the feeding of the poor, and yet be void of cha∣rity: and may likewise be thought in some sort to discharge their Trust, and yet not to discharge their Consciences. Our Saviour in this very chap∣rer, and upon this very occasion it self tells the Pharisees whom he converst withall, that They were such as justified themselves before men, but that God knew their Hearts; for THAT WHICH IS HIGHLY ESTEEM∣ED AMONGST MEN, IS ABOMINATION IN THE SIGHT OF GOD. The better that any thing is of it's own nature wherein we are im∣ployed, the more need have we to look to our Mindes & Affections in the managing of it, that so we may not miscarry in that, wherein we seem to triumph, and most to glory and pride our selves. Which that it may be the better avoided in this present business in hand (as in all others besides) it is worth the while for men to enquire into their state & Condition in Grace; and the constant and general frame & temper of their own Hearts, there being nothing done as it should be, which does not flow from such a Principle as this. Our Saviour again in the following words makes this sober and serious Expostulation, If ye be not faith∣full in that which is ANOTHER man's, who shall give you that which is your OWNE? we may a little invert it,
and turn it thus; If ye be not faithfull in that which is your Own, who shall trust you with that which is another man's? There is no man can ever be a Good Husband for Others that is a Bad Husband for Himself; and he that neglects the Care of his own Soul, can never be a good Trustee for another's Estate. Religion is an Vni∣form business, and consistent to it self: Men may carry it perhaps plausibly and gloriously in the Eyes of the World, and make a fair shew in the flesh for a little time; but every man will have so much Comfort at last, as he hath sinceritie in him, and a spirit in vvhich is no guile. When God shall come to Iudgement, and Christ shall sit upon his last Tribunal, (as he one day vvill) He will then call men to Account for Affections, as well as for Actions, and for the Principles of doing, as well as for the Things themselves, which have bin done by them; and then shall every one have Praise, or Blame from Him.
These things I doe not suggest, as any way suspecting your Selves, who have given suffi∣cient Testimony of your Fidelity in things of this nature by former experiences: Nor yet as in the least reflecting upon the Example here presented unto you, whom I have looked upon
as a Person of as great Integrity in this Business as any man else. But onely as taking occasion from the Opportunity which is here afforded to discourse of the Point at large, and to express my thoughts about it in a General and Theological Discussion. I have nothing further but my Prayers that God would set home the Truths here mention'd upon the Hearts of all those that are partakers of them, and that he would send forth many such Persons out of your renowned and flourishing Societie, as may be inrich'd with the like Estates, and the like Hearts; which is the earnest and unfeigned Desire of

