


IT was far from my Thoughts, as being conscious of my own private Weakness. that this: poor Sermon should gain such Accept∣ance with you, as to judge it worthy either of your Thanks, or of publick View: But seeing your Pleasure is to Order the Publishing of it, I do humbly Obey. And there∣fore
take the boldness to Offer and Consecrate the same even to you, who are the Head and the Re∣presentatives of this whole Land, and have com∣manded both the Preaching and Printing of it: Yea, and it is my Duty which Obliges me to make you this thankful Acknowledgments for the many singular Favours and Courtesies, particularly that of your last Liberal Bounty and Kindness be∣stowed and fastned upon me; so that I must say as Ruth said once to Boaz, Chap. 11.10. Why have I found grace in your Eyes, that you should take knowledg of me, seeing I am a Stranger. Verily I can ascribe and impute it to no other cause; but unto Gods infinite Mercy, and your own Goodness. The great God of Heaven, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, so direct your Hearts, that all and every one of you may truly, and indeed (according to Jethro's Counsel) approve your selves to be Men of Abili∣ty, fearing God, men of Truth, hating Covetous∣ness: That you may truly and indeed (according to the Power God hath intrusted you withal) oppose the violent stream of all Lewdness, and Wicked∣ness, and Prophanness, and be a lively Example to the Practise of Piety, of Holiness and Godli∣ness: Yea, that you may have both the Caurage and Zeal of Moses, to Defend and Protect the true Religion and Worship of God, against all Opposers thereof. And this the Lord expects at your Hands, in regard of the depth of your Inter∣ests:
You are more concerned in the Publick wel∣fare of this Island, than others of a more private Station, and therefore you are bound to seek and to promote the Good and Welfare of this Island, more than others. It is a Maxime in Divinity, Beneficium postulat officium; Those whom God calls to the Highest places, he calls withal to the Highest services: Therefore it behoveth you above all things to remove all Impediments which might hinder the Advancement of the Glory of God, the Flourishing of the Gospel, and the Hap∣piness and Prosperity of this Island. If this be your chief Study and Care, then certainly the God of Heaven will be with you, and bless you in all your Doings, in all your Consulations: Then indeed, this great Keeper of Israel will keep and preserve you in all your Wayes, both in your going forth, and in your coming in, from this time forth and for evermore.
And this is the daily Prayer of 

