


My Very Noble Lord,
THough Truth exposeth it self (with its naked Breast, and thereby make its owners Victors) over Trucu∣lent Papists!—Yet
May it please your Lordship, With Famous Constantine, to cast your Purple Robe, in your Noble Patrociny over these Scriptural Apologies, in order to the more happy preventing of a dreadful Sacrifice, first of Protestanism, next of Protestants, by a bloody Papists and his Associates, a God-daring and Heaven provoking ge∣neration, turning the whole fabrick of the Word of God in∣to a Nose of Wax, and render the most serious pretences of a specifick Love-union, to offer their damnable Problems in to the world, whom David describes, speak with a heart and a heart. What is mine here, I must acknowlegde, my Lord, is not worthy of such Illustrious Patronage, but the Truth it self begs your Patrociny, which ever I have heard, and in part do know, doth lodge in your Noble Family, who always have been for Peace, Champions, for Religion, Ornaments, for the Truth, Patriots. Whatever may be the various Sen∣timents
of mens minds amongst the very judicious, in re∣ference to the Integrals and Circumstantials of Godliness: yet as it is reported of that heroick Spirit of Boleslaus, the most materials of his Ancestors, he caused to be kept in re∣cord, and affixt them as obvious to his eye within his room. Yea, the remarkable passages and Vertues of that Famous Em∣perour, Marcus Aurelius, are combined in your Lordships Breast. Nothing I desire to know, but what Vice and Vertue is, and that I may serve the Immortal God aright; since so much trouble in Life, and pain in Death. I won∣der how Rational men, can hound a Phaenomenon to catch a Flie; for my part, I have not only built a Throne to my Son, but a Temple to my God. Thus he writes to his Son Commodus and Panutius his Secretary.
My Noble Lord, The transcendent Properties in your Lordships serenity of Mind, dexterity of Judgment, doth far surpass my Minerva, which that ancient Philosopher Bius speaketh of a Noble person, is here verified, comparing him to a Torch shining upon a Mountain. The luster and radiations of the Sun beam undervalueth the light of a Candle; yea, Aquila non captat muscus. Yet those of a lower Orbe, My Lord, through the help of such a Lanthorn may travail on their journey, and pass through the Thieves of Jericho. Those bloody Jesuits trampling upon Gods Heritage, penning their Panegerick Theams with the blood of Gods Innocents; beating their paradoxical brains, in dipping their quils in the Blood of Monarchs. Now that the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ may land your Lord∣ship with top and top gallant, a full assurance, and plero∣chie of Faith in Emmanuel's Land, where the Anchor is laid upon the blood of Jesus within the vail, shall be the Prayer of,

