



MY LORD,
I Little thought, when, in so private a way, I lately offered much of the following Discourse to your Lordship's ear; I should receive the com∣mand (which I am not now, so far as it proves

to me a possible one to disobey, or further to dispute) of exposing it thus to the view of the world, or so much as to present it to your Lordship's own eye.
It was indeed, im∣possible to me to give an exact account of what was then discour∣sed, from a memory that was so treacherous, as to let slip many things, that were pre∣pared, and intended to have been said that

day; and that could much less (being assis∣ted but by very imper∣fect memorials) recollect every thing that was said, several daies after.
Yet I account, upon the whole it is much more varied by enlarge∣ment, than by diminu∣tion. Whereby, I hope, it will be nothing less capable of serving the end of this enjoyned publication of it.
And I cannot doubt but the injunction pro∣ceeded

from the same pious gratitude to the God of your life, which hath prompted, for seve∣ral years past, to the ob∣servation of that dome∣stick Annual Solemnity, in memory of your great preservation from so near a death. By a fall from an Horse. Decemb. 5. 1674. That the re∣membrance of so great a mercy, might be the more deep∣ly imprest with your self, and improved al∣so (so far as this means

could signify for that purpose) to the instruc∣tion of many others.
Your Lordship was pleased to allow an hour to the hearing of that Discourse, What was, proposed to you in it, is to be the business of your life.
And what is to be done continually is once to be throughly done. The impression ought to be very inward, and strong, which must be so lasting as to govern

a man's life. And were it as fully done as mor∣tality can admit, it needs be more solemnly renewed at set times for that purpose.
And indeed that such a day should not pass you without a fall, nor that fall be without an hurt, and that hurt proceed unto a wound, and that wound not be mortal, but even next to it, looks like an artifice and contrivance of Provi∣dence to shew you how

near it could go without cutting thorough that slender thred of life, that it might indear to you its accurate super∣intendency over your life, that there might here be a remarkable juncture in that thred, and that whensoever such a day should re∣volve in the circle of your year, it might come again, and again, with a note upon it, under your eye, and ap∣pear ever to you as ano∣ther

Birth-day; or as an earlier day of resur∣rection.
Whereupon, my ho∣noured Lord, the fur∣ther design of that Pro∣vidence is to be tho∣roughly studied, and pondered deeply. For it shews it self to be, at once, both mercifull, and wise, and as upon the one account it be∣long'd to it to design kindly to you, so upon the other, to form its design aptly, and so as

that its means, and method might fitly both serve, and signify its end.
If, therefore, your Lordship shall be in∣duc't to reckon the counsel acceptable, which hath been given you, upon this occa∣sion, and to think the offering your self to God, a living Sacrifice, under the endearing ob∣ligation of so great a mercy is, indeed, a rea∣sonable service. Your

life by that dedication acquires a sacredness, becomes an holy, divine life. And so by one, and the same means, is not onely renewed, and pro∣longed in the same kind of natural life, but is also heightned and im∣proved to a nobler, and far more excellent kind. And thus, out of that umbrage onely and shadow of death, which sat upon one day of your time springs a double birth, and resurrection

to you. Whereby (as our Apostle speaks in another place of this Epistle) you come to yield your self to God as one alive from the dead.
So your New year (which shortly after be∣gins) will alwaies be to you a fresh setting forth in that new, and holy course of life, which shall at length (and God grant it to be, after the revolution of many fruitfull years, wherein you may continue a pub∣lick

blessing in this wretched world) end, and be perfected in a state of life not measu∣red by time, wherein you are to be ever with the Lord.
Which will answer the design of that merci∣full providence to∣wards you; and of this performance (how mean soever) of

