



SInce it is the lot of the following
Pages to be exposed to publike
view; There is somewhat of
justice in it, to your selves, or
me, that the world do also know wherein
divers of you have contributed thereto,
that, if any thing redound hence to pub∣like
advantage, it may be understood to
be owing in part to you: or, if it shall
be reckon'd an useless trouble, in
this way to represent things, so obvious
to common notice, and whereof so much
is already said; all the blame of the

publication be not imputed (as it doth
not belong) to me only.
But I must here crave your excuse,
that, on this account, I give you a nar∣rative
of what (for the most part)
you already know, and may possibly
not delight to remember; both be∣cause
it is now become convenient that
others should know it too, and not ne∣cessary
to be put into a distinct Pre∣face:
And because to your selves the
review of those less pleasing passages
may be attended with a fruit which
may be same recompence for their want
of pleasure.
Ther  give the Reader leave to
take notice, and let it not be grievous
to you that I re mind you, That af∣ter
this your near RelationMr. An∣thony Vp∣ton, the Son of John Vp∣ton, of Lupton, Esq (whose
death gave the occasion of the ensuing
Meditations) had, from his youth, li∣ved
between Twenty and Thirty years
of his age in Spain, your joint-im∣portunity
had at length obtained from
him a promise of returning: Where∣of.
when you were in somewhat a near
expectation, a sudden disease in so few
days landed him in another world, that
the first notice you had of his death, or

sickness, was by the arrival of that Ves∣sel
(clad in mourning-attire) which,
according to his own desire in his sick∣ness,
brought over the deserted body to
its native place of Lupton; that
thence it might find a Grave where
it first received a Soul; and obtain a
Mansion in the Earth, where first it
became one to a reasonable spirit.
A little before this time, the desire
of an interview among your selves
(which the distance of your habitati∣ons
permitted not to be frequent) had
induced divers of you to appoint a
meeting at some middle place, where∣by
the trouble of a long journey
might be conveniently shared among
you.
But, before that agreed resolution
could have its accomplishment, this sad
and most unexpected Event intervening,
altered the place, the occasion, and di∣sign
of your meeting; but effected the
thing it self, and brought together
no less than Twenty, the Brothers
and Sisters of the deceased, or their
Consorts; besides his many Ne∣phews
and Neices, and other Relati∣ons,
to the mournful solemnity of the

Interment. Within the time of our be∣ing
together upon this sad account, this
passage of the Psalmist here insisted
on, came into discourse among us; be∣ing
introduced by an occasion which
(though then, it may be, unknown to
the most of you) was somewhat
rare, and not unworthy observation;
viz. That one of your selves, having
been sometime before surprised with an
unusual sadness, joined with an expe∣ctation
of ill tidings, upon no known
cause, had so urgent an inculcation of
these words, as not to be able to forbear
the revolving them, much of the for∣mer
part of that day, in the latter part
whereof the first notice was brought to
that place of this so near a Relations
decease.
Certain Months after, some of you
with whom I was then conversant in
London, importuned me to have some∣what
from me in writing upon that
Subject. Whereto I at length agreed,
with a cautionary request, That it
might not come into many bands, but
might remain (as the occasion was)
among your selves. Nor will I deny it
to have been some inducement to me

to apply my thoughts to that Theam,
that it had been so suggested as was
said. For such presages and abodings,
as that above-mentioned, may reasona∣bly
be thought to owe themselves to
some more steady and universal prin∣ciple,
than Casualty, or the party's
own Imagination: By whose more
noble recommendation (that such a
gloomy Premonition might carry with
it not what should only afflict, but
also instruct and teach) this Subject
did seem offered to our meditation.
Accordingly therefore, after my re∣turn
to the place of my abode, I ha∣stily
drew up the substance of the fol∣lowing
Discourse; which, a year ago,
I transmitted into their hands who
desired it from me, without reserving
to my self any Copy. Hereby it be∣came
difficult to me, presently to com∣ply
(besides divers considerations I
might have against the thing it self)
with that joint request of some of
you (in a Letter, which my removal
into another Kingdom occasioned to
come long after to my hands) that I
would consent these Papers might be
made publike. For as I have reason to

be conscious to my self of disadvan∣tages
enough to discourage any under∣taking
of that kind: so I am more
especially sensible, that so cursry and
superficial a management of a Sub∣ject
so very important, (though its
private occasion and design at first,
might render it excusable to those few
friends for whom it was meant) can∣not
but be liable to the hard censure
(not to say the contempt) of many
whom Discourses of this kind should
more desgnedly serve. And therefore,
though my willingness to be servicea∣able
in keeping alive the apprehension
and expectation of another state, my
value of your judgments who conceive
what is here done may be useful
thereto; and my peculiar respects to
your selves, the members and appen∣dants
of a Family to which (besides
some relation) I have many obligati∣ons
and endearments; do prevail
with me not wholly to deny: Yet par∣don
me that I have suspended my
consent to this publication, till I
should have a Copy transmitted to me
from some of you, for my necessary
review of so hasty a production, that I

might not offer to the view of the
world, what, after I had penn'd it had
scarce passed my own. And now, after
so long an expectation, those Papers
are but this last week come to my
hands: I here return them, with little
or no alteration; sve, that what did
more directly concern the occasion, to∣wards
the close, is transferred hither;
but with the addition of almost all
the directive part of the Vse: which
I submit together to your pleasure and
dispose.
And I shall now take the liberty to
add, my design in cnsenting to this
request of yours (and I hope the same
of you in making it) is not to erect
a Mnument to the memory of the De∣ceased,
(which how little doth it signi∣fie!)
nor to spread the same of your
Family (though the visible blessing of
God upon it in the fruitfulness, piety,
and mutual lve, wherein it hath stu∣rishl
for same generations, do chal∣lenge
observation, both as to thse
braaches of it which grow in their
wn more natural sil; and thse, as
I have nw occasion to take further no∣tice,
that I find to have been trans∣planted

into another Countrey). But
that such into whose hands this little
Treatise shall fall, may be induced to
consider the true end of their beings;
to examine and discuss the matter
more throughly with themselves, what
it may or can be supposed such a sort
of Creatures was made and placed on
this Earth for: That when they shall
have reasoned themselves into a setled
apprehension of the worthy and impor∣tant
Ends they are capable of attaining,
and are visibly designed to, They may be
seized with a noble disdain of living be∣neath
themselves, and the bounty of
their Creator.
It is obvious to common observation,
how flagrant and intense a zeal, men
are often wont to express for their per∣sonal
reputation, the honour of their
Families, yea or for the glory of their
Nation; but how few are acted by that
more laudable and enlarged zeal for the
dignity of Mankind?
How few are they that resent the
common and vile depression of their
own species! Or that, while in things
of lightest consideration they strive with
emulous endeavour, that they and

their relatives may excel other men, do
reckon it a reproach if in matters of
the greatest consequence they and all
men should not excel Beasts! How few
that are not contented to confine their
utmost designs and expectations within
the same narrow limits! Through a
mean and inglorious self-despiciency,
confessing in themselves (to the Truth's
and their own wrong) an incapacity
of greater things! and, with most in∣jurious
falshood, proclaiming the same
of all Mankind besides!
If he that, amidst the hazards of a
dubious Warr, betrays the Interest and
Honour of his Countrey, be justly infa∣mous,
and thought worthy severest
punishments; I see not why a debaucht
Sensualist, that lives as if he were
created only to indulge his appetite,
that so vilifies the notion of man, as if
he were made but to eat, and drink,
and sport; to please only his sense
and sancy; that in this time and
state of conflict between the powers of
this present world, and those of the
world to come, quits his Party, bids
open defiance to Humanity, abjures the
Noble Principles and Ends, forsakes

the Laws and Society of all that are wor∣thy
to be esteemed men; abandons the
common and rational hope of mankind
concerning a future immortality, and
herds himself among brute Creatures;
I say, I see not why such a one should
not be scorn'd and abhorr'd as a Tray∣tor
to the whle Race and Nation of
reasonable Creatures; as a fugitive
from the Tnts, and desertor of the
common Interest of men; and that,
both for the vileness of his practice,
and the danger of his example.
And who, that hath open eyes, be∣holds
not the dreadful instances and
increase of this difection? When it
hath prevailed to that degree already,
that in Civiliz'd, yea in Christian
Countreys (as they yet affect to be
cal'd) the practice is become fashiona∣ble
and in credit; which can square
with no other Principle, than the dis∣belief
of a future state, as if it were
but a meer Poetick, or (at best) a Po∣litical
Fiction. And as if so impudent
inidelity would pretend not to a conni∣vence
only, but a sanction, 'tis rock'd
an odd and uncth  for a man
to live as if he thou ; and

a great presumption to seem to dissent
from the prophane infidel Crew. As
if the matter were already formally
determined in the behalf of Irreligion,
and the Doctrine of the life to come
had been clearly condemned in open
Council, as a detestable Heresie. For
what Tenet was ever more exploded
and hooted at, than that practice is
which alone agrees with this? Or what
series or course of repeated Villanies
can ever be more ignominious than
(in vulgar estimate) a course of life
so transacted as doth become the expe∣ctation
of a blessed immortality? And
what? After so much written and
spoken by persons of all times and Re∣ligious
for the immortality of the hu∣mane
Soul, and so common an acknow∣ledgment
thereof by Pagans, Maho∣metans,
Jews, and Christians; Is
man now at last condemn'd and doom'd
to a perpetual death, as it were, by
the consent and suffrage even of men?
and that too without trial or hearing?
and not by the reason of men, but their
lusts only? As if (with a loud and
violent cry) they would assassinate
and stifle this belief and hope, but not

judg it? And shall the matter be thus
given up as hopeless? and the victory
be yeilded to prosperous wickedness, and
a too succesful conspiracy of vile Mis∣creants
against both their Maker, and
their own Stock and Race?
One would think whosoever have re∣maining
in them any conscience of ob∣ligation
and duty to the common Pa∣rent
and Author of our Beings, any
remembrance of our Divine Original,
any breathings of our ancient hope,
any sense of humane honour, any re∣sentments
of so vile an indignity to
the nature of man, any spark of a
just and generous indignation for so
opprobrious a contumely to their own
Kind and Order in the Creation, should
oppose themselves with an Heroick vigour
to this treacherous and unnatural com∣bination.
And let us (my worthy Friends) he
provoked, in our several capacities to do
our parts herein; and, at least, so to
live, and converse in this world, that
the course and tenour of our lives may
import an open asserting of our hopes in
another; and may let men see we are
not ashamed to own the belief of a life

to come: Let us by a patient continu∣ance
in well-doing (how low designs
soever others content themselves to
pursue) seek honour, glory, and im∣mortality
to our selves; and, by our
avowed, warrantable ambition in this
pursuit, justifie our great and bountiful
Creator, who hath made us not in vain,
but for so high and great things: And
glorifie our blessed Redeemer, who
amidst the gloomy and disconsolate
darkness of this wretched world, when
it was overspred with the shadow of
death, hath brought life and immor∣tality
to light in the Gospel. Let us la∣bour
both to seel and express the power
of that Religion, which hath the in∣choation
of the (participated) divine
life, for its principle; and the perfe∣ction
and eternal perpetuation thereof,
for its scope and end.
Nor let the time that hath since
elapsed, be found to have worn out
with you the (useful) impressions which
this monitory surprising instance of our
Mortality did at first make: But give
me leave to inculcate from it what was
said to you when the occasion was fresh
and new: That we labour more deeply

to apprehend Gods dominion over his
Creatures; And that he made us prin∣cipally
for himself, and for ends that
are to be compast in the future state; not
for the temporary satisfaction and plea∣sure
of one another in this world.
Otherwise, Providence had never been
guilty of such a Solecism, to take out
one from a Family long famous for so
exemplary mutual love, and dispose him
into so remote a part; not permitting to
most of his nearest Relations the enjoy∣ment
of him for almost thirty years (and
therein all the flower) of his age; and
at last, when you were expecting the
man, send you home the breathless
frame wherein he lived.
Yet it was not contemptible that you
had that. And that dying (as Joseph)
in a strange Land, he gave, also, com∣mandment
concerning his bones; that
though, in his life, he was (mostly) se∣parated
from his brethren, he might
in death be gathered to his fathers.
It was some evidence (though you
wanted not better) that amidst the
Traffick of Spain, he more esteemed the
Religion of England; and therefore,
would rather his dust should assciate

with theirs, with whom also he would
rather his spirit should.
But whatever it did evidence, it oc∣casion'd
so much, that you had that
so general meeting with one another,
which otherwise, probably, you would
not have had, nor are likely again to
have (so hath Providence scattered
you) in this world. And that it
proved a more serious meeting than
otherwise it might: for, however it
might blamelesly have been designed to
have met together at a cheerful Ta∣ble,
God saw it sitter to order the
meeting at a mournful grave; and to
make the House that received you,
(the native place to many of you)
the House of mourning rather than of
feasting. The one would have had more
quick relishes of a present pleasure;
but the other was likely to yeild the
more lasting sense of an after-profit.
Nor was it an ill errand to come toge∣ther
(though from afar, for divers of
you) to learn to dye. As you might,
by being so sensibly put in mind of it,
though you did not see that very part
acted it self.
And accept this indeavour to further

you in your preparations for that
change, as some testimony of the re∣membrance
I retain of your most obli∣ging
respects and love, and of my still
continuing

ANTRIM,
April 12.
1671.
