



IT is likely that the Title of the following Trea∣tise
will put many of you (my dearly esteemed
Friends) in mind, that sundry Sermons were
preach't twenty years ago among you upon this
Subject. I had it indeed in design, to have given
you some abstract of those Sermons; But searching
among my Papers, could find none but so imperfect
and broken Memorials as would be of little use for
that purpose. And yet being desirous to present you with
somewhat that might both be a testimony of my affe∣ction,
and an advantage to you: And knowing this
Subject was grateful to many, and affords what may
be useful to all of you; I have for your sakes, applied
my self to a re-consideration of it. Few passages or ex∣pressions,
probably, will occur to you that you heard be∣fore;
yet you will find the substance of the Doctrine
the same: As from so plain a Text, it could not
well but be, whosoever should have had the hand∣ling
of it. The First Part is even altogether
new, except the introductive suppositions in the be∣ginning.
Nor do I remember I then had more than
one Discourse to you on that Subject, before the pra∣ctical
application of it. The other Part contains many
things formerly delivered to you, though perhaps
not in the same order, much less in the same words,

whereto the short Notes in my hands could no way
inable me.
The matter here treated of, is the very Substance
of Religion; The first and the last; The root and
the flower; Both the basis and foundation, and
the top and perfection of Practical Godliness;
And which runs through the whole of it. Nor knew
I therefore what to present you with, that could have
in it a fitter mixture and temperament of what
might be both useful and pleasant to you.
As there is therefore no need, so nor do I desire
you should receive the matter here discours'd of,
meerly for my sake; there being so great reason, it
should be chiefly acceptable on higher accounts. I
do very well understand your affection to me; and
could easily be copious in the expression of mine to
you, if I would open that Sluce: But I do herein
resolvedly, and upon consideration restrain my self;
Apprehending, that in some cases (and I may sup∣pose
it possible that in our case) a gradual mortifi∣cation
ought to be endeavoured of such affection as is
often between those so related as you and I have been.
Which is no harder supposition, than that such af∣fection
may be excessive and swell beyond due bounds:
So it would, if it should be accompanied with impa∣tient
resentments towards any Providence or Instru∣ment,
whereby it finds it self crossed, or from whence
it meets with what is ungrateful to it: If it prove
turbulent and disquieting to them in whom it is,
or any others: Or if it occasion a looking back with
distempered lingerings after such former things as
could be but means to our great End▪ with the neglect
of looking forward to that End it self still before us. Far
be it from me, to aim at the keeping any thing alive that
ought to dye; that is, in that degree wherein it ought
so to do.

But our mutual affection will be both innocent and
useful, if it be sutable to mortal objects, and to per∣sons
not expecting the converse we have had together
any more in this world. If also in the mean time it
preserve to us a mutual interest in each others prayers.
If it dispose us to such acts and apprehensions of kind∣ness
as our present circumstances can admit. And if,
particularly, as it hath moved me to undertake, it may
contribute any thing to your acceptance of this small
labour, which is now designed for you. The subject
and substance whereof, as they are none of mine, so
they ought to be welcome to you, for their own sake,
and His who is the prime Author, though they were
recommended to you by the hand of a stranger, or one
whose face you never saw.
They aim at the promoting of the same End which
the course of my poor labours among you did, (as He
that knoweth all things knoweth), The serious pra∣ctice
of the great things of Religion, which are
known and least liable to question; without designing
to engage you to or against any party of them that dif∣fer
about circumstantial matters. They tend to let you
see, that Formality in any way of Religion, unaccom∣panied
with Life, will not serve your turn, (as it will
no mans); Than which, there is nothing more empty,
sapless, and void both of profit and delight.
I have reflected and considered with some satisfacti∣on,
that this hath been my way and the temper of my
mind among you. Great reason I have to repent, that
I have not with greater earnestness prest upon you the
known and important things wherein serious Christi∣ans
do generally agree: But I repent not I have been
so little engag'd in the hot contests of our age, about
the things wherein they differ. For, as I pretend to
little light in these things (whence I could not have

much confidence to fortifie me unto such an underta∣king);
so I must profess to have little inclination to
contend about matters of that kind.
Nor yet am I indifferent as to those smaller things,
that I cannot discern to be in their own nature so. But
though I cannot avoid to think that course right which
I have deliberately chosen therein, I do yet esteem that
but a small thing upon which to ground an opinion
of my excelling them that think otherwise, as if I
knew more than they. For I have often recounted thus
seriously with my self, That of every differing Party
(in those circumstantial matters) I do particularly
know some persons by whom I find my self much ex∣celled
in far greater things than is the matter of that
difference. I cannot ('tis true) thereupon say and
think every thing that they do; which is impossible,
since they differ from one another as well as me. And I
understand well, there are other Measures of Truth
than this or that excellent Persons Opinion: But I
thereupon reckon I have little reason to be conceited of
any advantage I have of such in point of knowledg,
(even as little as he should have, that can Sing, or
Play well on a Lute, of him that knows how to Com∣mand
Armies, or Govern a Kingdom); And can
with the less confidence differ from them, or contend
with them. Being thereby, though I cannot find
that I err in these matters, constrain'd to have some
suspicion lest I do; and to admit it possible enough, That
some of them who differ from me, having much more
light in greater matters, may have so in these also.
Besides, that I most seriously think, Humility, Cha∣rity
and Patience, would more contribute to the com∣posing
of these lesser Differences, or to the good estate
of the Christian Interest under them, than the most
fervent Disputes and Contestations. I have upon such

considerations little concern'd my self in contending
for one way or another, while I was among you; or
in censuring such as have differed from me, in such
Notions and Practices as might consist with our com∣mon
great End; or as imported not manifest hostili∣ty
thereto. Contenting my self to follow the course that
to my (preponderating) judgment seemed best, with∣out
stepping out of my way to justle others.
But I cannot be so patient of their practical dis∣agreement,
(not only with all serious Christians,
but even their own Judgments and Consciences also),
who have no Delight in God, and who take no
pleasure in the very substance of Religion.
I have been grieved to observe, That the case hath
too apparently seemed so, with some among you: Some
have been openly profane and dissolute, and expressed
more Contempt of God (which you know was of∣ten
insisted on the one part of the dayFrom Psal. 10. 13., when I had
this subject in hand the other) than Delight in
him. I know not how the case may be altered with
such since I left you; or what blessing may have fol∣lowed
the endeavours of any other hand: Death I am
sure will be making alterations, as I have heard it hath.
If these lines may be beforehand with it, may they be
effectually monitory to any such that yet survive! That
however this or that external from of godliness may
consist with your everlasting well-being, real ungodli∣ness
and the denial of the power never can; which
power stands in nothing more than in love to God,
or delight in him. Therefore seriously bethink your
selves, Do you delight in God or no? If you do,
methinks you should have some perception of it. Sure∣ly
if you delight in a friend, or some other outward
comfort, you can perceive it. But if you do not, What
do you think alienation from the life of God will

come to at last? It is time for you to pray, and cry,
and strive earnestly for a renewed heart. And if any
of you do in some degree find this yet many degrees are
still lacking. You cannot delight in God, but upon that
apprehension as will give you to see, you do it not e∣nough:
Therefore reach forth to what is still before.
I bow my knees for you all that a living delightful Re∣ligion
may flourish in your hearts and families, in the
stead of those dry, wither'd things, worldliness, for∣mality,
and strife about trifles. Which will make
Torrington an Heph-zibah, a place to be delighted
in; your Country a pleasant Region: And (if he
may but hear of it) add not a little to the satis∣faction
and delight of
Antrim,
Sept. 1.
1674.

