



I Offer this Discourse, My Honoured Lord, to
Your Perusal, in Confidence that the Subject
and Design of it will be so far Grateful to
Your Lordship, as in some Degree to Atone
for the Imperfections of the Management.
I Believe it will not Offend against Your Lord∣ships
very Accurate Judgment of Things, that I
have not been so sway'd by an Authority, which hath
signifi'd much in our Age; as to represent the Natu∣ral
State of Man, as a State of War, which either
must signifie Man in his Original Constitution, to
have been a very ill-natur'd Creature, or must signi∣fie
his Nature to be less Ancient than Himself.
FOR I cannot Doubt, but the Author of that
Maxim, would have Disdain'd their Way of Speak∣ing,
who by Nature Mean Vice. Or to have been

Guilty of so Pious a Thought, that God at first
made Man any better Thing than we find Him.
I Shall the less passionately Lament my Infelicity
in losing the good Opinion of Men of that Sentiment,
if I stand Right in Your Lordships. Not knowing
any of your Rank and Figure, in the World, with
whom I Count it a greater Honour to Agree in Judg∣ment,
or do less Fear to Disagree.
IN Matters of Secular Concernment, it becomes
Me not to Profess any Judgment at all, besides the
Publick, unto which in Things of that Nature, eve∣ry
Private Mans ought to be, and is professedly Re∣signed.
YET within that Compass, notwithstanding the
Just Esteem Your Lordship hath of the Noble En∣dowments,
which do then Illustriously Shine in the
Military Profession, when there is a Necessity of their
being redc'd to Practice: I Apprehend that other∣wise
Your Lordship hath no more gratful Thoughts
of War, than I, nor more ungrateful of the Necessa∣ry
Means of Preserving Peace. That which is the
Reproach of Humane Nature could never Originally
belong to it. Nor can any thing more expose its Ig∣nominious
Depravation, than it should ever be Ne∣cessary
the Sword should Dispute Right, and the
Longest, Decide it.
IN the Matters of Religion which is every Mans
Business, and whose Sphere as it is Higher, must be

proportionably Wider and more Comprehensive; I
Hope it is Your Lordships constant Care to add unto
Clearness and Rectitude of Thought, the Pleasant∣ness
of Taste; and that you apprehend it to consist
not more in a Scheme of Notions, than of Vital Prin∣ciples;
and that your Love to it proceeds from hence,
that you Relish it and Feel you Live by it; You are
hereby Fortified against the Reproach that attends it,
from their Contempt of it who are every Day assault∣ing
Heaven, and would have the War not ended, but
only transferr'd thither-ward.
THAT which though some Vent, and others ad∣mire
as Wit, even Paganism it self has Condemn'd as
Foolishness. Your Lordship is in no more Danger
to be alter'd hereby from your chosen Course, than a
Man in his Health and Senses, by Satyrs against Eat∣ing
and Drinking.
I Reckon Your Lordship is so much taken up
with the great Things of Religion, as to be less ta∣ken
with the Adventitious Things Men have Thought
fit to affix to it. I do not more Emulate Your Lord∣ship
in any Thing, than a Disdain of Bigotry; nor
more Honour any thing I Discern in You than True
Catholicism.
AND Recounting what Things and Persons do
truly belong to a Church, I Believe Your Lordship
is not professedly of a Larger Church, as Counting
it too Large for You but too narrow, and that You af∣fect

not to be of a Self-distinguisht Party. Nor, be∣sides
the Opportunity of avowing the Just Honour,
and Obligations I have to Your Lordship, and
Your Noble Consort, with my Sincere Concern for
Your Hopeful and Numerous Off-spring, did any
Thing more Invite this Address to Your Lordship,
than the agreeableness of such Your Sentiments to
the Mind and Spirit of
My most Honoured Lord,

