



Worthy Sir,
IN an age, when books had better be burnt for Hereticks, than pre∣sume to appear with∣out the dull formality of an Epistle; such a notable de∣fect would present them in as rediculous a Querpo, as a Courtier without the pro∣perty of his Sword, though to both equally useless; therefore, least I should be taxed with too much ignor∣ance
 or presumption, to you who are our petty Heroes particular friend, and the depositary of his greatest se∣crets. To you, who have been an eye witness of some of the most remark∣able inconveniences that his natural curiosity, restless disposition, Amours, Incli∣nation, and fiery nature have plung'd him in: finally to you, that by consequence can best discerne what fruits are of his own growth, from what he may have borrow∣ed from his neighbours Or∣chards, I dedicate these fol∣lowing sheets. I am sensible
 that now I should proceed to the setting forth of your praises, and humbly suppli∣cate for your generous pro∣tection, but really I am so lit∣tle accustom'd to the flatter∣ing stile of a Dedication, that I know not what more to say, therefore would glad∣ly take the opportunity to end with the general con∣clusion of, Sir, your most humble servant, B.
But then, what would the Bookseller say? who yet does expect so much scribbling as must fill up some empty pages of the last sheet? why Faith to
 please all parties (if it be possible) I will make bold to lay you aside, and speak a word or two to the Cur∣teous Reader, and that I hope will do the jobb.
In the first place, I will let him know, that he will find here such varieties of humours, as, I hope, will please him, provided he adds not a number amongst the peripatetick Cinicks. To such I must confess these things would prove eyesores, at least if not a Scanda∣lum Magnatum, but to the Gay, Aiy, and witty sort this may be useful while
 they leave the knoty points of the more morose part of learning to be cleav'd in sun∣der with the Beetles of the sowr Philosophers under∣standing.
In the first part you will meet with such accidents as wild young Travellers are apt to fall into, and if you please, you may make good use of them; In the second you will be diverted with the extravagant conceits of a Rosycrucians chymereal Philosophy, and sublime learning in the obstruce Sciences. In the third your imagination will be tickled
 (especially if ever you have put your nose in a chymical Author) with some quaint expositions of the most dis∣ficult points, on all things such as the envious malice or con∣ceited ignorance of some Writers have left to posteri∣ty, wrapp'd up in those mi∣sterious riddles, that most wonderfully do puzle this age, and will fit the next for New Bedlame. But I advise you not to pin your Faith on all I say, for it may not in every point prove to be Madam truth in its puris naturalibus. And why you should expect to find more
 reality in a Romantick story then in the Alchymists re∣ligiously grave Vollumes, I know not, except, Ridendo dicere verum, come in your mind, and delude you into the fooles Paradice. Well take your chance friend, while I inform you, that in the fourth part you will meet with the fruits and results of rash youth, when once it makes its own sword a Law, and every indifferent object the sub∣ject of his affections.
Now Curteous Reader, but that I think you wiser than my self, I would ad∣vise
 you to follow what is good in the whole, (If you can find any) and so to take warning by others harms, as to go to bed in a whole skin, and the next morn∣ing sing to the tune of some new Ballad.
Felix quem faciunt, aliena pericula cautum.
Farewell.
