



SIR,
IT seems very wonderful to me, that after the clear Revelation of Scripture, and the Instructions of Men; after the many Renowned Examples of Christian Suf∣fering, the Repeated Instances of every Age; after all Mens Fears and Apprehensions, Reasonable and Ʋn∣reasonable, (for either of these are apt to awaken, and engage to Consideration) the generality even of Christians themselves should be such utter Strangers (as I find they are) of the True Notion and Nature of Persecution.
Now to Rectifie the Mistakes, and Clear the Ʋnderstandings of the Ignorant Herein, is the main Design of the ensuing Discourse.
And truly, I am not out of all hopes of giving some Light to the Doctrine in hand; at least wise, of doing somewhat to∣wards the Satisfaction of Those (if this small Piece shall haply fall into their Hands) who either have not heard of, or have not had leisure to peruse, or possibly have not been able to procure the Larger and more Elaborate Discourses on this Subject. Were I sure it would prove wholly useless, (tho I

am apt to Hope, and induc'd by Learned Friends to Believe, it will not) I should wave the Publication of this Address for Your sake, and of the Discourse for my own.
Sure I am, it can do no harm, nor justly give any Offence, being written with the Faithfulness and with the Tenderness of a Spiritual Chirurgion. Alas! our Breaches are over∣wide already; they need not be widned more by harsh Re∣flexion, and keenness of Expression. Some Spirits are natu∣rally Perverse and Froward, and ought (if possible) to be Cor∣rected and Sweetned, not Exasperated more, not stirr'd in∣to a greater Ferment.
Of this I am extremely sensible; and desire not to Pro∣voke, but to Heal. If I were (tho, praised be God, I am not) of another Frame of Spirit, I am sure I should take an ill time to shew it in, when I address to You; to You (Sir), who seem to be made up of Gentleness and Temper. Your Reasonings with Dissenters (who do therefore chuse to apply themselves to You) they are Sedate, and Calm, and full of an Obliging Condescention. Your Delight it is (and You make it Your Business) to Argue Fairly, and Lovingly persuade Men to Conformity. And when all Your Arguments, and Win∣ning Behaviour will not do it, (And who can promise himself a never-failing Success?) You gain This Point howsoever, They come over to a better Opinion of our Church and Church-men: They are satisfied by You, that it's the Churches Desire, as it is Yours, to Invite, rather than Compel; to Convince, that it may not Correct them.
Thus do You discharge Your Duty diligently, and chearfully, like a True Son of our Church, a Faithful, Exemplary Magi∣strate, a Loyal Subject, and a Good Christian: I ought to add, like a True Friend of our Clergy; for such do You (I must needs acknowledge it) upon all Occasions approve Your self: (For of This (to say nothing of others) Your Favours to me, Many and Great, are a pregnant Argument: forasmuch as I can in no wise attribute them to any the least Merit of mine,

but to Your Goodness, and Respect to my Gown.) And thus while You temper Your Prudence with Piety, and joyn Sobriety and Candour, to an inviolable Loyalty, and Reverence to the Church, You stop the Mouths of Gainsayers; and even Those who Suffer under You, cannot be angry. This is certainly the most Christian, and most feasible Course for the filling our Churches; and it is Yours. And if Men will stand out not∣withstanding; if they will not learn by Your Example, nor bow to Your Reasons, nor hearken to Your Counsels and Per∣suasions; they become still the more inexcusable; they may thank themselves for what they endure; and are as far from what may be term'd Persecution, as they are from Conformi∣ty: unless You will say, they are their own Persecutors.
I pray God to make 'em sensible of their Errours, and thorow∣ly satisfied of the High Injustice of arraigning their Gover∣nours for that which it is their Duty to do.
The Subordinate Magistrate is oblig'd to see that the Laws be put in Execution; and the Supreme is oblig'd to take care that there be such Laws as are apt and qualified to Engage, and to Preserve Men in Peace, Concord, and Uniformity. The Government it self cannot well, I was going to say, it cannot innocently Tolerate Men in a Schism; certainly it cannot give any Man License to sin: neither is it in the Power of any law, or Dispensation, to make that Justifiable and Lawful, which in its own Nature is Evil and Sinful. Such, unquestionably, is all Separation from This, or any other Esta∣blish'd Church, that is Sound, and Pure, as Ours is.
But and if the Government could (as it cannot) make Se∣paration no Schism, and no Sin; yet (I would observe, and I hold my self oblig'd upon This occasion to vindicate the Pro∣ceedings of our Governours herein) That neither has the Govern∣ment any reason to grant, nor our Nonconforming Brethren any reason to expect a Toleration, or Relaxation of the Laws.
I know, These two things are almost co-incident: however, they will severally admit of a distinct and particular Conside∣ration.
1. Then, I would observe, That the Government has no reason to grant a Toleration, &c. For if These Men do not Suffer, the Government in all likelihood will; there being no∣thing more destructive of the Publick Peace, than a General Liberty of all sorts of Worship.
Of This we have had Late and Sad Experience. When every man did that which was right in his own eyes, it was little consider'd, whether it was right, or not, in the eyes of others. Men abus'd their Liberty into Defiance of Au∣thority; perfect Lawlesness being the Result. When one Man out of a giddy humour wandred about in search after Truth, another thought he might as easily find it at home: When This Man thought he might serve God in any way, his Neighbour was of opinion, that 'twas altogether as good, and much more easie, not to serve him at all. So then, we may easily divine, by what we have seen and felt, that a Conni∣vance, or Toleration of all sorts of Religion, is the ready way to destroy all that looks like Religion; and that (had it not pleas'd Heaven to direct our Governours herein) our Na∣tion would have sunk by degrees to downright Scepticism and Infidelity; to as little Sense of Religion, as some of a Neigh∣bouring Country are said to have done, who, by a general Al∣lowance of all sorts of Worship, had made their Consciences so pliable, that they could renounce their Bible, when it serv'd a Turn, and cry, they were Hollanders, and not Christians.
But, secondly, As the Government has no reason to grant, so, it may be considered further, that our Dissenting Brethren have no reason to expect a Toleration.
And here I shall not need to mind them of the Old Non-conformists Opinion in the Case; who plainly declar'd, that to Allow of different sorts of Worship, was inconvenient, un∣reasonable, and extremely dangerous to Church and State. I would only offer to consideration, Whether We (if We were in Their Circumstances, and They in Ours) might in any reason expect This Liberty from Them. What (would they say)

shall we admit of That which we verily believe is unlawful? Would you have us Allow, openly to Allow of That in others, which we cannot Allow in our selves? Would you have us wanting in our Repect and Care for your Souls, which we are oblig'd to upon a double account, as Christians, and as Gover∣nours? To countenance That which is, or That which is taken for a Sin, is a Sin: And to encourage it by the way of Tole∣ration, is to countenance it with a witness: And how can we do This thing, and sin against God, and our own Consci∣ences? This sure is what every of them would be ready to of∣fer: This is what they with reason might. And now do but invert the Scene, and we have the plain Case between us and them. Our Governours know, and are persuaded, that Sepa∣ration from our Church is Schism; and that Schism is a very grievous Sin. They cannot unconcernedly see any Persons en∣gag'd in it: and for Those who are under their Government and Care, they cannot give them That Liberty, which would prove mischievous in the abuse of it, and is therefore onely de∣sir'd, that it may be abus'd: So that for them to expect a To∣leration, is to expect That which cannot reasonably be expected: it is to expect That which they themselves, if they were in Power, would never grant, or think it reasonable that it should be expected from them: indeed, it is to expect That, which se∣veral of them will not at present Allow to their own Children, and Dependents.
I would not be mistaken: I do not, nor can I approve of Compulsion in all Cases. Religion is such a Worship and Service of God, as supposes the Concurrence of the Will; and now the Will cannot be forc'd, it is free as Thought, and is persuaded by Words, rather than Blows, as Lactantius well observ'd: No Humane Laws or Power can possibly take hold of it; it is out of the reach of Fire and Faggot, and all the Affrighting Instruments of Cruelty; so that it is impossible to be Compell'd (properly speaking) to any Religion; and therefore it is unreasonable any Man should be Compell'd to

the Profession of any. Indeed it does not lie in any Mans power to be of what Religion himself pleases, tho as to the out∣ward Profession it does: and now no one can be oblig'd beyond his Power: And certainly it is very hard, that a Man should Suffer for not Professing that Religion, which he cannot hear∣tily embrace, and is therefore oblig'd not to profess.
But then I must observe, on the other hand. That there are some Opinions have a natural tendency to Mischief; to Civil Jars, and Ʋnchristian Divisions; to Fatal Disturbances in Church and State: And tho a bare Dissent in Judgment may not, should not; yet These, whereever they are found, do iustly come under the Lash of the Law: and if the Church had no Power to shut out the Refractory and Disobedient; nor the Civil Magistrate any to suppress Heresies, and Schisms, and Disorders in the Church; there were nothing then to be expected, but Anarchy, and Confusion, and every Evil work. Alas! we do not live in a Golden Age, that Men should be suppos'd Governable without Laws, or Laws available with∣out their Sanctions, Rewards, and Punishments. Some Men cannot, others hardly can, be kept within tolerable Bounds, notwithstanding them. And what would these be, what would they do, if there were none? Conscience is frequently, too too frequently abus'd, and made a Cloak for all manner of Villa∣nies; at best, 'tis a prevailing Principle with those only who have it: many have it not; and the Magistrate's Sword of Justice has more Rhetorick far, than the Terrour of the Lord, to persuade such Men: And Those whom Religion can∣not allure or engage, the Gibbet can, and often does Affright into Obedience. Many, who would not stick at Assassinating Princes, Destroying the Church, and Massacring Man, Wo∣man, and Child that stood in their way, are yet kept in by the Execution of wholesom Laws; and he must be a Bigot indeed, of a very lewd Religion too, that shall do these things, when he must run the danger, the immediate danger of his Life for his pains. So then, You see the Necessity of Laws for

Societies, and Sanctions for Laws, and may readily guess, how miserable This Church and Nation were, if there were none; or indeed, if those that are, should never be Executed.
These things consider'd, I cannot see with what Forehead any Man can blame our Governours, either for Making, or Executing the Laws: especially they have none at all against meer Dissenting; much less any that are Sanguinary, as our Roman Neighbours have: they have none of any kind, that in the least savour of Cruelty or Rigour. They never do, after the manner of Rome, extort Mens Opinions from them by Racks and Tortures; and then let loose the Laws upon them, after a Discovery. They are favourable as may be, and slow in inflicting of Punishment: of which This is a fair Argu∣ment, That the loud, reiterated Clamours, and Out-cries of the Faction, are not punish'd at all. These would not, cer∣tainly they would not be more favourably dealt with in any Establish'd Church of Christendom; neither could we (as I said before) expect more, or so much Favour from them, if they were (as some of them have been, and have again en∣deavour'd, very lately endeavour'd to be) in the Seat of our Governours.
Surely then it would much better become them, and they would act more like good Subjects, and good Christians, and Men of Reason, if they would consider of things, before they presume to complain of their Governours, and over-liberally promise themselves a Reward for I know not what Services, to I know not whom; I am sure, for none to Christ, and his Religion, when they Suffer (as generally they do) for their Disservice and Disobedience to That Authority which Christ has given to the Higher Powers, and whereto he has very plainly commanded all of us to be Subject. I say, It were Wisdom in them, and it is their Duty, to consider, seriously to consider These things, before they presume to speak evil of their Rulers, and charge them with Rigour, Tyranny, and what not? If they did This, as they ought, they would find,

that there are (as I shew in the Discourse) certain Qualifica∣tions and Conditions requisite to True Christian Suffering; and that without These no Man can justly pretend to It: and if any should challenge the Title, they would certainly miss of the Crown of the Martyr.
But enough of This; I wish You do not think it more than enough: howsoever it be, I am satisfied of Your Candor and Goodness, and depend upon These, Your Patronage, and Fa∣vourable Acceptance I do now stand in need of, and do greatly value, and do here beg. I must confess, I cannot be sorry for what I have done; indeed I must have offer'd violence to my Nature, and could not have easily excus'd my self, had I not (now that so fair an Opportunity presents it self) us'd my Endeavours, my Honest, tho Mean, Endeavours, to convince Men of their Errours, and let them see the Injustice of their Clamours against the Easiest and Best of Governments. And why may not the Honesty of my Design bear me out, as well as the bare Pretence of it does others? I must needs say, I see no Reason for it.
But indeed, the Design is not only Honest; it is Great, and Noble. Loud is the Noise, and Many are the Complaints of Persecution; and, I fear, of dangerous consequence they are, (Complaining of the Government, being a kind of Libel∣ling and Persecuting it:) So that to remove These, is to Ease the Government; to do something towards it, is a propor∣tionably Good and Laudable Office; and even for him who endeavours it only, his Design is as Good and Great, though his Success be not.
That the several Persons by whom These Offences come, may become daily more and more satisfied of the Guilt, and the Ʋnwarrantableness of them; and that You may long con∣tinue among us for This, and other Excellent Purposes: That we may long see (as now we do) the Happy Effects of Your Diligence and Faithfulness in Your Administration of Justice; of Your Care and Prudence in a very Regular Family; and of

Your Excellent Example (joyn'd to the vigorous Endeavours of the Worthy Pastor) in a very Conformable Parish: And that Heaven would Bless You, and Yours, with all Health and Happiness, Spiritual and Temporal, is the hearty Prayer of,
(Honour'd Sir)

