



Right Reverend Father in God,
WEre not the eyes of the World dazled with the Tinsel of its one vanity, it would certainly discern Reason to be far from casting contempt upon the Clergie, especially upon those of it that labour in the Word and Doctrine, but rather to esteem them very highly in love for their work sake; because the design of it is, not more to promote the glory of God, than the good of Men, in any or all their capacities, and that in this World as well as that which is to come;1 Tim. 1.3. for the end of the Com∣mandment is charity; and Charity (as Johannes Climacus hath well described it) is the resem∣blance of God, the fountain of faith and vera∣city,

the depth of equity and meekness,Scal. parad. grad. 30. the ocean of Humility and the abdication of every averse thought. If then men were duely wrought upon and transformed by the Gospel, what manner of persons would they be? how delightful and profi∣table both to themselves and others, how quiet and peaceable, as well as pure and holy would their lives be, in all godliness and honesty? yet the Age we live in is thought so degenerate, as that that of the Poet,
Ovid.Aut petis, aut urges ruiturum Sisyphe saxum, is most frequently too applicable to each of us in our attempts to make it better; insomuch that if in this life only we had hope, we were of all men most unhappy, because most improsperous and un∣successful in the work of our calling. Yet the dread∣ful bonds of our Office oblige us to continue in it, and if in meekness we instruct those that oppose themselves, we have the incouragement not only of strong confidence that we shall deliver our own Souls, but also of a peradventure God will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth. Having therefore received your Lordships command to preach at the Visitation, I thought it my duty rather to run the hazard of being thought pragmatical, than to trifle away an opportunity of doing good, by being impertinent: hereupon I took

the boldness to endeavour a description of Archip∣pus his Ministery, duty and obligations to perform it, that seeing we also have the same Ministery, our minds might be stirred up by way of remem∣brance, that we faint not, but by manifestation of the truth, commend our selves to every mans conscience in the sight of God; the design I am sure was so good, as that if I could perswade my self to believe I had well managed it, I should readily subscribe to your Lordships judgment, that the Sermon is fitting to be seen; but whether it be or no, it was your Lordships pleasure (and that in the audience of the Clergie there present) to com∣mand me either to Print it my self, or to deliver it to your Lordship, that so it might be committed to the Press. I humbly acknowledg the greatness of your Lordships favour in conferring the Honour of such a Command upon me; yet I cannot obey it without reluctance, because (though I should belye my self, if I should say, I thought my discourse al∣together useless, yet) I cannot judge it worthy of a publick View. But since your Lordship was plea∣sed, before a cloud of witnesses, to command its be∣ing exposed thereunto, I dare not disobey, lest I should add a kind of scandal to disobedience, the co∣hibition of your Lordships command: I cannot re∣quest without the rudeness of offering to derive on

your Lordship the imputations of rashness or levi∣ty: the performance of it I cannot omit, without exposing my self to the Animadversions of my Bre∣thren for disobedience to my most reverend Dioce∣san: I must therefore beg of your Lordship to al∣low this weak discourse the benefit and favour, which nature affords its tender off-spring, and that is to take Shelter under your Lordships Patro∣nage, as that doth under the Protection of those, from whom it draws (as this from your Lordships command) its breath and being. If this be granted, although perhaps it will not stop the censures of the Supercilious, yet it will take out their sting, and make them harmless to

