



SIR,
ALthough the quality of this work be truely such, that, considering the brightnesse of Royal Majesty, and the obscurity of its own extraction, it cannot expect a bare acceptance, much lesse plead any merit in this addresse, yet doth it find more reason for hope than despair; for as much as the whole World hath taken notice that your Majesty's Grace and Clemency is founded more upon the transcendent goodnesse of your own Disposition than the qualifications of your Subjects. Allowance hereby being made for what is mine, it were needlesse to insist upon the Nobility and use∣fulnesse of the subject, the excellency whereof as humane transcend∣eth not your Orb, and the utmost improvement of which is within the sphear of your activity. It were a piece of pedantry to shew to your Majesty that History is the store-house whence Precedents may be fetched for all sorts of Actions, Publick and Private, Military and Ci∣vil; that it is a Mirrour of prudence to shew both their beauty and de∣formity, a Touchstone to discover deceits, an incentive to virtue, and a terror unto vice; that in it are contained the Prudence of times, imbecillity and strength of Nations, Reasons of State, Councils of Peace, and Stratagems of War; that in it Monarchy triumpheth over the Confusions, Alterations, and Seditions of Popular Government. And should I go about to instance in the various helps it affoardeth to the management of Civil matters, I might justly incurre more than the censure that light upon him, who was so impertinent as to read a Lecture of the Art of a General in the presence of Hannibal. For it may justly be said that your Majesty hath improved History to the

utmost; that your actions have so far imitated antient Patterns as to exceed them. Others have wasted and destroyed Nations, you have recovered and restored three dying ones. Others have raged with fire and sword, have rooted out, overturned, and made desolate; your Majesty by Mercy and Grace hath replanted, setled, and inriched. Alexander Conquered the effeminate Persians, and subdued other Na∣tions whom their own unfitnesse for Military matters helped him to overcome. Caesar tamed the naked Galls, and painted Britains, whom fool-hardinesse and barbarism had armed against themselves; or if there be any other Atchievements of them, or others, which seem more glorious, yet the valour of their Soldiers, the experience of their times, and vicissitude of humane affairs, challenge to themselves the greatest share of reputation. Your Majesty hath subdued those things which are beyond Mars his reach: You have tamed wild and ex∣travagant passions of men, Conquered stubborn and perverse disposi∣tions, laid low prejudice, and convinced such, whom all these distem∣pers had rendred affectedly ignorant and disobedient. Your Majesty's Conquests therefore so much more excell the commendations of o∣thers, as it is more glorious to cure than kill, to restore than to de∣stroy, to follow the dictates of Compassion and Mercy, then of in∣dignation and revenge, to Conquer the mind than the body; and indeed to overcome one's self than subdue others. That this is no flattery History will ascertain future times, and both the mouths and hearts of your People at present do testifie, which, though in other matters they may disagree, yet all unite in this concent, that you are the True Father of your Countrey. In our acclamations during those so∣lemnities of your Majesty's Royal Coronation, seeing there is no need of wishing you the Goodnesse of Trajan, we so much the more pray that the Happinesse of Augustus may light upon you, and that those solemnities may in one part imitate the Saecular ones amongst the Romans, that though some of us have heretofore seen the like, yet through the length of your happy reign none of us may do it for the time to come. I for my part, though a vvell-wisher to History, un∣feignedly desire, that not till after very many years so great an acces∣sion of glory may come to it, as will accrue from the passages of your Majesty's Government; and that in the mean time your Majesty may be as happy in the love and loyalty of your People, as they are in your Princely clemency and care. To this, both a sense of merit and duty binds me, being

