



SIR
IN obedience to Your Commands (for such to me are your requests) and that I might give a publike testimo∣ny of my gratitude for all your Fa∣vours, and bounty towards me, I have Pressed the ensuing Sermon for Your Service, & prefixt Your Name, as having the greatest right thereto.
Tis the first Sermon, of this kind, that ever I made, and I hope 'twill be the last on so sad an oc∣casion. I acknowledge that not long before, at the intreaty and tears of two poor Orphans, and the importunity of their Friends, I (having, God is my witness, no other end then charity, to save the di∣stressed Orphans charges, and Bury their dead Fa∣ther decently) Preached at his Funeral, a Sermon made long before upon another occasion. This inno∣cent act, some have endeavoured to asperse, pre∣tending (as you have heard) that some Men of

worth and note, have highly censured me for it. Which I cannot believe; 'tis below their worth to wrong open innocence. Indeed we read of a man of a great Name (Alexander) that wronged St Paul; but of no worth, he was a Copper-smith. I cannot think men of worth, let their names be never so great, will take up here the Tinkers office, 'tis too smutty for them.
Sir, the Coare lies here; Your pitching upon so worthlesse and inconsiderable a person as my self, for such honourable imployment as this, has begot a heart-burning in some narrow breasted persons, which breakes out into such kind of groundless aspersions: as if I affected popularity, and Pharisee like desired to be seen and heard in publick: where∣as (the Lord knowes) I no more delight in it, then the deformed Cripple, to be seen on a Theatre. Had I sought this honour, so much grudg'd me, I ac∣knowledge I had justly deserv'd the censure of be∣ing arrogant: had I deny'd you, who, that knowes my obligations, could accuse me of lesse then high ingratitude? I am confident, persons of farre higher worth were invited first to this noble task, and tis our unhappyness we injoy'd them not; their high parts would farre better have become this Scene: but, but let me say, none could have more patheti∣cally performed the part of a mourner then my self. Many might have done it with greater skill and parts, but none with stronger affection.
Sir what I here have brought, is so mean, that with greif and blushing I present it. I know your goodness will bate it something, upon the score of grief, that stupefyes, and at that time I was over∣whelmed with. You must expect nothing that's flo∣rid either in Sermon or ensuing Speech.
Non est conveniens luctibus ille color.
I presume you'l find truth plain and pertinent in them both. The last is justly culpable, non in regard of what is, but what is not (that ought to be) said: All there is generally known to be truth; but that All, amounts not to Half of whats due to Her you justly loved so dearly. However, knowing that your modesty had rather I erred on this, then the other extreme; and presuming your generosity will cour∣teously accept of weak things well meant; I humbly put my self at your feet, and this poore thing into your hand, and begge nothing but your pardon for it: Doe Your Self, and it that right, in reading it as to agnoscere quod Dei est, and vouchsafe the Authour the favour as to ignoscere quod homi∣nis est, so will you eternally oblige
Sir

