



REverend, and much honoured Fathers and Brethren, it is a received Maxime, that publike rights and interests are to be preferred before private and par∣ticular; spiritual, before secular; divine before humane. Now as the internal spiritual gover∣ment of Christ in the invisible Church, is farre more excellent then any other: so also his external visible government of the visible Church, hath the preheminence above all visible civil governments and Kingdoms of this world. And if it be lawful even for private persons to vindicate, by humane Laws, the extents and rights of their particular civil inheritances and possessions: and if it be accounted the duty of good subjects to vindicate the extents and rights of their civil Soveraigns Dominions, with their Estates and Lives, even by the Sword: then much more is it the duty of Christs Subjects, by disputes and argumentations to vindicate the extents and rights of Christs external political Kingdom; the one being but of civil concernment, the other divine; the one tending but to a civil end, the other a spiritual. And therefore I hope none will blame me for appearing in publike to contend for the extent and rights of Christs political Kingdom in his Church here on earth.
My first Thesis on this Subject was composed for the private use of my self, and some few neighbour Ministers, in a monethly private meeting, according to our custome. But being made pub∣like, at the desires of others, it met with opposition from two re∣verend Brethren: first by M. John Ellis junior, who undertook to confute it, with other Tractates of divers of my betters that were  the same subject▪ and secondly by Reverend Mr. Hoo∣ker,

who is since departed out of the visible militant Church, into the invisible Triumphant; the losse of which burning and shining light, the Church of God cannot sufficiently lament. Now be∣cause some things therein set down were by them mistaken, and other things not so fully cleared, as I desired, I thought good to set it out again more enlarged, and vindicated from the mistakes and opposi∣tions that it met withall.
The reasons of my so long delay herein were, First, because I was the least and least concerned therein, though the most tartly dealt withall by M Ellis. And secondly, because I desired to see some of my betters go before me, in vindication of their own Tractates of the same subject. And thirdly, because I understood by M. Ellis's book, and by common fame, that there was an answer to M. Ru∣therford coming out, wherein I should finde my question discussed, by that eminent and worthy Divine M. Hooker, which was indeed sent over, but perished in the sea, and so was retarded one year lon∣ger, until it could be transcribed, and sent over again. And since that was printed, the seat of the warre, by the siege of Colchester, coming so near us, we were all in a fear and danger, so that I thought it no fit time to attend to controversies: and I had indeed almost laid it quite aside, but that the importunities of some, and the insultings of others excited me again to take it in hand.
And now I finde a fourfold unhappinesse hath betided me herein.
First, The darknesse and sublimity of the Subject, which I could no way make plain, so as to be understood by vulgar apprehensions, because the handling thereof put me necessarily upon the use of so many latine words, and logical terms of art, which are not usually understood by common people. And therefore despairing to be under∣stood but by those that had some skill in the Latine tongue, and in Logick, I have set down the words of such Authors as I have had occasion to cite, in their own languages, in which I found them, lest otherwise this Tractate should swell too great.
A second unhappinesse is, that this Tenet seemeth to crosse so ma∣ny of our own Divines, in their writings against the Papists. But indeed it doth only seem so, for it is manifest that the Church Ca∣tholike which they intend, is not the same with this that I have to deal about. For they speak of the Church Catholike consisting only of the Elect and I consent unto them that th Church is  le:

but my question is about the external state of the Church, contain∣ing hypocrites as well as those that are truly godly, in which Church the Ordinances of worship and discipline were set.
A third is, that I am fallen upon a subject wherein I can finde so few going before me, and therefore could have the lesse help from Authours.
A fourth is, that I being a mean Countrey-Minister, want both those abilities and opportunities, to enable me to write of controver∣sies, having constant employment of preaching in mine own Congre∣gation, and frequently abroad, lying upon me, so that I cannot at∣tend polemical Divinity, as they must that undertake such a work.
My principal scope in this and the former Thesis, is to prove that there is one Church Catholike visible on earth: and that Gods in∣tention and donation of the Ordinances of worship and discipline, was first to the whole Church, and secondarily to the particular Church∣es, as parts thereof. And yet I acknowledge the ordinary and con∣stant exercise of those Ordinances is primarily in the particular Churches, and a secondary and only occasional exercise of them in greater parts thereof; and a very rare exercise of them in the whole conjunctim upon some general extraordinary occasion, and that can be no otherwise, then by delegated Commissioners from the several parts of the whole, when convenible.
If it be conceived by any that some of the Arguments in this Tra∣ctate are multiplied more then is needfull, and are laid down more singly then was meet, I will not deny it: Be pleased in the reading of them to consider them together, and I hope they will prove con∣clusive.
I finde also by the review of this Tractate, that some things are ofter touched upon then I was aware of: be pleased to impute it part∣ly to my forgetfulnesse, and partly to mine endeavour to follow the method of my former Thesis, and yet to answer what was objected against it by others, who followed their own methods, which occasioned some coincidency.
And since the transcribing of it for the Presse, there came to my hands two other Tractates about the same subject, written from N. E. the one in Latine by that reverend and worthy M. Norton, Minister at Ipswich there, in answer to Apollonius; the other by

two reverend Ministers, viz. M. Allen, and M. Shepard, in an∣swer to M. Ball.
It grieved me much that I saw them no sooner: I have only in∣serted a few annotations upon those tractates, because I was loth to make a Postscript; and because I found that most of the material pas∣sages in them concerning this subject, were already spoken unto in this book.
I have now shewed mine opinion on this question, and submit it to your sage and mature judgements, and should be glad that my betters would shew me theirs, and either correct what I have erred or failed in, or make more clear what I have endeavoured to prove and defend. If I have herein erred, I would not willingly be an heretick, but shall be willing upon conviction and proof to retract the same, but if I have defended a truth (as I conceive I have) I should be glad to be confirmed in it, and gladder to have the truth confirm∣ed, that it may appear so to others.
Now God the Father, who is the God of truth; and Jesus Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the life; and the holy Ghost, who is the Spirit of truth; guide you and us into all truth. So prayeth,

Septemb. 8. 1649.
