



IT is my affliction and it may be yours, that a work both soundly delivered and composed should be im∣perfectly published and presented to you. Had the same hand compleated it, though the matter would not have been mended by it, yet the expression might. How∣ever as curt and plain as it is, it will not be the lesse profitable or instructive to you. It may be and it is the Churches comfort that its Head hath made a provision for it, its Prophets may cease personaly to preach, yet they shall not cease to teach it, their voice may be heard when their face is no more seen, & although they die they may live & speak for its furtherance and help for ever. The same Spirit may breath in and actuate their work which did their persons, and make the perusal of it as powerfully to strike the heart by the eyes as when it past thorough the ears to it. In the con∣fidence of this, was your able and of you tender Pastor, not only declaring to you the whole counsel of God while he lived, but desiring and indeavo∣ring that after his decease you might have all these things alwayes in remem∣brance. That you have seen and injoyed no more of those helps he had desig∣ned and fitted for you, is both his misfortune and yours, the same envy prosecu∣ting
 his memory which did his person, and if it were possible (when what blunts the edge of it to others sharpens it here) would pursue him, though past its reach, into the other world. This hath not however neither shall it discou∣rage me from the perfecting of his resolution, if the great Lord open a way to it. Until that be, you will I hope candidly accept what is here presented to you as the fruits of his love and of your desire, and I trust, not take it unkindly if I mind you of the progresse of his work among you; which though some have pee∣vishly pickt at and impeached, yet have not had the happines either by Scrip∣ture or reason to better it; accusing thereby themselves of not being over wise or Able workmen, who fall a demolishing of an others apprehended defective building, and yet neither prepare nor indeavor to raise more proper and fitt su∣per-structures of their own.
You are his witnesses that he was serving the Lord among you with all humi∣lity of mind and with many tears and temptations, that he kept back nothing which was profitable for you, but hath shewed you and taught you publickly, and from house to house, testifying repentance towards God and faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ as the only means by which you could obtain salvation, and laying it as the foundation work among you. He thence cleared to you the whole mystery of Godlines, and raised thereon an edifice which may abide the trial, when the hay and stuble which others have built may be consumed. He largely opened the state of the Covenant, the excellency of the mediator of it in all his offices, shewing how every way fitt and able he was for the work and his faithfulnes in it, in ruling, defending preserving the Church as their King, by a law and rule becomming him, discovering both the advantage and obligation of it with as great plainnes and accuracy (without disparagement to any) as any work of that nature doth pretend to. He was as full in clearing up Christs fatisfaction, in the excellency and extent of his sacrifice, and administration of his Priestly office, as far as the word did lead him, and beyond that bound he did not adventure, least he should seeme to cite at his barre to give an account of his work, him, whose understanding is infinite. He likewise demonstrated how this great Prophet had, according to the promise, taught the Church all that which the father did command, in the power, truth and extent of what it ought to beleeve and doe. As likewise the provision he made for succeeding ages, by the ordinances he instituted to be received by it. As Preaching. The Sacra∣ments, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. Prayer. And that of order and Goverment in the Church, as matters of its present concernment. As for the things referring to the future state of the Church till the Lords coming again to judgement, His master only gave him liberty to designe it, resolving to acquaint him more with them above. All which work though he did politely & largely deli∣ver, yet he concisely and catechetically digested it, for a memorial to you and a help to your seed after you to be built up in the holy faith. This being a considera∣ble part of his imployment on the Lords day did not disingage him from providing you other helps for the understanding of the written word, which he labored to fasten on you as your onely rule for faith and work, so far were you from being troubled with or imposed on by the new coyned Antinomian, Socinian, liber∣tin, &c. errors of these times out of his Pulpit. Your selves I call to witnes with what vehemency he indeavored to prevent sin in practise, and to fence you against error in judgement; The one by the Pathetical discourses wherewith he intertai∣ned you on those Topicks which concern the aggravation of sin. The other by
 those elaborate ones evincing the testimony given by the Prophets and Apostles, concerning Christs being the Messiah, and the light that God gave the Church thereof thorough out all ages. Bending his main force to dismantle those fortifi∣cations raised both by Jewes and Romanists against its intertainment, and for the defence of their own position that there is no typical Doctrine of Christ in Moses and the Prophets, no not a word of him in all the Old Testament; So that he not only laid among you but made good the foundation work thereby. All which peeces for the instructing and confirming you in the saith which was once delive∣red to the saints may be your quickning entertainment when God permitts. What light he gave you for the understanding of several portions of Scripture, and some whole Books, and making you knowing in them, may be imputed to you by his master as no small crime if you forget. What should I mention his opening those excellent truths treasured up in the Book of Psalms, which it is the Churches unhappines after his going thorough it with you, he had not the liberty to com∣pleat according to his own model, of which if providence crosse not the work, you may have a specimen subjoyned His weighty discourses on the whole Epistle to the Romans which perished before he fell himself. His Lectures on the Epistle to the Hebrewes which he finished with you. I mention not his occasional work, which is well known to have taken up not lesse of his time, then others (who think much of themselves) constant work hath done. I designe not this to magnify him or to depretiate them, but to shewe you the advantages you have had above many other Churches, and wherein then were you inferior to the best? I pray God your fruit be proportionable to it, and comfortable to him in the day of his meeting you before the Lord.
What should I now adde to you, but this humble and hearty desire and request. That you would peruse this work not barely for your recreation or diversion but for your proffit, it may display and blow up to a flame those sparks which lay as in embers concealed in your hearts; and think it your concernment not only to be acquainted with truths but to use them. Continue followers of him only as he was of Christ, and cleare up by your conversations you have not received the grace of God in vain. Live as great things as you know, and convince the world that knowledge as well as charity doth not puff up, but edify. By your holy, harmles and heavenly communion demonstrate that the communion of saints is not a bare Article of faith, and a thing only beleeved to be, and not to be seen in this world. Remember that your body's and souls are not your own, but the Lords, for they are bought with a price, and use and preserve them, as those which are indeed the Temples of the holy Ghost; so made by his solemn possession as by your pre∣sentment of them to him. Honor all his own ordinances by your attendances, and try the Spirits and words whether they are of God. Let the simplicity of the truth in Jesus be your rule for faith and manners. Hold fast that which by the word of God you are confirmed is good. Value prayer, though this degenerate age augh at it, and earnestly begge the Father to give you that Spirit, which he hath promised the Son to bestow on all his seed, and to those who ask him. Let the awe of God be alwayes in your hearts, and labor with him that vain thoughts may no longer lodge within you. The lying lip and false work keep far from you. In all your wayes adorn the Doctrine and Gospel of God your Saviour. Remem∣ber to keep holy the Lords day, and follow both the example and directions your pious Pastor hath in order to it furnisht you with. Make conscience of fami∣ly-prayer, and let it not be the aggravation of your sin that the more that duty was
 prest on you, the more you neglect it. Charge your children and housholds after you that they keep the way of the Lord in doing justice and judgment. Reproove the sins of others with wisdom and love, and where you are not capable of that, mourn and sorrow for them. Judge not, that you be not judged. Love your ene∣mies, blesse them that curse you. Doe good to them who hate you, pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you. Render to Caesar the things that are Caesars and to God the things that are Gods, walking with a conscience void of offence towards God and man. Live as those who would be alwayes fitt to dye, to die being sent for and not legally summoned, because you desire to be dissol∣ved, not because you must. This is all the evil rule that I ever heard taught you. And as evil as some men think it, if you truly walk according to it, peace shall be on you and mercy, as on the whole Israel of God. The God of all grace who hath called you to his eternal glory by Christ Jesus after that ye have suffered a while, stablish, strengthen, settle and perfect you for his own heavenly King∣dom. This he alwayes most importunately beggs for you, who in him is obli∣ged to be.

