


Right Worshipful,
WHen I considered the ex∣cellency, glory & beauty of the true power of god∣liness on the one hand, & the few freinds it had on the other hand, though it might justly challenge love, respect, embraces, and protection even from the greatest Princes in the world;1 Tim. 4.8. forasmuch as godliness hath the pro∣mise of this life, & that which is to come; yet by woful experience we finde that its daily perse∣cuted on the one hand by open enemies, though not as such; as Christ was not crucified as Christ, but as a deceiver; so godliness is per∣secuted as factious and Schismatical hypocrisie,

and as an enemy to the State, &c. so on the o∣ther hand its betrayed, disgraced and under∣mined by its pretended friends, and at this time being almost out of fashion, seeing in ge∣neral true religion is turned into notion, and the power of godliness into a form, shadow and outside, so that now piety suffers exceed∣ingly; Then give me leave to plead on its be∣half, even to you to whom God hath given the sword in these parts, so that true godliness might be promoted and protected by you, and all irreligion and prophaneness discountenan∣ced, and punished; seeing the Magistrate doth not, or should not bear the sword in vain, and he to whom its committed, ought to be a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do well: and though not many wise,1 Cor. 1.26. not many mighty men after the flesh, not many noble are call∣ed; not many Justices of the Peace are guilty of being acquainted with this power of godli∣ness (its a very rare thing to finde greatness and goodness go together) yet some there are who are found to be chosen, and faithful. God hath not left himself without witness,1 Tim. 1.11. even among these: whose love, affections, and zeal are manifested to the glorious Gospel of the blessed God (a continuall supply of such godly Patriots, the Lord grant and prosper unto us) which is far dearer to every gratious heart

then its dearest blood, or what ever is desirable under the Sun, or to be admired by the sons of men; and according to mens gifts, and great∣ness of place, is the excellency of good, or ex∣cess of evil; men in authority have the greatest opportunities of doing good or evil, & as they are improved, so is the ruine or happiness of a state; therefore we may heartily wish that all men in eminency of place, who are enemies to Jesus Christ, might be fools and dunces, that they might not be able to manage their malice and power with such depths & dexterity, to the more dangerous undermining of the power of godli∣ness; great men are more subject to temptati∣on then others, yet God chose himself a David, a Moses, a Jehosaphat, a Josias, &c. to be very excellent instruments for his glory; and if God doth expect most from them to whom he hath given most, and the greatest Harvest where he hath sown most seed; then dreadful will their account be, who cannot answer God one for a thousand, who have not imployed their gifts, talents, and power to the glory of that God who hath so liberally bestowed them on them: for God will not have the sword of Magistracy lockt up in the scabbard unto a wicked offendor, nor maliciously drawn against the just.


,Rom. 13.3. For rulers are not a ter∣ror to good works, but to evil (that is, they should not be a terror to good works) how then have many rulers mis-exercised their power in punishing vertue, and countenancing vice? how have the fair and tender locks of Jesus Christ, in the profession of the power of godliness, been cropped and singed, and the black ruffled hair of the whore of Babylon decked, crisped and curled to the view of the world, to the sensible grief and wo of many thousands in this Kingdom? how hath forma∣lity been advanced, and reality depressed? how hath truth suffered and error raigned? how hath the sword been turned against the faith∣ful in the Land, and they made the only Butt against whom all the arrows of malice have been directed? and I am confident that no Na∣tion under heaven have been greater or more bitter enemies to the power of Godliness, then some in this Nation have been, and still are and would be; yet they themselves profess the same faith, the same Christ, the same God, and the same baptism, but the deeper will their wound of conscience be, and the heavier their damnation. Indeed, as he is not a Jew, that is one outwardly, even so he is not a Christian, that's one in shew, that hath only an outside in Religion, that is, he is onely so nomine, non re,

in name, but not in truth: Yet we see that all that are baptized, they appropriate the name of Christians unto themselves; in word they profess they know God,Tit. 1.16. but in works they deny him, being to every good work reprobate; for to God they are abominable, and disobedi∣ent to all the commands of God and of Jesus Christ; yea how many thousands in this Nation are there, that are so far from the power of god∣liness, that they hate the very form; yea shall I say more? they are without humanity it self: O how Atheistically barbarous and prophane do men live! These are they who are without God in the world,Ephes. 2.12.2, 3. they only are lead by the power of the prince of darkness; the God of this world hath blinded their eyes, hardned their hearts; yea and they are sealed up unto ever∣lasting condemnation, and yet know it not, and yet these must pass for Christians: O let these know that it will be easier for Turks and Indi∣ans in the day of Judgment then for them.
Now the scope of what I shall in this small Treatise humbly present unto your serious me∣ditations, is to set forth the sad condition of all them that content themselves with a form of godliness and deny the power thereof; as also the excellency and happiness of those that can make it out to their own hearts that the power of godliness dwels in their spirits, having

also laid down several marks of both, whereby every serious inquisitive soul may know how its condition stands with God; they are the me∣ditations and endeavors of some spare hours from other Imployments which I have made use of. O let not the humility of the stile, or any prejudicated thoughts of the insufficiency of the author be a scandal or impediment to your per∣usal of his labors, or to make you say with An∣tipater King of Macedonia when there was a book concerning mans happiness presented to him; , I have no leasure; but read and Judge by the rule of the Spirit of love, which is the strongest obligation; Quis le∣gem det amantibus? major Lex amor est sibi: Love is at once a freedom from all Law, and yet a law of the greatest necessity.
My desire is (and God say Amen to it) that this plain Pill (though naked and altogether without the guildings of Rhetorick, and there∣fore the more consentaneous to true Gospel Physick) might be very effectuall both to City and County, which indeed it will be to all that take it down into their hearts: O that God would be pleased by it to purge us from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and make us live up to every mercy we enjoy, giving the glory of all grace to the God of glory and power, who onely can make all means effectual by the

working of his own spirit in the hearts of the sons of men: he can aswell bless weak means as strong;Jer. 37.10. wounded men shall take the City if he command them; pezants shall be more po∣tent then Princes, if they have Gods commis∣sion: so its in the power of the Almighty to make these few gleanings as copious in fruit∣fulness as the fullest sheaves of harvest, & these weak and unsinewed meditations as effectual as the high and strong parts of others, which I shall leave in the hand of him who is all suffici∣ent to do abundantly more then we can ask or think; humbly desiring your candid acceptance of these my slender endeavors: and I shall desire at the hand of the Lord your daily increase in faith in Jesus Christ, for that is that potent & princely grace (that is) that victorious grace attended with all her glorious train, reading down triumphantly before you all vain pomp and transitory glory, that she may hold still fresh and flourishing in your eyes the immorta∣lity and bliss of a never-fading crown, and shine fair & fruitfull in your souls untill it set you down safe in the midst of a most glorious and ever-induring kingdom of heaven, and having finished her blessed task, resign you up, & leave you for ever in the bosome of Christ, the Au∣thor and finisher of your course, there to remain everlastingly blessed in the injoy∣ment

of fullness of joy and pleasures at his right hand even to all Eternity.

