



Gentlemen,
I Hope the discriminating Character of the Men to whom I make this Address can justly offend none. I would pray that all the Gentry in this Nation were such and more than such; even sub∣limely and powerfully Christian, Spiri∣tual and Holy: But to entitle all to be so Noble, would be accounted a Re∣proach by multitudes of them who call themselves Gentlemen. I will not there∣fore in the least asperse them by interest∣ing them in this Concernment of Reli∣gion. My design only is to engage pregnant wits, and serious spirits in
 matters of Nature and Grace to a due consideration of the Examen of a Dis∣course styled Sure-Footing in Christiani∣ty, and after all weighed to give their discretive Judgments as becomes men loving the Truth,
The Reason why I direct this work unto you, is because I do see the Dis∣courser boasting, that it was to his excee∣ding satisfaction to understand, that mul∣titudes of the most Eminent, solid, and ingenuous wits of our Nation, had been diligent perusers of this Book. You then are the precious souls, after which he hunts to catch by his Discourses, not to save but to destroy you: It will there∣fore be no way injurious to you, nor uncivil for a poor Country-Fellow to I∣tem you, to look about you; for there are snares laid for your souls. I confess Sure-Footing in Christianity is such a lovely Title to a Book, that it would al∣lure any Serious Christian to hunger after it and peruse it: I could not choose but long to see it when first I heard of it; having a desire to be sure of heaven. But best Names and Titles may be pre∣fixed to the worst Authors and Books;
 as this will be found by an intelligent, piercing, Christian Reader. I shall not prejudge, but having perus'd the whole with as much diligence, as I can, I shall offer unto you the most eminent, Solid, Ingnuous, and Christian wits, these Animadversions to be weighed thereupon.
1. As to the Title I offer unto your observation, whether any or all his Discourses do answer it or make it good, that he hath discovered A sure-Footing in Christianity; when the very Church and Religion for which he contends, are yet under dispute among many, whe∣ther they be Christian or Antichristian? Can he give us Sure-footing in disputa∣ble matters? Again, what greater lubri∣city or slipperiness can there be, than in Common voluntary-talk from Fathers to Sons, which is his Oral-tradition of doctrine? unless there be a standing-written Record by which their reports may be tried? Yet herein is the surest ground he gives us to stand upon. It is my happiness in some kind that I know not the Man; therefore I can have no personal grudge, nor disrespect unto
 him nor quarrel with him: but as he is interested in a cause contradictory to the Gospel of Christ, and sure way unto salvation. And herein I profess my self an Adversary to his Sure-footing; yet so far as to shew him, where he may set his Foot surer for Heaven. For indeed his Title seems to me to be given from the reason of Contraries, as Mountains are said to be from mo∣ving,Montes à movendo, quia mini∣mè movent. because they move not at all; so may his Book be styled; Sure-footing in Christianity, because it giveth none at all; but rather sets men on slippery pla∣ces whence they easily slide, and fall in∣to perdition: as is discovered in the Ex∣amination of it. As his work is entitled Sure-footing, so may he as Author, thence bear the Denomination of Sure-foot, or Sure-footer:Ichnoates Ovid Me∣tam. page 3. Or as a Country man of ours translates the name of one of Actaeons Dogs, Sure-tracer; For having meta∣morphos'd Christ into the shape of a strange Roman Beast, pretending him, he makes a loud cry to the rest of the Ken∣nel, and fastens upon the Lord who bought him, and bites him through; though he bespeaks him, I am Jesus
 whom you persecute.
2. I give you here a finger pointing to his Preface, Transition to the Appen∣dixes, and his Post-script Letter to his Answerer; where (if words can do it) he sets in the Front of his Book Pro∣logum Galeatum, a Preface Helmet-steeled; not suffering any weapon-stroak to pierce into his Book, if any will be∣lieve him, when he saith, It is impossi∣ble that Reason strained to its utmost can invent any other Principle to secure us in Christianity but his Tradition: words able to make a man afraid to assault his Discourse, if he were a white-liverd Souldier. And no less hath he guar∣ded it in the Rere, affixing his Epilogum Calceatum & clavatum, that is, shod it with iron, to strike more dangerou∣sly than an Horse flinging backward; So that his Body of Discourse is armed Cap a Pee, that he fears no assault, thinking himself shot-proof. What else mean his vaunts, and his Laws, which he imposeth on his Answerer? His Postcript of defence being more simple than the rest; For wherein hath he brought controversie from an endless to
 a Conclusive way? unless it be in this, that all men must yeeld to his Conclu∣sion, to subscribe to Popish-Tradition; and then we are all friends. I suppose some such easie Protestants he met with∣all to whom he communicated his thoughts, and received approbation from them. His pride in exalting him∣self is displaied enough in his Transi∣tion: As that the Opposers of Dr. Pierce thought fit to answer his Testimonies; but left to him the way of Reason and Principles, to make his Congress with him. This man then it seems is ac∣counted the Master and Oracle of Rea∣son among his Tribe. And again; It is needless perhaps to the Generality (how∣ever very satisfactory to Examining wits, such as his own) to confute that in Common, which is already confuted by Retail. So then this Gentleman is an whole-sale Merchant for Rome one of the better rank, others retailers of a meaner trade. Let him be so, but it had been better spoken by another, than himself. His demands of his Answerer, whereunto he accounts him obliged, are partly Ra∣tional, which ingenuous men would have
 observed without his forestalling: but mostly unreasonable and frivolous which to grant, were to yeeld the Cause, and this is begging to the purpose. I have conformed to that which is, To speak to the main of his Book, and not catch at some odd words; And therefore have I followed him step by step: though I confess, it liketh me better what I have only seen of an answer made by a wor∣thy person to this Book,Mr. Tillot∣son. (after I had travell'd thorough it in my way) who hath more concisely and sufficiently me∣thodized and answered these Discourses; For indeed one sheet of Paper may contain a Reply abundantly satisfactory to the strength of Argument therein. It will be your wisdome then to discern the man and his language.
3. I propose it to your most serious thoughts and judgments. Doth not Rea∣son bind such a scientifical undertaker, (as he professeth himself to be) to give exact explications, and definitions of those terms which must make up his Conclusion? And what loose and Iden∣tical descriptions doth he make of Rule and Faith singly and joyntly? Can your
 understandings bear such frivolous and frothy dealings in matters of so high con∣cernment as Salvation? I think not.
4. I appeal to you; Is it not most slanderous to say, that the Protestants make Scriptures-Letter unsenc't their Rule of Faith? Did ever any of them state it so? Or is it not absurd for him to impose it on them, that by Scrip∣tures they must mean the Letter only unsenc't,pag. 38. Sect 34. as he doth on the Bishop of Down; when he tells him, that must be his meaning, and that the faith of our Church hath for its object Ink thus fi∣gur'd in a Book? Have not mens wri∣tings their minds and innate sence in them, as well as their words; both of them being signs or significations of things? Or, will be deny to God, that which is granted to men, even to sence, and spirit his own word? Yet thus su∣perciliously he doth, and blasphemously subjects the Scriptures of God to be sen∣ced by his lying Tradition. See and con∣sider and judge for God.
5. I shall mind you of his equivocal evasions under the Ambiguity of his Tradition. First e tells us, that Prote∣stants
 take a wrong aim, to dispute a∣gainst things delivered, instead of Tra∣dition it self. This is his new Inventi∣on, whereof he boasts, and hopes here∣by to elude his Adversaries, as if they had mistaken in their disputes against Je∣suits, to argue against the matter of Tra∣dition, (as if the Papists held them for faith) Whereas they mean by Tradition, as the Rule of Faith, only the method of publickly delivering down Tenets, &c. that is, Oral-speech or words without sence or matter. It is left to your judg∣ments to discern, what a new, nothing, this Invention is; and whether his Fa∣thers had not more wit to maintain mode and matter of Tradition to be the Rule of their Faith: A fuller reply to this the Examen may give.
2. His reciprocating Popish-Oral-Tra∣dition with the Universal Tradition of mankin, is to be marked: for so he often styleth it; as if all mankind were Papists; or his Oral-delivery were the speech of them all. Whereas we know there are as many sorts of Traditi∣ons as Men; and as many sorts of Men as Nations or languages: neither could the
 spreading Power of the Roman Beast over many Nations, make them all of one Tradition, as to matters of Religion, though for a time it prevailed much; and that as an Usurper against Christ.
3. His confounding Scriptur al Tradi∣on with Oral is to be noted; as usually he doth in citing of the Fathers; where∣by he grossely abuseth his unskilful Rea∣ders, perswading that all under the term of Tradition, must note his Oral-Delivery, when the Author cited mea∣neth it of Scripture. How he dodgeth in and out among these Amphibolies is worthy of most piercing observa∣tion to note out a Deceiver.
6. May I in the last place, as to the Man and his work only add this Item to you. Let not his Flatteries upon one hand, nor his Impudent boldness, presumptuous Confidence, and bitter Invectives against his Adversaries on the other, scare you or byass you: Weigh Principles and Conclusions justly and se∣riously. He hath hinted that your eyes will be intent upon his Answerers; and I dare not suspect your impartial scruti∣ny of him and his Discourses: Though
 he account all mad men who oppose him; yet you will finde them in their witts, speaking words of soberness and Truth for Christ.
Lastly not to extend an Epistolary Bound any Further, I shall close up with a Compassionate complaint, and Prayer. Is it not Pity that Royal Heads and hearts in their respective Ditions under Papal power, and noble Spirits in their seve∣ral Stations, should be enchanted by such seducing Spirits? Lord, reveal thy Son not only unto, but in the hearts of such Princes, Nobles, great, and wise men, who desire to know and love thy Truth; that they may not be given up to beleive lies, but deliver their souls from the snares of those Hunters, and let thy Truth make them free.
Is it not sad to behold so many great Houses and Families consumed with droppings of sin, smitten with breaches by the Concussions of their Iniquities, and even subverted by Profaneness, Ir∣religion, and ungodliness, because they will not make mention of the name of the Lord, nor call upon him? Lord look from Heaven, and pity these who
 do not, who cannot pity their own souls, who curse God out of their habitations; and think it their Gentility. Sprinkle them that they may shut their mouths from blaspheming; Let them see what was not told them: and let them consider, what formerly they would not hear, e∣ven the secret of thy Salvation. Is it not further to be lamented, to see nota∣ble Heads, Pregnants wits, Sagacious un∣derstandings to spend their studies upon vain Curiosities; and scarce take up a thought to reach the full assurance of understanding to the acknowledgment of the Mysterie of God, of the Father and of Christ? Is it not yet more piti∣ful to find such spirits who beleeve the Prophets and Apostles, sit down with Agrippa perswaded only to be almost Christians? who content themselves with the letter and form of Godliness, and yet never make out to the power of it; How sad is this to seem to come so neer to the Kingdom of Heaven, and yet fall short at last. Such slight Christianity makes many halt at this day between God and Baal: But they who thoroughly do the will of the Father shall know the Doctrine of
 Christ to be of God, and cleave unto it; Such are my hopes of you. Now the God of all Grace so teach you all that you may learn Christ,Omnia a∣mittet qui facit Doc∣trinae Chri∣sti jctu∣ram Bez. as the Truth is in Jesus, to put off the old, and put on the new man, and so walk and perse∣vere in the Truth, that ye loose not the things, which ye have gained, but may receive a full reward, Amen.

If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Heb. 10.38.

