




Right Worshipful, &c.
THE Divine Preacher tells us; 'Tis better to go the House of Mourning, than to the House of Feasting. And there
is indeed great reason for his say∣ing so. 'Tis something, that this latter place commonly leaves Men Vainer, than it finds them. But 'tis a weighty one that he is ex∣press in: the former; That, is, the end of all Men, and the living will lay it to heart. It shews; What all must come to: there∣fore, the need of being prepared accordingly. Now, that my Lot is fallen in a great Family of greater Sorrows, altho it be your greatest Care to turn those into the Speediest Joys; is no Absur∣dity to affirm. I'm sure, besides the sad Calamities of our Dome∣sticks, the Experience of my small Apartment hath for these two Years past, by frequent and grie∣vous Sickness, and by Death late∣ly, met with loud Knels of Hea∣viness.
Nor may we doubt, but that many of your selves, some time or other, have heard such doleful Lessons. Nay, who can tell, how soon those, yet exempt∣ed, may taste of the same Bitter Cup; and perhaps drink deep∣er of it? So that a Discourse, adapted to such Circumstances, cannot be unseasonable. Especial∣ly, if it respect Preventing, Sup∣porting, Delivering thence, and making wise Improvement there∣of. All which Advantages these Papers aim at: and, it is hoped, do not utterly miss their Mark.
Unto your Worships, the Essay, such as 'tis, is most humbly dedi∣cated: as to It's Author's Patrons; and most worthy of more Honour than is within his reach to pay you. To forbear (tho not forget)
your kind Respect unto Himself: nor to insist upon the most Signal, but Secret, Charities of several of you, unto many hundred Pounds, (which, tho you would not have your left hand know what your right hand did, could not be quite concealed; indeed, such Rare Examples ought not): Your Joint Compassion, and Tender Care of the Many Poor in this Great Hospital, proclaim your Merit, hardly Imitable; I'm sure, truly Admirable! For, be∣sides your Constant Provision of the Best Food, and Physick, and Surgery, that you can get; with very meet, both Firing, Lodging, and Attendance, you are now New-building of their House; and at the vast Expence of many Thousand Pounds. Whereby, at once you prevent their being Bu∣ried
Alive in the Ruins of an Old-decayed-Place; and likewise pro∣vide for, Better-Preserving Life, and Sooner-Restoring Health, un∣to them, by a far more Airy, Sweet, and Pleasant Dwelling, than before they had: or ever could have ho∣ped for, But from Your Selves. That the God of Mercy, who first inclined you, may preserve and prosper you, to the finishing of this Earthly Tabernacle for his Poor; and, in due season, Re∣ward you with an Habitation not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens, is the Prayer of,
Right Worshipful, &c. 
