



My Lord,
WHen the Gospel was first pro∣mulgated by the Preaching of Christ and his Apostles, the Scribes and Pharisees a∣mong the Jews, the Philoso∣phers and Disputers of this World among the Gentiles, i. e. the Wits of that Age were some of the most eminent Opposers and Rejecters of it; the one requi∣red1 Cor. 1. 22. a Sign, the other sought after Wisdom; the one would have Signs and Miles wrought at their Demand, the other would have Philosophical Reasons drawn from Natural Causes to make them believe: and for lack of these (as it seems they pretend∣ed) Christ crucified was to the Jews a stum∣bling-block,

and to the Greeks foolishness: and that for the same Reasons (such as they are) he seem to be so still to some of the Wits of these Times, I am assured by the Witings of such Persons as want neither opportunities of Converse with Men, nor ability to understand their Principles and Pretences. Some there are that have heard, and perhaps have read a little of the things called Miracles and Demonstrations, and for want of these, they seem to despise and con∣temn the Gospel. But the tuth is, could these Brisk and Airy, these Talkative and Dogmatical men, obtain leave of themselves to be sious so long as to consider the na∣ture of the Gospel, and the Demonstration of the Spirit, they might perhaps find them∣selves somewhat like those in the PrimitiveRom. 1. 22. times, who professing themselves to be Wise, be∣came Fools: Nor have they any reason to look on this as a reproachful Suggestion; fo since Life and Immortality are brought to light by the Gospel, upon either of these Pre∣tences (and they can have no better) to reject it, is but to play the fool very wise∣ly, and to run mad with a reason for it: and that not only because the Gospel ac∣quaints us with matters of the highest and best importance that can be unto us, but also because which of these wayes soever

they chuse to palliate their Infidelity, it will at length lead them to deplorable ab∣surdity.
For the Semeiotical or Jewish Postulatum, is a very manifst and malepet piece of Folly: not only because the Gospel was at first abundantly confimed by Miracles, un∣contollably attested; but also because if that were constituted the way of demon∣strating the truth of Divine Revelation, it would lead men to the impudence of pre∣scribing to the Most High, and setting bounds to the Almighty, of expecting al∣terations in the course of Nature, and of having Preachers (like Juglers) to shew tricks at the demand of every petulant Re∣quirer. Instances hereof we have divers in the Holy Scripture, but few I think so peg∣nant as that of the Pharisees seeking of ChristMark 8. 11. a Sign from Heaven, tempting him. They had no mind to be his Disciples,, but to make tryal of his Skill and ability, and therefore they demand a Sign, and that presently, up∣on the spot; and this Sign must be, not that which he had given them but the day before, by feeding four thousand with se∣ven Loaves and a few small Fishes; this did not please their Pallats: but they must have a Sign of their own chusing, and that not from the Earth, the Wind, or the Sea,

but from Heaven: from thence it must come in all haste to satisfie their wanton Curiosity▪ And was not this to expect that the Powers of Heaven and Earth should dance attendance on them at their senseless and impudent demand? It is plain then, that Insolence and Impiety, Folly and asinine Stupidity are the Brood that this Postulatum brings forth. And if this be the way of proving the Gospel to be of God, how shall future Ages be secured against it? Are men more wise and modest now than they were then? I doubt it; be∣cause there are some (even in our Nation) that are fallen into such as this Absurdi∣ty: Whence else is it that they require a Miracle to prove that Miracles have been done? but would they stand a little, and consider whither they are going, they might perhaps perceive, that he who put them into this way, hath no extraordinary Wit as is pretended.
And they that think to excuse their In∣fidelity or Neutrality by the Grecanick Po∣stulatum, seem not to me to be much wiser: because they hanker after such Proof as the nature of the thing will not admit, and reject that that is most poper: for, the Go∣spel we know contains matters of Faith, and these matters of Faith (especially

those of them that are most excepted against) are contained either in Historical Narrati∣ons or Doctrinal Propositions: the former ha∣ving received their Being from Free Agents, not from Causes Necessary, or of their own nature determined to the doing of that that is be Believed, cannot admit of strict and rigorous Demonstration, but are capable of proof only by Testimony: and this we have for matters meerly Historical in the Gospel, as fully as for any other of the same, or (as I think) of a far lesser di∣stance: for, not only all Christians of the remotest Regions, but Jews and Pagans, Heathens and Infidels of all sorts have re∣ceived them for true, and confirmed themVi Grot▪ de Vrit. Relig. lib. 2. §. 21 unto us. This is all the Proof we either have, or can reasonably desire of these things, because their nature will admit of no other.
And if they are not, much less are the Doctrinal Propositions (containing meer matters of Divine Faith) capable of De∣monstration, because they are a Mystery con∣cerning God, his Nature, Essence or Opera∣tions: and one would think that men of Wit and Parts should not betray so much Folly, Ignorance, and want of Learning, as to expect Philosophical Demonstration for things of that nature: for such Demonstra∣tion,

must be either à priori or à posteriori: à priori it cannot be, because that supposes causes precedent to the First, viz. God himself, and so implies a Contradiction. Nor can it be à posteriori, because the Go∣spelCol 1. 26. is the mystery which hath been hid from Ages and from Generations: if it be not, whence was it that all the Learned as well as the Vulgar among the Jews and Gentiles were ignorant of it, till Christ and his Apo∣stles made it manifst? it seems therefore, the Faith of the Gospel is a sort of Super∣natural Doctrine, which cannot possibly be demonstrated by the Light of Nature, and for that reason (were there no other) it is unreasonable to demand it, and sensless to reject the Gospel for lack of it: such Doctrine can admit of no demonstration but that of the Spirit: and this indeed is made à posteriori, yet not from the constant and ordinary Phaenomena of Nature, but from things Novel and Anomalous (such as Pre∣dictions and Miracles) purposely designed for that end: and this is the way of pro∣ving the Gospel to be Divine, far more decent and proper than any other, because it becomes the Majesty of God, and conci∣liates Authority to his Word, by making Cor. 2. 4, 5. our Faith to stand not in the Wisdom of men, but on the Power of God.

Now to shew that this Demonstration was abundantly made by the Spirit in Christ and his Apostles, is the great design of this Treatise: which being written on an oc∣casion of a Command laid on me by your Lordship, was by me humbly offered to the Honour of your Lordships view: and ha∣ving attained thereunto, your Lordship it seems was pleased to condescend so far as to read over as much as your Lordships time would give leave, and then to return it with many thanks to me for my good pains (as your Lordship was pleased to call them,) wisely placed on so worthy a Theme; together with such other expressions of your Lordships Approbation, as neither I did expect, nor (as I fear) doth the Treatise Dserve. But I submit to your Lordships Judgmnt, and had I not so done, this Treatise had been buried in obscurity with its Author: but having that encouragement, I thought my self sufficiently armed against all elation or dejection of mind, at the various censures that may possibly be passed upon it, if it should come abroad; because I neither know, nor am like to met with any more able to judge of such matters, or impartial in Judging, than your Lordship. Hereupon I gave my consent to its being made ublick: and for its freer passage among men, in this

declining age of Christianity, I am humbly bold to let the World know, that your Lordship is thus far concerned therein▪ and forasmuch as it contends for that Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, which is at this day (God be thanked) most excellent∣ly established and most mercifully preserved in the Church of England, whereof also your Lordship (very deservedly) is one of the Chief Ministers, with all humble confi∣dence I perswade my self, that for so doing, your Lordship will either not be offended at, or will easily pardon

