



Right Honourable, &c.
THE Subject of the ensuing Discourse was of your Appointment, and the Sermon is now publish'd at your Command: So that, if the Text gave you no Title to it, yet you have made it yours by approving it. And therefore lest the Faults of it should reflect upon you, I think my self bound to declare this truth by way of Apology for them: That 'twas made in a hurry of other business, and amidst the distractions of a man going into another World. I don't tell you this; because you knew it before, and for that reason, and for the sake of some things in it well meant, I presume gave the whole a favourable acceptance, though it be far from a correct piece. Neither should I have told it others, who may possibly throw away so much time as to read this Discourse, but that I am more concern'd for the reputation of your Candour, than of mine own Judgment. For I could be well content to publish my weakness without an Apolo∣gy, when 'tis the best means, I can use for the discharge of a necessary duty: And gives me an opportunity to testi∣fie my gratitude both for that general, and unanimous consent whereby you entitled me to the honour of your service, and the particular favours, and great civilities

which, though a stranger, yet as a Clergy-man I have re∣ceived from you.
And since the acknowledgment of Benefits is one branch of the Vertue of Gratitude, I hope you will think it my duty and nothing else makes me say, that, that part of this Sermon which treats of the advantages of Ship∣ping to this Island, does more eminently concern your selves: And that the obligations you have laid upon me, before mention'd, do infinitely fall short of those I lie un∣der, as an English man, to the Eastern traffick which you mannage. For most of the useful Arts amongst us owe their Original to Asia the Less, or Greece, from whence they were deriv'd to us and some, before the Roman Con∣quest: And by the best account that History can give us, we first received the Christian Religion immediately from Syria. So that, not to speak of the Benefits we at present enjoy from the Levant trade, the merits of its past services have been so incomparably great to the whole Nation, that I doubt not, but they'll be an Argu∣ment to Authority to continue the protection, and encou∣ragement of it; as they ought to be, to all English men to wish, and pray for its prosperity. Amongst whom, as more particularly bound, your happiness in every kind, and degree of it, shall be the constant subject of the Prayers of
Right Honourable, &c. 
