



May it please Your Highness,
THat I should commend a Cavalier to You, may, at this time, seem an incongruous address, con∣sidering how much You have suffered from some of that party: But then, if those I present be none of that some, but such as are neither guilty of Schism nor Sedition, nor (being true to their principles) can be so; it will then, I hope, not be taken as presumption, so much as duty, to commend such Ser∣vants to the protection of so good a Master. So that now, Sir, having drawn You into a cncern in that Party, I shall be a little more free on their behalf.
Sir, It is to all the world apparent, that there is no Party that by their Principles stand more inclined and affected to the pre∣sent Government, that is, to Monarchy, then they: For they fought for their then Monarch, even for Monarchy sake; not for him as he was Charls Stuart, but as that their Sveraign Lord the King, which by the grace of God had the present do∣minion over them. Nay, Sir, in that, we did not only shew good affection to this present Government, but to You our present Governor; yes, and fought for You too, and that when You fought against Your self. For, Sir, it cannot be denied, but that as You are more eminently Your self now then before, as being by the grace of God advanced to that power You had not then; so also, in fighting for him, who was by relation our then pre∣sent Protector, we did fight for You your self, our present Pro∣tector now.
But it may be objected, that there are some that have con∣ceived personal prejudice against You. It is too plain there are so; but these are not the men I plead for, nor are they such as (by the most considerable men amongst us) are owned as true Royalists or Cavaliers No, Sir, they are by them looked upon as their greatest enemies, even because, by teir unduiful and disloyal attempts, they have given You occasion to suspect the whole party. Sir, our Principle is to respect him that is our

Higher Power as in conscience sake to the ordinance of God, and not out of any fancy sake to his person alone, as the ordi∣nance of man. And yet, Sir, in respect of your personal worth too, and of that affection and esteem the most of us have of you, I will speak it knowingly, that were it in our own choice, we should rather have you then any other in the three Nations to be our Soveraign. And as for any hardship under which we do for the present lie, and wheein violation may seem to be offered to the Act of Oblivion, we do (as I said) impute the oc∣casion to those that have wrongfully assumed the name of the Royal party. It is not (I assure You) taken as proceeding from Your self, who are looked upon as the chief Author of that Act, as David was of that Covenant made with Abner, for reducing all Israel (such as had formerly taken part with the house of Saul) under one obedience But as all the people and all Israel understood then that it was not of the King, so are they perswaded of You now. We consider, that as David had such as Shimei and Sheba, that out of personal relation to others did disturb him, so also had he sons of Zerviah, such as were too hard for him, although in the Throne: He had such as Joab, who out of emu∣lation to be outscript in service or fidelity, or out of secret grudg or anger at the loss of a Brother, or the like, received in the time of war, would perswade that Abner, and such as he, came but to deceive him, and to be as Spies to him in the behalf of some o∣ther In which their dealing towards such as were their brethren and of the same Nation and Religion with themselves, they shewed not so much conscience and good nature, as is recorded 2.Chron 28. 9, & c. to have been used towards those that had been overcome by war then.
But, Sir, we look upon You as as our Joint-Protector now; and our prayer shall be to Him that hath the hearts of Princes in His hand, and can turn them which way soever He pleaseth, That no Councel may prevail with You, but what may be for the Glory of GOD, and the general Peace and good of these Nations. In which Your royal resolution, I hope You shall never fail of the ready assistance of those that are of the Royal party; nor, I am sure, of the prayers and endeavours of

