



Honoured Sir,
'TWas no easie matter to find a Patron for so General a Satire as these two Dialogues Contain; since the Vices, and Follies they expose, spread them∣selves so far through Man∣kind, that few, very few are
 free from some Tincture of them. This Consideration, wou'd, I confess, have pre∣vail'd on me to have Publish'd them Naked, and without any Patron, had not my rest∣less desire of giving a Pub∣lick Testimony of the value I have for your Merit, Presented You, Sir, as a Man out of the reach of all that I have said in this small Volume, and indeed, of all true Satire.
You have tasted the Plea∣sures of the Town, but
 not fed on 'em to a Surfeit, as most that have your Youth, and your For∣tune, and that at their own Command, use to do: Youth cou'd not betray you to the Follies of the Town, nor Riches to its Vices: Your Nice and Solid Judge∣ment, gave you, from the Observations on the Trans∣gressions of others, an early, and unrepented Experience, to preserve you from the first; and your own innate Temperance, secur'd you
 from the infection of the latter: Your Moderation in all things cut off all ex∣cess, and your Generosity, and Love to such as you Honour'd with the Title of Friend, permitted you not so to over-value the Goods of Fortune, as to prefer them to God-like Compassion, or the Heroick Service of your Friend.
Men generally arrive at Wisdom by such rugged steps of self-experience, that the advantage it brings in
 Age, seems not to compensate the Price we pay for it in all our Life before, of Health, and Fortune. But with you it has grown acquainted in your Youth, and taught you to retire from the pursuit of Noise, and Nonsense in this Town, to the calm retreat of your Paternal Inheritance, there to Converse with the best part of the best of the Dead; their Wit in their Works; without being Ob∣lig'd to dash that Pleasure with the daily impertinencies
 of the Living, which Con∣versation in Cities forces upon us. I must tell you this, my Friend, That as I admire your Choice, so I envy it, yet only as a Friend may; repining that I can't have the same happiness, without any desire of dimi∣nishing yours.
But this Retreat of yours, ought indeed to have deter'd me from Dedicating any of my lighter Performances to you, since, as you have Judgment, so you have Lei∣sure
 to examine them more severely. But the Charm of a Friend will I hope cast a Vail o'er my Faults, and make You Espouse them with all their Defects. This I can say for these Dialogues, if that be any Excuse, that they are the unpremedita∣ted Products of my Fancy, both as to Thought, and Language, without the Cul∣tivation of my Judgment, which wou'd both have added, and diminish'd, if I had been Master of my own time. The
 Satire is not meanly di∣rected against any parti∣cular Person, aiming only at the Follies and Vices too many are infected with. I cou'd never much value their Performances, nor at all agree with their Notion of Satire, who make no di∣stinction betwixt the Person, and the Folly or Vice: For my Friend might have some of them, which my Love for him wou'd make me desire to Reform, without any Per∣sonal Reflection; that being
 the effect of a Private and Poor Revenge, below the Generous Indignation that shou'd inspire true Satire. If, therefore, any find them∣selves touch'd, they ought to make a Right Use of it, and Correct those Failings, which render them liable to Ridicule, and Laugh∣ter.
But I shall not be very Sollicitous about the Gene∣ral Reception of this Book; if it does but Contribute to your Diversion, at your
 more unbended Hours, it wou'd be an extream Satisfaction to him, Sir, that is Proud of Subscri∣bing himself

