


THE truth of my heart gives me boldness to profess before
him who onely knows it, that the same God who hath called
me to the over-sight of your Souls, hath wrought in me a zealous
desire of your Salvation. This desire cannot but incite me to a
careful prevention of those dangers which might threaten the disappointment 
of so happy an end. Those Dangers are either Sins of Practice, or Errours
of Doctrine. Against both these I have faithfully vowed my utmost endea∣vours.
I shall labour against the first by Preaching, Example, Censures;
wherein it shall be your choice to expect either the Rod, or the Spirit of meek∣ness.
Against the latter my Pen hath risen up in this early assault. It
hath been assured me that in this time of late Vacancie, false Teachers,
catching the fore-lock of Occasion, have been busie in scattering the tares of
Errours amongst you. I easily believe it, since I know it is not in the power
of the greatest vigilancie to hinder their attempts of evil. Even a full See
is no sufficient barre to crafty Seducers; their Suggestions we cannot pre∣vent,
their Success we may. This I have here assay'd to doe, bending my
style against Popish Doctrine with such Christian moderation as may argue
zeal without malice, desire to win Souls, no will to gall them. And since the
commonest of all the grounds of Romish deceit is the pretence of their Age
and our Novelty, and nothing doth more dazle the eyes of the simple then the
name of our Fore-fathers, and the challenge of a particular recital of our
Professours before Luther's revolt; I have (I hope) fully cleared this coast,
so as out of the right apprehension of these differences my Reader shall evident∣ly
see the vanity of this cavill, and finde cause to bless God fox the safety of
his station in so pregnant and undeceivable a truth.
For me, I shame not to profess, that I have passed my most and best hours
in quiet Meditations; wherein I needed not bend mine edge against any Ad∣versary
but Satan and mine own corruptions. These controversary points I have
rather crost in my way, then taken along with me. Neither am I ignorant
what incomparably-clear beams (in this kind) some of the worthy Lights of
our Church have cast abroad into all eyes, to the admiration of present and
future times; no corner of truth hath lyen unsearch'd, no plea unargued: the
wit of man cannot make any essential additions either to our proofs or answers.
But as in the most perfect discovery, where Lands and Rivers are specially de∣scribed,
there may be some small obscure inlets reserved for the notice of fol∣lowing 
experience; so is it in the business of these sacred quarrels: that brain
is very unhappy which meets not with some traverse of discourse more then
it hath borrowed from anothers Pen. Besides which, having faln upon a
method and manner of Tractation which might be of use to plain understand∣ings,
the familiarity whereof promised to contribute not a little to the infor∣mation

 and setling of weaker Souls, I might not hide it from you, to whose
common good I have gladly resolved to sacrifice my self. Let it be taken
with the same construction of love wherewith it is tendred. And that
you may improve this and all other my following labours to a sensible ad∣vantage,
give me leave to impart my self to you a little in this short and free
Preamble.
It is a large body, I know, and full of ordinate variety, to which I How direct
my words: Let me a while in these lines sever them, whom I would never
abide really disjoined.
Ye, my dear fellow-labourers (as my immediate Charge) may well challenge
 the first place. It is no small joy to me to expect so able hands, upon whom
I may comfortably unload the weight of this my spiritual care. If Fame do
not over-speak you, there are not many soils that yield either so frequent
Flocks or better fed. Goe on happily in these high steps of true Blessedness,
and save your selves and others. To which purpose let me commend to you
(according to the sweet experience of a greater Shepherd) two main helps of our
Sacred trade; first, the tender Pastures, and secondly, the still Waters: By the
one I mean an inuring of our people to the principles of wholesome Doctrine;
by the other, an immunitie from all Faction and disturbance of the publick
peace.
 It was the observation of the learnedst King that ever sate hitherto on the
English Throne, that the cause of the miscarriage of our People into Popery
and other Errours was, their ungroundedness in the points of Catechism. How
should those Souls be but carried about with every winde of Doctrine, that
are not well ballasted with solid informations? Whence it was that his said
late Majestie (of happy memory) gave publick order for bestowing the latter
part of Gods Day in familiar Catechising; then which nothing could be devi∣sed
more necessary and behoveful to the Souls of men. It was the Ignorance and
ill-disposedness of some cavillers that taxed this course, as prejudicial to Preach∣ings;
since, in truth, the most useful of all Preaching is Catechetical. This
 layes the Grounds, the other raiseth the Walls and Roof; this informs the Judg∣ment,
that stirs up the Affections. What good use is there of those Affecti∣ons
that run before the Judgment, or of those walls that want a Foundation?
For my part, I have spent the greater half of my life in this station of our
holy service; I thank God, not unpainfully, not unprofitably. But there is no
one thing whereof I repent so much, as not to have bestowed more hours in
this publick Exercise of Catechism; in regard whereof I could quarrel with
my very Sermons, and wish that a great part of them had been exchanged for
this Preaching conference. Those other Divine Discourses enrich the Brain
and the Tongue, this settles the Heart; those other are but the descants to
 this plain-song. Contemn it not, my Brethren, for the easie and noted home∣liness:
the most excellent and beneficial things are most familiar. What can
be more obvious then Light, Aire, Fire, Water? Let him that can live with∣out
these, despise their commonness. Rather, as we make so much more use
of the Divine bounty in these ordinary benefits, so let as the more gladly im∣prove
these ready and facile helps to the Salvation of many Souls; the neg∣lect
whereof breeds instability of Judgment, misprision of necessary Truths,
fashionableness of profession, frothiness of discourse, obnoxiousness to all Errour
and Seduction. And if any of our people loath this Manna because they may
gather it from under their Feet, let not their palates be humour'd in this
 wanton nauseation. They are worthy to fast, that are weary of the bread
of Angels. And if herein we be curious to satisfie their roving appe∣tite,
our favour shall be no better then injurious. So we have seen an un∣discreet School-master, whiles he affects the thanks of an over-weening Pa∣rent,
marre the progress of a forward child, by raising him to an higher form
and Authour, ere he have well learned his first rules; whence follows an

empty ostentation, and a late disappointment. our fidelity and care of pro∣fit 
must teach us to drive at the most sure and universal good, which
shall undoubtedly be best attained by these safe and needful ground∣works.
From these tender Pastures let me leade you (and you others) to the still
Waters. Zeal in the Soul is as natural heat in the body; there is no life
of Religion without it: But as the kindliest heat, if it be not tempered
with a due equality of moisture, wastes it self and the body; so doth Zeal,
if it be not moderated with discretion and charitable care of the com∣mon
good. It is hard to be too vehement in contending for main and
evident truths; but litigious and immaterial verities may soon be over∣striven 
for: in the prosecution whereof, I have oft lamented to see how heed∣less
too many have been of the publick welfare; whiles in seeking for one
scruple of truth, they have not cared to spend a whole pound-weight of preci∣ous
Peace.
The Church of England, in whose Motherhood we have all just cause to
pride our selves, hath in much Wisdom and Piety delivered her judgement
concerning all necessary points of Religion, in so compleat a body of Divinity
as all hearts may rest in: These we reade, these we write under, as pro∣fessing
not their truth onely, but their sufficiency also. The voice of God
our Father in his Scriptures, and (out of these) the voice of the Church 
our Mother in her Articles, is that which must both guide and settle our re∣solutions:
Whatsoever is besides these, is but either private, or unnecessary
and uncertain. Oh that whiles we sweat and bleed for the maintenance of
these oracular Truths, we could be perswaded to remit of our Heat in the
pursuit of Opinions! These, these are they that distract the Church, violate
our peace, scandalize the weak, advantage our enemies. Fire upon the Hearth
warms the Body, but if it be misplaced, burns the House. My brethren, let
us be Zealous for our God; every hearty Christian will pour Oyle and not
Water upon this holy flame: But let us take heed lest a blind self-love,
stiffe prejudice and factious partiality impose upon us, in stead of the cau∣ses 
of God. Let us be suspicious of all New Verities, and careless of all
unprofitable; and let us hate to think our selves either wiser then the Church,
or better then our Superiours. And if any man think that he sees fur∣ther
then his fellows in these Theological prospects, let his tongue keep the
counsel of his eyes; left whiles he affects the fame of deeper learning, he
embroile the Church, and raise his glory upon the publick ruines.
And ye worthy Christans, whose Souls God hath entrusted with our spiri∣tual
Guardianship, be ye alike minded with your Teachers. The motion of
their tongues lies much in your eares: your modest desires of receiving need∣ful
and wholesome Truths shall avoid their labour after frivolous and quar∣relsome 
Curiosities. God hath blessed you with the reputation of a wise and
knowing people: In these Divine matters let a meek Sobriety set bounds to
your inquiries. Take up your time and hearts with Christ and Him crucifi∣ed,
with those essential Truths which are necessary to Salvation: leave all
curious disquisitions to the Schools, and say of those Problems as the Philoso∣pher
did of the Athenian shops, How many things are here that we have
no need of? Take the nearest cut you can, ye shall find it a side-way to
Heaven; ye need not lengthen it with undue circuitions. I am deceived
if (as the times are) ye shall not find work enough to bear up against the
oppositions of professed hostility. It is not for us to squander our thoughts
and hours upon useless janglings; wherewith if we suffer our selves to 
be still taken up, Satan shall deal with us like some crafty Cheater, who
whiles he holds us at gaze with tricks of jugling, picks our pockets.
Dear Brethren, whatever become of these worthless driblets, be sure to
look well to the free-hold of your Salvation. Errour is not more busie then

 subtile; Superstition never wanted sweet insinuations: make sure work
against these plausible dangers. Suffer not your selves to be drawn into the
net by the common stale of the Church. Know that outward Visibility may
too well stand with an utter exclusion from Salvation. Salvation consists
not in a formalitie of Profession, but in a Soundness of Belief. A true
body may be full of mortall diseases: So is the Roman Church of this day;
whom we have long pitied, and labored to cure in vain. If she will not be
healed by us, let us not be infected by her. Let us be no less jealous of her con∣tagion,
then she is of our remedies. Hold fast that precious Truth which
hath been long taught you by faithful Pastors, confirmed by clear evidences
 of Scriptures, evinced by sound Reasons, sealed up by the blood of our blessed
Martyrs: So whiles no man takes away the crown of your constancie, ye shall
be our Crown and rejoycing in the day of our Lord Jesus; to whose all-sufficient
Grace I commend you all, and vow my self


