

BE not deceived any longer, dear Christian Souls: be ye free, that ye may
be safe. There is a certain Sacred Tyranny that miserably abuses you, and
so cunningly beguiles you, that you chuse rather to erre and perish. God
hath given you Reason, and above that Faith; do not so far wrong your
selves as to be made the mere slaves of anothers will, and to think it the
safest way to be willingly blinde. Lay aside for a while all prejudice and superstitious
side-taking; and consider seriously these few words, which my sincere love to your
 Souls and hearty ambition of your Salvation hath commanded me (as before the
awfull Tribunall of Almighty God) to tender unto you. If what I say be not so
clear and manifest to every ingenuous judgment that it shall not need to borrow
further light from abroad, condemn this worthlesse scroll, and in your severe doom
punish the Author with the losse of an hours labour. But if it shall carry sufficient
evidence in it self, and shall be found so reasonable, as that to any free minde it
shall not perswade but command assent; give way (for Gods sake, and for your
Souls sake) to that powerfull Truth of God which breaks forth from Heaven upon
you; and at last acknowledge (besides a world of foul Errours) the miserable in∣solence
and cruelty of that once-Famous and renowned Church, which (to use
Gerson's word) will needs make Faith of Opinion, and too impotently favouring
her own passions, hath not ceased to persecute with fire and sword the dear and holy
servants of God; and at last (notwithstanding all the vain thunderbolts of a
proud and lawlesse fury) make much of those your truly-Christian and religious
brethren, who according to the just liberty of Faithfull men, refuse and detest those
false and upstart Points of a new-devised Faith.
But if any of you (which God forbid) had still rather to be deceived, and dote
upon his received Errors, and (as angry Curres are wont) shall bark and bay at so
clear a light of Truth; my Soule shall in silence and sorrow pity that man in vain.
I wis, we have had disputing enough, if not too much. Away from henceforth with
 all these Paper-brablings: God from Heaven shall stint these strifes. Wonder, O
Catholicks; and ye whom it concerns, repent.
