

Worcester, Apr. 7. 1697.
SIR,
THE Papers you were pleased to send me I have carefully perused; and I am not without Hopes, that through the Blessing of God, they may allay those unreasonable Heats, which have made so great a Noise, about the Point of Justification: and yet we are told, that they all agree in the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, and the Covenant of Grace, as founded upon it. But we find by too common Experience, that it is possible for Men upon their own Mistakes to grow as warm in this Mat∣ter, as if they were disputing with the Jews, as St. Paul did in his Epistle to the Romans. But if such Persons would lay aside Prejudices, and Impartially consider the State of the Case at that Time, they would far better understand this Controversy, and not think so hardly of their Brethren.
For, nothing can be plainer to me, than that St. Paul opposes that which he calls, The Righteousness of God by Faith,Rom. 1.17.3.21.10.3. to their own Righteousness, which was by the Law: And which made the Re∣ward not of Grace, but of Debt. And Faith is taken by him as a Term opposite to the Law, and importing the Grace of the Gospel; Therefore it is of Faith that it might be of Grace.Phil. 3.5. So that Justificati∣on by Faith is in other Words, being justified by the Grace of the Gospel,Rom. 3.27, 28.4.15. manifested by the Doctrine of Christ, and procured by his Sufferings: which are granted, both by them and us, to be the only meritorious Cause of our Justification. The remaining Dispute then, can only be concerning those Terms on which we may be made Partakers of this Grace of the Gospel, which is communicated to Mankind, as the Effect of Christ's Satisfaction. Which is very different from that which St. Paul managed, against all such as set up their own Works (whether according to the Law of Nature, or of Moses) against the Gospel of Christ, and thought there was no necessity of any such Propitiation by Christ, as St. Paul asserted, in order to the Remission of Sins and the Favour of God. For, the Jews believed, that the Righteousness of the Law, as it was performed by them, was sufficient in order to their Acceptance with God; and that there was such a Proportion between their Works and the Favour of God, as made it a Debt of Justice. Which Opinion remains among them to this Day, as appears by this Saying of Manasseh Ben-Israel, Hinc meritis Gratiam Dei acqui∣ri non est Dubitandam. By which it seems, that the Jews have not alter'd their Opinions since the Apostles Days; but all that understand
Christianity aright, do agree, that there is no other meritorious Cause of our Acceptance with God, but the Propitiation which Christ hath made.Colos. 1.14. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins.Titus 3.5, 6. And not by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us; that being justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs accor∣ding to the Hope of Eternal Life.
But here comes the material Question to be resolved; How we come to receive the Benefits of Christs Sufferings?
To answer this Distinctly, we must consider them Two Ways:

1. As they respect Mankind, or those in General for whom Christ died.
2. As they belong to Particular Persons.

The former are those Benefits which result from God's Acceptance of Christ's Sacrifice on behalf of Mankind; which the Apostle calls, God's being in Christ,2 . 5.19. reconciling the World to himself, not im∣puting their Trespasses unto them: If this be meant of actual Par∣don, then all the Sins of the World are not imputed upon Christ's Death, without any Act on their Parts; and so the Ministry of Re∣conciliation would be to no purpose; which the Apostle immediately adds, was committed to them. To what End, if the Sins of the World were already forgiven? But the Apostle saith, v. 20. That it was to perswade Men to be reconciled to God: i. e. to believe and repent and obey the Gospel. For what Reason? If not, that thereby they might actually partake of these general Benefits which arise from that Recon∣ciliation Christ hath made by his Death? Which can suppose no Condi∣tions in us, being the immediate Effects of Christ's Propitiation, and must be distinguished from what follows, Reconciliation on our Parts.
But as to the Particular Effects, belonging to some Persons, as di∣stinguished from others, the Question arises, Whether God out of his infinite Goodness, do bestow them on those whom he designs for Happi∣ness without regard to any Act of theirs? Or whether by the Gospel, be hath limited the Conveyance of them to the Performance of certain Conditions? There is no Question, but that if nothing but Freeness of Grace be to be look'd at, that is much freer, which requires no Conditions, nor expects any: But if they be expected, whether out of Gratitude, or otherwise, they are real Conditions as to the End. But we are to look not only to the Freeness of God's Grace, (which no doubt was the Foundation of the Covenant of Grace) but to the Author, and to the Terms of it.

The Author of it is God himself, who out of his Infinite Goodness hath sent his Son to be a Propitiation for our Sins; and we cannot suppose a∣ny Covenant made by him to be repugnant to the Perfections of the Divine Nature. Now, Holiness and Righteousness are essential Attri∣butes of God; and any such Covenant, which in the Consequence of it, overthrows the Rules of Righteousness and Holiness, must be look's on, as contrary to the Pure and Holy Nature of God. But such a Cove∣nant as consists only in absolute Promises (if it can be called a Cove∣nant) must supersede any Obligation on Man's Part to any Duty, as a Condition of enjoying the Benefit of those Promises; and consequently overthrow the Rules of Righteousness.Psal. 11.7. But the Righteous Lord lo∣veth Righteousness. And he that doth Righteousness is Righteous,1 John 3.7. even as he is Righteous. How is it then possible to conceive, that God should make such a Covenant of Grace with Mankind, as should have no regard to the Practise of real Righteousness? And this Supposition must lessen our esteem of the Divine Nature and Perfe∣ctions, overthrow the Design of Religion, and make God a Respecter of Persons, by taking no Notice of their inward Qualities and Dispo∣sitions.
Which are things of such dangerous Consequence, that I can hardly believe that any who pretend to love the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity should entertain such Principles, from whence they do too naturally fol∣low. For, if any Person should make it his Business to render Christianity suspected, as a Design to Promote Libertinism, under a Pretence of advancing Free Grace, he could not make use of any Hy∣pothesis more effectual than this; That God requires no Conditions in order to the Benefit of his Promises. But to suppose that God is so Gra∣cious, as to forgive the Sins of truly humble and penitent Sinners, who resolve by the Grace of God to depart from Iniquity, and to live as becomes the Gospel, is so far from any Incongruity to the Divine Na∣ture, that it tends more to advance our Apprehensions of God's Goodness joyned with his Wisdom and Holiness; and so brings Mankind to a due Love of God, and a Hatred of Sin.
As to the Terms of this Covenant, I think it not possible for any unprejudiced Person to read the New Testament, and not to see, that it still supposes Conditions on our parts, to make us Partakers of the Benefit of Christ's Sufferings. But it is possible for Men to be so fond of a particular Opinion, which they have before taken up, that they may accommodate all places to that darling Notion; I mean as to the absolute freeness of God's Grace. Which, if it be pursued, must
everthrow as well the Satisfaction of Christ, as the Conditions on our Part.
But here lies the great Difficulty; How can we be justified with∣out a perfect righteousness? And our own Performances at the best make but an imperfect Righteousness; and therefore the perfect Righteousness of Christ must be imputed to us: And if a perfect Righteousness to be joined for our Justification?
This is the Force of all the Reasoning I have met with about this Matter, to which I shall give a plain and dictinct Answer:
1. I am far from disowning the Righteousness of Christ to have been a perfect Righteousness; or that it is the only meritorious Cause of our Justification. Or, to speak plainer, I do freely own the Satisfa∣ction of Christ to be the Foundation of the Covenant of Grace, by Vertue whereof we are justified.
2. That to be justified is to be put into a State of Grace and Fa∣vour with God. I do not mean, that we are justified by Inherent Righteousness; i. e. that God justifies when he gives Grace; but that upon our sincere performance of the Conditions on our part, God receives us into a State of Favour or Grace. And so deals with us as with righteous Persons; and not meerly declares us to be such. For although the Word Justifying be often used as a Forensick Word, or a Law Term, and so is opposed to Condemning; yet that Use is not to be pressed too far: because it will inclose us in many Difficulties about the Tribunal, the Law, the Plea, the judicial Act, and the several Cau∣ses, Material and Formal, &c. all which, I think, tend more to darken than to clear this Point of Justification, which ought to be kept out of School Terms and Logical Niceties, as much as possible; since St. Paul did not speak according to them in this Matter. For so Adoption is Originally a Law Term used likewise by St. Paul, and it would be hard straining to bring Adoption to all the Formalities of the Roman Law.
If we look into the Design of St. Paul, we shall find it was to state the true Ground of our Acceptance with God; which he shews could not be from any thing Mankind were able of themselves to per∣form in obedience to the Law, because they were under guilt, and could never clear themselves from it. But God hath set forth his Son to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood,Rom. 325, 26. to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins, &c. To declare at this time his Righteousness, that he might be Just and the Justifier of him that believeth in Jesus.

So that here we have the Foundation or Meritorious Cause, the Pro∣pitiation of Christ; the Goodness of God in accepting this Propitia∣tion in order to Remission and Justification; and the way we come to partake of it by Faith in Christ; as it imbraces these Offers, and carries along with it those sincere Endeavours obeying the Gospel, which God accepts as our Evangelical Righteousness. But to be Justified in St. Paul's Sense, is to be admitted into the Grace and Favour of God on those Terms; and so it doth not lie barely in Remission of Sins, which is rather the Consequence of this Acceptance with God.Rom. 3.28. There∣fore we conclude, that a Man is justified by Faith, without the Deeds of the Law; i. e. A man is received into the Favour of God, not by his own Works, but according to the Grace of the Gospel, and the Terms contained therein. And this I take to be St. Paul's meaning.
3. The Righteousness of Christ may be said to be imputed two ways.

1. So as it becomes our Personal Righteousness, which is called For∣mal Imputation.
2. So as the Benefit of Christ's Righteousness and Satisfaction, re∣dounds to our Advantage.

If the former Sense be allowed, these Consequences follow:

1. That we must be as Righteous as Christ was; for, if Personal Righteousness can be transferred, the Person on whom it is transferred, must have that very Righteousness which was in Christ himself; and so must be as Holy and Innocent as he was; which I hardly think any will pretend to.
2. That there can be no Remission of Sin, as to such who have this perfect Righteousness, no more than there could be to Christ himself; Imputation for Remission of Sin, and of Personal Righteousness are incon∣sistent: For the one must suppose Guilt, and the other cannot; when the Personal Righteousness is actually imputed. There may be antece∣dent Guilt before the Imputation; but where there is perfect Righteous∣ness actually imputed, there can be no personal Guilt; for if there be, it can be no perfect Righteousness as to him.
3. That there can be no Conditions required, where a perfect Righteousness is imputed. For a Condition is in order to something to be obtained; but here the full Benefit is already received by the Impu∣tation of a perfect Righteousness; and it is absurd to suppose Conditi∣ons for the obtaining of what is past. It cannot then be denied, that those speak consonantly enough to this Hypothesis, who exclude all Con∣ditions from the new Covenant; but very dangerously as to the Design of Charity; since our Saviour himself bids us to pray to God to forgive
our Trespasses, as we forgive others; which I think supposes a Condi∣tion on our Parts in order to Remission. But if no more be meant by Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, but that the Sufferings of Christ were in our stead, and for our Advantage as to Remission and Justifi∣cation, I do most heartily and freely own it.
4. The Apostles Argument against Merit and Boasting, do by no means hold against such an Evangelical Righteousness as comes from the Grace of God, and tends wholly to the Honour of it: which is so clear that I need not to prove it.

This is a short Account of my Thoughts in this Matter; and I think we do not differ in the Substance, however we may in the manner of Explication. I am

