



Most Reverend, Right Reverend and Reverend,
I Bless you all in the Name of the Lord, and Blessed be your Meeting this Day, and this Appointment for you to Sit about so Blessed a reconciling Work. I have but this short Grace to say, Blessed are the Peacemakers.
When such a Choice of Persons is Congregated, and their Business Accommodation, the Tidings hereof to the poor Outed Shepherds should, methinks, be so affecting, as if the Angels were again upon the Wing, and singing over that Hymn, Glory be to God in the highest, in Earth Peace, and good will towards Men.
Alas! How many Years have passed since the Refor∣mation, wherein your Nonconformist Brethren have been a Loading, and their Burthen encreasing, and none of you that were willing, were able to ease them, when by the Artifice of the Papists, and the Higher Powers influenced by them, you were forced to bear the blame of those things which your Souls did abhor: And now is the time come when God hath sent us such a Nursing Fa∣ther and Nursing Mother to his Church, as hath called you to the liberty of shewing of what manner of spirit indeed you are. Blessed be his Name for it, and the hoes we have on that account. This is the day which the Lord hath made, we will be glad, and rejoyce in it.

I know indeed how hard of belief the most of our Brethren generally are that any good should be done for us by a Convocation or this Meeting. It is impossible (they are readier to say) that those—But Reverendly beloved, I am perswaded better things of you, and things that ac∣company Salvation, though they thus speak. I am perswa∣ded that even this will stimulate you to a greater ear∣nestness to do them the more good (for such is Christia∣nity), and that I shall not need to say any thing (not any more than in the Title) to put you on this grateful task, The same also which ye are forward to do: I have less need to be impertinent in offering Arguments to such Wits, which were to bring Water to the Spring: but this one thing I have need to do, which is, to beg of you that you will Pardon what is done, if in any thing the Author seems to presume, or to be more slender than he ought, for want of more time and search, or does in any regard offend. I will also beg of you more Two things; the One is, To take heed how you make more conditions necessary to us for Communion with you, than Christ requires of you for Communion with him: The Other is, That you do not Tantalize your Brethren, or Procra∣stinate that Kindness (whatsoever it is) which you intend towards those who are capable to receive it; For we must needs die, and are as water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered up again: Neither doth God respect any person, yet doth he devise means that his banished be not expelled from him.

Octob. 3. 1689.
