
TO 
THE RIGHT HONORABLE,
My very good Lord,
JAMES Lord Viscount Doncaster,
Right Honourable,
FInding these Papers amongst others lying aside in my Fathers Study,
where of I conceived good use might be made, in regard of that spiri∣tuall
advantage which they promised, I obtained of him good leave to
send them abroad; whereto he professed himself the more easily indu∣ced,
for that his continuall and weighty employments in this large and
busie Diocese will not yet afford him leisure to dispatch those his other fixed Medi∣tations
on the History of the New Testament. In the mean time, the expressions of
these voluntary and sudden thoughts of his shall testifie how fruitfully he is wont to
improve those short ends of time which are stolne from his more important avoca∣tions;
and (unlesse my hopes fail me) the pattern of them may prove not a little 
beneficial to others. Holy mindes have been ever wont to look through these bodily
Objects, at spiritual and heavenly. So Sulpitius reports of S. Martin, that seeing
a Sheep newly shorn, he could say, Loe here is one that hath performed that com∣mand
in the Gospel; having two Coats, she hath given away one: and seeing an
Hogherd freezing in a thin suit of skins, Loe (said he) there is Adam cast out of
Paradise: and seeing a Medow part rooted up, part whole, but eaten down, and
part flourishing, he said, The first was the state of Fornication, the second of Mar∣riage,
the third of Virginity. But what do I seek any other Author then the Lord
of Life himself? who upon the drawing of water from the Well of Shilo on the day
of the great Hosanna, took occasion to speak of those Living waters which should 
flow from every true believer, John 7. 38. and upon occasion of a bodily Feast,
Luke 14. entred into that Divine discourse of God's gracious invitation of us to
those spiritual viands of Grace and Glory. Thus, methinks, we should still be clim∣bing
up in our thoughts from Earth to Heaven, and suffer no Object to crosse us in
our way without some spiritual Use and Application. Thus it pleased my Reverend

 Father sometimes to recreate himself, whose manner hath been, when any of these
Meditations have unsought offer'd themselves unto him, presently to set them down:
a course which I wish had been also taken in many more, which might no doubt have
been very profitable.
These, as they are, I send forth under your Honourable Name, out of those many
Respects which are in an hereditary right due to your Lordship, as being apparent
Heir to those two singular Patrons of my justly-Reverenced Father; the eminent
Vertue of which your Noble Parents in a gracious Succession yields to your Lordship
an happy Example, which to follow is the onely way to true Honour. For the daily
increase whereof here, and the everlasting Crown of it hereafter, his Prayers to God
 shall not be wanting, who desires to be accounted

