



SIR,
'TIS well known unto you, that the Ruin of England, and of the Churches of Christ in it, hath been ever since the First Reformation, aimed at by the Papists, whose rage hath not only appeared in the many little Plots that have been from time to time discover'd; but even in their Rebellions and Insurrections in King Edward's days. The Spanish Armado in Queen Elizabeth's. The Gun-Powder Treason in King James, &c. and this lte Hellish Conspiracy, which was design'd for the utter Extirpation of the Protestant Religi∣on, and the Universal destruction of all the Professors thereof, whether Episcopal, or Dissenter. For which reason, this is no time to add fewel to the Fire of Protestant Dissentions. Nor is it meet to insist on any matter of Indifference so far as thereby to hinder a firm and lasting Ʋnion among Protestants. If the Dissenters can without offence to God, and wrong to their own Consciences comply with the Terms impos'd by you for Ʋnion, their non-compliance is a sin, that in its tendencies advances Popery: But if the Dissenter cannot conscientiously conform to your Impositions, as they really cannot, and you can without sin make such easie Overtures for Peace, as may be grateful to Dissenters, your refu∣sing in this case to comply, doth sufficiently evince You to be the Divider, and Promoter of the Papacy.
The Dissenters being sincerely desirous to do the utmost they can without sin for Ʋnion, you greatly injure them in representing them as Enemies thereunto. 'Tis true, you cry up Ʋnion, Ʋnion, but you will not part with what you judg but a trifle, for it. You cry down Dissenters as enemies to Peace and Concord, as Schismaticks, Factions
and Seditious, as Friends to Popery, exposing them to the greatest con∣tempt and rage of your Considents, as if their Consciences were but Hu∣mour, their sense of Scripture but fancy, their Sincerity in embracing the Protestant Religion but Hypocrisie, their Zeal  Reformation but a blasting it, and their Opposition unto Popery a promoting it. But is this fair and equal? Doth such a Procedure become the Learning, the Gra∣vity and Religion of Dr. Stilling sleet? Can you in your more cool de∣liberations reflect on all this with uninterrupted peace? What, without any rebukes or checks of Conscience?
SIR, Can you consider, how untrue, as well as how severe the charge is with which you load your Dissenting Brethren? or can you think on the many mistakes on which you ground your charge, and yet believe that all this may return to your comfortable account another day? Me∣thinks there is a smart rebuke attending the method of your Procedure, namely, that in your reproaching the Dissenters as Promoters of the Papists designs, you should unawares make a discovery of your self as such an one; for certainly you have in your Preface, yea and in your Book, said enough for the advancing the Papisls Designs, just as F. Thomas Ma∣ria Carasa, who in his delineating the Excellencies of Pope Pius the Fifth did most exactly (though unawares) give the Pourtraiture of Antichrist: for Dedicating some Theses unto this Pope, he did it thus, PAƲLO V. VICE DEO, &c. some Novelles of which, being sent unto Venice and elsewhere, it was soon noised about the City, that 'twas the Picture of Antichrist, for that the Inscription paƲLo V. VICe Deo, contain'd in the Numerical Letters the number of the Beast in the Revelation, 666. Of which my Author Mr. Bedell in his Answer unto Mr. Wadsworth's Letter, saith, Whom could they blame but them∣selves, by their approving of such an Inscription as unawares by the Pro∣vidence of God should so plainly characterize Antichrist? In like man∣ner it may be said of you, seeing in the management of your smart charge against Dissenters, you have unawares (if not designedly) clos'd with such Principles, and magnified such Arguments as prove advantageous to none but the Papal Interest, whom can you blame but your self? or how can you observe the nature of this unwary slip, without some inward chick?
That you should expose your self in such circumstances without any provocation, doth abundantly suprize, and that in so many a particular instance, beside what I have mention'd under the third head in the follow∣ing Enquiry, is considerable: For,


1. You say, That 'tis no improbable that the Jesuits were the first setters up of spiritual prayer; you mean of its publick exercise, or speak not to the purpose, seeing 'tis that the Dissenters plead for in their De∣bates with the Episcopal, and 'tis that by which they gain so much in the esteem of the people. But this the Jesuits are against, they agree∣ing with you in that they are only for the exercise of free Prayer in private and not in publick, just as the famous Mr. Hooker, who speaking of Private Prayer, saith,Hooker. Ec∣cles. Poii. ib. 5. pag. 223, 225. Ed. ult. That 's a duty perform'd by us as men, and that we are at our own choice, both for time, and place, and from, according to the exigence of our own occasions in private. — But publick Prayer must be according to some prescribed form. Which exactly agreeth with that of Bellarmine, Azorius, and Filliucius; all Jesuits.
2. You charge your Brethren as if they had oppos'd an Absolute, or an Apostolical Antiquity, because they believe not your Hierarchy to be such; but you unawares have fallen in with Bellarmine in exalting such an Antiquity he pleads for, supporting it with such arguments as are setcht out of the Jesuits Storehouse, to the great dissatisfaction of the old Episcopal Protestants, as I have shewn out of Mr. Chillingworth.
3. You insist much on the Hierarchy, as if it had been the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion, but unawares have so far gratified the Jesuit, as to be freed from their black Character of Heresie; for 'tis observ'd by some Episcopal Divines,De Desper. Calvin. caus. . 11. that Cudsemius the Jesuit saith, That the Calvinian Sect in England, may either endure long, or be suddenly chang'd in a trice, in regard of the Catholick Order there, in a perpetual line of their Bishops, and the lawful succession of Pastors received from the Church; for the Honour of which we use to call the English Cal∣vinists [i.e. the Episcopal] by a milder term, not Hereticks, but Schis∣maticks.
4. You represent the Dissenters as subservient to the Papal interest, because they are not for uninstituted ceremonies, yea you suggest as if a Ceremony had been in greater estimation with you than the peace of truly tender Consciences; whereby you do unawares furnish the Jesuit with a strong argument for the necessity of a Ceremony; for saith el∣larmine,
Ceremonies are a momentous parts of worship, because there have been great Dessentions in the Church about Ceremonies, which ought not to be about lesser matters.
5. You say the Dissenters by their Nonconformity have blasted the Honour of the first Reformation; But as this is untrue, even so you have by insisting on it unawares advantaged the Papist.

1. That the Dissenters do judg honourably of the first Reformation, may appear from the account we give of it thus:
As it must be acknowledged, that there were in these Lands many concern'd for a Reformation about Transubstantiation, and some other things before Henry the Eighths, even so in his time a Reformation of the Hierarchy and Ceremonies began, which was carried on by Edward the Sixth that Pious Prince, the wonder of his age; in whose time, although the Reformation went on gloriously, yet very slowly, because of the many Hindrances were in its way. For,

1. Many of the Episcopal Clergy being zealous for their old Su∣perstitions, yea even the Bishops of London and Winchester, did much mischief in impeding the Reformation.
2. The generality of the people devoted to the Traditions of their forefathers, would rather run the hazard of the loss of their lives, than of one ceremony. As appears,

1. By the many Insurrections and Rebellions in several Counties, especially in Cornwall, and Devonshire.
2. From the great Neglect shewn concerning his Majesties Injuncti∣ons, and Proclamations, Acts of Parliament, and divers Letters sent from the Council unto the several Justices of every County for the pro∣moting Reformation.
3. The unhappy Divisions between the Kings Ʋncle the Duke of Sommerset, the then Protector, and other Lords of the Council. To which add,
4. The Kings being under age, (which was abus'd by the Papist) and also the shortness of his Reign. All which duly weighed, it must be con∣sest even by the greatest enemies to our Religion, that 'twas a wonder∣ful
Providence that so great a Progress was made in so short a time. Sur∣ly 'twas Digitus Dei, and the Instruments imploy'd in so excellent a work deserve our greatest Praises, in that they acted so wisely in the manage∣ment of the work of Reformation, which was carried on thus gradually. For,

1. Though Tho. Dobb was cast into the Breadstreet Counter, where he died for speaking against the Idolatry of the Mass, beside one John Hume, we find no other Prosecution of Poenal Laws against Protestants.
But, 2. Commissioners were sent out to endeavour a present Reformation as to some Particulars.
3. A Parliament call'd for the Repealing some Poenal Statutes. Free liberty given publickly to profess the Gospel. Many zealous Freachers before Banished, Licensed to return and Preach.
4. Certain of the most Grave, and best Learned Bishops by his Majesties Order assemble at Windsor. Castle, who did draw up a form of the Ad∣ministration of the Sacraments, which was sent abroad into the several Diocesses, about which there arising great Divisions and Schisms among the Episcopal Clergy;
5. His Majesty engageth the Bishops, &c. to compose that Book, Entituled, A Book of Common-Prayer, &c. which was approved of, and established by the Parliament.
Yet, 6. Though this Service-Book was so admirably well suited to the capacity of the Vulgar, who were so zealous for their old Superstitions, the People be∣ing ignorant, made an Insurrection in Devonshire, and Cornwall, to whom his Majesty in a Letter expresseth himself thus: As for the Service in the English Tongue, it hath manifest reasons for it. And yet perchance it seemeth to you a New Service, and indeed is none other but the old, the self-same words in English which were in Latin, &c. Act. Mon. 



Thus the first Reformers, as indeed, even so in the apprehension of the Dissenters, did their utmost in King Edwards days, and in Q. Maries did discover a zeal of doing more, might they furvive that Persecution: In pursuance of which Resolutions, several who either suffer'd under Q. Mary at home, or were in exile abroad, in Queen Elizabeths time, did seriously attempt a further. Reformation, for their doing which, they have been branded as Schismaticks, Dividers, and promoters of Popish designs by such as will not so far honour the beginnings of King Edwards Reformation by endeavours to promote it. All this you know, and therefore in obliging all to rest satisfied with a Reformation wrested out of Popish hands in a time of the greatest difficulties, which could ot then be more than what Popish Bishops, such as Bonner and Gar∣diuer conform'd unto, you do greatly advantage the Papal interest by drawing us gradatim from our greater Reformation, unto what was carried on in King Edwards days, and it may be for the same rea∣son
you will perswade us to that of Henry the 8th, which is but one step further back, and so on.
But whether you have not offended God in this indecent procedure, I leave to your own more serious considerations, humbly beseeching you to meditate on those following hints given us by a Reverend Di∣vine of the Church of England (Mr. Down,) who in his Preservative against the contempt of the Ministry, expresseth himself thus, It is a fearful speech of St. Chrysostom, Quis unquam Clericum lapsum pani∣tentem vidit? Whoever saw a Minister recover himself after a fall by repentance? And indeed it is but seldom seen; for the fins that are single in others, being double in him, and an idle word in anothers mouth being as it were Blasphemy in his; God punisheth him more rigorously than he doth others.—The strongest wine turneth into the sharpest vinegar, and the Noblest Angels sinning, be∣came the vilest Devils. In like manner it is with us.

Reverend Sir,
You cannot but be sensible of the dangers we are in, of the ne∣cessity of Love, Peace and Concord among our selves, and conse∣quently of the evil tendencies of the method you have taken, in the untrue Accusations you have laid in against the innocent Dissenters, the mistakes you are guilty of in the prosecuting that your design, and the unwary slips that prove advantageous to our common enemy the Papists, and in fine of the service this inconsiderable tract may be of, in setting you right; I say you being sensible of all this, my con∣cluding request shall be, that you will put the most candid comment on this essay, and joyn with me in this Letany.


