



My noble Friends,
THis Piece of Jonathans Bow, and its Parallel in a rural expression, might both have been laid up in the Book of Jasher, in some ob∣scurer corner, and unknown, and the Author deservedly (like the Latinian Shepherd) have ever slept in some more solitary cave, had not the fair aspect of your merit and importunity stooped so low as to make the speakers lips your favourite to bring this work to light, which now like Memnon's Statue, the Son of the morning, is so framed of dark marble, that the rising Sun of the LUCY's name casting its beams upon it, makes it to render a resplendent image of it self, with a mournful sound in lamentation for
its Master; and may these Notes flying abroad become as Funeral Birds, each morning to bewail the loss of so true deserving a person; for nothing is more to be con∣dol'd, or moving humane compassion, than a Son of the morning to be suddenly interposed with darkness, and a flower of the light soon blasted and withered in the blooming,
Bacon. de Sap. vet. cap. 14. as the learned Lord Verulam makes the mo∣ral: I cannot therefore blame your mourning Blacks and Cypresses, much less your Tears and Sorrows, when I read of a Turquois stone that would glister and look bright upon the Living owners finger,
Caufin. Embl. li. 11. c. 54. but at his Death to have chang'd his colour into lowring and sweating tears, as sensible of the loss. The Darling of the time, this lovely youthful Gentleman, is chang'd into a Cypress tree, whose boughs and bark lopt and cut down by Death, bids you take hence your mourning wreaths, the funeral rites belonging as consecrate to the Death and Obits of the nobler sort; which wood will entertain no moth or timber-worm of vice to breed or thrive upon it, and once cut down, revives no more but in succeeding plants; Vespasian miracles, faln over night, and reflourishing more fixt and green the next morning in its followers: of whom, the next in league is you Dame MARGARET, his dear and onely Spouse, who amidst the Ladies boast∣ing of their tyre and jewels,
Plutarch. in Phocion. might with the Grecian Dame shew forth your Husband, and say for you and him, Hic est ornatus meus; Loe, here's my richest ornament and jewel. Your sweet conjunction, and con∣jugal affection drew forth your beholders and your coun∣tries hearts to vote that this Sun might stand still in Gibeon,
Josh. 10.12. and this Moon in the valley of Ajalon. But Divine pleasure hath forbidden that,
Ovid. Met. 1.11. fab. 10. and parted the two Kingfishers of Love and Delight, and left you without
your Mate, to bewail your condition, as now widowed and bereav'd of your companion. Fonseca the Spanish Frier will teach you n to lay aside perfumes of Amber∣greece, and Nuptial garments, and to smell of Frankin∣cense and Prayers at visits of your Husbands tombe;
Lent. Ser. 18. Luc. 7.11. to dress your windows, not with roses, violets, and pansies, or love and idleness, but with the herbs and flowers of Artemisia, that Motherwort, of mortifying those affe∣ctions; bearing the name of her who by drinking each day a spoonful of her Husbands ashes for a Mornings draught, at last made again two bodies into one, and en∣tomb'd him in her owne bowels.
De viduis. 1 Tim. 5.4, 5. St. Ambrose hath many comely precepts for the Widows, second to S. Paul's, and seemeth to correct the Poets fancy, that Widows should be changed into Birds called Kingfishers, with greenish feathers, and a ruddy beak, and face, as ill-beseeming that condition to fly abroad with new green fancies, and to shew their face too full of sanguine amo∣rous complexion. I have shewed you a more excellent way: Learn by this your sad experience, the truth of that Hebrew Proverb,
Drus. probl. 5. clas. 1. The Bride gets up into the Marriage-bed, and little wots 'twil prove her Bride∣groomes Death-bed: At the Wedding therefore they use to take a Glass, wherein both drink, to begin their joys; but then they break it,
Idem li. 2. quest. 9. to denote the brittle condition of the Marriage-bonds, and how soon it may be da'shd to pieces. S. Francis also somewhat minding this, was wont to make him Wife and Children of the snow, fair, but soon fading comforts. Fancy you so of Husbands, and their Issue, twill wean your mind the more from all such worldly allurements and relations. This Text of Jonathan will tell you they are but Butts or Prickmarks standing within a dangerous distance, and at the mercy
of Death: and all the glory of Youth, Beauty, Valour, and Wealth, high places of Honor, and Relations of Friends, wherein the pride of heart doth flant it out, is by the true confession of the Gallants in Solomon, like an arrow which parteth the air,
Wisd. 5.12. and immediately cometh together again, and a man knows not where it went thorough. And you my honoured Friends, Pardon I pray you the Enquiry, my affection led me into the Ark and carriage of your Ancestors, lest mine eye may seem too curious to peep into, or my hand too rash and presumptuous to be laid upon it, it is your due, and more if I could do it;
Mr. Dugdal's Warwickshr. our industrious Chorographer will make it out.
The short and summe of all I shall humbly present to your thoughts, is contained in that ancient Proverb, Parate vos in vestibulo, ut ingrediamini conclave, Dress you so in the Gatehouse, that you may enter into Christs withdrawing Closet;
Heb. Prov. for he that labours the six dayes of this life, may eat and rest on the Seventh, his perpetual Sabbath. This will be done by observing of the best Examples, and the best you hear or saw exem∣plary in your deceased Brother, Fidelity in Trust, love to Virtue, Humanity to his Friends, Bounty to the Poor, Providence in his Affairs, Welcome to his Relations, Humility in his deportments, Kindness to Bro∣thers and Sisters, Innocency to his Neighbours, Love to all; in which incomparably your Ancestors are known to have excell'd,
Holcot. on Wisd. 5. Lect. 66. and left a light for you to follow. An old Archer, and good Marks-man, to allude to the Lesson of my Text, will advise you further, and bids, Beware of three arrows in Satans quiver,
Rev. 6.2. 2 Kin. 13.16. 1. Carnal concu∣piscence, 2. Envious detraction, 3. Whispering suggestion; these wounded not his Liver, Eyes, or Ears.
The quiver of Christ puts three better into your hands: The 1. is the Light of Scripture, in this the Man of God must guide and give you aim. 2. Is the Death of Nature, this directs you to the life of grace. The 3. is the day of Censure, which keeps you in the fear of God. The three first of Satans arrows he was free from, and afraid of: The three last he was much exercised in, and well acquainted with, his Example he hath bequeathed to you. The Legacy, Dear Mistris, he hath left to you is comprised in three Counsels, Have Purity in your Religion,
Erpenius Arab. Prov. Patience in your Condi∣tion, and Prudence in your Conversation. To you all, and as many as follow these Rules, peace be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God;
Gal. 6.16. which is in fine the vote of

