



I Have been encouraged to ex∣pose this Sermon to publick view, by the perswasion of some, that it might at this time conduce to publick good, which if I can pro∣mote (though with the hazard of mine own credit) I regard not. The great judgment wherewith God hath scourged our Nation this year, and the little sense which we express of it, would provoke a man (other∣wise

not forward) to adventure on the cen∣sure of the world, if he had but the least hope to do any good against the sottishness and stupidity of it; which seems to exceed that of the Old World, even so much as the execution of Divine Wrath doth the meer menacing and threatning of it. We used formerly to startle at the report of the Plague, but now we are become so brutish,ob. 39. 22. that we mock at fear and are not affrighted: My desire is (whatever my hopes are) to remove some from off the Lees of this most presumptuous and ill-presaging senceles∣ness.
Now after I was perswaded to publish this Sermon, I concluded (if it had any thing of worth in it) it was due to your Lord∣ship and Brethren in the first place, an under you to the whole City, from and amongst whom I have a comfortable subsi∣stence

with so much respect and affection, as obligeth me more than I think meet here to express. You may read here what a dreadful punishment the Plague is, and consider, if it do not concern you to use your greatest diligence and circumspection to pre∣vent a danger and to secure your City, which the Sword hath brought to poverty, and the Plague would quickly bring to beg∣gary. When you read what a sore judgment the Plague is, and remember how God hath visited other places with it, this will be powerful to quicken you unto a thankeful acknowledgment of Gods gracious and mi∣raculous preservation of this City, so much beyond (not only our deserts) but even our expectations. Having so frequent occasi∣ons to speak to you, I forbear to enlarge my self in an Epistle: Blessed be God, the Fa∣ther2 Cor. 1. 3. 10 of mercys and the God of all com∣fort,

who hath delivered us from so great a death, and doth deliver: in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us: so rests

