



Right Honourable,
IT hath been of old fore-prophesied that in the perillous latter times there should be many murmurers and complainers (Jude v. 16.) who are seldome, if at all, satisfied with their lot, and with the dispensations of God toward them; And that because (as is there added) they walk after their own lusts, and so can∣not but quarrel what doth crosse them in that woful course, and complaine of their best and most useful enjoyments, if they finde not that satisfaction which they lust after, in them: And we, in our times, have but too many sad experiences of distempers of this kinde; evidencing the corrupt frame of our hearts, and our great distance from God occasioning these distempers. But right discerners will judge otherwise of the Lords dealing. They will submit unto, and acknowledge mercy in what is profitable; though it be not pleasant, but grievous. They will read and acknowledge mercy in what they feele and suffer, when they consider how much more they deserve: and, They will admire the mercies which are remem∣bred and continued with them in the midst of wrath. Humility as it is a safe grace; and layeth a man low, beneath the violent blasts which shake the lofty Cedars; So it is free of that un∣thankfulnesse wherewith pride is attended and plagued, 2 Tim. 3.2. And in particular, True grace and humility will teach men to covet earnestly after the best things, and to prize them, and blesse themselves in the enjoyment thereof, though otherwise their condition be sad and grievous. And indeed, if men under affliction, ought to enquire after, and esteeme of God because he hath endowed them with reasonable souls, and teacheth them more then the beasts of the earth, and maketh them wiser then the fowles of heaven, Job 35.9, 10, 11. How much more ought they to prize the more special mercies of God continued with them? And especially, that in the holy Scriptures he afords unto them the means of knowing them∣selves, and an offer of Christ, with all the consolations flowing from him, and an interest in him, and directions how to apply and improve the same in all cases? Though this be the great and choice mercy aforded to the world, Psal. 147.19, 20. and to be esteemed of above thousands of gold and silver, Psal. 119.72. as being able to make us wise unto salvation, and containing matter of songs in the house of our pilgrimage; Yet it is not the simple enjoy∣ment of this mercy, nor any pretence of an estimation thereof, that can prove a people bles∣sed, unlesse in practice they labour to emprove the mercy, and do make use thereof as a glasse wherein to behold and know themselves what they are, and be invited thereby to embrace and close with Christ revealed therein, upon his own termes, and do study dayly to testifie their subjection to God speaking in his Word, by setting it before them as the rule of their conver∣sation, and to rejoyce in the consolations thereof over all their sorrows, blessing the Lord daily for the continuance thereof with them, though he strip them of other things. And here, there is but too just cause of regrate, that though our day be short, our journey long, and our way clear; Yet the generality of the visible Church and professors, are either idle, or out of

their way, and in their greatest throng, are but labouring in the very sire for vanity. If we look upon the most part of those, we will finde that, being ignorant of their true good, or not giving credit to what is revealed in the Word concerning it, they do spend their strength in seeking after any good, yea, or any shew of it, that hereby they may deceive and full themselves asleep, and take the best course they can to skin over these wounds, grievances and discon∣tents, which do attend miserable and fallen man, the perfect cure whereof is onely to be found in Jesus Christ; And that, by seeking more then is to be expected in and from the creature, they do not onely misse of their aime, but deprive themselves of that good they might finde in the right use of the good creatures of God, all the dayes of their life. But it may further be regrated, that the abuse of this mercy is more universal then that onely such should be charg∣ed with it; Sad experience doth testifie how truly the Apostle did give warning, that in the last dayes, vilest abominations should mask themselves under a forme of godlinesse, denying the power thereof, 2 Tim. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and since the profession of Religion hath been in any reputation among us, how frequently do we find men make use of a pretence of piety to render their vilest errors plausible; Yea, to carry on their selfish and carnal designes? Whence it is come to passe, that innocent and lovely holinesse suffers for their sake, and the Name of God is blasphemed, and holinesse so generally stumbled at, through them. Beside, If we look up∣on those who fear God indeed, How sadly may it be lamented that they are idle, and turned off from their great work, to needlesse diversions and distractions? And among those who are most busie, How few are to be found who follow a right method in their walking? Many do covet more after what is adorning, then after what is saving; Some do earnestly desire after satisfaction to their sense in the wayes of God, without acquainting themselves with the solid way of living by faith: Some do habituate themselves to a trade of discouragements; under which, after they have wrestled awhile with anxieties and bitternesse; they fall faster asleep in security, then if they had a Delilah in their bosome. And generally, That Summary descripti∣on of a Gospel way held out by the Apostle, Phil. 3.3. is but the practice of very few. Men do not worship God in the Spirit, because they learn not to rejoyce in Christ Jesus; and this they study not because they are not put from all confidence in the flesh, or, in any thing be∣side Christ. And if they would begin at having no confidence in the flesh, and look upon their being emptied of all things as a all not onely to close with, but, to rejoyce in Christ and his imputed righteousnesse; they would finde vertue flowing from him daily, to enable them to worship God in a lively and spiritual way, and to order their conversation as becometh the Gospel.
As these considerations serve exceedingly to commend the patience and long-suffering of God, who hath not removed his Candlestick from us, notwithstanding our not walking in the light, and our abuse of corrections, which have been sent to chasten us, for not entertaining the offer of salvation, and to quicken us in our Christian course: And as they ought to excite all, in their stations, to mourn before the Lord, and to stand in the gap to make up the breach; and Ministers in particular, to be instant in season, and out of season, if so be there may yet be a returning to him who smiteth, and we may become an afflicted and poor people trusting in the name of the Lord, and he may delight in us, and call us Hephzi-bah, and our Land Beulah: So it also hath prevailed with me to contribute my mite in this publick way (beside my ordi∣nary weak travels in my charge) and to make offer of this Exposition on that rich Treasure of the Gospel written by John. A subject (though handled by me briefly, and in much weak∣nesse) full of the substance and marrow of Religion, tending (as John himself giveth an ac∣count of his scope in it, Chap 20. 31,) to point out Christ the true remedy for sinne, in his person, and offices, and to direct us how to attaine salvation through faith in him. Which be∣ing to come to publick view, I have made bold to present it to the world under your Honou∣rable Names, and to joyne you together in this Dedication, whom God hath conjoyned in the strict bond of nature; which is daily confirmed by that mutual respect, tendernesse and affe∣ction, which You bear one toward the other.
It is not much my way, and I know Your Honours do not expect it, that I should stuffe this Application with large commendations of You, or with acknowledgments of your re∣spects to my self, and Your kindnesses towards others of my Relations. My great scope in it

is; As to encourage You in the good way wherein both Your Honours are engaged in Your several measures: So to excite and engage You yet more to emprove Your eminency (as You are or may be capable of this service) for the advancement of Christs interests in this back-sliding and degenerate time. Not that Christ needeth any such help, who by weak things can confound the mighty, and by things that are not, bring to naught things that are. But that it is Your own true honour and interest, not to be among those Nobles of Tekoa, who put not their necks to the work of the Lord; but to subject Your selves unto him, and lay out Your selves, in Your stations, for promoving his Kingdome, and the advancement of piety and the work of the Gospel. As for your Honour, my Lady Weems, all the lovers of Christ in Scotland do with thankfulnesse remember their obligations to Your late Father, The Right Honourable Earle of Rothes, of precious memory, whom the Lord raised up to be a prime In∣strument in the late Reformation, and who spent himself, till his last breath, in that publick service. And those who know Your Ladiship best, will bear witnesse that you have endeavour∣ed, in your Sphere, to trace his steps, not onely in Your private and secret practice, but in your open countenancing and encouraging of godlinesse, and honest Ministers of the Gospel, at all occasions: Wherein I trust You shall be helped to persevere and abound unto the end. Your Honour hath received many favours from the Lord, particularly; that he hath made you a joyful Mother of children, who are (the Lord continuing their life, for which I pray) to suc∣ceed in several Honourable families of the Land, beside those of them who are, or may be placed in other families, by marriage: Which, I doubt not, You look upon as a strong obliga∣tion to lay forth Your self that they may prove friends to truth and piety in their station and generation. In subserviency whereunto, I have presented this piece to your Ladiship, as con∣taining a brief hint at many of these precious truths which are necessary to salvation, and use∣ful to be inculcate upon these who minde the way to heaven. And for Your Honour, My La∣dy Beuccleuch, Albeit, by reason of your young and tender years, many of these truths here presented may transcend your capacity for present; yet as your grave, prudent, and sweet disposition and behaviour, your opposition to profanity, and respect to the Sabbath-day, and your careful observance of such duties of Religion as your tender age is capable of, do much refresh those who are concerned in you, and converse with you; (as being things not usual in so tender an age; especially in one who wants not sufficient baits of worldly advantages and contentments to divert you) and do give good ground of hope, that if the Lord continue you, ye shall prove an ornament to your dignity and station: So it hath engaged me to prefix your name also to this piece, as an incitement to you to proceed in that good course; and that your Ladiship may have an help ready at hand, from whence, as ye grow up, ye may drink in that sound doctrine which is according to godlinesse.
Now that the Lord himself may blesse you both, in all your relations and concernments, may continue you long togther, may make you a blessing to each other, and may blesse this and the like means unto you, for your furtherance in faith and godlinesse, till ye come to your eternal rest, is the hearty prayer of

