




Most Gracious Soveraign,
I Humbly crave license to prostrate at your Royal feet, a learned Disputation of the famous Bohemian Martyr John Hus, in defence of our renowned John Wickliffs 17. Article; largely evidencing the Supream Au∣thority of Christian Kings, and Temporal Lords, over the Temporalties, and Persons of Delinquent Prelates and Churchmen, backed



with an Additional Appendix, (hastily compiled in the midst of my other distracting publike Im∣ployments in few hours space,) not unseasonable, or unworthy publike Consideration, in relation to ancient and late alienations of Abbots, Bishops. Cathedral lands, now under your Majesties and your Parliaments Deliberation, in order to their Purchasers satisfaction, for the prevention of fu∣ture Animosities, suits, & establishment of Cor∣dial Unity, Amity between all Your Subjects, after their many years sad Intestine bloudy Schisms and Discords.
The sole Occasion of this Publication, was the many late Petitions of Purchasers, and others complaining of someQuem dabis mihi de nu∣mero Episco∣porū qui non plus invigilet subdorum evacuandis marsupiis, quam vitus extirpandis? Ubi est qui orando flec∣tat iram? Ubi est qui prae∣dicet annum acceptibilem Domino? Pauci admo∣dum sunt, qui non quae sua sunt quaerunt. Diligunt munera; nec possint pariter deligere Chri∣stum, qui a manus dederunt mammonae. Bernard. Sermo 77. super Cantica. Bishops, & Churchmens covetousness, or averseness to give them such competent satisfaction for their Purchases, by new Leases or otherwise, as Your Majesties Royal Declarations, the Commons-House Votes, and Your Noble Generals Engagements, (in order to Your Highnesse most joyfull, peaceable Restitution to Your Throne) induced them to expect; and of their violent, or vexatious procee∣dings,

contrary to Your Gracious Proclamati∣on, and Commission. The principal design of it is, to Vindicate Your Majesties ancient Sove∣raign Jurisdiction, with the Legal power of your Parliaments & temporal Lords, over the Pos∣sessions and Persons of the greatest Prelates, in cases of Delinquency, See Grotius de Jure Bell. l. 3. c. 10. War, or Publike Necessity; and the Lawfulness of seising, alie∣nating their Temporalties, imprisoning, bani∣shing, executing their persons for Criminal Offences, and Contempts (of which they have been frequently guilty) without any Sacrilege or Impiety. The contemplation whereof (I presume) will henceforth perpetually bind them to their good behaviours, both towards Your Majesty, your Parliaments, and People; and engage them to a charitable, sober, religious use of all their Temporal endowments, to a most hea∣venly, humble, world-contemning Con∣versation, a diligent faithfull discharge of their Episcopal function, by Acts 5. 42. c. 20, 21, 28, 1 Cor. 9. 14, to 24. 2 Tim. 4. 1. 2. Rom. 15. 18. 19 20. Mar. 16. 16. daily constant prea∣ching, fasting, praying, and administration of the Sacraments to the Souls committed to their pastoral charge; and to an aemulous imitation of our pious, primitive Archbishops and Bishops,



Wilfrid, Aydan, Ceadda and others, of whom Eccles Hist Gentis Aug∣lorum, l. 3. c. 4. 28. l. 4. c. 3. Venerable Beda, and Actus Pon∣tisicum Cant. col. 1636, 1637. Gervasius Dorober∣nensis render us this account: Non Equi∣tando, sed pedibus ambulando, ver∣bum Dei instantissime praedicabant. Tota tunc fuit sollicitudo Doctoribus illis Deo servire, non seculo; tota cura cordis excolendi non ventris. Nulla causa fuit sacerdotibus Dei vicos adeundi, nisi ut praedicarent, vel baptizarent, vel animas curarent. Cuncta quae sibi à Regibus vel divitibus seculi donabantur, mox pauperibus qui occurrerent erogate gaudebant. In tantum erant ab omni peste Avaritiae castigati ut nemo territoria vel possessiones ad construenda Mo∣nasteria à potestatibus seculi, nisi co∣actus acceperet. All their Oblations and re∣venues were Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 27. Spelman. Concil. p. 96. Surius Con∣cil. Tom. 1. p. 359. equally divided into 4. parts. The 1. for the sustentation of the Bishop and his family, not in a pompous Lordly splen∣dor, but sober and Christian hospitality; The 2. for the maintenance of his Clergy or Chap∣ter; The 3. for the relief of the Poor; The 4. for the repair of Churches: and if any sur∣plusage



remained, it was bestowed in alms and other pious uses; not spent in Luxury or worldly pomp. No part of it was treasured up in the Bishops own purse to enrich himself, or Leased to, or bestowed on his wife, children, kenred, servants, or Courtiers as in later ages, (as real Spalato de Repub. Eccl. l. 9 c. 7. 2. 36. Bernard super Cantica Sermo 77. & Goncio ad clerum in concilio Rhe∣mensi. Sacri∣lege as any now declaimed against.) Their An∣gelical and Evangelical Conversations, purchased them such veneration and high esteem among all sorts of people, Gervasius Dorob. actus Pontif. Cant. col. 1636, 1637. & Be∣da. Ut ubicunque Clericus aliquis adveniret gaudentèr ab omnibus, tanquam Dei famulus exciperetur. Etiam si in itinere pergens inveniretur, occurrebant, & flexa cervice vel manu signari, vel ore illius se be∣nedici gaudebant; verbis quoque horum ex∣hortatoriis diligenter auditum praebebant. Et si quis Sacerdotum in vicum fortè deveniret, mox congregati in unum vicani, Uerbum vitae ab illo expetere, et operibus im∣plere curabant. Such an Episcopal life as these then led in our Bishops and Clergy now (without future contests, Lu. 22, 24, 25, 26. Vidos omnem ecclesiasticum zelum fervere sola pro digni∣tate tuenda? Honori totum datur, sancti∣tati nihil aut parum, Bern. de consid. ad Eugenium. l. 4. c. 2. which of them shall be the Greatest, Richest, Highest, but best, holyest, humblest) would speedily reconcile both them, their Purchasors and Opponents, yea produce



such a reverend estimation and entertainment of their Persons and Ministry in the Laity, as Your Majesty by your most pious Declarations, Pro∣clamations, Speeches, and unwearied Endea∣vours have exhorted, and conjured them unto; that so all your Subjects 1 Tim. 2. 1, 2, 3. may henceforth live a quiet and peaceable life in all godlinesse and honesty, under Your most just and gracious Government; Which as it ought to be their daily prayer, so it is their bounden duty, and will be the only means of their future felicity.
Let thoseDeut, 33. 26, 27. everlasting Arms of the Eternal God, riding upon the heavens for Your help, which have so miraculously protected, supported, restored Your Royal Majesty to Your King∣doms, and thrust out the Enemy from before You without sword or spear, for ever embrace, defend, preserve Your Sacred Person in perfect health and safety, to reign over them in all Pro∣sperity, Tranquillity, Felicity and Glory, till extreme old age (and no other casualty) shall tran∣slate You from a temporal to an eternal Crown in the Highest Heavens; Which bath been, is, and alwayes shall be the daily Prayer of
From my Study in Lincolns Inne, Novem. 24. 1660.


