



BEloved for the fathers sake, first premising, that they are not all Israel, that are of Israel, I know there is drosse mingled with your sil∣ver, chaff amongst your wheat, and the Ca∣naanite is still in the land, and troubles you: but to you that are indeed the true seed of Abraham by faith in Jesus Christ, do I dedicate this Treatise. You beloved are of God, and have your fathers name written in your foreheads; you are the true Israe∣lites, to whom pertaineth the Adoption, and the glory, the Covenants and Gospel promises, whose are the fathers, and for whom Christ came, who is over all God blessed for ever. You are a chosen gene∣ration, a Royal priesthood, a holy nation, a pe∣culiar people, walking in the steps of your father Abraham, hearkning to that great Prophet whom God hath raised up among your brethren, and have been baptized into the name of the father, son, and holy spirit. But the devil (that implacable enemy of souls) hath endeavoured to wreak his ma∣lice upon you above all people, opening his floodgates to overwhelm you; the Archers have shot sorely at you, the plowers have made deep furrows upon your backs, yet you are still supported by the rock of Ages, and strengthned by an Everlasting Arm; they have

laboured in vain, for the blessings of your father Abraham have prevailed above the blessings of your progenitors.
Your begining in these nations (of late years) was but small; yet when it pleased the Lord to dispel those clouds that overshaddowed us, and scatter some beams of the Gospel amongst us, he gave you so great an increase that Sion may say with admiration, who hath begotten me these! &c.
Nor is it lesse observable that whereas other Re∣formations have been carryed on by the secular arm, and the Countenance and allowance of the Magi∣strate, as in Luthers time by several German Prin∣ces; the Protestant Reformation in England by King Edward, Q. Elizabeth, &c. The Presbyte∣rian reformation, by a Parliament, Comittee of Estates, Assembly of Divines, besides the favour and assistance of great personages; you have had none of these to take you by the hand, but your pro∣gresse was against the impetuous current of humane opposition, attended with such external discourage∣ments as bespeak your embracing this despised truth, an effect of heart-sincerity, void of all mercenary con∣siderations. Yea how active has the Accuser of the Brethren been to represent you in such frightful fi∣gures, exposing you by that mischievous artifice to popular Odium, and the lash of Magistracy; in so much that the name of an Anabaptist was crime enough: which doubtlesse was a heavy obstacle in the way of many pious souls.
And what our dissenting brethren have to ans∣wer, upon that account (who instead of taking up, have laid stumbling blocks in the way of Re∣formation)

will appear another day. Yet notwith∣standing the strenuous oppositions of those great and learned ones, The mighty God of Jacob hath taken you by the hand, and said be strong.
Besides it has a considerable tendency to the ad∣vancement of divine grace, if we consider the way and manner of the Reviving this costly truth. When the professors of these Nations had been a long time wearied with the yoke of superstitious ceremonies, traditions of men, and corrupt mixtures in the worship and service of God; it pleased the Lord to break these yokes, and by a very strong impulse of his spirit upon the hearts of his people, to convince them of the necessity of Reformation. Divers pius and very gracious people having often sought the Lord by fasting and prayer, that he would shew them the patern of his house, the goings out, and come∣ings in thereof, &c. Resolved (by the grace of God) not to receive or practise any piece of posi∣tive worship, which had not precept or Example from the word of God. Infant-Baptism coming of course under consideration, after long search and many debates it was found to have no footing in the Scriptures (the only rule and standard to try do∣ctrines by) but on the contrary a meer innovation, yea the prophanation of an ordinance of God. And though it was purposed to be laid aside, yet what fears, tremblings, and temptations did attend them lest they should be mistaken, considering how many learned and Godly men were of an opposite perswasi∣on: How gladly would they have had the rest of their brethren gone along with them? But when there was no hopes, they concluded that a Christi∣ans

faith must not stand in the wisdom of men, and that every one must give an account of him∣self to God, and so resolved to practise according to their light: The great objection was, the want of an Administrator, which (as I have heard) was re∣moved by sending certain messengers to Holland whence they were supplyed. So that this little cloud of Witnesses, hath the Lord by his grace so greatly encreased, that it is spread over our Horizon, though opposed and contradicted by men of all sorts.
And now friends I can safely bear you record, that it is not humour, conceitednesse or singularity (so often charged upon you) that makes you decline the BaptiZing your little ones: For I know they are as dear to you, as children are to any parents under heaven; your sighs and tears, those heart-breaking desires and pathetick wishes you send to the mercy-seat for them, is a sufficient testimony hereof, and your petitions, that Ishmael may live before God, that your children may be converted, that they may have an Interest in the new Covenant, that the law of God may be written in their hearts, that their sins may be pardoned, their natures sanctifyed, and their souls eternally saved And did you know that Baptism could contribute the least iota hereunto, how readily and zealously would you perform it? be∣sides it is an easy service, that would bring you into the credit and esteem of differing professors, divers of your natural relations, &c. yea 'tis as safe, as ea∣sy, nothing of self-denyal or the Cross attending it. And it is very remarkable that many have suf∣fered for owning most (if not all other) points of faith and Christianity, yea divers have suffered e∣ven

unto death for denying, yet none (that ever I heard of) suffered for owning Infants-Baptism.
Yet though your children are dear to you, the word of the Lord, and the purity of his worship is far more dear, and hence you dare not adde to his words lest he reprove you, and you be found lyars. You dare not offer strange fire to the Lord, which he hath not commanded, nor prophane an Ordinance; you know that Baptism (being a part of instituted worship, not found in natures garden) has of it self no vertue, but what it receives from the iustitutor; For as one well observes moral laws are good, and therefore commanded: but positive worship is comman∣ded, and therefore good. So that your adversaries clamour without ground, and the Lord will judge between us. And if it be questioned why I insist so much upon this subject? I answer, I was weary with forbearing when I saw your affliction, and be∣held the reproaches, wherewith your opponents un∣mercifully persecute you. But brethren as I have gone in and out among you these six and twenty years, so I have had opportunity to know those pious souls among you, whose Conversation is in Hea∣ven, who live above the Clouds, who groan un∣der the body of sin, and remains of corruption, I have known your manner of life, your faith, pa∣tience, long-suffering, charity; I have also seen your dark side, and observ'd your infirmities (which your adversaries view through a multiplying glass;) But if there be any society or Community of people that differ from you, that have not their dark side, let them cast the first stone. Yet you dare not allow the least sin in you; your prayers and endeavours f

greater measures of mortification, and that you may be sanctified throughout, stand compleat in the whole will of God, and be filled with all the fruits of righ∣teousnesse through Jesus Christ, are famous instan∣ces that you are pressing after perfection.
I know you do not desire these Encomium's, but I have the example of the holy spirit, whose steps I humbly conceive I may follow. Rev. 2.2. where these Commendations are given of the Church, I know thy works, thy labour, and thy patience, and how thou canst not bear them that are evil; and for my names sake hast laboured, and hast not fainted, &c. It's true the Lord knows these things in another manner then we do, viz. by searching the heart; we by outward observation: yet so far as we know we judge.
And now what remains, but that you hold on your way, and grow stronger and stronger, being like that shining light, that shines more and more to the perfect day; dayly purging your selves from all filthynesse of flesh and spirit, perfecting holyne  the fear of God, walking in the steps of your f Abraham, and in a little time you shall he received into his bosome, where the weary are at rest, and the wicked cease from troubling. And so I commend you to God and the good word of his grace, which is able to make you stand, and give you an inheritance a∣mong them that are sanctifyed, and remain

