



DEAR FRIENDS,
THE Great Work of Faithfulness and Labour which by Fervent Prayer and a Una∣nimous Call you have pre∣valled on me to come hither and undertake, for the pro∣moting the Honour of Jesus
Christ, the Edification of your own Souls, and the Conversi∣on of poor, lost Sinners, doth much influence and incline my Spirit, almost to do, or be any Thing, in order to these Bles∣sed Ends. As the Divine Providence hath cast my Lot among you, so now a Divine Precept doth make me to be in all Things for your Good,
2 Cor. 4.5. your Servant for Jesus sake. I have therefore in this poor Essay before you, at your own Instant and joint Appli∣cations, brought forth, as far as I,
Mat. 13.52. a poor Scribe, instructed unto the Kingdom of God, am
able, out of Christ's Treasury Things new and old.
Rev. 1.14. These are the Fruits which your Souls have lusted after, and the Fruits for which you have been cry∣ing, Give, Give: i. e.
Prov. 30.15. you have askt them from the Pul∣pit, and some of you have thought long before the Week was gone about, to take them in the Great Congregation:
Psal. 40.9, 10. You have now askt them again from the Press; and lo! here is the Savoury Meat,
Gen. 27.7. such as your Soul loves! I desire to bring no other into your Chambers, than what the Lord your God hath brought me:
v. 20. I hope I
dare not tender you Stones for Bread,
Luk. 11.11, 12. or venture to bring in a Scorpion to you that ask an Egg. Indeed, I had not once a Thought, that these Papers, without being burnt, must have lighted up a Candle for any to see to Sup by; but now I judge, that so long as I am yours to serve you, I must light up any Thing, if you may but shine the more. You have professed a sweetness to your Taste at the first prepa∣ring of this Discourse, when this Banquet (as now you see it) was only made ready for some Meals upon the Lord's
Days, 'till I had finished the Subject: And now I crave this Blessing upon your Meat, that as you have chosen more than other Seven Days to keep this Feast,
2 Chro. 30.23. it may be also sweet and nourishing in your daily Bread at home! that however the Covers may in process of Time be found mouldy in some of your Houses, the Pro∣vision it self may never be so in your Hands, much less pu∣trifie in any of your Heads,
Exo. 16.20. 'till it breed Worms and stink. I know it is possible in rich Feeding to contract Diseases, and instead of killing Hunger,
quicken some Mortal Sting. But tho' Spiders will suck Poy∣son out of the sweetest Flow∣ers,
Heb. 6.9 I am perswaded better Things of you, who profess to be New Creatures.
Now, that the Doctrine of Grace here offered may meet with the Principle of Grace to receive it, and afford good Nourishment, when good Food and a sanctified Appetite meet, is the Prayer of
DEAR FRIENDS, 
