



Much honoured Father,
BOoks claim a just title to a Dedicatory commen∣dation, whether
this title be just jure naturali, or by Prescription, I
intend not to dispute with this small piece which cals it selfe mine, and
claimes the same portion which o∣thers have beene sent into the world with;
I will not deny it's request, though I might have so done, since it 
appeares in the world without my ple∣nary consent) it shall
have it's Due: Nor will I be unjust, or unthankfull to you who have the
clearest, and fairest title to this Homage; for if either Greatnesse or
Goodnesse be a just claime, your's is the justest; if Great∣nesse
of obligations be a good title, None may contend with you; a Fa∣ther's
obligations on a Sonne are confes∣sedly greatest. If Goodnesse,
and Bene∣ficence be the best claime, I must tell the world, your right to
this is such, There cannot be a better Patron then a Good Father. If
I adde no more to set out your worth, (besides I prevent the losing my
selfe in the Dedication, and the disproportioning the Frontispice to the
building,) I shall cut off the jea∣lous surmises of an uncharitable world
(which will suspect there is none so good, because they are so few.)
And (which I most intend) reserve more roome for the Practicke part of that
ho∣nour and obedience which I owe you. I cannot more doubt your
reception of this, then I can your reception of my selfe, and to entreat for
this, (I thinke) were to detract from the repute of a tender Father which you
deserve. What it wants of worth, in it selfe, will be more fully, and
easily made up, whilest it hath the rising advantage of a Sonne's
affections, (whose willingnesse makes his lest essay of
thankfulnesse worth accep∣ting,) and whilest it hath the graines of
allowance which a Fathers kind∣nesse will cast in to make up the
weight.
Sr, these first fruits being judged ripe sooner then I
thought, and so gathered (much against my will.) and having been offered
first in the Tem∣ple for the honour of God, and the service of his
spirituall Temple, are now in this handfull left to you, as that portion
which I might not with∣hold from you, and as the first
fruits duly offered did procure a blessing on the offerer, so I hope it
will fare with your Sonne, who nothing doubts your blessing will be on his
head, and doubts it will, as Jacob's, prevaile a∣bove the
blessings of your Progeni∣tours, for the abundant encrease of Grace,
Mercy, and Peace on
 From
Merton Coll. 
July 6. 1659.
