



IT hath ever been the custom (partly to give, partly to gain respect) to commit nothing to the Press, but under the inscription of some persons name, to whom their work might be acceptable, and by whom it might be rendred more acceptable unto others: Now whilst I thought on the Dedication of the ensuing Sermon, my thoughts never strayed farther, than one of you; to whom, I concluded, that all men; for the argument of it (set aside other respects) would adjudge it due, but to which of you, I had none to direct me, and therefore followed mine own fancy, which was this, not to dis-joyn you, who were so nearly joyned in the same common relation, and have already approved your selves to be the genuine children of the same mother: It is not my purpose to commend you, but to commend your mother to you, the fruits of your religious edu∣cation, do (to the credit of your family and the observation of the world) in a great measure shew themselves: but let me tell you, you lye under a greater engagement than ordinary: many eyes are upon you, that expect you should bring forth fruit answerable to the stock that bare you: though you be vertuous, yet you will not be thought worthy of commendation, ex∣cept you excell. Paul tells us how he might boast, that he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews, 3 Phil. 5. that is, an Hebrew both by the father and the mothers side; this it seems was esteemed a great priviledge among the Jews: it was deemed a privilege to be a Proselite, a greater privilege to be an Hebrew, but the greatest priviledge to be an Hebrew of the Hebrew: so may every one of you boast, that you are a Christian of the Christians, descended on both sides from believing and religious parents, such as did so professe themselves to be, and were accounted really so by all that knew them: this is your priviledge, it will be your praise, if your practise arise to the height of it.Valer. Max. lib. 3. cap. 7. The Romans forced the lewd son of Scipio Africanus to pluck off from his finger a signet-ring, whereon the face of his father was engraven, accounting him unworthy to wear his picture, that would not resemble his vertue: and if you should degenerate, you will be thought unworthy the name of your parents. This I tell you, not so much because I fear you, but because I would not be thought to flatter you: as you have therefore begun well, gone on worthily, so continue and abound, knowing  have for an example: let the fruits 

more; that the name of Mickle-thwait may be greater, and yield a sweet and fresh perfume in the Churches of Christ to succeedings generations. To this end it is, that I present this Sermon to you, desiring that you would accept of it, and take in good part my freenesse with you.
Now for the Sermon it self, I expect to meet with Censures from two sorts of persons. They that knew her better than I, will think that I have said too little: and they that knew her not so well, will think that I have said too much: In answer to the former, I confesse I have said too little: When a Painter is about to paint a man, he first draweth some rude lines and this is called : then he addeth the black colours, this is called : lastly the vive colours, and this is called ▪ now I acknowledge, that toward the resemblance of your mother, I have only given some rude draughts, the most that I have done is the adding of black colours: the perfecting of the work which consists in super-adding the vive and lively colours, I leave to a more skilful hand and learned pen, who will lay his foundation lower than I have done, and therefore raise his superstructure higher. For those that think I have said too much, I will only say as the Fathers of old to them that doubted of the Trinity, Go with John to Jordan and there thou shalt see:Comitare Johannem ad Jorda∣nem & vi∣debis. so go but to York and there you shall be assured; repair to those that were her intimate acquaintance, enquire of them concerning the truth of what I have said, and you will say, as the queen of Sheba concerning Solomon, it is a true report that you have heard of me, yea the half was not told you, 1 Kin. 10.6, 7.
I have but one thing more to adde I acknowledge, that I have here and there made addtions and alterations in the Sermon from what I preach'd: and though I had never so much time exactly to pen any thing, yet I should alwayes judge it necessary before it come to publick view, lambere foetum, to look and lick it over again, which when I have done, it will be still unpolished, and my best homily nought a kin to Chryso∣stome. Yet if some persons, reputedable enough to judge had not thought it fit to be printed and were earnest to have it so, it had been buried with∣in the same walls where is your mothers grave.
Now the Lord make you to abound more and more in knowledge and in all judgement, that ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere and without offence till the day of Christ, being filled with the fruits of righteousnesse, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and prai of God: thus prayeth
Octob. 13. 1659

