



SIR,

S틀ch Impulsions I within me at present feel,
In which I admire God's providential Wheel,
Ezek. 10.13.
In seeing God's goodness in your preservation
When under Exile, from your native Nation,
Rev. 1.9.
And being prohibited by a Proclamation:
Also the great trouble had in your station,
Standing for the welfare of the Nation:
Your judicious understanding, Sir,
1 Cor. 10.15. in relation
틀nto State Affairs, and virtuous Inclination
For Gospel-religion, Sir, in your generation,
I have made unto your Worship this Dedication;
Hoping your Clemency, Sir, will you excite
To accept of, as it were, Sir, a Widdows Mite.
Mar. 12.42.
Oh may it do good in this wicked generation,
That Men may see their great abomination
Of all sorts of wickedness in the Nation,
Ezek. 14.6.

And repent of them by real Reformation,
틀nder, this God's wonderful Dispensation,
Before God's wrath fall, or desolation feel,
Admire God's Works of wonder,
Ezek. 1.20. and cry, O Wheel!
God's rod is now, Sir, hovering over us,
Foundations of the Earth are out of course,
And without Reformation it will be worse
Psal. 82.5.
In England, for wickedness is little remorse.
I fear and tremble, Sir, the storm is not past,
Sin will cause on all Attempts a blast.
Though Popery now go out o'th' Land amain,
Yet,
Joh. 4.20. Sir, if we old Customs still retain,
And don't from superstitious Worship refrain,
It will provoke God to bring Popery again:
Mat. 23.32.
Mercy and Judgments calls England repent,
But instead of it, murmuring and discontent.
What a Chaos of Confusion we are under
At present, consider England's sins, 'tis no wonder.
Many dangers and fears, Sir, lye upon us,
Yet, Sir, I tell you it may be worse.
Observe this Dispensation,
Mat. 24.10. though peace be intended,
Yet how many in the Nation are offended?
Many are for Onyons and Garlick of Aegypt,
Psa. 106.14, 15.
Will-worship, 'till God lash us with his VVhip.
Oh when will England's eyes be open, say I?
This unto us, Sir, the Scriptures descry;
Before Christ's coming the Moon and the Sun
Joel 3.15.
Shall be darkened, the Stars also as they run
Shall withdraw their light,
Act. 2.20. as though done.
For the Lord will roar out of Sion,
틀tter his Voice from Jerusalem like a Lyon,
Joel 3.16.
The Heavens and the Earth shall shake;
Did not Bishops and Priests lately quake?
Isa. 33.1.

God will shake also e're long Sea and Land,
That is, will move all Nations, understand;
From the highest to the lowest deem'd,
Hag. 2.7.
Kings and Beggars to Christ all one esteem'd:
Not only Earth will shake, Temporal power,
But Heaven, Ecclesistical, in that hour.
Once more, signifieth not only shaking,
Heb. 12.26, 27.
But the removing things of Mens making,
Because all these were made with hands,
By power and authority of Mens Commands
And Inventions; then they will see plain
How they have worshipped God in vain.
Mar. 7.7.
But those things which must remain
Are from God, not to be shaken once again,
For Christ will his Truth still maintain,
Will destroy all that don't desire his reign.
Luke 19.27.
God hath lifted up now his powerful hand
Against such who will not yet understand
His way of Worship, behold now England,
How hath God wrought for us without delays,
Isa. 26.10, 11.12.
And Curs'd all Men of corrupt ways;
This is God's end, that England should feel,
Acknowledge God's overruling providential Wheel.
There is a Curse to all that don't understand
Or consider the operation of Jehovah's hand:
Isa. 5.12.
How hath God, Sir, wicked Men withstood,
Who design'd Protestants lives and blood;
Who had been in blood before now involv'd,
Had not God in mercy their Plots dissolv'd:
This is the Lords doing, Sir, in our dayes,
Psal. 118.23.
And should be marvellous in our eyes.
God calls now aloud, not only by his VVord,
But also his VVorks of wonder, now record

A Summons to give God glory,
Psal. 96.7, 8. as doth appear
Both by works of Mercy and Justice clear.
Many a time his anger hath turned away
From us, hath not, Sir, unto this day
Made a full end of us, even when we
Highly provok'd God in such a degree
So to to do;
Psal. 82.5. Oh let's not now in sin grow worse,
Though the VVorld and Men are out of course!
God's Throne is in Darkness, Scripture saith,
VVhich to us is the only Rule of Faith.
God's VVheels of Providence in their race
Are very difficult,
Psal. 145.3. Sir, for us to trace
And find out; let's admire his Free-grace
For Gospel-liberty we had every place;
Let us admire now God's VVorks of wonder,
In guiding the King we did live under,
Prov. 21.1.
By inclining the King's Heart to a Talleration,
So to enjoy Gospel-liberty in the Nation,
'Till this,
Psal. 82.1. Jehovah's wonderful Dispensation,
God over-rules Men, Sir, in their generation,
Beyond Mens Designs,
& 86.10. and their Intention;
God is God alone, as the Scriptures mention.
VVho would have said, Sir, under that storm,
The other Year, we should enjoy such a Calm?
Blessed be God for his refreshing Balm!
By the Prince of Orange in the Nation,
Jer. 51.28, 29, 30, 37.
VVhom the Lord hath call'd by his Dispensation
To be King of England in his generation,
To work, I hope, England's Reformation,
And so prevent England's Desolation.
I hope King William, Sir, will be instrumental,
Chief under Christ of great Babylon's fall.
For as Scriptures are truth without exemption,
The time draws near of Sion's redemption;
Luke 21.28.

For before the Year 1700. we see or feel
Great turnings will be of God's providential VVheel.
Not, Sir, that I have a prophetical spirit given,
But what Scripture reveals, as my Name's Stephen;
God is sometimes pleas'd to suffer exasperation
To go high, Sir, that his power in a Nation
May appear more eminent in Mens station
Isa. 42.8.
In composing of them for t' stop's desolation;
Puts a stop to the great'st danger, 'tis no story,
This course God takes for his own glory:
God makes Men's wrath now him to praise,
Psal. 76.10.
And remainders of wrath stops in our days.
Let's cry, O the VVheel within the VVheel!
Ezek. 10.10.
Oh may England his operating work feel,
To be reformed! least the VVheel of Providence
Run as fast backward now from hence,
Jer. 15.6, 7.
As ever it did forward for us by descent.
O let England by Reformation now repent!
Ezek. 10.17.
Let's now the motions of the VVheel discern,
Psal. 86.10.
For of all second Causes God sits at stern.
God works clear contrary to expectation
Isa. 55.8. & 11.6, 7.
Of most; is not this truth in our Nation?
The Wolf and the Lamb together dwell,
The Leopard with the Kid, Scriptures tell,
The Cow and the Bear together feed.
Sure those things do from God proceed.
For many who smell like a Kirkish Verment,
Mat. 7.15, 16.
Can now, Sir, put on a Lamb-like garment.


What's too hard for the Lord to effect?
Is not God of infinite power to protect
Psal. 145.3.
His People? let's depend on God,
Psal. 146.3, 5. and respect


Men but as Instruments in Jehovah's hand;
If God throws down, then none can stand:

This in England we have seen, O may we feel
God's Spirit, reforming us under this VVheel
Of Providence! for of all Kings God is greater,
God can bring Meat out of the Eater;
1 Tim. 6.15.
God can bring Water out of the Rock;
Let all Worship God,
Psal. 78.15, 16. not stones and stock.
If God be God, worship him in Faith,
Not superstitiously, Idol Baal, Scripture saith
God is a Spirit,
1 King 18.21. and requires Age or Youth
To worship him in spirit and in truth:
Not like Book-worship,
John 4.24. which I could tell
How some limit the Holy One of Israel
By their Forms,
Psal. 78.41. and still dead Liturgies desire,
But all this while where's the Spirit of Prayer.
We know not how to Pray as we ought,
'Till God's Spirit work it in our thought.
Rom. 8.26.
If Prayer, Communion with God be in a Book,
VVhat need the Spirit any farther look?
Vers. 9.
Yet without the Liturgy there's no Devotion,
But Schism,
Act. 28.22. a Sect, or some despised Notion.
But not to enlarge here, let none strife
For a dead Form, 'tis the Spirit giveth life:
Bodily exercise profiteth little, not at all
Without the Spirit,
Joh. 6.63. he giveth life in all.
Yet many for the Church of England cry,
Yet never are reformed by their Liturgy:
What is highly esteem'd with Men in a Nation,
Is unto Jehovah in Scripture an abomination.
Luk. 16.15.
Demetrius,
Acts 19.24, to 29. the Scripture tells us plain,
His soul was meerly for self-ended gain;
Sirs, You know by this Craft you and I
Have our Wealth, therefore against Paul cry,
For great is Diana of the Ephesians so high,
Whom the World worshipeth, Paul's Doctrine defie;
And so a Confusion they brought to pass,
Forsook Paul for love of worldly gain like Demas.
2 Tim. 4.10.

And others too, Sir, now in our Nation,
To define who, I'le leave to your Consideration.
What's a Form of Godliness without the power by?
2 Tim. 3.5.
Without the Spirit's operation what's a Liturgy?
Yea, the purest Forms of Worship rested in,
Without Faith and Practice are all but sin.
Rom. 14.23.
Out-side forms of Worship are but the shell,
The Spirit breaks the Nut, gives the kernel.
1 Cor. 3.6, 7.
Many rest in a form of Godliness in their race,
As if Duties ex opere operato could conferr Grace.
A lifeless formality is esteem'd in the World high,
Tit. 1.16.
As a Kab of Doves dung was sold, Scriptures descry,
In the Famine of Samaria, at a very dear rate;
2 Kings 6.25.
What's a Profession without Practice for an eternal state?
He that Professeth, and doth not Christ's Command,
Is like the foolish, building his house in the sand;
Mat. 7.26, 27.
VVhat's a Liturgy, or any Book to stand upon?
'Tis a sandy-foundation to build Salvation on,
Let's use Ordinances, but rest on none
For Salvation, but on Jesus Christ alone.
To draw, Sir, to a Conclusion, only this I Note;
Levit. 19.19.
God under the Law forbids a linsey-woolsey Coat;
Then sure under the Gospel there's no Institution
For a Surplice, but from a Papal Pollution.
But to say no more at present, your judicious Eye,
1 Cor. 10.15.
Sir, knows very well what my lines imply.
Concerning VVorship, at large my lines impart,
VVhich I present unto you, Sir, with my Heart.
Also a word of Free grace is here demonstrated,
2 Pet. 3.1, 2.
And the arrogancy of Free-will is dilated.
Also a word of Love in the latter end,
To know real from feigned, as many pretend:
Here is some Meat, though in a homely dress,
I aim at Matter, I am no Poet I confess:
Yet here's Gospel-truth, as much as those
For bulk as write, Sir, now in Prose;

For here's no phantasticol Rhime or Verse,
Col. 2.8.
But Scripture-truths it doth full express,
By the Spirit's operation I hope,
Col. 2.12. Sir, in all,
Being written when none cared for my Soul;
VVhen Father and Mother did me forsake,
God his Promise good unto me did make:
Psal. 27.10, 11.
VVhen under that great hour of temptation,
Rev. 3.10.
VVhen betrayed Monmouth came in the Nation;
Then God preserv'd me wonderfully in those dayes,
Psal. 107.8.
Bless God,
& 103.2. O my Soul, O give God the Praise!
Thus,
1 Cor. 10.15. Sir, I have given you a fore-taste
Of what my lines contain, now I haste
An end; on your Patience, Sir, I have intruded,
With Prayer for you my Epistle is concluded:
Exod. 23.23.
The Angel of the Covenant still stand by
Your Worship, to protect you from your Enemy;
Jehovah bless you, Sir, I wish you well,
Grace be to you,
Gal. 6.16. and to all God's Israel.
To God my Prayer for you shall advance,
While I am,
2 Tim. 4.22.

SIR, 
