



SIR,
IT is the observation of a learned man out of Tertul∣lian, that Christ is always crucified between two Theeves, that is, Truth suffers between two ex∣tream Errors: and I have observed, that the mo∣derate man is ever crushed between two extream par∣ties, who because he would have them both friends, is looked upon by both as an Enemy. Yet methinks, now, if ever, a Treatise of Moderation should be accep∣table, after we have had such sore and sure experience of the evils that arise from its contrary. I know it would have been to as little purpose, to have presented to publike view a subject of this nature, in the times of our busie wars, as it is to give advice to a man in the heat, and height of his passion: but now that things af∣ter so many years of confusion, are grown more calm and composed; I hope likewise, that mens spirits are accordingly tempered; especially having proved by trial, that because they would suffer nothing before, they are now forced almost to suffer every thing; this is a sharp remedy, but Pride, Uncharitableness, and Hypocrisie, are sore diseases; if the Lord shall hereby cure us of these sins, and afterwards restore, and settle us, we shall have cause to acknowledge his dealing with us, not only just, but mercifull.
One great enemy unto moderation, are deep and dangerous engagements unto a party, which make men

of that desperate humour, as to resolve according to the Proverb, That because they have gone over Shooes, they will over Boots too. There is but one thing re∣quired to make a wise man, that is, Consideration; yet that Consideration is twofold, either before or af∣ter the fact; the former tends to prevent a mischief be∣fore it come, the latter to remove and heal it, when through inadvertency it is come; the former is better, yet the latter is good, if not out of season; for as we say, Better late wise than never: But such is the proud humour of deeply-engaged persons, that they refuse to put in practice the latter, because they would not be thought to have neglected the former; and re∣solve rather to continue fools even ad delirium & insa∣niam, than they will be thought, once not to have been so wise as they might have been. These men are of the Forlorne hope, and their Word is, Go forward, but their forwardness is frowardness, and if not seasonably repressed by Authority, will precipitate themselves and others into destruction. I confess that to backslide in matters of Religion is both base and sinfull; but if a man hath over-shot himself, and gone too far, it is both his wisdom and safety in time to look back. God forbid, that any who professeth himself to be an Israe∣lite, should think of returning back to Aegypt; no, fare∣well all cringing, and crossing, and bowing, with such like dregs of refined Popery, that they may never re∣turn again, till his Holinesse by the help of his Catho∣like Son reduce the Church of England, is my Prayer unfeignedly. But in things that tend to the order and well-being of the Church, which are at present, toge∣ther with the other, utterly demolished, there is no doubt but Authority will give us leave to look back to the Constitutions of the Primitive Church, and the Constitutions of our own Church formerly (so far forrh as agreeing with them, and not repugnant to the Scriptures) except we should depend upon an immedi∣ate Revelation for our direction.
A second enemy unto Moderation is Hypocrisie, and self-endedness, these make men that they do not so much desire publike settlement, as private safety, and causeth them altogether to hold off from engaging themselves to take up the quarrels of the Church, lest if their endeavours should prove unsuccessfull, they might suffer by it. Such as these may be observed to stand not in medio, but in bivio, expecting the event, that they may apply themselves accordingly.Pelago se non ita commissu∣rum esse, qui quando liberet pedem referre posset, Melch. Adam in Vit. Bez. As King Henry the fourth of Navarre told Beza, who urged him to shew himself in the quarrel of the Protestants Reli∣gion, that he would keep upon the shore, and not launch too ar out into the deep; but so that if a storm should arise, he might soon get to land again: A Lesson that, it seems, Baldwin, a man in great esteem among the French, but a very Ecebolus in Religion, taught him. It was once the Speech of a deep Politician, that it was good to follow the truth, but not too near at the heels, lest it should dash out his brains: But if all men were of this mind, when would the quarrels of our Church be taken up? certainly not till the day of judge∣ment, if out Church should continue so long.
A third Enemy unto Moderation is Pride and popu∣larity, I joyn them both together, because they sel∣dom goe asunder: A man cannot be moderate, who is not setled in his judgement, and humble in his appre∣hension: now Pride makes a man stiff, where com∣pliance is necessary; popularity makes him base in con∣descension, where fixedness of resolution is requi∣red.
Lastly, there are some that live by quarrels and dis∣sentions, who are of all others the greatest Enemies unto Moderation. These are of his mind, that bade when the sword was drawn, throw the Scabbard to the Devil. We read in Plutarch of one Demades, by pro∣fession a maker of Coffins, that was banished out of the City of Athens, for wishing that he might have good trading; that Wise State truly interpreting the lan∣guage

of his wish; as desiring some Epidemical disease, his private profit being inconsistent with the publike flourishing of the Commonwealth: so those people, who are undone, and cannot live but by undoing of o∣thers, certainly wish no good to our Church or Nation; but must needs be State Barretours, to keep the sore al∣wayes raw between Magistrates and Ministers, be∣tween Governours and their people.
Sir, besides all these, I have observed two great evils under the Sun, and they are these. That if a man be zealous he shall presently be accounted immoderate by prophane persons, and if he be moderate, he shall be thought to be lukewarm by hot professors: So that be∣tween prophaness and indiscretion, it is almost impos∣sible for a man to maintain his reputation; for those which condemn zeal (that keeps it self within its own circuit) under the pretence of immoderation, they are scarce worth the answering: Ahab accused Elijah for the troubler of Israel, and Tertullus St. Paul for a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition, and Michol despised David as a vain person, when in his zeal he danced before the Ark; yet the Holy Ghost commends all these for their zeal; but no where condemns them of Immoderation. For such as condemn Moderation for lukewarmnesse, if they be observed in the general course of their lives to be conscientious, they are to be pitied & directed; but if they be carnal & Time-serving Professors, they are to be sharply dealt with, and de∣tected, as those whom we may justly suspect for Hypo∣crisie, and the driving on some privare design. I will only adde this, that of all men, they who plead for a Toleration, have the least reason to accuse moderate persons of lukewarmness.
SIR, I might have added much more to what I have said concerning the Enemies of Moderation. Give me leave to say a little in vindication of men of mine own function, the Priests (as the Sectaries & Star∣gazers call them) who lie under the Odium of Immode∣ration.

I do freely confesse, that if the Lot should be cast, I fear many of our Tribe would be taken; yet e∣ven for them I think, I may safely say this, that many speak Against them, for speaking but that, which they themselves think. But for others, who doth not see, that therefore they are accounted immoderate, be∣cause they do zealously declare against the Heresies and Corruptions of the times, and the giving of Credence to the predictions of every vain Sooth-sayer and Astro∣loger, falsly so called? Again, I may subjoyn this, that many Ministers are more strict than otherwise they would be, because they see, that people are Generally more loose, not only in their practice, but their opi∣nions, than they have been; herein imitating a carefull Father, who holds a more strict hand over his child, than otherwise he would, because he sees that his natural inclination, together with the temptations of evil company, provoke him to break out into such dis∣orders, as are not only sin in him, but shame to his Fa∣ther. Thirdly, therefore it may be, some Ministers are the more stiff, because they know, when they come to a debate, they must be forced to abate something, and cannot with safety abate too much; as a Chapman will ask full as much, as his commodity is worth, be∣cause else he knows, that he shall be bidden less than it is worth; all the danger is, that if a man ask too much, perhaps he shall be bidden nothing at all. Lastly, peo∣ple expect zeal from Ministers, though they care not for it themselves; as many that care not so much for prea∣ching, as to come constantly once on a Lords-day, who yet would be ready to Article against their Minister, if he did not preach twice. That which Luther said some∣times, Nunquam periclitatur Religio, nisi inter Reveren∣dissimos; the Vulgar are readie enough to take up as a Maxim, or an Oracle. It is observed, when Christ was crucified, Pilate the Civil Magistrate absolved him, Cai∣phas the High Priest condemned him, Judas, his own disciple, betrayed him: people are willing to wash

their hands, as Pilate did, and think they have done all well enough, if they can with any colour lay the blame at the Ministers door. Sure it is, cold Ministers make bold sinners; and all the blame will be laid upon the unfaithfull Ministry, that should have been burning and shining lights, if Atheism or Heresie grow to an height.
Sir, I know you bear honourable respects, out of con∣science, to all conscientious Ministers, however tradu∣ced and maligned by some Apostatical persons. And this (set aside my private engagement, the publike re∣cital whereof would not make others more to wonder, than your self to blush) hath induced me to dedicate this Sermon to you, as a testimony of that honor which I bear to you, and cannot otherwise to the world ex∣presse. It was intended for you by the unworthy Au∣thor, when the other Sermon (concerning Mutual Love) was put forth, if the Printers slacknesse had not prevented, and I am sure, I have no reason to alter my intentions. For my self, I wish, that the Sermon were but in any respect worthy of your patronage, as you are in every respect worthy of its dedication. For you, I wish, that you may indeed show, that you patronize it by practising it. And that your Zeal may not burn up your Moderation; nor your Moderation choak your Zeal, is the prayer of,
Sir,
October 25th 1656.

