



May it please Your Majesties,
THAT which imbolden'd me to lay these Papers at Your Royal Feet, was in discharge of the Instructions I received from the Governour and Ga∣rison of Inniskilling, hum∣bly to Present before Your Majesties, together with their Address, a true Ac∣count of their Faithful Endeavours for the Support of the Protestant Interest, and of Your Majesties; together with the Reasons and Grounds upon which they proceeded in this so extraordinary a Revolution; and the rather, because Inniskilling made no De∣claration

upon their first taking up Arms, as most other parts of Ulster have done.
And, witb Submission, I think it most pertinent to plead before Your Majesties the Difficulties we found in what had but the appearance of Disloyalty to our Prince; for Your Majesties will be ill serv'd by men who have not Loyalty in their Principles. They who pretend they forsook their King for you, out of a Desire only of change, their pretence is immoral, and humours are inconstant, their Flattery is but the Tribute of Base Souls, and of Traiterous Conse∣quence to Princes; against whom the Justice or Wisdom of a Prince cannot secure him; for both these could not preserve Moses and David from the madness of the people.
May it please Your Majesties, We in Ireland were ill used, exceeding ill; we were disarm'd and displac'd, after the most signal Services of our Fa∣thers, and many of our selves, to the Crown; and the Arms put into the hands of the Murtherers, the bloody Murtherers of Forty one, and their Off∣spring; of whom our County afforded the most re∣markable, the Mac Guires, who were the first in that hellish Conspiracy, and inhuman in the execution of it. The chief of whom was thought worthy to be brought hither, and suffer the pains of his Rebellion in Lon∣don. Your Majesties will believe us, that not

only the Off-spring, but some of the very Hands which committed those Massacres, were arm'd by Authority at the same time that Protestants were thrust out of the Army, on pretence that some one or other of their Relations had ingag'd with the Usur∣pers, though themselves had served the King to the utmost Extremities; and many were Cashiered, against whom even that pretence could not be found, and who had bought their Places with the King's Li∣cense, and laid out all they had upon it; till at last, being a Protestant, was given for the Reason: and we were discourag'd by all the Artifice of Jesuit, or Irish, and even threatn'd another Massacre by many of their lesser Politicians, yet could not all this remove us the least step from our Duty to the King.
But, with Your Majesty's Patience, there was more than all this; We had Acts of our Parliament which did incapacitate these men from bearing either Arms or Offices; yet did we even faultily acknow∣ledge, and submit to their Authority, out of profound deference to the King, who had placed them over us, though apparently to our Ruine, and overthrow of our Religion. All our Bishopricks and Livings that fell in the King's Gift, were kept vacant, and the Revenues given to the Popish Clergy. Their Bishops kept publick Visitations in the Vacant Dio∣cesses,

and assumed even the Title; one of whom was made Secretary of State, and signed himself by the name of his Bishoprick in all his Warrants and Di∣spatches, that none might plead ignorance of the King's Intentions towards us. And we were told by some in the highest place, That the King would fill no Pro∣testant Vacancies in the Church; so that we saw great part of our Churches in their possession, and nothing interpose, but the lives of a very few (and most of them) Old Men, to leave us not one Prote∣stant Bishop in the Kingdom. And for our Civil Rights, our Judges, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, and even Constables, were for the most part made of Papists: and the Act of Settlement was then doom'd in every Coffee-house to the same Condemnation under which it has fallen since. And the Army being in∣tirely in those worst of Popish Hands, the most barbarous Irish, who had thrown off hu∣manity it self, our prospect was all black and dismal.
Then it was that You, Sir, appear'd, like the Sun, to dispel those mists which had darken'd all our Sky. Your Declaration revived us from the very Grave, while it shew'd us a way only to stand by, and see the Salvation of the Lord; only not to hinder you to re∣lieve us without hazard, or even Dishonour to our King; No more being askt, than to let our Par∣liaments

be free; and the Laws run in their Anci∣ent Channel. To this generous Declaration, we gave full and absolute Credence; and drank it in as thirsty Sands does the showers of Heaven: And look'd upon You as no other than a Miracle; a Mo∣ses sent immediately from God, to deliver us from Egyptian Servitude and Idolatry. And as a no less wonderful effect of this, that our King had been so perniciously Advised, as to Abdicate his Throne, Voluntarily to throw up his Government, Disband his Army, and Retire, some said to a Monastry, some to Rome, and some Dead; as every man's Fancy led him, and which to believe we knew not; for at that Distance, we were abso∣lute Strangers to Court, and to any true Intelli∣gence. At this very time, Lord Tyrconnel Ar∣med the Rabble of the Irish Papists, to the Num∣ber of Forty or Fifty Thousand, and to live upon the Countrey without Pay; whence ensued miserable Depredations, open Noon-day Robberies, and an in∣evitable, and sudden Ruine of the Brittish and Protestant Interest in Ireland. Having granted Commissions dated about the beginning of January last for these New Levies, he after upon Notice of the King's Desertion the 10th of December, alter'd the dates of these Commissions to the first of December; to bear a show as done while the

King was in the Government, and consequently that we should believe it was by his Majesties Orders.
And many of these New-rais'd men were so Tran∣sported with the Glorious prospect they had before them, that they had not the Continence, no, not their Priests, to refrain telling us, That they were now our Masters, and we must submit to new Laws, such as should be their Pleasure, and what we had deserved in their Opinion.
Then it was we thought our selves no longer un∣der obligation to be active in our own Destruction, to acknowledg Officers whom our Laws did inca∣pacitate, and acting more violently than ever, in the open Contempt of our Laws, and visibly to our Extirpation; and that in all reasonable Presumpti∣on, even without Orders from the King, who being gone from us (for what Reasons we neither knew at that distance, nor could examine) we did not think we ought to continue in assisting to the breach of our Laws in any lesser hands, whether of the Lord Tyr∣connel, or of any other. And in this Cause only it was, that we first took Arms in defence of our Laws, against those, who when the King was gone, would govern by Force, tho the Law said they should not be capable of any Employment; and when they declared they would act in contradiction to all the Laws in being; and went so far in it, as to lay us absolutely

in the mercy of another Massacre, with which some of them threatned us, and the most moderate of them did not tell us we were secure from it. But on the contrary, very many Intimations were sent from Fosterers, and others among the Irish, to their Friends of the Protestants, to be gone, to send away their Effects, to save their Lives, for that a storm was coming. They had Publick Masses through all the North, for the furthering of that which they called Inteneragh, that is, a Secret Intention. Our Hills were daily covered with Multitudes of them, Arming and Inlisting themselves; and they were quarter'd in our Towns, and in Private Houses. All of them were Armed, of all Sorts, Sexes, and Ages; the old Women, and young Children, provided them Skeans and Half-Pikes, for which they cut down our Woods before our Faces; and it was dif∣ficult to get a Horse shod in our Countrey; all Smiths being taken up in fitting this sort of Armo∣ry. Nor were their Circumstances alter'd more than their Looks and Behaviour; and if we might believe themselves, nothing wanted but the Signal to perfect what had been begun in Forty one; we were absolutely in their Power, and we had but that moment to rescue our selves.
Such Extremities might have excused great Ex∣cesses; which I might very fully show, were it not

for swelling this Discourse beyond its intended bounds, and therefore I forbear it.
And now it remains to show how we became Sub∣jects to Your Majesties, without breach of our former Loyalty; or rather how the same Loyalty becomes now due to Your Majesties; and we do even with bold∣ness hope, That the shewing how firm this our Loyalty held out through all the Temptations of the last Reign, will render it the more acceptabte to Your Majesties. This then was the scheme of Af∣fairs which our little Intelligence brought to us; That the Late King had, by Advice of the Jesuits, quitted the Government on purpose to put us into Confusion; and had then put himself into the hands of a bigotted Prince, Enemy to our Nation, and Per∣secutor of our Religion; That upon his obstinate De∣sertion and Abdication of the Government, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of England, Assembled, did unanimously place Your Majesties upon the Vacant Throne. Thus we heard, and this we believ'd.
And what were we, that we should take upon us, at our distance from Affairs, to understand them bet∣ter than those at the Helm, or to dispute what no one in England, made the least hesitation to admit?
And what could we embrace with more delight, than to see the Crown, Madam, upon Your Royal

Head, the next undoubted Heir to him who had Abdicated it? Whose Virtues gave You as good a Title to the Election, as Your Blood to the Succes∣sion, in that Illustrious Line, which we Pray God may Reign over us till Time shall be no more.
And were not even our Wishes left behind, to be∣hold all Your Glories doubled, in Your Conjunction with His Present Majesty, born to Empire, and a Pattern to Future Fate.
It was this Fate, Great Sir, Great Madam, These were the Steps by which we were raised beyond our own Contrivance, but with our ready Consent, to become Your Subjects: And how we have acquitted our selves in that Glorious Relation we stand in to Your Majesties, is the business of that Account which I now begin, without studying the Stile, or any other Ornament but Truth, which must be obscur'd in any dress I could bestow upon it.
