



A Word spoken in season is much commended
by the wisest of men, Prov. 15. 23, and 25.
11. Yea, it is made one of Christs excellen∣cies,
that hee had the tongue of the Learned,
and knew how to speak a word in season. Isa. 50.
4. Such words are not onely profitable, but
also powerful, and carry abundance of convincing strength
and force with them, Iob 6. 25. This principally hath em∣boldened
mee to dedicate this Treatise to you. Had I
searched for five verses thorow the whole Bible, I could
hardly have found five together (all things considered)
more suitable and seasonable for the present times wee live
in.
In them wee have an Alarum for the Drowsie, a Cor∣rasive
for the Impenitent, a Cordial for the Penitent, and
many quickening Considerations to move us all to a speedy
preparing to meet our God in a way of unfeigned Humilia∣tion
before the Decree bring forth, and the fierce anger of
the Lord ceize upon us.
Here wee may see Ephraims Dignity, and Ephraims Down∣fall,

and those sins which helpt to bring him down; and in
him wee may read Englands condition; the Lord hath made
us his Ephraim, hee hath laid his right hand upon us, hee
hath made us the head of the Tribes, hee hath set us above,
when for our sins hee might long since have laid us in the
dust. Ephraims sins were Ephraims ruine; and if those sins
bee found in England, which were found in him, what can
wee expect but the like judgements? for God is the same
to the same sinners. If Samaria's sins bee found in Lon∣don,
London must look for Samaria's judgements. God
will not spare sin, where ever hee findes it, bee it in City or
Country. Sin hath brought down greater Cities than yours;
as they had their times of rising, so of ruining; as of build∣ing,
so of burning; witness Nineveh, No, Tyrus, Baby∣lon
and Ierusalem: Sin hath made them all a desolation. For
my own particular, I shall never expect that City or State
should prosper, till Gods Church prosper; or that our houses
should continue, when Gods house lies waste; all our build∣ings
will bee but Nods and Babels, that is, unsettlement
and confusion, till Gods house bee setled and exalted a∣mongst
us, Hag. 1. 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, &c. It is the sins of Eng∣land
that I fear more than all the enemies in the world. It
is not Spain or Italy, it is not France or Turkey that I fear;
though all Nations should compass us about, yet were wee
but an obedient people, I should not doubt, but that in the
Name of the Lord wee should destroy them. But it is the
Atheism, Heresie, Blasphemy, Security, Impenitency, Apo∣stacy,
Prophanation of holy things, Formality, Hypocrisie,
Unrighteousness, Division, Witchcraft, and contempt of
the Gospel. These, even these, are the enemies that I fear;
and if any thing destroy us, it is these abominations that
reign amongst us. Bee instructed therefore, O England, and
thou, O London, the chief City thereof, lest the Lords soul de∣part
from thee, and thou bee made a desolation, Jer. 6. 8.
God hath bornelong with our provocations, but hee will
not alwaies bear, but will at last reconcile his patience
with the fierceness of his fury. Let not therefore Satan de∣lude
any, as if these were but some melancholy conceits,
some fearful fancies, or vain prognostications of some ly∣ing
Astrologers; but know, that these are certain Asser∣tions,

grounded upon the infallible Word of God, whose
Threatnings, as well as Promises, are like unto Sil∣ver,
that hath been seven times purified, and horowly tri∣ed,
Psal. 12. 6.
It is true, wee have many Priviledges that others want,
but no Priviledges can preserve an impenitent people
from ruine; Ierusalem was highly priviledged; and had
the choicest Preaching a little before its downfall. The
sins of a City and Nation may bee so great, that though
Noah, Iob and Daniel (three men that could do very
much with God, Ezek. 14. 14.) Should stand before the
Lord for them, yet they shall not prevail for a hardened,
Apostatizing people; where such spiritual judgements go
before, there temporal judgements alwaies follow, Isa. 6.
9, 10, 11, 12. Sinning is worse than suffering; better see a
people bleeding, than blaspheming; for by our Sufferings
God is glorified, but by our sinns hee is dishonour∣ed.
Wee are a people that are much for Liberty; wee can∣not
endure a yoak, no, though it bee Christs easie yoak,
yet wee will not have him to reign over us; wee will not serve
him with gladness, and singleness of heart in the abundance
of all things; and therefore hee may justly make us serve
our enemies in the want of all things, Deuteronomy 28. 47,
48. And as wee are all for Liberty, so hee may justly
proclaim a Liberty for us to the Sword, Pestilence and Fa∣mine,
Ier. 34. 17.
God hath humbled many in your great City, by sickness,
poverty, and decay of Trading, &c. But have you been made
humble thereby? Hee hath sent the choicest of his Ministers
amongst you, and fed you (in a spiritual sense) with the
finest of the Wheat, but have you answered Gods cost and
care? and are you bettered by all his dispensations to you?
Have you heard the voice of the Rod, and who hath ap∣pointed
it? or have you not rather fallen away more and
more, and grown worse and worse? if so, how can you ex∣pect
peace, when your Apostasies, witchcrafts, and spiritual
fornications are so many? 2 King. 9. 17, 18.
But it is not for mee to counsel you, who have so many
livingSee Mr. Willes his most seaso∣nable and solid peece, on 2 Tim. 3. 1. new∣ly printed. and dead Counsellors at hand; I shall therefore betake

my self to Prayer, desiring that the good will of him that
dwelt in the bush, may dwell amongst you, that hee would
bee for walls and bulworks to you, and your glory in the
midst of you; that hee by the Spirit of fire and of burning
would purge out of you every thing that offends, that your
scumme of Blasphemy, Heresie, Hypocrisie, Unrighteousness,
&c. may no longer abide in you, but that the Name of your
great and famous City may forever bee, Iehovah Shammah,
The Lord is there. This is, and shall bee the Prayer of
Kingsnorton,
Novemb. 17. 1659. 
