


Dearly beloved in the Lord,
MY hearts desire and Prayer for you is that you may be saved, And since God saveth none ordinarily but by means, I here pre∣sent you with a Practical Book, which by the blessing of God may be a means to lead you safely through this Wilderness to the heavenly Canaan. Here you will finde Directions for all sorts, for Magistrates and Ministers, for Superiours and Inferiours. Here you have Antidotes against those nineteen sinnes (of these last and worst times) which are so rife both in City and Coun∣trey; for, where can a man goe but he shal finde such as are Self-Lovers, Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers, False-accusers, Covenant-breakers, Vnholy, &c. So that

the Treatise is very seasonable, the good Lord make it pro∣fitable.
To this end, First, You that are Magistrates may see their duty in the Treatise it self, on 2 Timothy 3.2. p. 26.27. Rulers must Rule for God, you must not bear the sword in vain; but you must be a Terror to Drunkards, Swearers, Sabbath-profaners, Whore-masters, Seducers, Blasphemers and all the rabble of Hell. 'Tis an old complaint that England hath golden Lawes, but Leaden Executioners▪ Be The ex∣cellency of a zealous Ma∣gistrate: you may see on 2 Tim. 2.4. Zealous therefore for God, we never lose by venturing for him. Remember that at the last day you must give an account of your Steward ships, of those Offices, Talents and Opportunities which you have received, and what good ye have done in your yeare, what Vices have been punished, what Goodnesse hath been promoted, and what disorders rectified.
A Zealous Magistrate is the best Common-wealths-man, such a Nehemiah is a means to keep off wrath from the City and Place of his abode. When Men punish, God spareth; but when men spare then God ariseth to execute judgement on the wicked. Mistake me not, I plead not for Cruelty, or rigour, but for Iustice; as Magistrates must be Clement and Mercifull (as occasion requireth) distin∣guishing of sinners, observing who offend through weake∣nesse, and who of wilfulnesse; So he must be just and sharp against incorrigible and incureable Offenders, least they infect others. Be Men of publicke Spirits, cast off all self-seeking and private-spiritednesse; I could wish that every Magistrate had Master Iacombs Sermon, on Acts 13.36. it is an excellent piece, and will teach you how to serve God in your Generations.
2. You that are Under-Officers must (in your spheere) be also active for God, little Birds we see sometimes set the greater on singing: your zeale may quicken others. Doe, but doe not over-doe your duties, least you bring an Odium upon Religion by your Pharisaical rigour and auste∣rity, but doe all in a Spirit of Wisedome, Love and Meek∣nesse, else you may sinne in over-doing, as well as in Under-doing.
3. You whom the Lord hath set as Spiritual Watchmen in the City, it concerneth you to promote his work with one shoulder and one consent. Unanimity is the glory of Societies, and maketh them Si eritis inseparabiles, e∣ritis insuperabiles. invincible. The Primitive Christians were of one heart and one soul, they had a holy conspiracy in the wayes of God,Erat fidelium cor unum, & anima una, non Physicè, sed Moralitèr, q. d. Ita animis & sensibus erant concordes, ac si omnes unum idemque habis∣sent cor. à Lapide, in locum, Ubi plura. Acts 4.32. When the shepherds are divided, the flock must needs be scattered, and Gods work hindred: If there be four Oxen in a Team, and these four draw foure several wayes, the worke must needs go backward;See Motives to Unitie, Bur∣roughs Irenicum, Chapter 31. &c. Gournall on Ephes. 6.15. c. 13. p. 422. but when all draw joint¦ly together, how comely, pleasant and easie is the work? The Application is easie. Take heed of that Rock of offence, and Roote of division,Fenner on Rev. 3.1. p. 10. to 21. folio. The gathering of Churches out of Churches, which is indeed the destruction of Churches. 'Tis an uncharitable, and an unscriptural Practice,V. Mr. Blake on the Co∣venant, Chap. 31. p. 240. There is no Pre∣cept nor President for it in all the Book of God.V. The Answer of the As∣sembly to the dissenting Bre∣thren. In fine, p. 60.61. The Dissenting Brethren were not able to produce one example out of Gods Word for the gathering of Churches out of Churches, though they were pressed to it by the Reve∣rend Assembly of Divines.
We read in Scripture of Gathering Churches from a∣mongst Heathens, but never of gathering Churches out of constituted Churches. Were England a land of Heathens, and no Church planted amongst us, it might be proper e∣nough to gather Churches here, but to put a planted, con∣stituted, setled Church into the condition of Heathens,See Master Gage his Defence of Parish Churches. See Master Cawdry, In∣dependen∣cy a great Schism, sa∣vours strongly of Pride and Censoriousness. Parochial As∣semblies (if the Parishes were but regulated and made more uniform and compact) are the best both for Pastor and People; when this gathering of Churches breedeth as ma∣ny Divisions in Families, almost as there are persons; e▪ g. The husband is a Presbyterian, and goeth to his Church, the

Wife an Independent, and goeth to her meetings; the Sonne an Anabaptist, and goeth to his meetings, the Daughter a Quaker, and she hath her meetings, &c. What Rents this kind of gathering maketh, let the Reader judge: Besides the great inconvenience of having Church-members at such a distance; one at London, another at Dover, a third at West-Chester, a fourth at Yorke. I know some that dwell nigh an hundred miles off him whom they call their Pastor,To cull out ten or twenty and make them the Church, excluding two hundred or two thousand (in some pla∣ces) as dogs and swine, doth exceedingly puffe up the one (so that Ministers can scarce tell how to please them, but in a short time they picke quarrels and fall all to pieces) and discourageth the other, and so prejudiceth them a∣gainst their Ministery that it loseth the operation it should have upon their hearts. such sheep are like to be well fed and looked to that are at such a distance from the Shepherd. More∣over, it is a kinde of Sacriledge to rob godly Ministeres of the first-born of their Pray∣ers and pains, of the creame of their flockes, and the Crowne of their Ministery. If they will gather Churches out of the world (as they call it) let them first plow the world, and sow it, and then let them reap with Gods blessing, else he is but a hard man that reaps where he hath not sowen. There is supersti∣tion on the right hand as well as on the left, and the De∣vil cares not on which hand we miscarry so he can but get us out of the right way.
Be not over-righteous in making the Gate of the Church narrower then God hath made it, shut not out those whom God admitteth. Better be too Charitable, then too censo∣rious. Pitty the many hundreds of poore, ignorant, profane, uncatechized souls that are in your City, the great (I had almost said the greatest) part of a Ministers worke lieth out of the Pulpit.
I have experimentally found more good by week-dayes Catechising, then by many yeares Preaching, condescend to the Capacities of the weakest, by workes of mercy, and by all good means labour to win them to Christ: Be not high nor supercilious, be not harsh and censorious in cast∣ing off the greatest part of your flocke as dogs and swine; if they be ignorant, you should instruct them; if scanda∣lous,

by all wise means you should labour to reclaim them. This rigorous casting off them and their Infants doth but harden them, and make them out of love with Religion; when a tender and compassionate carriage towards them, might have brought them into better order.
4. You that are Tradesmen be just in all your dealings▪ Plain honesty is the best Policie, though it gain but little, yet it keepeth the credit and the custome, when he that over∣reacheth and cozens me once, shall never cozen me a second time.
Much of religion is seen in our dealings with men (Psalm 15.2, 3, 4) Let a man professe like an Angel, yet if he be faulty here, all his religion is vain. Piety towards God, and Righteousnesse towards man are the best Walls and Bul∣warks of a City.
It is true, your walls are razed, but it is not the want of walls; but the See 20. considera∣tions to quicken you in 2 Tim. 3.15. wickednesse of the Citizens that ruines a City. If Piety be within, God himselfe will be a wall of fire round about you to de∣fend you,Civitatis eversio, morum non murorum casus. Aug. and offend your Enemies, and your glory in the middest of you▪ Zacharie 2.5. Isay,Boni cives civitatis maenia. Spartanis multis seculis Civium virtus Vrbis murus fuit. Pezel. Mellif. Histor. P. 1. p. 234. edit ult. 26.1. Good Citizens are the best fortifications. God hath blest you with the Nether-springs and given you a South-land, you have a rich and fruitful Soile, a River that bringeth you Treasure from farre, doe you as Achsah the Daughter of Caleb did, begg for a better blessing, even the Upper-springs also, for Grace and Glory, which will refresh you to Eternity, Ioshua 15.19.
The Riches of your City lieth much in cloathing, Oh get your Soules cloathed with the robes of Christ his Righte∣ousnesse for your justification, and the White Robes of In∣nocency, Integrity and Sanctification; these are the one∣ly true riches of a Christian, which can never be taken from him.
5. You that are young lay your foundations low if ever you would build high; with See 20. considera∣tions to quicken you in 2 Tim. 3.15. Timothy, give up your selves

to God betimes, fly the lusts of youth, mortifie the flesh with its affection and lusts, Redeem the seasons of Grace, know the day of your Visitation and improve it, remember your Creator betimes, the sooner the better, since the seasoning of our youth hath a great influence upon the remaining part of our dayes God hath blest you with many able & laborious Ministers, who are ready on all occasions, in season and out of season to dispense the Mysteries of salvation to you, (so that you cannot sin at so cheap a rate as formerly) happy are you, if you have hearts to improve the mercy, storing up in these dayes of Spiritual plenty, Truths against times of Errour, Light against times of darkness, and comforts a∣gainst times of discomfort. If Philip King of Macedon re∣joyced that his son Alexander was born in that time when Aristotle lived, that so he might be instructed by him▪ how should we then rejoyce who are born in such a time when the Gospel is so fully and freely publisht to the world, which is able to make us wise unto salvation.
Lastly, you that are Governours of Families, set up Religi∣on in the Power of it there, let them be Bethels, Houses of God; and not Beth-avens houses of Vanity & iniquity, lest God make them Beth-anys houses of sorrow and affliction. Lay injunctions on your Children and Servants, that they keep the way of the Lord, So did Abra∣ham (Genesis 18.19.) as you would partake with him in blessednesse,To incourage you to the Dutie; See an excellent little Tract of Master Cawdry, cal∣led Family-Reformation, and of Mr. Philip Goodwins Trea∣tise on the same subject. so follow him in Obedience. Let not the greatnesse of your Families make you neglect the Dutie, Abraham had a great Family, above three hundred that could bear Arms, yet he Catechized them, and instructed them in the wayes of God, Genesis 13.14. The houses of the Primtive Christians were as so many little Churches, Romans 16.5. 1 Corinthian, 16.19. Clos. 4.15. Phi∣lem. 2. Solomon (in all probability) had thousands in his Court, for he had seven hundred Wives which were Prin∣cesses and their retinue must needs be great, he had fourtie thousand stalls of Horses, and these required many servants, besides the dayly provision for his house, sheweth the great∣ness

of his houshold, 1 Kings 4.22, 23. yet it was so well or∣dered, that the Queen of Sheba was amazed to see it, 1 Kings 10 5, 8, 9. yea his servants were so seasoned with Re∣ligion, that about five hundred yeares after their Children are recorded by the Spirit of God to be the most eminent of their times for Religion, Ezra 2.58. Nehemiah 7 60. How will this shame us that have so few to looke to, and yet neglect them!
I am now come to my last Stage, I have no better Lega∣cy to bequeath to you, Gold I have none, and silver I have but little, but such as I have I give unto you. Now the good Lord blesse you and keep you, he purge out of your City every thing that offendeth, that the name of your City from henceforth may be, Iehovah-Shammah (Ezekiel ult lt.) The Lord (in his special love and presence) is there. This is and shall be the Prayer of

Kings-Norton in Worcester-shire,
Jan. 1. 1657./58.
