




My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE Dedication of this Treatise
was intended for the Parliament;
but that being Dissolved, it most
properly falls to You, who are
under God the Pillars of the State.
Such is the corruption of the Times we live in,
that we are put to dispute every inch of Ground
with the Enemies of Truth: Magistracy, Mini∣stry,
Sabbaths, Sacraments, Trinity, Scriptures, &c.

all things are now questioned, nothing be∣lieved
or practised by many. Formerly I have
vindicated Baptism, Learning, and the Mini∣stery;
now I am come to a Vindication of the
Magistracy.Satan planteth his strongeft Batteries against the Royal Forts of Ma∣gistracy and Ministery; who ever are spared, Da∣vid and Peter shall be sifted, knowing that he gains a double advantage by their miscarriage, viz. Example and scandal: by which two wings it will soar higher, and flie much further. Swinnock. Many are the affronts and dis∣couragements
which faithfull Magistrates meet
with from an ungratefull world, as well as Mi∣nisters:
you are now cryed down (by those Level∣ing
Libertines, the fifth Monarch-men) as
Antichristian and Beasts (by those brutish men,
Jude 10) as well as we. These are their
V. Standard of the Fifth Monarch-men p. 20. words: The Beast and false Prophet are the
wicked bloody, Antichristian Magistracy,
Ministry and Lawyers. We are all here shipt
together in the same bottom, and must sink or
swim together, when these Monsters of Munster
Reign. One while we are troubled with Church-Levellers,
and anon with State-Levellers; but
God hath, and will levell all such as go about to
level his Ordinances, and to destroy that Order,
which he hath, set up in the World, as you may
see in the Treatise, it self.
The sons of Belial may as soon pull the Stars
out of the Firmament, as totally root up Magis∣tracy
and Ministery. They are the two great
standing Ordinances of god, which must stand
so long as the world stands (Matth. 28 ult. 1 Cor.
15. 24.Nec Hesperum nec Lu∣ciferum formosiorem esse  dixit Aristoteles, Non est major thesaurus, non elcemosyna opulentior, non bonum excellentius, non res hominibus utilior (post ipsum verbi Ministerium) quàm. Mgistratus suum facientes officium▪ Luther▪
They are the Pillars of Church and State,
they are like the two Pillars in the Porch of Solomons
Temple, called Jachin and Boaz, i. e.
straitnes and strength (1 Kin. 7. 21) These are
two special properties of a good Pillar, it must
be strait and strong; and when Superiors are

such, then are they supporters indeed Psal. 75. 3.
Gal. 2. 9) The Hebrews have a saying, that the
world is upheld by three things, viz. by Iu∣stice,
Religion and Gratitude; and when
these three fail, world the (say they) decays.
But a better then they hath told us,Ncessariae res sunt in rep. bene munitae arces, muri, turres & arma; at nihil sunt haec praesidia prae uno pio Principe, publicae pacis studioso, Luther. that when
the Judge and the Prophet are taken away, then
comes Confusion and Ruine, Isa. 3, 2, 5. When
Sampson would destroy the Philistims, he took
hold on the two Pillars, and brought the house up∣on
their heads,
Judg 16. 25, 26, 27. Take away
these two Pillars of Magistracy and Ministery,
and you destroy both Church and State.
The Devil bears an inveterate hatred against these;Pius & magnanimus Ma∣gistratus est verè Gygas, qui cotibus improborum se audet opponere; ic enim non Hectorem, non Achillem, sed ipsum proster∣nit Satanam. Luther in Psalm 82.
they are the two Butts that he specially
shoots at; because by them God doth more especi∣ally
batter his Kingdom: Where Moses and
Aaron, the Word and the Sword go hand in
hand together, there Satans Kingdom falls like
lightning from heaven, suddenly, universally,
and irresistibly. I have experimentally found a
greater Visible Reformation in one year (when we
had anCol. Greavis. active, prudent, pious Iustice in the
Parish) then in twenty before, notwithstanding all
my preaching and assisting of the Officers.
There should therefore be a sweet Harmony
and mutual assistance between Magistrates and
Ministers, since the one helps to uphold the other,
and they are ordained by Gd for the mutual ayd
of each other. The Minister wants the ayd of
the Magistrate in Temporals; and the Magi∣strate
wants the Ministers ayd in Spiritual and
eternal blessings. The Minister hath need of the

Magistrates sword to defend him against unrea∣sonable
men; and the Magistrate hath need of
the Ministers ayd to maintain his authority in the
consciences of men, (Titus 3. 1.) This made a
Learned Magistrate to say, Were it but for our
felves (viz. for the upholding of Magistracy)
we had need to uphold the Ministery. Tis State-Policy
and Church-Policy so to do; for without
Ministers men may live commodiously, but not
Piously; and without Magistrates men may live
Piously, but not peaceably and commodiously;
like stones in an Arch these two help to uphold
each other. Hence good Jehoshaphat joyned Prin∣ces
and Levites together, the better to promote
and countenance Religion in the Land, (2 Chron.
17. 8.) Tis a great mercy to Magistrates when
they have good Ministers to assist and instruct
them, it makes them prosper as King Uzziah
did when he had a good Zachariah, who had un∣derstanding
in the Visions of God, to counsel him,
(2 Chron. 26. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8. Hence tis that David
had his Seers, Asa his Azariah, Jehoshaphat
his Jehu, Hezekiah his Esay, Josiah his Hul∣dah,
and Zerobabel his Joshua. These are (or
at leastwise ought to be) the Magistrates best
Friends, by their praying preaching and ex∣ample
they help to keep off sin and judgement
from a Land: Hence tis that the Prophet Nathan
is called the Friend of David (1 Kings 4. 5.)
and Jehoshaphat calls the Levites his Sons,
2 Chron. 29. 11. and King Joash calls Elisha
His Father, as King Joram had done before him
(2 Kings 6. 22. & 13. 14.) Such reverence did

the great ones of the World of Old she to Gods
Embassadors. In the late troubles we see hiw
those places that had faithfull Ministers to in∣struct
them, were ready to venture their lives and
estates for the publick good; when the ignorant
Welch and Irish, and those dark corners of the
earth were habitations of cruelty. An untaught
people, are always an untoward people. Let
there be no dissention then between us, for we are
Brethren. Si collidimur, frangimur: if we
dash one against another, we destroy one another.
Let there be no interfering or incroaching on each
others Offices; but let each keep within the bounds
of that sphere and station, wherein his God hath
set him. Magistracy and Ministery are  di∣stinct
Callings,Magistratus est ordinatio Dei Creatoris, & ad omne genus hominum spe∣ctat; sed Ministerium Ec∣clesiasticum est donum & ordinatio Christi. Media∣toris, ideoque non proriè & jure ordinario spectat nisi ad illos qui de Ecclesia Christi, Ames. Medul. l. 2. c. 17. § 48. as I have shewed in the Treatise it self.
And since the discouragements are many which
Magistrates meet withall in the faithfull dis∣charge
of their duty: I have therefore set be∣fore
you the Dignity of your Calling, and shewed
how sensible God is of my indignities that are
done unto you. Yet lest any should be pufft up with
his Honours, the Holy Ghost presently adds the
Morrality of Magistrates, and tells them, though
they be earthly Gods, yet they must die like men;
and though they have been Iudges of the World;
yet at last they must be judged themselves: and
lest any should pretend ignorance of their duty,
in this Psalm, which I may fitly call, The Ma∣gistrates
Directory, is set forth, 1. Nagative∣ly,
what Magistrates must not do. 2. Affirma∣tively,
what they ought to do; with many Reasons

dispersed thorow the Psalm to quicken them to
their duty. So that I do not know a more live∣ly
Psalm for this purpose (all things considered)
in the whole Book of Psalms; so sharp and search∣ing
it is, that the bare singing of it at West∣minster,
the Sabbath before the Iudges were to
Vote concerning Ship-money, brought the man
into question that caused it to be sung: and yet
the Psalm was composed (as the Learned conceive)
that it might be sung either at the Creation of new
Magistrates, or else before the old Ones,
before they went to the Judgement Seat.
I have the rather been induced to this work,
because I have observed that such as Rulers are,Quales in rep. Principes, tales reliquos solere esse cives, dixit Cicero.
such usually are the people: if they be erroneous,
the people will quickly follow them, Isa. 3. 12.
O my people,Malorum principium sunt mali Principes, Emman. Thesaurus. they which lead thee, cause
thee to erre. One sinner (especially in authority)
destroys much good, Ecceles. 9. 18.Though vertue be more amiable, yet vice is more imitable, especially in a Prince. One Reho∣boam,
Ahab, Jeroboam falling from God,
and setting up Idolatry, will quickly draw all Is∣rael
with them, 1 Kings 12. 28, 30. 2 Chron.
12. 1. The wicked walk on every side in great
numbers and swarms, when the vilest men are ex∣alted,
Psal. 12. 9.Mgnorum ominum me∣diocria non sunt peccata. Luther. The more potent the sinner, the
more mischief he doth; they have greater power
and more able Instruments at hand to promote
their projects and wicked designs. The great red
Dragon that hath seven heads, and ten horns, and
seven Crowns, i. e. that hath great Potentates to
act for him, draweth the third part of the Stars
down, and casteth them to the earth (Rev. 12. 4.)
i. e. Teachers, and such as by Profession did shine

like Stars, yet by the Tyrannical persecution of
those great Ones were drawn to Idolatry. Great
mens lives are poor mens Laws; they are the Look∣ing
glasses by which inferiors of times dress them∣selves.
All their Actions are Examples, and their
Examples have a kind of compulsive power:
Hence Peter is said to compell them whom by
his Example he drew to Iudaism, Gal. 2. 24.
What we see, sinks deeper into us then what we
hear.Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures, Quam que sunt oculis commissa. Horat. On the contrary, when great men are
good men, they do much good; if Asa and He∣zekiah
be forward in reforming, so are the people,
 Chron. 15. 9, 10, 11, 12. & 31. 1. When cer∣tain
Embassadors praised the Lacedemonian Soul∣diers
for their good Order, who before were mu∣tinous,
one of them ingenuously answered, Nos
iidem sumus ut nuper, sed alius nunc nobis est
Dux. We are the same men still, but now
we have another General. This is the very end
why God advanceth any to honour, that so they
might honour him, Hest. 4. 14.
Twas Vespatians Honour that his greatnessNec quicqam in te muta∣vit ortunae ampltudo, nisi ut prodesse tatundem pos∣ses & velles. Plin. Epis. ad Vespat.
became more advantagious to him in the promo∣ting
of goodness. To encourage you, know, that
if you build Gods House, he will build your hou∣ses (Exod. 1. 20, 21.) if you advance his name,
he'l advance your names; and if you honour him,
you shall be honoured by him. We see in all Ages
how Reforming Princes have prospered as Moses,
Joshua, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah▪ Asa, 2 Chron.
14 2, to 8.See Mr. Woodwards Chro∣nicle of the Good Kings of Iudah. Princeps religi∣onem roborando, ab ea ro∣boratur. Nazianz. VVhat made Q. Elzabeth flourish? Why, she was happy in her Counsellors (by whom
she was for the most part ruled) and so grew ami∣able

to her Friends, and terrible to her Foes.
Wisdom is better then strength, or weapons
of War, Eccels. 9. 18. Romani cedendo vin∣cunt.
The welfare of a State is preserved, not
so much by a multitude of Warriours,Twas a foul blot upon Chilperick a King of France, that he was Titu∣laris non Tutelaris Rex; de∣uit non praefuit Reip. as of Wie
and Pious Counsellors. Many Souldiers think it
needless to Guard thse who have the long-sword
to Guard themselves; but let such know, that he is
but sorrily Guarded who hath himself only, and
a few fellow-Creatures for his Guardians.Optimm munimentum est mnimento care. If
God be against you, what good can your long
Sword do you? Ezek. 3. 3. 26. Piety and Integrity
are the bst Guardians.
2. Encourage a Learned, Pious and La∣borious
Ministry. To this end improve your
Interest for the buying in of Impropriations, that
so every Congregation may have an able Pastor;
for we see by daily experience that scandalous
means breeds scandalous Ministers. Tythes are
no burden to any but such as esteem the faithful
dispensing of the Gospel a burden; but for men
to Plow and Sow for such as are truly Impropri∣ators,
is a great grievance thorow the Land. How
many steal the Goose and sick down a fea∣ther?
swallow an hundred pound per annum?
and allow the Minister four pound per annum,
the blood of souls cryes against such men: and
if the blood of Abels body cryed so loud against
Cain, how loud will the blood of so many souls
cry against these Sacrilegious Cainites? The
abolishing also of that Clause in 31. Henry 8. 13.
which exempts many great Livings from pay∣ing
of Tythes, because they paid none in the

times of Abbots and Friars, were a very
Noble Work, and well beseeming a Parlia∣ment;
for by this means a great part of ma∣ny
Parishes pay nothing towards the mainte∣nance
of the Gospel, and the burden lyes upon
a few Tenants and inferior persons, who some∣times
pay fifty shillings, whilest the Lord of
the Mannor pays not five pence. How many
Patrons of Churehes are Latrons, robbing
their Ministers whom they are bound to de∣fend?
3. If ever the Lord shall call you to Par∣liament
again, labour to find out some expe∣dient
for an Accommodation and the recon∣ciling
of Gods people amongst themselves.See Motives and Directi∣ons for an Accommodati∣on in D. Boltons Arraign∣ment of Error, p. 340. ad finem, libr. U∣nity
and Unanimity in Gods Worship (which
some look upon as a misery) is indeed a great
mercy, and is enjoyned by the Apostle as a spe∣cial
duty, 2. Cor. 13. 11. Be of one mind, q. d.
Though there have been divisions and dissenti∣ons
amongst you, yet now be Unanimous, and
live in Peace together. Tis of greater conse∣quence
then many imagine.See the danger of Divisi∣ons, in Mr Clarks Tract against Toleration. p. 35▪ & 40. &c. Division in the
Church breeds dissention in the State, and a
State divided cannot long stand. The A∣postle
would never so earnestly have besoght,
and so strongly adjured Gods people to Unani∣mity,
had it not been a special duty, Rom.
15. 5. 1. Cor. 2. 20. Philip. 2. 1, 2. The Au∣tors
and Fautors of those sad Divisions and
sub-divisions which abound amongst us, have
much to answer for before the Lord. Tis ea∣sily
seen at what dor they come in upon us.

The best means that I know to suppress exorbi∣tances
in the State, is Parliaments; and to sup∣press
disorders in the Church, is Synods. That
Synods are Gods Ordinance, and have been blest
with success from God, is confest by all sober men
on all hands; and why anV Cottons Keys, chap. 5 p. 25. and Burroughs Ir∣nicum, ch. 7. p. 43, 44. Bol∣tons Arraignment of er. for p. 266. &c. Ordinance of Christ
should lie so long unpractised I know not? How
long shall the Church of God lie as a Field
without a Fence, and a Vineyard without a
Hedge, so that every wilde Beast breaks in
upon it? For want of Discipline, what cor∣ruption
in manners, and Errors in Doctrine
like a Flood have broken in upon us, and
there is none to restrain them! for want of
it young Ministers begin to degenerate both in
their Life and Doctrine, since they finde the
reins to lie so loose upon their own necks.
The Presbyterian Government is that Go∣vernment
which by Covenant we are bound to
promote: it being that Government which all
the Reformed Churches of Christ do practice;
and the onely Platform of Government
which carries a Ius Divinum in the fore∣head
of it.Se my Comment. on 2 Tim. 3. 8▪ p. 174, 175. &c. Let those that can, produce a
better Platform; that model of our late dis∣senting
Anonymus (I shall not say Anoma∣lous)
Brethren hath made the Breach wider
then ever; yea,V. Declaration of the Faith, and Order of the Congregational Chur∣ches, 1658. some that wavered in that
point, are now convinced of the weakness
and insufficiency of their grounds for that
way of Independency. We have some Govern∣ment
in the State; yet Church-Government and
Reformation ought to be preferred before that of

the State, is▪ proved to my hand by a Learned
Pen.Mr. Anthony Burgess his Fast Serm. on Iudg 6. 27. Preacht 1645. The Politicians of the World abuse Rulers
when they go about to prepossess them with pre∣judice
against the Kingdom and Discipline of
Christ, as if twere distructive to the Civil Go∣vernment;
whereas if they would but look abroad
into the world they should find that the Rulers
of the world have not more free, faithfull, loy∣al
Subjects then those that are truly Religious, and
willing to submit their necks to Christs sweet and
easie yoke.
4. Restrain that Spirit of Error and Delusi∣on,
which like Wild-fire hath spread over all
the land.That men should be tole∣rated to worship the De∣vil (as tis easie to prove the Quakers do, if we consider the men, the matter, and the manner of their speaking) is ve∣ry sad. Nothing will please some men, but a
boundless Toleration of all sorts and Sects; no
Magistrate nor Minister must controul them, all
Government to such ungoverned ones is Tyrannie
and persecution. How well this Toleration agrees
with our National Covenant, wherein we vowed
the extirpation of Heresies, and whatsoever is
contrary to sound Doctrine, let the world judge.
Twas the great sin of Julian the Apostate, that
he granted Liberty to Pagans and Hereticks, that
by letting such weeds grow, he might the better
destroy Gods Harvest. Tis charged as a sin upon
the Church of Thyatira,Against Toleration, see an elaborate Treatise of Mr. Clerk, called, Apples of Gold. that she tolerated Jeza∣bel
to seduce Christs people, Rev. 2. 14, 20.
5. It were to be wished that some effectual
course were taken for the enjoyning of all Gover∣nors
under a penalty to send in their children and
servants, both publickly and privately to be Ca∣echized.
The gross Ignorance which still abounds
in the body of our people is lamentable. Religion

makes the best children, the best servants, and the
best Subjects▪ as we see in Abrahams Catechi∣zed
Family, how promptly doth every one there
perform his duty? Tis just with God to suffer
Inferiors to rebel against their Superiors, when
they suffer them to Rebel against God.
6. It were to be wisht that some course might
be taken for the better Regulating of Parishes;
tis sad to see how unequally they are divided. In
many places one Parish comes to another Parish
Church-walls, and yet these people belong to ano∣ther
charge, it may be three or four miles off.
Parochial Assemblies (if they were made more U∣niform
and compact) are best both for Pastor
and people.V. Mr. Firmin against Schism, chap. 2. p. 39. &c.
7. Free-Schools are very much wanting in
many parts of the Nation. Children are the Se∣minary
of the Church; and if the seed be naught▪
the crop cannot be good.
Quest. But where is the means to maintain
those Schools?
Answ. Since all is devoured, I know but one
way that is left, and that is by the Improvement
of Commons and Wast-lands; they might (if
wisely managed by Commissioners from Parlia∣ment;
for the Cormudgeans of the world will
never consent to part with a Turff for Christ, if
they can help it) be improved to ten times the
value that now they are at, to the benefit of the
Parishioners, and the advancement of many pious
Uses.
8. It were to be wisht that all Market Tons that are very populous, and have men fit for Go∣vernment

in them, were freely made Corporati∣ons;
and that Inferior Market Towns had a Iu∣stice
of Peace, either in them, or planted very
near them, that the people might not run seven
miles to have a Swearer, Drunkard, or Sabbath-Profaner
punisht. This would prevent abundance
of sin which is committed in these places, at Mar∣kets
and Fairs especially, for want of Iustices.
The Lord, the Righteous Judge of all, di∣rect
you by his Spirit, preserve you from
sin and error, he fasten you as a nail in a
sure place, crown your endeavours with
success for the setling of Truth and
Peace upon firm foundations in this di∣stracted,
distressed Church and State; he
make all Mountains a  before you,
that you may be the Repaires of our
Breaches, and the raisers of the Founda∣tions
for many Generations, that the
children unborn (in their Generations)
may Rise up, and call you blessed. This is,
and shall be the Prayer of
 Kingsnorton
Septemb. 10.
1659.

