



FƲnerals may well be stiled (with Sacraments) Vi∣sible Sermons, because they teach by the Eye, and outward Senses. The Dead speak aloud to the Living, and as it were in a Glass, represent to them what their condition in the circulation of a little time will be. Shortly, we shall be in the place of Silence with them. When we see others fall before us, how easily and naturally is it infer'd, that our standing cannot be long after them. Yet how apt are we to flatter our selves with the spinning out of our Thred of Life to a great length! A man would wonder, that in the Wilderness, where so many Thousands died, Moses should then pray, Lord, so teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom, Psal. 90.12. If they who had so many dying Objects continually be∣fore them, needed to be stirred up to pray in this man∣ner, surely much more have we to whom such spectacles (though many) are more infrequent. To Correct this

folly and madness which possesseth the hearts of men while they live, Eccles. 9.3. Who turn away their Eyes from their Sepulchre, and divert them with more pleasing prospects, I have ventured to comply with your Requests in Publishing this Sermon. I am equal∣ly surprised, That you should desire, and I permit so thin a Discourse to appear abroad. I expect to be Cen∣sured for distributing a Trifle amongst so many of you. I take you all joyntly in the Dedication, because on this occasion to have addressed to one, might have been interpreted a disregard to the rest; Besides, it being Preached by your Order, and by the same influ∣ence being now made Publick, I engage you to be ac∣countable with me for all the rude strokes in it. I know your design was to keep up his Memory; but such an hasty Monument Erected to it, cannot long preserve it; I had neither Art nor time to build one. The Errand this Discourse comes on, is not to desire you to remem∣ber your Father; It would be a rudeness to request that he might live in your thoughts; I am sensible, you will do that without my being your Remembrancer; but I beg, That nothing which was Exemplary in him, be Buried with him, and sealed up in his Grave; That you would improve what was delivered at his Funeral to the best Spiritual advantages, that you may live as strangers in this World, and persons belonging to a better; That it may prove effectual to the furtherance and joy of your Faith, shall be a considerable part of the hearty Prayers of

