


My dearly beloved in the Lord,
MY hearts desire and Prayer for
you is, that you might be sa∣ved:
and since none can at∣tain
to Happiness, but such as
walk in the way of Holiness;Isa. 35. 8. Heb. 12. 14.
my desire is, that you may be
kept pure and holy, not onely from those gross
blots which abound in this degenerate genera∣tion,
but also from the spots of the times, such
as Separation, Independency, &c. 'Tis your
glory and my comfort, that when other people
by their Pride and Censoriousness, by their
Sects and Schisms are a dayly vexation and
heart-breaking to their Ministers, yet you have
been unanimous, though you be a great body,

and many of you a knowing people, having
enjoyed the means in one part of the Parish
for almost fifty years together, and that by a
succession of very eminent and able Divines,
conformable non-conformists, conformable to
the Canon of the Scripture (Gal. 6. 16. )
though not to the Bishops Canons:
Where the Lord raise p that valiant and
Religious Knight Sir Richard Greavis, who
by his wisdom and courage sheltred these Re∣verend
Ministers from those Episcopal storms
which otherwise had fallen upon them. I have
found you also a very tractable people; few
families but have submitted to examination
before the Sacrament, and have freely sent in
some hundreds of your children and servants
to that end. You have begun well; perse∣vere,
that no man get your Crown from you.
I have now served you above three Prentiships;
and as Iacob said of himself, Few and evil had
his days been, so mine have been few, but full
of trials, internal and external. So soon as I
began to exercise, my refusing to read the Book
of Sports on the Sabbath endangered me.
That lustre of years which I spent at Mosely, I
was threatned by the Episcopal party for Non∣conformty;
since I came to you, I have suf∣fered

deeply by the Cavaliering party; often
times plundred, five times their prisoner; oft
cursed, accused, threatned, &c. Yet the Lord
delivered me out of all, and hath made my
latter end better then my beginning. 'Tis now
my Motto, Per vincula cresco. We never lose
by serving or suffering for Christ. And now
at last I have been set upon by the Sectaries,
who sometimes have spoken to me in the mid∣dle
of Sermon, sometimes after, sometimes
challenge me to dispute, &c. But my comfort
is, that he that hath delivered me from the paw
of the Lion, will also deliver me from every
evil work, of evil and ungodly men.
Now I beseech you by all the mercies of
God,Feb. 23. There were three Ser∣mons in a house in the Parish, by a Long Cutler, a Nalor, and a Milner. by all the pains and service amongst you,
and sufferings for you; that you all minde the
same things; let there be no divisions, no Sects
nor Schisms found amongst you; but labour
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
Peace.An ignorant and unchaechised person is a fit prey for the de∣vil. When mn are children in knowledge, then they are tosse too and fro wih every winde of Doctrine. Pauls farewel to his Corinthians, shall be
mine to you, 2 Cor. 13. 11. Finally, brethren, fare∣wel:
e perfect, be of good comfort, be of one minde,
live in Peace; and the God of love and Peace
shall be with you.
And since errours are so rife amongst us,Epnes. 4. 14. Levit. 13. 44. and
some begin to creep in amongst you, to draw

you from the publike Ordinances; I shall give
you a little preventing Physick.
1 Get your judgements rightly informed:
the Understanding is the eye and Guide of the
soul; if that be corrupt, and mislead you, you
must needs fall into the ditch: if a disease get
the brain, 'tis hardly cured; hence the learned
observe, that corruption in judgement is worse
then corruption in manners, especially when
the mind has been enlightned with the know∣ledge
of the truth. Leprosie in the head, was
of all other Leprosies the most dangerous and
destructive, and he was to be pronounced ut∣terly
unclean: he was unclean if he had the
Leprosie in his hands or feet; but if 'twere in
his head, then he was utterly unclean.
2 Be Real Christians; think it not sufficient
that you are Christians in Name, and have a
form of godliness, but be Christians indeed, and
walk in the power of godliness; be Nathanaels,
Israelites indeed; then, and never till then, you
are worth beholding and admiring, Ioh. 1. 47.
Behold,Many become i matters of Reli∣gion meer S cep∣ks, because they would not  Practicks, S. Ward. an Israelite indeed, &c. The reason why so
many fall away, is, they were formalists, never
humbled under the sight and sense of their sins,
never received the truth in love, 2 Thes. 2. 10,
11. but lived in Pride, Hypocrisie, barren under

the means of grace, and therefore God gives
them up to strong delusions, to believe lyes: in
his just judgement he punisheth one sin with
another: when men be ungrateful, unfruitful,
unanswerable to Times and Means, not walk∣ing
worthy of the Gospel, then God gives them
up to Heretical and soul-damning ways and Er∣rours:
if Ahab will not hearken to Micaiah a
true Prophet, he shall be deluded by lying spi∣rits;
if the Gentiles when they know God by
the light of nature, will not glorifie him as God,Rom. 1. 21, 24, &c.
in giving that honour and respect to him which
they could not but apprehend to be due to the
divine Majestie,Anabaptism▪ Socinianism, Arminanism, &c amee scourges to plague formal Proessors, and rotten hypocrites &c. God will give them up to
vile affections; so punishing the breach of the
first Table, by giving them up to the violation
of the second.
3 Get meek and humble spirits; these the
Lord hath promised to teach his way, when spi∣ritual
Pride is punished with a fall: those high∣flown
Heresies which abound amongst us,
whence come they but from Pride?Non est hodiè sciens qi no∣vitates non in∣venit. Hunt not
after novelties, neither be wise above that which
is written.
4 Let your principal care be about practical
fundamental points, such as Faith, Obedience,
a good Conscience, how you may mortifie your

special corruptions, and crucifie the flesh with
its affections and lusts; study how you may live
soberly in the use of the creature, Religiously
towards God, Righteously and justly in all your
dealings with the sons of men; for if you do
these things, you shall never fall: and that you
may do them, is, and shall be the Prayer of him
who is the weakest of all his Brethren, and the
meanest in his fathers house, even
From my study
in Kings-Norton
March 3. 1650.

