




DEAR SIRS,
IT is Customary with some Persons, to front the Reasons of the Publication of their Treatises with this: viz. That they were induced thereto, by the pres∣sing Importunity of their Friends. I verily believe I may have as good a Foun∣dation for the imploying of this Argu∣ment, to excuse my exposing some of my Father's Sermons to publick View, as most of those that have at any time ad∣dressed their Readers with this Plea:

With what Ʋrgency many of you have been prompting me to this Ʋndertaking, I leave you to your selves to be informed. To gratifie your desires, and in Compliance with your earnest Solicitations, I here at length present you with a few Sermons of his, that were some Years since Preach∣ed amongst you, upon the Subject of our Lord's Ascension into Heaven. I con∣fess, I was a long while very backward to the Publication of my Father's Di∣scourses, because I saw the World was al∣ready cramb'd with so many Treatises on all kind of Subjects, that I almost doubt∣ed, whether amongst so great a Croud, there would be any room admitted them for Entertainment. However, I have resolv'd to send these into the World, but what acceptance they may meet withal I cannot presage; only thus much I dare ad∣venture to presume upon, that they will meet with a Cordial welcome from you. But let me leave this Caution with the Rea∣der, that he expect not to meet in these Discourses with a Gaiety of Expression, or a pompous Rhetorick; for the Author

never affected a finery of Language in his Pulpit-Discourses, but always studied plainess, that he might affect and Profit, not Amuse his Auditors. I have often heard him speak with somewhat of concern against those Pulpit-Declaimers, whose Language discovered their Design rather to be Ostentation, then Edification. I question not but he was as able to Trim and Adorn a Discourse, as most of those that would fain have the World applaud them as mighty Orators. But he was sa∣tisfied, however, that might make the People admire, it was not the way to make them wiser or better. Well, a plain Discourse it is that you are here presented with; but yet as it is not gau∣dy, so neither does it appear in so sordid a Dress as to attract Contempt: Had my Dear Father had the Publication of it himself before his Decease, you may be confident it would have had something more of exactness, then now can be supposed to attend it. For its highly improbable, that posthumous and popular Discourses (especially if their Authors ne'er designed

them for the Press) should be chargeable with no Defects; when as some of the least Composures of this kind have their Flaws. If you meet with any thing in the following Sermons liable to Objection, remember these Discourses could not pos∣sibly have the Author's Review to ren∣der them more Correct before their Pub∣lication. And then they struggle under the Disadvantage of having been Copied from a few blotted Notes that were scarce∣ly Legible: yet thus much I dare aver, that altho' the Scribe may have been guil∣ty of some few mistakes, yet not of very great ones.
But as to the Author of these ensuing Sermons, My endeared Father, it may perhaps, be expected by some, that I should give a Character of him suitable to his Worth, and tell the World what were those commendable Qualities in him, that recommended him so much to the esteem of many that knew him: I could, I confess, say many things of him, as a good Christian, a Scholar, a Pastor, and a Parent, which would discover him to

have been a Person above the common Rate; but I should incur the censure of many, should I attempt any thing of that nature. Therefore all I shall do as to that matter, shall only be to remember you of some things concerning him, which fell within the knowledge of most of you. He was, altho' a Person of a crasie Body, yet a very painful and diligent Student, that carefully imployed his time to the best advantage; insomuch, that he was not but with great difficulty, at any time drawn to recreative Diversions. Tho' it may be, his enfeebled Body, and his shattered Spirits called for their frequent Repetition. He was a very faithful and affectionate Pastor, that readily conde∣scended to the meanest, and would Con∣scientiously discharge the Duties of his Function, notwithstanding the Frowns of the greatest: He was as forward to re∣prove the Lives of those of a higher Sta∣tion, as the Follies of those that moved in a lower Sphere: His Prayers were al∣ways fervent and pithy; his Preaching very clear but warm, and he delivered

his matter with such a winning Pathos, that he even commended the Attention of his Auditory; he filled not his Discourses with bitter Invectives against the Persons of those that differed from him in some Con∣troverted Points, but many times spake honourably of them. His design was not to raise mens Passions, but to allay them when exorbitant; not to Exulcerate mens Minds, but to calm and sweeten them. He Preached to instruct the Ignorant, to reclaim the Sinful, to comfort the con∣trite Soul; but not to fill mens Hearts with Rage, or their Mouths with Clamour. He was a Person ir∣recoverably averse to any thing of flat∣tery, or a daubing Language; who always made his Tongue the Interpreter of his Heart. There are a sort of men in the World, with whom there are, as the Poet speakes, . Moschus.
Charming Tongues, but Hearts full of rancour and bitterness, whose Words do not keep Peace with their secret Intenti∣ons. And I am sure the Author had sufficient reason to be exemped from that number; he was a fond lover of Integrity, and was obstinately set against all Temptations to any thing of Injustice; insomuch, that he has sometimes drawn upon himself the displeasure of his Friends, by his stiff ad∣hesion to Truth and Equity. It was al∣ways his temper to value Truth and Ho∣nesty before the Applauses of Men, or the profuse Commendations of mistaken Friends. Amicus Plato, Amicus Aristoteles, sed ma∣gis Amica veritas; He might have justly challenged for his Motto: He was a very Conscientious and Laborious Minister, so well pleased with the Work his Master had called him to do; that his ma∣ny Bodily Infirmities that very much indisposed him towards the last of his Time, could not detain him from en∣gaging in it. How often has it been fitter for him to have been in his Bed then in his Pulpit? His Weaknesses

were so very great, although his bodily Disorders were sometimes violent; yet then was he extreamly willing to spend the little remains of his Strength to in∣struct and profit you. He often adven∣tured into the Pulpit, when his Distempers had exceedingly enfeebled him; so that sometimes he has been seized by a fit of the Hipochondriack Passion in the midst of his Work, to the sudden surprize of the Congregation, (for that was the Disease that attended him by frequent returns, from the Confinement in the South gate-Prison in your City, to the ut∣most Period of his Days). The last time that ever he was in the Pulpit, he labou∣red under a great deal of Weakness, and a visible disorder of Body; insomuch, that his Legs trembled under him, which I ob∣serving a little before he entred the Church, entreated him to forbear Preaching for that Season, and to permit me for once to sup∣ply his room; or that he would allow me to apply my self to the Reverend Mr. Col∣lings for his Assistance, who had often made a very friendly Offer of it, in case my

Father's great weaknesses should at any time disable him for his ministerial Work. But he put me off with this Reply, that he was loath to omit that Season; because he was afraid he should never have on oper∣tunity of Preaching more; which was a sad Presage of what soon befel him: yet he could not be disswaded from doing his Master's Business, altho' he labour'd un∣der such great bodily Infirmities, but he ascended the Pulpit, and entertained the Auditory with an excellent Discourse from the Song of Moses, Deut. 32.1. which Song begins thus; Give ear, oh ye heavens, and I will speak, and hear oh earth, the words of my mouth. He de∣signed several Discourses upon these Words, but his Death prevented him. From the consideration that Moses delivered that divine Song just as he was about to take his final Farewel of this World; he thence observed this precious Truth.
Doctrine 1. That gracious Souls, the nearer Heaven they are, the more Hea∣venly will they be.
On this Truth he had Preached several Sermons; but then farther remarking that this sweet Song delivered by Moses just be∣fore his departure, had a manifest regard to the welfare of the Church of Israel, he thence observed this other precious Truth.
Doct. 2. That good Men die with the Interest of God, and Souls much upon their Hearts. In his last Sermon he most∣ly insisted upon this Doctrine, and conclu∣ded it with this Passage: Oecolampadi∣us when he fell sick at Basil, sent not for the Physician, but the Pastors of the Churches, and notwithstanding his Pain and Weakness, with much Life and Vigour, besought them to conti∣nue constant and firm in the purity of that Doctrine they had professed and Preached; and for other things he wil∣led them to be less careful, assuring them, that the alsufficient God would

provide for them, and not be wanting, When thus he had ended his Discourse, he concluded all with these sad Words (which he spake feelingly, tho with a sweet Voice) I believe this is the last Sermon that ever I shall preach to you, or that ever you will hear from me; Or Words to that purpose which proved a truth, tho a doleful one: For no sooner had he left the Con∣gregation, but he instantly repaired to his House, betook himself to his Bed, and from thence in a few days was carried to his Grave: A vast Multitude of People at∣tended his Funeral; after his Interment the Reverend Mr. George Tross, his wor∣thy Successor preach'd his Funeral Sermon to a very numerous Assembly, from those Words, Zech. 1.5. Your Fathers where are they? and the Prophets do they live for ever? From which Text the Auditory were entertain'd with many suitable and profitable Truths, which I wish may have a lasting Impression upon all that heard them. My Endeared Father, preach'd his last Sermon, March 6. 1688. and exchang∣ed this life for a better, March 14 of the

same Year: Yhus, he delivered, as it were his own Funeral Discourse, then went to his home, and dyed: Thus suddenly was he removed not without your sorrowful Resentment of so great a Loss; may those excellent Truths that he taught you, still have a room in your memories, and a happy Influence upon your Practices, and that will be the best way to secure his Name from Oblivion, and to evidence your own Names to be written in the Lambs Book of Life, Rev. 21.27. But before I can dismiss this Account of my Father, I look upon my self obliged to reply to an invidi∣ous Objection, that formerly many have made a Noise with to lessen his Esteem, and procure his Discredit. Viz.
Obj. Mr. Hallet said they, was a man of very mean Abilities, that had little of a Scholar in him, for he had never the Benefit of an Academical Tuition, he was never graduated in any University, ne∣ver had a regular, methodical Educa∣tion, and therefore wondred People were so fond of one of so little Learning.
To which I answer, 1. I heartily rejoyce that I could never hear any thing objected against his Piety. 2. I do most sincerely wish that the Persons that made a clamour with this Cavil were Possessours of a great deal more Learning than my Father was e∣ver Master of. 3. I may further add, that I have known very many Persons that have had an Education in our Academies, that have no great reason to boast of their acquired Abilities, or to value themselves upon the account of their Clerkship: De∣grees and Colledge commons, I am convinc'd do not inspire Men with Knowledge and Learning; and I have reason to believe that Men may be wise and knowing, altho they were never nursed up in those Semi∣naries, for I have been acquainted with some that have been well skill'd in Arts and Sciences, in the learned Tongues and Languages, and yet had never the Advan∣tage of an Accademial Instruction: Such have profited more by their Diligence, and their own private reading, than many o∣thers by their Colledge Lectures, and their little Debates in the Schooles: I say this,

not that I would be thought to give a disparaging Character of an Academial Tuition, but only to prove that Learning and skill in Sciences are not always confi∣ned to Persons thus educated; and I am sure my Father was a plain instance of it. But 4. I shall offer a farther Reply to this Objection in the Words of the learn∣ed and pious Mr. Baxter, which you may find in the Preface to his Teacher of House∣holds; Speaking there of the learning that is to be met with in the Ʋniversities; he thus expresses himself, If any say there is no great or solid Learning to be got elsewhere, let them think where great Augustine, and most of the great Lights of the Church for Four hundred Years attained their Knowledge; and whether the Scaligers, Salmasius, Grotius, Selden, and such others got not more by secret laborious Reading, than by Academical Tutors and Disputes; and whether such famous Men as John Reinolds, Blondel, &c. even in the Universities, got not their great Learning by searching the same Books which may be read in ano∣ther

place. This I suppose to be abun∣dantly sufficient to blunt the Edge of that Cavil, and to vindicate my Father's E∣steem from that Objection.
But now to return to the following Dis∣courses, I have already told you that their Subject Matter is our Lord's Ascension in∣to Heaven; a Subject very proper to be discours'd upon to a Christian Auditory, or to be propounded to the perusal of Christi∣an Readers; seeing we find it an Article inserted in that ancient and common Creed, which usually, (but yet how truly I can∣not say) passes for an Apostolical Com∣posure: This Article of our Lord's Ascen∣tion, is a Truth upon which a Christian's Hopes are much bottom'd, and Promises a Treasury of Comfort to all the faithful fol∣lowers of Jesus; for that our Redeemer has escaped the confines of the Grave, that he has gloriously triumphed over Death and Hell by his Resurrection and Exalta∣tion, and that he is now in Heaven at the right Hand of his Father, interceding for his faithful People, who are got in this

Vale of Mortality, is matter of transport∣ing Joy to all that are sanctified. This as∣sures them that the great Work of Redem∣ption is compleated, that God is reconci∣led, and that they themselves shall at last be advanced to Heaven, where their glori∣fied Head now resides, managing their Cause for them, as their most prevalent Advo∣cate; but I shall not undertake to dis∣course on these Matters in this Preface; because this will be but to detain you from reading the same things better said in the Treatise it self, only let me observe that the Author in these Discourses most con∣vincingly proves that the Humane Na∣ture of Christ ascended above all aspe∣ctable Heavens, or that Christ as en∣tire Man, as to Soul and Body, was tran∣slated into the blessed Regions obove. And its strange, that any that pretend to credit the inspired Writings should call this into question. I nothing doubt, but that very Body of Christ that was crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem, was the very same Body that was laid in the Sepulchre; and am fully satisfied

that this same Body was raised out of the Grave, and ascended into Heaven, and is now there at the Right Hand of God: I doubt not but the Body of Christ is now glorious, and is beautified with more ex∣cellent Qualities than it was vested with, whilst he was here in his state of Hu∣miliation; but yet this hinders not, but that this Body is still the very same that bled, and expired upon the Cursed Tree, neither do the Sacred Scriptures tell us any thing of another Body that Christ has now in Heaven quite distinct from that which was crucified and laid in the Grave But all this while I do but detain you from reading more weighty and instructive matter.
Therefore to conclude, Sirs, Remember it was the Importunity of many of you that drew these following Sermons into publick View; let me therefore entreat you to give them a careful and diligent perusal, and do not throw them by into a corner a moulding (as too many deal by their Books) as if they were some of the

useless Lumber of your Houses. But read them seriously, and meditate upon the Truths contained in them, with some So∣lemnity of Thought, and then you will fully answer the Design of the Publisher; Who is,
SIRS,

Ex musaeo,
Nov. 26. 92.
