




Reverend and Honourable Sirs;
THis Sermon being Preached in your hearing, and received with the good liking of that numerous audito∣ry then present (as I understand) and as appeared by their more than usual attention while it was deli∣vering; for what was said of our dear Saviour, I may without ostentation say of my poor self, The eyes of all that were in the Synagogue were fastned on him. Luke 4.20. And being importuned by some worthy friends to make it more publick, I have condiscended, hoping it may adde some few mites to the publick trea∣sury, for the Churches good. And I assented chiefly upon these reasons.
First, Because it was so well approved and accepted by such pious, learned, and judicious Worthies, as your Honours, great assertors of piety, equity, and right, by whom, this Circuit hath for some years, been honoured, as well as blessed, in the Administration of Justice.

 Secondly, Because I have some hopes, it may put, at least a stop to that great inundation of Sin and Pro∣phaneness, which is gone forth into the Land, by ani∣mating his Majesties Commissioners in all places, to a diligent discharge of their duties in so good a work.
Thirdly, That it may stand as a lasting evidence of my humble and cordial thankfulnesse to that supreme Moderator of all things, for enabling me, a poor worm, to labour so long in his Vineyard, and to bring forth some fruits both in Youth and Age, and to perform such a task twice, at such a distance of time, the interval of more than ten Olympiads intervening. I cannot think of meeter persons to Devote it to, than your Honours, who so well approved both the manner of delivery, and the matter delivered; which I humbly beseech you to accept in good part, and to shelter it under your Pa∣tronage. It is Printed, almost verbatim, as Preach∣ed, only in the last point some little enlargement is made, which I was forced then to omit, least prolixity should have impeded your most weighty business.
Thus humbly craving pardon for my boldness, com∣mending this poor Work to the blessing of God, for the glory of his Name, and good of his People, I commit you to his safe Protection, who am,
 From my Study in Blechingley. Aug 13. 1666.
