


HAving been prevailed with to Publish this small Treatise, which was conceived might prove of some Use to the Churche of Christ: I have made choice to commend it






unto you, who, defire, may especially share in and injoy the benefit of it. Which, I have done, as a Testimony of that great Respect and Love which I owe and bear unto: you: For though I be an unworthy Ambassador of Christ unto others, yet doubtlesse I am chief∣ly so unto you, being that part of the Lords Vmeyard wherein particularly he hath set me to labour. And the search∣er of of hearts knoweth how much I long after your Spiritual Welsare; the pros∣perity of whose Souls would exceeding∣ly rejoyce me.
When the Lord shall graciously vouch. safe opportunity of putting these things in practice among you, I hope (and not without some ground) that you will be found a ready and willing people to receive and submit unto them, so far as they shall appear to be agreeable un∣to the mind of Christ, and to make for his glory: And in so doing you
will both Facilitate and further the Work, and greatly encourage the Work∣man.
Now that the Father of Lights would fill you with the knowledg of his Will, in all Wisdom and Spiri∣tual Understanding, and enable you to walk worthy of the Lord unto all well∣pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the Know∣ledg of God. That the God of all Grace would stablish, strengthen and settle you in his Truth and Wayes in these-evil dayes, wherein so many un∣sound and unstable souls turn aside from the truth, giving ear to deceivers that with fair words and pretences corrupt the minds of the simple, to the dis∣honour of God, the grief of his Mes∣sengers, the offence of his People, and the hurt and hazard of their own Souls.
Finally, That the very God of peace
would sanctifie you throughout, and pre∣serve your whole Spirit, Soul and Body blamelesse unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the hearty prayer of Your Servant for Jesus sake J.H.
Aug. 28.1657.
