



Most honoured Madam,
I Had fully designed another Discourse, viz. concerning the Nature & Work of Conscience for your Ladiships Pa∣tronage. But understanding of pre∣parations

by an abler judgement, on that subject, I have for some time suspended the publishing of my own conceptions. And there∣fore, though at present I shall not entitle your Ladiship to my own, yet make bold to prefix your name to the labours of another, viz. This following supply to a former Catalogue of Bishops: A work that calls him Authour, whom my mother call'd father, and in which I presume your La∣diship with delight will read the duly merited Commendations of that Reverend Prelate Dr. John Still, whom your Ladiships children call Great Grandfather. This Anthor stiles his acquain∣tance, his Friend, his Instructer,

his Diocesan, whom the Diocesse of Wells once knew their worthy Bishop, and the poore of the Almes-house of Wells still re∣member their bountifull bene∣factor. Now as this Authour in the following relations hath a∣voyded the needlesse multiplying of words, and hath industriously studied a compact brevity: So I shall not widen the entrance to them by rarifying these dedica∣tory lines into any large compasse, either by an importunate craving your Ladiships acceptance, that were to wrong your goodnesse, or else by any ample declaring the reasons that guided my thoughts to the publishing this tract, or entitling your Ladiship to it. Yet

that I may somewhat satisfie the Reader, I shall give a briefe account for the one and other. And thereby let the World know, that an equitable gratitude to the dead Authors memory, and a good will that aimes at the pleasure and profit of the living hath engaged my desires to lend a hel∣ping hand to midwife this dis∣course, which hath layen ready for the birth above 40 yeers, now at last unto the publique view; It being the ingenious off-spring of his braine who was a remote instrument of my being. And in∣deed the discourse it selfe is so full of profit and delight mixt together, as acquainting us with many and choice occurrences of

former men and times, that it would have engaged the greatest stranger to greater labour. And therfore prevents a needless com∣mendation from my related Pen, since it will abundantly commend it selfe to the ingenious Reader. To whom it likewise will suffi∣ciently be justified even in those passages that seem most likely to offend: Since such that are inge∣nious are supposed duly to con∣sider,
The nature of the Discourse: A History, the greatest com∣mendation of which is impar∣tiall truth.
The quality of the Author: A Courtier, that writes to a

Prince, the sonne of that King who held that Prophetick Axiom as a sure truth, and we see it fulfilled, No Bishop, No King.
The time when, and the sub∣ject of whom this Tract is.
So that if any should take, what is not intended, offence at the honour he gives those, that have been since lesse honoured, or at the zeal he shews against some whom he supposed their adver∣saries: The Publisher desires such to consider, that in those daies when this discourse was penned, those principles which now ap peare publiquely as the Sun, and have burnt as a flame, were then

but a small Candle newly lighted, and that carried in a dark Lant∣horne, not to be seen by all, or in all places, and not at all to be seen in the Court, where the Authour lived; Which considered, the most displeased Reader, if any such be, must impute those heats to the Authors zeale, if not according to truth, yet according to his know∣ledge, and the then apprehended true principles of Ecclesiasticall Policy.
And as for my prefixing your Ladiships name to this discourse, I shall onely adde, That as I con∣ceive it not incongruous to entitle one of those Bishops grandchildren to the relation of the lives of those

Bishops, so am I exceeding glad by such an opportunity to have the advantage of letting your La∣diship know, That in what soever may fall within the compasse of any capacity to be any way ser∣viceable to your Ladiships con∣cernments, your desires or com∣mand shal not meet with a readier or more industrious compliance from any, then from him, who craving pardon for this boldness, takes the liberty to write himself, without complement or vanity,
Madam,

Wells, May 1. 1652.
