



THe memory of the Just (saith the Wise man) is blessed, or Prov. 10. 7.  in benedictionem. more sutably to the Originall) for a blessing: and that in re∣gard of
God, whom we are excited to bless and praise, by remembring the vertues of the just;
Us, to whom the remembrance of his good exam∣ple (if attended with Imitation) is a blessing, and will lead us to blessedness;
Him, on whom this is conferrd as a blessing, that though his body rot, his name shall not, but be re∣membred . Sept. Cum laudibus. Vulg. (according to the vulgar Latine from the 70) with praise and honour.
That the memoriall of your dead Brother's exem∣plary life might be kept alive and perpetuated to suc∣ceeding Generations, the publication of this plain Piece was earnestly desired by your self with many of his friends, and readily yeelded to by me since;

though I do not judge the Sermon worthy to be print∣ed, yet I am sure he is worthy to be remembred.
To this end I have endeavoured in the close of the Sermon, to draw his picture, not to the length (I confess) but (I hope) to the life, so truly, that I dare say, whoever well knew him, and shall view this portraiture, will acknowledg it to be like, and not at all flattering; which that it may be the more pub∣likely beheld, I have by the Printers help, hung it in a convenient light;
And now (worthy Friend) before I take pen from paper, give me leave to annex a word of
Gratulation, in a thankfull acknowledgment of those many undeserved kindnesses which were vouch∣safed to me by the deceased, and are continued by your self;
Exhortation, which concerneth as well my self and all who shall peruse this discourse, as you, that (to allude to the Philosophers phrase) we would all bear Zeno. the colour of this dead servant of God, by following his excellent pattern.
Supplication to the great God, for You, your vertuous Consort, and Posterity. That Divine bounty may continually pour upon you all these graces and blessings which conduce to your present and future well being, is and shall be the prayer of

