


THere were some dayes which
were called by the Romans,
Atri & infansti,Alex. ab A∣lex. Genial. Dier. lib. 4. cap. 20. black and
omnious dayes, dayes not to
be reckoned with a white
stone, but marked with a
black coale. Such was, and no doubt will be
for ever accounted the 30th of January 1648. by
the inhabitants of England, Scotland and Ire∣land,
as being a day wherein one King and three

Kingdomes were beheaded at one blow. The
King deprived of his natural, and the Kingdoms
of their political Head.
Before that dismall Day came, I thought my
self many wayes oblieged to be among the small
number of those who did in their Pulpits earnestly
deprecate, and vehemently declaim against
that villanous attempt.
Since that time, at the yearly Returne, ei∣ther
upon or near the day,Isaiah 62. 6. I adventured to be∣come
a remembrancer, To God (be it spoken with
reverence) of vengeance, To the people of pe∣nitence,
for that bloudy fact, a fact indeed,
which though it is not to be mentioned without
abhorrency, yet cannot be forgotten without
stupidity.
I have now lived to see an Yearly Fast
enjoyned upon that dolefull Day, to be kept
throughout all Generations; and by your fa∣vour
(Worthy Senators) had the honour
to be one of your servants in that solemne
Work this last Anniversary.
I knew not any Subject more proper for
such a Day than Mourning, and (God know∣eth)
my designe and desire was to make

all sorry but none angry. If because of my im∣partial
reprehension, any instead of being prick∣ed
to the heart with sorrow,Acts 2. 37. & 5. 33. were cut to the
heart with anger; I am heartily sorry I was so
much disappointed of my aime.
My hope is, that if they who heard with
a left eare, will be pleased to read with a
right eye, they will find nothing but what
may very well admit of a Candid constructi∣on,
However, I blesse God that my faith∣full
(though slender) performance met with
your favourable acceptance.
In obedience chiefly to your desire, and
partly for my own vindication, I have made
the Discourse publick, which (without any
wilfull omissions, and with very few additi∣ons)
I humbly tender to your review and pa∣tronage,
above all commending it to divine be∣nediction.
I cannot passe by that remarkable passage
of providence, which so directed the Preach∣ers
Discourses, that by the discord of their
Notes, they made the sweeter Harmony, whilst
the one excited you to great Mourning,Matth. 5. 11, 12. the
other to exceeding Joy. So that I may very

fitly invert the Psalmists words,Psal. 30. 5. Heaviness en∣dured
for the morning, but joy came in the
evening. Nor were the Texts (upon this ac∣count)
more opposite one to the other, than
both apposite to the Day, on which there
was cause at once both of grief for the peoples
vices, and joy in the Kings vertues; sadnesse
for the sinnes which brought him thither,
and gladnesse that he behaved himself so well
there.
And (blessed be God) that as even on
that Day of Mourning, there was cause of
Rejoycing in the Magnanimity of Charles
the First; so that after many years of Mourn∣ing,
we have at length great cause of Rejoyce∣ing
in the Prosperity of Charles the Second.
Nor is it a small addition to our joy, (I speak
without flattery) that under our Gracious So∣veraigne,
we have at this day an House of
Commons made up of Gentlemen, and those
both faithfull Subjects to their King, and zea∣lous
Friends to the Church: so that we as∣sure
our selves, Unde periculum inde reme∣dium,
as an House of Commons was the
source of our former miscry; so an House of

Commons will be the happy means of our future
tranquility.
I shall only crave leave to inculcate in the
close of this Epistle, what was insinuated in
the close of the Sermon. That what was here∣tofore
fondly mistaken, nay, falsely pretended,
may by you be effectually endeavoured; name∣ly,
a thorough Reformation, not of our Re∣ligion,
(which though I will not say it is not
at all defective, yet I cannot say wherein it is
corrupt nay, I dare say, is exceeding good)
but of the manners and lives of people which
are excessively bad. That your impartial zeal
would purge the Land at once of that faction
and prophanenesse which still threaten our ru∣ine.
Finally, That you would go on as you have
begun, and improve your power to the utmost,
for promoting the honour of God, his name,
his worship, his dayes, stablishing the Kings
Throne, confirming the Churches Rights, and
setling the Kingdoms peace.
That in order to these excellent ends,Isaiah 11. 2. the
Spirit of the Lord may rest upon you, the
spirit of wisdome and understanding, the
spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of

knowledg and the fear of the Lord to guide
and direct you in all your Consultations; and
that your labour of love to God, the King,
the Church, the Kingdomes, may be recom∣pensed
an hundred-fold upon you and your
Posterity, is, and shall be the fervent prayer of

