







My Lord,
THat abundant experience you have had of Divine prote∣ction, is no small cause both to you of gratulation, and your friends of congratulation.
Had it not been the Lord who was on my side (may your Honour now say) Had it not been the Lord who was on my side, the waters had overwhelm∣ed me, and the proud waves had gone over my soul. There

needed no more, and it could be no lesse then a powerfull providence which hath made your passage prosperous, and settlement glorious.
How truly then may you take up that expression of holy Job, I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ears, but now mine eyes seeth thee, Since that amiable promise of Gods fa∣vourable presence with his people, which you heard with comfort imperfectly explain∣ed in this Sermon, you have seen with joy fully accom∣plished in your own experi∣ence: and I doubt not but you say to God with adoration in words, not much unlike those the Queen of Sheba spake to Solomon with admiration, The one half of the goodnesse of thy presence, O Lord, was not told me, so far doe all verball Discoveries come short of Gods reall manifestations.
And surely what should move your Lordship to desire a representation of this weak Discourse I know not, unless that you might see how that Doctrine which is here dark∣ly

illustrated, hath been to you superabundantly verified.
I little thought such an un∣polished piece should ever have been exposed to publike view; but Gratitude hath taught me rather to undergoe the Worlds harsh censure, then incur your Lordships just displeasure.
And indeed, though it greatly troubleth me that in publishing these rude notes I must set forth my ignorance, yet withall it much rejoyceth me that I have an opportunity by these lines to acknowledge your Muneficence. What a bountifull Mecaenas your Ho∣nour hath ever been to the Tribe of Levi, those who have had the happinesse of your acquaintnnce, and my self the meanest among them, cannot but testifie with grate∣fullnesse: But I well know you love not that either your vertues or favours should be openly proclaimed, and like the fixed stars, the higher God hath set you, the lesse you de∣sire to seem. I shall therefore turn Praises into Praiers, and

endeavour to pay my mani∣fold obligations to you, in de∣vout supplications for you.
May that gracious presence of the Almighty, which hath hitherto gone before you, still accompany you, to make your troubles few, comforts many, a∣bode quiet, return safe, life long, death happy, election sure, and salvation certain. For all which he shall still implore the Throne of Grace, who is,


Madam,
YOur goodnesse accepted this Sermon from the Pulpit, and your plea∣sure hath now commanded it to the Presse; as being desi∣rous often to view, with a Religious eye, what once you heard with a reverend ear; such as it is I here humbly tender to your Ladiships ac∣ceptance.
The box indeed is mean, but the Jewell precious; the

fashion homely, but the stuffe rich; the chest iron, but the treasure gold: The manner of handling plain and despi∣cable, but the matter there∣in contained Divine and com∣fortable.
The truth is, the most reviving Cordiall to a fainting spirit, and effe∣ctual Antidote against the deadliest afflictions, is the operative presence of a pro∣pitious God. It is onely the assurance of Divine favour towards us, can sweeten every condition to us; and as the observing eye of an Omni-present God is a just Ground if awfull reverence, so the preser∣ving aspect of an Omnipo∣tent Father, is a sure foun∣dation of a joyfull confi∣dence.
A familiar Demonstra∣tion of this Doctrine is the subject of this ensuing Discourse, the sight where∣of I am confident was so much the more desired by and will be welcome to you, by how much your own ob∣servation

can plentifully attest its undoubted veritie.
Indeed though faith must beleeve above, nay, against sense: yet sense is a singular support of faith. Divine Promises are then most plainly understood, stedfast∣ly beleeved, and joyfully perused, when we have be∣held them graciously full∣filled.
May your joyous expe∣riments of the Almigh∣ties presence with and for you, be still multiplied: your pious Assurances of his Favour be more en∣larged, and by the cast∣ing in of this mite into your Spirituall Treasury, a further addition to your comforts be vouchsafed.
What a sweet odour your Honours vertues have left behinde you, I must passe over in silence, as knowing, your discreet Zeal, sincere piety, courteous affability, and be∣nign charity, are all crowned with that modest humility, which will not endure a Pub∣lication.
How much I am your Lady∣ships debtor by those liberall respects your favor hath cast upon me, my slender Quill cannot expresse. All the re∣turn I shall or can render is, first to make mention of you and yours in my Praiers to God, next to engrave your beneficence in the Table of a thankful memory; and with∣all in real complement to sub∣scribe my self,




