



DId not the law of Thankfulness forbid me to deny what you are pleased to require, these imperfect Notes had not been made thus publick. But I had rather incur the censure of indiscretion than the brand of ingratitude; and if the perusal of this unpolished dis∣course may adde to your comfort, I shall be the lesse trou∣bled, if the publication of it detract from my credit; espe∣cially considering that the concernment is very large; and as I pray it may, so I hope it will, be of good use and bene∣fit to Merchants, Mariners, Souldiers, and all sort of Tra∣vellers, who shall think fit to make it their Vade mecum.
And now (worthy Friends) give me leave to congra∣tulate your mutuall happinesse in that matrimoniall union whereof you have honoured me to be the instrument.
Yours (Noble Sir) in your dearly beloved Anne, whose name imports grace or favour, ab Heb.  gratiosus, be∣nignus fut. Prov. 18.22. Ruth 1.16. and in finding whom (ac∣cording to Solomons assertion) you have obtained favour of the Lord; one who so fully retaliateth your love, that she saith to you as Ruth did to Naomi, Where thou go∣est

I will go, and where thou dwellest I will dwell; ha∣ving learnt the just extent of that first Institution, which though it onely mentioneth the man, no lesse truly reach∣eth to the woman,Gen. 2.24. who must leave Father and Mother and cleave to her Husband.
Yours (Honoured Madam) in your deservedly beloved Nathanael, whom I doubt not but (according to the signifi∣cation of his name) you thankfully accept of as Gods gift; compositum ex  dedit, &  Deus. One, who is the Third Brother of his Fathers house, upon whom the Honour hath been conferred, of being sent as Chief Officer into forraign parts about publick employ∣ments; yea one whose singular dexterity and integrity rendred him no lesse acceptable to the Adventurrs, than his courteous affability doth to all who know him.
I have nothing more to adde but a Benediction: May she whom you have taken into your bosom, be a Leah for fruitfulness, as well as she is a Rachel for amiable∣ness. May you do worthily in India, and by a zealous care of Gods Honour, together with a faithful discharge of your Trust, be famous both in India & England. May that good hand of Providence which hath joyned you together, bless and preserve you both at home and a∣broad, by sea and land, in your persons and relations, in your going forth and coming home. May you both live to return (as you go forth) with honor. May you bring home (what you cannot carry with you) an hopefull Progeny. In a word, may you live together long on Earth comfortably, and for ever in Heaven happily. So prayeth

