



BY prefixing your names, the World will easily suppose me under great ob∣ligations to you, though it is as far from my design, to give, as I know it is from your de∣sire, to receive flattering expressi∣ons. A few Weeks ago I thought

my self far enough from making use of your Names, or any ones else in this kind. The sence of that Pro∣vidence A dange∣rous fall at a Trap-door which you met with, when you were last at Bristol (which did so suddenly bring you even to the Gates of Death, and almost as speedily restored you again) did give conception to the most of these Psa. 90.12. meditations: and because your urgent affairs prevented you of the opportunity of hearing them Preached, I was willing you should have a sight of them, that they might be your monitor and keep you company; the best stand in need of their Memento Mori's: for whichpurpose I began to transcribe them, intending nothing more than your, private view; but continually & Bramham Toulston Oglethorp Ceeds Shadwel Wakefield sternuously followed with these considerations which daily increas∣ed upon me, and would not be a∣voided, viz. That I had many

Friends in Yorkshire, Pontefract Hull Beverly Langlon Thoraby York Barwick in Elmet &c. where I drew my first Natural and Spiritual Breath, for whom I have endear∣ed affections, and whom I have daily in my remembrance; that the first fruits of my Ministry was sown among them; that I had spent some years there in several Places, Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, the Lord having made my poor Endeavours use∣ful to some: and especially that I ought not to forget, how Satan envying the Conversion of Souls, and that the Lord Jesus should have any Publick Worship, did stir up some of his Instruments (Persecutors and Apostates) se∣veral times for some Years to∣gether to Molest us, Fine us, Im∣prison us, and Impoverish us; al∣so how Graciously the Lord was pleased to manifest himself in our Assemblies, and so by his Spirit

wonderfully to support, strengthen and incourage us under losses & long confinements, that through Divine assistance we were enab∣led to hold on in the Lord's way to the last; those that gave us trouble being in the issue, either weary of their own Work, or convinc∣ed of the honesty of our's, and the integrity of our Hearts therein: that these my Fellow-sufferers to∣gether with all the rest that did sympathize with us, and remem∣ber us in our bonds, as bound with us, should be under some visible Character of my cordial Love, and seeing the Providence of God had for the present set me at so great a distance from them, that I was utterly disabled from doing or receiving good among them, I should put something into their hands, which might stir up their pure minds by way of remem∣brance.

I knew no more Useful Lesson to recommend to them, 2 Pet. 3.1. than this of Right Numbring their Dayes, which may put them upon a serious consideration of their dayes past, a due improvement of the present, and an Holy prepara∣tion for those few and evil ones that are remaining.
I am also made in this small undertaking, to have a sin∣cere respect to the Members of that Antient and Honourable society (whereof you are now a member) formerly walking with Mr. Henry Jessy where for some time;Now un∣der the care of Mr. Jam. Fit∣ten my old Friend & Fellow suf∣ferer and and Mr. Hen. Forte I did enjoy Comfortable Communion, till the Providence of God removed me thence.
And now I know that you will not be troubled, that you have been the occasion, and made way for me, that I might discover some of that true Love I have for my old Friend (and

Native Countrey) whose Souls I hope I could serve with laying down my own Life. But that I may not grow tedious to you, I shal only further tel you what I lat∣ly heard of you, from the mouth of a Judicious Christian, who hath many years been intimately ac∣quainted with you, both before and since your (signal) Conversi∣on:Mr. Smith is an ho∣nest Man with all his faults. more need not be said of the, best Saint in the World, and less cannot be said of the weakest; I confess I was much taken with the expression, and therefore mention it not only, because it is inoffen∣sive (having neither flattery nor reflexion in it, both which I loath) but because it may be of use to some; if he had said you had been an honest Manwithout faults, or but with a few; or if he had said, that he is a Man blessed with rare accomplishments, ad∣mirable

endowments, he can speak with the tongue of Angels, he hath the gift of Prophecy, and un∣derstands all Mysteries, and all Knowledge, he is willing to be∣stow all his goods to feed the Poor, and is ready (if need be) to give his Body to be burned &c. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. But he hath one Fault, I should have liked it leaft of al, for, it would have looked like that in 2 Kin. 5.1. Now Naaman Captain of the Host of the King of Syria, was a great Man with his Master, and honourable, because by him the Lord had given deliverance unto Syria; he was also a mighty Man in valour, but be was a Lepert: Or like the young Man in the Go∣spel, whom Jesus kissed, and his Neighbours applauded, but he lacked one thing, Mark 10.21. It seems the Righteous Man with his seven falls a day remains an upnight

Man; for, he doth not fall willing∣ly, he rifeth again speedily by Re∣pentance, and he mourns daily o∣ver his many humane frailties and infirmities: David, and Job, and peter, Were honest men with all their faults, though if the least i∣niquity be allowed and indulged, no Man can be an honest man with all his good Works, and Religicus performances. But Sincerity is a Grace of that excellent Nature, and universal inflaence, that it gives Life, reality and a beautiful com∣plexion to all other Graces; it un∣stings infirmities in the sight of men; and (through the merits of Christ) gives boldness to transgres∣sing Sinners, to draw near to the King of Heaven, not only with ex∣pectation of acceptance,Pro. 11.20. Heb. 10.22 but of complacency and great delight.
Lastly, For you (Mrs. Smith my dear Friend) I have only this to say to

you, that I am perswaded your Soul's in a good state for all your fears and complaints of a treache∣rous and unbelieving Heart, which are incident to the best of Saints, and which the Lord somtimes for reasons suffers them to be attended with more than some weaker Chri∣stians. That you both may grow in Grace, and especially in the Life of Believing, and be found still in the exercise of those good Works, (as the Lord shall enable you) of Gospel Hospitality, of entertain∣ing Prophers and Saints (though strangers and exiles) with your li∣berality and bounty to the poor Saints and People of God, and that under that very considerati∣on and denomination without more private and narrow respects: that you with all your faults, and you with all your fears may be presented blameless at the com∣ing

of our Lord Jesus Christ; and When your little time is ex∣pired in this troublesome, rest∣less Earth (whereas a Man uncan∣not find a place to set his foot easily) be safely landed in uncon∣ceivable and immense Eternity, shal be the constant Prayer, vvhilst time lasts, of

