



HOw good and how pleasant it is
for Brethren to dwell toge∣ther
in unity,Psal. 133. 1. the Psalmist
telleth us, or rather cannot
tell us, and therefore proposeth it by
way of Question, and ushereth it in with
a Behold of Admiration. Surely then,
for Brethren who dwell together in unity,
sometimes to meet and feast together in
amity, cannot be either had in it self, or
justly displeasing to any. At all solemn
Feasts Piety ought to be the first, and
Charity the last dish; upon which ac∣count



it is that they usually begin with a
Sermon, and end with a Contribution.
It was your pleasure (my honoured
Friends) to whom the care of the late
Solemnity was committed, to put the sa∣cred
part of that burden on my shoulders.
A Service which as I did not ambitiously
seek, so neither could I ingratefully refuse;
and therefore (according to my slender
abilities) have endevoured to perform;
of which weak performance your can∣did
acceptance hath laid upon me a
further obligation of gratitude. At
your desire the following Discourse
(whatever it is) was conceived in the Stu∣dy
born in the Pulpit, and now appear∣eth
to the World in the Printers sheets,
not doubting but that where ever you
meet, you will vouchsafe to own it, since
it (together with the Author) is so
much yours.


As for you (my Brethren) who
were pleased to honor the Stewards with
your presence, I heartily wish your libe∣rality
had been so large, that it might
have come abroad into all the land as a
pattern for others to follow; that as the
close of the Sermon is hortatory, so the
Preface might have been laudatory.
But since I cannot praise, I will pray,
The Lord make you to increase and abound
in love towards the poor and needy.2 Thess. 3. 12.
To all my fellow-Citizens, whether
then present or absent, I shall make
bold to commend a double word;
1. As the two Cherubims looked
with their faces one to another,Exod. 25. 20. and both
to the Mercy-seat; so let us mind each
others welfare, and all of us the Cities
good. Let there be no strife between
us Brethren,Gen. 13. 8. except it be who shall most
honour this place wherein we were born,

by an exemplary conversation.
2. As our Saviour said in another
Case to his Disciples,Luk. 10. 19, 20. Rejoice not that
the Spirits are subject to you, but rather re∣joice
because your names are written in
Heaven: So say I in this, let us not re∣joice
that we are London-natives, but ra∣ther
rejoice if we are Citizens of the
Heavenly Jerusalem.Heb. 12. 22. Let us not please
our selves with the priviledge of our
natural birth in this City, unlesse we
are born again from above, so as we may
truly say (according to Beza's Trans∣lation
of those words of S. Paul) our
City is in Heaven;Phil. 3. 20. Civitas nostra in coelis, Beza. where that we may
all meet together, celebrating an Eternal
Festival of Peace and Joy, is the un∣feigned
prayer of

