



Worthy Friends,
IT is the Psalmists assertion concerning God,Psal. 111. 4.
He hath made his wonderfull workes to be
remembred,Ainsw. ibid. or (as Ainsworth tracing the
footsteps of the Originall more closely, readeth
it) He hath made a memoriall of his mar∣vellous
workes. Indeed as God expects that men should,
so (knowing our dulnesse) he hath taken care himselfe that
the remarkable dispensations of his providence shall not be
forgotten.
Divine workes are of two sorts, either blazing Comets,
or shining Starres, blustring Stormes, or gentle Showers,
wofull Desolations▪ or mercifull Preservations. Those are
acts of Justice, these of Mercy, both of Power, and God
hath made memorialls of both.
That his exemplary justice on seditious Corah and his
complices might be perpetually remembred,Num. 16. 38. he commands
their Censers to be made broad plates for a covering of
the Altar, (for so it followeth) and they shall be a signe

(to wit, rememorative, and thereby commonitory) to the
children of Israel.
That his eminent Mercy to the Israelites in the Wilder∣nesse,hem 9. 15.
when raining bread out of Heaven, he give them
(to use the Psalmists language) Angells food,Psal. 78. 15. might be re∣corded
to posterity. Moses (as the Lord commanded) bid
Aaron take a pot,xod. 16. 33. and put an Omer full of Manna there∣in,
and lay it up before the Lord (for so the reason is ex∣pressed
in the next words) to be kept for their Generations.
This extraordinary event which happened, was doubt∣lesse
a speciall effect of Providence, and that such as was
mingled with severity and clemency, severity to them who
were consumed in, clemency to you (my Honoured
friends) and the rest who were delivered from, or snatched
out of the flames. And surely your Anniversary Comme∣moration
of so notable a worke, deserveth singular com∣mendation,
that being thankfulnesse indeed which con∣sults
for renewed prayses, by repeated memorialls.
In pursuance of this pious designe, I conceive it is, you
have desired this Sermon to be made publique, that being
(according to Gods command concerning Israels delive∣rance,Exod. 17. 11.
and Amelek's discomfiture) written (yea Printed)
in a Book, Time (which is so great a devourer) might not
consume the memory of this consumption. And Printing
(which is so faithfull a Register) might preserve the me∣moriall
of this preservation.
In order to this end, I have concurred with your desires,
and caused this imperfect piece to see the light. Commen∣ding
it to Gods benediction, You and yours to his prote∣ction,
I subscribe my self, as your many favours oblige me,

