



AS it is not only lawful,, Greg. Naz. but
(in Gregory Nazian∣zens
opinion) a most due
debt, to publish the
praises of Gods eminent
servants (especially when dead;) so
it is expedient that the publication
should be extended as far, and perpe∣tuated
as long as may be.
It is the advantage which all discour∣ses
(particularly encomiastical) have

by being printed, above that which they
have by being only spoken; that where∣as
these are like pictures hung in a
private Gallery, those are as statues
set upon an high hill, every way conspi∣cuous;
these are as pictures drawn in
fading colours, those are as Imagery
wrought in lasting Arras.
Vpon these considerations (worthy
Sir) I suppose it is, that you desired this
following Discourse might (by the
Printers help) become legible, and
though I am very conscious of its ma∣nifold
defects, upon the same reason I
have fulfilled your desire.
It were too great pity, if such a rare
and precious Jewel as he was should
have been lockt up in a Cabinet; yea,
pity it is, that a more skilful Lapida∣ry
was not made choice of to have set

him forth in his lustre. But the best
of it is, his native lustre was such as
needed not the help of Art; and so far
is this Discourse from adding to his
splendour, that in truth it receiveth
whatever worth it hath from him.
Such as it is, I tender to you by this
Dedication, and justly, since you have
the greatest right to it, as being an In∣ventory
of your Dear Fathers best
goods, and choicest riches, which he
hath at once carried with him and left
behind him, in as much as the good
works of them who die in the Lord
follow them,Rev. 14. 15. to wit, for their own re∣muneration;
and yet stay here to be
paterns for others Imitation.
An Inventory I call it, and that such
as I dare own to be so far true, that
there is nothing said of him which doth

not belong to him; and therefore let
none think that I do nimis adulari, at
all flatter him, though on the other hand
I ingeniously acknowledg it is far short
of what might have been said of him:
and therefore your self with the rest of
his relations may think that I did fri∣gide
laudare, coldly commend him:
The Truth is, though I will not use
Saint John's hyperbolical expression
concerning our Saviour;John 21. 25. There are
many other things which Jesus did,
the which if they should be written
every one, I suppose that the world
it self could not contain the books
which should be written: yet I dare
say, the several Passages of his excel∣lent
life could not be contained in an
hours discourse, but justly require a
large Volume.

And now (Honoured Sir) though
it grieve you to have lost, it is no small
comfort to you that you had such a
Father, so far excelling in all virtue,
nor will, I hope, the reading afresh
what you have heard before, discom∣pose
you, since you will finde more white
of your deceased Fathers gracious life,
than will checker the black of his do∣lorous
death: nor is it only a Com∣fort,
but an honour, a great honour
to you to have had such a Father,
who was greatly and highly (yet
no more than deservedly) belo∣ved
and honoured, both living and
Dead in City and Country. But with∣all,
give me leave to mind you, that the
having such a Father, layeth upon you
a strong obligation of duty to walk in
his steps and conform to his Patern,

which I trust, in some measure you do,
and will do more and more. May you
(if it be God's will) equalize his years,
and as you grow in years, grow in
grace, that you may if not equalize, yet
come near to his righteous Patern.
I doubt not but whilst he was on earth,
he put up many devout Prayers for
you, your Consort, your Posterity, and
not for you only but your sisters with
their Relations, whereof you all have
and will experience the benefit, nor can
I close with a better Prayer than that
all those blessings ghostly and bodily
which he implored for you, may by
divine bounty, be continued and
multiplied upon you: I subscribe
my self,
Apr. 7. 1668.
Sir, 
