


Right worthy Sir,
DId not speaking or writing truth of them that are alive incur a suspition of flattery, had not the beames of your Graces been abundantly resplendent to this whole City from those Orbs of Authority wherein you were justly placed; Finally, were it not that I know how repugnant the publication of your worth is to the humility of your mind, who desire laudanda facere non laudata audire, to doe things praise-worthy, not to hear or read your own praises; an Encomium had been the Proemium of this Dedication.
But though upon these considerations I shall forbear to characterize those eminent vertues, by which you oblige all that know you: yet give me leave (Honoured Mecaenas) to make a publique acknowledgement of those munificent favours by which you have engaged me, since I had the honour and happinesse of enjoying you as a Parishioner; an ingenuous recognition being as the least so the utmost payment that I can return.
In testimony of my Gratitude, and observance of your desire, I here present to your Judicious eye what not long agoe was offered to your Religious ear. What should render this unpolished discourse acceptable to

you I cannot conceive, unlesse it be the special Interest you have in the joyful occasion of it; namely the happy marriage of your deservedly beloved Daughter. Indeed matrimoniò prospicere, to provide fit matches for their Children, is the last but not the least care that lieth up∣on the Parents: well may it be a just cause of singular joy, when a marriage is consummated with the Parents consent and to the Childes content. May your joy be still multiplied in their mutual loves, prosperous estate, and an hopeful progeny descending from their loyns.
And now Worthy Sir, give me leave in few words to tell you what great things the Lord hath done for me. It is not many weeks since by a violent Fever I was brought low, very low, so that my soul drew nigh to the grave: But it hath pleased the powerful mercy, and merciful power of my gracious God to deliver me from going down to the pit, so that my life seeth the light; and (praised be his goodness) I am in some measure restored to health. God hath done his work of mercy, mine of duty remai∣neth, to be thankful and fruitful. It is no small piece of Christian skill, rightly to improve mercy when conferd; this is my task, which that I may be enabled to per∣form, I earnestly desire both yours and the servent prayers of all God's people.
I have nothing further to add, but only my prayers for you, which shall never be wanting at the throne of grace, that your days on earth may be lengthened, exter∣nal enjoyments sanctified, spiritual graces increased, inward comforts enlarged, and your good works at last rewarded with a Crown of glory.
So prayeth 
