



SIR,
I First preached, and have now published this Discourse as a Testimony of my sor∣row for Londons Ruines. If the phrase and compo∣sure be (as I am conscious they are) very defective, my Apology is, That it was a time of Distraction; besides, broken Language is the best Rhetorick upon a mournful occasion: And considering those manifold Relations and Obligations I have to that once illustrious City, it will not (I hope) be looked upon as a presumption, that I have thus publickly expressed my sor∣row;

for that cloud of smoke which hath covered her, or rather that flame of fire which hath laid her honour in the dust.
London was the place of my Birth, Bap∣tism, Education, and (excepting those years which I lived in the University of Oxford) in and about the City, hath been the place of my abode and habitation to this day.
It is now full Twenty and seven years since I entered into Holy Orders, Eighteen whereof I exercised my Ministerial Function in that one Parish-Church of St. Dyonis, which together with many more (proh do∣lor) is now laid waste. And, though I must confess my self highly obliged as in special to many persons of Honour and Quality, so in general to all sorts of Inhabitants in this Parish, where by Gods Providence I now am, and have (according to my slender ability) officiated well nigh Six years, whose merciful preservation in this late imminent danger, I heartily congratulate, and praise God for: Yet I cannot but acknowledge those many and great kindnesses which in those years I received; and that not only (though chiefly)

from that particular Parish, but several other Citizens, as well of the upper, as the lower sort: So that though I wanted not some Ene∣mies, I bless God, I found many Friends, with whom if I should not affectionately sympathize in this their Calamity, I should justly incur the odious brand of ungrateful and obdurate: Nay, if I forget thee (O London) let my right hand forget her cunning; if I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth.
Being upon these considerations (honoured Sir) resolved as to the publication of the Sermon, I know not to whom more sutably than your self I should make the Dedicati∣on; and that both in reference to my self in particular, and the City in general.
Among my numerous acquaintance in the City, I have great reason to look upon you as a singular Friend, as well as a prime Parishio∣ner in that place where I lived so long: Nor must I forget to own not only that liberal boun∣ty, those free entertainments, but those sage advices, and forward encouragements which I received from you in the late perilous

times, when it was a Crime to own a Prelati∣cal Clergy-man.
Among the Inhabitants of the City, you are the principal Mourner. The Kingdom calls the City her Mother, and the City calls you her Father, as being the eldest among the Al∣dermen; not only in respect of years, but office; none now surviving who before you had the honour to have the Sword carried before them: And who should be chief Mourner at the Daughters Funeral, but her Father? And though I easily believe your par∣ticular losses are great, yet I dare say such is your compassion, That you are much more af∣fected with the publick misery, than your own damage; and such your devotion, that you are most afflicted with those iniquities which have procured this misery.
Upon this account, I am confident you often turn aside (in your meditations) to see this sad fight, and probably have prevented me in what I cannot but take notice of, how within the revolution of less than seven years, we have lived to see a most joyful, and a most doleful sight. The one of the Sun breaking

forth, the other of the Fire breaking out. That of the King in his beauty, this of the City in its ashes. That a representation of Heaven, and this of Hell. That in the Spring of the year 1660. this in the Autumn of the year 1666.
It cannot be imagined with what gladness of heart all Loyal Subjects beheld their Na∣tive lawful King, after a Twelve years tedi∣ous Exile, return to his Throne; and not in an hostile, but amicable manner pass through His chief City to His Royal Palace, wel∣comed with the multiplied shouts and accla∣mations of all sorts.
Nor can it be expressed with what sadness of heart all good people beheld the flaming Fire, as it were a Conqueror, riding upon the wings of the wind from street to street, with a triumphant rage through that great City, eating up her Habitations, casting down her goodly Structures to the earth; and not ceasing, till He that said to it Go, said also to it Stay. Had the sight of that wonderful and merciful Restauration quickned us (as it ought) to sutable Returns of Gratitude and Obedience,

we probably had never beheld this dreadful and woful desolation. And since the former could not allure us to our Duty, I would to God this latter may yet at length affright us from our sins: Then I should comfortably hope, what I doubt not we all earnestly desire, a resurrection of this City out of her Rubbish, to a more glorious estate than before.
Which (worthy Sir) that (if it be Gods blessed Will) your Age may be prolonged to see, and thereby prevent the bringing of your grey hairs with sorrow to the grave; and however, that whensoever you go hence, the blessings of Heaven may rest upon the heads of your Posterity: And as you have been a vigilant, diligent, prudent and faithful Sena∣tor in this Terrestrial City, so you may (after a long course finished on earth) be a Trium∣phant Citizen, and have an everlasting habi∣tation in that heavenly City of the living God, where the Moth frets not, the Rust eats not, the Fire consumeth not; is the uncessant prayer of,

