




HAppy were this Age, were its Principles of supposed Truth sound, and Practice ac∣cording: But both (if considered by a seeing Eye) may seem more irreparable than heretofore they have been. No City-consuming Fires, no sweeping-Plague lays waste our Dwellings; no Civil War hath vext of late the Land. These Mercies much exceed our Merits; but the Causes of all these Calamities, and far greater (Gross Errors and Mistakes in Opinions and Practice, with wicked Contrivances of dreadful peril to Princes and to the Church) still remain in a fuller Conflux than in former Times. Good Hezekiah had re∣course to God, and spread before him the Letter that exprest the Churche's, seeming unexpressible, Sorrows
and Snares of Death. So I shall spread a List of no less perilous Evils before your Sacred Majesty, and this Honourable Senate (God's Substitutes), that so this Nation may timely foresee and shun them; And (to that end) I count it my indispensible Duty to God, to his Majesty, and You, to tender this Treatise to you, because it may much concern your Safeties, especially in this juncture of Time. My humble Design therein is (by God's help, and your assistance) to remove those many and most dangerous Opinions that hinder the Agreement of all Church-Societies, Sects and Na∣tions. So God may come (not to smite the Earth with a Curse, as he lately seemed to be about to do, but) with healing in his Wings: So the subtil Contri∣vances of secret Enemies may be turned into Amity, and Death be disarmed: For, mistaken wild Gourds were called Death; because their Effects were like those of the Waters into which the Star fell, whereby they be∣came bitter and deadly; but Mistakes in Opinions and Manners are much more, in Men and to the Church the poisoned Arrows of Death, which cannot be drawn forth, nor possibly removed, but by the Dictamnum of Truth made manifest: All other means, without this, may seem invalid; nor will the most vigilant care avail much, till this Work be first done or well begun. Difficult it must be, and not without danger, for the most powerful Efficient to work with much success, where the Subject (the People almost generally) re∣mains uncapable through many mistakes. Howbeit, as the Ark had no stay till the Waters abated, and it re∣sted on Ararat; So the Church; and the Nations of this World, can never find footing of any firm stability, till these floods of false Opinions (that dash upon the
Church and States with Storms and Tempest) decrease, or be dried up. As oft therefore as the best Founders build upon no better Foundations in Men; so oft must their Fabrick fall, and they, as oft renew their labour without effectual success; For, Effects (their Causes continuing) must continue. That this most needful Work, of highest concern to You and to all Men, may succeed in your Majesties hand, and in the hands of this Honourable House (that you and they may be the Ma∣ster-Builders of lasting Peace and Prosperity to this and all Nations) is the incessant Prayer of

