



Right Worthy Sir,
THis soul-weaning Funerall Sermon, preached by my re∣verend brother, at the Inter∣ring of my much honoured Vncle, Richard More Esquire, being through the importuni∣ty of some brought from him unto me to be put in Print, and recommended to whom I shuld think fit: I knew not who could better make attestation to this indefatigable Sena∣tors worth then your self, his bosome friend.
What testimonie is here given him, either by my faithfull brother, or by me, is but an Epitome of yours, and his Countreyes lar∣ger
 knowledge of him. He spent his last breath in prosecuting and promoting that Scripture-Church-Reformation, whereunto his parents had been zealous Witnesses: who were not more carefull of his education in religion, and learning, then he was apt to take it. In so much, that at ten yeers of age he was able to read the Old Testament in the originall. Though the death of his father in his youth diverted him from going to the Vniversitie: yet he grew so active for the publike, that it is hard to tell, whether he did more service to his Countrey before, or after he was in Com∣mission of the peace. I should sorrow as a man without hope of repair of his Countreys losse, but that he hath left a son, as fit to suc∣ceed him in his place, as in his estate. In diffi∣cult businesses, for his Countrey, he was not wont to strain courtesy, to follow others: but was willing to lead the way, and break the Ice. He was a Sanctuary to conscientious men in their persecutions. I could name some, who falling into limbum patrum, I mean the courts of Tyrannizing Prelates, who found him ready by his travails, friends, counsell, purse, to helpe them out. He would lose the great∣est friend he had to stand for the right of his
 poorest neighbour. He was a friend, so throughly cordiall, that in all his undertakings for any, on any occasion, with Boaz, he could not rest, till he had effected it. He was a countenancer, up∣holder and frequenter of Lectures & Lecturers. He hated vice in all, but especially in Ministers, whom yet he had rather reclaim then ruine; and he was wont to let them know, that he so lo∣ved their parts, as he abhorred their exorbitancies. As Christ descended to do his Fathers will, so he was willing to stoop to any place below himself to do his neighborhood service. He was no , no self-putting-forth man, he sought rather to be, then seem strict. He much honoured the Lords day and his Ministers; his opinion was to his death, there was due to God a 7th. part of our time, and a 10th. part of our estate. Some of his last words were, How are the Ministers provided for? He lived much by faith, especially in these sad and exhausting times: as appeares not onely by his deeds, his casting into the publike treasurie all his plate, & all that he could make or get; but also, by such as these his latter speeches: Every man must rise & fall with the publike. We must give all for gone, and wait what God will do for it. And it makes no matter what becomes of me and mine, so it go well with the publike, as
 I am confident it will in a short time. And when some told him it was like to go ill wth Shropshire: He answered, Shropshire wants faith, as well as other places. And when some of his family to∣wards his end was speaking solicitously to him: God (said he) that feeds the Ravens, will not suf∣fer you to want. I do not love these distracting thoughts. Thus his faith wrought with his works to the last. And yet it no whit blunted his indu∣stry for the good of his family. A carefull father he was of his children, for whom (being four sons and one daughter) he had provided plentifully in his life; and a tender husband over his dear and pious consort, who had lived with him above 50. yeers, and had done him much good, and no hurt, all the days of his life, to whō he left by will, made three yeers before his death, 400. l. over & above joynture; but the Lord hath given and the Lord hath taken away, and wch of his, here, can now say his bread is his own? Such is the rapine of war. From which he is now freed, being absent from his body, present with his Lord: to which marke you also are pressing forward, as a Taper daily spending your self, to light others. The Lord make you and your posterity to fare the better for your publick faithfulnesse: so prayeth

