


Dearly beloved Friends,
IT would seem strange if I should leave you out in this affair, since what is here published was Preached among you, and they were your Sermons in the Preaching. I have not much to Communicate to you in this manner, having so many sfea∣sons of speaking to you, (blessed be

God or the continuance of them) on∣ly meeting with this fair opportunity, I cannot but make mention of that U∣niversal and continued Affection, I have met with from you, since the Lord by his Providence brought me among you, I cannot likewise but take no∣tice,(to the praise of our Lord and your incouragement) of that union Love and moderation there is among you: notwithstanding some difference in apprehension, your soundness and stedfastness in the Faith of the Gos∣pel,Mat. 28.20 *  1 Cor. 11.26. your zeal and Love to the Name, Honour, Offices and standing Ordi∣nances of the Lord Jesus in this Age, wherein he hath so many sorts of Enemies appearing against him; your peaceable dispositions, together with your readiness to suffer for, rather than run from the discharge of your Duties and Consciences towards God, when Persecution and trouble threat∣ned you, &c.
Let me exhort you to Bless the Lord for, and improve your present liberty; pray that those whom the Lord hath made to see it their interest not to fall out with Religi∣on, may come to see it their chief concern to fall in with it prepare for worse times, and endeavour to see your own sins to be the procu∣ring cause of them; make trial what influence the right measuring and spending of time will have upon the power of Godliness which is so much decayed. Be careful to grow in Grace, and go on as it is your true de∣sire, to strengthen Christianity yet more in its more principal and vital parts, keeping up Communion with God in serious meditation and servant Pray∣er giving Religion an honourable and chief respect in your Families; daily renewing Acts of Faith and Repentance, watching carefully over the Tongue: looking well to the

Hand's that they over-reach not, nor withhold more than is meet; to the feet and conversations that they be preserved without grieving and offending slips and falls, &c. Fi∣nally, pray for me earnestly that I may approve my self a Work-man that need not be ashamed; If you would feel my Sermons, let me feel your Prayers, and be helpt by them. I shall conclude with that needful ad∣monition, Revel. 16.15. From which I have lately Discoursed largely to you, Behold I come as a thief, blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth his Garments, lest he walk naked and men see his shame. That you may stand compleat in all the will of God and be kept by his Power through Faith unto Salva∣tion, is the constant prayer; and through Divine assistance, shall be the Hearty Endeavour of

