




SIR,
AT your command this small Barke was first launched into the River, and is now put forth to Sea; I know the season is perillous, and perhaps she may meet with a contrary winde, but her Anchor of truth will pre∣serve her from sinking in the sharpest storme. She is no man of Warre, nor intends offence to any, onely a Mer∣chant Man, designed to advance the spirituall traffique, Her outside is plaine, but her lading is rich. The Com∣modities which she bringeth are the incomparable Jewell of Wisdome, the Amber of Purity, the Gold of Peace, the Silkes of Gentlenesse and Tractablenesse, the Oyl of Mercy, all sorts of pretious Fruits, the Diamonds of Im∣partiality, Sincerity, and these fetched not from the utter∣most Indies, or any places of the earth, but the uppermost Heaven of Heavens.
To your Coast (Honoured Sir) she first putteth in, not doubting the Harbour of a favourable protection, since,

though I was the unskilfull Carpenter, you are the Ow∣ner; and besides you have a considerable share in her goods, your prudent, peaceable, gentle, mercifull, just and up∣right conversation, being evident to all who know you.
Onely give me leave (Worthy Friend) to advise, that you would continue and encrease this Heavenly Trade. True, you have experienced through Divine Providence, blessing your ingenious industry, the advantage of traf∣fiquing in those remoter parts of the World; since your re∣turne to your Native Countrey, the same Providence hath found out for, and conferred on you an invaluable Jewell (a Consort decked with all Wisdoms Ornaments) and by her hath blessed you with those pearles (Children) which no riches can purchase. But in the midst of all these enjoyments, forget not what Solomon saith of Wisdome; The merchandise of it is better then the merchandise of Prov. 3. 14, 15. Silver, and the gain thereof then fine Gold; she is more pretious then Rubies, and all the things thou canst de∣sire are not to be compared unto her.
I have nothing more, but to declare to the World, how much I am engaged to your selfe, and vertuous second self, for Multiplied Courtesies; To Supplicate the Great God, for the accumulation of his mercies both celestiall and terrestriall, on you and yours, and subscribe my self

