



May it please your Highness,
IT was the saying of David, Psal. 112.6. The Righ∣teous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. And of Solomon, Prov. 10.7. The memorial of the Just shall be blessed. Divine Providence made it my Lot to hear this Sermon pathetically delivered by that Pious Divine Dr. Harrison, in a full and fluent manner, extracting Tears from the Eyes, and Sighs from the Hearts of the Hearers. I moved the Doctor for the Printing thereof, being so precious a piece, touching so unparallel'd a Person, that it was more fit to be made Publick then to perish in Oblivion; who in a modest manner termed it, A sudden, imperfect and unpolisht Collection of scattering Thoughts and Notes, which brevity of time, and burthen of Spirit wou'd not permit him, more compleatly to Com∣pile; yet upon my Importunity he was pleased to Conde∣scend to my Motion, and deliver'd me this Copy now Printed, written with his own Hand. The usefulness of the Piece repleat with so many rare Observations, together

with the desire of erecting all lasting Monuments that might tend to the Eternizing of the Blessed Memory of that thrice Renowned Patron and Pattern of Piety, your Royal Father (whose pious Life is his never-perishing Py∣ramide; Every Man's Heart being his Tomb, and every good Man's Tongue an Epitaph) hath emboldened me in all Humi∣lity to present it to your Highness, as a lively Effigies to mind you of his matchless Vertues. And as the Learned Au∣thor intended it not so much for the Eye, or Ear, as for the Heart, not for Reading only, but Practice principally▪ So may your Highness please to make use thereof as a Pattern of Imitation for Piety and Reformation in the Na∣tions; that your Highness may become a successful suc∣cessor of such a peerless Predecessor, to inherit his Good∣ness with his Greatness; that out of his Ashes you may spring another Phoenix; as an Honey-Comb out of the strong Lyon; a Roy Branch of that rare Root, a strong Rod to be a Scepter to Rule: So shall your Highness holy and vertuous Progress be a new Crown of Comfort to the Three Nations, filling the Peoples Hearts with joy∣ful hopes of Happiness, and a firm, well grounded Peace, that they may sit safely under their own Vines and Fig-Trees, freed from the Terrors and Turmoils of tumul∣tuous, bloody Broils; And that your Highness may ob∣tain and enjoy the Continual Protection of the Omnipo∣tent Protector to Crown your Highness and the Nations with Loving Kindness and tender Mercies, shall be the Constant Gordial Prayer of

