



Dear Friends,
THERE are two things which do most evidently prove man by nature a lost Creature.
The one is the exceeding propensity and inclina∣tion in the heart of every man to actual sin, Psal. 58.3. Job 15.16. Though every man is not actu∣ally guilty of every sin, yet is there not a sin in the world, but is seminally and vertually in every one's Nature.
The other is that strange infatuation the Ʋnder∣standing lieth under, and its proneness to mistake darkness for light; damnable and deformed Errors for beautiful and saving Truths: And that which is saddest of all, a tenacious adherence to, and a resolved perseverance in, these by-paths of Error, is very oft a mournful consequence that follows them.
Now as these two things do shew the fearful ru∣ines and miserable condition of all by Nature: So there are two things which all Gospel-ministers should vehemently urge upon their people as effectual remedies against so dangerous and pernicious a ma∣lady.
The one is the absolute and indispensible necessity of the new birth; Joh. 3.3. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. This new birth is no less than a renova∣tion of all the Powers and Faculties of the Soul, a

putting off the old man, and a putting on Christ; a changing that heart into a new gracious tender heart, that was by nature an old unbelieving stony heart; any thing that persons rest in short of this new birth, is short of Salvation.
The other is, soundness of judgment in the Do∣ctrine of Christ; it is not like that the Life should be holy, if the Ʋnderstanding be corrupt; there are damnable Principles as well as damnable Pra∣ctices, 2 Pet. 2.1.
Indeed all Erroneous Opinions are not alike dan∣gerous; such as strike at the fundamental Articles of Christianity are most deadly; such as err in les∣ser Points, are not in so much danger.
Therefore, as the more fundamental and noble a Doctrine is, the more earnestly should we contend for it; so the more directly any Erroneous Opinion subverts same fundamental Truth, the more zeal and indignation we should shew against it; as also the greater care to antidote our selves and others against it.
Now amongst those Erroneous Doctrines that have been like pricking Briars, and wounding Thorns, ever since the beginning of the Reforma∣tion, to the Protestant Churches, those wild and Erroneous Doctrines that have been broached by the Antipedo Baptists, on Anabaptists, have not crea∣ted the least trouble to the Church of Christ, but have been a perpetual vexation and trouble to all our godly Reformers, as is evident by the sad complaints of those godly men in their Books, as who will but read the Works or Lives of Calvin, Luther, Zuinglius, Melan∣cton,

Oeculampadius, Musculus, &c. and our English Divines, may be abundantly satisfied. The danger many of you were in of being sucked in among the Anabaptists, or at least to join with them in excluding your Infants from Baptism, the Seal of the Covenant, was that which first put me upon preaching upon this Subject; and it is the earnest re∣quest of several of you, that makes me consent to the Printing of it. The Sermons you have lately heard upon this Text, have been (glory to Free Grace) of admirable use to establish and settle those of you that were staggering in this Doctrine; that where∣as there was many scruples in many persons about Infant Baptism, yet now there are very few, if any, of those that constantly frequent this Congre∣gation, but have attained great satisfaction.
As God that knows my heart, can testify for me, that it is not yours, but you, that I seek, your present holiness and eternal happiness; so my great∣est joy amongst you will be to find that my labour is not in vain; that you are gained to Christ, and joined to him by so firm a faith as the gates of Hell may never prevail against.
I bless God for that encouragement I have had amongst you, many of you that sprung from Parents of the opposite Persuasion, having so chearfully listed your selves in Christ's Service, and by receiving Christ's Press-money, have more solemnly engaged your selves to be his Servants for ever. And that so many of you, and many even of adult age, have thought it their honour to be catechised in the Pub∣lick Congregation, which, I hope, will be followed by many others.
In short, Your exceeding willingnss to wait on the Ministry with those saving impressions which, I hope, God hath made on many of your hearts, are to me a ground of hope, that what is so hopefully begun amongst you, will be as comfortably finished in the glory of God, and your Eternal Salvation.
If any demand a reason, why one who willingly acknowledges himself to be the unfittest of a thou∣sand, hath attempted this work, which hath been so well performed by several abler Pens? I only an∣swer, That what others have done, being either too voluminous, or Answers to other Books, were therefore not so proper: Besides, they that know my Circumstances, the confident repeated Challenges, the restless Insinuations of the Anabaptists, together with the various Attempts that the Persons of that Persuasion have made to ensnare and draw away my Hearers (though I bless God with no success) to their own way; will see that I lay under a kind of necessity for what I have done.
Christian, study thy own heart, love all that fear God, though differently persuaded in some les∣ser things. And pray for him who desires to serve thee in our common Saviour,

