



My Lords, and Honoured Gentlemen,
THese Papers which were writ with a more private design, yet chiefly in∣tended for the Service of Their Majesties and the Publique, are now addressed to your Lordships to render them the more useful to those Ends; the several Eminent Stations in which all of you are, gives you the opportunity of improving whatever is herein proposed to that purpose. The unhappy management of the Affairs of Ireland on every Rebellion, hath made the Charge of their Reduction to England ten times more than needed. Camb∣den observed that by long usage it was grown a mischievous Custom in Ireland, that Rebels might with part of the Plunder they took from the English procure

Pardon: Whereby, and the Lenity of England, Rebellions were nourished there. This is most certain that the Papists have always had such Influence on the Councils of England, as on the conclusion of every Rebellion, they have been left in a condition to renew them at pleasure; to the great Charge of England, and Ruin of the English Planters in Ireland, and of their Improvements. And now, they, the French K. and the late K. J. have their Instruments at work to that end. But five Rebellions having been raised there betwixt 1567, and 1642. and now a Sixth, (of which two formidable and chargeable ones hav∣ing happened within the memory of many yet living) will, if we be not doomed to Infatuation, instruct us in the necessity of breaking their power, and utterly disabling them for future Rebellions.
There are a Party of Men who while the late K. J. was in Ireland mag∣nified both it, and the Force of the Irish, but upon the Tydings of the happy progress of His Majesties Arm, (to detract from the Glory of His Acqui∣sitions) they represent that Kingdom as chargeable and useless, nay as dis∣advantagious to England. It hath however to their Mortification already yielded Laurels to incircle His Royal Brows, and will do Treasure to His Coffers, with a rich Return to this Kingdom of the Charge laid out for its Reduction; if the Settlement thereof be duly attended. It is enough for His Majesty to Conquer, it ought to be the Care of His Ministers to settle and secure. There is indeed a great measure of Wisdom required to improve Victories, as well as Courage and Conduct to Atchieve them. It hath been observed to be the Fate of the English to lose that by Treaty, which they gain by Conquest; Five Hundred Years Experience hath verified it (in great measure) as to Ireland. The Affairs and Trade of that Kingdom, its Ʋtility and Importance to England, and the Influence it hath on the Trade and Rents thereof, seems to have escaped the observation of most of our Statesmen and Merchants; I have in these Papers attempted to rescue them from that obscurity, and to lay them before Your Honours. Now that the Affairs of that Kingdom are before You in Parliament, Councils and Committees: For which presumption nothing can Apologize, but the Zeal for the Publick, with which they were written. I am in all humility,

