



SIR,
UNder the present License of the Press, and Freedom of Re∣ligion, Two very fair Establish'd English Liberties; me∣thinks I have the Umbrage even of a Law on my side, to Authorize my Presumption, in paying this publick Devotion, to so Worthy a Patron; and fixing so fair a Name, in the Frontispiece of so poor a Trifle.
You must pardon me, Sir, if I lay hold of all occasions, and every Argument to warrant my Ambition: Besides, I have a stronger Charter than Poetick Priviledge, 'tis my Gratitude that dictates to my Pen; You have already vouchsaf'd to Honour me with your Smiles, (and where such Goodness descends, 'tis natural for our Pride to aspire) whil'st warm'd and animated by that only Encouragement, I am embolden'd to make you this Dedication; insomuch that my present Devoirs have more of the Thanksgiving, than the Prayer; a Duteous Acknow∣ledgment for Blessings already received. And here I must avow to the World, That in Addressing to a person Enrich'd with so many Generous Accomplishments, I▪ set not out a Discoverer, a Columbus to any unknown Golden Coast: No, Sir, Your

past Favours have swell'd my Sails, whil'st I am carried by a fair Levant to an open free Port, and a Hospitable Shoar.
That Sweetness of Temper runs through all Your Conver∣sation, so free from any Allay of Pride, (that too common Taint of Prosperity,) that You have all the Sweets of the Rose, without the prickles. Your Goodness so Frank, and so diffu∣sive, and the Access to it so Easie, that those who have the more particular happiness of Your nearest Intimacay, and Friendship, find those Charms in Your Conversation, that they are scarce (pardon the seeming Contradiction,) to be enjoy'd: For the more they are possest, the more they are desir'd.
HONOUR, and GALLANTRY are not only Born, but bred up with You. You Challenge not only all the Ad∣vantages of a Fair and Generous Birth, but You have all the Improvements of a Generous and Sprightly Genius too, with so forward, so hopeful, and so growing a Merit (that ample Addition to your Hereditary Desert) that the Stem is a Grace to the Root.
If Providence does ever Study for her Fair Creations, she Thinks when she makes a Compleat Gentleman. And Fortune in the Donations of her Golden Favours upon You, has not Showr'd them at Random; she found that WORTH, that challeng'd her Smiles, and her Graces are not her Gift, but her Reward.
But to all Your other Felicities there's the chief one yet want∣ing, to compleat the Summ; the Charms of LOVE, that double Heaven of Joy, where You must give Blessings when You receive them. And here I must beg your leave, to wish You that truly fair and Virtuous Choice, That like the Famous Youth of Troy, You may have Rival Beauties all waiting when your kind Hand shall give the Prize, and bestow the Ball of Gold. And truly, the Generous and the Brave shou'd ever make Love,

their nearest Care. For indeed, Love is the only Foundation of Immortality. For though Noble Virtues, a Sweet Fame, and Fragrant Memory may keep a fair Name alive; yet to make Your self live for Ever, You only want a Lovely Feminine Partner, to draw Living Copies from so Excellent an Original.
But I must not dwell too long upon this Subject, For as Dedi∣cations are by Custom, only the Panegyricks upon the Patron's Virtues, possibly to so much Modesty, (one of your most shi∣ning Perfections,) I may make but ungrateful Musick on that Theme. Yet why shou'd WORTH and HONOUR any more Blush to hear their own just Praises, then the Hero, or Monarch his Triumph, or Coronation Song. The Theme on this side may be as Copious, and as inspiring as that; Desert and Ap∣plause are not confin'd only to Palaces and Thrones; the Chap∣plet sometimes may Sparkle, as well as the Diadem. 'Tis true the Encomiums of Extraordinary Desert; are what my poorest of Quills shou'd not presume to attempt, as being a Province for the Elder Sons of Apollo; and yet when I consider, that the Ayres that are tuned but to an Oaten Pipe, may be as chearfully and heartily Sung, though not so sweetly and loud as to a Silver Trumpet; I have that only Plea for this Boldness, which gives me the Honour of Subscribing my self,
Sir, 
