



I Now tender what you are plea∣sed to owne: sooner I could not, because wanting time & health, I had onely broken notes. I am now come as neere my selfe, as my notes will helpe me. It was my resolution from the first, to hold me to the worke in hand, the work of the day, the work of my calling; accordingly I made, and pursued my choice, waving all disputes Sacred, or Civil. Things ever move best in their owne Sphere: And O that all things might ever runne in their right channell! My worke was to Mourne, to Preach; not to Parliament-it: and I never brought a sadder heart to a businesse. Nay, The divisions of Reuben still sticke, and have lest those impressions, which will not off.Judg. 5.15. I bleed still
in the breaches of Dying Ireland, and in our Home-Jealousies. Alas! That Brethren who promise and purpose so well, work and sweat so hard, should so hardly understand each other. There is, I feare, a Divine displeasure in it. Where Unity is,Psal. 133.3. the blessing is. The spirit of Iealousy & division is a Messenger of wrath.Judg. 9. &c. And then most, when All complaine of it, and No one will owne it. For this My soule shall weep in secret; and in Rebaccahs case, I will take up her complaint; Why is it thus! As for you Noble gentlemen, What can I say now? It is wisdome (you know) to know ones owne Compasse, and you are far above me. Your Place is high, your Task great; and yet your strength not infinite. By Place,Psal. 82. you are Gods: and yet Men; you must Fall (and may faile) like others.Queid est Ec∣clesia? Viri & mulieris. Ohey in Eph. 5. Gods own Synod (the Church) is made up of men: and men be Men, in the Greatest Councels. Compare them to the Highest God, their greatest agitations, are but as the busie sweatings of so many Ants in a Molehill. Your work is also great. As your Place, so your Work is Gods. Your businesse lies about Laws, and Orders. Order is a Sacred thing, Law, the work of a God. No man can see,
or say All in his Law; Sin will evade; witnesse our good Laws touching the Lords day, Swear∣ing, and Drinking. Now (for sooth) you must tell us what Prophanesse is, what Swearing you meane, and when a man is Drunken. Nay, when a Law is with some difficulty conceived and with more brought forth, it is not an easie thing to teach it to Speak plainly: nor are men so happy in their expressions as was S. Paul, who wrote,2. Cor. 1. nor more, nor lesse then we Read. I speak not this in a Discouraging way.Et nescit reme are leo Crand.  &c. Eurip. Noble Spirits know not what that meanes. Only they know from the Poet, That it makes a man lesse then nothing. Laws therefore must be; else all goes to losse. Leave men to themselves, each mans lust will be a Law; each mans Opinion, a Bible. My speech onely tends to this, to provoke you and my self to pray∣er and dependence. He that will undertake the work of God, with the wit and strength of a man, will but shame the worke, and break him∣self. My hope is, That you will begin and end with God: that you will doe all in his strength, and doe his best work first. Mens Consciences are miserably perpelxed between Command and Command. Our Congregations are as much divi∣ded,
betweene Teacher, and Teacher. The con∣clusion in time will be,1 Cor. 1 12. We are of Christ, We will believe none of them all. Let me assure you, The case betwixt Pastor and Flock will be very sad, if there be not a timely settlement. But things of this nature I had rather speak in Pri∣vate, then in Presse, or Pulpit; And there rather to God, then to Man. I therefore reine in and be∣take my selfe with aged Jerome to my Tuguri∣olum, and there blesse God, that I dare sleep, and can say, that ought is my owne, and there deplore my barren ministery for almost twice twenty yeares, and implore the blessing of heaven upon my Deare Soveraigne, & his Great Councel. Now the Great Counsellor give you a right understanding,Esay 9.2 Tim. 2. in all things: And the God of Peace himselfe (he alone can do it) give you peace,2 Thes. 3.16. in al things, by al meanes. So wil pray
From my poore Study Iune 13.164.

