



SIR,
YOu are called to a place which I cannot but love, Hanwell, you are yet but young,Eccles. 11.10. and youth (God saith) is vanity, and vanity feeds upon it self,Job 11.12. being empty and impatient of Counsell; we were wont to say of you in your Childhood, that you were a man, we now upon better grounds expect it from you; and
do pray you seriously to minde your self: First, whether you are cal∣led: Secondly, and by whom. 'Tis true, you are called to a great estate, but that is made up of such materials as do stand upon two lame feet:1. Tim. 6.7. the first is Uncer∣tainty; first outward things are uncertain; 1. to us, they have wings,ov. 23.5. and are now upon the wing, flying from house to house, and (as I may say to my cost) from nation to nation; on the o∣ther side, 2. we are uncer∣tain to them, sometimes we play with them as children with birds and send them flying by unthrifty and ungodly meanes, at other times death seises us and seque∣sters them on the sudden. You need
not go from home to learn this, my dayes are not many, yet in them, I have buried three of your Fa∣thers, with their respective wives, besides branches, more then I can name; you are (within few years) the fourth heir of that ancient house; such is our life, and so un∣certain the supports thereof. But admit a certainty, yet halt these outwards, on another lame legge,  and that's Unsufficiency, they will not secure us from any evill, they will not procure us any good, at least they will not give us any full satisfaction, we read of some who had more Kingdomes then you have Mannors; who enlarged their desires like hell, and yet were as unsatisfied as hell it self: so true
is Solomon (to say nothing of hea∣thens) the eye is not satisfied with seeing,Ecceles. 5.10, &c. &c. and when all is done, all is but vanity, and the vanity of vanities: this (I confesse) is not easily beleived, till experience hath confuted us. I remember what your Father told me, upon his death bed, I have often heard you (said he) speak of creatures vanity, but I could never beleeve it till I had tryed, upon triall, he found me true. O that Sir An∣thony in his youth, would appeal to Sir Anthony in his age, be∣leeve it (said he to his heir, your Grand-father) all is vanity, meer vanity, so have I, so will you in time find it; but so much of that.  In the next place, be plea∣sed
to consider, 2. who hath brought you hither; surely preferment comes not by chance,Ps. 75.6, 7. it is the Lord that sets up, and puls down, now in mercy, now in wrath; the world may seem to run on wheeles, but those wheeles are full of eyes,Ezek. . and an eye of providence is most visi∣ble in these revolutions which re∣late to you. When I first knew Hanwell, I found Sir Antho∣ny Cope there, and there I leave him again, whilest I leave the world, the wheel with eyes is come about, and ends where it began for my time; and truly it will be no small comfort to me dying, may I leave the same Sir Anthony in the same place; the Sir Anthony that I found there, was not onely
morally good, temperate, sober, continent, &c. but spiritually good, a man truly zealous for God in his day, worships, truths, a man who did much countenance all honest Preachers, and (which is not ordinary) his own most, a man terrible to the wicked, comforta∣ble to the Godly, a lover of his Countrrey, and with Uzziah a lover of husbandry in that his Town, who made it his study (as he would say) to imploy the poor there, and to keep thence, such as would either burden or blemish the place; This was the Sir An∣thony that I found there, and my prayer unto heaven is, that the same name and man, may still and still there live, and be ever like
self, that his house may be farre from the curse, Nah. 1.14. and be filled with the presence of the God, who is both his own, and our blessednesse; and here I must now end, having exceeded my purpose, I say but thus much more, and I have done. The longer I lived in those parts, the more need I found of laying principles well, these few are some of those many delivered in a shorter and plainer way, these thus preserv'd and enlarged, I tender to you as an expression of my true observance of that Honourable house, and ho∣nest Town, where I spent most of my strength, and which I commend to the word of grace
to be further built up in the faith of Christ, in whom I would be whilest I am, Sir,

Trinity College Oxf. Octob. 13. 1653.
