



Madam,
STrange not my slownesse. I never penn'd and printed more unchearefully, more sadly. Sorrow moves slowly. And what is this your Ladiship hath now woone from me! alas! I cannot print your Lord alive againe: nor did I intend any pourtraiture of him. What I spake was meant to the Living. The Dead
needed not my attestation. Indeed I loved Him more (as another once said) than to say much of Him. All that I can wish, is, that all, who pretend to Him, and his Religion, would expresse him in these particulars.

 1 That they would See with their Owne Eyes, and satisfie themselves in their Owne Grounds.
 2 That they would be True to their Owne Principles; that so a man might know where to have them, and see, that they did Believe themselves.
Cic. de sinbus lib. 2. Epicurei mihi videntur meli∣us sacore, quan dicere. 3 That they would Say lesse and Doe more, and so difference themselves from other men, as once some Philoso∣phers did.
 4. That they would give leave to Dissent, where Assent cannot be with∣out Dissembling.

It is confessed, Madam, That
Sir Thomas and I were not alwaies of one minde. Dissent we did, in some things: But this I shall ever honour in Him, That He was Himselfe, and his Friends too. Neither prostitu∣ting his owne, nor ravishing another mans judgement; Herein we concur'd, and for this I honoured him, and he was pleased to owne me.
He was as A∣vistotle saies of the magnani∣mous  The world conceives my losse to be exceeding great. And it is a truth. For I have lost the Freest Repro∣ver that ever I met withall. But why should wereckon our friends Gaines to our Losses! I have done, Madam, with him.
And now let us (I beseech you) get off from our selves. At least, Let's im∣prove our sorrows to spirituall purposes. Mourne for this Kil-friend, Sin. Mourne for the losse of our time, and
our not inhansing opportunities and societies. And henceforward set our faces Homeward, Heaven-ward. Study Heaven; Secure Heaven; Trade and dwell in Heaven. There looke our selves; thence expect our Sa∣viour.
Meane while consider, Noble Lady, your great trust. A Great E∣state, A great Family. You have ma∣ny Servants to order; Children to edu∣cate; Neighbours to relieve. Here seale up your Thankfulnesse to God; your Faithfulnesse to your Dearest Husband. And the God of Heaven help you. Thus at last I returne you your own. What to call these Funerall Dispatches, I wot not. Yours (such as it is) it is, you will owne it with∣all its imperfections, and stand betwixt blame and me.

 I could not come home to your De∣sires fully. Some things I forgat in the Delivery; and some I then abridged for haste, and now make short breathd enough. But I am come as neare to my meaning, and my own Copie, as I can. The Lord go with it, and ever be with you, and all yours. So will Pray

