



Worthy Friends,
THat I might pay a more than Momen∣tary acknowledgment for the many Te∣sies of Love and Honour I have daily receiv'd at your hands ever since Providence brought me amongst You, I humbly lay at your feet this little Book: And since Friendship is best preserv'd and cultivated by mutual Obli∣gations, I will (which indeed is all I can do on my part) in Return of Your many good Offices▪ when ever any of You, or your Friends, are pleased to call for my Assistance, make it my sole care and design to Administer proper Me∣dicines, as the Patients necessity shall require.
Another Reason of my Dedication, arises from the knowledge I have of Your Zeal or Godliness, and the Propagation of the true

Religion, to which I hope this my little Book will in some measure Contribute. I need no stimulate You to the encouraging of Virtue, and curbing of Vice, since I know that You, according to the Power God has invested You with, will take care to punish Iniquity, and maintain the Purity of the Christian Religion, which has suffer'd so long by the Remisness of many of its Professors, insomuch that Athei∣stical Principles and Practices have strangely gotten ground of Gospel Truths, to the Spiri∣tual Grief of all the Godly.
And now since I consider'd that Spiritual and Corporeal Maladies are the two grand Mis∣fortunes of Mankind, I have in these sheets endeavour'd to Remedy both.
Physick is chiefly what I Profess, nor am I asham'd since it is of such Intrinsick worth, that it even adds honour to the most honour∣able Practitioner: That it is profitable to the Natural Body, and consequently to the Body Politick, since the latter consists of the former as a Whole do's of its Parts, must be acknow∣ledg'd by every one that is Sanae Mentis, and

needs not Helebore. Hence the Wise Gre∣ians did not without Reason highly commend Hypocrates, and the Latines their Corne∣ius Celsus, for their Courage in first Ven∣uring, and Wisdom in wading into the Depth f this Mystery, and for their transmitting in heir Works this Noble Art to Posterity.
This Art was anciently Valu'd at so high  Rate, that Apollo and Aesculapius, steemed by some the first Founders of Physick, ere adored as Gods for the Excellence of their vention. Besides, the Word of God, which ndeniably Warrants our Esteem for whatso∣ver it Extolls, mentioneth Phisitians by way f Honour before the giving of the Law; e which doth not only implicitly allow, but xpresly Commands (if the Old English Tran∣ation be credited) the use of Physick; see en. 50.2. Psal. 147.3. Exod. 15.26. od giveth Medicines to heal, Health is the rince, the first Born, as Life is the King, of utward Blessings. The Widow in the Gos∣l disesteemed all her substance in comparison  this Iewel: And Job said, Skin for Skin,

and all that a Man hath to save his Life. The Phisitian, who is Manus Dei, brings his precious Pearl, Health to the oppressed Sick, where God sees it ncessary for their futur good. God and Nature (qui nihil frustra agunt) have appointed Herbs not only for Meat, but also for Medicines, the virtue and value of which would never be found out, no made serviceable to their right Ends, if some did not employ their time and tallants in search thereof: tho' 'tis a task full of difficulties; for the natures or effects of Simples alter accord∣ing to the difference of places in which they grow, and according to the Constitution of the Persons to whom they are given. How mi∣serable then are those places where nothing but ignorant Pretenders abound, whose Medi∣cines are usually worse than Ineffectual, an such as take them are deliver'd up to th Mercy (I should rather say, Cruelty and Exe∣cution) of Ignorant Pretenders. On the othe hand, what a great felicity and happiness is i when the Sick and Diseased meet with Per∣sons both of much Science and Conscience, wh

nderstand and consider the Cause of Diseases,  Nature of Ingredients, the Constitution of atients, the difference of Climates, and the roper Seasons of Administring Physick, and aithfully, according to these Circumstances, Prescribe and Apply it.
Yet, dear Countrymen, all this without God∣iness is not enough, which, as the Diamond to he Ring, addeth real Value to all natural and cquir'd Accomplishments, and which is the nly Ark for the Soul to be shelter'd in when a Deluge overfloweth. O! how glad would sanctified Schollars be, who are now cry'd up for sublime Wits, for the Quintessence of Learning, for living Libraries, and Divine Eagles, for Magistri Sententiarum, Do∣ctores Angelici, Seraphici, Subtiles, and what not, if they could pass at the great Day for the greatest Ignorants, and most illiterate Innocents that ever were in the World.
'Tho' my Practice is Physick, yet have I presum'd to Write of Holy and Spiritual things, because Religion is absolutely neces∣sary in all; and also to beget in all Men dili∣gent

endeavours after true Piety, as the onl means to arrive at a right management o their Parts.
The Lord grant that what I have written▪ may be apply'd as Medicinal, to the health o my own, and the Souls and Bodies of others▪ which is the hearty Prayer of
Honoured Sir, And dear Countrymen,

