



Ladies,
THIS Project of Composing a DICTI∣ONARY for the use of the Fair-Sex, (which may serve as a Secret Oracle, to Consult in all difficult Cases) being the First Attempt of this kind that has appeared in English, 'tis hoped 'twill meet with a Courteous Reception from all, but more Especially from you, for whose sakes 'twas undertaken; and if it re∣ceives any Favour at your Hands, I shall Attri∣bute its Success in the World, to the ILLU∣STRIOUS SUBJECT it Treats on; viz. The Virtues and Accomplishments of your Sex; which are so many and Admirable, that no Volume can contain them in their full Extent.

However my thoughts and good wishes have bid fair in this Essay, which is intended for a General Entertainment, and will, I hope, prove to the Satisfaction of the Learned and Ingenious of the Age; whose Discretion I need not doubt, will keep them from wresting it to any other end, than what it was designed for; viz. The Benefit and Advantage of the Modest of either Sex, not desiring that this Book should fall into the Hands of any wanton Person, whose Folly or Malice, may turn that into Ridicule, that loud∣ly Proclaims the Infinite Wisdom of an Omni∣potent Creator, neither is any thing inserted in this WORK, but what I have sufficient Autho∣rity to back it with ready at hand.
It is now near a Twelve-month since I first entred upon this Project, at the desire of a worthy Friend, unto whom I owe more than I can do for him: And when I considered the great need of such a Book, as might be a Compleat Directory to the Female-Sex in all Relations, Companies, Conditions and States of Life; even from CHILD HOOD down to Old-Age, and from the Lady at the Court, to the Cook-maid in the Country: I was at length prevailed upon to do it, and the rather because I know not of any Book that hath done the like; indeed many Learn∣ed Writters there be, who have wrote excellent well of some Particular Subjects herein Treated of, but as there is not one of them hath written upon all of them, so there are some things Treated of in this Dictionary that I have not met with in

any Language. 'Tis true, MY OWN EX∣PERIENCE IN LOVE AFFAIRS, might have furnisht out Materials for such a Work; yet I do not pretend thereby to lessen my Obligations, to those Ladies, who by their Generous imparting to me their Manuscripts, have furnisht me with several hundred Experiments and Secrets in DOMESTICK AFFAIRS, BEAUTIFY∣ING, PRESERVING, CANDYING, PHY∣SICK, CHIRURGERY, &c. Proper for my Work, and such as were not taken out of Printed Books, or on the Credit of others, but such as are Re-commended to me from their own Practice, all which shall be inserted in a Second Part, if this First meets with Encouragement, that so both together may contain all ACCOMPLISH∣MENTS needful for Ladies, and be thereby ren∣dred perfect. Nor shall I dissemble the Assist∣ance which I had from the Private Memoirs of Madam—a Person well known to all the World, for being both Exact and Curious in those Matters, of which my DICTIONARY Treats. And as this Work contains my own Observations on Love and Marriage, &c. For many Years, as also the Secrets received from Ladies of the best Quality; So Lastly, That nothing might be wanting to render the Work perfect, I have consulted the most valuable Books written for, and against the Fair-Sex, as also Dr. Blan∣cards, Mr. Blounts, and other Dictionaries, of note, from which I extracted what was proper for my Work; for as the things Treated on, are many and various, so were my helps.
I hope Ladies, you will not think it much that as the Famous Limner, when he drew the PIC∣TURE OF AN EXACT BEAUTY, made use of an Eye from one, of a Mouth from ano∣ther, and so Cul'd what was rare in all others, that he might present them all in one Entire Piece of Workmanship; so I, when I was to write of Love, Marriage, the Behaviour, Dress and Humours of the Female Sex, have consulted all Books I could meet with on those Subjects, to Compleat my own Experiences; So that you'll find here at one view, the whole Series and Order of all the most Heroick and Illustrious Women of all times, from the first dawning of the World to this present Age, of all degrees, from the IMPERIAL DIADEM, to the SHEPHERDS CROOK, of all Regions and Climats, from the Spicy East, to the Golden West, of all Faiths, whether Jews, Ethnicks, or Chri∣stians, (and particularly an Account of those WOMEN MARTYRS that suffer'd in Queen Mary's days: And in the West in 85: And of all Eminent Ladies, that have dy'd in England for these last fifty years) of all Arts and Sciences, both the graver, and more polite; of all Estates, VIRGINS, WIVES and WIDOWS; of all Complexions and Humours, the Fair, the Foul, the Grave, the Witty, the Reserv'd, the Familiar, the Chast, the Wanton. What ever Poets have fancied, or credible Histories have Recorded, of the first you have the Misteries and Allegories clearly interpreted and explained; of the latter,

the Genuine Relations Impartially delivered.
Here therefore (Ladies) as in a perfect Mir∣ror, you may behold the lively Ideas of all laud∣able Qualities whatsoever, suitable to them in all Callings and Conditions; here you may observe the profoundest of Learning and Divine Con∣templation in the Prophesies of the Sybils, &c. Here are Erected the Trophies of Female Forti∣tude and Valour, in several Instances. Here Queens may learn the Arts of Splendor and Mag∣nificence from Nitocris, Cleopatra, and others. Wives here may read how to demean themselves toward their Husbands in all Conjugal Affection. Daughters may here be taught Examples of Obe∣dience and Chastity, from the Vestal Votaresses. Matrons may find here that decent Deportment which becomes their Gravity, and Widows, that Constancy which besits their Solitude. Here is also to be found the true Interpretation, and Etymo∣logy, of Womens Names; with so plain derivati∣ons of each Name, whether Hebrew, Chaldee, Sy∣riack, Greek, or Latin, &c. that any ordinary Capacity may understand them.
But never does my Hand more compulsively di∣rect my Pen, nor my Pen wih less willingness blot Paper, then when I am forced in this Work, to lay open the frailties of your Sex, before so much commended. But this is my Encouragement to proceed; because I can produce nothing out of Hi∣story, to the Disgrace of the bad and vicious, which adds not to the Honour of the good and ver∣tuous. Were none foul, what benefit were it to

be fair? And if none deformed, what Grace could it be to be featured? There were no honour to be ascribed to Modesty, but that we see the dishonour of Immodesty depending; nor to the temperate, but that we daily find the Inconveni∣ences inherent to Riot and Excess. Besides, were all alike fair, what praise were it to be Beautiful? Or if all alike chast, what admiration could be attributed to so rare a Vertue?
I could not therefore but conclude it the highest of Injuries, that whereas the Actions of Men, had met with so ample and so many memorials, Your Sexes being not inferior to them, should meet with so slender and so few, and that to Erect this Monument to their lasting Glory, would be a piece of justice great as their misfor∣tune, in not having a more Judicious Recorder of their Worths then

