


Gentlemen,
'TIs fit my obedience should last as long as your Commands, in a willing rea∣diness whereunto about eight years since I presented you this Book enlarged with some private Acts and other Secrets of your Council, properly there inserted for your daily use, and as necessarily here omitted, for hat they immediately concern your selves, and not others, and therefore unfit to be communicated.
— Nonúmque prematur in Annum. Hor.
Eight years digest what you have rudely hinted,
And in the ninth year let the same be Printed.
As I never had opportunity of presenting you any thing properly mine, so neither durst I be guilty of so much Injustice as to deny you that so truly your own, as is this
fruit of my slender endeavours, which by your equal command was at first under∣taken, and now made more publick to the World, whatever the same be, 'tis re∣ally yours; but more principally the publick's whose, both you and I, and all that we can do, are; If it may in any sort prove service∣able to you, and you thereby become more use∣ful to the publick, I have my desired end.
And well considering the indefatigable labours of my primitive Predecessor in this place and Office, the learned Mr. John Hooker (whose works bespeak him famous within these our Gates) can deem it no less than a duty Incumbent on my self as one of his Successors to tread in his Steps, by imi∣tating him in his vertues, even by doing something in my Generation, that may shew my gratitude to this truly Ancient and re∣nowned City of Exeter for many plentiful favours conferred on me.
In a word, I've here methodically set down the chiefest of your Officers, from the first of them to the last, most of your ancient Customs intermixt with such Historical Ob∣servations peculiar hereunto, as hastily I
have collected, all which with my self I cast at your Feet.
Inveniunt veluti Patronos saepè Libelli,
Vobis sic librum dedico, méque simul.
As little Books their worthy Patrons oft do find,
So with my Book my self to you I here do bind.
I cannot exempt my self from the common frailty of nature, possibility of erring (hu∣manum est errare, belluinum perseverare) on the least conviction, Ile at once confess my oversight, and amend it, if not prevent∣ed by the charity of the discoverer, for which he shall not only reap my thanks, but withall the benefit of that old Aphorism. Blessed be the amending hand; nam facile est recole∣re, laboriosum condere.
For these twenty Years last past and up∣wards with all faithfulness I have endea∣voured to serve you in my Office, the chief∣est point whereof consists in preserving the right of Orphans, whose cause I have e∣spoused, and (under your protection) through some difficulties maintained, wherein I have met with some Beasts here, (as St. Paul did at Ephesus) in the shape of Men,
unreasonable, unnatural, and incredulous, for the Apostle tells us, that they who provide not for their own are worse then Infidels, of some such kind of Men this place hath not been free, who have seemingly denyed the Faith by preferring Strangers to their own Lineage, Children and Posterity in the dis∣posal of their Estate, contrary both to the Law of God and Man, for by the Custom of this City (which is also used in London, and both confirmed by sundry Acts of Par∣liament) no Freeman (his Debts and Fu∣neral being first discharged) can deprive his Children of one full third part of his personal estate, by means of which Law I have recovered the right of some Orphans, herein, and in so doing, my Conscience (more then a thousand witnesses) informs me, that I have been still careful in the discharge of my Trust, being constantly encouraged so to do through your exemplary rule of distributive Justice.
Sirs, you have the sole propriety of and in these my labour's and as absolute a power to dispose thereof as of the Authour, who subscribes himself my Masters

September 30. 1676.
