



IF our Souls were but affected with the sad and deplorable condition of the Churches of Christ, by rea∣son of those great divisions that are among them, upon the advan∣cing of every novel opinion, we should take up the wish of the Prophet, and say, Oh that our head were waters, and our eyes a foun∣tain of tears! especially if we consider what great dishonour it brings to God, who is and would be known to be a God of peace and not of confusion in all the Churches of the Saints: and as God is dishonoured, so the edification of the Churches are hindred; whilst their Religi∣ous discords prove as great an obstruction to their spiritual building, as the confusion of Languages did to the building of Babylon: and as discord among Christians hinders their
edification, so it hinders the conversion of o∣thers; for if a Jew or an Infidel come among Christians, and observes the several Opinions that are among them, may they not have just cause to say, You are mad? Oh then! as you tender Gods honour and your own edifica∣tion, and the worlds conversion, follow the things that make for peace.
And in order hereunto, let me give you some Cautions.
First, That you be careful how you take up an opinion, or receive anything for truth, be∣fore you have well weighed and considered of it. The foolish (saith Solomon) beleeveth EVERY thing: but the prudent will consider his steps, Prov. 14.15. plainly shewing, that some are so foolish, that if they do but hear a thing, they will inconsiderately and rashly receive it. Too much of this folly is at this time among professors, who run to receive every new thing that they hear of, before they are able to give a Reason for the truth of the thing they so receive. These men often prove troublers of the Churches peace; and turn the joy she had of a sudden Proselite, into great sorrow; & that either by their unruly and disorderly promoting their new received o∣pinions, to the disturbance of the peace, and hin∣derance
of the growth of the Churches; or else by their sudden departing from those Notions, that they hastily and inconsiderately received. For it is worth observing, that those that hasti∣ly imbrace a thing (though it be truth) sel∣dom do remain permanent Professors of it: this our Lord Christ teacheth us in the parable of the sower, Mat. 13.5. compared with the 20. where it is observable of the seed that fell a∣mong stony ground, how that ANON it sprung up, but it SUDDENLY withe∣red away for want of root: which Christ interprets to be for want of understanding, as appears, if you but compare this hasty Profes∣sor with the professor who is said to receive with understanding, ver. 23. whereas the other is said to receive it incontinently, ver. 20. he departeth from it as suddenly, ver. 21. I speak not this to the end that I might discou∣rage people from hasting to keep Gods com∣mands; but that, according to the Proverb, they should make no more hast then good speed: for sad experience tells us, that the Churches have sped very ill by such rash in∣considerate members, who have proved distur∣bers of the peace, while they have been in; and many times have made havock of the Churches
peace in their going out, by drawing others after them.
Secondly, As I would caution you to be careful in receiving, so I would likewise have you careful in the promoting any thing that you have so received.
In the first place, take heed of being too hasty in the venting that thou hast newly received: for if once a man hath vented an opinion in publick, it will be hard to recant, though it prove very erronious: how sad is it then to see men dispute in publick for that to day, when they doubted of the truth of it but yesterday!
2. Be careful in promoting of any thing thou hast received passionately and uncharitably, branding all that differ from thee as Law-breakers and denyers of Scriptures, calling all Ranters, Quakers, Papists, Atheists, &c. that deny the truth of thy opinion, as Mr. Tillam doth in his Treatise of the Sabbath, pag. 6. & accusers of Christ, and reproachers of the Apo∣stle Paul, pag. 122, 123. again, he calls those that do not agree with him in this point about the keeping of the seventh-day Sabbath, base∣born muck-worms, pag. 26. But no wonder Mr. Tillam speakes at this rate, since as he confesseth in his Book, That sometimes his
affection did out-run his judgment.
Likewise Mr. Spittlehouse in his Book called, Error blasted, wherein he useth a great many words in Capital Letters, instead of Capital Arguments; taking that for granted which he ought to have proved (viz.) Thát the Seventh-day Sabbath is a moral pre∣cept: then having shamefully begged the Question, he manfully infers, That all that are otherwise minded, are breakers of Je∣hovahs Royal Law; when he himself (from that Text much insisted on by them, Mat. 5.17. to prove the Seventh-day Sabbath a com∣mand to beleeving Gentiles) faints in the way of his proof, by saying, It is PROBA∣BLE Christ preached that Sermon to the multitude, as well as to the twelve among whom there were Gentiles. But what if one should say, It is certain that this was preached while the first Tabernacle was standing? and that it is improbable that he preached to Gentiles, because preaching to the Gentiles seemed so strange to Peter, Acts the 10? might not a man have better ground to evince the one, then he hath to infer the other, (viz.) because Christ preached to the multitude, that therefore two of the twelve were Gen∣tiles? and yet for all he confesseth, that it is but
a PROBABLE conjecture, yet he hath the confidence to imbark himself in a Paper Fri∣got, manned with great words, to incounter with all for Law-breakers, that are not Se∣venth-day Sabbath-keepers. Comparing Mr. Ives who disputed against his opinion, to a beaten Cock, that was ready to hide his head in any hole, pag. 27. Which if he did, this ensuing account of the Disputations will make appear.
In the mean time, let every one that reads Mr. Spittlchouse his forementioned Book, see how he rather blasts himself then his erring Adversary: for he goeth to prove against Mr. Ives, That the Sabbath ought to be kept by the Law of Nature, in his Postscript, pag. 26. and yet in pag. 28. he cries out a∣gainst Mr. Ives, for that he went to disprove the Morality of it by the light of Nature; comparing him to the Quakers, that adhere to the light within them: you may see then how mischievous a thing it is for a man passio∣nately to promote an opinion; it makes his affe∣ction out-run his judgment, or else surely Mr. Spittlehouse would not have taken Argu∣ments out of Natures Oracle to confute Mr. Ives (as he thought) and after decry Nature as
corrupt, blaming Mr. Ives, for adhering to her dictates when he had laboured as in the fire, but two pages before, to prove the Law of Nature holy, just, and good: How much then doth it concern us to lay aside passion in the promotion of that we conceive to be true, lest we pull down that with one hand we set up with the other?
3. In the promoting of thy Opinion, be more studious for Arguments then Rhetorical flou∣rishes, which (together with railing Accusati∣ons) usually supply the place of Arguments; a strong sign of a weak Cause. And of this Mr. Tillam is sufficiently guilty: though at our Disputation he decryed Syllogisms, and refused to answer them; calling them the intising words of mans wisdom, when his Book is full of such kind of Humane wisdom, almost in every page, where he Courts all the Liberal Sciences for terms of Art to garnish his Book: as first, Grammatical terms, telling his Rea∣der of a Future Tense, and a Gerund in do, pag. 15, 73. and as though he were writing an Almanack, he abounds with Astronomi∣cal Phrases, as Meridian-Heights, the Suns Station & Retrogradation, Meridian glo∣ry, the celerity of the Sun when mounting the other Hemispere, the interposition of
the Terrestrial Globe, makes their Meri∣dian the Antipodes Midnight, Cloudy Speculations; the Moon in her constant inconstancie, and the Stars in the expan∣ded Firmament, the Empyreal Heavens, &c. pag, 8, 36, 42, 44, 166. Neither doth his book want Rhetorical expressions to carry on that which he wants Arguments to maintain; calling those that are Prosolited to his seventh-Day Sabbath-keeping, Ingenious, moun∣ting, refined Spirits; and others, base-born muck-worms, pag. 28.
Again, He calls the contrary Opinion, A shadie Speculation, pag. 8. Again, he is full of such Phrases as these, (viz.) Ideas of the Deity, Igitur, Emphatical, Demon∣strative Particles, High Encomiums, Intrinsical, Abstruse and intricate Per∣spicuity, the superlative presence, celerity, distracting Labyrinth, &c. pag. 9, 12, 92, 47, 54, 82. Logical and Poetical terms are frequently found in his writing: as Di∣lemma's, Scylla and Charybdis, Mean∣ders, Ariadnes Clue, the Father of Dae∣mons, &c. Who would think that aeman should garnish his Book with such Phrass as these, and yet resuse Academical Learning in
Disputation, as savouring of fleshly wis∣dom? nay, though he decryed Syllogisms as a carnal way of Discourse, yet he sometimes doth Syllogise in his Book, as the Reader may see in p. 19.I cite not these passages to the end that I might be thought to be a hater of humane learning, for I know it is of great use, and deservedly to be honoured; but to the end that the Reader may take notice that Mr. Tillam can cast honour upon learning when he thinks it will honor his Cause, but when it is used a∣gainst him, or makes for the de∣tecting his error, then he decries it as vain, and saith, he is sure that it is not of God, &c. & its worth observing, that while Dr. Cham∣berlain did Di∣spute Syllogistical∣ly, when he was Mr. Ives his opponent, Mr. Tillam did not shew any pub∣like dislike of such kind of disputation: but when Mr. Tillam came to respond to Mr. Ives his Arguments, then he inveig'd against it as a carnal thing: and yet for all this, when Mr. Tillam came to take upon him the part of an Opponent the next day, Mr. Ives desired him if he would not discourse Syllogistically, that he would prove the Position by plain Scripture; to which Mr. Tillam replyed, That there was no Text that in so many words would prove what he had asserted. Then Mr. Ives asked him why he blamed people for pro∣ving their practise by a Consequence, as he did in
his Book, pag. 96. if he could not prove his own practise without a Consequence? hereup∣on he was forced to take Sanctuary at a Syllo∣gism, as hereafter will appear, though all along he blamed Mr. Ives very sharply for using such a carnal weapon to discourse withal.
Let me beseech you therefore, from what hath been said, to suspect those men who are full of entising words, and empty of solid Arguments: and this is not only my advice, but the Apo∣postle's, who tells us, 2 Pet. 2. That with fained words some shall make merchan∣dise of Gods people; and therefore he bids the Colossians, in the 2 Chapter of that E∣pistle, To take heed lest any man begui∣led them through intising words. You see then, that good men may be spoyled of their joy, and Churches of their peace, by such who by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, Rom. 16.18. Be ready therefore to vent nothing for truth, but what you may be able to give a REASON of to them that ask you, with meekness and fear, 1 Pet. 3.15.
Lastly, Let me Caution thee to have a care not only how thou receivest an opinion, and how thou promotest it, but also how thou keepest and
retainest it: if thou findest that it is truth thou hast received, know, that her price is far a∣bove rubies, and no pleasure is to be com∣pared to it, saith Solomon, Prov. 8.11.
This the Poet saw, when he elegantly expres∣sed the estate of that man that had gained the knowledge of the Truth, saying, That it was a pleasure to stand upon the shore and to see ships tossed upon the Sea, and to stand in the window of a Castle to see a Battle and the adventures thereof below; but no pleasure is comparable to the standing upon the vantage ground of truth, (a hill not to be commanded, and where the Air is al∣ways clear and serene) and to see the er∣rors, and wrandrings, and mists, and tempests in the vale below: provided that this prospect be with pity, and not with swelling or pride. And as ano∣ther saith well, It is a Heaven upon Earth to have a mans minde move in Charity, rest in Providence, and turn upon the Poles of Truth: Oh then! when you shall have received the truth as it is in Jesus, walk in it, and be not easily perswaded to move from the truth unto which thou art called, for any base or by-end whatever; and the God of truth
shall at last recompence all thy Labours in it, and thy sufferings for it.
But is thou art convinced that some things whereof thou hast been perswaded are errors, be not ashamed to confess thy mistakes; knowing, that it is so far from tending to thy shame, (whatever Satan or thy own heart shall per∣swade thee) that it will be a crown of glory and honour upon thy head, Prov. 4.8, 9.
And in hold and contending for the Truth have a care lest thou over-valuest or underva¦luest the truth thou makest profession of, by counting those Truths essential to salvation & Church Communion, which are not so; or on the other hand by counting the Fundamentals of Christian Religion, but circumstantial things, and things without which a man may be saved: have a care then, lest thou by thy rigidness in things of less moment, shouldst disturb the peace of the Church, and offend the Consciences of thy weak Brethren for whom Christ died: the like care ought to be taken of the other ex∣tream of judging the Substantials of Religion as circumstances, lest by so doing we break down the whole Fabrick of the Christian Religion, and lay wast the profession thereof, by counting the props and stays of it as indifferent things.

Having cautioned you about the receiving, maintaining, and retaining of the truth, my desire is, that you make use thereof in judging these insuing Conferences about the seventh-day Sabbath, which I have carefully published for the stopping of slanderous mouths, who have misrepresented the Disputations; and also for the satisfying them that doubt, and confirming of those that are weak, that they be not carried about with divers and strange Doctrines, and tossed to and fro with every wind. If then by these threshings there be any thing beat out (that lay hid before) by which thy soul may be strengthened, and thy hungry desire after truth satisfied, give God the glory; and if by the light hereof any darkness or weakness is dis∣covered, bless the Father of lights; and if you do receive light, walk in it; that you may be found the children of it: and that this may be the end of our writing, and reading, praying, preaching, and disputing, is the prayer and desire of

