


THough there be nothing almost, Most
Illustrious Lords, that doth not de∣fend
the Constancy of Nature, yet a∣mongst
other arguments, your fa∣mily
may stand in the first place. From the
dayes of Dambrowca, that you have made
Poland happy, unto this present time, there
are as many Senatours of the Kingdom, of
your house as you have had Grandfathers, and
great Grandfathers in former ages, and all
of them of so great vertues, that all vertues seem
to be bred in your courts. That there were pios
men amongst them, the founding of Monaste∣ries,
and their large bounty to the Church can



testifie, that they were Magnanimous persons,
appears by their laying aside the supreme ho∣nours,
and undergoing meaner Offices, for the
publike good. Your Ancestours far before the
Lepidi, have out-run their yeers, by the cele∣rity
of their wife actions, and were made Ho∣nourable
Senatours, at that age that Scipio
could not think of being Consul. And why do I
speak of former dayes? Your Grandfather was
for this very thing of most famous memory,
who so raised Piety and Magnanimity to the
height, that were his hereditary vertues, that
he hath the name of the Patron of the True
Religion, and seems to be an example of most
prudent Oratory. To say no more, the most
Illustrious Lord your Father lives, and I wish
he might live alwaies, of whom so many & so
great things may be said, that the slendernes of
my wit cannot comprehend, nor my low style
expresse. The Church calls him, her nursing Fa∣ther
and Delight: The Senate their Eye, the
Nobility, the light of the common wealth, the
Muses their Patron; and to say what I would in
brief; Men think that in his brest is bred, what∣ever
vertue and prudence can be bred in any
Noble person. But most Illustrious Lords,
what shall I say of you and your two brothers?
I look upon your Illustrious and most Noble
Mother, descended from the Lesznii, and the



Dukes of Sanguscii, and you proceeding from
n honourable Seminary of vertues, do shew
forth some flowers in the spring of your youth
or the good of the Church and the Common
wealth, and there is no doubt but fruit will
follow in the Autum of your yeers. Most Illu∣strious
Lord Slupeck, I have no need to say
much of you, and your most noble family.
The Kingdom of Poland knows the worth of
it, and posterity shall thankfully remember
your most Honourable Father. And you whilst
ll your designes are Honourable, and engraf∣ed
into the Family of the Lesznii, what may
be aid of that family you justly seem to partake
of it. It is yet in your power to preserv a golden
ge in the Church and State: and being so, most
llustrious Lords, This work of the Constancy
of Nature, doth of right belong unto you, and
being I am come into the patronage of your
Noble family, it is my duty to offer it un∣to
you, whatever it is. Wherefore I lay it
at your feet, and I beseech you to pardon
any weaknesse in its mean dresse. No man was
ever unblamed to be wiser than his mean con∣dition
would suffer him; and no man lost his
abour that offered, though it were a mean
gift to the Gods.
Farewell, most Illustrious Lords; and pro∣ceed
and continue long to do good for God,



for your Country, and noble families; and to
shew favour unto me, that am most addicted to
your Honours.
From Leiden in Holland,
November: 1632.

