


To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, the Right worshipfull the Sheriffs, Mr. Recorder, with the Court of Aldermen, and Com∣mon Councel, &c.
AS among men, so there is a resemblance, and a kind of affinity among Cities which are the Mansions of men; and a reverence due to some more then to o∣thers: Carthagena in Spain, doth acknowledge old Car∣thage in Africk to be her Mother; Leyden in Holland doth glory that she is allyed to Lions in France, both of them bearing the name of Lugdunum; Saragosa in Aragon confesseth her self daughter to Syracusa in Sicily; and London, by some Antiquaries is called Troynovant, as having been first founded by the Trojans; But of all the Cities upon the earthly Globe, Jerusalem deserves most re∣verence, in regard our Salvation was wrought and consum∣mated in Her; In regard, that grand Prepitiatory Sacri∣fice for humne souls was offered in her: Therefore, under favour I held it not improper to Dedicat the History of this once so famous Metropolis, to the flourishing City of London.

In the holy Bible, the most authentick Patent of saving Faith, there is a Text which reflected upon the ncient Na∣tion of the Jews, and aymed only at their Cntry, viz. In Jury God is known, &c. Psal. 76. He was known in∣deed in that Land by the multitude of his Mercies, but af∣terwards by the severity o his Judgments; That race of people, partly because they were not co-labourers at the building of that Mount of humane pride the Tower of Ba∣bel, were, for many ages, the objects of his favour, till they made themselves afterwards the subjects of his fury. And as the Philosopher tels us Corrupo optimi est pessima, or as we find that the sweetest wines become the tartest vi∣neger; so those heavenly indulgences turn'd to heavy in∣dignations, those silver showers of extraordinary bene∣dictions became black stoms of vengeance. It is the me∣thod of divine Justice to correct first wth rods, then with scourges; and, if that will not do, with corpions; The Jews felt all the three degrees; and never was any people upon earth made greater examples of wrath th his own chosen Inheritance, a peculiar people that mig have m'd the right hand of primogeniture among the re of mankind. Now, whosover desires to make reserches into the grounds of these sad dysasters, will find, it was their sediious proud spirits, their instable and stubborn rebellious hearts, (which did them more mischief then the Roman R, or any o∣ther destructive Engines) the defiling f their Temple, the violation of the Tombs of the dead, with other acts of pro∣faneness and sacriledg: but principally the rejecting and crucifying of the Lord of life. For never any thing did thrive with them afterwards; insomuch, that, if there were no other motive for the Jews convsion, the length of these beavy judgments under which they groan to this day, were nough to do it; And tis observed the length of these judg∣ments doth often puzzle their intellectuals and put them at a stend; Fr some of their Rabbies will stare and shrink∣in

their shoulders at it, and sometimes break out into a kind of confession, that their judgments could not last so long but for crucifying one that was more then a man; Besides, the punctuall accomplishment of our Saviours pre∣dictions were sufficient to convnce any rationall creature; For, not long after, their Land became a stage of blood, and all kind of barbarisms. Their so renowned City, their Temple and Sanctum Sanctorum so fam'd all the earth over was made level to the ground: And observable it is, that these judgments fell upon their Temple at the highest time of holiness, at their Passover or Jubilee; so that one might say, That season which was ordained for their salvation turned to their perdition; Moreover the very inanimate crea∣tures, and vegetals, the very soil of the Country became co-sufferers with them, being forc't to part with her plen∣ty, as well as with her people ever since.
From that time to this day, 'tis well known what Runa∣gates, and Land-lopers they have been up and down the world; For although it is known there be many scores of thousands of them, dspersed and squandred here and there upon the surface of the earth, yet these straglers could ne∣ver since grow to such an unity and coalition as might form the species of any setled Government; but they still shuffle and prog up and down, being no better then slaves wheresoever they take footing. Moreover it is observed, that they apply themselves to the most sordid and servile conditions; for commonly they are either Lombardiers and Brokers for the pettiest things, as far as a blew point: Or they are Gabe∣liers and Tollmen, having some inferiour places in the Cu∣stom-houses, a profession so undervalued, and held infamous by their Ancestours: Or they serve for Spies and panders for intelligence, so that there be few great Officers in Tur∣ky, but have a Jew for that purpose; For they are known to be the subtilest, and the most subdolous race of people upon earth, as also the most fearfull and pusillanimous; inso much

that they are imployed no where in the wars, nor worth the making slaves of.
Now, the reason, why they are so far degenerated from their primitive simplicity and courage, is their frequent cap∣tivities, their desperate fortunes, the necessities and hatred they have been habituated unto from time to time. For no Na∣tion on earth hath been so generally contemned, both by Chri∣stians and Pagans; witness one Heathen Poet among divers oters, in these Hexameters, wherein there is an accumu∣lation of so many base attributes cast upon them,
Tum Judaea cohors infida, molesta, rebellis;
Perfida, dira, ferox, perjura, ingrata, superba.
Now the moralists observe, that nothing doth depress and de∣prave ingenious spirits, or corrupt clear wits, more then scorn, and necessity; nothing cowes them more then wan, and indigence;
—Virtutibus obstat
Resangusta domi—.
Touching the ten Tribes that were led Captives beyond E∣phrates, the present Jews know not what's become of them; yet they believe thy never became Apostates or Gentiles to this day. Some there are, and those of the best rank of Lear∣ned men, who hold, that the Tartars of Scythia, who about the year 1200. or a little before, became first known to the rest of the world by that name, and hold at this day a great part of Asia in subjection, are of the Israelits progeny, namely, of those ten Tribes, which were carried Captive to Assyria by Salmanazar, and some of his Predecessors.
The first argument they prduce, is, that the word Tartari signifies in the Syriak a Residue, or Remainder; such as those Tartars are supposed to be, of those ten Tribes.
Secondly they alledge, that they have alwaies embraced the Circumcision, the Anent Character of Judism.
Thirdly, they urge sundry Texts in E  proba∣ hereof; But this opinion hath found no  en∣tertainment,

with the best sort of Antiquaries.
The Jews of the Tribe of Benjamin (they say) are thos in Italy, Poland, Germany, the Turks dominions and all the Levantine parts; The Tribe of Judah, they hold to be setled in Portugal, where, they will not stick to say, that some thousands families of their race are, whom they dispence with all to make a semblance of Christianity, as far as the ta∣king of investitures in holy orders.
From hence they say their Messias is to come; of whom one may hear them discourse with such a relish, such a self-plea∣sing conceit and confidence that is wonderfull. This may be the reason why they instruct their children, and expound their law in the Lusitanian language in their Synagogues where women are not permitted to enter; for they hold them to be of an inferiour creation to man, and made only for sensuall pleasure, and propagation. They much glory of their mysterious Cabal, wherein they make the reality of things to depend upon letters, and words; but they hold, that the Hebrew hath the sole priviledge of this. This Cabal, or kind of knowledg, which is nought else but tradition transmitted frm father to son, & so from one generation to another, is, as they say, a reparation in some measure for the loss of our knowledg in Adam; And, they say, it was revealed four times: First to Adam, who being thrust out of Paradise; and sitting one day very sad, and sorrowing for the loss he had of that dependency the creatures have upon the Crea∣tor, the Angel Raguel was sent to comfrt him, as also to instruct him, and repair his lost knowledge; This they call their Cabal, which was lost the second time by the Flood, and Babel. Then God discovered it to Moses in the bush: The third time to Solomon in a dream, whereby he came to know the commencement, the mediety, and consummation of times, whereof he composed many Volums which were lost in the grand Captivity. The last time, they hold, that God restored the Cabal to Esdras, (a book they highly va∣lue)

who by Gods command withdrew himself to the wilder∣ness forty daies attended by five Scribes, who in that space wrote 200. and four books; whereof the first 134. were to be publikely read; but the other seventy were to pass pri∣vately among the Levites; and those they pretend to be Ca∣balisticall, and not to be all lost.
Concerning the present Religion of the Jews, there be three Sects of them. The first, which is the greatest, are cal∣led the Talmudists, in regard that besides the Holy Scrip∣tures, they hold the Talmud for authenticall, a book com∣posed by their Rabbines The second sect of Jews, receive on∣ly the Scriptures. The third, which is called the Samari∣tan, and whereof there are but very few at this day, admit only of the Pentateuch; viz. the five books of Moses, for authentick Scripture.
As, according to my former observation, this Nation is grown cowardly, & cunning, even to a proverb, which must be imputed to their various thraldoms, contempt, and po∣verty (which though it use to dastardize, and depress the courage, yet it whets the wit); so besides these qualities, they are commonly leight, and gidd-headed, much sym∣bolizing in humour with some of the Apocalypticall zelots of these times, and bold expounders of Daniel, with the other Prophets; whereby they use to sooth, or rather fool, them∣selves into some egregious fanaticall , which never∣theless passeth among them for an Illumination.
The first Christian Prince that expelled the Jews out of his Territories, was that heroick King, our Edward the first, who was such a sore scourge also to the Scots; and it is thought divers families of those banishd Jews fled then to Scotland, where they have propagaed since in great num∣bers; witness the aversion that Naton hath above others to hogs-flesh. Nor was this their extermina for their Re∣ligion, but for their notorious Cries; as  of wels, ounterfeiting of coins, falsfying of , and crucifying

Christian children, with other villanies. This hapned in the year 1291. And sixteen years after, France followed our example: It was near upon 200. years after, that Ferdinand dis-terred them out of Spain, and five years af∣ter him, Emanuel of Portugal did the like. But the Coun∣tries whence they were last expeld, was Naples, and Sicily, Anno 1539. In other parts of Christendom they reside yet in great numbers, as in Germay high and low, Bohemia, Lituania, Poland, and Russia; In Italy also, they are found; but in no country which is subject to the King of Spain; They live at Rom every quietly under the Pope's nose, and St. Mark makes no scruple to entertain them at Venice. In sundry places of the Ottoman Empire they are found ve∣ry numerous; so that it is thought, Constantinople and Thessalonica only, have near upon 20. thousand of them; Asia is full of them, as Aleppo, Tripoli, Damascus, Rhodes, and indeed all places of commerce, and traffick. There are numbers of them found also in Persia, Arabia, and about Cranganor in India. And to come to Africk, they have their Synagogues and Lumbards in Alexandria, the Grand Cairo; as also in Fesse, in Tremisen, and di∣vers places in the Kingdom of Morocco. There are about one hundred families yet left in Jerusalem. But that place where they are most unmingled is Tiberias, which the Turk gave to Mendez the Jew, for some signal services; Thither they oftentimes bring or send the bones of their dead friends, who have left large Legacies, to be interred from other places.
Besides those various visible judgments which have fallen upon the Nation of the Jews, as the utter subversion of their Temple, and City, with the slaughter of above eleven hun∣dred thousand souls during Titus siege; Besides the degene∣ration of their Country, of that Land which flowed with milk and honey, into such a barren condition; Besides their stragling confused course of life, with the generall contempt,

and despicableness they fell into; Besides the abjection  their spirits, and giddiness of their brains; I say, besides all these changes upon their minds, it seems there is a kind of curse also fallen upon their bodies; witness those uncouth looks, and odd cast of eye, whereby they are distinguished from other people. As likewise that rankish kind of sent no better indeed then a stinck, which is observed to be inhe∣rent, and inseparable from most of them above all other Na∣tions; And I wish that England may not be troubled with that sent again.
The occasion of these sad calamities which fell down in such catarracts upon the Jews, the discerning Reader shall discover in this ensuing story; therefore very worthy of his perusal, in regard they may serve for cautions to all people not to provoke the High Majesty of Heaven by such kind of sedition and profaneness: they may serve as so many buoys to preserve them from sinking into such gulfs of miseries; For if the naturall branches were not spared, how can the wild olive think to escape the fire of his displeasure?
So with my hearty prayers to Heaven for the prosperity and welfare of this glorious City, and that she may take fair warning by these Judgments, I rest

From the Prison of the Fleet 5. Feb. 1650.
