



Most Illustrious Princes and Lords,
AS all things have their revolutions, so hath naturall History the same chance. It was held for a goddess, and much ho∣noured in former times; witnesse the writings of Aristotle, Pliny, Dioscorides, and other famous men: but now a dayes it is so despised, that it is of no esteem at all; this mater needs no proving. I confesse the history of Plants is adorned by many, and Mineralls are made mention of; yet I doubt whether it be entirely professed in any University or School, (except Bononia, where Aldrovandus was). They that search out the secrets of Nature, in cursory discourses, fall unfortunatly upon the thorns of subtilties and snares of questions, and do nothing but weave and unweave them with a fine thred of controversies. Whence young Schollers suppose themselves fit to be Masters in Philosophy, when they know how to quote Aristotle for some things, confusedly and unreasonably for generall matters. Most gracious Lords, how unfit and hurtfull that is, I leave to every man to judge. As for me, what Goudanus the Mr. of great Erasmus speaks of Pliny, I dare to apply to natural History. That it is such, that who reads it not, is thought to be unlearned; he that disdaigns to read it, is more ignorant; and he that cannot rellish it, is most ignorant of all: And if there be any consideration had of conversati∣on, really it is more comely and more convenient for it, and for us to know wonderfull nature, and her motions; to learn the forces and natures of living creatures, mettals, sprouts, plants, to look into the Anatomy of man, and to

contemplate other rare admirable things in nature, than to rest satisfied in a few general things of motion, of the heavens, of meteors, and of the soul, (Johannes valent. Andr. in Jnstit. Magica.) and oft times to agitate these things againe, till we grow ridiculous. And indeed if the general Princi∣ples of natural Philosophy be lookt into, it will appeare they cannot consist without knowledg of History. For being that universalls are built upon particulars, illustrated, demonstrated, determined, re∣futed by them, how can he be skilled in Philosophy, who is ignorant of History? or how can he salve the many defects thereof, and con∣stitute Axioms that are introductive to action, and search out the forms, &c? The same will befall him as it befell Ixion, who embra∣ced a Clowd for Juno the powerfull goddess, whom he intended to em∣brace, and so is reported to have begotten Centaures and Chimaera's. As for what concerns action, he shall never change any other mettal into Gold, who knows not the natures of the weight, the yellow colour, of the malleablenesse, the extensivenesse, the fixt and volatile sub∣stance of them, and hath not diligently lookt into the menstruum, and seeds of minerals. He can never hope to retard old age, who hath not first the knowledge of the nature of driness, and of the depre∣dation of the Spirits upon solid bodies; of assimilation, and alimen∣tation. But the straightning of nature, and daily contesting with her, is the principall thing whereunto the knowledge of the same is direct∣ed. He is to me a true Son of natural Philosophy who knows how to augment, and multiply the Winds, to produce new mettals, to make mineral Waters; Artificial, of Vitriol, Brimstone, Allum, &c. and to bring forth new plants and animals. He is a legitimate enqui∣rer into Nature, who knowes how to prolong life, keep back old age, change statures and complexions, raise the force of imagination up∣on any body, cure diseases hitherto uncurable, ease pains, and can hasten the times of maturity, clarification, putrefaction, concocti∣on, and germination. I will now say nothing of Natures book, where∣in we may behold the supreme power, as the Sun is seen in the wa∣ter. For it is certain, that he is comprehended under the title of na∣tural history, and it is farr more easy to find out his goodnesse wis∣dom and power, by the apparition of new Starrs, the flowing of the Sea about Maccareo, the increase of Iron in Ilva, the marriage of palme Trees, the flowring of Mulberries, the ingenuity of Elephants, the Kingdom of Bees, the harvest of Pismires, the foresight of Dol∣phins, and the infinite Sympathies and Antipathies of things created, than out of those vast discourses of the entity of materia prima, identity of motion, the measure of time, &c: which are found in Albertus, Thomas, Scotus, Fonseca, Masius, Ruvius Toletus and others. Who knows not but that the knowledge of God is the principall end of Sciences? When I had diligently considered of these things, first induced there∣unto by the writings of that reverend man D. Johannes Andreas, my much honoured friend, I not only conceived a high love of naturall History, but I thought my self obliged to perswade young men that

were studious, to do the same. But because I observed that the The∣oreticall part was shut up in huge Volums, and the practick invol∣ved with great difficulties; and I saw that Youth that are given to idlenesse, would hate labour; and being addicted to pleasure, would not endure difficult things; I, imitating the Sons of Aesculapius, (who allure the sick to use bitter things, use also syrups confections electu∣aries, &c.) have culled out the most pleasant things, (and if any be doubtfull, it was done to spur them on) as much as my other occasi∣ons would suffer me, which I had in Poland, being Tutor to the most noble Kurtzbachius de Zwada: as also by my proper studies in the low Countries, out of the huge volumes of Pliny, (concerning whom, I like that saying of Lipsius He that calls Pliny his works Pandects, in my opinion shall not err; for that man read, knew all, and shut up Greece and Italy in one volume) Agricola, Gesner Aldrovandus, Libavius, Mathiolus, Scaliger, Cardan, and many more writings, and by these my purpose was to invite with intreaty the studious youth, that labour so much in the common principles of natural Philosophy, to a more serious scrutiny of Nature. But, most illustrious Princes and Lords, when, as the manner is, I sought for a Patron, I thought this work did of duty belong unto your Name. For If it be considered; the examples of Solomon, Alexander, Mithridates, Diocletian, Francis the first King of France, and others, will teach you, that the knowledge of natural Phi∣losophy belongs also to Princes and to great men. If you; I confesse, the hope of Poland now, and in time may be the Starrs, of that Coun∣try, that with the beams of their light, will vouchsafe to illuminate the Church, the Common-wealth, and schooles of learning. If I; I have drawn these things forth chiefly for the good of my Nation, and I study other things, if God please to lend me space to perfect my in∣tentions. Yet I deny not, but it may be I owe more to you already than I can pay. For, most Illustriuos Prince Janusius, you were pleased at Lipsia to invite me to your Table, and to discourse with me. And the most illustrious Lord Alexander Przybkowic Przybkowsky, your high treasurer, thought me worthy, to have the offer of a place in your illustrious family, if occasion were. Most illustrious Lord, how great your Noblenesse was to me, my conversation at Lesna with the most learned Lord Michael Henry, a most excellent Chymist, and your hof-master; and with the reverend Mr. David Ursin, a man of singular fidelity and prudence, who sojourns with you, may suffici∣ently witnesse. Also, most Illustrious Lord Boguslaus, your letters are sufficient testimonies, whereby you often spake to me when I lived in Holland, and the good words you spake of me being absent, most lovingly when you departed from Lesna. Wherefore, most illustrious Lords, whatsoever this small work is, I lay it down at your feet; and you I hope will receive a small gift of a thankfull mind, with that Heroick humanity that is bred in you; and think, that I owe you much more, but I cannot give you more than I do. God grant that the Majesty of Arts buried in our minds, may be recall'd and brought to life

again by your promoting voyce, and be restored to its former luster. As for me, if I find that you accept of these things, and that they are usefull for our students, I shall indeavour to handle these things more accurately, and to frame a compleat Circle of Arts and Sciences in a small history, that young students may have the fruit of it, and may more happily be promoted in the course of their studies. I wish it. In the mean while, that you most Illustrious Lords, may live long for the glory of God, and good of your Country. Given at London, May 15 old style, Anno 1631.

