



Right Wor:
I Have for a long time had an earnest am∣bition
to offer something unto you that
might be, in part at least, worthy of your
self; and I hope you will make this pre∣sent
to be so, by your gracious acceptance,
suffering it to wear your livery: The Author
of it was a very learned man, whose works can
be no waies prejudiciall to any person of
Honour. The subject of this Book is seri∣ous,
and of great Importance, I fear no ob∣jection
but that it may not be judged so suta∣ble
for your younger thoughts. Yet I presume
you wil not be offended with me, that I should
conceive such ripenesse and maturity of judge∣ment
in you beyond your yeers, as to tender
a Book to your patronage, whose subject may
deservedly imploy, and stumble too, the appre∣hensions
of the greatest Sages, and learnedst
Rabbies of our times: For my own part I ne∣ver
much fancied Poeticall strains, and flashe
of wit, that are commonly bare outsides and



make a crackling noise in the world, having
no solid matter containd in them. Yet I know
such empty vanities can hardly want Patrons;
It were then great pity that such a rare piece
as this should fail of a favourable Maecenas.
The question here agitated is, Concerning
Natures Constancy, (and not concerning the
Inconstancy of vain mens Manners) which
I wish idle brains would seriously reflect upon,
viz. whether this age wherein we live, may
not afford persons (for man is the chief thing
here considerable as famous for their valour,
for skill in all Arts and Sciences, and all other
Noble qualities and endowments, as there
were in former dayes. The Author who
maintains the Affirmative, hath made it
good, as I suppose, beyond all exceptions, and
therein hath paralleld, and I may say, exceeded
by force of Argument, any that have maintain∣ed
the contrary; and that to the vindication
of his own particular, in this excellent Book
of Natures Constancy. True it is, that there
were many men formerly of great Honour
and Renown in severall Countreys, and men
of our daies, are reputed generally to be as Pig∣mies,
compared with those Giantlike Heroes
that were before us; and in some particu∣lars,
I think it cannot be defended, but they
might surpasse us. Yet in regard we have the



benefit of their labours and our own endea∣vours,
we, though dwarfs, standing on their
shoulders may see farther than they could. For
since the flood, commonly men lived no lon∣ger
than we do now, and they wanted the help
of many things that we enjoy; God hath been
bountifull to every age in some notable disco∣veries
never known before. For even in that
very thing that learned Archimedes, is so
much magnified for, his , our Age can
justly say , that we have exceed∣ed
him. Martial in his Epigrams complains
of such who carped at those that were eminent
for Parts, in the times they lived in, and
would give them no commendation because
they were not Antient.
Tu solos laudas mortuos Poetas:
Nolo ut tibi placeam, perire.
And in another excellent Epigram he states
it at large, taxing the malice and envy of de∣tractors,
from the then present Age:
Esse quid hoc dicam, vivis quod fama negatur,
Et sua quod rarus tempora Lector amet?
Haec sunt Invidiae nimirum, Regule, mores:
Praeferat antiquos semper ut illa novis.
Sic veterem ingrati Pompeii quaerimus umbram,
Et laudant Catuli Julia templa senes
Ennius est lectus salvo tibi, Roma, Marone.
Et sua riserunt secula Maeonidem.


Rara Coronato plausêre theatra Menandro:
Nôrat Nasonem sola Corinna suum.
Vos tamen, ô nostri, ne festinate, libelli:
Si post fata venit gloria, non propero.
I confesse the noblenesse and admirable worth
of Ancestours are as spurs to posterity to set
them on upon some Honourable designes, that
may make them worthy of their Progenitors;
So Virgil hath it in his Heroick verses.
Sis memor, & te animo reptentem exempla torū.
Et pater Aeneas & avuncalus excitet Hector.
Yet Ovid clears it, that what they did afore
times, will not ennoble us, if we tread not in
their steps of Honour and Vertue.
Nam genus, & proavos, & quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix en nostra voco,—
We may, nay we shall honour our Ancestours
the more by endeavouring to go beyond them.
For the men of Israel & Judah, had no under∣valuing
thoughts of posterity; nor was King
David displeased at it, when Solomon was made
King, that the people prayed that God would
make his Throne greater than the throne of his
Father David.
Paterculus a singular Historian, seemes to
hold the Negative, but that is meant onely,
as to the rising and falling of particular Genera∣tions,
that like to mans life, have their childe∣hood,
youth, vigour, and olde age. As Physi∣tians
distribute the times of diseases, wherein



are to be observed, the beginning, augmenta∣tion,
state, and declination of them. For even
as a man being to go up a hill, first comes to
the foot of it & so mounts higher by degrees til
he come to the top, and then he must of ne∣cessity
go down again, as being able to go no
higher. So there is an  and top-point
in all humane affaires, which being once
gained, they fall back as far as the low rise they
first had. We see this largely verified in seve∣rall
ages, (I will not be tedious to rifle Histo∣ries
to set them down here) wherein we read,
that Learning and Military Arts, and purity of
Religion have flourished wonderfully, yet by
degrees they have all failed and worne away,
and as grosse ignorance and pusillanimity;
blindenesse and superstition have succeeded
them, as can be imagined; like to the seven
yeers of famine in Egypt, wherein the seven
yeers of plenty were forgotten, as if they had
never been. But that this is not so in the
generall course of the world, that hath a conti∣nued
revolution, and circular motion, is cleer∣ly
seen in the very change of the yeer; For
spring goes on to summer, summer to Autumn,
Autum to Winter, and so comes about again:
No spring so good, but, if not the next, yet
some yeers following, may present us with the
like or better, however the declining Au∣tum,



and cold hoary Winters have passed be∣tween.
I am of opinion that the Author who
maintained this Theorem, not as a paradox,
but as a reall truth, hath obliged our Age to so∣lemnize
his memorie, for giving us this hint
to exasperate our endeavours, and for chalking
out the way, whereby we may be able to do
more than any Age before us. That they should
not so much reflect on former times, as to for∣get
that God had reserved somthing for them,
if they would not be wanting to themselves.
No Hercules Pillars are here set up, with a Non
ultra engraved upon them; but we are to make
use of Charles the Fifth his Motto, and go on
couragiously with a Plus ultra, adding to
what our forefathers shewed themselves ho∣nourable
in. Give me leave for a cloze to
make this application, that as your worthy
Ancestours were highly honoured for their
vertues, and for being good Patriots to their
countrey, so you may have the happinesse to
exceed them all, and to raise up Trophies of
honor unto posterity, beyond your famous pre∣decessours,
improving by your goodness those
gifts that God hath bountifully bestowed on
you. Which are the cordiall wishes of him
who is,

