


THE profitable use of Bathes, both for necessity and com∣fort, is such, and so well con∣firmed from all antiquity, as I need not labour to illustrate it more; only it hath been the ill hap of Our Countrey Bathes to lie more obscure then any other throughout Christendome, although they deserve as well as the best, because very few have written any thing of them, and they either have not mentioned, or but slightly passed over the main points concerning their causes and originals; contenting themselves with an emperical use of them. This hath made me, through the instigation also of some of my worthy friends, to attempt some∣what of this kind: which if it give not sa∣tisfaction according to my desire, yet may be a provocation to some others, to perfect that which I have begun. And seeing I do it for the use of my Country, I have neglected

curious ornaments to garnish it withall, but have clad it in a plain Sute of our Country Cloath; without welt or gard: not desiring it should shew it self in forain parts: Mea cymba legat littus.
But in this mine undertaking, I find my self exposed to many censures, both concern∣ing some Paradoxical Opinions in Philoso∣phy, which notwithstanding I deliver not gra∣tis, but confirmed with good grounds of rea∣son, and authorities: as also concerning the re∣formation of our Bathes, which do daily suf∣fer many indignities more wayes then I have mentioned, under the tyranny of ignorance, imposture, private respects, wants, factions, disorder, &c. so as they are not able to dis∣play their virtues, and do that good for which God hath sent them to us; and all for want of such good government as other Bathes do enjoy. I blame not our City herein, unto whose care the ordering of these Bathes is committed, the disorders and effects being such as are out of their verge, and neither in their power, nor in their knowledge to redress. For they have sufficiently testified their desire of reforming all such abuses, when they vo∣luntarily did joyn in Petitioning the late King James of blessed memory, to that end: by whose death this Petition also died. And they knew well that it must be a superior power

that must effect it. In these respects I have need of some noble and eminent Patron to pro∣tect both me and my Bathes, whose cause I take upon we to plead, and to advance, according to their due desert: but especially for the Bathes sake, which I desire may flourish to the utmost extent of benefit to the people; and to have all impediments removed out of their way, which may hinder them in the progress of their virtues. This is the cause Sir, why I presume to dedicate these my labours to your Honour, who having observed in forrain parts, the uses and governments of all sorts, and being both by the favour of his Majesty well able, and by your noble disposition well inclined and willing to maintain good or∣der and discipline, will, I doubt not, excuse this boldness, and pardon my presumption. Consider Sir, that this is your native Coun∣trey, which naturally every man doth affect to advance, and these Bathes are the principal Jewels of your Countrey, and able to make it more famous then any other parts of this Kingdom, and in advancing them, to ad∣vance your Name to all posterity. wherefore howsoever my self deserve but small respect from you, yet I beseech you respect the Bathes of your Countrey, and me as a wellwisher unto them.

And as the common opinion of your great worth and abilities, have moved me to this boldness, so the particular favours of your Noble Lady, and the encouragement of your learned Physitian, Doctor Baskervill, mine especial Friend, who hath spurred me on to this work, have removed out of my mind all suspition of misconstruction. But that as mine intent hath been meerly the en∣larging of the knowledge of those points con∣cerning Bathes, and more especially of our Bathes in Somerset-shire; so you will be pleased to accept of this publick invitation by me to do your Countrey good, and your self ho∣nour, which I wish may never be disjoyned. And to me it will be no small encouragement to devote my self and my best endeavours to your service. So I humbly take my leave this 23. Aprilis, 1632.

