



SIR,
HAving bad the happiness in a strange place to light on so good an acquain∣ance as your self (whose Sober, Candid, and npassionate temper receives an Additional  its native lustre from the perfunctory, dis∣bliging, and illiterate Genius of others:) I ould not but take the first opportunity to te∣ifie my Respects; and the rather, because

having fallen on a Subject in which you may claim some right; I thought it not safe to enter your ground without your leave.
Besides, we are told by Solinus (whose As∣sertion admits a further probability from the Epithetes of  &c. given her by Pausanias, Plutarch, Aristides, mentioned also in Hesychius, Suidas, Harpocration, and others, of which I have In Historia AEsc laii, . elsewhere more largely treated in another Language, that Minerva was for∣merly the Patroness of these Baths; and what fitter person could I find out to address this brief Discourse of Baths unto, than him.
— Tritonia Pallas, Quem docuit, multa{que} insignem reddidit arte.
I have joyntly discours'd of the Baths and City, which seem to me to resemble the two parts of a Compositum, Body and Soul: And as there is a more than ordinary respect due to the body, on the account of its being the Case and Cabinet of that pearl of great price, out more noble and diviner part, the Soul; So I thought it my Concern to make some refle∣ctions on the City also, as well as the waters,

by which I think it doth in some measure ap∣pear, that it cannot justly be said of the Baths, what was once of the wit of Galba the Ro∣man Emperour lodg'd in a deformd body, that they have a bad habitation.
If I have not here drawn the Baths to the life, it may be considered that it was intended only for a rough draught, and (what is more) that I had not your Pensil. The thing it self, as to the Composure of it, is the hasty product of less than 14 daies, and those too in the middest of, and stollen from my other Employ∣ments; what therefore is wanting now, I hope hereafter to supply.
In the mean time, Sir, I humbly offer to your kind acceptance this small acknowledge∣ment of my real respects, as to one whose high∣er seso with Academical Studies, together with the helps and advantages of Travel, hath made a Pillar of your faculty, which your courteous disposion and civil Deportment, hath so nearly polish'd that you seem to have attain'd, if we believe the Poet, the utmost perfection, having in you that which doth at once, both delight and profit. Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci. Her. de Art. Poet.
As for those that are meer husks and out∣sides of Physitians, that desire to be thought to be what they are not, and are nothing less than what they seem to be; whose empty heads

serve for no other use than Rattles, only to make a pretty noise to please children, whose mouths also are open Sepulchres, and they themselves little better than painted ones.
Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis, &c.
We may well spare, or rather not spare them, as being not the true Sons, but the By∣blows of AEsculapius.
Sir, I beg your pardon for giving you this trouble, and assure you, That

Bath, Oct. 24. 1668.
