



Much Honoured Friend,
IT was the reiterated Request of your Dear Hus∣band, (and my worthy Friend), that I would perform the last Office of Respect to him in the preaching of his Funeral Sermon, when-ever it should please God to take him hence. And this Request of him (whilst living), your self was pleased to back after his Death.
I have again and again publickly testified my Averseness from engaging in Services of this Nature; and (possibly) as to enga∣ging in this, there were some special Reasons and Considerations to heighten my Averseness. Yet, considering how I was pressed to it, by the Desires both of the Dead and of the Living; I thought, I should be disingenuous and defective in the Obligations of Friendship, if I did not comply with them; which therefore accordingly I did.
Having discharg'd the Preaching Part, you further desired me to publish what I had preached. To gratify you in that, I was the more inclinable, because I had left things in the Sermon so imperfect and unfinish'd; (for I had not time to go through a considerable part of what I had to say, both upon the Text, and also upon the Occasi∣on). The Truth is, while I graspt at too much, I did nothing (to purpose); and therefore was willing to do what you desired, that I might have an Opportunity of filling up what then was wanting.
I am very sensible what a Captious and Litigious Age we live in, how Divisions and Animosities do abound amongst us, how hard a mat∣ter it is for One to commend One of his Party, (especially if he be of any considerable Eminency therein); but some or other of a differing Party will be finding fault, and picking out something to be the matter and ground of severe Censures. If this shall be my lot, I must submit;
but I have done whatever I could to prevent it▪ For I have so commended the Person discoursed of, as not in the least to reflect up∣on any others of a different Perswasion. And as to the commanding of him too, I have not done is ; but all along, (to the best of my Knowledg  ha kept with in the strict Bounds of Truth and Justice. Yea, to avoid Partiality and Flattery (the too common Attendants of Funeral Sermons), I have, (with all due Modesty), taken notice of his Infirmities as well as of his Excellencies. If all this will not , I hope I shall bear them with Patience, (if not with Contempt).
How many Funeral Sermons did your dear Husband live to preach for others! here is now one preached for himself; and God knows how soon some may do that for me, which I have now done for him. We live in a fluid State, and have no Abiding hare. No sooner had I dispatch'd what I had to do upon the Death of this Friend, but God threatens me with the Death of Another; (a most Eminent Person of another Profession): Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity!
The Lord bless you and yours; and grant you all to reap the Benefit of those many, many fervent Prayers, which he (who is gone) sent up to the Throne of Grace daily for you. All that I shall further say it, but to assure you, that now you are deprived of the Prayers of the Dead; you shall ever have the hearty Prayers of him, who whilst he lives, shall be ready upon all occasions to shew himself,
 July 21, 1682.
