



Dearly Beloved in our Lord Jesus,
THis Treatise (such as it is,) I dedicate to you; I judging it most proper, to dedi∣cate that to you, the great design of which, is (in special) to excite you, to dedicate your Persons, your Houses, your All, to God. Had I gone by favours received, by Personal obligations, (the usual measures by which writers proceed, in making their Dedications,) (in which they take the opportunitie, of acknowledging favours recei∣ved, and of expressing their gratitude for them,) I say, had I gone by these measures, (although I must ever acknowledge my self, highly obliged to verie many of you, yet) certainly I had else∣where made this Dedication; (viz.) to that (tru∣ly) Honourable Person, (with whom I have had the happiness long to live,) to whom for her
favours, to me and mine, I owe more than to all the world besides. But the Rule, by which (at present) I go, is the matter, here treated of and insisted upon: that therefore be∣ing most suitable and applicable to you, and you being specially (though not exclusively) concern∣ed in it, and this discourse, being penn'd on pur∣pose upon your particular Case, (of Rebuilding your Houses,) I could not but judge it most con∣venient, to present and dedicate it to you.
As to the Dedication I am right enough, but I wish, I could give my self and others, as satisfa∣ctory an account, concerning the thing dedicated; but indeed that I cannot do. I here tender to your publick view, a very mean and inconsiderable piece; a Discourse more plain, more unpolished, more ordinary than this, hath very seldom seen the light. And how I come to trouble you, or the world, with such imperfect, worthless endea∣vours of mine, I do not well know, and (to any that will be severe) can less justifie. I cannot but look upon my self as guilty of that, which I have censured in some, lamented in others; namely, the burdening and overcharging the world with Books, many of which are as empty, as the Cardi∣nals Trunks once were; and which contain no∣thing in them, but what is trite, common, almost trivial. Surely it should not be thus, and it would not be thus, if men had either that prudence or
that modesty, which might well be expected: The plain thread-bare suit, may do well enough at home, but when persons go abroad, better clothes are required; 'tis folly to open that shop, wherein there are no wares; for by this, the seller is disparaged, and the buyer disappointed. I need not make the Application, others will do that for me; and they (probably) will first begin with my self, who am too much within the lash of these allusions. Well, if it fall out so, I must submit; severe reflexions upon what I have here done, are (I fear) too justly deserved by me. All that I have to say, (for your satisfaction and my own en∣couragement) is this, the subject (which I pursue) is very excellent, (in it self,) and very seasonable, (for you,) (with respect to that great affair, which now lies upon your hands:) the matter is weighty, though the manner of handling it be weak; the former must make some amends and reparation for the latter; had it not been for the excellency and seasonableness of what I insist upon, I had stifled these Papers in the very birth, and the Sun should never have shone upon them; but that being seriously considered by me, I am en∣couraged to make them publick; and I am not without hope, but that (notwithstanding all my defects and infirmities) some good may be effected by them. And in this hope, I commit them to God, and to his Benediction.

Now since I lay so great a stress upon the sub∣ject or argument here prosecuted, 'tis requisite that I presently give you some account of that: 'tis then (in a word,) Holy or Religious Dedica∣tion; the principal and main notion of which, is the Devoting of Self and All to God: many other things (as you will find,) are included in it, and are expressive of it, but this mentioned is the main thing; as in holy dedication, you have the vitals of Religion, so in this act of devoting All to God, you have the vitals of dedication. This (in the general consideration of it) is a dutie, 1. Very spiritual: 2. Very comprehensive; for indeed all duty is contained in it, (either formally or virtu∣ally and reductively:) Dedication to God through Christ, is the summary of Law and Gospel; 'tis the Synopsis, Epitome, Abridgment of all Practi∣cal Divinity: he that doth this, doth all, he that doth not this, doth nothing. 3. Very necessary; both as to the truth of grace here, and also as to the possession of glory hereafter. Baptismal de∣dication may make men Christians, but 'tis only the dedication (which I speak of) which can make them real Saints in this life, and happy Saints in the life to come. And 4. 'tis a most high, raised, weighty, fundamental duty; 'tis the very Heart and Spirit of Christianitie, the marrow, pith, kernel, quintessence of Religion lies in it: 'tis not only a spiritual dutie, but 'tis the very spirit of
duty. These things you will find fully proved (as I hope) in this Treatise, here (that I may not detain you too long in the Porch) I do but glance upon them. Since then I must be printing, (not∣withstanding that rooted averseness that is in me thereunto,) could I have pitched upon a better Argument than this? O that the meanness of the writer and of the writing, may not disparage the nobleness and excellency of the subject!
Worthy friends, I set before you no lately upstart or novel doctrine; I come not with nice and curi∣ous points, (tending more to speculation than re∣al profit,) or with what is abstruse and intricate, (to perplex your heads;) I put no bone into your hands, (by which your teeth might be broken, ra∣ther than your souls fed and nourished;) I do not present you with matters polemical and controver∣sial, about Doctrine, Discipline, or any other thing: I do not trouble you, with what concerns party and party, so as to make it my business, to bring you over to a side; neither do I lead you to things, which lie but in the suburbs of Religion, and are a great way off from salvation: All these (or at leastwise some of these,) I have designedly and industriously shunned: That which I offer to you, is as ancient as the word of truth, very plain and facile, intelligible to the meanest capacitie, of a Practical Nature, tending only to the ad∣vancement of piety and godliness, that wherein we
all agree (as to the Theory,) and which we must all practise, as we are Christians, that which lies next to the very heart of Religion, and is abso∣lutely necessary to future blessedness: this is the true stating of what I pursue in this Discourse, and all this is wrapp'd up, and to be found in Holy Dedication.
This is the Dutie in general, which I branch out or reduce to two Heads, viz. Dedication Per∣sonal and Domestick: the explication and enforce∣ment of these two, is the work and business of this little volume. I know, other species might be as∣signed of this Genus, or other Parts of this whole, but these two were as much, as I at present could grasp, and therefore I name no more. I did in∣tend indeed a Third Branch, but I will give you an account of that by and by. Concerning this two-fold Dedication, I will here say nothing; if you please to peruse the Book, you will there find them distinctly opened, (in what is proper to each of them,) and also practically urged, by several convincing and powerful considerations.
That I ingraft a discourse (of the Dedication of the Person,) upon this stock, (which only speaks of the dedication of the house,) is (I confess) a breach of the strict Rules of method: But I wish this was my greatest fault, I should more easily then presume upon a pardon. The truth is, when I first fixed my thoughts upon the Text, I
intended only to speak of House Dedication; but when I had waded a little into that point, I pre∣sently perceived, that it was necessarie for me, to premise something concerning the dedication of the person; because this maxim offered it self to me, that Personal Dedication must antecede Do∣mestick Dedication, and that no man will dedicate his House to God, unless he do first dedicate his self to God. Upon the evidence of this truth, I could not but do, what I have done: If I have vio∣lated the laws of method, you must excuse me; for I could not judge these so considerable, as the carrying on of my great design, which was this, to give you an entire discourse upon a duty so weighty and so necessary; and had I spoken of the one, and not of the other, the Discourse would not have been entire. Had I foreseen, that I should have been so large upon the Dedication of the Person, I would have pitch'd upon some Scripture which had been more express and proper to it; but that was as much beyond my imagination, as this is be∣sides my Text. And when I had made up the gar∣ment, I could not think it worth my time and trouble, to search out another Body, which would exactly fit it. But I check my self, in writing thus much about it, for may be less time would have done that, than what I spend in writing this Apology.
This objection (as to the first branch of Holy De∣dicati∣on,)
is made against my self, but (as to the second Branch,) there (I fear) objections will be made against the Thing: Personal Dedication can∣not be denied, as a duty lying upon all; but House Dedication (possibly) will not so easily be assented to, under that notion. Some ('tis like) may argue against this, and that too, upon dif∣ferent grounds and pretexts: for some may object, that 'tis Novel; others, that 'tis Jewish and anti∣quated, and now under the Gospel out of date and superannuated, and therefore not to be pressed as a duty.
'Tis neither convenient nor necessarie, to say much for the obviating or answering of these objecti∣ons; these blocks may soon be removed out of the way. As to the first, I'm sure this is not New, to have the highest truths, and the most important duties, charged with being New: all along No∣velty hath been pleaded against matters of faith and practice. When Paul preached Christ and the Resurrection, the Athenians branded his Do∣ctrine with this; May we know, what this New Doctrine whereof thou speakest, is? Acts 17.19. As they, (though upon a different account,) what New Doctrine is this? Mark 1.27. this is the usual carriage of men, with respect to the great discoveries of the Gospel. But to the business in hand: Is House-Dedication new? that which was practised by David himself, is that new? that
which was enjoyned by God, in the times of the Law, is that new? (See Deut. 20.5.) that which was done by Abraham, by Joshuah, and by divers others, (recorded in the word) is that New? State House-dedication aright, and in its full la∣titude, and you will find, ever since Religion was in the world, that such as were seriously religious, did always make conscience of it; and therefore is that New? O how apt is the naughtie heart of man, to catch at every thing, which may serve for a fence against dutie, and which may a little blunt the edge of conviction about it! And as to the second objection, that this dedicating the House is a Jewish thing, and not obligatory under the Gos∣pel, that I absolutely deny. If it be meant by Jewish, that the Jews practised this duty, that I grant; but if that be all, that is intended in the objection, then it ceases to be an objection: Must we do nothing that the Jews did? must everie thing be shunned by us, as Jewish, which was done by that people? then we must part with much of our Religion, even in things unquestion∣able. But if it be meant by Jewish, the doing of something which was limited to the Jews, and to the Mosaical dispensation, and which afterwards was to vanish; then the objection is grounded upon a falshood, and upon a great mistake, House-dedi∣cation being no such thing: I need say no more by way of Refutation, than just to open the nature of
the dutie: take it in general, under the Title of House-dedication, there may be some appearance of Judaism in it; but take it in its several parts and branches, (as here I speak to it and urge it,) so it consists of nothing, but what is moral, and what is of perpetual obligation: To enter upon the Habitation, by Prayer and Praise, is this Jewish? To commit the House to Gods protection, is this Jewish? To advance Religion, Piety, Godliness in the Family, is this Jewish? To devote dome∣stick mercies to God, is this Jewish? Have not all these a moral stamp and signature upon them? and so are not Christians under the Gospel, obliged to them? If the Jews dedication of their Houses, had li'n only in some external, ceremonial, civil Rites, and I had pressed them upon you, then the objection had been of some force; but when I press nothing upon you, but what lies in Religious acts, (which are as proper to us as they could be to them,) in the verie substantial, or essential parts of sanctification and godliness, Judaism cannot be alledged, to take you off from the performance of it. I desire the Reader, not to pass judgment upon the General Title, but first to peruse and weigh the particulars, by which 'tis opened, and then let him tell me, whether House-dedication (as so stated) be a Jewish, antiquated thing, or whether it be not rather a moral duty, and that all persons whatsoever are now under the obligation of it.

Honoured Citizens, I hope no objections, nor discouragements neither, (from without or from within,) shall ever be able to keep you off from a due performance of this blessed dutie of House-dedication: You are now very busie, in joyning house to house, (but not in the Prophets sense, Isa. 5.8.) in the repairing of your breaches, in the re-edifying of your wast and desolate Habitations, (which for some time have been forsaken, and left like a wilderness, and cut off through the fierce an∣ger of the Lord, Isa. 27.10. Jer. 25.37.) and here∣in I pray the God of Heaven to prosper you. Now to present you with some thing, that might be suitable and seasonable for this enterprise, this is my principal aim and design. As to the late ter∣rible Fire, (the saddest Tragedy that Providence hath acted (or permitted to be acted) upon the Stage of the world, in these latter Ages,) as to that Fire I say, which in four days, by four large swarths, mowed down so many thousands of your dwellings, this I meddle not with, (farther than as the matter insisted upon in this Treatise, doth here and there lead me to it; you have had the pious labours of several persons already upon that sad and dismal Argument, to which I shall add no∣thing:) 'Tis the bright side of the cloud that my eye is upon, 'tis the building not the burning of your Houses which I treat of: and what is it in reference to this, which I urge? but that they
may be consecrated and dedicated to God, when∣ever they shall be built: And under this Head, I reduce all that I have to say; and doth not the duty speak for it self? Doth it not carry its own light and conviction along with it? Doth not the late tremendous hand of God call upon you for this? After such conflagrations, will you not en∣ter upon your Houses, and live in them, with a due sense of God? When God hath been so con∣tending with you, shall things be just as they were before? Shall not the voice of such a rod be heard, in some notable reformation? Hath God over∣thrown many of you, as he overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as brands pluckt out of the burning, and will ye not yet return to the Lord? (Amos 4.11.) Do ye not yet perceive, that 'tis a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God? Will you again provoke God, to return with the same judgment? I beseech you, consider what God hath done, what you have done, what you are now to do; and carry it so, that breaches betwixt God and you may be healed, that his anger (the worst of Fires) may be quenched, that all differen∣ces may be comprimised, that you may be secured from all evils, and live in the enjoyment of all blessings: And the most compendious way to this, is first to dedicate your persons, and then your houses to God: O let God dwell where you dwell; let God be entertained in your Habitations: O
keep up his worship, promote his interest, devote all to his service and glory; live under a continual de∣pendance upon him, and an universal devotedness to him, and let not sin find any harbour, or have any reception in your Houses; thus do, and fear not, all will be well; be you faithful in your de∣dication, and God will be faithful in his protection and benediction: Persons and places dedicated, are under a special providence, God will not have them to be touched.
There are very many things, which your pre∣sent affairs and actings, might lead me to speak to by way of advice: You are much taken up with building, O that spiritual building may not be neglected by you. Pray mind the building of your Ark, and do as Noah did, Heb. 11.7. In such threatning times as these are, it concerns every man, to have his Ark ready made: 'tis better now to be without an house, than without an Ark; we have seen several deluges of judgments, what will be next we know not: Prov. 22.3. A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself, but the simple pass on and are punished. You are erecting fair and beautiful Houses, but are you your selves, the House, Building, Temple of God, that he may dwell and inhabit in you? Heb. 3.6. 1 Pet. 2.5. 1 Cor. 3.9, 16. 2 Cor. 6.16. Eph. 2.22. You are building for Earth, but what do you do for Heaven? Do ye lay a good foundation against the
time to come, that ye may lay hold on eternal life? (as 'tis 1 Tim. 6.19.) Are you by a saving Faith built upon Christ, that great and only foundation? 1 Cor. 3.11. What assurance have ye, of a build∣ing of God, of an house not made with hands, eter∣nal in the Heavens? (2 Cor. 5.1.) Thus from your external and material buildings, I might take occasion, to suggest divers things, which re∣fer to inward, spiritual and mystical Building, (for by this allusion, the spirit of God in Scripture, doth much delight to set forth the state and duty of Christians:) As also, I might much enlarge in the exhorting of you to several duties, (upon ano∣ther account,) suitable to your present posture and concern: viz. That ye would for ever humble your selves under that mighty hand of God, which hath been so severely lifted up against you: that the late judicial, amazing Providences of the most High, may never be forgotten by you, but that they may, frequently be thought of, and du∣ly improved: that you would take heed of securi∣ty, pride, vanity of spirit, in slighting what is past, and in promising great things to your selves for the time to come; so as not to say with them, The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewen stones, the Sycomores are cut down, but we will change them into Cedars, (Isa. 9.10.) That you would be sure, in Building-work to take God along with you, and to keep down all carnal confi∣dence:
(That place is remarkable, Mal. 1.4. Whereas Edom saith, (O that this may never be the language of London!) We are impoverished, but we will return and build the desolate places; thus saith the Lord of Hosts, they shall build, but I will throw down; and they shall call them, The border of wickedness, and the people against whom the Lord hath indignation for ever. A terrible word this is; the Lord grant you may never speak so sinfully against God, and that he may never speak so ter∣ribly against you!) That you would enter into your New houses with New hearts; that as your houses are like to be better than before, so your hearts and lives may be better also; that your old sins may never be admitted into your New habita∣tions; I say, I might be verie large in the urging of these things upon you, but I chuse only to name them; some of them fall in, under House-dedication, (to which I limit my self) and there I speak to them; the others, I must pass over, that I may not offend with too much prolixitie.
You perceive in this Dedicatory discourse, I go no higher than to you, who have Authority, in and over your own Private Houses: As to your Ma∣gistrates, (who have a greater and a more exten∣sive Authority,) I could not judge it so conveni∣ent, (considering the present circumstances, wherein I stand,) to make my Application to them; otherwise, I would 1. have been verie ear∣nest
with them, to come up to Holy Dedication: for who are more under the obligation of this, than they? They have not only a single person or a bare house, but they have also interest, power, authority to devote to and improve for God. O what publick blessings are Magistrates, when they do this! What abundance of good do they do, by their pious example, and holy zeal: They be∣ing as Planets fixed in a publick Orb, how is their light and influence diffused amongst verie many! If they give themselves to God in an holy life, if they advance Religion, Godliness, the worship of God in their families, how doth their pattern provoke and excite others to do the same. 2. I would humbly have recommended two things to them; the first of which refers to the present at∣tempts of rebuilding this desolate City, and 'tis this; That they would endeavour (as their wisdom shall direct them) to further and procure, the set∣ting of a Day apart, for solemn Prayer, in order to the obtaining of Gods blessing upon us, in this great undertaking. Methinks so great a work should not be engaged in, without solemn seeking of God; the foundation of all our Buildings should be first laid in Prayer: The happy issue and success of such an enterprise, as the rebuilding of a City, so much depending upon Gods blessing, (for except the Lord build the House (and much more the City,) they labour in vain that build it, Psal. 127.1.)
Surely he should be sought unto for this, in a verie solemn and serious manner. I find this piece of Religion amongst the verie Heathens, that when∣ever they entred upon the building of their Cities and eminent places, they always began with the invocation of their Deities; (of this many instan∣ces might be given out of History if it was need∣ful:) Shall Christians come short of Heathens? Shall darkness out-shine light? Shall Nature out∣strip Grace? Shall Idolaters carry it better to a false God, than we to the true God? This is the first thing, and that which is proper to our en∣trance upon the work, (and we are but there as yet:) But then secondly, in time (I hope) it will be finished; we are now but laying the foundation as it were, but I trust in some years (the fewer the better,) the Top-stone will be laid, and we shall cry Grace, Grace, (Zech. 4.7.) we have as yet but the Embryo of a City, but I hope, this will go on to a full and compleat birth: If it so be, (which God grant,) then I would humbly re∣commend this to the present Magistrates, (or to those, who shall live to see the finishing of what is now but begun,) that this City may be dedicated, (that is) in a publick and solemn way committed to Gods protection: Did Nehemiah thus dedicate the walls of Jerusalem? and why should not we have for this City, (the Metropolis of our Nation, up∣on the safety and welfare of which, the whole Na∣tion
both in Temporal's and Spiritual's doth so much depend, and which is always like to be en∣vironed with many dangers and enemies,) I say, why should not we have for this City, as soon as it shall be built, a general, express, solemn, religi∣ous Dedication, answerable to that of Jerusalem in Nehemiahs time? of which you read, Nehem. 12.27. (ad sin. cap.) But these are things only proper to our Magistrates; and I not presuming to prefix their Names before this Dedication, it would be improper for me, to say more upon them.
If I may not be so happy, as to prevail with them for a Day of Prayer, yet let me prevail with you, to be much in private seeking the Lord, in order to your particular, and the general concerns of this City: Building-work and praying-work should always go together: where many hands are imployed in the one, many hearts should be imployed in the other. In every business and un∣dertaking, God should be called upon; how much more, should this be done, in so great and weighty a business as that is, wherein you are now engaging? I trust God hath gracious and merciful designs towards you, and towards the whole City; that he will bless and prosper you in what you are about, (as 'tis said of Judah, they built and pros∣pered, 2 Chron. 14.7.) I hope, he hath not said that of London, which once he did of Tyrus, I will
make thee like the top of a rock, thou, shalt be a place to spread Nets upon, [thou shalt be built no more,] Ezek. 26.14. And as the Prophet concerning Ba∣bylon, (according to some Interpreters,) Thou hast made of a City, an heap; of a defenced City, a ruin; a palace of strangers, to be no City, [it shall never be built,] Isa. 25.2. But now, if God hath gracious designs towards us, they must have their effect and accomplishment in the way of Prayer. That Scripture hath been much upon my thoughts, in Ezek. 36. verse 10.—The Cities shall be inhabited, and the wastes shall be builded: and ver. 33, &c. In the day that I shall have clean∣sed you from all your iniquities (pray observe that) I will also cause you to dwell in the Cities, and the wastes shall be builded: And the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all that passed by; And they shall say, This land that was desolate, is become like the Garden of Eden, and the waste and desolate, and ruined Cities are be∣come fenced and inhabited. Then the Heathen that are left round about you shall know, that I the Lord build the ruinous places, and plant that that was de∣solate; I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it. Here are gracious promises made to Jerusalem, (whose case and ours do too well agree, in the late judgment,) but how shall they be made good? It follows, verse 37. I will yet for this be enquired of by the House of Israel, to do it for them, &c. You
see by this, that though God designs mercie, (and that particular mercy too, which suits with your present state,) yet he will not actually bestow that mercie, without prayer: so that let Gods intentions and purposes be never so merciful to∣wards us in this City, (for the building up of the wastes thereof,) yet if he be not sought unto and called upon, we cannot expect any gracious exe∣cution of them: And is not this enough to quicken you to prayer? The Jews in the rebuilding of Jeru∣salem, whenever they met with any dangers or difficulties, (and they met with many,) still they applied themselves to Prayer, Nehem. 4.9. Ne∣vertheless we made our prayer unto our God, &c. If you be free from these dangers and difficulties, yet the very nature and importance of the work it self, calls upon you to call upon your God. O will you build and not pray? this is (in effect) to say, you will build whether God will or not; and is not this highly sinful? He burnt your Houses, whether you would or no, will you build them up again, whether he will or no? O take God along with you, (as I said before,) and by humble pray∣er engage him in the work, and then undoubtedly it shall go on and prosper: If he be with you, and undertake for you, the business is done: I will build thee, and thou shalt be built, Jer. 31.4. I will work, and who shall let it, Isa. 43.13. The work may stick upon your hands, and miscarrie in your
hands, but it will go on smoothly, and shall cer∣tainly succeed in the hands of the Almighty. Why may not we go now to God, and (with submission to his will, and with a due consideration of the Nature of the mercy, and of different circumstan∣ces,) plead with him old promises? Isa. 61.4. They shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former desolations, and they shall repair the waste Cities, the desolations of many generations, Jer. 30.18. Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will bring again the captivity of Jacobs tents, and have mercy on his dwelling places; and the City shall be builded upon her own heap, and the palace shall remain after the manner thereof, &c. Amos 9.14. They shall build the waste Cities and inhabit them. I say, why may not we, in the present juncture of affairs, plead these promises to God, in the case of Lon∣don?
Dear Citizens, Let us do our duty to God, and then let us be above all discouragements, which may arise either from men, or from the work it self, which lies before us. It would not be amiss, if (in your circumstances) you would often read over the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah; where you have an Historical account of the re-edi∣fying of Jerusalem and of the Temple; in which, you will meet with many things, that will ex∣actly suit and parallel your present case; (for this City (in many respects) is Jerusalems Counter∣part:)
That famous City you know, was taken and burnt by the Babylonians, and so it lay in its ashes and ruines for seventy years: (And I will not meddle with that enquiry, (which is much more proper for persons far higher than I am,) whether the Babylonians had not an hand in the firing of our City also.) Well, when this time was expired, the Jews fall upon the rebuilding of Jerusalem: but good Lord! what pauses, inter∣ruptions, oppositions, discouragements, difficulties did they meet withal, in that undertaking? Ez∣ra 4.4. The people of the land, weakened the hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in build∣ing; And hired Counsellors against them, &c. And several of them wrote a most malicious letter to Artaxerxes the King of Persia, designing, by their cursed insinuations to put a stop to the work; (verse 12.) Be it known unto thee O King, that the Jews which came up from thee to us, are come unto Jerusalem, building [the rebellious and the bad Ci∣ty,] and have set up the walls thereof, &c. These Samaritans and Others too, did all that ever they could to hinder the progress of the Jews, in the repairing of Jerusalems breaches: Sometimes they deride them, Nehem. 4.2. sometimes they conspire to fall upon them by force of Arms, Ne∣hem. 4.8. (and then Nehemiah set a watch against them night and day) (verse 9.) Sometimes they endeavour to dishearten them, Nehem. 6.9. For
they all made us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened from the work, that it be not done. Be∣sides all this (from enemies,) the Jews were much discouraged, (as you read in the History in these Books,) from the work it self: O it was so diffi∣cult, they should never be able to carrie it on, Nehem. 4.10. Yet good Nehemiah (notwith∣standing all this,) would not have the Jews dis∣couraged, but he animates them to the work, and in the work; Nehem. 2.17, 18. Ye see the distress that we are in, how Jerusalem lieth waste, and the Gates thereof are burnt with fire: Come and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that we be no more a reproach: Then I told them of the hand of my God, which was good upon me, as also the Kings words, that he had spoken unto me; And they said, [Let us rise up and build:] So they strengthened their hands for this good work. I pass by other places, which refer to his encouraging of them in the work: what the issue was, you know; notwithstanding all these oppositions and difficulties the City was built and finished, to the grief and consternation of all enemies, Nehem. 6.16. And it came to pass, that when all our enemies heard thereof, and all the Heathen that were about us saw these things, they were much cast down in their own eyes; for they per∣ceived, that this work was wrought of our God. The times, in which all this was done, were full of distraction; yet the Jews were not dispirited;
they set upon the business and did it, even in these times; (according to what was prophesied in Da∣niel) Chap. 9.25. The street shall be built again, and the wall, [even in troublous times:] Now, (Gentlemen) some of these discouragements (or some others,) I fear lie upon you, and I heartily lament it; but yet be not disheartened; set upon your work; and say, The God of Heaven he will prosper us, therefore we his servants will arise and build, (Nehem. 2.20.) I rejoyce (with all my heart) to see that done which is done; but O that I could see our Citizens more vigorously carrying on the rebuilding of this City! Jerusalems wall went on apace, for the people had a mind to work, (so 'tis said, Nehem. 4.6.) Surely if persons amongst us, had but a mind to build, the City might be finished in a few years: But some have got good Accommodations elsewhere, and there they intend to fix; some are discouraged by the distractions of the Times; some are taken off up∣on one account, some upon another, and so that which was destroyed and ruined in three days, is not like to be raised up again in many years. 'Tis not so proper for me, (a Minister of the Gospel,) to be earnest with you, in stirring you up to build Houses, (a thing of a Civil nature;) and if affe∣ction to the City, and your own interest do not lead you to this, all that I can say will signifie but little: but it would be the joy of my soul, if I
might see London to recover its pristine glorie, and (in a word) to be London again: And (I hope) you will excuse, my hinting of these things to you, which is occasioned by my cordial affection to that place, the verie dust and ashes of which is precious to me. I return to that which I was up∣on, and I shall add but this; Let us with fervent prayer apply our selves often to the Throne of Grace, let us unfeignedly humble our selves be∣fore the Lord, let us sincerely reform what is amiss, let us put away sin, (there, there is the greatest discouragement;) let us thus do, and then let the work be never so difficult, enemies ne∣ver so malicious, the times never so bad, we may engage in what lies before us, and God will bless us in it. Supplication, Humiliation and Refor∣mation will carrie all before them.
As for me, I shall not cease to pray for you; it shall be my daily request to God for you, that he will direct you to do that, which may most tend to his glory, the good of this City, your own com∣fort, and the benefit of succeeding Generations; and then, that he will be pleased, to encourage and prosper you herein, and crown your undertakings with good success. The Lord bless everie one of you, in your persons, relations, estates, employ∣ments, habitations, in all that concerns you: the Lord carry on the work now upon your hands, and then hide and defend you continually. And as
for thee (dear London) let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I forget thee: O that thou (Phoenix-like) mayest grow out of thy ashes more glorious than ever thou wast; that (as 'tis with met∣tals new cast) it may be better with thee than before; that (as it was with the person of Job) thy latter end may be blessed more than thy beginning; that (as it was with the Temple) the glorie of second London may be greater than the glorie of the first. The Lord say concerning thee, Though I have af∣flicted thee, I will afflict thee no more, (Nehem. 1.12.) That it may be said of thee, The Lord hath taken away thy judgments, he hath cast out thine enemies; the King of Israel, even the Lord is in the midst of thee, thou shalt not see evil any more, (Zeph. 5.15.) O let not God any more contend with thee by Fire, Plague, or any other judg∣ment: O Lord God cease I beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small, (Amos 7.4, 5.) O that the punishment of thine iniquity may be ac∣complished, O daughter of Zion; and that God will visit the iniquity of the daughter of Edom, and dis∣cover her sins, (Lam. 4.22.) The Lord make thee, a quiet habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, that not one of thy stakes may be re∣moved, nor one of thy cords broken, (Isa. 33.20.) The Lord bless thee, and make thee an Habitation of Justice, and Mountain of Holiness, (Jer. 31.23.) That thou mayest be called, the City of righte∣ousness,
the faithful City, (Isa. 1.26.) That thou mayest be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever: As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so let the Lord be round about thee, from henceforth even for ever, (Psal. 125.1, 2.) Amen, Amen.
I have now but a few words to add, concerning this mean Tractate, and I will free you from the further trouble of a tedious Preface. If I should fall upon Apologizing for my self and for it, many words would be requisite: 'Tis best for me to for∣bear that, (though I acknowledge great need of it,) and without more ado, humbly to cast it first upon Gods blessing, and then upon your candor and kind acceptance. If it may please the Lord, by it to do good to any of you, he, he only shall have the glory; and may I but see that, I shall not much regard the censures, which it may please some to pass upon me. I tell you beforehand, (that you may not expect and look for that, which is not here to be found,) here's no high strains of Rhetorick or humane eloquence, no fine and curious Metaphors, no compt and florid ex∣pressions to gratifie your fancy; here's no Mar∣gent stuffed with Citations, (to give me the repu∣tation of an hard student or well-read person;) here's no New notions or Novel matter to satisfie such as like nothing but what is so; here's some∣thing, which may suit with the humble, serious,
hungry Christian, and which I hope such an one may receive benefit by; but as for others, (alas) here is nothing to answer their expectations. The style and language is e'en as plain as your fourth-rate-Buildings, (yet pray let not the Book be confined to Allies and Lanes, but let it be ad∣mitted into your Streets also:) And the matter treated of, is common and usual; that which se∣veral of our worthy Divines (under other Heads, and in another method,) have verie fully insisted upon: All therefore that I can pretend to, to give you encouragement to peruse this Discourse, is the seasonableness of it, with respect to your present affair of Building; upon that I take the advantage of urging old and known Truths upon you; and had it not been for that special occasion, I had not given you the trouble of Reading, or my self the trouble of writing. I had no sooner resol∣ved upon this work, and made a little Provision for it, but it pleased the Soveraign disposer of all things, to lay his afflictive hand upon me, in a verie acute and dangerous distemper. And O that I could say, I was yet freed from it! but for ought I can see, this distemper is like to be to me, like Iacobs bruise upon his thigh, I must halt of it all my days. As soon as my merciful Father gave me some relaxation of my violent Pains, I began to pen what here I now publish; but God knows, the remainders of my disease did verie
much unfit me for such an undertaking; and I was fain to hasten over things, because I feared everie day (and so do yet,) the return of former Paroxisms: Had it not been for this, possibly I might have tendred you this Treatise somewhat more elaborate; but now you must accept of it as it is. I intended a Third Branch of Holy Dedica∣tion, viz. the Dedication of Time; but I am pre∣vented and hindred as to that, at present.

1. The state of my bodie will not bear a studious and se∣dentary course; and I am fain to spend the most of my Afternoon-time in Motion and Exercise, for the recoverie of my Health.
2. That's a subject somewhat large, (according to the method that I have propounded to my self;) and if I should an∣nex that to these two, I fear it would make this Volume too big and bulky. If God be pleased to continue Life, and to restore Health, and if I find that this Piece be in any measure useful, I may hereafter publish what I design upon that Ar∣gument.

And now Brethren, as to your Building-work, I commit it to God, and to his Blessing; and as to your Selves, I commend you to God, and to the word of his Grace, which is able to [build you up] and to give you an inheritance among all them, which are sanctified. That you may heartily,
sincerely dedicate and devote, Person, House, Estate, All to God, is the Prayer, and (ac∣cording to his power) shall be the Endeavour of him,

