



My good Friend,
UPon the late afflictive Breach, which it pleas'd the Holy and Sovereign God to make upon you, in the taking away of your dear Husband; it was your request to me, to Preach upon some Subject that might suit with this dark Providence. I most readily comply'd with you herein; not only to testifie my respect to the Dead, but also (and chiefly) to take the advantage of such an Opportunity to promote the Good of the Living.
The Text, (upon which the following Discourse is ingraft∣ed,) was chose by your self. And could you, or any other, have chose a better, for such an Occasion? It being so well adapted to the General Case of Gods People, and to the Particular Case of your dear Husband, both as to Life and Death. 'Tis true, it is a common Text, much beaten, often and often insisted upon, upon the like Occasions: yet, the Matter wrap'd up in it is so Weighty and Momentous, as that the frequent handling of it did not in the least discourage me, from giving my Thoughts too and Medi∣tations upon it. And indeed, although several have,
from time to time, been drawing from it; yet it is far from being drawn dry: it being like the Breast, which, though often suckt, yet remains full; or like the Spring, which, though many Pitchers be put into it, yet by new supplies it's still kept from being empty.
The Argument, which it leads unto, is very plain, wholly Practical. And accordingly, so is this Treatise upon it: I hope, none that are judicious and serious will despise it because 'tis so: Plain Truths, because such, are disrelisht only by vitiated and distemper'd Palats. 'Tis common Food, not Dainties and Curiosities, that sustain the Natural Life; and sure, the Spiritual Life does most depend upon, is most supported and strengthned by the plain and easie Truths of Religion, in the most familiar and intelligible opening and pressing of them. Wit may please the Fancy, but it will never reach the Conscience; abstruse and knotty Points may break the Head, sooner than the Heart: when all is done, 'tis the frequent, plain, powerful inculcating of the most known and familiar Truths and Duties of the Gospel, that must bring Souls to God, and Heaven. Oh give me to hear and read, that which tends to further Faith in Christ. Real Godliness, univer∣sal Obedience; that, which will promote the holiness of my Life, the peace and happiness of my End; let these be urg'd and press'd upon me, with plainness and earnest∣ness: This, this is that Preaching which through Gods blessing must save my Soul.
This is the thing designed in this Sermon; viz. to pre∣vail with Sinners to engage in serious Piety, in holy and Ʋpright Walking with God. And what an Incentive have we in the Text hereunto! The End of that Man is Peace: Peace? peace in a dying hour? What are a thousand
Worlds to this! to live in Peace? and then to die in Peace? What higher felicity is the Creature capable of! What have we here to do, to be sollicitous about? but this, first to live well, and then to die well: all other Things are merae Nugae, baubles and trifles in comparison of these. Well, I have here cast in my poor Mite to further them; oh that it may find acceptance with God, and success with Men! (with as many as shall peruse what here is pub∣lisht!
But why do I erect a Porch before such an inconsidera∣ble Building? I return to your self▪ After I had done what first you desired, you then would have me Print what I had preached. That troubled me, and brought me into a streight; I being loth to deny, and yet not knowing well how to gratifie. The doing of it, might be some kindness to you, but then I very well knew therein I should be unkind to other Friends, (whom I had denied in the same request, up∣on the same Occasion;) and most unkind to my self, in publish∣ing a thing so raw and indigested as this is. But that which drew me to a compliance with you, was, your Rela∣tion, (whom you sent to me about this) told me, you de∣sired only a few Printed Copies for your self and your special Friends; this I thought not my self much concerned to oppose.
To lessen my pains, you got a Friend to transcribe what I had preached. He most accurately had taken in Writing what (upon the Review) I found I had not been so accurate in speaking. I perused his Transcript, mending and altering some Expressions, (so far as Interlining would admit of;) but as to any considerable alteration of the Matter, (in some necessary additions to it,) I could not have the advantage of second Thoughts, (unless, I wrote all over again.) So you must take it as it is!

I commend you, and all yours, to the blessing of the great God. Praying, that this smarting Rod may be sanctified and sweetned to you all; that, God will be your God and Portion forever; that, what you have lost in the stream may be abundantly made up to you in the full and never-fail∣ing Fountain; that you may all imitate his holy Example whilst he lived, and so partake of that unspeakable happi∣ness which he possesses now he is dead. So prays

Febr. 14. 1682.
