



THe different aspect of Countries, wheresoever I travell'd, was still grate∣ful; and Nature, in her various formes and dresses, like so many diversyfied scenes and represen∣tations, alwayes pleased me; but never more, me thinks, than here in Wales: Where in a lofty and stately Situa∣tion, having the Ocean on one side, and the flat Campagne on the other, she seems, as it were, delighted in her self, and to look about her with a sort
of comely Majesty. The rich and for∣tile Vales, (as they call them) with their misty exhalations, foggy vapours and fat offrings, had formerly, in∣stead of feasting me, only stupifyed with a lethargique dulness, my wit and senses. Which here with the pure and subtil air of a supremour Region are reinvigorated: and enter∣tain'd with so many various Objects of profitable use and meditation, that I cannot well express them. The low, flat, pastoral Country, which I lately left, seems now to my imagina∣tion like some calm, dead water; than which, nothing is more odious or tire∣some to an active sturdy Vessel: which ever best appears in a proud, imperi∣ous and tempestuous Sea. Which kind of pompous and majestic aspect, I, methinks, at this present enjoy among
these lofty Mountains; Not to be consider'd without some excellent re∣marks. For the strange precipitation of waters, in vast currents, from such places not over-topt by others, is to be admired as scarcely comprehen∣sible. So that the artificial cascades of Ruelle and Versailles are but faint shews and shadows compar'd to these impetuous and natural Cataracts. Besides, their excessive latitude con∣futes and destroyes the earths Eter∣nity, asserted by the perversity of some Philosophers. Which otherwise at this time could not appear in so unlevel'd a posture, though the substance of these Mountains had been adamantine.
Sir, I was delighted, with a kind of ravishment, in the midst of such pleasant thoughts, which your last Letter, on a sudden, has utterly di∣sperst,
and left me in a mourning so∣litude. For, the good old Knight you say, is irrefragable, and earnestly in∣sists upon some speedy Accomplishment of what I once promised concerning Reginaldus Polus. To whom, I hear, he has some remote Relation, by reason of the Princely Bloud of Wales being commixt with that of the Royal Line in him. 'Tis strange, a person so generous, so remiss, so indulgent amongst his Tenants, should be so severe and rigorous to me; and that no confession of a debt should avail without immediate payment: Especially where he knows such occur∣ring difficulties, which by such weak undertakers as my self, cannot be overcome. He thinks it, perchance, a prone and easie matter, with ad∣vantagious language, to reduce this
noble Of spring of the Royal Fa∣mily into favour again among his Compatriots; not considering the pre∣sent posture of the times, where the hearts and minds of people are in that high, violent and malignant fermen∣mentation, which no rational, perswa∣sive Discourse can mitigate or reduce to any moderation: Where the in∣genuous, candid, Loyal Protestant passes for a manifest Papist; though the Religion of the latter, (wherein their forefathers were regenerated) be now more odious among them, than the Saracenical, or any sort of Paganism. So that an Essay herein, is not, as he esteems it, alike as to commend the Athenian Socrates at Athens, among persons thus former∣ly seduc'd with false principles, false histories, false doctrines, and still
infested with the same prejudice and passions from thence resulting: but rather almost of the same nature with the undertaking, to have plausibly commended the Major African Scipio in the old Carthage, or Hannibal at Rome. However, you tell me, that he sayes for my comfort, if I write ill, I shall be in the Mode and Fa∣shion; if Well, it will be Recommen∣dable: And how noble the attempt alone will be to restore the memory of this Person, who was the honour of our Nation, and the Age wherein he lived; when Tully so glorifies himself in recovering the very Tomb stone only of the great Archimedes. All this only tends to the same purpose, of lea∣ving no escape or subterfuge, but forcing me to write some rhapsodous Discourse: Which is all I can per∣form,
and will never satisfie his cri∣tical Judgment.
Had I any dexterity for this Task, I should need no spur or invitation.
For this Cardinal has been along time the only Object of my Affection and Admiration. My volatile Fancy, which every where else is quickly tyred, can only here insist, repose and dwell. He is my Socrates, my Aristides, my Eastern and Western Gregory the great.
But having mentioned the former of these persons, I must add, That he is not only mine, but the Roman So∣crates, and that, in an Age, which the Italians place in parallel and com∣petition with that of Augustus in point of Wit and Learning. Those rare examples of a sublime Vertue, and Christian Piety, as Cardinal
Borromeus, and others, which fol∣lowed after, they confessedly owe to him, as the Reformator of Religion and the Age.
These considerations, as they in∣cite my Affection, so they deter my Modesty: Especially when I look upon him, as an Object of such diverse Qualities, and so various Dimensions, which afford no certain limits of Mo∣dification. For sometimes his Devo∣tion imprisons him like an Hermite in a Cell; sometimes some other qua∣lities enclose him in the Cabinet-Coun∣cils of Princes; at other times he is at a more large restraint in his Study, like an elegant Writer, subtile Philoso∣pher, and profound Divine: And sometimes again, I find him so wholly inconfin'd, and expos'd to the Sun and Air, as they call it, that no person
was ever employ'd in more different Embassies, or of higher Nature, and betwixt the greatest Princes, that in these many hundred years have ap∣pear'd on the stage of humane Af∣fairs. But, methinks, the chief scene of the splendid and glorious part of His Life, was at the open∣ing the oecumenical Council of Trent: where, as first Legate, he had a rare occasion to shine, and appear in that ample Posture, which became his di∣vine Person, his Royal Extraction and his admirable Elocution. Where I shall at this time abruptly leave him, in complyance of our noble Friends re∣quest, to prepare for the next Pac∣quet, the Preface to his Life, as it is in Italian, Latin, and now very common in French.

