



SIR,
YOU have so many years together pursued me with your Favour and Bounty, that I ought to have been alwaies upon the Watch for an opportunity of Publishing my Gratitude. Your late great ob∣ligation in giving me the advantage of your Comedy, call'd Bellamira, or the Mistress, has given me a fresh subject for my Thanks; and my Publishing this Translasion affords me a new opportunity of owning to the World my grate∣ful resentments to you. I am heartily glad that your Comedy (as I never doubted) found such success, that I ne∣ver met with any Man of Sence but applauded it: And that there is abundance of Wit in it, your Enemies have been forced to confess. For some you have, though I cannot but wonder why you should have any, who are so careful in all your Actions, that you never injure any Gentleman: and so void of Scurrilitie in all your Conversation, that I never heard you speak ill of one behind his back: a vice too often practised among our English Gentry. But there will be alwaies Enemies to Wit and Common Sence, who for that reason cannot be Friends to you For the Judgment of some Ladies upon it that it is obscene, I must needs say they are Ladies of a very quick apprehension, and did not their thoughts lye very much that way, they could not find more obscenity in that than there is in every other Comedy. These Nymphs though they are so over nice in words, may perhaps, be frank enough in their actions. And I have have known the time when they would have been more fa∣vourable to you. The great favour you did me, in giving me

this Play, with all the rest of your obligations to me, as I will never forget, so I shall be alwaies proud of an occasion to boast of so good a Patron; who uses me not as some Supercilious Men would (who do good meerly out of Va∣nity) as a troublesome hanger on: But treats me with the civility and kindness of a Friend. And I have had the ho∣nour to have alwaies found as much of both from him, as if I had obliged him in receiving, as much as he me in confer∣ring his benefits.
It is honour enough for me, that I have from my Youth Lived in yours, and, as you know, in the favour of the wittiest men of England, your familiar friends and acquain∣tance, who have encouraged my Writings; and suffer'd my Conversation. I mean not any of the profess'd Poets; for I take none of them to be of that Rank, and most of'em God knows are far enough from it. But it has happen'd in our time, that some few men of Quality have been much the greatest wits of the age, nor do I think England ever produ∣ced so great in any age, the loss of two of which, the Earl of Rochester, and the Duke of Buckingham, we who had the honour to be acquainted with them can never bewail enough.
After all this I must think I hope without vanity, that the Author of Mack-Fleckno reflects more upon himself than me; where he makes Fleckno commend Dulness, and chuse me for the Dullest that ever writ; and repeats dull, dull, &c. over and over: indeed he gives his own dullness a civiller term, and calls it being Saturnine. But sure he goes a little too far in calling me the Dullest, and has no more reason for that, than for giving me the Irish name of Mack, when he knows I never saw Ireland till I was three and twenty years old, and was there but four Months
Besides as I have heard you observe the foundation of that Libel is false and unnatural; for tho some may have mista∣ken dulness for wit, and commended it as such; yet no man ever commended Dullness as dulness.
Had he staid till he had supplied the Stage with more new hu∣mour then I have done, or till he had written a better Comedy then Epsom Wells, or the Virtuoso (neither of which by the way are taken from a Novel, or stollen from a Romance) he might with a better Grace, and more Authority have pronoun∣ced me dull. But he is not content with that, but has ano∣ther fling at me for playlng upon the Lute. I must confess that that and all other Gentleman-like Exercises, which I was ca∣pable of Learning, my Father was at the charge of, and let the Libeller make his best of it.
I hope Sir you will not think me guilty of Arrogance in my own Vindication, especially since there have been such strong endeavours to depress me, and by those who had least reason to do it
It is hard to believe that the supposed Author of Mack-Fleckno is the real one, because when I taxed him with it, he denyed it with all the Execrations he could think of. How∣ever my Dullness admits of an excuse, because I endeavour to avoid it all I can. But had I been base or dishonest, I could have made none, yet if he pleases to let my Reputation alone, I shall not envy him the Fame he has.
And now Sir 'tis time to give you an account why I pub∣lish this Translation. I have I must confess ever look'd upon Translating as a difficult, and irksom piece of Drudgery, and below any man who had a genius of his own, and have been as much averse to it as I should be to the making of a Dictio∣nary: For though both of 'em are works of publick benefit, yet they are unpleasant all the while.
I was provoked to this first by the supposed Author of Mack-Fleckno, who saies in another Pamphlet; that to his knowledge, I understand neither Greek nor Latin, though in Bury School in Suffolk, and Cajus Colledge in Cambridge, the places of my Youthful Education, I had not that reputa∣tion, and let me tell him he knows the contrary.
And Secondly by another Writer, who (without any pro∣vocation whatsoever, I having seen him but once in my Life,

when he was pleas'd to thank me for a civility I did him.) a∣bused me after that in Print, where he saies Bavius and Maevius ought to have been reserved by Fate to be Translated by me and Settle. I will not compare my self with him, but I leave it to him to consider, whether Settle has not out-done all that he has yet produc'd in Poetry. It was at best an ungen∣tile thing in his friend, who suffer'd those Verses to be pre∣fix'd to his Book, since I had never given him the least offence, or so much as seen him.
But to trouble you Sir with no more Digressions of this kind, I have endeavour'd in this Translation to come as near the words and thoughts of my Author, as my skill in both Languages could enable me. I have omitted no part of his Sence, nor have I varied from it, nor added to it, but in some few places where it was necessary to a meer English Reader, for explanation. I will not say as a Cock Translator does of Lucretius and Virgil, that he has added nothing but what he is confident the Authors would themselves were they now Living, by which arrogant saying he would insinuate that his Genius is much like theirs, or equal with them.
I have not endeavour'd to make it an English Poem, nor to fit it to our Customes and Manners, but to retain the Roman ones, and as much as ever I could to preserve the Spirit of the Author; and to that end have made it as much a Translation as I could. For I have observ'd in all Paraphrases upon the Greek and Roman Authors of the first Rank, the Strength and Spirit of thom is deaded, and in some quite lost.
At best the thoughts of those Paraphrastical Writers, mix∣ing with those of such noble Authors, look like patches of homely Wollen upon the richest Silk. Because the modern ages have produced no Genius like theirs; the imaginations must be very different and unequal; and methinks such Po∣ems go down like Wine of two tasts. Some by Paraphrasing do nothing but beat out the Sense thinner, as Gold-Beaters do Gold.
In keeping close to my Author, I am forced to make my Periods sometimes in the middle of Lines; contrary to the

late English practise: and I have alwaies chosen rather to make a rough Verse, than to loose the Sense of Juvenal. Tho I must needs say, I do not think great smoothness is required in a Satyr, which ought to have a severe kind of roughness as most fit for reprehension, and not that gentle smoothness which is necessary to insinuation.
I have added some Notes or Illustrations upon the Satyr, some being necessary to all who are not conversant with the Author, though otherwise good Schollars: And for the sake of those who are not such, I have added more. So that (as it was my chief end) I hope I have made the Original clearly to be understood by any one who is the least a Grammarian And, if I find this Essay to be favourably received, I will go on with the rest of the Author, in which I have already made some progress. Though I can only do it by way of diversion, I having more material business upon my hands at this time.
My friend Mr. Higden has made an ingenious version of this Satyr, but in other Numbers, and a different way, so that we shall not interfere one upon another.
I shall say nothing of the Author or his Life, till my transla∣tion grows into a larger Volumne. For the Dry Critiiks who object that he is too severe and bitter, and that his Satyrs are more fit for Declamations then Poems, I think them not worth the answering. I have chosen this Satyr to give the Reader as a Sample; it being one of the wisest, and noblest in the Book; wherein any man may perceive the difference between the Wisdom and Dignity of true Roman Satyr, and the Levity and baseness of false English Libells. But Sir I ask your par∣don for troubling you so long, and now shall only assure you that I am proud of any opportunity of Publishing to the World that I am,
Sir,



I have prefixt before my Translation of this Satyr, a version of that famous Answer of Cato to Labienus, who would have him consult the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon in the Lybian De∣serts.



FUll of the God (within his silent Breast)
Words worthy of the Oracle h' exprest.
What Labienus would y' inquire if I▪
As a free Roman, had not rather dye
Bravely in Arms, than stoop to Monarchy from the time of the Tarquins, was become odious to Romans, and Cato was the most obsti∣na of all the Repub¦licans. Monarchy?
If we in Life can any value see?
Or whether long or short much diff'rent be,
If any violence can depress the brave?
Or Fortunes threats force against Vertue have.
Are great attempts by not succeeding less?
Does a brave act grow braver by success?
We of these truths such full conviction find,
Heav'n cannot fix them deeper in the mind.
We all on God, as parts of him depend;
There does the mighty chain begin and end.
Were Temples silent, the Almighty will,
Spight of our selves, we cannot but fulfill.
Heav'n needs no voice, to tell us what to do,
At first it plants in man all he shouid ever know.
Nor could a God so narrowly provide
For human kind, in these parch'd Sands to hide
Truth for a few, to all the rest deni'd.
Where can you think the Seat of God to find,
But in Earth, Sea, or Air, Heav'n, or a Virtuous mind?
Why should we seek him farther then? for he
Is wheresoe're you move, and whatsoe're you see.
Let doubtful men their Fortune Tellers try,
And Anxious into future chances Pry
No Oracle can e're my doubt secure
But certain Death; that does my mind assure.
Impartial Death that strikes alike at all,
As well the Coward as the Brave must fall.




Ille Deo plenus tacita quem mente gerebat
Effudit dignas aditis è pectore voces
Quid Quaeri Labiene jubes? an liber in Armis
Occubuisse velim potius quam Regna videre?
An sit vita nihil? sed longa an differat Aetas?
An noceat vis ulla bonis? Fortuna{que} perdat
Opposita Virtute minas? laudanda{que} Velle
Sit satis? & nunquam successu Crescat honestum?
Scimus: & hoc nobis non altius inserit Ammon
Haeremus cuncti superis: Templo{que} tacente
Nil facimus non sponte Dei; nec vocibus ullis
Numen eget: Dixit{que} semel nascentibus Autor
Quicquid scire Licet. Steriles nec Legit Arenas
Ʋt caneret paucis mersit{que} hoc pulvere Verum.
Estne Dei sedes nisi Terra & Pontus & Aer?
Et Caelum & Virtus? superos quid quaerimus ultra?
Jupiter est quodcun{que} vides quocun{que} moveris
Sortilegis egeant dubii, semper{que} futuris
Casibus ancipites. Me non oracula certum
Sed Mors certa facit, Pavido forti{que} Cadendum est.


