



MY LORD,
WHen your Lordship laid your commands upon me, to interpret JUVENAL, it was an honour I beheld with fear; for, though I knew him to be one of the greatest Classick Authors, yet I doubted, I should not find him the easiest: because I then 1638. heard of no man that had attempted to put him into any other language: But O∣bedience to your Lordship, carried me through all the difficulties of my first Translation, and from the good successe of that (answerable to the event of all things acted according to your Lordship's judgement) I was incouraged to copy him a-new, out of his exactest Edi∣tion,

printed 1644. afterwards at PARIS: to which I have added a large Comment, and the Designe of every Sa∣tyr in Picture. Thus restored to himself, and illustra∣ted, I presume to bring JUVENAL once more to kisse your Lordship's hand: from which I received him, like an old ROMAN Coin, hard to be read, but worthy to be studied by our ablest Antiquaries.
Truly, my LORD, if my abilities could have reached the height of my ambition, I would have de∣dicated, out of the learning of the GREEKS and RO∣MANS (wherein your Lordship is so great a Master) not my interpretation of another; but some worke that should have owned me for the Author, and trea∣ted of such subjects as your Lordship daily reads: but since I cannot what I would, I acquiesce in what I can: it shall be happinesse enough for me, after the learned Authors of Sciences, and Commentators upon Lawes, have taken up your more reserved time, if my Author may entertain your houres of recreation: which I would not promise to my self, but that he DELIGHTS with PROFIT: For, your Lp^'s. divertisements are more serious then most mens studies, your very mirth being observations upon Men and Businesse, which your Lordship knowes was the end that JUVENAL

aimed at: and undoubtedly MORES HOMINUM should at first have been the Title to his SATYRS, if his modesty could have prefixed, what I have done, out of his own words, QUICQUID AGUNT HO∣MINES.
But sooner may the Sun let fall his beames upon a solid body, without making a shadow, then Merit can exist without Detraction: No marvail, therefore, if Envy or Follie have stirred up Enemies against this in∣comparable Satyrist, in severall Ages. In his time, his Country was exasperated by too great a CLEARNESSE of his stile, made (for the most part) by their own self-reflexions: for, guilty men are shrewdly apprehensive. Afterwards, to remoter parts, and strangers to the ROMANE Customes, he appeared OBSCURE, and was looked upon, like the Moon in an Eclipse, as drown∣ed in the shadow of a forein clime. Lastly, though the greatest Scholars have made use of JUVENAL'S authority, as CUJACIUS in the civil Law; DE LA CERDA to explane TERTULLIAN; and GROTIUS to assert the Rights of Peace and War; yet, in our seed-plots of Learning, there sprung up a Sect of little formall Stoicks, that for a few wanton words (all they could make sense of) cast JUVENAL out of their

hands: just as if Pygmyes should throw away Dia∣monds, set in Tablets bigger then themselves, only because their foils were black.
My Copie will not (I hope) be liable to these ex∣ceptions: The first falls to ground of it self, for, the bitterness of these Satyrs, being only PERSONAL to the ROMANS, cannot touch the ENGLISH: there∣fore, I have made it my businesse, to clear them from all OBSCURITY, which is the second charge. To perspicuity, I have added language so well-qualitied, that (I am confident) the third sort of accusers will never inform against this JUVENAL for Immodesty. And if when I took off his obscenity, I could have set on the full perfections of his Pen, my industry had been crowned to my wish.
But though I am too much composed of earth, to ascend to my desires: I know your Lordship parti∣cipates so much of Heaven, as to descend to the ac∣ceptance of intentions. Yet when your name (now flying in the breath of every University) shall be the Protection of such learned Pieces as I cannot SHOW, but only can CONCEIVE: thus far my present De∣dication will be happiest, as being first authorised by your Lordship, which I look upon as the earnest of

a generall approbation; for, the noble follow your opinion; all your example. But if there should be some one that dislikes my way, because I goe not his; such an Adversary I shall not think considerable, since the Judge (from whom no Scholar will appeal) gives sentence for

