



My LORD,
I Was desired by the Authour of this Poem, to excuse to the World his employing any time in work (or, as he would rather have it called, Idleness) of this sort; and the boldness, in-publick inscribing it to your Patronage. I cannot better do ei∣ther, than by plain telling truth.
Some perplext business drew him to the Terms at Clon∣mel, in which Journey, for diversion of Law-thoughts, and entertainment of time, which was not very capable of more serious studies, he took with him Juvenal, and his learned Translators, Sir Robert Stapleton, and Dr. B. Holiday, onely with the design of pleasing himself by the comparing the Original and Translations: a plea∣sure truly worthy of an ingenious mind, at once to view the product of Three so great Wits employed on the same con∣ceits. By the way at Kilkenny. making a short stay, a ju¦dicious Friend possest him, that Juvenal was the properest for a Pindarick Version, of any Authour of that nature. This induced him afterwards to try, how he could thnk
 over Juvenal's thoughts that new way in English: which design he the rather cherished, because such kind of writing could not at all rival those great Names, who had already done Juvenal so much justice in our Tongue. This occasi∣on truly gave birth to this Poem: and I believe your Lord∣ship, as well as other good Judges, will be apt to think, con∣sidering the Authours temper and inclination, such time could not have been by him much better spent.
Returning home, he reviewed what he had done, and moved by the worth of the subject, gave three Copies to Persons of Quality, known by him to be addicted to Lite∣rature, (of whom your Lordship, by sending your Copy to the Press, not without great encouragement, made it known you were one) designing onely thereby, farther to invite them to the reading such old Books, which at once present much Wit, Learning, and Morality. From the Press the Papers came to my hands; and I should neither do your Lord∣ship, nor my Friend justice, if from mine they did not re∣turn to yours.
According therefore, to the Authours obligations to your Lordship, and that right which I have in him, I consecrate this his small Piece to your Name, not imagining it can add any honour thereto, but presaging it will from thence re∣ceive both life and lustre; and withall professing, I greedi∣ly look the opportunity he gave me, of publick acknowledg∣ing my self,
SIR,

