




THat I do prefixe your names and make choise of you (Right worshipfull, &c.) before all other in this Dedication, and publication of these Sermon∣notes, is not done without good ground and reason. First, I ac∣count it very sutable to my duty, to give you this
taste of my labours, and thus to render an account unto you in part, how my ministeriall pains have been imployed here for the spirituall good of your sons, servants, factors, and friends (respectively); seeing your prayers and desires (attested under so many of your hands at first) were that my ministe∣ry might prevail mightily in these parts, and that those of our Nation here, might walk answerable to the professi∣on of the Gospel. I have, to these your good de∣sires, joyned not my prayers only, but my best in∣deavours that, by the good fruit and efficacy of my ministery here, you may have no cause to repent you either of your choice of me, or cost on me and them; but that you may by Gods mercy reap the harvest of that your seed, and fruit of your expectation and desires. You by this taste, may perceive the me∣thod and manner of my plain teaching, which is framed, not to tickle the ear, but by Gods mercy to touch the heart; and not to please any man (in his sin and security) but only in that which is good. My indeavours, I say, tend this way, the blessing and success is from God, of whom it is still and e∣ver to be sought.
Again, I should be unthankfull both to God and to you all (by whose desires, votes, and good li∣king, I was called to this imployment) if I did not, by some more then private acknowledgement take notice and give testimony of Gods good hand of providence towards me, by making you his instru∣ments to call me to this place and meanes of im∣ployment at such a time, when through the malig∣nancy of some degenerate spirits, sensualists and time-servers, and through their hatred of the truth,
power and life of religion and godliness; they by false reports, defamations and accusations without proof, got their lies, if not credited and beleeved, yet made use of (though under other pretexts) to my unjust deprivation, yea and banishment from mine own dwelling house and native home, by pro∣curing letters in his Majesties name (whom by like mis-reports they mis-informed and abused) not on∣ly for the setling of another in my place and means, but to require my removall from Newcastle; by which means I was cast meerly upon Gods provi∣dence, who yet in the riches of his wisedome and mercy to me; (I say not to yours in these parts, who yet had been so long destitute, but) to my self, (who desired nothing more then imployment) had pro∣vided, as those here to desire supply (so your selves upon the recommendation at first of a private friend without my privity, seconded by the approbation and recommendation of a worthy Divine) to pitch upon my self, and to put me (otherwise an ancient born—and sworn-brother of your Company) into imployment again by the free and unanimous vote of your Generall Court (procuring me also a warrant from the Councel for my transportation) and so to provide for me not only a competent yeerly mainte∣nance and minervall, but a convenient dwelling house, as also to be at further cost for a place of our asembling and meeting.
This I acknowledge as a great favour and provi∣dence  God, who (till he again gather the outcasts of Israel) provided you to give me a call, as once he commanded the widow of Sarepta to sustain the (persecuted) Prophet Elijah,1 Kings 17.9. sending him in like
mercy to her only (as me now a Prophet not accepted (at least generally) in mine own countrey,Luke 4.24, 25, 26. to your friends here,) when yet there were many widowes in Israel (as then were many places destitute of faith∣full Pastors in England.) Thus it fared here in some proportion with me—and many other in Eng∣land, as once when the Jewes in envy and opposi∣tion against Paul and Barnabas,Acts 13.45, 46 did put the word of God from them, and so judged themselves unworthy of everlasting life, whereby those servants of the Lord, turned to the Gentiles (God so commanding) who hear∣ing it, were glad and glorified the word of the Lord. The Gentils we see (with the woman of Canaan) were glad of that which the Jewes did surfet on, and of those Crumbs which fell from the richer, but loathed table of the Children: Even as many now, who (loathing the homely Manna of the Word, in the simplicity of the Gospel, and long∣ing after such teachers as are according to their own minde, humour, and heart) find, as those in the wil∣dernesse, who had other meat according to their lusts given them indeed, but with a curse, both of body (for while their meat was yet in their mouths,Psal 78.30, 31. the wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them) and of soul too, for he gave them their request, but sent leannesse into their soul, Psal. 106.15.
3. By this (not undesired by some here) my de∣sire is (by penning and printing) to water that seed which at first was sown by preaching,Joh. 14.26. and (as neer as I can) to become a Remembrancer, (this way also as well as by prayer at the throne of grace) to my hearers here, even after my departure and decease, by stirring up that spirit in them, which as
a Remembrancer is promised to them in due time and season to bring to their remembrance what hath (by Christ and his Minister) been said unto them;2 Pet. 1.15. that so they may either reap that good which was and is in∣tended by me, or that this may prove a testimony on Gods behalf, in time to come, against them, that hee hath not wholly been wanting to them. And thus with hope that my ministeriall pains and conceptions, (which, with some of my ancient hea∣rers, proved altogether abortive) will yet find bet∣ter acceptance here, (and such as I blesse God, with many other of better temper among my ancient hearers, they have found) and that the seed cast on the thornie and stonie ground and hearts of many in England, will take better root and thrive bet∣ter in another soil (as some trees transplanted do,) I recommend this mite of my good will to your Worships, and to their perusall here, as also to the Churches service and use elsewhere, resting,
Dantzick, June 28, 1642.

