



My Lord,
HOly Writ acquaints us with many cursed Conspiracies against the Innocent and the Good. But I find none more sottish and cruel, than that we read of, John 12. v. 10.11. Where the High-prists con∣sult to put (not Jesus only, but) Lazarus also to Death; because by reason of him many of the Jews believed on Jesus. Lazarus wasguilty of no Crime, but because [he was.] It seems his
very Being and Life was fault enough, which though redeem'd by a Miracle, must now be destroy∣ed by Malice: For his bare Presence and Motion Drew Disciples; his very Looks preached the Go∣spel; he opened his Eyes and Taught. And while thus doing, he would never make an end of doing mischief to them. Therefore they consult to dispatch him out of sight, and to silence this Teacher, by muf∣fling him up in a Napkin again, and laying him under a Stone.
It is certain (My Lord) that every Turn of your Head, Glance of your Eye, Motion of your Hand, Step of your Foot is a vexation and a Plague to your Enemies the Papists, who believe your very Shadow so fatal to all their Contri∣vances and Aims, that whilst You live, they Shrivel and Wither. Your Breath strikes con∣fusion to all their Plots, and therefore no wonder they have variously consulted your Death, as well as your Great Masters: Lazarus must dye too.
But then to promote it by projecting a Design of
setting Jesus against Lazarus, and imposing a be∣lief that He [Innocent He] should conspire the ruine of his Masters Honour and Kingdom, is a Plot like to prosper into the same Glory of the Proje∣ctors, as this your Lordship will hear of in the fol∣lowing Discourse. One would swear such Men were Planet-struck, their Counsels confounded from Heaven (as the Languages at Babel) and the Witnesses stammering out an improbable E∣vidence.
Praised be God, who hath frustrated (hitherto) all their Hellish attempts both against your Sove∣raign and Self. May his Majesty live for ever, a sure Defender of our Faith and Church: And may your Lordship live too, the Dread and Eye-sore of the Enemies of its peace. And may You ne∣ver be Imagin'd to be lessened in the Affections of your Prince, nor in your own to the Interests of his Royal Person and Kingdom; but may Realize in your Devotion to Majesty, those Hyperbolical expressions of Allegiance and Duty wherewith Furre and
Velvet, have even tired the Court all this Year. And let that idle imputation and reproach of a Re∣publican Design be equally the Subject of your Diversion and scorn. When all wise Men know you too Prudent and Politick to endeavour the un∣hinging those firm Establishments of Church and State, to whose fixation and Glory you lent so Great an hand, and (I doubt not) bear so true an Heart, however enviously the contrary be insinuated by your Inveterate Enemies. And no wonder, when Jesus himself (who dar'd the World and Devil to convince him of sin against God) was yet In∣dicted of Treason against Caesar, (Joh. 19.22.) and bawl'd to death by the Exclamations of those, whose Hypocritical pretences to Loyalty, serv'd only to mask very fitly the Face of their Cruelty. From which God ever defend your Lordship and all Good Men. I am (My Lord)

