



AS, my Lord, amongst the innumerable precious Be∣nefits and Blessings, which God hath graciously vouchsafed to Mankind, or to any part there∣of, His Word, Statutes and sa∣cred Oracles infinitly surpass, excel, and, so to speak, obscure all the rest by far, more than the Sun doth eclipse the lesser Lu∣minaries: so according to that common saying, Corruptio opti∣mi, pessima; Nothing by many

degrees is so mischievous, noxi∣ous, and deadly as the Corrup∣tion and Depravation of these lively Oracles; For thus, tho by a cursed accident, The Wine of our Fathers Kingdom is turned into Wormwood, and that Heavenly and unpressed Honey into Gall; whereby the greater part of the visible Church hath perished! For the Poison hath this most unhap∣py advantage above all others, that it is of an hydropick nature, making the infected, the more they have drunk, so much the more desirous to drink. Hence that sagacious Spirit, the grand

Enemy of Mankind, judged this the choicest expedient and mean, for restauration of his falling Kingdom: For to speak nothing o the first 4000 years of the World, he hath ever, since the very infancy of Christia∣nity, to his outmost, put this in practice, always raising up such as were most famous, or rather infamous, through their cor∣rupting, abusing, and detorting the Word of Life, and Charters of our Salvation: Of which kind, in the early days of Chri∣stianity, were Cerinthus, Mon∣tanus, the Cataphrygians, Samosa∣tenus, Arrius, and a multitude

beside. But these first Essays, by reason of their palpable and direct overturning of the un∣doubted Fundamentals of Christianity which rendred all their sophistry, tho never so subtile, most suspected, proved inefficacious to do the Business, tho in some respect, infectious enough. Therefore the Lord having by many Means, and in special, by the first four Coun∣cils, blown away these pestife∣rous Mists, and cleared up to mens minds, these grand Truths of the Holy Trinity, the God∣head of Christ, the Unity of his Person, the Distinction of his

Natures, and the like. The Me∣thod was altered, and the fol∣lowing opposers of Truth acted by the same Spirit, that the for∣mer were, went more subtilly to work, not only forbearing to oppose these Fundamentals, but, in shew at lest, endeavou∣ring to defend and assert them: By which it came to pass, that they were more easily believed in all they said, by the too sim∣ple people. In the mean while they secretly and slily sowed their Tares under the specious pretext of Unity, Order, De∣cency, Ornament, and antient Tradition. Under the covert of

these & the like, was the whole Mass of Paganism introduced, guilded only with the varnish∣ing Title of Catholick Doctrine. For thus in stead of the humili∣ty of a Gospel-Ministry, was brought in a Prelatick Hierar∣chy, in imitation of the Pagan Protoflamines, which at length procreated to the World the Man of Sin, to head this dege∣nerating Church in their Wic∣kedness: And so they had Uni∣ty, which was worse than Divi∣sion; and an Order, that became the cause of the most horrid Confusion the World hath hi∣therto seen. Thus also the sim∣plicity

of the Gospel was turned into Heathnish Pageantry; and the glory of the Church of God did degenerat into a meer worldly pomp and grandour. But at length how sad and mi∣serable became the case of the Church, whe through the power of humane inventions, delivered under the name of Tradition, & the Dictats of the Romish-depute of the old Dra∣gon, such poisonous dregs be∣came the best part of the essen∣tials of their Religion! Justifica∣tion before God, ascribed to the belief and practice thereof, and Justification by Faith in the

Son of God, decried and ma∣ligned! Thus were the same fun∣damental Truths, which had been more openly assaulted by the former Hereticks, now no less powerfully, but more sub∣tilly almost overthrown. But so soon as the Lord, as it were by the dawning of a second-Chri∣stian-day, had discovered Romes Abominations, and rendered her hateful to all good Men; the old Artist & his associats chang∣ed their method, tho not their design, impugning again more openly, these fundamental Truths they had assaulted in the early days of Christianity;

But that the Weapon, already blunted, might yet cut, behold a new Artifice! For these at∣tempts were not made, for the most part, by these who persist∣ed in the company of the now deservedly hated Church of Rome, but by these who were in appearance the Deserters and Opposers thereof: Under the covert of which, they far more securely infected many, who were in communion with the reformed Church, impudent∣ly asserting, that the chiefest points of Christianity wee Po∣pery, on this account that the Papists had not expresly denied

them. These were known by many names, as Servetians, An∣ti-trinitarians, Socinians, and the like. But more general was that of Anabaptists, comprising in it self all these, and many other such Vipers. The true progeny of these Anabaptists are these, now known by the Name of Quakers, the men with whom Ideal, who for design and me∣thod, are all on with the bulk of both antient and modern Hereticks. Two Artifices were alternatively used by the anti∣ent Hereticks: and by a conti∣nued succession derived unto our present Adversaries, the one

of which was to abuse the Scrip∣tures; as if one should mould a Bushel of Jewels, into the shape of a Dog, Toad, or the like hateful Creature. The o∣ther, when in spite of all these shifts, they were Convicted out of the Scriptures, to turn upon the Scriptures themselves, as being not free of their own Errors, nor of Divine Autho∣rity. How exactly the Quakers write after their Copy, none acquainted with their Do∣ctrines, seeth not. I hope there∣fore it shal not be unprofitable, if the following Discourse shall unfold more particularly these

practices of our Adversaries, which I with a humble confi∣dence can averr; and moreover I make some Discoveries, in particular of this more spiritu∣al Mystery of Iniquity, by none I know hitherto directly undertaken. Moreover, this my Treatise can be judged by none altogether superfluous, who considereth, that the whole Land is ready to be overspread with the Hemlock o Pelagia∣nism, now known by the name of Arminianism, with which the bulk of the Prelatick Clergy is already infected, for with this Heresie I have several Ran∣counters.

But I will not trouble your Lordship with a further account of this my small Un∣dertaking; Yet this I crave leave to say, that whatever I in∣tended of this kind, it was de∣signed for your Lordship, not for instruction; for to a high∣er pitch, and that not without ground I presume your Lord∣ship to be arrived, but only for a testimony of my gratitude to your Lordships most Noble and Munificent Grand-Father, whose large bounty to the Lear∣ned, and Learners, did liberal∣ly extend it self to me also, tho most undeserving. Wherefore

if there were any worth in this my small Essay, your Lord∣ship by right of succession may challenge a propriety therein. Neither were your Lordships Vertues unknown to me, while I had the honour of receiving my Education under the same Roo, and at the same time with your Lordship. But the spe∣cial motive of my ambition to prefix your Lordships Name to my sheets, is, that your Lord∣ship by undoubted arguments hath proved your self, to be a sincere lover of the now much deserted and maligned Truths of GOD, and a true favourer

of his afflicted Church, tram∣pled on these many years by oppressing Lords, that never had lawful Dominion over her: whose Prelatical Yoak and Hi∣erarchy, as it hath proved the stair, by which, beside many other Tyrants, the Pope hath got to the unmeasurable height, at which he is now arrived, so it is ready to become the bridge, and pave the way for his Re∣troduction into Britain, with this much I thought to have troubled your Lordship seve∣ral Months ago, but then could not, for May last, my Papers not being admitted to the Press

without the allowance of the then publick Inspectors, were given to Doctor Munro, there∣unto appointed by the Prelat of St. Andrews, by whom I was prohibited the publication thereof, unless I razed out of them, all mention of Popery whatsoever. So great hath the zeal of these good men been against Popery, that so far as they could, they would not suf∣fer it so much as once to be named. Yet do I not complain of any wrong done to me, but only show to your Lordship, and the World, to how sad a pass things were then brought!

Go on therefore, my Lord, espousing the Cause of the true Protestant Interest, in oppo∣sition to Popery, and whatsoe∣ver hath a tendency thereto: Thus shall your Lordship add the truest lustre to your Nobi∣lity, by causing the Heart of the destitute, and widow Church to sing, and bringing the blessing of her that was rea∣dy to perish upon your Lord∣ship. And however matters shall succeed, your Lordship shall be Feasted with the Deli∣cacies of a good Conscience, in respect of which, the choic∣est Banquet of Cleopatra with

her Anthony, are far from a∣mounting to the coursest of Commons. In which, that the Lord may prosper your Lordship, and bestow upon your Lordship and Family, his choicest Blessings, is, and shall be, the earnest Prayer of, my Lord,

