



Beloved Christians;
THE Dedication of these few Sheets of my Vindicatio
is due to you; and it would be a Crime to prefix any ¦ther
Name or Names: You are concerned with me in th
Matters here spoken to; and your Concern is little le
than that of my own; yea upon some Accounts it is evident
greater: You have also some knowledge of these things; yea som
of you do know the truth of what I write, to your exceedin
great grief and sorrow. This Neighbourhood hath of a long tim
been the Seat of many Anabaptists; and the Stirs they have mad
have not been small; witness that Disputation held in the Paris
Church July 27. 1649. between Fisher and several Ministers, b¦fore
some thousands of Hearers (about three Thousand, as th
Printed Relation telleth us it was guessed) and a late one b¦tween
them and my Predecessour; and they have not come short 
my time, having urged me to the same, though I have answere
them only with contempt of their Challenge.
The Reflection I made touching their troubling weak and unst¦ble
Souls, and their Practices of this kind, are Matters well know
to many of you: Every Day discovers how restless they are 
turn some or other of you away from the Faith you profess, an
to make you renounce your first Baptism. Ʋpon these Account 
judge it a part of my Ministry, which I have received in th
Lord, to watch over you, and to preserve you from those Seducer
and if I should not take all occasions to warn, to exhort, and istruct

you, I am afraid I should not fulfil the same. Beware of
hem therefore, and be not terrified and dismay'd at their bold
and desperate Speeches, cavilling at, and condemning Infant-Bap∣ism
as a new Doctrine, a Scriptureless thing, as Antichristian;
which yet was practised many hundred of Years before the Name
of Anabaptists, or Baptists (being taken for a Society of Peo∣ple
opposing Infant Baptism) was ever known in the World, and
long before the Man of Sin was ever revealed. But why should
ou be afraid to have your Children baptized, when Christ shewed
his Love to those Lambs, by taking them in his Arms and
blessing them; and the Holy Ghost makes no difference be∣ween
them and the oldest Disciples, calling them Holy,
and saying, the Promises equally belong to them; and God
to where in all his Word forbids you to dedicate them in
Baptism, or refuseth them? Let them shew you that Scrip∣ture,
if they can, which forbids Children to be baptized.
What, hath God less love for your Children than for those
of his old People the Jews? Is his Mercy clean gone from our
hildren? Is he not the God of the Christians also? Yes ve∣ily
the same God in Covenant; for he is a God keeping Cove∣ant
and Mercy with his People; whose People we are if we be∣ieve
on Jesus Christ his Son; and we are Children of Abra∣am,
to whom Circumcision was given as a Seal of the Covenant
od made with him and his Seed; to which Baptism now answers;
Christ changing the two old Sacraments, Circumcision and the Passo∣er,
into Baptism and the Lord's Supper, the Subjects of them
ho were to receive Spiritual Benefit and Priviledge thereby
eing still the same. Many things I know they have written to
isprove this; but I seriously profess, that their Distinctions and
ub distinctions about Circumcision being a Seal to Abraham, and
ot to his Seed; the two Covenants God made with him, &c.
re so handled by them in some of their Books scattered among us,
hat I can hardly understand them, and wonder how they could render
ich plain Matters so intricate. But until they can shew you
ow God makes a difference between Children under the Law and

the Gospel, taking theirs in, and leaving ours out, why should yo
keep your Children back from the priviledge of so blessed a Sa∣crament,
or seek a new Baptism for your selves? As for the
point of Dipping, can you, dare you lay the stress of the Efficacy
of a Sacrament wholly upon the quantity of Water, as though the
application of more, or in another way than Sprinkling or pouring
could profit you so exceedingly? Or, must you needs be adult, and
profess yo Faith, as though the Vertue of the Sacrament did
wholly consist in what you do, and nothing in the Grace of God 
Cannot God bless his own Ordinance to Infants? Beware, I beseech
you, least you should provoke God, by limiting him after thi
manner, and scandalize your Brethren, and all the Reformed
Churches of Christ, even the purest of them (as that of the Wa¦denses,
now commonly called Vaudois, who were never tainte
with any Corruption of Antichrist, but certainly the most pur
and Apostolical in the World) who baptize Infants, and generall
apply the Element of Baptism some other way than by dipping
as by pouring it on, sprinkling, &c. But, I pray, what do yo
see in these Men that you should think the Word of God came on¦ly
to them? What Power and Demonstration of the Spirit is ther
in their Preaching? What Holiness and Exemplariness in the
Lives more than others, to convince you that they are the Peop
of God above others? I do not go about to set you against their Per¦sons,
or Societies, and therefore say nothing that may tend to the
Reproach, but I am shewing you how vain it is to believe eve
Word they say, to prevent your being insnared by their confident
boasting of things they are never able to prove. Let me speak 
some of you in the Words of the Apostle; Be no more Childre
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrin
by the slight of Men, and cunning craftiness, whereby the
he in wait to deceive: And I do earnestly exhort you all, to a¦tend
to that Gospel Precept, If it be possible, as much as th 
you, live peaceably with all Men; live peaceably even wi
these Men; as they are Neighbours live in love; let not the
Questions and Strivings about Matters of this or any other natu

imbitter your Spirits, and provoke you to speak unadvisedly,
much less to be guilty of any Misbehaviour in your Actions; ra∣ther
pity them, and pray for them: They are their own Enemies-many
ways, especially their Childrens, whom they debarr of ma∣ny
blessed Priviledges; therefore pray for them, and be at peace
with them: The strange Divisions of the Land of our Nativity
is a sorrowful Consideration to all that fear God, and are by no
means unnecessarily to be widened: I could upon this account be
content most gladly to be silent; but my own defence, and your se∣curity,
will excuse my Ʋndertaking: But truly I had rather ap∣pear
among you in the Pulpit than in Print; and had rather speak
five Words to Edification than ten thousand in a way of endless
Controversie. As for you, my Brethren, believe the Promises, ob∣serve
the Institutions, and obey the Words and Commandments of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and keep your selves pure, that none may
be able to speak evil of you, or to reproach your good Conversati∣on;
this will give you Peace, and end in your everlasting Happi∣ness.
For this I make my Prayers to God for you; as also that
he would stablish, strengthen, settle you; hoping to approve my self
a faithful Minister of Christ unto you in all things, desiring and
endeavouring your eternal Salvation, as I am

From my Study, June 25, 1695.
