


DEformity (fairest Ladies) is a single name, yet a complicated misery; for a young Algebraist in this only word, knows how to read a whole Iliad of evills. Poets fancy the creature to be hatcht in Hell; nei∣ther do they greatly injure it, for∣asmuch as it brings with it suffi∣cient matter for a whole Hell of misery to those, whose darkned soules are clouded with it's fright∣full adumbrations: and as it comes from thence, so would it willingly
thither againe, as appears from it's shunning the light, and only solacing it selfe in duskie soli∣tudes. For those whose bodyes are dismist natures presse with some errata's, and have not the royall stamp of Beauty to make them currant coyne for humane socie∣ty, make choice of obscurity; judg∣ing death lesse insufferable, then that ignominy which too often at∣tends deformity. It is a disease usually looked upon as infectious, and hath one symptome of dange∣rous consequence, it breeds obstru∣ctions, and that chiefly to Ladies preferment; since none save Grooms or Oastlers think those worth their courtship, who are rusted
over with ill-inticing looks.
Now to quit you Ladies from the loathsome embraces of this hi∣deous Hagge, (which might there be so many Furies in Hell, would make a fourth) I have published these Cosmeticks; so Beautify∣ing, that those who use them shall Diana it in company, and with a radiant lustre outshine their thick∣skind companions, as so many browner Nymphs.
Though you may look so pallid∣ly sad, that you would be thought to be dropping in your Graves; and though your skins be so devoid of colour, that they might be taken for your winding sheets; yet these Recipe's will give you such a rosie
cheerfulnes, as if you had new be∣gun your resurrection. They are the handsome Ladies Panacaea, of such efficacy that they will teach you creatures of mortality to retrace the steps of youth, and transforme the wrinkled hide of Hecuba into the tender skin of a tempting He∣lena.
Inchase but your cheeks Ladies, with some of our auxiliary un∣guents, and ye shall see, that ex∣act complexions make but foyles to advance your features: and con∣ceited beauties craven'd with their own defects shall crouch in your presence, and force you almost to be proud; while having no parts to value, they shall dispond them∣selves.
When once your artifici∣all roses display themselves, o∣thers shall seem pale, as if they envied your tempting perfectious; and their naturall vermilion shall only serve them to blush that their features are outvied by yours. Other Ladies in your company shall look like brown-bread sippets in a dish of snowie cream, or if you will, like blubberd juggs in a cup∣board of Venice glasses, or earthen Chamber pots in a Goldsmiths shop.
If you glory in Captives, and desire by a sparkling splendour to fire Platonick Amoretto's out of their lawlesse liberty, borrow but lustre from these Artificiall Smegmaticks, and you shall find
none composed of a mettal so cold and Saturnine, that can Salaman∣der-like resist your actuating flames: for whiles those Ma∣dams who slight the use of these helps, shall have nothing to heigh∣ten affection but the Antiperistasis of a December look, and Phleg∣matique complexion, your Aprill and Sanguine face shall infuse heat into the cold misogynist, and make the stoutest heart a sacrifice to love and altar too. If any re∣maine uncaptivated, it shall only be those leaden hearted cowards, who dare not approach your infla∣ming presence for feare of melt∣ing, or those emerited Souldiers of Venus, whose frigid constitutions
banish all youthfull fires, out of a timorousnesse of being calcin'd. Nay the Lillies and Roses of your cheeks shall be the Old mans true Anacampserote, such drugs that shall make him think of former joys.
But perhaps a zealous Some∣body censures you for evill hearts because you aime at having good faces; and would like you the worse, should you once look so well. Yet refuse not enlightned, yea enlivened eyes, but with Jona∣than tast a little hony though a furious Saul forbids it. Be not banisht company for want of Beau∣ty, when Art affords an innocent supply; nor live a Martyr to that
narrow conscience, which forbids the use of oyle to make a cheer∣full countenance. Borrow our ruddie vermilion, and become purple-plusht roses to be gathe∣red by the hand of some captivated Hero, least in the green-sicknesse livery of your own swarthy com∣plexions, you be taken for thistles and crapt by Asses.
