


Beloved Friends,
MY own mean esteem of the single
weight of that Testimony expected
from me concerning my dear Bro∣ther
on the account of my intima∣cy
with him in Kings Colledge (the known me.
morable passages of whose exemplary life and
death are now happily compiled and published
for your special perusal) moves me to call in

a twofold recommendation thereof from you to
those that knew him not, who being confirmed in
the truth of this Narrative, may thereby be won
to believe, admire and emulate the signal grace
of God in him.
1. That remembring so much thereof your
selves, and what opportnity I had of know∣ing
the certainty of all: you would assure those
who may enquire of you; That the imparti∣al
compiler hath kept within the bounds of truth
and sobriety in prosecution of his honest aims,
to advance the glory of Gods rich mercy to
this chosen vessel, and by reviving what re∣mains
he could collect of this burning as well
as shining light (alass how soon extinct!) to
awaken and quicken the formal professors, if
he may not induce the profane scoffers of this
age, to a more serious study and improvement
of those invisible Realities, the clear evidence
and powerful influence whereof, our good friend
did so abundantly experience. The truth is,
the Transcriber (though best accomplished,
and most inwardly acquainted with what,
might conduce thereto) doth and could not
but fall short of declaring the transcendent ex∣celencies
of this sublime soul and precious Saint,
which till toward his end, when his heart was
too full to hold in what could be uttered)
were much concealed even to those who knew
him best, by reason of his great humility and
modesty. These disposed him rather to receive
than communicate; except where he had no ex∣pectations

of the former, and either familiar
intercourse ingaged, or the apprehended exigen∣cy
of those his heart was drawn out to in
Christian love and compassion, constrained to
the latter. Yet many of those precious streams
that did flow from him we must lament the loss
of, through default of careful rececivers or
faithful retainers. He was of clear intellectu∣als
and a large heart both for craving and
comprehending what was worthy his persuit:
which being happily improved by his education,
and timely seasoned with a spiritual savour of
Gospel mysteries (for obtaining of which he
had then with others, choise advantages) was
a great help to his proficiency in acquaintance
with the vital exercises and soul satisfying en∣joyment
of the divine life, above not only his
equals, but seniors and instructors. He was
much dissatisfied with himself under any decays
or abatements, till he could (if not alone, by
imploring the assistance of Christian friends)
recover what he sometime had had such sweet
experience of. And not content with any at∣tainments,
was still pressing on to what his
prospect in the promises, encouraged by his hap∣py
praelibations, assured him was attainable.
He was to this end a chearful embracer and
diligent improver of spiritual opportunities, ex∣act
in his Christian watch, much wrestling,
(and very prevalent) with God in prayer,
and with himself in his solitudes, striving to
disentangle his heart from what might diveri

his holy ambition, and to raise it to the high∣est
activity and capacity for glorifying and
enjoying God in Christ, for the excellency of
the knowledge of whom he accounted all infe∣riour
attainments but loss. What he had tasted
and seen, he was grieved to see others neglect,
desirous to bring others to experience, by earnest
commending them to God, designing with himself,
and contriving with his spiritual confidence what
might conduce thereto.
He had a true sympathy with those that were
bound with him Heaven-ward. Their pressures
and conflicts, were his burdens: His prayers and
counsels, their ready assistants: their refreshments,
his revivings: and their spiritual proficiency, his
joy.
He was a secret and compassionate mourner;
as in general for the worlds▪ degeneracy, pre∣tended
Christians unthankfulness for the Gospel,
the hazards run by innumerable precious souls;
so especially for the dreadful apostacies of some;
the then threatning decay amd growing for∣mality
of others: sometime seemingly forward;
which brought him nigher to God, and more in∣flamed
his holy zeal. But this chiefly was car∣ried
out to advance the power of Religion in
the family and persons he was peculiarly rela∣ted
to: apprehending there to lie his best oppor∣tunities
as well as strongest obligations. And his
success was very encouraging.
This is part of what I knew of him in Cam∣bridge,
who refer you for farther reviewing your

remembrance to the narrative. But both his
spiritual receipts and expences were much in∣creased
the two last years of his life, when I
had not opportunity of personal converse with
him: And by reason of our distance (and at
that time ignorance of his weak condition) I was
not so happy as to share in the priviledge of those
who had the conveniencie of receiving his last and
sweetest breath. Though I soon after had the
account (while things were fresh in their me∣mories,
and warm on their hearts) from the
eye and ear witnesses, that some of them have
now been induced to make more publick. But next
and chiefly,
2. I intreat you to recommend the truth of
this narrative, by your faithful adhering to, and
diligent promoting of what some of you learn∣ed
from him, and others professed with him.
That by imitating his good example, and im∣proving
his experiences with your longer op∣portunities,
you may be such proficients in Chri∣stianity,
as shining like lights your selves to
hold forth the word of life for convincing the
incredulous: That the mysteries of regenerati∣on,
a life of faith in Christ, the fruitful em∣provement
of union and communion with him
to a prospicuous conformity to him, crucifixion
to the world by his cross, and a conversation
with him in Heaven while on earth (therein
proposed, herein exemplified) be no figments,
but great realities; no slight matters, but of
greatest consequence: not such singularities,

but that others according to their measure, ta∣king
the like course, may be experimentally ac∣quainted
with the surpassing sweetness of an in∣terest
therein. And the rather am I bold to
intreat this of you, because I was privy to his
souls concern, for the concernments of your
souls. How passionatly he desired to see Christ
formed in you, and rejoyced at any evidence
thereof. How earnestly he would pray for you all;
and especially for those he had more occasion to deal
with, or cause to be jealous of. How affected
he was with your dangers and snares. And
what a desire he had you might out-strip himself,
who could not take up his rest on this side Heaven.
The good Lord help every one of us to shew
the same diligence to the full assureance of hope
to the end, that we may not be slothful, but fol∣lowers
of them who by faith and patience inherit
the promises.
I have one farther request, that you would
pursue by your most earnest supplications the
design of publishing this narrative, that God
would make it prosperous to the pious ends there∣in
proposed, and for which I hope in his provi∣dence
it is reserved now for publick view. Espe∣cially
that it may provoke to holy emulation; not
only those who were more peculiarly endeared to
our pretious Friend by natural or spiritual bonds;
(And that if any of these be fallen from their
first love, they may be excited to repent, do
their first works, and strengthen the things
that remain; lest having begun in the spirit,

they wretchedly end in the flesh, and draw back
to perdition) but also, some at least of them that
sueceed in the Chambers and Studies, which some∣time
were sanctified with the word and prayer, by
those that singly and joyntly (as Bhamber fellows
and Colleagues) earnestly implored the divine
benediction on those two royal foundations he was
member of: That the God of the spirits of all flesh
would make them fruitful nurseries of such as might
be eminent instruments of Gods glory here, and turn∣ing
many to righteousness, might shine as the stars
for ever and ever. Wherein you may expect the hear∣ty
concurrence of

