



AFter a tedious. Contraste with my self, whose Patro∣nage I might most properly implore, to protect this fatherless piece; I must needs confess that your Lordship was the first and last of my thoughts; and I hope good reason will vindicate me in that bold∣ness.
First, Because your Lordship is by Divine Providence, chosen to be the Diocesan of this great City, where so much mischief and villany has been of late (and we still may justly fear is) concentred: and your Lord∣ship is so far concerned in the care of
those souls, that it may be hate yours, that those whom you cannot bring into your Fold, by your sweet Paternal-Call, may be drawn to it by the power of your Pastoral-staff, or abandoned to the mercy of their own beloved Wolves in Sheeps-cloathing.
Secondly, Because your Lordship is honoured to be so neer his Maje∣sties Royal Ear, and is, as to all Church matters, his chief Intellectus Agens; so your Lordship is con∣cerned again, to inform his Majesty of the Civil dangers, that are like to proceed from such religious Muti∣neers. For this sect here treated of, are of the very race of the Hyper∣phanii that ingenuous Barclay speaks so largely of in his Argenis,Bar. Arg. lib. 2. fol. 92.93.94. and de∣scended from the same Father Usi∣nulca, and are truly (as he is plea∣sed to say) a sort of people, who as certain creatures are nourished with poyson, so they grow strong
in publick calamities, and are only fatted with War and slaughter. The first Children of the Church, bore neither rod nor stick to plant faith in the hearts of men; but these Pro∣testants of Integrity (as they call themselves) have published a Re∣ligion to the world, all bristled with Swords, all sooted over with the smoak of Canon, all besprinckled with the blood of Christians. Senec. E∣pist. 24. Now in such a case the Philosopher ad∣viseth all States-men, Quicquid fieri potest, quasi futurum cogitare, to con∣ceive that all things may, which can come to pass: and though the wis∣dom of Modern Statists has been seen a little in some neat and cleanly evasions, fine deliveryes, and shiftings of dangers when they are neer, yet the most approveable part of pru∣dence will be seen, as it has alwayes been your Lordships course, in solid and well-grounded preventions of them before they fall, and to keep
them aloof: and therefore Josephus that learned Jew most judiciously ad∣viseth likewise, that Bonum est dum adhuc stat Navis in portu,Joseph. de Billo Jud. l. 2. praecavere tempestatem futuram, & non eo tem∣pore, quo in medias irrueris procel∣las, trepidare; It is necessary for him that goes to Sea, to foresee a Storm coming, if he can, and not to rush into the fury of the Seas, and trem∣ble at the tempest afterwards; that will avail little, but to be rendred ridiculous for rashness.
Your Lordship very well knows that this kind of Caterpillers when they have once taken head, will not easily be taken off: and it is as true as old, Turpius ejicitur, quàm non ad∣mittitur. They are of the nature of those birds, whose feathers are so imperious, that they will not quiet∣ly mix with the plumage of others; if they do, they then consume them as with a dull file: Nor are they un∣like that unsociable Tree, which the
wise Secretaries of Nature have cal∣led by the name of Iff, that insen∣sibly draws the juice of all plants to it. But I need not enlarge more concerning the danger of their ad∣mission into power; for there is none that has converst with them, but knows, that the Sea it self is less fu∣rious, a Thunder-clap less dreadfull; nay the gall of Dragons, and poyson that swelleth up the necks of Asps, is much more tolerable.
My Lord, all this that I have said, is not to inform or advise your Lordship, whose knowledg is super-excellent in all things; but to justifie to the world, the oeconomy of your Prelatical Proceedings: For under whose wing soever this Cockatrice Egg gets life, it will repay it with a death, and sting to the heart of him whose bosome hatch'd it, en∣snaring him in his own goodness. These Cockatrice Christians doubt∣less intend nothing more (for they
are not afraid to speak it) than to play their old game over again, and rebel again against this most Excel∣lent and Clement King, and the Church, and will grow every day more and more insolent upon his Majesties, and your Lordships pious mildness and gentleness: For we have seen sufficiently, that how great vertue soever may be in a Prince, or Prelate, it will be all contemned by them, if there be not seasonably ad∣ded an opinion of their justice and severity: For no Persons in power are better beloved of the people, than they that shew in time, that they have in themselves matter worthy of fear. They must be made I say to know, ere tis too late, that the Mi∣ters of Prelates, are like the Crowns of the Kings of Egypt, which carry Aspicks upon the top of them, that insensibly sting those who too neer approach with intention to offend them: and by this means your Lord∣ship
shall prove to the world, that you have not spent so much time in your former divine solitudes, and the sweet delights of your studyes, to gather so much honey, but that you yet retain the vigour of a sting; which casts me naturally upon the third and greatest reason of my pre∣sent presumption: Which is, that I have had the honour long to know your Lordship, (though the Authour of this piece now departed much longer and better) when you were a principal Gover∣nour amongst us, in that most famous University of Oxford, the glori∣ous Seminary of so many great Spi∣rits, that have held predominance in all manner of learning and scien∣ces, and Warden of Allsouls-Col∣ledge: which hath always been a most principal part in that Pantheon, and like the Altar of the Sun, from whence light has been borrowed to illuminate all other Lamps. I have
been long knowing (I say) to your most incomparable piety and parts; and indeed what is fitter then that that Soul should be full of light and flames, that is to serve others, for so great a guide? for by your Lord∣ships great reading of men as well as books, there are become incorpora∣ted in your sole person, the vertues and faculties of thousands others. Your fair soul ever appeared to be (like the Ibis, that precious bird of Persia that builds her nest alwayes in Palmes) perpetually conversant in great contemplations, and had no more impressions of earth, than the su∣pream Sphere of Celestial Bodies. As nothing was too high for your under∣standing, so nothing was too low for your bounty & beneficence. Psal. 104. Ep. ad Heb. God Al∣mighty has bestowed upon you the gift which the Scripture attributes to the Patriarch Joseph, to oblige hearts by sweetness; not unlike the Engins of Archimedes, which made
water mount in descending; so your Lordship ever caused your humility to descend, but still to make it rea∣scend to the sourse of the prime sublimity; and your vertues upon earth, will make your Crowns in Heaven. Your Lordship has al∣wayes communicated your self with so much sweetness, facility and affa∣bility, that you encreased alwayes respect by familiarity, which usual∣ly dissolves it; and like a precious Amethyst, shined so much the more, as it hath been often worn. It has been only the mischief and misfor∣tune of our late times, that hindred your Lordship from being sooner preferred to the Pontifical Robe; for the opinion of the world did point your Lordship out for it with your first blooming beard: your early learning and gravity so much anticipating your years, and vertue rendring you Reverend before time. But it is your Lordships glory to
have deserved the honour of a Bi∣shoprick, sooner than to enjoy it.
Pardon my Lord, that I have dared to draw your youthfull Character with my rude pen; but those excel∣lent endowments of your Soul, so much akcnowledged by envy, can∣not but be admired by truth. And now that your Lordship is so far stept into years, we find yet the vigour of your divine vertues augmented by time, in their happy influences upon us, as it is said, that the best Incense comes from old Trees, and Torches made of Aromatick-wood, cast out their odoriferous Exhalati∣ons when they are almost wasted. Be∣fore you were an example only to youth, but now your Lordship is become a pattern to Priests, and a president to Prelates; under whose heart remains a Temple of true Piety. Who then so proper for the highest Prelacy, as he that can enter∣marry Sobriety with Chastity, and
Piety with Learning? How pure ought those persons to be, who are not only of the House of God, but of his Cabinet, and as it were of the very bosome of God? In the Sacrifices to the Sun, there was never made an effusion of Wine; How far from that then ought they to be, who are to sacrifice to the great Master of the Sun? And Chastity as holy Zeno telleth us, is happy in Virgins, strong in Widdows, St. Zeno. faith∣full in the Married; but with Priests and Prelates, it ought to be as it is in your Lordship, wholly Se∣raphical.
Some Bishops we have known, that have lived in Bishopricks like blind Cyclopes in a hollow cave, in∣somuch that they have gone very far towards a perswasion of the world, that piety was a thing al∣most impossible to be aspired to, like ill-Physicians that make the sick despair of health, because they
cannot cure them. Julius Caesar wondred to see men dandle Apes, having Children in their houses; and who can but admire in Prelates, to whom God has afforded so many spirtual Children, to see them kiss Monkeys, and it may be something worse, play with Dogs, and carry Hawks, &c?
From all these vanities your Lord∣ships known innocency and piety has alwayes defended you, and you appear now in the Church as you ought to do, like those ancient Sta∣tues of Polycletes and Phydias, of which there was not a lineament but spake. Your Lordships example has been a perpetual Sermon, which is the best of preaching (as St. Greg. Nazianzen divinely observes of the great St. Athanasius) that his voyce was as a Thunder-clap, and his life a Lightning flash; Greg. N.z. in Jamb. because words never thunder well, if examples en∣lighten not. There is no Libertine
but will be daunted at the sight of such a life, lead truly according to Christianity: it is a mirrour that kills Basilisks by the repercussion of their own proper poyson. So may your Lordship thunder on still, and en∣lighten this distracted people with your pious Precepts and Practice; that these poor seduced Christians, may be reduced out of the Clawes of the Cockatrice, and recovered into your Christian Fold. And sure I cannot at all despair of the effect, if their refractory spirits will be at all won with sweetness. It is said, that Amber sweetly drawes a trifling straw, and Adamant gently wins the hardest iron, and with a Hony-comb fountains of the most troubled wa∣ters are cleansed. Nothing disarmes a Passion, (and their whole Religion is no more) so much as Patience and temper, which your Lordship is known to be the accomplished Ma∣ster of; and so shall by that means
throw prostrate at your feet, those hair-brained Zelots, who seem now to roar over your Lordships head. Flecti autem qui recusant, frangi opor∣tet; nec invalescenti Ecclesiae & Rei∣publicae morbo,S. Fulgent. molli uspiàm Diaetâ succurrendum est, sed Chirurgiâ. So may your Lordship proceed and prosper in your happy Prelacy, and grow up to be as exemplary an in∣strument of your Royal Masters peace, his Kingdoms happiness, the Churches good, glory of your gown, and honour of your University and Colledge as that great and glorious Prelate Henry Chichly was, your most famous founder; which is meant for as much temporal felicit, as can be wish▪d from the heart of

