






Most noble and honouralbe Lords.
CAsting our eyes about us to see, under the wings of whose patrociny & protection, we should shelter the ensuing Apology or vindication; we could not, in our apprehensions, fix upon any so fited for this, as your Lo. who, by the station, & office you bear under his Maj. in this Kingdom, are constitute the prote∣ctors of the poor, the Releevers of the oppressed, & the breakers of every un∣just yoke: the serious thoughts of which does aflord us this confidence, that as our unjust oppressions make us ob∣jects, fitted for your Lo. compassion and justice; so your Lo. office. and what it binds unto, in the behalf of the op∣pressed, before God and men, will▪
on the ingenuous & plaine production of our reasons, for the justice of our cause, at length prevail, for breaking of these yokes of oppression now on us; and removing of their real causes. We therefore cannot but in charity and reason expect, that much humanity & justice, from your Lo. that was grant∣ed by heathen Rulers, to Ministers & Christians, in the primitive times of the Christian Church; of which we have in Scripture & History memorable in∣stances. Was not Paul Act. 26:1 permit∣ed by King Agrippa to speak for himself, who, in vindication of his righteous cause, deduced the grounds thereof, and cleared the so to the conviction of his hearers, that they judged him nei∣ther worthy of death, nor of bonds? Did not some of the Roman Emperours, upon the reading of the Apologies of the Christians, as of Justin Martyr, Apollinaris, Mileto, Origen, Tertullian, and others, declare their innocency, and mitigat the rage of persecution, that then prevailed against them? May not
we then, who professe the same Pro∣testant Religion with your Lo. enter∣taine ourselves with the hope of the same favour & justice, that was shew∣ed by Rulers, to the Lords people be∣fore us?
As our adversaries calumnies & bit∣ter reproaches, with which they labour to render us odious to all, especially, to your Lo. are unjust and malitious; (being partly their evil and uncharita∣ble deductions from our principles and actions, and partly grosse & notorious lies; such as the heathens charged on the primitive Christians, who finding no just mater for their accusations from their Profession and behaviour, gave it out to the world, that they worshiped the Sun, an asses head, and used pro∣miscuous copulation at their assemblies;) So it is the Testimony of our conscien∣ces, that as a brazen wal does sheild & uphold our Spirits from sinking, under those burdens, with which they have aimed to keep us at under with your Lo. We know, there is no new or stran∣ge
thing happened unto us, but what hath been the common lot of eminent saints, yea of Christ Jesus, our blessed Lord and Master; the servant is not gre∣ater then the Master; if they dealt so with him, no mervail they deal so with us. So great is the Testimony & wit∣ness of our consciences, as to all the greivous things, they have and do charge upon us, that we have hitherto possessed our souls in patience, and not opened our just and true greivances (as we might and should have done) for fear of offending your Lo. But perceiv∣ing the truth of the Gospel, the righte∣ousness of our cause, and the welfair of immortal souls are like to suffer thorow our too long silence, we have adven∣tured to disclose our thoughts, and to give, so far as we can, a satisfieing ac∣count of the grounds of that faith and hope, for which we suffer. The God of Gods knowes, & Israel shall know, we use this fredom and plainness of speech towards your Lo. and all others, not from any contentious and ill affect∣ed
humour; but from the sense of the obligations laying on us, for the con∣servation of the true interest of Religi∣on, and the hope of relief for these from your Lo. which we most humbly beg and exspect, for the sake of truth and righteousness, that are now fallen in the streets, and fled into Corners if on an impartial examination of what we have said, in the defence of our cause, and of ourselves for its sake, against the reproachs of our enemies, it shall be found that it is not just, but iniquous, we ask no benefite from your Lo. cle∣mency and justice; let all severity be used. But if the cause of our former and present sufferings be righteous (in the confidence of which, we have been bold to give to your Lo. and the Chri∣stian world this sober ensueing account) we humbly entreat that protection and relief in its defence, which your power and station in this Kingdome do enable and oblige your Lo. to.
Wherefore casting ourselves at your Lo. feet. We doe, in the behalfe of
pure Religion & undefiled & the souls of all concerned therein, beseech your Lo. First That our just & well grounded ex∣ceptions against Prelacy & Erastianisme, may be taken into consideration & laid to heart: for if they hold good, will not the future consequences of these evils, to this land, your Lo. families, & poste∣rity, be dreadful, who thereby are laid pento the judgments, denunced in the the Word of God, against perjury and Covenant breaking? We doe not lay the stresse of our cause on the Covenants & Oaths, taken by this nation, against the foresaid evils or corruptions, as the primary and chief Argument (as will appear to all on the perusal of our subsequent Apology;) but on their op∣position to the Word of the holy and true God: for, we grant, Covenants and Oathes, that are obligatory and binde to an observance, suppone their matter to be antecedently just, and do bring their primary obligation from it; hence the things contained in, & engaged to by Covenants and Oaths,
must be proven and made out to be ne∣cessare & righteous from the Word of God, before their obligation can be admitted & received; which we have laboured to doe, in this following discourse. And if from it, our Cove∣nants and Oaths doe appear to be just, are we not assured, that the corrupti∣ons and sins engaged against by such di∣vine tyes, and relapsed into contrare to these engadgments, doe provoke our Holy and righteous God, to the inflicting of all those plagues and judg∣ments, threatened in the word against the violators of such sacred bonds? And if this be a truth; (as we hope none will deny) what can we then expect to our selves & posterity, if reformation & repentance doe not prevent, but ru∣ine and desolation, according to every ones accession to these evils; which, no doubt, are crying for vengeance on this declining Church? Next, We pray your Lo. to consider, that we build our conclusions on no other foundati∣on, then our worthy reformers in this
Church and others, laid downe in their arguments and debates against popery; which for its want of, and opposition to the holy Scriptures, they have con∣demned for an Antichristian defection from the doctrines of Christ. We hold to the sufficiency and perfection of the holy Scriptures, resolving, thorow the Grace of God, to admit of no other rule of faith and obedience, in the ma∣ters of our God, but these: what they condemne, we must renunce; & what∣soever doctrins or practises, in the house of our God, want their authority and approbation, we cannot, yea dar not admit? The experience of the Church in preceding ages shews, what mis∣cheifs, the opening of this door, hath brought in upon her, to the al∣most uter ruine of all her concerns.
The present grouth of popery, and the quick advance it makes among all degrees of Professors, in this and our nighbouring Churches, sayes to all, &, we suppose, to your Lo. that the fase∣ty & preservation of the protestant re∣formed
Religion, does, in all pruden∣ce, require, that its real and sincere friends should be encouraged, and not thus persecuted with violence; which no doubt, tends so to the wea∣kening of the Protestant interest & cau∣se, that in one of Queen Elizabeths Parlia∣ments, it was judged a sufficient reason, not only to restraine the rigide pressing of conformity, but likewise to encoura∣ge all Non-conformists, who, in those times, were looked upon as stout an∣tagonists to popery, and such as might be employed, entrusted and made use of in opposition to it. Is it not to be feared, that the ope, having his instru∣ments and emissaries amongst us, for working out of his designes on these Churches, which, all his former en∣gines have not hitherto effected; and finding, through our confusions and di∣stempers, the occasion fitted for his purpose, hath no question, a secret active hand, in influencing and increas∣ing of this violence; which, if the Lord, in his mercy to this many wayes af∣flicted
and ruined Church, doe not pre∣vent; will facilitat his longed for, & much endeavoured designes against the reformed Religion in these Ilands. And however we are represented to your Lo. as unfriends to Religion, and the interests of State (as if they must ruine if we stand) yet the experience of past and present times, beside our publick confessions, doth sufficiently witnes∣se, how malitious our adversaries are in this unjust calumny? We are no in∣novators, nor pleaders for innovation in Church or State; but do hold, adhere to, and resolve, through the grace of God, to maintaine the reformed Prote∣stant Religion, against all sorts of ene∣mies, as it is contained in the holy Scriptures, summed up, and breifly comprehended in the Confessions of faith of the reformed Churchs; especi∣ally in the Confession of faith, Larger & shorter Catachismes of this Church, in opposition to all Popish, Arminian, So∣cinian, and Sectarian errors and innova∣tions. We hold for our maine & root∣ed
principle, the holy Scriptures to be the Word of God, the absolute per∣fect and only rule of faith and maners; not needing any supplement of Ecclesi∣astical tradition: yet we do not deny Antiquity its due respect, use & reve∣rence: and although we maintaine, that every Christian, of what rank & degree soever, ought to study, & be conver∣sant in the Scriptures; yet we acknow∣ledge the necessity and great use of a Gospel standing Ministry, and re∣ceive the directive authority of the Church, not with an implicit faith, but with the judgment of discretion. We hold the teaching of the Spirit ne∣cessare to the saving knowledge of Christ; but absolutly deny, that the Spirit bringeth new revelations in ma∣ters of doctrines, worship & Govern∣ment; but only that he opens the eyes, and enlightens the understanding, that we may perceive and rightly take up, what is of old revealed in the word by the same Spirit. We rejoice in Christ Jesus, having no confidence in the flesh,
or in a legal righteousnes; desireing to be found in him, who of God, is made unto us wisdom, righteousnes, san∣ctification and redemption; yet we constantly affirme, good works of pie∣ty towards God, of equity and charity towards men, to be necessare, both necessitate precepti & medii: our Ministers presse on themselves & hearers, the necessity of Regeneration, as the solid fundation of good works; & the severe, strict exercise not of a popish out side formal, but of a spiritual, real morti∣fication and self denial. We extol all ordinances of divine appointment; but reject all humane inventions, especially religious and significant not institute ceremonies in the worship of God.
It ought to have no little weight with your Lo. that by using of such vio∣lence, the most sober, judicious, univer∣sally religious and industrious part of the subjects, and consequently the most useful and stedfast to his Maj true inte∣rest and honour, are exposed to dayly vexation and trouble, to the great dam∣mage
and prejudice of this Nation and Kingdom. We suppose that, upon an impartial view, it will be found, that the choice and better part of the sub∣jects is dissatisfied with the Govern∣ment, now introduced into this Church, and consequently obnoxious to the se∣verity of the lawes, enacted against non-conformists: and of what dange∣rous consequence this may prove to Church and State, we leave to your Lo. most serious consideration. We know, the certaine issue of all maters, is known to God only; but if we shall take our measures, in conjecturing at future events, from the working of present causes, there is all rational ground to fear, that there are dismal and heavy times coming on this nation; which, by taking and fallowing of right wayes, in the present juncture of affaires, your Lo. may prevent; and if not done, will, no doubt, afford mater of bitter sorrow, & repentance to your Lo or children after∣wards. It is & shall be our hearty prayer to God, that your Lo. may have the Spi∣rit
of wisdome, and of the fear of the Lord, poured out upon you, to fore∣see the evils, that are hastening towards us, and in time to hide yourselves, this Church & Kingdom from them.
Is it not apparent to all, that con∣science does not act, nor lead our anta∣gonists? Do not their opinions about Prelacy; their Profession of all readi∣ness to comply with the contrare, if on foot; their frequent changes into the interests and formes of all preceeding times, how contrare soever to their once professed and sworn principles (while true Presbyterians remained constant and immoveable, thorow the times that went over their heads;) their covetous and licentious lives, discover their want of conscience in the courses, they now so furiously run? Let not your Lo think, that it is his Maj. inte∣rests, (as they pretend) or any true consciencious regaird to these, that mo∣ves them to such obseqiuous compli∣ance with the present lawes? Let the out ward interests of this world be sepa∣rated
from their way; and it shall soon appear, how void they are of true zeal for his Maj. and his lawes, as is evident beyond all denial, from their carriage & behaviour, in past & present times. As we have no external benefite to ex∣pect to engage us against conformity to the present lawes about Church Go∣vernment; so we are to look, from our principles, and practises conforme thereto, no lesse then the ruine of our selves & families in this world: if con∣science of duety towards God & this Church, according to the word, did not determine and move us, of all men we were the most foolish and miserable; but seeing our hearts, in the consideration of the justice of our cause, & of the sin∣cerity of our intentions, in acting con∣forme to it, does not condemne us; we have this confidence towards God, that as we are acquit & shall be justified before him; so shall we be recompenced and rewarded, to the aboundant com∣pensation of all outward loses; even for these things, for which we are condem∣ned
of men; so that that which is esteemed our folly, sin and misery, is and shall be reputed our righteousness, wisdom and glory.
Albeit we have not the external advantages of power, riches and wordly policy, but the contrare to contend with, and endure; yet, seing the Word of God in our hands, doeth prosper and prevail to the gaining of immortal souls, the restraining of impiety, and the pro∣pagating of the savour of the true knowledge of Christ Jesus, in all places where it comes, notwithstanding of the opposition made unto us in this work; it will, on many accounts, be your Lo. wisdome, not to stand in contra∣dictory tearmes thereto, least your Lo. be found to fight against God in the persons of his ser∣vants and people; for, we are assured, that this work and cause is of God, partly for its confor∣mity to his holy word; & partly for its undenia∣ble fruit and successe, in converting & saving of souls from sin, preserving and maintaining of its self, against the opposition it meets with on all hands; which we take for a signe of its being of God, as the Christians did of old in their debates for the Christian Religion a∣gainst its adversaries, which under great op∣position grew and prevailed exceedingly, al∣though stript of all the outward advantages of worldly power and policy. If this cause be of God, and approven by him, as we nothing
doubt, it will not be in the power of the might∣est to crush it. Men may afflict and put us to great sufferings (which to them will be a signe of perdition, but to us of salvation;) but while this Church continues Protestant, and hath God abiding in her, their contradiction will be in vaine, as is hitherto manifest. And a thowsand to one, but it resolve in their own ruine here & here after.
The mater of difference betwixt us and our adversaries, being in their owne confession (a popular argument they much use with the peo∣ple) not foundamental, but indifferent, we humbly beg of your Lo, that for preventing of further confusions in this Church, & attaining of the true peace of the same, you will be pleased, to consider, whether it be better and safer for this Church, that the Chistian Re∣formed Religion be totally ruined among us, for satisfying of a few; or a thing indifferent, & far removed from the vitals of Religion, be taken away, and not thus enforced by violence on so considerable a part of the subjects, who, for conscience sake, cannot receive, nor sub∣ject thereto? And knowing that a serious and impartial examination of this one question, if diligently pursued, would quickly determine your Lo, to courses quite opposite to these now prosecuted with so much heat against us; we intreat your Lo, not to give eare to these ca∣lumnies
and undue representations of the pre∣sent case of affaires in this Church, made by our enemies, the Prelates, by which they la∣bour to instigat to all this unjust and unseaso∣nable violence, that will Produce bitter and la∣mentable effects to this & the succeeding ge∣neration, if not prevented in time.
Most noble & honourable Lords, we cannot but take notice of that too common prejudice entertain∣ed against Presbyterian Government & instilled with so much artifice by our opposits in the mind of many, on which, they have alas too much advantag, through the love of sin, & natural en∣mity at the wholsome severity and power of the Christian Religion, that is predominant in all unregenerat persons; to wit, the strictnes & im∣partiality of Presbyterian Government in its exercise, against all sorts of scandals, in all de∣grees of Professours, the great as well as the meane; for we know, that while Presbytery was up and in vigour amongst us, the zeal and faithfulness of Ministers, in reprehending all sorts of sins, and exercising of discipline im∣partially, conforme to the commands and ruls of the word, without exception of persons, is that which hath caused all this dislike of, and rigour against Presbytery; and conciliat that much respect to, and love for Prelacy, as to eject the one, & bring in the other. We will not now enter on the debait, whether this strictnes
against sin be the native product of Presbyte∣rian Government, when exercised conforme to its principles; or the contrare the genuine consequence of Prelacy, that necessarly results from its constituent & preserving causes? Which were no great labour to make out. But leav∣ing this, we humblie entreat your Lo. to have that patience towards us, as to suffer us to say. 1. In conformity to the principle of the Chri∣stian profession, it must be, in the confession of all Christians, mater of sad regrait & lamen∣tation, that in places, where the Christian Reli∣gion is owned, zealous faithfulness against soul destroying sins, should be admited & received, as a prejudice against Ministers & their Govern∣ment; which should commend & cry it up; yea that does endear it to all conscientious Chri∣stians, that rightly understand their owne Pro∣fession. Must it not be a terrible length, this generation is gone, in declineing from the po∣wer of Religion; when that, which is its excel∣lency & glory in the sight of God & good men, is become the occasion & mater of its dislike & reproach? Can there be a fuller evidence and discovery of the predomining & prevailing po∣wer of naturs enmity, in Professours, over the life of true godliness; and their being given up to the lusts & sinful inclinations of their owne hearts, that thus sets them in opposition to the meanes, appointed for their delivery from the
dominion & power of damning sins: whither are we gone, and what may we expect will be the hight of our defection, and the judgment of it, if Professours put themselves in such a plaine & open professed contradiction to their Christian Profession? 2. Let not your Lo. think, we say this with an intention to justify any failing, in this mater, commited by any of our perswasion, that shall be made appear to be such from the Word of God, & our Professed principles. And although we cannot condem∣ne all the instances, that are now disapproved by our antagonists; yet we grant, there were considerable escapes, in preaching & exercise of discipline, which were the effects of impru∣dence & passion in some, and of wordly incli∣nations & designes in others of corrupt minds; who to raise themselves in this world, and for that end, to gaine the favour of persons of leading influence & power, keept no measure, but rune to strang hights of zeal against some sins, while they connived at others; but seing by their compliances with the cryed-up cause of these times, they do now declare to all the world that they vvere never of us; how unjustly are their wicked follies imputed to our Govern∣ment and vvay. But for all the instances given in against us, and the hideous cry raised after them, yet vve must say, the greatest and most common failing among Ministers, vvas in the
defect, in that the most vvere not so diligent, faithful & impartial, in the application of the vvord to the sins of the times, personal rebukes & censures, as they should have been; as (alas) vvas too visible & observed by many; for vvhich novv they bear their rebuke, in that many of those are now become their cruel per∣secutors, to whom they were sinfully sparing & indulgent. Moreover, let it be granted, that many of these instances were in the ex∣cesse unjustifiable; yet if the constitution and principles of Presbyterian Government were not for, but against them, it cannot be charg∣ed with these: they must be the faults of the persons, and not of the Government; other∣wise all Governments must be condemned, as guilty of all the mal-administrations, commit∣ed by Governours; which all acknowledg to be absurd? But when any of the contrare mind∣ed shall demonstrat these to be the native pro∣duct of our principles for doctrine and Govern∣ment, they shall be considered, & according to the conviction they give of the same, they shall be acknowledged. But will your Lo. be pleased, to consider the sad & deplorable ex∣treme our antagonists are run into, who medle not with any sort of scandals, except a few and these in the meanner & lower degree of per∣sons, over looking all in the more opulent and great; which hath encouraged wickedness to
lift up its head, and to diffuse its self thorow all ranks without control, to the infecting of this Church with all kindes of scandals; which, no doubt, will resolve either into the total ruine of the Protestant Religion, or els in sad desolat∣ing judgments, on this land; and if it come this length (which we earnestly beg of the Lord he would prevent, by pouring out of a Spirit of repentance and reformation on us) where will be our advantage by Prelacy, that is now so much extolled?
Therefore not loving to trouble your Lo. any further, we shall adde but this humble and earnest request; that your Lo. would be pleased, to make some due and just representation of the true State and low condition of this Church, unto his Maj. who (we hope) through your Lo. intercession, will, in his wisdome and clemency finde out some just expe∣dient, for relieving of this Church of her oppressing evils, under which she groans; and undoing of these heavy bur∣dens, that lye on us: for which we are your Lo. humble petitioners, and had been so alittle sooner, if we had not been discouraged by lawes anent Church maters, that seems to us, to close all door of accesse to his Maj. and your Lo. for representing our just greivances this way. If we may not obtaine this reasonable and just request (as we suppose) there is not another refuge left us, but to referre our cause to the righteous tribunal of the just and almighty God, where your Lo. and we will stand on evn ground, and have judg∣ment passed without respect of persons.
