



I Have been much sollicited, & ear∣nestly written to, to communicate these my Labours; because
when I preached them first at your Town, it pleased God of his infinite Mercy, thereby to convert a poor soul then present, and one more elsewhere, from Dark∣ness to Light, and from the power of Satan to God; which hath occasioned the com∣ing forth of this Treatise, unto the publick view of the VVorld, by a Friend, whose desire it was to publish the same: For who can tell whe∣ther it may not be the Bene∣placit, and will of God, that more souls be thereby won
to God? The subject mat∣ter thereof, you see, is as apt as any, by the good blessing of God, to subject souls to the mighty Power of that VVord which here I hold forth, and press, to make you press toward the Mark, for the Price of the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus, to strive that you may enter in∣to the narrow Way, which leads to Life, to offer a Sa∣cred Violence to Heaven, to your selves, nay, to God himself, blessed for ever, to take, to win, to get that great,
that glorious, that spacious Kingdom of Heaven by Force; forcing your selves to leave the VVorld, to a∣bandon Sin, to fight against Satan, and to lay hold on eternal Life.
O Sirs, here is work for all your Town, for all this Country, for all England, for all your dayes. The Ancient of dayes so diffuse his holy Spirit into your hearts, that you may all become men of another spirit, labouring for Heaven: Heaven is worth
the striving, the strugling, the pains-taking, which in this Treatise is required, that you may be saved. Towns∣men commonly are more at leisure to listen to such a dis∣course as this is, because they are not under such a pressure of worldly work, as those are which mansion in the Country; & therefore I hope you wil afford some of your spare hours, to read that Lecture, which here is read from so precious a Scripture; and that you will not put off
these tenders of my Love, and such a Theam as this is; like that unwise King of Macedon, who, when one tendred unto him, a Treatise tending to Immortality, said, , that is, I am not at leisure.
I beseech you, Sirs, by the Mercies of God, in the Bow∣els of Christ Jesus, that you will be serious once, and set your selves in earnest to that great VVork which is here proposed, working out your Salvation with fear & trem∣bling;
for your time runs out apace in the Glass of time: and I have this confi∣dence in you all, (2 Cor. 2.3.) that you would not willing∣ly have the silver Cords of your lives broken, before your hearts, with sorrow for sin, be broken; nor would depart this evil world, before ye depart from sin, and have left the vanities of the world, and gotten a sound assurance of an other better world; nor yet cease to be retainers to the Sun created, before ye
be retainers to the Sun of Righteousness; nor take your farewel of the Elements, be∣fore you have bid farewel to this present life's Allure∣ments: And therefore why do ye linger? why do ye not break away from Satan by force? why do ye not once begin to have a low and ab∣ject esteem of this common way of existence, this retain∣ing to the Elements, and be∣come the Servants of Holi∣ness? why do ye not strive to be the Children of Light,
before ye cease to be main∣tained by the usury of light?
Usura Lucis. why do ye not set all things apart, to have your part in that holy taking of that great & glori∣ous Kingdom of Heaven by Violence? I for my part, when I take a full veiw and circle of my self, do con∣ceive, that without this I am nothing, my life nothing, my performing of duties no∣thing. Do you conceive so too, and then be doing as wel as reading the things in this
Book contained. Nay, my Beloved, do this especially; before ever you take this Treatise in hand to peruse it, resolve to be Assaulters, ur∣gers, Pressers, Forcers of your selves, and of Heaven by it: but withal, beg and pray before you read one line, & that upon your ben∣ded knees, seriously and ar∣dently, that the great God of Heaven himself, will write these lines in your hearts, which I have written in this Book, that you may do them.
O that you would hear me in this! For how many Books have been read in vain with∣out this! This, this must make this my labour of love auspicious, your reading prosperous, and your lauda∣ble endeavours salutiferous. But I also my self will pray for you.
O my God, bedew there∣sore these silent lines with thy Benediction, so as that this populous Town of T — may consider in this her day the things which belong to her
peace, and tend to immortali∣ty, as they are tendered to it in this Book for all eternity.
So prayeth

