



IT is a very comfortable priviledge (good Madam) vouchsafed to sincere and faithful Christians, that being planted in the house of the Lord,Psal. 92.14. they shall still bring forth fruit in old age; when other trees grow doddick and past fruit-bearing, these trees of Righ∣teousness (by a singular blessing from God) shall be able to yield the fruits of the Spirit,Gal. 5 21. for the honor of God who planted them, and for the good of that Christian community whereof they are members. They are more in prayer, and more in magnifying the grace whereby they stand; more in their meditations of God and the things of God; more in their preparations for death, and for an entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of Jesus Christ; more in imparting experiences of the gracious dealings of God with themselves and others, for helping the troubled spirits of their brethren; more free in Alms-deeds and all good uses, according to ability; more mortified to the world, and to their passions; more pro∣fitable to the Church in whose prosperity they rejoyce, and grieve in the adversity: and better redeem the time whereof they see so little remaining.
Though they be infested with their infirmities of old age, and with divers incumbrances of the world, yet e∣ven in old age they mind the doing of good, yea more good then they were wont to do; as willing to the uttermost (while they may) to shew forth the praises of Him who hath called them out of darkness into his marvellous1 Pet. 2 9.
 light. The recompence of reward draws nearer and nea∣rer, and in little time will be fully in their possession; therefore for the inch of time that remains in this taber∣nacle, they will work as fast as they can, with all faithful∣ness, carefulness, and chearfulness.
And this their priviledge stands upon sundry unmove∣able grounds, as, The eternal love and counsel of God, who enables them to persevere and be fruitful; The me∣ritorious intercession and powerful grace of Jesus Christ,John 15.5. in whom they are as branches in their Vine: The effe∣ctual working of Gods blessed Spirit, who is promised to abide with them for ever:14.16. The immortal and incor∣ruptible seed of the word,1 Pet. 1.13. whereof they are born a∣gain, and cannot perish for ever: The faithful and stedfast Covenant of grace,Jer. 32.40. which as it engageth God ne∣ver to depart from them, but do them good, so it war∣rants them fresh abilities, that they shall never depart from their God, together with promises in particular; and divers helps both to hold out to the end, and to bring forth fruit still in old age.
This I write (good Madam) to comfort you in this your age, and against the many infirmities which accompany it. The Lord adde unto your days abundantly, and give you yet to see the peace of his Jerusalem. Many good fruits you have born already, and we rejoyce in seeing them; your love to the House and Ordinances of God, which sometimes you frequent with danger to your health; your love to godly Ministers, whom you esteem worthy of double honour; the religious ordering of your Family; the careful observation of the Lords Day, which with many is almost out of request; the large provision you make weekly for poor people, with other good fruits,
 which will abound to your account in that great day of Jesus Christ.Phil. 4.17. Go on (good Madam) and never be wea∣ry in well-doing,Gal. 6.9. in due time you shall reap if you faint not; and (according to the premisses) you shall be sure in this holy way never to faint; for, the way of the Lord is strength to the upright,Prov. 10.29. and the whole stream of the Scriptures runs for your encouragement.
At this time I make bold to present your Ladyship with these brief and plain Meditations, and pray your accep∣tance, as from one who desires to acknowledge the grace of God in you, and to help you along to the end of your course with much joy and assurance, humbly taking my leave in present, and unto death remaining

