


To the Right Worship-the MAjOR, and to his Brethren; and to all the Inhabitants of the town of Plimpton, together with the rest of my loving hearers of the Gentrie, and others who dwel in the adjacent Countrie. Grace bee unto you, and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
IT was meet that these Sermons should first come to your publick view, be∣ing dedicated to you, be∣cause
they were first prea∣ched among you.
But I hope you do not think that the sole hearing, or reading of them, will bring your souls to hea∣ven.
Heaven must bee taken by violence, For the King∣dom of Heaven suffer∣eth violence, and the vi∣olent take it by force, Mat. 11.12. And there∣fore you must offer an holy violence to your own na∣tures, every one of you, must
Isa. 64 stir up your selvs, and lay hold on God him∣self, must labour hard
with your selves, and with the God of heaven, and force heaven.
Heaven hath a new title,
Mat▪ 7 14. and streight gate; for streight is the gate which leads to life, and therefore you must strive to enter. Be as wise as Serpents, saith Christ, Mat. 10.16.
Serpents will go to a rock, & creep into the nar∣row clefts or holes of it, to strip off their old skins, when they are old, that they may becom young again; let your wisdoms match theirs, and let Christ, with his strictness, which is the
streight gate of heaven, bee your rock, & do you there∣at exercise your selvs, strip your selvs, and force your selvs to becom new, labou∣ring hard to put off the old man, and to put on the new man, which is created after God, in true holiness and righteousness, that so doing you may com to heaven.
I beseech you mark what I say, this you must do by faith in Christ; for with∣out him you can do nothing, John 15.5.
Without him you cannot come off from your houses of clay and sin, to walk
with him over the fields of Contemplation, there to me∣ditate. Without him you cannot forego your old lod∣gings of sinful and sensual delights, to go with him o∣ver his pleasant villages, there to lodg: without him you cannot leav your beds of ease, and rest, to break your beloved sleep, and to rise early enough to get with him to his heavenly vineyards, there to rest.
It is said, that when Christ had preached much to his lest beloved disciples of watching, hee closed up his lecture at last with this
most seasonable Scripture, And what I say unto you, I say to all, watch, Mark 13.37.
So I, having spoken much of striving to you, ny dearly beloved Audi∣tors, I winde up and finish my discourse in like man∣ner, saying, And what I write unto you I write un∣to all, Strive.
That is, strive to deny your selvs, and to overcom sleep: strive to stir up your selvs & to vanquish sloth: strive to conquer your selvs, and to have more sweet communion with
Christ himself. strive to walk more with him, to lodg more with him, to rise more with him, that when you have been dead and buried, you may bee glori∣ously raised again by him out of your graves at the last day; and beeing rai∣sed by him, rest and reign with him, and walk with him arm in arm, together with all the holy Angels, and all the truly worthy that ever lived, beeing lif∣ted up to the highest perfe∣ction of bliss, endless peace, and blessed immor∣talitie,
to bee enjoied to all eternitie. So praieth

