


Right Honourable,
SO ancient is the Mode of Dedicating Books to Great Persons, that we shall find it practised even in the Apostles time, and shortly after; for Luke him∣self, though he was inspired by the Spirit, yet dedicated his Book, called The Acts of the Apostles, to Theophilus, Act. 1. And S. Au∣stin dedicated that most excellent Piece of his, which he wrote against the Epistles of the Pela∣gians, to the Noble Bonifacius. Answerably whereunto, I also here dedicate this Book, most Noble Sir, my great Favourer, to your Lord∣ship, to manifest my grateful mind for all your great and undeserved Favours extended to me, and cumulated upon me, the unworthiest of all the Ministers of Jesus Christ: hoping, that as your Lordship hath accepted of the Dedications of others, so you will be pleased to accept of mine; and that my God will bedew these my Theolo∣gical Sudors and Labours with his Celestial
Benediction; so, as that when your Lordship has perused and read the same, you will use them also for your Eternal Good, labouring as for Life, to have that sweet Society with Jesus Christ which Saints have both Day and Night, by an Holy Walking with his Great and Glori∣ous Majesty in his Celestial Galleries and Walk∣ing Places, Cant. 7.5. and fighting the good and great Fight of Faith, as one of his valiant Warriers, wrestling with God most mightily, to overcome God. O Great Sir! may it please your Honour, to give your mind to these great things more than ever, and to do them; for then how rich you would be in God on a sudden! and how sure of Heaven! for Heaven would then not only be above you, but also in you: Rom. 14.17. and you would be able to say tru∣ly, Now I have enough: for, loe what a Life I now live, living by the Faith of the Son of God who loved me, and gave himself for me! Gal. 2.20. and spending my whole time with my Love Christ, by Night as well as by Day, to satiate my longing desire with his most sweet So∣ciety! and Oh the unexpressible Peace that I now have within; being assured in my Heart, that with everlasting Bliss I shall be blessed! and Oh the longing Joy which does now sur∣round me! and what a Globe of Glory becircles me! Oh, Noble Sir, 'tis true Nobility for a Man to be a Worshipper of God, a good Reader
of God's Book, a good Keeper of Holy Commu∣nion and Society with the highest Majesty; for that will bring us to the greatest Riches and Felicity. As for this World's Riches, you have enough of them, blessed be God: but one dram of Spiritul Grace, one Glimpse of Jehovah's Face, one Glance from one of Christ's Love-like Eyes, one Drop of his precious-Blood, one Draught of his sweetest Wines of Love, one Sip of his Di∣vine Consolations, will do you more good than all this World's Goods. And therefore, let that be thought upon, and laboured after, above all things: for then, I say again, you will be able to echoe forth these Words from your very Heart, and from an undeceiving Experience: Oh, what an Ocean of ineffable Delights do now overflow me, and what a Mass of Heaven's Bliss surrounds me! But I intend to close up this E∣pistle with praying thus. May Heaven's Bles∣sing be dropped down upon my poor Labours, and upon the Head of this Noble Lord to whom I exarate and write these Lines; that he, reading and practising the same on Earth, may reap the benefit thereof above in Heaven; re∣ceiving an Eternal and Immarcessible Crown of Glory.

