



Highly Honourable,
MAy it please your Lordship to per∣mit your most humble Servant to make this Address to your Honour. And first to give an Account of my boldness therein shown; Your Honour knows how long I have been a Tenant to your Noble Father, and to your Honourable Self also; and I remember how ready you have been to offer me a Spiritual Living for my Preferment; so that I could not but reflect upon that, and all other Fa∣vours with Thankfulness, and to erect, as it were, a Monument of my Gratitude by dedicating this Treatise to your Honour: hoping that if you will be pleased to improve it, Godliness Epitomized, contained there∣in, will bring you to be so familiar with Christ, that great King of Kings, as that his Majesty and your self will seldom or never be asunder: and that thereupon you will say like David; When I awake I am still with thee, Psal. 139.18. and, I am Prayer, Psal. 109.4. (so it is in the Hebrew) being all for Prayer, and spending a great part of your
time in Prayer. I have read of a Godly Minister, that of twenty four Hours, he spent eight in Prayer; which is not expected of every body, nor required of your Honour; but that you, and all Christ's Saints spend much time in Prayer: Pray often, and even by Night as well as by Day, Luk. 18.1, 7, 8. Well, Great Sir, I trust in God that he will lead you into all the Truths and things which here you are pointed to: and that thereup∣on you will lead such a Ceraphical, Celestial and Transcendental Life for Holiness, as that being ecstasied in your Spirit, you will be able to say, O! what a Heaven! what a Paradise! what a Beatity doth circumscribe me! Heaven being in my very Heart, and my Heart in Heaven. Heaven is high, I confess; but not too high for Strivers, Wrestlers, for holy Livers: and therefore let us strive, Great Sir, as for Life, to enter into Life by a sweet and holy Liv∣ing with our dear Jesus, whose Life was a most strict, most pious, most Heaven∣ly Life indeed; that we may live with his most blessed Majesty in Bliss and Beatity, Greatness and Gladness, Peace and Prospe∣rity to all Eternity. Which that it may prove so, I humbly beg that the great and mighty Lord of Heaven and Earth would write these Lines that are written in this
Book with his own Holy Finger, as with the Pen of a Diamond, in your Honour's Heart, and in mine too, and in all the Hearts of those which shall peruse and pervolve the same. Amen, Amen.

