



Much honoured Sirs,
I Had provided for you a∣nother subject, long be∣fore this time, and it was sent up and undertaken by some to be Published and after that to be presented unto you,
but hitherto it hath met with obstacles; and therefore whether it may have the happinesse to see the Light it self, and to be seen by your selves, or not, I resol∣ved to procrastinate and put off the ma∣nifestation of my grateful mind to∣ward you, for the many Civilities, Courtesies and Favours which you ma∣nifested and shewed unto me, when I first arrived at your famous City, out of my Native Countrey, and there first imbibed and learnt your English Lan∣guage, and then there also preached in it; but forthwith to present unto you some other Tract, and this by Name, though my intent was and is, that it should do good to others also. For I humbly conceive, that it may be very aptly communicated unto many, it con∣taining such things, as may very fitly
be assimilated to Christs five loaves, wherewith were fed as you well know, five thousand men, beside women and Children, Matth. 14.21. For what think ye, Honoured Sirs, I pray you of these five things:

First, Of the sweet Experiences of Christs Love.
Secondly, His Mercy.
Thirdly, His Merits.
Fourthly, His Delights.

 Fifthly, His Comforts?

Will they not serve as well to feed the Souls of those thousands of Men, Women and Children, which (as I suppose) are in, and near your City, as those five loaves the bodies of those five thousand Men, besides Women and Children? Will not they please them as well? Will not they fill them as well? and will there not be enough thereof left, when they are all filled for many, many thousands more, as after the filling of so many thousands, there were left and taken up of the fragments that remained twelve baskets full, vers. 20. to fill many more?
Worthy Sirs, My Soul longs to do
good to your Souls, and if by this Tract I may fulfil my desire, and thereby make you so wise to Salvation, as to labour with all your might after the enjoying of those five pleasant things, which I but now compared to those five miraculous loaves, wherewith Christ satiated so many thousands, for your soules delight; I care not though I my self be censured for pride and pre∣sumption, and be counted as Paul was, 2 Cor. 11.16, 17. a fool for my la∣bour; my labour being but small, but your gain and comfort then exceeding great; for then it will be with you, as it was with the Children of Israel, when they lived in the Land of Ca∣naan, and every one did sit under his Vine and under his Fig-tree, as the Lord had promised it, Mich. 4.4. both
which, as
Habita est haec arbor (Ficus) etiam apud veteres com∣mendatissima & pri∣mum secundum vi∣tem locum obtinuit. Danaeus in Phys. Christ. fol. 138. Writers tell us, are chief among the trees and plants in our Eden; in that every one of you also will sit under his Vine, and un∣der his Fig-tree: though every one of you properly have not his Vine and his Fig-tree, yet metaphori∣cally under the shadow of Christ and of his sweetest Mercie (both which are like to both) according to my Text, I sate under his shadow with great de∣light; and will live most sweetly in that New Canaan, which in this Book I have discovered as a Land which aboundeth with the sweetest Figs, and Apples, and Grapes, and Wines of joy, of jocundity, of delight, of consolation, even to admiration, and wherein that
sweetest Saviour, our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our Shadow, our Vine, our Fig-tree, our Apple-tree, our Tree of Life, Cant. 2.3. Isa. 25.4▪ John 15.1. Rev. 22.2. brings forth his pleasant fruit; not only every moneth, Rev. 22.2. but also every morning, For his compassions are new every morn∣ing, Lam. 3.23. So as that every day every one of you may then say, as the Spouse in my Text, in words at full, I sate down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit (this morn∣ing, or this day) was sweet to my taste. And as it was with St.
Hieron. Epist. 77. Jerome, when li∣ving in his Wilderness, he seemed to be in the Heavenly Jerusalem, where the Angels sing, so it will be with you; for you will then seem to your selves,
to be in the same New Jerusalem, where the Angels sweetest Musick is, and where that sweetest Tree of Life, Christ corporally is, and where fulness of joy is, and where pleasures are for evermore, Psal. 16.11. though other∣wise you are, as it were, in a wilder∣ness, this world, wherein you are now sojourners, being but, as it were, a bar∣ren wilderness, wherein no water, that is the water of Life, is, it being only to be found in the New Canaan, which is here in part, and in the heavenly at full for ever.
O Sirs! How is it with you, when you hear me speak of these things? Is it not with you now as it was with Mo∣nica, blessed Austins Mother? who when she heard her Son most sweetly dis∣course
of the joyes of Heaven, cried out and said, Evolemus; Quid facio hic? Let us flee hence; What do I here? That is, Are ye not even ready now to eccho forth the same words, after all these sayings of mine, concerning this New Canaan, and the Heavenly too, What do we here? Let us flee hence from the vain delights, namely, and sin∣ful pleasures of this vile world, and get into this New Canaan as fast as we can, to live such a sweet and com∣fortable life here, as they do, who live therein, and a far sweeter in the Hea∣venly hereafter for ever.
But I am loath to detain you a∣ny longer here upon the Borders of that goodly Land; I would to God, you were all in it, and that I
might even now leave you in it; and therefore I will humbly take leave of you, and commend you to the good bles∣sing and grace of God, praying hear∣tily, that he will bless you all, and these my Labours to you all, will elevate and lift up the light of his Countenance upon you, that your soules in this thing here may pros∣per, will behold you with his plea∣sant face, will grant you all his Grace, that from henceforth you may all live the life of Grace, living and spending the remainder of your breath in the foresaid New Canaan here upon earth, all your dayes with unutterable delight; and after your dayes here ended, with the ANCIENT OF DAYES in the Hea∣venly, and that in bliss and bles∣sedness
sedness, greatness and gladness, peace and prosperity, through all Eternity.

