



MADAM,
MY great Respect, and thankful Mind which I bear to your Wor∣thy-Self, and to your, No∣ble Family, for many Favours received, hath caused and
compelled me to Dedicate this Tract to your much-ho∣noured Name: and if it may but find entertainment and acceptance, I shall count my labour well bestowed.
Only give me leave, Much Honoured Lady, to give you a short Account of this my present Undertaking. These late Times are and have been very sickly, and many every where are fallen asleep; and when the time of our depar∣ture will be, the Lord only knoweth: and we our selves also know this, that it cannot
be long before we likewise shal go to our long home, and be no more seen at our present homes, because our life is but a vapour, Jam. 4.14. and we flie away, Psal. 90.10. which not with standing, how few are there which prepare them∣selves for that time; Cogitan∣tes de fine infinito, ut vivant in infinitum: VVhence it com∣eth to pass, that most men, when after they have lived a careless life, they come to be unmanned by Death, they go Imparati in locum paratum, Unprepared to a place prepa∣red,
idque in aeternum, and that for ever; for that which ends All, is without end. And their nearest friends are much the cause of it; for the com∣mon fashion of Friends is to put their friends in mind of Death, when they doubt that they can live no longer; Zenas the Lawyer, and Luke the Physician, must have given them over, before they will send for Barnabas to give them good Counsel and solid Consolation against their dis∣solution. But I for my part will not deal so with my Chri∣stian Friends.

My design in this Tract is this, To tell men plainly that shortly they must put off their caribly Tabernacles, & shew them evidently, How they must die whilst they live, that they may live when they die; dying in, by, and according to Faith. This, this I aimed at when I penned this Treatise; which, if it be acted by Faith, will so work upon mens and womens precious souls, and do them so much good, as that they will even long to enjoy the chiefest good; and when their work here is done, will
shew them Heaven open for them; where there is health only, and no sickness; living, and no dying; incorruption, and no corruption; ease, and no pain; singing, and no sor∣rowing; For the former things are passed away, Rev. 21.4.
Many, I confess, have writ∣ten on this subject of Death, but you will find, that I have left the common road, as much as I might; for my principal aim in this Tract is, To put men upon that New and Li∣ving Way, which the Apo∣stle
speaks of, Heb. 10.20. and which must be taken by Faith; according to which we must die, to live for ever.
That Great God, and Sa∣viour, who can do whatsoever he will in Heaven and on Earth, so bless these my La∣bours to you, Madam, and to al that shal read them, as that both you and they may fare the better for them here, and hereafter, for ever.
So prayeth 

