




SEeing it hath pleased the Lord Christ first to move me to select this subject, and to spend my Meditations upon it, and good Christians next again and again to desire it, while I was yet teaching of it, before I could finish it, that it might be copied out, and communicated unto themselves and others, I could not well with a safe con∣science
detaine i. For if he that reserves corn and will not spare it to those that need it, be lyable to a
Prov. 11.26. curse. I might justly feare lest I also keeping back the spi∣rituall food of the soul-fatting word of God, when it is thus earnestly craved, should incurre the same horrible danger of be∣ing accursed. Better it was ther∣fore and safer for me to expose my self to a censure (which be∣ing a stranger and most insuffi∣cient, I cannot well avoyd) then to a curse.
And now for as much as those hungry souls have moved me at last to impart it, as not da∣ring to deny it, I could do no lesse then expresse my singular care for you, and great love,
which I beare towards you, by sparing the same spirituall ali∣monie unto you in speciall, and making you partners with those, who were served first, be∣cause they came first, and heard me first, when I distributed and divided the word of truth first, touching that most sweet and medicinall Rose of Sharon Christ Iesus blessed for ever.
Nor may you be offended wth me for making you partners onely, and not sole owners, for
1. You loose nothing by that, having as much as they.
2. Besides that sweet Rose, of the which I treat here, is a Rose of the field, and not of a gar∣den, and therefore ought not to be enclosed, as garden Roses are
and reserved by a few, but ra∣ther as common be imparted unto many. And therefore it is my heartie vote, and the thirst∣ing desire of my soul, that not you onely, and those to whom I dedicate this book as joynt∣partners with you, but also all others, that shall reade it, may take and own that most need∣full and wholsome spirituall food, the preaching I meane of Christ, the sweet Rose of Sha∣ron, and most nutritive bread of Life, who in those Sermons made publike for the good of all, is profered and tendered un∣to all.

