




THe Is  Do∣mi ab  qae  sa  Ro cerus ad Ecclsiam  &  ab eccle spectu ▪ &c. Dd. Rl Dffi.  20 Pope of Rome is wont to exhi∣bite, and to shew forth once a yeer on a
 Lords day unto his Ro∣man people, a certain gli∣stering, and glorious Rose to signifie the LORD JESUS, who in my text resembleth himself to a Rose most faire and fra∣grant.
The consideration whereof (I confesse inge∣niously) moved me not a little to think more seri∣ously of this most excel∣lent comparison, then e∣ver I did before; for a man (being a Minister) cannot but reason thus
 with himself: if he whom we Protestants judge to be against Christ take it upon him thus so∣lemnly to put men in mind of the Lord Christ, by shewing unto them a Rose emblematizing Christ, how much more should we Evangelicall Teachers, who professe our selves to be all for Christ, shew forth unto our Christian people their Lord and Master Christ, not onely once a yeer, as he his Golden
 Rose, but as much as pos∣sibly we can, by our of∣ten preaching, and pub∣lishing the Gospel of Christ (that most sweet and redolent Rose of Sha∣ron) whereby we may hope to do infinitely more good unto Gods Orthodoxe people, then he by shewing a Rose artificiall unto his super∣stitious Romans.
For the Triplex autem est in hac flore matcria, au∣rum videli∣cet Muscus & Balsa∣mum. Idem fol. 121. matter of that Rose is but,

1. Gold.
2. Musk.

 3. Balsame.

But the matter of the Gospel, (which he preacheth not) is Not sig∣nified one∣ly but profered whereas the Popes Rose is but significant as they say. Christ himself the Rose celesti∣all, which is more pre∣cious then Gold, more fragrant then Musk, and more medicinall then Balsame, as I have endea∣voured to make it appear, as evidently and mani∣festly as I could in this Treatise, which through importunity) I have been animated to publish, and now am bold to tend∣er
 unto you first, because you heard me preach first (in your own Paro∣chiall Temple the last Winter) of this most de∣licious Rose, which is Christ himself blessed forever.
To say no more now of the said Rose it self, because I affect brevity in a Preface, I shall but crave the good blessing of our good God upon my poor indeavours, that they may prove as bene∣ficiall unto you, as my
 enlarged heart towards you, my most respected, kinde, and loving neigh∣bours, doth desire it.

