


May it please Your Lordship,
THE general Decay and Contempt of the Christian Religion amongst us, has made me think, that I could not bet∣ter employ the Leisure, which, by Your Lord∣ship's Favour, I enjoy, than in using my best Endeavours to shew the Excellency and the Certainty of it. And what I have done, is here humbly presented to your Lordship, as of Right, and upon many Accounts, it ought to be.
The Honour and the Satisfaction which I have often had to hear Your Lordship speak in the behalf of Religion and Virtue, encou∣rage me to hope, that a Performance, though but such as this, upon that Subject, may ob∣tain your Acceptance. And the Name only
of a Person of your Lordship's Honour, and Learning, and Knowledge of the World, may perhaps be of more advantage to the Cause I undertake, than any thing I have been able to write.
Religion may seem, by Descent, and as it were, by Inheritance, to belong to Your Lordship's Care: The Wisdom and Piety of Your Great Ancestor appear to distant Ages in the Reformation, which, through the Blessing of God, was in so great a measure, by His means, establish'd in this Kingdom. And I have with Joy often thought, that I could observe the Spirit and Genius of my Lord Treasurer BƲRGHLEY now ex∣erting it self more than ever in your Noble Family. From whence, methinks, we may presage Happiness to the Nation, and may yet expect to see a true sense of Religion revive, and may hope, that even in our days, Chri∣stianity, amongst English-men, shall be more than a Name, which is every where spoken a∣gainst.
An eminent Vertue is a Publick Good: There is a powerful and commanding Force in Great Examples, to countenance Vertue, and discourage Vice and Profaneness; to make Irreligion appear, as it is, base and con∣temptible in the World; to degrade it, and thrust it down among the lower and un∣taught part of Mankind. Much is not to be expected from the Schools and from the
Gown, under such Contempt and Discou∣ragement. But the Great and the Honoura∣ble have it in their Power to do great things; things worthy of Themselves, and for the Advancement of God's Glory. Persons of High Birth, and both by Nature and Educa∣tion fitted for the Highest Undertakings, whose Vertues shall flourish with their Years, and add New Lustre to their Hereditary Ho∣nours, may yet regain a due Esteem to Re∣ligion, and adorn the Gospel of Christ. This is a proper Object for the Ambition of gene∣rous aspiring Minds to express their Gratitude to Him who has placed them so much above the rest of the World; and when they find themselves happy now, to disdain to aim at any thing less than Everlasting Happiness hereafter. To be Miserable after Happiness, is an Aggravation of Misery: But to receive Eternal Blessings, as the Fruits and Improve∣ment of such as are Temporal, is the Privi∣lege of those whom God has been pleased to distinguish from others by his Mercies, and who distinguish themselves by a regard to his Honour and Service.
All that know Burghley, (and who is there almost that doth not know it?) are surprised with Wonder and Delight, to observe what Art can do, and to behold the Splendor and the Magnificence of Foreign Countries in our own: But the Glories and Rewards of Vertue shall continue, when Burghley it self
and the World shall be no more; and will make Death but a Passage and an Advance∣ment from one Palace, from one Honour to another; and a Removal only from the un∣certain Riches and imperfect Felicities of this Life, to the Mansions of Eternal Bliss in Hea∣ven.
That these my Endeavours may prove but in any measure serviceable to the Ends of Re∣ligion and Virtue, and thereby to the Glory and Happiness of your Honourable Family, in this and a better World, is, My Lord, the un∣feigned Desire and Prayer of,

