



THe In hac Dominica (quae septima est ab illa quae septuagisima vocatus) Romanus Pontifex celebraturus ad Ecclesiam pergens & rediens ab eadem, auream in manu sub aspectu populi fert rosam, &c. Durand. Rational Din offi▪ 6 f 120Pope of Rome is wont to exhi∣bite, and to shew forth once a yeer on a

Lords day unto his Roman people, a certain gli∣stering, and glorious Rose to signifie the LORD JESUS, who in my text resembleth himself to a Rose most faire and fra∣grant.
The consideration whereof (I confesse inge∣niously) moved me not a little to think more seri∣ously of this most excel∣lent comparison, then e∣ver I did before; for a man (being a Minister) cannot but reason thus

with himself: if he whom we Protestants judge to be against Christ take it upon him thus solemnly to put men in mind of the Lord Christ, by shewing unto them a Rose emblematizing Christ, how much more should we Evangelicall Teachers, who professe our selves to be all for Christ, shew forth unto our Christian people their Lord and Master Christ not onely once a yeer, as he his Golden

Rose, but as much as pos∣sibly we can, by our of∣ten preaching, and pub∣lishing the Gospel fo Christ (that most sweeet and redolent Rose of Sharon) whereby we may hope to do infinitely more good unto Gods Orthodoxe people, then he by shewing a Rose artificially unto his super-stitious Romans.
For the Triplex autem est in hc flore materia, au∣rum videli∣cet Muscus & Balsa∣mum. Idem fol. 121.matter of that Rose is but, 

1. Gold.
2. Musk.

3. Balsame.

But the matter of the Gospel, (whiche he preacheth not) is Not sig∣nified one∣ly but profered whereas the Popes Rose is but significant as they say. Christ himself the Rose celestiall, which is more fragrant then Musk, and more medicinall then Balsame, as I have endea∣voured to make it appear, as evidently and mani∣festly as I could in this Treatise, which through importunity) I have been animated to publish, and now am bold to tend∣er

unto you first, because you heard me preach first (in your own Paro∣chiall Temple the last Winter) of this most delicious Rose, which is Christ himself blessed forever.
To say no more now of the said Rose it self, because I affect brevity in a Preface, I shall but crave the good blessing of our good God upon my poor indeavours, that they may prove as bene∣ficiall unto you as my

enlarged heawrt towards you, my most respected, kinde, and loving neigh∣bours, doth desire it.

