



WHEN I was prevai∣led with for the preaching of this Sermon, I was so far from having the least thoughts of making it publicke, as that I did not so much as suspect, or
feare an invitation thereunto. And when I received intimation that it would be ex∣pected from me, I yet fully resolved to resist the utmost violence of importuni∣ty; and I had done so (although as it is said of Elisha, 2 Kings 2.17. I was urged till I was ashamed) but that it was objected to me, That this my deniall was unsutable to my Sermon: for the scope of that was to quicken unto the love and practise of Thankesgiving; in the pressing of which, if I were serious & in earnest, how could I with hold that which you desired onely as a testimony and help of your thankful∣nesse; If thanksgiving vvere so excellent and divine a duty, vvhy vvould I not (ha∣ving a Call from such as I acknovvledged godly and judicious) further it by my pen as vvell as tongue? This argument I con∣fesse won upon me, and hath drawn from me more then a conformity to your de∣sires; for that vvhich vvas but a Sermon, I have enlarged into a Treatise. If God shall honour and blesse it so far as to make it in∣strumentall in stirring you up unto a zea∣lous
and sincere practise of this glorious and heavenly duty of thanksgiving, I have my end. But now if it should meet with a contrary issue, if you should be unmoved thereby, and not vvithstanding it, remaine unthankfull, or else cold and remisse in your thankes, the griefe vvill bee mine, but the danger yours. For this small Tractate vvill bee one vvitnesse and aggravation of your unthankfulnesse, Iohn 12.48. And be∣sides, such an entertainment of it, vvill bee very unagreeable to the argument by which you perswaded me; nay, it will ar∣gue that your obstinate earnestnesse for the publication hereof, proceeded rather from curiosity and vainglory, then from a religi∣gious desire to be quickned unto, and assi∣sted in your praises. But to use the expres∣sion of the Apostle, Heb. 6.9. I am perswaded better things of you, and things that accompany saluation, that are answerable to such a saluation as this of yours. In confidence of, and prayer for which, Irest,

