



SAd experience tel∣leth even good Chri∣stians, how weak their

owne spirits are in the sore trials of these di∣stracting times, even where their peace and comforts are continu∣ed, before they are put to suffer as their bre∣thren abroad do. Fears of evill threatned doe much disquiet them, and too often suspend their faith from doing the due and proper of∣fice of it: So that they deserve a check for

their unbeliefe, in the words of our Lord; Why are ye fearfull O ye of little faith? Mat. 8.26. And yet because they dislike and struggle with this unbeliefe, they deserve pitty, and to be helped against it; which was the occasion of these meditations at the first and now of publishing them.
And for this Dedi∣cation 

of them to your worthy selves, the cause is apparant: Partly I would help forward your comfort in God, after all your activity and charge in the great Cause of God now in agitation. Partly I would make knowne your exempla∣ry love to the work of God, both in times of peace, maintaining a Lecture at your owne

cost, and spending much upon the poore, upon Ministers and others; and in these times of warre, exhausting your estate to buy Arms, Horses, and provisions of divers kinds for helping the Lord against the migh∣ty; beside your conti∣nuall cares and coun∣sels for the publike, and for the peace of our County, which (a∣mongst

other our Wor∣thies) oweth much to your worship for the safety of it, and repel∣ling of the enemy. Your Martiall Family hath gained much honour hereby among all godly and understanding Christians. And part∣ly I would hereby tell the world, that to me and mine you have bin a most free and loving Patron, and was the

like to my Predecessor and his Family: The Lord returne into your bosome seven fold, add to your dayes abun∣dantly, give you health take away or mittigate those paines you are sometimes subject un∣to, strengthen you in the inner man by his Spirit, fill you and yours with all heaven∣ly graces and comforts, keepe you unblamable

to his Kingdome and glory, and give you (with us) to see the peace of Sion againe e∣stablished, with the utter disappointment of all the enemies. Which are the daily prayers of
May 26. 1644.

