


TO THE Most High and Mighty Monarch, CHARLES II. By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, DEFENDER of the FAITH, Grace and Mercy be multiplied.
YOur Majesty's Acceptance of a Treatise of Your most humble Servant tending to Immortality; and of a large La∣tin Poem, bidding Your Majesty wel∣come into those Western Parts, in Your Royal Fort of Plymouth, emboldned me to offer and to dedicate these my Theological Labours also, which are comprised in this Book; hoping that they will be Graciously accepted, as the former were: and that so much the rather, because this said Book brings to You, as to a Great King, that Great King whose Name is Jesus, King of Kings, Rev. 19.16. to keep Your Ma∣jesty Company in your Solitudes; and for Your Majesty to spend your time with His great Ma∣jesty both Day and Night, according to this Book, wherein Godliness is Epitomized; and
wherein also are contained some Essays made against that odious, and far-spreading Sin of Ʋsury: which will need the Protection and Support of an excelse and mighty Atlas to sup∣port such a weighty Frame, and subject Mat∣ter, because it will meet with bitter and potent Adversaries which will be ready to oppugne it, to keep their great Goddess Diana, Ʋsury I mean, and her Silver Shrines. Which hath necessitated me, in all Humility, to betake my self to such a mighty Shield as Your Majesty's great Power and Protection is, under which a wary Combatant may lie invulnerable. Nor am I the first that made so bold as to dedicate a Book of this Nature to a King. When fa∣mous Bishop Downam wrote against Ʋsury, up∣on Psal. 15. as I do now, he dedicated his Book to the King of Scholars, King James; and it was accepted: Answerably hereunto, I promise my self a Gracious Acceptance likewise. But I desire to end with praying to the King of Kings, that Your Majesty may be kept by His mighty Power and Protection from all Treache∣rous Conspiracies; may long sway the Sceptre of your three Kingdoms in Halcyon Days; and after that Your Majesty hath superated the spa∣ces of your Humane Life, you may, being ele∣vated to the Horizon of future Felicity, and entranced into Heaven, there reign also, as one of the Kings of that other World, with the
King of Kings, 2 Tim. 3.12. Rev. 2.20. far scattering the bright shining Rays of your Ine∣narrable Glory. Amen.

