


WORSHIPFƲL,
MAay it please you to give me leave to de∣dicate, and to present this little Tract of The Saints Assurance unto you, as to a Person so enobled with Grace, as that by God's Grace enabling you, I hope you wil not only Patronize it; but also promote my grand design in it, which is to stir up all that shall read it, to the gaining of the said
Assurance thorow Gods assistance.
Worthy Sir, you see what a Subject I am faln upon, even a Subject which will subject our fears, eject our doubts, and deject all adverse powers, which in the want of this Assurance are wont illaqueate our very intellects, to captivate our wills, and to subju∣gate all the powers of our souls. Souls therefore will never do well till they be heavened with it; for my part, when I take a full circle of my self, and a thorow view of my condition, do find without it my very being to be a burden, my life a
Sustain∣ing the loss of the light of God's counte∣nance. loss, my heart a hell; for Oh the hel∣lish horrors that a man shall feel in his heart, when this Assurance is far from his heart! But when
it is in it, O what a glad man is he! Heaven being in his heart, his heart in Heaven; Oh Sir! what a Heaven, what a Paradise, what a beatitude did circum∣scribe that holy * Father, when,
St. Hie∣rom. as he writes of himself, he was, as it were, in medio Angelorum choro, in the very midst of the quire of Angels, hearing them sing, as he was in Eremo, in a Wilder∣ness! and may not we be so too? yes verily, if we would but labour, as we ought, for this Assurance, treading into the Vestigaes or footsteps of those blessed Hebrews, who were so assured of their sal∣vation, and eternal bliss, according to that memorable expression of the Apostle, Heb. 10.34. Know∣ing
(mark) knowing in your selvs, that you have in Heaven a better and more enduring sub∣stance; for then as they thereby were, so we thereby shall come to the innumerable company of An∣gels, &c. Heb. 12.22. Confess I must that it is as hard a thing to acquire, and to gain this Assu∣rance, as any thing I know in the world, and you know, Sir, how the Church of Rome doth fulmi∣nate and thunder out her
Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 9. & 16. Ana∣thema's against us, for maintain∣ing this Assurance to be had in this life; but I am not discoura∣ged from this treating on it by ei∣ther, for against the one, I know that I am defensated and born up by God's never-failing Truth, a∣gainst
the other by his power; and therefore I say, for all this, let us, O let us labour, and labour hard (because our work is so hard) & strive, as for life, to be perswaded in our hearts, that without fail and doubt we shall enter into life. Life here is sweet, but that above is sweeter, & the Assurance of it the sweetest thing in all this world's circumference; for when a man hath it, he may truly say of it, Oh! what a life do I now live, living by the faith of the Son of God
Gal▪ 2.20. who loved me and gave himself for me? Oh the unexpressible peace which I now have within me, being perswaded in my breast that with heavenly bliss I shall be for ever blest! Oh what a glorying
joy doth now warm me! what a Ocean of comfort overflow me and what a Heaven of glory becir∣cle me! Oh this Assurance, this heavenly Assurance is nothing else but the very gate of Heaven,  Jacob said once of the place where he saw the Angels of God ascend∣ing and descending upon a Ladder which reached to Heaven, Gen. 27.17. Oh Sir, could we but fol∣low those lessons which are laid down for our going up as it were by steps to that height of hope, which in this life a man may tower up to; could we live such a spot∣less, such a strict, such an holy, such a seraphical life as here is shewn us, could we get the par∣don of our sins sealed to us, could
we gain that high and unquestio∣nable testimony of Gods holy Spi∣rit, which is to be had by us, how soon would this be our case too? and how soon would we be able to eccho forth the same expessions be∣ing filled with unparallelable consolations? Oh Sir, let us stir therefore, and strive to our utmost, to express the vertue, the life, the power of the things here shewn us, labouring especially for a gust of the very joys of Heaven, which here we are pointed to; and to lead an extraordinary, exemplary, blameless, most holy, and heavenly life, which we are appointed to: And what I say to your worthy self, and my unworthy self, I say to all; strive, Oh strive with all
your might, for this most glorious and Heavenly Assurance of your salvation, which you expect to an endless duration for your souls delight.

