


GENTLEMEN,
ALthough no doubt you have already received abundant satisfaction for your preparation to the weighty work of Reformation in hand, by an Eloquent Apollos,Mr. Geer a man so mighty in the word of God, yet I hope it will not be a work altogether superfluons, to put this  (though so plain) into your hands, for the help sometimes of your memory, if it may not serve at present, as a Card or Compass whereby to steer your course in the current of your weighty affairs. To govern well was ever accounted Ars artium, and to judge aright now at this time especially, De rebus & person is Ecclesiasticis, I fear will prove a matter of no small difficulty. But I hope that , who searcheth all secrets, will inable you with his discerning Spirit to uncase such Hypocrites (if any such there be) as under a pretext of zeal to this your design, may peradventure take advantage to effect their own long-plotted sinister ends, in the defamation, and destruction of their innocent Brethren.
What Salt soever they shall cause to be brought before you,Mat. 5.13. made foul by some accidentall fall, or their fowler tongues; yet having not lost all its savour, let it not be cast out to be trodden under their feet; but rather as good Chymists endeavour its recovery and preservation, that out of it you may extract such a {salt} as being well separated from its Terra damnata, may serve
again to absterge the foul mouths, and alay the boyling heat of their feverish hearts, that are now grown frantick, and even mad against the poor disconsolate Church of God.
This present, I cannot say much of it, for there is not much said in it. However, be pleased to deign it your acceptance, if not for the offerer, yet for the oblations sake, () for it is a work holding forth such words as shall judge us all, even Judges,1 Thes. 5.13. Joh. 12.48. and all, at the last day. Now the Lord grant you may so pull down, and set up, so change, reform, and confirm; so purge and refine, that if it be possible, you may make a Coelum terrae, and so become your selves Rutilantia Sydera in seculo seculorum;

