



SIR,
THe following Discourse, being Clad in a mean Country Dress, and wanting the usual Ornaments of this Learned Age; High Strains of Oratory and Eloquence, and the brave Flourishes of Rhetorick, was never by me thought Worthy of an Imprimatur. But such has been the Importunity of some, and the Arguments of others; pretending the Publica∣tion thereof may tend to the Publick good, that is, to the Confirmation of some in their Loyal∣ty, and to the Reducing of others from their Disobedience (which indeed ought to be, the
, only Design of all our Endeavors,) as that, at last it has free leave to Walk abroad; and if it meets with any that are dis∣affected to the Present Government; I only re∣quest, They would first Candidly peruse it, be∣fore they Censoriously Condemn it: As for all others, I doubt not but their Charity will east a Veil over all its Errata's.
And as for the reason of its Dedication unto your Honour, it is double.
First, Your High and Ʋndeserved Favours bestowed upon my self:
Secondly, Your Eminent and Constant Loyalty, not only to His Present, but also to His Late Majesty of Ever Blessed Me∣mory.
For it is well known, that you did not only make it your Duty, but your Delight (which is your Glory) to Serve His Late Majesty
in the Extremity of His Misfortunes: And you were ever found (in the very Front) among those many Heroes and Worthies, which Fought and Suffered for Him.
And truly, were I not assured that your Mo∣desty had rather your own Works, than my Pen should express your High and Great Merits, I could easily enlarge this short Epistle into a Vome. And willingly Expatiate in your due Praises, for venturing your Life and Fortunes in the Service of that Glorious Martyr King CHARLES the I. Who was a Good Man; in Aristotle's strictest Definition, i. e. , &c. Having in Him an happy Connexion of all the Virtues (Gradu Heroico) in the highest Degree.
And here, I cannot but admire, and be a∣stonished, to read, that ANTONIUS TRIUMVIR, a Roman Heathen should have such an High Valuation for
Varro's Learning; as, after Semence, to par∣don Him and Subscribe
Vivat Varro, Vir Doctissimus.
And that the most Exemplary Piety, the Ʋniversal Learning, and the wonderful Ac∣quirements of our Ever Blessed Soveraign CHARLES the I. should not have the least Influence upon the Minds of his Mur∣therers, and should not have caused them to Retreive their own Ʋnjust Sentence of Death, which they most Barbarously had passed upon him; nor at last prevail with them to Subscribe.
Vivat Rex, Vir Doctissimus, & Pientissimus.
But the All-wise God designed a better Life, and a more Glorious Kingdom for His Ma∣jesty; and therefore he permitted them to open the Cage and Tabernacle of his Body, that so his Immortal Soul might the sooner take Wing,
and fly up unto the higher Regions of endless happiness; and there take Possession of that In∣corruptible Crown of Glory, which the Holy JESUS (who was gon before) had prepared for Him.
Ʋnto which place of Eternal Bliss, that your Honour, and all those, who have faithfully served their Prince and Country; May in due time, arrive, shall be the constant and daily Prayer of him, who is,
Noble Sir, 
