



Dearly beloved in the Lord,
HAd there been nothing else to have put me upon this Dedica∣tion, but the great respect which you shewed to my Prede∣cessour, Reverend Mr. Geree, that alone had been abundant∣ly enough to have commanded this Respect from me to you. The contributing of 30l. per annum to his widow so long as she lived, and the raising of a considerable portion of money for one of his children, after her decease, that was left without any provisi∣on, was such a Testimony of the high esteem you had of that your pious Pastor, as is not I think to be parallelled by that which hath been done by any other Congregation. And I have purposely made this honourable mention of it, that when there is the like occasion, it may be an example to many others.
But I have other inducements to move me to what I here now doe. The greatest part of this Work, such as it is, hath gone through my hands, since I was called by you to undertake the charge of your souls: and there∣fore, by reason of the speciall Interest you now have in me, I know none that may challenge a more speciall Interest in these my poor labours then you may do. The design indeed of the Work looks farther then you, even to the common good of all, that shall seek for some help herein for the un∣derstanding of this part of the Holy Scripture. But yet because the support the Author hath of late years received from you hath contributed so much to the carrying on of the Work, he cannot but think it most equall, that it should tender its first service to you; and that too the rather, because many of you, by reason of your calling, are like to be very instrumen∣tall in spreading it abroad into the hands of others. To you therefore,

my dear Brethren, together with as many affectionate desires of your spirituall good as my poor heart can hold, do I here present this 3. part of my Annotations; and do indeed own it as a speciall mercy of divine Pro∣vidence to me, considering how far my daies were declined ere I was cal∣led to dispense the word of Grace amongst you, that the thrid of my life should be drawn out so far beyond mine own expectation, that I should now have the opportunity of leaving behind me this pledge and memo∣riall of my thankfull acknowledgement of your love and kind respects to me, (in the extent whereof amongst you I think I may glory as much, as can well be expected in these broken times) as likewise of the tender af∣fection, which I bear to you all, and that continually I have you in my heart (to use the Apostles expression Phil. 1.7.) that I may by all possible means to the utmost of my power advance the spirituall and eternall good of your souls.
Only now, I beseech you, let me close this tender of my service here∣in with this Request, that you would not by looking on this Dedication, and minding the Book no farther, make that a vain and empty comple∣ment, which I present unto you with a reall desire of advancing the stock of your saving knowledge in the great things of Gods law, and which I hope through Gods Blessing may turn to profit in this regard, if you will be pleased attentively to read over these Notes together with these Scri∣ptures, which their design is to unfold.
Oh, my Brethren, as you desire to growingrace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, be much in reading the Scriptures, the Oracles of God. Hearing hath the preheminence for awakening Con∣science. But Reading (in my poor judgement) carries with it some kind of peculiar advantage for the edifying and establishing of the minds of Christians in point of solid knowledge.
As for these particular Books, which are here explained, I think I may safely say, without any blame-worthy reflection upon the rest of the Scri∣pture, that they are the choicest pieces of the Old Testament. The Scri∣pture is the Paradise, the garden of God upon earth: and these Poeticall Books are (as I may say) as so many goodly knots in the midst of this gar∣den; wherein the discoveries that are made of divine truths are set forth with the intricacies and elegancies of many florid figurative expressions, purposely to render them the more delightfull to us. Solomon himself saith as much in expresse terms concerning his Books, Eccles. 12.10. The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words; or, as it is in the Hebrew, words of delight. And this may well invite you with strong affectionate

desires to search into those treasures of wisdome, which are therein so pleasingly conveyed to us.
And now, my dear Friends, I have nothing farther to adde, but my prayers for you, that you may be still united more and more in the way of truth, and in the bond of Christian love and peace; and withall ear∣nestly to begge your daily prayers for me, that I may be still enabled through grace so to hold forth the Word of life unto you, that I may re∣joyce in the day of Christ, that, even to you-ward, I have not run in vain, neither laboured in vain; which I hope you will not fail to doe for
April 21. 1658.

