



Right dearly beloved in the Lord,
THis poore work of mine, the first-fruits of my labours in this kind, must needs passe through your hands to the publick view, not onely in regard of the speciall interest you have in me, whom your selves were pleased many years since to chuse to be your Pastor to feed your souls, but also in regard the work it self was at first col∣lected, and composed purposely for your service and use.
It is now above twenty years since the Lord was pleased to open a doore unto me for the preaching of the Gospelof Christ amongst you, wherein, though with much weaknesse, I have endeavoured to the utmost of my power, I blesse God, to build you up in the knowledge of God and of Christ▪ and need no other witnesses then yourselves, that I have not sought yours but you, as having indeed from my first entrance amongst you resolved with the Apostle, very gladly to spend, and to be spent for you, though the more abundantly I loved you the lesse I were loved by you.

Amongst other wayes wherein I have studied to be ser∣viceable to your souls, it pleased God to put into my heart that I would undertake the unfolding of such passages of the holy Scripture as were somewhat more difficult and obscure to such as would come in and partake of my labours therein; and the end I propounded to my self in this was, both that I my self might hereby be the better enabled in publick also to declare unto you the whole counsell of God, as occasion was offered; and that you likewise might with the more advan∣tage and comfort exercise your selves in your private reading of those sacred volumes.
Now having for severall years spent some time every Lords day in this imploiment, I was at length importuned by some friends, that were partakers of my labours therein, to prepare those Annotations for the Presse, which were the chief substance of that which I had collected for that service. They alledged what satisfaction and comfort themselves had received in the hearing of them, and what an advantage it might be both to them and others, if they might have them ready at hand at all times to inform them in any thing they scrupled in their private reading; and so farre I was swayed with what they said, that I resolved in the publishing of one part of them to make triall whether they would find that ap∣probation and welcome abroad, that might give encourage∣ment to send orth the rest after them.
These indeed come forth in a sad time, when arms are in farre more request then books; but we must herein submit to the good will of God. It hath fared with this Book in this, as with many a traveller that hath prepared for a journey when the sunne shined fair, and yet was constrained at last to go forth in a storm. When I began first to transcribe these

Notes for the Presse the skie was clear and shined upon us, and yet now when they should go forth, the whole kingdome is overspread with a cloud, that is like to poure down showrs of bloud upon the whole land: the Lord give us grace to turn to him, who hath promised to be a refuge from the storm. Well, but yet the book being passed the Presse, and being withall to go upon Gods businesse, I was unwilling to for∣bear the publishing of it, especially when I began to con∣sider, that the drift of it was to help men to reade the Scrip∣ture with profit, and that there is never more need for men to be much in studying Gods word then in troublesome and sad times, God having there stored up those cordialls for us which in such times must chear up the sick fainting spirits of his poore afflicted servants: unlesse thy Law had been my delight, saith David, Psal. 119. 92. I then had perished in my afflictions. Having therefore resolved to publish it, and to leave the suc∣cesse to the good providence of God, I here present it to you in the first place, to whom it doth of right belong. If it may prove a means to bring you, whose souls God hath com∣mitted to my charge, to be in love with the Scripture, or adde any thing to your stock of knowledge and grace, I have if not all, yet my chief desire. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our father, which hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting consolation and good hope through grace, comfort your hearts and stablish you in every good word and work. And so I commend you to Gods grace, and desire likewise your prayers unto God for him who is

