



SIR.
May it please your goodnesse to ac∣cept from a strange hand (not at all knowne vnto you, yet dayly, accordinge to obligation, lifted vp for you) a Kingdome. A rich present indeed, (but none of myne: either as Author, or Translator) and worthy your selfe, beinge the expression to the life of that Kingdome which you alreadie enioy in the fund of your soule: as I may very well coniec∣ture by the fruicts of your writings in your con∣templatiue Characters; and the dayly effects of your most pious endeanours for the introducin∣ge, conseruinge, and dilatinge of this King∣dome of God in the soules of all sorts of people. Lett the Kingdome of Glorie be your Rew∣ard for euer. I was, I must confesse at first de∣terred from settinge forth this incomparable Peice, hauinge not the Oiginall by mee, but
 only some mangled copies: fearinge to blemish soe accomplisht a worke, and sublime an Au∣thor. Yet comparing it with the most true, and exact practicall Kingdome I know now extant in the soules of the poore En∣glish, but true Benedictine Nunns of our La∣dies of Hope in Paris dedicatinge themselues for the conuersion of a Kingdome in this pureColoss, 2. 3. Luk. 12. 2. Isay 53. . Gal. 4. Contemplatiue state. Leadinge a life hidden with Christ in God. Feare not little flocke? I hope, as God hath giuen you alreadie a Kin∣gedome in your owne soules, soe will hee in∣troduce itt into others, for your sake. Prayse ô barren weoman who beareth not: singe, prayse, and make ioyfull noise, who didst not beare, because many are the childeren of the desolate; more then of her that hath an husband! saith our Lord? Comparinge I say this Kingdome with that in te soules of these most happie Religious with whom (o my Happynesse!) I dayly conuerse: I am not only encouraged to set itt forth, but very confident, (hauinge soe bright, and true a Mirrour, or lookeinge Glasse to behold) I shall doe it to the life; if myne owne blindnesse doth not seduc mee. And no  therefore since this Kingdome is drawne from thence; I must acknowledge it SIR, to be yours, and that none hath greater right, and title to itt: then yourselfe. Your Pietie hauing beene she cheife Patron, Pious Benefactor, powrefull Protector of this little, but highly deseruinge flocke. Take it therefore,
 and accept of it noble Patron. Continue your Patronage, Exercise your Charitie, Extend you Powre in comfortinge, assistinge, and pro∣tectinge these heauenly creatures. A worke most worthy, wlbeseeminge, and highly ad∣uantageous euen to the greatest Monarch of the world. For I dare promise you for itt, not only a Kingdome, and centuplum in this life; but an Eternall Kingdome of Glorie, and Crowne of high reward in the next. For your enioyinge of which They, and he shall euer Pray. Who is.
Most R: and Right Ho.
SIR.

