



Most Royal Sir,
YOUR Unparallel'd Magnanimity, and other Your most Eminent
Vertues and Excellencies, are so well known to the Christian World, as that Envy it self cannot obscure them.
And whatever English Man does, or shall hereaf∣ter, audaciously presume, to deny You his hearty  and Euge, is, and ever will be, unworthy, any lon∣ger to be an Inhabitant of Great Britain,
Whose present Peace and Prosperity (next unto Almighty God's Over-ru∣ling Providence, and unto Our most Gratious King's
Wise Conduct of Affairs) is Owing unto Your High∣ness's Matchless Valour and Prudence,
The which You have most signally demonstrated in Vanquishing the King's and the Nation's Enemies Abroad,
And in being highly in∣strumental in Suppressing them at Home:
So that, if Fabius Maxi∣mus Deserved the Thanks of the whole Roman-Senate, for his prudent Manage∣ment of their Republick Concerns,

Then, infinitely more, has Your Royal Highness Merited, not onely the Thanks of Our English Se∣nate, but over and above, even Statues and Shrines of Gold, Gratefully to be e∣rected, in perpetual Memo∣ry of Your most Glorious Atchievements.
But, Ah, ungratefull En∣gland! That, after Your most Illustrious Highness had Jeoparded Your Roy∣al Person in many despe∣rate and bloudy Battels, at Sea, and at Land, onely for the Honour and Wel∣fare
of this Your Native Country, whose Safety You oft times most Generously preferred before Your Own,
You should, at last, be so basely and so inhumanely requited,
As to have an Ʋnchri∣stian and Unnatural Bill of Exclusion from Your Un∣doubted Birth-Right, pass against You, through the Prevalency of the Anti-Protestant and Factious As∣sociatours, in the late House of Commons, who, (over∣powering the Loyal Party
in the said House) Voted, Sabbati 6. die Novembris 1680, and on Sabbati (a day, when, surely! those Fanatical Persons thought the Holy Jesus was again gone out of this World, down into the Grave as to his Body, and Descen∣ded into Hell as to his Soul, doing Penance there for Mankind,
And so, would not, on a Saturday, be present, upon Earth, to eye and behold their disloyal and disinge∣nuous Actions, and there∣fore, They became Ram∣pant,
and did what they pleased in spight of God and the King; And be∣ing a Majority, they Voted, Nemine Contradicente, Sab∣bati) 26 die Martii 1681.
Your Royal Highness's Exclusion from the Impe∣rial Crown of England and Ireland, &c.
Printed by the Order of Wi. Williams, Speaker.
A Vote, steep'd in so much Gall and Vinegar, and attended with so much Disloyalty and Ingratitude, As might justly have set
All Your Noble and Hero∣ick Passions on fire;
But, God be praised!
In imitation of the Cap∣tain of our Salvation,
You have perfectly Con∣quered Your self.
Which personal Victory, according to, not onely the Stoical, but also, Christian, Philosophy, is more Me∣morable, than All your o∣ther most Famous Conquests. And Caesar like, nay, rather Jesu like, You have forgot Nothing, but to be Re∣vengefull, upon Your in∣veterate Enemies.

Which is Your Immor∣tal Glory.
And one thing, I most humbly suggest to Your Princely and most Christian Consideration, as an unde∣niable Truth,
Scil. That Those Your Enemies, who have, or still do, endeavour Your Roy∣al Highness's Exclusion, (Contrary to the Divine and Natural Law of Your Birth-Right and Primoge∣niture) neither were, nor are, Protestants, nor any true Sons of the Church of
England as now established by Law,
But they were, and are, onely a Company of Per∣jured Pseudo-Protestants,
Who under the speci∣ous pretence of being Vo∣gued Protestants, did, and still do, carry on their Di∣abolical Faction and Trea∣sonable Association.
For, in England, onely He is a Protestant,Beaufrons, c. 1. who heartily believes, and as heartily protests for, and couragiously defends,
The King's Supremacy,

And who (Christian∣like) Cordially declares for the Succession of the King's Lawfull Heir according to Primogeniture, whether He be Papist or Protestant, whether Morally Good or Bad;
For, This is the con∣stant and professed Doc∣trine of the Apostolical-Protestant Church of Eng∣land,
As (I humbly conceive) is sufficiently proved in the following Treatise,
The which does truly blush to approach Your
Royal and most Illustrious Presence, in its mean Dress and Country Garb.
But, forasmuch as it is the lively Draught of a most Loyal Heart towards His Majesty, and of a most Faithfull and Devo∣ted one, towards Your Highness;
The Authour, therefore, most humbly begs Your Candid Acceptance of it;
Assuring Your High∣ness,
That, He has no other Ambition in Publishing the same, than, where he lives
to be instrumental in edu∣cating and instructing the People in the true Princi∣ples of Primitive Piety and Loyalty,
And, whilst He lives, be serviceable (according to his Capacity) unto God, the King, and the Church;
And to let the World know, that He is,

