


HOnoured Sister, I salute you in our Lord Iesus.
To this Relation follow∣ing touching your beloued Daughter, [the most whereof your selfe, and a good part whereof, your Sonne, (by a speciall Prouidence of God, bringing him from Oxford hither, at that time of love,) haue been both Eye-and Ear-witnesses,] as you haue the neerest interest of any: so it cannot but be accepta∣ble to you, to retain such a Monument of the Ex∣ceeding Riches of GODS GRACE manifested to her, and uttered by her; that untill April 6. for foure yeares together, had been so deeply afflicted in Spirit, tossed with Tempest, and not comforted. Where∣by both your selfe, and all your Christian friends in London, Daintrie, in and about Shrewsbury, and elsewhere, that haue known your Sisters sad condition; and haue prayed and mourned for her; now that God hath restored comforts to her, and to her mour∣ners, (Isa. 57, 18.) they may the more be stird up to praise and magnifie the Name of the God of Par∣done,

the God that heareth Prayer. And if the Lord please to moove in the reading hereof, it may administer some door of hope, to some other poore soules, that are in as sad a condition, in as wofull and dolefull a plight, as your Daughter lately was in, and had so continued, especially since shee was about eleven or twelve yeares of age, till now of late, that shee is towards sixteen, as you more fully know. I doe acknowledge the LORDS good∣nesse, and blesse his holy Name for his gracious dispen∣sation towards me, that by means of Mris Sarah Jones (then of Lambeth) he brought me to sympathize with you, when (about ten or eleven yeeres agoe) your soule was (as it had been for some yeares together,) in sad despair: and that soon after he refreshed me with the refreshings that he gave in to your soule. And that hereby the most wise God, made such way for acquain∣ting me so fully also, first with your beloved Daughter Sarah her sorrowfull, and then with her so joyfull estate: and that gave me so many opportunities of be∣ing frequently with her, that I also with your selfe, might be a witnesse of both; and might be an instru∣ment of Publishing to the world, THE EXCEED∣ING RICHES OF HIS GRACE, EXALTED towards her; and by her to many sad despairing soules, and to others: So as I hope the Lord will make it in∣strumentall for the great refreshing of many poor, sin∣full, sorrowfull, weary soules; that thus may be parta∣kers of the same.
When some shall heare that when your Daughter was struck both Deafe and Blind, and so could neither

heare the Word, nor read it; that then should be the time of love. And when they shall read such unfold∣ings of Gospel-Mysteries by a childe, newly comfor∣ted, before shee could heare any Creature speak to her; (pag. 16.) such descantings on severall choice Scrip∣tures, discovering the Gospels pith and marrow, that was folded up therein: so amplifying them by illustra∣tions, and making such application: some will be rea∣dy to reject all, as incredible: some will gaze on you, or say; Blessed is the womb that bare such a childe; insteed of exalting God alone. Then have you need to re∣member what answer Jesus Christ gave to such an ex∣pression, (Luk. 11. 27, 28.) and what he said, Re∣joyce not in this,—but rather rejoyce that your Name is written in Heaven. When some shall reade, how her eyes and eares were opened, first for a time, when was greatest need, and shut againe for a season; and how when in humane reason, shee was unlike to live two dayes more: that then, and not till then the Lord should raise her up by Faith, to EÀTE and ARISE; and then to WALK, (pag. 133-138-141.) they will wonder. And some will come, or send to you, to your son, and to your daughter, to enquire about it; as some came to Hezekijah, to enquire of that won∣der, that was occasioned by him, (2 Chron. 32. 24-31.) The lifting up of his heart thereupon, and his not rendring according to the benefit done unto him: [which you heard sweetly opened and applied, on the day of Thankesgiving, for your daughters resto∣ring; pag. 144.] and his humbling himselfe for that

lifting up of his heart; are all writ for our instructi∣on and benefit: as also Herods taking Glory to him∣selfe, Act. 12.22, 23. and Christs warning against this, Joh. 5.44. All this shewing what we are subject unto; and what cause there is to look up to Jesus Christ our strength, our all in all; that he would not leave us to our selves; but make us like himselfe, humble, (Phil. 2.3-9.) and like his Apostles, that rent their garments when they were admired; and led such out to the alone exalting of the God of Heaven himselfe in his Son, (Act. 14. 14. Act. 3. 12, 13.) Who shortly will bring down every high thing, and he alone will be exalted in the Earth: When great voices shall say, THE KINGDOMES OF THIS WORLD, ARE BECOME OUR LORDS, AND HIS CHRISTS; AND HE SHALL REIGNE TO THE AGES OF AGES, Rev. 11. 13-15. Even so, Come Lord Jesus; Amen. The joy hereof fre∣quently refresheth with the refreshings of God:
London (Postscript. Moonths according to Holy Scrip∣tures, begin at New Moons, (Phasis, or first appear∣ing time,) Num. 10. 10 Num. 28. 11. Greek: Psal. 81. 3. Heb. (cal'd Moonths, from Moons. Thus in this yeare 1648. the first Moonth Nisan (Ester 3.7.) be∣gins March 14. vulgar: 2d Moonth Ziu, (1 King. 6. 1.) begins April 13th: 3d Moonth Sivan (Ester 8. 2.) began May 12. &c. The rest, (with their sig∣nifications, &c.) being published in the Scripture-Almanack; the Relator thinking to make use of, with the Vulgar Kalendar, in the ensuing Relation; was led as yet to forbear it, till thereby people be furthered to understand the Scripture Language therein; least he might seem to many Readers, a Barbarian, 1 Cor. 14. 9. 11. 2d Moonth Ziu, 2d day. Vulg. April 27. Revised AEthanim 3. Vulg. Septemb. 21. 1647.
Your fellow-servant and Brother, having & hold∣ing the witnes of Iesus;HENRIE JESSE, aliàs HENRIE JACIE.
MAy 24. 1647. Mris SARAH WIGHT, being then still very weak in body, (and keeping bed since April 6.) said thus to the Relator: I would others might heare how graciously the Lord hath dealt with me, the chiefest of sin∣ners, that none might DESPAIR and murmure, as I have done: Though I murmured as they in the Wildernes, as much as those that sell, yet he hath brought me into the land of Canaan: and hath brought Legion to her right mind, and set her at his feet. I was strongly perswaded that what I did eat or drink, it was as the unworthy eating the Sacra∣ment, I stil did cat and drink my own damnation: every thing I did, or saw, was terror to me. So it remained, and might have remain'd for ever, had not his loving kindnes preven∣ted me, and drawn me to himselfe.
O that all creatures, reasonable and unreasonable, might praise the Name of the Lord | And I would others might heare of this, that none might PRESUME: For if they knew the terrors that I have felt, the terrors of Hell, for sinning against light, against God, and against a Parent, for murmur∣ing, lying, revolting; (judging I had committed that im∣pardonable sin,) if they knew what it is to have God hide his face, and be as an enemy, they would not presume.
