


May it please your Lordship,
KIng David (that holy man, great
Prophet, and good Magistrate)
longed for, and accepted of a
Bottle of Water from his three
Worthies, drawn out of the Well at the Gate
of Bethlehem, which was then the Quar∣ters
of the Philistines his enemies, though
he drank it not, but poured it forth before
the Lord as an offering, to quench the thirst
of his droughty Army; I hope, my Lord,
his Exam I may (in some part) be an in∣centive
to your Lordship to accept of this
small Tract presented unto you by one Un∣worthy,
though you read it not, which was
by him collected during his sad Restraint
and Captivity within the stone walls and

iron grates of a Prison, the pleasant Ter∣ritories
of a Goaler, but the Charnel-house
to hide men ruinated by their dislocated
and broken fortunes.
It would (my Lord) be an act worthy your
Honors owning, to inspect a little into the
premises hereafter mentioned; And I be∣seech
you, my Lord, disdain them not for
the indigency of the style (for he that wrote
them wants Learning) but mind them for
the Truths therein contained.
If your Honor thinks that a living Dog
is better then a dead Lyon, then let Com∣passion
move your Lordship (as God hath
now planted you in Authority) to look upon
the dying condition of living men in a
Prison.
Your Lordship (perhaps) may be infor∣med
by the Goaler, that persons under the
power of his Key want not for subsistence:
I do affirm (my Lord) that such an asser∣tion
is a notorious falshood; and, that if it
lay in his power, the Prisoners of Ludgate
would be of all prisoners the most miserable.
My Lord, it would adde Excellency to
your Worth, and Eternity to your Memory,
would you but according to your Honors

power and wisdom, endeavor the finding
out where those noble and great Legacies
are buried, and in whose hands they died,
which formerly belonged to that Prison,
Generations yet to come would finde reason
to engrave your Action in Golden Cha∣racters.
When your Lordship views the Revenues
of the Keeper to arise from nothing to six
or seven hundred pounds per annum, it
will amaze you; but if your Lordship con∣siders,
that two Turnkeys and a Butler do
likewise raise their aunuities to 2 or 300 l.
a man, and that it is harassed out of the
decaying Estates of poor men, I hope then
it will be beyond your admiration.
My Lord, frequent Visitations of Pri∣sons,
by just and worthy Persons authori∣zed
to Examine Abuses therein, would
(I humbly conceive) stop the torrent of their
Avarice and Opprssions: Their Extor∣tions
being indeed the real cause why men
are forced rather to Compound than pay
their just Debts.
Two things I humbly crave of your
Lordship, Pardon and Protection: Par∣don
for my boldness in presenting so mean

and frivolous a thing to so noble a Magi∣strate:
Protection, because I have nei∣ther
Rhetorique nor Eloquence to de∣fend
my self against the Adversaries ma∣lice.
Truth and your Lordship must be
herein both my Shield and Buckler.
Your Honors greater thoughts shall be no
longer detain'd by reading of the meer
Entities of
My Lord,

Ludgate Chappel,
Nov. 7. 1659.
