



Worthy Doctor, and loving Friend,
I Am one of those many that honour both your Person and Profession: Not because I have a weak body, and so often stand in need of your healing and

saving hands; for that were to love my self, not you: but because I find in all ages, as well as in this, that Physitians have been men of most rare parts and eminent learning, There are but few of your Col∣ledge but are known to me by their Merit or Courtesie; I ne∣ver come out of their company, but I feel my self better both in health and knowledge; and I do not think that any Age can boast of so many Monsters of wit and learning (for Vertue hath its Monsters as well as Vice) as there is now among you. And truly, if there be no better encouragement made for the study of Divinity, the

Learning of this Nation will lie in your hands, as doth now the welfare, and ye will be Pa∣trons of both.
But then, as your Professi∣on is eminent, so are you in your Profession. I will not say, more then others, for those Comparative expressions (be∣sides their uncharitablenesse and incivility) are poor Com∣mendations; and, I think, do rather debase then exalt the credit of a friend. For it seems to me to imply, that a man hath not merit enough in himself to make him high in the esteem of the world, unless we set him upon the head of another.

Non tali auxilio—
I shall not need such helps in my addresses to your self; for you may stand upon the high Mountain of your own worth and merit, and without setting your foot upon another, make your self visible and known unto the whole world▪ Besides those rare things in Nature, you have discover'd to us ma∣ny secrets and occult qualities, which former Philosophy could not teach us; and are so well acquainted with the Body of man, that you can un-pin the whole frame, take it in pieces, as a man doth his Watch, set

it together again, and make it go better. I do not mean bet∣ter then it was created; but since it hath been debauched and disordered by several ma∣ladies and obstructions. Be∣sides the excellent and happy knowledge you have in Phy∣sick, you are eminent in Ma∣thematical Philosophy; you have read over the whole Vo∣lume of Heaven, and are per∣fectly acquainted with their motions, influences, stars and Intelligences, as if you had been bred above in that Vni∣versity. Neither doth this precious Iewel of knowledge dwell in a Caskanet of an ill

Nature, for that would take much off its lustre and bright∣ness; but in a sweet dispositi∣on, as our famous Oughtred saies of you, suavissimis mori∣bus, ingenio perspicacissimo.
From this fountain run so many hasty and full streams of love and kindness to all your friends and acquaintance: And to this your good Nature do I impute the earnest desire you have had to hear me often discourse of my dangers and disasters at Sea; not that you take delight in my sufferings, but rejoice in my deliverance. You have violently importun'd me many years, to write the

sad Story of my shipwrack; which I thought I should ne∣ver be brought to, [For per∣sonal things ought to be concealed.] But there is such Magick in the love of a friend, that I can sooner deny my self then him. And therefore I shall give you in these few lines a brief and hasty relation of my Second Voyage toward the East. But if this sad story make you Sea-sick, (for good men are not well when they hear the evils and misfor∣tunes of others) you may thank your self. For the fault is not in my sufferings, but in your Virtue and tender∣ness;

and you are to blame your own Commands, not my love in the performance.

