



HONOURED SIR,
TO make a trivial Apology for
publishing the following
Sermons, would be as idle,
as themselves in this scrib∣ling
age to some may seem
superfluous. Those usual
reasons of friends intreaties, and desired Copies
might be as justly alleadged by me, as they are
commonly by others; but these cannot so far
prevail, as your commands, no longer now to
be disputed, much less denied.
Sir, Your word carries Authority with it not

onely ad praelium, sed ad praelum, in sub∣mission
to which (though I exchange charita∣ble
ears for critical eyes) I rather choose to
expose my self to the censure of others, then be∣come
guilty of any disrespects to your self.
And though the meanness of these discourses
may a little impeach the judgement of you the
Approver,Mihi nunquā placuit cuiquā illustri viro, & tantâ, quan∣tâ es ipse sub∣limitate con∣spicuo, prae∣sertim non ociosâ digni∣tate jam fru∣enti, sed ad∣huc publicis negotiis, eis∣dém{que} milita∣ribus occupa∣to, aliquid meorum opus∣culorum le∣gendum im∣pingere, &c. S. Aug. de nup. & concupis. ad Valerium, l. 1. c. 2. and not a little shew the inabilities
of me the Composer, yet they presume to present
themselves, being not onely ennobled by your
repeated commands, but emboldned by your
readiness to receive them into that Patronage
and protection, they cannot more confidently
implore, or better expect then from your self,
who have lately so eminently appeared, and still
make it your business to dethrone those Epide∣mical
and reigning sins they decry, and to up∣hold
the forsaken Justice they plead for and
maintain. Whilst others enjoy their places for
private advantage, you freely conferring your
Offices, make use of yours for the Common
good, in laying down whereof, you may avow
as Nerva (in a case not much unlike) did,
se nihil fecisse, quò minùs possit, impe∣rio

deposito, privatus tutò vivere, with
so much integrity have you demeaned your
self in your place, holding on (like a
Cato or Fabricius) in the course of Justice,
notwithstanding all the difficulties did oc∣curre.
Macte ergò sis virtute tuâ, praestan∣tissime
Philippe, never to find what ano∣ther
good Philip of the last Age, to his great
griefOld Adam too hard for young Melan∣cthon. did, any thing too hard for you, but
continue so prosperous a Patriot in your
countrey, that noTwo night∣sprung mush∣rums that sucked the earths fatness from far bet∣ter plants than themselves, growing up in Hen. the 7th time, and cut down by Hen. the 8th. Speed, p. 762, 766. Empson or Dudley may
be able to stand before you, and that by the
faithfull discharge of those great Trusts reposed
in you, you may if possibly exceed the renown
of your nobleSr Philip, and Sr Francis, Grand-father, and Father, & the present Sr Philip, all se∣questred Knights in one house at the same time. Ancestours.
And as from his late Majesty of glorious
memory, you had theKnighted at Newcastle for eminent ser∣vice done a∣gainst the Scots, 1644. sword of Honour, as an
Ensign or Trophy of your valour,Togâ Acae∣micâ relictâ Miles evasit. early bran∣dished
over your undaunted head, so have you
by his present Majesty this addition, viz.Philippus ex utroque,
both swords Civil and Military, put into
your hands, as a farther marke of his Royal
Grace and Favour, for your former Loyalty,
and signal Services.

And though you may now with—Vejanius armis Herculis ad postem fixis latet abditus àgro. Horat. Vejanius,
justly hang up your armour, and betake your
self to rest, Tanquam miles emeritus, yet
to the joy of your Countrey, are you still employ∣ed
to serve your King and them, doing wor∣thily
in Ephratah, and being famous in
Bethlehem.
Sir, to enumerate particulars were more fit
for a Volume than an Epistle, yet should my
pages swell in that kind, I need not fear the im∣putation
of the Delphick Oracle, in the case
of your name-sake of Macedon, niìs
, for all is so well known in your
own County, the very mention of your Name
is enough to bring them to remembrance; a∣mongst
which the grand and publick affair (fit
onely for so publick a spirit as your own) now
in hand deserves not the least commendation.
Be not dismayed,Exo. 32. 20. Great Sr, if a Golden
Calf be not so soon broken, or burned, as once
it was. New upstart Idols (as our Henry the
seventh upon anotherOn Perkin Warbeck (who following the steps of Lam∣bert Symnel) was another cheat, that then also abu∣sed the peo∣ple. occasion said) were al∣ways
God Almightie's vexation; and so are
they his people's too: but yet when zeal and

power unite against them, they cannot long be
idolized.Ld Verul. in vit. Hen. 7. A Golden Eagle was once observed
to fall down at the approach of a Noble Phi∣lip,
and still Magna est veritas, & praeva∣lebit:
which that it speedily may, I with the
joynt suffrages of innumerable more (both in∣jured
and others) of our Countrey men, do
congratulate its valorous Champion,. Ignat. Epist. ad Polyc. and cor∣dially
wish an event proportionable to the me∣rits
of your Cause, and an issue as successfull
as your designs are just and honourable: so
prays he whose ambition is to be
Sir 
Sid. Suss. Coll. Camb. Octob. 20. 1670.
