



Men, Brethren, and Fathers;
I Presume with all Humility, to offer this small Discourse, ra∣ther to You, than to any other Patrons; because being levell'd against the Church of Rome, the implacable and mortal Enemy of the Protestant Religion, it is a Service to You in the first place; and therefore has an immediate right to Your Acceptance and Encouragement. The Protestant Cause against Popery, is a very

Good One in it self; but besides, You have so ma∣ny, and so strong Engagements to it, that when∣ever a Defence of it is recommended to Your Patro∣nage, it comes to its Own, and therefore I hope will be received by You. It is a great part of the Doctrine of the Church of England, to say, that we are not Papists; and very many of the thirty nine Articles are wholly spent in condemning and renouncing Artic. 14. the Arrogant and Impious Do∣ctrines; Artic. 22. The fond, and vain, and un∣warrantable Inventions; Artic. 31. The blasphe∣mous Fables, and dangerous Deceits of that False Religion. I have endeavoured to justify that Doctrine of our Church, by giving some further Reasons, why we are not Papists; and by shew∣ing, that we can never be made Papists, but by putting out the Eyes of the Nation.
My Design both in the preaching this Sermon heretofore, and in publishing it now, was partly, to prevent, as far as in me lay, the Ruine and Destruction of those many millions of Souls which are now your Charge; and will certainly perish, if ever they come under the Conduct of the blind Romish Guides: And partly, to free my self from the Blood of our miserable Posterity, which will undoubtedly be required of this Generation, if Po∣pery return again in our Days, after it has been so long cast out.

Popery is the worst Religion, or pretended Re∣ligion, in the whole World; for she puts out the Un∣derstandings of those of her own Communion, and tears out the Hearts of all others: whom she can∣not deceive, she will destroy. Upon which account she is the Common Enemy of Mankind, and of us in particular, whom she has threatned with utter Extirpation, and has given it us under the Hand of her Secretary Coleman. Now I can as soon believe Transubstantiation to be true, as believe that we are bound to encourage and assist her in∣tended Cruelty against us, by meeting it half-way, and by vowing our selves Sacrifices to it. On the other hand; Unless we use our best Endeavours, both against Popery, and all those treacherous In∣lets which make a way for it, we do but mock God when we pray against it; and particularly, when we say that excellent Prayer against the Popes of Rome, which our own Church has put into our Mouths.
The Lord of heaven and Earth The 2d Part of the Sermon for Whit sunday, p. 286. defend us from their Tyranny and pride, that they never enter into his Wineyard again, to the disturbance of his silly poor Flock: but that they may be utterly confounded and put to

flight in all Parts of the World: and he of his great Mercy so work in all Mens hearts, by the mighty Power of the holy Ghost, that the comfor∣table Gospel of his Son CHRIST may be truly preached, truly recei∣bed, and truly followed in all places, to the beating down of Sin, Death, the Pope, the Devil, and all the King∣dom of Antichrist, that like scattered and dispersed Sheep, being at length gathered into one fold, we may in the end rest altogether in the Bosom of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, there to be partakers of Eternal and Eher∣lasting Life, through the Derits and Death of Jesus Christ our Saviour.
Amen.
