


Noble Sirs,
THere is no Argument in Divinitie, wherein every Soul that earnestly
seeks Salvation (or the avoidance of damnation,) ought in reason, to
be more desirous of satisfaction, than in the point of of Eternal Ele∣ction,
and Reprobation. Nor are Scholastick disputes concerning
these Points in themselves so dangerous, as they are made by such as
are more apt to abett Contentions sett on foot, than able rightly to ex∣amine,
whence the quarrel first began, upon what termes it stands, or
how it may fitly be composed. In searching out the true sense and meaning of whatsoever
it hath pleased God to reveal, there can be no offence: in the manner of the search we often of∣fend.
Diligence and accurate pains are alwaies commendable, as in every other Subject, so
in this, wherein Curiositie is only dangerous: Howbeit wheresoever Curiositie of search is
dangerous, peremptorie Resolutions (whether negative or affirmative) must needs be pernici∣ous,
seeing suspension of Assent in difficult or controversed Cases, is a propertie no less Essenti∣al
to true Faith, than firm adherence to divine truth known and acknowledged. And if the
blame were bestowed, in that proportion it hath been deserved, amongst the several Commenta∣tors
upon the Scriptures prefixed to these discussions: the heaviest burden would lye, not upon
such as make new Queries, but upon such as have taken upon them to give absolute Determi∣nations
without accurate search of the Apostles meaning: preposterously seeking to compre∣hend
what they should admire, and endeavouring to stirre up affected admiration of that
which every Novice might fully comprehend, were their Resolutions in this Argument as
Orthodoxal, as they are peremptorie.
The end of these present Queries is to find out a middle way how to maintain some principal
Conclusions of Reformed Churches (specially concerning the Servitude of mans Will; the
Nullitie of merits or of Works foreseen, and the Irresistible efficacie of saving Grace:) with∣out
association of those Rigid Premisses which latter ages have invented for their maintenance,
as Astronomers of old did Epicycles, and Copernicus of late the motion of the Earth for
salving their Coelestial Phaenomena. To pick quarrels with Antecedents of good use,
whereas the fault lies only in the Inference, is a fault too common to Controversie-writers in
every age. And thus to spight an erroneous Conclusion, the foundations of many useful
truths are often overthrown, and new false Principles brought in their place, which will bring
forth dangerous errors by faultlesse Consequences.
I have often been enforced to season my retired thoughts with sighs or tears, whiles I beheld the
factious oppositions of forraign Reformed Churches abetted, animated, and propagated by men
whom God had placed as Bystanders or unpartial Vmpires; and blessed with all opportunities
of making peace amongst others, so they themselves had been the sons of peace. The parties here
meant were English Divines, men freed by Gods especial providence from all vicinitie of pub∣lique
adversary or such politick provocations as their forraign brethren were often misled with.
Some, or rather a great many, of no mean note have held it as a matter of conscience, and af∣fected
it as a choice fruit of zeal, to presse those Rigid Opinions upon their Auditors which
the first Authors of them would never have conceived or quickly would have abandoned if
they could with safe conscience have subscribed unto the English Leitourgie. And in very

truth this peculiar Symptom of the crazed and ill-tempered Presbyterie (I mean zealous ad∣herents
to Rigid Tenents of Reprobation) hath been been an especial motive to withdraw
manie hands and pens from subscription to our Common Prayer-book or book of Homilies.
It was a subject of much sadder contemplation to see (as who sees not that hath not resolved
to wink at the soloecisms of his good friends?) manie Divines, well fitted and engaged for bet∣ter
imployments, become anxious sollicitors for the admission or rather intrusion of that very er∣ror
into Reformed Churches, whose extirpation in the Synogogue, the prevention of whose propo∣gation
throughout the Churches of the Gentiles by him planted, was a great part of his labours
who in sacred labours, was more plentiful than any, than all his fellow Apostles.
The attempt for this intrusion found no such furtherance from the pretended Title of Anci∣ent
Orthodoxal Truth as from present opposition to modern errors; As if the parties of whom
I speak, had held it an Aphorism of sacred Policie, to entertain any Heathenish, Jewish or
Turkish Fugitives, able to do service against the Lutheran. That sundrie Writers of grea∣ter
note and name than here to be named by me, have (out of opposition to the Lutheran) given
more suspition of concurrence with the Stoick, the Modern Turk, or Jews that lived in our A∣postles
time, than the Lutheran doth of any concurrence with the Papist or other Heretick
whatsoever: I shall be able to inform him that will friendlie and privately debate this seeming
Paradox with me, whether by writing or by word of mouth. But, as the world now is set,
openly and publickly to confront a countenanced error, would breed greater dissention between
brethren in profession and affection, then the unseasonable publication of truth, (specially by so
mean a messenger of truth as my self) could recompence:
Dum furor in cursu est currenti cede furori.
It is one thing to give the way unto such fierce oppositions as daily meet us, and another to
be carryed headlong with them or to sollow them, as their Patrons too often follow Princes
Courts, that is, as we say, afarre off.
Whilst I was an Artist I liked the Old Prescript well [Loquendum cum multis, Philo∣sophandum
cum paucis.] The medicine a little corrected, is not much amisse in Divini∣tie.
[Theologizandum cum paucis, non loquendum contra multos] unless it be unto
some few, and those no parts of the multitude or Vulgar sort, either for judgment or affection.
Amongst my choisest acquaintance and most respected friends, I had no choice left, in Com∣petition
with your selves, to whom in all congruitie, I rather ought, or more safely might com∣municate,
what I conceive of this or other like points of Divinitie more necessary to be enquired
into by such as are intelligently ingenious, than expedient to be published or communicated
without distinction of Times and Persons. For of my choicest meditations heretofore, either
published or privately perused, I have ever liked the impression much better, whilest I lookt
upon it in your disposition and conversation, than whilest I read it in mine own papers, or from
the Press. Vos estis Epistola mea: of all my labours in the Ministerie I have reapt no com∣fort
like to this: That it hath pleased God to use me sometimes as a Waterer of those precious
seeds unto which he himself hath given plentiful encrease: and to with-hold any thing, that
my conscience tels me may yeild wholesome nourishment, (though but rudely and homely dres∣sed
(as this small Present is) unto those sacred Plants which the right hand of our heavenly
Father hath planted in your brests, were to robb my self of my chiefest joy. Thus I have ad∣ventured
in a Case (as it is commonly apprehended) of great danger to be your Taster, being
more willing (as I know you are perswaded of me) to drink the deadliest bodily poison that
could be ministred unto me, than willingly to infect your souls with any poysonous doctrine.
Howbeit I profer not these brief Receipts as Mountebanks do their druggs, or Tradesmen
their waves upon Oath or confident Asseverations, but rather referr them to the farther
trial of your less partial more judicious tast, faithfully promising on my part all readiness to
recall, amend, or alter, whatsoever upon better examination shall be found amisse; whether in
the Matter, the Method or Manner of speech.
And upon these Termes I interest you by these presents in other Treatises of this Argument,
all which I have purposely consecrated as a Memorial Pledge of those Kind References
which heretofore have been betwixt us, of that respect which I will ever bear unto your persons;
and of the honour due (from me especially) to your virtues. VALETE.
From my Studie in
Corpus-Christ Colledge,
Jan. 1. 1619.

