


The case is.
THat Right once so known ought to be so continued and maintained to the Right heir by the supream magistrate, who is the Immediat vice-gerent of God the Father, Protector of Right and truth, and hater of deceipts, and falsities, nay is all and always himself nothing but Truth, Right, Justice, Love, Mercy, and Equity, un∣changeable, everlasting, whose vice-Royes therefore ought not to carrry his sword in vain, but defend Right, and cut off wrong at all times, all opposers and oppositions
to the contrary notwithstanding: And to restore and Revive right, if suppressed or mortified by any force or fraud: how or how long soever any false laws, made by false Lawyers, contrary to the laws of God and Nature, and to the great Charter of England notwithstand∣ing, proved by principles of Divi∣nity, maxims of Law, And axioms of Philosophy as followeth.
 God is almighty Gen.
17.1. yet cannot lie Heb. 6.18. Lawyers can bend their tongue like a bow to speak lyes Jer. 39.5. (In every court at
Westminster nothing more com∣mon, especially Chancery) They have made their statutes of cham∣pertite to deter all men but them∣selves to take any part of poor mens Rights, to recover the rest from their oppressors, that forciblie and fraudulently detain all from them: their statutes of Fines and Recove∣ries to Establish the Right of the oppressed in the oppressor, their statute of Limitation to continue that wrong for ever, that cannot be righted within such a time as to their gain by both parties: They spin out with delayes in Law, andmake the right that it can be but Remediless by their Law for ever. Their Statutes to imprison men for debt, and make all banckrupts to inrich themselves, and many more, which I shall not here speak of in particular, but wish them for all their Inventions in general, to hear the word of the Lord, saying, ye scornful men that Rule his people, because ye have said we have made a Covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement. When all the over-flowing scourge shall pass through, It shall not come unto us, for we have made lies our Refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves; Isa: 28.15. Therefore thus saith the Lord, I lay in
Zion, for a foundation, a stone &c. Judge∣ment also will I lay to the line, and Righteousness to the plummer, and the hail shall sweep away the Re∣fuge of lies &c. And your Covenant with death shall be disanulled &c. When the over-flowing scourge shall Pass through, then ye shall be troden down by it
vers. 16.17.18.
 God is everlasting
Deut. 33.27. Immutable in his promise and divine Counsel
Heb. 6.18. his truth endureth to all generations
Psal. 100.5.117.2.146.6. But the Vi∣perous generation of Lawyers con∣fine and limit it by their Statutes, that it shall by their consents in∣dure no longer, nor reach further than they please. The lip of truth shall be established for ever. Prov. 12.16. But Lawyers lips and la∣bour run counter. Buy the truth and sell it not Prov. 23.23. But Lawyers sell the Law which in it self is truth, and buy false titles. And purchase to themselves great Reve∣news without Right Psal.
19.8.
 God is a god of truth
Psal. 31.5. Isa. 65.16. Jer. 10.16. 2.
Cor. 1.18. And Commandeth his children not to lie one to another,
Levit 19.11. Col. 3.9. And a Righteous man hateth lying
Prov. 33.5. The devil is the father of lies and liers Jo.
8.44. He that speaketh lies shall not escape Prov. 19.5. but shall perish: vers. 9. If a Ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked: Prov 29.12. our Lawyers love lying and make their livings thereof. Whose sons and servants they be, I leave to the Judgement of God and his Saints.
God is a God of peace, yea even the everlasting Father and Prince of peace, of the Increase of his go∣vernment and peace, there shall be no end, upon the throne of Da∣vid and upon his kingdom to or∣der it and to establish it with Judgement, and with Justice, from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hoasts will perform this Isa. 9.6.7. Now my Lord Ge∣neral, and all you valiant and in∣comparable Commanders, officers & souldiers of the hoast of God, rais∣ed and continued by Gods provi∣dence for the Reformation, as well as preservation of this our English, Israel, digest these promises of the Lord of hoasts into your hearts, Act them with your hands, confide in his zeal who telleth you he will perform, & sear not the vain threats of Babling lying Lawyers, who out of the confusion which they find in their Consciences, since they are uncased of their Canting pedlers french, have lately and frequently menaced you behind your backs, that if you should offer to ungown them, they would unsword you: yet perswade you to your faces that their said Statutes and the like were by their predecessours de∣vised, and are by them maintained for preservation of peace. Consi∣der what peace it is that establish∣eth wrong insteed of Right de∣ceipt & falsehood insteed of Truth and Righteousness. Is it a peace for any but themselves and their Adherents, to withhold heir wrongfull possessions from the Right heirs and owners. Doth not the Lord tell you and them, there is no peace to the wicked?
Isa. 48.22. And Moses forbid you to seek their peace,
Deut. 23.6. Have not you a further promise of God which concerneth not them, saying, the Lord will bless his people with peace
Psal. 29.11. Not Scribes and Pharises, the chief Lawyers in Christs time, who denounced eight woes against them. Matth. 27.
Luke. 11. And not such peace as can be separated from Righteous∣ness, for saith the Royal Prophet, Righteousness and peace have kis∣sed each other Psal. 85.10. Believe them nor therefore that have heal∣ed the daughter of my people slightly, saying peace, peace, whenthere is no peace. Were they a∣shamed when they committed ab¦homination, nay they were not a all ashamed, neither could they blush, Therefore they shall fall a∣mongst them, that fall at the time that I visit them. They shall be cast down saith the Lord
Jer. 6.14.15.
 God is a God of Love, and com∣mandeth each child of his, thou shalt love thy neighbours as thy self,
Levit 19.18. Matth. 5.43. Mark. 12.31. were Lawyers Gods children, and loved their neigh∣bours as themselves, how could they cheat them as they do, and possess themselves and their brood by force, fraud and deceipt of all they can of their neighbours rights, and by such means make them∣selves so potent and numerous a generation, as they are in this land. Yet if thou shalt say in thy heart These nations are more than I, how can I dispossess them. Thou shalt not be affraid of them: But shalt well remember what the Lord thy God did to Pharaoh, and unto all Aegypt Jer. 7.14.15. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, and keep his charge and his Statutes, andhis Judgements and his Comman∣dements always. And know you this day, for I speak not with you children, that have not known and which have not seen the Chastise∣ments of the Lord your God, his mighty hand and stretched-out Arm, and his miracles
&c. Deut 11.1.2.3. Oh love ye the Lord all his Saints, because he hath set his love upon you. Therefore will he deli∣ver you Psal
91.14. But favour no oppressour, and know that in a ma∣gistrate to spare them is to help them: Which who doth, let him hear what the Son of a Prophet asks such a magistrate, and Answers himself. Shouldst thou help the un∣godly, and love them that hate the Lord: Therefore is a wrath upon thee from before the Lord 2. Chron. 19.2. And learn of a Prophet these ensuing Characters of the ungodly. Who hate the good and love the evil, who pluck their skins from off them, and their flesh from their bones, and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as flesh within the Cauldron (who when they shall be visited) Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hearthem, he will even hide his face from them at that time as they have behaved themselves in their do∣ings, Thus saith the Lord concern∣ing the Prophets that make (his) people err, that bite with their teeth and cry Peace Micah 3.2.3.4.5. More principles of divinity could I alleadge for this purpose, might I think these Joyned with all our experiences should not suffice to describe our
Westminster Lawyers, in their own kinds and colours, but believieng thus much will serve for this time, I shall apply my self to the Maxims of the Law of England, which I find conducing to the same end as followeth.
 First Right cannot dye saith
Lit∣tleton, Sect 479. And Cook upon the place fol
279. Yea, although the disseised should Release his Right to the disseisee, or turn Te∣nant, It is inconvenient that the Right should dye, but live Recove∣rable in and to his heir. Which if true (as all Maxims are or ought to be) How can our Recent and pre∣sent Judges and Lawyers, that mur∣ther this everlasting Right with their Statutes of Fines, Limitations,
&c. maintain their predecessors Inventions against the Law of God, the great Charter, and this Maxim, without appearing manifest sub∣verters of the Law of England, which Doctor & Student affirmeth, and the mirrour of Justice proveth punctually by Analysis. And these men themselves sometimes bragg of to be derived from, and grounded upon the Laws of God, and nature, According to the Advise of Eleu∣therius the 3. to King Lucius recor∣ded by Mr
Fox & others, and con∣sequently Traitors to the Law and Common-wealth, whose estates Re∣al and Personal ought to be con∣fiscated to the use of the Common-wealth, from which they filched them (as I have proved to be their own censures in my treatise called Judges judged out of their own mouths) And their costly Carrion Carcases, fit to be hanged as 44. of their predecessors were in one year in King
Alfreds time, as witness the mirrour page 239.240.241.242.243.
&c.
 Secondly it is a Maxim of
Plou∣den in his Commentaries upon the Law of England, Resolved in the Earl of Lesters Case. That all hu∣mane Laws made contrary, or not consentaneous to the Laws of God and nature, although by Acts of Parliament, are void, and need no Repeal to vacate them: Which if true, how can our filicers maintain their blasphemous Rea∣sons Printed, and published under their hands, and Continue their extortions. And how can the Judges and pleaders of the Law, Countenance or suffer them and their prothonotaries, and the Rest of their ministers, to continue their said extortions, and increase them more than ever before? And do the same themselves without in∣curring the penalties aforesaid.
 Thirdly it is a positive Maxim of Law declared in the great Charter cap 29. That no freeman of
England shall be disseised of his Inheritance or birth-right, without the Judge∣ment of his peeres and vicine neigh∣bours. Which if so, how can any disseisor disseise or dispossess any freeman of
England of his inheri∣tance or birth-right by force or fraud? Or how can any Judge or pleader of the Law countenance, ormaitain, or suffer such disseises unrestored by them to the right heirs without incurring like penal∣ties as aforesaid.
 Fourthly it is another Maxime declared in the said Charter cap. 11. and approved by the mirrour page. 234. That no Common Pleas shall follow the upper bench (which if true) how can the Judges of the upper bench by Law Commit men for debt, which is a Common Plea? That hath no Relation to fellony, trespass upon the case, trespass vi et armis, or any trespass at all, to their marshallsey, or any bayliff ar∣rest them, or any Gaylor Receive & detain them, upon bills of Mid∣dlesex, and Latitates (which ex∣presly run for Trespass) and fa∣mish them to death (an Incom∣parable false Imprisonment and murther) in the name of Law and Custom because long practised, not onely without any colour of Law, but expresly against it without in∣curring like penalty as aforesaid.
 Fifthly it is a chief Maxim of the Law of England, that the Law it self is and ought to be the onely Right, full, and sufficient, Rule ofall Judges and Lawyers, by which they ought to be ruled, and not offer or presume to over-rule their Rule, which if they could but right∣ly understand (saith
Cook upon Magna Charta) would never suffer them to err; had Baron Tomlius un∣derstood this Rule, he had not tumbled himself upon his tellclock seat as he did to convay the poor opinion of a pratling Barrester, which stood on his left hand to ano∣ther Baron that sate on his Right, to hasten my Commitment to the fleet, in respect of my books, not my cause or had his fellow Barons known how unlawfull it is that I should be examined upon interrogatories, by or before such Judges as declared themselves my adversaries in their open Court. Or how little I care for their malice, I believe they would not have been so hasty to commit me as they were, but shall Judges and Lawyers, that profess know∣ledge in Law, subvert it when they please, by pleading misprision, that is to say mistake. And their late Statutes made for that pur∣pose, and alleadging, that if they should be hanged, none would be
Judges after them. Did King Al∣fred find it so, did not a heathen King make the Son sit Judge over a cushion, which he had caused to be made of his fathers skin, His Predecessor Judge in the same place, to mind him, that if he would violate the Law as his father did, he would serve him alike? doth not our Law compell men to be Shreiffs and Constables &c. If they Resuse being chosen? And do not we find such Refusers, when they are sworn officers, fittter and honester men than offerers. Are not I gno∣rant intruders without either choise or approbation of their Countries, worthiest to be hanged of all Inter∣lopers, for taking & keeping places of Judicatures from more knowing Justicers; Baron Thorpe insisted much in Court upon the statutes of misprision, whereof a Judge of his name could make no use to save his hanging, nor did his hanging deter the Baron to become a Judge, & an over-ruler of the exchecquer Court, though not half so knowing a Justi∣cer as his names sake, or Wild his foreman. Who is so Just as to detain 500. l. Land a year from the Right heir, without any good title (as is Reported) And therefore thought it Just to wayve and damane his own Commission to Inquire for such things, and punish me for the ex∣cuting of it. To conclude this point, were all prevaricating Law∣yers hanged, honester men would be found for their places. And have they not incurred the said penalty by this Maxim.
 Sixthly, it is a Maxim of truth and common reason, chief grounds of our Common-Law, That force, sraud and deceipt are the greatest opposites and enemies to all Just Laws. And that all Just Laws are or ought to be sufficiently power∣full to subdue and supplant them. And that therefore it is that the sword is put into the Magistrates hand not to hold in vain. And wis∣dom put in his head to discern and prevent, or punish frauds and de∣ceipts more dangerous than force, because more clandestinely acted, & under colour of Law, while force thrusteth it self to sight, and defies Justice to her face, chance what will. This is Justice Northyes Reso∣lution, the other Bayliff, and Will∣mot.But do not all such Judges, as prefer wrong before Right, and falshood before truth, Incurr the said penalty.
 Seventhly, it is a Maxim of Rea∣son, that all nations are or ought to be governed by Just Laws. And that their supream Magistrates should want no Power or means to execute their Laws, so that their Subjects should have Right at all times without delay or partiallity, or more cost than the cure is worth. And thus much was agreed upon between the Kings people of Eng∣land, in and by the great
Charter cap 29. And is not the great Char∣ter confirmed by above 33 Parlia∣ments, corroborated upon the Petition of Right Tertio Caroli, and Ratified by this Parliament, which if it be so, how can it be said that any Statutes made contrary to the Law of God and nature, and the great Charter, shall stand up a∣gainst them, although not expresly Repealed. Or how can they be al∣leadged to bind the supream Ma∣gistrates, that are sworn to do and maintain Right and Justice to all men, at all times, in all places of the land by their proper sub∣ordinates in every County from so doing, but by traitors to God and the Common-Wealth? or how can the Judges at Westminster con∣fine and contract all the Law of England in and to
Westminster, and into 4 terms yearly to be onely de∣termined by them, that surcharged with multiplicity & aboundance, end not a Rich cause in 7 years, nor a poor mans while he lives. And when they seem to finish a cause or decree or Judgment, it is more to their gain than their necks are worth, and cost to their Judicated than their causes are worth, (nor do they commonly finish any cause at any time, but leave it upon a quillet, whereupon to revive it at their pleasures without their incurr∣ing like penalties as aforesaid.
 Eightly, and lastly, It is a com∣mon Maxim, not onely of common reason, but also of the express Law of
England. That by the Law of the Land no man is bound to accuse himself; If so, what mean∣eth the Jesuitical Spanish Inquisi∣tion, Introduced to the Exchec∣quer and Chancery of England to
interrogate men against themselves, and imprison them untill (to attain their liberties) many faint-hearts are forced to perjure themselves, to accuse themfelves of things where∣of they are guiltless. That Judges and Lawyers and their Impes may beget causes to extort Fees as well by Innocent mens forced Oaths against themselves, as by their own wilfull and malitious perjuries against all men but themselves. Whereby contrarie to Saint Pauls Doctrine, that an Oath for confirmation is unto men an end of all strife, Heb. 6.15. Lawyers make it a beginning, and contrarie to Gods command∣ment, saying, love no false Oath,
Zachar. 8.17. Lawyers love to force, procure, and multiply them. And shall they not incurre the said penalty by this Maxim?
So much for Law Maxims for this occasion at this time, to con∣clude with Axioms of Philosophy conducing to this matter.
 Health is the greatest happi∣ness man can desire. Sphinx Theo∣logica Philosophica de Medicina, pag. 539. It is twofold, that is tosay, first of the Soul, for which Christ is the onely Physician, who to ease man of his sin, the chief cause of all diseases, both Ghost∣ly and humane, took upon him∣self, that had none, all the sins of the World. And died to re∣deem all penitents from eternall death, the due punishment for sin. The second is of the body, for which the best man
Physici∣an called by God to that voca∣tion, and gifted accordingly, is to be honoured before many, be∣cause by his faculty with Gods assistance the Corporal afflictions of many are restored to sound health, the agony of others qualified; And which is most of all wor∣thy consideration, stayes the Souls of many in the prisons of their bodies (by Gods Providence) un∣till longer and seasonable times of Repentance & amendment of their lives. And these are the gifts of God, and endeavours of good Phy∣sicians.
Contrary-wise our Judges and Lawyers, and their monstrous ma∣ny headed whelps requite their patient profitablest clients with,
not onely sickness both of souls & bodies, but also the death of both, so far as in their power lieth, as is proved by wofull experience thus. Debters, not able to pay their debts, are committed for their debts upon capiases, Latitates, and out-laries for trespass, by the Judges of the upper bench, be∣ing no Judges in that case, to their marshallsie; become there sickned in their minds and souls upon such their commitments, conside∣ring there is no Law to Warrant such doings, but the willfull Cu∣stoms and practise of the said sup∣posed Judges, to murther men in and under the name of their Law, for their own gain and superflu∣ities, worse than high-way-men that act manfully to relieve their wants. By the name and Custom of Lawless necessity, for which, if convicted of the fact, they sub∣mit to the Law, which Lawyers would defeat by calling their facts misprisions, which in effect are prises less lawfull: than Robbers, and more abusefull to the Law and Common-Wealth, because committed under colour of Law
and Justice. Further the sickness of the minds and souls imprisoned, is aggravated with the considera∣tion of the wants, and miseries which their wives, children and fa∣milies (that were wont to be su∣stained by their libertie to care and provide for them) must indure by their Captivitie, their bodies and their families participating of these and more griefs of their souls. But more sensible of their hunger and thrist, cold, and nakedness when they have sould even their apparrell as well for night as day, to pay their Goalors and their ma∣sters extortions; and prolong their own miseries so farr as their abi∣lities last. And the cruelty of their Goalers (when they fail to bribe them) in crouding them in dun∣geons where they must infect on another, with a necessitated Con∣tagion caused by their Goalers covetousness, to gain by hiring all the Rooms and liberties of the prison, ordained by Law to lawfull prisoners, to cheators, voluntary prisoners, & willfull assumers of the denomination of prisoners, to de∣feate their Creditors of their Rights
by which they live Riotously upon their Creditours charge, & their Cre∣ditours perish for want of their own. Judges, Lawyers, Gaolers live, & flou∣rish by the ruine of them both, grant∣ing liberties to all such said chea∣tours, contrary to all Law, to walk and take their pleasures as they list, some throughout England, and o∣thers to the East and West-In∣dies. And thereby feasting their bo∣dies and their Impes upon the fast of their finders, and thriving in their wickedness till God rebuke them. The Warden of the Fleet I find by Law is no Goaler within the Statute of H. 6. And by experience a Gentleman merci∣full and affable to the poor, satiable and unburthensom to the Rich, compassionate, and comfortable to all his prisoners, so that (by Gods providence and his clemency,) he and we live wholsom in our bodies, and cheerfull in our hopes. I write not this digression in flattery; but in duty to declare truth as I find it. So returning to my tenet, it is the sickness and death of the Souls and bodies of all their Clyents and their Families, (except those of theirConsorts) that the Art of our mo∣dern Lawyers practiseth upon, And if perchance they ease a Rich clyent of some part of his pain for their own extracrdinary gain (ex∣cept their deed be taken for their will) they shall hardly obtain hea∣ven by their merit. These are the instigations of the Devil, & indeavours of bad Lawyers. It is the health of their patients souls and bodies that the art of Physitians worketh upon. And although some Medica∣sters, that have not the art, Intrude into the profession, and kill more than they cure for want of skill, not good will, their will being taken for their deed pleads more in mercy than Lawyers misprisions.
 It is an Axiom which
Theode∣ctes a famous Philosopher, Cited by Stobaeus in his
66. Sermon, That all men endowed with natural abillities desire 2 things before they have them, which many when they have them, desire to be rid of. That is to say old age and wives. Cicero upon Cato Major maintai∣neth the same in effect. The cau∣ses of these 2 desires are twofould. That is to say in good men fordivine ends, In bad men for their worldly pleasures, Their summum bonum, beyond which they have neither hopes nor desires: But for the desires of good men to be old men, Ambrose Hex lib 1. saith, that although old age, in most men, is most subject to corporal Infirmi∣ties, It sooner endeth the mise∣ries of this life, and openeth the gates to a happier. In good man∣ners it is most decent, In Counsel most subtile, in constancy to im∣brace death most stable, in Re∣pressing lusts most strong, and fi∣nally the Infirmitie of the body, is the sobriety of the mind.
In bad men their desire of old age is to prolong their earthly pleasures in their enjoyment of o∣ther mens Rights, which they pos∣sess by force, or fraud or both, and famishing the Right heirs in dun∣geons, while they pamper their own bodies and their Impes in their sumptuos Pallaces, built up∣on their prisoners Inheritances. Living in which Condition we may observe them in their health se∣cure, in their sickness timorous, and Commonly distracted, in theirdeaths desperate, in manners rio∣tous, in counsel wicked, in lusts insa∣tiable, finally the strength of their bodie is the madness of their minds. And are not these the true Characters of our Lawyers and their adherents. To the next point, good men love to meet with good Wives, like Isaac and Rebecca, to be their Consorts, Comforts and helpers in goodness, to propagate
Saints as well by their examples of life and Conversation, as by their naturall endowments to ac∣complish the end of their Creati∣ons, that is to say, to fullfill the number of the elect, to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven by the merits of their Saviour. And in the time of their pilgrimage, and way thi∣ther, to indeavour the Increase of the glory of God, and the Peace, Love, and Unity, of his people in this world. Bad men desire weal∣thy wanton mercenary Wives, to be their Companions and helpers in mischiefs, as
Isabel was Achabs. To incarnate and multiply De∣vils as well by their examples of life and Conversation, as by their natural endowments to accom∣plishthe end of their miscreancie. Briefly to cooperate with them in all endeavours to increase the delusions and dominion of the De∣vil, and the sedition, hatred and en∣mity of this world. So that at last they must as brothers in Iniquity, with
Antichrist, become possessed of hell, where there is endless sorrow and gnashing of teeth, a place provided for them before the world began, from which God deliver us: But are not these also true characters of our Lawyers?
Popes, that have thought them∣selves as omnipotent as Common Lawyers, never offered to divorce men from their Wives, but where they Judged the marriage unlaw∣full for some Reason, or pretence of Reason in their Laws. But our Lawyers and their Goalors &c by fetching men from the Remotest parts of England to Westminster, and Committing and detaining of them for debts, or most com∣monly for supposed debts or tres∣passes without any colour of Law, while their adversaries (most fre∣quently Lawyers Attorneys) &c. In∣sinuate, sollicite, and at last, bytheir diligence, lies, false messa∣ges from their husbands, and other diabolicall practises, over∣come their feminine frailties, and make them their Whores, get their consents to possess them∣selves of all their husbands estates, reall and personall, consume part of the personall to feast their Whores at the lower end of their tables, where their own Wives sit at the upper, and their families be∣tween. While they contrive Con∣veyances with fines and procla∣mations to assure their prisoners Reall estates to themselves and their heirs, to which their bewitch∣ed Whores give way, and their Imprisoned husbands never hear of the matter till too late to be re∣medied by our Lawyers Law. Is not this more and worse than a po∣pish divice: Others they fetch from nearer parts Prisoners to their Marshallseas, suffer their Wives to boord and bed with them untill they have sould beds and all, and then failing to satisfie extortions, their husbands are dungened and their Wives cast & kept out in the street, except yielding to the lustof a turn-key, such as he liketh, be let in to serve his turn and after turned again to the rest in the street, where often they and their children starve, not daring when they find any scraps to aneer their husbands and parents, to relieve them with any till all be starved. In streets and dungeons Husbands Wives and Children. Creditors look after your debts, what might have payed you part, if nor all in time, had you taken a lawfull Course, Goalers and their partners have parted in fees, usurer dye with grief, not for the loss of thy debters but the debt and boast of thy Revenge, thou hast dice of his bones. Is not this more and worse than the Popes divorce, yet more and worse then this, Judges and Goalers do in diverting and restraining the Saints of God from his service, and hearing of his word preached, by which faith commeth and is maintained, so farr as in them lieth, except when in malice to some Orthodox minister, not love to the prisoners they cast him amongst them, not to the end to better them, but to worse himself.
The premisses considered, Let all men assure themselves, God hath a greater quarrel with this Nation than can be appeased till the land be cleared of such Achans. Par∣liament spue them out, Army drag them out, to quarter them is freer for thee than any free quarter in the Countrey. Because their wealth, filched from the Common-Wealth, ought to be restored to it, and to thee first that best deservest thy share therein Read the Histories of England, and find Lawyers the causes of all our Civil Wars in all ages, observe what success we have at this present by imploying men of that profession to mediate with forriners for Peace, and so souldiers look to your own, and fare well upon your own, which the Law maketh and will maintain to be your own as shall be made good to his death, by your faithfull and loving friend

