


SIR,
THis comes not to bespeak you Patron of the Book to which it is prefixed; but to ac∣knowledge, and to make known unto the world, That you have been both a Faithful Friend to the Great Author thereof, in Conserv∣ing; and also a Publick Benefactor in producing the Manuscripts here printed in this and the precedent Volume, the Tenth and Eleventh Books of His Commentaries upon the Creed.
But, though I think I have done you some small right in making this Acknowledgment; I fear, by occasion thereof, you may be thought by others, to have done the Author and your self no smal wrong. The Point wherein your Judgement may suffer, will be, The Concrediting so Precious Deposita to so mean a Person as my self. And yet to vindicate your self, and to comfort me, The ensuing Narration may give some Ar∣guments of Hope, That this was not done (sine Numine) with∣out the contrivance of Divine Providence, first putting toge∣ther diverse small particulars, and then advancing them to the effecting of a Work not small.
The first stone of this Work was laid some 44 years ago, in my School-Acquaintance, with a Vertuous and studious young Gentleman Mr. Ro. Nettleton of Yorkshire. This Friendship being intermitted by the space of fourteen yeers (he going to Oxon, and I to Cambridge, Anno 1617.) was afterwards renewed by meeting and Conference; which, though Casual and short, did soon discover (as the Ointment in the right Hand will not long be hid) That we had all this while been Disciples to One Man, though we had lived so many years (without any the least Dr. Iackson. Intelligence or Commerce) in Two several Academies. After This, there followed a second Pause or Cessation of Twelve or fourteen years more: Towards the end of which space, The Difficulties of the Times brought me to seek retirement in Oxon; where, by the Mediation of Mr. Benson (a very Ingenuous

person, and Amanuensis to Dr. Jackson) I made suit to Dr. Newlin (Successor to our Author in the Government of Corpus Christi Dr. Iackson made Dr. Shel∣don and Dr. Newlin Super∣visors of his Will, and en∣trusted his Pa∣pers with them. Colledg) to view some Papers for my private Information, but could not obtein, though upon condition to peruse them only in his own Lodgings; So careful and cautelous was that Faith∣ful Man, for which I honour and commend him.
This just and kind denyal sharpned my former desires, and made me seek out a Precator (a very Grave and Learned Man, well known to your self) by whose Mediation I might obtein Dr. Lany. from you, or by your help, what I could not otherwise get. Whereupon you were pleased to give me so fair an Advousion of your Favour, as supported my hopes for the space of three yeers more, when returning to Oxon and missing your self, I made means a second time to Dr. Newlin, and got a sight of some of Dr. Jacksons Papers. This was in the Year 1646.
In the year 1651, Mr. Nettleton being in London, and being very disirous of the thing, intreated me to expend that small Acquaintance I had with the Learned and Pious Dr. Hammond, in obteining of your self, and by your Mediation of Dr. New∣lin a sight of such Papers as Dr. Jackson left behind him; which you granted and effected with so memorable alacritie, as did both mcourage Him, (divers others assisting the design also) to contribute towards the reprinting of the first three Books ill See the Preface to the First Book. printed in Quarto; and after that, towards the publishing of the Tenth, (besides some charge in writing out part of this Eleventh Book;) and obliged me to assist the best I could in doing of them all.
I have great cause to bless the Almighty for many blessings at all times, but signally for Three bestowed upon me in these sad times of publick calamitie. 1. That he hath ever fed me with Food convenient for me; mine own bread being the Bread of my Desires. 2. That he hath repaired my other losses with a great supply of Learned and Pious Acquaintance, greater perhaps, then the times continuing prosperous would ever have afforded me; (so true is the Good Word of God, Mark 10. 30.) Thirdly, That though I was forced from My Nest, (wherein I said I shall dye) yet he suffered me not to be utterly deprived of all opportunities to do him service. And I think my self bound to profess, that in this Price (which God by your hand hath put into mine) I take most comfort, as hoping that my Negotiation therewith, by Gods gracious acceptation, will abound to mine Account, and pass for a supplement or

substituted Commutation of such duties as I have otherwise been defective in. And I earnestly beseech all such as were ever committed to my Tuition in the University, or to my Charge in Cure of Souls in the Countrie, to serve themselves of these my endeavors (in another mans Labors) so as out of them to repair all their dammages sustained by my negligence, omissions or deficiencie in duties towards them.
And now (Honoured Sir) if I have not wearied you with this  (as it is very nauseous to my self) I can subjoyn a second Series of Arguments, That Gods good hand of Providence was in this Business throughout. If I ever made any high me∣naces, or had Projects of doing any thing worthy a Clerk, the very thoughts thereof before I die, are perisht. And I be∣came justly frighted into this humbled despereing Temper, partly, by conversing with this Great Authors Works, published twentie years ago, where I read this Passage (and I cannot but subscribe to it:) [If the sins of this Land for forty years past were See his Ser∣mons upon Jer. 26. p. 32. See this Book, fol. 3716. divided into ten parts, the sins of the Pulpit and of the Presse would make A Large Tenth.] Had not this Good Man been taken away from the evil to come, but lived to hear the Pulpitings, and read the Printings of these last twenty years, what would he have said? Would not he have reckoned them, Nine parts of ten? Being then resolved, Periturae parcere Chartae, never to increase the de∣plorable Bundels of Supervacuous Books by any composure of mine, I acknowledg my self (as Caelibes and Improles are in a more especial manner bound to assist the Widow and the Or∣phan) obliged to help out the more profitable works of Learn∣ed men deceased.
As God, by convincing me of disabilitie, hath taken away all hopes and desires of publishing any Work of mine own; So he hath given me an extraordinary delight of serving out the works of this Man; and this delight hath made me able to take more pains in this, then ever I took in any other Book-businesse throughout my whole life. Yea, God seems to have given me life beyond all expectation, partly for effecting this Work. I said (in the year 1649) I shall certainly go down to the grave; God strangely brought me back from the Gates of Death (He only knows what more to suffer) I cannot see at present what else to do, but to publish these Tracts, the Quintessence of which is, That of The Resurrection of the Dead.
I have yet Two Things to trouble your patience with. The Former is, To secure you, that I have made no Merchandize,

no base Gain, no gain at all (for any would be base in me) of those Jewels you committed to my Trust. The Later, To as∣sure you, That I have dealt as carefully and faithfully in the Publication of These Tracts, as I would (if the Case had so been) the Author should have done in mine. And yet if this satis∣faction be too general to stay that wonderment which haply will arise in your mind, when at the end of Chap. 43. you shal find A Fragment of the Authors interserted: Be pleased over and above the Reasons there given, to accept of this Following. The Opinion, [That the sins of those Jewes who crucified our Saviour, See fol. 3373 (persecuted his Apostles, and stoned S. Stephen) were not visited upon them; but that the Plagues respectively due for doing so, were fended off or superseded by the signal vertue of Christs Blood speaking better things then that of Abel, and special Efficacie of His Prayers for them] was new, and seemed, though quaint, yet very useful for us of suffer∣ing Condition.
I confess, I am scrupulous of losing any Fragment of this Authors, but was highly tender of leaving out in that place, the least Grain of weight that might adde any shew of proof to His intended Conclusion; which I would fain have rendred as probable as might be: That we, who are to fill up the leavings of Christs afflictions () might more willingly and perfectly conform to Our Captain, not only in Patience, but in Charitie also; and be excited, ear∣nestly to sollicit and employ the Interest we have in God through Christ, chiefly for the Conversion and Salvation of our Adver∣saries, and then for sparing them as to temporal punishments: That it may one day appear they fared the better for those that fared worse for them, even for those whom they counted the worst of men, the Troublers of Israel, the Anathemaes or Cursed things.
If this will not satisfie you, I have no Refuge left, but to fly to the Sanctuary where the Authors ashes lye, and to beg par∣don of you, in whom, by consignment of Will, his Person lives; which I presume you will the sooner grant upon condition I cease to trouble you further. May you please then to sit by a while, only to view how I demean my self (and to awe me in∣to Reverence) in my Addresses to the Common Christian Rea∣der, who, by what he hath here already heard (and shall after read) will joyn in thanks to You, and Prayers for You,
With 
