



May it please your Royal Highness,
AS the Peace of Kingdoms, which your Royal Highness excel∣lently knows and the duty and safety of Subjects, together with the great ease of Princes, con∣sist in one short, easie rule, and equitable, well maintain'd, and practic'd, The submission of the Creature to its Creator; or the Obedience of Inferiours▪ in the low condition of the one, to their respective Superiours over them, in the Authority, and high Character of the other; so it may be affirm'd, that the Peace and welfare of the Church depends no less upon the like lesson and method.
For what are Conventicles, Schismes, Heresies, Idolatries, which disturbe the Peace, and de∣stroy

the being of the one; but like so many Riots, Factions, Seditions, Treasons, which alike un∣dermine, and overthrow the Constitution of the o∣ther? so that in short, the Disturbers of the World, are those alone, who disobey Superiours.
Who, in the time, and under the covert, of Peace, are of two sorts; such as undutifully despise the right, or treacherously erect a wrong Sove∣reign over themselves. The first are those, who from Avarice, or Pride, or Ambition, by craft or force, disobey the Laws, and usurp, and en∣croach upon the Rights, and Prerogatives of their lawful Governours; where every inconsiderable Inceptor, and Puny Recusant, is a Cromwel, or Lucifer, in his path and tendency. The next those, who through fear, or easiness, will admit, or submit, to any wrong pretender in his usurpa∣tions, and believe the Serpent against God: And then it cannot be expected, but that they, who mis∣take their Sovereign in the first place, will mistake their Loyalty in the next; And Allegiance mis∣plac'd shall make men Rebels, as much as the failer or subduction. The prime indispensable charge therefore, first of Heaven's King, next of every King on Earth that represent him, is that known Commandment; Thou shalt have none other Gods but me.
The Peace therefore of Churches and States manifestly consists in two points. 1. In the exact knowledge and discovery, who are our right, and

lawful Superiours on Earth. 2. In exact obedience perform'd to their Laws and wills, and no other. Nor to them, acting beyond their Sphere, and us∣urping upon Gods Rights in Heaven, under whom all Earthly Superiours and Inferiours are equally fellow-subjects. And not to be allowed the liberty of eyes, and understanding, or private judgment, to discerne between right or wrong Leaders, which is of such temporal concern and preservation to every man in this World; nor between the will of God, and his Creature, where they interfere, which is of such Eternal moment in the other, (wherein lyes the Radical errour of some Modern Christian Heathenism,) were to be depos'd from being men any more, or reduc'd to an Eternal non-age and inability, to discern between good and evil, and fitter therefore to be governed, than to govern ei∣ther themselves, or others.
Having therefore, for the establishment of Friends, and the comfort of Regular, and re∣covery of Irregular, and seduc'd sufferers for Reli∣gion, bestowed endeavours, to distinguish the seve∣ral parts of Divine and Human Soveraignty, whereon the Peace of Communities, and the Sal∣vation of Souls depends, (being as manifestly distinguishable, as Heaven and Earth, or Soul and Body,) and stated also, and evinc'd the Title of Right Mother-Church, to our own Brittain; (though its known, a Harlot can bid fair for a true Mother, where she lights not on Solomons for

Judges, and where she does, be willing the Child be divided into Sects, and parcells, which she is not like to enjoy to her self entire,) and sufficiently demonstrated, (to any whose invincible minds and Spirits are unreduc'd from their Loyalty to God and truth,) That Popery, in its Leaders, is an uniform invasion, and in its followers; a ne∣cessary disobedience to right Soveraigns, in Hea∣ven and Earth, and Protestancy in its Princi∣ples to be safe and clear from such disorders;
I judg'd fit to dedicate the Argument, to whom it was duty to present the first Copy; to your Royal Highness, my Gracious Prince, and Master, having afore-hand weighed and consider'd, (as I ought,) it would make for your Highness Honour, and publick love, either at home, or abroad, in the disjunctive, whatever were its resentment, or success: At home, with God and the Countrey, if it serv'd in the least to fortifie your Royal Breast against temptations, or at least with Forreign Lords of Celestial Crowns, and Canonizations, against whose Sacred Avarice, and Catholick can∣ting for Tribute and subjection, and other Politick Arts, which are not unknown, and infallible er∣rours and Idolatries, which are not unconfuted, such plain and manifest Truths, from clean hands and ends, could so little prevail; though se∣conded with the sense of the whole Nation, and the rights of this ancient Apostolical Church, un∣doubtedly Senior, if not Mother to Rome it self.
Withall, the Subject being of the Heart, and Conscience, and comprizing, as the heart doth, in a narrow Room, a competent stock of Divine Rules, and measures, to judge of Truth, (and about Church matters,) seem'd therefore the fitter present for a Prince, so nigh to Soveraign, who is a Nation contracted in one man.
And Princes, like God whom they represent, delight in hearts: And no Prince in Story was ever the Darling of more English Hearts, than your R. H. and strange and unjust it were, you should suffer any abatement of that Glory, for no other reason, but your exalted superlative zeal for God, and your Conscience, above Crowns or Kingdoms, being the highest strein and pitch of sublime and transcendant Honour, that Mortality could ever exert or phancy; and higher still, if that zeal were well guided with discretion, (as the Apostle requires,) and not taken upon un∣due trust; whereof if there were not some mani∣fest cause to doubt, or fear, none were more in∣excusable, and worthy to be deserted forever by Your R. H. than him, who having had once the honour, to adhere to you in your military dangers, should want a heart at last to follow you in your Ecclesiastical motions after truth, my more proper Element and Profession.
Having therefore, as I ought, doubted my self not a little, and reviewed my Principles upon this occasion, and with best endeavours of Brain

and Knee, studied to know the Truth, and Gods mind herein, with a heart resolv'd to be of its side, to my power, against the World, it seem'd agreeable to Ministerial obligation, as well as Loyal Reputation, to communicate my satisfacti∣ons to the World, in the view of your R. H. that all might see, that nothing else was able to make a Loyal Brittain shrinke from the steps of his Prince, but a greater Loyalty to the manifest rights of God, and the King, and the Truth.
Which I trust, will not be construed Contempt, but Constancy, nothing being more the duty of e∣very Loyal Servant, (and a Minister especially,) than to be as faithful to his Prince, (and conse∣quently to God and the Nation,) as Conscience is in every breast, which will never approve, or agree to any disloyal revolt from Heaven and Truth, but will chuse rather to be silenc'd for a time than con∣sent, and with patient agony refer the matter to God himself.
Nor are any to be reckon'd straight-way unfor∣tunate, (as is the manner of some weak and Car∣nal reasons, and Turba Bemi, and also the Divinity of some grave Deacons of the belly, and present ease and greatness,) for any wound, or in∣convenience, they may bring upon themselves, for such fidelity to the Temporal and Eternal In∣terests of their Master, either from declar'd, which is more faire, or undeclar'd, and invisible Hostilities, which is less: For such suffer in their

manifest duties, which is therefore to be presum'd to be their choice by consequence, (when such need require) and their right, and best self-preservation, (if they be right men or Christians,) for if we are bound to love our Neighbours as our selves at the least, so much more our Prince, and Countrey, above our selves, as the hand doth the head.
And greater and truer love cannot be ex∣press'd, than by long misery and durance for the Truth, like an Anchor under Waves, to hold fast the great Soul of one's Prince (compos'd of Grace and Mercy, and the fear of God,) by his bowells and compassion, stronger than any Cable, from running against Eternal Rocks, and clashing with his Heavenly Sovereign; which is the first, and Original disloyalty, and insurrection against the Chief, whereof the Tumults of Subjects against Secondary Mortal Soveraigns, are usually but copies, and fatal consequences, by man's manifest fault, but Gods secret righteous judgement, as the fear and subjection of the Creature is ob∣serv'd by Divines to be abated and impair'd towards Adam, after his fall.
And no Prince can more deserve such Mar∣tyrial fidelity from Servants, and Subjects, than your R: H. not only upon the score of Loyalty and Conscience, common to all Princes, but of per∣sonal, and peculiar merit, and exemplary frequent fatigues, and hazards, and lovely deportments on the confines of life and death, for the glory of

your Country, which your R. H. valued above your life, and present, and hereditary greatness, as much, as many mean and vulgar spirits, do below their petty self-ends and differences.
And that great fight cannot easily depart from my remembrance of your serene Magnanimity, and cheerful unconcernedness on Quarter Deck, June 3d. 1665. which betoken'd to my hopes, a great distance of dangers from your R. H. even then, when Roaring deaths hail'd thick about your R. Person, and besprinkled your Buff with the bloud of your ever memorable Companions, that fell by you. Such contempt of death, and the Pomp, and Glory of this World, for the defence of your King, and Country, being a lively resemblance of that true Christian Charity, which doth the like for Christ, and souls: and fits the understanding to receive, and embrace the truth. And I have just cause often to bless God, for a kind of Pub∣lick reward then, of my many Prayers in private for your R. H. (which was my chief, and sole Ar∣mour in your defence) that your R. H. should ob∣serve, and declare it as an Omen of Victory, an∣next to the publick Service and Exhortation per∣formed by me the even before the fight, by your R. H. appointment, that one of the greatest Ships of the Enemy, should take fire in that moment in the fight of both Fleets, reported to be one of the member that were particularly bound to destroy you.
And why should I distrust in God, or the power of truth, or the success of sincere love, and loyalty, but that these my prostrate sentiments, proved, and preferred, through much patience, before all the offers of this World, may not contribute with the Prayers of all good Christians, and far greater Abilities, and Counsels, and the consideration, and candor of your R. H. own breast, and Prince∣ly Loyalty to God and Truth, the greatest of all, to beget that satisfaction, and stability in your R. H. as may kindle more Bon-fires in our Streets, than did that your Renowned Victory?
Quinctius the Roman General, proclaiming in the name of the Senate by sound of Trumpet, unexpected Liberty to all the Cities of Greece, then newly Conquered, as the Nation met to be∣gin their Olympick games, did so discompose, and lick up all their inclinations after their sports, with the suddainness of the good tydings, that when they could believe it to be true, they could think on nothing else; And rushing, one upon a∣nother, with excess of joy and thankfulness, to kiss his hands, and to cast their Crowns and Gar∣lands at his feet, went nigh, to put him in ma∣nifest danger of his life, with their Crowd, and immoderate Transports, that forgot all manrs and distance, had not his great strength of body, and the Vigour of his years, being 33, saith Livy, and some content, and satisfaction to observe

whence their Rudeness sprang, served to Rescue him from the danger of too great love.
Such a Jubile to our Brittain, and such a lovely danger to your R. H. (as may be gather'd from the General pulse) the dismission of some scruples would soon produce, which many suspect, and fear, but I never did, nor can, (before a special declaration) being so over-ruled to the contra∣ry by your Princely wisdom and justice; for what greater violation of the Law of Nations can there be, (to the dissolution of all Faith and Truth among men, whereon Allegiance to Princes, and the peace of the World, hang) than openly, or secretly, to oppose, or prejudice a Religion professed, before it be Renounced? or wherein can the Catholick plai∣ster of dispensation to equivocate, mend the matter with Generous and sober understandings, whereby the soul is licens'd to be damn'd, to save the skin?
Least therefore by any pretence, or whisper of Right, or colour of Conscience, (wherein all the fear can lye) your R. H. should be mis-led to espouse unnaturally a Forreign, and wrong Superiour, to the manifest dethroning of our Right Mother-Church of Brittain, more Ancient, as well as more sound and Orthodox, than the other; I have (leaving all speculative Controversies, and hard questions, to Scholars and Students,) throughly handled one Practical point of plain Right, and Title, or meum and tuum, or the Pretences, and Immunities of both Churches; which will give great light, if not

a final end to all the rest, and which all sorts of men, as well lay, as Clergy, are bound to know upon their duty, and Allegiance to God and their Coun∣try, and Justice, and Civility to their Neigh∣bours, least they be betrayed by willful Ignorance, to aid an Usurper against the Right Heir; wherein no more learning, or Logick is required, to master and understand the point, but so much temper and Judgement, as serves to hear an evidence, and discern between soul and body, or God and Creature, or Christianity and Heathenism, or Loyalty and Treason, and to lay hand upon heart, and to fol∣low, either the Laws of God and man, whereby all men are Rul'd, or fate and Providence, whereby they are Over-ruled.
But whether in Gods mercy, or Judgement, we are to be freed, or continued under our fears and anxieties, to the fixed, and resolved in faith, it signifies no more, than putting on a Winter, or a Summer habit, either the militant Garb of Pa∣tience, to our great reward and comfort, (and your great account, which alone can abate it,) or the Triumphant of thanksgiving, to the mutual so∣lace and bliss of both. But as for the weaker flock, whereof Paternal Princely bowels, and pastoral charge, are ever the most tender; with what security and content, will they lye down be∣side the still waters in green Pastures, when they shall have such a Shepheard, to be their guard and back, and a terrour (much less a harbour) to

the Roman Wolves, that would devoure them? How will the Mountains skip like Rams, and our little Hills like Lambs? Great and unparallel'd was our joy, for your R. Brothers Restoration, and your own together, to your Ancient Rights, and Dig∣nities over us, that the whole Nation seem'd like unto men that dream'd; but so great is the sence and fear of Spiritual Slavery upon them and their chil∣dren, more insupportable than any Temporal (which it also may draw along with it) that the joy of that day is like to be but a dream indeed, compared to those exultations, and full content, and streins of hearty Triumphs, (if heart-strings can hold) that shall break out in every street and cor∣ner of the whole Nation, with Bon-fires, and Feasts, and praises, reaching up to Heaven, and thence to earth again, in the responses of Angels to our An∣thems, at the day of your return, from the danger of errour, to our Church, and our blessing, and the truth. That your R.H. will be more glorious in the end, than in the beginning, after your Victories o∣ver temptations and deceitful guides, like the Sun after an Eclipse; which is the present trust, or shall ever be, as it ought, the daily prayer, and study, and Patience of

