



My LORD,
WHat of Ecclesiastical Government in the Christian Church, hath passed our fore-fathers unquestio∣ned

more than One thousand five hundred years, from the Apostles downward, that, is become the un∣happy Dispute of this last Age, both as to Pen and Sword.
This had its Rise at Geneva, Anno 1541. Ric. Hookers Eccles. Pol. Pref. the people having thence tumultuously expelled their Bishop, and being thereby without Government, and to seek for the way toward it, thereupon did Cal∣vin put himself on them, finding, in that, a fit introduction to greatness, and by his prudence, and learning, (in both which he excelled) became he there an Oracle, and his will a law. Of that made he use in medi∣tating, forming, and proposing a Model of Church-government, (it being desired of him by the people;)

which he well ordered to his ends, and interests; intermixing Church, and Lay-Elders; (those fixed, these yearly elected) appointing a double number of the Laity, to what was of the other; Ep. p. 2 Beza de grad. Min. c. 11. That is, six Mini∣sters, and twelve others, chosen out of their three Councils of State, viz. Six out of their Council of two hundred, and four out of that of sixty, and two out of the twenty five; wherein (for pleasing the peo∣ple) the advantage of major Votes was given them in decisions; and in that, most of power in them (seem∣ingly) placed; whereas, indeed, all was thereby in himself, and in his Church-Elders principally, well judging, that the fewer (being learn∣ed, leading, and lasting) might easily

influence, and overbear a greater number not so reaching, and chan∣ging, whose election also might be by the other so ordered, as to serve a Church-interest. And least (on consideration,) this might be (over∣soon apprehended and avoided. Therefore had Calvin (underta∣king that form of Government, desi∣red of him) first, politickly, obliged that people by Oath to receive and submit to what should be so proposed; Provided, it were agreeable to Gods Word, and to the approbation of such of the Reformed Churches as should be thought fit to be therein consulted. And accordingly, did he carefully hold, in that, to Scripture-names and words, knowing, that this could not but sound well howsoever, and

that it might take with the less dis∣cerning, and would certainly pass with those, whose interest it was to be so satisfied. In which, he fixed principally on the name of Elders; a Scripture-name, of which much is spoken in both Testaments, but in the New Testament sounding toward the frame of Government in the Christian Church: yet, in the New Testament was found the word Bi∣shop also: and this, as considerable, for Church government as could be pretended to, in that other of El∣ders; and yet, must not (notwith∣standing) the name of Bishop be in this new Model mentioned: for, the Name would mind the injurious casting off of their Bishop, and the Thing stood in the way to other

grandeures; therefore with the per∣son must the name of Bishop be shut out also. But how may that be with∣out force and wrong to Scripture? where, of the Name and Office of Bi∣shops, is mention frequent and ho∣nourable; As to that, the expedient is readie and easie. It is but ordering the Text to the gloss, and framing such an Interpretation for that Scri∣pture-name Bishop, that thenceforth (although never till then) by Bishops, Elders be understood: so as, whatsoe∣ver is in the New Testament said of Bi∣shops, should be of Elders onely, & that Bishops and Elders be as the same, not distinguished in office or work. But such avoiding of express Scriptures by private constructions, could not sa∣tisfie all: therefore, what is short

in that, is to be supplied otherwise; that is, by the sense and approbation of other Reformed Churches: and to that is this new Law-giver put (unex∣pectedly) by a reluctancy found in the people, they beginning to resent the design, and desiring (if possible) to get off, and loose from that, in which they now saw, (but too late) themselves intangled. And whereas their late obligation of an Oath, could not but stick close, it behoved to seek their libertie some other way, and no other way appeared so rea∣dy, as that part of the mentioned proviso, the sense of other Churches in the case, by which was hope for eva∣ding, it being observed, that no other Church was then so modelled in Go∣vernment; and therefore, was it

hoped they might be inclined not to fa∣vour this, being new and strange. This, the people now press, and to four of the Helvetian Cities and Churches is by them addressed, with which Calvin closeth readily; that being what he expected, and for what he was prepared, and of which he had already assurance. For, (all that having been foreseen) he had before (underhand) by Letters, dealt with the principals of those Churches, that they would not fail to declare for that form of Government, in which he had so laboured for Ge∣neva, (saying) That Religion, and piety, and the welfare of that Church and people depended on it. Whereby when that business was by all par∣ties laid before those Churches, the

Answer was readie; which was, That they had heard of those Consisto∣rial Laws, which they acknowledged for godly Ordinances, and drawing to∣wards the prescript of Gods Word: therefore did they think it good for the Church of Geneva, not to change the same, but rather to keep as they were. Thus, is Calvins Work done, and setled, and the people brought to a succumbency; onely, it remained, That whereas it had been by those compromising Churches, more warily delivered concerning those Laws of Government, that they were godly Ordinances (which might seem a lean expression) and that they did draw toward the prescript of Gods Word, (which was short and diminishing) therefore was something to be decla∣red

more absolute and positive in the case. And seeing it was not to be expected from other Churches, it was thus therefore otherwise order∣ed (and as effectually) First, that this Discipline be cried up (as it was industriously) for ancient, Apostoli∣cal, and wholly Scriptural; and so, above all other forms whatsoever, and therefore, to be that to which other Churches should conform; and Gene∣va (as to Church and Government,) to be esteemed of all, and above all best reformed: unto which, in that cursed National Covenant in Eng∣land, was respect had particularly.
Wherein is to be observed the prodigious growth of this last nights mushrom; that this, but just now, standing on its good behaviour, and

beholding to others votes and ap∣probation (and that begged) for introducing it, and needing an Oath (slily imposed, and inconsiderately taken) for holding the people to it, it self also looking on it self jealously, whether to be or not; yet should it now from a politick Government start up in a moment, and be transformed to what is Divine. And therefore no longer begging, but commanding; nor to be now confined to Geneva, (where first imposed,) but Geneva in that, giving Laws to the world, and expe∣cting from other Churches conformity to that as the principal. By all which (notwithstanding) although other Reformed Churches had been in all this time, little influenced; yet (sure∣ly by some fatality) hath it been

with us in these Kingdoms other∣wise. For this Geneva form well pleasing our English, fled to Geneva in Q. Mary's Persecution was by them brought thence in their return; by whom it having been for a time hatched in private Conventicles, at length was it brought forth, and after by strong hand imposed on our Churches for imitation: as was that Idol-altar at Damascus pat∣terned for Jerusalem. 2 Kin. 16. 10, 11. This be∣gan in Scotland, where Episcopacie was cast off by the Reformers (Ge∣neva Principled) and that (as in Ge∣neva,) in a way popular and tu∣multuary so imbibing Reformation with Schism. And although in th other Kingdoms Episcopacy still held, and many years flourished after the

Reformation, (to the glory of our Church above all others reformed) yet was that sacred Hierarchy, in that time, by that Party oft pushed at; and at length, (they getting head and power in our late dismal times) our very foundations of Govern∣ment, Civil, and Ecclesiastical, Re∣gal, and Episcopal, (as by a general earthquake) were at once, and to∣gether, overturned, and in their ru∣ins buried: under which universal desolations lay these Kingdoms, mi∣serably, when (as by miracle) all were again raised and restored to their former beauty and lustre, by His Sa∣cred Majesties glorious and happy Re∣stauration. (And next and unto His Majesty) doth Ireland own Your GRACE in its Settlement, both as

to Church and State, our general set∣tlement of the Kingdom by your great Hand, speaking Your glory to ge∣nerations. And whereas all these mentioned evils and miseries, had been occasioned by schism, and by that particularly concerning Church-government, and that this present generation hath been (in a great measure) bred and educated in an Age, where that truth hath been si∣lenced, and nothing heard but what hath been loudly against it, and the contrary magnified, as what only is according to Scripture: and consi∣dering, that this, (we must now say) controversie, being cleared, mens minds (or some of them) might be satisfied in the truth, and thereby setled in obedience; therefore (occa∣sion

being for it) did I take up this subject, in which Episcopacy is assert∣ed as Apostolical, and the contrary ex∣amined, so far, as the short time then allowed me would admit; which being by Your GRACE comman∣ded from me, it is thus in due obe∣dience presented; yet in some parti∣culars here and there enlarged, above what was in publick delivery, what is so added, being what was intend∣ed to have been then spoken, had I not been enforced by the time, and work of the Day, to contract. All which is now laid at Your Excel∣lencies feet, and under Your great and piercing Judgment, there, leaving it humbly, and ever praying for Your Lordships happiness every way; and that the Lord would remember You

according to the good by You done for the House of our God, and for the Of∣fices thereof. Neh. 13. 14.

