


Most Honourable,
How much Ireland (happy in your Government) is above all other Nations in Europe, influenced by the power of Rome, is to Your Excellency well known, as to the world, and by themselves also acknowledged, and gloried in.
But unhappy is it in being thereby, and by Romish Emissaries (of malevolent and factious principles promoting other interesses) carried on fatally, to the disturbance of the peace of the Kingdom. Of this we have had Memorials of former Ages, some of them fresh and bleeding; nor are we even now without jealousies of what may yet be, were there opportunity for it.
This is not to be ascribed to the stars, or clime, or nature of the people, who have had of old the character, justly, of a people peace∣able, harmless, affable to strangers, and in themselves, and to all, pious

and good. So was it, while the Religion professed by their Forefa∣thers was according to the primitive faith of purer times of the Church (although not then without some soil.) And thus find we it even now in those of the Nation who are of reformed and purer principles.
But being in after times corrupted in Doctrine and Discipline, and that the now Religion of the Irish is quite another thing from that of their forefathers (of whom yet they boast themselves Children, both as to faith and blood) we now find the Change great, as in Religion, so in disposition and manners:
On which we collect, that the grounds of our peace from those, must not be Extirpation, but Reformation, by removing those their false Teachers, who mis-inform and mis-lead the Nation; and our withal instructing the people in the waies of peace and truth.
As to the latter I have observed, no people more desirous than are these to hear and to be instructed, nor any better, being so educated.
In which I cannot but mention and recommend as a president to o∣thers, the zeal of a pious and learned Prelate, the present Archbishop of Cashel, who has set himself on that work industriously by instruct∣ing the Irish in their own language; and hath already gathered the comfortable fruits of his godly labours, drawing in and retaining ma∣ny of the Nation firm in the faith, the number also of such encreasing.
The means for that in former times, and in some of our own me∣mories, was the translating and Printing our English Lyturgy, and the New Testament into the Irish tongue, that testifying our care of their salvation, and giving them thereby to understand in their own language the truth we profess and teach, contrary to the mis-informa∣tion of others concerning us.
And to this purpose that learned Prelate Doctor Bedell late Bis∣hop of Kilmore (happy in his Zeal and labours that way) to that of the New Testament and Common-Prayer before translated and Printed in the Irish tongue, did add the Translation into Irish of the Old Testament also, with David's Psalms in meter. This I have in my hands in the manuscript, and wish it were for such a publick good, printed and published.
In the mean time, to give some stop, if it might be, to the Current of Popery, I conceived in might be convenient and necessary that it be known and declared to this mis-lead people, as to others, who that is whom they so follow, that he is that very Antichrist, by whom they may be carried away by that deluge of Apostacy into perdition, wherby these may by grace be brought to consider their waies.
This is that which is in the following Treasise intended, and is, I hope to some evidenced, which appearing, other points and erroneous Doctrines of Popery will fall, depending on that the principal.
Of this in my late preaching it, I had the honour of your Excellen∣cies being then an hearer; and being prevailed with after for publish∣ing it, I thought it fittest for your Lordships Patronage, in whose hands is the Government of that people for whom this is particularly design∣ed. it was a confident presumption in him, who under the letters I. S. (it may be, far from his name) did offer to your Patronage an in∣vective against that Church of which you are, The Church of England your Mother, as not being the Church of Christ, nor any part of it; which had its full confutation by a learned piece, Doctor Andrew Sall, I hope the contrary may find better acceptance from your Excellency, this shewing that the Church of Rome, of which J. S. shews himself to be, is ANTICHRISTIAN, and communion there to be unto some dangerous, and damnable to others.
It is in this my Comfort, which was St. Paul's speaking before King Agrippa) that I speak to one who knoweth these things. And from whom I am perswaded (none of these things are hidden, Acts 26.3.26.) For your Excellency is not a favourer only of Learn∣ing, but you your self also learned eminently, and particularly versed in Church-Antiquities, on which most of that here spoken, is depend∣ing.
Which your affection to Learning appears in your large collection of Books, with which that your rich and compleat Library in England is stored. The same of which hath crossed the Seas hither, as elsewhere a∣broad There may the learned find knowledge in variety, beside what con∣cerns Records both of England and Ireland, such as are not other∣where,

where, unto which recourse may be had as to a VATICAN.
And as to Ireland, considering the few years of your Government over us, I dare confidently aver, that none, so as your Lordship, know∣eth so much of the Kingdom, People, Manners, and several Interesses there, and understands better the Measures, for governing answerably; and such a person so knowing, this Kingdom requires.
In your Excellency shines the Heroick Vertue and Courage of that renowned Martyr for King and Country, your illustrious Father; and that well tempered with your own personal Affability taking with, and obliging all; yet to each with a becoming distance of state and place, so as none to presume on more than just favour in Judgment, Ju∣stice being to all, and any without difference dispensed.
Tros Tyriusve tibi nullo discrimine habetur.
This is now testified in the present Connaght Court of Claymes under your Government the Irish in that Province, having therein their help, as had before the other parts of the Kingdom their distri∣bution of Lands in former Courts of like nature. In which those of Connaght having been post-poned, they were given over as re∣mediless, until by his gracious Majesties continual care of his People they were thus considered, and that by your Lordships procurement and management.
God multiply his blessings on you in your Person, and in your Excellent Lady, and Noble Progeny; and make us happy in the continuance of your prosperous Government, generally desired; which are the prayers of

