




Much Endeared and intirely Beloved,
IT is necessary I say something upon this occasion, tho' not much, for a long E∣pistle will not become this short Tract; and Dedications of late Years have been much abused to a vain Flattery, tho' of Antient Ʋse, and may be of no small Profit; and seeing we find this Custom approv'd by the practice of one of the Pen-men of Holy Writ, St. Luke, in his Gosepl, and the Acts, it is less to be disparaged: And I am the more encou∣raged. —I have three Reasons for the publishing of these Hymns, besides your Im∣portunity; viz.


1. That by a frequent perusal of them you may be helpt to recover the Fragments of divers Discourses which have slipt your Memory, and so be of no small use to you in your retired Meditations on Divine things.
2. That you may have such Hymns and Spiritual Songs by you for your publick use in your Families, that are most a∣greeable to your Principles, and nearest your Affections; containing also variety of Matter.
3. For the better and more orderly per∣formance of this part of divine Worship in the publick Assembly; for by premedita∣tion you will be capable conjointly to sing with more Judgment and Ʋnderstanding, and make the sweeter Harmony in the Ears of the God of Order.

I have not used (neither do I pretend to) Rhetorical Flourishes, and Guilded Flights, but have accommodated my self to your Temper and Capacity, even the meanest and weakest among you; and it is observable, that the profoundest Pro∣phets accommodated themselves to their Hearers or Readers Capacities; as of Fishes to the Egyptians, droves of Cattle
to the Arabians; Trade and Traffick to the Tyrians: So our dear Redeemer tells his Fishermen, That they shall be Fishers of Men; and after he had express'd him∣self in plain Parables to the People; (as if the Essential Word had been at a loss for a fit Word, familiar, plain, and low enough for our dull and shallow Apprehen∣sions) Whereunto (saith he) shall we liken the Kingdom of Heaven, &c. And the Evangelists, for their Hearers sakes, spake Vulgarly many times. Beloved, many among us tip their Tongues, and store their Heads, some for shew, and some for delight; but Ministers, above all men, have their Talents in trust, that there∣with they may save themselves and those that hear them; they must condescend to the Capacities of their Hearers, and stoop to the Apprehensions of the meanest; and become all things to all Men, in St. Paul's Sense, that they may win some: 'Twas a saying of a Learned Bishop, Lord! send me Learning enough, that I may Preach plain enough. And if I had used a higher Style, it may be many of you could not have sung with that Ʋn∣derstanding that is required: A plain Preacher and Author suits best a plain Hearer and Reader; and I design'd
these Hymns only for your Ʋse, not for any others, either Learned or Ʋnlearned; and if you kindly accept and make use of them, I have attain'd my End: And as for Carpers and Censurers, I value them at the same rate as they do this Piece.
I thought to have said something to the Argument of Singing, but Mr. Richard Allen in his Book lately Published, called, An Essay to prove singing of PSALMS with conjoined Voices a Christian Duty. Hath cleared this blessed Truth so ef∣fectually in a few Leaves, (unto which Book I refer such as want further Sa∣tisfaction) that I cannot in the least degree pretend to Mend it, and therefore shall not touch it, being also confin'd to too little room.
Brethren, the things contain'd in this Piece, will be far better understood and spoken of in Heaven by the Glorious Noon-day Divinity, in which the immea∣diately Illuminated Assembly do there Sing Jehovah's Praise, than by such a stammering Tongue and scribling Pen as mine, which doth but marr them; there we shall not only be of one Judgment in
this point of Singing, but well-skill'd and unanimous in the practice of it: Alass! I write my Lord's Praises but by Moon-light; I cannot Praise him so much as by halves: The excelling Glory of Christ dazzles all Apprehensions, swallows up all Expressions; he's altogether Love and Lovely: What Tongue belonging to a renewed Person can be silent while his Praises are tuning? When we have worn our Tongues to the stumps in ascribing Praises to him, alass! we have done nothing when all is done.
But, to Conclude, I hope your Candor will overlook the Faults and Slips, either of the Author's Pen, or the Printer's Press; and my hearty Prayer to Jehovah is, that in the main it may tend to the Comfort and Profit of your never-dying Souls; that you may be the better fitted and prepared to Sing his Eternal Praise in the Mansions of Glory above, in the Company of glorious Angels, the Seraphims and Cherubims of God: And the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the E∣verlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good Work, to do his Will, working
in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be Glory for ever, Amen.

From my Study in Blew-Anchor-Alley, Bunhill-Fields; on the 11th of the second Month, 1696.
