


SIR,
THere are many cogent Rea∣sons which induce me to pre∣fix your Name to this Epistle: For, besides those personal Obligati∣ons which I am not able to recount, and the Relation you bear to the Pa∣rish wherein I was several Years In∣cumbent; (and wherein your good Example and Authority have had no small Influence, for the Advance∣ment of the Interest of the establish'd Religion and Government,) I say, be∣sides all these, I could instance in ma∣ny Particulars of your singular respect
Kindness to all honest orthodox Cler∣gy-men, your Charity to the Poor, but especially poor Scholars, and your Hospitality to all; not to men∣tion your pious Beneficence in repair∣ing and beautifying God's House at so great a Charge: But, I would nei∣ther offend you nor my Reader, with that unpleasing and phantastical Me∣thod of Flattery and Ostentation.
Yet (Sir) I shall never be awant∣ing in my Wishes, and hearty Pray∣ers for you; that you may persevere in your Endeavours to preserve and propagate that Order and Uniformi∣ty in God's Worship, which you have hitherto prosecuted with so much Zeal, Success, and Integrity. So, that by your Proficiency in Grace and Virtue, you may not only erect a Mo∣nument to your self, but transmit a Blessing (with a plentiful Estate) to your hopeful Posterity.
AND now my most kind and re∣spective Parishioners, (for whom this
small practical Discourse is chiefly in∣tended) you are not insensible of the Occasion of my Removal from you, and the Inconveniencies which I then suffer'd by it, which I am now unwil∣ling to repeat, save that I do unfeign∣edly pardon the unhappy Instrument of it. And tho', I hope my Pastoral Care and Affection for you (in my Absence) did not fall much short of my Obligations; yet, because I could not personally discharge my Duty, I then resolv'd to compose this Treatise chief∣ly for your Use, and do now present it to your candid Acceptance. Where∣in I've endeavour'd to remind you of those Truths which I have formerly taught, and wherein (I hope) you are now establish'd. Whereunto I have added some Forms of Prayer, for the Benefit of private Persons and Families; which I heartily beg (not only for my Satisfaction, but your own) that you would sincerely, fer∣vently, and constantly make use of,
Morning and Evening, both with your Families, and in your Closets. Yet so, that (when Opportunitie's present) you do not neglect the more solemn and public Service of the Church, for the wilful Omission of this important and necessary Duty of Religion, as 'tis highly dishonourable to God, a Scandal to our holy Profes∣sion, and of very dangerous and damnable Consequence to all, but to Masters of Families especially, who have the chief and immediate Charge of, and Inspection over the rest; so, if it be sincerely and devoutly per∣form'd, this will intitle you to, and qualifie you not only for the Com∣forts and Blessings of this, but a fu∣ture and better Life: Nor have I the least cause to doubt, but that my well meant Endeavours herein, will meet with a ready and kind Acceptance, from you especially. And may your hearty Compliance with the Truth and Duties herein recommended,
bring you by degrees, to the perfect Knowledge and Practice of true Wis∣dom and Holiness; and make you abound still more and more in all the Virtues and Graces of the inner-man, to the Praise and Glory of our infinite Creator and Redeemer.
This Discourse (I hope) will prove so agreeable to the primitive Institu∣tion of the Christian Religion, that the Excellency and Ʋsefulness thereof, (as the Title imports) are in a great Mea∣sure represented, both in its Principles and Practices. A Religion, which shews the Dignity of Christ's Person, the Sufficiency of his Merits, and the faithful Administration of his Offices; by vertue whereof, he is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. A Religion, which above all things teacheth us to be godly and honest, pure and peace∣able, and to abound in all the Fruits of Piety, Justice, Charity, Sobriety, Loyalty, &c. and in all and every
one of these without partiality, with∣out hypocrisie.
And herein I have endeavour'd to be serious and practical, rather then make use of any vain glorious Digres∣sions of Wit and Eloquence; and have not fail'd to beg the Assistances of God's Grace and holy Spirit to di∣rect me in the Composure. Besides, the private Satisfaction I have expe∣rienc'd already, and the Benefit which (I hope) you'l reap by it, will not only compensate all the hard Mea∣sures I can meet with; but sufficient∣ly countervail all my Pains and Fa∣tigues herein. Nor am I concern'd for any more in this World, then to discharge the Duties of my Calling with a good Conscience, and leave behind me a good Example. I have not much troubled my Reader, with the Quotation of those Authors I have made use of. And the Faults which have escap'd the Press are neither ve∣ry many nor material; yet there are
some, which I desire he will either candidly censure, or correct.
And now, let us all indeavour (as we are oblig'd by the many power∣ful Motives of Duty and Interest) to adorn this most excellent Religion of the holy and eternal Jesus, by our un∣shaken Faith in its Principles, and hearty Compliance with all its just and reasonable Commands and Con∣stitutions whatsoever. So that we may reap in this World Satisfaction and Peace of Mind, and in the World to come Life everlasting. And if this Discourse, (now that 'tis made pub∣lic,) may any way conduce to the magnifying of God's Glory, and the Interest of his Church; (which is the Argument of it) I shall return him most hearty and unfeigned Thanks for the Success, and my Friends for the Encouragement in the Publicati∣on. Now, to God's merciful Gui∣dance, Protection, and Blessing I commit you: And as the Assistance
of your Prayers, to enable me the better to discharge my Duty in the Ministerial Office, is not the least Part of my Happiness; (for the Du∣ties of Minister and People are reci∣procal,) so I doubt not, but 'twill be Comfort and Satisfaction to you, to have this Assurance from me, that I am in all Sincerity,

York, January 23. 1685/6.
