


Honoured SIR,
'TIs not the apprehension of any Worth or Excellency in this Discourse, (except what its Subject Matter imports) that could tempt me to the Publication of it: Nor am I so vain as to think, that any thing of mine should find such Acceptance in a learned and critical Age, but that the Dread of its severe Censures would rather deter me from appearing in public, then the Opinion of my own
Performances could encourage me there∣unto; save, that I hope by committing my well intended, tho' slender Labours to Your worthy Patronage, I shall be secured at least (however otherwise treated) from open Reprehension or Calumny, by sheltring my self under the tutelar Ʋmbrage of Your great Name. A Name indeed deservedly great; if Your exemplary Piety and Vir∣tue; Your Loyalty to our Gracious So∣veraign, and Integrity to the present Government; if Your strict and im∣partial Administration of Justice; Your charitable Temper in composing Diffe∣rences, to the singular Benefit and Satis∣faction of the neighbouring Country; if Your excellent Pattern of Houshold Government in all the Relations and Circumstances of it; and Your parti∣cular Respect and Deference to all the truly loyal and Orthodox Sons of the Church of England, but the Clergy especially: If all these I say, and Your other innumerable Acts of Charity and
Beneficence may add any thing to Your Character; no Person of Your Rank has more improv'd the Patrimony of Ho∣nour, (deriv'd from Your truly Religi∣ous and Loyal Ancestors) nor advanc'd a Family to an higher Pitch in the ge∣neral Esteem of All. But I would not offend Your Modesty with more particu∣cular Enumerations and Eulogies of Your Merits: And indeed, the Trans∣actions of Your whole Life are so obvi∣ous to a considerable Part of the Nation, that 'twould be very incongruous to in∣large this Dedication with needless Pa∣negyricks. To whom then could I de∣dicate this Discourse with that equal Respect of Choice and Duty, as to Your Self; who, (besides Your Integrity and Success in those public Admini∣strations) have not only been a Friend and Patron, but even a Parent to the Author;Beneficio∣orum me∣moria se∣nescere non debet Sen. Lib. de Be∣neficiis. both whilst Your domestic Chaplain, and always since: So that the sincerest Gratitude and Service in my private Devotions are too small a
Tribute, for those many and undeserved Favours Your Bounty has bestow'd on me and mine. And therefore, as my Book in Duty desires Your Patro∣nage; so, for many considerable Reasons I have ventur'd it abroad in the World under Your Protection. But 'tis not ex∣pedient, nor do You expect that I should acquaint the World with the Particu∣lars that I owe You: Besides, those ver∣bal Acknowledgements (as they are often censur'd; so they) are but unsuit∣able Returns for real & great Favours. 'Tis Love and Duty that's payable from Your Votary; and I have no other Way at present to discharge my Obligations,Primitias Cordis & Oris. than by a humble Dedication of my La∣bours to the Memory of Your Name and Family, which I desire to do with all possible Respect and Observance: And may it prove (as 'tis sincerely design'd) a lasting Monument to Posterity of Your courteous Beneficence, and my re∣al Gratitude.
I hope, (Sir) You'l find in the candid
Perusal,Quod scriptum habetur sempet va∣cat ad le∣gendum, cum vacat legenti. Ne onero∣sum sit praesens, quod com voles su∣mitur, cum voles poni∣tur, Aug. Ep. 1. that this Discourse does carry in it the Stamp and Impress of Truth and Holiness: And as I could not have chosen a Subject more Excellent and Beneficial in it self, so neither, (I am well assur'd) more acceptable to You; which will minister the hope at least, that the Dignity and Usefulness there∣of, may atone for the want of Elegancy in the Composure.
Such as it is (good Sir) be pleas'd to accept it, as the humble Messenger of my Duty and Respect; that by the Favour of Your Patronage, my Endea∣vours herein may be more kindly inter∣preted: Nor need I fear a Reprimand for the Boldness of this Attempt; since Your Goodness will pardon, and your Candor bear with more Indiscretions, than I would willingly be guilty of.
God Almighty bless You in Your rea∣dy and loyal Intentions to serve Your King and Country, in the faithful Ma∣nagement of that honourable Trust re∣posed in You by both: and may You per∣severe
in your pious and zealous Reso∣lutions to serve the King of Kings sin∣cerely and affectionately, in the Com∣munion of this best of Churches. And that You may be every way happy in Your incomparably prudent and pious Lady, those hopeful Cions Your Chil∣dren and Grand-children, and all Your Worthy Relations; (whereby You and They may prove Ornaments to Your Country, Instruments of God's Glory here, and Possessors of it hereaf∣ter) shall be the daily Prayer of,
Worthy SIR,

