


My beloved Friends and Brethren,
THough by God's Providence, which most wisely Orders all Things, I now live at a great distance from you; yet I still retain a Pastoral Affecti∣on for you, and ordinarily remem∣ber you in my Prayers, and have an Heart that is truly desirous to serve you in the great Work of your Souls, and is glad when any pains of mine can prove serviceable to you therein.
I remember the Labours which I have spent among you, with a ve∣ry sincere and good Will, tho' alass! with much weakness, in my great

Lord and Masters Service; and I hope also that you will not forget them. And if by tract of time, ma∣ny things which I have taught you have slpt out of your Memories, (as I cannot expect but they have;) yet much of that, which I prepared and preached to do you good, I printed, whilst I was among you, for the Benefit of others, and the Books are in many of your Hands, and may be in more, wherewith you may refresh your Memories when you please.
In those labours of my Ministry, which I took among you for a course of several years, I thank God I endeavoured to lay before you his whole Counsel, according to the best my Skill. And suited my Dis∣courses, to the needs of the place, and to Times and Seasons, to pos∣sess you with such Thoughts and Tempers, as I judged needfull to support your Spirits, and to direct

your Practice under them. And I was not silent, but warned you, yea, sometimes till I even wearied some of you with warnings, against your Spiritual Dangers, when I thought any great Danger to your Souls drew near. For you your selves know, Brethren, that I have not kept back the Truths of God from you, nor suppressed them at the times when you had most need to be put in mind thereof; tho' I found some were like to be displeased therewith, and as St. Paul says, to count me Gal. 4. 1. their Enemy for telling them these Truths.
Now there must be a strict Ac∣count given one day, both how I have discharged my part in that Sta∣tion, and how you have discharged yours. And my Hearts desire, and earnest Prayer for you all is, that you may, both bear in Mind all the faithful Warnings and Instructions, which according to the best of my

understanding, I was continually pressing upon you, and left with you; and may likewise willingly, and carefully follow them. That so, when both you and I are brought before our ever Blesled and Great Master, (as most certainly we shall be,) we may both rejoyce together; I for having been your affectionate and Faithful Monitor, and you for having afforded a willing, a mind∣ful, and an obedient Ear.
And now, since I am out of the may of serving you otherwise, I have sent this Companion among you, to minister to your most Serious and Holy Thoughts, and to direct and go before you, both in your Prayers, and in your Practice. And I desire, that by your frequent and considerate use thereof, you wouldturn the Hymns and Prayers contained therein, to become the familiar and genuine Sense and Language of your Hearts. Learn habtually to breathe these

Thoughts, and daily to live by them. And by this means you may both perfect the work of your Repentance, and preserve the Peace of your Consciences, which are the greatest and most concerning things you have to mind, and the chief things, which I earnestly pray you that you would, and hope that you will mind, all the days of your Lives. And this I shall look on, as the best, and the most obliging Return, that you can make to me for this Labour of Love; which I desire you to receive, not only as a Token of my Respect and Kind∣ness to you, but also as a proper means, which, by God's Blessing, may do you good, if you please.
I humbly commend it to the Ac∣ceptance and Blessing of the Al∣mighty, without which it will be of no force, either among you, or among any others. And I heartily commend you all, to the Protection

of his Good Providence, and espe∣cially to the Guidance of his Grace, that he would deliver you from all dangerous Errors and Wickedness, and both make you perfect in the doing of his Will, and give you Comfort in the same. I remain, my Beloved Friends and Brethren,

From my House in London,
Jan. 23. 1693.
