


Dearly Beloved in our Lord,
THE Church has provided this short Catechism, or Instruction to be learn'd of every person, before he be brought to be Confirm'd by the Bishop, wherein she teaches all things that a Christian ought to know, and believe for his Soul's health; and she has enjoyn'd All Fathers and Mothers,See the Rubrick after the Catechism. Ma∣sters and Dames, to cause their Chil∣dren, and Servants, and Prentices, to come to the Church at the time appoin∣ted, and obediently to hear, and be or∣dered by the Curate, untill such time as they have learn'd all that is here ap∣pointed to be learn'd.
How seasonable and necessary this In∣junction is, in these days, our wofull expe∣rience does sufficiently convince us, when we reflect on the gross Ignorance and Irreligion of persons in those places, where Catechizing is neglcted, which all sober Christians do sadly deplore.
Since then the Providence of God, who is wont to glorifie his strength in the weak∣ness of the Instruments he uses, has caught me up from among the meanest Herdmen Am. 1.1., into the Pastoral Throne, and has been

pleased to commit you to my care; The Love I ought to pay to the chief Shepherd, obliges me to feed all his Lambs and his Sheep that belong to my flock,John 21.15, 16. and according to my poor abilities, to teach them the Knowledge, and the Love of God▪ and how they may make them both their daily study and prac∣tice.
One thing onely I most earnestly beg of you all, whether old or young, that ye would help me to save your own Souls; that ye would learn, and seriously consider, again and again, the terms on which your Salva∣tion is to be had.
As for you who have Families, I beseech you to instill into your Children and Servants their Duty, both by your Teaching, and your Example: In good earnest, it is less cruel and unnatural to deny them Bread for their mortal Bodies, than saving Knowledge for their immortal Souls.
Ye that are Fathers, or Masters, I ex∣hort you to tread in the steps of Abraham, the Father of the faithfull, and the friend James 2.23. of God, and like him, to command Gen. 18.19. your Children and Housholds to keep the way of the Lord.
Ye that are Mothers, or Mistresses, I ex∣hort you to imitate that unfeigned Faith 2 Tim. 1.5., which dwelt in young Timothy's Grand∣mother Lois, and his Mother Eunice, who taught him from a Child 3.15. to know the Holy Scriptures, which were able to make him wise to Salvation; and like them, to bring up your Children and Ser∣vants in the nurture and admonition of the Lord Eph. 6.4..
I passionately exhort and beseech you all, of either Sex▪ never to cease your conscien∣tious zeal for their instruction, till you bring them to Confirmation▪ To renew their Bap∣tismal vow; To make open profession of their Christianity; To discharge their Godfa∣thers and Godmothers; To receive the so∣lemn▪ Benediction of the Bishop; To share in the publick Intercessions of the Church, and to partake of all the Graces of God's Ho∣ly Spirit, implor'd on their behalf; that God who has begun Phil. 1.6. a good work in them; may perfect it till the day of Christ; and that I my self at that dreadfull day, may ren∣der Heb. 13.17. an account of you with joy.
How much the Catechism of our Church may conduce to so desirable an end, you will in some measure judge by the following Ex∣plication, as imperfect as it is, and which, by God's gratious assistence, I have so con∣triv'd, that at one and the same time, it may both inform your understanding, and raise your affections; and that it might the better sute with every ones leisure and infirmities, it is Pen'd in short Forms of Devotion, to be us'd in whole, or in part; in separate Collects or Ejaculations, or occasionally, as your Spi∣ritual necessities shall require.
God of his infinite mercy bless the whole, to his own Glory, and to your Edification, through Iesus the Beloved. Amen, Amen.

