



My Lord,
IN compliance with Your Lordships Desire, I here pre∣sent You with this faint Portraicture of your Dear, and Excellent Lady. Those rare Virtues, that endow'd her Noble Soul, had mightily endear'd her Person, and will always embalm her Memory, among

those that knew her. But as they rendred her a Bles∣sing to this, so they prepared her for the Converse of Angels, and Blessed Spirits in a better Place: And to compleat all his other Mercies, God has Crown'd all his Graces in her, which were ripe for Glory, by taking her to be Happy with himself. Had he lent us the Bles∣sing for a longer Time, her Life would have been most truly instructing, and had the daily use and benefit of a Sermon. But since it has pleased him to take away the Original, 'tis pity the World should want the Copy too, and lose the Benefit of her Example. Your Lord∣ship has already reaped much Profit, and is still in hope to receive more, by reflecting on it Your self: And You trust it may bring a like Advantage, and serve to kindle and cherish like Inclinations, in the Hearts of many others also. I am sure it is very fit for Gene∣ral use, and will do good to all that hear of it, if they are not wanting to themselves. For she was a very lively Draught of many excellent Virtues; and they must either be perfectly Good, (as none are in this World) or extremely bad Souls, who cannot improve by be∣ing set in the Light of such Patterns.
One main Hindrance of this good Effect, my Lord, is the suspicion of Flattery and Insincerity in these Di∣scourses, as if in them Men were not careful of strict Truth, and sought not so much what may be truly said,

as what may set off their Subject. I cannot promise this Relation any Security from such Censures, since the truest, and most faithful Accounts in this kind, can∣not always avoid them. But I have this Testimony in my self, That in the Description I have given of this excellent Person, I have spoken nothing to deserve them. I have represented her as most exemplary, and imita∣ble, in Modesty, and Sincerity; and I am sure I have had a great Concern upon me, not to lose either in Discoursing of her. I know there is not only Sinceri∣ty, but Care too required in every one, who will take upon him to be a Reporter: And this I have held my Eye upon, in all the Parts of her Character. I freely confess to Your Lordship, my Aim has been to speak too little, for fear of saying too much; and that I have designedly used wariness in several Expressions, lest ven∣turing to the utmost Bounds of Truth, I might happen to step beyond them. And whatever Judgment they may pass, who knew little of her, I have this to satisfie my self, and the World too, that they who knew her best, and especially Your Lordship, will say this is not only a True, but a Modest Character.
I heartily wish, my Lord, this Draught of Your Dear Lady, were fitter than it is, to serve Your Lord∣ships Ends, of rendring her Example useful to the World, and doing Honour to her Memory. I hope, thro'

the Grace of God, and Your Piety and discreet Care, that the Representation of her Virtues will not renew Your Grief, which shews her to be set above it. For it would trouble me to think I have sent a Companion into Your Retirements, to minister to Sadness and dejected Thoughts, and render this Service, which is perform'd with willingness, uneasie in the Remembrance of it, to,
My Good Lord,

From your Lordships house near Coles∣hill, Oct. 23. 1684.
