



Great Sir!
PErmit me, I beseech You, to lay at Your
Royal Feet this small Manual, which
has no other design but the Supporting
of Your Sacred Majesty, and Your Faithful
Friends and Adherents under those Cala∣mities
which Your Majesty has born with
so much Magnanimity, Patience, and
Christian Resolution, that it shews You to
be the Heir not only of Your Royal Father's
Crown, but of his Afflictions and Suffer∣ings;
Exerting the like Constancy and Cou∣rage
under them, as that Blessed Martyr
did. 'Tis true, indeed, Your Royal Father
was a Protestant, and Liv'd and Dy'd in and
for that Profession; and I cou'd heartily wish
that Your Majesty was so too: For then we
might quickly hope to see an end of our pre∣sent

Miseries in a short time. But tho' so
great a Blessing be deny'd us, yet shall my
Loyalty and Duty approve it self the same,
as if You were ; for I cannot conceive
(what ever some may think) that Your
Majesty's being of another Perswasion than
my self, can discharge me from my Allegi∣ance
to You. And I hope Your Majesty will
not the less regard what I have here Writ∣ten,
because I profess my self, as I always
did, to be a Member and an Vnworthy Son
of the Church of England: For as it has
always been my Iudgement, that he that Be∣lieves,
Lives, and Prays, according to the
Rules that Christ has given us, is a True
Christian and a happy Man; so I believe
that the next way to Heaven is not to look
after Controversie, but Conscience; and to
spend our Zeal and Time not in being Con∣tentious,
but Religious: And therefore where∣soever
I live in the Christian World, whi∣ther
East or West, it is not my being a good
Scholar that will make me happy, but a good
Christian; not a Learned Disputant for
Christ, but a Devout Servant to him: Nor
the being of such or such a Party or side in

the Church, but a True Member of his Body.
AND if Your Majesty wou'd Vouchsafe
to bear with me a little, I cou'd easily de∣monstrate
this to be the most Safe Way: For,
if I am Regenerated by the holy Spirit, and
made a Christian by true Baptism, believing
the Scriptures; can it with any Colour of
Reason, be Suppos'd that I shall suffer Dam∣nation
for not equally Believing Traditions?
And if I make Conscience to serve and Wor∣ship
GOD, can it be thought I shall Perish
for not Worshiping Images? If I pray to
GOD, as our Blessed Saviour hath taught
me, saying, Our Father, &c. Who can
think I should incur the Sentence of Dam∣nation
for not Invocating Saints and Angels?
And if I receive the holy Communion of the
Body and Blood of Christ, in both kindes,
according to Christ's Institution, as even the
Roman Church Confesses, who can believe
I shall be damned, because the Cup is taken
away by a Council?
THESE things I urge with all humili∣ty,
only to let Your Majesty see what reason I
have to believe the Protestant Religion to be
the most Safe Way: And if through the

Divine Blessing they should be made Effica∣cious,
to cause Your Majesty to Return to,
and Embrace the Religion professed even to
Death, by Your Royal Father, for whom I
am sure You have so justly a great Venera∣tion,
it wou'd be the Ioy and Rejoycing of all
Your People; and wou'd open a Door of hope
to 'em, even in this Valley of Achor.
But if for our Sins, we shall still be depriv'd
of so great a Blessing, it is yet our Duty to
submit to the Soveraign Will of our Almighty
Maker, and to continue our Loyalty to Your
Majesty, praying, That the Divine Good∣ness
would graciously support You under
those great and many Troubles wherewith
it has pleased Him to Exercise You here;
and at last to Translate You to a brighter
Crown, even a Crown of Immarcessible Glory.
Which is the Daily and Earnest Prayer of,

