



Most Dear and Beloved in Christ:
I Hope I can say (with the holy Apostle) that you are by me dearly beloved, my Joy, and my Crown; yea you are my Ho∣nour, and in you I would rejoice, being the Ornament of my poor Ministry, by which the most of you have (through the Blessing of God) been converted to Jesus Christ: and if you stand fast in the Faith in one Spirit, striving together for the Faith of the Gospel, and do adorn

your Profession, living in Love, and endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, you will cause my latter days to be most sweet and comfortable to me, after all those Troubles, Sorrows, and Reproaches I have met with, both from within and from with∣out. Evident it is God hath most eminently appeared to strengthen your hands: tho the Archers have sorely grieved you, and shot at you, yet your Bow abideth in strength; and that the Arms of your Hands may still abide strong by the Arm of the mighty God of Jacob, shall be my continual Prayers.
My Brethren, I here present you with that which you have so long waited for, and desired me to endeavour to do, viz. to state an account of the most concer∣ning Articles of your Faith, which you have heard read, and have approved of, and which I thought

good no longer to delay the doing of. (1.) Not knowing how soon I may put off this Tabernacle, and therefore would leave behind me an account of that holy Doc∣trine and Order, in which through Grace you are established (for at your desire also I have drawn up the whole Rules of your holy Dis∣cipline, which you may have ad∣ded unto this, and bound up to∣gether). (2.) And the rather I have done this, because the Ge∣neral and more Large Confession of the Faith of our Churches, is now out of Print; but that is not all, for that being 12 d. price, some cannot well purchase it. (3.) And also that all Men may see what our Faith is, and that we differ not from our Brethren who bear other Names in any Fundamen∣tal Point or Article of Faith; and that they may discern the diffe∣rence between you and some that bear the same Name with you.

(4.) Tho you agree in the ge∣neral with all other Churches of the same Faith, in all those Ar∣ticles there inserted, yet therein your whole Faith is not compre∣hended, viz. that of Imposition of Hands upon baptized Be∣lievers as such, and singing of God's Praise, &c. because some of our Churches dissent from us therein: yet my desire is you would nevertheless shew all Ten∣derness, Charity and Moderation to such as differ from you in those Cases, and not refuse Commu∣nion with them; and indeed your late sweet Temper appears to be such, that I need not press you to this. All that I shall say more, is to entreat you to labour after Holiness, and to awake out of sleep, that you may adorn your sacred Profession, and prepare to meet the Lord; that as you have a good Doctrine, you may also have a holy and good Conversa∣tion;

and then we need not fear who can harm us, whilst we are followers of that which is good, O let us bear one with another. and if in any thing we differ, let us avoid all Animosities. Brethren, great things are near, watch and pray, look out and be ready. But at present I shall con∣clude with the words of the Apo∣stle, Finally, Brethren, fare∣wel; be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one Mind, live in peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you.
So prays your unworthy Brother, Pastor, Overseer, and Servant, who earnestly desires your Pray∣ers, also,

From my House in Freemans-lane by Horsley-down, Southwark.
Aug. 16. 1697.
