



My Lord,
WHen I Preach'd this Sermon to my
own Parish, I had no Design to
make it more publick. But since
your Lordship desires it should come
abroad, I readily submit to it. For, besides the just
and great Regard I have to your Lordship's Request,
I would not be wanting in any thing, that may serve,
though in a very small measure, to do Honour to that
most dear, and exemplary Saint, your deceased Bro∣ther.
I am conscious that the Draught I have made
of him is very imperfect: but such as it is, it sets
out many things most worthy to be imitated, which
may render it no lost Labour to the World. To do Right
indeed to the Subject, I should speak in Proportion to
what he deserved: but to do service among those that
survive, the saying any thing almost of him is suffici∣ent,
since it must needs be worth Mens while to hear

any Particulars remarqued upon, where almost all are
excellent. And so long as his Character may benefit
others, were he on Earth again, he, whose stu∣died
care it was to do good, and shun the praise of it,
would readily pardon all the well-meant Errors and
Defects of the Compiler, which make it wanting to
his own Honour. And I am well assured your Lord∣ship,
who succeeds him in his Virtues, as well as in his
Estate and Honour, will do so too.
In particular, my Lord, I hope your Lordship will
reap Benefit by these Papers. For to your own
Stock of an excellent good Nature, and Religious Prin∣ciples,
you have made the discreet Choice of his admi∣rable
Example to improve both, and have already tran∣scribed
it, in some choice and commendable Methods.
God grant your Lordship a lasting Continuance, and
daily increase of those Noble Endowments, which make
you Brothers in Virtue as well as in Blood, that you
may not only equal, but exceed him in all those Excellen∣cies
and Pious Qualities, which set him out for a rare
Pattern, and injoy a much longer Life, wherein to
display, and do good to the World with them. This,
my Lord, is, and always must be the most hearty
Prayer of,

Coles-Hill
Mar. 30.
1686.
