



MY LORD,
HAving published this Treatise to promote, as much as in me lies, an intire Practice of our Blessed Saviours Precepts, and a com∣fortable expectation of his Rewards a∣mongst us; I have presumed to address it to Your Lordship, hoping it will find Acceptance in Your Pious Judgment for

the sake of those things which are con∣tained in it, and because Your Lordship is a most eminent Example as a Christi∣an, and a most discreetly zealous and di∣ligent Promoter as a Bishop of the Sub∣ject of it.
In this Work my Great Design has been to press men to a conscientious re∣gard of their whole Duty, and to show them how much contentment, and cheer∣fulness of Spirit they have reason to en∣joy in the careful observance of it. And these are ends so excellent, as may well excuse the imperfections of any honest En∣deavours, which shall be put forth in or∣der to them. For what greater service can be done to our Blessed Lord, than to exalt his Authority in the hearts and lives of all his Followers? What grea∣ter honour can be brought to Religion, than to promote a pious practice, and thereupon a constant joy and cheerfulness in the minds of all its Professors? And

what more faithful kindness can be shown to the Souls of Men, than cleerly to lay before them, and most earnestly to press upon them such things as will give them peace and comfortable expectations of God's love and favour in this World, and secure their eternal happiness in that which is to come? And since I have directed all the Parts, and every thing that I have said in the following Dis∣course, to these ends; I am willing to hope, that, notwithstanding all its defects, I have therein done no unacceptable ser∣vice to my Saviour, and to all good men, who will be much readier to encourage a∣ny honest tendences to this purpose, than to reprove, and throw them by, for the sake of those weaknesses, and that want of skill, which shall be found in them.
In this hope, my Lord, I make bold to Present it to Your Lordship, whose great and most exemplary Virtue will not, I believe, be averse from Patronizing

that, which tends even in a low degree to further and promote it. I pray God preserve Your Lordship, and continue You, what You now are, an Illustrious Pattern of all Private and Political Virtues to this Your Native Country. That Religion may still be adorned, and this distressed Church supported, by that exemplariness of an upright Conversati∣on, that great Prudence, and unweari∣ed Diligence, and undaunted Courage, and most wise and steady Zeal, which Your Lordship has always shown in Your High Station for the things of God com∣mitted to Your Care, and which have rendred You greatly serviceable to Your Saviour, and a most valuable Blessing to this poor Church and Nation. This, my Lord, is the most hearty Prayer of,

