



THE Sermon which follows, when I first com∣posed it, was never intended for the Press: I am very sensible of its defects, and that it is very short of that Argument of which it treats: The Cha∣racter which I have given of your late Husband de∣ceased, falls short also of that excellent man. It was a trouble to me that it fell to my share to perform this last office. For though no man loved or esteemed the good man more than I did, yet there were many that could have done him greater right. However, since it was your pleasure to desire it, I thought it became me not to dispute the matter: And since what I did was accepted, and I was desired to make it publick, I was willing to comply, in hopes that it might do some good: I know very well that a great example of Piety hath a considerable influence: And though I do not pretend to give the just and full Character of our deceased Friend; yet, I hope, what is said, may be of some use to recom∣mend substantial and unaffected Piety to mankind. If it gain this effect, I shall think my self abundantly re∣warded, and shall have great cause to bless God for it.
I am very sensible how great a loss the death of such a man is to the Publick, how great to my self, and how
grievous to you his departure hence was. But we are to submit to the will and wisdom of God. He lived to good purpose and to a good old age; He is placed above Con∣tingencies, and is out of the reach of Evil. He glori∣fied God on the earth, and is now passed into the glory above. We may mourn for our selves, and at the same time ought not to forget to give God hearty thanks for his great goodness to him; we are to improve our loss as well as to bear it with patience. And the hope we have of Heaven will be able to sustain us; and if we cherish and increase this hope in our selves, we are cer∣tain that whatever befals us will advance us toward that blessed state. If we be good our selves 'twill not be in the power of any evil to render us miserable; if we be not, nothing will make us happy.
But I need not tell you this, who have of a long time been a Disciple and follower of Jesus, and have made a wise choice of that better part which shall never be taken from you.
This following Discourse belongs to you. I desire your acceptance of it as a testimony of the honour I preserve for the memory of your deceased Husband. I am

