



Honoured, and Beloved;
IT grieves me I have further occasion to
trouble you after this manner: I know not
what should move Mr. Marlow to write
his Appendix, just at a time when he was told
I was writing an Answer to his first Discourse:
he might have had a little Patience, and have
staid till my Treatise was published, whereby
he might the better have perceived, whether
what he wrote the last Year would abide the
Test or Trial of God's Word or not: This is
therefore his second Attempt in publick against
God's holy Ordinance of singing of Psalms,
Hymns, &c. before any body appeared visibly
to oppose, or put a stop to his undue Proceed∣ings.
For what Call he had to begin this Con∣troversy
at such an unseasonable time, I know
not; but since he has done it, certainly none
can see any just cause to blame me for standing

up in the Defence of that Truth of Jesus Christ,
which I am so well satisfied about, and esta∣blished
in, and that too as it is practised by the
Church, to whom I am related as an unworthy
Member, and above twenty Baptized Congre∣gations
besides in this Nation. Tho before I went
about it, I offered my Brethren (him or any
other) a sober and friendly Conference in the
Spirit of Meekness, which I could not obtain,
tho I did not give such a publick Challenge as
my Brother intimates in that strange Epistle he
hath wrote to me; but upon the coming forth
of his Book, I was troubled, and would have
had it been discoursed in the General Assembly,
but that was not consented to; and then I
told my honoured and Reverend Brethren my
purpose was to give an Answer to his Book, but
did not enter upon it till I was urged by several,
and particularly by Mr. Marlow himself, before
divers Witnesses, in such kind of words as these,
i. e. Answer me like a Man. Whether he is
answered like a Man, or but like a Child, is left
to your Consideration, 'tis done according to
that Light and Ability God hath been pleased
to bestow upon me.
But if he, or any of his Helpers, do see
cause to reply, they must answer such Per∣sons
who have wrote upon this Truth, like
Men, and Men too of great Parts, Learning
and Piety, or let them not trouble me nor the
World any more. As touching his Epistle to
the Churches, I shall take but little notice
of it, nor of that he hath writ to my self,

sith in my Judgment, neither of them signify
much; you are Men of greater Wisdom than
to be frightn̄ed out of an Ordinance, or de∣terred
from seeking after the Knowledg of it,
with these scurrilous Names of Error, Aposta∣cy,
Human Tradition, prelimited Forms, mis∣chievous
Error, Carnal Forms, Carnal Wor∣ship,
&c. These are hard Words, and do not
bespeak a trembling Heart, nor a humble Spirit,
and better becomes a Man that pretends to Infal∣libility.
But what some Men want of sound Ar∣guments,
they think to make up by hard Words
and Confidence; but this will never do with
you. How hath our Practice of baptizing Be∣lievers,
&c. been branded with the reproachful
Name of Error? and 'tis very observable how
some Men of far greater Parts and Ability than
my Brothers or mine, either have cried out a∣gainst
the Reign of Christ, Conversion of the
Gentiles, and calling of the Jews, as a gross
Error, as witness Mr. Richard Baxter parti∣cularly
of late. 'Tis Arguments I know you
look for, and if you find those of Mr. Mar∣low's
to prevail against what I have said, do not
regard what I have wrote in the least; for I
would have your Faith (as the Apostle speaks)
to stand in the Power of God, and not in the
Wisdom of Men. The smallness of the Num∣ber
of our Churches who are in the Practice of
this Ordinance, I also know will signify no∣thing
with you, provided it be proved to be
a Truth of Jesus Christ: What tho there was
not one of our Churches that had Light in it,

it would certainly the more concern them to
enquire after it. And tho he hath so coursly
saluted me, &c. yet I am not concerned at it
further, than to bewail his Confidence and Ig∣norance,
to say no worse, I know no Men in
any Age, who appeared first to vindicate a
Truth, which others call an Error, but have
met with the same Usage I meet withal from
our Brother; who, I hope, is a good Man, and
means well, yet is he strangely beclouded. As
I have been a Preacher up of Spiritual Worship
(as he says) and that too more than thirty
Years (tho a poor and unworthy one;) so
through the Grace of God, I hope shall conti∣nue
to do unto the end of my days; and 'tis
only Spiritual Worship, you may perceive, I
plead for, in contending for singing of Psalms,
Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, none of which
three can be without their special and particular
form. But must they needs be therefore carnal
and humane Forms which appertain unto
them? I see 'tis time to stand up for the Form
of Ordinances, for the Form of Doctrine, and
for the Form of sound Words; for if we must
part with singing of Psalms, Hymns, &c. from
his pretended Arguments about Forms, all
external Ordinances must go as well as that of
Singing: In a word, we must give up our
whole visible Profession, and wait for those ex∣traordinary
Gifts of the Spirit that were in the
Primitive Time, if we must not sing till
we have that extraordinary Gift to do it,
which some had in the Apostles Days, and the

like in discharge of every Gospel-Ordinance,
which were to abide in the Church to the end of
the World.
He may as well therefore say, I do but coun∣terfeit
that excellent Gift in Preaching (when
I preach) which was in the Primitive Gospel-Church,
as thus to charge me in the case of our
singing by the ordinary Gifts of the Spirit:
Read his Epistle to me, Append. p. 15.
It seems to me as if my Brother does not un∣derstand
the nature of Moral Duties, or natural
Worship, but mistakes, and thinks natural or
moral Worship must needs be carnal, tho we
never plead for the performance of any Duties
that are moral naturally in themselves, without
the help and assistance of God's Spirit, and the
Graces thereof in our Hearts. Is it not part of
natural Religion and Worship, to fear God, to
love God, and trust in God, and that too with
all our Hearts, and with all our Souls, and with
all our Strength, and love our Neighbours as
our selves? &c. These Duties appertain to na∣tural
Religion; yet without the divine Help and
Influences of the Spirit, we can do none of them
in a right manner; no more, say I, can we pray,
nor sing the Praises of God, which are Duties
comprehended in our fearing, honouring, wor∣shipping,
and loving of him. And whereas
Mr. Marlow reflects on me, as if I singled out
my self more than others in London, in pushing
on this practice of Singing. I must tell him,
I have abundance of Peace in my Spirit in what
I have done therein: And if our People (I

mean, the Church to whom I belong) are one
of the first Churches of our Perswasion in this
City, found in the practice of this Sacred Or∣dinance,
I am satisfied it will be to their great
Honour, (and not to their Reproach) and
that not only in succeeding Ages, but also in
the Day of Jesus Christ.
But, blessed be God, the greatest number of
our worthy London-Elders are as well satisfied
in this Truth as my self, and many of their
People too, and will generally, I doubt not,
in a little time get into the practice of it.
Our Reverend Brother Knowllys 'tis known is
clear in it, and has practised it for some Years,
though at present 'tis not used in his Congre∣gation.
He told me lately, he is about to
write in Vindication thereof, which he in∣tends
to publish in a short time, if the Lord
please to spare his Life.
And whereas Mr. Marlow affirms, as if I
had brought Singing into our Congregation,
to the grief and trouble of many of our Mem∣bers;
it is false, for 'tis known the Church
hath been in this practice near twenty Years
after Breaking of Bread, and near 14 Years on
Thanksgiving-days in a mixt Congregation.
And what was done of late in bringing it in af∣ter
Sermon on the Lord's Days, was done by a
regular Act of the Church in a solemn man∣ner:
And though some of our worthy Brethren
and Sisters are at present somewhat dissatisfied
with it, yet I doubt not but will in a little time
see their Mistakes, if such busy Men as he do

not in an undue manner blow up Coals of
Contention amongst us.
Can any sober Christian think he hath done
well to publish the Private Affairs of a Par∣ticular
Church to the whole World? It seems
to some as if he has hopes there will be a Breach
in the Church, upon the Account of our Sing∣ing
the Praises of God; but I hope he will
find our worthy Brethren understand themselves
better than to go about to impose on the
Church or Consciences of their Brethren, or to
strive to pull down that which the Church
and themselves too, have been a building for
so many Years. Can there be a Man
so left of God as to countenance any Per∣sons
to make a Schism in a Congragation, be∣cause
they cannot forgo a Duty they have so
long been satisfied in the practice of, and so
the whole Body to submit to the Sentiments of
a few Persons, as if they had Power over our
Faith? We do not say our dissatisfied Brethren
shall sing with us, or we will have no fellow∣ship
with them; no, God forbid we should
impose on their Consciences. We do not look
upon Singing, &c. an Essential of Commu∣nion;
'tis not for the being, but for the com∣fort
and well-being of a Church. We have told
our Brethren (since we sing not till after our
last Prayer) if they cannot sing with us, nay,
nor stay with the Church whilst we do sing,
they may go forth, and we will not be of∣fended.
Should any countenance, through a hot and

unaccountable zeal, such a Schism, it would
make strange Confusion in our Churches. And
since he thus publickly hints at this private
Case amongst us, I had I thought a clear Call
to open the matter plainly as it is, to clear my
self and the Church, to all who may read his
Epistle and this my Answer, for we have done
nothing we have the least cause to be ashamed
of, or unable to justify in the sight of God or
Man.
I shall add one word to the consideration of
the Brethren of our Church, I doubt not but
they will consider it.
1. If they look upon us as equal in Knowledg
and Uprightness towards God with themselves,
they may see we have the same ground to be
offended with them in diminishing from God's
Word, as they may be with us, for adding (as
possibly they think) to God's Word.
2. And let them consider 'tis a horrid Evil
to break the Bond of Spiritual Union, and un∣awares
to wound the Body of Christ.
Whose Work is it thus to do, but the Devil's?
and what a reproach doth it bring upon the
Truth? and how grievous is it to all truly
Godly Ones, and grateful to the Enemies of
our Sacred Profession? Besides, upon such a
trifle, can it be so hainous a Crime to be found
often in that Duty, which they with us have so
often and long been in the practice of, and in
a mixt Assembly too, many and many times?
Besides, brought in by almost an unanimous
Agreement in a solemn Church-Meeting, there

being not, above five or six that shewed any
publick dissent, nor they neither signifying any
such dissatisfaction, i. e. that if we sang at such
Times, they could not bear it; nor do I hear
they do desire us now to decline the said
practice. Love will cover a greater Fault than
this, for they may see cause to believe 'tis not
Self-Interest, but the Glory of God we wholly
aim at. But to return.
The truth is, I wonder any should be ta∣ken
with his Book, for I never saw any thing
come out in Print upon any controvertible
Truth, that has less of Argument in it, or
more of Confidence. And 'tis not my Thoughts
alone, nor more destructive Mediums made use
of to the whole of the external Parts of Reli∣gion.
Nay, one told me very lately, that one
of our dissatisfied Members intimated to him,
as if our Bible was not truly or rightly tran∣slated;
and it seems to rise from what Mr. Mar∣low
hath asserted in his Book about the word
Hymnos. I fear'd that would be the Effect
of his Attempt, if any Body regarded what he
hath said upon that account.
But, pray, what Call has he to rebuke me,
after this publick manner, especially before the
whole World? If I had done any thing amiss
in his Judgment in that Matter, I could wish
he had had more Wisdom and Prudence, or else
lest the Controversy to some more discreet and
abler Pen.
I cannot forget the two Brethren that oppo∣posed

Singing the Praises of God, and would
not comply with the Church, (though they
did not separate themselves from the Church)
when first the practice of it was received
amongst us near twenty Years ago. One
of them soon after brought a great Re∣proach
upon Religion by immoral Actions, and
came to nothing, and the other sometime af∣ter
turned Quaker, and to my Face denied the
Resurrection of his Body, &c.
As to that way Mr. Marlow speaks of prai∣sing
of God in Prayer, without singing of Prai∣ses,
as being more suitable (as he thinks) to
the ordinary Gifts of the Spirit. I must tell
him, God's Word is our Rule; and since God
doth require his People to celebrate his Praises
by singing Psalms, Hymns, &c. doubtless that
suits as well with the ordinary Gifts of the
Spirit, as such Gifts suit with Prayer, Preach∣ing,
&c. And I fear one day he will not be
found able to give any good account of himself
in his bold Attempt, in seeking to rob God of
his glorious Praise by singing to him, as he hath
enjoined us to do; nor do I fear, but through
the Help and Authority of God's Word, I
shall, in the Day of Christ, stand with Joy
and Confidence before him, upon this respect,
when possibly he may be ashamed, if he has not
sincere Repentance for what he has done.
Is it not a false Assertion for him to say as he
doth, (in his Epistle to me) That as to our
way of Vocal Singing together, there is nei∣ther
Command nor Example for it, either in

the Old or New Testament? I shall leave it
to the Consideration of all wise and sober Men.
Certainly all will conclude the Man is strangely
left of God, especially considering he builds his
main Confidence from a remote and indirect
signification of a Greek Word, and yet, as I
am told, understands not that Language nei∣ther.
My Portion is, I perceive, to undergo hard
Censures from Men; but 'tis no more than my
Blessed Master met with; and what am I that I
should complain? One said, He was a good
Man: but others said, Nay, but he hath a De∣vil,
and deceiveth the People. John . 12,
20.
The Lord increase Love among all the Saints,
and a bearing and forbearing, a gentle and Chri∣stian
Spirit. We all know but in part. And
O that the Lord would be pleased to deli∣ver
Men, who profess the Gospel, from that
horrid Sin of backbiting of their Neigh∣bours,
and from that bitter and unaccountable
Spirit of Prejudice that seems to be gotten into
the Hearts of some; from whence they seem to
tear the Names of their Brethren to pieces
through undue Offences. These thnigs are mat∣ter
of Lamentation, and I fear the forerunner of
a dismal Hour that is coming upon us. Cannot
Christians have the Liberty of their Conscien∣ces
from their Brethren, to practise a Truth ac∣cording
to their Light, without being charged
and censured after this manner, with Carnal
Forms, and mischievous Error? &c. I shall

not retain you longer, but desire you, whoever
you are, impartially to read and well weigh my
sober Reply to my Brother's Appendix: I am
glad it came forth before all my Treatise was
printed off, though it is true it makes the Price
more than I intended.
There is a Reverend and Learned Friend,
who meeting with Mr. Marlow's Appendix, find∣ing
him quoting learned Authors in an undue and
unaccountable manner, to little purpose, (which
because, it might possibly amuse the Unlearned
and more unwary Reader) he has, in love to
this Sacred Truth, and to deliver the Souls of
Men and Women from Mistakes, made some
Reflections on what he has wrote on that ac∣count,
at the close of this Reply. If the Lord
please to bless what I and my Reverend Friend
have said to the further clearing up the Truth, I
shall not be troubled at my Pains nor Charge.
I have been forc'd to repeat some things twice
or thrice, by reason of his leading me in such
an unusual Path. This is all at present,

