




Madam,
THere are many Books alrea∣dy extant upon the Argu∣ment which the following Dis∣course treats of: And those also so very good in themselves, and so very happy in their Authors, that
I cannot think that this which fol∣lows, will ever deserve a name a∣mongst them. For as it was at first drawn up for those whose needs re∣quired all plainness of speech; so it now adventures abroad in the ve∣ry same dress in which it was at first composed and delivered. And therefore I might well find great reason to dispute with my self whe∣ther or not I should adventure this Discourse abroad.
But whatever demur these things might make, yet sure I am, I did not doubt to whom I ought to address it, when I was once resol∣ved to make it publick. 'Tis due to you, Madam, whatever it is, up∣on more scores than one. And though it be unworthy of so good a name, as it will now bear; yet I am certain that it needs it.
I shall not need to recommend to your Ladiship the subject of this following Tract. You are alrea∣dy greatly in love with that part of your duty which is here discoursed of. You are firmly resolved to lead a life of Religion, and to give up your self to the obedience of the Laws of your Lord and Saviour. Now certainly you will find no∣thing a greater help to you than frequent and devout Communions are. You will find great need in your pilgrimage towards Heaven of such Spiritual repasts and viands. Nothing can be more welcome to a pious Soul than to meet with these happy opportunities of be∣coming better. And they that love their Lord must needs be very for∣ward to celebrate the memory of his death, and unspeakable kind∣ness to them. The doing of this
as we ought, will redound greatly to our advantage. We shall by this means be reconciled to God, and in perfect charity to one ano∣ther: We shall be more fit to live, and more prepared to die: We shall the better support under our sorrows, and be the more strong against our temptations; our bur∣den will be the lighter, and yet our strength the greater: We shall here receive new strength and vi∣gor to walk in Gods ways: We shall think that easie which once we thought intolerable: We shall lead at once an innocent and an useful life. The advantages of frequent and devout Communions are not to be expressed. Here are joys which no man can rob us of; Treasures more valuable than that of the Indies. Every pious Soul will witness to this truth. And
therefore, Madam, I doubt not but you will the more favourably receive this treatise for the argu∣ments sake which it discourseth of.
But still, Madam, I have farther reason upon my own account to make my acknowledgements to your Ladiship. Your kindnesses to me have been very great, and have laid a great obligation upon me to shew my thankfulness to you. And as an unfained testimony of my gratitude I am bold to present you with this Discourse. It is in∣deed but a small tribute of thanks, which here I pay you; but yet is such as I have, and your Ladiship will I hope, rather regard my mind than the thing it self. How∣ever I shall be extreamly glad if any thing that is here offered may be of any use to your Ladiship in advancing your eternal interest and concern.
You have made a good begin∣ning, and a wise Choice in devot∣ing your self to a Religious Life. Continue, Madam, in this purpose. This will turn to your account when all other things will fail you. There was never greater need of regular and exemplary piety than now. Religion is now become the scoff and derision of profane and foolish men. It is not now the mode to be severely Pious. Pure Religion and undefiled is very rare∣ly to be found. It is infinitely sad to think that so excellent a Religion as ours is, should be almost every where, either misunderstood, or spoken against. Your Constancy now will be more rewardable than at other times. You will now see cause to shew a great regard to the Laws of your dearest Lord, when they are so commonly trampled
upon. Count it your honour to be truly good. And dare to own your Saviour before men, and he will confess you before his Heaven∣ly Father.
We are concerned to refute the Atheists, and to defend the excel∣lent Religion which our Lord hath left us against gain-sayers. But there is not a more effectual way of doing this than by an exemplary and pious life. This does more than our most subtile and nervous reasoning, a great example of Piety does more good than a learned Pen. This is the most likely way to pre∣vail against those that oppose them∣selves. Our enemies mouths are stop'd if we take this course: These Arguments are unanswerable, and will convert more to the Faith than our Reasons are like to do. Now, Madam, you can thus defend your
Religion against contentious men. This is the way to restore us to what we should be.
I have great reason to believe that your Ladiship will be a great ex∣ample of real piety. That you will strongly pursue every vertuous and good thing. But yet, Madam, you will pardon me that I put you in mind to persevere and to abound in every good thing. This proceeds not from any distrust, but from a great and sincere desire of your happiness. That the Almighty would keep your Ladiship from every evil thing, and bless you with all the blessings of this and a better Life, is the most hearty prayer of,
Madam, 
