



THe sutableness of a Dedication is to be mea∣sured from the agreeableness of the Subject to the Person to whom it is directed; If it is to sue for Defence and Patronage, (which the fol∣lowing Sermon stands in need of, (not for the subject matter, but for the weakness of the handling of it,) it ought to be laid at the feet of such who are eminent for the Vertue it recommends to the World: Now al∣though you are many ways intitled to this Sermon, as being first compos'd, and Preach'd by your com∣mand, and by yours, (together with the injunctions of the very Worthy, Loyal, and Judicious Gentle∣men of the Grand Inquest,) now publish'd in Print, yet the Title upon which it offers it self to your Pro∣tection now is, that you are a person of exemplary Loyalty, of steady resolutions for the establish'd Go∣vernment in Church and State, which is the design of this discourse to promote and defend.
Soon after I receiv'd your summons, to officiate as your Chaplain the last Assizes, the discovery of the late horrid Conspiracy determin'd my choice of my sub∣ject:
I plainly saw that Lenity was no charm against the Witchcraft of Rebellion, and that the factions and restless Spirits of some men in our age, by their Sedition, had made it necessary to have Penal Laws, and to have them duly executed; I thought it might be proper therefore to assert the necessity of the Ma∣gistrates being invested with an irresistible Coercive Power: and foreseeing also that many who measure their Religion by their Secular Interest, would be ready to comply so far as to avoid the penalty of the Laws, but at the same time despise Dominion in their Hearts, and secretly speak evil of Dignities; I thought I could not do better service either to them, or the Government, than by laying open this their mi∣stake, in setling Obedience upon the only sure and right foundation, the principle of Conscience, which will engage us to be hearty and sincere in our sub∣mission to our Governours, in all times and places.
This is the great security that the Christian Re∣ligion gives to the Powers of the World; and this argument the ancient ApologistsJust. Mart. Apol. 2. ad Anton. Pium. Athenag. Orat. pro Christ. Cypr. ad Deetr. made use of to recommend it to them, that it allows of no Re∣sistance; that it proposes higher rewards for Obedi∣ence, and severer punishments for Disobedience, by binding it as a duty in point of Conscience, than any Sanctions of Humane Laws.
And herein also the Church of England (above others) has declared her self to be truly Christian, and
sono Enemy to CaesarAct. Rev. Reg. Ed. 6. & Act 37 Reg. Eliz., by asserting the Kings Su∣premacy, and by requiring our obedience to the Magistrate, as ordain'd by God, not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake.
So that in this discourse I have endeavour'd not only to express the Character of a good Subject; but of a true Son of the Church of England; and to speak properly, none can be the latter, but he must also be the former: And indeed I have so great a ve∣neration for all the doctrines and establishments of that Church, that I think it far more eligible (if God should permit it for our sins) to fall and perish with it, than by any indirect or unwarrantable means to go about to defend it, or to live and triumph in its ruines. And herein I am confident I express not only my own sentiments, but yours also, and the sense of all the Loyal Nobility and Gentry of our Country, which as it gives place but to few other Countrys for their number and quality, so it yields to none for their Loyalty, Unanimity, and Zeal for the establish'd Government. I could not doubt therefore but that a discourse of this nature would be grateful both to you and them; and I am sensible that your Zeal for the Subject has so far biass'd your Judgements, as to cause you to overlook many flts in the managing of it, otherwise you would not have thought it fit for a Publication: But it was not good manners in me to withstand your repeated Commands; and I doubt not
but you aim at the same design in its Printing for which it was Preach'd; to make men sensible, in this restless and seditious Age, of their duty to God and the King, that they cannot truly serve the one, unless they submit to the other.
If it may be any ways serviceable for these great ends, for the promoting of Loyalty, Peace, and Religion with any, especially among those that Pro∣vidence has plac'd me with, I shall think my pains well bestow'd; and it will abundantly recompence the censures and ill treatment it is like to meet with from those who are obstinate and irreclaimable.
That God would strengthen your hands, and pro∣sper you in your undertakings for his service, and give you all the comforts of this life, and of a better, is the hearty wish, and prayer of,
Coventry, Aug. 30. 1683.
Honoured Sir, 
