



My LORD,
THE following Discourse, such as it is, I do with all humility present to your Lordship. The argument it treats of commends it self, and challengeth regard from all the Disciples of Jesus. The design of it is to prove our Jesus to be the Messias. This is a truth of the greatest moment, and as such was much insisted upon by the first preachers of the Christian Religion,
and deservedly placed in our an∣cient Creed in the head of the o∣ther Articles of our Christian faith, and next after the Article in which we own the belief of a God. And whatever defects there may be found in the following Tract yet, as I am certain that I have chosen a most excellent Subject, so I have pursued it with a sincere and ho∣nest intention.
If any should find fault with this well-meant Discourse, and condemn me even for that for which I am not able so much as to accuse my self, it shall be so far from creating me any trouble that it will not surprize me as any thing that is new and strange is wont to do. Whatever my mis∣take or my faults may be, I shall be so far from being pertinacious in either of them, that no man shall be more welcome to me than
he, who shall assist me in dischar∣ging me from them. Nor do I de∣sire to live any longer in this world than whiles I am disposed both to find the truth and to follow it.
I think my self more especially obliged to give your Lordship an account how I spend my time. And that consideration moved me to prefix your Lordship's name to this following Discourse. But that was not the onely motive which in∣duced me to it. All that have the honour to know your Lirdship have great cause to bless God for you. The Clergy of this great City are very sensible of their hap∣piness. They look upon your Lord∣ship as a great Blessing, and a good presage. The Jews have a saying in their books, that when the Shepherd is angry with the sheep he placeth over them a blind guide. Those who are un∣der
your Lordship's care justly look upon you as bestowed upon them as a token for good; they think them∣selves favoured greatly, in your Lordship, by the great Bishop and Shepherd of their Souls. I was willing to take this opportunity of testifying my most unfeigned thank∣fulness to God for your Lordship. That God would long preserve your Lordship, and assist and prosper your endeavours for the good of his Church; that he would pour upon you the blessings of this life and preserve you to the unspeakable glo∣ry of the next, is the most hearty Prayer of,

