


Loving Friends,
IT pleased the wise Dispo∣ser of all things, to cast my lot among you in one of the most dreadful Vi∣sitations that ever Eng∣land knew, when the black Horse of the Pestilence, with Pale Death on his back, pranc'd our Streets at Noon day, and Midnight; at which dreadful (and never to be forgotten) time our sense of Seeing was

well-nigh glutted with beholding the sight of our Diseased and Deceased Friends, enough to have extinguish'd the optick faculty.
No Papers then over our Dores were set
With Chambers ready furnish'd to be Let;
But a sad Lord have mercy upon us, and
A Bloody Cross, as fatal marks did stand
Presaging th' noisome Pestilence within,
Was come to take revenge of us for Sin.
And as our Eyes might well be dim'd so might our Ears be deaf'd with the doleful cryes of the Poor, for Food to keep them from Starving; of the Sick, for Physick to keep them from Dying; and of them that were Marked, for Spi∣ritual helps to preserve them from Perishing.
We well might hear of Death there was such plenty,
One Bell at once, was fain to Ring for twenty:
No Clocks were heard to strike upon their Bells,
Cause nothing Rung, but Death-lamenting knells.
Which dreadful noises so terrified some, and affrighted all, that men knew not what course to steer to pre∣serve themselves from this wounding shaft.
Some by their fear to go to Church deburr'd,
Anon are carri'd Dead into the Yard:
And Churches new with too much Burial fed,
Fear'd they should have no meeting but of Dead▪
This Poyson'd Arrow of the Pestilence (especially when it was first foot among us) wounded so suddenly and sharply, that we could scarce be resolved whether 'twas Sickness or Death it self that assaulted us; for many lying down to repose in the Evening, made their sleep true kin to Death, by dying before the Morning.
—Ah who would then defer
A preparation for this messenger!
But not to detain you longer with a large Epistle to a little Book, be pleas'd to accept thereof as a Testi∣mony

of my sincere love to you, which shall always be accompanied with my hearty Prayers for you, that our mer∣ciful God would be pleas'd to with∣draw his Sin-revenging Scourge, which is still amongst us, and charge his Angels to guard your persons from future dangers; and give you his holy Spirit to guide your Souls in the Path of Holiness here, and bring you to the Palace of Happiness hereafter.

From my Study at St. James Clerkenwell. Octob. the 18. 1665.
