



Holy and Beloved,
IT cannot but rejoice my Soul, when I
consider of the exceeding Grace and
abounding Goodness of the Holy God
towards you his poor and despised Churc
and People, in respect of that clear Disco∣very
he hath given you of most of the glori∣ous
Truths of the Gospel, and of the true
Apostolical Faith and Practice thereof. You

have not made Men, General Councils, nor
Synods, your Rule, but God's Holy Wd:
your Constitution, Faith, and Discipline, is
directly according to the Primitive Pattern;
God hath made you (in a most eminent man∣ner)
to be the Builders of the old Wastes,
and Raisers up of the former Desolations, and
Repairers of the waste Cities, the Desolations of
many Generations, Isa. 61. 4.
You have laboured to sever the Gold from
the Dross, and to build with proper and fit
Gospel-Meterials, viz. Spiritual and Ling
Stones, well hewed and squared by the Ham∣mer
of God's Word and Spirit, and will not
take one Stone of Babylon for a Corner; you
will go forth (as far as you have received
Light) by the Footsteps of the Flock, and
feed your Kids beside the Shepherds Tents,
Cant. 1. 8.
And God of a small People hath gracious∣ly
made you a Multitude; you have been
helped, and so born up by everlasting Arms,
that you have held fast your Holy Profession
in the Day of Trial, and exposed all that
you have had in the World to spoil and loss,
for the sake of Jesus Christ, when many
turned their Backs, and exposed the Holy
Name of God to Reproach; and to our fur∣ther
Joy, many of you have of late, more
especially in your General Assemblies, shewed
your great Zeal for the Name of God, and
Care of his Church, in a more than usual man∣ner;
and particularly you have endeavoured

to revive our hopes, for the continuation of a
faithful and laborious Ministry for the time
to come, by striving to promote such Lear∣ning
and Studies as God's Word directs
to; and not require (like Israel's Task-Ma∣sters)
poor Ministers, as I may so say, to
make Brick and allow them no Straw; but you
do now more fully see that Gospel-Ministers
ought to have a Gospel-Maintenance, even
such as God hath ordained; that so they
might not be intangled with the Affairs of
th Life, but wholly give themselves up to
that great Work they are called to. Go on
and prosper, Holy and Beloved, Let not your
Hands be weak, nor Satan obstruct or hinder
so hopeful a Beginning; let it appear you do
love Jesus Christ more than Father or Mo∣ther,
more than Son or Daughter; and la∣bour
to reform what is amiss as to those
great Evils that abound too much in the
Churches of the Saints, tho I hope not so
much amongst you as among some others,
particularly in respect of Pride and Cove∣tousness,
or that base Worldly and Earthly
Spirit that is the Bane of Religion, and
makes the Lor'd People of so ill a savour in
the World; let your Lives declare whose
you are, and to what Countrey you belong;
and as you have a good Doctrine, so labour
for a suitable Conversation; and then, Bre∣thren,
what can or will be wanting to make
you compleat in the whole Will of ?
Truly, according to my small Light, I know

not, unless it be a restoration of this lost and
neglected Ordinance of Singing Psalms,
Hymns and Spiritual Songs, which I fear,
and partly understand, some of you want
light in. I have therefore made bold to de∣dicate
this small Treatise to you all, hoping
you will take it from me in good part, and
well weigh what is here said, before you judg
and condemn it for an Errour.
I am afraid of some old Prejudice some of
you have taken against this Sacred Truth of
the Gospel (for so I must call it); you can't
think you have as yet come to a full attain∣ment,
or are already perfect in Knowledg.
Besides, I hear you generally own Singing of
Psalms, &c. an Ordinance of God; and in∣deed
I cannot see how any, who own the
Bible and New Tastament of Christ to be
their Rule, can deny it. Why then, consi∣der
whether you have this Ordinance at all,
or can be said to sing in any proper Sense:
Certainly many of you are wholly without
it, as will I hope appear fully, if you read
this Treatise quite through impartially. Can
t be thought the Churches should be enjoin∣ed
by the Holy Ghost to sing Psalms and
Hymns, and yet there's no coming at the
practise of it without an extraordinary Spi∣rit,
or miraculous Gifts?
I have been provoked by our Brother,
who wrote against Singing, to set Pen to Pa∣per,
and not only by him and his Book, but
I have been induced by Multitudes, for seve∣ral

Months, to give him an Answer, so that
I hope you will not be offended with me in
what I have done. I have much Peace in the
doing of it; and truly, Brethren, the loss
of this Ordinance doth, I am afraid, more
obstruct the increase of our Churches than
many are aware of. What a Multitude are
convinced of Christ's true Baptism, and yet
refuse to have Communion with our Churches
when baptized, because they say, if they
hould, they must lose this Ordinance of
inging, which they have an equal Esteem
or: And how doth it open the Mouths of
ur Godly Brethren of other Perswasions,
o speak against us, for being so zealous for
ne Gospel-Ordinance, and so careless about
nother, that very few Christians, who have
ad the greatest Light, Zeal and Piety in
ny Age of the Church, ever doubted of?
 grieves me to think there should be a
reach made in God's Worship among you,
o whom God hath given so much Light in
other Cases. And, O that what is here said,
might through the Blessing of God prove a
Means to repair it.
In a Word, Singing is injoyned; Some
hing it is: If we have it not (but 'tis with
ou) we would willingly know what your
Singing is, or what you call Singing: For
we do say and testify, we believe you are
wholly without Singing in any proper Sense
at all. The Lord give us Moderation; don't
let us be bitter one against another.

I shall beg a part in your Prayers, and in∣treat
you to look over what Weakness you
may see in this small Tract, for I am, you
know, but a Babe in Christ's School, and
know but in part.
And now to you, my Beloved Brethren and
Sisters, (who meet on Horselydown) whom I
hope I may say are my Joy and my Crown,
whose Souls are most dear to me, and whom
I can say I truly love and long after; it re∣joices
my Spirit to see how generally you are
inlightned into this Gospel-Duty; but 'tis
no small grief to me to see (since the Church
in such a solemn manner agreed to sing the
Praises of God on the Lord's Day) to find
some of you so much offended; I am per∣swaded
'tis for want of Consideration, for
you have no new thing brought in among
you. Hath not the Church sung at breaking
of Bread always for 16 or 18 Years last past,
and could not, nor would omit it in the time
of the late Persecution? And have not ma∣ny
of the honest Hearers (who have stayed
to see that Holy Administration) sung with
you, at that time, and yet none of you ever
signified the least trouble? And have we not
for this 12 or 14 Years sung in mixt Assem∣blies,
on Days of Thanksgiving, and never
any offended at it, as ever I heard? What is
done more now? 'tis only practised oft∣ner:
and sure if it be God's Ordinance, the
often practising of it, by such who find

their Hearts draw out so to do, cannot be
sinful.
And on that Solemn Day, when the Church
would have it put up, to see  the Mem∣bers
stood affected about Singing, almost
every ones Hand was up for it, or to give
Liberty to the Church at such times to sing.
And when put up in the Negative, but about
5 or 6 at most (as I remember) were against
it. Did any one of you, at that time say,
if we did proceed to sing at such times, you
could not have Communion with us? which
if you had, I perceive the Church, nay
every one of us who had born our Burden
for many Years, would have born it a little
longer? Besides, did not the Church agree
to sing only after Sermon, and when Prayer
was ended? And if those few Brethren and
Sisters who were not satisfied, could not stay
whilst we sung, they might freely go forth,
and we would not be offended with them;
so far was the Church, or my self, from impo∣sing
on the Consciences of any. But is it not
hard that some of us should so long be laid
under a Burden, when the Church generally
was against Singing at that time, and you
cannot bear it now it is come to be your Lot?
I am afraid the noise of these things are mis∣represented
abroad, and therefore I thought
it might not be amiss to rectify Mistakes in
you, or any other Brethren. The matter of
Difference that is at present between the
Church and some few of our dear and belo∣ved

Brethren and Sisters, is not about Sing∣ing
it self, nor singing with others, for that
has been all along the practise of the Church
for many Years (as before I hinted) but on∣ly
about singing on the Lords Day, unless it
be one Member, except the Judgments of
any other are lately changed.
But my Brethren will, I hope, seriously con∣sider
of the Matter, and labour after that
Christian Love, Tenderness and Forbearance
the Gospel calls for. We are exhorted to bear
one anothers Burdens, and so to fulfil the Law of
Christ. For the Lord's sake let us not fall
out by the way, and lay things grievous on
one anothers Spirits; for we are not Lords
over one anothers Faith, but Helpers of each
others Joy. O my Brethren, pray let us all
watch against Satan, and strive to keep the
Vnity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. I
must confess, divers of you did much desire
me to answer Mr. Marlow's Book before this
time, but I hope you will excuse my neglect,
for some of you know the occasion of it;
tis done now, and in the fear of God re∣commended
to your perusal. And O that
the Lord would be pleased to bless it to your
Satisfaction, then shall I have cause to praise
the Lord that I undertook the Work. I can
y you lie near my Heart, and I would do
any thing I am capable of to promote Truth
and Peace amongst our selves, and in all the
Churches of Christ.

If any of you should say, How can we
be satisfied to have Communion with the
Church, when we believe 'tis an Innovati∣on?
(that's a hard word.) Ar you Infalli∣ble?
Is there not ground for you to fear
you are mistaken, or to think in the least
'tis a doubtful case, since so much is to be
said for it, and has been so generally received
from the beginning by most enlightned
Saints, and you your selves with the Church
for so long a time been in the Practice of
t at other times?
Besides, can you find any ground from
God's Word, that will warrant you to se∣parate
your selves from the Church upon
this account? and also may not the same
or like Scruple rise in our Spirits against
having Communion with you, who we be∣ieve
lie short of a plain Gospel-Ordinance,
nd so, through want of light, diminish
from God's Word, as you say we add
thereto by doing of it? But far be it from
us to have a thought to act that way to∣wards
any of you. Moreover, will not
such a practice, of a Separation from the
Church upon this account, justify other
Godly Christians, who are Members of such
Churches who do not sing, (that are con∣vinced
as well as we it is their Duty) to
separate from those Congregations, to joyn
with such Churches as are in this practice?
Doubtless that Door that will let you out

of this Church, will let others out of those
Churches, (I mentioned before) and there
are not a few such in this City. There is
one thing I think good to note here, to pre∣vent
any mistake, that tho I call Preach∣ing
a moral Duty, yet to preach the Go∣spel
only, appertains to such whom God
particularly hath gifted for that Work, and
who have a lawful call to it.
I shall conclude with the words of the
Holy Apostle, Finally, Brethren, farewel: be
Perfect, be of good Comfort be of one Mind,
live in Love and Peace, and the God of Love
and Peace shall be with you. 2 Cor. 13. 11.

From my House near Horsely∣down,
South∣wark,
April 3d 1691.
