


May it please Your Lordships,
THIS Sermon was at first Composed, and is now Publish∣ed,
with peculiar Respect to Their Majesties Subjects in
this Kingdom. Those in England who had the Advan∣tage
of Enquiry and Correspondence, need not the Informations
here offered. But the Protestants of this Kingdom have been so
long and industriously kept in the Dark, and not suffered to look
into the Designs of those that had them in Subjection, farther than
they felt the effects of them, that many may be Strangers to the
full extent of those Designs, and the Miraculous Steps of Provi∣dence
by which they have been delivered from them.
I know much more might be said, and has been said on this
Subject. But I have chosen those Points that seemed to me most
proper for the Occasion. And, I hope, enough to satisfy us all
of the great reason we have to praise God for our wonderful De∣liverance,
which was the design of the Discourse.
Your Lordships can witness what sense the Protestants of this
City have of it; and for ought appears, the whole body of them
through the Kingdom, are in their Present Majesties Interest to
a Man. Which could never have happened, if the late Govern∣ment
had been in any measure Tolerable to them. And had others,

instead of being at ease where they were at that time, lived here
under the Government they fancied so Indulgent, I doubt not but
they would have had the same sentiments with us, and been cured
of their Folly.
Your Lordships have come to the Government of this Kingdom
in an Ill and Vnsetled Posture of Affairs: but you need look back
only to Presidents in each of your own Fa∣milies
to guide your Management with
the happiest Success.Sir Henry Sidney, five times Chief Governor be∣tween the Years 1557, and 1578. Adam Loftus, Arch-bishop of Dublin, three times Lord Justice between the Years 1582, and 1600. Your Ancestors go∣verned
it in Times as difficult as the pre∣sent,
and had the chiefest part in reforming
the Superstition and Barbarity of the Na∣tives,
and in setling Religion on that hap∣py
foot, on which it has since stood; but they, and all since, have
been forced to leave the Work imperfect: It remains now, I hope,
to be perfected by you.
Your Lordships may reasonably conclude, that it is not an easie
undertaking to Civilize and Reform this Nation, since so great
Persons were not able to perfect it. And yet that it is to be done,
because they went so far in it. For want of a vigorous prosecution
it has been to do a-new every forty years hitherto. Your Lordships
have the Experience of many such Periods to direct you how to do
it effectually. We hope, and heartily pray, that it may now at
last have its accomplishment in Your hands under Their Majesties
Government; and that this may be one of the blessings of Their
Reign, Providence has given you an opportunity of making your
Selves, and your Memory, grateful to present and future Ages,
by becoming happy Instruments in it. That you may be such, I
hope your Lordships will believe is by none more zealously desired
than by,
My LORDS,

