



May it please your Lordships:
THIS Sermon was at first Composed, and is now Published with peculiar respect to their Majesties Subjects in this Kingdom. Those in England, who had the Advantage of Enquiry and Correspondence, need not the Informations here offered. But the Prote∣stants of this Kingdom have been so long, and industriously kept in the Dark, and not suffered to look into the Designs of those that had them in Subjection; (further than they felt the effects of them) that many may be Strangers to the full extent of those De∣signs, and the Miraculous steps of Providence by which they have been elivered from them.
I know much more might e aid, and has been said on this Subject. But I have chosen those points that seemed to me most Pper for

the Occasion: And I hope enow to satisfie us all of the great reason We have to Praise God for our wonderful Deliverance; which was the design of the Discourse.
Your Lordships can witness what sense the Protestants of this City have of it; and for ought appears, the whole Body of them through the Kingdom, are in their present Majesties Interest to a Man. Which could never have happened, If the Late Government had been in any measure Tolerable to them. And had others, instead of being at ease where they were at that time, Lived here, under the Go∣vernment they fancied so Indulgent, I doubt not but they would have had the same Sentiments with us, and been cured of their Folly.
Sir Henry Sidney Five times Chief Governor be∣tween the years 1557. and 1578. Adam Loftus Arch-Bishop of Dublin, three times Lord Justice between the years 1582. and 1600▪Your Lordships have come to the Govern∣ment of this Kingdom in an ill, and Unset∣tled Posture of Affairs: But you need look back only, to Presidents in each of your own Families, to Guide your Management with the happiest Success your Ancestors Governed it, in times as difficult as the present; and had the Chiefest part in Reforming the Su∣perstition and Barbarity of the Natives; and

in settling Religion on that happy Foot, on which it has since stood: But they, and all since have been forced to leave the Work Im∣perfect: It remains now, I hope, to be perfe∣cted by You.
Your Lordships may reasonably conclude, That, it is not an easie undertaking to Ci∣vilize and Reform this Nation; since so great Persons were not able to perfect it: And yet that it is to be done, because they went so far in it. For want of a Vigorous Prosecu∣tion, it has been to do a-new, every forty years, hitherto; Your Lordships have the Ex∣perience of many such Periods to direct you how to do it effectually. We hope, and hear∣tily Pray, That, it may now at last have its Accomplishment in Your Hands, under their Majesties Government; and that this may be one of the Blessings of their Reign: Provi∣dence has given you an opportunity of making your Selves, and your Memory Grateful to Present and Future Ages, by becoming hap∣py Instruments in it. That you may be such, I hope Your Lordships will believe is, by none more Zealously desired, than by,
My LORDS,

