


May it please your Majesty.
Augu ST. Augustin in an Epistle to Cassulamus saith, that he which for fear of any power hideth the truth which  learned,Chry∣sostom pro∣voketh the Wrath of God to come  nd Chrysostom saith, he is not only a Traytor to the  openly for truth teacheth a lye, but he also which doth ; shew forth that truth which he knoweth, the considerat  these sentences so prevailed with me, that I durst not be such a Traytor neither to God nor to your Majesty, as to conceal what I have learned, which as I conceive may tend to the glory of God, in the exalta∣tion of the truth of the Gospel of Christ, and to the honour of your Majsty, and the benefit of your Majesties Kingdom, both in Church and Common-wealth, whereby your Majesty may be supplyed with Money for the necessary charges of the Kingdom, and the relief of the Poor, and easing your Subjects something in their Taxations, by turning the stream into the right Channel, by taking the temporallities from the Prelates, &c. into your Ma∣jesties hands again, they being your own Right, belonging former∣ly to your Predecessors, and the conditions now failing for which they were given, as will appear hereafter in this discourse God willing.
But perhaps it will be objected that it is sacriledge to take the temporallities, &c. from the Church, I answer if it be granted to be sacralidge to take from the Church, yet I hope upon tryal, it will appear that the Prelates are not the Church, and that the Prelates are sacralidg ous persons, in detaining and converting the temporallities to their own private uses, which was given to the Church, and the Poor, and other pious uses, the Prelates be∣ing only Stewards thereof, or Overseers for the use of the Church and the Poor, but have proved unfaithful Stewards.
Now that the Prelates are not the Church will thus appear, when the Church of Anteoch sent Paul and Barnabas, &c. as their

Messengers to the Councel at Jerusalem, the Text saith Acts 15.4. When they came to JerusalemThe urch ot the elates t the ngre∣ ons of ievers. they were received of the Church, that is of the Church of believers, and of the Apostles and Elders, hence we see that the Apostles and Elders are not called the Church, they were but particular Chuch members with other believ rs, and according to ths the nineteenth Article of the Chuch of England, describes a visible Church of Christ, to be a congregati∣on of faithful m n, &c. also Paul admonished the Elders of Ephesus to feed the Church of God, that is the believing Christians. Act. 20.28.
ug stin St. Augustin saith of himself and all other Prelates in the 23 question and 7. If we possess any thing privately, but that which doth suffice us, it is not ours but the goods of the Poor, whose stewards we are, except we challenge to our selves a property by some damnable usurpa∣tion, the glss upon that part of the question saith, that Prelates are but only Stewards of the Church goods, and not Lords thereof.
mbrose And St. Ambrose upon Luke 16.2. Give an account of thy Stew∣ardship, &c. hereby saith he, We learn that Prelates are not Lords, but Steward or Bailliffs of others mens substance.
ierom. And St. Hierom in an Epistle, quest. 16. and 2. chap. Quisquid, saith whatsoever the Clergy hath, it is the goods of the Poor, and wri∣ting unto Nepolianus he saith, how can they be of the Clergy, who are commanded to contemn and despise their own substance, for to take a∣way from a Friend it is theft, but to deceive the Church and take away that which should be given to the Poor, it is sacralidge.
arnard. And St. Barnard upon these words, Simon Peter said unto Jesus, &c. Truly said he the goods of the Church are the patrimony of the Poor, & whatsoever thing the Ministers & Stewards thereof, not Lords or Possessors thereof, do take unto themselves more then sufficient for a competent living, the same is taken away from the Poor, by a sacra∣lidgious cruelty.
usebeus Eusebeus in his Treatise upon the pilgrimage of St. Hierom saith, If thou dost possessed garment or any other thing more then extream ne∣cessity doth require, and dost not help the needy, thou art a Thief, and a Robber, wherefore dearly beloved Children let us be Stewards of tem∣porallities and not possessors thereof.
And Isidor in his Treatise de summo bono. ch. 24. Let the

Bishop know that he is the Servant of the people, and not Lords over them, a also in the 5. book o Decraeals. extra. e. donationibus, sub. athoitate Alixandrii. Tartii. Episcopi. Paritienses, he saith, We believe that it is no unknown unto your Brotherhood, that a Bishop and every other Prelate, is bu Stewards of the Church goods, and not Lords thereof, both Lands and Tythes saith he are pure Alms, which after the necessity of the Clergy is satisfied, no according to their pride and covetousness, but in comely cent manner, ofte the example of Christ and his Apostles, the rest blonge o the Poor, and thos that withhold it from them, they are Thieves, Robbers,  Sacralidgious per¦sons, saith he.
William Wroughton Thus it is manifest by what is already said, besides what is said here after, that Kings, and Princes, and Lords Temporall, by taking the tem¦porallities, &c. from the Prelates, and disposing of them for the use an benefit of the true Church the believing m mbers of Christ, and the poor and the benefit and safety of the Kingdom, the uses for which they wer first given, they will in so doing be so far from committing sacraledge that they will do a work pleasing and acceptable both to God and all good men, to their everlasting honour, by putting a stop to the pride, & wanto and luxurious riotous lives of some, which is occasioned by the uperflu¦ity of worldly wealth and riches, which they wrongfully possess and de¦tain from the right owners thereof, having forsaken the right way, and fol¦lowed the way of Baalim, who loved the wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.15 By with holding good from them to whom it is due, Pro. 3.27. and as William Wroughton writ to King Henry the eight, so long as ye maintain Antichist, the Popes Knights, that is Bishops in such inordinate riches, you shall never saith he banish that monstrous beas the Pope out of England.
When we say that such and such Lands were given to the Church, w cannot imagine that they were given to such a building of lime and stone and timber, nor to such a parish, and so to him that should usurp authori¦ty of Rule and Government there from age to age, whether he be good o bad, holy or prophane, for such are not to be accounted the Church, no so much as particular members of the true Church, which is the mstca body of Christ, except they believe, and all that do believe truly withou hypocrisie, rich and poor they are interested in the Church Lands and Goods, all the poor in general are objects of Charity, to do good unto all but especially to such as are of the huoshold of Faith, Gal. 6.10.

In the time of the Law when Tythes was paid by a divine institution unto the Levites, for their service in the Tabernacle and Temple, because hey had no inheritance of temporal Land among their Brethren, yet even hen the strangers, fatherless and widdows, had an interest in the Tythes s you may see in Deut. 14.28, 29. and Chap. 26.12, 13 and since that service ceased for which tythes were paid, there is no new institution in he Gospel for the payment of tythes, and yet our Prelates and Priests as hey will be called, will have both temporal Lands and tythes, and keep ll to themselves, neither widdows nor fatherless have any thing, and herefore it can be no sacralidge but a work of Charity, for Kings and Princes, and Lords Temporal to take the temporallities from them for he benefit of the Kingdom, and tythes also, or at least to cause them to llow some part thereof unto the poor.
The with holding of tythes, &c. From such to whom they are due, as to he beleiving Church, the poor, the Fatherless and widdows, God calls t a Robbing of him in tythes and offerings, Mal. 3.8, 9. For Christ saith hatsoever good or evil is done to one of the least of those little ones that be∣ieve on him, it is taken as done to himself, Mat. 25.40, and 45. yea even hose of the Clergy who are not true believers, they have no right nor ti∣le from God to the Church goods, and God will charge them as having he spoil of the poor in their Houses, Isaiah 3.14.
Suppose the Prelates should plead for themselves that temporallities nd tythes have been setled upon them by many Acts of Parliament, to hat it may be answered, that no Act of Parliament on Earth can make oid the Law of God inacted in Heaven, viz. That when tythes were aid by a divine institution, yet the Stranger, Fatherless and Widdows, ad by divine appointment a right and interest in them, how then dare y now receive tythes, not by divine, but by humain institution, and yet ye no part thereof unto the poor, the Stranger, Fatherless nor Widdow, e may rationably imagine that it was because of the hardness of the arts of Prelates and Priests, in keeping that to themselves which belong∣d to the poor, which caused that Noble King Carrolous Magnus to have it ecreed in a counsel, that in wealthy places two parts of the Church ods should be given to the poor, and the third part to the Clergy, and  poorer places that there should be an equal division between the poor d the Clergy, and if by the covetous unsatiable desires of the Prelates d Clergy, they have gotten the Church Lands and tythes setled upon

them by many Acts of Parliament, yet another Parliament, upon better information, and better consideration, of the Kingdoms necessity and dai∣ly charge and the necessity of the poor, and the unlawful spending of the Church goods, by them which have no right unto them, but spend them quite contrary to the intent and meaning of the Donors, why may not the King, Princes, and Lords temporal, take again into their hands the Church goods which was given by their Predecessors, from them which so sacreligiously abuse and usurp them, and imploy them for the benefit of the Church and Kingdom and the relief of the poor.
If the King commit a power into any mans hand, and find that he or they do abuse that power, he may not only lawfully, but he ought to take that power from them again, the whole Popish Clergy of Bishops, Prelates, Abbots, Priors, and Monks in England, had once their priviledges and temporalities setled upon them by act of Parliament, and yet the King and Councel seeing the inconvenience thereof, by another Parliament took those priviledges, temporallities and tithes from them, and so may this or another Parliament do by our Prelates for the benefit of the Church and Kingdom, and the relief of the poor.
For Bishops and Prelates are useless in the Church of Christ because they are none of those Church Officers which Christ gave to the Church at his assention, Ephe. 5.11. he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, their is aed in 1 Co. 12.28. helps that is Deacons to minister to the poor, and goverments that is ruling Elders, now ruling Elders are inferior to teaching Elders, as Paul saith, 1 Ti. 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well b counted worthy of double honour, especially they who labour in the word and doctrine, they who labour in the word and doctrine, they especially are worthy of double honour rather then the ruling Elders, in Pauls judge∣ment, and he had the Spirit of God to teach him, now if Christ who is the alone Law-giver to his Church, saw these Church Officers sufficient for these four ends for which he ordained them, as first for the perfecting of th the Saints. 2ly. For the work of the ministry. 3ly. For the edifying o the Church, which is the body of Christ. 4ly. For the time, till we al come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God Then all other pretended Church Officers, are superfluous and useless

besides St. Paul saith that he shuned not to declare unto the Church, the whole counsell of God, and that he kept nothing back that was profitable for the Church, but taught them publickly and from House to House; Acts. 20.20.27. And yet in all his Epistles he hath not made mention of any Lord Primot or Metropolitant, or Prelate, or the like as any of Christs Church offi∣cers, or of their dignities, or jurisdictions as being profitable to the Church, but only those Church Officers mentioned above in Eph. 4.11.12. and 1 Cor. 12.28. Therefore all other are strange Creatures, which neither Christ nor Paul, nor the Scriptures of the New Testament makes any mention off, unless those that Paul speaks of verse 29. that after his departure grievous Wolves would enter not sparing the Flock, yea the Papists themselves say that there is but three sacred orders in the Church, all the rest by their own confession is of human devising
Again as Bishops and Prelates are useless in the Church, so also they are usurpers of the Kings royal prerogatives, in making out their prossess, sitations, suspentions, sensors, and excommunications and the lie in their own names, and by making, Printing, and publishing in their own Names, New Visitation Oaths, Articles, Injunctions, Cannons, Rites, and Ceremonies, and inforcing them upon Ministers, Scoolmasters, Church-Wardens, and others, and have excommunicated, suspended, Silenced, fined, imprisoned, and persecuted, his Majesties faithful Sub∣jects, for not submitting to their usurped power, as though they were Kings and Governours, both of Church and State, contrary to several Statutes and to Magna Charta and the Petition of right, as Mr. Prinne saith in his Book of the Exorbitances, Treasons, Seditions, and Conspi∣recies of Bishops, &c.

