



IT may possibly be a little wondred at, that I should
write at this time any thing upon this Subject,
which may seem to revive the Controversie, of which
little has been written of late Years; it may
therefore seem necessary I should speak something by way
of Apology for my self. First of all, I must tell you,
that this Treatise was wrote the last Summer, altho it
had no Birth till now, and many know what Provo∣cations
I had about that time to write in behalf of our
Practice in respect of Baptism: having heard how a
worthy Minister (whom I respect and honour) who
liveth not far off from me, had publickly preach'd up the
baptizing of little Babes, bearing very hard upon those
of our Perswasion; and could I have had a friendly
Conference with him, 'tis like this had not seen the Sun.
Besides, we were challeng'd to dispute the Point with
some Ministers of the Church of England much about
the same time, not far from London: But tho they
had rendred us as odious as they well could (and as
if we had nothing to say for our Practice, viz. for bap∣tizing
Men and Women) yet when all came to all, none
of them would appear to defend what they had spoken,

which caused some to conclude it did behove me, or some
other to write something about it. Moreover, a godly
Friend (of some Eminency in London) sent for me to
his House (who, tho a Baptist, yet walks with our
Brethren called Independents) and desired me that I
would be pleased to write a Sheet or two upon Bap∣tism,
chiefly to shew what it was, sith he perceived
many good People were mistaken therein, and did, as
he conceived, take that to be Baptism, or Baptizing,
which was not the thing, he having examined what the
Greek word  Baptizo did signify, and found
by Lexicons, and by conferring with Scholars, it did
not signify Aspersion, Sprinkling, nor pouring, nor any
other Washing than Immersion, or total dipping of
the Body in Water; and therefore did conclude it ne∣cessary
this thing should be further opened, and would
have me to conser with one able Person who well un∣derstood
the Greek Tongue about it, which I was
willing to do: Nay, and besides all this, when we
wrote our Key to open Scripture-Metaphors, we
promised the Reader we would write something con∣cerning
this very matter, as you may see if you read
Pag. 38. Part 2. which, though it be above six
Years ago, we never performed till now. All these
things considered together, with that great Impulse of
Spirit I found to do it, I thought I had a sufficient
Call to undertake the Work, altho I know it has been
more effectually managed by far abler Pens some Years
since, yet I conclude (with others) a short Tract of
a small Price might come into more Hands than bigger
Volumes would do.
Moreover I must confess, I have not a little wondred
to see so many Eminent Fathers, and famous Di∣vines,
both Ancient and Modern, speaking so clear∣ly
as to the literal, proper and genuine Signification of
the word Baptizo, and yet finding so many wise and
learned Men of late so strangely contradicting themselves

by their own Practice. I am sure if Prejudice and
Partiality were laid aside, and Men would deal faith∣fully
with their own Consciences, they must confess our
Practice of Immersion (or dipping Believers in
Water in the Name of the Father, &c.) must of
necessity be congruous both with the literal and spiritual
Signification of the word Baptism, and Practice of the
Apostles and Primitive Church; and so it will be found
one day, and that they have no just cause given them to
reproach or charge us as they do: who laying the Foun∣dation
of their own House false, or not according to the
Patern; and not contented so to do neither, but vilifie
and reproach them who build exactly according to the
Direction of the Master-Builder: We marvel how they
can satisfy themselves to keep up that Practice of theirs
of Rantism, since there is nothing to be said in the
Defence of it from God's Word; and if once it was
laid aside (with the wrong Subject) as an unwar∣rantable
Rite, and they would cleave to the Primitive
Institution and Practice, what a glorious Reformation
in point of Church-Constitution and Discipline would
there be! and what a sweet Harmony and Vnion
would follow amongst us! for there has been no one
thing that hath caused like Contention in the Church
for many Years, as this of Infants-sprinkling hath.
If our Brethren would but lay this seriously to Heart,
I can't but think it would put them to a stand or
pause about it. It had need lie clear in the Word of
God, since so great a stress as the Foundation of their
Church in such an eminent manner (in respect of its
Constitution) is laid upon it, and it being that main
thing that obstructs and hinders that blessed Vnion and
Fellowship amongst so many good Christians as it doth,
who hardly in any other things differ at all in any
Article of Faith or Practice. And whereas our Bre∣thren
seem to fly for Refuge to that indirect and remote
Signification of the word Baptizo of washing, yet

how apparent is it, that it means no other Wa
but such as is by dipping, swilling, or total wet
that thing, Part, Member, or Person all over it.
Water, that is said to be baptized; for tho all dipping
or baptizing may be called a washing, yet all washing
is not dipping, &c. In a proper sense the word Bap∣tize,
Wilson in his Dictionary saith, is derived from
, Tingo, to dip, or plunge into the Water,
and signifieth primarily such a kind of washing
as is used in Bucks where Linnen is plunged
and dipt, &c. But how evident it is, that sprinkling,
or pouring is no such washing, viz. baptizing.
Ainsworth upon Lev. 15. 5. says, to baptize, or
wash his Flesh, as is expressed ver. 13, 16. meaneth
his whole Body; likewise (saith a great Author) the
Hebrews affirm in every place, where it is said in
the Law of bathing the Flesh, and washing the
Cloaths of the Unclean, it is not meant but of
baptizing the whole Body, &c. but if the Greek
word would bear sprinkling or pouring, yet that
will not justify Men thus to baptize, because not ac∣cording
to the Vsage of the Primitive Church; nor
doth it answer or reach the Signification of this Ordi∣nance,
which is the Death, Burial, and Resurrection
of Jesus Christ, together with our Death to Sin,
and rising with him to walk in newness of Life;
to represent which great Mystery, it was ordained, as
you will find if you read this Treatise. I have been
the larger upon this, because if Baptism is nothing
less, nor more, nor any other Act than Immersion, or
total dipping the whole Body, &c. than abundance of
godly Christians must seek after true Baptism; neither
can Infants, it appears from hence, be the Subjects of
it, sith their tender Bodies can't bear it in these cold
Climates, without palpable danger of their Lives, as
our Opposites confess, and formerly, by woful Experi∣ence,
found to be so. Jesus Christ never appointed an

nance to destroy the Lives of any of his Creatures.
ut why will not our Brethren keep to the great Insti∣ution,
and exact Rule of the Primitive Church?
Must we content our selves with that Light which the
Church had in respect of this and other Gospel-Truths
at the beginning of the Reformation,—since God
hath brought forth greater (to the praise of his own
rich Grace) in our Days? And why should a Tra∣dition
of the Antichristian State, be so zealously de∣fended?
The Church will never certainly appear in its
Primitive Glory, till this Rubbish be remov'd; which is
nothing less than to take a Stone of Babylon, and lay it
in Sion for a Foundation. Besides, it doth not a little re∣flect
upon the Honour of the Lord Jesus, thus to derogate
from his holy Law, who is appointed Heir of both
Worlds; who hath settled in his Church that Religion,
and every Ordinance thereof, which must remain unaltera∣ble
to the end of Time, or Consummation of all things.
He (as our Annotators well say) is the Builder of God's
House, propagating a holy (not a fleshly) Seed for
himself; and hath appointed, and fixed on the Matter
and Form thereof, as seemed good in his own sight,
who is the brightness of the Father's Glory, and
express Image of his Person, &c. And what an
account our Brethren or others will be able to give to him,
for presuming to do any thing contrary to the Apostolical
Constitution, when he comes to judg the Quick and
the Dead, I know not.
As touching that great Argument for Infant-Baptism,
taken from the Covenant made with Abraham, tho
something is here said in Answer, and enough hath been
said by others formerly, yet I must acquaint the Reader,
there is a most excellent Treatise prepared, written by a
very worthy and judicious Person (and ready for a
timely Birth) wherein that grand Objection, and all
thers are answered (beyond what any I think have
itherto do.) But if we should grant all they





say of Abraham's Fleshly Seed, and Foe
Holiness, yet that will not prove Children to have
a Right to Baptism, because Baptism (as well as
Circumcision was) is a meer positive Law, and
wholly depends on the Will and Pleasure of the Law-giver:
which is in this Treatise opened and asserted a∣gain
and again, and not without good Reason. But
lest I should keep the Reader too loong at the Door,
I shall conclude this Epistle with my hearty Prayers,
that God would be pleased in Mercy to open our Bre∣threns
Eyes, or ours, wherein either they or we lie
short as touching any part of God's Will, and let us
strive to live in Love and Concord together, wherein
we do, or can agree. 'Tis Truth I contend for, and
that Truth which was once delivered to the Saints,
and shall, I hope, whilst I am in the Body, who
now (as well as formerly) subscribe my self thy Ser∣vant
for Jesus sake,
Aug. 6. 1688.

