



Right Honourable, and Much Honoured,
IF it might be a competent Atonement for my In∣flexible Disobedience to your just Commands, I am not only willing to acknowledge my Fault, but I have here publisht my Discourse to evidence my Repentance.
I no sooner, indeed, return'd from my Attendance upon

your Honourable Assembly, but shameful Reflections upon my Rudeness, dogg'd me to my Home.
'Tis true, your inimitable Indulgence allowed me to Capitulate, when I should have Obey'd: And I had leave to Trye my Discourse by the Judgement of the Right Reverend Bishop of Oxford (an Ordeal I well hoped would have burnt it:) But thô I have some Years lived upon the Excesses of his Charity, and have been surprized with Instances of his Favour, too great for any thing but Heaven to recompence, yet now I found a Censure I did not look for; I found, He had too high an Opinion of your Judgements, to suf∣fer or allow me, even to seem to distrust them. And now,
My Lords, and you Right Worshipfull,
Prompted by the Patronage of so much Piety as Mor∣tality can pretend to (for such is his) and actuated by so great a sence of Duty, as I am capable of conceiving, the necessity of my begging your Protection is doubly su∣perseded. I will be bold therefore to put this Print into your hands, meerly with that design, with which 'twas dictated to your Ears; only to Inform, Convince, or to Confirm. The Argument (I hope) will defend it self, whatever Enemies it may meet to oppose it: That it will find none, I am not so fond to imagine, having already heard the Eccho of their Calumnies; Complements peculiar to some men,Quod scelus perpetrari, cùm de talibus benè audiam? whose kind Resentments of an Honest

Discourse, are enough to blast its deserved Reputa∣tion.
There is a Praise which sheds a disgrace, a villa∣nous Commendation, that ruines the Credit it offers to support; as an Encomium upon Religion given by an Atheist, is a mischievous Satyr against all Virtue.
Wherefore, as I can scorn their Flattery, so can I bid defiance to their Envy; having the Felicity of a Fore∣head of Flint to obviate those of Brass. But, since the Reverence I had for Truth, and the Awfull regard it influenc't me with, in the composing and speaking this Sermon, as also the Deference made to it by that Ho∣nourable and Reverend Assembly it was spoken to: Since I have found all these too thin a shield to defend either my self or it, I will here offer at a justification of both.
My design (it's said) was my own Preferment, not charitable Edification, nor the Glory of God: My Mat∣ter and Managery too intolerable to endure the Hear∣ing.
As to the First, thô I have ever been a Dissenter from the Doting World, and thought such Shrines too poor for such a Sacrifice as my Conscience, yet I have no provocation to invade the Honour of the Almighty with them, by searching (to find out the Hypocrisie of) their Hearts.
But however, I am glad to hear, that they grow Jea∣lous, Religious Loyalty has such Encouragement; for 'tis not long since, things lookt as if That Virtue had been the wrong way to promotion. And had not the Star that directed me been in Heaven, there was a Sun newlyOr rather Setting; For we that are on this side the Line, can behold the Sun in such a Position onely, as that its Rising and Motion is from our Left to the Right Hand; But the Me∣dal shews it so, as past the Meridian, and in its De∣clension. From whence I collect, That either this Planet of the Gravers was to be supposed to be of an Irregular motion, and un∣heavenly, or 'twas design'd for a Foreign Plantation under or beyond the Line, where it might be imagin∣ed Rising, and so Adored, (as Carolina or those parts of the World;) or else the Almighty was so con∣cerned at the Carvers Blas∣phemy, that he thought fit to over-rule the Project, and make the Frame it self the Prognostick of the Idols fall. Risen, whose Votary I might have been, with greater assurance of a Popular Reputation: I mean that Idol lately out in Plate; which presents you with a Sun breaking out of a Cloud (sup∣pose it a Cloud of Guilt;) and a mag∣nificent City under it, beneath which you read, Laetamur, as if their Dwellings had been but Triumphal Arches Erected to the Honour of the Malevolent Planet, and the very Foundations of their Houses joyfully affected with the Reappearance of their Guardian Deity. Now if this Com∣ment be Analogous to the Text, then is it possible for the Metropolis of the Land, to Honour the Genius of a profligate Re∣bel, more than they Revere the Lord or his Anointed. And consequently the like∣lier Doctrine to have got Preferment, had been the Reverse of this I have here publisht. These Samaritan perjur'd Tribes should have had my Justification, and the Villany I censure, should have been celebrated by my praise.
As to the Matter I delivered, here it is, and more; for I was so strictly caution'd against a tedious Dis∣course, that I omitted some few Periods, which I have here supplyed; but not a Tittle of that I heard object∣ed to, by my Audience. If there be any Errour, it is not malicious; and therefore, as I will gratefully resent Conviction, so by the Charter of Humane Society, I will demand a Pardon. The Truth is, the Enemies I have known to speak against this, or the last Discourse I de∣livered in the same place, upon the same Occasion, are such as are desperately guilty, or men that shew you Heads (like those upon Clipt Money) without Letters.
Nor can I conceive there are any so lewd, as to Remonstrate against what I have here said concerning Perjury by a Covenant of Association; but such as have been disciplin'd under the Paedagogy of the Delphick Devil, and therefore are never to be reclaimed by any Dictates from the Oracles of God. Wherefore, as Con∣stantine onceSocrat. lib. 1. cap. 7. said to Acesius, the Heretick, Quaere tibi Scalam, & ad Coelum solus ascende; so must I declare, That be the Advocates of Perjury and Rebel∣lion what they will, I would not be in Heaven in their Company, except those Impieties were Repented and For∣given. And now,
My Lords, &c.
If I have not more trespass'd upon your Honours by

an unnecessary Vindication, than I did when I delivered the ensuing Discourse, I am happy above Disturbance. Your acceptance of all I have done, I am loath to que∣stion; and your Experienc'd Goodness prompts me further to begg, I may be Reputed,
Right Honourable, Right Worshipfull, AND Much Honoured,

