




Brethren,
AS I was put upon preaching on this great Subject; so I am satisfied it was at
a very seasonable Hour, this Doctrine being greatly struck at by too many
Persons, though of different Sentiments in many Points of Religion. And
as it was well accepted by you, who heard these Sermons (and the others that followed)
when preach'd; and having been prevail'd with to publish these to the World, so I
hope some may receive Advantage hereby: Though for the meanness of the Author, and
weakness of the Work, they may not meet with that Entertainment from some as the
Subject deserves; yet for your sakes whose Souls are committed to my Charge, and for
whom I must give Account to the great Shepherd of the Sheep at the last Day, I
readily consented to this Publication; as also that all may see that we are in this, and
in all other great Fundamentals of Religion, established in the same Faith with our
Brethren, and all Sound aud Orthodox Christians in the World: And can∣not
but look upon our selves greatly concerned, to see how Men by Craft and Subtilty
endeavour, through Satan's Temptations (though I hope some do it not wittingly)
strive to subvert the Gospel of Christ, and corrupt the Minds of weak Christians.
An Error in a Fundamental Point, is dangerous and destructive; but should we mi∣stake
some Men we have to do with, we should be glad: The Lord help you to stand
fast in the Truth, as it is in Jesus (in which through Grace you are well established:)
Our Days are perillous; Satan seems to be let loose upon us, and is in great Rage, his
Time being but short. Brethren, 'tis a hard Case that any of those who maintain the
Old Doctrine of Justification, should be branded with the black Name of Antinomians.
As for my part, if Dr. Crisp be not mis-represented by his Opposers, I am not of
his Opinion in several respects; but I had rather erre on their side, who strive to exalt
wholly the Free Grace of God, than on theirs, who seek to darken it and mag∣nifie



the Power of the Creature, though we fear the Design is to wound the Truth and
us, through that good Man's sides, who, I doubt not is gone to Heaven: O when
shall we see that Truth, Peace, and Vnion longed for!
My Brethren, the Doctrine we preach does not open a Door to the least Licentious∣ness
(as 'iis unjustly said to do by some, who are either wilfully or ignorantly blind.)
No, God forbid. Nothing can promote Holiness, and Gospel-Sanctification like unto
it, only it teaches us to act from high, sublime, and right Evangelical Principles: It
shews the only way to attain to Gospel-Purity, flows from our Vnion with Christ;
and that no Man can arrive to any degree of true Holiness, or expect to meet with
any Success therein, without a Principle of Spiritual Life, or saving Faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ. The Nature of Men must first be changed, and that Enmity that
is in their Hearts against God, be removed, before they can be holy: The Tree must
first be made good, or the Fruits will be evil. The Image of God must be formed in
our Souls, which puts the Creature into an actual bent and propensity of his Heart
to the Practice of Holiness. If a Man hates not Sin, be not out of Love with Sin,
How should he be in love with God and Holiness? Now because we say Sanctification
is not necessary, as antecedent to Justification, but is the Fruit or Product of
Vnion with Christ; though we deny not but the Habits of Holiness are infused at that
same Instant that Faith is wrought in the Soul, Must we be look'd upon as Promoters
of a Licentious Doctrine? Must we make our own Performances, or Obedience a
Condition of Justification, or be laid under Infamy and Reproach? 'Tis by Faith only,
that we come to have actual Enjoyment and Possession of Christ himself, and of Re∣mission
of Sin; and not only so, but of eternal Life; and so of Holiness also, and
no other ways. The good Lord help you to a right Vnderstanding of these things, and
make you all a holy People, to the Praise of his Glory, and Honour of your Sacred
Profession.
The Holy Apostle having asserted Justification by the Righteousness of God, which
is by Faith in Jesus Christ, desired to know him and the Power of his Resurre∣ction,
&c. which he did not to be justified thereby, but as a Fruit flowing therefrom,
or as a further Evidence thereof: The first he had attained; but there was a higher
degree of Sanctification in hts Eye, which he pressed after, as then not having attained:
Whose Example let us follow.
I shall say no more: You own a Rule of Gospel-Holiness; Let me exhort you to la∣bour
after sincere Obedience: And pray forget me not in your Prayers, that God
would graciously help me through all my Troubles and Temptations, and preserve me
and you to his Heavenly Kingdom; who am your Servant for Jesus's sake, and so
shall abide till Death.

