



Loving Father:
HOW much I am
obliged unto you
both for my being
and well-being, I
desire now to testifie unto the
world; for though to requite
your love and bounty, be not
within the sphear of my Activi∣ty,
yet since the ApostleQuicquid est, quod dat Patri Filius, utique minus est, quia hanc ipsam dandi facultatem Patri debet. Seneca lib. 3. de Benefi∣ciis. Patri∣bus & Dis non possumus retribuere aequali. Arist. 8. Ethic.  1 Tim. 5. 4 com∣mandeth
Children to learn to
requite their Parents, and Nature

it self hath taught the unreaso∣nable
The fow which teacheth children to requite their Pa¦rents is the Stork from  natural af∣fection, and she is called : hence com¦meth  when chil∣dren study to requite their Pa∣rents.Creatures this lesson, I
shall endeavour, (God assisting
me with his grace) to pay that
three-fold debt, of reverence,
obedience, and gratitude, which
all children owe to their Pa∣rents:
As Aeschines therefore,
when he saw his fellow-Schol∣lers
give great gifts to Socrates
(being poor, and having nothing
else to bestow) did give himself
to Socrates, professing to be whol∣ly
devoted unto him: so I shall
ever devote my self unto your
service, to whom (next under
God) I owe my self, and those
abilities I have, both natural,
and which through Gods bles∣sing
upon your liberal educa∣tion,
by a double apprentiship
in twoMagda∣len-Hall in Oxford, and the Middle Temple in London. famous and flourishing
Societies I have acquired. To
expresse therefore my due ob∣servance,

and gratefull recogni∣tion
of your former care, and
cost, and withal to give you
some account of the fruitful
spending of my time, I here pre∣sent
unto you some Choyce Ob∣servations
concerning the tvvelve
first Caesars, Emperours of Rome.
A work (as I conceive) both de∣lightful,
and useful, and there∣fore
to you (I hope) not unwel∣come;
as Geographers express
the whole world in a little Map,
so have I laboured Graphically
to describe these great Monarchs
of the world in a little model,
neither strictly tying my self to
any one Historian, nor relating
all the passages of their lives, but
excerping out of the most prin∣cipal
Tertul. Euseb. Eccles. Hill. Iosephus, Plutarch. Taciti Hist. & Annal. Aurel. Vict. Eutropius, Pliny, Soli∣mis, Seneca, Macrob. Sa∣turn. Sueto∣nius, with Casaub. Animadvers. Eras. Apo∣theg. & Chi¦lid.Authors, such things of
them as were most memorable.
Amongst all which Writers
(though I confesse Tacitus his

stile is elegant, & full of wise sē∣tentious
Est orati Taciti ∣rum in mo∣dm arguta, & prudentiae plena Bodin. l. 4. de Me∣thod. Histor.Apotheg.) I have chief∣ly
followed Suet. 1. because my
worthyMr. Wil∣liam Pemble. Tutor (whosememory
I shall ever honour) made choice
especially (of that History to read
to his Pupils. 2 Because his Phrase
is pure & polite, and himself a
faithful Historian: Of whom it is
recorded (as I think) by Eras∣mus,
that he wrote the lives of
the Romane Emperours, prorsus
ea libertate, quaipsi vixerunt, with
the same freedom that they lived.
Alex. ab Alex. Genial. dier. lib. 1. c 1.
calleth him sincerissimum. Scripto∣rem,
and Ludov.Sutonius Tranquillus Graecorum & Latino∣rum Scripto∣rum diligen∣tissimus, at∣que incor∣ruptissiimus, res duodcim Csarum vi∣detur mihi integerrimè exponere qui in optimi Principibus nec vitia, nec suspiciones vitiorum ta∣cet: in pessi∣mi vero co∣lores virtu∣tum non di∣simulat. Ludov. Vives de tradend. Discipl. lib. 5 Tranquillè & aequaliter Fluit, rebus{que} unicè addi∣ctu, orationis ornamenta non negli∣gens, sed secu∣rus praeterit, & tamen hunc ipsum ornatum velut umbram on id agens trahit. Famian: Strada, lib. 2 Prols. Histor. Vives, incor∣ruptissimum.
And I desire to
write as freely and unpartially
of them, since I may say of them
all, as Tacitus doth of some of

them, that they were Mihi nec be∣neficio
nec injuria cogniti; only I
shall herein fail, that I write
not of these Emperours Stylo
Imperatorio, with a high and lofty
stile. Iulius Caesar is here placed
in the forefront, he being the
first Emperour. For this title
was at the first given unto him,
that had fought valiantly for his
Country and slain many ene∣mies;
IuliusNature meant Cae∣sar for a Conque∣rour, when she gave him both such cou∣rage, and such cour∣tesie, both which put Marius in∣to amaze. They which durst speak to him, (said he) were ig∣norant of his greatnesse; and they which durst not, were so of his good∣nesse. Caesar (having
brought the greatest part of the
then known world into the sub∣jectiō
of the Romans) was the first
that was saluted by the title of
absolute Emperour, and all the
Emperours succeeding were cal∣led
Imperatores & Caesares from
him, Mat. 22. 21. Dunbar in his
fifth Century of Epigrammes hath
these verses of Iulius Caesars and
Pope Gregories reforming the
Kalender.

Caesar Gregoriusque annum dum jure
reformant,
Deformant regnires sine jure, sui:
Scilicet antiqui facies à Caesare regni
Versa est, à Papa Pristina religio:
Malo reformari civilem à Caesare stam∣mam.
Malo reformatam Gregoriique fidem.
The Emperours after Iulius Cae∣sar
were called Augusti from
Octavius, the second Romane
Caesar, who revived the good
lawes, and reformed the bad. But
the Emperours succeeding him,
having more are to be great
then good, rather raged then
reigned, and the decrees of some
of them, viz. Tiberius and Caligu∣la,
are witily termed furores non
judicia. Quatuor Principes ferro in∣terempti
(saith Tacitus in his Histo∣ry)
four of these Emperours
were slain with the Sword, Gal∣ba,
Otho, Vitellius, Domitian: which
three first Plutarch compareth (in

regard of their short reign) to
Kings in a Tragedy, which last
no longer then the time that
they are represented on the
stage, Iulius Caesar, and Caligu∣la
were also slain, Claudius, and
Titus were poisoned, Nero slew
himself,Augustus Caesar dyed in a Com∣plement; Livia, Con∣jugii nostri memor, vive, & vale. Tiberius in dissimu∣lation; as Tacitus saith of him. Iam Tiberium vires & cor∣pus, non Dis∣simulatio de∣serebans. Vespasan in a Iest, sit∣ting upon the stool, Vt to Du io. Galba with a sentence, Feri, sixe re si  Romani; holding forth his Nek,  last Essayes in 4.  Augustus dyed in a
complement, Tiberius in dissimu∣lation,
Galba with a sentence,
Vespasian with a jest, yet he died
peaceably in his Bed, which no
Emperour since Augustus ever
did. TheMacrob. lib. 1. in som. Scipion. Heathens shadowed
the sting of conscience by the
Eagle or Vulture that feed upon
the heart of Prometheus, and by
the three Virgins which they cal∣led
Furies, following men in a
hideos form, with burning
torches in their hands, which
some of the worst of these Hea∣then
Emperours really felt after

their bloody cruelties, and veri∣fied
that oldTimeo in∣custoditos a∣ditus, timeo & ipsos cu∣stodes. Maxime, he must
needs fear many, whom many
fear.See in the Book of him, and Domitian. Caligula (though he con∣temned
the gods, as they called
them) yet at the least thundering
and lightening would run under
his bed, and cover his head.Dion in Nerone. Nero
that monster of Mankind having
killed his Mother Agritina,
could never after endure the
worm and sting of conscience
for his foul fact,Our Eng∣lish Chro∣nicles re∣port of King Ri∣chard the third, that having im∣brued his hands in the Blood of two O∣rient Prin∣ces, he ne∣ver after had quiet in his mind, his body was privily fenced, his hand ever upon his Dagger, his countenance grimme and gastly, his sleep unquiet, for he rather slumbred than slept. The night before the Battel fought in Bosworth-Field, he dreamed a terrible dream. Credo non erat solum, sed Conseintia scelerum. Polyd. Virgil. but confessed
that he was often haunted with
the apparition of his mothers
Ghost, and tormented also
with scourges, and burning
torches of the Furies. We may
take notice of many Morall
vertues also in the best of these
Heathens, Julius Caesar, Augu∣stus

Vespasian, and Titus that
mirrour of humanity, and see
in them the truth of that old
Maxime, Magistratus virum in∣dicat,
a place sheweth the man,
and it sheweth some to be bet∣ter,
some to be worse. It was
said of Caligula, that there was
never better servant and worse
Master: Omnium consensu capax
Imperii, nisi imperasset, saith Tacitus
of Galba: but of Vespasian he saith,
Solus Imperatorum Vespasianus mu∣tatus
in melius. But least I should
be upbraided with the City of
Myndus, for making my Porch
too bigge, here will I cast An∣chor,
ever remaining.

