



MY LORD,
IT may seem very improper to address a Translation out of French to Your Lordship, who have spent so many years to the greatest advantage in France, and who is not only a Great Master of that Gentile Language, but of all the more eminent modern Lan∣guages of Europe. But those

who have the Honour to know any thing of Your Lordship must needs allow, that no Dedication of what is Ʋseful to the world, or Learn∣ed in any kind, can be more properly tendered than to a Person who being born in the Highest Rank of our Nobility, has Power to Patro∣nize whatsoever he takes into his Protection, and who being fully re∣plenished with all the admirable ac∣complishments, which a mighty Ge∣nius, a penetrating and vigorous Ʋnderstanding, an early and ex∣emplary Virtue and Piety, and all sorts of Foreign and Domestick improvements could bestow; in or∣der to render Your Lordship either a Great Minister in affairs of State,

a Compleat Courtier, an Eminent Patriot in the time of Peace, a Valiant and Judicious Commander in the time of War, or an excellent Judge both of Men and Books. My Lord, the Treatise I now offer You, is not writ after the usual way of ordinary Chymists; it has none of the bombastick expressi∣ons, nor ridiculous pretences, none of the Melancholick Dreams, and wretched Enthusiasms, none of the palpable falsities, and even impossi∣bilities wherewith the common rate of Chymical Books has been stuff'd heretofore. The Author is no Believer in that great and un∣happy stumbling-block, the My∣stery of Projection, nor at all ad∣dicted

to the Transmutation, or ra∣ther Adulteration of Metals. He is an excellent Operator, his Reasonings are close and pertinent to the matter in hand, and all de∣duced from matter of Fact; in∣somuch that I think he may be said to have Purified and Refined Chy∣mistry from the many dregs and feculencies, which by other mens over-refining, and over-curious diligence it had been tainted with before. I shall not trouble Your Lordship too much with things so unsuitable as these are, considering that Your Noble Soul, and Pub∣lick Spirit is hourly engaged in serving, and becoming highly useful to your Countrey upon the

greatest occasions. Your Lord∣ship had a considerable share in the happy conclusion of this Sum∣mers Campaign, with Your most Illustrious Father, his Grace my Lord Duke of Beaufort, who did maintain, by his Presence, and Wise Conduct, that great Post of the utmost importance, the City of Bristol, against the power of the Rebels, who confidently gave out that they were sure of Bristol, and doubtless might have been so, unless prevented by the Wisdom and Courage of His Grace, and Your Lordship. These things, My Lord, are but the begin∣ning of what the World is to

expect from You, and may now very reasonably promise it self, under the auspicious Government of our most Potent, and most In∣vincible Monarch. What great thing may not reasonably be pre∣sumed, when the Head and Bo∣dy are so admirably fitted for the Conquest of the World! and the rather, now the Body is so well Purged from the sowre Leaven of Intestine Rebellion. May Your Lordship long continue to partake of His Majestie's Royal Fa∣vour, and to Ennoble the most Illustrious House of the Somer∣sets, with thousands of gallant Actions, worthy Your self, and

worthy Your high Descent from some of the Greatest Men in the World, for many Generations past. I am,
MY LORD,

