



THE following Discourses of our most Reverend
Author contain his judicious and pious Thoughts,
upon the Third Chapter to the end of the First Epistle
of St. Peter, which together with the Commentary
on the First and Second Chapters, published the last
year, make a compleat and useful Explication of that
whole Epistle. They might have been all of one Impres∣sion,
and so have come into thy hands at the same time,
and in one Volume, had not some prudent considerations
oblig'd us to change the Printer: However we have
taken care so to print this Second Part, that it may con∣veniently
be bound up with the first; and there is little
loss by the delay, but that of time, which perhaps
is not so much neither, but that it may (with more pro∣fit
to thee) be happily redeemed.
I know that some do not relish the phrase and con∣texture
of such Discourses; but I am on the other
hand assured by others, very able and competent judges
of such performances, that they are highly valuable in
their whole scope and tendency: for they think
that they not only contain the purity of Doctrine
according to Scripture, but also the life and spirit of

Christian Morals; and that they happily cement toge∣ther,
and bear in upon the heart right notions of God
and Religion with solid Piety: In a word, that, as they
are written by a Primitive Spirit and in a plain Stile,
so they may, through Gods grace, sow the Seeds of Pri∣mitive
Devotion, which is too much worn out in this
Age; the seat whereof is more in the Heart, than in
the Head. If they serve in any measure those great
ends, our labour is highly rewarded.
Let such then, as shall reap this benefit by these
well designed Papers, be pleased to know, that it is
not so much to me, as to the Pious Zeal and Care of
our Great and now Blessed Authors surviving Relati∣ons,
that they owe this Happy Enjoyment: whose Virtue
and Piety afford matter enough for a large Preface, if
their Modesty did not so awfully restrain my too for∣ward
inclinations, that I must content my self to
say, that they now live like him, whom they ten∣derly
loved whilst he was amongst them; and that
as he did, so they make it their business to do good,
without letting the World know of it. It has been
at their charge and pressing desire, that all those
papers that are already printed, have been copied out,
prepared for the press, and published. They neither
proposed to themselves, nor expect any other advantage
but thy Edification, and therein the glory of God; rich
returns indeed, and which nothing can rob them of, but

meerly thy inproficiency, and if that happen (which
God forbid) the loss shall be more thine than theirs.
I was not willing that such good ends should be ob∣structed
by my declining any part of the trouble that
fell to my share; on the contrary I considered it a Du∣ty
I owed first to God, and then to the memory of the ex∣cellent
Author, whose divine converse and wonderful
example, gave me early and powerful Resolutions to
dedicate my self to God, and the Service of his Church.
In my performance I have done my best (tho short of
what I wished) to serve thee; there remains in our
Hands some brief but lively Discourses upon the Epistle
to the Ephesians, upon the Decalogue, the Creed,
and the Lord's Prayer, which possibly may be made
publick in a convenient time. When this is done, I
think we have ended all we intend to publish at present.
Let us therefore set about the reformation of our Lives,
in the use of these means, depending upon God for the
success; and that he by his free Grace and good
Spirit, may enable thee and me, by this and all other
helps, which this Age affords, to make greater and
greater Advances towards Heaven, and so to finish
our Course with Ioy, is and shall be the hearty Prayer
of,

York, March 13th.
1694.
