



Right Honourable, and Right Worshipful,
THO I was importunately solicited to make the following Discourse publick, not only by the Gentry of the Country, but likewise by most of the Learned in the Law, who were part of that nume∣rous Auditory before whom it was deliver'd; yet the Sense of my own incapacity at the best, together with those few days which my pressing Occasions would allow me, to fit my self for such an under∣taking,
made me demur for some time ere I durst correspond with their Requests. And indeed nothing but the consideration of Two such great Patrons your selves, (who may each of you lay just Claim to it), could have prevail'd with me to have repriev'd it to a longer Life. You both are so great encouragers of the Subject it chiefly Treats of, (Justice and Mercy) that as they seem riveted in your very Constitution; so you may claim a natural Right to this Discourse. So that as most Persons are necessitated to screw up their Inventions to fit Epistles Dedicatory, by Flattery and Applause, to make the Subject of which they Treat, and the Person to whom they Dedicate, to quadrate with each other. There is such an agreeableness between your Genius and the Matter compris'd in the subse∣quent Discourse, that should I say it decyphers each of you, there is no part of the World that is thorough∣ly read in either of your Tempers, which would think the Encomium undeservedly plac'd. You my Lord, from your first setting out into the World, have had the Character of Wise, Just, Good, and Be∣nign, and as every day adds to your Knowledge, so does it to the lustre of your Glory too. For by the conti∣nual
and impartial Exercise of Justice, still bestud∣ed with Mercy, you beautifie your Place, high as it is, abundantly more than it can adorn you; and thereby embellish that Fountain from whence you derive your Commission. And were you really to hear the sentiments and expressions of all good Men in your late Circuit, concerning your Lordships Wis∣dom, Industry, and Compassion, joyn'd with an unbias'd Care for Equity, 'twould outstrip Hy∣perbole itself, and constrain you to blush at their so frequent admiration of your Vertues.
And as for you Sir, you have always mov'd un∣der that excellent Character of having oblig'd all that know you, by your extraordinary Candour, Cle∣mency, and Justice. And altho the Sphere, you move in, be not so conspicuous as that of his Lord∣ships, yet that Specimen which you have always gi∣ven of a strict regard to Justice and Commiserati∣on, is a sufficient evidence, that in what Post so∣ever you were plac'd, you would act according to the Rules of Prudence and Sincerity. But besides all this Sir, I have a greater Tie to lay this at your Feet, as an expression of that indelible Gratitude which I must ever owe to you: And tho Flattery be
so sordid a thing, and so much against my Temper, that you know Sir, I would sooner die than be guilty of it; yet the fault would be as great on the other hand, should I wrap up such favours as I have re∣ceiv'd from you, in a dark obscurity. For I must not be asham'd to own, that (besides all other kind∣nesses, which are vastly great) I owe that which is dearer than Life, even my Liberty itself, to your exceeding great Favour; you alone having been the Instrument of freeing me in a great measure, from those sorrows which a Romish Adversary forc'd me to grapple with. And therefore be pleas'd to accept of this, as a Monument of my publick acknowledg∣ment, which is all the favour I shall at present ask from you; only that you will both of you vouchsafe to excuse the freedom of this Dedication, and Pa∣tronize it (not for the merits of its Author, but) in hope that it may, in some measure, promote that important Work, which is the Subject of the follow∣ing Papers; which will add infinite Satisfaction to,
April 2. 1692.

