



Right Honourable,
I Intended the Dedication of this
Treatise to the Parliament be∣fore
I had the happinesse to be a
Member of so Honourable a
Society. Who are so fit to Pa∣tronize
a worke concerning God, his word and
workes, as the Parliament of England, and such
a Parliaments, who have heard more of God
and his will, and seene more of his wayes in
lesse then a lustre of yeares, then many pre∣cedent



Parliaments have in severall Ages▪ Ar∣duous
and important matters concerning
ChurchQuia de ad∣visamento & ssensu consilij nostri pro qui∣busdam or duis & urgentibus negotijs, nos, Statum & dfen∣sionem Regni nostri Angliae & Ecclesiae con∣cernentibus, uoddam Par∣liamentum no∣strum apud Civitatem Westmonaste∣rium tertio die Novembis proximo teneri ordinavimus. or State have been the daily Theme
of your serious debates. Queen Elizabeth
once in her progresse visiting the County of
Suffolke, all the Justices of Peace in that
County met her Majesty, having every one
his Minister next to his body, which the
Queen tooke speciall notice of, and thereup∣on
uttered this Speech, that She had often
demanded of her privy Councell, why her
County of Suffolke was better governed than
any other County, and could never under∣stand
the reason thereof, but now She her
selfe perceived the reason; it must needs be so
(said Shee) where the word and the sword
goe together.
You did Honourable worthies) neare the
beginning of the Parliament, cause a Synode
of Reverend and Able Divines to be called to
advise you in Church-affaires. God hath sent
unto you (as Jeremie speaketh) all his servants
the Prophets,Jer. 7. 25. and 35. 15. choice men out of every County,
(as you your selves were elected out of ma∣ny)
to be serviceable to you in the great



worke of Reformation. You have had the
benefit of their faithfull advise, of their fer∣vent
Prayers, and diligent labours. When
did any Parliament enter into so solemne a
League and Covenant to reforme themselves
and Kingdome? when were there so many
dayes of Humiliation kept so generally in
England? when was there such a constant
daily LectureThose Gen∣tlemen of the House, and others that live neere Westmin∣ster may heare 500 Sermons yearly at least, one every Morning, and foure every Sabbath. of worthy men in Westminster-Abbie
before? In the Parliament held 5. E.
3. so many excellent lawes were made, as it
was called bonum Parliamentum I hope as you
are now in Prayers and Print stiled the Re∣pairers
of the breach, and restorers of paths to
dwell in, so future Ages will honour you with
the title of Optimum Parliamentum. When in
the Councell of Constance, talke was Mini∣stred
touching the reformation of the Spiri∣tualty,
and some said quòd oporteat incipere à
Minoritis, the reformation must begin at the
Friers, no said the Emperour Sigismond,Foxe in his Booke of Mar∣tyrs. Non à
minoritis sed a Majoritis incipienda est reformatio,
meaning the reformation ought first to begin
with the Pope and Cardinals and Bishops, and
so discend after to the inferiours. Some Em∣perours



were called Great for their good∣nesse;
religion makes a Nation or person
honourable Rom. 9. 4. compared with 3. 2.
That was a worthy Speech of a Germane di∣vine
writing to Oecolampadius, Veniat verbum
domini, & submittemus, etiamsi nobis essent sexcenta
colla: As Queene Elizabeth passed in Trium∣phall
State through the Streets of London af∣ter
her Coronation, when the Bible was pre∣sented
unto her at the little-Conduit in
Cheape-side,Speeds Chro∣nicle Chap. 24. p. 858. she received the same, with both
her hands, and kissing it laid it to her breast,
saying, that the same had ever beene her chiefest
delight, and should be the rule by which She meant
to frame her Government. You have likewise
covenanted to reforme the Church accor∣ding
to the word of God, the best Rule both
for a Personall and Ecclesiasticall Reforma∣tion.
There is a double generall subject of
reformation. 1. Corrupt persons, 2. Cor∣rupt
things. You have cast out a scandalous
Ministry; labour to settle (I beseech you) in
all the three kingdoms Pious & able Preach∣ers.
Christ (the great Reformer of his Church
Mal. 3. 2 Matth. 3. 12.) specially purgeth



the Sonnes of Levi Mal. 3. 1. because he hath
appointed them the office of purging others.
secondly the ordinances of God must be both
Pure and Perfect in a compleate Reformati∣on.
You have cast out a great deale of rub∣bish;
O that the House of God might be
built. It was a blemish upon some of those
reformations mentioned in Scripture, that
the high places were not taken away, and
that their reformation needed a further re∣formation.
God did much honour King Ed∣ward
a Childe, and Queene Elizabeth a wo∣man
in making them the beginners of a bles∣sed
reformation. O that the Lord would be
pleased by you to perfect what they begun,
that Christs government, worship, and disci∣pline
might be set up in the three Kingdoms.
In the times of our troubles, peace and truth
have beene joyned together in our Prayers
and Capitulations; O let them never be se∣parated,
I will reveale unto them the abundance
of peace and truth Jer. 33. 6. and the same Pro∣phet
Jer. 9. 3.complaines, that there were none valiant
for truth in the earth. Buy the truth and sell it not
saith Salomon, contend earnestly for the faith



which was once delivered to the Saints.Jude. 3. v. Amicus
Socrates, Amicus Plato, sed magis amica veri∣tas.
You have covenanted to extirpate heresies
and whatsoever is contrary to sound doctrine. In
your first Declaration, there is this memora∣ble
passage, It is farre from our purpose or
desire, to let loose the golden reines of Dis∣cipline
and government in the Church, to
leave private persons or particular congre∣gations,
to take up what forme of divine ser∣vice
they please; for we hold it requisite that
there should be through-out the whole
Realme a conformity to that order which
the Lawes enjoyne according to the word of
God. God hath done great things for you
and by you, and therefore he expects great
things from you. It was a noble resolution
in our Josiah, Edward the 6th, when he was
pressed by Bishop Ridly and others to tole∣rate
his Sister Masse in her owne Chapell, he
would not (though importuned) yeeld there∣to,
saying, He should dishonour God in it;
but being much pressed by them he burst into
teares, and they thence concluded, that he
had more divinity in his little finger then



they in all their bodies; O that you would
study to premote Gods glory, and be zealous
for his truth, since you have had such expe∣rience
of his mercy, and likewise could not
but perceive the evill of those dangerous er∣rours,
which were too much indulged by
some of those whom you have cast out.
I shall now speake of the threefold Subject
I handle in my Booke. 1. The Scripture,
2. God, 3. The Workes of God. It is report∣ed
of Charles the Great, that he set his Crown
on the Bible,Ego ipse odi meos libros, & sape pies interire, quòd etuo ne morentur lectores, & ab∣ducanta lctio∣neipsius scriptu∣rae, quae sola omnis sapientiae fon est. Luthe∣rus in 9 c. Genes. and Luther was so zealous to
have the Scriptures read, that he professed, if
he thought the reading of his Bookes would
hinder the reading of the Scripture he would
burne them all before he dyed. Alphonsus
King of Spaine and Naples, read the Bible with
Lira's glosse foureteen times over. The Em∣perour
Theodosius the second, wrote the New
Testament out with his owne hand; many
speake much of new light, but the Prophet
EsayEsay 8. 20. saith To the Law, and to the Testimo∣ny:
if they speake not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them. Take heed of
too much of that new light, which the world is



now gazing upon;Jer. 6. 16. and 18. 15. so much new light is break∣ing
forth, that the old zeale is almost extinct
by it, saith a MinisterMaster Buckley of the Gospell Cove∣nant on Zach. 9. 11, p. 14. and 104. of New-England. The
Familists say they are above Ordinances;
when the body hath no need of nourishment,
then (and not afore) will the soule have no
need of Ordinances; we about Westminster
have beene better instructed out of the 20.
of Exodus 24. Some talke of Revelations and
the Testimony of the Spirit. But now the
Scripture is compleated, I must not expect
any immediate Testimony of the Spirit. Lu∣ther
saith, if any Spirit should come and speak
any thing to him that he brought not Scrip∣ture
for, he would spit in his face. The Scrip∣ture
is the best Cynosure to follow, it was
Davids Counseller,The Schoole∣men afime that tree things cannot be efined. it is a perfect rule of a
Perfect Reformation.
Secondly, all Christian States and Persons
should labour for an experimentall practicall
knowledge of God and Christ,1 God ob sum∣mam formosita∣tem. Phil. 3. 8. 10.
the vision of God in Heaven shall make us
perfectly Happye.2. Materia prima ab sum∣mam informi∣tatem. Quid Deus sit ipse tantum
novit,3. Sinne ob∣summam defor∣mitatem. what God is, God himselfe doth onely
perfectly know. But he hath revealed him∣selfe



to us in his word and workes. That place
in 34 of Exodus, 6. 7. verses is as full a descrip∣tion
of Gods Attributes, as any in all the
Scripture, The Lord, the Lord God, mercifull,
and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in good∣nes
& truth; keeping mercy for thousands, forgiv∣ing
iniquity, transgression & sin, & that will by no
meanes clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the
Fathers upon the children, and upon the childrens
Children, unto the third and fourth generation.
If God were more known, he would be more
loved,Psal. 9 9. honoued, feared, trusted. The Hea∣thens
extolled the knowledge of a mans self,
but Christians must chiefely study to know
God.
This is a Noble Subject for a Christi∣an
Parliament and a Christian King∣dome
to exercise themselves in; O that
you would all labour to know Gods excel∣lencies,
and to propagate the knowledge of
him to the many darke Corners of the Land.
Thirdly, the workes of God are to be dili∣gently
observed by a Christian State. One
observes that there is a five fold Declaration
of the workes of God.Mr Carill on Psal. 1 18. 17. An Arthnieticall De∣claration

Psal. 40. 5. Secondly, a Logicall De∣claration
of the workes of God, when we shew
the severall kinds of them; as the workes of
Creation, the worke of Redemption, the
worke of Providence; and distribute those
into workes of mercy, or works of Justice.
Thirdly, an Historicall Declaration, when we
declare the persons acting, the places, the
times the Counsels, the mannaging of the se∣verall
actions, the events and successes.
Fourthly, a Rhetoricall Declaration. Fifth∣ly,
a Declaration purely Theologicall, or a
practicall Declaration of the works of God.104. Psal. 24.
We should be lifted up by Gods manifold
works to the Consideration of his unlimited
greatnesse that is the first cause and author of
them all; we can turne our eyes no way, but
exceeding great multitudes of works wrought
by God doe offer themselves to our view.
If we looke upward, downeward, on the
right hand, on the left, into our selves and
other things; our minds shall be encountred
with diversity of rare Workes of Almighty
God. These workes are all made with much
wisdome Psal. 136. 5. and the serious consi∣dering



of Gods workes is a great part of the
sanctifying of his name. Never had any Par∣liament
more reason to magnifie Gods good∣nesse
for his singular mercies. Oh that as ma∣ny
of your deliverances were got with suppli∣cation,
so they might be worne with thanke∣fulnesse;
and as you have been a Parliament
of many Prayers, so may you be a Parliament
of many prayses, which is the earnest desire
of

