





My Dearest Mother,
THese Papers were long written for my own peculiar use, and laid abbout the shelves of my study; in a dress, whose hue they yet retain: and indeed so sensible I am, of the unfitness of such Youth as mine, to appear in Print, that were I not under the Press my self, I would not suffer my Soliloquy's, ever to come under it; and the rather,
because intending them pure∣ly for my own service in their draught, I expended my whole industry in getting affections, and neglected that accuracy in the contexture of my Ex∣pressions, which otherwise I had taken. Renewing the Co∣py, is a Task, that I (a poor Day-labourer) can by no means set on; and sith I com∣ply with those, who think this worthy to be sent abroad, a necessity is laid upon me to send it as 'tis. You know, I never affected taudry fashions in my own Garb, nor indeed do I in my Books; and I have a satisfaction to my self, in that those judicious Christians,
who gat it out of my hands, esteem it as clad (at the least) decently. A very aged and learned Doctor, (an eminent Dignitary of this Church of Ireland,) whom I never yet saw, save once, and that but on an occasion, which gave me no more than a half-hours Discourse with him,Dr. W.S. hath in an affectionate Letter to me these very words: In these Papers I now with many thanks send you, you have made choice of acceptable words, choice arguments, and superexcel∣lently expressed; no language ever better. You have spoken your own thoughts by Gods words; so that no enemy,
not the Devil himself, can say, but that you have said as well as may be, though a∣mong the English, Theology is cultivated in most of its parts, beyond what is found among Foreigners; yet, I think, the Papists outgo us in Devotionary Books. We are forced to English and al∣ter some of theirs, to make them , Thomas de Kem∣pis, Bellarmine, Parsons, &c. But so far as you have gone, you have outgone them: they have spoken holily, and very usefully; but what you utter is Bible all, & your thoughts are apples of silver, are placed in pictures of gold. Your last
Book, (i. e. a sheet of Christs satisfaction I sent him, ac∣quainted me with that argu∣ment, better than I was be∣fore; but this hath gone dee∣per into my heart, I have ta∣ken this with me, when I went to God, and like Heze∣kiah's Roll, I spread some of these Papers before me; and if like him, I did not weep sore, I have the more reason to grieve, that I did not so grieve. Had I been young∣er, and my eyes better, I would have Transcribed, if not all, yet some of these so pious Meditations. But if my Head be not laid, before they come out in Print, I shall with
the first get one of the Books. The good God bless your ho∣ly endeavours with suitable success, &c. My honoured good Mother, this (with like encouragements,) hath em∣boldened me to present you thus publickly, what I thought to have done in my own Hand∣writing It is true, the excel∣lent Mr. Rob: Bol's occasional reflections, were put into my hand, more than a year agon, by a Lady happy in a near re∣lation to that truly honoura∣ble, both Gentleman, and Chri∣stian; and I had thoughts of presenting you the fruits of my plowing with his heifer, but they being catcht from me by
a Friend, who liked them too well or too ill to restore them, I had not till now, any Essay of a Subject and language pro∣per to send you. The illustri∣ous Gentleman I last named, hath very praise-worthily set upon the reducing of both Phi∣losophy and Divinity, from aery, opinionative, and talka∣tive, to solid, experimental, and demonstrative. As for Phi∣losophy, (though I rejoyce in his, and the Royal Socie∣ties labours for it, (if I had brains, I have nor time nor af∣fection to the extreme studies thereof: but as for Divinity, I should have a thousand joyes, if this, or any endeavour of
mine, should make for its re∣claiming from controversial to practical, in any one soul; for sure I am, the exercize of my heart, in pouring out such So∣liloquies to the Lord in my Closet, stand me in much more stead, than a thousand Dis∣putes about that Mint and Cummin, which slayes the ge∣neral regard of the weighty things of the Law, in Great Britain and Ireland. But to so mean a Present, why preface I so many words? I will end with onely congratulating my self this, That whereas the glory of some Children is one∣ly their Fathers, mine, is my Mother too; for as I glory in
having a Father, who is able better to serve the Faith and Joy of Christians; so I do in having a Mother, who ere now has, and I am sure will a∣gain encourage by her kindest acceptance, the weak endea∣vours of. My gracious Dearest Mother,

