




SIr, Since I have had the happiness to be known to you, (my Habitation being not far distant from yours) I have found so much Candour and Civility in you, that I thought I needed not to seek further for a person, to whom I should dedicate this little Tract of Travel and Coyns, you having Travelled into the most famous Coun∣tries
of Europe,
Mr. Firth in his Sts. Monu∣ment, re∣ports of my Lord Willughbies eldest Son, that he had seen Rome, though he was not at all tainted with her errours: he brought over many of the rarities of other Nations, but none of their sins. and (being inquisitive after all Curiosi∣ties) also improved your tra∣vel both to the acquiring and knowledge of Coyns, and ma∣ny other rarities, some of which you were pleased for∣merly to shew me and others, and have (for the better com∣pleting of this Treatise) com∣municated to me several Ob∣servations, about Forein coyns especially. I would our Gen∣try generally were more stu∣dious, and would spend their time as profitably as you and
some others do. That would confirm what Mr. Burton in his Melancholly
Part 1. Sect. 2. Subsect. 15. observes of some of our English Gentry, that they are excellently well learned, like those Fuggeri in Germany, Du Bartas, Du∣plessis, Sadael in France, Pi∣cus Mirandula, Scottus, Ba∣rottus in Italy. There is an Honourable Gentleman
Robert Boye Esq now of the Royal Society, (whereof you are likewise a worthy Member) who hath Travelled abroad to good purpose, and by his Philosophical
Experi∣menta Fructi fera & Luci. fera. Expe∣riments and other useful Trea∣tises, hath much honoured the Nation. I may here relate, what I have heard from a very
worthy Divine; that he never knew a Family, wherein the Men and Women both, were of so obliging a Carriage, and of such great abilities. There is also a learned Knight and Baronet
Sir Nor∣on Knatch∣ball. of this Parliament (mentioned among the Bene∣factors to the Polyglott Bible) who hath written Critical notes in Latine on the New Testament. I shall onely adde this, that it may seem strange for me to publish a Discourse of Money, who (when I had the honour to be a Member of the House of Commons) was alwaies silent when that Sub∣ject came into debate,
Sir, 
