


MADAM,
THE Heroick Women assembled in this
Gallery are come from all parts of Hi∣story
to lay down their Crowns at your
Majesties Feet, and to congratulate in
common the Honour you have rendred
to your Sex. True it is, Madam, that all
the Eyes of Europe are now fix'd on you.
And there are no Mouths so little Chri∣stian
and so much ingaged elsewhere, which do not seriously,
and sincerely applaud you.
However, Madam, I may say, that the Company I present
unto you will bring no confusion to the Feast. They are Sove∣raign
and Illustrious Women, who have been like your self,
the choicest objects of their Ages: They are Victorious Per∣sons,
whom Vertue and Glory have Crowned with their own
Hands. And this must needs be a sweet satisfaction to you that
so many Soveraign and Illustrious Women have descended
from their Thrones and Theaters to become your Spectators.
The Sound and Acclamations of so many Heroesies who ap∣plaud
you with their Hands cannot chuse but be a pleasing
harmony to your Ears.
The chief thing, Madam, is, that these Applauses are no
Stage Representations; that these Acclamations are no con∣strained
or purchased Flatteries. They are serious and legiti∣mate
Tributes, which the vanquished pay to their Victress.
And you have vanquished them with so much Grace and Ju∣stice;

the Advantages you have over them are so charming,
and your emulation hath been so modest, as there is not one a∣mongst
them who is not thankful and well pleasing with your
Victory.
This Victory, Madam, so acceptable to the Vanquished,
is intirely Yours. It is not of your Regency; It is of your
whole Person: And though it be Peaceable and free from
blood, yet it is not inferiour to those tumultuary and bloudy
Victories you have gained in the generall distemper of all
Europe. It is certainely your great glory to have overcome on
the Rhein, on the two Seas beyond the Alps and the Pyrene∣an
Mountains: But your Glory (Madam) is much greater,
by having ouercome in Histories and Annals, in Heroick
Ages, and in the Region of great Examples. And what
noise soever is made by the Arm's of France, the Reputation
of your Vertue Victorious over the Artemisias, the Rada∣guna's
and Pantbea's, is far more illustrious and resplendent
then the renown of your Fortune victorious over so many de∣feated
Armies, and reduced Fortresses.
I need not fear that any one will accuse me of flattery, or re∣proach
my words with hyperbolicall Excesse. Heathen Ver∣tues
were never of the force, or stature of Christian Vertues,
and amongst these later yours (Madam) are the most Vi∣gorous
and eminent; they are Heroick and Soveraign▪
Your Piety indeed is of another Elevation and Zeal, then
their affected shews of Devotion, who limit to the circle of
their Beads, who referre all their Meditations to the modesty
of their dresse, and to a few tears squeezed out by force. Your
Piety amuseth not its self in making smoak in the house of
God, and trafficking with him by consuming Tapers, and
evaporating Perfumes. It draws from the bottom of your
heart the fire Incense and Victime of the Sacrifices it offers to
his Divine Majesty; And which is more acceptable to him
then all the Gums of Land and Sea; which is more pleasing
to him then the bloud of slaughtered flocks; it presents unto
him the Contrition of a Soveraign heart, the Humility of a
Crowned head, and the abasement and adoration of a humili∣ated
and religious Authority.

This private Worship, and these domestique Sacrifices,
make not her whole imployment; she hath other more gene∣rall
Practises, and other Exercises exposed to the eyes of the
world. These Practises are Instructions which equall the
worth of Laws: And these Exercises are Examples which
command. She refers her particular devotions to the edifica∣tion
of the People: She Prayes and Meditates for an infinity
of Souls: And the Propagation of Faith, the Defence of the
Church, the safety of the Kingdom, the Peace and Tranquil∣lity
of the whole Christian World are the points of her Medi∣tation,
and the scope of her Prayers.
Publick persons ought thus to meditate and pray for the
Publick: Their Devotion should be a devotion of Order, and
their Zeal a zeal of Discipline. They cannot vow any thing
better then wholesome Laws, and good Examples, not any
thing more holy then Mercy and Iudgement. And what is
aspiration and desire in their Oratory, ought to be reduced to
Order and Policy in the Body of the State. In this sence it is
said, that Piety is an universal Good, and for all uses; And in
what sence soever it be spoken, the extent of this saying is at
present filled up by the extent of your Piety, which is the
Generall Merit, and the Common good of the Kingdom.
Is it not your Piety, which hath forced heaven, and over∣come
the resistance of yeers; which hath obtained the fruit of
Benediction, the expectation and desire of the People, after all
their desires were exhausted, and their hope and patience in a
manner consumed? Is it not this Piety which hath retained
on our side both the Fortune which the death of the deceased
King had set at liberty, and the reputation which seemed rea∣dy
to retire with Fortune? Is it not this Piety which crowned
the ashes of this good Prince and brought Victory to his Fu∣nerall;
which infused resolution and courage into the sorrow
of France; which shewed unto our Enemies couragious and
formidable Tears, and a bold and triumphant Sadnesse? Is it not
this Piety which hath made the Perfume wherewith our mali∣cious
Devils have been chased away; which hath bound up
the spirit of Discord, fatall to Regencies, and funestous to the
Minorities of Princes?

Our fear Madam was, that we did ask too much, and did
beleeve our wishes too great when we demanded a smooth
and peaceable Regency for your Majestie, and when we wish∣ed
the King a Minority free from Rebellion and Troubles:
Yet what we behold at present Madam, is far greater then
our wishes, and much exceeding our demands. VVe see a
Regency managed with Vigour, and Addresse, still attempting
and prosperous: A Regency which hath the splendor and re∣putation
of the most Illustrious Reignes. We behold a Mi∣nority
Victorious and Conquering: A Minority respected by
Subjects, and dreadfull to Enemies: A Minority which is the
hope and support of the Christian VVorld. VVe see a
VVoman who diverts bad blasts, and changeth malignant
Constellations: A VVoman belov'd and follow'd by For∣tune:
A VVoman the Superintendent and Directresse of
Victory. VVe behold a Child, who hath the Credit and
Reputation of Reigning Soveraigns. VVho is the Arbitra∣tor
of Princes, and the Master of Nations; who ballances
and decides the Affairs of Europe.
All these Prosperities, Madam, are after God the works
of your Piety, the fruit of your Devotions, and the reward of
your good Deeds. Your Oratory is the common Fortresse,
and generall Magazine of our Frontiers. It is the principall
Peece of our Campes, the most redoubtable to our Enemies.
In your Oratory, that is formed which destroys their Engins,
and disorders their Designes: that which takes in their Towns,
and defeats their Armies: And all our Victories commence in
your Cabinet, through your Zeal and Prayer, before the Con∣duct
of Generals, and the Valour of Souldiers compleat them
in the Field.
By this way of Combatting you make a holy VVar, and
fight like a Christian Heroesse. Thus the good Angels and
blessed Souls fight in the behalf of Men: Their Piety is their
Valour, and their Prayers are their Weapons. And your
Majestie, who so profitably imployes this Victorious Piety,
and these combatting Devotions, merits no lesse thereby the
Name of Heroesse, and the Title of Conqueress, then if you

exposed your Person to the labour and toil of Sieges, to the
perils and hazards of Battels.
Force is not so great as it is esteemed, for being cloathed
in Iron, for handling fire and steel, for making a breach with
Canon-shot. True and eminent Force is to defeat Armies by
desiring their overthrow; It is to demolish Citadels and Forts,
by bowing knees, and lifting up hands to Heaven: It is to
take in Cities, and to subject Nations by a Tear let fall a
hundred Leagues from thence, by a word which no man
heareth.
Such was the Force of the Prophets, Generals of the Hosts
of God: Such was that of Moses, Gideon, and Debora, who
led the Elements, and Meteors to the Warres; who had Na∣ture
and Fortune in their Troups; who effected more by a
signe given by their hands, then could be performed with
armed Nations, and a whole world of Engins. Such was the
Force of the Victorious VVidow, who vanquished all Assria,
encamped before a City, and defeated it with a few sighes and
tears. It was like that of St. Hellen who overthrew Maxen∣ius
his Party, by her good works; Like that of Pulcheria,
whose Alms and Fastings were the principall weapons of two
Raignes. Like that of Cotilda who preserved Clodoueus, inga∣ged
in a disadvantagious Encounter, and repulsed the Germans,
who poured down like a deluge upon their Frontiers. And
even at present, Madam, this Force is the same with that of
your Piety, which at the foot of Altars performes all the me∣morable
Exploits of our field Armies; And which even in
your Closet gains Battels, and takes Towns in all the parts of
Europe.
But this commanding and Victorious Piety is not the one∣ly
Peece of your Regency: It is assisted by Prodence and
Justice, by the Graces and Magnificence, by all serviceable and
delightfull Vertues; And these Co-operating Vertues, acting
as they do, in the Spirit and by the conduct of Piety which
governs them, are indeed of another Elevation then those
which Act in the spirit of the World, and by the direction of
Morality.

That Prudence which the VVorld inspires, is but a tutor'd
and disciplin'd Malignity, but a certain Venome tempered
with Flegme, and infused with method. Your Majestie puri∣fied
both within and without, hath nothing of Malevolent
or Imposture, nothing of captious or double, Dealing.
The lights of your VVisdom cannot be false, comming
from so high a Region, and from so cleer a Source. They can∣not
be defective, Marching with so even a pace, and levelling
at so elevated an End; nor cannot it be reproached, as having
either by mistake or weaknesse fixed it thoughts upon those
mean and inferiour Ends, which humane Prudence seeks in
Time, and within the limits of Matter.
Justice meerly Morall, is, to expresse it well, but an authori∣zed
VVilfulnesse, a wilde and cruell Habit, which lawfully of∣fends.
Its force is but a force of Obstinacy and unpliableness;
By striving to over-bend the Level it breaks it; It snaps in two
the line, by endeavouring to hold it too straight. And be∣ing
often enough abused by the small distance between the ex∣tremity
of right, and the extremity of wrong; It acts great
cruelties where it thinks to produce great Examples. Your
Justice, Madam, illuminated and tempered by Piety, which
governs it, is equally remote from those two Extreams. It is
truely forceable and entire, but it is of a temperate and gentle
Force. It is of an Integrity like that of Laws which are far from
Cruelty and harshnesse, which are modest and respectfull.
And ordaining things with this Integrity and Force, it com∣mands
Persons with respect, and sweetens in them the sense of
what may be the most rigid in its Orders. It cannot be said,
Madam, that the Law is a leaden Rule in your hands: It hath
there all the evennesse and solidity it ought to have: Nor can
it be said to be a Rule of Iron; It hath neither the weight nor
roughnesse thereof, nor breaks the things which will be no
more then adjusted.
But there is no Law so rigorous which may not be sweet∣ned
by the Graces with which you Act. And Justice; nay the
most unflexible and vindicative Justice would alter its inclina∣tion,
and countenance, and become milde and munificent in

their Company. In this I say much, Madam, and yet this
much is but a part of what may be said. VVe know the Hi∣story
of the first Domination the VVorld hath seen, and con∣sequently
know, that they were the Graces which tamed
the cruelty of the first Men; which imposed the yoak upon
their necks, which made them love bondage and chains.
However this yoak was yet but rough-drawn; These chains
were rude and and unpolished: And the wonder is, that the
Graces which imposed them on Men, were then but unexpert
and half rustick. Your Majesties Graces are of a higher Ele∣vation,
and have another kinde of Force then those other.
They are such whose commands oblige, and which are plea∣sing
to those they binde: They are such as alleviate duties, and
sweeten servitude; such as know how to polish the Scepter, and
temper the over great resplendency of the Crown. And, Ma∣dam,
I shall not stick to say, that lesse efficacious Graces then
your own have sweetned Injustice, and set a pleasing face up∣on
Tyrannie.
The Importance is, that these your Majesties Graces are
not onelie modest and disciplined, but Religious and entirely
Christian: Your Piety hath inspired them with devotion
and zeal: It hath sanctified them, and sanctified your Pru∣dence
and Justice. And this sanctification of the Graces, Ma∣dam,
is not a vain intertainment of the mind, nor an amaze∣ment
of unimployed Reason. Force is more necessarie there∣to,
then to the melancholy austerity of retired Ver∣tues.
Aud it cannot be but the effect of a continuall and ob∣stinate
labour, of an ever firme and attentive soul, to please
without intermission; to delight with seriousnesse; to be still
in good humour and of good example; to gain hearts with∣out
making any unseemly Advances, or hazarding one single
word of Indiscretion.
Magnificence, which is an other Vertue attending on great
Fortunes, and great Souls, is governed like your Majesties
Vertues, by this directing and commanding Piety, which is
the Superintendent of your Life. It is no new thing to see
Magnificence at Court. It is Originary of that Country: There

it hath its Theatres and Exercises: And there is no private Per∣son
so well provided with whom it suffers not inconvenience
and constraint. But to speak truly (Madam) it is very rare to
see at Court a well Ordered and Regular Magnificence, pu∣rified
from Pride and Haughtinesse, cured of Ostentation and
Excesse, disingaged from sense and from the things it mana∣geth.
And this Orderly, Regular, Spirituall and unclogged
Magnificence hath an other kind of force then Frugality,
Modesty, and Simplicity which are far remote from burthen∣some,
and ingaging Objects.
Soveraignty, Madam, hath a splendor which sutes with its
own Condition. It hath lights which belong unto its Digni∣tie,
and which you cannot lawfully extinguish. The Vertues of
your Fortune are of another Order, and ought to have other
Marks then those of your Person. And by a disposal contrary
to that of the Ark of Covenant, which was only covered
with skins, and adorned within with Gold and Purple. Your
Majestie may well reserve Modesty for your Interior, and
Humility for your Sentiments: but it owes Lustre and Pomp
to your Dignity: It owes a specious and splendid Exteriour
to the eyes of the World. This mixture of Splendour and
Modesty, and this alliance of appearing Majesty with a veiled
Humility, is the last form and consummation of Christian
Magnificence: And I know not Madam, whether in the
whole Course of your life there be any part wherein your Ver∣tue
is more vigorous, or your Spirit acts more gallantly and
with greater Force.
There is mauy times but a constrained and necessitated Mo∣deration;
nothing but an artificial and ill-looked Poverty in
what is stiled the Vertue and Power of private Persons. That
which is Humility under Sackcloth, and is Abstinence in a
Cloister, would be peradventure Pride and Presumption under
Purple; Ambition and Avarice in a Palace. True Power,
Madam, consists in floating as you do, above the abundance of
your Condition, and the plenitude of your Fortune: It con∣sists
in conserving the elevation of your Soul, and the Free∣dom
of your Heart amidst an Infinity of Objects, which

sweetly ruine, and bind with pleasure. It consists in keeping
your self in a posture of mind like that of the Cherubius on the
Ark, who amongst Gold and Pretious-stones, in the midst of
Purple and Perfumes, turn not away their eyes from the
Propitiatory. In fine, it consists in preserving the Purity of
Intention, and the Rectitude of sight, in the most pompous
and resplendent Actions, and in Imitating the Planet-Rulig
Intelligences, which look onely upon God, and aim at no∣thing
but his Glory in the splendor of their Orbs, and amidst
the numerous Objects they convey unto us.
These Vertues Madam, which are all Heroick and Royall,
have conjoyntly wrought upon the Statue erected unto You
in the midst of this Gallery: Magnificence hath furnished the
Matter, which is pretious and befitting the Merit and Repu∣tation
of the Work. The Graces, I mean the industrious
and skilfull Graces have carved it, and given it all the Lectures
which a compleat Figure can receive from a perfect Modell.
Force hath received it from their hands, and raised it upon its
Basis. Justice hath graved the Inscription, and Piety hath
been the Overseer and Directresse of the whole Peece.
These Artists are none of the common Artificers, nor
their works any of the Vulgar ones. Their hands transcend
those of the Ancient Sculptors: And the Eternity they are
to give, is a far different eternity from that of the Heroes in Mar∣ble,
and the Gods in Brasse All these Gods and Heroes framed
by Men, are long since dead and buried: We scarce retain their
dust, & some small fragments half consumed by time It belongs
only to the Graces and Vertues to work for Eternity. Not only
Years, but even Ages, more injurious then Years treat their
Works with respect: And yet at this day in the Books and
Memorialls of Worthy Men there are Ancient Pieces of their
Modell, which are as neat and entire, as if they came but new∣ly
out of their hands. The Portraitures they have made of
your Majesty, of what matter soever they be composed, will
be used with the same respect and esteem, they will not be de∣faced
and destroyed; they will be entertained and multiplied
by Time. And Posterity, even the least Curious, yea the least

Cultivated and rudest Nations will desire their Copy.
VVhiles these honours and this acknowledgement of Po∣sterity
are in Expectation, be pleased Madam, that the most
Noble and Illustrious Part of Antiquity may honour you in
this Gallery. This will be no impure and tumultuary Wor∣ship:
The honours which shall be rendred you by so many
Wise, by so many Magnanimous, by so many gloriously chast
Women will not be disavowed, and unauthorized. Such
fair hands cannot present you but with most pure Incense, nor
make you other then beautifull and precious Crowns: And
nothing but just and melodious Acclamations, nothing but a
Harmony of Honour and Heroick Hymns, can proceed from
so many Soveraigne and well instructed Mouthes.
This Veneration will be common to the Illustrious of your
Sex: But those of your Race and Name will bring unto it a
particular Zeal, as they have a Duty, a Part, and Interests
peculiar to themselves. And in the Crowd of so many Hero∣esses
which will presse to be seen by your Majesty, the Blan∣ches
and Isabella's, whether of Castile or Austria, will make
their Offerings and Vows remarkable amongst the rest. Be∣sides
Madam, they have a neerer Relation to you, and owe
you more then others: And the honour they have to Revive
in you, and to be Irradiated by your Reputation, is to them
a second Life more Illustrious then the First: It is to them a
temporall Beatitude, wherein they take more glory then in the
eternity they enjoy in History.
But Madam, the Honour which Heroick Women shall
render you, will not be like those Ceremonies of the good
Goddesse wherein Men had no share: VVe shall be admitted
thereto in Common; we shall mingle our Duties, and Ac∣clamations
with theirs; their Incense and our own shall make
the same Persume; their Hymns and ours shall make but one
Consort. Your Goodnesse Madam, and our Duties, your
Vertues and the VVonders they have wrought, will be the
Subject of these Hymns. The Prosperities and Victories of
your Regency will be loudly sung: And Peace which is the
Crown of Prosperities, and ought to be the End of Victories,

will be the close of our Songs, and the accomplishment of your
Praises.
Yes Madam, this Victorious and Crowned Peace, will be
the reward of your Pietie and good VVorks. It will be the
fruit of the Zeal and Conduct of those two Princes, who are
so Beneficiall and Glorious, either by the hazard of their Per∣sons
in the Field, or by their Abilities and sincere Intentions in
the Cabinet Counsell.
Their Example will infuse Force and Vigour into the Re∣sults
of Counsell: And so many judicious and sharp-witted
Heads, which compose this Illustrious Body, will contribute
to the Conclusion of this Important Affair, the union of their
Judgements, and the harmony of their Lights. The chief
President of Justice, that Christian and French Cato, who
might make up a whole Senate, and whom we might oppose
to the Ancient Republique, will put his helping hand therto,
with that incorruptible Integrity, and that unlimited Capaci∣ty,
which is the Hope and Ornament of this Reigne, and will
be the Example and Admiration of future Ages. I hat other,
so just, so well tempered, so well composed, and so charitable
wise Person, to whose care your Majesty hath committed the
Administration of your Revenues, will contribute thereto
that generous and pure Integrity, and that disinterressed and
faithfull Zeal, which have always carried him to the good of
the State, and the ease of the People. And if he hath been
able to sweeten the harshest part of his Ministery, if he hath
introduced Civility and good Offices into the Exchequer, and
reconciled the Graces with the Treasury, well may he also
sweeten the Asperity of Factions, well may he contribute to
the restauration of Tranquillity in the State, and to the Recon∣ciliation
of Peace thorowout all Europe.
Here Madam, I must not forget that so able and faithfull a
Minister of State, who assists you to sustain the burthen of
Affairs: He is one of our Chiefest hopes, and will be one day
one of the principall Instruments of the Peace we expect. The
spirit of Ancient Rome wherewith he is so abundantly endow∣ed,
was a spirit of Direction and Counsel, a spirit Superinten∣dent

over Victories, and Arbitrator of Events. Heretofore all
known Nations, and the whole world that was capable of Dis∣cipline
submitted to the Manners and Impressions of this spi∣rit.
It ordain'd with Authority and Soveraign Power, both
Peace and War. It disposed the good and bad Fortunes of
Kingdoms, and made the temporall Destiny of Nations. Now
if this spirit was so soveraign and efficacious in rusticke Sena∣tors,
in half savage Consuls and in grosse and Illiterate Sages;
we cannot sear that it degenerats and grows weak in him who
is the Senator of the Christian VVorld; who is the Consul
of a spirituall and sacred Republique, who hath joyned acqui∣red
with naturall Lights; who hath been polished both by
Ecclesiastical and Civil Sciences. The wheels of the State
Madm, directed by this spirit, must needs be rdered rightly
and with addresse; nor can the Genius and Purple of the Se∣nate,
which succeeds the Ancient Senate but give Force and
Dignity to our Affairs.
It is not prejudiciall Madam, that this spirit be the spirit of
Rome, which was heretofore the Head of the Roman VVorld,
and which is at present the Head of the Christian. There is no
member to which the spirits of the Head are strangers: There
is no Countrey where Wisdom and Fidelity are not naturall.
And moreover the most Noble and perfect things, even those
that have most Vertue and Force, are not Originary of the
places where they Act Great Rivers have their Sources three
hundred Leagues from the Countreys they enrich and culti∣vate.
Fire, Light, and the spirit of the Planets, which pro∣duce
so great effects in the low Region of this VVorld, are Ori∣ginary
of the Higher. The Intelligences were not created in the
Sphear they move. The Angel-Guardians of this VVorld,
are not of this VVorld. And your beautifull Soul Madam,
that Soul of yours so Noble and Munificent, so Elevated and
Royall, is but a Guest and Passenger in the fair Body it governs.
It is not then Madam, Inconvenient or contrary to Justice,
nor yet against Order, that this rare Spirit should be to our Af∣fairs
what the Administring Spirits are to the Sphears and Pro∣vinces
committed to their charge: VVe thence cannot expect

but a lesse defective, and a more harmonious Conduct; but an
Administration more disingaged from matter, and elevated
above the clouds of Interest; but a Tranquillity lesse casuall,
and more regular; but a Prosperity more generall and of a
larger Extent▪
No, Madam, this Prosperity will not be a restrained and
particular Prosperity. Superiour Causes are not Nationall and
propriatory, they do no good which is not Universall: And
all Europe, even the whole Christian World will have their
share of it after France. Th Acknowledgement thereof will be
also common, and the Benedictions generall. Your Majestie
will receive Praises in every Language for it. And in this con∣sort
of Praises, Madam, I may peradventure, be so happy as
to raise my voice above the rest, to give it a Body and light, and
to make it last with your Name and Memory.
So excellent a VVork should not be unadvisedly underta∣ken,
and in a bad season: It should not be touched with a hea∣vie
and benummed hand: It requires a calme and commodi∣ous
Serenity, as also fit and selected hours. I hope to enjoy them,
Madam, from the continuation of the fair dayes your Regency
doth promise to us.
And I further hope, that the Graces which ingage them∣selves
in all that belongs to us, setting their hands to this work,
together with the Muses, will joyntly draw your Picture, which
shall resemble you as neer as is possible.
What I here offer you Madam, is but a rough Draught of
this Picture. Your Majestie may see in little the height of
my Designe, and the greatnesse of my Zeal: And this Earnest
will manifest that by the common Obligation of our Order,
and by my particular inclinations, I am as perfectly as any
other
Madam,

