



SIR,
I Have at length sent
you, though not so
soon as I should have
done, your History, of
the Rites, and Customes of
the Jewish Nation, which
I have caused to be
Printed. And this I should have done
much sooner, had not my own continu∣ed
Travells throughout almost all parts

of France, together with the Troubled
Condition of our Kingdome, (wherein
Mars had so frighted the Muses, that they
have scarcely yet put off their Tremb∣ling,
and returned to their Peaceful Cells
again,) hindered me. For I ought not at
all to have delayed, but should have spee∣dily
returned you very great Thanks, up∣on
the Receit of your Letter; in that,
among so many, and so great Persons of
Worth, and Learning, that France afford∣eth,
you were pleased to do Me so much
honour, as to make choice of Me, to be
the Onely man, to whose Censure you
thought fittest to submit this your Learn∣ed
History. Not that I shall ever suffer
my self to be drawn into your Perswasi∣on,
and to believe, that, to undergo my
Censure, is all one, as to receive
, the
Heighth, and Crown of Approbation.
But seeing that you are pleased to have so
great an Esteem of me, as that you have
not ceased by frequent Letters, to soli∣cite
me to give my Judgment, such as it

is, upon this your Learned Piece; I con∣ceived
it did not become me to deny you
any longer. For, that I may here give
you your Just Praises, what Glory soever
all those Authors that have written of the
Rites, and Customes, of the Jews, (who
were sometime called, The Holy Nation)
can have deserved, it is all (I speak it se∣riously,
and without Flattery,) due to
your Excellent History. For, the greatest
part of those other Writers, were, either
not sufficiently acquainted with the Se∣crets
of the Jewish Religion; or else,
were carried away with their own Cho∣ler,
and a burning Hatred against Them:
or perhaps they were not very skilfull in
the Hebrew Tongue, or were too much
addicted to Dreams, and Trifles▪ or last∣ly,
were perhaps not so Faithfull in their
Writings, as they should have been:
Since Rashnesse it self is Ingenious enough
in Lying; and a Haughty Spirit cares not
to inform himself sufficiently, in what he
undertakes. But, I must needs confesse,
you are free from all these Crimes: so that

all things, here, are Perfect, and every
way Absolute: neither can I find where
to complain of any thing, unlesse it be,
(pardon the Liberty I take, to speak free∣ly,)
of the too much Brevity therein ob∣served;
so that, by this means, you have
omitted to say any thing, concerning the
Origination, and Ground of the Divine
Precepts, to which you so strictly keep
your selves: though this, perhaps, you
have done willingly, and of set purpose;
lest otherwise you should be forced, in
relating the most Prodigious Allegories
of those of Your Nation, either to defend,
or else condemn them. For they do so
shamefully stuff up their Writings with
These; that a man would take them ra∣ther
for horrid Monsters, then for serious
Stories; and, such as scarce Hercules him∣self
would ever be able to overcome.
And yet I do protest seriously, that I
could wish, you had not past by with so
quiet a Silence, that so infinite a Number
of other things, which do not a little
puzzle, and perplex the most Learned of

us Christians: as namely, that of your Li∣lith;
concerning which, it is a wonder to
observe, how many, Various Mysteries
are delivered by the Rabbines: as likewise,
touching their Vestments, called ,
Zizith, or Tephilim: of their Divination
of Dreams: of the Modesty to be observed
in their Easements: of the Cock, offered
for , Caparah, or, the Redemption of
Sins: of the Mystical Kindling of the
Sabbath Lights: of the Closing up of all
the Passages of a Dead Man's Body: of the
manner of making the Knot, wherewith
they bind up the Jawes of their Dead: of
their Looking upon, and Cutting off their
Nailes: What their Powder at present is,
in Punishing Malefactors: of the Purging
of Souls by Fire; and the like. For, as con∣cerning
Lilith, whom they, in their Wri∣tings,
affirm to have been Adam's First,
though Dis-obedient Wife; if we look
but on the Bare Letter onely of these
things; there is hardly any one so stupid,
or senselesse, as not to perceive how just∣ly
all those things, which are frequenly

brought in, by the greatest Masters in the
Secrets of your Religion▪ deserve to be
scorned, and hissed at. But if we but look
higher, into the most Hidden, and My∣sterious
Points, delivered by Your Wri∣ters;
we shall not be able any where to
discover more Deep, and Profound Theo∣logy;
as may appear to any one, that will
but take the pains, diligently to consider
that Book of yours, which you call Pardes
tract. 21. cap. 5. And as concerning the
Divination of Dreams, you might perhaps
forbear to say any thing here, because
you had been before informed by our
Learned Countryman Naudaeus, that I
had already, in a just Volume, written
upon the same subject, discovered what∣soever,
in a manner, is to be found, con∣cerning
the Observation of Dreams, both
among the Hebrews, Egyptians, and Chal∣deans:
and had also in another Work of
Mine, spoken largely of the placing of your
Beds from North to South; which is one of
your most Famous, and Sacred Rites:
Namely, in my Notes upon the Learned

Nachman's Epistola Sacra, or, De Sacro Con∣bitu:
which having Translated into La∣tine,
and illustrated with Annotations, I
promised to send to you, in a late Letter
of mine, wherein I desired to be inform∣ed
by you, concerning the Mysterious
manner of Making your Tephilim, and
the true Use of them; though you return∣ed
me not anything in Answer. For, I
earnestly desired to know the reason, why
your Borders must consist, each of them,
of Five Knots, and Eight Threads: for I
professe, I am no whit satisfied with the
Applying this, to the Five Books of Mo∣ses;
and to the Commandments of the
most Glorious and Eternal Deity: as I
neither am in those other Subtle, Quaint
Niceties, concerning the Easing of the
Belly; where you say, that Those that make
water, Naked; in a Porch, or Entry of any
House, shall be Poor men: and that who∣soever
useth the Name of God, in any
Stinking Place, shall die shortly after.
Neither am I satisfied any whit at all in
the Reason, which is given, for your stop∣ing

up all the Passages of a Dead Body,
after the Breath is gone out of it: and
therefore the Wise Ben Maimon did ve∣ry
discreetly forbear to say any thing of
it, where he gives us the Plain Manner of
Ordering the Dead, in the beginning of
his Halaca Ebhet, cap. 4. in these words:
 that is to
say; The manner of the Hebrewes Order∣ing
their Dead, is thus: They close their
Eyes, and bind up their Jawes, if their
Mouth chance to gape; and stop up all the
Passages of the Body, and anoint it with di∣vers
kinds of sweet Spices. Where he ma∣keth
not the least Mention at all of That
Superstitious manner of stopping these
Passages; lest he should seem to heap
Trifles upon Trifles. He likewise slight∣ly
passeth over their Binding up of the
Jawes; and hath not one syllable, of the
Figure of that Maxillary Knot: which yet
I should have taken very Unkindly at his

hands, but that the Author of the Addi∣tions
to Eleazar Metensis his Book, entitu∣led
, Jereim, hath relieved us
herein, and preserved this Piece of Anti∣quity
from being lost: For in the 17.
Maamar, he saith thus:
. that is to say:
They cover their Dead with Winding-sheets,
sewed together with White Thread: and if
the Mouth gape never so little, they bind it
up with a Knot, the ends whereof represent
the Figure of the Letter . This Knot is
made of Black Strings; which Sorcerers also
afterwards make use of, in their Inchant∣ments.
I could wish, that you had like∣wise
furnished us, with some other such
Passages as this, either out of the Gama∣rah,
or other Writings of the Rabbines;
which might assisted Us in the Under∣standing
of those things, which you have
delivered: Or, at leastwise, that you
had given us some Information, concern∣ing

your Power of Punishing Malefactors,
and your Wayes of Punishments. For see∣ing
you have, at present, no True Power
of Sentencing Offenders, you do not put
any Criminal Person to Death; but in∣flict
some Other kind of Punishment up∣on
him, which the Roman Law is unac∣quainted
with: as for Example, Your
making them stand in Cold Water: your
Banishing them, and causing the Banished
person to wear upon his back, an Inscrip∣tion,
declaring the Cause of his Banish∣ment:
yonr causing them to sit, Naked,
upon an Ant-hill: Your making them to
stand, Naked, among Swarmes of Bees,
and to endure their Stings: Your enjoyn∣ing
them Tedious, and Restlesse Watch∣ings,
and Perpetuall Wanderings from
place to place: Your forcing them to sub∣mit
themselves to be Trod upon, and Kick∣ed
by others; and to wear Iron Chaines
about their Neck, either for ever, or for
a certain time onely; and likewise your
Binding their hands behind their Back,
with Bonds of Iron: and lastly, your so

Long, and Irksome Fasts; by which your
Penetentiaries have become so stinking,
and Ill-savoured, as that they have been
rendred a Scorn, and become Loathsome
to all other Nations; and have been a
fit subject, for the most Witty, and Tart
Epigrammatist to play upon. And these
Fasts of yours are so Rigid, as that they
are called, in the Language of your most
Secret Theology, , Malcuth, that is
to say, The Kingdome; intimating here∣by,
Regnum Severitatis, The Kingdome
of Severity. They are also called by the
Name of , Haiabascha, signify∣ing,
Dry, and Withered; as we are infor∣med
at large, by the Zohar, the Treasury
of the Mecubalists; and by R. Meir Gaun
Ben Gabbai, upon the , Derek
Emunah. or, The Way of Faith; as also, by
Abraham Ben David, upon the ,
Jetzirah, cap. 1. Com. 40. Of this kind
are your Sabbatarian Fasts also, which
they were Anciently wont to begin, by
Looking upon their Nailes, and Paring them:
for no other reason, as I conceive, but to

intimate thereby, the Prodigious Multi∣plying
of the Children of Israel; who,
though they were cut off, as it were, like
the Nailes of a Man's Hand, in that most
heavy Bondage of theirs in Egypt; yet
did their Nation still spring up plentiful∣ly,
and Multiply, in spight of their Egyp∣tian
Oppressors. The Learned Rabbi Be∣chai
conceiveth the Reason of this Cu∣stome
to be; 
that is to say; That a
man should think of the Excellency of the
First Man, Adam, whose Garment before his
Fall, was like a Man's Nail, that is to say,
of a White and Ruddy colour. Whence the
Bride, being Sick of Love, Calls her Bride∣groom,
White and Ruddy. But I shall
omit to speak any more of this Particular,
here; as having elsewhere discoursed of it
more largely. Their Sabbatarian Fasts
were begun then, by their Looking upon,
and Paring their Nailss; and were ended
with a Dolefull Hymne; which they, even
to this day, are wont to prolong, (as you

very well note) after Sun-set, every Sab∣bath
day at Even, that the Soules of the
Wicked, (which they conceive, are free
from their Torments all that day) may
return again unto them so much the la∣ter,
by how much the longer this Dolefull
Song is drawn forth in length. In the
mean time the Pious Women take espe∣cial
care of the Lights, which they set up,
on the Eve before the Sabbath, that they
may burn clearly: of which Ancient Su∣perstition
of theirs, you have, very dis∣creetly,
forborn to make any mention:
Namely, how they were of old, and at
this day are wont to promise to them∣selves
Good, or Evill Fortune, according
as they find these Lights, to burn, either
cleerly, or dimly: which, certainly, is, a
a kind of Pyromancy. These women are
very careful also, to see that these Lights
be every way Pellucid, and shine with an
Equal Flame: which is the True Reason
also, as I conceive, why they do so much
abhor , Levanah, the Noon, when it
is Horned; and also forbear to do any

manner of Business, or Worke, in the
New-Moones, when as but a Part of it is
enlightened, towards us: and this was the
Reason, that there was Anciently a Propi∣tiatory
Sacrifice used to be offered, in the
Temple, at this time, which was supposed
might be a means of diverting the bad In∣fluences
of the New Moons from them. So
that it may hence appear, how much
some of your Rabbines, (who are herein,
though upon no very good grounds, fol∣lowed
also by one of our Christian Di∣vines;
a man otherwise very knowing in
the Jewish Affairs) are wide of the truth;
where they affirm, that the Jewish women
keep this day holy, because that it was
upon the same time, that they refused to
give up their Golden Ear-rings, Chains,
and other Pretious Ornaments, toward
the making of the Golden Calf. And thus
you may see, that there are no sick mens
Dreams so grosse, but that some of the
Wise ones, may chance, sometimes, to
take them up, and maintain them for
Truth. The New Moons then were ac∣counted

Unfortunate, by the Jewish Wo∣men,
unlesse they chanced to happen up∣on
the Monday: upon which day, Rabbi
Chomer, a Learned Jew, and a very great
Astronomer, accounts them to be most
Fortunate; especially if they happened
after Sun-rising: although neither He
gives any Reason, why it should be so; nor
any other Author, that I ever remember
to have seen. Not but that I know very
well, that the Talmudists have delivered in
Bava Kama, cap. 7. that the Divine Law-gi∣ver
went up into the Mount Sinah, to re∣ceive
the Law, upon a Thursday; and, ha∣ving
received it, he came down again up∣on
a Monday; which was the Reason
perhaps (say They) why the Women
have ever since kept this Day Holie. But
why should it not then be so kept, by the
men also? But these are Trifles. If a man
might have libertie to give a guesse at the
reason, why they accounted the New-Moon,
falling upon a Monday, to be Fortu∣nate,
I should conceive this to be the most

probable; namely, because that the Gene∣ration
of Mankind being much governed
by Moisture, This day having a Moderate
proportion of it, is therefore thought the
more Fortunate: and also, because it is the
second day of the week; which number
the Pythagoreans conceive to be, &c. Pri∣mus
generans, the First in Generation: and
therefore, it being so Fortunate, and of so
good Omen, to the businesse of Generati∣on,
which Women, by reason of the Bles∣sing
promised by God upon it, do so
much desire; they observe every New
Moon, falling upon a Monday, as a Holy
day; and celebrate it, as being a Fortunate
day, as to the businesse of procreation of
Children; that so, by this means, they
may be fruitfull and happy in Child-bearing.
However the truth of this be,
it hath been an Ancient Custome, both
for Men, as well as Women, to Fast upon
Thursdaies, and Mondaies: yet not every
week throughout the Year, as Ben Caspi
informs us, but only vpon those weekes,

wich they called, Sabbaticall. But, what
those weeks were, I do not very well un∣derstand:
and therefore I conceive it
would be more consonant to Truth, and
to Historie too, to say; that, Anciently,
each several Week, throughout the Year,
was called by the name of , Sab∣bath;
whence that boasting Speech of the
Proud Pharisee may receive no small
light, when he saies, in the Holie Gospel
of our Saviour Christ, Jejuno bis in Sabba∣tho;
I fast twice every Sabbath: that is to
say, Two daies in every week; namely Mon∣daies,
and Thursdaies: upon which daies
they yet use, with the most vehement af∣fection
of mind that can be, to say a cer∣tain
prayer, which begins with these
words, , Vehurachum; by the
secret Virtue whereof they believe, that
those Three ships which were filled with
the chiefest of their Nation, and sent into
Banishment by the Emperour Vespasian,
without either Oar, or Sail, about them,
were delivered from most evident perill

of shipwrack: the first of which, they say,
landed safe at a place, called Lovanda;
the second, at Arlada; and the third, at a
place called Burdela. Which names,
though Buxdorfe say, are no where to be
found; yet I conceive, the two last of
them may, without any absurditie, be un∣derstood
of Burdeaux, and Arles, or Or∣leans,
two Cities of good Note, in France.
But I shall here forbear to prosecute these
things any further, as you have done;
least while I endeavour to take away all
scruples out of the Reader's way, and to
bring forth such Novel Points of Learn∣ing,
as he must needs be pleased withall; I
should much exceed the Bounds of an
Epistle, and offend him▪ with a courtesie. I
shall therefore, (Learned Sir,) take my
leave of you at present; wishing you all
the True health, which is to be found,
onely, in the Faith of Christ; and beseech∣ing
God, that he would at length bring
you home to the sacred Banner of our
Mediator, and Saviour Christ; without

which, the holy Scriptures proclaim, that
there is no way, or Passage to Heaven,
and the Joyes thereof.
From Paris, Mart. 31.
An. Dom. 1637.
