


Most honoured Sr.
TO this worthlesse Tract, ha∣ving meditated a double de∣dication (not then purposing to prefix both, or that I thought one not enough) which of these two should preponderate my equall incli∣nation to either, I could not though with long debate determine; at length there∣fore that I might dwell no longer in this suspence, I resolved to issue out both, and the rather because their errands were so difform, so divers: for
This Treatise is the first fruits of my

studies, therefore of common right sa∣cred to God; and the rather because the main subject thereof is His Day: His, by institution; His, by denomi∣nation, and (it being the first fruits of dayes,Hexam. as Saint Basill elegantly calleth it) of right his. Now seeing all offerings were according to Gods pre∣script; First, to be brought to the high Priest, who was to examine them whether they were such as God would accept, and then to present them before the Lord. To whom sooner then to your self, Sir, should I bring this my petty oblation? It is said that Cain and Abel brought their offer∣ings, that is, (as most learned men con∣ceive) to Adam their Father, that he might present them; why then may not I mine to you? If he was their Priest, why may not you be mine? Fathers of Fami∣lies (you know) were anciently all such:

And though Consecration and Ordina∣tion hath somewhat dimmed their wonted splendour, yet I hold for certain that their Priestly office neither is, nor shall be utterly extinguished. To you there∣fore, Sir, I hope not impertinently, I bring this my poore oblation; I know too well how strong frailty is in me, to say it is without blemish, or not lame; yet if your judgement shall conceive it a work acceptable to God, and beneficiall to his Church, I most humbly crave you would be pleased to present it to him for me. And this is the first cause of this addresse to you; The other, this:
Phocylides.Sir, you are my Parent, second in ho∣nour to God; so the wisdome of the An∣cients styleth you: and certainly if any Parent may challenge honour from a Son, you may from me. To which honour you have a double title: One, wherein all Fa∣thers

intercommon by Generation; the other, almost peculiar to your self by E∣ducation, I had almost said, Regenerati∣on; perhaps not altogether unfitly, for good nurture is a kind of morall Regene∣ration, and usually a preparative to the Spirituall. I call the Education you have bestowed upon me almost peculiar to your self, because that whereas most Pa∣rents are either sordid in their allowance, or negligent in instructing, or become lewd patterns to their children; you have in breeding me failed neither in purse, nor in precept, nor in example. I write not this to flatter you, but to manifest that I set a due and just value upon this your Fatherly care, and that though there were no Divine Law to constrain me to it, yet this alone were sufficient reason for me to honour you.
And if every the meanest part of my

education obligeth me to this acknow∣ledgement, sure your training me up to letters much more, especially in this age, when to know even Fundamentalls and necessary Truths, is accounted at least pedanticall, if not as (Saint Paul said of preaching) foolishnesse. I do not hereby arrogate to my self the name of a Scholer; for my delight in learning hath been more then my proficiencie, which God knoweth is very slender, so slender as these my simple labours dare not approach you from any assurance of their own worth, but be∣cause they are the products of those stu∣dies, which derive their originall from your extraordinary both charge and care, they think themselves of right to belong to you, and so their motion towards you is not more voluntary then naturall.
Be pleased, Sir, to entertain them as testimonials of my filiall gratitude, which

is the chief end of this their second re∣sort to you; for they exceed their Com∣mission, if they speak so much what they are themselves (though that is mere weaknesse) as what I am, that is,
Sir, 
