



YOu will marvel perhaps (Re∣verend Lord President) what hath moved me being a Divine by profession, and a Religious, to write concerning Health, a Subject proper to Physicians. But concerning this matter, I doubt not to have given so just reasons in the Preface of this work (where I have set down the aim of my undertakings in this kind) as will take away all ground of wonder∣ment. Inasmuch as it is not my pur∣pose to write like a Physician concern∣ing the preservation of Health; that is, setting down a thousand observations and cautions touching the quality of

meats and drinks, and of their proper use according to the several seasons of the year, and of timely purgation of humors and of sleep and watching, bodily exer∣cises, and medicines whereby the several humours are to be corrected, and whereby the Head, Stomach, and Bowels are to be comforted and strengthened: I say, it was no part of my intent to enter upon the handling of any of these matters. For however it would have been no great difficulty perhaps to have gathered these things out of sundry Authors, and af∣terwards to have with judgment di∣gested them according to order and me∣thod: yet, that I might not seem to act the Part of a Physician rather than of a Divine, I have thought fit altogether to omit the mention of them. There was a higher matter in my de∣signs, and that which is proper to Di∣vines: that is, to recommend to aell (and in particular to the Religious, and those who are studiously addicted to the employments of the mind) that Holy Sobriety which is the pro∣curer of so many singular benefits both to the minds and bodies of men. For

besides that it brings Health and long∣life, it doth wonderfully conduce to the attainment of Wisdom, to the exerci∣ses of Contemplation, Prayer, and Devotion, and to the preservation of Chastity, and other vertues; and with∣all causeth all these employments and functions to be performed with marvellous ease, and exceeding great consolation. It befits not a Divine to busie himself in trifles, which appertain to the body, and to engage dtlicate persons to the further pursuit of such matters; especi∣ally considering that bodily health may very well be preserved without them: but a Divine ought principally to have an Eye to those good things whereby we may become acceptable to God, and promote our own salvation. Inasmuch then as Holy Sobriety doth bring with it the good things belonging to both parts of a man, I did not think it mis∣beseeming my profession, to write this fiort Treatise in the commendation there∣of, and withal to shew and declare, by what way and means we might come to the just scantling and measure there∣of.

I have annexed a Treatise tending to the same purpose, of a Venetian Gen∣tleman, Lodowick Cornaro, a man of great eminency, and of a sharp judg∣ment: who having learned by experi∣ence of many years the great vertue and power that is in Sobriety, did at last by writing notably make declaration thereof.
Both these Treatises (my Reverend Lord) I have thought fit to dedicate unto your name, and to send forth into the world under your patronage. For to whom can a Treatise of Sobriety be more fitly dedicated, than to such a one as hath so stoutly and constantly follow∣ed Sobriety, as by the help thereof to preserve himself vigorous and cheerful unto near upon Seventy years of his age? You are he that can sit a hungry in the midst of daily feasts, enjoyned to be made unto the Gentry that pass by solitary Campinia: and whilest others fill their bellies and satisfie their appetites, you contract both into narrow bounds and limits. Besides this, there are sundry other causes, which deserve this testi∣mony of my venerable respect towards

your Lordship; to wit, that zeal where∣with you do so industriously promote the cause of your Religion, which is so ex∣ceedingly beneficial to the whole Church, and to our Belgia: and together here∣with that singular wisdom of yours in Government, through means whereof you have for so many years space safely conserved your noble Hospital in that desert where it stands, in the midst of many tumults of wars, and shocks of armies, in great licentiousness of milita∣ry discipline, and almost daily inrodes of both sides unto it: by means whereof you have further not only recovered it out of those great debts, wherewith it was formerly burdened, but have more∣over adorned it with beautiful structures, and a high Tower, for the setling of a Monastery therein. And that I may pass over your other vertues, whereof Sobriety the mother of all vertues, is the true cause in you, this dedication seems due to you in particular, in re∣gard of that ancient friendship which for above forty years space I have had with your brother, Father George Co∣librant, a learned man, and of noted

holiness, exceedingly addicted to sobrie∣ty, prayer, mortification of the flesh, and zeal touching the soul: by whose example and wholesome admonitions, many Centuries of excellent young men have in sundry places given themselves unto holy Religion. The conjunction that we likewise have with your other brother, John Colibrant, a man of great uprightness, whose every where approved integrity far excells rich patrimonies, makes this work belong to you. I could relate many other things appertaining to your own and your friends commenda∣tion: but I make spare of them, that I may not offend your modesty, which doth not willingly hear such matters.
Receive therefore (Right Reverend Lord) this small gift, a testimony of our affection towards you and yours: and be not wanting to the recommendation of that excellency of holy Sobriety which you have made proof of in your self, and we make declaration of in this Trea∣tise, to all men, but especially to Gods servants, that they may by this means come to serve God more perfectly and

sweetly in this life, and obtain greater glory in heaven.
Now I beseech the Divine Goodness to prosper all your holy designs to its own glory, and the salvation of men; and after that you shall have been adorned with all manner of vertue, to renew your long and happy Old age with the blessed Youth of Eternity.
From Lovain, Gal. Jul. 1613.

