


Honorable, and Honored Sir.
A Sufficient A∣pology for my bold ad∣venture of presenting this part of my poor endeavors unto the publick view, may be an observation of the heathen; that when the Lord is pleased to visit a Nation with the sword, or the like judgment,Eurip. apud Sarah l. 11 pag 498. then ; the worship of

God is weakened, and men will not honor him as they should. Not so much for your particular in∣clination toward mee doe I make mention of your Name before this Treatise: as for that ge∣nerall Concession and Homologie, That the publick inferres the pri∣vate benefit: In the peace of the City,Jerem 29 7 ye shall have peace: For I feele my selfe no sense∣lesse member of those bodies, which out of di∣vers experiences chal∣lenge an interest in your Honours most favoura∣ble Integrity and Love, which you have alwaies borne to Gods Glory, Christs Gospel, and all good Causes, where∣in

you may bee charita∣ble. The greatest great∣nesse hath no greater Honour belonging to it, then to be an Abrech to Persons, Bookes,Gen. 41.43 and Causes of this Nature. Such Cedars have their spreadth and tallnesse to shelter such Fowles of the Heaven under their shadow. It was the pious resolution of Luther in one of his E∣pistles; Inveniar sanè Superbus, Avarus,Luther ad. Stanpit. A∣dulter, Homicida, Anti∣papa, & omnium viti∣arum reus, modo impij silentij non arguar, dum Dominus patitur: That hee had rather be coun∣ted any thing, then bee accused of wicked silence in Gods cause. And

wee know, that the more dishonoured and trampled upon any cause of God's is, the more hee expects that wee should appeate for it. Now lest any man should bring a bloud-shot eye, to make all appeare of a wrong colour; that I have made no particu∣lar Person my Aime or Adversary, my witnesse is in heaven,Job 16 19 and my record on high. But because losse of Sal∣vation followeth ob∣stinacie in Errour,Camero p. 286. in fo¦lio. I have done my poore endeavour to proclaime Gods will. If any doe demurre, or obstinately persist, or resist, they may remember they erre

not without warning.
Common Ingenuity com∣mandeth mee thankful∣ly to acknowledge, what you have done for one, that hath no wittie In∣sinuations for extract∣ing of your favours, nor Impudency enough to returne them in flat∣teries: yea, who had such obstructions be∣tweene his heart and his tongue, that hee could scarce expresse the least part of his Thank∣fulnesse, much lesse is hee able to make you a requi∣tal.
But the Lord of Lords grant, that you may find all favour in the eyes of God and Man, that all true Happinesse

may be multiplyed upon you and yours, and crown you with eternity. So prayeth,

