



Most Honourable,
TO begg your Pardon, or Protection, were to suppose a Fault, or Hazzard, but in this Dedication finding neither, I shall waive that Formality: humbly submit∣ting what I have to say; my Reasons, and my Self, to your Authority, and Wisdom, without more Prologue, or Apology.
There is a Faction which under the note of Presbyterian, seems much concerned to stickle against Bishops, & Church-rites, on the behalf of tender Consciences. Their Writings and Opinions, are with great



Freedom, Craft, and Diligence, dispers'd throughout the Nation; to the great Scan∣dal of the true Church, and the Encourage∣ment of those of the Revolt. But this is yet the least part of the Mischief, or in ef∣fect of their Design: Their Ayme being to Tumultuate the People, and make a Partie against the Civil Power. Indeed their Pamphlets wear the Face of Church-dis∣putes, and Modells; but he that reads them through, and marques them narrowly, shall find the King's Authority the Question.
That the late War against the King was Lawfull; is a Position common to them all, and this they publiquely maintain, as the main Basis of the Cause. By which assertion, they cast the Bloud, and Guilt upon His Majestie; make his Adhaerents Trai∣tors: place the Supreme Authoritie in the two Houses: subject the Law to an Or∣dinance: the Government, to a Faction: and animate the Schismatiques to serve His Majestie in beeing as they did His Fa∣ther.

This is the drift of their seditious Libells, and of their Projects too; if any judgement may be made upon their strict conformity of Argument, and Methode, to those that first embroyl'd us.
How farr this matter may require your Care, becomes not me to meddle: I thought it might be worth your Honours Know∣ledge, and led by an Opinion of my Duty, this state of the Affair, (such as it is) I doe most humbly lay before you.
His Majesty had no sooner set Foot upon English ground, but swarms of Pestilent papers were in a Readiness to enterteyn him. Some of the sharpest of them, I delivered to several Members of that Session, with the Stationers name for whom they were Printed, (Smith, at the Bible in Cornhill, Croftons Agent) but all too little to suppress them. One Passage is this that Follows; spea∣king of the limited Power of Kings —

Dowglas his Coro∣nation Sermon, Page 10.This may serve to justify the proceedings of this Kingdom against the late King, who in a hostile way set himself to o∣verthrow Religion, Parlia∣ments, Lawes and Liberties.
Hand in hand with this Pamphlet, came forth Smectymnuus; Reviv'd, and recommended by Mr. Manton: and since that time, some Hundreds more of the same stamp, whose common business 'tis, by Affron∣ting of the Law, and Flattering of the Rabble to cast all back into Confusin. A∣mong the many other Actours of Religion, I find not any man playes his part better, then the Author of That Treatise which hath extorted This: who indeed, abuses the People in very good terms.
Some hasty Observations I have pass'd upon him, in favour of the easie, and decei∣vable Vulgar; which Prailties I submit to



your Honours Charity; but the main Equi∣tie of the Cause, I hope, will stand the test of your severest Justice: for doubtlesse much is due to the late King's Honour, as well as to his Blood.
And somewhat (with submission to your Wisdoms) may be allow'd to his Partie: at least sufficient to protect them from Popular contempt, and the Infamous lash of every daring Libell.
I dare not trust my self further with my own thoughts, and yet I take them to be such as very well consist with the Duty of

