


THe Cm mon good is the Common pretence of all seditious Combi∣nations: and it is no new thing for a Crafty Faction to impose upon a simple Multitude, empty Appearances, for Truths and Reason. But our Reformers scorn to stop at this dull, general method of Confusion. The Law of God must be subjected as well as that of the Nation; we must call Treason, Loyalty, and com∣mit Murther as a point of Conscience.
No lesse than this is hinted in the



Presbyterians Justification of the Sco∣tish League and Quarrel: nor have they any other aim, than by procuring an Allowance of That War, to make way to Another. To this end, they disperse their poysonous Infusions into all Quarters of the Kingdom, under those very Forms of Piety, and Tenderness, by which they first betrayed us: and by those very means do they now prose∣cute afresh their first Intentions. That is, they labour to promote the Cause, by scandalous and rank Invectives, a∣gainst the Church, and stirring up of Tumults to Reform it: by a loud Phari∣saical ostentation of their own Holyness, & a sour churlish Censure of all Others: by sharp and sawcie Aspersions upon the Royal Party, and by Reflections yet more bitter and Audacious, upon his Sacred Majesty, and his Murtherd Fa∣ther.
To see these Libells passe with Free∣dom,



and Impunitie, as if they were Authorized: and to observe what foul Mistakes are grounded upon these grosse Allowances, to the Kings Disad∣vantage, and all without Controll or Confutation. This, and no other Rea∣son (so God blesse me) that is; of pri∣vate Passion, or Animosity of temper) hath drawn this honest Folly from me. I reckon it my Duty to my Prince and Country, to my own Honour, and to the Oath I have taken, Where ever I find a publique Enemy to discover him: And be∣ing thus Commissioned, both by Au∣thority and Conscience, I proceed.
The Benefit of this Treatise is direc∣ted to the People, and the Design of it is onely to lay open the Presbyterian Juggle, that in one Age they be not twice de∣luded by the same Imposture. My Ar∣guments are Drawn from their own Practises, and Positions: from Presidents of Former times; (Cartwright and his



Disciples) from what hath passed with∣in our own Experience; from what these very men have done, and from the very Logique of their own Writings, what they professe, they do intend to doe.
As the Delusion is apparent, so is the Justice of Discoursing it.
Can it be thought, that by the Act of Pardon, his Majestie ever meant to subject all the Sober and Legal Interests of the Nation, to be worried by a Facti∣on? Who of the Royal Party charges them? Or if they did, what has the Law done to offend them? Or say the Law be sharp against them, his Majesties unparalell'd Mercy has by his Royal Grace taken off the edge of it; hazzard∣ing himself to preserve these unthank∣full People, which are now practising upon that Authoritie, that saved them.
And I beseech you what is the good∣ly Subject of the Controversie? The



Presbyterian Discipline forsooth; and Ce∣remonies of Mystical and Humane Insti∣tution.
Touching the Former; St. Augustine tells us, that Aërius turn'd Heretique up∣on the misse of a Bishopprick. (the first assertor of Church-Parity) I am affraid some of our Reverend Clergy are sick of his disease; for their design is not so much to convert Bishops into Presbyters, as to make every Presbyter a Bishop.
And then for Ceremonies; they teaz and chafe the Common-people into a pet∣tish scruple, that would be well and quiet enough without them. They make their Consciences like Skittish Jades, that boggle at their own shadowes, and start into a Precipice to avoid a Feather.
They tell us too of Number, and press their Importunities in the Name of ma∣ny thousands of the good people of the Nation; so did the Kings insolent Judges, and with as much truth the one as the other.

Let it be further noted, that in this case, the Factious and Schismatical Clergy are but (with reverence) Bawds to a State-faction. A Tumult for Religion, is within one step of Rebellion.
Nor do they only shape their loose Opinions to their lewd purposes, but by all secret arts and practises, they form their Parties. But here I am confin'd.—
All I design is only a fit Caution to all Well-meaning Subjects, not to believe their Eares against their Reason. If they can adde one Syllable, of Weight, to what they have already Promised, and Broken, I'le give my self up to the Par∣tie.
This is not yet to cast a general Blot upon all persons of that Judgement, nor to excite any unquiet thoughts to∣ward the rest: but only to present a Modest, and an Usefull warning to the people.
So far am I from a desire to move a∣ny



distemper, that I do positively affirm, should the King (which is impossible) pick out of all his Subjects those very persons, who upon twentie years ex∣perience, have proved through all ex∣tremities how much they love his Cause and Person, above their Lives and Fortunes: should, I say, these be pick'd out by his Majestie, and marqu'd for Slaves to those that with an equal Zeal and Steadynesse have opposed him; Our Dutie were the same yet.
Severitie, and Kindnesse may move us as Men, but not as Subjects: Obedience to Kings being a Divine Precept, and not subjected to those accidents which work upon our Passions.
Nor shall this sense of my own Clearness betray me yet to a surprize; for I fore-see a thousand mischiefs may befall me, and all which either pri∣vate Malice, or open and bold Preju∣dice can cast upon me; I am provided



for. To those of the Presbyterian per∣swasion that truly love the King, I bear a more then Ordinarie Respect, because it is a more then Ordinarie Virtue, and for the rest, I care not.
I am not now to learn the temper of the Rigid Presbyterians. They did me once the Honour to Condemn me, almost at Mid-night, by a Pack'd Com∣mittee, and without a Hearing; well-nigh four years they kept me in New∣gate upon that Account. This was a pretty tast of their good Nature. I do not now Complain, but I Confesse, it would have pleas'd me as well if the Bishop that Christens still by the Dire∣ctory, had chosen some other Chancellour, instead of my Judge Advocate: — But I desire only to make a sober use of these Mistakes; The King knowes nothing of them.
God Preserve his Majesty, Convert his Enemies, & Comfort his Friends. Farewell.
