



HAving been lately Employ'd,
to Draw up some Proposals.
touching the Regulation of the
Press, and to Search for cer∣tain
Seditious Books, and Pa∣pers:
I think it Agreable both
to my Reason, and Duty, that I
Dedicate to your Honours some Accompt of my
Proceeding; especially in This Juncture, when both



the Danger, and the Remedy, are the Subject of
your Present Care. The Drift, and Argument of
This Little Treatise, is Express'd in the Title.
One Particular only was forgotten in the Body of
the Discourse, which I must now Crave Leave to
Insert in my Dedication; (i. e.) An Additional
Expedient for the Relief of Necessitous, and Supernu∣merary
Printers; Many of which would be well
enough Content to Quit the Trade, and Betake
themselves to Other Employments, upon Condition
to be Re-imburst for their Presses, Letter, and Print∣ing-Materials:
and it is Computed that 4000 l. or
thereabouts, would Buy off their Stock; for the
Raising of which Sum, and so to be Employ'd, there
occurrs This Expedient.
It is Credibly Reported, That there have been
Printed at least Ten, or Twelve Impressions of a Col∣lection
Entituled, The First, Second, and Third Vo∣lume
of Farewel-Sermons: (with the Figures of the
Ejected Ministers) which is no Other, then an Ar∣raignment
of the Law, and a Charge of Persecution,
against the King, and his Parliament.
Upon a Supposition of Twelve Impressions, (at a
Thousand a piece, which is the Lowest) the clear
Profit, beside the Charge of Paper and Printing,
Comes to 3300 l. which Sum, being Impos'd as a
Fine, upon Their Heads for whom the Books were
Printed, will defray a Considerable Part of the afore∣said
Charge, and what is wanting, may be abundantly
made up by the like Course upon the Publishers of
Other Seditious Pamphlets, Keeping the Same Pro∣portion
betwixt the Profit, and the Punishment.


Of the Farewel-Sermons, I Seiz'd the other day
in Quires, to the Quantity of betwixt Twenty and
Thirty Ream of Paper; and I Discovered likewise
the Supposed Author of Another Pamphlet, En∣tituled
[A Short Survey of the Grand Case of the Mi∣nistry,
&c.] Wherein is Maintain'd, in opposition to
the Declarations Required by the Act of Uniformi∣ty;P. 21.
That in some Cases It may be lawful to take
Arms against the King—To take Arms by the
Kings Authority, against his Person,P. 22. or Those Commis∣missioned
by Him— And that the Obligation of
the Covenant is a Knot cut by the Sword of Authority,P. 23.
whilst it cannot be Loosed by Religious Reason. Con∣cerning
which, and many other Desperate Libels, if
your Honours shall think fit to Descend into any
Particular Enquiry, it may be made appear, that
whereas not One of Twenty is Now taken, scarce One
of a Hundred could Scape, if there were not Conni∣vence
(at least; if not Corruption) joyn'd to the Craft
and Wariness of the Faction.
How the World will understand This Freedome,
and Confidence, in a Private Person, I do not much
Concern my Self; (provided that I offend not Au∣thority)
but the Question to Me seems short, and easy,
Whether it be Lawful, or not, for any Man that sees
his Countrey in Danger, to Cry out TREASON?
and Nothing Else hath Extorted This Singularity of
Practice, and Address, from

