



Gentlemen,
THE Kindness you have already shew'd to the Observator, I cannot but in Common Ho∣nesty take as done to my self, and I dare here assure ye, that what Obligations soever you shall hereafter lay upon L'Estrange, shall be acknow∣ledg'd by the Observator.
You were pleased, on Wednesday the 31. of August last, at Justice-Hall, in the Old-Baily, to Present Nathaniel Thompson, Benjamin Took, and Jo∣anna Brome, for Maliciously Printing and Publish∣ing

or causing to be Printed or Publish'd, three Scanda∣lous and Seditious Papers and Libels, Entitled, 1. The Loyal Protestant, and True Domestick Intelli∣gence: 2. Heraclitus: and 3. The Observator, tending to the Advancement and Introduction of Po∣pery, and to the Suppression and Extirpation of the True Protestant Religion within his Majesties Realms and Dominions: And this Terrible Present∣ment was Usher'd into the World with this Preface, [We the Grand-Jury, Sworn to Enquire of Offen∣ces committed within the City of London, do upon our Oaths, Present, &c.
Now there are Three Quaeres (Gentlemen) which (if I durst be so bold) I would presume to offer ye upon this Prologue. First, Being Sworn to Enquire: Have you Impartially Enquir'd, or not? 2ly. If ye have Enquir'd, Are these Three Pamphlets all the Enormi∣ties that you have Discover'd upon that Enquiry? 3ly. What's become of all the Rest? for you are as well Sworn to Present, as to Enquire.
These are Quaeres that I have sometimes formerly mov'd; and the Answer was, That these Three Papers were thrown in your Porridg-dish. Now if ye stumbled upon 'em by Chance, where's your Enquiry upon Oath? Or if ye found any thing else, what's become of your Oath of Presentment? If ye had but taken me to your Assistance, I'de have carry'd  where you should have 

and Sedition; Pulpits, Cabals, and Coffee-houses of the same Cloth and colour. I'de have brought ye ac∣quainted with the Voxes, Vindications, and the Black-Box men: A New Set of Jack Straws & Wa Tylers: (But where's Old Walworth with his Dag∣ger?) I'de have shew'd ye Twenty New Schemes of Christianity, as well as of Policy; the Doctrine of the Insufficiency of Christs Death and Passion; of De∣posing Kings; of Placing the Fountain of Power in the People; Scripture-Proofs for speaking Evil of Dignities: And in one word, the Scenes dispos'd, and the Stage fitted for the Second Part of the Tragedy of Muncer, and the Curtain ready to be drawn. I could have gotten ye a Key to the Soul-Saving-State-Con∣founding-Sheriffs Case, and let ye into the Mystery of that Incomprehensible Dispensation. It is a great Bles∣sing to a Government, for men upon their Oaths, in the Administration of Publique Duties, to be Nicely and Ca∣suistically Instructed in the Bounds and Measures of Swearing: And this is a Piece that cuts out Perjury from Damnation, to a hairs breadth; and will bring ye a True-Protestant Conscience within the very smell of Fire and Brimstone, and yet carry him off a∣gain as whole as a Fish, into his ready way to the Land of Promise. Now here would have been Enormity∣work, e'en as much as ye could have turn'd you  to. But what's all   the ? 
Dick Janeway's Paper says that, First, He hath Wickedly and Maliciously Endeavour'd to Sow Dissention and Discord amongst Protestants, there∣by to render them an easier prey unto their Com∣mon Enemies the Papists.
Pray Gentlemen, d'ye call this the Presentment of a Grand Jury, or a Final Verdict upon the Merits of the Cause, to say First, that a Man has done such a thing, and then to Pronounce that he did it with such an intention, or to such an end? But now to the Article.
So far has the Observator been from Labouring Dis∣sention and Discord, that no man has more declar'd him∣self against it, or taken more pains to lay open the Moral Impossibility of Peace in the State according to this Con∣stitution, without a strict Uniformity in the Church: But if you would have fix'd your Presentment aright upon this Head, you should have presented the Enemy in the Parable that Sow'd the Tares: And if you will but look into the Third Section of this Book, for your better satisfaction, you will find that the Dissention and Dis∣cord that you talk of, was Sow'd Forty years ago; and that what we see now, is only an After crop.
The Second Point is, Countenancing and Abetting the Villanous Contrivances of the Popish Conspi∣rators, who have endeavoured to cast Fictitious Plots upon Protestants, thereby to make way for their own Hellish Plot to take effect.
That is to say, The Observator is in the Popish

Plot. Why do ye not inform against him to the King and Council then, and say Where, and When, and How, and What? Why do ye not Name the Contrivances, and say who are the Conspirators? Or what if ye should set forth your Grievances in a Protestant Mercury, or get little Hancock to open your Case in one of his News-Letters? He'l do't for Pence a piece, and that's just Eighteen pence for his Reward. I do assure ye Gen∣tlemen, I am in no other Contrivance then to do the Part of an English Protestant, a Loyal Subject, and an Honest man, towards the Upholding of the Govern∣ment; and I was once within a Trifle of a Halter, for being in that Popish Conspiracy (as they call'd it once before) with the Late King: And if the same Word, and the same Humour be now taken up again, I am in just such another Plot.
The Third Charge is the Vilifying and bringing into the Disesteem of his Majesty, and the whole Nation, the Commons of England, when Assem∣bled in Parliament, by Arraigning and Impu∣dently Condemning their Proceedings.
You forget (my Masters) that Impudence is the Sur∣name of the Greatest Phanatique in the Three King∣doms; and that the Epithete, Villanous, fits him too as if it had been made for him. Therefore for the future, I would advise ye to put your Slanders  better language. And now to the Accusation, The Observator does first defie ye to shew One Line in all his Writings that will

bear the sence you have Impos'd upon't. And 2dly, The late Long Parliament which the Fanatiques have Loaden with so many Reproaches, had at least as many Good Pa∣triots, Protestants, and Subjects in it, as any Parliament since. Nay, there is One of your Number (at least) who has said Positively that L'Estrange is a Papist, which is as False, as if Mr. Presenter had gap'd, and the De∣vil himself had spit in his mouth. But it is come to that pass now, that a man cannot speak a word in favour of the Ecclesiastical Order and Discipline, but it comes presently to be an Arraigning of the Commons in Parliament.
4. The Observator is Charged with Endeavour∣ing to Render his Majesties Protestant Subjects in general, and more particularly those in this City, suspected to him by mis-representations of, and odious Reflexions upon their Legal proceedings in their Common-Halls, and Common-Councils; as also by False and Ignominious Reflexions upon some of their Magistrates; and by Arraigning the Integrity of Juries of this City, for bringing in Verdicts according to their Judgments and Con∣sciences.
Be you your selves now the Iudges (my Masters) which are the rather to be Complaind of; Those that De∣fame the most Eminent of your Citizens, or those that Vindicate them: Those that make it a Crime to be Du∣tiful to the King and the Church; or those that Assert the

Honour and Conscience of that Obedience? And this is the very Case betwixt those Seditious Scriblers, whom you have not touch'd at all, and the Observator. And which is yet more Remarkable; After all your seeming Fierceness against Popery, ye have not so much as Presented one single Papist. What ye mean by odi∣ous Reflexions upon your Common-Halls and Com∣mon-Councils I cannot Imagine, unless it be that some Notice has been taken of the Freedom of a Gentleman that said he knew before-hand, London was to be Burnt, and had several Checks (as is reported) from the Court it self for't. If that be the Point, I shall take the freedom to tell ye, that it is wonder'd at to this day, that it was never put home to him, how he came to the know∣ledge of it. And though I am not Conscious of any one Disrespectful thought toward this Famous City in my whole Life; saving in the Late Rebellion, when the Fanatique Rabble had torn the Government of it to pieces by the same Methods that are now Prescrib'd and Practic'd over again by Hundreds of Enflaming Libels; yet if such a thing had been, I do not know how your Common-Halls, and Common-Councils come to be more Sacred than the Debates of the House of Com∣mons, and of his Majesties Privy Council; which are daily abus'd by Malicious Forgeries; by Contemptu∣ous and Defamatory Reflexions without Controll: Pro∣vided only that the Misrepresentation be made on the Right side; as in the Printed Copies of several Loyal

Speeches, and Unanswerable Reasonings in the Right of the Crown, where only the general drift of the Speech is set forth without any thing mention'd of the Argument.
As to the Abusing of your Magistrates, I am of opi∣nion they would have found it out themselves, if any such thing had been. And then for your Juries bringing in Verdicts according to their Consciences, they are Sworn to find according to Allegations and Proofs, and not when the Law determines one thing, for them to think another; for at that rate, 'tis at their Choice to make an Honest man Guilty, or a Criminal Inno∣cent, and at once to overthrow the Reason and the End of Government. The Law says 'tis Treason in the People to Conspire the Death of the King; but the Phana∣tiques make it Treason in the King to deny the Sove∣reignty of the People, as you will find abundantly, and particularly clear'd in several Sections of this Pamphlet. But neither is the Observator Chargeable even with this Article.
The Observator is lastly Presented for Endea∣vouring to Disgrace and Discountenance Religi∣on it self, by an Ironical, Immoral, and Atheisti∣cal of writing against such as he endeavours to Stigmatize by the name of True Protestants.
Now if I were well enough acquainted with ye, Gen∣tlemen, I would most humbly beseech ye to Expound this word Religion. Is it one Persuasion that is single and true to it self? Or is it a Medley of Various

and Disagreeing Opinions in the matters of Holy Worship? Tell me now (I beg of ye) how it is possible to bring one and the same Truth to a Consistence with a hundred and fifty Divided, Implicated, and Inextri∣cable Errors: Nay, and they are Boundless too; for there are Monsters in Heresies as well as in Bodies, which by a Promiscuous Liberty of Mixture and Confusion, must necessarily produce still New and New Diversities to the end of the world. But you shall have this Religion better Decypher'd by some of your own Doctors in the following Papers; and I shall particularly remit ye to the Oracles of Dr. J. O. W. J. and R. B. And you will find in the Conclusion that the Uniting of Dissenters is just such another piece of Non-sence, as the Separating of your selves to∣gether.
Now for the Appellation of a TRUE Protestant, It is but calling of those People by the name, which they have given themselves: And not with any Regard to the Reformed Religion neither; but in a Reflecting way of Discrimination from those of the Establish∣ment; for in the naming of themselves True Pro∣testants, and taking the whole Schism into that di∣stinction, what is this but to intimate that those of the Church are False Protestants, from whom they have divided. This is the first step toward the explaining of those False Protestants to be Papists. But what they are they will tell you themselves, if you will but

consult their Sayings: And I do not find that there be∣longs any great matter of Complement to this sort of True Protestants.
I should not have been thus free with ye, Gentlemen (before Company) if the Observator had not prevail'd upon me to follow your Example, in giving Counte∣nance to the Publishing of so many thousand Copies up and down the City, at the Election on Michaelmas day last, and all over the Kingdom, by a Scum of Mercenary Intelligencers: Insomuch, that whosoever gives Credit to those Papers, must necessarily believe the Observator to be one of the greatest Rascals upon the face of the Earth: And I do confidently Affirm, that they are infinitely greater that Publish him so to be. If the Presentment had taken place, and the matter gone on in a due form of Law, a man might have had a Speech yet for his money, but this way of Proceeding runs to the Tune of Four and Forty, and Condemning the poor Rogue to the Gallows over again, without a hearing.
I would not be Ungrateful to any man, any manner of way; and I could not tell how to pitch upon a more suitable acknowledgment than by this Dedication. First, It was your Pleasure to set your Presentment abroad with a kind of a Noverint Universi; and I have taken the best care I could here, to make it twice as Publique as it would have been otherwise. 2dly, You were pleas'd to

do Honour to the Observator, by Printing your Names to the Scandal; and for that Reason they are here like∣wise Exposed with his Vindication. 3dly, In regard that ye are men of Bus'ness, and not at leisure perhaps to turn over Books; and zealously affected over and a∣bove to the Reputation of an odd sort of Christians that style themselves True Protestants, what more agree∣able Present in this World could I make you, than this Collection of True-Protestant-Sayings, ready drawn up to your hands, where you shall see all their Virtues Common-plac'd, their Graces drawn to the life, their Agreement among themselves, their Affection to the King and Church; the Moderation of their Principles, and the tenderness of their hearts towards their Sovereign, Faith∣fully and Impartially set forth and transmitted to Po∣sterity by themselves, and effectually Sign'd, Seal'd, and Deliver'd to the World, for the use of future Ge∣nerations by their own Rabbies. Gentlemen, I am with all Reciprocal Affection,

