



My LORD,
HE that Owes more then he is Worth,
and Payes as far as he is Able, is
an Honest Man; and That's My
Case more wayes then One. Nor
is it possible for Mee to Think of my Debts and
not of your Lordships Bounties, at the same
time: Under whose Roofe I have formerly

receiv'd so many, many Benefits. In the Esta∣blishment
of That Felicity, I reckon'd my self
as sure, as in the Possession of it: I did, (my
Lord) and I must do so still, or do a harder, and
a worse Thing, in Thinking Otherwise. For I
am the same I was, and to suppose your Lord∣ships
good opinion, either Begun, or Ended
without Reason, were to subject your Wisdome,
or Stability to a Question.
Since so it is, (My Lord) that I cannot suspect
your Kindnesse, without an injury to your Ho∣nour,
nor let your Obligations sleep without
some Testimony of my Thankfulnesse: Vouch∣safe
to know, (my Lord) that after more then
Twenty Years spent in serving the Royall
Interest:
Near Six of them, in Gaoles; and
almost Four, under a Sentence of Death, in
Newgate; Fortune has been so kind, as to
leave me yet a Bottle of Inke, and a Heap of
Paper; out of which pittiful Remain, I make
your Lordship a Present of a Book. This Book
I humbly offer, (not to your Reading, or
Thought, but) barely to your Countenance:
Let it (my Lord) but wear the Credit of
Your Patronage. Which I the rather wish,

because of a Late Pamphlet that I find De∣dicated
to your Lordship, by a Mournevall
of Presbyterians, wherein my Name is not
well us'd: and truly (if I am not Mistaken)
his Majesties Justice and Authority much
worse; about the Imprisonment of Mr. Crof∣ton.
I must Proceed now to acquaint your Lordship,
that beside the Honour of your Protection,
I have great need of your Interest, and Favour:
which yet I dare not Beg, for fear of Offen∣ding
your Readinesse to do me all reasona∣ble
Justice without it. In Truth; it is not
for a man either of my Nature, or Condition,
to Thrive by Begging; for he that is both
Poor and Honest, carries a Double Clogg:
Especially in This Age, (my Lord) when
(Heaven and Hell apart) 'tis a greater
Scandal and Misfortune to be Indigent, then
Treacherous.
But there are (my Lord) that do not stick to
say, I'm Both: and I forgive with all my Soul,
the Worst that ever was said of Mee, with
good Intention to the King. It is not long
since I troubled your Lordship with a Paper

upon This Subject; to which (with Leave) I
shall add a word or two.
Some will needs have it, that I do not suffi∣ciently
Deny the Six hundred Pound.
My Lord; I do so far deny it, that I wish
That Peny, or Penyes-worth, which (to the
best of my Knowledge) I ever receiv'd from
any Creature of the Rebels Party, or by
any Order from Them, or any of Them,
may rise against Me at the Day of Judg∣ment.
There is a further Rumour, as if Captain
Whitlock should have sent me word that he
would justifie it: whereas I never heard a
Syllable from him to That Purpose; nor can
the World shew the least Colour for the Truth
of That Report.
Let me be Pardon'd (my Lord) if I conoeive
This Addresse not altogether Impertinent;
for if it did belong to you to Condemne me,
while you but Thought me Guilty; your
Lordship is certainly Oblig'd in Honour, to
Acquit me when you Know me Innocent. In
This Particular, (my Lord) I think you are
Bound to do me Right; but in what Fol∣lows,

I totally Depend upon your Favour.
There is a Pitifull creature, One Bagshaw▪
(a Chaplain to the Earl of Anglesie, and the
Authour of the Animadversions upon the
Bishop of Worsters Letter) This Fellow,
when his hand was In, against the Bishop, lends
Mee a Lash too, for my Practices with Crom∣well.
Your Lordship would do me a Peculiar
Honour, to Procure that he might be called
before the Counsell, to make good his
Charge: where, if I prove not Him That
Villein, which he Pretends, I am, let Mee
suffer for it.
My LORD,

April 11.
1662.
