



My LORDS,
IF in Duty to his Majesty, I become Troublesome to your Lordships, I hope you will vouchsafe to Pardon so honest an Importunity: Especially considering the high Necessity of the Office, as to the Publique; and the little Benefit he expects to reap by it, that Undertakes it. It is in Truth

(My Lords) grown hazzardous to Assert the Cause of the Late King; or the Authority of This, against the open, and profess'd Adversaries of Both: And they Proceed, as if the Act of Oblivion had only Bound the Hands of his Majesties Friends, and left his Enemies Free. Which would not be, were but your Lordships duly Enform'd in the Matter; and That you may be so, is the Scope and Service I pretend to in This most humble Dedication.
I Think (My Lords) it may be made appear, upon a Modest Calculation, that not so few as Two-Hundred-Thousand Seditious Copies have been Printed, since the blessed Return of his Sacred Majesty, (which being Exposed with Freedome, and Impunity, cannot fail to be Bought up with Greediness) To These may be added divers Millions of the Old Stock, which are Contriv'd and Penn'd with Accurate Care and Cunning, to Catch All Humours. What This Glut of Poysonous Libels may Produce, is submitted with Just Reverence to your Lord∣ships Wisdom; for I presume not to make a Judgement, but barely to Offer an Informa∣tion: Wherein, (as the fairest Evidence of my

Respect and Duty) I shall be as short and plain as possibly the Case will bear.
The late War is (in Terms) Justified against the Late King;Pag. 57. and His Majesty Charg'd as an Overthrower of Religion, Parliaments, Laws, and Liberties.
Several Counterfeit Prodigies Apply'd,Pag. 58. as Portents of Revolts; Persecutions; Casting off Kings; And in fine, the Drift of the whole Book tends Chiefly to Predict the Dissolution of the English Monarchy, and Episcopacy.
The Totall Extirpation of Bishops (under the Title of Sons of Belial) is Recommended,Pag. 59. in Mr. Manton his Publication of Smectym∣nuus.
The King's Supreme Authority in Matters Ecclesiastical, is absolutely disclaym'd,Pag. 60. and the People are Encouraged to Oppose the Impo∣sers of Ceremonies, as Adversaries of the Truth.
The Power of the Two Houses is Asser∣ted in Coordination with the King.Pag. 62.
Harrison, Carew,Ibid. &c. are call'd the Ser∣vants of Christ: Their Cause, Christ's Cause;

and the Murther of the late King is reported as the most Noble,Pag. 63. and High Act of Justice that our Story can Parallel.
Iid.The King's Judges, and Counsell, together with the Jury that Sate upon John James, are Charg'd with thirsting after His Blood.
Iid.His Majesty is Revil'd and Menaced for his Proclamation against Conventicles.
For Opposing These Insolencies, and De∣fending the King's Rights, His Cause, and Government (without ever receiving any Pre∣tence to a Reply) I have been Twice Libell'd (by Mr. Edward Bagshaw) as Cromwels Spy,Pag. 34. and a Person Infamous both for Conditi∣on, and Morality.
My Lords, I dare not Beg, but I do secret∣ly Wish, that he may be call'd to make it Good; which I the rather do, because the Latter of the Two was Tender'd to your Lordships as My Character; But Principally, for the Conse∣quence: For if it comes to That once, That (in a time of Peace) a Man cannot be Loyall, but at the Hazzard of his Life and Honour; and that it becomes more Safe, and Beneficial to

be Guilty, then to be Innocent, I do mst Duty∣fully remit the Rest to your Lordships: Humbly Beseeching You (My Lords) to receive This fur∣ther Advertisement concerning Mr. Bag∣shaw.
He denies the King's Supremacy;Pag. 11. and Animates the Subject against it. Affirming [That God has not Committed unto the Magistrate, but to his Son, the Government of His Church, even in the Outward Polity:] That the Command renders a Thing, in it self Innocent, utterly Unlawful.] He makes the King an Usurper.] An Idolater.Pag. 12.] An Impi∣ous Pretender.Pag. 14.] He calls the Praelation of Bishops, an undue, and Anti-Christian Dig∣nity.] He Inferrs His Majesty either no King,Pag. 15. or no Christian.] He is Peremptory,Pag. 16. That the King is Singulis Minor, and, that the People may Depose him.] Fixum Ratumque habeatur,Pag. 17. Populi Semper esse debere Supremam Majestatem.]
Having exposed These Particulars, with se∣veral of the Authours, and Publishers of them, Referring to the Pages of the Ensuing Dis∣course;

I shall leave before your Lordships Feet This Humble Testimony of my Desires to serve the King. Wherein, if I have done Amisse, I Submit; if Otherwise, I have done but my Duty: Which obliges me to Live and Dy, with an Unspotted, and Inviolable Faith to∣ward his Sacred Majesty; keeping my self also within Those Terms of Modesty, and Venera∣tion, which may become
My LORDS,

