



Gentlemen,
THat you may not glory ei∣ther in your Cause, or For∣tune, you are here Con∣demn'd to suffer Publique Shame by a weak hand; yet so, as not to make Mee proud of the Conquest; for ye fight against your selves, and fall by your own Weapons. This is the Certain Fate of all your Stri∣vings against the Right of Bishops. The Liberties you challenge, must be allow'd again by You to the People: and where's your Holy Discipline then? Thus are ye Broken upon your own Wheel, and your Selves cast in∣to the Pit ye Digg'd for Others.
The well-weighing of This Consequence twenty years ago, might have sav'd a great deal of Sin, and Treasure: it may prevent the same again, (for ought I know) even at This Instant, duly to consider it: for to deal freely, Gentlemen, you are now Re∣entred upon that deadly path that leads from Heaven to Hell, from Conscience to Disobedience: from the Reforming Pulpit to the Kings Scaffold. How shall I reconcile that Reverence I bear your Character, with the just Indignation due to your Actings?
You have of late Publish'd a Book; Thus called;
A PETITION for PEACE, with the Reformation of the LITURGY, &c.
Your Petition appears fortified with Twen∣ty Reasons, which I take a Freedome to reply upon, and I make a little bold too with your Liturgy: submitting the Reason of All, to the Judgement of the Indifferent World; and to your selves my Dedication.
Your Writings are like the Pestilence

that walketh by Night, and the Plague that destroyeth at Noon-day. They steal out, and disperse themselves in the dark, but the Ma∣lice of their Operation is Publique.
Many unseemly Circumstances there are in the menage of this your Pamphlet, which I refer to their proper Notes: but since you plead the Kings Authority for what ye did; It will behoove me in the first place to clear that point; and no way better then from the very Words of his Majesties Commission; directing,
To advise consult upon and about the Book of Common Prayer, and the several objections and exceptions, which shall now be raised against the same, and (if occasion be) to make such reasonable and necessary alterations, corre∣ctions, and amendments therein, as by and be∣tween you, the said Arch-Bishop, Bishops, Doctours, and Persons hereby required and authorized to meet and advise as aforesaid, shall be agreed upon to be needful and expedi∣ent, for the giving Satisfaction to tender Con∣sciences, and the restoring and continuance of peace and unity in the Churches under our pro∣tection and Government.
How far Your Liberties agree with These Limitations, be you your selves the Judges.
I am afraid you'll think my Introduction some-what below the Dignity of the Sub∣ject; but though the Argument in it self be grave, methinks your menage of it, is exceeding pleasant: In truth, so much, that all your sober Fashions will hardly make me swallow it for Earnest.
You know we have had a Long and Bloody War, Gentlemen: and the same Actions which on the Legal side, were Du∣ty, Piety, and Justice, were in the Ad∣verse Party, no other then Rapine, Mur∣ther, and Rebellion. These Crimes call for Repentance, and either Christianity is but a story, or it concerns those People that have This Load upon their Consciences, frankly, and seasonably to discharge themselves.
Would not a Searching Sermon now and then upon this Subject, do as much good as a Discourse of humane Impositions? 'Tis not an Act of Pardon, and Oblivion, will bring Them off, at the great day, that have these Horrours unaccompted for. As Pub∣lique Ministers, Kings may remit Publique

Offences: and forgive Those who cannot yet forgive Themselves. The Royal Power ex∣tends but to the Law not to the Conscience. They shall not Dye for That which yet they may be Damn'd for. A man that Robs a Church may scape the Wheel, and yet the Sacriledge cleave to his Fingers.
In fine; Monarchs may dispense with their own Laws, and interpose betwixt the Gib∣bet, and the Offender; but betwixt Sin and Vengeance; — Guilt, and the dreadful stroke of Divine Justice; there's but one Mediator: before whose Majesty Kings are but anima∣ted Shadows, and all the dazling Glories of this World, a Black Obscurity. In short; he that has made his Peace with the Law and not with his own Soul: — on Earth, and not in Heaven, has done the least part of his business.
You are now crying up Those People for the Godly Party, whose wretched Souls were by the Magick of your Covenant-Holy∣ness charm'd into Disobedience. You're Scru∣pulizing now again about the Lawfulness of Ceremonies: but not a word touching the Vnlawfulness of the War. For shame, for

shame, Gentlemen; That very point be∣trays you. It looks as if you would have the people still believe the Cause was good, and that upon the same presumption of an Imaginary Superstition, they may tread over the same Steps again.
Tell them how ill they did to fight against the King: (if you believe 'twas ill done) press their Repentance and bewayl Publiquely your own Engagements in that sinful Quarrel: You betray otherwise the Souls ye plead for, into a final hardness,— into an Obstinate, and Im∣penitent Security.
This is so undeniably your Duty, (unless you still adhere to your first Cause,) that there's no Shifting: so that the Tryal of your Integrity depends upon this Issue: If you be truly Loyal, and Repentant, where-ever you have Preach'd disobedience, you will Recant it: however your Confession must be as Pub∣lique as your Sin. Without This cleerness all your Talk of Conscience weighs not a Nut-shell. Only betake your selves to your own Pastoral Discipline; And there I leave ye.

