



I Humbly present you, Ladies, with a small Piece, which (if not spoyl'd in the Translation) will, I hope, not only give you some diversion, but be usefull to you all; whether you profess the most rigid Vertue, or give greater indulgence to your Appetites. And happy shall I think my self, if I can be any way serviceable to you; who have ever had so high an Esteem for you, that in my for∣mer years, my whole Life was a Passion: Nor am I now without the greatest Vene∣ration for you imaginable.
I should not forestall you with any ac∣count of the following Dialogue, but that I think it necessary to answer some Ob∣jections that may be made against it. For
example; It may be thought an Omission, that I have not turn'd that part which relates to Dressing, wholly according to the Modern custom; But truly (besides that I was willing, by leaving most of it as I find it, to give you some taste of the an∣cient way of Dressing) I thought it need∣less; because two or three hours Medita∣tion every Morning, with as many employ'd in practising the Results, renders most of you perfect enough in that Mystery. Some few particulars of their Cloathing I have left out, because they could not be made very intelligible in English. Others may be shock'd perhaps at the sight of an anci∣ent decay'd Lady, whom I may call a sort of a Meet-help, not to give her a broader name: but there is no reason to be ffen∣ded at her; the Woman's a good Woman in her kind; and there may be an admira∣ble use made of her. For she teaches those whose Constitution enclines them to follow their pleasures, with too great an impetuo∣sity, and with too great a carelesness of
their reputation; She teaches them, I say, to enjoy them with such a Temperance, and with such a Conduct, as may be the least Scandalous, give the least Jealousie and Disquiet to their Family, and conse∣quently do them the less Injury, besides the giving, no ill Examples: Whereas their Youth, uninstructed and guided by too ea∣ger an Appetite, (always lodg'd in some naughty corner about 'em) would proba∣bly hurry them into a thousand inconve∣niences and hazards to themselves and o∣thers. Nor is there any danger that these Precepts should hurt or mislead the Vertuous: (which are, I presume, by much the most numerous part of your Sex:) True Vertue is high proof against all the Batteries of Vice, whether in your own Blood, or from us; nor dare the boldest of us attack it. You have very sel∣dom, if ever, known Assaults made against her that's reputed truly Chast; For a vi∣tious Man cannot approach, at least not endure the bright and awfull Regards of
Sacred Vertue; no'ne but a Maid can look against the Sun; neither Men nor Books can hurt you, without you please; You must betray your selves, like the first Woman, if you fall. Therefore let me intreat you all, to read this little Work, which has not one word in it to offend the tenderest Ear. You that are the most rais'd above Vice, will not find it without many usefull In∣structions for you; and those that are of a lower Character, will see directions for their wiser Conduct. That the former of you may ever stand firm as you are, and the rest grow discreeter, is the earnest and sincere Wish of,
LADIES,

