




My Lords,
IN Obedience to your Lord∣ships,
I do here present you with a Copy of that Dis∣course which was so lately preached before you. I dare not quarrel with it now, lest that should implicitely Question your Lordships Judge∣ments, and the Judgements of se∣veral
other persons of Quality, who have been pleas'd to approve of it: Yet this I must say, That I was so far from thinking it might become the Press; as that in such an Audito∣ry, and upon so so∣lemn an occcasion, I judg'd it unwor∣thy
of the Pulpit. But since your Lordships have thought otherwise, & because it scarce savours of good manners to contra∣dict either your Thoughts or Com∣mands, I have thus submitted it to your Lordships Plea∣sures; though I am
not altogether in∣sensible what sun∣dry prejudices will attend it. 'Tis suited to a particu∣lar Season, and therefore, like mu∣sical notes, harmo∣nious in their due time and place, but nothing less when dis-joyned from these: nor dare I
wish, that it might again become fa∣shionable, since that were to imprecate publick mischiefs. 'Twill be distasted by some, because it seems to derogate from the deserved worth of a good Conscience; though its Author was so far from this, that
he could more glad∣ly have pleaded a∣gainst Laws with∣out this Balance, then against Con∣science without their Conduct: only men were leaning rather towards the later extreme; and if he seems to bend a crooked Tree too much on the con∣trary
hand, his in∣tent is no other but to make it straight in the close. 'Twill be censured by o∣thers, for prefer∣ing Achitophel before David; for advancing carnal Reason too highly, & too much slight∣ing the assistance of Gods Spirit: but this
was as far from my thoughts, as to speak of it, had been besides my purpose. That the Lord doth thus eminently help those, who by pray∣er and faith, wait upon him, is a most comfortable and precious truth: yet I humbly conceive, that such assistance
can be expected on∣ly in those Under∣takings, to which God calls men, not to which they call themselves: And then too, in the di∣ligent use, not in the slothful & su∣percilious neglect of lawful means: for this lesson the Cre∣ator hath taught
us by his own pra∣ctice: If Omnipo∣tency design the restauration of a languishing Heze∣kiah,Isa. 38.21. Joh. 9.6. or his sight who was born blind; a lump of figs, clay, & spittle must be applied: And as diseases in the natural body are not curable
without Physick; so neither those in the Politick without Laws. Nor have I pleaded for what's amiss in these: 'tis true, I have com∣pared them to the sweetest Musick; and do, I confess, judge known Laws the beauty and harmony of a
Commonwealth; yet if this Harp be out of tune, or want a string, let some skilful ear, and cautious hand be intrusted with its Reformation. But to vote Laws re∣dundant and un∣necessary, as too many have done; to break these
bands in sunder, & cast these silken Cords of Reason from us, were to antidate Divine vengeance in one of its most terrible threatnings; even with our own hands to stretch out upon these Nations the line of confusion, and the stones of
emptiness. This Discourse is yet subject to a farther disadvantage; 'twil fall, no doubt, into the hands of ma∣ny, whom obscurity or non-observation of our late Exorbi∣tancys, may render strangers to its just ground and plenti∣ful occasion; though
this was not only the over-jealous surmises of some, nor the discontent∣ed and secret mut∣terings of others; but things visibly acting both in our Native Country, and here: Nor could the utmost care of our Honor∣able and pious Go∣vernors
(their Ex∣cellencies the Lord Deputy Ireton, whose memory is still precious; the Lord Deputy Fleet∣wood, a person so eminently gracious, that this Age hath scare parallel'd him; the Lord Henry Cromwel, whom God hath
furnished with wisdom & conduct even to admirati∣on:) I say, the ut∣most care of these, and of those other worthies, who were still drawing in the same yoke with them, could not suddenly redress this: for when once a Distemper hath
seiz'd the blood & vital Spirits, the head may more ea∣sily condole then cure it. And really we, in this flegmatick climate, grew strangely in∣fected with that State-malady, this following Sermon declares against: some Persons of
very considerable Quality, were not asham'd to tell you, that they expected are long to carry all the Law of England in their pockets. Nor were these esteem'd such Lovers of Books, as to make that Pocket-Com∣panion very bulkish
neither. I cannot but smile, (and the Lord grant it may be with a thankful heart) when I call to mind how neat∣ly we were courted by the smooth and still voice of plau∣sibility, into a con∣sent to our own ruine. And that design goes on most
dangerously, which makes least noise: for the screaking wheel is more in∣terrupted then the silent. But I must humbly crave your Lordships pardon for this tedious di∣version from your more serious Em∣ployments; and I shall here break it
off, the rather be∣cause 'tis no less then a publick In∣jury. That the weighty Ʋnderta∣kings now recom∣mended to your care, may be ma∣nag'd in the fear of that God, before whose more dread∣ful Tribunal your selves with the
meanest of those whom you are now to sentence, must ere long appear; shall be his earnest request at the Throne of Grace, who is,
From my Study in Clonmel, August 5. 1657.

