


MADAM,
I Never read any thing with more pleasure and satisfaction than the most in∣genious Letter of Religion address'd to your Ladyship. The Author's noble design, and happy method of execu∣ting it, could add nothing to the value I always had for his great Learning, Candor, and Ingenuity. But to find his performance approv'd by a
Person of your Ladyship's extraordinary Judgment and Vertues, has, I own, very considerably increas'd my ve∣neration for him.
If my Opinion is of any weight with your Ladyship, I think he has shewn Religi∣on to be plain, short, and intelligible, according to those very rules by which he tries its orthodoxy: And that the knowledge of it depends not upon the helps of Spurious Learning, he has with a deal of genuine Learning
demonstrated. What ought to recomend him most, is, that although he be a Divine, yet he pretends not to make any thing pass upon you by vertue of the bare Authority of his Profession; but he modestly writes as an unprejudic'd Person, what he believes any other had a right of doing, whom your Ladyship would please to honour with her Commands.
'Tis now extremely rare to meet with Learning, Li∣berty, and Integrity, united
in one Person; as we find 'em in our Friend. For Learning is frequently at∣tended with Prejudices, Big∣gotry and Pride; Freedom of thought turns into Licenti∣onsness, when 'tis not guided by knowledge; and we per∣ceive most Men every day sacrifice both Learning and Liberty to their Interest. But what's of more fatal con∣sequence is, That several who have the Reputation of those Endowments, are the farthest in the World from possessing them. Learning, for Ex∣ample,
is a term of great Ambiguity. True Learn∣ing consists in the Know∣ledge of things as they are in themselves, and the expressing of this Know∣ledge in proper words whereby it is convey'd in∣to the minds of others. To this a right Method indeed is necessary, but Elegance only accidental.
This is a natural and easy notion; but did it univer∣sally obtain, Learning would become more common than is
compatible with some Mens interest. To frustrate there∣fore all its native and useful effects, Learning must be made to consist in strange and difficult words, in the meer Grammatical Knowledge of Languages, without any re∣gard to the sense, if sometimes they have any; in frivolous, precarious, and impertinent distinctions; in Etymologies, a World of old stories, and the Lord knows what Gib∣berish and Nonsense. This the truely Learned call Pe∣dantry.

But your Ladiship being apt to think others can have no indirect designs no more than your self, may imagine that this false Notion could never be industriously promo∣ted, but might be only the prevailing effect of casual Ig∣norance in certain places and times. I shan't trouble you now, Madam, with a Hi∣storical account of the matter; but I beg of you to consider two or three things which may be capable of undeceiving a less discerning Person. This
kind of Learning, in the first place, being attain'd with mighty difficulty, very few of either Sex have the Patience, or the leisure to study for it; and so most of the World are oblig'd to take it at second hand from others, who never think themselves over-paid in consideration of their pains or merit. Be pleas'd next to remember, that the ignorant are no pro∣per Judges of Learning, and that all those who are not Men of Art being ignorant, must therefore never pretend
to question or contradict any thing the Learned say; much less may they take up∣on 'em to teach or instruct others. Now, Madam, if you don't think this Privi∣lege of being exclusively of all others the only Men of Learning, the only allow'd Teachers, and the only Judges of what they them∣selves do teach, to be a form'd design; if you don't think it as dextrously manag'd as any other joint-stock, or monopoly in the World; if you don't think the advan∣tages
worth the pains of con∣triving the Scheme; I'm content to lose your Lady∣ship's good Opinion, which I prefer to that of all the Learned in Four Ages I could name, adding the majority of such as are now so accounted.
There's nothing more obvi∣ous than that this artful Learning destroys all Liber∣ty of course; and as for Integrity, they are incon∣sistent, as Paint and Beauty: for our Learned Guide must
be always telling us that he labours for our information; so far at least, he must com∣plement us for our Patience and Money. But that he o∣therwise intends, our slow proficiency assures us; Rea∣son also does convince us that 'tis against his interest we should improve, for so in time he grows useless; and he often blabs out the secret himself when he tells us that what he says is unintelligible, and not to be apprehended by us in this World; whatever we may
do in the next. How Reli∣gion has thriv'd, or is like to do so under such manage∣ment, I need not particu∣larly describe to your Lady∣ship; who more readily sees all the consequences, than many others can con∣ceive the thing it self.
As Religion is the con∣cern of all, so our Author shews the study of it to be the business of every body; and that nothing can be true Re∣ligion, which Poverty, want
of Letters, particular Cal∣lings, or any condition of Life can hinder us from acquiring. Wherein this Excellent and most divine Religion (which depends not upon certain forms, times, persons or pla∣ces) does consist, I shan't re∣peat out of the Letter which you have already perus'd; but give it you in the words of Minutius Felix, the most Eloquent of the Christian A∣pologists. Do you think, says he to the Idolaters, that we conceal what we adore, because we have no Tem∣ples
nor Altars? For what Image can I frame of God, when, if you rightly con∣sider, Man himself is his Image? What Temple shall I build for him, when the whole Universe, which he has made, is not able to contain him? And when I that am but a Man, can command a larger habitati∣on, shall I confine the pow∣er of the Divine Majesty within one small shrine? Should we not rather de∣dicate a Temple to him in our Minds, and consecrate
an Altar for him in our hearts? Shall I offer those things in Victims and Sa∣crisices to the Lord, which he has created for my use; scornfully throwing back his gifts to himself again? This were Ingratitude; when the most pleasing Sacrifices to him are a good disposition, a pure mind, and a sincere Conscience. Who∣soever therefore keeps himself Innocent, he prays to the Lord; He that loves Justice, does offer him Sacrifice; whoever abstains
from fraud, procures the favour of God; and he that delivers any out of distress, makes him an agreeable offering. These are our Sa∣crifices, this is our Divine Service: And he that is the honestest Man among us, him we also count the most Religious.
Are not these, Madam, are not these most charming and Heavenly Expressions? Here's the description of a Religion truly becoming the Dignity and Goodness of the Divine
Nature. 'Tis as general as Mankind; not varied by their different Languages, Occupa∣tions, or Customs; and as much the interest of all in ge∣neral, as it must be the de∣light of every honest Man to observe it.
Now if true Learning be nothing else, as I said, but the knowledge of things properly express'd, (and of this, Madam, you show your Sex to be very capable) I see no reason why all Men indif∣ferently should not as lawfully
teach, as they are bound to practise, their Religion. Why Women likewise may not enjoy the privilege of instru∣cting others  the Religious duties, which they are ob∣lig'd to practise themselves, I want ll to be enform'd. They have the same Senses of Seeing and Haring with us, they have the same Faculties of Thinking and Speaking, they learn to read and write with the same Facility, they equally understand the noti∣ons of Virtue and Vice, of Disrepute and Honour, of
Wisdom and Folly; they are as much concern'd, as we are for their own happiness, as well as that of their Friends; and will be so for that of all Mankind, when they consider themselves ob∣lig'd to contribute towards the preservation of the whole, in the good whereof their own is involv'd. Some Wo∣men have left behind them Illustrious Monuments of their Invention, Knowledge, and Courage; and what particular persons have done, 'tis possible for the generality
of the Species to do, or more. Nor can I perceive any dif∣ference between us, but that of Sex and Education; and to whom the defects of the latter are to be imputed, any Man would blush to relate that is concern'd for the ho∣nour or justice of our kind. The particular care your La∣dyship has taken to inform a great many of your poor ig∣norant Neighbour's Minds, as well as to feed and cover their Bodies, is a Demon∣stration that the duty of In∣struction may be as success∣fully
perform'd by your Sex, as that of Charity or good works.
I don't understand you right, Madam, or I need not beg your Pardon for publish∣ing this little piece without your privity or permission. Reason, I know, is the O∣racle that must decide this business: And there seems to be more reason for the liberty I have taken, than for our Author's compliance with your Ladyship's request, tho' he was likewise in the right. He wrote nothing but what
he was convinc'd you perfectly under∣stood before, taught by the original di∣ctates of your own fruitful mind; so you receiv'd his admirable perform∣ance, rather as a mark of his respect, than a present you needed: therefore I presume now to distribute it among those of yours and my own Sex, who want such an assistance from him: You en∣vy no person, I'm sure, those divine per∣fections of Body and Mind, whereof your Enemies (if you can have any) must own you are Mistress; much less would you deprive others of the benefit they may receive from this Treatise, al∣though the usefulness of it to your self was prevented by an excellent genius. That you may be ever happy, Ma∣dam, is the constant desire of

