

Honoured SIR,
MY Old Distemper returning sud∣denly upon me, I could not wait on you as I design'd, and see you on Ship-board: Yet my hearty Prayers and Well-wishes have, and shall ever attend you, for the good Success of your Travels, and safe Return. I think my self also obliged to congratu∣late your happy Voyage, and hopeful Settlement (and as I am informed) in a flourishing and well-govern'd Universi∣ty; where you cannot want Means and Opportunities to improve your Parts considerably, and enrich your Soul with such excellent Habits, as none of your Rank and Years may out-do you in the most desirable Accomplishments of Know∣ledge, Wisdom and Experience.
But (Sir,) besides those many Obli∣gations which I shall always recognize with the greatest Expressions of Love and Gratitude, I have several other Mo∣tives
and Inducements, (as you'll see in the Sequel of this Epistle,) which have prompted me to give you the trouble of perusing these following Sheets: And tho I am very sensible, that you cannot want the Counsel and Advice of Men far more eminent for Learning and Ob∣servation than I durst ever pretend to; yet my Endeavours may have their de∣sired Influence (and kind Acceptance) as the Effect of undissembled Love and Fi∣delity, and the Product of his retired and serious Thoughts, who (to his power) ever was, is, and, God willing, shall be a true Friend to your Self and Family.
Yet I must beg leave to tell you, (be∣fore I proceed to the subject Matter of this Epistle,) that the Eyes of your Country are much upon you, as the hopeful Son of such a Father; and there∣fore you must expect, as your Accomplish∣ments, so your Defects will be narrowly and critically observed. You must there∣fore either study to equal, and (if pos∣sible) out-do his eminent Vertues and Endowments, or otherwise you'll find that they'll exceedingly lessen and e∣clipse
your own. Besides, you have left your Country, Relations and Friends, for the increase of Learning and Experience; we do all therefore hope to see the generous and worthy Fruits and Effects of your Care and Industry, and as great a change in your Person as in the Climate. Nor can it be much satisfaction to your self or others, tho you be able to give an account (at your return) of the strange Occurren∣ces of Nature or Event: For, the Fruits of Study and Travel should not rest there, but your chief business will be to culti∣vate and beautifie your Soul with such useful and profitable Knowledge, as may be a future benefit both to your self and others; nor can any thing less than this, counter vail the great Charge, Hazzards, and Fatigues of Travel.
You should also consider (Sir,) that your Co-temporaries here are growing up apace, and may be great Proficients in all sorts of Learning; and therefore as you'll have greater Opportunities, so you must endeavour to make a sutable Im∣provement in all the gentiel, ingenuous and vertuous Accomplishments, both of
Mind and Body. But if by their Dili∣gence they should out-strip you, it would be no little Reflection; not to mention the fruitless expence of Time and Money, and the far greater Hazzards you run upon amongst Foreigners and Fugitives.
Nor will it be unseasonable to remark to you, that several Young Gentlemen (within the compass of your own observa∣tion,) have returned from beyond Sea's, as ignorant to the full, and more immoral and extravagant, than if they had never left the Smoak of their own Chimneys. They have indeed dearly purchased, and brought over with them some new Modes, affected Gestures, (if not the Diseases of the Country,) and such Language and Deportment as are not only ungentiel and unbecoming, but unmanly and unchri∣stian: (We shall have occasion to take notice of some Particulars afterwards;) insomuch that they are so far from being either wiser, or better for their Travels, that (to give them their due) they have only commenced Masters of that hellish and black Art of Debauchery, Irreligion and Profaneness. But,

These Examples (Sir,) are only noted by way of caution: For we know, and shall always hope for, and expect better Things and Fruits from you: And your virtuous Temper, and hither to religious Education, will be a Sovereign Antidote, and sure Defensitive against all the dan∣gerous and charming Illectives you can possibly meet with. To which give me leave to add the following Advice, which I hope may be useful to you in all your Tra∣vels; nor shall it be unseasonable, whilst you continue in that well govern'd Socie∣ty, where perhaps the least Danger is neither fear'd nor suspected.
Not to trouble you with a longer Ex∣ordium: What I have further to impart, shall for Methods sake, be comprehended under these Three following Heads of Discourse. And the
First, will respect the well-husbanding and management of your Time in attend∣ing your Studies, or Conversation with others. The
Second, Your Morals, and Civil De∣portment. And the
Third, Your Religion.

In all which I shall endeavour to lay down such Rules, as I hope may direct and encourage you to imploy your Time to the best Purposes; so that you may go on chearfully in your Business, with the greatest success, delight and satisfaction; and return home thro' Gods Blessing, every way accomplisht, as a well-bred Gentle∣man, a good Scholar, and a sound Chri∣stian. All which would be the greatest Comfort and Blessing to your Parents, an Ornament to your Country, and the most peculiar Happiness to your Self.
Of these severally and in Order. And First,
