



My Lord,
THis Orphan Book, that can by no modish A∣mours recommend it self to the pleasant Men of the Time, nor by Satyrizing Church or State, can hope to have a Par∣ty on its side; must needs be assured of many Adversaries, and can be in hope but of very few Friends. It flies, My Lord, therefore first (to almost all
that is left of 'em) the Shadow and Name of the Ancient He∣roes; begs an Adoption to the vertuous Name, and asks leave to make use of the Voice of Metellus: not daring, under a less Capacity, to speak to the Vices of our Age. It hears, my Lord, from the Ghost of Elo∣quent Curio, which here it has rais'd,
Livor edax tibi cuncta negat,
Luc. Phars. lib. 1. which though he spake only to Caesar in his life-time, his Ghost may yet, with truth enough, remember less Men of it now: At a time when Party, when Picque, when Passion, when In∣terest, when but fansied Opini∣on, may every thing, to any Man, deny.
Therefore this Orphan, to decline the stroak of so wild a
Passion, as Envy has always appeared to the literate World, falls to the ground, as expert Hunters often do, before the savage wild Boar: and far,
When it turns upon 'em. from the Ambition of contesting with such an Adversary as the best scarce withstand, vanisheth from the sight of the World: Leaves the Ghost of great Me∣tellus, the Light of Reason, and the Voice of impregnable Truth, in the mouths of sharp Acer, and eloquent Curio, to di∣spute Libertinage with the Age: especially in the Second, and Third Part, where, grown to more Virility, it attacks the pregnant Vices of the Time, and adventures to combat with the Darling of our Days. Ho∣ping from such mouths as those, to speak inoffensively Truth; if not to the Persons (which this
Book altogether declines) at least, to the Vices of the Times.
By this happy necessity, this Little Book, dignified, my Lord, and adopted to the vertuous Name of Metellus, now truly ennobled, addresses to your Lordship (not as such Orphans and Destitutes commonly do) presuming upon the Nearness of Blood its Authour has to your Lordship, and that Noble Family of your Name; but by a higher impulse of Nature, yet (as Iron to the Load-stone goes) by a natural Sympathy the brave BIRONS of En∣gland have, with the vertuous and glorious Metelli of Rome, this Little Book, by Metellus adopted, to your Lordship now naturally comes; and hopes, that for the Palladium's sake, by its brave adopting Ancestour re∣scued
from the burning Tem∣ple,
Of Vesta. it may find Favour and Countenance, from a Family, who have been as great Lo∣vers of Minerva, as Servants of Mars; and who are (beyond all Alliance of Blood) to the glorious Metellus, in Bravery, of Kin.
Metellus rescu'd from flames the Palladium at Rome. The BIRONS, had not Fate it self been a Foe, and had not our Sins been our Enemies too, had rescued from the worst of Confusions more than the Pal∣ladium here.
Non habet scientia ∣nimicum praeter igno∣rantiam. Not only our U∣niversities from Ignorance, the only Enemy Science has in the World; our Churches from Profanation and Sacriledge; our Monarch, and Monarchy it self, from Assassination; our Countrey from Slavery worse
than those flames: if all had been as brave as faithful, and of as good Lives as they. Men, if not the most admired, certain∣ly the most deserving Admira∣tion of any of their time. Se∣ven brave Brothers, six of them Knighted for their Bravery and Birth.
My Lord John Biron, the Eldest Brother, General.
Sir Rich∣ard, Go∣vernour of Newark, which he bravely defended.
Sir Robert, sometime General of the Ord∣nance in Ireland.
Sir Tho∣mas, Colo∣nel of the then Prince of Wales his own Regiment of Horse, slain in the War. Sir William, and the other Two Field-Officers, one of 'em slain at York in Defence of the Town. The Eldest deservedly honoured with a Barony, which he bought with his Blood. All in eminent Command, all emi∣nently suffering, all eminent∣ly acting for their Country and King; might justly be thought, (as one well observ'd of 'em) the bravest seven Bro∣thers that have appeared in the World since the Maccabees days. A Family deserving Eternal Memory, if it were but for the brave Actions of the Eldest,
the then victorious Head of that Family, that had so much Heart, my Lord JOHN BI∣RON; who, to say nothing of those so many personal Brave∣ries of his, as that at Brill,
In Oxford∣shire.
In Wilt∣shire. and elsewhere: At Round-way-down, with Fifteen hundred Horse and Dragoons, he not only de∣feated, but absolutely routed a considerable Army of Horse and Foot, under no unskilful General; where he took Two and forty Colours, all their Cannon, all their Baggage, and almost as many Prisoners as he had Men: more might be remembred, but
Satis est hanc mihi nosse manum.
Mart. Epig. de Scaev. Yet to these brave seven Bro∣thers, we must add the brave Uncle, Sir NICHOLAS BI∣RON, Governour of West-Che∣ster,
one of the Generals of the Royal Army, and one of our then greatest Masters of the Military Art, your Lordship's great Uncle; the Eighth good, the Eighth brave Man, of the same Family, and the same Name, at the same time survi∣ving, and with hazard of all they had, fighting for their Country, and defending their King.
Pardon therefore, My Lord, if this little Orphan, adopted by the great Metellus, from its Cradle as it were, presume to Address it self to your Lord∣ship, the immediate Heir, and Snccessour, of so great a Name as BIRON is here; since in you, as in your Noble Ancestours, Bravery still, and Ingenuity join; Qualities that sympathize so much with the Name of Metell.
In this First Part, My Lord, as in its younger Years, it pre∣tends but to divertise your Lordship with a pleasant Pre∣lude to a more serious Dis∣course; but in the Second and Third Part, grown to more Vi∣rility, it will entertain your Nobler, and more Heroick Thoughts. Its Authour being Ambitious but to be Esteem∣ed,

