



I Thought it proper, most Illustri∣ous Sir, to speak something by way of Preface concerning the Method of the Physical Schools Dedicated to the King. Before I sent my Son Francis Fambresarius to the Colledge of Montpellier, where he took his Degree of Doctor, I was willing to understand how much he had profited in the study of Physic, by the Instructions of his Father, and the Professors of the Parisian Aca∣demy, where he had been for four
Years: Therefore I made use of pri∣vate Questions and Exercises to exa∣mine him; which now, for the bene∣fit of all Students, aspiring to be fa∣mous in Physic, I thought good to make publick: For what is beneficial, by so much the more common it is, so much it is the better. I have us' a Method no less plain then compen∣dious, in all the Questions touching the singular Parts of Physic. The general Parts of Physic are generally first examin'd, afterwards those which are special, specially; the Form of Examination accustom'd in the most Famous Academies, being exactly ob∣serv'd. But why I have given to these Physical Questions the Title of Schools, there are two Reasons: The one, because that according to the best Regulated Academies, I have induc'd so many Doctors upon the Examination of a Candidate concer∣ning the whole Body of Physic divi∣ded
did into so many Parts, the Senior Doctor beginning with the first, and so the rest in their Order: Secondly, Because that Cicero frequently uses the Word Schools, for the Disputa∣tions themselves frequently us'd in the Schools; as in the first Book of his Tusculan Questions. This I al∣ways adjudg'd to be the most perfect Philosophy, to be able to Dispute co∣piously and elegantly of the greatest Questions; to which purpose I made it my Business that we might pre∣sume to have Schools, after the man∣ner of the Greeks. As after thy De∣parture, having several Friends with me in Tusculanum, I endeavour'd to try what might be done in that kind; for as before I declaim'd and pleaded Causes, which no man did longer then my self; so now I make use of ano∣ther sort of Declaiming in my Old Age. I bid them put the Question which any one desires to be resolv'd
in, and then either sitting or walk∣ing I dispute it. Therefore have I divided the Schools or Exercises of five days into so many Books. But I shall detain thee no longer in the Porch, (Most Noble Hero of our Art) I only beg of thee, to accept of these my Lucubrations with a fa∣vourable Aspect; which will add to the Heap of your former Kindnesses to me. Live long, for our Kings, for thy own, and our sake, Fare∣well,
Paris, In the Calends of March, 1622.
