


My LORD,
AS soon as I began to write the Book, I now present you with, My Lord the Earl of Portland, your Illustrious Fa∣ther, did me the Honour to employ me in your Service, to read Histo∣ry to you. I was surprized with Pleasure, to observe that the Pro∣vidence of God having designed me for this Employment, had turned my thoughts upon a Subject; the knowledge of which is so absolutely necessary for you, that so you may
reap the full advantage of those wise Instructions, which your Fa∣ther who loves you tenderly, will one day give you, concerning those extraordinary Revolutions, which Europe has with Amazement be∣held for thirty years together.
He knows the secret Motives and hidden Springs, which produ∣ced them all; and he has always been the Depositary of the Secrets of that Great Prince, who had the greatest hand in them; he has ser∣ved him in his brave and hazardous Enterprizes, with equal Zeal and Courage.
'Tis from a Father so exqui∣sitely skill'd in all the Arts of Po∣liticks and War, that you will learn, my Lord, the Intrigues of all the Negotiations, which have been trans∣acted in his time, the present Inte∣rests of Princes, the Account of Bat∣tels, Sieges, Marches of Armies, in
which he has always held a conside∣rable Post. In giving you the Nar∣rative of his own Actions, he will instruct you, how a Person of your Rank and Quality, may equally love your Country, and a Prince, who do's you the Honour to trust you with his Secrets; what Rules you are to observe, that so you may do good service for the one, without intrenching upon that inviolable fi∣delity, which you owe to the other. In short, he will teach you, what a Peer of England is obliged to do, that he may be serviceable to the King in Parliament, and at the same time deserve the Esteem and Appro∣bation of a People extremely jea∣lous of its Rights and Priviledges.
Others besides, my Lord, the Earl of Portland may possibly be able to give you good Counsel in these Affairs. But there is one thing yet behind, which your in∣comparable Father alone can teach
you; And that is, My Lord, Mo∣deration in an elevated Fortune. He has himself lately given you a rare example of it. The Greatness of his Soul in this respect, is a thing so extraordinary, that you will scarce∣ly find an equal Instance, in all those Ancient and Modern Histo∣ries, which you design to read. Keep your Eyes always fixt on this Domestick Example. It can't but powerfully impress this weighty Max∣im in your mind, That to set bounds to your Ambition, though just and reasonable, is truer and more substantial Glory, than 'tis to rise to the highest Dignities.
I have told you my Lord, that the History of the Reign of Lewis the XIII. will be of great use to you, to let you into the understanding of those Revolutions, which have hap∣pened for some time past in Europe. You will there see how the Affairs of the Empire put on a new face
after the Peace of Munster; And there find the causes and first begin∣nings of the Decay of the Spa∣nish Monarchy, which before that time, was dreadful to its Neigh∣bours. You will there read the first steps of France, to that height which it arrived at, under the Con∣duct of the violent and refined Poli∣ticks of a Cardinal, who renders his Master powerful at home, by hum∣bling the Princes and great Men there, and formidable abroad, by entring him into a seasonable League with the Crown of Swedeland and the United Provinces. The good Correspondence which the great Fre∣derick, Henry Prince of Orange, and this able Minister held toge∣ther, did not a little assist the Car∣dinal, in compassing his vast De∣signs.
The Swedes were hitherto hardly known, but for their Wars against Denmark, Poland, Muscovy, and
some extraordinary Revolutions, which Religion, or the differing in∣terests of King and Subjects had pro∣duced in Swedeland. We shall see in the course of this History, a new Warrier arising out of the North with a small number of Troops, for the Rescue of Germany, almost en∣tirely enslav'd by the Ambition and Arms of Ferdinand the Second. Gu∣stavus Adolphus King of Swedeland makes the Emperor Tremble, for fear of losing his Hereditary Countries. The Rapid course of his Victorius Arms carryed to the Rhine, makes jealous even those Princes which call'd him to their Assistance, and those Sovereigns which had desi∣red his Alliance. That which you ought particularly to be affected with, My Lord, is the reading of the resolute Efforts of your Dear and Illustrious Country, to defend it's Li∣berty after the twelve years Truce was expir'd. The Spaniard's pleas'd themselves with the hopes of ma∣king
great Advantages of the Di∣visions which arose in Holland, and some other Provinces, after the Conclusion of that Truce. But the Valour and Wise Conduct of Maurice and Frederick Henry Princes of Orange defeated those hopes, which seem'd to be but too well grounded. You will be very much pleased to find here Sieges Form'd by those Two Great Masters in the Art of Taking Towns, and Victories Won by those Two Famous Generals, to whom they came from all Parts of the World to learn the Art of War; and, in short, That Cou∣rage, not Inferiour to that of the Ancient Romans, with which the United Provinces did weary out the King of Spain, until he renounc'd all his Pretensions to 'em, and was forc'd to acknowledge them, in a Solemn Treaty, for a Free Republick.

I believe you have not forgot that which my Lord, your Father, told you in one of his Pleasant and Profitable Discourses which he had with you the last Summer, in the Walks of his beloved Soli∣tude near the Hague. He reci∣ted to you one Day the Predicti∣on of Prince Frederick Henry, a little before his Death: That his Posterity would be under a Necessity one Day to declare against France, as he had been to oppose the Ambitious De∣signs of the House of Austria. It has fell out as this Judicious and Knowing Politician had fore∣told. The House of Orange hath had the Honour to have given the first Blow, which shook the Power of Spain, and by a surpri∣zing Turn of Affairs, the only Remaining Branch of that Noble Stock, which hath been so fruitful in Heroes, can glory this Day, that by his Prudence and Valour he
hath defended that same Monar∣chy, threatned with approaching Ruin. Could that fierce and bloody Philip II. have ever thought that the Posterity of that Man, whom he had basely murder'd, af∣ter an unworthy and ridiculous Proscription, should be one Day the best Support of his tottering Crown?
The History of the Reign of Lewis XIII. will discover to you, my Lord, the Reasons which Phi∣lip Frederick Henry had to fore∣see the Glory which was reserv'd for a Great King, the Heir of his Blood and of his Virtues, who gives you already signal Marks of his Distinguishing Favour.
'Twould be but a small Matter to learn from History, The Inte∣rests of Sovereigns, the Accounts of Battles and Sieges, the In∣trigues of Treaties and Negotiati∣ons,
the Good or Bad Quality of the different Actors. Its greatest and principal End is to confirm in you the Good Senti∣ments of Religion, Virtue and Probity, which, my Lord, your Father hath took care to in∣spire you with. They charm'd me the first Day I had the Ho∣nour to be in your Company; and I bless God, with all my Heart, that they appear so pure, and so deeply engraven in your Soul, that we have all the Reason in the World to hope, that the Conta∣gious and insinuating Air of the Court, and of the World, will ne∣ver be able to corrupt or wear them out; and that you will ne∣ver wander from the Paths of Piety, Prudence, and Valour, which my Lord, the Earl of Portland, hath trac'd out to you. Hea∣vens grant, which have design'd you to enjoy the great Advanta∣ges which a Father can leave to
his Son, that you may make an Use of them worthy of the Pu∣rity of the Holy Religion which we profess. These are the ardent Desires of him, who shall be, all his Life, with a prosound Respect, and inviolable Fidelity,
My Lord, 
