


Reverend and Learned Sir,
ACcording to my bounden Du∣ty, and the earnest Desire was in my heart to reduce as ma∣ny as I could of that great number of Scismaticks and Separatists that are about us, to the Unity and Communion of our Church, among other things, in order thereto, having received the worthy Tractate of Mr. Ro∣bert Conold, most fit to help on that my Design, I commended the perusal thereof to the chief head of the Inde∣pendant Faction, and most inflexible
heart to Reformation about us (so I take him to be:) for he told me then, it would be to no purpose, he being (as in his own expression) an old grown Oak in the Principles he was in. But through much importunity, I got promise of him to read it over, and give me his Judgment of it, both he granted, upon condition that I should answer to things against the late Common-Prayer Book of our Church, that were in Print, that he would send me. Whereupon I promised to give my Answer to the chief Objecti∣ons; whereby I became engaged to return an Answer to him of the things of greatest concern therein; which promise of mine will be made good, and he ob∣liged to return something about that Tractate of Schism, if there be deliver'd to him what I have drawn up to Mr. Powel's Fourteen Considerations, in the beginning of his Book; of which pro∣mise, if he fail, I hope there will be con∣viction of him, and of his constant hear∣ers, and thereupon conversion of them to another Judgment and Practice. Now having made known to several persons
the said Considerations, and my Answers thereto, as I have at times drawn them up, and my purpose of delivering them to the party in Writing: Divers prns have advised, and desired me to endea∣vour the publishing of them by the Press, alledging withall several Reasons to per∣swade me thereto. As first, because the Factions, spreading them by Copies, may willingly adulterate the Original, and so disable it, as to the conviction of them they communicate it to. Secondly, be∣cause if not Printed, it will not be so com∣monly had for the benefit of the Multi∣tude of their weak Proselytes, who are captivated, and held in the sad bondage of the following, and like erroneous Ru∣diments and Traditions of the Jesuitical Heads of the several Factions in the King∣dom. And thirdly, because they hear∣ing of my Promise made long since, and not yet performed, he and others give out, that the Allegations in that Pamplet a∣gainst Set-Forms of Prayer, cannot be an∣swer'd by my self, or any of my Judg∣ment. Upon consideration whereof, 'tis presumed, that if my Promise be not per∣formed
and published, it may occasion the more secure Settlement of them in those dangerous Errors; as also make a greater seduction of others to them, than other∣wise would have been.
For which reasons I have pitched upon the latter way of publication hereof (if Authority shall permit.) Now if your self shall, upon perusal, approve the An∣swer as Orthodoxal, and that it may be helpful to the bringing back but of the simple (yet as I presume conscientious) Multitude, ledd away through good Words and fair Speeches (as the Apostle speaketh) of those who have caused Di∣visions and Offences, contrary to sound Doctrine. Then I most humbly beg, that your self would Patronize this small Work, being Dedicated to your Prote∣ction. To which request, if you shall condescend, 'tis very probable, those Adversaries of our Church will not dare to rally Forces again about the present concerns, or to give me another chal∣lenge, fearing that if so, you may be∣come Second upon the next Quarrel,
whose success in conflicts of this kind, they know to have been such, that they will not venture upon any further Un∣dertakings about this matter.
But, Reverend Sir, whilst I am arguing against these and other Errors near of kin to one another, and reading these Answers to Mr. Powel's Errors (to some loth to come out of them) they tell me, I am not of the same Opinion as former∣ly; they say I was against Infant Baptism, and the Book of Common-Prayer, I now write for.
Sir, to say a little to these Charges. 'Tis well known to your self, by my Let∣ters, word of Mouth, and Practice (but best known to my self) that I can easily take upon me, by acknowledgment of my Errors and Mistakes (for God's glory, my own and others Eternal Safety) all the shame, and Temporal Evils incident thereupon, which is much evident, when through your discovering to me the Er∣ror I was in, your self knew I came as willingly, as through your help, safely
down from that high and dangerous Pre∣cipice I had climbed up to, of absolute and irrespective as well Reprobation as Ele∣ction, by giving too much credit to di∣vers Authors of those Opinions, and by not well comparing Scriptures with Scripture touching those Points. And could I think that my Grant of what they cast upon me wrongfully, would any thing further their return to us herein, (I speak it, God bearing me witness) I would take it all upon me, per modum altissimi silentii.
But, Sir, I have found upon Inquisition, that both those Reports have been rais'd and spread abroad by one not of their Judgment. The falseness of that Report, that I was against Infant Baptism, will be apparent in that I have Testimony under his hand that raised it, and malitiously spread it abroad, that at least a year and a half before November the 19th, 1660. I did in my Sermon, from several places of Scripture, maintain the Lawfulness of Infant Baptism. Oportet mendacem esse me∣morem. And I have to the same Testi∣monial
the Subscriptions of the three chiefest men in Hardwick, and Pulsham St. Mary the Virgin (besides my Accuser.) Which Notes then deliver'd in Hardwick Pulpit, were drawn up by me in 1656. after my Living of Wighton in Norfolk was taken from me, and conferred upon Mr. Robert Hocknell. And those Notes were drawn up by me at the request of divers (going for Anabaptism) to know my Judgment about that Point, which Notes sent them altered their thoughts, and strayed their further progress there∣in.
And whereas many say from the afore-said Mouth, that I was against the Com∣mon-Prayer Book I now write for;
I confess, that for some short time af∣ter his Majesty's Restauration, I omitted Officiating by the Common-Prayer Book, but did begin with the Confession, Absolu∣tion, and Lord's Prayer therein, and after the Lessons, repeated the Apostles Creed, and after the Prayer for his Majesty, and other Prayers and Collects I could re∣peat
memoriter, until I might (as I ex∣pected) hear from Authority the re-in∣joyning the Observation thereof pun∣ctually. With which Service so per∣formed the Loyal Party for a while rested contented, but soon after the death of Thomas Glean, Esq (a man of known Loyalty to the Crown, and Conformity to the Church of England) the Major, now Sir Peter Glean, his Son, was offended, left the Parish Church, in his own person went to Shelton, and told me so he would do, till I observed the Book of Common-Prayer, as I ought to do. Where∣upon considering with my self, that I was for set Forms, and had no Excep∣tions against our Liturgy, and that the major part of the Parish was for that way, I told Sir Peter, I was resolved if the Pa∣rish procured the Book, punctually to use it. I remember Sir Peter's Expression presently was this: Cosin, I am as glad of your Resolution, as of an Hundred Pounds given me. And the next Sunday after, according to mutual agreement, he deli∣ver'd to me in presence of the Congrega∣tion, before any thing said by me, the
Book of Common-Prayer, and desired my Observation of it, which was perform∣ed by me accordingly.
But, Sir, were all truth that is suggest∣ed against me, I know not why the re∣membrancing me thereof should allay my Proceedings herein, according to my Promise (though so st alledged by them, as I judge for that end) considering the Charge given to St. Peter, Luke 22. v. 32. When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. And truly had I been against set Forms of Prayer, and our Liturgy, (as this Author was at the drawing up of these Considerations) and afterward should have been convinced of the Great∣ness of the Error, and the Damage to the Church of Christ, through perseve∣rance therein (as my Conscience tells me they all are guilty of, who stand off from joyning with us herein) the first thing I should have undertaken, should have been to imitate St. Paul, converted to the Faith by the heavenly Vision, who forth∣with Preached that Faith he once de∣stroyed, Gal. 1. v. 23. I should soon have
endeavoured thereupon by this way I now am in, to have brought men to unite in this way of Devotion with our holy Mother, the Church of England. Thus pray∣ing God to bless you with Health, all happiness, and length of days, I rest very much devoted to serve and honour you, whil'st

