



Right Honourable,
THe impressions of benefits from equalls, should have no other Table then the heart to be planted in. The great distance betwixt your Honour and my poore selfe (in the remem∣brance of your many favours) may justly chalenge more then my heart, if more could be given up of me.
As a weake witnesse of my will,
these papers seeke your honours pro∣tection and perusall, not as a Debt paid, there is neither in them, nor me, a worthinesse to deserve that Ti∣tle, either in the condition of them, as meriting to be called a debt; or satisfaction, paid; I can never attaine unto it.
VVhat I owe you sir, is my life, in a miserable Bondage supported by you, in visiting me with your many reliefes, when I languished under the burthen of Captivity in Constantino∣ple, there Feeding, loathing, and from thence redeeming me, (in the mercies of God) and in mee my life, which I owe you: the principall is in the hands of the Creator, but you Sir have interest in it, by these obliga∣tions, and I will pay that in my pray∣ers for you, which is the best use of it.

Your goodnes Right Honoura∣ble, lookt right forward, and survayd our calamity, and no other respect, with a compassion wedded onely to it selfe, and our sorrowes. Great men use to sell their Labours, and give for a return, you sir did neither: the sub∣jects of your pitty are witnesses; be∣ing many, whom in your honoura∣ble Embassie from his Majesty, to the G. S. abundantly tasted your chari∣ties, that were cloath'd in no other Garment then their owne, not for a moneth or failing, but to enstating in a better being, and free.
Your Honours house was a Sanctu∣ary to those Captives could escape in∣to it, your presence was the fu-ll of their hopes, your absence is a Frost unto them, and in that, your memory is their teares.

Your vertuous Lady, stood up the mirrour of her Sex, in her frequent bounties to us all, being not onely ty∣ed to you in the sacred bands of wed∣locke, but in these of Piety and pitty, which are the Seales, and markes of a Religious and understanding spirit: and where the compassion of some (in vaine glory) is limited but to some onely, to purchase a Title, & no more; yours was perfect, and extended to all, which is a treasure cannot be ex∣hausted, but will distribute Honour to you, both in this life, and everlasting comfort in the world to come.

