



Most reverend Father in God and (besides the cere∣mony of your stile) really my very gracious Lord,
IT is become a formality of the times, to enter bookes into the world under great names, and to make them seeme greater then they be, by studied straines of ex∣cessive commendation, whereby many times they raise the Readers fancy much higher then his faith; and while they ad∣vance their Patrons praise farre above all beliefe, they depresse their owne reputations below a charitable hope: and so make many, instead of reading on when
they have begun (as it were with one foot on the thre∣shold) first to stop, and then to step backe, lest their entertainment in the second course should be answera∣ble to the first; their deceitfull flourishes in the dedi∣cation, promising little sincerity in the ensuing dis∣course.
I have no cause to feare it will be my ill hap, to take such handsale of any judicious and pious peruser of these papers, while I doe but tell (not you, my Lord, for it is already upon evident record, whereof your owne great reading gives you intelligence at the first hand, but others) how you are valued by such as are best able to judge, and seeme to have least of the Bias of advantagious interests, or partiall affections, to wry their censures from the streight line of truth, to the crooked brace of a favourable falshood; which I would have them know, not so much for your ho∣nour, as for their owne good, that in the fulnesse of such an example, as your Grace's, others (especially of our Tribe, and most of all those of your own orbe) may find both the discovery of their own defects, and inducements to diligence, in following so faire a pat∣terne for their further proficiency.
Of many, who have writtn what your modesty will not acknowledge, I will take up with the testimo∣nie of three onely: The first shall bee learned Master Selden, a man of that profession, which (by some) is held too emulous of the credit of the Clergy, and who hath taken much paines against their profit in his history of Tythes: he notwithstanding hath the most reverend Archbishop of Armagh in that esteeme, that
he holds him
Reverendissimus Antistes Jaco∣bus Usserius, Archiepisopus Ar∣machanus, vir summâ pietate, ju∣dicio singulari, usque ad miracu∣lum doctus. Selden. Marmora Aru deliana in editionis ansa. p. 8. sine, & p. 9. princip. A Prelate of exceeding great piety, of singular judgement, and of so much learning, as is no lesse then miraculous.
The second shall bee
Ea certè pietatis tuae & erudi∣tionis apud nos est existimatio, ut Usserii nomen pietatis nobis & virtutis nomen sit, quibus fama constans frequenter ingerit, tot in∣gentes dotes quibus te Deus instru∣xit. Frederic. Spanhem. epist. Dedi∣cator. praefix. 3. pari dubiorum E∣vangelicoum, excus. Genev. an. 1639. Fredericus Spanhemius, Pastor of the Church, and Professor of Divinity in the Uni∣versity of Geneva, a man, who by his bookes of Evangelicall doubts, hath given undoubted evidence of his Abi∣lities, both for the Pulpit of the one, and the Chaire of the other; and hee from Geneva writes thus: Your piety and learning is of that accompt among us, that the name of Usher to us is a name of piety and
So said Greg. Nazianz of A∣thanas. A . Greg. Naz. orat. 21. tom. 1. p. 373. vertue, constant and continuall fame ringing in our eares the many and great gifts wherewith the Lord hath endowed you. And because piety is the Principall, and (therefore Master Selden did well to assigne it the first place in his Elogium) he remembers it againe:
Summa cum laude, voce, ac calamo, plus tamen exemplo do∣ces, &c. Seld. You teach (saith he) to your great praise, by your tongue, and by your pen, but much more by your practice among them who daily look upon your life, and observe the uprightnesse and integrity of your man∣ners: And
Vident in te non anxiam, non affectatam pietatem, sed gravem, & seriam, & quae in illum solum fer∣tur, cui soli debetur; vident raram humilitatem per quam à fastigio tuo descendis, nec quicquam infra tuam dignitatem existimas, quod ad promovendum regnum De fa∣cit. Ibid. Your serious and unaffected piety, which is directed only towards God, to whom alone of duty it belongeth; and (withall this) they see (that which makes these graces the more shining, and more sure) your rare humility, whereby you descend from your height of dignity and de∣sert, and condescend to men of low estate, Rom. 12.16.
thinking nothing too meane for the eminence of your place, which may any way conduce to advance the King∣dome of God: Whence hee takes occasion
Publicè pro∣fiteor, quanta Genevae no∣strae nominis tui sit claritu∣do, quantus a∣pud nostrates honor. Ibid. publickly to professe how glorious a name you have, how great honour in the City of Geneva.
The third witnesse (and, that I may not turne your candor into another colour, the last I will produce, who gives ample attestation to your great worth) is the late Author of an Epistle, published principally a∣gainst Bishop Halls tenet of Episcopacy by divine right, (under the borrowed name of Iraeneus Philadelphus) who in the first page of his supplement of things omit∣ted (having left you out, where hee names other Bi∣shops with respect) makes you amends with this honourable mention:
Segrego etiam à choro Episco∣porum Romanensium Jacobum Usserium Archiepiscopum Arma∣chanum, rarum non solum magnae Brittaniae, & Hiberniae, sed uni∣versi Christiani Orbis ornamen∣tum, in quem quicquid superiori saeculo clara lumina, Cranmerus, Latimerus, Hooperus, Juellus, ha∣buerunt pietatis, zeli, suavitatis mo∣ram, sanctitatis vitae & doctrinae, atque reconditae eruditionis, vide∣tur quasi soedere facto concurrisse▪ Omiss. fol. 1. post pag. 76. epist. Iraenei Philadelph. I ex∣cept (saith hee) from the company of Ro∣manizing Bishops, James Usher, Arch∣bishop of Armagh, a grace or ornament not onely of great Brittain and Ireland, but of the whole Christian world, in whom all the piety and sanctity of life, all the zeale and sweetnesse of dispositi∣on, and the learning, the hidden learn∣ing (hidden from the knowledge of o∣ther learned men) of those famous lights of the former age, Cranmer, Latimer, Hooper, Jewell, are met as it were by a covenanted consent.
It is not possible (my Lord) that such eminency of grace and applause should not be dogg'd at the heeles with envie; and dogged envie barkes out many times with reproachfull calumny: and Gods wisdome suf∣fers mans wickednesse so to worke, for the welfare of
those he loves best, lest they should love themselves too well, and take a dangerous delight in too good a conceit of their owne good parts, and others great prayses (which might robb them of their fundamen∣tall grace, humility; for either of these, but especially both together, like the abundance of Revelations, 2 Cor. 12.7. may incline many to selfe-exaltation;) for the buffeting of Satans messenger (the tongue of a slanderer, for there is a smiting with the tongue, Jer. 18.18. and if any tongue bee Satans, it is that which malignantly traduceth the most worthy) is ei∣ther a meanes to prevent such puffing up, or a remedy against it; God by his all-wise goodnesse, tempering and turning a rank poyson into a soveraigne medicine, and so wel (I doubt not) it will be with you, (my Lord) if others be so ill minded towards you: and, in such a case, an Apology put in may prevaile, and prosper so farre, as not only to heal the wound which that cruell weapon, the tongue (for it is a sharp sword, Psa. 57.4.) hath made, but to smooth the scarre in the skin, when the flesh is made whole.
If then there be any in whom sin so aboundeth (be∣cause grace aboundeth in you and towards you) as to suspect your sincerity, and to speake as ill as they thinke, (and it is like, with men who run to extremes on either hand, you may suffer on both sides; on the one as a Bishop, on the other, as too gracious with such as mislike, or admit not of Episcopall Governe∣ment) I conceive (beside the clearing testimony of your owne conscience, and Gods attestation to the integrity thereof) you may, for the one sort, who set misconceits upon you for the callings sake, with com∣fort
call to minde, that such as are addicted to a disci∣pline which denyeth that disparity wherein you are placed, have given that testimony of you which I have here observed; and more (surely) of that sort would doe you right in the like kinde, if they knew as well as I (and I hope they shall know it ere long) how humble you have beene (not humbled as some are by the Parliament) and in humility, how hearty and forward to take downe your selfe, and to project a forme of Ecclesiasticall Government, wherein you might be but as one of us in a sociable participation of Ordination and Jurisdiction with the rest of your bre∣thren, the incumbent Pastors and Preachers of particu∣lar Churches.
And for the other sort, who thinke you have but too kindely complyed with the Disciplinarians of Geneva, and other parts, else they would not have honoured you so much as they have done, the wiser and better sort will take it for a token of your wis∣dome and goodnesse; and to take off the offence of some (who, in an over high conceit of Episcopall preheminence, disdaine all reformed Churches but those that have it) I can tell them, that Archbishop Whitgift entertained a Minister of the French Church, one Master Buse, to preach a weekly Latine Lecture in his owne Chappell, and to other forraigne Ministers was very bountifull, as to Drusius, Rhenicherus, Fre∣gevill, whom hee entertained in his owne house; and not onely gave liberally to those whose merit was farre above their meanes, (when they came within his reach) but sent his bounty abroad to like objects in forraine parts, as to Master Beza, hee sent sundry times much money out of
his owne purse, besides the generall collections and con∣tributions to Geneva, which hee also greatly furthered, as
Sr. G. Paul in the life of Archb. Whitgift p. 63, 64. Sir George Paul hath written in the relation of his life.
And it had beene more for the honour of the En∣glish Prelacie, and much better for the publick peace both of the Church and State, if there had beene more courteous correspondence betwixt Episcopall and Presbyteriall Divines, notwithstanding the dif∣ferences betwixt them in opinion or preheminence.
But there are a sort of men, who, whether out of unsoundnesse in religion, or pride or perversenesse of disposition, or some politick intention, I cannot tell, but out of some motive (surely) which is not good, take small cause to raise great clamours against those whom they should rather rescue from reproach, if o∣thers did defame them: Such an one was hee who sate so heavie upon the skirts of the Geneva Bible publickly in the Pulpit, charging the marginall anno∣tations with Judaisme and Arrianisme, against whom I wrote an Apologie about twenty eight yeers agoe, which a double occasion now calleth to remem∣brance, the one precedent, the other present.
The former is, That it was the time of my first happy acquaintance with your Grace, when upon your perusall of some part of it, you left a letter for mee (at your departure from Oxford) approving what I had done, and encouraging mee to hold on in clearing their innocency, who were most untruly traduced in a solemne assembly of the whole Univer∣sity; so long since is it, that I have had cause to observe your sincere affection to all the faithfull Labourers in
the Lords vine-yard, whether of Geneva or any other Church of the reformed religion.
The other occasion is present, and it is the desire of divers, who wish well to the edification of ordinary Readers of the Bible; and therefore desire that the Geneva notes, after a serious review and needfull cor∣rection, may be restored to their attendance upon the sacred Text, from which they have been all this while discarded, as if they had been guilty of those heynous accusations which were objected against them, and whereof my book, I doubt not, (by the sentence of a
The worthy Knight & Ba∣ronet, Sr. Edw. Dering, who hath the Chair in the Cōmit∣tee of Books. competent Judge, in whose hands it now is) will ful∣ly and cleerely acquit them, which hath led me a little out of my way, but it is but a short digression, as a step from the margine to the text, whereto the tax of these marginall annotations did induce me, and whence I may readily goe on to note another Accuser of the brethren of the same kind, who upon the difference of one word in the Edition of Ignatius at Geneva, falls foule first upon the Printers, in these words,
Sed à Genevensibus Typogra∣phis praeter fraudes, fucos, & prae∣stigia, non est quod quicquam ex∣pectemus. Ric. Montacutius Eccles. Cicestr. Minister. Apparat. ad origin. Ecclesiasticas. p. 19. Of these Geneva Printers we must expect nothing but frauds and fal∣lacies, and impostures. And then upon Videlius, (a learned and religious Mi∣nister of that Citie, who set forth that Father) in such intemperate termes as these,
Neque audax & importunus Ig∣natii censor quicquam attulit ad paginas suas implendas praeter in∣scitiam, & incuiam, & impudenti∣am singularem, dum ad suum Ge∣nevatismum antiquitatem detor∣quet invitissimam; non autem quod oportuit, Calvinismum amussitat ad antiquitatem. Ibid. p. 19, 20. That bold and importunate Censor of Ignatius hath brought nothing to fill up his pages, but ignorance, and carelesnesse, and egregious imposture, whereby hee writhes Antiquity back to his Genevatisme, and doth not, as he ought, regulate Cal∣vinisme
by Antiquity. In whose defence I need say nothing, they of Geneva are enow, and old enough to answer for themselves; and I doubt not, but will doe it in due time.
I am sorry that I have occasion to observe the like lashing out in him, of whom, by his bookes of devoti∣on and moderation, I was made to expect rather no re∣proofes of such men, then any such reproaches as I read against Master Parker, who ha∣ving said,
Non volentes, sed nescientes; non per apostasiam aut contem∣ptum, sed per infirmitatem & ig∣norantiam lapsi sunt, qui in disci∣plina aberrârunt. Park. de Polit. Ec∣cles. lib. 2. c. 8. The Fathers, which erred in this matter of Discipline, did not offend out of will, but out of want of knowledge; not through apostacy or contempt, but through infirmity and ignorance, receiveth his refutati∣on in these words of high disdaine, viz.
Bish. Hall of Episcopacy. part. 1. p. 60. But can I now forbeare to aske, Who can endure to heare the bray∣ing of this proud Schismaticke?
If I say any thing to succour the credit of Master Parker against this contempt (to which my charity en∣clines mee) I shall with some men perhaps endanger mine owne, who will be ready to suggest (as the Jews against the blind man in the Gospel, John 9.28.) that I am one of his disciples; and if they doe, I will in∣genuously acknowledge, that, having read his booke against symbolizing with Antichrist in Ceremonies, and being required by a great and learned Prelate to give my judgement of it many yeares ago, I answered then (and I am of the same opinion still) hee hath car∣ried the cause against you, my Lord, but not against me: What meane you by that, said the Bishop? I meane, said I, that he hath written enough against your urging of the
Ceremonies, but not against my yeelding to them, if I may not enjoy my Ministry without them: Thus much for my selfe, now for Master P.
I should have thought that his great learning (well knowne by his printed workes, though against the Crosse, and crosse to the Crosier) might have secured him from such a brutish scorne, especially from that which degrades him to the lowest forme, not only of men, but of beasts; and that as it is hard to prove, so none should be hasty to impute either pride or schism, where conscience is pretended, reasons abundantly alledged, and secular comforts deserted, as in his case it was; his words did not (mee thinkes) so much as tempt, much lesse authorize any one to returne upon him with such contumelious termes: for did hee say any thing against the Fathers, that he must for that be held unworthy to be called a sonne? yea, so worth∣lesse, as to bee excommunicated from men, and sorted to beasts? hee said, they erred; and why might hee not? for, were they not men? they erred in Disci∣pline, they might for all that in matter of doctrine be very learned and Orthodox Doctors: They erred (said hee) not out of will, or through apostacy or contempt, but through want of knowledge in that particular, and of infirmity: they might then (notwithstanding all this) bee very good and holy men (as indeed they were;) and must Master P. for saying but this, bee so farre undervalued and vilified, as to bee made but as the embleme of grossest stupidity? For right a∣gainst this inhumane wrong, I appeale from the Pontificall Tribunall of the Judge, decreeing the di∣vine
Right of Episcopacy, to the closet of the devout Doctor, where if hee meditate seriously upon this passionate reproach, hee will vow (I hope) to doe so no more; and because hee hath not been wont in this sort to breake out of the way of Christian mo∣deration, the plea of Balaams Asse may serve him for some excuse, Was I ever wont to doe so unto thee? Numb. 22.30. Wherein, that none may accompt mee like Cham, to bee a mocker of so reverend a Father (Reverend and Father both, without borrowing any reputation from his Rochet) I professe, though his word braying brought that story to mind, I would not have noted it with any reference to him (whom both in this booke, and elsewhere, I have mentioned with affectionate and venerable respect) but that the Asse did not bray, but speak; and speak not the words of a man, but of an Angel.
And O that all our Prelates, who plead their pre∣heminence from the title Angels, Revel. 2.3. had been really Angelicall! that wee might have seene by their workes, their heart-strings were tuned to the song of the blessed Angels, Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will towards men; that wee might have discern'd their desires by their endeavours (as your Graces) to be seriously set upon the happy union of those sacred Sisters, Truth and Peace, Zach. 8.19. Peace and Holinesse, Hebr. 12.14. to which your zeal hath burned with such a bright blaze, and ardent and constant heat (and yet hath it beene guided with so much prudent circumspection) that I cannot but hope God will make you an effectuall instrument of a most blessed accord both of Churches and King∣domes;
and I heartily wish that you had, and pray that you may have many Iraeneos Philadelphos (like him whom as such an one I have heard you many times mention with much commendation) who may give most hopefull assistance of happy successe to such a worthy designe.
God forbid, that either we of England, or our bre∣thren of Scotland should be so stupid, as not to appre∣hend, that the safety of both Nations is bound up in our union one with another, and our ruine like to be let loose in our rent and distraction; or so stubborne, in asserting our owne interests, or working of our owne wills, as to fall out for them: and by our mutuall ho∣stility, so to weaken each part, that the common ene∣mie may come in upon us, and overcome us both; rather then so, we should yeeld to any thing but sinne, part with any thing but with a good conscience.
In that which I have hitherto said (my good Lord) I have shewed but some part of that good report, which (by such as are least lyable to suspitions of par∣tiality) is published of you; and because opposites doe illustrate the evidence of truth, I have noted some ex∣amples of another straine, whereby it may appeare, that the great schisme and distraction among us, hath been made and maintained, not by a kind and respe∣ctive correspondence betwixt persons or Churches of a different Discipline (as some not onely untruly, but absurdly suggest) but by proud and supercilious disdaine, rash and peremptory censures, rigorous usa∣ges of such as have had the advantage of the upper ground, to trample on those that were placed below them; which hath been a principall cause of the great
hatred and contempt of the Prelacie; so that it is not now taken by many as an honour to the man, but the man an honour and succour to it; who takes the calling of a Bishop, as Saint
Episcopatus nomen est operis, non honoris. August. de Civit. Dei. lib. 9. cap. 19. Augustine said of it, rather for a matter of duty then of dignity, which binds him
Quantum quis praecelsi culmi∣nis obtinet locum, tanto necesse est praecedat caeteros gratiâ meri∣torum. Concil. Toletan. 11. cap. 2. tom. 4. pag. 820. Edit. Parisiis. 1636. to so much more diligence as hee hath the higher preheminence; and that duty
Ibid. Item Concil. Constantinop. 6. can. 19. tom. 5. Concil. pag. 328. Concil. Trident. Sess. 24. Can. 4. tom. 9. pag. 414. chiefly to consist in preaching of the Word, making more account of the Canons which concerne the sub∣stance, then the ceremonies of their calling, as all men see your Grace doth, preaching every week in the Pa∣rish of your abode, according to the Canon of the
Episcopus, si infirmitate non fuerit impeditus, Ecclesiae cui proximè fuerit, die Dominico de∣esse non debet. Concil. Aurel. can. 33. tom. 1. p. 723. first Aurelian Coun∣cell, and abiding there, though with disadvantage and inconvenience to your selse, where you may doe most good, making the choice of the Prophet Jeremy, I will get mee to the great men, and speake unto them, for they, saith hee, have knowne the way of the Lord, Jer. 5.5. If they had not known it, he might have come to teach it them; and if our great men know it already, you will make them know it much better; smoothing the difficulties, and clearing the doubts of faith, in such sort, that their minds may bee settled in assurance of that which before they had but in fancie, or held but in opinion; and this in a plaine and easie way, yet full of power and authori∣ty; so that I may say of your Grace, as the people said of our Saviour (reserving a just measure of prehe∣minence to him that spake as never man spake, Jo. 7.46)
you teach as one having authority, and not as the Scribes, Luke 7.29. not as they who write all they say, and can say nothing but what they have written; who preach coldly, as Erasmus noteth, because they are word-bound to a peece of paper; and not as the Scribes, because they said and did not, Matth. 23.3. but your life is a patterne, as well as your doctrine, and a rule of religious conversation; and therefore I doubt not but God shall have much honour among the honourable by your ministery unto them, and in∣tercourse with them at Court, and elsewhere; for if Plato his presence and example wrought so much change in the Court of Dionysius a Tyrant, that up∣on his comming thither there followed a wonderfull modestie and temperance in Feasts and banquets, and other reformations, so that as
Plutarch in the life of Dion. p. 972. Plutarch noteth, the Court was cleane changed, how much rather may we expect that the Court of so good a King (as, blessed bee God, wee have) should bee much bettered by your Graces addresses to his Majestie, and your prea∣ching and practice so much observed, so highly estee∣med by the best of all sorts? Which was one cause that induced mee to dedicate this preparative dis∣course of the Sabbath to your Grace; for, that being the chiefe of dayes for honour to God, and holinesse in men, it was meet the defence of it should bee countenanced with a name, which is eminent in both.
Besides, (which gives your Grace more interest both in mee, and what now I present to publick ob∣servation) the better to furnish and further mee in the prosecution of this cause, you have beene pleased to
communicate unto mee divers MS. Treatises of the Sabbath, such I could not hope for from any other treasurie of learning then yours, which aboundeth with exquisite variety, not to be found either in Book∣sellers shops, or common Libraries; and to promise mee under your hand, any help of that kind. Where∣in I am like enough (my Lord) to take you at your word, and sure enough that you will keepe it, when upon just occasion I shall present my desires to your Grace to that purpose.
It may be some will think I should have dispatched the difference about the title of our Christian Ho∣liday in a shorter discussion; and to them I shall op∣pose others (who have read it, and are wise enough to censure it) that say there is nothing idle or im∣pertinent in it, nothing vainely or tautologically re∣peated; and the more sit to bee somewhat large, because so many adversaries (which are not to bee sleighted) have so long opposed it, and one of them with so much acceptation among some yong Students in the University,
Dr. Pocklingt. his Book. as that for their delight they have read his booke at their common sires, which the high Court of Parliament judged to the fire to bee burned; and by mine intentive handling of that which is of smaller moment, (though the least things in Religion, as the filings of Gold, be very precious) I was willing to engage my selfe to a proportionable care and diligence in those more important parts of my Sabbatary Treatises, which hereafter (by Gods assistance) I shall set forth.
It is time I should draw towards an end, lest I make my porch too large for the pyle of building
that belongeth to it: and yet I beleeve no Reader will think me too long, but your Grace; nor you, but that you will thinke I grace you too much; and in∣deed, (my Lord) if I did not know you had so much humilitie, (with all that excellencie of knowledge and goodnesse, which is obvious to all unblemished eyes) that no prayses are like to puffe you up; and were not confident, that you know mee too well, to take mee for a flatterer, I would not allow my selfe to make such a dedication unto you: But while I apprehend you as you are in your selfe, and (as I conceive) towards mee; I cannot thinke I have of∣fended in excesse, but I should bee very faulty in defect, if I should not adde to all that I have said, an Advertisement to your Grace, touching the gene∣rall both observation and expectation which, now e∣specially is set upon you (which, I am sure, will never be frustrate by your default).
Your great abilities, and your acceptation with the greatest, make many of the best and some of the wisest confident that you can, and your answerable zeale and sincerity makes them of strong hope, that you will take all the faire opportunities that God puts into your hands, to helpe forward the casting of all scan∣dals out of the Church, and the setting up of all good meanes to keepe them out for future time: Gods Providence (which doth nothing in vaine) may well bee thought (after so long absence, and so great distance of your ordinary residence) to have brought you hither at this time for so great, so good a purpose: So that, though there be some
Sunt qui quod sentiunt, etiamsi opti∣mum sit, (invi∣diae metu) non audent dicere. Cicero l. 1. de Offic. p. 362. who think better then (for feare of envie) they dare speake, and
so doe a great deale worse then (perhaps) they think: for (as
Veritatem reticere quod∣dam sacrilegi∣um est. Sedul. in epist. ad Rom. c. 11. sol. 8. Sedulius saith) to conceale the truth (when there is just cause, and a fit season to set it forth) is a kind of sacriledge, It is both beleeved and looked for, that your Grace, as you can upon occasion shew your selfe a Paul in eminence of knowledge, and a Barnabas in sweetnesse of spirituall consolation; so with Paul and Barnabas, you will waxe bold in the cause of God and his truth, though (as it was their lot) you should meet with contradiction, even unto blasphemy, Act. 13 ver. 45, 46. and indeed, the sincerest and wisest working may sometimes not onely faile of due acceptance and successe, but bee as wilfully withstood on the one side, as it is zealously pursued on the other: Yet your Grace may take the more heart to give free scope to your conscience herein, because you are so generally gracious, that as Hierome said to
Tuae dilectionis fama disper∣gitur, ut non tam laudandus sit qui te amat, quàm scelus putetur facere qui non amat. Hier. ad Florentium, priore epist. tom. 1. p. 53. Florentius, To love you, is not so much to be reputed a praise, as not to love you a crime: I should be guilty of no lesse, if I should not in mine heartiest prayers to Al∣mighty God commend your good health, and long life, for his glory and his Churches comfort, and sin∣cerely professe all humble observance to you, as the duty of

From my lodging in Pauls Church-yard, March 19. 1640.
