



Right Worshipfull,
BY these Papers which now I send you, your suspensive thoughts of my silence (wherein I conceive your charity would not bee forward to condemne me of neglect) may receive sa∣tisfaction and assurance, that I have neither for∣gotten, how much your goodnesse hath engaged me to you and yours, nor am willing to preter∣mit any fit opportunity, which may represent
me as gratefull to my friends, as they are gra∣cious to me. They had sooner appeared in your sight, if dutie to the publike had not anti∣cipated my time and endeavours for another service.
And yet they are now so much more sea∣sonable, as time hath the more reduced you, to that dispassionate temper, wherein you were, before your hopefull Sonne, had made his happy change from Earth to Heaven. And surely a departure hence to such a bles∣sed place, must needes be then most happy, when remaining here (as now if ever) is most perilous.
I shall not need then (I hope) for sup∣port of your patience to presse upon you (in particular) the consideration either of his high advancement, above the state of Morta∣litie and misery, or of GODS peculiar right, to doe with his owne as hee will, Matthew 20.15. Or mans common lot, which is alwayes to be so subject unto death, that the
Hebreum nomen Me∣thim per sce∣va: significat mortales, per tzere: mor∣tuos. Marian. Annot. in Deut. 2 34. & Lorinus in eundem lo∣cum. Tom. 1. Com. in Deu. p. 106. col. 1. word in the Hebrew (which in English is rendred men, Deutr. 2.34. with the various situation of two little prickes) signifieth as (some observe) both mortall or lyable to death, and dead
indeed. And when it is the generall condi∣tion of all man-kinde, it is held by the wise an Argument of
Quis tam superbae impo∣tentis{que} arro∣gantiae est, ut in hac naturae necessitate (omnia in e∣undem finem revocantis) se unum ac suos se poni, velit. Sen. de con∣solat. ad Po∣lyb. c. 24. impotence or arrogance for any to expect a particular exception of themselves or theirs.
Nor because his death was (in respect of the ordinary course of mans life) unexpect∣ed or sodaine, will it be requisite to commend to your serious meditation, the saying of
Stultissim sunt, qui de morte imma∣turâ quaerun∣tur, Lactant. de Opificio hominis. ca. 4. Lactantius, censuring the folly of those, who complaine of deaths immaturity, or the opinion of
Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 7. cap. 53. Pliny, That sodaine death is the greatest happi∣nesse that can befall man.
It will bee enough, if with the piety and prudence, (wherewith you were wont to read such serious and sad discourses) you please to entertain this, which I here present to your atten∣tive perusall. And although it be thus now pro∣posed to common view, it is yours, by peculiar interest, and that two fold.
The one Naturall in his name, and by his occasion, who (in part) by Nature once was yours, but now by grace and glory is wholly Gods.
The other Morall, as from my selfe, who have a power, and hold my selfe obliged in
Iustice to doe you right herein, and in Gratitude to give some publike Testimony (in this kind) how much I am, and desire to remaine upon record
From my lodging at the Bishops head in Pauls-Church-yard, May 10. 1643.

