


Honourable Sir,
THough you were not at leisure (when I waited on you about the beginning of May last) to receive a true and full In∣formation betwixt D. H. and me: I was not dismissed from you, with such discou∣ragement, that I should not have hope of abetter opportunity, both for Audi∣ence and Acceptance of any just motion, I had to make unto you: which (at that time) was, that you would be pleased, to cast your eye upon those Papers, then Manuscripts, which now I humbly offer in Print to your Perusal. They are the same in substance which then I shewed to my Reverend Brethren M. T. G. and M. T. P. two worthy Ministers of your County, and both before and since (viz. the last Act at Oxford) to my highly honoured Friend, D. P. F. Prebendary of Christ-Church: which I note as a circumstance of time, to clear me from all suspition of, or spirit of Presumption or contradi∣ction, against the Proviso of the late Ordinance of his High∣ness the Lord Protector, and you of his Council of the 29. of
August. 1654. in the behalf of the outed Ministers Wife and Children: For I could not then divine what your Wisdomes would Order or Ordain for that parti∣cular.
For the Ordinance it self, entirely taken, it is the Judgement of many wise and godly men, that it will much promote the Reformation of corrupt manners (which from scandalous Ministers, like a pestilent contagion, have spread abroad among the people, as the Prophet complain∣ed of old, From the Prophets of Hierusalem is pro∣phanenesse gone into all the Land, Jer. 23.15.) and it will prove the more effectual to that purpose, because it is committed to their execution, whose Zeal will not cool into carelesse Negligence, or partial connivance: that was it which made the Government of the City of Geneva, to be so much commended (even by Bodine a Papist) to which he ap∣plieth the saying ofRidiculum est ad legem esse bonum, ita fit ut quae legibus nusquam vindicantur, illio i. Genevae coerceantur ab ils censoribus, qui summam virtutis opinionem, de seipsis exci∣tarunt. Igitur nulla meretricia, nullae ebrie∣tates, nullae saltationes, nulli mendici, nulli otiosi, in ea civitate reperiuntur. Bodin. Method. hist. c. 6. p. 246. Seneca, It is a ridiculous thing (saith he) there to be good onely by ordaining righteous things, their manner is, to be practically as well as legally just, as strict in execution, as wise in constitution of good Laws, thence it is that those excesses, which no where else are duly punished, are there restrained; so that no whoredome, no drunkennesse, no dan∣cings, no beggars, no idle persons, are to be found in that City.
And for that Proviso (of the fifth Part) his High∣nesse, and you of his Council had to induce you to it, 1. An Ordinance of Parliament. 2. Examples of Pra∣ctice in several Committees answerable to it. 3. An Opi∣nion
of Charity as the ground of both: which I humbly conceive, might make you lesse willing to debate the Point, and more ready to passe it, then otherwise you would have been, if it had been (as a new thing) to be cast into the mould of your own judgements. The lesse cause is there for such as suffer by it, to be offended at the Ordinance (as it is yours) and the lesse offence I hope will be taken at the reasons or deprecations of the pressure of it (by those who feel it heavy upon them) as it is theirs, who have urged it to their prejudice: requiring a fifth part for the Wife and Children of the offending Party, but awarding nothing for him nor his, who offended not, when he is (without any Pretence of insufficiency or mis∣carriage) put out by the Patron, upon the death of the former Incumbent; which if it should be ratified (as a Law of the Medes and Persians, without any alterati∣on, Daniel 6.8.) may not sinne seem to have a per∣petuall priviledge, which to innocence shall never be per∣mitted.
But I am perswaded better things of you, for I am confident, you never thought to make any of your Ordi∣nances (in such matters to be received (as the Pope obtrudeth his Dictates) for infallible Decrees: Nor did our Bishops (though some of later time were forward e∣nough, to take too much upon them) assume any such Authority, to the Canons of their Synods, as if they could not erre: for they all subscribed, to the 21th Ar∣ticle of the 39. Articles made in the year 1562. not onely of the Fallibilitie of Generall Councils, but of their actuall failing in things pertaining unto God.
Nor can I fear from you or any of your Honourable
rank, the tart entertainment of Amos by Amaziah, for being too bold at Bethel, Amos 7.13. in presenting my Conceptions to your Cognizance (though as yet it may be somewhat different from some of yours, who sit and act in so high a Sphere) since you are not more emi∣nent for Dignity or Authority, then for the Profession of the purest kinde and degree of Reformed Religion, which if it be sincere (and I dare not think otherwise) is founded in Humility, and Humility will dispose you to receive (without disdain) any considerable Ad∣vertisement, though from a Servant: You have read it said of Job, by God Himself, That he had not his like for Goodnesse in the Earth, Job 2.3. and for Great∣nesse, he was the greatest of all the men of the East, Job 1.3. and yet was he so low in his own Eyes, that he did not despise the Cause of his man-servant, or maid-servant, when they contended with him, Job 31.13. And of Moses, as well the worthiest as the meekest man that was upon the face of the Earth, Numbers 12.3. (for he was Captain Generall under the Lord of Heasts, and over his own peculiar People, a miraculous Deliverer of them out of the hand of a most Potent and Obstinate Tyrant) that he slighted not the Counsell ofJethro was a Priest of Midian, rather then a Prince (though the Original word be taken sometimes for a Prince or chief Ruler, because his Daughters were so meanly imployed, and so little respected by the Shepherds, Exod. 2.16. Jethro, Exodus 18. though in Gifts, in Graces, in all Authori∣ty, Divine and Humane, Ecclesia∣sticall and Civill, by many degrees inferiour to him.
I have been thus farre drawn on in an ingenuous free∣dome of Speech unto you (Worthy Sir) by the Remem∣brance
of my first Acquaintance with you (many years agoe) occasioned by that rarely Religious Gentle-woman, then my gracious Parishioner, and since your worthily and singularly beloved Yoke fellow: who was not more Honoured for her Piety, by the Godly, then loved for her Charity and Humility, by all that knew Her: in which Graces my conceit hath hitherto been, that you were both suta∣bly and happily matched.
But now it may be it will not become me to look so farre backward (to what is past) but rather to look up∣ward to what you are at present, by your high Prehemi∣nence: and from you, and for you, I must raise my thoughts farre above you, even as high as God him∣self, blessing him for you, and for your Honourable Colleagues (though principally for his Highnesse the Lord Protector) in that you have all concurred in a pi∣ous as well as a charitable Providence, for the Mini∣sters certain and comfortable Maintenance (for you con∣sidered them as by Office the Servants of God, so by Na∣ture, Nation, and Religion, Brethren to your selves) manifested many wayes, particularly by the Instrument of Government ofArt. 35. December 16th, 1653. and the Ordinances ofPag. 633. August 29. and September 2. both of the year current, 1654. which we cannot but account not onely as a gracious Beneficence of yours unto us, but as a mercifull Deliverance of us, out of their hands, who think us worthy of no better cherishing (for the best Service we can do to God or man,) then such as Ahab appointed for Micaiah, Put this fellow in prison, and feed him with the bread of Affliction, and with the water of Affliction, 1 Kings 21.27. whose princi∣ples
since we know them to be such as are as repug∣nant to the Right and Propriety of Civill Authority as to the Right and Propriety of Sacred Ministrati∣ons, we shall hold it our Duty by all warrantable wayes of opposition, (within the compasse of our Facul∣ty and Function) to appear and act against them, as well for your sakes, as for our own; I speak in the Plurall Number (though in my present Addresse I be alone) because I am well assured that the most, and worthiest of my Brethren of the Ministry (with whom I have conversed) are wholly of my minde, in this matter: Though our Conditions in some respects be so different, as may put some of us to Petition to your Honours, for an Additionall or Supplementall Ordi∣nance or Declaration, that may succour us against in∣jury, and secure us against misery, which (without our own faults) may befall us, if by a seasonable, and sufficient Remedy from your Wisdome, Power and Goodnesse, they be not prevented. Mine own present case, may be an Instance in one particular; which I have here drawn up with more Care and Scruple, lest I should offend against Truth and Conscience, in the least point, then desire to obtain any self end, or worldly interest of mine own: as having my most in∣tentive Thoughts set upon mine Account, and Hope of a better World, whither I can have now but a ve∣ry short Journey, mine Age being already arrived at Davids periodThe dayes of our years are threescore and ten. Psalm 90.10. Yet, while I am here, I shall heartily pray, That God will both per∣petually direct and assist you, in all your Consultati∣ons and Resolves for the Publique Welfare of Church
and State, and graciously Requite all your good Offi∣ces, to his House and House-hold, and shall faith∣fully professe, and seriously endeavour to approve my self,

Brightwell in Berks Octob. 17. 1654.
