


To the right Worshipfull

Sir William Brereton, Baro∣net.
Peter Venables, Esquire, Baron of Kinderton

 Knights of the Shire for the County Palatine of Chester.and

Sir Thomas Smith.
And To the Worshipfull Francis Gamull, E∣squire.

Burgesses for the Ci∣tie of Chester. John Ley wisheth the welfare of this, and the other World.
Right Worll. and worthy Sirs,
AS the good providence of God, and the good will of your Countrie have sorted you together, in the designe of publicke service of the Church and State; so your united Interests in the cause and composer of this Booke, have joyntly rather claimed as a dutie, then invited as a courtesie, that I should present it to pub∣licke
view under all your names. It proposeth and pursueth many (as I hope a judicious Reader will upon serious perusall find them) just and weighty exceptions against the late Oath of the sixth Canon; wherein it waiteth upon the wisdome and justice of your Ho∣nourable House of Commons, who have vo∣ted it, to vanish like the smoake of a Canon, without a Bullet (making a great sound, but doing no hurt) to avow your righteous and religious Act therein, against the mis-conceit of such as, either partially or perversly, mis∣deeme the deserved doome which you have passed upon it. And if now (by your hands) it may come to the eyes of your venerable As∣sociates, it may haply find such acceptance in their sight, that by your common favour it may have the honour to appeare before the right Honourable Lords of the Upper House of Parliament, and to represent us (who were most exposed to the perill of the Canonicall Decree) the more capable of the concurrent Grace of you all, in the full and finall abroga∣tion thereof.
And for my selfe (besides my generall en∣gagements,
with thousands who owe you the affectionate observance of publicke Patri∣ots and Patrons, in the places to which you are called) the particular favours which I have received from you in severall, oblige mee this or any other way (wherein I may doe you any acceptable service) to expresse my selfe

From my Lodging at the Foun∣taine in Pauls Church-yard, Febr. 22, 1640.
