



MY LORD,
S. Clement in the ele∣uenth booke of Aposto∣licall constitutions wri∣teth; that Selene (the great beauty of Rome in those dayes) when she shewed her selfe from a high Tower vnto the people of that Citty, Simon the Magician by sleight con∣ueyances represented as many Selenes, as were windowes in the same Tower. Howeuer there was no more then one true Selene, the rest being meer out∣ward
resemblances (hauing nothing of inward substance) contriu'd by naturall magicke vnto deluding the Eye-sight of the Beholders; in like manner, thou∣gh true Theology is not diuided, nor has many faces, being the science of one God; that shew's her selfe front the high Tower of one diuine faith, which supports her: neuertheless through the subtill dealings of Satan, is represented with as many faces, as there be new models of Christian doctrine, that is, as many, or rather more, then ages down from Christ till these dayes, euery age respectiuely hauing coind new opi∣nions in order to the mysteries of Chri∣stian Religion. Heady, and high-myn∣ded schollars, once they come to be blown vp with the actiuity of their own witt, and thereby become inordinate2. Timoth. 3. erunt homines seipsos amantes.
louers of their own thoughts, leaue the loue of truth. As a troubled eye, so the vnderstanding deluded with opinions, which goe beyond the boundaries of nature, cannot see the light of truth: Mittit illis Deus operationem er∣roris, quoniam charitatem verita∣tis recipere noluerunt. 2. Thes. 2. In regard heady schollars are carried on the wings of Pride, and will not em∣brace the loue of truth, the supream prouidence giues them vp to their heart's lust vnto vncleaness of errour, that is, GodSecundum S. Aug. l. 20. ciuit. c. 19. Deus mittit, quatenus diabolum facere ista permittit. permitt's Satan to send them strong delusion vnto belieuing lies, and taking pleasure therein, which together with pertinacy so by degrees, blind's them, that they still encrease in madness, till at lengh through faction,
sedition, and schism they endeauour to ruine, as it were, all true Christian do∣ctrine, and Religion: witness Nesto∣rius, Arius, Pelagius, Donatus, and sundry other anciēt and modern schol∣lars, which (vpon what designs of am∣bitionS. Austin l. de vtil. cred. c. 1. saith, that he is an He∣retick that for temporall interest either coineth, or fol∣loweth new opinions. and interest is needless to ex∣press) through new coind Theologies haue laboured to turne the Church of God into vtter disorder, and confusion. As all rebellion is to ciuill, so all schism is to ecclesiasticall gouernement dan∣gerous, and pernicious. In the old law, lest the people of God might be decei∣u'd with false coyne, and weights, the originall Cycli, and originall weights were conseru'd in the Sanctuary of the Temple, and no money, or weights
allow'd which were not conform to the original's of the same Sanctuary. Likewise that the same people might not be deluded with false coyns, and weights of doctrine, the chaire of Moy∣ses by diuine dispensation was cloathed with infallibility. The high Priest how wicked soeuer could not vtter wicked doctrine from Moyses chaire, as appea∣rs euidently from Christs own words Mat. 23. The scribes and Pharises sit in Moyses Chaire &c. From which sacred Text S. Austin l. 6. con. Faus. Manichae. c. 29. infers thus. In Cathe∣dra Moysis mali sedentes bona di∣cere cogebantur. Besides when God erected Moyses his Chaire (Deutro. 17.) he promised that all definitions, De∣crees, and decisions of matters in deba∣te as comming from that seate should
be of vndoubted truth. Moreouer the children of Israël, were bound to sub∣mit to the sentence of the high Priest, the law condemning of pride, and pu∣nishing with death those, which diso∣beyed the commandement of the Priest, that ministred to our lord, and the Decree of the Judges.
In the new law lest Christians might be carried away with euery winde of doctrine S. Peter, and his Chaire by diuine dispensation were invested into much better priuiledges, then Moyses, and his Chaire. For our Sauiour tooke speciall care, that S. Peter might not fall away from the true faith, as does euidence his prayer. Luc. 22. Oraui pro te (Petre) vt non deficiat fides tua: I haue prayed for thee (Peter) that thy faith faile not: and doubtless his prayer was effectuall according to the
Apostle (Hebrae. 5.) Exauditus est (Christus) pro sua reuerentia. Our lord prouided for S. Peter that his faith might not faile, to the end saith S. Leo (ser. 3. de Assumpt.) The head being made invincible, the state of all the rest might be more sure: that is, the rest thereby might be strengthned, and confirm'd in faith. S. Peter accor∣ding to S. Ambrose (l. 9. Noui Testam. 9.75. Tom 4.) after his denying of Christ was constituted the supream Pastour of souls, because, it was said to him afore, When thou art conuerted confirm thy Brethren; neither was Christ's prayer offered in order to the person of S. Peter only, but likewise in reference to his office; according to the inter pretation of the best antiquity, so that the effect of the same prayer will
continue as long, as the Church of Christ shall endure on Earth: and in∣deed euen as Christ commaunds S. Pe∣ter to feed his sheepe Ioa. 21. soe he commaunds him to confirm his Bre∣thren Luc. 22. but that saying of Christ: Feed my sheep, did not relate to the person of S. Peter onely according to all Orthodox Writers: but also to the office of supream Pastour, which was conferd vpon S. Peter with intent to continue it in his successours, being of necessary vse in the Church: wherfore Christ saying to S. Peter, confirme thy Brethren, ought to carrie the same in∣terpretation; and in earnest it were ma∣nifest weaknes to giue vnto the succes∣sors of Moyses greater prerogatiues, as to power, authority, and infallibility in the gouernement of the Synagogue, then to the Successors of S. Peter in the
gouernement of the Church of Christ; for this were to prefer the law of bon∣dage before the law of grace. In conse∣quence of the premises the Roman faith of S. Peters successors cannot fai∣le; not to fall away from faith is a priui∣ledge proper to the Church of Rome, that is, to the Bishops of that seate, as al∣so plainly appears by the clear Testi∣monies of primitiue Fathers. For exam∣ple S. Cyprian Epis. 55. affirm's That infidelity, or false faith, is inconsi∣stent with the Church of Rome: S. Austin Epis. 66. auer's that our lord hath plac'd the doctrine of truth in the office, and Chaire of the Roman Church, and S. Bernard Epis. 190. to Pope Innocentius against Abailardus, writeth thus. We must refer to your Apostle-ship all the scandalls, and
dangers, which may happen in mat∣ters of faith, for there, defects in order to faith ought to be remedied, where faith cannot faile: for to what Other see was it euer said, I haue pray'd for thee Peter, that thy faith faile not. Although Bishops of Rome that succeed in the Chaire of S. Peter may personally err, as priuate Doctours: ne∣uertheless none euer did, or shall err iu∣dicially, or definitiuely, that is none of S. Peters successors haue, or shall de∣uiat from the truth in their consistories, Courts, Councils, consultations held concerning matters of faith, Religion and generall manners, because Christ's prayer (I haue pray'd for thee Peter, that thy faith faile not) protects them. Wherfore the ancient Fathers recur'd to Rome, and applyed them∣selues
to the Chaire of S. Peter in all matters of controuersy pertaining to Religion, and faith, namely S. Austin and the Bishops of Affricke vnto Inno∣centius the first, and vnto Celestinus (Epis. 90 95.) S. Chrysostome had re∣course to the same Innocentius (Epis. 1. & 2.) S. Basil to the Pope in his tyme Epis. 52. S. Hierom to Damasus Epis. 5. 7 58. and S. Cyprian Epis. ad Corne∣lium, expresly affirm's that, the cause of all schisms, and heresies proceeds from want of obedience to the supre∣am Pastour. Nec aliunde, saith he, haereses obortae sunt, aut nata sunt schismata, quam inde, quod vni Sa∣cerdoti Dei non obtemperatur, nec vnus in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacer∣dos, & ad tempus Iudex vice Chri∣sti cogitatur.

From disobeying of lawfull Pastours began the notorious schism of Core, Dathan and Abyron, who rose vp a∣gainst Moyses, and Aaron, whome God had appoynted Chief Rulers ouer them, and the rest of the Children of Israël; puft vp with proud thoughts of their own abilities, and conceipted worthiness, they were troubled, and grieu'd at the establishing of priesthood in the family of Aaron onely, and therefore arrogated to themselues pri∣estly function against the ordinance of God, and to the vpholding of their schism coind a new Theology tea∣ching, that Moyses, and Aaron tooke too much vpon them, lifting themsel∣ues aboue the people of our lord, say∣ing all were alike holy, and our lord with euery one of them alike: after the same manner all schisms, and heresies
down from our Sauiour Christ till the∣se dayes haue sprung vp against God's ordinance; in euery age some one, or other wanton schollar hath drawn Disciples, and gathered Accomplices together against the supream Pastour, that is the Bishop of Rome, and our true Aaron, as S. Bernard calleth him l. 2. de consid. c. 8. pretending that he tak's too much authority vpon him, lifting his own chaire aboue all others; seeing that the spirit of God is with euery one of them to teach, preach, and administer the Sacraments with∣out dependence of him. Their intent and aime in rising thus against the su∣pream Pastour of the Church, is to per∣suade the vnlearned, that the speciall priuiledges of Pasce oues meas: con∣firma fratres tuos, which Christ cō∣fer'd on S. Peter, doe not descend on
his successors alone: in consequence of which they conceiue it needless to seek to the Bishop of Rome for Confirma∣tion of their new opinions, or to value any condemnation in order thereto, that proceeds from that Apostolicall Chaire; and as all wanton schollars, which coyne new notions of Doctrine in order to the mysteries of Christian Religion seditiously rise against the su∣preame Pastour of the Church, so they speake contemptuously of the schooles of orthodox Doctours, in regard these be the supream Pastours chiefest con∣sistery, and the Churches sanctuary, that keeps the Originall Cycli, and wei∣ghts of all Christian doctrine where wi∣th they weigh all coyns of new Theo∣logies, and such as are found too light are laid aside for the high Priest to con∣demne and anathematise, lest the vn∣learned
learned be deluded thereby. And in∣deed since the first erecting of scholes, Cōnexae sunt, saith the learned Ca∣nus, scholae contemptio, & haeresum pestes; contempt of scholes and here∣sies are inseperably connected toge∣ther. For example Luther afraid of the originall weights kept in the scholes of Orthodox Doctours sharpned his ton∣gue against all the Vniuersities of those dayes, which he called Lupanaria Antichristi, the stews, or Brodel houses of Antichrist; and t'is common alike to all such as coyne, or follow new opinions to haue an extream ab∣horrence from the scholes of Orthodox Doctours. But woe to all such wanton schollars, as goe out from the rest into seuerall sects: for they perish in the contradiction of Core; They are
clouds without water carried about of winds, Trees of Autumne wi∣thout fruit, raging waues of the sea foming out their owne shame, and confusion: wandring starres, to whom is reseru'd the storm of dark∣nes for euer (Ep. Cath. Judae) because they despise the scholes of Orthodox Doctours, rise against the authority of their supream Pastour, and cut out of their own braines vnauthorized Mo∣dels of new sects, and Religions.
As the Prince of darknes by diuine permission transforms himselfe into an Angel of light, so he guideth the pen∣cils of Ambitious schollars vnto set∣ting forth false resemblances of true faith. The extream wantonness of hea∣dy, and high mynded Teachers by the crafty dealings of Satan has euen in our
dayes turn'd Christianism into great disorder, and confusion; As the People of Rome through the delusions of Si∣mon Magus were diuided in order to the true Selene, some conceiuing her to appeare from one window, some from an other, and some from as many win∣dowes, as darted seeming resemblan∣ces of her; so very many Christian peo∣ple, especially these of our own nation, fince they haue let goe their hold of S. Peters Chaire (that is since their fal∣ling away from the obedience due to the Church of Rome, that first conuer∣ted them to Christianism) are of diffe∣rent iudgements, as to the true faith, deluded by the subtill sleights of new Teachers, which according to the se∣uerall lustes of their high mynds haue diuided them into seuerall sects: some be Lutherans, some Caluinists, some
Protestants, some Anabaptists, some Independēts, some fift-Monarke men, some Quakers, some Deists, and some Atheists. There are now as many faiths, as wills, whiles either faith is represen∣ted, as new Teachers will, or as they will, so is interpreted: and whereas ac∣cording to one God, one Lord, and o∣ne baptism, there is also but one faith, men of these dayes are faln away from that, which is the onely faith, and be∣gin to belieue, that there is none at all, confounded with the great variety of seeming faiths; The ground wherof, as tis afore intimated is in regard, Non vnus in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacer∣dos, & ad tempus Iudex vice Chri∣sti cogitatur. Because due obedience is not exhibited to Christ's Vicar, and the Chaire by our lords voice founded on S. Peter. As in the old law schisms,
so in the new law, heresies spring vp. The Childrē of Israël fell into schisms, when they fell away from their due Obedience, to the Chaire of Moyses; and Christians fall into heresies, as oft as they rise against the Chaire of S. Pe∣ter coyning, or following vnauthorised nouelties, whereby Christian souls are misled into most desperate precipices of errours: in regard whereof, I haue been mou'd to write a Theology con∣form to the ancient Cycli, and weights of the holy Churches sanctuary, that is, to set forth a whole body of Christian doctrine; built vpon Scriptures, Tradi∣tions, Councils, and Fathers which de∣serue to be prefer'd before Schollars of new Notions; that is Christian people ought to adhere, conforme their con∣ciences to, and rely their eternity rather on those, then these, which is the Co∣unsell
that the great S. Austin guies in his 2. Booke against Julian the Pela∣gian Bishop (who had brocht new opi∣nions to the preiudice of souls) exhor∣ting all Christians to regard rather the learning of the holy Fathers, which flourished in the precedent ages, and the constant and vniuersall practice of the Catholicke Church, then the pro∣phane nouelties vented, and spred by the Pelagians. Saying Hos (antiquos Patres) oportet, vt Christiani popu∣li vestris prophanis nouitatibus an∣teponant, eis{que} potius, quam vobis eligant adherere.
My lord herein lies the sole in∣tent of these conceptions, which I present you with, and vnder your authority aduenture into publick view vnto aduantaging such as are pious∣ly
soberSecundum S. Aug. l. 14. de Trinit. c. 1. munns Theologiae est & pijs opitulari, & veritatem contra impios defendere. and to defend the truth against such as are impiously wanton. This is the ayme of my Theologicall discourses, and the height of my desi∣res is but this, that they may be recei∣u'd into your Lordships protection, which is ground warrantable enough to gaine them credit, in regard of the high measure of knowledge which is extraordinary in you, beseeming a well studied diuine, as appears by your own writings, which together with your o∣ther gifts of nature, and grace renders you admired by all, that know your Lordship aright, Besides that which a∣lone might embolden me to address these endeauors vnto your Lordship, is your eminent nobility. The best blood, that is in any English subiect, run's in
your Lordships veins, as euidence your paternall, and maternall descents from the most renown'd, and ancient Hou∣ses of Pembrock, Northumberland, and Derby: Again your sundry noble al∣lyances. The lord Talbot that was Heire of Shrewsbury maryed your only Daughter, a Lady of great vertue, and Vere vidua. A widow indeed, hauing for aboue these 20. yeares continued in her widow hood, notwithstanding her Ladyships youth, person, birth, and great doury, which made her the am∣bition of many noble Suitours. Moreo∣uer your Lordships onely and most hopefull son marryed to the most ac∣complished in honour, obligingness, sweetnes, and piety the lady Elizabeth Daughter to Edward Lord Marquess of Worcester, which brings forth also an alliance with the most illustrious House
of Norfolke, Arundell, and Surrey.
Since I am fallen vpon your eminent Nobility, has not your owne Lady much added thereto? if your House we∣re without an ample series of renowned progenitors, might not your posterity haue a glorious Rise from her Ladys∣hip, whose eminent vertues haue ren∣dered her memory blessed. Nobilitas sola est atque vnica virtus. Besides has not that gallant Person the lord Crauen her Ladyships Brother added something of greatnes to your posteri∣ty, whose braue and gallant actiōs per∣formed a broad in foraine parts haue gain'd much honour to his Country. Moreouer the rising of that family is honorable: the supream prouidence ha∣ueing brought it to the height of Emi∣nence, which it now happely enioyes
(as the same prouidenceAug. l. 5. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 15. profitetur Deum terrenam gloriam excellentissimi Imperij cōcessisse bonis ar∣tibus Romanorum, id est, vt ipsemet interpretatur, virtu∣tibus, quibus ad tantam gloriam nitebantur. extended the Empyre of the ancient Romans) in re∣gard of Morall vertues, which were e∣minent in your ladies Father and Mo∣ther the Raisers of it, for as much as their zeale to the law of nature, that is to do Iustice (giuing to euery one what is euery on's own) and to shew mercy vnto the distressed (feeding the hungry, and cloathing the naked) ren∣dered them admired of such as knew them: and according to holy Scriptures, God exalted the Midwiues of the He∣brew women, and made them houses, Exod. 1. For their complyance to the law of nature in preseruing of innocent Babes, which the Tyrant of Fgypt had commanded them to kill: and sin∣ce I am fallen vpon Gods merveilous
rewarding of morall good works; in confirmation of this truth I might pro∣duce conuincing examples in our own Country, where very many in these ti∣mes through a supream prouidence are aduanc'd to honours, dignities, and e∣minent offices, that is God hath built them new Houses of nobility, or en∣creased the glory of the old, for pre∣seruing loyalty to their king (which is the law of nature written in their he∣arts) they feared God, and honoured his annoynted against the commande∣ment of the Tyrant of England, and therefore are exalted: and truly vpon this score the supream prouidence hath built his Grace the Duke of Albermarle a more glorious House thē any subiect in the Christian world this day enioys, in as much as through a happy mana∣ging of his loyalty he carries the name
not onely of Paterpatriae but likewise of Pater Caesaris, hauing preseru'd both Caesar and his Countries. In con∣sequence of the premises his Maties. Ca∣tholick subjects, that with the effusion of their blood, and loss of their Estates haue cherefully performed that duty of nature in order to loyalty, may ho∣pe, that a speciall prouidence in good time will make for them Houses of Ea∣se, which shall be the daily prayer of
MY LORD

