



THere is none example of any one dead, but may be an admonitor of the mutabi∣lity of mans estate to any one alive: Since death is not the limited lot of particular persons, but the common doome of all living creatures, of man∣kind especially, as having alwayes a de∣sert of the sentence of death by the guilt of sinne in his soule, and a condition of body ever capable of the execution of that sentence.
But for these two memorandums of Mortality (now presented by the Presse to publike use) the one of a godly Ma∣tron, the other of a gracious maid her daughter (whom I bring in both together, because there was a time, when the mother and the child by their bodily union, were reckoned but for one person, and when their bodies were divided, their souls were, as was said of the soule of Jacob and Benjamin, as it were bound up in one bundle, Ge. 44.30, 31.) they areso much
more meet to be commended to your memory, as they were the better known unto you, and the more frequent and familiar reci∣procations of respect have passed betwixt you, & they have bin usually such and so many, that in mine observation (for di∣vers years together) seldome hath your house bin without some guest of theirs, or theirs without some of your Family, and this amicable entercourse hath been mutually exercised with such cheerfulnesse of affection, as came neare in confor∣mity to the communion of the Primitive Christians (so farre as the distance of your ordinary dwellings would permit) and they as St. Luke sheweth in his Story of the Acts, had all things common, Act. 2.44. and this Community (like that professed by Ruth to Naomi, Ruth 1.16.) hath held on from life to death, from death to buriall: For the daugh∣ter, (whose death through the dearnesse of motherly love was an occasion of her Mothers translation from a mortall to an immortall life) spent her last dayes, as one of your hous∣hold, dyed under your roofe, and lyeth buried in the Church of your both Parish and Patronage.
And that neither of them might be buried in oblivion, I have now published that of both to common view, to which I have bin divers times sollicited by such as were neare enough to them to discerne a meere colour of sanctitie from the solid truth of it, and who have too much inte∣grity in them (by straining their owne consciences) to scrue up the credit of others, to an over high commendation: the just elevation whereof, (in reference to those two whom death parted for a while, but now hath joyned in their better part for ever) is so well knowne to you both, that if what I have written of them, were to come to a legall proofe, I might (for very much of it) produce you two as witnesses (above ex∣ception) of their well deserving, and of my true speaking of them, which is one reason of my Dedication of their
Funerall Remembrance to your names. Another is the request of him, who had a peculiar right in the Mother (as an husband) a primary right in the daughter as a Father, and a very great Interest in me as an ancient familiar and an affectionate friend.
But that which hath moved memost unto it, is a desire I have (since besides all your former favours in our own Coun∣try, you will needs be so kind, as to importune me so often to the entertainment of your house where you are now a sojourner) to trafficke with you upon the tearms of the Apostle, by commerce and exchange of spirituall things, for things carnall, Ro. 15.27. 1 Cor. 9.11. and the spirituall things, wherein for the present, I am desirous to make some returne for your favours are an advice and a prayer: mine advice is that (while your conjugall amity is visibly such, as those that observe it, doe very well perceive, you are both very well pleas'd in your choyse) you would now and then, by meditation of a mortall divorce, prepare not only for cou∣rage to encounter the pangs of death, but (which to either of you may haply prove a more difficult taske) for patience to beare the sadnesse of a surviving life: For a parting there must be betwixt you and yours, as well as others, and it will cost you the more in griefe (when it commeth) if you doe not prepare and fore-cast for it, by serious study of the hard lesson of Self-denyall, of what is most deare and delight∣full to you before hand: And this I meane not only for the affection communicated betwixt your selves, but for that al∣so, which (in common) as you are Parents descends from you, upon your hopefull children: and which I wish may be moderated to such a measure as may become the children of an heavenly Father, professing to pray for the fullfilling of his will, (according to the prescript of the Lords Pray∣er) before your owne; so shall you be sure to be gainers by
the greatest losse that can be fall you. Now my prayer is that God will be pleased so to unite your heartiest devotions and af∣fections in himself, that in his favour you may find a Sove∣raigne Antidote against all the discomforts of this life, and that after it, you may meet in a blessed fruition of him in a better world, wherof there is none end. This shall be a part of the daily intercession of him, who desireth to be
From my lodging in Pauls-Church∣yard, June 3. 1643.

