



Right Honourable,
THough, in an Answer to two injurious Petitions, put up the last year to the Parliament (that then was) against all set and certain Maintenance of Ministers, I borrowed the Name of Theophilus Philadelphus, because I was unwilling to own the many misprisions of the Printer, I made bold to acknow∣ledge YouFor the military men, I can say some∣what upon mine own certain knowledge: at the Committee for Plundered Mini∣sters, I found more favour from one Colo∣nel (whose name I then knew not, viz. Collonel Fleetwood now Commander in chief over Ireland, and I thought he had not known me) then from any, yea or from all the rest (one ancient friend excepted) though at that time they met in an extra∣ordinary number. So in the Epistle to the Ministers before the Answer to the Peti∣tions in the last leaf but one. by your Name, as my Patron and Protector then, when I knew you by none other Title, then a Member of Parliament, and as such an one (happy it had been for this Nation, if all had been such) you acted (on my behalf) accord∣ing to the uprightness of your heart, and equity of my cause, to bring mine adversary to better terms then
otherwise I could have hoped for. And when the Com∣mittee for Plundered Ministers to make me some amends for my precedent sufferings (whereof I can tell a true and a strange Story, and it may be shall doe, when a fitter opportunity inviteth me to it) sent me to officiate as Minister of Brightwell, and assigned unto me the Rights and Emoluments of the Rectory sequestred from Dr. H. you were pleased to write a very respective Letter to the Governour of Wallingford, Mr. Arthur Evelin for his assistance and favour to me, as my just occasions should have need of it: and for your sake I found him so ready to do me not only all Right, but so many courtesies be∣sides, that I must humbly beseech your Honour, to thank him for me: and since we were well acquainted, I found him for mine own sake, the best Neighbour that ever I enjoyed, and by his removal from these parts (upon the sleighting of Wallingford-Castle) not onely my self, but all that are rightly principled, and sincerely affected to the best Reformation of Religion and Government, are apprehensive of a very great losse:
Dr. Owen Dean of Christ-Church.
Dr Stanton President of Corpus-Christi-Colledge.
D. Wilkins Warden of Waddam Colledge.
Dr. Langley Master of Pembroke-Colledge.
Dr. Wilkinson Principal of Magdalen-Hall.
Dr. Conaunt Rect. of Exeter.
Mr. Cornish Prebendary of Christ-Church, with others of eminent note for learn∣ing and godliness in that University.
 for he liberally and chearfully enter∣tained a choice number of Preach∣ers from Oxford, who (by turns) contributed their pains to a weekly Lecture at Wallingford, and hath managed both his military Authori∣ty, and the Office of a Justice of Peace, with such constant Pru∣dence and Impartiality, as made him both a great Com∣fort and Encouragement to the Good, and as great a Terrour and disheartning to the wicked: which I the rather now profess in publick, because I cannot (notwith∣standing
the discontinuance of entercourse betwixt us) either forget, or not gratefully remember, the many friendly and affectionate Offices I have received from him, and have not any other, or not any better way (at present) for that purpose, then this occasion of thankful acknowledgement of your Lordships favour (immediate by your self, and mediate by him) hath ministred un∣to me, which I conceive you will not take for an unplea∣sing impertinency, or digression: because I have good reason to believe, that as he much honours you, so you have a good esteem of him as worthy (for his Abilities and Fidelity) to be accepted under the relation, and with the affection and confidence of a Friend. And for my self, as by the Divine Providence, and your own Good∣ness, I found you a gracious Advocate in my cause, when I knew you not; so now I do know you, I shall not doubt of your propitious Patronage in this, which now I hum∣bly present to your equitable Cognizance and Conside∣ration, and shall endeavour by my heartiest Devotions to Almighty God for your Honour, to make a supply for the unwilling defects and failings of more real returns, which if my Means were answerable to your Merit, or mine own minde, would certainly be made by

Brightwell in Berks, Octob. 17, 1654.
