


Holy and Beloved,
I Have been long your debtor, it is fit I should now pay you your own with inte∣rest, which here I present you, by answer∣ing the substance of Mr. Goodwins Water∣dipping no firm footing for Church Commu∣nion, which if you will in the fear of God, and without prejudice consider.
I make little question, but the riddle of my departure from you, whose Society I prized (not a little) will be un∣folded. That strange action of our Saviours (so contrary to his natural genius) mentioned John 2.15. mightily affected the Disciples, and made them to cast about to find a ground for it: perhaps it may be so with some of you, in respect of me, because of my suddain breaking off from your Society, wherein you know I took much delight, I can say more, than in Corn, Wine and Oil, and where I had no want, but a surplusage of respects, above what I was able to merit
at your hand. In a word, where my content was so great that it made departing from you more grievous to me than death it self would have been.
And how contrary it is to my Spirit to make trouble or cause breaches I need not tell you, I take it for granted, that it is upon all your hearts, how much I abhorre it: So that I conclude it cannot lightly but be a matter of some wonder to you, that I should thus break off from you, as well as Christs strange action in the Temple was to the Disciples.
Now whilst they were casting about to find a ground for this astonishing action of our Saviour, and searching in the right place, namely the Scriptures, at last they met with it, John 2.17. And they remembred that it was written, namely in the 69 Psalm 9. The zeal of thy house hath eaten me up.
In like manner, Do you wonder? and are you casting about for a ground to fix my departure upon, then take the Disciples course, judge not according to appearance, but judge righteous judgement: do as they did, plough with the heifer of the Scriptures, and you will easily understand this riddle; hearken not to Satan, the great enemy of all righteousness, who will suggest unto you some ignoble root or other to fix it upon: it was his way of old, when Christ cast out devils, the devil suggesteth he did it not by the pow∣er of God, but of Beelzebub the Prince of devils.
The Apostle Paul himself, notwithstanding all his zeal, and faithfulness, and unparalell'd self-denial, yet there was some even in the Church of Corinth, who he so dearly loved, who judged him as a man walking according to the flesh in all, 2 Corinth. 10.2. I think to be bold against some which THINK of us, saith he, as if we walked according to the flesh. Heavenly John, that bundle of love, met with a proud, hungerstarved, close fisted Diotrephes prating against him with malitious words, 3 Epistle John 10. Tis an old trick of the Devil to bespeak the rejection of the truth, by working an ill opinion of them that maintain it. If this hath been the portion of such green trees, tis not for me to complain that am comparatively dry; my weaknesses are many, and no
doubt but hath afforded many appearances of evil to you, but these heavenly soules were judged where there was nei∣ther evil nor appearance of any; the consideration whereof is no small consolation to me under all your mis-judgings.
But for the matter it self of my departing from you, as my record is on high, that no worldly thing should have separa∣ted me from the Church, so I have the witness within my self, that no carnal consideration whatsoever hath contributed to it, to the value of the least hair of my head: and how cometh any body to dream any such thing? When mens business lieth in the East, do men use to set out full West? or do men use to take up meanes in full contestation to their end? Alass, alass, I considered beforehand, that this way is every where spoken against, and the generality of the Pro∣fessors of it of small esteem, for learning, parts, or any thing that commendeth men to the world: their garb and cast that of the Disciples, Luke 6.20. Blessed be ye poor: Now, that they were exclaimed on by the learned in their writings, and frequently in Pulpits at this day, their name cast out as evil, and hated in a manner of all men, that if times of per∣secution for conscience come, they are like to be the first sufferers: So that I had many struglings and wrestlings with the flesh, before I could get the victory to submit to it; nay, the truth is, had not the truth concerning it struck my con∣science, and the light shone into my judgement with that clearness, that I could by no meanes avoid it with peace, I had never forsaken my old standing, which was more ho∣nourable, easie, and every way more acceptable to the out∣ward man.
Now what those Considerations are that command my judgement to that point, whereat it now standeth in the business of Baptisme, which is that onely thing which sepa∣rated between me and you, you have scattered up and down in this my Answer to Mr. Goodwin: But yet I think good to give you the sum thereof under a few heads.
1. I considered the excellency of Jesus Christ above Moses,Hebr. 1. Heb. 3.3. Heb. 1.3. from thence argued to the ungodliness, and danger of slighting him in any of his Commands.
2. I found Baptisme with Water to be one of his Com∣mands,Mat. 28 19. Acts 2.37. and joyn'd with Teaching by name in the Commissi∣on of Christ, and the same presence of Christ promised joynt∣ly as well to Baptisme as Teaching, to the end of the world,Mar. 16.16 and serving the grand interest of Remission of sins and salva∣tion (in some sense) and commanded by Christ to be done upon all discipled persons,Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.16. and that with huge solemnity, In the Name of the Father, Son and Spirit, and that too amongst the last words he spake on earth.
3. I found that he intended not the reiteration of it by the same person, and that therefore there ought to be all due care of practising it without corruption.
4. I found the design of Christ in the Ordinance it self to be exceeding rich and spiritual, namely, amongst many other ends. 1. To oblige the Disciples unto Christ, that as Circumcision bound men to keep the Law of Moses, so doth Baptisme to keep the Gospel of Christ, therefore the Spirit borroweth the word Baptism, which respecteth Christ to express the obligation of the Jewes to the Law of Moses, 1 Corinth. 10.2. And were all baptised unto Moses. Further, the design of Christ is to affect the heart by the will of God seen in the Ordinance of Baptisme, as well as heard in the Word preached, therefore to present in a figure the substance of the Gospel to the eye, as the Word preach'd doth to the ear, namely, the washing away of sin by the bloud of Christ, the death,Acts 22.16 Col. 2.12. Rom 6.34. burial and resurrection of Christ for sinners, and the sinners death to sin, suffering with Christ, resurrection to all newness of life here and glory hereafter.
5. This being the plain design of Christ in the Ordi∣nance, I considered Infant-sprinkling, which ordinarily go∣eth for Baptisme, and found the great design of Christ in a manner frustrate by it, because there is no sign or figure of any such thing as death, burial and resurrection, and conse∣quently not that Sermon of the Gospel, which Christ intend∣ed to make by it, as is most evident by the Scriptures, which
palpably discovereth it to be a humane invention.
6. I found, that as Baptisme was by Christ instituted, and the Apostles practised, namely, upon discipled persons, made so by Teaching, as the Acts of the Apostles abundantly prove.
The form being by burying the body in water, which Cal∣vin and others honestly confess to be the old way.
The worthy design of Christ therein is excellently ser∣ved.
The party being a Beleiver is capable of fellowship with God in the Ordinance, and voluntarily submitting thereto, out of conscience of duty, and knowledge of the intent of Christ in it, is like to feel their obligation to Christ by it, into whose Name they themselves desired to be baptised; where∣as Infants are neither capable of desiring it, knowledge of the meaning of it, faith about it, or any such thing as fellow∣ship with God in it, and when grown up, can onely tell by hearsay, that ever any such thing was done at all upon them, most unlike therefore to feel the like obligation to Christ by it.
Then for the form, it being by burying the body in water, and raising it out again thereof, there is a most exact repre∣sentation between sign and thing signified, which Christ in∣tended in (this) sign, as appeareth by the Scriptures (though not in all signes) which heavenly projects of the Lord Jesus,Col. 2.12. Rom. 6.4. in the Ordinance, are totally frustrate in childrens sprin∣kling.
7. I find the Scriptures in all expressnese of letter are in many places for Beleivers Baptisme, whereas there is not one such Text for Childrens, nor any instance of the Baptisme of so much as one Child in all the new Testament, though the firmament of the Scriptures are filled with the stars of Be∣leivers Baptisme, so that many learned men have acknow∣ledged Infant-baptisme is not in Gods Word, and those who go about to found it on Scripture, build all on conse∣quences (ifs, may bees, and why nots) which Argument Mr. Goodwin hath often used to confirm the doctrine of ge∣neral
Redemption, and to draw the contrary opinion under the suspition of error.
8. I found the unregenerate world, naturally falling in with Childrens baptisme, which is a shroad sign it is a de∣vice of her own, The world loveth her own, John 15.19. And on the contrary, hating Beleivers Baptisme with an invete∣rate hate, as she doth every Ordinance of Christ, administred in the naked plainness and simplicity of it.
9. Infant-Baptisme disagreeth to the spiritual state of the Church under the new Testament, because Baptisme being the initiating Ordinance into the Church, it letteth in a sort of members which the new Testament knoweth not, namely, such as cannot worship God in Spirit, whereas the Scrip∣ture saith, John 4 23. That God (now) seeketh SUCH, (meaning onely such) because he maketh the Churches growth unto an holy Temple to be by the meanes of the building, its being fitly framed together, Ephes. 2.21. and a∣gain, he maketh the encrease of the body unto its edificati∣on, and its growth up into the head to be, partly at least by the meanes of the WHOLE body its being FITLY joyn'd together and compact, and (mark) according to the effectuall working in the measure of EVERY part, whereas Infants are altogether uncapable of such effectual working, or of any fit conjunction with Beleivers: And though chil∣dren might be Church members under the old Testament, when also wicked persons might, if Abrahams carnal seed, not so under the New; it is plain from the Scripture, that Christ will have the matter (thereof) be the spiritual seed of Abraham manifested by repentance and faith, Math. 3.9. Therefore, 1 Corinth. 1.1. giveth the matter of the Church by due constitution to be (called) Saints, and commandeth, that if any prove themselves otherwise by disorderly walking to withdraw from them, 2 Thes. 3.6, 14.
10. I find the sharpest adversaries this way hath even in their writings on purpose to disgrace it, and to magnifie the contrary, namely Infant-baptisme, God maketh them to let fall such expressions as justifie it, and condemn their own.
As for instance, Mr. Rich. Baxster, speaking of the full and proper ends why God instituted the Ordinance of Baptisme, he saith, they are rather to be fetcht from the Aged than In∣fants, and that because, MARK, The Aged:

1. They are the most FƲLLY CAPABLE SƲBJECTS.
2. THE MOST EXCELLENT SƲBJECTS.
3. THE MOST EMINENT SƲBJECTS.
4. OF WHOM SCRIPTƲRE FƲLLY SPEAK∣ETH.
5. THE GREATER PART OF THE WORLD WHEN BAPTISME WAS INSTI∣TƲTED, who were to be partakers of it.

But on the contrary, as for Infant-baptisme, he acknow∣ledgeth in the same place,P. 301. Of plain Scrip∣ture Proof. that the Scripture speaketh darkly of it, yea, that it is SO dark in the Scripture, that the con∣troversie is thereby become not onely hard, but SO hard, &c. as he saith he findeth it.
Now if this learned and holy man, hath not in a few words said more for our way, than in his whole book against it, and that upon pure principles of reason and Religion, let the world judge, for if Infants baptisme be dark in the Scrip∣ture, and so dark as he complaineth.
1. How doth this agree with the Title of the Book, and the superscription of every page, Plain Scripture proof for Infants, &c. Doth not plain Scripture proof, and dark Scripture proof directly oppose? And however Mr. Bax∣ster thinketh he seeth such a thing, though it lie darkly, he knoweth many learned quick-sighted men, that profess they cannot see it there at all no more than we. But if the case be indeed thus, as it is by Mr. Baxsters own confession, that of Infants Baptisme the Scripture speaketh darkly, but of Beleivers or the Aged, that the Scripture fully speaketh, and besides, that they are the most capable, eminent, and excel∣lent Subjects, with what conscience, either of duty to God, or comfort to the soul, can any Christian man cleave to In∣fant-baptisme, and despise Beleivers? If Infant-baptisme be a dark way, and so hard to find, is he a wise man that chuseth that way, when he may walk in the light? Doth any honest
man, in his right mind, chuse untroden paths, when the beat∣en rode lieth just before him? and doth not Christ say, he that walketh in the dark stumbleth, John 11.10? or doth it become the people of God to be so indifferent in matters of Religion, as not to care whether they walk in the light or in the dark? or can any man think to please God by chusing a dark way, hard to find, when a lightsome path, beaten by the feet of Christ and the Saints, looketh him full in the face: Or where is that man in all the world, that will give as much for land that the title too is dark, as for that which is clear and unquestionable? Doth not every one say, of Titles not clear, Ile not meddle? Hath not Mr. Baxster said to Mr. Bed∣ford, it is good going the surer side of the hedge, p. 303. of Plain Scripture proof? and is not Beleivers Baptisme the surer by his own confession? Or doth it become men to be more solicitous about their temporal estates than their spiritual? Or can leaving the light, and walking in the dark, be thought the way to the Saints everlasting rest?
11. It agreeth not to the wisdom and goodness of Christ, that Baptisme should be so dark in the Scripture as Mr. Bax∣ster saith it is; not to his wisdom, because it is appointed for babes, and because he expecteth obedience, who that expecteth obedience will leave their Lawes hard to find? Not to his goodness, because he hath put the Disciples under a sore penalty in case of disobedience to whatsoever he hath commanded.
Now the way of Baptisme after faith is clear and manifest, as Mr. Baxster acknowledgeth, most like therefore to be the Statute of Christ for his Babes to submit too, and not that which is dark. Besides, would it not be a good excuse at Judgement, for the neglect of any Law of Christs, if men could say, the Command was dark, and so hard to find.
12. As Beleivers Baptisme agreeth to particular Chur∣ches, gathered out of the world by the Word, so doth Infant-baptisme agree to the National Church, and Communion therein, which you have renounced, because by Baptisme they
are immembred into the Church, and so capable of Church Communion; yea, ('tis their right) if their Baptisme be reckoned valid, because according to Scripture, Acts 2.42. All baptised persons were added to the Church, and continu∣ed in the Apostles fellowship, breaking bread and prayer: by what rule then can the Parishes be withdrawn from, when they are esteemed duly baptised persons, till legally proceed∣ed against for disorderly walking: If then you will reject their Church state as good, as you do, by withdrawing from them, you must not allow their Baptisme, because their Bap∣tisme, if good, giveth right to it, Indepency then rejecteth the fruit, but letteth the tree stand that beareth it.
If it be objected, that some (though not all of the Inde∣pendents) disallow the Baptisme of some children, namely, such whose Parents beleive not.
Tis true in words, but not deeds: where is there one man in all the Independent Churches, the truth of whose Baptisme was ever called in question?
13. Infant-baptisme agreeth to the carnal interest of those men, who take up preaching for filthy lucre, whereas Belei∣vers Baptisme altogether frowneth on it.
Infant-baptisme taking in high and low, rich and poor, into the Church, maketh both more and richer Customers to the Minister, Beleivers both fewer and poorer, because they are but few that beleive, comparitively, and for the most part of the poorer sort; so that which way soever I looked on Infant-baptisme, I found the signes of a plant which the heavenly Father never planted; and on the contrary, Be∣leivers Baptisme every way answering the breathings of the Spirit of God in Scripture, and consequently, that it be∣came me, as a friend to Truth, and for the honour of Jesus Christ, not onely to obey Christ by submitting to the Ordi∣nance my self, but to strive the restoring it to its primitive puritity, to which I take my self obliged.
1. By the Scripture, Jude 3. It was needfull for me to write unto you, and exhort you, that you should earnestly contend for the faith ONCE delivered to the Saints.
2. By the example of holy men of old, that when they set upon reformation in the worship of God,Neh. 10.19 2 Kings 23 25. Jer. 6.16. Mal. 4.4. 2 Chon. 33.8. had respect to ALL the Law in reforming, both before and after the Cap∣tivity, which also was according to the express Command of God.
3. By Gods high approbation of such his Servants, who did accordingly, as you may see in the instance of Josiah, 2 Kings 27.25. David is called, a man after Gods own heart, Acts 13.22. because a fulfiller of all his will: and Caleb so highly dignified,Josh. 14. from 8. to the 14. because he fully followed the Lord his God. Solomon is disparaged by this, 1 Kings 11.6. That he went not FƲLLY after the Lord, as did David his Father.
4. By the Covenant that the whole Church entered into with the rest of the Nation, to reform both in doctrine and discipline according to the Word of God.
But you cannot think Baptisme any part of Christs Law, and so the practise rather a piece of will-worship, than fully following of Christ.
To which I answer: When the doctrine of universal Re∣demption first sounded in your ear, it was as hard to bear as Beleivers Baptisme is now, and as farre from your thoughts to be the mind of Christ, but that which was hard then is easie now, that which was darkness then is light now, and that which was wood, hay and stubble then, is gold, and silver, and pretious stones now; yea those doctrines, that when time was, in your hast, you were ready to say, he deserved to loose his eyes that preacht them, now for your joy could al∣most be content to pluck out your own eyes in gratitude to him that brought them: (Is it not true.)
And again, concerning the Church way, mind Mr. Good∣wins words to Mr. Thomas Goodwin when he was in Holland, Your authority, graces, learning, parts, judgement and example, have made the stone of separation amongst us so massie and hea∣vie, that we are constrained to be at double paines and labour in removing and rouling it from the consciences of men. A great part of our imployment is to stanch the issue of that fountain of bloud, which you have opened in the womb of our Churches here.
But yet since Mr. Goodwin hath found cause to build up that which then he threw down with so much zeal and in∣dustry, and I verily beleive, if a man should have said to Mr. Goodwin at that time, Sir, the time may come when you may find cause to separate from the national Church, and gather a particular, he would have said, Am I a Dog, that I should do this great thing? Oh how he sweat at it then to roul that hea∣vy stone of separation from the consciences of men, at last found it too heavy to be done at all, and so thought fit, ra∣ther to lie under the weight of it, than heave any longer at it. I write not these things to shame Mr. Goodwin, it is no shame to a man, that he knoweth but in part, and that he is not Master of all knowledge at one and the same time; The path of the just, being as the shining light,Prov. 4 18. which shineth more and more to the perfect day. If more spiritual light shine not into the judgement, if it not a sore sign, that the path of such men is not the path of the just? And if when it is come into the judgement, if it shall not appear in practise, then it is a sign of a heart glued to some carnal worldly interest or other, which causeth the person to withhold the truth in unrighteousness. Tis not changing simply that the Scrip∣tures find fault with, but being GIVEN to change. Changing, as the case may be, is so farre from being a fault,Prov. 24.21. that it is a sign of a growing soul in grace, of walking after the Spirit, of a self denying upright soul, that lieth naked be∣fore the truth, unmarried to any secular interest. Truths faithful friend, that so truth may get up, careth not though it self go down.
This therefore is the glory, not the shae of Mr. Goodwin, that when the truth came into his judgement, as it is in Je∣sus, he consulted not with flesh and bloud, but with Paul, preacheth the faith which once he destroyed, for which ma∣ny glorified God in him.
I beseech you therefore let no man mis-judge me in the ground of tis relation, as if I intended hereby to cast the least disparagement upon him, whom (for the good I have received from God by his hand) I am bound above many to love and honour.
But if you ask, wherefore then serveth this story? I an∣swer, that you should not think of him above that which is meet; to let you see that Mr. Goodwin is but a man, and sub∣ject to like mistakes that others are and therefore his present superabounding confidence, though it rise to that height, as to think all others little better than mad, that is not of his opinion, is no demonstration that he is in the truth, tis so far from that, that if a man may judge what is like now to be, by what hath been, now is the time that Anabaptisme should arise, life up it self, and be exalted in Mr. Goodwins judgement, because heretofore (in other cases) not long after such high expressions of confidence, he gave up the bucklers, and the truth took possession of his heart, which it never could get before. I cannot therefore be out of all hope, that Mr. Goodwin may one day fall down at the foot of that truth, which he now trampleth on without mercy. And though our Arguments seem weak and frothy to him for the present, and the fruit of a distempered fancy, it doth not follow that they are so; but this onely, that Mr. Goodwin is fully perswa∣ded in his own mind, which he is wont to be, as well when he is out of the truth as well as in it.
The scope hereof is threefold.

1 To shew, that though you are not now of our mind, it doth not follow you never will be.
2. To prevent rash and hasty judging.
3. To admonish you against having, not onely Mr. Goodwins, but any mans person in admiration.

The snare of admiring men is great, both to the admirers and admired.
To the admirers. 1. It maketh them swallow what the admired say without due chewing, and so their faith will stand more in the wisdom and judgement of such men, who they deifie, than in the power of God.
2. It issueth an under esteem of, and scornful slighting of others,1 Cor. 1.12 compared with 1 Cor 4.6. who yet are worthy instruments in the Lords work, this was the case of many in the Church of Corinth.
To the admired, the snare is great upon them also, even to puffe them up, and make them swell against their brethren, and so also to procure the displeasure of God against them, Acts 12.22. Oh what care therefore doth Paul take to keep
both the World and the Church from undue attributi∣ons to him, Acts 14.11. upon his cure of the Creeple, The people lift up their voices saying, The GODS are come down in the likeness of men, and much ado they had to keep the peo∣ple from sacrificing to them, which made the Apostles, Bar∣nabas and Paul, rend their clothes, run in among the people, cry∣ing out, and saying, Sirs, why do ye thse things? we are men of like passions with you; much after this manner is it with per∣sons that God useth in converting and edefying soules, Gal. 4.15. especially when also found able in the warrs of Christ for truth; so that if such men do not run in upon the people, and disown all undue reverence, they will have much ado to keep within the bounds of those respects, due to Instruments. They will be more apt to say what such a man saith, than what Christ saith, or Paul, or Peter, or James, or John, saith, nay in a manner to beleive what such a man beleiveth in every thing.
Now indeed we read of eminent persons, great bene∣factors, and that withall have served in warrs to conquest, the people have made them judges in civils. But this is too much to give to any mortal man in spirituals: There the Command is express, Math. 23.9, 10. Call no man Master, or Father, not in the besotted Quakers sense (by denying such titles to men) but Christs sense, which is by accepting men for lords over our faith, which Paul disowneth as to himself in respect of the Churches, in the 2 Corinth 1.24. Nor for that we have DOMINION over YOƲR FAITH, and that which Paul took such great to prevent in the Churches, 1 Corinth. 2.5. That their faith should not stand in his wisdom; though he doth own being their Father, 1 Cer. 4.15. in a sense, and Master too, 2 Thes. 3.12, 14. in subordination to Christ.
But I fear I shall be too tedious in my Epistle, my heart being greatly enlarged towards you, I have much ado to stop the progress of my pen; but least my Epistle prove to o bul∣ky, I shall here break off, though abruptly, assuring you, that its not the want of love to you, but the conscience of duty
to Christ, who loved me, and gave himself for me, that sepa∣rateth between you and me.
As for your hard thoughts and speeches concerning my departure, as on the one hand I am provided against the dint of them, by the conscience of my own perfect innocen∣cy and integrity in that matter, and who is he that can make my glorying void? On the other hand my prayer is, they may never work to disaffect me to you, but to the doubling of my requests to God, to enlighten your judgements in the truth, and so make way for our meeting again never to part more.

