



RIGHT HONORABLE,
ALL that I have done in this Work, may well seem a con∣tinued Solecism: When I have with so unskilful a hand attempted to explain so abstruse an Epistle, and handled things so difficult in so brief a manner, and lastly in daring to dedicate these so impolished papers to a person of such Iudgment and Learning. And what account shall I give of these things?
I know indeed, that among those  passages hard to be under∣stood, which are in S. Pauls Epistles, 2 Pet. III. 16. this First to the Co∣rinthians claims no small share; an Epistle behind none for the variety of the things handled, and for the difficulty of the style wherewith they are handled, above all. Things these are to be trembled at, but alluring withal, and pro∣voking a mind greedy of the knowledge of Holy Scriptures so much the more to the study of them, by how much they are the more difficult. So that it was neither arrogance nor rashness, that I imployed my self in these obscurities; but a studious mind, breathing after the knowledge of the Scriptures, and something restless, when in difficult places it knew not where to fix. What fruit I have reaped, I say not any thing of, but this, that I repent not of my pains: for I have in some measure satisfied my self, but whether I shall do others, is not in my power to judge. I hope it will not give offence upon this account, that if I mistake, I mistake only in Historical matters (as most of those things are that here create difficulty) where there is no fear of dashing upon the Analogy of Faith, or the Doctrine of the Church.
That I presume, Right Honorable, to lay these my rude thoughts before your Learned Eyes, is not boldness, but Duty, Gratitude, and Obligation. I know well enough, such is my meanness, that I am not able to invent or frame any thing, that may be worthy of that great Learning, wherewith you are so signally endowed. But it is your Goodness, with which you are as much en∣dowed, that I and these my papers have to do with. They approach to pay their respects to it, and to render you all the thanks that possibly I can, for that Favour, Assistance, and Batonage, that your Honour vouchsafed to aid and comfort me with, when I and my affairs lay under adversity, and hazzard. You, Great Sir, came in to my succour, and when I was wholly a stranger to you, and you to me, yet you generously afforded me your helping hand, and that of your own accord, unasked, and with an earnest diligence, care and affection. Oh! How much am I endebted to that kindness of yours, and wherewith shall I requite it? Let this issue of my Studies, whatever it be, serve as a Monu∣ment of my Vows; and having your Great Name inscribed upon it, let it live and glory, and testifie to all the World the Obedience, Duty, and Gratitude that I owe you, Being
Right Honorable

From Catharine Hall, Cambr. Commencement Eve, Iuly 4. 1664.
