



Right Honourable,
IT was never in my thoughts to make these my Meditations
publick, I could not conceive them to be fitting for the Press; but Your
Lordships Orders, and the Commands of those whom I stand obliged to obey,
have occasioned it. If therefore You finde here no excellency of speech, no
elegancy of phrase, be pleased to remember it was a Sermon preached upon
the 23. of October, the day designed by the bloody Popish Irish
Rebels for our destruction, the day when stripping and whipping began to be
in fashion. If therefore there want the cloathing of words, I say, 
Habitum temporis hujus habet.
My designe was not to tickle the Ear, but to affect the Heart;
and to move the Auditory to a thankfull acknowledgment of the goodness of God
towards us, (the Remnant that are left) that we were not involved in the common
Calamity, that our lives were given to us for a prey, and we were rescued by
a hand of Providence, as so many Brands plucked out of the midst of the
burning. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for
it was cruel, Gen. 49.7. Like Joah, they shed the blood of war, in
the days of peace, 1 King. 2.5. They had Copies to write after, the
Sicilian Vespers, the Massacre of Paris, &c. but they
endeavored to goe beyond their Masters. The Rudiments of their Religion (if
they wanted Copies and Examples) teach and warrant them to be perfidious,
bloody and cruel to us. It shall ever be remembred (while Popery endures)
what theirdetermination was, in the Council of
Constance; in the case of John Huss and Jerom
of Prague, when it was required, that those two servants of God
should appear in that malignant Council to give a reason of their Faith and
Doctrine (which they were still ready and desirous to do) the Lords and
Nobles of Bohemia would not hazard the Lights of their Church, till
the publique Faith of the Imperial Majesty was ingaged for their safety,
and the Emperour had sent them his safe Conduct: And when (up∣on those
Letters of safe Conduct) they appeared in the Council, and had given an
account of their Faith and Doctrine, and that the Papists were not able to
resist the Wisdom and Spirit by which they spake, they resolved to
choak the Light of the Gospel with the Smoak of the bot∣tomless Pit, and
condemned them for Hereticks, adjudging them to be burned, (a very hot Answer
to their Arguments.) The Lords of Bohe∣mia have recourse to the
Emperour, complain of the unheard-of Exam∣ple, and declare, That the Honour of
the Imperial Majesty lay at stake, the Faith of the Empire was enga∣ged,
and in point of Honour was to be vindicated. 
Antoninus pars 3. Chronicorum lays down the
matter thus: Condemnati sunt ad ignem. Et quia imperator non videbatur
hoc aequanimiter ferre; propter salvum conductum eis datum; respondit ei
sacrosancta Synodus; cum ar∣gui non posse de fide mentita; quia
Concilium ipsum non dederat iis salvum conductum, & Concilium majus
est Imperatore, &c. Cui de∣terminationi ut bonus Ecclesiae filius
acquievit, &c.
Conc. Const. Sess. 19. Declarat sancta
Synodus ex salvo conductu per Imparatorem; aut alios Prin∣cipes haereticis
concesso, nullum fidei Christianae aut jurisdictioni Ecclesiae
praejudicium generari posse aut debere; quminus liceat judici Ecclesiastico de hujusmodi personarum
er∣roribus inquirere; eos{que} punire, quantum justitia suadebit; si
errores suos revecare pertinaciter noluerint, etiamsi de salvo conductu
confisi ad locum venerint judicii, alias non venturi. Nec sic
Promittentem quum fecerit quod in ipso est, ex hoc remanere
obligatum. The Emperour be∣stirs himself, and interposes with
the Council, but at last the Physitian of Rome salves the
Emperours scruples, and with those Catholick Fathers (upon mature
deliberation) lays down this Catholick Decision, as a Catholick
Maxime of their Catholick Religion (Can. 19. Conc. Const.) Fidem
non esse ser∣vandam Haereticis; No faith is to be kept with
Hereticks: So they called them, and so they call us. And so this Catholick
Declararion of his Holiness and his Council, will warrant them never to keep
any Oath, Faith, or Promise, with us, but still to be treacherous,
perfidious and rebellious, as long as a Protestant lives, and to be like
Dan, a serpent by the way, and an adder in the path, that bites the
horse heels, so that his rider shall fall back∣ward, Gen. 49.17.
The Ring-leaders in this Catholick Mischief were Priests and
Fryars, (I speak not universally of all, for some condemned it as
abominable) but such there were, Incendiaries, Captains of Troops,
high-way-Robbers, and high-way-Murtherers; they had learned of Pope
Julius the Second, to cast away Peter's Keys, and to take
Paul's Sword; they left the Mass, which they call an unbloody
Sacrifice, and slew, murthered and sacrificed men, women and children, a
bloody Sacrifice indeed; and thus they raged promiscuously against all,
and the scarlet whore was made drunk with the blood of the
Saints.
The Massacre of Paris was tragical and bloody enough,
it was of 60000 persons; and that (they say) as a gallant and heroick Act,
was pictured in the Popes Pallace: but this Tra∣goedy being so universal,
and of so vast a number, so many thou∣sands, there was no room left for
it in the Popes House, but it shall not want a Memorandum in our
Hearts for ever.
They shewed their inveteracie and implacable hatred against
the very Name of English; they were cruel to the very Beasts and Cattel
that were of English strain, and in some places they would not
presently kill them, but now and then cut Collops out of them, and so let
them run and roar to death. And they dealt with some men as with the
beasts, they broke their backs, and so left them in the fields to graze,
and when they had eatenround about them, they would not kill them,
but remove them to better pasture. Multitudes of all sorts they
dispatched and killed out right, many they left half dead, intreating for
many days for no other favour at their hands but death, but that was refused.
Amongst those thousands thus tortured, tormented, hanged, and drowned,
and burned, I cannot but remember that horrid Murther at Port a down,
where (besides those whom they drowned to make them sport) they continued
that act of drown∣ing for seven or eight weeks together. It hath been
credibly reported by many, that dayly and nightly Visions were there seen,
representing the men, women and children whom they had drowned, sometimes
singing Psalms, sometimes brandishing naked Swords, sometimes
scritching in a fearful manner; the very Rebels that dwelt near the place
confessed it, and were so terrified with those dayly Apparitions, that
they were forced to remove their dwellings: But the Priests and Fryars to
make the matter sound the better in the ears of their seduced
Prose∣lytes, told them it was the cunning sleight of the Devil to hinder
the great work of propagating the Catholick Religion, and killing the
Hereticks. And indeed these two must go to∣gether, they cannot propagate
their Catholick Doctrine, but by our destruction: If the Protestants
stand, Rome must fall; but if Rome stand, Rome
will be still contriving our fall.
(I must write one thing in a Parenthesis, because it is not
fit to come into the sentence, and that is the prodigious and un∣heard-of
villanies which they acted with women even after they were dead.) In a word, I
may say of those many prodigious Villanies, savage Cruelties, and
barbarous Inhumanities, which they without any scuple commonly and generally
acted, as the Poet said, 

Saevior es tristi Busiride; saevior illo;
Qui falsum lenio torruit igne bovem.
Qui{que} bovem Siculo fertur donasse tyranno;
Et dictis artes conciliasse suas.
Non mihi si centum linguae sint; ora{que} centum;
Ferrea vox.
If I had an hundred Tongues, and a Voyce of Thunders, I could not
speak all that they have acted, and others suffered in the time of the late
unparallelled Rebellion. My Lords, the Lord hath preserved you and us in the
midst of the over-flow∣ing waters of Jordan, that the waters of the
proud have not gone over our soul. Our Danger was great, our Deliverance was
great, and therefore we should endeavor to render to the Lord according to
the great Blessings we have received. This is the sum and substance
of the following Sermon, which I hum∣bly offer unto Your Honours. Now He that
keepeth Israel, watch over You continually, guide You here with his
Counsel, and after receive You to glory. This is the Prayer of
 From my Study in S. Audoens Arch, 
Octob. 25. 1661.
