



Ever Honoured,
MY creeping and weak Studies neither able to go, nor speak for themselves, do (like Pyrrhus in Plutarch) in silence crave your Tuition. For they desire, when they now come to light, to refuge to you, who next to God first gave them life. Your incourage∣ment and incitation did first set me forward to the Culture of holy Tongues, and here I offer you the first Fruits of my barren Harvest. Your tried Learning and tried Love, assure me that you both can judge soundly, and yet withal will not judge too heavily of my weak endea∣vours; and such a Patron my Book desireth. This hath caused to you, this present trouble, and in me this present boldness. I know it had been more secure to have been obscure, and not to have come thus to publick Hazzard; for as the Roman said well, It is hard when the World shall shew me mine infirmities under mine own hand: yet have I had some reason, to manifest my self thus openly to the view of all. Some there be that have hardly censured of me for idleness and sloth (as they make it) because (it seems) I intrude not every moment into the supply of other mens Ministries, since it hath not yet pleased God, to prefer and promote me to a Charge of mine own. I know well the saying of the Apostle Rom. 1. 14. belongs to all Ministers, To Greeks and Barba∣rians,The Syrian to that verse adds a word which may well serve for a Comment mehhaobh leakrez, I am a debtor, or I ought to Preach to the wise and foolish they are all debtors, and (as the Syrian adds) leakrez, they are debtors to Preach: And whoso is necessarily called, and refuseth, is as bad as the false Prophets were, that would run before they were sent, nay, he may seem rather worse, that when he is sent will not go. From this censure how far I am free, my Conscience tells me; though I must confess that I am not so hasty as many be, to intrude my self, where is no necessity: This hath among some purchased me the skar of slothfulness: to vindicate which I have here ventured as Children do, to shoot another arrow to find one that is

lost: so have I hazarded my Credit one way to save it another. I know mine own weakness, and that this my pains, to Scholars, may seem but idle: yet had I rather undergo any censure, than the blot of the other Idleness, the begetter of all Evil, and of Unthankfulness, the hinderer of all Good. This is the cause that brings me to a Book, and my Book to you. That by the one I may testifie to the World that I love not to be Idle, and by the other witness to you, that I love not to be Unthankful. Accept I beseech you of so small a Present, and so troublesom a Thankfulness, and what I want in Tongue and Effect, I will answer in Desire and Affection: suing always to the Throne of Grace, for the present prosperity of your Self and your Noble Lady, and the future Felicity of you both hereafter.
From my Study at Hornsey, near LONDON, March 5. 1629.

