



MY LORD,
LET me bespeak you in the words of Orosius to St. Au∣gustine. I have obeyed your commands (my most Ho∣noured Lord) I wish I could say to as much purpose, as I have done it willingly. But I satisfie my self with the bare testimony of my Obedience, wherein my Will and endeavour is at least seen.
Such is your Lordships value for the Holy Scriptures, such hath been your care to promote and encourage the explication of them for the benefit of others, that you have not disdained my poor endeavours of this kind; animating me to a progress in what I have begun, not only with bare En∣treaties, but with the additions of your Lordships Counsel, Assistance, Patronage, and Bounty.
I should be the most stupid amongst Men, if such kind, and benigne en∣couragements should not enflame me to attempt something, wherein at least I may give your Lordship some specimen, not only of my Obedience, but Gra∣titude.
I confess my self, by I know not what kind of Genius, warmly carried out toward these kind of studies, than which, nothing can, to me, be more de∣lightsome and satisfactory. But when it pleases your Lordship both to add such Sails to my little Vessel, and also fill those Sails with such gales

of your Favour, I still the more pleasingly engage my self, having not only the conscience of my own duty, but an ambition of serving your Lordship, and approving my self grateful to quicken me to it.
Under your Lordships wings do these worthless labours of mine adventure abroad, alas! how much below your Patronage, short of your worth, and in∣deed of my own undertaking; the thin and slender product of a plentiful watering, aiming at great things, but trifling in the performance.
I took, I confess, an high flight, when I attempted the Explication of this Evangelist, but how weak and languid I have proved (besides that the thing it self speaks sufficiently) there shall be none readier to accuse than I to condemn my self. Let then the Reader spare his censure, for I will load my self with a shameful acknowledgment that I have adventured in things too high for me: And when he sees this, perhaps he will forgive me, undertaking so difficult a task, wherein my design hath been only to be use∣ful: Nay, perhaps pity me, if I cannot indeed attain at what I would. But if he will neither forgive nor pity, but still carp and censure me, let him make the experiment upon this Evangelist himself, and see if he also may not step as short as I have done.
My Lord, I have this comfort however, that I have not been idle; I had rather puzzle my self with hard and knotty Enquiries, than wear out my time in either doing nothing, or trivially. Nor can I reproach my self that I have made this research into this Sacred Volume through unwarranta∣ble curiosity, but out of humble sincere zeal of mind, both to learn what I can my self, and teach others; offering, I hope, nothing that is noxious, and sometimes that that may profit.
But (my Lord) that which is my principal encouragement, is the Pa∣tronage and candor of so great a man, who, I cannot but hope, will accept this small trifling gift, with a gentle and easie aspect, from the frequent experiment I have already made. But I must recal that rash word gift, when all that I can offer to your Lordship is absolute debt: And alas! How poor a pay-master does your Lordship find of me! A few sorry scriblings, for great and substantial kindnesses not to be reckoned up. Yet such they are that bring along with them all the returns of thanks that I am able to make. And since I have nothing else, may the great God of Heaven, of his infinite goodness and bounty reward you with all manner of felicity, tem∣poral and Eternal: Which he from his heart wishes and makes it his daily prayer, who is,
MY LORD,

