



MY LORD,
THIS second Volume of Dr. Lightfoots Works, the effect of great Learning and as great Industry, being brought to a conclusion, it seemed to want nothing to make it compleat, and to recommend it to the World, but some Great Name to stand before it. And since the Choise of this laid in me, the poor Instrument employed in preparing these Labours for the Press, I could fix upon none so proper, so suitable, as your Lordship, upon two accounts. The one is mine own private Obligations unto your Lordship, being my very Reverend Diocesan, under whose Paternal care I live and discharge my ministerial function in peace, and from whom I have received Favour and Countenance; and lastly, to whom I ought to ac∣count for the spending of my time, as I find, in some antient injunctions of our Church, the inferior Clergy were bound to do. The other is the Book it self, which contains some of the last and best Labours of a Man, of as great worth and abilities, as fame: in all the Pages of whose Writings appear lively stroaks of Learning, Religion, and a Love of the Churches Peace and Prosperity. Of which most sacred things your Lordship is so known and emi∣nent a Patron.
Pardon me then, My most Honoured Lord, that I have presumed to grace this Piece with your Venerable Name: and vouchsafe to take these Pious and Learned Labours under your Honours favour. And if there shall be any thing found herein, that will not bear the censure of your Lordships severer Eye, whether it be the Publishers, or the Authors error, I do earnestly recommend both to your Lordships great Candor and Charity.
I cannot take my leave without my Prayers for your Lordship, That God would prosper your pensive thoughts, and weighty cares for retrieving the di∣stressed condition of our poor Church, occasioned in a great measure by con∣tentious and unpeaceable Spirits: Spirits that even from the very first times of the Reformation have been undermining its welfare, and exercising the skill and patience of its earliest Bishops. In so much, that it was long since the judgment of one of your Lordships Grindal. Predecessors in the See of London, and one that had been charged with too much favour and gentleness to∣wards them, that severity was necessarily to be used. For thus he writes in a Letter (which I have seen) to a great Minister of State, Anno 1569.

Mine opinion is, that all the Heads of this unhappy faction should be with all expedition severely punished to the example of others, as people fanatical and incurable And the same New Reformers (as they were then termed) created so much affliction to the Church, that it made Sands. ano∣ther very Reverend Prelate of this See quite weary of his Bishoprick, and drew this complaint from him in a Letter dated 1573. I may not, in con∣science I cannot, flee from the afflicted Church: otherwise I would la∣bour out of hand to deliver my self of this intolerable, and most grie∣vous burthen. I make no doubt, but your Lordship, being in the same place, and having to do with Men of the same temper, feel the same burthen. God Almighty strengthen and encourage, succeed and bless You in all the wise methods You use in the Government of Your Church and Clergy.
But I forbear any further to interrupt Your precious hours, only recom∣mending my pains to Your Lordships acceptance, and my self to Your Bles∣sing, being
My Lord, 

Low-Leighton, May 14. 1684.
