



I Did not know how to pay may Respects to the Memory of so Eminent a Saint, and Worthy a Person, as our late (too early) De∣ceased Friend; nor how to give so
lively a Testimony of my entire af∣fectionate love to your Souls; nor make my serious Sentiments and Sympathy (which I bear with you in this our common loss) manifest to the Worlc; nor answer the Call of so Stupendious awakening a Provi∣dence, if I had not according to my little skill broken the bonds of Mo∣desty, and rear'd this Pillar (In per∣petuam hujus Rei Memoriam) inscrib'd with that golden Sentence from Heaven;
Mark the Perfect man, and behold the Upright, for the end of that Man is Peace.
You have here presented to you, that from the Press, which once you heard from the Pulpit, wherein I
follow the counsel and conduct of wiser heads than my own.
The Lord hath lately alarm'd us with much Sickness and many Deaths: Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell, are no little things; yet I am afraid we are no more affected with them, than the People of Israel were with Amasa's Death, 2 Sam. xx. 12. While he lay dead in their sight, they all stood still; but when he was removed, and a Cloth laid over him, they all went on in pursuit of Sheba, the Son of Bichri. So while we see our Friends dead, or dying, we are a little serious; but when they are laid in their Graves, we follow this World, and are apt to
forget Death and Judgment to come: Though we know it is not the Riches of this World, but the Righteousness of Christ; not greatness, but good∣ness, that will stand us in stead when we die.
May this little Book lie before you, to mind you of these things; it will serve as King Philips Boy, who saluted him every Morning with a Memento Philippe quod sis mortalis. It contains nothing but seasonable plain truths, concerning a Plain and Ʋpright man, from one that had rather speak five words in plainness to Edification, than ten thousand in a forc'd style, or vain affectaion.
That which I greatly desire (at
this time) is Elisha's wish to Elijah, 2 King. 2.9. that now you have sustained a very great loss in the de∣parture of so useful a Friend, A double portion of his spirit may be upon you. I shall now leave you to read and transcribe in your hearts, and copy out in your lives these few Characters and Rules of a Perfect and Ʋpright man, that you may have Peace at the last, which the God of peace grant both to you and to him; Who is

