



THOSE very arguments, which first and chiefly moved me to turn over the Talmudical Writings, moved me also to this pre∣sent work: so that from the same reasons, whence that reading first proceeded, from them, proceed also this fruit and benefit of it. For first, When all the books of the New Testament were written by Jews, and among Jews, and unto them; and when all the discourses made there, were made in like manner by Jews, and to Jews, and among them, I was al∣ways fully perswaded, as of a thing past all doubting, that that Testament could not but every where tast of, and retain the Jews style, idiom, form and rule of speaking.
And hence in the second place, I concluded, as assuredly, that in the obscurer places of that Testament (which are very many) the best and most natural method of searching out the sense is, to enquire how and in what sense those phrases and manners of speech were understood according to the vulgar and common dialect and opinion of that Nation; and how they took them, by whom they were spoken, and by whom they were heard. For it is no matter, what we can beat out concerning those manners of speech on the anvil of our own conceit, but what they signified among them in their ordinary sense and speech. And since this could be found out no other way, then by consulting Talmudic Authors who both speak in the vulgar dialect of the Jews, and also handle and reveal all Jewish matters; being induced by these reasons, I applied my self chiefly to the reading these Books: I knew indeed well enough, that I must certainly wrestle with infinite difficulties, and such as were hardly to be overcome, yet I undervalued them all, and armed my self with a firm purpose, that if, it were possible, I might arrive to a fuller and more deep knowledge and understanding of the style and Dialect of the New Testament.
The ill report of those Authors, whom all do so very much speak against, may at first discourage him that sets upon the reading of their Books. The Jews themselves stink in Marcellinus (Lib. XXII.) and their Writings stink as much almost among all; and they labour under this, I know not what, singu∣lar misfortune, that, being not read, they displease, and that they are suf∣ficiently reproached by those that have read them, but undergo much more in∣famy by those that have not.
The almost unconquerable difficulty of the Stile, the frightful roughness of the Language, and the amazing emptiness and sophistry of the matters hand∣led, do torture, vex and tyre him that reads them. They do every where abound with trifles in that manner, as though they had no mind to be read; with obscurities and difficulties, as though they had no mind to be understood. So that the Reader hath need of patience all along, to inable him to bear both trifling in sense, and roughness in expression.
I indeed propounded three things to my self, while I turned them over, that I might, as much as I could, either undervalue those vexations of reading, or soften them, or recreate my self with them, and that I might reap and enjoy fruit from them, if I could, and as much as I could.
I. I resolved with my self to observe those things, which seemed to yield some light to the Holy Scriptures, but especially either to the Phrases, or Sen∣tences, or history of the New Testament.
II. To set down such things in my Note-books, which carried some mention

of certain places in the land of Israel, or afforded some light into the Choro∣graphy of that land.
III. To note those things, which referred to the history of the Jews, whe∣ther Ecclesiastical, or Scholastick, or Civil; or which referred to the Christian history, or the history of the rest of the world.
And now, after having viewed and observed the nature, art, matter and marrow of these Authors, with as much intention as we could, I cannot paint out in little a true and lively character of them better, than in these paradoxes and riddles. There are no Authors do more affright and vex the Reader, and yet there are none, who do more intice and delight him. In no Writers is greater or equal trifling, and yet in none is greater, or so great benefit. The Doctrine of the Gospel hath no more bitter enemies than they, and yet the Text of the Gospel hath no more plain interpreters. To say all in a word, To the Jews their Countrymen they recommend nothing but toys, and destruction and poyson; but Christians, by their skill and industry, may render them most use∣fully serviceable to their Studies, and most eminently tending to the Inter∣pretation of the New Testament.
We here offer some specimen of this our reading and our choice, for the Readers sake, if so it may find acceptance with the Reader. We know, how exposed to suspicion it is, to produce new things, how exposed to hatred the Talmudic Writings are, how exposed to both, and to sharp censure also, to produce them in holy things. Therefore this our more unusual manner of explaining Scripture cannot upon that very account, but look for a more unu∣sual censure, and become subject to a severer examination. But when the lot is cast, it is too late at this time to desire to avoid the sequel of it, and too much in vain in this place, to attempt a defense. If the work and book it self does not carry something with it, which may plead its cause, and obtain the Readers pardon and favour, our oration, or beging Epistle will little avail to do it. The present work therefore is to be exposed, and delivered over to its fate and fortune, whatsoever it be: Some there are, we hope, who will give it a milder and more gentle reception; for this very thing dealing favourably and kindly with us, that we have been intent upon our Studies, that we have been intent upon the Gospel, and that we have endeavoured after Truth; they will shew us favour, that we followed after it, and if we have not attained it, they will pity us. But as for the wrinkled forehead, and the slern brow, we are prepared to bear them with all patience, being armed and satisfied with this inward Pa∣tronage, That we have endeavoured to profit.
But this Work whatever it be, and whatever fortune it is like to meet with, we would dedicate to You, My very dear Katherine-Hall men, both as a Debt, and as a Desire. For by this most close bond and tye, wherewith we are united, to You is due all that we study, all that we can do, if so be that All is any thing at all. And when we desire to profit all (if we could) which becomes both a Student and a Christian to do, by that bond and your own merits, You are the very centre and rest of those Desires and wishes. We are sufficiently conscious to our selves how little or nothing we can do either for the publick benefit, or for Yours, yet we would make a publick Profession before all the World of our Desire and Study; and before You of our inward and cordial affection.
Let this pledge therefore of our love and endearment be laid up by You, and while we endeavour to give others an account of our Hours, let this give You an assurance of our Affections. And may it last in Katherine-Hall, even to future Ages, as a Testimony of Service, a Monument of Love, and a Memorial both of Me and You.
From my Study. The Calends of June 1658.
