



To CESAR the things which are CESARS, AND To GOD the things which are GODS.
COME hither, stranger, and stand by me while I am sa∣crificing, and when you hear me relating my own story, help my Prayers with yours, assist me in this Holy Office, and worship the same Deities with me.
I sing the mercy of God, and the clemency of the King, by which I was preserved from suffering Ship∣wrack, when I had been already Shipwracked; and from being driven out of doors, when I had been already driven out.
This Rectory of Great Mundon, which I have now enjoyed for almost twenty years, belongs to the Royal Donation and Grant pleno jure, as they use to speak. By which right two Rectors were placed here here∣tofore

by two Kings; persons they were of eminent Name, of no ordi∣nary Worth, and the like to whom their times produced not many: One was the very famous George Downham S. T. D. presented by King James, who was promoted hence, and sent over to the Bishoprick of Derry in Ireland. And he leaving it, that excellent person Samuel Ward, S. T. D. Master of Sidney Sussex College, in the University of Cambridge, and also the most Grave and Learned Professor of the Lady Margaret in the same University, was made his successor by King Charles. Upon his decease I succeeded here; far unequal (alas!) to so great Men; and as unhappy, that I was not admitted by the same right, but by that Power, that then, while the Wars prevailed, possessed all. The brittle∣ness of this my weak Title lay not concealed, but when the Kings Ma∣jesty, in which we now rejoyce, by a happy turn of Providence return∣ed to his own Rights, it was presently discovered; and this Rectory was granted to one, who was a suiter for it, by the Royal Donation.
Thus I and my fortunes are Shipwracked, and my affairs are come to that last extremity, that nothing now remains for me, but to leave my House, and these quiet retirements, wherein for so many Years I follow∣ed my Studies with the highest satisfaction, and the sweetest leisure. But another thing there was, that stuck more close, namely, that I seemed to see Royal Majesty offended with me, and that brow, that shined on others with a most sweet Serenity, sad, clouded, bended upon me; and certainly to perish under the displeasure of a King, is twice to perish.
Under these streights what should I do? There was no place for hope, when the fatal Instrument was now signed against me: But to Dispair is to subscribe to ones own misfortune, is to derogate from the Kings mer∣cy, is to submit to certain ruine, under uncertain suspicion. Perhaps the most merciful King is not angry with me at all; for Eagles do not use to be angry with Flies. Nor perhaps is it too late, nor altogether to no purpose, to seek after a remedy for my Wound, not yet uncurable, for as yet the fatal Decree was not gone out without Repeal. Perhaps my case is altogether unknown to the best King, or disguised by some un∣just complaint; and it is a comfort, that my business lies before a King, not before a common Man.
To the Altar therefore of his Mercy, I humbly fly, in a lowly suppli∣cation, begging and intreating him to consider my case, to revoke the destructive Decree, and to vouchsafe to continue, and establish my station in this place. Take now, O England, a measure of thy King; and even from this one Example learn, what a Prince thou hast to boast of. The Royal Father of his Country received my supplication chearfully, com∣plied with my desires, and granted me his Donation, established it with his Great Seal, and (which I desire might be written in Letters of Gold to last for ever) by a particular and, as it were, a paternal care, took order, that hereafter none by any means whatsoever should proceed to do any thing that tended either to my danger or ruine.
O! how would I commemorate thee, thou best of Princes, Greatest Charles, how would I commemorate thee! What praises, or what ex∣pressions shall I use to celebrate or set forth so great Clemency, com∣miseration and goodness? Those are light obligations that speak, these my Obligations stand amazed, are speechless, and swallowed up in ad∣miration.

It is for common Men to do benefits that may be expressed in Words, it is for Charles to oblige beyond all that can be spoken.
I will add another thing also, O stranger, which the same Mercy and Goodness also added. For when I feared the same fortune, in the Uni∣versity, as I had felt in the Country, and fled again to the same Altar, the Royal bounty heard me, granted my Petition, ratified my Desires, and confirmed and strengthned my Station there also.
To comprize all in a word, which indeed exceeds all words. Although I were an obscure person and of no note, altogether unworthy, and of no merit, wholly unknown to the Kings Majesty, and lying possibly un∣der some kind of accusations (for it wanted not an accusation, that I was put into these places by that Authority, that I was) yet twice within two weeks, by the Royal favour I obtained his Grant, confirmed by his Hand, and the Great Seal of England. And thus rooted out here, he replanted me, and ready to be rooted out elsewhere, he preserved me, rescued me from danger, freed me of my fear: so that now I, as well as my Worthy predecessors, have this to boast of, that I have a King to my Patron.
But far be it, far be it from me, most unworthy Man, to boast; all this, most Great, most Merciful Prince, redounds to your Praise alone, and let it do so: rather let England glory in such a Prince, and let the Prince glory in such Mercy. Triumph, Cesar, triumph in that brave Spirit of yours, as you well may. You are Charles, and you conquer, you subdue all, by pitying, delivering, giving and forgiving all.
That conquest I shall always acknowledge with all humility and thank∣fulness: and thou, little Book, and you trifling Sheets, wheresoever ye shall fly, tell this abroad in my Name every where, and to every man. That although there be nothing else in you worthy to be read, yet that this my sincere profession may be read and heard; that next after the Divine Mercy, I ow to the mercy of the King, that I enjoy this sweet leasure for Learning, that I enjoy these quiet Retirements, that I enjoy a House, that I enjoy my Self.
So, O Father of the Country, may the Father of Mercies reward you seven fold, and seventy times seven fold into your bosom, and may you feel every day the benefit and sweetness of doing good by the recom∣pences that are made you by Heaven. Thus may your Mercy ever tri∣umph, and ever reap, as the fruit of it, the eternal favour of the Di∣vine Mercy. Thus may England be Crowned for a long time with her King, and may the King be Crowned for ever with the Love of God, with his Protection, his Blessing, his Grace, his Glory.
Made these Vows, Ian. I. 1661.
