



Honour'd Father,
THat old complaint of St. Jerom,
that Divinity is become every
ones Trade, was never more
seasonable then of late times a∣mongst
us; when all Professions invaded the
Pulpit, and God's word was rudely handled
by those that were Bunglers at their own
trades. To vindicate me from that impu∣tation
of unseemly meddling with sacred
things, if my Education, which hath been
all along in Letters, and the Imployment I
am in, which requires of me sometimes to
perform the place of Catechist, will not serv:
yet the Relation, which I and this Treatise
both have to your self, will abundantly plead

a defence. For if the Church hath accept∣ed
services of this nature from several of her
sons in the Laity; then I hope, I that am
not only a Son of the Church, but the Son of
a Church-man too, shall escape censure; e∣specially,
when I own my self in this small
work no other then your Amanuensis, and do
but copy out those notions of Truth and Du∣ty,
wherewith you by your early institutions
season'd my Youth: So that in effect, the
Book I present you, is as much your child,
as the Writer of it, and this Explanation,
what it is, is  Filia vocis, (the veneration
I owe to a Father will justifie the Allusion;
I mean) the Echo, the rebound and report
at distance of your Instructions, and those
discourses you made a score of years ago, at
Hales-Owen. Sir, It was then your custom
constantly on Sunday-afternoons, with all
familiar plainness, to set forth the Grounds
of Religion, and Principles of Christianity;
an exercise (though perform'd in the Desk)
of as great necessity, and tending as much to
edification, as that other (I was going to
say) Idoliz'd way of Preaching. Yet the
sad truth is, that in this age of disorders,
Preaching hath not been so much abus'd, as
Catechizing (with other holy ordinances)
hath been disused. And indeed, to this neg∣lect

we may mainly impute most other mis∣carriages.
When the Ground-work sinks,
'tis no wonder if the Building totter, and run
to decay; and if these Foundations should be
shaken, it may iustly be fear'd that the
whole Fabrick of Church and State will goe
to ruine, and fall into confusion. An un∣grounded
Christian will be easily perswaded
to give himself up to any wild opinion or loose
practise, to turn Heretick or Rebell, and
prove a fit Instrument for the managery of
Satan's designs.
I must confess, that much hath been writt
already upon these Subjects; so that the
very Titles of those Books, which have been
intended Comments, and Expositions of Ca∣techetical
Heads, and Enarrations of the
Grounds of Religion, would take up more pa∣per
then this whole Discourse wasts: And
I know there are many Excellent Treatises of
this kind, even in our own Language; yet
I have not met with any one hitherto, that
hath comprehended all the Rudiments of
Christian Doctrine (for so I think I may
safely call these Heads of Catechisme) in
one Manual, or delivered the plain mean∣ing
of them in so familiar a Phrase & Me∣thod.
For whilest others ingage in contro∣versie,
and spin out all School-Divinity out

of these plain Truths, and fill their margin
with quotations out of the Fathers, and ac∣commodate
Humane Learning to Sacred
purposes; as if they meant to print only Ad
Clerum, laying out their vast abilities out
of the Peoples reach: I judg'd it more suita∣ble
to publick Vse, and to the scant mea∣sures
of my Skill, to give only a Gramma∣tical
account by an easie Paraphrase and exe∣getical
interpretation of every clause, word
by word, and then of the whole sentence to∣gether.
Nor have I been wanting, as oc∣casions
have invited, up and down to bring
in Practical considerations, nor fear'd some∣times
to enter the Lists against the Roma∣nists
and (their Proselytes) our Sectaries;
yet not so as to fetch in strength from Au∣thority
without, but make use of those wea∣pons
only, the present place afforded me.
I have been the larger in my Discant upon
the Lords Prayer; becasue indeed it is the
Ground of all Liturgy. In the Creed I did
not think it safe or fit to mention those old
Heresies so long since exploded, for fear least
a weak Confutation should teach them; (see∣ing
there have been too many in our late Se∣parations,
too industrious to revive them,
and bring them into Credit;) but contented
my self with a short, and (I hope) Orthodox

explication of the Mysteries of our Faith.
When I was upon the Decalogue, I could not
but make National reflections upon each
Commandement, yet so as to convince the
whole People, not to upbraid any one Par∣ty:
For though the Act of Oblivion in∣joyns
us to forget Injuries done to Men,
yet Religion will oblige us to remember our
Sins against God. The Sacraments I
have handled with that brevity, that I
have not there much insisted on the Rites,
wherewith our Church administers them;
but elsewhere in the Book have in the gene∣ral
offer'd somewhat to their defence. Where
I plead Admission of all to the holy Ta∣ble,
I would not be understood to speak for
those which are under Church-censures. On
every of these parts I have said little of the
much which might have been said, and
for ought that I know nothing that has
been said by others, having had a special care
all the way of the Eighth Commandement.
Sir, You are the onely Author that I have
consulted, and these sheets have not been
the travail so much of my Invention as of
my Memory; while I have been reco∣vering
those Notices, your Institution
lodg'd in my young head and heart.
Wherefore what I have fail'd in Elegance





of expression, or Solidity of matter, I
must first here beg your Pardon for, (see∣ing
that contrary to the method of the
Resurrection, what was sown in strength
is now ras'd in weakness:) And next crave
your Blessing upon the Book and Me,
that God would make us both service∣able
to the Publick; For I very well un∣derstand,
what hazard of censure I run, by
appearing thus in Print; and what Obli∣gations
I now lay upon my self to walk
carefully, and order my conversation a∣right;
since he that puts forth a Book
of Religion, and leads an irreligious
life, doth but libell himself, and scan∣dalize
his Book, Sir, As it was your
great care and love to send me in my
younger years to several places for my e∣ducation,
so 'twas my no lesse happinesse
that I was principled in Religion by your
self, and though Scholar to sundry Ma∣sters,
was your Catechumenus. I thought
it then the most fitting Gratitude to re∣turn
you what I receiv'd, and design
your own Instructions the Memorial of
my Dutie. That the God of all Conso∣lation
would crown your Old age with
Honour and Ioy, and after these many
years of Suffering and Persecution (where∣in

you have had so large a share) heap
upon you the blessings of Peace and a long
Life, that you may see and partake the
prosperity of Jerusalem, shall be the
dayly prayer of,
Dear Father,
St. Thomas-day,
1661.

