



May it please your Highness,
SPeculation is the life of a Schol∣lar, and action is the
life of a Prince.Arist. Pol. 6. 2. Aquin. eth 1. 2.
suarez et urid. ibid Rev. D. Pi∣ep. ded. cos∣mgr.
It sufficeth the one to meditate up on the great
things which former ages have done, while the other doth
great things, which future ages my
meditate upon: the one 
Mentes sapientiores su qui es∣cend. Pla.

 vid Rev. d Reyn Passion: e Arist. et ali∣i,
&c. rests when he hath 
Bacon de Augment. scient. des∣rtes medit. 7. Digby immortality soul
7. raised a scheme, a frame,  an 
De Idea in Deo vid. Grot. Christ. relig.
1. An∣not. ex An∣ &c.
Idea within himselfe propor∣tionable in all things to the 
He hath made all things in nuber and msure Syr. 
Synes beautifull in his ime, Ecl.
3.11. order, and method of beings without him; while the other
having understood this
vid Dic∣kens. Delph. Phaen. de Pan.
 Scalig. exercit. 6. c. 7.
m. Tertull. de Palleo. 2 Plat. de
2. all is urged by
his eager virtues to performe things as great as those he understood;
and actions as great as his thoughts.
There is 
Norunt Garamantes et Indj &c. I have
heard Turks, Jews, speak hono∣rably of you no tongue, nor lan∣guage, but
hath heard that you are as eminent for your action as for your birth; That you
are a Prince in both, in both your selfe is as well known as
your name.
I need not informe you (great Sir) that all great actions in any
way are guided by a 
Arist eth 6.7
 Mel.
. 2. Null qua na¦tura impedi∣te s con∣filio expedi∣untur: Liv. see Reyn:
n Hos. 14. v. 9. Ser. 7.
wisedom from above, first pure then peaceable, ac∣cording to the principles and
max∣imes of that way, together with the conclusions rationally, deducible from
those principles to their pe∣culiar ends by a discreet applicati∣on of proper
meanes; for it was  your selfe that mannaged the great affaires of
France and Spaine with a wisedome as 
Medi t∣lissi ibij,see Duke of Rho, In∣terest of States and
Kingdomes. distant from the sud∣den rasnesse of the one, as from the solemne
slownesse of the other; bare action the priviledge of lower be∣ings,
valour the glory of those more noble, or honour becoming your selfe sufficed
you not, wihour a wisedome guiding
all these above your selfe and yeares; Therefore when I entertained thoughts of
drawing a rude draught of these great actions, and counsels that I look upon as
the best patternes of Modern Policy, I mean these of this honourable
Person, who discovered most of a Politicians virtues, with∣out any of
its vices; that could be wise as a Serpent, and yet
innocent as a Dove; I immediately resolved to dedicate it to
your selfe; wisdom is justified of its children, the Dia∣mond only can
cut Diamond, the  wise onely understand the wise; when I
presume to make your Highnss the Ptron of this Modern
Policy, I intimate you ought to be the sub∣ject of another, which some 
Dig  soule
might attempt with a Pen as Hero∣ick as your
word; writing your life, with as
much Majesty as yo lived it
with.
 Or a Pour∣traicture of his sacred Majsty CHARLES the second, with his two
illustrious Brothers the Duke of Yorke and Gloucester. Sold by H M at the
Prin∣ces Armes in the lower end of Chan∣cery lane. When envy suppressed
the worth and malice blasted the innocence of our dread Soveraign with those
ca∣lumnies (that were never licenced but in the age when Men spoke what∣ever
they thought fit, there being no King in Israel;) I humbly de∣sire
your Mediation for a pardon to my inconsiderable selfe, who was then past all
fear of loss 
Amorem
sserit Plato
. Cael. Rhodig. 16. 15.
durst vin∣dicate injured truth and Majesty ad∣vancing them
above interest, preju∣dice, & malice, by a course I thought most
conscientious as a Christian, and most generous as a Man; my 
 highest designe was to establish his sacred Majesty in
the hearts of his people, which was all poor I could doe towards his
establishment in his Throne.
Now envy, malice, and ignorance dares abuse that renowned
Person whom the King hath desired
to ho∣nour, to whom we owe even your very selfe, I could not
ut doe his Majesty, the Nation,
and Himselfe right in justifying his honourable actions, which I doe
sufficiently when I repeate them; I must con∣esse I am sorry that former powers allowed me that
leasure I had to vindicate the best Majesty; but now his Majesty is come
again to his own House in peace; I am contented to be at leasure to doe
justice to the best Loyalty.
Diou. Hal∣. see Suet. in Tit. Vesp. Leighes Caesars: Mallel: M.S
S. Bib. Bodl.Vespasian one like your selfe, the darling of
Mankind, as he dismissed one sad from him; so he professed 
 that his Doores were alwayes open
for Schollars: But to his favourite Appollonius desiring accesse for
Dion and Euphrates, he said
 but to you my very breast is
open, a poor Schollar despaires not of a gracious admission to your royall
presence, while he is confident you will give his grace the Duke of
A∣male admission to your very heart: But alas! Its high
time to leave your Highnesse full of thoughts to ad∣vance the honour
and good, and to improve the virtue and valour of your dread Soveraigne and
gracious Brothers Dominions; and to retire with my best affections, devoutest
prayers, & my honest endeavours into the croud—of your
Admi∣rers, and Servants,

