



Worthy Sir,
IN compliance with your Desires, which, where there is Friendship, have the weight of Commands in them, (though there wanted not Those neither from Mr. High-Sheriff your Son,) I have at last ventured in∣to the world that Discourse, at which, in the de∣livery of it, your domestick Grief having in∣disposed you for the Publick, you could not be present. It comes forth with this Advantage, if this be one; that 'tis somewhat larger by the Accession of many things, which time would not give leave then to Inlarge upon. If there be any further benefit or satisfaction may redound to the Reader from it, as it now appears, (which

I dare not hope for) you have a particular Right to challenge the Acknowledgment: this Sermon having bin begotten under your roof, conceived and born within your walls, and so of Due be∣longing to you; the Old Law both Sacred and Ci∣vil having ordered, that Children born in the House should be reckoned into the Master's Possession; and it being the Vsual Course, which the Municipal Law it self prescribes, that poor Children and Wanderers be sent back to the place of their Birth to be provided for.
Sir, Having given you some small account of my Obedience, I cannot but think my self obli∣ged to acquit my self also in some measure up∣on the score of Gratitude. Thanks is the least Return can be made: there will be more; the Prayers of our poor drooping Parish-Church, which you by your late seasonable Kindness have put Life into. For I need not assure you (as one that are so well acquainted with the purport of Holy Writ, and studied in Gods promises, which are to None more Ample, then to the libe∣ral and cheerful Giver) that as Charity in ge∣neral is the surest way of putting our Wealth out of the reach of Fortune: so particularly Bounties to Pious and Publick Uses have in several regards

peculiar and large Retributions ascertained to them, both in our Temporal and Eternal concerns. If this Freedom of Mentioning, what you perhaps wish might have been Concealed, offend; I must mind you, that such Actions as these, where the very Example many times is as useful as the Benefacture, though they are not to be done to that End, yet our Saviour says they must be done in that Manner, that men may see our good works and glorifie God.
Sir, this sorry Inscription, whatever It is, begs your Acceptance, as a hearty, though a mean Testimony of those Respects, that are Due to you from Him, who is

Chelsey June 24. 1671.
