



Honourable, Worshipful, & Worthy Sirs,
WHat was then (though not affecti∣onately enough) presented to your attentive and judicious ears, is now most humbly offered to your discerning eyes; the good Spirit of the Lord hand it down into your Hearts, the best receptacle of Divine Truths. 'Twas my work to suit the
Text to that Occasion, and the Sermons to the Text; yours to suit your Attentions to the Ser∣mons, and His to do us all good, we doing so. If any shall demand why these were then Preached, or are now published? your Honour can satisfie the former, your Worship the latter. That I have mounted the Dedication so high, to so many, (when to every individual a just volume had been an incompetent Oblation) this presumption I must answer for.
As Artaxerxes that great Persian Monarch accepted a present of Water from a poor Labou∣rer (with a smiling countenance) not having need thereof; for may (perhaps) your Generosity these plain, unpolished Sermons from one under so ma∣ny Obligations to serve you. The censures of the ignorant I have no reason to regard, nor need I fear those of the Learned (who can do much bet∣ter with their Pens, yet do nothing) for de Stra∣minibus non curat invidia.—The carelesness of many who wofully and wilfully squander away Sacrament-days without due observation, hath awakened my Pen to remind them of the precious∣ness and usfulness of this Ordinance, and of their duties to their never-dying Souls. Who sees not some so sick that they complain they cannot live, and yet so sinful that they dare not die? before another day any of us (the most young or strong) may be in another world; though we shall live out, yet surely we cannot out-live the determin'd time. These serious thoughts of Death cannot
bring us sooner to our graves, but they should bring us nearer to our duties, to a more constant and con∣scientious attendance on this holy Ordinance a∣mongst the rest, which is the grand design of these ensuing Pages.
In short, the Truths in them contain'd are Gods, as such embrace them; the weaknesses mine, how many soever. I have borrowed help from others to erect this feeble Fabrick, but most from the Spirit of the Lord, to whose gracious conduct in your passage to Glory, I shall never cease to com∣mend you, beseeching that my service be not ac∣counted my crime.
The good Lord make you shining Lights in that publick Orb in which God and the King have fixt you, and more illustrious Patterns of all Graces and Vertues (wherein you now excell) to those you converse with. This shall be the breathing of his Soul, who is, Sirs,

Aug. 26. 1673.
