




May it please your Highness,
SPeculation is the life of a Schol∣lar,Arist. Pol. 6. 2. Aquin. eh 1.2. surez et Burid. ibid Rev. D. Pri∣p. ded. cos∣mogr. and action is the life of a Prince.
It sufficeth the one to meditate up∣on the great things which former ages have done, while the other doth great things, which future ages may meditate upon: the one Mentes apientiores sun qi es∣cendo. Plat.  vid Revd Reyn Passions: ex Arist. et li∣i, &c. rests when he hath Bacon de Augment. scit. des∣crtes medit. . Dgby immortality soul 7. raised a scheme, a frame,

an De Idea in D vid. Got Christ. relig. 1. An∣n. ex An∣g &c. Idea within himselfe propor∣tionable in all things to the He hath made all things in nber and msue Syr.  yne beautifull in his ime, Ec. 3.11 order, and method of beings without him; while the other having understood this vid Dc∣kens. Delph. Phen. d Pan.  Salig. exerci. . c. 7. 8 Im. Terull. de Palleo. 2 Pla d 21. all is urged by his eager virtues to performe things as great as those he understood; and actions as great as his thoughts.
There is Norunt Gramantes et Indj &c. I have heard Turks, Jews, speak hono∣rably of you no tongue, nor lan∣guage, but hath heard that you are as eminent for your action as for your birth; That you are a Prince in both, in both your selfe i as well known as your name.
I need not informe ou (great Sir) that all great actions in any way are guided by a Arist eth 6. 7  Me. . 2. Nulla qu na¦tura impedi∣t sun con∣fili expedi∣nu: Liv. see Reyn: on Hos. 14. v. 9. Ser. 7. wisedom from above, first pure then peaceable, ac∣cording to the principles and max∣imes of that way, together with the conclusions, rationally, deducible from those principles to their pe∣culiar ends by a discreet applicati∣on of proper meanes; for it was

your selfe that mannaged the great affaires of France and Spaine with a wisedome as Me li tu∣lisius ihij, te Duke of Rhoan, In∣terest of Staes and Kingdomes. distant from the sud∣den rashnesse of the one, as from the solemne slownesse of the other; bare action the priviledge of lower be∣ings, valour the glory of those more noble, or honour becoming your selfe sufficed you not, withou a wisedome guiding all these above your selfe and yeares; Therefore when I entertained thoughts of drawing a rude draught of thee great actions, and counsels that I look upon as the best patterne of Modern Policy, I mean these of this honourable Person, who discovered most of a Poliicians virtues, with∣out any of its vices; that could be wise as a Serpent, and yet innocent as a Dove; I immediately resolved to dedicate it to your selfe; wisdom is justified of its children, the Dia∣mond only can cut Diamond, the

wise onely understand the wise; when I presume to make your Highness the Patron of this Modern Policy, I intimate you ought to be the sub∣ject of another, which some Dizn ac virum musae vetat morj: Horat. soule might attempt with a Pen as Hero∣ick as your sword; writing your life with as much Majesty as you lived it with.
 Or a Pur∣traict re of his sard Masty CHARLES the seond, with his two illustrious Brothers the Duke of Yorke and Gloucster. Sold by H M at the Pin∣ces Armes in the lowr end o Chan∣cery lane. When envy suppressed the worth and malice blasted the innocence of our dread Soveraign with those ca∣lumnies (that were never licenced but in the age when Men spoke what∣ever they thought fi, there being no King in Israel;) I humbly de∣sire your Mediaion for a pardon to my inconsiderable selfe, who was then past all fear of loss Amorem asseruit Plat . Cael. Rhodg. 16. 15. durst vin∣dicate injured truth and Majesty ad∣vancing them above interest, preju∣dice, & malice, by a course I thought most conscientious as a Christian, and most generous as a Man; my

highest designe was to establish his sacred Majesty in the hearts of his people, which was all poor I could doe towards his establishment in his Throne.
Now envy, malice, and ignorance dares abuse hat renowned Person, whom the King hath desired to ho∣nour, to whom we owe even your very selfe, I could not but doe his Majesty, the Nation, and Himselfe right in justifying his honourable actions, which I doe sufficiently when I repeate them; I must con∣esse I am sorry that former powers allowed me that leasure I had to vindicate the best Majesty; but now his Majesty is come again to his own House in peace; I am contented to be at leasure to doe justice to the best Loyalty.
Diou. Hal. a see Sue. in Tit. Vesp. Leighes Caears: Mallel: M. S S. Bb. Bodl. Vespasian one like your selfe, the darling of Mankind, as he dismissed none sad from him; so he professed

 that his Doores were alwayes open for Schollars: But to his favourite Appollonius desiring accesse for Dion and Euphrates, he said  but to you my very breast is open, a poor Schollar despaites not of a gracious admission to your royall presence, while he is confident you will give his grace the Duke of Au∣marle admission to your very heart: But alas! Its high time to leave your Highnesse full of thoughts to ad∣vance the honour and good, and to improve the virtue and valour of your dread Soveraigne and gracious Brothers Dominions; and to retire with my best affections, devoutest prayers, & my honest endeavours into the croud — of your Admi∣rers, and Servants,


