



Honoured Sir,
I Send you this imperfect Draught of your Excellent Essay con∣cerning Humane Understanding, which I must confess, falls as much short of the Perfection, as it does of the Length of the Origi∣nal. Nevertheless, as I lately in∣timated to you (and you were plea∣sed to think, that what I propos'd in reference to this Design, would not be wholly lost Labour) I am not without hopes, that it may in this contracted Form, prove in

some measure serviceable to that Noble End, which you have so successfully aimed at in it, viz. The Advancement of Real and Useful Knowledge. The Induce∣ment which moved me to think of abridging it, was a Consideration purely extrinsical to the work it self; and in Effect no other than this; That it would be better sui∣ted, to the Ease and Convenience of some sort of Readers, when re∣duced into this narrow Compass. In order to this, I thought the First Book, which is employ'd in refuting the common Opinion of Innate Notions and Ideas, might be best spared in this Abridgment; especi∣ally, since the Reader may be convinced by what he shall find here, that such a supposition is at least needless, in regard he may

attain to all the Knowledge he has, or finds himself capable of, with∣out the help of any such Innate Ideas. Besides this, I have re∣trench'd most of the larger Explica∣tions; and some useful Hints, and instructive Theories I have wholly omitted, not because they are less considerable in themselves; but because they seemed not so necessa∣ry to be insisted on in this Abridg∣ment, considered as a previous Instrument, and preparatory Help, to Guide and Conduct the Mind in its Search after Truth and Know∣ledge. I did particularly pass by that accurate Discourse, concerning the Freedom and Determination of the Will contained in Cap. 21. l. 2. because I found it too long to be inserted here at large, and too

weighty and momentous to be but slightly and imperfectly represented. This I hope will prove no prejudice to the Essay it self; since none I presume will think it reasonable to form a Judgment of the whole Work, from this Abridgment of it: And I perswade my self, that few Readers will be content with this Epitome, who can conveniently furnish themselves with the Essay at large. However, I am apt to think, that this alone will serve to make the way to Knowledge some∣what more plain and easie; and af∣ford such Helps for the improve∣ment of Reason, as are perhaps in vain sought after in those Books, which profess to Teach the Art of Reasoning. But nevertheless, whe∣ther you shall think fit to let it

come abroad, under the disadvan∣tages that attend it in this Form, I must leave you to judge. I shall only add, that I think my own pains abundantly recom∣penc'd by the Agreeable, as well as Instructive Entertainment, which this nearer View, and closer In∣spection into your Essay, afforded me: And I am not a little plea∣sed, that it has given me this op∣portunity of expressing the just Value and Esteem I have for it, as well as the Honour and Respect I have for its Author. I am
Honoured SIR,

Oxon, Ap. 17. 1695.
