



My Lords,
WHile I am paying my Obedience to your
Lordships Commands for the Printing of
this Sermon, I humbly crave leave to say something
for the clearing of my self from a Prejudice, which,
if true, would render me unfit to be so far owned by
your Lordships, as to be admitted to Preach before
You; and having done it, to be commanded to Print
my Sermon. For I cannot but take notice, that both
before and since I received that Honour from you, I
have been tax'd as being not Protestant enough, on
account of a Book, called, Considerations touch∣ing
the true way to suppress Popery in this King∣dom.
How far I was concerned in that Treatise, the
Preface to it sufficiently declares.

The Book it self was Publish'd in Michaelmas
TermThat is, in the Book∣sellers style, 1677. 1676. just two years before the Popish
Plot was discovered.
The design of it was proposed to me as the likeliest
Remedy at that time against the same Disease under
which we are now labouring for Life, or Death: but
it was before things were come to such a dangerous
Crisis.
I saw it was much the same Design that many of
the best and most eminent Protestants, particularly Q.
Elizabeth and K. James, had at several times
countenanced, and put in practice with very good suc∣cess:
they were, next to the uniting of Protestants,
for the dividing of Papists, whose chief advantage hi∣therto
has been their Union, such as it is, and our
needless Divisions. But at that time I thought it more
proper and seasonable than ever, upon the best Iudgment
that I could make of their and our Circumstances. And
I have some reason to think I was not mistaken in this.
For now I see that at the very time when this was
brought to me, and while I was forming my thoughts
upon it, the Papists themselves were in a great appre∣hension
of this very thing, as being of all other ways
the most likely to blast their hopes, and to preserve us
from that Ruine which they were then bringing upon us.
Thus ColemanAug. 30. 1675. at that time wrote to the Popes In∣ternuncio,

p. 17. o the Collecti∣on of Letter set out by order of the House of Commons.There is but One thing (saith he) to
be feared, (whereof I have a great apprehensi∣on,)
that can hinder the success of our Designs;
which is, a Division among the Catholicks
themselves. How dividing them? It follows, by Pro∣positions
to the Parliament to accord their con∣junction
to those that require it,—on Conditi∣ons
prejudicial to the Authority of the Pope;—and
so to persecute the rest of them with more
appearance of Justice, and ruine the one half
of them more easily than the whole Body at
once. And to shew that Coleman was not singular
herein, Cardinal HowardMarch 1676. Ibid p. 82. delivers this as their
Iudgment at Rome, where, if any where, they are
Infallible; Division of Catholicks will be the ea∣siest
way for Protestants to destroy them.
This being said for the Design from so good Au∣thority,
I have this farther to say for my self, that on∣ly
the last part of that Book was my own, in which I
did justifie the Reformation of this Church; and what
I wrote in that part, I am sure no Papist can dis∣prove,
and I think no Protestant has cause to com∣plain
of it.
I thank God I have in this whole matter the wit∣ness
of a goad Conscience; and I hope likewise your
Lordships good opinion of my honest zeal to main∣tain

the Protestant Religion against Popery. For a
farther Testimony whereof, and in obedience to your
Lordships Commands, I humbly present this following
Discourse.
My Lords,

