



My LORD,
THis Treatise, which is grown up under your Lordship's Eye, and has ventured into the World by your Order, does now, by a natural kind of Right, come to your Lordship for that Protection, which you several years since promised it. 'Tis not that I think any Name, how great soever, set at the begin∣ning of a Book, will be able to cover the Faults are to be found it. Things in print must stand and fall by their own Worth, or the Reader's Fancy. But there being nothing more to be de∣sired for Truth, than a fair unprejudiced Hea∣ring, no body is more likely to procure me that, than your Lordship, who are allowed to have got so intimate an Acquaintance with her, in her more retired recesses. Your Lordship is known to have so far advanced your Specula∣tions in the most abstract and general Knowledge of Things, beyond the ordinary reach or com∣mon

Methods, that your Allowance and Ap∣probation of the Design of this Treatise, will at least preserve it from being condemned with∣out reading; and will prevail to have those Parts a little weighed, which might otherwise, perhaps, be thought to deserve no Considera∣tion, for being somewhat out of the common road. The Imputation of Novelty, is a terrible charge amongst those who judge of Men's Heads, as they do of their Perukes, by the Fashion; and can allow none to be right, but the recei∣ved Doctrines. Truth scarce ever yet carried it by Vote any where, at its first appearance: New Opinions are always suspected, and usually opposed, without any other Reason, but because they are not already common. But Truth, like Gold, is not the less so, for being newly brought out of the Mine. 'Tis Trial and Examination must give it price, and not any antick Fashion: And though it be not yet current by the pub∣lick stamp; yet it may, for all that, be as old as Nature, and is certainly not the less genuine. Your Lordship can give great and convincing Instances of this, whenever you please to oblige the Publick with some of those large and com∣prehensive Discoveries, you have made, of Truths hitherto unknown, unless to some few, to whom your Lordship has been pleased not wholly to conceal them. This alone were a sufficient Reason, were there no other, why I should Dedicate this piece to your Lordship; and its having some little Correspondence with soms parts of that nobler and vast System of the Sciences, your Lordship has made so new, exact,

and instructive a Draught of, I think it Glory enough, if your Lordship permit me to boast, that here and there I have fallen into some Thoughts not wholly different from yours. If your Lordship think fit, that by your encou∣ragement this should appear in the World, I hope it may be a Reason, some time or other, to lead your Lordship farther; and you will al∣low me to say, That you here give the World an earnest of something, that, if they can bear with this, will be truly worth their expectation. This, my Lord, shews what a Present I here make to your Lordship; just such as the poor Man does to his rich and great Neighbour, by whom the Basket of Flowers, or Fruit, is not ill taken, though he has more plenty of his own growth, and in much greater perfection. Worthless Things receive a Value, when they are made the Offerings of Respect, Esteem, and Gratitude: These you have given me so mighty and pecu∣liar Reasons to have in the highest degree for your Lordship, that if they can add a price to what they go along with, proportionable to their own Greatness, I can with Confidence brag, I here make your Lordship the richest Present you ever received. This I am sure, I am under the greatest Obligation to seek all occasions to ac∣knowledge a long Train of Favours I have re∣ceived from your Lordship; Favours, though great and important in themselves, yet made much more so by the Forwardness, Concern, and Kindness, and other obliging Circumstances, that never failed to accompany them. To all this you are pleased to add that which gives

yet more weight and relish to all the rest: You vouchsafe to continue me in some degrees of your Esteem, and allow me a place in your good Thoughts, I had almost said Friendship. This, my Lord, your Words and Actions so constantly shew on all occasions, even to others when I am absent, that it is not Vanity in me to mention, what every body knows: But it would be want of Manners not to acknowledge what so many are Witnesses of, and every day tell me, I am indebted to your Lordship for. I wish they could as easily assist my Gratitude, as they convince me of the great and growing En∣gagements it has to your Lordship. This I am sure, I should write of the Vnderstanding without having any, if I were not  sensible of them, and did not lay hold on this Opportu∣nity to testifie to the World, how much I am obliged to be, and how much I am,
My Lord,

