





MY LORD,
ON a perusal of your late Treatise, Entituled, The Prote∣stant Peace Maker, I find your Lordship so very much dispos'd to pursue Charity, Peace and Ʋnion, the only neces∣sary mean left us for the preservation of the Reformed Protestant Reli∣gion, that though I am a perfect stranger to you, I cannot choose but make, and hope that you will Candidly receive this present Dedication.
There is now (as your Lordship expresses it p. 29.) an argument for Ʋnity, which must be heard, and is uncontroulable; We must Unite or be destroyed. At all times Christian duty obliges us there∣to: now necessity or self-preservation too, or more parties may bal∣lance one, when any single other cannot. [Thus 'tis evident we must Ʋnite.] The strength of the Protestant Cause, both here, at home, and throughout Christendom lies in the Ʋnion of Protestants, and the glory, purity and power of Christianity in this world, stand or falls with Protestantism. But the only question is upon what Termes must the Church of England come over to the Dissenters, or the Dissenters go over to the Church.
The right stating the true Termes of Ʋnion is a work of extraordi∣nary difficulty, a work that requires the heads and hearts of the great∣est, the most judicious and Holy men on earth to contribute all they can towards it. Government in the Church must be secur'd, tender Con∣sciences reliev'd; Where there is no government, all things will run in∣to confusion, where there is no relief for tender Consciences, there can be no union. The government of a National Church must be National, and such as is most exactly suited to the civil constitution of the Nati∣ou, The former must not interferr with the later. But of this, though your Lordship speakes nothing, yet may your Lordship see something (God permitting it) in good time that some Dissenters have to offer towards the healing our breaches, and that also in a way consistent with an establishment of such a National Church government, as agrees with the antient constitution of this Kingdom: That which your Lord∣ship's wisdom hath insisted on, is a point of moment and importance, namely, the Liturgy and Ceremonies, concerning which you propose mutual concessions and approaches, as the only probable uniting ex∣pedient. Now if complyance be likelyest to do the business, (you say, let us relax a little on both hands in the fear of God, and fall

upon it; Let us Candidly consult what good Conscience, what pru∣dence will bear towards an accommodation. (To this you add Page 118. 119.) I do not conceive the alteration of an expression, or per∣haps here and there of an whole Prayer or two, by Law, or the dis∣pensing (still by Law) with some ceremony in Law, for the sake of some unsatisfied, but otherwise regular Christians (who are not suppos'd of the Cathedral Body) I say, I do not conceive such con∣cession or relaxation as this, would break the harmony and beauty of our worship, or disturb the Ʋnion or Peace of our Church. I will therefore freely publish my thoughts to be, that whither we Consider the Nature of the thing it self, or with regard to the Apostle's Rule. Rom. 15. 1, 2. Not to please our selves, but every one of us to please his Neighbour for his good to Edification. In either re∣gard I say, there are some Collects, and perhaps Rubricks too, which with all Duty and Submission I humbly conceive may be alter'd for the better. And farther that in some Seasons, and in some private places.—If the Obligation to a Ceremony or two were taken off, the benefit which would hence redound to the Church would be very Considerable.—And I seem to my self herein to follow the sense and guidance of our Church, for even at present the Injun∣ction of the Ceremonies does not appear to me to extend it self to all places and seasons. There are also divers other points, which when once the design of a fair Accommodation shall be on foot, will be fit to be mentioned, and indeed will both of Course offer themselves, and be I judge, as easily granted; such as the Liberty of exchanging Apo∣criphal Lessons for Canonical ones, any Amendment of such De∣fects, as can be prov'd, in the Calendar, The Use of the most Correct Translation of the Psalms. A better Metrical Version al∣so, and perhaps some like matters, which we may account small, some Diffenters do not.




My Lord,
May the expedient you propose be attended unto, the desired Ʋnion would soon be obtained, for thereby all those Arguments mentioned in the ensuing Treatise, which press hard on the Consciences of some Dissenters, concerning the present Terms of Communion, would be answered, their Consciences relieved, and they be of the same exter∣nal Communion with the Church of England. I do therefore humbly presume to beseech your Lordship to do your utmost for the furthering this peaceable, and uniting Design, for certainly you have hit on

what, if closely followed, will reconcile us, and as your Lordship will express it, this is the only probable expedient, for 'tis an undoubted Truth, That there are among the Dissenters a considerable Number, who are under the most powerful, and plain Convictions of Conscience about the Ʋnlawfulness of the present Liturgy as Ordered by the Canon, and Rubrick to be used, and of the Ceremonies that they cannot but by sinning against God to the wounding of their own Con∣sciences, conform.
That the World may be assured of this much, and see how necessary some Relaxations are in Order unto Ʋnion. I have shewn what are the Sentiments of some of the most Judicious and more moderate Dis∣senters, why 'tis yet they conform not to the Terms of Lay-Commu∣nion impos'd by the Church, and why 'tis they erect seperate Congre∣gations. Some are so fully Convinced of the unlawfulness of the pre∣sent Liturgy, and Ceremonies, that they refuse to Conform, because they think their Conformity to be sinful, but other do not so much insist on the sinfulness, as on the Inexpediency of their Conformity. They cannot Conform without Scandal. By Scandal they mean (as your Lordship doth) with the Scripture generally) The drawing, or encouraging others to do what they are not in Conscience con∣vinc'd they may do.




My Lord,
There is a real Disposition, yea, longing Desires among the Non-Conformists towards a Protestant Ʋnion, and it rejoyceth their very Souls to find some such as your Lordship among the dignified Ciergie, and do bless God for you. There are some such also in England, who, tho' they Conform, do it not blindfold, nor upon Corrupt In∣ducements. We believe there are many of you, who can in the fear of God, profess you have again, and again considered the Eccle∣siastical Laws, and according to your Duty, as you believe, you have been, and are obedient, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake, and that you are Sound Protestants, and as great an Eye-Sore to the Papist, as any among the Dissenters. However we are as Confident, That there are others, who are pretendedly at least great zealots for Conformity, and yet Aimrather at an Union between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome, who consequently hate a Protestant Dissenter much more than they do a Papist, not being asham'd to profess They would rather be Papists, than Presbyteri∣ans.

There are many such, who delight not only to misrepresent the Dis∣senter, as your Lordship will perceive by the Reverend Mr. Baxter's reply to your Postscript, but moreover, to Unchurch all the Foreign Reformed Churches, who have not an Episcopal Ordination, Thus Mr. Conold in his Notion of Schism Dedicated to Anthony Lord Bishop of Norwich, p. 14. asserts, That he who is out of this Line of Apostolick Succession, and exercises any Ministerial Office without the Commission of Episcopal Ordination is but a Lay-Imposter, and a Schismatick from the Catholick Church, and (p. 43.) speaking of Foreign Protestant Churches, adds, But if any of them have a Ministry which have no other Orders than their own Ʋsurpation, or popular Election, I know not how to Acquit them from being Shismaticks from the Catholick Church. But yet though he is so severe in Censuring the Foreign Protestant Churches as Schis∣maticks from the Catholick Church, he is as Merciful to Foreign Papists, for in his Epistle to the Reader. As for those of your Re∣ligion [vid. the Popish] who live under the Laws of the Romish Dominions, I have a great Charity for them (says he) for they can plead Submission to their own Superiors, and I am apt to believe, that plea may be very considerable, when they come to appear before the Prince of Peace and the God of Order.
There having been some such in the Church of England ever since the first Reformation, they have impeded all Essayes for a Protestant Ʋnion, and have done their utmost rather to Accommodate the Dif∣ferences between Ʋs and Rome, whereby Instead of Relaxations and Abatements towards Dissenters. The Church of England has made the Terms of Communion the more difficult and uneasie unto us, to the hightning and increasing the Divisions, and at this very day will be at the same work, wherein, unless timely prevented, they may succeed. We beseech your Lordship therefore to animate your Brethren, who are hearty to the Protestant Interest to Consider with just regards the tender Consciences of Dissenting Protestants, and to appear in making a brisk Opposition to those, who under pretence of making the Church of England the more Grand, and August designs her Ruine by bringing her into her Antient Slavery to the Church of Rome.
'Tis to be wished a Bill Comprehensive of all Sound Protestants might pass in Order to the uniting us, But if that cannot be, a Bill lesser Comprehensivē with an Indulgence will very much contribute to

the Churches peace, and the strengthning the Protestant Interest. To which end, That the Advice your Lordship gives p. 62. to the end, may be regarded by all, is the Prayer of him who highly values your Lordships great Learning, your Christian Temper, and Moderation, and who is

April. 1. 1682.


