



SIR;
THese Thoughts concerning Edu∣cation, which now come abroad into the World, do of right belong to You, being written several Years since for your sake, and are no other than what you have already by you in my Letters. I have so little varied any thing, but only the Order of what was sent you at different Times, and on several Occasions, that the Reader will easily find, in the Fami∣liarity and Fashion of the Style, that they were rather the private Conversation of two Friends, than a Discourse designed for publick view.
The Importunity of Friends is the com∣mon Apology for Publications Men are afraid to own themselves forward to. But you know I can truly say, That if some who having heard of these Papers of mine had not pressed to see them, and afterwards to have them printed, they had lain dor∣mant

still in that privacy they were de∣signed for. But those whose Judgment I deferr much to, telling me, That they were persuaded, that this rough Draught of mine might be of some use, if made more publick, touch'd upon what will always he very prevalent with me: For I think it every Man's indispensible Duty to do all the Service he can to his Country: And I see not what difference he puts between himself and his Cattel, who lives with∣out that Thought. This Subject is of so great Concernment, and a right way of E∣ducation is of so general Advantage, that did I find my Abilities answer my Wishes, I should not have needed Exhortations or Importunities from others. However, the Meanness of these Papers, and my just Distrust of them, shall not keep me, by the shame of doing so little, from con∣tributing my Mite, when there is no more required of me, than my throwing it into the publick Receptacle. And if there be any more of their Size and Notions, who liked them so well, that they thought them worth printing, I may flatter my self they will not be lost Labour to every body.

I my self have been consulted of late by so many, who profess themselves at a loss how to breed their Children, and the early corruption of Youth, is now become so general a Complaint, that he cannot be thought wholly impertinent, who brings the Consideration of this Matter on the stage, and offers something, if it be but to excite others, or afford matter of cor∣rection. For Errours in Education should be less indulged than any: These, like Faults in the first Concoction, that are never mended in the second or third, carry their afterwards incorrigible Taint with them, through all the parts and sta∣tions of Life.
I am so far from being conceited of any thing I have here offered, that I should not be sorry, even for your sake, if some one abler and fitter for such a Task, would in a just Treatise of Education, suited to our English Gentry, rectifie the Mi∣stakes I have made in this; it being much more desirable to me, that young Gentle∣men should be put into (that which every one ought to be sollicitous about) the best way of being formed and instructed, than that my Opinion should be received con∣cerning it. You will however, in the

mean time bear me Witness that the Method here propos'd has had no ordi∣nary Effects upon a Gentleman's Son, it was not designed for. I will not say the good Temper of the Child did not very much contribute to it, but this I think you and the Parents are satisfied of, that a contrary usage according to the ordi∣nary disciplining of Children, would not have mended that Temper, nor have brought him to be in love with his Book, to take a pleasure in Learning, and to de∣sire as he does to be taught more than those about him think fit always to teach him.
But my Business is not to recommend this Treatise to you, whose Opinion of it I know already; nor it to the World, ei∣ther by your Opinion or Patronnge. The well Educating of their Children is so much the Duty and Concern of Parents, and the Welfare and Prosperity of the Nation so much depends on it, that I would have every one lay it seriously to Heart, and after having well examined and distinguished what Fancy, Custom or Reason advises in the Case, help to pro∣mote that way in the several degrees of Men, which is the easiest, shortest and

likeliest to produce vertuous, useful and able Men in their distinct Callings: Though that most to be taken Care of, is the Gentleman's Calling, for if those of that Rank are by their Education once set right, they will quickly bring all the rest into Order.
I know not whether I have done more than shewn my good Wishes towards it, in this short Disourse; such as it is the World now has it, and if there be any thing in it worth their acceptance, they owe their thanks to you for it. My Affection to you gave the first rise to it, and I am pleased that I can leave to Posterity this Mark of the Friend∣ship has been between us. For I know no greater Pleasure in this Life, nor a better remembrance to be left behind one than a long continued Friendship, with an honest, usefull and worthy Man, and lover of his Country. I am,
Sir,

