



TIs my work as a man, more as a Christian, most of all as a Mi∣nister of the Gospell to search out the se∣crets of the Gospell, in their no∣tion and operation. Certaine persons were appointed to stand upon Mount Gerizzim and blesse, and yet nothing they did this way is mentioned: and certaine o∣thers appointed to stand upon mount Ebal and curse, and what they did this way set down par∣ticularly
and largely  D  12, 13, 14. Is God more apt to curse then blesse? Why Solomon should make all the instruments of the Temple of Gold, and mention them parti∣cularly to the very hinge, and never mention the Arke; doth this abide Wood, when all the rest Gold? or is Wood as splen∣did, and as precious as Gold? The Scripture is full of these Secrets, as to the notion of truth: but, O how full of secrets is truth in its operation in our hearts! In this latter I am most a Student, and yet least a Proficient; though I have but little skill in the notion, yet farre lesse in the mysterious operation of the Gospell. What experiences Christ hath imparted, in much love, I here present unto you: they may be much added unto, by heavenly influences pro∣per
and peculiar to every Chri∣stian Reader, and by his owne tra∣vels in these waies of wisdome. We are called little ones: and in∣deed so we are whilst here, little in all things but ignorance and impotence. Yet we little ones have great ones waiting upon us, and these have more priviledge then we whom they wait upon, which is another secret, for they alwaies behold the face of our father:Matth. 18 10. which if we could doe too, we should in his light see light, un∣derstand all mysteries and all knowledge, all truth in notion and operation: which should make us wait for the appearing of Christ, and long till this change come, that Lords have as much as their servants which attend upon them. Blood carries the life and the exquisite spirit and sence of
nature with it, and yet hath not sence nor feeling it selfe: so truly is it with us Ministers, we are the Salt of the earth, the blood and spirit of the World, such as carry exquisite spirit and sense through the mysticall body, and yet feele just nothing (upon the matter) our selves. which makes us so short of what we should be, in the re∣velation of the mysteries of the Gospell; I speak in this, princi∣pally of one, who hath his births in divine things, to much out of due time and due measure, yet hath to blesse God, that I can condemne my selfe. The more Heavenly in our lives, the more the best knowledge falls in of it selfe with us. Living creatures which lie hid in the earth long, for a great part of the yeere to∣gether, have (we say) no blood,
or very little, a drop or two about the heart. If our souls lie hid in the earth much (as these times tempt this way) you will have little good blood or spirit in you; a drop about your heart to keepe you from Hell hereafter, and that will be all; not enough to keepe you from many Hels here: much lesse will you have so much blood and brave spirit, as to search and finde the deep things of God belong∣ing to your peace, crowne, and glory. The wind at one point of the Heavens, and at one season of the yeere, is called a Husband to all things which spring upon the face of the earth, 'tath in it then such a spirit of generation and nutrition: Favoni à favendo, bi vini vo∣cat. this wind makes all things in this season so smile upon us: and this wind blows all the yeer long, and is still with us,
whilst we have our conversation in Heaven. Oh how sweetly, how generatingly doth that wind wch blows where it listeth blow upon us who are in all our waies tra∣velling homeward! Severall things you will finde, Christians, in this book; some, about Christs resur∣rection: the blooming of this Tree is judged by some, to have been in the Spring; if at the fall, yet then doe some Trees bloome againe. I have seen ripe fruit and blossomes together, so is alwaies on Jesus Christ that tree of life, ripe fruit for any to feed on, at any season, and yet vigor still Budding and blossoming againe for more. This work speaks that miracle repeated, a dry rod bloo∣ming and bearing Almonds: one blossoming at the fall; one after many plunges raised, to give wit∣nesse,
and set seale to Christs re∣surrection. You whom I know and much love, well understand my often infirmities, and so at what after season I blossome and beare; and therefore will (I hope) for rarity sake, keep these blos∣soms, and small fruits, to admire Christ the orderer of all times and seasons, who can make Spring when he will, and in what he will.

