



BLeeding hearts, you are honour'd to be Baptized, with Christs Baptisme, to pledge your deare Saviour, in his owne Cup. Count not, call not honour misery. The Wine in your Cup, is red indeed, but with∣out dregs to you; Christs drinking first hath sweetned it well to Saints. Wrath makes sufferings, misery: let the World Houle in their wounds but doe not you complaine: let them curse as bearing Caines marke, but doe you blesse God and glory, as bearing the markes of the Lord Jesus. Love in the bot∣tom of a bloudy Cup, and the deeper a man drinkes, the sweeter. Christ powers out love upon the Soule, when the body powers out bloud upon the truth. A Spirit of glo∣ry,

is a bleeding Christians glory. There is inward advancement, when outward debasement. The soule is in Heaven, when the body is in Hell for Christ. Was that a Dungeon or a Heaven, in which they sang so sweetly at midnight? Gods dealings are righteous, when Mans dealings are wick∣ed: a man might beare suffering upon this ground, that hee hath sinned; but how sweetly may they be borne, when sugar'd with love, and all sinne forgiven? Yee prisoners of hope: what is your hope? What say you of Englands night? Will it ever have day? Would my Soule could enter into your se¦crets: Would I could participate with you, in some of your Prison-enlargements. If you finde a Heaven in Hell, what will your Hea∣ven be? Now in the Ile of Patmos,A patri∣moniis jam ejecti. What say's GOD to your soules concerning these bleeding Jlands? Many Christians for whom you have bled, are now a flying from you, to save their Bloud; write after them yee bleed∣ing hearts; preach your Prison-experiments, the faith and hope of your Bonds, and con∣clude like Paul, Remember our Bonds, and Wounds for Christ and you; Surely if there be any Bowels, this will bring them backe to die with truth and you. I believe the Resur∣rection

of thy dead, O bleeding England. Your Graves shall open, yee Prisoners of hope, and your buried glory and honor shall return to you. Truth shall out-live tyranny. Righte∣ousnesse shall wash her Feete, in the Bloud of the wicked. Pride shall be dethroned; and shame shal be her pavilion. Your inte∣grity, yee Parliament-worthies, Christ will vindicate; your great paines and labour of love, Christ will returne to you and yours. Steele good resolution, and Christ will car∣ry you through all opposition. You are great sufferers, I would this little Booke might give some refreshment to you, together with the rest of Gods suffering ones. Bleeding Ire∣land, God also is with thee, and will be. Thy Land is full of murderers, but not too many for God to overcome. God is as just, as Man is cruell: cruelty will cut its owne Throat, when thou canst doe nothing to evade it. Venomous Creatures die in thy land, by a pro∣vidence from Heaven, which reason can∣not reach. God and the whole Creation,. fight against barbarous bloud-shed. Thy nak∣ed Women and Children, which mourned, starv'd and died in winters past, will fight against the monsters which stript them, in ummers to come, when thou want'st men,

money, and meanes to doe it. The Vipers which have gnawed out thy guts are got in∣to our Bowels too, that we might afford thee no reliefe;Moriendo Christiao, vivit Chri∣stus. but God will relieve, both thee and us. 'Twas a cursed crue which brought Gall and Vinegar, when Christ cryed Eloi, Eloi. England had helpt thee Ireland, had t not beene for this cursed Generation; but the bloud of both Kingdomes will be upon them. Christ was not overcome, when killed. Many may die but Christs cause in these poore envid ilands, will live. Mannage your blou∣dy businesse bravely, yee Souldiers of Christ in England and Ireland, the Lord of Hosts s with you. Your sufferings are many, your pay will bee great. Two Heavens are before you one for you and posterity here, another peculiarly adorned for sufferers unto bloud,Cant an pnn slagel∣lum. above. flinch from Christ and his cause, and lose both. Vale.

