



Dearly Beloved Brother,
THough I have ever been desirous to avoid all Occasions of publick appearance, yet when your affaires required, I did immedi∣ately and chearfully undertake this Service; choosing rather to expose my abilities for performance to censure, then to give the least suspicion of any unwillingness to serve you. Nor was it onely my great affection to you, and your great kindness to me, that did move me hereto (though either of these con∣siderations, had been prevalent with me,) but that great respect and love, which I have for many years observed you to bear unto the Orthodox and Loyal Clergy. And be∣ing encouraged by the Approbation this Sermon had from ma∣ny judicious and worthy persons of that Honorable and great Assembly to which it was preached, to make it yet more pub∣lick; the same reasons which moved me to undertake the composing and preaching of it, do also direct and determine me in the Dedication of it.
I have in this discourse endeavoured to give the Magistrate his due Honour, and that happy Government, under which we of this kingdom live, it's due Encomium. You have, in the late times of trial, by your suffering the plunder of your Estate, and the evil intreating and imprisoning of your Per∣son,
manifested your esteem of, and loyalty to, that Govern∣ment, which then was most injuriously (to say no worse) affronted and spurned at, but is now happily restored and established▪ and will therefore (I presume) be ready to countenance any attempt, that is made, for the further ad∣vancing of what you have suffered so much, to preserve and maintain, I mention your Loyalty, not onely to represent you a fit person to undertake the Patronage of a discourse of this nature, but also to perpetuate the memory of it, to the deserved Praise, of your self, and those many other worthy persons in whom it was found. For though, that now, through the mercy of God to this Kingdom, his Majestie having power restored to him, both to command and reward obedience, it is no special Commendation to any Person to be a dutiful and loyal Subject; yet then was it signally praise∣worthy, to dare to be Loyal, when, so to be, had such dreadful effects attending upon it.
That Almighty God would bless you in your Person, in all your Relations, and in all your Concerns, is the hearty desire and earnest Prayer of

Welby. Iune. 27. 1674.
