


YE are called a flocke of holinesses. sanctitatum pecus. Ezek. 36.38. Blessed is that people, whose popularity is rather in graces then in persons; in flocks and troopes of holinesses, rather then in flockes and troopes of men. Holinesse puts every person in the ninth place, and makes him an hundred millions in number; by which account a few flocks of holi∣nesses would be an innumerable com∣pany of men, Gods Host, Mahanaim, bina castra, two Hosts, ten Hosts, ten thousand Hosts. Flocks of holinesses are not onely numerous, but glorious. Flocks of Flowers in the spring, flocks of Pearles like Pibles upon the Sea∣shore, all facing the Sun; yea or flocks
of Suns looking forth like the morning, from severall serene parts and points of our Horison, and all facing one ano∣ther, not so glorious as flocks of holi∣nesses facing Christ, and Christ them. The shepherd is not smitten, but smild on now, and yet these flocks of holi∣nesses are scattered. Our Princes (as the Prophet speaks) not altogether Kings,Isa. 10.8. but altogether servants and slaves to divers lusts: instead of so many Vines,Isa. 7.23. so many Brambles, as the same Prophet speaks; through the wiles of that wicked one, and the just judgement of God. The root of this bit∣ternesse hath laine hid long, and been that. Achan which hath troubled us, to wit, a heart not perfect with God, denying the power of what we profess. The Gospel is  1 Cor. 13.12. a riddle, and so is the heart: and yet if either be hid, we perish; I feare both (though these times of much light) lie hid; such sad
perishing of leafe and tree could not else be.
Spirituall inspection is the subject of this piece presented to you; if it may lay open to you, what hath laid open you to others, will be matter of bles∣sing God and his, poore servant, who hath his worke to unravell riddles, and tread out labyrinths with the thred of the Scriptures, and findes only this light to discover darknesse. If a man will be safe, he must obey ne∣cessityƲt omnes, intelligans fi salvi esse velint, ne∣cessitati p∣tendum. sull. The Scripture and thine own heart, are two necessary things to be searched; cast off the study of these, and you cannot be safe. Obey necessity, read two Volumes over and over all the daies of thy life, the written word and thine unwritten heart; the one riddle unriddles the other: the Volume without opens the Volume within, and is a Glasse to bring Christ and the soule face to face. The triall of our faith is
precious, whether by the rod or by the word: by both grace is refined much, which is very precious to a sincere heart. Comparing our selves oft with Christ shames us, humbles us, con∣formes us, and so derives his beauty whom we so intensely look upon, which is a pleasant translation from defor∣mity unto beauty and glory. Imbecillitate alierum non nostra vir∣tute valea∣mus, saith Tully of ta∣king those who tyran∣nixed, who made ma∣ny Lawes, & proximae quaeque du∣tiores, and the last stil worst: By the weaknesses of others, and not by our valour do we prevaile, saith a great Statesman. So truly may I say, by our weaknesses, sloath, carelesnesse, the divel more prevailes, then by his own strength simply considered, though a creature very strong. We so cut off our own locks, and cast off our own mer∣cies, our own armour, and walke naked, laying aside Ordinances, Scrip∣tures, and all close conversation with God and our selves, that satan slayes us heaps upon heaps, with the jaw-bone of an Asse, with any rotten foolish
thing, carries us captive at his will.
Much confusion is now amongst us, of which God is not the author, but satan and our selves. Ʋnsoundnesse swels: the heart lifted up, falls under the power of darknesse, the divell, and all confusion. Take heed Christians of hypocrisie, its property is pride: pride puffes up, and then God puls all down to worse then nothing: a little of this leaven leavens the whole lumpe: be purging out therefore daily, every little of this leaven, that when satan and temptations come, they may finde nothing (if possible) of hypocrisie in you. Lie at those breasts which give sincere milk. Let your soules conceive by pure streams. Persons who venture in preaching, doe not you venture in hearing. Tis a ventrous age, such as no eye ever saw more, and lesse laid to heart. Among all wonders amidst us, this is surely the greatest, that there is
not yet shipwrack of all, considering how venterous all are, and of and to what parts. In that ministery in which you cannot see your selves, surely you cannot see Christ, how much and how oft so ever he may be named, as tis true è contrà. Grievous wolves are entred in among us, tearing and rending all that is hopefull; the sense of this makes me to complaine, not any bodies doing well. Such who take not honor to them selves, but are called, the meanest in the body under the conscience and assi∣stance of this, may be a blessing to his brethren below and above him. Grie∣vous Wolves are entred in, & the more grievous because of our own selves,Acts 10.30 as the Spirit of God hath foretold; and of these would I could warne you night and day with tears. Wild beasts are abroad, never more, nor more grie∣vous, and yet we are loth to believe that it is evening, or any thing encli∣ning
unto Sun-set: if in spirituals we were as promising as otherwise, I hould thinke so to. I looke for much good, but not in such waies as many of us take. If wounds in the body be no vent for the rottennesse, pride, and filth of our souls; if misery be unsanctified, it becomes like theirs below, everla∣sting. If we yet doe wickedly, and deale hypocritically with our God, who hath brought us out with a strong hand, from the Iron yoake, and the burning brickill, surely seven times more will misery multiply upon us untill we die, because we have despi∣sed him which speaks from Heaven, and as much from Heaven, and from that excellent glory (I thinke) as to any of the Gentile world. A per∣verse spirit God hath mingled amongst us, that we can neither smite nor smile with God, we can neither mourne nor daunce to him, which doth thus to
us: which spirit is no small judge∣ment, but is as the nerves of the whole body loosened; and then how all should hold together long, is unlikely. God magnifies his grace. Tis true: but not alwaies to be abused. We may leane upon grace, but not trample it under foot; God will distinguish between these two, if we cannot. Lets all lean upon our beloved: but what's more and inconsistent with this, proceedeth from the guile of our spirits, and that wily one, and will be a Spiders Web, and make the shame of our nakednesse to appeare in the day of his appearing, who is the searcher of all hearts: which apparition he loves and waits for, who is till then

