



SIR,
MY natural modesty and backwardness to appear in pub∣lick, together with the diffi∣culty of obtaining the Press,
have detained this short Treatise so long from you, that you may well judge it unseasonable now to be presented unto you. Yet considering the duty of that relation wherein I stand unto you through your late dear Yoak-Fel∣low, whose death was the occasion of this Dis∣course; and the obligation that is upon me by so ma∣ny favours and unde∣served
kindnesses received from you; as also the be∣nefit which possibly may accrue to others from so serious a Subject; I have ventured it abroad into the world, under the pro∣tection of your Name, how weakly so-ever mana∣ged, and liable to the censures of this scrupulous Age. However, I may hope, that, as Funeral Sermons, above others,
have an advantage up∣on Auditors by their sad occasion, so this also may affect the impartial Read∣er by the weight of its Arguments. And although it was first intended and promised you for a private present, and an acknow∣ledgment of that due re∣spect, and unfeigned love, which I do and shall e∣ver bear to your self, and your Relations; yet I pre∣sume
it will not be the less accepted, because others are now made equal sharers in it. And my confidence herein is the more strength∣ned by the consideration of that publick spirit which you have mani∣fested at all times, by your willing and unwearied pains in the service of your Generation; where∣in your integrity and faith∣fulness have so eminently
appeared, that your name is known and honoured throughout the Nation. But this above all is your Crown, that in all your publick employments, you have not sought your self, and the advance∣ment of your Family, so much as the honour of God, the interest of his people, and the enlarge∣ment of the Gospel, by your high esteem of, and
the encouragement you have given unto the Faith∣ful Ministers of it, a∣mong whom I have been an unworthy Labourer. And blessed be the Lord, who hath made his Grace to abound towards you by his assisting and supporting presence in all your paines and travels, whereby you have been enabled so chearfully to undergo the burden of your hard ser∣vices;
who hath also bles∣sed your careful and con∣scientious endeavours for the promoting of Godli∣ness in your Family, and among your near Relati∣ons. One fruit whereof I cannot but mention for your unspeakable comfort, concerning your dear Re∣lation taken from you, be∣ing present at her dissolu∣tion; who about to close her eyes from her mourn∣ing
Children and Friends, and all the visible things of this life, did sensibly, joyfully, and openly ac∣knowledge and declare her assured and known interest in Christ, unto whom she imme∣diately departed. Now the Lord supply all your wants, and be your reward, and the blessing of your off-Spring. And if this poor present may add any thing of spiri∣tual benefit and advantage
to your own soul, the souls of your relations, or any o∣thers, it will be the rejoyc∣ing of
From my study at Shenly in the County of Hertford, Oct. 20. 1669.


