



Gentlemen,
THe Popular Noise of a certain Farewell Sermon, Preach'd amongst you, has Rang so loud in the Town, that all Tongues are full of it; for indeed, there is that extravagant Vengeance in it, denounced against you, (for you are his Mark,) as seems not a little amazing. This Farewell, (to give the Author his due,) has dealt Hell and Damnation as liberally amongst you, as ever the late Famous Impostor Wickham (in his last Will and Te∣stament) did his Lands and Legacies; and truly, upon due Examination, 'tis to be fear'd, with equal Truth and Veracity, our Lombard-Street Pastor being much the same Oracle with the St. Clements Testator.
Eternal and irrevocable Damnation, Gentlemen, is a very severe Sentence, and the bold Pronouncer, ought to weigh before he Dooms; for 'tis not the pretended Pastoral Commission and Authority, can Warrant such Pulpit Thun∣der-Claps to strike at Random. 'Tis easie to Cry out, An Usurer! An Usurer! Good Lungs, and Mad Zeal, may go far, but right Reason, and upright Judgment, ought to go farther. He that would shew us the Fiend, would do ho∣nestly
 to point us the Cloven-foot: And our Open-Mouth'd Zealot, when he resolv'd, in a full Cry, to run down all Lombard-Street at a Breath, he would have done well to have Thought a little before he Talkt all, and only paus'd, to make some Distinction betwixt Commerce and Extor∣tion, Honest Traffick, and Unjust Usury. Had he given you that fair play for your Lives and Souls, (for they were both under his Lash) he had done something. But truly our Head-long Jehu-Driver, had no such License to spare, and his Patrons must expect no such Favour at his hands.
In short, you take Interest for Money, and with the Spirit of Muggleton, (the Copy only out-doing the Original) he has over and over told you, you are all Damn'd for it. And as he began with you, to keep up his Character, he resolved to end with you; his Farewell we understand, being only a Sum∣mary of his former continued Fulminations against you. By what Inspiration all this condemn'd Vengeance against you moved, I will not pretend to inquire, it being possibly no where better describ'd then in a Famous Poet.
Thus Wind i'th' Hypocondriack pent,
Proves but a Blast, if downward sent;
But if it upward chance to fly,
It turns new Light and Prophecy.
Now Gentlemen, the business of this following Dis∣course being a vindication of Truth, in answer to the In∣dignities and rude Treatments you have received from him, and consequently, to justifie the publick Right you have done your Selves; as such, it begs your favourable Accep∣tance,
