



THE Design of this Treatise be∣ing to prove, that Schisme is a work of the flesh, it cannot be improper to submit it to the cognizance of a Magistrate, the Peace of the State being equally violated thereby, as the uni∣ty of the Church; and, when the Veil of the Temple is rent, there usually follow∣eth an Earth-quake through the whole
Land.—Turn tua res agitur: the same persons that despise Aaron, do affront Moses: And indeed in a Church and Kingdom so knit and consolidated, as ours are, (Where the King is through God's good providence, a Nursing-father to the Church, and not only professeth himself to be of its communion, but hath graci∣ously obliged himself by Oath, to defend the rights and priviledges thereof, and to that end hath established many good Laws, not only by Statute, but by Canons Ecclesiastical (which are also the King's Laws:) and where the Church on her part, as to external peace and order, in∣tirely acknowledgeth her dependance on the King, as Defender of the faith, which she professeth, and in all causes, and over all persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, supreme Moderator and Governor, and by the indispensable Laws of God is so obli∣ged to the duty of Allegiance, that neither she, nor any of her children ever did, nor can deny that, without denying their own Doctrine and Profession: and long and certain experience hath taught us, that whoever retained themselves in the com∣munion of the Church, did yield due obe∣dience
to the King, and contrariwise as many as withdrew from the communion of the Church, were professed enemies to the King) It is impossible, I say, to con∣ceive how a Schisme should be maintained in such a Church, without actual Sedition in the State. In this Tertullus the Ora∣tor was right, when he called the Authors of a new Sect, Ring-leaders of Sedition, and , a very pest; for Schisme, like the Plague of Leprosie eats into the Walls and Timber of the House; and as Opta∣tus observes of the Schisme of the Dona∣tists, what Family is there, where either the Wife is not withdrawn from her Hus∣band? or Children from their Parents? or Servants from their Masters? And the Divisions of private Families produce publick mischiefs: for as a Family which consists of divers persons, being divided, cannot stand; so a Kingdom, which con∣sists of divers Families, being divided, will come to ruine: as when the several twists of a Cable, which holds the Ship at Anchor, is by little Vermin eaten through, the ship is exposed to the violence of every wind and storm. When the Church loseth a Member, the King doth not only lose a
subject, but gaineth an enemy: when either Lay-men make use of schismatical Meetings, or Religious men of seditiòus tumults, the peace of the Church and State are equally indangered.
Secondly, It cannot be denied, that the very act of separation, is a biddingPertinaciae Schismatis non est alia ratio quam o∣dium fraternum. S. Au∣gust. contr Parm. l. 1. c. 4. farewell to all cha∣ritable Opinions, and ami∣cable conversation towards those, from whom the sepa∣ration is made: And when they who first separated from the Church of England, did on the very same grounds dissent from the brethren of that separation, and with∣drew into new Sects, they were professed enemies unto all, but that Faction to which they adhered: For no separation is held justifiable, but from such, in whose com∣munion the dissenters do apprehend (at least) that they cannot serve God as they ought, but that they should sin in doing as the rules of that communion do require. And if so, how should they scruple to dis∣obey the King's Laws, when they think them contrary to God's Laws? or how should they care to be at peace with them,
who are in their apprehensions enemies to truth? Their hatred will rather increase, and become implacable, and they will call it Zeal, how bitter and fierce soever it be. For when Men think their opinions and passions warranted by Religion, they also think themselves bound, by their greatest hopes and fears, to prosecute them to the utmost of their power: and as the mista∣ken Disciples did, to call for fire from Heaven, on all those that dissent from them, and that they should do God good service in slaying of them. The differen∣ces that have been raised among us about things indifferent, have caused the loss of more of the bloud and spirits of this Na∣tion, as well as of true piety, than the per∣secution of all its professed enemies: Long have we languished under that issue of bloud, which was opened by punctilio's of Religion: for our controversies did not concern the fundamentals of Religion, but only the dress and garments of external worship, and yet how great a matter did a little fire kindle, when it was blown from a coal taken from the Altar? for they who, as the Priests of God, should weep between the Porch and the Al∣tar,
Joel 2.17. and not only by their tears, but by their bloud too, endeavour to extinguish the flame, did as the Priests of Mars scatter fire in every corner of the Temple, and warmed themselves at the flames, which they had kindled. What if the matters contended for were vile, and inconsiderable? they had the Art to set them off by glorious Names— The Cause and Covenant of God, the Kingdome and Scepter of Christ; and in such a cause, they are bound, as they think, not only to leave, but in a literal sense, to hate Fa∣ther and Mother: All moderation is luke∣warmness, and they will be cruel, that they may not be accounted cold, as the Royal Martyr foretold, p. 69. of his . Many persons do at this day look upon The Covenant, as a holy and harm∣less Instrument for Reformation, but who among all the Covenanters was there, that did not think himself bound to oppose the King in reforming the Church? But I am sure, says that Royal Person, The right method of reforming the Church, cannot consist with that of disturbing the State, nor can Religion be justly advan∣ced by depressing Loyalty, which is one of
the chiefest ingredients and ornaments of true Religion, for next to Fear God, is Honour the King: and yet no Artillery Yard did ever discipline more Men for War, nor any Magazine furnish them with keener Weapons, than the Tongues and Pens of some Disciplinarians have done.
Thirdly, I would willingly be inform∣ed, what company of persons in any Age, did openly separate from an Established Church, wherein they might serve God without sinning by communicating with it, and did not also trouble and disturb the State.
The multitude cannot look through the Vizor and see how they are acted by the ambition and covetousness of a few male-contents, who under a seeming Zeal for the Truth, have real designs against peace: and do expose the Temporal and Eternal welfare of their followers, for the accom∣plishing of their own ungodly Lusts: not unlike the Ape that burnt the Cats foot in the fire to pluck out her beloved Nuts.

Fourthly, Nor can it be otherwise thought but that Schismatical persons a∣mong us do drive Seditious designs, if it be considered, that there is no pious duty or laudable exercise of piety and devotion, but it may be done more solemnly in the pub∣lick Assemblies, than in any private Con∣venticles whatsoever.Non licet de sepa∣are ubi iect in belius mmuta∣g, Aug. ontra resc. l. 2. .28.  230. of chism. And what Rea∣son can there be, as Mr. Hales says, why they should do that secretly and suspici∣ously which they may do warrantably in the publick Congregations, except they are afraid their Devotions will be less acceptable, when they serve God with Re∣verence, as well as with godly Fear? It is beyond question, that there may be such corruptions in Doctrine, and such Idola∣trous practices required in Worship, as may justifie a Separation; but neither of these can be pretended against our Church. The Covenanters indeed did pretend a necessi∣ty of reforming our Doctrine, but to this day have not mentioned any one Article, that needed it; but while the Covenant was warm upon their Spirits, they requi∣red, that all persons admitted into any Benefice should subscribe our Articles,
having first read them publickly, and professed their consent to them, as long as the House of Lords had the Power of admission committed to them; and even now in cool bloud, all parties that have any thing of Sobriety do make the Do∣ctrine of the Church of England the Standard by which they authorize their own. And if the present Dissenters were Christians indeed, the great and uncon∣troverted Fundamentals of Religion wherein they agree with us in judgment, might reconcile their affections in those lesser things, wherein they differ. Opi∣nionum diversitas & Opinantium uni∣tas non sunt , Hales of Schism, p. 215. How unreasonable and irreligi∣ous a thing it is to contend for Ceremonies to the neglect of the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith, is I hope satisfactorily evinced in another discourse hereunto annexed.
Fifthly, I shall therefore propose ano∣ther Argument to prove that Schism as it is now practised among us, is inseparable from Sedition, because if men did dissent purely upon the account of Judgment, and Conscience, they would dissent soberly
and peaceably, and as the Nonconformists in Mr. Balls days joyn with us in some∣things which they cannot but allow, though they refused to communicate in other things which they suspected; and concern∣ing those things also, they would in all humility and meekness seek satisfaction, and distrust their own Opinions, which they find to be contrary to the judgment of their Superiours whom they cannot but acknowledge to be very learned and good men. For as Erasmus on Romans 14. Dignitatis ratio poscit, ut imperitior peritiori obtemperet, We owe so much to the Authority and wisdom of our Supe∣riours that in things doubtful and sus∣pected (and he instanceth in things far more obnoxious than our Ceremonies) they who have less knowledge ought to obey him that hath more; and he gives this reason, because if it be a crime of Arro∣gance, to despise the Superstition of the weak, and of him that erreth in Sim∣plicity; of how much more intolerable Arrogance is it, if he that is more weak in Faith and Knowledge, do judge and condemn them, that are better than him∣self? according to the vulgar rule of un∣learned
persons, who judge all unjust which themselves do not practise: and the Apostle tells such that the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, (i. e.) the spirit and temper of the Gospel con∣sists not in being solicitous about such things which are left to our Christian li∣berty, but about the promoting of righte∣ousness, and peace,Ro. 14.17. and joy in the Ho∣ly Ghost, which are indispensably in∣joyned; so that sober and conscientious Dissenters, would rather according to the Will of God suffer patiently for well-doing, than studiously promote discord and divisi∣on, and all those evils which the Apostle says do accompany it.
I cannot forbear to commend that ex∣cellent advice of S. Augustine to such persons. Epistle 56. If thou art que∣stioned (saith he) concerning points of subtilty and controversies, tell them, thou knowest not what to Answers, because thy Learning lyeth not that way; if thou art urged to declare what thou knowest, and wherein thy learning lyeth, Responde, to nosse, quomodo sine istis, homo possit esse beatus. Answer thou, I have learned how a man may be happy without
the understanding of such points. And Mr. Hales observed that when scruples of Conscience began to be made or preten∣ded, then Schisms began to break in. Trea∣tise of Schism, p. 217.
And now let any indifferent man judge; concerning such as instead of dissenting peaceably and seeking satisfaction meekly, in such punctilio's, of the nature of which they may be safely ignorant, and as the Jews say of some of their questions, refer the resolution of them until Elias come, do not only renounce all Communion in the established Worship; but contrary to the known Laws of God, and the King, di∣sturb the publick peace, rail at their Bre∣thren, defame and resist their Superiors, are deaf to all arguments, and will not be perswaded when they are over-convinced, but instead of patiently enduring what is not in their power to amend, as S. Au∣gustine adviseth, do with equal pride and impatience attempt the casting off of all Government, whether such are men of tender Consciences, or of carnal, and by consequence of Seditious principles.
Sixthly, Which will yet more evi∣dently
appear, if it be considered that Schisms are ordinarily contrived, and abetted, by discontented and ambitious persons, whose seditious and Traiterous designs against the State, do want the Midwifry of Schism, to give them Birth and Maturity. The Vow at Hebron was a means to form an Army against David,2 Sam. 15.7. and Come see my zeal, the Motto of Jehu's standard,2 Kings 10.16. which drew many after them, who went in the simplicity of their hearts to their own destruction. And if mens practises may be judged of by their principles, the doctrines that are infused into the spirits of the people at such meet∣ings, will sufficiently prove that their designs are seditious. For when men do extol their new Discipline as the King∣dom and Scepter of Christ, and affirm that all the Scepters of the Earth must bow to it, or be broken in pieces; that Dominion is founded in grace; that wicked men are Usurpers and have for∣feited all that they have, and it is no more robbery to deprive them of it than for the Israelites to rob the Egyptians; when they assert the nullity of former Oaths for obedience to lawful powers by
framing New Covenants, and imposing on the subjects contrary to the command of their lawful Prince; that good inten∣tions may justifie unlawful actions, and they may do evil that good may come there∣of; that Christian liberty doth free the Believing wife from the unbelieving hus∣band, the godly child from his ungodly Parents, and the faithful servant from his Infidel master; When their preach∣ing is of cursing and lyes, despising Domini∣ons, speaking evil of Dignities, vindictive groans against their Brethren, complaints of the decay of Religion, of oppression of the Godly, cursing all Neuters that do not help them against the Lords Anointed, or that do their work negligently, and withhold their Swords from bloud: How spiritual soever such men may be thought, the wea∣pons of their warfare are carnal (i.e.) they are seditious; such men are not Am∣bassadors of the Gospel of Peace, but of the Evangelium Armatum, every line whereof as Draco's Laws is written in bloud. When King Richard the First had taken prisoner a Bishop, that was in Arms against him, the Pope sends to him to deliver his Son, but the King
sends the Pope the Bishops Armour, and asketh him if that were his Sons coat? I would fain know of them that profess themselves the children of Peace, if these be the garments of their Ghostly Fathers that begat them. The great sorceress Medea perswaded the daughters of Peleus, that the way to recover their aged Father to youth and strength was to cut him in pieces and boyl him according to her Art. None but a people that have been bewitched could be perswaded that the way to re∣store our Church to strength and beau∣ty, was to divide it into so many sedi∣tious Sects.
And now I suppose that I have given the World and you, Honoured Sir, suffici∣ent Reason for this address to so emi∣nent a Magistrate, seeing they that murmur against the sons of Aaron, that they take too much upon them, are found to have Rebelled against Moses also; and the same persons that re∣nounced communion with the Church of which they were once Members, and withdrew into Conventicles, cryed out,
We have no part in David,2 Sam. 20.1. neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse, every man to his Tents O Is∣rael. As St. Augustine observed of the Donatists, Quid est Imperatori cum Ecclesiâ? aut quid nobis cum regi∣bus seculi? quos nunquam nisi invi∣dos sensit Christianitas, August. l. 2. ad Peril. c. 92. If the Magistrate may punish murther, oppression, robbery and sedition, why may he not restrain such practises as give occasion to all these, unless we would have him do what God says he ought not (i.e.) to bear the sword in vain? Clamate si audetis, (saith St. Augustine) puniantur a∣dulteria, puniantur homicidia, sola Sa∣crilegia volumus impunita. There is great reason then that the Ministers of the Gospel should apply themselves to the Ministers of the Laws. Israel will ne∣ver prevail against her enemies, except Moses's hand be lifted up as well as Aaron's, those Royal Oaks must support our feeble Vines, or they will be trod under foot by unreasonable Men. You are Custodes utriusque tabulae, under
God and the King, Defenders of our Faith as well as our Laws.
Sed quis custodiet ipsos Custodes?
But who shall protect them, that should protect us against the obloquies and stri∣vings of an unruly People? even that God, who having set Joshua over the murmuring Israelites, assured him, Jo∣shua 1.5, & 6. As I was with Moses, so I will be with thee, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee: Be strong and of a good courage. And now, if ever, our Magistrates ought to be Men of cou∣rage, as well as fearing God, when the execution of the Laws is termed perse∣cution, and such as will not tamely per∣mit their Religion and Liberties to be invaded, are accounted enemies to the Godly Party.Chap. 4. of tumults. But as the Royal Martyr observed, Nothing doth more portend Gods displeasure against a Nation, than when he suffers the confluence and clamours of the Vulgar to pass all boundaries of Laws and reverence to Authority.

I say not this, Honoured Sir, to pro∣voke you to greater activity for the pub∣lick welfare, who have not onely done more and better than others, but have prevailed beyond expectation. I onely pay a grateful acknowledgment for what you have already done, and exhibit a Noble example to others, of one who pre∣fers the publick Peace above his private interest, and doth his duty to God and the King with as much resolution, as o∣thers neglect or oppose it; and if there were but five such Magistrates in a County, they would through God's bles∣sing, redeem an unworthy Nation from those flames which threaten a Conflagra∣tion, like that of Sodom and Gomor∣rha.
I cannot omit, Great Sir, your con∣stant respects to men of my Profession without respect of Persons; you love a Cler∣gy-man eo nomine, not only the worthy Dignitaries of our Church, but (I may say it in a better sense than a great Lawyer was wont to say) you love a poor Clergy-man with all your heart, and have de∣servedly
acquired among us, the Title of Deliciae Cleri, the Clergies delight.
And now it is time to beg your pardon for this and many other Troubles by which I have trespassed upon your Pati∣ence, beseeching God to preserve the Peace of our Jerusalem, and that You and yours may Prosper as you Love it.

Exon April 1677.
