



May it please your Grace.
I Have learned long since not to appear empty before the
Lord, nor without an Offering be∣fore so immediate a
Minister of God. This therefore (such as it is) I humbly devote to
the ser∣vice of the Church of God as it is e∣stablished among
us: which contains a Vindication as well of the Heal as
Chief Members of Church and State from the scandalous
imputation of Po∣pery, and charge of the sane upon
their Accusers, in an impartial relati∣on of matters of
fact.
It is I confess one of the meanest, yet a
very necessary Work, to remove those Stumbling-blocks
and heaps of Ʋncleanness which men of perverse minds
have laid to obstruct the Peo∣ples entrance to our Church: among which, none
hath given greater of∣fence than the clamour of Popery and
Idolatry. Come to the Presbyterian Clergie (says the L. C. J.
Hales in a Pamphlet lately published by R. B. p. 28.)
and they will tell you that E∣piscopal Government is Romish and
Su∣perstitious, and their Ceremonies and Ʋsages Antichristian. Yea
they will come to the People, and tell them, (without asking) that the
Royal Mar∣tyr was the Head of the Grotian Religi∣on, (i. e.) of
Popery: That your Re∣nowned and Religious Predecessor
Archbishop Laud laboured to introduce Popery (though he were in
truth the greatest Scourge and Horrour to that
Party.) The Great Earl of Strafford, and the Learned Dr.
Cousin, were proclaimed and persecuted as
Papists, though living and dying they gave Demonstrations to the
contrary.
And evident it is, that these false Suggestions were really
and purpose∣ly intended and fomented, to animate the
people, and actually engage them in one of the most horrid
Rebellions that ever was acted by any barbarous people. Yet is this
Outcry renewed, and to the same mischievous intent, as is
acknowledged by Holloway; That the general designe in which he enga∣ged,
was to get off the King from his evil Counsel who had advised him to put a
stop to the proceedings against the Popish Plotters: That it was reported
in all parts that Arbitrary Government and Popery were coming in apace; which
incensed the common people in all parts, and made such a grumbling, that we
feared longer delays would make them mutiny. (This in his Paper to the
King.) And in that to the She∣riffs, He was fully perswaded
that not onely Popery, but Arbitrary Government was intended, and that he
believed ma∣ny thousands in the Nation would have appeared on these
reasons. And in this he persisted at his Execution, telling the
Sheriffs, That it was feared that Arbitrary Government and Popery was
designed; and truly I think at this pre∣sent, by what I can understand,
that there is little better designed. Thus the present Government is
newly dressed up in the old Rags of Popery, as the Primitive
Christians were in Beast skins, to expose them to the rage of
the people.
W. J. in his Celeusma accuseth ma∣ny of the
Conforming Clergy to be specie duntaxat Protestantes, and that
they do supparisitare Pelagio-Socino, sed imprimis Papae &
Papismo; though it be no less than a contradiction, that they should
be at the same time, So∣cinians and Papists. And still
the Cry is carried on, That our Hierarchy is
Antichristian, and that we have scarce two or three
Protestant Bishops in our Communion: That the Cler∣gy is
Popishly affected, and are Pro∣ctors for Rome: That our
Church hath made many steps to Popery: That our Liturgy is the
Mass in English, and the Litany a Popish
Conjuration.
From these malevolent Suggestions it is, that the
credulous people are not onely affrighted from our Com∣munion, as if our
Temples (like those of the Egyptians) were filled with
Serpents and Crocodiles; but are dri∣ven into Sedition,
Conspiracies, and Rebellion, and into many inextricate
Errours, and hurried from one Sect and Heresie to
another, till they fall into that common Sink of Quakerism, which is
a compound of the dregs of Popery and Fanaticism.
There seems to be (and God be thanked for it) a general
abhorrence of Idolatry and Popery in the
hearts of the people; but that the established Church is guilty of
these Abominati∣ons, is the mischievous insinuation of
unreasonable and malicious men, who seek to raise themselves
upon its ru∣ine. And with such invincible preju∣dices are
the minds of too many pos∣sest, that they are deaf to all
Argu∣ments and Demonstrations to the con∣trary; they are as
secure, as if they had been taught by an Oracle: since Mr. Calvin
(as Grotius, p. 115. of his Votum pro Pace) observed,
Illam mutationem quae Buceri consilio in An∣glia erat instituta
Papismi accusavit: and T. C. taught, That they ought
ra∣ther to conform themselves in Orders and Ceremonies to the fashion of
the Turks than the Papists. (See p. 27. of the Confer. at
Hampton-Court.) And the Popery which is now so vehement∣ly
opposed, is that which our Dissen∣ters conceive to be
practised in the established Church.

But the inconsiderate Multitude will not perceive, that
while they are affrighted by such Shades and Appa∣ritions
from the Communion of our Church, they do really embrace the most dangerous
and distinguishing Articles and Principles of the
Roma∣nists. They do as verily believe that the Presbytery
or the People have a Supreme Power over the Chief
Magi∣strate, as the Papists affirm the Pope to have.
And as he challengeth the Keys and Sword of St.
Peter, so do they the Crown and Scepter of
Christ, (for so they stick not to call their
Discipline) to which all Powers on Earth must bow or
be broken. And their Practice hath been agreeable to these
Principles: for from hence that damnable Doctrine (as St.
Paul calls it) of resisting the lawful Powers, and the
practices of open Rebellion and secret Conspiracies, have
been of late days as frequent among Fanaticks as among the 
Papists. And they presume to Ca∣nonize
those that perish in Rebellion as Saints and
Martyrs, as the Pope him∣self hath done by Thomas Becket
and Father Garnet. Nor hath any Gene∣ral or
Provincial of the Jesuits exa∣cted a more blind
obedience, or usur∣ped a more uncontroulable power over the
Consciences of their Proselytes and Emissaries, than some of these
have done. So that indeed, many of their Principles and
Practices are but old Popery in the new dress of
Presby∣tery, as they have been formerly pa∣rallel'd by some of
their Independent Brethren, out of their own Books of
Discipline.
Nor yet will their Leaders seem sensible of the
pestilent effects of scan∣dalizing the established Government
with the growth of Popery; when their own Disciples, having
pluckt their Spectacles from their noses, can as plainly discern
Popery not onely in their Ministry, and
Discipline, and in every thing that they retained for
Or∣der and Decency, but in their Sabbaths and
Sacraments, in their very Do∣ctrines of Repentance and
good works, and in that of the blessed Trinity it self:
all which have been ridicul'd as Popish by some that pass for
true Pro∣testants. But in all their Calumnies our
Adversaries meet with the same fate and infatuation as other false
Ac∣cusers of innocent persons commonly do; their very Charge
carrieth a Con∣futation with it; being laid against those who have
given the plainest demonstrations of their detestation of
Popery, and have acted most rational∣ly
successfully against it; while the Informers are
notoriously known to agree in the same Principles, and to
conspire in the same Practices as the Papists do, for
the destruction of that Church which hath been acknowled∣ged by all
sober Protestants, and dreaded by the
Papists as their most formidable Enemy.
The Jesuits and Dissenters have so long
contrived and communicated politick Maximes and Counsels
for the subversion of our Establishment, and confederated in
practices tending to that end, that it is hard to determine whether there be
now more Fanati∣cism among the Jesuits, or more
Je∣suitism among the Fanaticks: As in the story of two
famous Brothers, the one a Jesuit, the other a
Calvinist; who disputed so plausibly and suc∣cessfully for
their Opinions, that the Calvinist was perswaded to
embrace Popery, and the Papist to espouse
Calvinism: and yet they were Bre∣thren still. And if
such persons as act to the same end, and use the same
means, are equally criminal, I know not how to make a
distinction where I see no real difference. Certain it
is, that as Fanaticism could never have grown to so
great a bulk among us, if it had not been nourished by
Popery; so Popery would have been extreamly weak
and languishing, if it had not been encouraged and anima∣ted by
Fanaticism. No other Arti∣fice could have made the Popish
Plot to be suspected of a Sham (as some have called it) but
that Conspiracy of some which call themselves true
Protestants, but have served the Ro∣man Cause and
Interest more advan∣tageously than all their own Consults
and Confederacies have done.
I should not have presumed to de∣dicate this Treatise to
your Grace, had it been a Novel or Private Opi∣nion, and not
the deliberate Sense and constant Judgment of the
Govern∣ment, as well as the Practice of the Factions ever
since the first concep∣tion of the Reformation. King
Hen∣ry the Eighth observed, that the new Sumpsimus was as
busie to stifle it before it came to its birth, as the old
Mumpsimus was. And in succeeding times, the Government had as
watch∣ful and jealous an eye, and carried as strict a hand over the one
Faction as over the other; restraining them by the same
Laws, and executing the same Penalties on both; as appears by
those wholsome Statutes made in Q. Eliz. to retain her Majesties
Subjects in due Obedience; which have been ever interpreted by the
wise Judges and common Practice of the Nation,
equally to concern Dissenters of all sorts. It
therefore seems an unaccountable Er∣rour in them who profess a
detestation of Popery, to attempt the abrogation
of those Laws (especially if (as the Dissenters affirm)
they were intended chiefly against the Papists) as being a
Grievance to his Majesties Protestant Subjects, and an
incouragement to Po∣pery: when in all probability, the
Popish Conventicles would have been as frequent as
those of the Dissen∣ters, had those Laws and
Sanctions been anulled: and in such a juncture of
time and circumstances, the wisest consult of the
Jesuits could not have contrived a more probable means to gratifie
their Party, and advance their Interest, than by such a
designe. Nor hath this been the first joynt attempt of the two
Factions to procure a To∣leration for each other; it being the
readiest way to destroy the establish∣ed Church, as the Letters of Mr.
Cole∣man and his endeavours did intimate.
I fear I have transgressed the bounds of Modesty,
as well as of an Epistle Dedicatory to a Person on whom the
management of so many great and publick affairs is
incumbent. But I held it my bounden duty to make a publick acknowledgment of
your Graces unparallel'd favour to a person of such an inferiour
Rank, of so mean capacities, and at such a re∣mote 
distance from your Grace. And for this and my former
rudenesses, I most humbly importune your Graces Pardon, as I do
also for the mistakes of the following Treatise; which
being intended to stop the mouths of such as maliciously
accuse their Fathers and Brethren, and to open the
eyes of such as are ignorantly seduc'd by them, that by plucking out
(if it be possible) the beam that is in their own eyes,
they may cleerly perceive that there is not a mote of what they
falsly forged or fondly fancied to be in their Brothers
eye. And I hope I have not hereby forfeited the reputation or priviledge
of subscribing my self,
 Exon,
May 16. 1684.
