



THIS Sermon not reaching the ears of those for whom it was
chiefly intended, I have by your Lord∣ships direction offered it to their
hands, that it may be as a Glass not only to shew them their distorted
faces but infectious breaths, which may fix some spots on the glass it
self, but such as (I doubt not) will be easily wiped off. I have
attempted a very difficult work, The governing of an unruly evil, for as St.
James sayes, every kind of beasts and serpents have been
tamed by man,Chap. 3.7. except the Serpent that
is within him, the Tongue, which no man can tame. It was made to be
our Glory, but we generally turn it to our shame, especially while
therewith we seem to bless God, but curse and speak evil of those who
bear most of his Image, his Magistrates and Ministers, v. 9. It
isfull of deadly poyson, such as never hurts less
than three at once, the person slandered in his good name, by Calumny; the
person that listeneth to him, in his Charity, by Preju∣dice and evil
surmises; and himself most of all, by doing the Devils work in
slandering his brethren, v. 8. It is a Fire, saith St.
James, v. 6. and the worst of fires, for it is, set on, fire
of hell; (i.e.) the Devil the father of lyes; He is that god of Contention
who imploys these Boutefeaus as Mars did his Priests to scatter
coals of fire in the Temple and inflame the whole course of Nature. Other
evils may be seen and avoided, but this shoots out arrows that fly as
invisibly in the day as in the dark; it is of such a Versatile and
Proteus-like nature, that no knot can hold it, but it defies the Laws
of God and man. Our tongues, are our own, we ought to speak, who is Lord
over us? Psal. 12.
I should not have enlarged this discourse but that I
per∣ceive Calumny is become the malus genius of the Nation, which
seems to be possessed not with a dumb but a talka∣tive spirit, that
hath turned Religion into lying and slan∣dering. And such mens
Religion, St. James assures us, is vain, ch.
1.26. 'Tis like that wherewith the Votaries of Mercury did worship
him by casting stones at his Image and murdering their brethren in
Effigie.Our Apostle discovers the root of this evil to be a bitter
zeal, or envy∣ing and strife in the heart:Chap.
3.14. the blistering of the tongue is caused by an ulcerous heart;
and 'tis from within out ofthe heart that all these impurities do
proceed. Wherefore according to our Saviours method, I have endeavoured to
cleanse first that which is within, and to suppress the first motions
of murmuring and discontent, by applying the lenitives of Right reason and
Christian Religion which teacheth us to be of a meek and calm, a cool and
quiet Spirit, to do our own business, and be content with such things as
we have, and not to quarrel at the providences of God and the Administration
of publick affairs.
But now men are grown presumptuous, self-willed, they are
not afraid to speak evil of dignities and things which they understand
not, 2 Pet. 2.10. They are not afraid to insinuate as if the King
favoured the Plot, which hath been declared to be against His Majesties
person, and the Established Religion. They quarrel the Succession,
and would put by the true and undoubted Heir. They insinuate that His
Majesty is no friend to Parliaments, and would Rule us by an Arbitrary power.
And as to the Church of England, they accuse it for declining apace
to Popery, and approving Popish, Socinian and Pelagian Doctrines, as
Lewes du Moulin, and the Author of the Celeusma; when it is
confessed by foreign Divines, that it is the greatest fence against
those pernicious errors. They talk as if the Church Governours were mere
Thorns, and the in∣struments of the Devil, exercising Tyranny and
Op∣pression, whereas the termes of Conformity as to thepeople,
are confessed to be much more facile, than ever they were since the
first Reformation. And in truth the Indulgence granted to such men hath
destroyed more by 1000 to one, than that which they call perse∣cution
(i.e.) the execution of good laws. They tell the people of an utter
impossibility of Conforming to the Church of England, because of
many heinous sins in that Con∣formity, (Baxter's Plea for peace,)
and that the Con∣formists are generally guilty of Perjury. And these baits
are dispersed through the Nation, and greedily swal∣lowed by the
Credulous people who consider not what deadly hooks are under them. And how
great a matter a little of such wild fire kindleth! Against these false
suggestions and dangerous murmurings, the ensuing dis∣course is
intended.
The Persians were wont to observe an Anniversary
Festival which they called the death of Vices; and as an Embleme
thereof, they destroyed as many Serpents as they found in the Land. I could
not devise how to celebrate this happy Festival better than by
endeavour∣ing the mortification of those murmuring and discon∣tented vices
which were the cause of our former troubles, and reduced us to so low a
condition, that none but Gods own hand could deliver us, as with all
thankfulness we acknowledge. But as Ezra says, ch. 9.13. If
after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, for which God hath
punished us less than we de∣serve,and hath-given us such
deliverance as this, we should again break his Commandments, and neither
fear him for his Judgments, nor obey him for his Clemency, but continue to be
as our Fathers were, a mur∣muring and rebellious generation, may not our
God be justly angry with us, till he have consumned us so that there
be no remnant nor escaping? May we not fear that he will deal with us as
he did with the murmuring Israelites, who for forty years together
under the various and miraculous dispensations of mercies and judgments
so grieved his Holy Spirit that he Swore in his wrath they should never
enter into his rest? Psal. 95. Our sins have really brought us to
that brink of destruction which our guilty fears make us to appre∣hend with
horror, and yet we strive with all our might to cast each other into that
gulf which like an open Se∣pulchre is prepared to swallow us all.
Archimedes is said to have invented such an Engine, as if he could
have found where to six it, he would have undertaken by it to remove the
Globe of the Earth out of its place. This Engine some Mathematicians
suppose to have been a Screw; which lost invention, some of our Age
have recovered. And if male-contented spirits be permitted to insinuate to
the hearts of the credulous people, their fears and jealousies, their lyes
and slanders, their murmur∣ings and discontent, they would in a short
time remove the well Established Foundations of Church and State. 
The God of Peace, Unity and Concord who stilleth the raging of
the Sea, allay the madness of such people. 
"And give us all that peace which the world cannot
give; that our hearts may be set to obey his Com∣mandments, and also that
by him we being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our time in
rest and quietness, through the merits of Jesus Christ our
Saviour.

