



May it please your Lordship,
I Am very sensible how Criminal it is for any Christian to
do what the very Heathen have forbid, to speak any thing of the Dead, but
what is well; and yet there are so ma∣ny ill things recorded of Mr.
Baxter in the following Treatise, that I might justly incur your
Lordships displeasure, if I could not plead very necessary and
satisfactory Reasons for this Underta∣king.
First therefore, I plead that I have said
little or nothing in what is now published, but what Mr. Baxter
report∣ed of himself, as Matters of Fact in the History of his Life, and
other Books printed in his Life time, or what is fair∣ly inferred from the
same.
2. That the Substance of what is now published, was
printed about nine years before his Death, which it is evident he had
perused, and acknowledgeth he had given no Answer to it, (except a
Menti∣ris, which was his usual Reply to other Adversaries, for
want of Reason and Ar∣gument).
3. I say that (though dead) he hath first provoked me;
for in p. 188. part 3. of his Life, he saith, Long
of Exeter wrote so fierce a Book to prove me out of my own
Writings to be one of the worst Men living on Earth (full of Falshoods and
old retracted Lines and half Senten∣ces) that I never saw any like it:
and yet though so much concerned, and surviving about Nine years, he hath
notdiscovered that fulness of Falshoods, &c.
which he suggested; but tells his Readers that it is none of the Matter in
Controversie, whether he be good or bad: whereas it is certain, that a good
Man would never ingage in so bad a Cause as he hath defended by his
Per∣sonal Actions, as well as in many Wri∣tings; and he himself tells us,
That a true Description of Persons is much of the Life of
History, p. 136. of his Life. And an evil Tree cannot bring forth
good Fruit.
4. I plead not my own Cause, but the Cause of the Church
and National Constitutions, and in truth of all De∣grees of Persons in the
Nation: for this Historical Relation of his own Life, contains a virulent
invective and grin∣ning Satyr against all that live in con∣formity to the
Ecclesiastical or Civil Laws; the King is represented as a Papist and
Authorizer of the Irish Insurrection; the Parliament is Tyrannical, making
such Laws as proved Taring Engines,and such as no Man fearing
God could submit to; the established Order of Episcopacy as
Antichristian; the Cler∣gy as perjured and persecuting Persons; the
Nobility and Gentry as strengthners of Iniquity in the Land: And do not
such Scandals demand a Reply?
5. It is necessary to disperse those Clouds and
Umbrages with which he would cover his mischievous Designs, his Pleas for
Peace, first, second, and third, and his Only way of Concord,
be∣ing nothing else but Seeds of Discord and Confusion; and necessary
it was that such ill things should have good Names given them: those that
would propagate Schisms and Heresies need a Form of Godliness to set
them off. Arius, Aerius, and Donatus were Men of good
Learning, and as to appearance of good Lives also; yet the one most
strangely propagated that damnable Error of denying the Lord that bought
him: and the other those Schisms which have divided the Body of
Christ, hisChurch, to this present Age: 'Tis but an Artifice
therefore of all Seducers, of which the Apostle forewarns us, 2 Tim.
3.2,3. That in the last days men should be lovers of themselves,
covetous, boast∣ers, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, without na∣tural affection; truce-breakers, false
ac∣cusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,
traitors, hea∣dy, high-minded; lovers of pleasures more than of God; and
all this under a Form of Godliness; and when even Satan can transform
himself into an Angel of Light, it is no marvel if his Ministers
be transformed as the Ministers of Righte∣ousness.
6. I remember that our Excellent Bishop of
Worcester prudently foretold of Mr. Baxter, That he
would dye lea∣ving his sting in the wounds of the Church; which Mr.
Baxter hath abun∣dantly fulfilled in this and many other of his
Writings, which Stings must be pluckt out, or the Wounds which they 
have made, will be still kept open and bleeding; for though Mr.
Baxter be dead, he hath done what he could to raise up, and arm a
Succession of such a Generation of Dissenters, as shall still eat
into the Bowels of the Church, and he hath provided a Magazine of Am∣munition
for them. Mr. Sylvester tells us, How much he was delighted in a
hopeful Race of young Ministers and Chri∣stians; how much he valued young
Di∣vines and hopeful Candidates for the Mi∣nistry; how liberal he was of
Counsel and Encouragement to them, and inquisitive after, and pleased
with their growthful Numbers and Improvement. (And he told me) that he
had the greatest hopes and expectations from the succeeding Ge∣neration of
them, that they would do God's Work much better than we had done before
them. To which end he ac∣quaints us, in the beginning of his Pre∣face,
That Mr. Baxter left the orderly disposal of his bequeathed
Library to young poor Students. So that here is a Fundprovided
for a perpetual Schism. And Mr. Sylvester hath discovered a
hidden Treasure of Mr. Baxter's, which he is improving as a Supply
of Deficiencies, in another Volume.
Having shewn your Lordship the Reasons of my Undertaking, I
shall briefly give you an Account of what I have performed to frustrate
these per∣nicious Attempts. Your Lordship knows, I have served as a
Veterane Souldier in these Parts of the Church Militant about Fifty years,
and might now sue for a Dismission (being somewhat elder than Mr.
Baxter was when he left writing, which was, as Mr.
Sylvester says, Seven years before his death, when he
was, as I compute it, Sixty nine years old, and I am now entred into the
Seventy sixth year) yet to excite and encourage men of greater Abilities, I
have, as I were able, performed these two things.
First, Whereas a great part of this, and other
Writings of Mr. Baxter, as also of his whole Life, hath been spent
in framing Objections against, and De∣famations of our
well-establish'd Dis∣cipline and Liturgy, which he blameth as too
confused for want of Method; and for its Matter (abstracted from the Penal
Laws) as abounding with Thirty or Forty such tremendous things as a man
fearing God could not comply with; though many men, such as Dr.
Beveredge, Comber, Falkner, and the Authors of the London
Cases, have convincingly Answered and Vindica∣ted them; yet conceiving that
none could so effectually confute them (ad homines at least) as
Mr. Baxter him∣self hath done, I recommended them that are
unsatisfied, to the serious use of Mr. Baxter's Last
Legacy and Admo∣nitions to Dissenters, lately printed, which if they
would read without prejudice and malice, well weigh the force of his Arguments,
they would do much right to Mr. Baxter and them∣selves: For whoever
shall think of opposing what Mr. Baxter hath said inPassion or heat of Disputation against what is proposed in
those Admoniti∣ons, will but shew how often Mr. Baxter hath
contradicted himself; nor will any sober Person, that hath sound and
wholsome Reasons offered by Mr. Baxter, for the informing of his
Judg∣ment and Conscience, pass by those and fasten on such putrified
Soars and Ulcers, and like the Horse-leach, con∣tinue sucking in Corruption
till he bursts and dyes, when Salutary Food is provided.
Secondly, Whereas Mr. Baxter and his
Admirers value him for his great Zeal and constant Endeavours for Ca∣tholick
Charity, and particularly for Unity, Love, and Concord between all Parties in
this Nation, I have shewn in this Abridgment of his Life, and mostly
(ex Ore suo) from his own Re∣lations, that as much as in him lay, he
hath made the Terms of Love and Union impossible; and that as he was a
great Incendiary of our UnnaturalWars from the beginning to the
end, having engaged some Thousands in the Rebellion, and served as a
Chaplain to the Garrison at Coventry in 1642. so he was a Chaplain
to Whaley the King's Jaylor in 1647. so in our unchristian
Divisions, he hath been the most for∣ward Agent and Disputant (Quorum
pars magna fuit, as testifieth Mr. Syl∣vester) and that
elaborate History of Bishops and Councils which he began to meditate in the
Year 1640. and af∣ter many years was printed, to shew (as the Learned Dr.
Maurice hath pro∣ved) how much he wanted of being a Scholar or a
Christian. For Mr. Baxter himself was afraid, lest that
Hi∣story, as opened by him, should prove a Temptation to some to contemn
Christiani∣ty it self, for the sake and crimes of such a Clergy,
p. 181. part 3. And indeed they had been intolerable in any Nati∣on, if they
had been such as Mr. Bax∣ter represents them. But whoever shall
consult the Catalogues of Anci∣entHeresies, or the Histories
of Schisms and Ecclesiastical Feuds and Tumults, (whether those Sixty
Heresies reckon∣ed by Epiphanius, or those Eighty eight by St.
Augustine, or those great∣er Numbers by Philastrius and
Theo∣doret: or those Schisms occasioned by Novatus and
the Donatists) will have a hard Task to prove any lawful Bi∣shop
to be the Founder of any of those Heresies or Schisms. It is evi∣dent
therefore, that he hath endea∣voured to ruine the Primitive Govern∣ment of the
Church, to raise a new Model of his own disturbed Imagina∣tion. So that if
there be any such Sins as Schism and Rebellion, and such as Endeavour to
defend and per∣petuate them are guilty, this Dux gregis may bear the
Bell.
Yet lest it should be thought that I have disquieted my
self and others in vain, and being an old Man, have dreamt a Dream, and
Combat with Fears and Jealousies of my own Ima∣gination,let it be
considered, That as of old a Man of Gath came forth, defying the
Armies of Israel, saying, Give me a man that we may fight
toge∣ther, and if he kill me we will be your Servants, but if I prevail
against him, you shall be our Servants; at whose words all
Israel was dismayed and greatly afraid, and the
Philistines shouted and cried Victoria: So there hath been
a Defiance published (in the Life of Mr. Baxter) to the whole Host
of Israel, whereat great Insultation and Triumph among the
Non-Conformists is heard in our Streets; and is there not a Cause why an
obscure Shepherd, how meanly soever he be otherwise armed, having got
Goliah's own Sword wherewith to fight him, should enter the Lists
against him?
My Lord,
There is another such Disease as the Pice, that
hath infected both Sexes a∣mong us, and is become Epidemical;Mankind still longs for forbidden Fruit, they loath Manna, and
require Meat for their Lusts. How hath that dam∣nable Heresie of the
Socinians spread it self of late, and corrupted the Faith of many,
though the Authors are ei∣ther unknown, or Persons of a very ill Character,
who, under the Name of Deists and Ʋnitarians, design
the Contempt of all Revealed Religion, and to unite us all in Atheism. But as
Mr. Baxter's Person was had in ad∣miration among many Thousands of
his Proselytes, so his Remains are e∣steemed by them as precious and
ve∣nerable, as any Relicks of the Blessed Virgin Mary by the
Superstitious Pa∣pists. Whatever raw and undigested Notions, uncharitable
Censures, mali∣cious Scandals, and false Histories he hath uttered, are
lickt up and swal∣lowed by a giddy Multitude as Rari∣ties and luscious
Dainties, and the Di∣ctates of an Infallible Teacher.
I shall trouble your Lordship but with one
Instance; Mr. Baxter hath asserted as past doubt, That the
Mar∣quess Antrim had a Commission from King Charles the
First for Raising that Irish Rebellion, wherein Two hundred
thousand Protestants were Massacred; this is published again from Mr.
Bax∣ter by Dr. O. in the later end of his second
. And though the ground of this
Report hath no other Founda∣tion but a Libel published by some Regicides,
yet the confirming it by two such Evidences as Mr. Baxter and the
Doctor, hath authorized it to pass as Common Discourse in Cabals and
Coffee-Houses. I cannot but won∣der that the Doctor should so little
consult for his own Credit; for who will regard his Testimony against
other Persons, who hath so confidently as∣serted such a Blasphemy
against the Lord's Anointed; whatever he hath deserved of the Nation by his
former Evidences, he deserves another sort ofPension for this
Scandalous Imputation; for we must blot out of our Calendar the Celebrated
Memory of the Royal Martyr, or shew a Mark of our just Indignation
against such a One as hath so publickly affronted the Authority and
Wisdom of the whole Nation. Pudet haec opprobria. This may be
wor∣thy of the Cognizance of the Parlia∣ment.
My Lord,
I am conscious that I have moved a Nest of Wasps and Hornets
that will be buzzing about my Ears, but I am an old Man and hard of Hearing,
so that I shall not be troubled with their Noise; and as for their
impotent Stings, they have been so vainly spent on the Church of
England, that they are become very Drones. And I well remember, that
when the present Bi∣shop of Worcester had provoked them by his
incomparable Sermon against Se∣paration, almost as soon as it was
pub∣lished,a Forlorn Party of Reformado's appeared publickly
against it; such as Humphries, Alsop, Lob, a Country and City
Non-Conformist, with Dr. Owen and Mr. Baxter as their
Leaders, with their united Force beset him, and rail∣ed lowdly against him,
yet durst not Attack him, but evaded his weighty Arguments. And Mr.
Sylvester in his Preface tells us, That the present
Arch∣bishop, the Bishops of Worcester and Ely, their
greatest Antagonists, were expresly mentioned by Mr. Baxter
as Per∣sons greatly admired and highly valued by him; and of their
readiness to serve the Publick Interest, both Civil and Re∣ligious, he
doubted not. Yet such is the Hypocrisie of these Men, that they will
openly Scandalize and Defame such Persons (for the Edification of their
Party) whom they inwardly approve of and admire for their Personal Ver∣tues
and constant Endeavours to serve the Publick Interest of Church and
State. And though I despair of merit∣ingtheir good Opinion by
what I have done, yet I have learnt to care less for their Calumnies and
Reproaches, which though plentifully, and with great ve∣hemence thrown out,
will not stick.
And now, my Lord, begging your pardon for this tedious Address,
and too confident Interruption of your more important Affairs. I bless the
good Providence of Almighty God, who un∣der Christ the Great Shepherd and
Bi∣shop of our Souls, hath placed me un∣der the Tuition and Patronage of a
Person of such Primitive Courage and undaunted Resolution, as hath
con∣stantly and successfully stem'd that Spring-Tide of Popery and
Socianism which was violently overflowing of us, and I trust will as
effectually withstand those raging Waves of Fa∣naticism, which so
impetuously as∣sault the Ark of God on every side, that we being
delivered from the Hand of all our Enemies, may serveGod with
one Consent in Righteous∣ness and Holiness all the Days of our Life, is
the earnest Prayer of
 Exon, 
Jan. 1. 1696.
