



I May justly fear, that in the Dedication of these Exercitations, I have done as some inconsiderate Persons, who seek to ex∣cuse a less, by committing of a greater Offence: It was, I confess, a great Presumption, that I prefixt your Lordship's Name to a Hasty Scrible against the Crime of Persecution charg∣ed on the Church of England; and now I presume upon your Lordship's Patience and Patronage in a Case of greater Impor∣tance; it is not a Scandalum Magnatum, nor any of the Plea's of a Temporal Crown, but a Crime Laesae Majestatis, an Overt Attempt to overthrow the Crown and Kingdom of our Blessed Saviour; as if he also were a King de Facto, and not de Jure; which I now lay before your Lordship, it is the Crown and Dignity of him in whose Person and Due Worship and Honour our common Salvation is wrapt up: The Sanction of our Law, (viz.) de Heretico comburen∣do, was, I confess, too severe; but if there be not some Powerful Restraint laid on such Damnable Heresies as deny the LORD that bought them, the Sons of Belial, will not forbear to deny him on Earth, with a Non Obstante to our Saviour's threatning, Him will I deny before my Father which is in heaven: The Ecclesiastical Laws are but as Bruta Fulmina, to such as wilfully Excommunicate themselves; and unless the Temporal Power supply the Defects of the Spiritual, we are like to run into a worse Confusion than hitherto we have; this sort of Men being as great Enemies to the one as to the other.
Ruarus who incurred a Banishment for his Socinianism, though as modest as any of them, in a Tract of Magistracy, printed with his Epistles, p. 461. says, The times may be such, and if we consider the state of all Ages and Nations, they have been, and still are such, that it is more hard for a Christian to discharge the Office of a Magistrate, espe∣cially of a Supreme, than for a rich Man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. They are for an Independent Ministry; no Friends to either
 of our Lord's Institutions, the Sacraments of Infant Baptism, and the Eucharist; and though while they are under the Power of the Civil Magistrate, they plead for an enlarged Charity, yet if at any time they get the Sword to hang at their sides, their Cruelty will be much more extensive: This I speak the more positively, because,
First, Their Principles lead them to it; for if the Papists, with whom we agree in the chiefest Articles of Religion, be such im∣placable Enemies, as to design the utter Extirpation of our Church, how much more will the Socinians, who condemn us as Polytheists and Idolators, for worshipping those whom they account meer Crea∣tures, execute their Fury on us?
But 2ly, their Practices have abundantly declared their Inveterate Malice, for when one Arian Presbyter had drawn Constantius to be of his Opinion, I tremble to relate what Havock was made in the Church; and before that time under Dioclesian, having gotten the Do∣natists and other Hereticks to strengthen their Party, they commit∣ted more Outrages on the Catholicks than Dioclesian himself, though that was the fluctus Decumanus, the most impetuous Wave that over∣flowed the Church: I shall give a brief Account from a Witness a∣bove all Exceptions, Vincent Lirinensis, Ch. 6. Contr. Her. with whom St. Augustine agrees, in his Discourses against the Arians, Vol. 7. and Socrates l. 2. c. 10. l. 4. c. 13. and Sozomen l. 3. c. 6. the words of Vin∣centius are these: Cùm prophana ipsa Arrianorum, Novitas velut quaedam bellona aut furia Capto prius omnium Imperatore cuncta, deinde Palatii cul∣mina legibus novis subjugasset, nequaquam deinceps destitit Universa Mise∣rere atque vexare privata & publica sacra, prophana{que} omnia nullum boni & veri genere descrimen sed quoscunque collibuisset tanquam deloco superiore percutere tunc temeratae conjuges, depopulatae viduae prophanatae Virgines, monasteria demolita desturbate, clerici verberati Levitae acti in exilium sa∣cerdotes oppleta sanctis ergastula carceres Metalla quorum pars Maxima interdictis urbibus protrusi, atque extorres inter deserta spleluncas feras saxa, nuditate fame siti affecti, contrite & tabe facti sunt. Atque haec omnia nunquid ullam aliam ob causam, nisi utique dum pro caelesti dogmate hu∣manae superstitiones introducuntur, dum bene fundata antiquitas scelesta no∣vitate subruitur, dum superiorum instituta violantur, dum rescinduntur sci∣ta patrum dum convelluntur definita Majorum, dum sese intra sacratae, at∣que incorruptae veritatis castissimos limites prophanae, ac novellae curiositatis libido non continet. This one Testimony of so good an Author, is enough to make us abhor the Authors of the Arian, and much more of the Socinian Heresie, which is more Impious, and guilty of the greater Blasphemy, the more sacrilegious Novelty, and of such intol∣lerable Pride and Contempt of all Mankind but themselves, even
 while they are under severe Laws, that I believe, if their Power were equal, it would be as well for our Temporal as Spiritual Con∣dition, to live under the Roman, as the Racovian Harrows.
The Statute 29 Car. 2. which abrogated that De Heretico Combu∣rendo, declares, That it doth not take away or abridge a∣ny Iurisdiction of Protestant Archbishops, Bishops, or other Iudges of his Majesty's Ecclesiastical Courts, in Causes of Atheism, Blasphemy, Heresie, Schism, or o∣ther Damnable Doctrines or Opinions; but they may proceed to punish the same according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, by Excommunication, Deprivation, Degradati∣on, and other Ecclesiastical Censures, not extending to Death. So as before the Act, the Learned Judge Hales, in the beginning of his Plea's of the Crown, gives an Account of the man∣ner of Conviction of Hereticks, which he says, is, First, By the Common Law. (Whereof he gives some Instances.) Secondly, By Archbishops and Bishops in a General Synod. Thirdly, By the Bishop in his Diocess. The Common Law, he says, inflicts no Forfeiture, neither indeed doth the Ecclesiastical, if the Crimi∣nal abjure his Opinions, being pro salute Animae, but if he relapsed after Abjuration, he is left in a worse condition. The matter of Heresie was to be judged of by the Canonical Scripture: Or, 2. By what hath been determined by the four General Coun∣cils. 3. By any General council according to express Scripture. 4. By Parliament, with Assent of the Convocation. What Pow∣er your Lordship hath over the Head or Members of Exeter Col∣ledge, in case of Heresie, I refer to their Statutes.
What Operation these Methods may effect, I know not, but there needs a speedy Application, where the Gangreen gains so visibly, and may be so mortal: But why talk I thus to so great a Master in our Israel, who hath a more perfect knowledge of all those things where∣of I speak? Your Lordship hath been a constant and eminent Asser∣tor of the Faith established in the Church of England, the Foundati∣on whereof is that of the Ever Blessed Trinity, on which all our Worship, and all our Hopes are built; but ungodly Men have in this too licentious Age, endeavoured with all their Might and Sub∣tilty to subvert this Foundation: and that which hath caused this Address to your Lordship, is a holy Indignation, when I consider∣ed, that there are more who appear in Print to destroy, than to e∣stablish this Foundation, which hath caused me, though the weak∣est of many Thousands, (that my Zeal may provoke others, that have more Knowledge and Abilities) to solicite the Cause of the E∣ternal
 Son of God, against whom that Outcry in the Gospel is re∣vived, This is the heir, Come let us kill him, and seize on his inheritance; which they attempt to do by force of their own Merit, and a Na∣tural Righteousness; making void the Righteousness which is of God by Faith in Christ, who is Jehova, The Lord our righteousness: He that says of Faith in Christ, as the eternal Son of God, That it is impertinent to our Lord's design, fruitless to the Contemplator's purpose, and dangerous in respect of Blasphemy, and because we have no sure grounds to go upon, see p. 29. of the Naked Gospel, in 2 Col. He that shall say, that it is made the most mischievous Incendiary in the Christian World, To the Reader, p. 7. of the last Edition. He that shall say of those who altogether deny our Saviour's Deity, and dare not wor∣ship him at all, That he dares not in Charity deny the name of Christians, or hope of Salvation to such, p. 55. of the last Edition, gives great en∣couragement to the Infidelity of Jews and Turks, and contradicts the Scripture which assures us, That there is no other Name under Heaven given among Men, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.12. And the pretence of enlarging Charity, is too short a Cloak to co∣ver so much Nakedness; it is not Charity to spare a Barrabbus and crucifie Christ; it is as much against the Law of the Land, and the Constitutions of the Church, as against the Law of God, to cherish such Vipers: The Act 10 Guilel. & Mariae, made for exempting their Majesties Subjects, dissenting from the Church of England, from the Penalties of certain Laws, provided that such as will have benefit by that Act, shall subscribe a Profession of the Christian Belief, in these words: I A. B. profess Faith in God the Father, and in Iesus Christ his Eternal Son, and in the Holy Spirit, one God blessed for evermore. This is the Faith which I con∣tend for, and for which I beg your Lordship's Patronage, who hath already so eminently and successfully appeared in its defence, against that unlimited Toleration which would have destroyed it: He that is now your Client is the Eternal Son of God, to whom as the Au∣thor of our Salvation, we were dedicated in our Baptism, and have been taught by the undoubted Oracles of God, That he is our Creator by whom all things were made that are made; that God that redeemed his Church with his own proper Blood, neither is there Salvation in any other Name; the true God and Eternal Life, to whose Almighty Protection, and All-sufficient Grace, which are able to save to the ut∣most, all that come to God by Him, I shall daily recommend your Lordship, and all your Relations and Affairs, as is in Duty bound,

