



Reverend Sir,
ALthough I am no Conjurer, yet I su∣spect I have done enough to raise the spirits of the Donatists, which are wont to be very troublesome, and that it may exceed my skill to allay them: And therefore I have thus seasonably (I hope) taken Sanctuary under Your Name; for I have observed that some consecrated Persons, as well as Places, are not haunted with such Spectres. And though such Apparitions have been very affrighting & vexatious to Men of weak judgments & wa∣vering minds, yet some Persons who have arm'd themselves with constant integrity to God, and resolved Loyalty to the King, have been least obnoxious to their power and malice; as good
Souldiers that keep their ranks are not so much exposed to the hazards of War, as they whose fears make them sneak from Place to Place. And this, through God's good providence, was Your security in the late Times of Confusion, wherein notwithstanding the busie Emissaries of the Prince of Darkness, you did not only shine as a bright Example of Christian resolu∣tion, sound Doctrine, and a holy Life, but did really influence a great part of your neighbour∣ing Clergy, the sense whereof hath obliged me to this publick acknowledgment; by which I cannot hope to add to your reputation, but to provide for my own quiet, against such unjust and unsavory reflections, as guilty persons are prone to make, from whom I appeal to your more righteous judgment, whether I have done them wrong, or no. Sure I am I intended them none, for I only present them with a Glass, wherein if they see their own defects, they have no reason to be displeased with the Glass, but with those Vices which cause the reflexion. So∣crates, l. 2. c. 15. of the Tripartite History, tells us, that Constantine to shame the Arians, provided by an Edict, that they should be cal∣led Porphyrians, Ut quorum mores imitati sunt, eorum nomine perfruantur, that they might be known by his Name, whose manners they did imitate: And a greater than Constantine did the
like by the Jews, John 8.44. Ye are of your fa∣ther the Devil, and his lusts ye will do. Every Man's publick profession and practices are the plainest characters to teach us what party he is of. They who through pride and discontent raise and propagate new Opinions, that they may head a Faction, and take pet at the prefer∣ment of better Men, vexing their Governors, despising their Authority, persecuting their in∣nocent Brethren, and fomenting Divisions in a well established Church, are as manifestly act∣ed and animated by the spirit of Donatus, as if there were a transmigration of Souls —

Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora gerebat.


As old Donatus did, so do his Race,
Cast up their Eyes and Hands with down-cast Face.

In vain therefore do such pretend, (as with great confidence they do) that they are the off∣spring of those Primitive Christians, who suf∣fered under the Heathen Emperors, for they in the worst times obeyed their lawful Governors in all things wherein they might not disobey God, and constantly adhered to their Bibles, their Bishops, and their Brethren, accounting all such Traditores, (i.e.) Traytrs, as forsook either. Such pretences therefore do make odious repre∣sentations of the Primitive Christians, as if they were in their Generation as factious and sediti∣ous,
as the late Donatists in ours; And as ill re∣flexions do they cast on their Christian Gover∣nors, as if they were very Persecutors. But, by their fruits ye shall know them: for, if it be con∣sidered how exactly every Scene of that horrid Tragedy, which was first acted in the Churches of Africa, hath been acted over, and (if I may so speak) over-acted in the Church of England, it cannot be denyed, that they who destroyed the Church of England, and its Defender, were the most natural off-spring of those Donatists, who so perpetually vexed the good Constantine, and made Havock of the Churches of Africa; or that the present Sectaries, who so tenaciously adhere to the principles, and follow the practices of them that brought such confusion on the Land in the former Age, are their proper Successors.
However, it is advisedly done by their Apo∣logists, to make their Pamphlets swell with the frequent mention of the Indulgence of some of the Emperors to peaceable Christians, but pass by the many strict Edicts of the most Christian and pious Emperors, against such as withdrew from the Communion of the Catholick Church, some of which I have transcribed for their bet∣ter information at the end of this History, and shall only acquaint them here with that success which Sozomen, l. 3. c. 11. of the Tripartite History, observed to follow on the due executi∣on
of them. Who speaking of the Laws of Constantine, against such as denyed communion with the Church in his days, The Emperor (saith my Author) strictly commanded that their Meeting-places should be taken from them, and they not permitted to assemble in private Hou∣ses, or Churches; by reason of which Law (I suppose, saith Sozomen) the Memorial of Here∣sie was utterly destroy'd, for after this Law, they could meet neither publickly in the Churches, nor secretly, being observed, and forbidden by the Bishops and Clergy. Doubtless those Bi∣shops and Clergymen were no Persecutors, they did what was their duty, and by a seasonable re∣straint of Men of corrupt principles, preserved the true Christians in peace. And certainly the present Bishops would be defective in a special duty of their Function, which is to preserve the Flock of Christ in Peace and Unity, if they should tolerate such, as seek to scatter and make a Prey of them. St. Hierome, who is thought by some to have been no Friend to that Office, doth yet affirm, that it was ever since the Apo∣stles days the best Remedy against Schisme. I shall entreat your patience, while I mention a passage or two of that Father, which have been tortured to speak against Episcopacy, but do so far commend its usefulness, and assert its anti∣quity, and authority, as may suffice to silence all
its adversaries. In his Comment on 1 Titus he saith, Antequam Diaboli instinctu, &c. Before such time, as by the instigation of the Devil, Factions were made in Religion, and the People began to say, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, the Churches were governed by the common Council of Presbyters: but afterward, when every one accounted those, whom he had baptized, to be his own, and not Christs; it was decreed in the whole (Christian) World, that one, chosen out of the Presbyters, should be set over the rest, unto whom the care of the Church should belong, that the seeds of schisme might be taken away. Would you know when this was done, and by whom, Panormitan will tell you, Li. Decret. de consuetud. c. 4. Immedi∣ately after Christ's death, all the Presbyters ruled in common—but after a while the Apostles cau∣sed, that Bishops should be created for the appea∣sing of Schismes. If any shall not agree that this is St. Hierome's sense, let him compare that pas∣sage in his Epistle to Evagrius, (85) Quod autem posteà, That after this, (i.) in the Apostles age, (as appears both by what goes before, and by what follows concerning St. Mark) one was chosen and set over the rest, was done for a Re∣medy against Schisme, lest every one drawing a part of the Church to himself, should destroy the whole: for in the Church of Alexandria,
from the days of St. Mark the Evangelist, unto Heraclas, and Dionysius, Bishops there, the Presbyters choosing one of their number, and setting him in a Higher degree, called him Bi∣shop: and in his Dialogue, ad Luciferianos, Ec∣clesiae salus in summi sacerdotis dignitate pendet, cui si non exors, & ab omnibus eminens detur pote∣stas, tot in Ecclesiis efficientur schismata, quot sa∣cerdotes. So then St. Hierome's testimony is ex∣press for the Antiquity of Bishops, (for as to the original institution, I shall not now discourse) that they were in the Apostles days, particular∣ly in the Church of Alexandria, in St. Mark's days, and in the Church of Corinth, ever since the People began to say, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, for the ending of which controversie, one was preferred above the rest; and the Scholiast tells us, on Titus 1. that Apollo was the Man, , the first Bishop of Corinth: and the same was decreed in all the Christian World; That the care of the Church was com∣mitted to them, and the welfare of the Church depended on their dignity, to whom if there were not an eminent and peerless power given by all, there would be as many schismes in the Church, as there were Priests; and lastly, that it was a principal duty of theirs, (though it be now accounted their crime) to prevent the growth of schisms in their several Churches.

And this is that which I have (according to my mean capacity) endeavour'd in these Papers, wherein I have only applyed that gentle Reme∣dy, which hath been approved by Ancient and Modern Divines, who agree, that, The means to confute schisme, is to reduce it to its first Ori∣ginal: for howsoever it comes to pass, that facti∣ous persons are in love with their own, they can∣not but abhor the actions of their Progenitors.
And now, Reverend Sir, If I have said any thing unworthy of your Name, I know, that as your judgment will discern it, so your candor will pardon it, since nothing hath moved me to this attempt, but my duty to the Church, and my particular esteem of your great Merits, who are a chief Ornament of the same; for though you have been placed in an eminent station, yet that you have rather honour'd that dignity, than been dignified by it, is the judgment of all that know you, and not only the private opinion of

Exon, Febr. 1. 1676/7.
