



THE Society whereof you are Members, (if it be fit to compare lesser things with greater), may acquaint you with the necessity of Government, Laws, and Order in the Church of God: First, You hold your Authority from the King, and his Laws; So doth the Church from Christ and his Gospel: You have Superior and Inferior Offi∣cers; So hath the Church: You have power to Enact certain Municipal Laws as occasion shall require, for the peace
 and welfare of the City; So hath the Church, by virtue of the general Pre∣cepts of Christ and his Apostles: You have certain Forms and Rites in the Aministration of Justice▪ to make it more solemn▪ So hath the Church, to procure the greater Reverence in the Administration of Publick Worship: u have many lesser Societies of Ar∣tificers, who have their dependance on you; So hath the Church, many Paro¦chial Congregations depending on the Bishop of the Diocess. Now, if dis∣contented and pragmatical persons should arise among your selves, and make it their business, to defame your Government, as if it were tyrannical and arbitrary burthensom and oppres∣sing, because of a f rnt Forms and Customs; if they should quarrel t some antiquted ws in your Legal proceeding▪ and take offence at the  and  Mae as  Ceremonies, (and you know  the same  Magistrates, a other  Minister). If these  pnt and plead  Reformation of all your
 Laws, and Government; if they should forge and pretend new Charters, and Commissions for the subversion of the old; and erect mock-Courts of Justice, censuring, hating, and (as much as in them lyeth) condemning all that will not be of their Rabble: If they should advance a Dozen of Burgo-Masters into the Office of the Mayor, and make every man one of the Coun∣cil; if they should abolish all the an∣cient Laws and Customs; lay aside all Rites and Formalities; and bring in new Ordinances, such as were never known in yours, or in the Government of any other Corporation? Were such practices tolerable? Or if not speedily re∣medied, would they not bring the whole City to Confusion? And is it not the duty of every good Magistrate, to pre∣vent such tumults? Now such is the present condition of our Church; Schism and Separation in the Church, being of the same nature with Sedition and Tumult in the State▪ And God forbid it should always be said of Zion, as Jer. 3.17. This is Zion whom no man seeketh after. Tum tua res, agitur, is one Argument to ingage you all (as
 you are Magistrates) in the defence of the Church; for seldom doth Facti∣on prevail in the Church, but it pro∣ceeds also to the alteration of the State. But you are engaged on more noble Prin∣ciples, as Members of that Church which I plead for; and your Examples (as things now stand) may be more instru∣mental for the peace of the Church, than your power; and when you meet with rational Dissenters, your Arguments may not be altogether ineffectual. I have presumed, to put a few such Arguments into your hands, which I doubt not, may be instrumental to the confirming them that are yet in the Communion of the Church of England, though perhaps not effectual to recall those that are departed; and yet I doubt not, but here is enough to convince them; their Conversion is the work of God.
It will be needless to give an account of my publishing this Sermon, or the pre∣senting it to you. I should be wanting to my duty as a Minister of the Church, if I should omit to serve her Interest, as far as I am able. And the desires of divers of this City, which was the place of my Nativity, and in whose welfare,
 that of my self and a numerous family are wrapt up, did easily prevail with me, to give this testimony of my real affection, as well to your persons, as to your Government. I shall only trouble you with an account of my Subject, which is a perswasion to unity in the publick Worship of God, as it is professed in the Church of England. If any ask, What that Church is? I answer, it is, The whole Nation, professing the Gospel of Christ, visibly uniting themselves by joint-consent, of King, Pastors, and people, and agreeing in certain Laws and Rules conformable to the Aposto∣lical and Primitive Precepts and Pat∣terns, for the Preaching of the Word, and the Administration of the Sacra∣ments with decency and order, in the publick Worship of God. If this description agree in every particular to our National Church, then the raising of Divisions in it, and making Separa∣tion from it, is the sin of Schism, and that sin extreamly dangerous; and therefore it is every mans duty, that lives within the pale of the Church, to keep himself in the Commu∣nion
 of the same: which is the endea∣vour and constant prayer of,

