



May it please your Lordship,
THIS slender Present comes as a grate∣ful Expression of that great Satisfaction and Joy with which your Clergy were filled; when your Lordship was installed our Diocesan.
Your Lordship's Client, according to his mean Abili∣ties, hath lately endeavoured after our Saviour's Me∣thod, to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and now he assays to give unto God, and his Church, the things that are God's. The Offering, I confess, is little, and lean, but coming as a Dove with an Olive Branch to that Ark, which hath been long tossed with
succeeding Waves, bringing Tidings of the Abatement of that Deluge which had overflown the Church and Na∣tion, and that the frightful Noise of Persecution doth now cease in our Land; I hope it may be taken into that Ark by your Lordships Hand. The Widows Mite which she cast into the Treasury, was graciously accepted by our blessed Saviour, and indeed it is only your Lordships Ap∣probation can give a Value to this Mite, as the Royal Stamp doth to those Metals which have no Intrinsick value in themselves. My endeavour is by a few Argu∣ments, to silence those Murmurings, Fears, and Jea∣lousies, that the Church of England will be (as they slanderously report it hath been) a Persecuting Church; and this would be as needless, if we had to do with rea∣sonable Men, and real Protestants, as to prove, that the Martyr'd Bishops in Queen Mary's days, who also were our first Reformers, were Persecutors, and destroy∣ers of that Religion which they planted by their Doctrine, and watered with their Bloud in every corner of their Kingdom, and which hitherto as a fruitful Vine hath brought forth such Fruit as hath honoured GOD and Man. But what need is there to draw a Line,Judges 9.11. when we have the Works of Apel∣les before us.
The more then Heroick Deeds of your self, and those ever memorable Bishops your Colleagues, of whom our English World was not worthy, have struck dead all such Objectors, who as one Man stood up, as Phinees did, and by Petitioning, or as the other Translation hath it, by executing of Judgment, Psal. 106. v. 30.
And by laying not only your Dignities and Honours, but your Lives and Fortunes in the Gap, gave a check and diversion to those Plagues of Popery and Slavery, which with so much otherwise Irresistible Violence were breaking in upon us.

And how can those Bishops be any longer accounted Persecutors, or unworthy of the Miter, who were such prepared Candidates for a Crown of Martyrdom for themselves, and so resolved Assertros of the li∣berty of the Gospel, and the Kingdom of God and our Saviour, for their Protestant Brethren. But as Suetonius, c. 74. says of Julius Caesar, That he thought it not enough that his Wife was without a Fault, but that she ought to be clear from all Suspicion of a Fault. Oportet uxorem Caesaris non solum crimine verum omni Criminis suspicione carere.
His present Majesty, after mature Consideration, hath now consummated the Ʋnion of our Established Church with his Royal Person, which he long since espoused by its Proxy, and lively Effigies, His Roy∣al Consort, and which hath hitherto to his good liking, behaved her self,  as an unspotted Virgin; for thus hath our Royal Sovereign solemnly declared in the most August Assembly of the Nation, That he is resolved to support that Church, whose Loy∣alty he doubted not would enable him to Answer their just Expectation, and that it should be al∣ways his particular Care, and as soon as conveni∣ently it might be he would call a Convocation: So that now there is as little cause of Suspicion left, that the Established Church should be a Persecuting, as that it can be a Popish Church; or that we shall have meerly a Parliamentary Religion, as the Pa∣pists say, as that we shall have a Popish Religion, as some Dissenters fear. It is too apparent, that the Church was singled out as a Sacrifice, and de∣voted by the Papists to Destruction, and for Pro∣tection, as a Dove Persecuted by the Romish Eagle; she hath taken Sanctuary in the Bosom of our pre∣sent Soveraign, and who can think that under the
Influence and Conduct of so propitious, and benign a Protestant Prince, that Dove should be transub∣stantiated into a Serpent. Nor can her greatest Enemy suppose her to be so void of all Reason and Religion, as to forget those Vows which she made in that day of her Distress, which our Divisions made so Dark and Tempestuous, of her ready Inclination to a happy Ʋnion, in which our Strength and Se∣curity against our common Adversaries doth con∣sist. And the God of Peace, who only can do it, make us all that dwell in one House, to be of one Mind, to know and do the things that belong to our Peace, before they are hid from our Eyes.
I beg your. Lordships Patience to hear a great Truth, which will never shame its Owner. We were at first hurried at so great a distance from one a∣nother, crumbled into so many Sects and Factions, and have been for almost Fifty Years together, run∣ning into irremediable Separations, by the Whips and Spurs of those furious Drivers and Riders, our common Enemies the Papists, whose secret, but now sensible Lashes, (and they must needs go, whom the Devil transformed into an Angel of Light, doth drive) have forced us to run into such Confusion, and Corruption, as none but he that raiseth the Dead could repair the decayed Careasses of our Church and State. And very Glorious would those Bodies have appeared at that Resurrection, were it not for some wrangling Sadduces, who would rather main∣tain an Annihilation, than grant a Resurrection; for whose Confutation it was necessary, for such as were concerned on the behalf of the Church, to as∣sert her Doctrine, and their own Innocency under the late Revolutions; when therefore for the Re-establishment
of the Church, a Commission was grant∣ed to some of different Perswasions, to consult there∣upon; the Spirit of the Covenant did so stir in some Dissenters, as to move them to insist upon a necessi∣ty of Reformation of Episcopacy, and Liturgy, of Do∣ctrine and Worship, to which the Advocates for the Church could not yield to the Satisfaction of their Adversaries, unless they had taken the guilt of all the former Wars and Confusions on themselves, and so have given their Adversaries an occasion to cry Victoria, and to triumph in their Destruction; from which they were sufficiently cautioned by the unrea∣sonable Dealings of those Men with the Royal Mar∣tyr, who taking Advantage by his too free, but on their parts forced Concessions, granting them all that in Reason and Conscience he could part with, still craved more, until they most unconscionably, and barbarously had worried him out of his Life. God forbid such Obstinacy should still be predominant a∣mong us, when there are so many powerful Adver∣saries watching and labouring for our Divisions and Destruction. We have chosen indifferent Arbitra∣tors to compose our Divisions, and heal our Breaches, and by the Blessing of God, we have an Ʋmpire who is both able and willing to determine them; let us once more agree to submit to their Determination, and I doubt not, that although we may not have what may please every one, yet we may have what will profit us all. And now, my Lord, I beg your Pardon for this Trespass on your Patience, and hear∣tily pray God for his Blessing on your Lordship's En∣deavours in that Station wherein you now are, the Consideration of which (it being for a more pub∣lick benefit) can only compensate your Absence, un∣till
it shall please God to grant us your Presence for our more particular welfare, which is much desired, and will be very acceptable to this your Diocess, and Native Country: And especially to
Exon, April 27. 1689. being the day of your Lord∣ship's Instal∣lation.

