



HAving been chosen by your Suffrage a fourth time to serve as one of your Clerks in the Con∣vocation, I have endeavour'd on all Occasions, as my great Age and mean Abilities permitted, and God's Blessing, enabled me, to defend the Church as by Law established, against all its Adversaries: and being unexpectedly invited by the Worthy Dr. Charles Good∣all to declare what I had observed concerning the Author of the , who was pleased to send me Dr. Walker's Libel, wherein he affirms, That Dr. Gauden was the Author of that Book. Among other Remarks which I sent to Dr. Good∣all, upon Dr. W.'s Book, I sent him my own Testimony in these words: I had the hap to be acquainted with Bp. Gau∣den as long as he was our Diocesan, and I have often heard him affirm, that he was fully convinced that the  was intirely that King's Work. How this Testimony of mine came to the knowledge of Dr. Hollingworth who was then writing against Dr. Walker, is not material, but I received a Letter from him desiring that I would communicate my Te∣stimony to him, for which I referred him to Dr. Goodall, from whom I suppose he received a Copy of my Testimony, Shortly after this, there came forth a third Letter of Ludlow's, and in p. 16. of a Preface to that Book, I found my Testimo∣ny repeated, and my Person reflected on, which I accounted
a great Honour, as being defamed by a Regicide in Defence of our Royal Martyr, this was one Motive to engage me for the farther Confirmation of my Testimony, which how well I have performed, I submit to your Judgments. This Te∣stimony was so acceptable to both the Doctors, that they so∣licited me for my farther Assistance in this Business; and Dr. Goodal who mostly encouraged me by several Testimonies which were very material, prest on me the Prosecution of this Subject, because Dr. Walker's Pamphlet by his frequent and solemn Appeals to God had altered the Opinions of ma∣ny of our own Church, and Multitudes of Dissenters; and that as well Dr. Walker's as Ludlow's Libels did equally tend to Subversion of Monarchy and Episcopacy, as now by Law established; these things prevailed with me to Review Dr. Walker's true Account, as he calls it, and finding it to be false, scandalous, inconsistent, and contradictory to itself, and to have no Foundation besides the bare Assertion of a Vain Per∣son, I resolved to joyn Issue with him on his own Proposal, in the last Page of his Libel, That if any Man can produce stronger Reasons for the negative part, viz that Dr. Gauden was not the Author, than he hath for the affirmative, he says, he not only will, but must believe that contrary part. The Case therefore is devolved on the Determination of the Rea∣der, whom I only desire to consider the Arguments and Au∣thorities which I have produced for stopping of that false and malicious Rumor, which hath been a long time muttered in every Corner, but now is proclaimed on the House-top, and like Pestilential Diseases on crazy Bodies, hath seized Men of weak Heads and corrupt Hearts; which being warmly ap∣plied to the infected Party, who with Jannes and Jambres withstand Moses, and resist the Truth, shall proceed no far∣ther, for their Folly shall be manifest to all Men, by

