



My Lords,
IT may seem Inconsistent with a Character Your Honours vouchsafe to bear, That any who live under the Influence of Your Lordships special Care, should be apprehensive of the Want of Protection. And it would be so indeed, My Lords, did all keep within the Bounds and Precincts of the Liberties al∣lotted them. But since I have been so rash, as to venture Abroad into the World; it is from that Transcendent and more Extensive Character of Honour, the Signature of Noble and Exalted Minds, that displays it self in supporting the Weak and De∣fenceless; and not from any Claim of Right, arising from Promise or Stipulation, That I can expect, and do most humbly crave Your Lordships favourable Protection, in a little Ramble that now I have made to the Press. Had the Excursion been greater, My Lords, it is probable my Confidence would have been more Excusable, and a fuller grown, and more bulky Book would have born a truer Proportion to the Ambition I had of having brought a more Earlier Offering of Duty and Gratitude to Your Honours. It was what I intended, My Lords, and should have performed, had not my Design, for want of kinder Nursing Fathers, bin starv'd into this scanty and lank Essay. Nevertheless, I am inclin'd to think, My Lords, That the Bulk alone will be no Hinderance to its Acceptance, nor to the Grant of that Favour which is humbly su'd for at Your Lordships Hands; since, if I be not very much impos'd upon, little as it is, it may do some Good in the World.
It is therefore in hopes of Your Honours Countenance and Ap∣probation, That with so short a Weapon, I have engaged a Mighty and well Appointed Adversary. The Attempt I confess, seems rash, My Lords, but cannot think it will be look'd upon as Dishonourable, since my Dagger is no Stiletto, is neither poison'd nor rusty, nor is

it wrap'd up and hid within a treacherous Sleeve. To such as may think it a little too sharp and keen, I have this to say, My Lords, That it is the more like for that to do Execution, and to prevent more trifling and fooling of Sophisters and Theorists, with a Mat∣ter that is too serious to allow it, or to admit of a dallying and perfunctory Dispatch. And that it was an honest Concern for so good a Cause, as that of Truth and Religion, with a zealous Endeavour to undeceive, if possible, a licentious and prophane Age, of a most dangerous Error, into which many, for no other Reason but that it is A la Mode, are capriciously fond of being deluded, that hath in a great Measure given it the Edge.
Were I to alledge other Personal and more particular Reasons for the Thing, My Lords, I should be blinder than indeed I am, and that's what no Man living can be, if I mistook the proper Judges to whom I ought to Appeal: But then again, I should be rasher too, My Lords, than is fit for a Man in better Circum∣stances than I am in to be, if by a Message from the Press, I summon'd in Witnesses, and an Audience to the Tryal. It is too great a Trouble for Your Lordships at present, That the Author with his little Naked Book, is laid at Your Honours Feet, hum∣bly begging from your Acceptance and Protection, a Covering for both, against the foul Weather of Censure and Malice.
If this great Honour be to be obtain'd, My Lords, I shall then rest secure, in the Confidence of being reputed to be, what really, and with all Submission, I am
My Lords, 

Charter-House,
June 16th, 1696.
