



My LORD,
THE present Times be∣ing pestered with nothing but Narrative and Narrative,

Evidence upon Evidence; one to strengthen, and another to invali∣date the Truth of a Plot: The Papists Libelling the Presbyteri∣ans, and the Presbyterians zea∣lously Answering them, and both disturbing the Publick Peace: Insomuch that Mr. Stationer hath now nothing to Entertain his Cu∣stomer with but some rare Pam∣phlet, which he is ready to com∣mend as excellently penned, and learnedly handled. St. Austin's City of God, The Practice of Piety, The Whole Duty of Man, &c. are grown even moul∣dy upon their Shelves; and none but the Advising C—, and Intel∣ligent V—, (the former furnish∣ing us with News from the Pope,

and the latter with strange Stories of Things which never were) can merit their Favour, or be vouchsaft an Acceptance: And therefore for me to intrude into his Shop, and desire a Place in his Classes, under the Notion of a Lover; is look't upon as the Superlative Degree of Boldness and Impudence, and I am immediately commanded to Re∣tire; or if I persist Intreating, I am thrust out of Doors, and cal∣led an Idle Fellow, a Toy, an E∣nemy to the Good Old Cause, and I know not what. Forgetting that Love ought at this time especial∣ly, to have the greatest Empire in Mens Hearts, to Ʋnite the Dis∣sentingly Reformed to the Truly Reformed Opinion; and thus like

Ephraim and Manasseh, both would agree against Judah (the Papists).
And now, my Lord, being like∣ly to be kept in Silence and Obscu∣rity, and uncapable to appear a∣broad without a PROTECTION, I made bold to enter into your Lordships Presence, and casting my self at your Feet, humbly im∣plore your Honourable Patronage.
Your Lordship will perchance be apt to ask me if this be a Time to talk of Love; To which I believe I need not study for an Answer, when the high Station your Lord∣ship has in the World, gives you the affrighting Prospect how little room Love takes up now among Men; Nay, 'tis almost forgot, and

therefore to give them this Memen∣to of it, will not altogether be in∣seasonable.
My Lord, the Stage whereon Our Gallants acted their several Parts was France, and having met with a General Acceptance and Fa∣vour in their French, I ventured to Equipp them in our English Garb. I hope they may give your Lordship some agreable Diversion, when your vacant Hours from more serious Affairs shall permit you.
Your Lordships Favour and In∣couragement is the sole Azyle to which I shall have Recourse, with which if I am honoured, I shall not value the severe Scrutinies of of the nice Critick, nor the Op∣probrious

Censure of the Sedate Phanatick, whilst I think it my Duty to write my self,
My Lord,

