



GOOD READER,
HEre is a Treatise presented to thy view, wherein through the guidance of Gods grace, and the conduct of his word, is attempted an assay to set forth the honour of the great Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to make his praise glorious. A De∣sign doubtless very acceptable to all that are Christ∣ians indeed, who cannot but rejoyce in any thing that may tend to the Exaltation of our dear Cru∣cified and Glorified Redeemer, who is the Rock
of Ages, the eternal excellency of his Church, the joy of all Generations. A work it is wherein all the company of Heaven is to be exercised unto all eternity. And albeit whatsoever is undertaken by Men or Angels in this kinde will come infinite∣ly short of his Merit, yet it is but fit that what any one hath here seen of his glory, either in his word or works, he be free in the communicati∣on thereof. Possibly there have been sundry at∣tempts made already of the like nature, and such, that this may seem to some at first sight to be su∣perfluous: However Let not the day of small things be despised by us: If some new materials, which will endure the searching fire of Gods spirit be here added to the gold and silver which others have before built upon this foundation, there can be no just offence taken thereat; Sure I am they will not be disallowed by the Master of the house, and therefore ought not to be rejected by those that are employed and salaryed by him to be Co-workers with me in the building.
It was not (God knoweth) any vain ambi∣tion or self-seeking that did first put me, the meanest of the Lords Servants, upon this work, which is indeed Opus Dei, the work of God; nei∣ther is it any such sinister aim, that makes me
rush upon the censure of the judicious in the en∣largement and compleating of it: Onely if Jesus Christ may hereby be magnifyed, and his Church edifyed, I have my desire, and it shall be the Crown of my rejoycing.
I confess notwithstanding there was an occa∣sion offered that did first induce me to this Un∣dertaking, and it will not be amiss here to make a short mention of it. Thus it was, In the heat of the late Schisme, it fell to my lot to preach a Sermon in the Cathedral Church at Winton upon the 26 day of December; wherein because I said,An Dom. 1654 I would not judge those people in the liberty of their Consciences, who did observe the Feast of our Saviours Nativity to the Lord (though with∣all I thenWhich is here also inserted in its pro∣per place. spake severely against the prophane abuse of it) I was accounted a superstitious per∣son, and a malignant (such was the discrimina∣ting terme that was then used) and reported far and near, that I had done more hurt by that one Sermon then other Ministers that were employed in that Lecture could be able to repair again by many. Which reproachful slander was so great a trouble unto me, though I was then justifyed by Persons of very good quality that were both wise and godly, that I was often minded, being per∣swaded
by those persons, and sundry others that heard of it, to publish in print the Sermon that I then preached, to the end the World might see how causelesly I was traduced. I did nevertheless forbear the said publication, not out of fear of the persecutions of those evil dayes; for I did my self observe that Anniversary Festivity in my own Parish, preaching and administring the Sacrament of the Lords supper, when very few durst ad∣venture to do the like. But having begun upon this occasion to prepare it for the Press, and find∣ing in the pursuance of it my Meditations enlarg∣ed to other matter then I at first delivered, I slight∣ed the Calumny wherewith I was asperst, as not worthy to be so much heeded, and breaking through many difficulties and hinderances, have by degrees extended that very Sermon to this length which is now before you. The greatest part whereof I have for some years kept by me without further additions; but of late I must confess I was as the Apostle (if I may so say) pressed in spirit to finish what had begun, and to publish the whole for the sake of Christ and his Churches.
And now give me leave to premise an Apology for some things in this Treatise, against which e∣specially
there may seem to lie some exceptions. First, I may possibly be adjudged too inconside∣rate in fixing the Epistle to the Hebrews upon St. Pauls account, because it doth not clearly appear (as it is commonly conceived) that he was the Authour thereof. Secondly, It may be said that here are sundry things inserted which have no na∣tural co-incidency with the principal subject that is pretended.
As to the first of these Exceptions, I know well there hath been some doubt made concerning the Authour of this Epistle; for it hath been much controverted a long time whether it was Barnabas or Clemens Romanus, or Saint Luke, &c. But for Saint Paul few were inclinable to entitle him un∣to it: their reason was, The style and idiom hereof seems to vary much from that which the Apostle ordinarily used in his writing, neither doth he own it himself, by setting his mark up∣on the front of it, as he doth in all the rest of his Epistles, but chiefly because the Writer of this Epistle acknowledgeth,Heb. 2.3. that he had learned the Do∣ctrine of Salvation from others, which, saith he, was confirmed unto us by them that heard it; Whereas the Apostle with very great confidence professeth that he never received if of men, nor was taught
it but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ (which last exception is indeed the most material,Gal. 1.12. but an∣swered sufficiently by a late Writer as may appear in the margine.Doctor Hammond, The word , us, is not to be restrained to the wri∣ter onely, but so as to comprehend those to whom he writes, uti patet Tit. 3.3. Eph. 2.5. Neither is it any new or strange thing for St. Paul to confirme the truth of the Gospel by the testi∣mony of o∣thers, and tradition from them which saw and heard. See 1 Cor. 15.3.) Hereupon it seems that doubts have risen concerning this matter: And it is fur∣ther conceived by some that it would savour of too much curiosity to resolve such doubts; For so long as we believe the Holy Ghost to be the Enditer, what need we perplex our selves about the Writer? As When a Prince will vouchsafe to send a Letter to any of his Subjects, it would ill become them to be inquisitive with what pen it was written; rather we should say of this Epi∣stle, as once it was said of the Book of Job, Ipse scripsit, qui haec feribenda dictavit, Ipse scripsit, qui & illius operis inspirator extitit, He writ these things that dictated them unto the Writer, &c.
Nevertheless though it be granted that it may not be of absolute necessity to make too curious inquiry after all those Pen-men and actuaries, whom the Holy Ghost employed in that excel∣lent service of being the perpetual Registers of the great Council of Heaven, yet neither are they to be quite neglected. We rejoyce in the message of good tidings that is brought unto us, yet that hinders not, but that we may make the messenger
welcome, and if he be missing, though his pre∣sence should not add to the Authority of the mes∣sage, yet we would seek him out, that we might gladly know him. Here in an Epistle sent unto us from God, and the messenger is supposed to be missing: Let now the name of God be magni∣fied, and his will herein revealed be embraced by us (as it is meet) with all acceptation: But if the knowledge of the instrument by whom it is handed to us, may any whit conduce to Gods glo∣ry in the removal of prejudices against the truth herein revealed, or in the conviction of the ene∣mies of the Lord Jesus Christ (such as were the Arrians of old, and the Socinians of late) it is not fit that we should balke it, especially when it is hinted unto us by the spirit it self in the holy Scriptures. To say nothing of the Title prefixed. to the Epistle, it being no part of the Canon, neither having been generally used by the Church∣es of Christ, therefore not argumentative, though it must be confessed it hath Antiquity to plead for it. To let pass also the Salutation in the close, which as the Apostle Saint Paul saith, 2 Thes. 3.17. is his token in every Epistle, so he writes (which might be more material, but that it may be said, Others in imitation of him do use the same Vale∣diction
too) we have a more sure word of testi∣mony, whereunto we should do well to take heed, and that is this. Saint Peter the Apostle of the circumcision in his second Epistle which he writes unto the scattered Hebrews, who were of his pe∣culiar charge, though dispersed into sundry remote Regions, calling them therefore Strangers in re∣gard of the places of their abode, far distant from their own Country, hath by a singular providence of God positively testified, that his beloved Bro∣ther Paul, and no other, was the Writer hereof. And to this purpose he gives us a plain demonstra∣tion▪ 2 Pet. 3.15. Where he speaks of an Epistle of Paul written unto these scattered Hebrews; which Epistle was it seems at that time extant, and in high estimation among the faithful, and which with other of Saint Pauls Epistles he commend∣eth as of equal Authority, being, as he saith, writ∣ten by him according to the Wisdom given unto him. Now this Epistle there mentioned, is very probably the same, which in the Scripture goeth under the Name of the Epistle to the He∣brews; otherwise how is the Church the pillar and ground of truth in holding out all the Ora∣cles and whole Counsel of God, if she hath been negligent in so eminent a part of her Depositum
commended unto her by the Authority of two chief Apostles, or, as one saith, lose Pauls Epi∣stle and keep Peters that makes mention of it, which is not with any colour of reason to be ima∣gined? We may therefore hereupon conclude that it evidently appears Saint Paul was the writer hereof.
But for that he here altereth his style, and doth not put his Name unto this, as he doth unto the rest of his Epistles, there are sundry probable con∣jectures commonly for it given. First the Jews had conceived against him a very great prejudice, and least they should thereupon have rejected his writing with indignation, he changeth his won∣ted style, and omitteth his usual Introduction of Paul an Apostle, &c. Not regarding himself, so that the word of God might run and be glorifi∣ed. Moreover he was design'd to be Apostolus Gentium, the Apostle of the Gentiles, as appears Gal. 2.7, 8. Therefore thought it best here to con∣ceale his Name, and to waive his ordinary title, least he should  assume to him∣self also the Title of Apostolus Hebraeorum, the A∣postle of the Hebrews, which properly belonged to another. And therefore though he might in an extraordinary way be employed by the Holy
Ghost in writing this Epistle to the people of that Nation (as Saint James also did.) yet withall he is very cautious herein to put them in minde of their duty to their own peculiar Guides that had the rule over them, which we see he doth once and again in this 13 Chapter vers. 7.17.24. But the truth is (as it is said) these reasons are but conjectural, that which is to satisfie us in this point is this, even so it seemed good to the Holy Ghost.
And thus I have given a large and clear resolu∣tion of this doubtful matter, which indeed was but fit to be done, because I do here oftentimes speak of the said Apostle, as the sure and certain Authour of that Epistle.
Secondly, Whereas there are sundry branches of this Treatise, which do seem to have no affi∣nity with the sense of the Apostle in the Text, and consequently not to be connatural with the main Doctrine that is here insisted upon, I answer, First, As Jesus Christ himself is (according to the A∣postles word) All and in All,Col. 3.11. That sea of living waters by whom all springs and rivulets of divine truth have their rise and original, and unto which they must return again; so is this Text, as it is here interpreted, not onely comprehensive of the
whole mystery of Christ, but also of the whole duty of man towards him: And therefore that which is here written in order thereunto should not be accounted as an impertinent digression.
Secondly, it is no new thing to finde corolla∣ries and collateral intersertions superadded in a way of subserviency to the principal subject hand∣led in Tractates either of a Theological or meer Humane Alloy: For it is with Books (as one very well makes the resemblance) as it is with Trees, these have some Masters and chief Branches in which the main Sap of the Root is carried, but they have also some under-spriggs and water-boughs, which by the vegetation of the princi∣pal Shootes do prosper the better, and are made to serve both for ornament and fecundity to the whole Body; Those have commonly some emi∣nent subject into which their whole strength and stream runs, but they have likewise sundry Pa∣rerga of less consequence annexed thereto, which though abstractedly considered may seem to be at a wide distance, yet being Methodically linked together, have a coalescency, imparting each to other both illustration and confirmation. So is it here, sundry resultancies and inferences do occa∣sionally spring up in this Book, as there do in all
our Sermons that we undertake, when the bloud and juyce of it runs chiefly into the Apostles sense of the Text, viz. the Doctrine of the Eternity and Immutability of the Lord Jesus Christ, which giveth life unto all the rest. So that what the Evangelist Saint John spake of his Gospel which he wrote the same may I say of all that is contain∣ed in this Book, These things are written that you might believe that Jesus is the Christ, and that believing you might have life through his name.
But I hear what is further objected, as, that I multiply Quotations, borrow the help of sundry Authours, and do but actum agere, bring the same crambe of words, repeating what hath sufficiently been imparted to the World by others, who have at large, and with much perspicuity and se∣renity of spiritual Wisdome writen of this sub∣ject. Now though I have hinted at this before, yet I conceive a necessity is laid upon me to rejoyn unto this Charge a full and clear Vindication.
First then, this I say, I know not of any that hath written of this subject so largely before me; But this I know, that both for the matter and manner of handling it, as it is grounded upon that foundation, which is precedaneous unto it, I am alone without any competitours or pretenders whatsoever.

Secondly, I do yield that I have in the carrying on of this Work consulted with Writers both An∣cient and Modern; and have thereupon, not without good cause been the bolder to offer my conceptions to publick view (though possibly in some places they may not be well resented) find∣ing them confirmed by those that have been wor∣thily reputed burning and shining Lights of the Church in their several Generations, who have born the burden and heat of the day in the Lords Vineyard, and upon whose Labours we are now happily entred. Yea more, I have not onely con∣sulted them, but frequently made use of their Te∣stimony, rendring it in their own words, some∣times to put by Imputations of Collusion, other∣whiles for the Conviction of Adversaries, alwayes to give full satisfaction to those who shall dili∣gently apply themselves to a religious perusal hereof. Nor am I at all ashamed to acknowledge what I have done in this kinde, nor need I fear to be taxed with any Plagiary superinducements of other mens Labours, though indeed as I have gone thorough my Neighbours Fields (the Owners whereof I do for the most part signifie by name) I have here and there plucked some Eares of Corn, and fitted them for my purpose
(which by a natural propriety is challenged of all as a common right) yet I have no where put in my Si∣ckle, and so can plead a justification in that particu∣lar. Howbeit this I may without arrogancy make my Plea: viz. My borrowing, whatsoever it hath been, is fully counter-ballanced with my lending again, which though it be to be reckoned but as a poor Mite cast into the Lords Treasury, yet it is se∣cundum mensuram donationis Christi, ac moderationem Spiritus dividentis singulis prout vult, and may through Gods blessing be to the furtherance of the Gospel, especially in regard of those interpre∣tations of Scripture, which I have here given, to which no Expositors of Holy Writ, nor any Authours whatsoever could lay any claim, nor any of their Assertours can at this day for them: All which I do humbly commend to the Chur∣ches Examination, a List whereof I conceive fit here to present unto you, though the Table at the latter end of the Book will give directions by Asterisks to the places where they are to be found.

Exodus 33.18. I beseech thee shew me thy Glory.
Exodus 33.19. And he said I will make all my good∣ness, &c.

Exod 34.6. And the Lord passed by before him and proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God, &c.
Deut. 32.7. Remember the dayes of old, consider the years, &c.
Deut. 32.8. When the most high divided to the Na∣tions, &c.
Deut. 32.12. The Lord alone did lead him, &c.
Deut. 33.5. And he was King in Jeshurun, &c.
Psalm. 2.7. I will declare the Decree, &c.
Psalm. 8.3. When I consider thy Heavens, &c.
Psal. 74.12. For God is my King of old, &c.
Daniel 9.24. Seventy Weekes are determined, &c.
Amos 5.18. Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord, &c.
Amos 5.19. As if a man did flee from a Lyon, &c.
John 1.10. He was in the World, and the World was made, &c.
John 1.11. He came unto his own, and his own, &c.
John 1.14. The word was made flesh, &c.
Acts 1.6. When they therefore were come together, &c.
Acts 1.7. It is not for you to know the times, &c.
Rom. 8.19. For the earnest expectation of the Crea∣ture, &c.
Rom. 8.20. For the creature was made subject to va∣nity, &c.

Rom. 8.21. Because the creature also it self shall be delivered, &c.
Rom. 8.22. For we know that the whole Creation groaneth, &c.
Rom. 8.29. The first-born among many Brethren, &c.
Rom. 11.25. Blindness in part is hapned to Israel, un∣til, &c.
Rom. 11.26. And so all Israel shall be saved, &c.
Rom. 11.27. For this is my Covenant with them, when, &c.
Gal. 4.5. To redeem them that were under the Law, that we, &c.
Col. 1.15. Who is the Image of the invisible God, &c.
1 Tim. 2.5. For there is one God and one Mediatour, &c.
Tit. 1.5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, &c.
Tit. 1.7. For a Bishop must be blameless, &c.
1 Pet. 4.17. For the time is come that judgement must begin, &c.
1 Pet. 4.18. And if the righteous scarcely be saved, &c.
Rev. 1.11. I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, &c.

The Interpretation of these Texts of Scripture
(Gentle Reader) as they are rendred in this Trea∣tise, I do leave unto thy most serious considerati∣on: Not but that there are besides these, sundry Expositions of other places of Scripture here also given that are not usual, yet nevertheless may well be conceived to be according to truth, without condemning those that have been commonly re∣ceived. These likewise you will meet with as you go along in your reading, and will require your most ponderous meditations. Onely I do desire that when you meet with an interpretation of the Holy Scripture which may seem somewhat strange unto you, not to be hasty in passing cen∣sure upon it, till you have found the whole dis∣course about it to be fully finished.
Again, it will perhaps be objected unto me by some, that I do here take but a slight occasion to be very large and vehement in maintaining the honour of our Church against her Adversaries, by justifying the Order which she observeth in the Publick Worship of God, and Ecclesiastical Go∣vernment: Whereto it may well be answered, Is there not a cause? When not onely the Church which is our Mother, the most eminent Pillar and Stay of Divine Truth hath been miserably rent and torn by Schismes and Divisions, but our Lord
Jesus Christ himself also was very much disho∣noured thereby, being made by a sort of wretch∣ed people the very Authour and Fautor of their Divisions; as if he had not been, and were not still to be to his poor Church what the Text here insisted upon, proclaims him to be, viz. , the Same? Cause enough then there is for every true Son of the Church to spend his Zeal in this Contrast upon all occasions, and to marke them as the Apostle adviseth, who cause these Divisions and Offences, that they may be avoyded.
It must be confessed, the late Schisme, while it grew more and more prevalent in this Kingdome till it pleased God to reduce us to our pristine or∣der by a merciful providence never to be forgot∣ten, did bring us especially of the Ministery into such a low despondency and pusillanimity of spi∣rit, that we had almost lost that Christian Valour, yea and English courage pro aris & focis, for which our Church and Nation have in times be∣fore us been so much renowned: But since the Lord God hath spoken, who can but prophecy? when deliverance hath been sent unto us by the out-stretched arm of an Almighty Power, who can forbear to rejoyce in it? And when God hath shewed us our Errour, in suffering our selves to
be deluded by a spirit of seduction, who can but lament his back-slidings, and appeare with his ut∣most strength in the vindication of that Truth and Church, which have been so treacherously forsaken? For my own part I do here in the truth and uprightness of my heart solemnly pro∣test before God and men, as I have been ashamed of my credulity in giving heed for some time to the cunning insinuations of those who pretended they were for the cause of God, but were found Lyars, so now (though possibly it may be said of me, as it was of Saint Paul,2 Cor. 10.10. that my bodyly pre∣sence is weak, and my speech contemptible, and therefore it is but little that can be expected from me that may be for the advantage of the Church in any kinde (all which I will not deny) yet) I do and must account it my duty with that little strength that I have, to endeavour what I can by all wayes and means the undeceiving of those poor seduced people, who, being bewitched with the like sorceries, do yet continue in their perverseness against the Lord and against his Anointed. What else should I do after so woful a defection that hath been among us, when, to my apprehension, I hear often the word of our Saviour to his Apo∣stle Saint Peter sounding in mine eares,Luk. 22.32. tu conver∣sus
confirma fratres, when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren: Let no man therefore blame me for my forwardness and vehemency in this matter upon any occasion, for I cannot but speak the things which I have seen and heard, as the same Apostle also said; yea let my tongue cleave to the roofe of my mouth, and my right hand forget her skill (how poor and slender so∣ever it be) if my tongue and pen both be not now ready for the Churches service, to fill up the ac∣clamation at the setting on the Head-stone of this great Work of Omnipotency in the re-establish∣ment of Order among us, both in point of Di∣vine Worship, and of Civil and Ecclesiastical Go∣vernment, with Grace, Grace unto it.
Lastly, I should now also be loth to be so far mistaken, as that by giving new experiments of rendring the sense of Scripture otherwise then it hath been generally taken, I should thereby in∣cline to favour that upstart Sect of holders-forth of new Lights, and new Truths, against whom I have alwayes protested my dislike with much loathing and abhorrency, and do still account of them no better then the smoke that comes out of the bottomless pit, which would in time darken the light of the Gospel, as much as the foggy
mists of Popery ever did, where it prevaileth. Deplorable is their estate, and accursed be their at∣tempts whosoever they are that set up any of their pretended Lights in competition with the Holy Scripture, and are not contented with that truth which hath already been revealed to the Church in those things that are necessary to salvation. The bed of divine truth is green all the year long,Cant. 1.16. no filthy weeds of spotted Errour so much as once appearing therein, nor no room at all to be found for any more seeds to be sowen in it, the smell thereof is so acceptably fragrant to every true be∣liever, that the scent of all things else in this world, how pleasing soever to flesh and bloud, is of no value with him, but noisome in comparison. If we therefore (to use the Apostles words) or an Angel from Heaven should trample upon this bed, or deface the beauty of it by scattering in it any other seeds, which (of what nature soever they be) will prove in effect to be nothing else, but the Tares of the Enemy, let him be Anathema. But to uncover this bed, and to shew what a delectable variety there is in the sweet nature of it, to the end that those who take pleasure in beholding it, may more and more affect it, will I hope be adjudged, by those that have judgment to discern, to be no
faulty compliancy at all with new fangled Opini∣onists, who pretending to novel discoveries of truth, root up the foundation. There is certain∣ly, as in Plants many secrets of nature that are yet unknown, so, in the Scripture much of the minde of God that former Ages hath not been acquaint∣ed with, which they that come after may under∣stand more perfectly, especially in the sense of those Prophecies which are to have their full ac∣complishment in the last Times. Truth is not now barren, as one observeth well, although she was prodigal in teaching our Ancestours (Etiam quicunque fuere mortalium sapientissimi, multa scisse di∣cuntur, non omnia) she hath a reserve laid up in her Cabinet for her friends and followers at this day, and will ever have, till she opens all her treasures unto them at the last day.
I say therefore, as countenance is not to be gi∣ven to those Masters of Novelties and new-Light Mongers of these dayes, who frequently and con∣fidently from the light within them vent most damnable Opinions, expresly contrary to the Written Word (as the Gnosticks of old did, whose Disciples they are, though they know it not) so should encouragement be given to those, who taking along with them the Analogy of Faith, and
the Analysis of those Places of Scripture which they fix their Meditations upon, are so happy as to finde out other interpretations thereof then were before known, which may occasion more light also to spring up in the Church to the glo∣ry of God, and advancement of the Gospel.
To which glorious ends that all whatsoever is here written in this following Treatise may hap∣pily tend, hath been, and shall constantly be the hearty Prayer of the poor unworthy Authour thereof, who is
(Dear Christian)

