



May it please Your Excellency,
THese Pieces of LUCIAN, which (as your Excellency can beare mee wit∣nesse) were Translated for your pri∣vate Entertainment above five and twenty yeares since, like Fugitive servants broken forth out of your Clo∣set, do now returne to you in a more Publike way. And truly, My Lord, whether it were Malice or Mis∣take I know not, but they were here in this place ta∣ken for Wanderers; And when they went to the Presse, met the Whipping-post in their way, by

the over severe persecution of some needlesly mo∣rose.
I need not tell your Excellency, that Translations compared with their Originals are commonly pictures of very differing shapes; Or that the Conversion of the meanest Author from one Tongue into another is so hard a Taske, that the undertaker may as well contrive a Marriage between two disagreeing Elements; or beget a friendship between Fire and Snow, as reconcile the se∣verall proprieties in which the severall. Tongues speake.
For as the Painter who would draw a man of a bald head, rumpled fore-head, copper nose, pigge eyes, and ugly face, drawes him not to Life, nor doth the businesse of his Art, if he draw him less deform∣ed, or ugly then he is; Or as he who would draw a faire, amiable Lady, limbes with an erring pencill, and drawes a Libell, not a Face, if he give her not her just features, and perfections: So in the Translation of Bookes, He who makes a dull Author, Elegant and quick; or a sharp, elegant Author flat, rustick, rude and dull, by contrary wayes commits the same sinne, and cannot be said to translate, but to trans∣forme. Now of all Authours, I know none more hard to be render'd like Himselfe then Lucian: whose Greeke is not of one uniforme Webbe, like Plato, Thucidides, Polibius, or Eunapius; but of such a new, and particular Stile, and Composition, that his best Interpreters into Latine, Erasmus, Sr Thomas

Moore, Melancthon, and some others, after all their learned diligence have but made him speake like a raw Traveller from one Country to another, and to expresse his mind imperfectly in the broken language of the place. The sharpnesse of his wit, the salt of his Expressions, the humour of his stile, and the Ayre of His conceptions, which in all his Writings have a secret, charming mixture, will require a pen dipt often in the standish, and the very Soul and Genius of the Author transmigrated into the Quill and Fancy of the Transla∣tour.
How great a Rhetoritian, and Orator he was, ap∣peares by his Orations. Some of which for the weight of his Arguments, the Distribution, and close pursuit of the parts, the Roundnesse of his periods: the rare Art in the choyce of his words, and Transitions, natu∣rally sliding into one another, and musically tyed toge∣ther, in a full floud, and torrent of perswasion: and yet like an even, un-interrupted stream, every where like himselfe, without Inaequalities, or swellings, may, without disparagement to such great Princes in that Art, stand in competition with the best Orations in Demosthenes, or Isocrates; And do farre exceed any thing spoken by Gorgius, Leontinus, or Aeschi∣nes, who in their Times were called the Eloquence of Greece.
'Tis true, His Subject, like Quintilian's in his De∣clamations, is sometimes Poeticall, and Fayned. But so free from Impossibilities, both for the matter, and

the Dresse, the same skill which made him plead for the Dis-inherited Sonne, in any reall Court of Iustice would have sent him victorious from the Bar, and have made the Iudges side with his defended Truth.
Perhaps some, who (without Rivals) do think them∣selves great Oratours, may differ from me in Opinion. But surely more out of Pride, and Kindnesse to their own Meteor-compositions, then justice to Lucian: who, had he seen a self-conceited Preacher goe up bus∣kind into the Pulpit, and there in a Tragicall stile, and voyce as Cothurnall, entertain his Hearers with a Romantick showre of words, which promised De∣monstration, the great Mountain of Discourse, but brought forth an abortive, poor, topicall Mouse; If he should hear a Text of Scripture transformed into a Chaos, pursued without just order, & stuffed with Bom∣bast, & confusion; sometimes flying aloft into a thin cloud of Non-sence, as if the Preacher aymed at some high preferment in the Moon; or else had stolne his Sermon from Lucian's true History, which speaks of Ants & Gnats as big as Elephants, and Whales; and de∣scribes Battles fought by two Armies in the Sun; some∣times puft up into such bubbles of Expression, as sound big to the eare, but are but bubbles to the eye, he would doubtless send such Garagantua, tumid Orators to the Doctor who cured his Lexiphanes of his Fustian dis∣ease, who upon the taking of a purge was deliver'd of a Tympany, and made to vomit all his tuffe, affected words, his Anodynes, Efforts, and Exertions up againe.
But I do not wonder that such Opiniators should be sick of this Disease: who having succeded a canting Generation of men, whose Rhetorick was as rude, & mechanick as their persons, do defile the English Tongue with their Republick words, which are most immusicall to the Eare, and scarce significant to a Monarchicall understanding. Words which are the meer Excrements of Language; which proceeded from the late Body politick of this Vncivilized Nation, and were not allowed their legitimate concoxion, but broke forth into the World with Brutishness, and Re∣bellion Coyned, & minted by those Seditious, Rump Grammarians, who did put their own impressions to the Kings Silver, and so committed Treason against their Prince, and their own rude stamp and sense to their Goth and Vandall words; and so committed Treason against His good people. Quem penes Arbitrium est & Ius & Normaloquendi.
Indeed it would make a man, who hath a true Taste in Rhetorick, and knowes from what fountains the wa∣ters are to be drawn, what ancient Examples in that Art are to be followed, and what just measure of Oyle is to be powr'd into his Lamp, who will speak with success, fall into a fit of Indignation, when he hears a rumbling fellow, to whom a Trope or Figure is unknowne, much more the Laws which give power and strength to a Discourse, start up a Rhetorician with no other furniture but Face, Impudence, and Noyse. And affront the ears of his hearers with a lump & heap of

such indigested stuffe, as hath no other excuse but that he spew'd it unpraemeditated. Such fellowes are only eloquent by faction; and nothing can pre∣serve them from being like the tumultuary Orator, who bespoke a set of friends still to vote his speeches good.
How exactly skiled in all sorts of Philosophy he was, and how fit to sit down in the chaire, and be the Iudge of Controversies, your Excellency may perceive by his curious, and Logicall examination of all Sects, In his Hermotemus. From whence I know not whether Lactantius did not borrow his Christian Arguments to prove, that as they all grosly erred in their Notion of true Happiness, (concerning which there were as many Opinions, as there were severall Schooles and Sects) so they were all no less mistaken in their Notion of Truth. Both, like the Oracle, concluding Socrates to be the VVisest man for saying, That he only knew this one Truth, that he truly knew no∣thing.
As for his Wit (a thing never yet perfectly defined) He hath had this previledge beyond most other Wri∣ters, That as it never wanted a solid Ground and Foundation in Matter, so after so many Ages 'tis still Fresh and currant. Aristophanes, in a Comicall way, was doubtless one of the greatest wits of his Time. And the like might be said of Menander, if Time, which de∣vours its children, had left us more thē his Fragments, to judg him by: yet their wit being only fitted to the Hu∣mours

and Persons of their own present Times, for the most part entred with the Prologue, and expired with the Epilogue of their Comoedies. And is now wit to none but those, who have taken the paines to be acquainted with the Manners of that Age; And can raise Laughter to themselves from the help of a Scholi∣ast, to tell them, why Socrates was made ridiculous for being a grave man, or Cleon for being a Knight, and Senator of Athens.
The truth is, some kinds of wit are like some kinds of Garments, which hold fashion for a while, but grow old in the wearing, and are left off in compliance to a newer mode. Or as 'tis with small wines, which taste quick upon the place where they grow, but pawle, and dye, by the way, if they be transported by Sea into another Country.
Men of vulgar Iudgments, and sanguine aâry cōprehensions, think all wit cōsists in the sudden brea∣king of a Iest, or the quickness of an Epigram, or the Tooth of a Satyre, or the Newness of a Saying, which was not heard before: but these are but the lighter Ingredients of wit, which like Squibs, flash, and blaze, and perish in the kindling. To make wit last∣ing, and long lived, a well weighed mixture of Reason is required; A working Invention to contrive, and de∣sign, a quick fancy to give the Edge, and a sharpe Iudgement to apply, and to shape, and square all this to present Subject, and Occasion. In all which this Au∣thor was so great a Master, that his Compositions

will be as lasting as the World. And his Images have already out-liv'd the Statues of Phidias, and Ly∣sippus, though to give them Immortality, they were carved, and wrought in Marble, and Corinthi∣an Brasse.
Notwithstanding all these Excellencies, set off with as great a variety of wit and matter, as can possibly match profit with delight; some Vineger men, at whose Births sure Saturne raign'd, and convey'd his leaden Influence into their Morosity and Manners, are not content in their dull, pedantick way to persecute all wit, as vitious, and profane, but seem wholy to incline to Sr Iohn Sucklin's opinion, who made a rich Alder∣man of London to have the greatest wit, for being perfectly well gifted in the Art of getting Money.
And these are they, My Lord, who have most wretch∣edly endeavour'd to change the fabulous Tradition, which goeth of Lucian's Death into true story; That returning from a Feast he was torne in pieces by Dogs. For first, among their other Ignorant aspersi∣ons, they have not stuck to call him Atheist: But is it not strange they should accuse Him of Atheism, who so ingeniously drove Idolatry out of the World? Before whose wit the Heathen Images fell to the Ground, as Dagon did before the Arke of God in the Scripture? Who did the business of S. Paul, and the rest of the A∣postles, by taking their Divinity from God's of wood and stone? Who stopt the mouthes of Oracles, quencht the fires upon their Altars, turn'd their Temples into

Deserts, undisguised their Delusions, and taught the cosen'd World that they payd deare for Lyes and Cheats? Was he an Atheist who would not allow their Iupiter to be the Thunderer in Heaven, whose Sepulcher and Cradle were to be seen in Creet? Who thought no Religion was due to a Venus made of Ivory; or to an Aesculapius which was the Crea∣ture of a Smith? Who laught at Gods made of the same Materials with their Altars; And thought an Apollo hewn out of a Tree not fit to be Worship't, but to Kindle an Oblation. If for this they call him Atheist, they cannot acquit themselves from being Infidels, and Heathens. They might as well affirme that Clemens of Alexandria, Arnobius, Iustin Martyr, St Austin, and as many Fathers of the Church, as armed their Pens against the Super∣stitions of those Times, were bred in Lucian's Schoole: and like Him, were Atheists too. Since they onely in a sober way proved such Gods to be no Gods: He exposed them to the scorne and contempt of those who did adore them. So that for my part, I know not to whose writings wee more owe our Chri∣stianity, where the true God hath succeeded such a multitude of false, whether to their grave confuta∣tions, or to his facetious wit.
Next, they object That hee is too Satyricall, and puts too much Gall into his Inke. 'Tis much to be su∣spected That They who thus object, are guilty of the Follies, Hypocrisies, and Crimes, which he with

so much pleasant wit labours to reforme. For if they were innocent, why should they read his Workes with such trembling apprehensions, as if he were risen from the dead to pluck off their Disguises, and say, Ye are the men I meane? Why should any man who is not like the Fantasticke Gentleman, who thought the bare having of a great Library, which hee understood not, nor ever meant to studie, would make him a great Scholar, quarrell with a dead Author, and speake hardly of his Ashes, for telling a story of one sick of this Disease, who bought Epi∣ctetus Candlesticks in hope it would make him a Philosopher? Or of one who at an excessive price bought Orpheus Harpe, thinking it would enable him to draw Beasts and Trees like Him, and without learning of the Art, would make him a rare Musi∣tian? Why should they be troubled with his Descri∣ption of a Feast, where a company of Wrangling Philosophers met; who began the meale with a grave Discourse of Vertue; then drank themselves drunke in praise of Sobriety and Fasting; Then, as their wine inspired them, proceeded to hard Notions; Then by vertue of a bigger Glasse to a comparison of Sects; From a comparison of Sects to most rude, un-manlike Raylings; which concluded in a Civil Warre, where Platters were made weapons, and were changed to pewter Syllogismes, throwne at one anothers Heads? Was he too much a Satyrist, who called such a meale as this, by the name of the Battle

fought betweene the Lapithae's and Centaures? Or was his Character too Keene of such Hypocriti∣call pretenders, for saying, that they were meere aequivocall Good men, whose Phylosophy and Ver∣tue lay in their sowre lookes, their artificiall Gra∣vity, their long beards, and formall Gownes? Did he bait his Hooke with too much Gall, who bai∣ted it with Gold, by which he makes whole Sholes of such grave dissembling men, place Happinesse in Wealth, and swimme Captives to his Angle? If such Truths as these deserve the name of Satyre, I must confesse hee was the best Satyrist in the World.
But can they who thus reproach him with the sharp∣nesse of his wit, say he was an Enemy to any thing but Vice? Was there ever a fairer Picture drawne of a truly Learned, Vertuous man then his De∣monax? Or could Demosthenes himselfe speake more in praise of his Owne Eloquence, then Lucian hath done for him? Or was there ever such a Pi∣cture of Beauty mixt with Vertue, as he drew of the Lady, which gave the Title to his Images? Yet some sowre formalists, who only want the long beards of his two faced Philosophers, to be as Pe∣dantick, and perhaps as learned as They, have not onely without wit disparaged Lucian's wit, which hath beene the Delight and Admiration of all Ages, but have grinned at Mee for being his Translatour. 'Tis not a worke proper for a Divine, say they. 'Tis

well St Chrysostome lives not in our Dayes. For if I be thus censured for turning a few pieces of him into English, what punishment did he deserve, who, being a Father of the Church, with a very pious Theft, converted severall parts of him into Homi∣lies and Sermons? But to assure their Wisdomes that they have barkt in the darke, without the help of Moon-shine to direct them in their Snarling, your Excellency knowes, I was no Divine, but a young Student of this Colledge, when these Sheets past through my Pen. But Lucian wrote against the Chri∣stians. 'Tis more tolerably spoken, and with lesse Ignorance then his, who said, Lucian was an Aerian, and wrote against Bishops. He might as well have sayd, that he wrote in Defence of Antichrist; Or that by the same Figure of wild Anticipation, He was an Arminian, because, In his Iupiter confuted, he wrote against Stoicisme, in the point of Fate, and Ab∣solute Decree. The truth is, these men have taken popular error for their Guide. For if they will give credit to the Iudgement of Philander, Micyllus, Opsopaeus, Cognatus, and some others, who by the difference of Wit and Style, could discover a Spuri∣ous Author from a true: the Dialogues in which the Christians are reproacht, were none of his. Or if they were, How am I to be accused, vvho have not made them English, but have left them lockt up in their owne untranslated Greeke? But he Wrote an Obscoene Lucius, and Meretricious Dilaogues,

not fit for the Eyes or Eares of a Chaste, or Chri∣stian Reader. These too I have left with their owne Curtaine drawne before them, and have not held a Candle to the Mysterious doings of a Stewes.
The truth is, My Lord, in this Translation I am guilty but of one great Offence, which these sharpe-sighted Men have most grosly overseene. And that is, not an Offence against them, but a∣gainst your Excellency, for not Translating more. Which I had done, if the late barbarous Times had not broke into my Study. And by raising a Rebellion against Learning, and their Prince, had not called You away to lead an Army in the Field. Where I reasonably supposed, that in the Head of a Campe, you could not finde leisure for such Divertisements as these. But when a Powerfull Enemy was in view, and ready to joyne Battle, would have thought it a very incongruous Recreation to read such Bookes as these with your Sword and Helmet on; or to Issue forth your Or∣ders with a Lucian in your hand. For the clea∣ring, therefore, of the many Obligations, which beyond all requitall you have often layd upon mee, I beseech you to accept of my Will for the Deed; Nor to dispise this Sacrifice, because the Sheepe is taken from another man's Fold, or because the Sheafe grew in another man's Field. But to put the greater value upon this meane Addresse, which

to show mee gratefull, hath put mee into the Num∣ber of those very poore people, who are fayne to borrow the Money with which they pay their Debts.

Christ Church.
Aug: 10, 1663.
