



SIR!
ACcording to your earnest desire and my promiss, I have sent up unto you the heads of those Reasons with large additions, which four years ago I tendred to som of our Church-forsakers, with hope to have gained them to unitie and communion with us. But by that time Hous∣preaching was counted a fine knack, and our English people taught to question the Calling of their Ministers, to call them by new names, Baals Priests, the black guard, Antichristian Priests, &c. And then 'tis high time to set up themselvs; if they had lived in the primitive times, when Christians did meet in dens and secret places for the worship of Christ, with hazard of their lives, they would have counted it a blessed privilege to enjoy the free use of the Ordinances in publike Assemblies; but now that libertie is granted, it is despised; our people are wanton and unthankful. Surely our Lord Christ was no Corner-creeping Preacher, Hee disclaimed it, I spake openly to the world, I ever taught in the Synagogue, whither the Jews resort,Joh. 18.20. and in secret have I said nothing: Neither doth hee allow it in his servants, whom hee forwarns not to seek him in Corners, Mat. 24.26 if they shall say unto you, Behold he is in the desart [among those which withdraw themselvs from the publike professors,] Go not forth; Behold hee is in the secret Chambers, Believ it not. When men shall say unto you, in such a hous or Chamber, there is one that hold's forth Christ most sweetly in a Gospel-way, let us go to him; Go not forth, saies the Text, Believ it not: How should any believ it? for what one new sweet Doctrine concerning Christ his person, or offices ave yee learned there, which yee were not taught before. Have yee y your new way gotten farther assurance of your salvation?
Have yee thereby grown in grace, and more escaped the corrup∣tions that are in the world through lust? or are yee more intangled in the same? What? Christ sweetly held forth, and yet no sa∣vour of that knowledg stick upon your souls? I demand with S. Paul,2 Cor. 11.4. Hee that cometh and preacheth, doth hee preach another Jesus, whom wee have not preached, or another spirit, or ano∣ther Gospel which yee have not accepted? Christ held forth in private, is it the same Christ, or another? the same way of Justi∣fication, the same spirit of sanctification, which wee have taught, or another? if another, I boldly affirm it, it is a fals Christ, a fals Gospel, a fals spirit: But if the same, why do people desert the Ordinance, as if it were not the same? Yes, becaus other men have a better way of Teaching Christ, and wee go not from one Christ to another, but to the same Christ held forth in a sweeter manner. Answ. If that bee the intent, then it is your wisest and surest way to partake of both, viz. of the Blessing of God in the Assemblies, and of the help of anothers gifts, either before or after the pub∣lick, by which means you will avoid the scandal now given (which an honest man will make conscience to do,) and you'l bee sure to meet with Christ, if hee bee any where manifested.
SIR, You may remember that I have often invited the people to com to mee, and open their doubts, which som have don (especi∣ally when self-examination of our spiritual estates was more in use amongst Christians.) Yea, I have offered, that if any soul could think of any matter or Text which might serv to answer their doubts, to eas their scruples, to direct their Consciences in particular Cases, or to inform their mindes in any point or Text not usually handled, that they should chuse the way to acquaint mee with their desires, and I would studie to answer their expecta∣tion: I do not remember, that any made use of this liberty, be∣sides your self, who once desired mee to preach upon that Text, Joh. 6.44. which I readily did in two Sermons, and shall as readily do the like, for any soul in the Congregation. I have not used
to trouble their heads with Controversies of the times; but when I had finished my Bodie of Divinitie, (which was the subject of my morning Sermons, wherein I aimed chiefly at Laying of foundations, as in the afternoons Sermons, going through som entire piece of Scripture (as the whole Epistle to the Galatians,) wherein I aimed especially at larger Applications for instruction in holiness and trials of our spiritual estate.) In the year 1647. The Testimonie of the London Ministers against the Errors of the times coming forth, I (to avoid suspicion of loading the times with Errors,) did take the Opinions as they were there drawn up to my hands and upon each head, I laid down one or two distin∣ctions very breifly (not by Obj. and Sol.) that so by sorting every thing apart, the Chaff by it self, the Wheat by it self;Heb. 5.14. my people might have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil, and see in which side of the distinction lay the Truth and in which the Error,Phil. 1.10. and so neither condemn all nor imbrace all things in the Lump, but bee able to discern things that differ. In all which, as in the cours of my ministerie, with all caution and tenderness avoiding this, Never to encourage any thing of the flesh, nor discourage any thing of the spirit in my Hearers. The which exercises, if God bee pleased to restore my health, I intend shortly to revise and publish.
Learned men will wonder, why I should come forth now in the Fag end of the day with a stale Controversie: But so long as sin reign's, we ought not to bee silent. Varietie of Books, though for matter the same, is of good use: You see that notwithstanding all the Ammunition in theCommon∣wealth or Nation. Kingdom, there is new made daily, some are naked, or the old is lost; so it is in Books, which are more needful then Arms, all com not into all hands, many would read little, if Books were not new. It's noted of the Arrians, that they got the sway of the world, and overtopt the Orthodox, partly by their subtilty crerping into Emperors Courts, partly by their unwearied diligence; the Orthodox after sound Confutation of
their Heresie, sitting down content with that discharge of their dutie: And surely if ever our glorious lights of the sanctuarie bee put out, and new ones set up in their stead, next unto God's wrath penally inflicting such a judgment for a Peoples unthankfulness, it will bee ascribed to our laziness, and their unwearied dili∣gence, rather then to any truth of their Caus; or excellence of their Arguing: For they do not or will not know when they are con∣futed, but after their Arguments answered ten times over, they are as brisk to offer new. disputation, insisting upon their old bald Arguments, as if never uttered before; their diligence should provoke us to the like, if not their diligence, yet love to their souls should,2 Tim. 2.25. remembring that of Paul, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselvs, if at any time God will give them re∣pentance to the acknowledging of the truth, that they may re∣cover themselvs out of the snare of the Divel, wee must not give over a Patient while there is hope, no not though they oppose themselvs, but with long-suffering they must bee instructed, becaus as the gift of grace, so the time of grace is in God's hand alone. It is a great skill to discern who are to bee forborn and who to bee opposed, they that make Divisions and parties in the Church and scandalize the Doctrine are to bee avoided,Rom. 16.17. others that walk hum∣bly and peaceably under that weakness and dissenting Opi∣nion from their brethren, are to bee forborn, loved, and cherished, till wee meet in heaven, where Luther and Calvin and all, whose Faith and hearts do center in the Lord Christ, shall for evermore bee fully agreed. To his Grace I commend you, who is able to establish you, and rest

