



Much Honoured Sir,
IT was the exprobration of Athens,Vertue and Magnani∣mity often sleighted. that she suf∣fered those men to dye in Exile, Ignominy and Oblivion, that with their vortuous endeavous had rear'd her up on the
pillars of fame. Miltiades, Aristi∣des, Solon, Phocion; Ubi vixe∣runt? ubi jacent? where liv'd they? where lie they? their worthy acts gave glory to that City, and that City covered them with the inglori∣ous dust of obscurity. How many worthy persons have ventured,All men take notice of faults, few enquire into perfe∣ctions. and lost lives and estates for the good of their King and Kingdom, and lie as forlorn, forgotten; nay, have not ma∣ny wrung blood out of the nostrils of Reason, in framing Arguments to their disgrace and dishonour; but they are blessed that have so suffered, and the Church hath in conclusion gain'd by their loss; yet, during the turbulent working of these thunder exhalati∣ons in our ayr,They who lay a foun∣dation of greatness, in irreligi∣on, will come to confusion. we have lamented, Miseram regni faciem, the mise∣rable estate of our Countrey, whose face hath been scratch'd and torn by the bloody nails of persecuting Bears, and the wretched instruments of blood and cruelty rewarded; Noble Sir,
not onely your many respects, and un∣merited favours congested and heap∣ed upon me in my poor-low condition,Revenge unsutable for Christi∣ans. occasioned by the injustice of those in Authority, and malice of adversa∣ries, (whom God forgive) depriving me of my means, the support and livelihood of my wife and children; but your great sufferings for Charles the first, of blessed memory,One hour of the Suns eclipse, is more gazed at, then a thousand clear days. Hujus seculi miraculum, and constant loy∣alty towards our gratious Soveraign, King Charles the second, Nulli se∣cundus, moves me to this Dedica∣tion; you have layn long at the Cape bona speranza, and what you have with sighs so heartily prayed for,Patience is the greatest sufferer, and the greatest conquerer. and with confidence and patience expected, your eyes now behold, and your heart rejoyeth at the wonderfull restauration of your liege Lord and Soveraign, the breath of your nostrils, as dear and pretious as your own soul.
My first Treatise, in defence of the Ministry, (in such times as few mouths
were open for it, and not without appa∣rent danger and hazard to my self, the honour of the Ministers of the Gospel, then thriving like trees in Autumne) was by you as curteously entertain'd, as faithfully offered. I have observed (right Worshipfull) your detestation of those horrible wickednesses committed;The house of the just a strong bulwark. your sense of that generall, and sensible declination in zeal, both to Religion and Justice, the two main pillars and supporters of Church and State; your love to all pious Orthodox Ministers, and contempt of those, that of a cast servitor, get into the Churches service, out of the chamber into the Chancel, and from the buttry-hatch, into the Pulpit; your exceeding pity and compassion to the Church of God, made havock of by a savage kind of people;Wisdom, prudence, goodness, magnani∣mity, coun∣sell, and whatsoever is praise∣worthy. your readiness and willingness (had you a thousand lives) to sacrifice them all for your Countrey; yea, let me say (without flat∣tery) there is nothing wanting that may sit you for the discharge of the
weightiest employment; and render you a true Christian, and worthy to suc∣ceed in your Noble fathers honour. I shall not (worthy Sir) enlarge my self on your sweet temper of spirit, your noble mind, your piety towards God, charity towards the oppressed,Piety dispo∣seth the actions to glorious actions. your skill in the French and Italian Tongues, how mature and wise your counsels; how sober and serious your actions; how well ordered and regulated your fami∣ly;Cato was preferr'd befor Ari∣stides, be∣cause he was Pater familias. how well esteemed and beloved by your Country; which particulars, to in∣siston, would swell to a Volume. In a word, you are not wanting in that, which is the life of Christianity, and Nobility, a good, and holy life; honour excluding vertue, ends in shame; and of such an one, it may be said, Quanto ornatior,Dignity in a person unworthy, is an orna∣ment in the dirt. tanto ne∣quior; the more adorned, the more wicked, God regards the title of Opti∣mus, more then Maximus; greatness is the fairest object to the worlds eye, but goodness to the eye of heaven; it is a
foolish dream to hope for immortality, and a long lasting name, by a Monu∣ment of brass or stone; it is your good life that shall immortalize your memo∣ry,A good conscience casteth the shadow of a singular reputation. and make every heart your Tomb, and every tongue your Pen, to write your deathless Epitaph. Worthy Sir, I must end where I began, with an humble acknowlegement, in testimony whereof, I have set to my hand, and sent it as a token of the gratitude of my heart, with my unfeigned prayers, and hearty wishes of all reall happiness to your noble self, most vertuous Lady, and sweet children, I remain,

From my Study at Wellington, May 24. 1660.
