



Grave Senatours,
IT may seem, not only an in∣discreet, but a presumptious (yea unsufferable) Act, in one so mean as I am, to press with so plain a piece into your most honourable pre∣sence. And indeed it would be nothing less, were it not that all other ways of finding re∣lief
for my self and a poor oppressed Con∣gregation of professed Christians, who have chosen me to be their Minister, were hedged up. I do not presume to come before you out of any absurd trust or vain confidence that I shall finde favour; neither can fear of displeasing keep me off (for that in either I should have dishonourable thoughts of that dreadfull Tri∣bunal; which all that are lovers of God, their Country, and true Religion, will make a con∣science of entertaining but in expectance and hope to finde Justice, as it is meet I and every one else should at your hands; so it is (may it please your honours) that for preaching of these Sermons (which here I humbly present to your view) I was judged unworthy to be con∣tinued in the employment of Gospel-preaching by such as are mine and the Truths, yea most of them the States enemies. And thereupon a great part of my livelyhood was (and is yet) detained, though setled in a regular way upon certain Trustees to my use (as being the Law∣full preaching Minister of Tavistock in De∣von) out of a Sheaf or Rectory neer adjoyn∣ing; taken in 15 years value at 90. l. per an∣num: 1350 l. being deducted in lieu of the said Parsonage out of the fine which the Gentleman was set at in his Composition for Delinquency, who formerly was seized in Fee-simple therein.

Whereupon receiving (as I apprehended it) a Call from God, to be employed in my Fun∣ction elsewhere, I obeyed it; and departed from the aforesaid Town of Tavistock, with a purpose to return thither no more to dwell among them.
But receiving Letters from the godly party, from time to time, in which there seemed to be a strong continued Call that I must re∣turn: I began to consider what was best to be done, whether to prefer my profit and ease be∣fore suffering affliction with the People of God (as I had cause to fear I did) or to trust God, of whose owning of me (with humility be it written) I had so many, so great experiences: And at last I resolved to advise with Godly, learned and judicious Ministers, which thing I also did, and found them all to agree (upon view of the Letters sent me) that I must re∣turn. One said,
Mr. H.P. that I could not part with the Godly party at Tavistock; and that he believed others would be of his minde when they did view the Call. Another,
Mr. L.S. that I would go off lame, and not recover while I did return. And so a third likewise; adding that my Case was his, and he must return to — whence for want of maintenance he had departed. Here God enabled me to deny my self, and I
wrote from London news of my resolution to come among them.
Mr. I.B. But as soon as that news came to the ears of the adverse party, it can∣not be imagined with what wrath of pride they run together. I will set down an extract of a Letter. — For since we heard that happy news of your comming, the Enemies do most furiously age, and have acted to∣gether (as we hear) to send a Letter to the Earl of Bedford, that at no hand he shall pre∣sent you, &c.
Now that I may sum up all in a few lines; This is the case; I was chosen by the Inhabi∣tants of Tavistock (My Lord of Bedford having promised to present and pay him whom they would chuse.) Their choice under many score hands, accompanied with attestations of the neighbouring Ministers, procured a legal presentation to the incumbency, without my stirring at all in the business, (indeed (to say truth) I had not freedom of spirit to do) I continued Preaching Minister quietly some time, and might still, had not my judgement concerning Discipline made me liable to dislike and Obloquy.
But now, they that were otherwise judge∣mented, and profane ones, gnash their teeth to see Christs Ordinances on foot in publique, and
themselves laid by as Reprobate Silver; and begin to quarrel at my preaching, and to joyne shoulder to shoulder against the new Church (as they were pleased to call us that laboured to serve God in the spirit, according to his word) and would have another to be their Minister that would, (according to Custome,) carry on (as they call it) Gods good service; Hereupon the Rascal Multitude are encouraged to abuse the Godly Party. Such as were Officers, Troo∣pers, and Foot-Souldiers in the late Kings Ar∣my, are thought fitter to be chosen Officers for the Parish, then men that have lain in prison or by the hedges in cold nights, and have been Plundered for their fidelity to the Parliament by their own wicked Neighbours; while the ringleader of this present adverse Party was in the Kings Quarters in Cornwall; Who now stands up like a Champion, and with big words thinks to trample down Gods People whom he (in a Letter written to one of them) calld the Rigid Faction.
I Humbly crave leave in the heat of a Christian, and fidelity of a Commoner of Eng∣land, to write, and I will write no more then I can proove (for I know whom I appeal unto) that the differences at Tavistock are no other but between Christ and Belial; The Common
Wealth of England and Royalty; worshipping of God according to rule, and Superstitious customary formality, whatever men pretend to the contrary.
Now because these ensuing Sermons are so cried down for unsufferable railing with which they are stufft by report of the Enemy; I have faithfully transcribed them and (with the help of such as wrote in short hand) brought them to that pass that now they appear in: Being verily perswaded that not one harsh expression (which might be more excepted against then another) is left out. Neither would I be thought to print them out of opinion that (in these glorious times of Gods giving gifts to men) they will give any great blaze; But to give an account of my manner of speaking in the name of the Lord: That so, if it seem good unto you, I may be restored to my bre∣thren and employment in the work of the Lord at Tavistock (though I shall in regard of means of subsistence have much less then I am to have should I continue Minister there, where I am come under the bond of Conscience; and whither I am by jealous Letters, and by strong Arguments woed to return again) Or other∣wise may submit to Gods will and pleasure (in whose hands are the hearts of all, to turn them
which way soever he pleaseth; and therefore yours) with this comfortable testimony, in mine own Soul, that I am ready to do my duty, keep my station, and go in and out before the People over whom the Lord hath made me Overseer: So far and so long as it shall please his heavenly Majesty to give me life, liveli∣hood and liberty so to do. And if my Ad∣versaries have any thing to charge me with, that is of legal cognisance; I stand at our English Caesars judgement seat, where let me be judged in Gods name. I that have learnd by his Grace to look with boldness on my Fa∣ther in Heaven, in Christ; need not fear those (but rather flie to them,) that are his Mini∣sters for our good on Earth; besides I am of them that have in most parts of England,
I was Captive to the Lord Vi∣coun Lisle, &c. and to Sir Har. Waller. the first four years of the ten at Breer∣wich, and elsewhere in Knt. and also in Ireland adventured my life, spent my strength and poor estate; often endangered my liberty, and limbs, and health, in my faithfull service of, and adhaering to the Parliament of England, for these Ten years last past, since my return to my native land from that exile which Episcopal Tyranny and tenderness of conscience forced me unto. I am loth to be too bold, I might boast of my many and great sufferings under the Prelacy, and of Gods wonderfull de∣liverances vouchsafed me in those dayes: but I
will make an end, humbly submitting my Ser∣mon to your censure, mine outward man to your ordering, and you shall I commend in my daily prayers (as in duty bound) to Jehovah Elohim, that you may be a blessing to the Common-Wealth, a joy to the good, a terror to the bad, and successfull in all your undertakings.
London, May 12. 1652.

