



Honoured Sir,
I Have long had an Ambition to lay some∣thing at your Feet that might be wor∣thy your Protection, but despairing to produce any thing my self deserving of that Honour, and impatient of making known how Proud I am of being in the Crowd of your Admirers, I cou'd not but lay hold of this Opportunity, where the Merit of the Sub∣ject, and Assistants I have had, might in some Measure attone for what is deficient in my Performance. I offer, Sir, to your Protection

this History of the Lives and Works of all the Dramatick Poets of your Native Country, of which few Nations have produc'd so great a Number under so very little Encouragements. But to shew them, Sir, the more Worthy your Patronage, I shall lay down a short Account of what Value their Art has been, in the most Polite and Politick, as well as most successful Go∣vernment in the World.
Athens, Rome, and France will furnish me with the Proofs I want. Athens gave Birth and Perfection to the Art, and seems, like the true Mother, to have been most fond of it, and herefore gave its professors the greatest Encou∣ragement. The Value that Government had for both is evident from these two Instances: Sophocles, as a Reward of his Antigone, had the Government of the City and Island of Samos confer'd upon him: And on the Death of Eupo∣lis in a Sea-Fight, there was a Law publish'd, that no Poet for the Future shou'd go to the Wars; so great a Loss they thought the Death of one Poet to the Commonwealth.
Thus we see that Athens that was the most Populous and Trading City of Greece, and which produc'd braver, better, and more learned Men than all Greece besides, prove, by the Encourage∣ment she gave Dramatick Poetry, that it was the Opinion of the Wisdom of that State, that Plays

were so far from being destructive of Industry and good Morals, that they were equally con∣ducive to the Honour and Advantage of its Peo∣ple.
To say nothing of the Care that was taken of the Poets, and the Esteem they were in among the Greatest and Bravest of the Old Romans; I shall only mention the Great Maecenas, who laid the Foundation of the greatest Monarchy that ever was in the World; who form'd as Great and Politick Designs, did as Great Servi∣ces to his Prince as any Man whatever; and and who indeed establish'd the greatest Emperor over the most Free and Polite People in the Uni∣verse; Maecenas I say, thought Poetry so worthy his peculiar Care, that we owe the best of the Roman Poets to him, and his Name is pass'd from a Proper to a Common Name for all Gene∣rous Patrons.
'Tis yet fresh in our Memories what that Ma∣ster in Politicks, the great Richelieu has done for these Politer Studies in France. The Theatres, the Academy remain a glorious Monument of it; and yet no Man could have fled with a better Pretence to the Multiplicity of Affairs, no Man ever dispatching more Business, or forming more Successful, and Serviceable-Designs for his Master's Advantage, and the present and suc∣ceeding Glory and Grandeur of Fre; for to

his Counsels the French Monarchy owes all that Terror and Power, with which we have seen all Europe so lately struggle with: And yet this great and busy Polititian could find a time in spight of the Weight of the whole Administra∣tion of France, to take Care of the Muses, and thought it an Honour to himself and Country for the lasting Advantage of learned Men and Poets. He took Care of the Reformation of the Stage, and by his Order the Abbe Hedeline, compos'd a Piece of the whole Art of the Stage.
But our Nation, alas! Furnish'd with as brave a People, and a greater Genius for Poetry than our Neighbours, had never yet been so hap∣py, as to find in the Administration, any Man with Soul enough, to think the Care of the Muses worth their Thoughts; and yet the World will never be induc'd to believe, that they are wiser or greater Politicians than Maecenas or Ri∣chelieu.
This Neglect of their Science has forc'd the Poets, who had nothing to expect from the Go∣vernment, to make the most Noble and useful School of Vertue, degenerate into a meer Di∣version; that they might Please an Audience, whence they cou'd only hope for their Support. And this has laid the Stage open to the weak As∣saults

of those whom either Biggottry, Intrest, or Hypocriy have made its Enemies.
'Tis not therefore the supine and criminal Neglect of the Great Men (I mean the Mini∣sters) of our Nation, that we are to form the Esteem that is due to this Science by; but the Care and value the most refin'd and most successful Polititians in the World have Discover'd for it; If the English States-Men come short of this, 'tis to be look'd on by all Men of true Sense, as their Defect and Infamy, not their Wisdom.
Wherefore, tho' the Publick has not yet thought fit to take this into its Consideration and Protection, yet I had reason to think a Man of Mr. Caesar's Qualifications, cou'd not but be pleas'd to extend his Protection to those, whose Business it is to celebrate the Vertues that gain you the general Esteem. You that forsook the lower Pleasures of Fortune and Youth, for the Pursuit of Honour and Glory in the War; You, Sir, that in your Actions have shown the Hero, have a nearer Reason than other Men, to take care of the Poets, whose task it is to cele∣brate the Heroes Deeds, and to transmit them in their most engaging Form to Posterity, for their Honour and Imitation.
Carmen amat quis{que} carmina digna gerit.

You, Sir, that have added to your Birth and Fortune so strong and general a Love, that your Wit, Sweetness of Temper, and Honour, defeat that Envy which Merit usually raises, will natu∣rally take care of those, whose Imployment it is to distinguish betwixt the Pretence, and Reality; the Man of true Sense and Bravery, and the Flashy Opiniator, and the vain Boaster of his own Deeds.
From you therefore I hope, Sir, a favourable Reception, when I shelter all our Dramatick Writers under the Protection of your Name; for in you we shall find a Manly, yet Modest Me∣rit
Worthy at once, and negligent of Fame.
Wit without Opiniatreture; but balanc'd with a true and penetrating Iudgment; Bravery which has nobly distinguish'd you from the Remisness of the Inglorious Youth of the Age, witness your Voluntary Campaigns in Flanders; a Ge∣nerosity that gets you the Esteem of all Men, while the sordid are the Contempt and Laughter of Men of Sense.
I need be no farther particular in the Enume∣ration of your Vertues, since where ever Gene∣rosity goes justly to the making up of a Chara∣cter, there can be no Vertue wanting. On this

Vertue, Sir, it is that I depend for your Pardon for the Presumption of this Dedication, which I hope I shall gain with the greater ease, because I have kept clear of the Crime of Dedications, Flattery, having confin'd my self much within the Compass of severe Truth, and the Sentiments of, Sir,

