



SIR,
THough all the parts of Phi∣losophy have their several excellencies, and perfecti∣ons, yet may we justly, in point of extent, assign the preheminence to Morality. For, if the Dictates of this

last, by a natural currency, diffuse themselves into all humane Transactions, so as that whatever is done by Man derives its approba∣tion or disallowance from a consonancy or opposi∣tion thereto, what can be less said of It, then that it hath a general influence over Mankind, that all Ra∣tional Nature is its adae∣quate subject, and that all Action, as well that of those of the highest, as those of the lowest rank, falls under the verge of it's Direction?

Hence came it, that a∣mong the ancient Philoso∣phers, they who most ear∣nestly apply'd themselves to the cultivation and ad∣vancement of Morality, were look'd upon as the greatest Exemplars of Life, and had, from their nume∣rous Auditors, all the ve∣neration and respects, which generous Contribu∣tors to the happy Govern∣ment and civilization of their Countries could with justice expect: whilst those others, whose studies

transcended the capacities of the Many, were forc'd to content themselves with the applause and acclama∣tions of the Few.
Nay, this Consideration may be press'd yet further, if we come to weigh the obligations, which the o∣ther parts of Philosophy have to This. For, whe∣ther we reflect on the Na∣turalists, searching into the miraculous abysses of Na∣ture; or on the Politician, contriving the Government of Nations, by a strict in∣spection

into their diffe∣rent Humours and Man∣ners; or lastly on the Oeco∣nomist, regulating his pri∣vate and domestick Con∣cerns, we must affirm, that their several attempts will not attain their proposed accomplishment, without the concurrence and illu∣mination of Morality.
These, Sir, were the Prerogatives of Morality while its Precepts were gently conducive to the happy conduct of mens lives. But into what im∣pure

hands it hath fallen of late years, and how it hath been disorder'd and de∣bauch'd into pestilent and pernicious deductions, I am unwilling to press at this time; wishing only, that the present Age may be so happy, as to weather out the mischievous Prin∣ciples wherewith extrava∣gant Casuisme hath so strangely pester'd it.
As to the present Col∣lection of Maximes, I am to acknowledge, that the greatest part of it was

made by a person of emi∣nent Quality in France. The several Editions of it there, and in the Low-Coun∣tries, sufficiently argue its kind reception among the Ingenious, in those parts. That it will be in some measure kindly entertain'd here, I have some encou∣ragement to hope; and this, partly from the Ex∣cellency and Novelty of the things themselves, and partly from their Dedica∣tion to a Person, who, by his engagement in Em∣bassies

to the remotest parts of Christendome, and his publick Concerns a∣broad upon other ac∣counts, hath had the op∣portunities of Seeing the Manners, and surveying the Cities of many Nations. That your great and gene∣rous Designs may meet with the success you pro∣pose to your self, is the earnest wish of,
SIR, 
