


Beloved,
BEcause the day is Cloudy among you, and the warming beams of that bright Sun of Liberty (which so many Saints in England, Ireland, and even in Scotland, sit under) is obstructed and kept off from you, by the furious marching of a youthfull Jehu (among you) in the head of a party that know not God, and that will not obey the Gospel of Christ; I thought good to present to you these ensuing Ser∣mons, preached among you and them; to be for a remembrance to you, a testimony against them, and an apology for my self, against those many oblo∣quies and opprobrious calumnies, which by evil tongues and unhallowed pens, dipt in pride, wrath, and malice, are dispersed against both you and me. The issue of things, I hope, you will readily refer to the righteous Judge; who hath a day set (which is always the best) to relieve his slandred, oppressed, and persecuted Servants. My
Per a Call of God. temptations on the right hand will appear, by the loud Calls that I have
to go into Macedonia, to help on the great Work of God now on foot there. And on the left hand the strong opposition that I finde against my return to you (which can scarce be conceived aright, much less exprest fully.) None but a God can hinder the buil∣ders of Babell, and destroy the enemies of Zion among you. Sit still a while, and you shall see his salvation; So far as the Angel of his presence shall go before me, I am ready to follow. Only let your conversati∣on be as it becommeth the Gospel of Christ, &c. And in nothing be ye terrified, &c. Our business (me thinks) is like the launching of great Ships; heaving and sho∣ving will not do it, till the tide come and it be high water. When God puts forth his arm, your holy and just desires shall be fulfilled. In the mean time wait, and read over these Sermons which once you heard; put in practice what is in them contained, rejoyce in the consolation that you shall finde here and there in them dispersed; live in love make up breaches, study to be quiet, and in your daily prayers, remember your Remembrancer

From my Chamber in London May 12. 1652.
