



Reverend and much honoured in the Lord,
BEing (through the Divine Pro∣vidence) upon the coming forth of the Act for Uniformity at a publick Lecture; and obser∣ving by the discourse of that Reverend and Worthy Per∣son that then preached, that the said Lecture was not like long to continue; and also how much in his Prayer he deprecated that black Cloud that he supposed to hang over the City, which threatned it with the removal of the Gospel; and also how earnestly he prayed that God would teach the Ministers of the Word in this Hour of temptation so to act, that they might neither through their cowardize betray the Truth, or through their rashness and precipitancy betray their own Liberties.

I found my self not only affected with very much grief and sorrow, to observe what dismal apprehensions were upon the mind of this Prea∣cher, who, I supposed, did not speak his own sense altogether, with very much pity and com∣passion towards the Soules of those that were like to suffer by the deprivation of such Ministers whom they so highly prized: but also with some kind of godly jealousie over my self, lest that I should be mistaken, who did not apprehend at present there was any such ground for Ministers to lay aside their Ministry upon the occasion of this Act of Uniformity.
Upon this occasion therefore I resolved that I would once again in the first place take my self very seriously to task, and make a diligent search into the grounds of my own satisfaction; to the end, that if I found them but weak, worldly, or wicked, I might disclaim them.
In this Work of self-reflection I found in the general, that as to what I now apprehend as to the externals about Modes of Government, Worship, and the like, that they are no new Impressions made upon me; but that ever since the horrid murther of our late gracious Soveraign King Charles the First, finding my self much mistaken and mis-led, by having so good an Opi∣nion of the judgement of good men in the Con∣troversies of these times, that I did not so much examine as I ought what was declared from the Pulpit or the Presse.

I have ever since more carefully followed the counsell of my Saviour, To take heed what I hear, and so not only to beware of men, but according to the Rule given by some of your selves upon a very serious occasion, to take heed and beware of the examples of good men, the best of Saints ha∣ving failed even in Ecclesiastical affaires; and therefore it was neither safe, prudent, or consci∣encious to imitate and follow the examples of holy men in Ecclesiastical matters, nor receive any thing from the Tradition of our Fore-fathers without examination and bringing it to the Test.
And in particular, though I had upon the coming out of several Discourses about these matters seriously perused and scanned the same, as what was written about the binding power of the Covenant; The sober and temperate Dis∣course of Liturgies; Plus Ultra; and the Petition for Peace; yet I returned to a serious review of the said Books before-named, conteining in them, as I suppose, the Marrow of all that hath been written from the troubles of Frankfort to this day on those Controversies.
Now having taken this pains, and finding my self rather more confirmed in the satisfaction of my mind as to all the particulars required by the Act for Uniformity, and so having removed those jealousies that were upon me, lest I should be mistaken.

It came into my mind, and I hope suggested by the Spirit of Truth and Love, that surely this poor dimme light which God hath set up within me was not to be put under a Bushel.
But that probably it might be a means to com∣municate some light to others, if I held it forth in this dark hour of temptation.
Not but that I knew very well the Church needeth no such Advocates as I, there having been so much published upon this Subject by per∣sons of great reputation for Learning and Piety of the Clergy.
But considering that I did not know that ever any in my capacity of the Laity had yet appeared; I was after many serious thoughts inclined to be∣lieve that a word in season from one that cannot be imagined to speak for obedience to these things, so much scrupled, from any other design than the Publick good and Peace, having no Ecclesiastical Promotions to get or lose, might have a better reception than what hath been said by others of the Clergy, who may be supposed to speak for their own by-ends and interest.
Worthy Sirs, I am not unsensible how that without very much Charity, which I humbly beg of you, it may be taken for a very great piece of arrogancy, that in this attempt I should presume thus to speak to my Teachers: But i I mistake not, I find it was to the members of the Church
Coloss this was enjoyned, that they should say
to Archippus, Take heed unto the Ministry which thou hast received, that thou fulfil it.
And therefore I humbly conceive that I have some kind of warrant for this charitable work to say unto you, most Reverend Fathers, whom I much honour for your work-sake, Take heed unto the Ministry that you have received that you fulfil it: That you leave nothing undone whereby you may expose your selves to be deprived of the ex∣ercise thereof. I do verily believe I should act the Devils part, as S. Peter did, if I should say, Sirs, pity your selves, Let none of those evils be∣fal you or your Families, which must necessarily be the effect of Non-Conformity; if I should up∣on carnal grounds perswade you to sin to avoid suffering. But if I be not mistaken, my design is to present you with that whereby you may be preserved from sinning and suffering also.
I do therefore here before God, Angels, and Men sincerely declare, so far as I know my own heart, that I have no design in this my underta∣king, no creature having directly or indirectly put me upon the same; but my principal aim and end is Gods glory in the continuance of your Mini∣stry amongst us, who are scrupulous in this point.
I must deal ingeniously with you, my heart hath often been troubled for you of the Ministry in these late times past, when I saw clearly the design of those that would extirpate Episcopacy root and branch, was to root out you the remaining part of
the Ministry of this Nation as Antichristian. To this degree of spirituall Reformation were men of Antiministerial spirits proceeding.
And how near we were then to the confines of Popery, I beseech you consult the sermon of Mr. Strong preached at Pauls upon Novemb. 5. 1653. saith he, pag. 19. Since this Nation departed from Rome, there were never greater attempts, nor higher hopes to bring us back unto this spiritual Egypt than there are at this day. To make this manifest he giveth ten Observations upon the pre∣sent times, to which I refer you.
Now the wonder-working God having so migh∣tily preserved you, and delivered you out of that storm which threatned you with so great a Ship∣wreck, do not, I beseech you, now cast away your selves, being come so near the Haven: do not through rashnesse and precipitancy betray your own Liberties and Opportunities for the Ministrie, and thereby expose the Souls of many to great grief and danger thereby.
Give me leave therefore to bespeak you in the words of that Reverend Professor of Divinity in Oxford in King Edward the Sixth's dayes, Peter Martyr, in a Letter of his dated Novemb. 4. 1550. in answer to Bishop Hooper of the 17. of Octob 1550. If we hold on in disswading from these indifferent things (meaning the Ceremonies) as pernicious and altogether wicked, we condemn with∣all very many Churches which have received the
Gospel, and blame too bitterly innumerable, which a great while agoe were accompted worthy of all praise. I would not now therefore, saith he in another place of his Epistle, greatly contend, especially for so much as we see that they by whom the light of the Gospel is much advanced in England, and may be more advanced do take part against us, (meaning, I suppose, the Bishops in those dayes.) I do observe some that have lately written against Conformity, do argue much against it, because of the great offence that hath been taken by the Reformed Churches at these things. And of this Plus Ultra amongst other instances giveth Peter Martyr for one, if I mistake not.
But who ever shall read his Epistle throughout, shall find that he did not approve of Bishop Hoopers Arguments against Non-Conformity: And how far he and other Divines of the Refor∣med Churches were from approving of such a Con∣tention and Opposition of these Ceremonies and Con∣formity to them, that rather then to yield, to lay down the Ministry.
I beseech you let me by way of Introduction offer to your Consideration the judgement of o∣ther forreign Divines in this case. Beza 12. Epist. ad quosdam Angl. Eccles. fratres, thus expresseth himself, Hortamur ut omni animorum exacerba∣tione deposita, salva manente doctrinae ipsius veri∣tate & sana Conscientia, alii alios patienter ferant, Regiae Majestati clementissimae & omnibus Praesu∣libus
suis ex animo obsequantur. He exhorteth them, that laying aside all bitterness or sowreness of soul and spirit, as long as the truth of the Doctrine and pu∣rity of Conscience was safe, they would bear one ano∣ther with patience, and obey the Queens most graci∣ous Majesty, and all her Prelates heartily.
And saith he further in the same Epistle, Non videntur ista tanti momenti, ut propterea vel pastori∣bus deserendum potius sit ministerium, quam ut ve∣stes illas assumant, vel gregibus omittendum publi∣cum pabulum, potius quam ita vestitos pastores au∣diant. And further saith he, Ibid. de geniculati∣one in Coena, de cantu Ecclesiae, Crucis consignatione, pueror. baptizandor. interrogatione, non est magno∣pere laborandum.
And therefore I beseech you, Sir, keep your zeal and exercise it about higher matters then the Surplice, the Sign of the Cross, Church-Musick, &c. and do not now expose your selves to be laid aside, to have no opportunities of exercising your Mini∣sterial function; for those things, as the reverend Beza saith, are not tanti momenti, & de his non est magnopere laborandum.
That you may not doubt lest that by submitting and conforming you should offend the Reformed Chruches;
I shall make bold to remember you of a very material passage in Hieron. Zanch. Thes. de vera reformandar. Ecclesiar. ratione; Testor me coram Deo in mea conscientia, non alio habere loco quam
Schismaticorum illos omnes, qui in parte Reforma∣tionis Ecclesiarum ponunt, nullos habere Episcopos, qui authoritatis gradu supra suos Compresbyteres emineant, ubi liquido possunt haberi. Praeterea cum Dom. Calvino, nullo non Anathemate dignos censeo, quotquot illi Hierarchiae qui se Domino Jesu submit∣tit, subjici nelunt.
Behold here a cord with two strings, which will not easily be broken; the Authorities of two worthy men together, that they are to be account∣ed rather for Schismaticks then good Subjects to Christ, that will not submit to that Hierarchy in lawful things, which doth submit unto Jesus Christ.
What therefore I find that holy Martin Bucer concluding his Epistle to Amplissimo Dom. & co∣lendissimo Symmistae Joanni à Lasco, after that he had much discoursed upon the subject matter of the doubts of many as to matters of Conformity, saith he, Therefore I desire and beseech you by the Cross of the Son of God, by the Salvation of the Churches, which are at this day overwhelmed with calamities, by the desired consent that we should seek to reign in all Churches, by the Peace that is in Christ Jesus: Again I desire and beseech you, that you do nothing rashly in this question of Ceremonies.
The like humble Petition do I make, beseeching and conjuring you by all his Arguments, and by all that ever was said by way of Argument to Ce∣menting duties, that you do nothing rashly in this
question of Ceremonies. Oh do not rashly put your selves out of your Ministerial imployment, who have now opportunities, and may yet, I hope, en∣joy them, of serving the Lord Christ in the con∣version of souls.
I am apt to think from what I have heard ob∣jected by some almost in the like case;
Alas, this poor man was newly crept out of the darknesse of Popery, and therefore he could not so well judge of the sinfulness of Ceremonies, and of Conformity to those superstitious inventions: But now we have enjoyed the Gospel above an hundred yeares since his writing, and we have now there∣fore clearer discoveries of the superstition of these Popish Ceremonies in Vestures, Gestures, and such like Romish trash.
To which I shall crave leave by way of Answer to present you with my poor Observations in this case as followeth; That in all that I have read of these sad Controversies ever since the Reformation of the Church of England from Popery to this day, I do not find any new arguments from Scripture rightly applied, to make or prove Conformity to be a sinne. But this I have observed, which I sup∣pose ought to be very much laid to heart, that the further discoveries of light that have appeared in these latter dayes, hath herein been manifested only by improving those mistaken and false prin∣ciples laid at first to the making of more things to be sinfull and unlawful then ever were before,
that upon a serious search will be found to be clear and innocent, as you will find in this following Discourse.
I shall make bold to give you but a few instan∣ces, by which the truth of what I say will be evi∣denced.
The first thing that I observed was scrupled in King Edward's dayes, was the wearing by the Mi∣nister that kind of apparel for form or fashion which the Popish Priests had ministred in. And this I gather from the Answer of Peter Martyr unto Bishop Hooper, who did not with the afore∣said Reverend Person account the wearing of these Garments indifferent but sinful, and that for these two Reasons, as being Jewish and Popish. These, saith Peter Martyr, are the chief strength of your Arguments; I will first intreat of them, after I will adde whatsoever it be, if I call to my remembrance any other thing brought in of you to confirm your Opi∣nion, pag. 5.
That these also were the Principles or Argu∣ments used by Joan à Lasco, to whom Martin Bucer writ, I find also in his Epistle to the same purpose; wherein there was so much said by these two Reverend and Moderate men, that one would think should have for ever eradicated these opinions out of the minds of good men, especially while they were but green and young.
But yet notwithstanding I find that in the raign of Queen Elizabeth there was such an improve∣ment
of these principles, as produced a Printed De∣claration in the name and defence of certain Mini∣sters in London, refusing to wear the apparel then prescribed for Ministers.
Now I find in that Declaration, besides the aforesaid Reasons, there were severall generall Scriptures to prove their unlawfulnesse, as those Scriptures that forbid addition to Gods Word, that his fear is not to be taught by the precepts of men; that to observe the use of this apparel would make the Papists more obstinate, and also be mat∣ter of scandal to the weak.
But how all these were answered I find by an Examination of that Declaration which was writ∣ten with that soberness and solidity, that one would have thought these things would never have been heard of more.
But instead thereof I find these Principles and Scriptures used by the Ministers in their aforesaid Declaration, are wound up higher shortly after by those, of whom Mr. Josias Nichols doth complain, That had made a rash and temerarious separation from the Church of England; and used also in part by Mr. Nichols himself as a Plea for not subscribing to all the 39. Articles, as you will find in the following Discourse.
I observe further, that which some of the Non-Conformists, as by their Petition at the coming in of King James, desiring a further Re∣formation, did but argue for the alteration of
some passages in the Common Prayer, as coming too near the Papists; and so being only a thing not convenient: as you will find to be the judge∣ment of Mr. John Ball. This is so improved as to be made a strong argument against the whole mode of our publick Liturgie; that it is Idolatrous, as having been used in an Idolatrous Service, even as was said of old by Bishop Hooper, the Ministers Garments had been by the Popish Priests. And this indeed you will find to be the great Argument against the Liturgie, brought by the Author of the Temperate Discourse, and of all his other Reasons, except that of the Covenant, why Ministers can∣not conform to the use thereof, are but the same with those Arguments of the London Ministers so many years before, why they could not wear the apparel then enjoyned. And the same Arguments that are brought by those called the Brownists and Separatists from the Church of England, and the Ordination by Bishops, Answered by Mr. John Ball, are now brought against a form of Prayer, and the Common Prayer of the Church, as you will find hereafter. And those things, as I said before, that were formerly argued against as inconvenient to come so near the Papists, as to Vestures, and the form of Worship, are by the Au∣thors of Plus Ultra absolutely condemned as un∣lawfull for the Church of England to retain either in worship or discipline any Conformity to the Church of Rome.

So that most Reverend and much Honoured, by this Discourse and these Observations, it will evi∣dently appear that it is not by any new light from Scripture rightly applied, that we do see further into the iniquity of these things now scrupled, than those Worthies which were newly crept out of the darknesse of Popery. But that if these passages which I have presented be but well considered of, and the dangerousnesse of that principle upon which the two former do hang, viz. that to wear this or that Vesture, to use this or that Gesture, Method, Phrase, or Form of Prayer that hath no Commandment from the Lord, nor example for it in the Word is sinful and unlawfull.
It will, I hope, be thought high time to look about us, and consider whether the hand of Joah be not in all this; and whether we have not more reason to suspect our zealous opposition of indifferent things, and refusing obedience thereunto; as being the product rather of that fiery spirit which our Saviour sometime rebuked in his Disciples, than of the Spirit of Peace, Truth, and Love.
I humbly offer therefore farther the judgement of that moderate and pious Peter Martyr, in his Epistle aforesaid, saith he, We must take heed, lest those things of lesse importance, by our strife, may be the means that those things which should be estee∣med of greater force and value, either cannot at all be brought into the Church; either if they be once brought in, cannot bee established with continuance.
And, saith he pag. 3. If now we pronounce those things wicked that be of themselves indifferent, so much would the most part of mens minds be altena∣ted from us. That from that day they would not find in their hearts ever after to hear with a good will at our hands sound Doctrine, and instructions of very necessary matter.
Worthy Sirs, I beseech you consider whether this hath not been the effect of your strife and contention about these things of less importance, and hath not alienated the minds of many, that they will never hear your instructions in matters necessary to salvation.
It is hath not yet, give me leave to tell you, it will unavoidably be the end of your present Non-conformity. Do you think that the way for to establish and continue those things which should be esteemed of greater force and value than a form of Prayer, a Rite, or Ceremony, viz. That soundnesse and purity of Doctrine that we have amongst us, and the great liberty of Preaching thereof, is for you to suffer deprivation of your Ministry, and hereby endanger all for matters that the Reverend Beza saith are not Tanti?
I find indeed a seeming Objection by the Pe∣titioners for Peace, pag. 13. That if men must be cast out of the Church or Ministry because that they are not wiser then the most Learned, s the Pastors of most of the Reformed Churches, and as Hildersham, Bains, Parker, Ames, Dod, Ball, Nichols, and
many such others as have taken Non-Conformity to be a sinne, how few, alas! how few will there be left?
But if you be pleased but to consider of the Quotations that I have presented before you of the Ancient pastors of most of the Reformed Chur∣cher, of what is newly come forth by Mr. Durel, in his Book entituled, A View of the Government and publick worship of God in the Reformed Chur∣ches beyond the Seas, and also of what followeth;
It will appear that this was a very great mi∣stake, and that they have not taken this Confor∣mity, to be a sin, but disobedience rather to the commands of our Superiors in this Case to be a sin and great abuse of Christian Liberty.
Of this mind, as I take it, is the Reverend Beza, Epist. 24. ad Peregrinarum Ecclesiarum in Angl. Fratres; Coxsequitur cum abuti Christianae libertatis beneficio, qui vel suis Magistratibus, vel praepositis suis sponte non paret in Domino, nec con∣scientiam fratrum edificere studet.
Now I humbly conceive, that he that by re∣fusing obedience to the commands of his superiors shall be exposed to those sufferings which the Act inflicteth; in this case he doth not take the way to edifie the conscience of his Brother, but to fill it with horrid perplexity and fear about these indif∣ferent things, concluding surely they are out of measure sinfull, that men will rather suffer so much then conform to the use thereof.

As to what hath been said by those worthies of our own Nation, taking Conformity to be a sinne; I hope I shall make it appear by this following Discourse to be a great mistake.
But if any of those have taken Conformity for a sin, is this an Argument sufficient for Ministers and Teachers of others, that do professe to abhor the Popish Doctrine of infallibility in the Church of Rome, for to stick to the practice of it? In this case, because that you would not be thought to be wiser than they that have taken Non-Confor∣mity to be a sinne. In my weak judgement it is, being too much of the Colliers Faith, that I have read, and doth savour of too much following the Tradition of our Fore-fathers in these matters.
Certainly those Traditions that do tend to the disturbing of the Peace of the Church and State wherein we live, to the alienating our affections from each other, that do professe our selves to be Christs Disciples; that do incline the minds of men to decline the example of Christ and of his Apostles, and to condemn the practise of many precious and pious servants of the Lord.
These are such Traditians as make the Word of God of none effect: such for which Saint Paul repented he had been so zealous for, Gal. 14. and such as from the observance thereof Christ came to redeem us by his most precious blood.
I confesse there is scarce any thing doth more stick with us in matters of Religion than to renounce
the Traditions of our Fore-fathers. Our Fathers worshipped in this mountain, said the woman of Samaria to our Saviour.
And if ever any had cause seriously to bethink themselves, we of this Nation have, whose dis∣contents and animosities (grounded very much, as I conceive, upon the Opinions and Traditions of some good men (since our Reformation from Po∣pery) have produced the most dolefull effects that I think any History in the Christian World can pro∣duce or parrallel.
Charity induceth me to believe, that if  Worthy men, such as Mr. Hildesham, that ch written so perswasively in Lecture 35. on Psal. 51. to satisfie weak Christians about the Surplice and the Cross, and to keep them from leaving the publick assemblies therefore; and Mr. Paul Baines that so zealously reprehended in his Book upon Ephes. 2.15. fol. 297. a Secession and departure from the Church of God, our visible assemblies, shewing this was not so much to reform as de∣form; giving also this most excellent Rule, which I find in other Pious and Learned mens advice,Aug. Epist. 119. Multa Tolerantur ub facultas non datur refecandi. Bza Epist. ad fratres Anglican. Possant ace∣tiom debent multa tole∣rariquae tamen non re∣cte praecipiuntu. That what∣soever lyeth not in our power to reform, it shall be our zeal and piety to tolerate and pa∣tiently bear.
And Mr. John Ball that hath so vindicated the
Common Prayer and Catechisme of the Church of England, as containing such points so contrary to Popery, that it is not possible Popery should stand if they take place.
A say again, that while I do consider of the spi∣rits and principles of these men, whatever they might be as to their practice, yet that they could not well take Non-Conformity to be a sin, their Principles and Arguments against the Separation now in Print (some of which you shall meet with in this following Discourse) clearly evidencing of the same.
And I am apt to think, that had they but sur∣vived those Warres which many of us have done who have seen and been Spectators of those gar∣ments rolled in blood, and of all those dolefull and dismal effects of our differences about modes of Worship and Government.
And had they but experienced how much when the bodies of men subdued by the power of the sword, their minds were no way reconciled to that Government and Worship which was earnestly endea∣voured to have been imposed upon the Kingdom.
And had they but seen how much by the same persons that helped to subdue the other, they were opposed with the same bitternesse as was the Epis∣copal Government: and their extirpation by some endeavoured root and branch.
I cannot but believe that they would have been of the same judgement about these things, as the
Reverend Mr. Perkins is of an Oath when it doth become impossible. This is as a voice from Hea∣ven to declare, that we are set at liberty from en∣deavouring the introducing of such a mode of Worship and Government as is displeasing to all o∣thers in the Kingdom but our selves.
And they would doubtless also have seen their own mistake in charging the pressing of subscripti∣on to be the cause of separation and troubles in the Church, and rather to think that the violent opo∣sition of thesame to be also very accessary there∣unto.
Now, dear Sirs, be intreated by the meeknesse and gentlenesse of Christ for the Gospel sake, for the peace of the Church also; which, as Mr. Pool saith in his Sermon upon Gospel-Worship, should be preferred above all things, next to the salvation of Souls.
Ye, who have seen what those Learned and Pious Non-Conformists saw not, neither possibly could have fore-seen would have been the event of Non-Conformity and discords about the exter∣nals of Religion; Be intreated, be intreated not to think those holy men before spoken of, to be infallible in their judgements, as to what you hold from them, neither do you take your selves so to be.
But to what you have read for your satisfacti∣on in these doubtful and disputable matters, con∣cerning which I find the Petitioners for peace pro∣fessing
they do impartially study and pray for know∣ledge, and would gladly know the will of God at the dearest rate.
Vouchsafe, I earnestly beseech you, the rea∣ding of these poor Collections of mine wherewith I now gresent you; and be pleased to put on this Resolution before you begin, that you will read it through, and according to some of your Profes∣sions do it impartially.
Weigh well, I intreat you, the Arguments that I bring to prove the lawfulness of Obedience to what the Act for Uniformity requireth, and give an Answer to them in your own Consciences, as clearly and fully as I have there endeavoured to present them. And let me beseech you in the Bowels of Christ Jesus, that whatsoever weakness you may find in any of the Arguments I offer, you will be pleased to consider from whom they come: Not from a Professor of Divinity in the Schools of the Prophets, but of Christianity in the School of Christ, who is put upon this Work not Ex officio, sed ex charitate, as I have before declared. And do not for the weaknesse perhaps of some one Argument despise any of the other till you have tryed their strength.
And above all let me remember you of what I find professed by some to be their practice, that you will be pleased to read it impartially, with the same candor, ingenuity and freedom from prejudice, that you desire any thing that you 
have made publick to the World should be read by others.
And were it not for one thing that now cometh in my mind, to which I shall presently speak a word by way of Answer, I should be in very great hope that the effect of your serious perusal of my poor and weak endeavours in these following sheets would be much for the publick Peace of Church and State.
That which I shall therefore speak to by way of Removal, I ground upon a very serious passage that I find in the Epistle of Martin Bucer, to Joan. à Lasco. It is, saith he, a very hard thing indeed, yea, to most holy men, to deny themselves; and he is seldome found amongst men, which would not be content rather to yield in his Patrimony, than in the Opinion of his Wit.
I am apt to fear, if I may speak out, lest what this Wise man then observed, should be some binderance at this time to that work which doth so much conduce to Unity, even that which is so hard and difficult even for holy men to do, To deny themselves.
Dear Sirs, be not found now in the number of those that will rather yield in your Patrimony, submit to Deprivation from the Ministry and all Ecclesiasticall Promotions, which are the Scholars Patrimony, rather to yield in reference to those Opinions which you have taken up for Fundamen∣tal Truths, if I mistake not.

I beseech you consider what is said by some Ministers in the Petition for Peace (except one put it out alone) that they would gladly know the Truth at the dearest rate. Surely, though the knowing and obeying of the Truth, if I mistake not, may be at a dear rate, considering what Bucer hath observed, how hard it is even for holy men to deny themselves, and retract their opinions; yet it being in it self that which Christians are bound to do every day, if they will exercise the grace of Repentance for their sins; they must professe there is a great change in their minds and judge∣ments.
Surely for those who are the Preachers and pressers of Repentance to others, that they are to declare their Repentance not only by their sorrow for sin, but by the change of their minds, retracting those opinions they had of sin.
It is but reasonable, that they should do them∣selves that which they enjoyn to others.
I do confesse that to stand to our Principles, that is, such Principles as are grounded upon the Oracles of Gods word is our duty, in which we are to be stedfast and unmoveable, standing like a Rock in the midst of the proud waves, brea∣king all that beat against it, but removed by none.
But we must take very great heed of stan∣ding to our own Principles, grounded onely up∣on the Oracles of men and their Traditions,
or the Oracles of God misapplied. This is not constancy but obstinacy; to yield and leave these our Principles is not Apostacy, but a great piece of self-denyal and true Piety. This de∣clares that we have gotten a victory over our selves, which is a greater conquest than to win a City, and have mortified that corruption that is in holy men, as Martyn Bucer saith, which inclines men more willingly to part with their Patrimony than their Opinions, and declares also that they have subdued that, than to the which the will of man is in nothing more na∣turally averse, than subjection to the command of our Superiours, as the Reverend Calvin long agoe observed, as you shall find here∣after.
I beseech you, Sirs, consider, for I doubt not but you know it well enough, that it is no just cause of scandal or offence given to weak Christians, nor yet of disgrace or disparagement to the wisest, holyest and learnedst men that ever were, to go back from their former asser∣tions and opinions, so long as they know that they goe forward towards Truth, Peace, and obedience.
What Saint Jerom writeth to Ruffinus is very well worthy of your thoughts, if I may be so bold as to be your Remembrancer thereof, Never blush man to change thy opinion, for nei∣ther you or I, or any person living are of so great
Authority, as to be ashamed to confess that they have erred.
It is farre better for those in my poor judge∣ment, to whom Christ hath committed the Care and Cure of the precious soul, and so are Leaders of their flock, upon a due conviction to confess that they have erred, rather than by their continuance therein to lead others out of the way by their example.
I remember a very good Note that I not long since heard, even from David's own practice, Psal. 119. That it was a very great piece of Christian ingenuity to retract our Er∣rors.
Now whether it be not an Error or a huge mistake, to publish to the World, and frequent∣ly to deliver in Pulpits what you shall find, Petition for Peace, pag. 11. That all additions to Gods Worship are sinfull, and to intimate that to subscribe to any thing but what is contai∣ned in the holy Scriptures, would accuse the Scriptures of Insufficiency, Petition for Peace, pag. 7.
Without distinguishing of additions to substan∣tials or circumstantials in Religion, as I find Mr. Ball doth frequently and faithfully, by which the loyal Subjects of Christ might be delivered from their fears of his displeasure, by the use of those things which so much would conduce to Concord and Unity.

Surely, these are Errors, and very perplexing to the minds of weak Christians, with others eidem farinae, which I desire may be conside∣red of.
To make these more evidently so, I have ta∣ken this great pains, to the endangering of my health, the denying my self of rest, while others stept, and breaking through many avocations I have had, so suddenly to digest my inward thoughts and bring them to this method that I now present you with.
To take off all just occasion of censure for one abounding in his own sense, I offer you through∣out the sense and judgement of very Pious and Moderate persons as aforesaid.
And therefore I beseech you once again, but to consider of what I find affirmed by Martin Bucer in his Epistle aforesaid, of whose judge∣ment I do professe my self to be in this point, as to Conformity, my design being much the same with his to that worthy person before named, after that he had answered his Argu∣ments, which are too much used in these days, saith he, pag. 6. If therefore you will not admit such liberty and use of Vesture to this pure and holy Church, because they have no command∣ment of the Lord, nor no example of it; I doe not see how you can grant to any Church that it may celebrate the Lords Supper in the morning, and in an open Church, especially consecrate to
the Lord, that the Sacrament may be distribu∣ted to men kneeling or standing, yea, to women as well as men; for we have received of these things neither Commandment of the Lord, nor any example, yea, rather the Lord gave a contrary example.
But it will be objected, saith he, pag. 7. That in England many use vestures with mani∣fest Superstition, and that they do nourish and con∣firm the people in superstition. Even so it may be answered, very many abuse this whole Sacrament, as also Baptisme, and all other Ceremonies. There∣fore let us withstand this mischief, and vanquish it utterly.
He looked, it should seem, upon it as a mis∣chief to be vanguished, to argue from the a∣buse of a thing against the lawfull use of it. And he doth further shew which way our en∣deavours must chiefly lie. Saith he, pag. 7. Let us chiefly endeavour that the heart may be purged by Faith, which Faith is first begun and encreased by the hearing of the Word. This hea∣ring is brought by the Preachers of the Goseel; such therefore let us call for, and that there may be store of them, let us be earnest for Reforma∣tion.
This holy man was farre from the mind of those that judge their earnestnesse for Reforma∣tion consists in opposing of Formes of Prayer, Vestures, and Gestures, even about Gods Wor∣ship;
and being dead, yet speaketh to you by my means, assuring you that you are quite out of the way, in resolving to lay down your Ministry, rather than you will observe and obey the Act for Uniformity.
Methinks the Counsel of the Wise man should be much upon your hearts at this time, Ecclesiast. 10.4.  Si Spiritus dominantis ascenderit super te, locum tu∣um ne demittas, quia sanitas quiescere faciet pec∣cata magna.
If the Spirit of the Ruler by his Lawes may seem to arise up against us, what then, are we to arise up against him? No, leave not thy place, we are set in a state of sub∣jection to the higher Powers: and therefore let us not give over the work where about God hath set us, but think rather of yiel∣ding obeidience; for yielding pacifieth great offences: some render the Word, Vir sanans,Annotations on the place. a Healer; and so the Septuagint, , He that by modest and gentle beha∣viour seeketh to heel the wound and breach be∣tween him and his Soveraign, shall pacifie great offences. The offence that the Prince may take at our not obeying, and the offence that we might take from the Prince commanding, are removed by yeilding of obedience. So then that
wisdom which produceth obedience is of a healing nature.
I beseech you, Sirs, let the Counsel of the Holy Ghost in this place prevaile with you to keep your places, depart not from them, but from those Opinions which may hinder from that yielding that may be of so healing a vertue at this time.
It is a difficult work, as the aforesaid Mar∣tin Bucer hath observed; and therefore he not onely pressed it in that place, but, saith he, further in the said Epistle, pag. 9. We see now, being taught by the experience of so many years, that the Lord granteth but to a few to de∣part from that sentence which they have once fastned themselves in, specially if also they have contended for the same.
Surely if ever this were a mercy to any, it would be to us in this Juncture of time; a mercy indeed, which God granteth but to a few, to depart, from that Sentence or Opini∣on which they have once fastned themselves in.
Oh, would God grant this mercy unto you the Ministers of this City, so blessing the endeavours of those that would perswade you to the lawfulnesse of Obedience to all that the Act for UNIFORMITY requireth, that they might be effectual with you to depart from that Sentence, that Opinion, that some are
supposed have fastned themselves in, because they have so vehemently contended against them as superfluous, superstitious, unnecessary and unlaw∣full.
How would then the true work of Refor∣mation, of which Ma tin Bucer speaketh go on? whilest Superiours in commanding, and In∣feriors in obeying, do reciprocall, love each other, and seek the publick good: How would the substance of Religion and the power of Godlinesse be promoted, when there is a Concord Ʋnion, and Agreement between those persons in the publick Worship of Almighty God, which have supposed the one party to be too common, irreverent and homely, the other too carnal and formal in their devotions? How would then the Jesuites be disappointed in their pre∣sent hopes and expectations? How would then many erroneous persons be turned from the error of their wayes; the poor Quakers be brought to see their pitiful mistakes; and those which have seperated from the Church of England as a false Church, to see that they have been of a false Opinion?
Doubtless we should then, and I fear not till then, be practical Christians, as to those Gospel∣duties, which I find conjoyned together by the Holy Ghost in one verse, 1 Pet. 2.12. Honour all men, love the Brotherhood, fear God, Honour the King.

As we are now in this confused and devised state and condition much out of love with Unifor∣mity. Many of us do profess that we love the Brotherhood, those that are of our own Frater∣nity, of this or that party, but we do not honour all men; but herein the Lord be merciful to us, how do we dishonour and reproach one another if they be not of the same way for modes of Wor∣ship and Government which we like best our selves? The offences of the tongue,Baxters Vain Re∣ligion of the For∣mal Hypocrite, pag. 198, 205. by all sorts of persons you will find reproved at large, which sheweth that yet we are far from honouring all men. Many there be that doe professe they greatly fear God, but they do not honour the King, by yielding obedience to his lawfull Commands, but dispute the meetnesse and the fitnesse of them.
If therefore now by what I have in the inte∣grity of my heart offered to your consideration, the God of Love and Peace shall incline your hearts to yield universal obedience to the Act for Uniformity, you will thereby shew your selves to be such as truly fear God, who is the God of Order, that you honour the King, love the Bro∣therhood, and honour all men; you will have no occasion then to censure those that differ from you in modes of Worship, nor any to censure you, if once there be an Uniformity therein.
For all these good ends and purposes, Reverend
and much Honoured in the Lord, do I humbly of∣fer these my ensuing Meditations to your View; which hoping you will take by the right handle, desiring your charitable construction and recepti∣on of this extraordinary attempt; beseeching God, to accompany it with as extraordinary a blessing, that it may obtain my desired ends and aime; I take leave to rest,
London, July 7. 1662.

