



MY LORD,
THe Church of God is ve∣ry fitly represented as a Lilly among Thorns,
Cant. 2.2. which though it self be both harmless and plea∣sant, yet must expect unpleasant and harsh usage, from the Ill-neighbourhood of them who are as Briers and Thorns.
Mic. 7.4. Psal. 80.12. Cant. 2.15. Prophane per∣sons, like the wild Boar, will be at∣tempting to dig up the Roots; and Hereticks, like little Foxes, will be
spoyling the tender Grapes, of this Vine,
Psal. 80.15 which the Lords own right hand hath planted. And both these sorts of them that are born after the flesh,
Gal. 4.29. through their enmity to them that are born after the Spirit, as they greatly disturb the progress and peace of the Shepherds of Christs flock (who must expect to be men of strife,
Jer. 15.10. and to op∣pose themselves against a current of prophaness and errors (of whose trou∣bles,
2 Cor. 11.26, 28. together with the care of the Church of God, the perils from false brethren are not the least part) so to those that are of the Flock, it must needs be an occasion of many sad thoughts and searchings of heart, many sad temptations and trials of their stability.
Now the Word of God, As it sup∣plies us with such comforts which in the multitude of the thoughts of our hearts,
Psal. 94.19. may at all times delight and bear up our souls: So in this sort of distresses,
Psal. 119.50. we may truly say, This is our comfort in our distress, Thy word hath quickned us. And that, Ʋnless this word had been our delight and
comfort, we must needs have sunk and perished under these troubles and tri∣als. Whose heart would not fail him to see so many false Prophets, and false Christs arise in the Church,
Mat. 14.24. if Christ had not told us before, That false Christs and false Prophets should arise; and St. Paul,
2 Tim. 3.1. That in the last dayes perilous times should come: And St. Peter,
2 Pet. 2.1. that There should arise false Teachers among us, which should pri∣vily bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them? What sad thoughts and searchings of heart would the divisions of Reuben cause,
Judg. 5.15, 16. while the sons of Belial are confederate in wickedness, if Christ himself had not told us, that his Co∣ming and Doctrin would not send peace in the earth, but a sword,
Mat. 10.34. not designedly, but by accident? How would it startle us to hear the confi∣dence of many in citing the word of Truth, for the defence of dangerous errors; if the Apostle had not told us,
2 Cor. 11.14. that Satan doth oft transform himself into an Angel of light; and the Evangelists, that he had the im∣pudence
to quote Scripture to our Saviour to entice him to evil;
Mat. 4.6. and therefore that it is no wonder if his ministers do transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ? How would it stagger us to see the outward strict∣ness of life, and specious pretences of Sectaries, if Christ had not told us, that many should come in sheeps clothing,
Mat. 7.15. who inwardly are ravening wolves? How would it sad our hearts to see men of good affections, and excellent gifts, drawn away to errors; if Christ had not told us that the Se∣ducers will be so prevalent,
Mat. 24.24. as to de∣ceive (if it were possible) even the very Elect? What sadness must it needs work in our hearts, to see men sleight and loath the spiritual Manna of Gods publick Ordinances, and to long for flesh of their own fancying; if the Apostle had not told us, that the time would come,
2 Tim. 4.3. when men would not endure sound Doctrin, but after their own lusts, would gather them an heap of Teachers, that should claw their itching ears? Whose heart would not break to see the general
coldness and want of zeal for God; yea, that Irreligiousness and Atheism of many; if Christ himself had not told us, that when Iniquity should so much abound in the later dayes,
Mat. 24.12. the love of many would wax cold?
Now God in his Word, hath told us of these things before hand, to the end that when we see them come to pass, we should not be offended:
Joh. 16.1. And withal, that being thus fore∣warned, we might endeavour to arm our selves against these trials. It is the duty of all men, like the good Beraeans, to search the Scriptures,
Acts 17.11. and find out the deceits of seducers. And those especially whom God hath made watchmen over his people,
Ezek. 3.17. ought to give all diligence in disco∣vering these enemies, that would gladly find an opportunity, to sow these Tares, while we are sleeping:
Mat. 13.25. To settle, as much as may be, them that stand fast; to reclaim (if possi∣ble) them that are gone astray; and to clear our selves from the blood of all men.
Acts 20.26.
This small Tract is designed for
the promoting of these Ends, which I hope may stir up others of better abilities and leasure, to go further in so necessary a work. If any ob∣ject, that this Doctrin of the Gospel being generally owned, did not need to be asserted: I answer, I could wish that all our Neighbours were both almost, and altogether, such Christians as they ought to be: But it is too sadly evident, that all are not Christians, that go under that general Name. Beside, if Saint Augustine's learned books de Civitate Dei, and that later Work of the noble Du Plessis De veritate Christ. Relig. be accounted both excellent and useful: then why may not ano∣ther of the same nature, that fol∣loweth them, though not passibus aequis, be esteemed acceptable, and useful in these giddy times,
Psal. 82.5. wherein all the foundations of the Earth are out of course? And as for the stile, it is such as is both sutable to my own Genius, and I hope to the subject here handled: And being designed chiefly for the benefit of ignorant
and misguided people: I thought it better to use such a language as might profit them, then such as might amuse them. However,
Gen. 27.22. if the hands be rough like Esau's, I hope the voyce will appear to be Jacob's.
Whatsoever it is, it tenders it self to your Lordships acceptance, as a Testimony of my canonical Obedi∣ence, and dutiful Respects to your Lordship, as my Reverend Dioce∣san, and much Honoured Patron: Whose candid construction of this mean Present, will much encourage the Authour; and your good Prayers pro∣mote the success of this small piece in the ends for which it is designed.
That I may no longer detain your Lordship from more weighty mat∣ters in reading these lines, I shall humbly take leave to break off: beseeching the great Shepherd and Bi∣shop of our souls, to double unto your Lordship, the abundance of those Graces and Gifts of his Holy Spirit, which may render you a common Good in your place here, and happy in
giving up the accounts of your Stewardship, with much joy. Which is the hearty prayer of

Warmister, March 1. 1665.
