


MADAME,
I Could not approach, but with a MIR∣ROVR in my hand, before your Majesty, the splendour of whose magnificence dazles so powerfully all the world, that I am not able
to behold the immediate presence on it, but by the reflection of its Rayes. Without fiction, MA∣DAME, your Glory is arrived to the point of rendring your perfections so unknown, as being so above the commune, that I believe most men honour you now by observance and example onely, as not able otherwise to reach the depth of the just reasons they might have for it. Nor is this All, to say that you are solely fair, and perfectly chaste; but it is necessary, beyond all this, to intimate secretly, in the Language of Thought, all the divine qua∣lities which you possess of Super∣eminence in all things, since their purity cannot discend to the capa∣city
of our discourse, without suffering a kind of prophanation. From hence is it, that if I should call you, The compleatly-perfect, I might well say in effect that which you are; but never thus should I represent the greatness of your merits, since every of them in it self ha's such particular perfections, as might challenge Altars from us, if your humility could permit it. These are such Truths (MADAME) as hinder me from praising your Majesty, not knowing how to express my self condignely. Well might I perhaps suggest it to remem∣brance, that your particular incli∣nations are the publick Vertues which we adore, and that of
the same temperament of hu∣mour, Nature composed here∣tofore the Sages of the World: But of all these discourses not∣withstanding, I cannot frame one onely praise sufficiently ad∣aequate to your worth, seing it is elevated beyond all Eulogiums. Insomuch, that if Admiration it self teach not a new Language to posterity, wherein to proclaim aloud the favours and graces wherewith Heaven hath ac∣complisht you; it must content it self, to reverence your Name, and adore your Memory, without presumption of speech of your actions, as being ever above all valuation, as well as imitation. To instance the immortalitie
of your AVGVSTICK Race, al∣though it be a pure Source of Ho∣nour, which can never be dryed up; yet all these Titles of a Kings Daughter, Sister, and VVife, can never adde to your Renown, which derives its value rather from the admirabilities of your Life, then the greatness of your Birth. Insomuch (MADAME) that the Scepters and Crowns of your Royalties, are the meanest Ornaments wherewith your Ma∣jestie can deck it self; since the least glymse of the least of your Actions, duskes the luster of all the other magnificence, which environ you. And I believe, had those Wonders of the World been of such a worth, as every
day you descry, they had power∣fully resisted against the assaults of Ages: but as they had no∣thing admirable in them, but the Name, Memorials have pre∣served that, and let them perish. But yours (MADAME) which are too perfect for a sutable Name, shall not cease to survive the re∣volutions of Times, as being enli∣vned by Vertue, which alone can exempt from Death. Let it not seem strange then, if I hazard the perils of the Sea, to render Homage to a Queen, whose Greatness perforce humbles the most arrogant spirits, being not able, so much as in thought, to reach to the first degree of her Glory. The Graces themselves
are hers, and the VERTVES have allianced their own and her Name; and all the adorable qualities which are found here below, are admirable in her a∣lone, as in their Source, I am constrained to be silent (MA∣DAME) being over charged with too much subject of speech. The number of your Perfections astonishes me, the greatness of your Merit ravishes me, the splendour of your Ver∣tue dazles me: And in this dazle, this transport, this ex∣cess of admiration, wherein my senses and spirits are all alike engaged; I am com∣peled to cast my self at the feet of your Majesty, and de∣mand
pardon of the boldness which I assume onely to en∣joy the stile of
MADAME 
