



My dear Children!
I Am sensible of my unworthiness, and un∣fitness to be seen in Print; it is now above Twenty years since, by the power and goodness of God, I was unexpectedly rescued from the jaws of death, which was the reason I then published that little book, called, Christs Power over bodily Diseases: and I had never been the Author of a book of this Title, had not two of you, but espe∣cially one made me the Father of fools.
I shall here say no more particularly to you two, but that sound repentance, and the fruits thereof, in a setled reformation of life, will yet be your glory, and my joy; but if ye hate to be reform'd, (which God forbid) I shall mourn till I dye for the loss of Children, but ye will be tormented for ever for the loss of God.
Children! I have not of the things of this world to leave you. I do acknowledge the wis∣dom
of God in not judging me sit to be intrusted with these things; but it's enough for us if we can call God our own, though we cannot call the riches of the world our own; some of you do with comfort remember how we have often wor∣shipped God together in singing with delight those words, Psal. 37.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. A little that a righteous man hath, is better than the riches of many wicked, &c.
I here leave you this Letter of the counsel and advice of your aged, and loving, and faithful Father, who sees death looking him and you in the face, and beholds the Judg before the door: this will speak to you, when death hath silenc'd me; and it speaks the same things which God, and Christ, and your own Consciences speak to you; and it speaks to you (as it were) in the hearing of the world.
1. Put a true value on your own Beings, for ye cannot love God and Christ, if ye do not love your selves; ye are of that kind of creatures who are made much higher than all other visible creatures, and but a little lower than the An∣gels; ye are capable to know, and chuse, and love, and delight in God, and to speak of him, and to entertain your selves continually with him; ye are of those creatures in whose happiness God glorifies all his perfections; he made this world for man; he commanded his only-begotten Son to sacrifice himself for man, and sent him
to be born, and to live, and dye, and to rise again, and to intercede in heaven for man; he hath reveal'd all the Truths of the Christian Religion for the good of man; and therefore ye should think it greater madness to sell your precious souls and bodies to the Devil, and your lusts, for the short and dirty pleasures of sin, than to sell a purse of gold, or a cabinet full of jewels for a bag of chaff or cherry-stones; and should ac∣count it below you to give your selves to any but to God.
2. Know that as your Beings are great, so your happiness or misery will be very great; Riches or poverty, sickness or health, this pre∣sent life, or the death that deprives you of it, are things too little to make you blessed or miserable; all the curses of God, or the blessings of the Go∣spel will be upon you presently; and ye can nei∣ther live like men, nor like Christians, till ye know what it is to be sav'd or damn'd, and what it is to lose or enjoy God.
3. That ye may escape the wrath, and obtain the glory set before you, let it be your chief end and interest to know, and honour, and enjoy God; use the creatures as his witnesses, to testi∣fie and declare the being and glory of God to you; for God hath not only made and appointed them to fill your hearts with food and gladness, but also that in the use of them ye may feel, and find, and fill your souls with God; but
especially behold the glory of God, as he is pre∣sented to you in the glass of the Scriptures, that he may have that name in your hearts, which he hath in his word.
Present him to your souls as God over all blessed for ever, that ye may conclude that he who is so infinitely good, as to be his own hap∣piness, is sufficient to make you happy: And that this God may be your eternal life and happiness, ye must know and behold his glory in the face of Jesus Christ, who is the Image of the invisible God, the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person; and therefore behold his glory as the Father of such a Son, and as the Lord of such a servant, for Jesus Christ is the Lords Christ, Luk. 2.26. Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.23. and executes his office of a Mediator in obedience to the will, and to the glory of God the Father, whose glory ye may behold in his calling him to such a high office, in his accomplishing him for the execution thereof, in prospering him, and making him suc∣cessful in his whole work, in giving him such a blessed seed, in making him victorious over all his enemies, and in rewarding him for his great service and obedience; so that according to the intent of the Scriptures forenamed, ye must la∣bour to get such a sight of the glory of God shi∣ning upon you in the face of Jesus Christ, as will make an impression of his image in your souls.

And therefore loathe and abhor sin, which is against the glory of God, and which is the only evil that can make you lose such a glorious God.
And for this reason be convinc'd of the va∣nity of this world, which is but a poor thing when the glory of God shines on your souls; for ye will be most blessed in him when this world shall be dissolv'd and pass'd away.
And let this make Jesus Christ glorious and acceptable to you, whose office and work it is to redeem you from all sin and misery, and to make you blessed for ever in the likeness and enjoyment of this glorious God.
And let this also cause you to endeavour to fill all persons with the great Name of God and Christ, that ye may gain them all the hearts, and love, and service ye can; and therefore in all company let God and Christ have your good word.
4. Know that to love and delight in God is the best imployment for the days of your youth; God is much concern'd for young persons; the Proverbs of Solomon are written, to give to the young man knowledge and discretion, Prov. 1.4. and one great use of the word of God is to teach young men to cleanse their way, Psal. 119.9. Young men, and maidens, and children, are call'd upon to praise the Name of the Lord, Psal. 148.12, 13. We find many mourning with holy Augustine, that
they loved God so late, but none complaining that they loved him too soon; as young as you are, in heaven and hell, it's better be a young child of God, than a young child of the Devil: young Saints are the glory of God, the fulness and accomplishment of Christ, the joy of Angels, the security and support of Religion, the crown of their Parents, and the blessing of their Gene∣ration.
5. Fill your time with the fruits of the Spi∣rit; see that your hearts be fill'd with grace, and then your days will be fill'd with fruit; be always receiving Christ, and resigning your selves to him; feel your hearts continually lay∣ing hold on eternal life, and live as if ye were always running to heaven; spend every day, so that ye may lye down in peace at night, that the Lords-day may be pleasant, death gainful, and eternity glorious.
6. Improve Gods Ordinances of worship; feel your vow of Baptism always fresh and strong upon you; feel the difference betwixt the Lords-day and other days; see that the word Preached be mixt with faith, ingrafted in your hearts; that it kill your sins, and reform your lives; pray continually, and in that duty see that ye be with the spirits of children with your Father in Heaven; let all your affairs pass through praying-hearts; and reckon all your own which ye sincerely pray for; Sing
Psalms, as those that make God your song and joy; and as if ye were sensible that ye are in the gates of heaven, ready to enter therein, to joyn with that world of blessed Angels and Saints in admiring and praising God. When ye come to the Lords-Supper, see all that is pre∣sented to you, receive all that is offered, and do all that is commanded you.
7. Be saithful to the Truth, and then ye need not be afraid of your selves, or of any other: this is your greatest safety, and ye may then feel the ground firm under you, and may say with David, Psal. 26.12. My foot stand∣eth in an even place; and if ye are called to suffer, chuse it rather than sin; and seeing men cannot kill your souls, let not the fear of them make you destroy them your selves.
8. Decline evil company; do not go with them to Hell, who will not go with you to Hea∣ven; but if ye are called into such company, feel your selves with God, whilst ye are with them, and carry it as those that are sensible that there is a God in the place; exercise those graces which are contrary to, and do cendemn their sins; be humble with the proud, meek with the angry, loving with the malicious, that they may be reproved by your graces, and that ye may not be defiled by their sins.
9. Labour to be a blessing to all persons; let men see that in you, for which they may have
cause to love and praise God; bear all wrongs, but do none; do what in you lyes to make all persons holy and joyful, but make none sinful, angry, or sad; forgive all, but let none have need to forgive you; exercise their love, but do not by your sins exercise their patience; give all cause to bless God for you, but give not cause to any to wish they had never known you.
10. Dread debts; do not unnecessarily bring your selves under the bondage of debtors; look upon it as more just and honourable to beg, than to borrow, if ye are not likely to pay, except in that case ye plainly acquaint the lender with your condition, that he may know what adven∣ture he makes; and when ye are able, pay seasonably, fully, and thankfully: I would have none to lend to any children of mine, without first advising with me, except they be in a hope∣ful way of trade: and my advice to such of you is, that you be afraid of being too much trusted; for it's often seen, that they who go to the length of their credit, are injurious to others, and prove bankrupts them∣selves.
11. Abhor Lying: This is a sin which is an abomination to the Lord, whom ye should always please; it's contrary to the Divine Na∣ture, which is in every one that is born of God, Ephes. 4.24. It's an abuse of your tongues
which should be your glory; for the use of your tongues is to express your minds; but in a lye your minds and thoughts do contradict your words; it's a wrong to others whom ye would have believe you, when ye do not believe your selves; it makes you unfit for humane society; for who will converse with those whom they cannot believe; ye hereby rot your names, for a lyar is one of the worst characters of the devil of hell; ye destroy your bodies and souls for ever, for all lyars shall have their part in the lake of fire and brimstone, which is the second death.
12. Do not dare to steal; take nothing from any person, but what ye can say ye received it from the hand of God, and can praise him for it; and can comfortably beg his blessing upon it; kill those lusts which ye would feed with the fruit of other mens labours; consider, that when ye are tempted to this sin of theft, ye are tempted to bring a curse on your estates and persons, to thrust a dagger into your Fa∣thers heart, and to hasten your selves to an untimely and shameful death, and a tormenting eternity.
13. Deride and jeer no persons; let your jests be harmless, and make not your selves the fools of your company; but whilst ye are cheer∣ful as men and women, lose not the savour of Christians.

14. Haunt not Taverns or Ale-houses, &c. Go not into such places, but when God calls you; stay no longer than he will stay with you; and do nothing there, but what ye shall have cause to bless God for when ye come a∣way.
15. Be thankful to them who have shew'd mercy and kindness to me and you; pray for them; inquire how it is with their posterity; and as ye are capable, do them good: remem∣ber Prov. 27.10. Thy own friend, and thy fathers friend forsake not.
16. Forgive all that have done me wrong, and pray to God not to visit it on them, or their posterity; ye know I have had hard measure from some, and I know that I have stood be∣fore God to speak good for them, and to turn away his wrath from them.
17. As for you that are or may be hereaf∣ter set up for your selves in a way of trade: my counsel to you is this: See that your persons be upright with God, that ye may have a Scrip∣ture-right to the promises of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, which is to be prefer'd before the best estate in the world. Pray to God for his blessing, and see every customer as sent from him, and love them as your selves; let all that deal with you have cause to say, that they deal with the members of Jesus Christ.

18. And for you that are or may be Ap∣prentices, my counsel and command to you is this: Let those Scriptures dwell in your hearts which teach you your duty, and encourage you therein, as Ephes. 5.5, 6, 7, 8. Col. 3.22, 23, 24, 25. Tit. 2.9, 10. 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20, 21. Commit them to memory, and bless God that he condescends to be a teacher of ser∣vants; be content with your present condition, which may be the easiest time of your whole age; be not apt to find fault, for that will make you uneasie to your selves, and to the family; let all your words, and looks, and actions, be such as do witness that ye do in your hearts honour your Masters and Mistresses, and Christ in them; bear correction patiently, though ye be wrong'd; the sufferings of Christ are set before you as your patern herein. Pray daily for your Masters, and their families, for ye ought to improve all your interest in God for their good; pray to God to fit you for your calling, that he who teacheth the hus∣bandman to plow and sow, Isa. 28.26. may teach you herein.
To conclude, Love one another according to all the Obligations that are upon you, but never put it in the power of any one to undo the other.
Kill all lustings after the honours, or riches, or pleasures of the world: Remember I have
told you, that as love fulfils all the Law of God, so lust fulfils the law of the Devil. I will say no more, chuse him for your Father that cannot dye: And as Mr. Bolton said to his children, so say I to you, Do not dare to meet me at the day of judgment in an unre∣generate state.
June 6. 1681.

