



DREAD SOUERAIGN:
THIS Tract will need Pa∣tronage, as Great as may be had, that's Yours. Yet, when I first Printed part of it, I presumed not to ask any, but thrust it out at the end of another's La∣bours, that it might seem, at least, to have the same Patron, your Royal Father of Blessed Memory, as the other Work, on which this at∣tended, had. But now I humbly beg for it Your Majesties Patronage; And leave withal, that I

may declare to Your Most Excellent Majestie the Cause why this Tract was then written: Why it stay'd so long before it looked upon the Light: Why it was not then thought fit to go alone, but rather be led abroad by the former Work: Why it comes now forth both with Alteration, and Ad∣dition: And why this Addition made not more haste to the Press, than it hath done.
The Cause why this Discourse was written, was this: I was, at the time of these Conferences with Mr. Fisher, Bishop of S. Davids; And not onely directed, but commanded by my bles∣sed Master King JAMES to this Conference with him. He, May 24. 1622. when we met, began with a great Protestation of seeking the Truth onely, and that for it self. And certainly, Truth, especially in Religion, is so to be sought, or not to be found. He that seeks it with a Roman One of these Biasses is an Aversion from all such Truth as fits not our Ends. And A∣versus à Veritatis luce, ab hoc luci Veritatis adversus (fit) &c. S. Aug. l. 2. cont. Adversarium Le∣gis & Prophet. And 'tis an easie Transition, for a man that is Averse from, to become adverse to the Truth. Bias, or any (b) Other, will run Counter, when he comes near it, and not finde it, though he come within kenning of it. And therefore I did most hear∣tily wish, I could have found the Je∣suite upon that fair way he protested to go. After the Conference ended, I went, whi∣ther my Duty called me, to my Diocess; not suspe∣cting any thing should be made Publike, that was both Commanded, and acted in Private. For W. I. the Publisher of the Relation of the first Confe∣rence with D. White (the late Reverend and Learned Bishop of Ely) In the E∣pistle to the Reader. confesses plainly,

That M. Fisher was straightly charged upon his Allegiance, from his Majestie that then was, not to set out, or Publish what passed in some of these Conferences, till He gave License, and until Mr. Fisher and they might meet, and a∣gree, and Confirm under their Hands, what was said on both sides. He says farther, that Ibid. Mr. Fisher went to Dr. White's house, to know what he would say about the Relation, which he had set out. So then, belike Mr. Fisher had set out the Relation of that Conference, before he went to Dr. White, to speak about it. And this notwithstanding the Kings Restraint upon him, up∣on his Allegiance. Yet, to Dr. White 'tis said he went; but to what other end, than to put a Scorn upon him, I cannot see. For he went to his house to know, what he would say about that Relation of the Conference, which he had set out before. In my absence from London, Mr. Fisher used me as well. For with the same Care of his Allegiance, and no more, These words were in my for∣mer Epistle. And A. C. checks at them, in defence of the Jesuite, and says: That the Jesuite did not at all so much as in Speech, and much less in Papers publish this, or either of the other two Conferences with Dr. White, till he was forc'd unto it by false reports given out to his private disgrace, and the preju∣dice of the Catholike Cause. Nor then did he spread Papers abroad, but onely delivered a very few Copies to special friends, and this not with an intent to calumniate the Bishop, &c. A. C. in his Preface before his Relation of this Conference. Truly, I knew of no Reports then given out to the prejudice of the Jesuit's either Person or Cause. I was in a Corner of the Kingdom▪ where I heard little. But howsoever, here's a most plain Confession by A. C. of that which he struggles to deny. He says he did not spread Papers. What then? What? Why he did but deliver Copies. Why but doth not he that delivers Copies (for instance, of a Libel) spread it? Yea, but he delivered but a very few Copies. Be it so▪ I do not say, how many he spread. He confesses the Jesuite delivered some, though very few; And he that delivers any, spreads it abroad. For what can he tell, when the Copies are once out of his power, how many may copie them out, and spread them farther? Yea, but he delivered them to special friends. Be it so too: The more special friends they were to him, the less indifferent would they be to me, perhaps my more special enemies. Yea, but all this was without an intent to calumniate me. Well: Be that so too. But if I be calumniated thereby, his intention will not help it. And whether the Copies, which he delivered, have not in them Calumny against me, I leave to the Indifferent Reader of this Discourse to judge. he spread abroad Papers of this

Conference, full enough of partialitie to his Cause, and more full of Calumny against me. Hereupon I was in a manner forced to give M. Fisher's Relation of the Conference an An∣swer, and to publish it. Though for some Reasons, and those then approved by Authority, it was thought fit I should set it out in my Chaplain's Name R. B. and not in my own. To which I readily sub∣mitted.
There was a cause also, why at the first, the Dis∣course upon this Conference stayed so long, be∣fore it could endure to be pressed. For the Confe∣rence was in May, 1622. And M. Fisher's Pa∣per was scattered and made common, so common, that a Copy was brought to me (being none of his spe∣cial friends) before Michaelmas. And yet this Discourse was not printed till April, 1624. Now that you may know how this happened, I shall say for my self, It was not my Idleness, nor my Un∣willingness to right both my self, and the Cause, a∣gainst the Jesuite, and the Paper, which he had spred, that occasion'd this delay. For I had then Most Ho∣nourable Witnesses, and have some yet living, That this Discourse (such as it was, when A. C. nibled at it) was finished long before I could perswade my self to let it come into Publike View. And this was caused partly by my own Backwardness to deal with these men, whom I have ever observed to be great Pretenders for Truth, and Unity, but yet such as will admit neither, unless They and their Faction may prevail in all; As if no Reforma∣tion

had been necessary. And partly because there were about the same time three Conferences held with Fisher. Of these, this was the Third; And could not therefore conveniently come abroad into the world, till the two former were ready to lead the way; which till that time, they were not.
And this is in part the Reason also, why this Tract crept into the end of a larger Work. For since that Work contained in a manner the substance of all that passed in the two former Conferences: And that this third in divers points concurred with them, and depended on them; I could not think it Sub∣stantive enough, to stand alone. But besides this Affinity between the Conferences, I was willing to have it pass as silently as it might, at the end of ano∣ther Work, and so perhaps little to be looked after, because I could not hold it worthy, nor can I yet, of that Great Duty, and Service, which I owe to my Dear Mother, the Church of England.
There is a cause also, why it looks now abroad again with Alteration and Addition. And 'tis fit I should give your Majesty an Account of that too. This Tract was first printed in the year 1624. And in the year 1626, another Jesuite, or the same, un∣der the name of A. C. printed a Relation of this Conference, and therein took Exceptions to some Particulars, & endeavoured to Confute some Things deliver'd therein by me. Now being in years, and unwilling to die in the Jesuites debt, I have in this Second Edition done as much for him, and some∣what more. For he did but skip up and down, and

labour to pick a hole, here, and there, where he thought he might fasten; and where it was too hard for him, let it alone. But I have gone through with him; And I hope, given a full Confutation: or at least such a Bone to gnaw, as may shake his teeth, if he look not to it. And of my Addition to this Discourse, this is the Cause; But of my Alteration of some things in it, this. A. C. his Curiosity to winnow me, made me in a more curious manner fall to sifting of my self, and that which had formerly past my Pen. And though (I bless God for it) I found no cause to al∣ter any thing that belonged either to the Substance, or Course of the Conference: Yet somewhat I did find, which needed better, and cleerer expression; And that I have altered, well knowing I must expect Curious Observers on all hands.
Now, Why this Additional Answer to the Relation of A C. came no sooner forth, hath a Cause too, and I shall truly represent it. A. C. his Rela∣tion of the Conference, was set out, 1626. I knew not of it in some years after. For it was prin∣ted among divers other things of like nature, either by M. Fisher himself, or his friend A. C. When I saw it, I read it over carefully, and found my self not a little wrong'd in it; but the Church of England, and indeed the Cause of Religion, much more. I was before this time by Your Majesties Great Grace, and undeserved favour, made Dean of Your Majesties Chappel Royal, and a Counsellor of State, and hereby, as the Occasions of those times were, made too much a Stranger to my Books. Yet

for all my Busie Imployments, it was still in my thoughts to give A. C. an Answer. But then I fell into a most dangerous Feaver; And though it plea∣sed God beyond all hope to restore me to health, yet long I was before I recover'd such strength as might enable me to undertake such a Service. And since that time, how I have been detained, and in a man∣ner forced upon other many, various, and Great Occasions, your Majesty knows best. And how of late I have been used by the Scandalous and Scur∣rilous Pens of some bitter men (whom I heartily beseech God to forgive) the world knows; Little Leasure, and less Encouragement given me to An∣swer a Jesuite, or set upon other Services, while I am under the Prophets affliction, Psal. 50. between thePsal. 50. 19. 20. Mouth that speaks wickedness, and the tongue that sets forth deceit, and slander me as thick, as if I were not their own Mothers Son. In the midst of these Libellous out-cries against me, some Divines of great Note and Worth in the Church came to me, One by One, and no One knowing of the Others Coming (as to me they protested) and perswaded with me to Reprint this Conference, in my own Name. This they thought would vindi∣cate my Reputation, were it generally known to be mine. I Confess I looked round about these Men, and their Motion; And at last, my Thoughts working much upon themselves, I began to perswade myself, that I had been too long diverted from this necessary Work. And that perhaps there might be In voce hominum, Tuba Dei, in the still voice

of men, the Loud Trumpet of God, which sounds many wayes, sometimes to the ears, and sometimes to the hearts of men, and by means which they think not of. And as S. Aug. S 63. De Di∣versis, c. 10. He speaks of Christ disputing in the Tem∣ple with the Elders of the Jews. And they heard Christ the Essential Word of the Father with admiration to astonishment▪ yet believed him not: S. Luk. 2. 47. And the Word then spake to th by a means they thought not of, namely per Flum De in puero, by the Son of God him∣self under the Vail of our hu∣man nature. S. Augustine speaks, A word of God there is, Quod nunquam tacet, sed non semper auditur: which though it be never silent, yet is not always heard. That it is never silent, is his great Mercy; and that it is not alwayes heard, is not the least of our Misery. Upon this Motion I took time to deliberate: And had scarce time for that, much lesse for the Work. Yet at last to every of these men I gave this Answer. That M. Fisher, or A. C. for him, had been busie with my former Discourse, and that I would never reprint that, unless I might gain time enough to Answer that, which A. C. had char∣ged a fresh both upon me, and the Cause. While my Thoughts were thus at work, Your Majesty fell upon the same Thing, and was graciously pleased not to Command, but to Wish me to reprint this Conference, and in mine own Name; And this openly at the Councel-Table in Mi∣chaelmas-Term. 1637. I did not hold it fit to deny, having in all the Course of my service obey∣ed your Majesties Honourable, and Just Mo∣tions, as Commands: But Craved leave to shew what little leasure I had to doe it, and what Inconveniences might attend upon it. When this did not serve to excuse me, I humbly submitted to that,

which I hope was Gods Motion in Your Maje∣sties. And having thus layd all that Concerns this Dis∣course before your Gracious and most Sacred Majesty, I most humbly present you with the Book it self, which as I heartily pray You to protect, so do I wholly submit it to the Church of England, with my Prayers for Her Prosperity, and my Wishes that I were able to do Her better Service.
I have thus acquainted Your Majesty with all Occasions, which both formerly, and now again have led this Tract into the light. In all which I am a faithful Relater of all Passages, but am not very well satisfied, who is now my Adversary. M. Fisher was at the Conference. Since that, I finde A▪C. at the print. And whether These be two, or but One Jesu∣ite,  know not; since scarce One amongst them, goes under One Name. But for my own part (and the Error is not great, if I mistake) I think they are One, and that One, M. Fisher. That which in∣duces me to think so, is First, the Great Inwardness of A▪C. with M. Fisher, which is so great, as may well be thought to neighbour upon Identity. Second∣ly, the Stile of A. C. is so like M. Fishers, that I doubt it was but one and the same hand that mov'd the pen. Thirdly A. C. says expresly, That theA. C. p. 67. Jesuite himself made the Relation of the first Conference with D. White: And in the Title-Page of the Work, That Relation as well as This, is said to be made by A. C. and Published by W. J. therefore A. C. and the Jesuite are one and the same person, or else one of these places hath no Truth in it.
Now if it be M. Fisher himself, under the Name of A. C. then what needs these Preface to the Relation of this Con∣ference by A. C. words: The Jesuite could be content to let pass the Chap∣lains Censure, as one of his Ordinary persecu∣tions for the Catholick Faith; but A. C. thought it necessary for the Common Cause to defend the sincerity and Truth of his Relation, and the Truth of some of the Chief Heads contained in it. In which Speech give me leave to observe to your Sacred Majesty, how grievously you suffer him, and his Fellows to be persecuted for the Ca∣tholike Faith, when your poor Subject and Ser∣vant, cannot set out a true Copy of a Conference held with the Jesuite, jussu Superiorum, but by & by the man is persecuted. God forbid I should ever offer to perswade a Persecution in any kind, or pra∣ctise it in the least. For to my remembrance, I have not given him or his so much as course Language. But on the other side, God forbid too, That your Majesty should let both Laws and Discipline sleep, for fear of the Name of Persecution, and in the mean time let M. Fisher and his Fellows Angle in all parts of your Domini∣ons for your Subjects. If in your Grace and Goodness you will spare their Persons: Yet I humbly beseech You see to it, That they be not suffer'd to lay either their Weels, or bait their Hoooks, or cast their Nets in every stream, lest that Tenta∣tion grow both too general, and too strong. I know they have many Devices to work their Ends; But if they will needs be fishing, let them use none but

And S. Aug. is very full against the use of Mala retid, unlawful Nets. And saith, the Fishermen themselves have great∣est cause to take heed of them. S. Aug. L. de Fid: & Oper. c. 17. Lawful Nets. Let's have no dissolving of Oathes of Allegiance: No deposing, no killing of Kings: Noblowing up of States to settle Quod Volumus, that which fain they would have in the Church: with many other Nets, as dangerous as these. For if their Profession of Religion were as good, as they pretend it is, if they cannot Compass it by Good Means, I am sure they ought not to attempt it by Bad. For if they will do evil, that good may come thereof, the Apostle tells me, Their Dam∣nation's just, Rom. 3.Rom. 3. 8.
Now as I would humbly Beseech Your Majesty to keep a serious Vatch upon these Fsher-men, which pretend S. Peter, but fish not with His Net: So whould I not have You neglect another sort of An∣glers in a Shallower Water. For they have some ill Nets too. And if they may spread them, when, and whore they will, God know, what may become of it. These have not so strong a Back abroad, as the Ro∣manists have, but that's no Argument to suffer them to encrease. They may grow to equal Strength with Number. And Factious People, at home, of what Sect, or fond Opinion soever they be, are not to be neglected. Partly, because they are so Near. And 'tis ever a dangerous Fir, that begins in the Bed∣straw. And partly, because all those Domestick Evils, which threaten a Rent in Church or State, are with far more safety prevented by Wisdom, than punished by Justice. And would men consider it right, they are far more beholding to that man that keeps them from falling, than to him takes them up,

though it be to set the Arm or the Leg that's broken in the Fall.
In this Discourse I have no aim to displease any, nor any hope to please all. If I can help on to Truth in the Church, and the Peace of the Church together, I shall be glad, be it in any measure. Nor shall I spare to speak necessary Truth, out of too much Love of Peace. Nor thrust on Unnecessary Truth to the Breach of that Peace, which once broken, is not so easily sder'd again. And if for Necessary Truths sake onely, any man will be offended, nay take, nay snatch at that offence, which is not given, I know no fence for that. 'Tis Truth, and I must tell it. 'Tis the Gospel, and I must preach it. 1 Cor. 9. And far1 Cor. 9. 16. safer it is in this Case to bear Anger from men, than a Woe from God. And where the Foundations of Faith are shaken, be it by Superstition or Pro∣phaneness, he that puts not to his hand, as firmly as he Can to support them, is too wary, and hath more Care of himself, then of the Cause of Christ. And 'tis a Wariness that brings more danger in the end, then it shuns. For the Angel of the Lord issued out a Curse against the Inhabitants of Meroz, be∣cause they came not to help the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty. Judg. 5. I know 'tis a GreatJudg. 5. 23. ease to let every Thing be as it will, and every man believe, and do as he list. But whether Governors in Stat or Church do their duty there while, is easily seen, since this is an effect of no King in Israel, Judg. 17.Judg. 17. 6.
The Church of Christ upon Earth may be

compared to a Hive of Bees, and that can be no where so steddily placed in this world, but it will be in some danger. And men that care neither for the Hive, nor the Bees, have yet a great mind to the Honey. And having once tasted the sweet of the Churches Maintenance swallow that for Honey, which one day will be more bitter than Gall in their Bowells. Now the King and the Priest, more than any other, are bound to look to the Integri∣ty of the Church in Doctrine and Manners, and that in the first place. For that's by farre the Best Honey in the Hive. But in the second place, They must be Careful of the Churches Maintenance too, else the Bees shall make Ho∣ney for others, and have none left for their own ne∣cessary sustenance, and then all's lost. For we see it in daily and common use, that the Honey is not taken from the ees, but they are destroyed first. Now in this great and Busie Work, the King and the Priest must not fear to put their hands to the Hive, though they be sure to be stung. And stung by the Bees, whose Hive and House they preserve. It was King Davids Cae (God grant it be never Yours.) They came about me (saith thePsal. 118. 12. Psal. 118.) Apum Si∣militudine ardorem no∣tat vesa∣num; Non est enim in illis multum ro∣boris sed mi∣ra Excande∣scentia: Calv: in Psal. 118. like Bees, This was hard usage enough, yet some profit, some Honey might thus be gotten in the End. And that's the Kings Case. But when it comes to the Priest, the Case is alter'd, They come about him like Waspes, or like Hornets rather, all sting, and no Honey there. And all this many times for no offence, nay sometimes for Service

done them, would they see it. But you know who said: Behold I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give to every man according as his Works shall be. Revel. 22. And he himselfRevel. 22. 12. is so Gen. 15. 1. exceding great a Reward, as that the mani∣fold stings which are in the World, howsoever they smart here, are nothing when they are pressed out with that exceeding weight of Glory, which shall be revealed: Rom. 8.Rom. 8. 18.
Now one Thing more let me be bold to Observe to Your Majesty in particular, concerning Your Great Charge, the Church of England. 'Tis in an hard Condition. She professes the Ancient Ca∣tholike Faith; And yet the Romanist condemns Her of Novelty in her Doctrine. She practises Church-Government, as it hath been in use in all Ages, and all Places, where the Church of Christ hath taken any Rooting, both in, and ever since the Apostles Times; And yet the Separatist con∣demns Her for Antichristianism in her Disci∣pline. The plain truth is, She is between these two Factions, as between two Milstones; and unless Your Majesty look to it, to Whose Trust She is committed, She'l be grownd to powder, to an irre∣pairable both Dishonour, and loss to this Kingdom. And 'tis very Remarkable, that while both these press hard upon the Church of England, both of them Cry out upon Persecution, like froward Chil∣dren, which scratch, and kick, and bite, and yet cry out all the while, as if themselves were killed. Now to the Romanist I shall say this; The

Errors of the Church of Rome are grown now (many of them) very Old. And when Errors are grown by Age and Continuance to strength, they which speak for the Truth, though it be far Ol∣der, are ordinarily challenged for the Bringers in of New Opinions. And there is no Greater Ab∣surdity stirring this day in Christendom, than that the Reformation of an Old Corrupted Church, will we, ill we, must be taken for the Building of a New. And were not this so, we should never be troubled with that idle and imperti∣nent Question of theirs: Where was your Church before Luther? For it was just there, where their's is now. There is no other difference between Us and Rome, than be∣twixt a Church miserably Cor∣rupted, and happily purged, &c. Jos. Hall. B. of Exon. In his Apologetical Advertisement to the Reader, p. 192. Approved by Tho. Morton, B. then of Cov. & Lich. now of Dresm. in the Letters printed by the B. of Ex∣ter, in this Treatise called, The Recoscile, p. 68. And D. Field. in this Appen to the third part. c. 2. where he cites Calv. to the sat purpose, L. 4. Inst. c. 2. . 11. One and the same Church still, no doubt of that. One in Substance, but not One in Condition of state and purity; Their part of the same Church remain∣ing in Corruption: and Our part of the same Church under Reforma∣tion. The same Naaman, and he a Syrian still, but Leprous with them, and Cleansed with us; The same man still. And for the Separatist, and him that lays his Grounds for Separation or Change of Discipline, though all he says, or can say, be in Truth of Divinity, and among Learned men little better than ridiculous: yet since these fond Opini∣ons have gain'd some ground among your people; to such among them as are wilfully se to follow their blind Guides, through thick and thin, till S. Matth. 15. 14. they

fall into the Ditch together, I shall say nothing. But for so many of them, as mean well, and are onely misled by Artifice and Cunning; Concerning them, I shall say thus much only: They are Bells of passing good mettle, and tuneable enough of them∣selves, and in their own disposition; and a world of pity it is, that they are Rung so miserably out of Tune, as they are, by them which have gotten power in and over their Consciences. And for this there is yet Remedy enough; but how long there will be, I know not.
Much talking there is (Bragging, Your Ma∣jesty may call it) on both sides. And when they are in their ruff, they both exceed all Moderation, and Truth too; So far, till both Lips and Pens open for all the World like a Purse without money; Nothing comes out of this, and that which is worth nothing out of them. And yet this nothing is made so great, as if the Salvation of Souls, that Great work of the Redeemer of the World, the Son of God, could not be effected without it. And while the one faction cryes up the Church above the Scrip∣ture; and the other the Scripture to the neglect and Contempt of the Church, which the Scripture it self teaches men both to honour, and obey: They have so far endangered the Belief of the One, and the Authority of the Other, as that neither hath its Due from a great part of Men. Whereas according to Christs Institution: The Scripture, where 'tis plain, should guide the Church; And the Church, were there's Doubt or Difficulty, should

expound the Scripture; Yet so, as neither the Scrip∣ture should be forced, nor the Church so bound up, as that upon Just and farther Evidence, She may not revise that which in any Case hath slipt by Her. What Success this Great Distemper caused by the Collision of two such Factions, may have, I know not, I cannot Prophesie. This I know, That the use which Wise men should make of other mens falls, is not to fall with with them; And the use which Pious and Religious men should make of these great Flaws in Christianity, is not to Joyn with them that make them, nor to help to dislocate those main Bones in the Body, which being once put out of Joynt, will not easily be set again. And though I cannot Prophesie, yet I fear That Atheism, and Irreligion gather strength, while the Truth is thus weakned by an Unworthy way of Contending for it. And while they thus Contend, neither part Consider, that they are in a way to induce upon themselvs, and others, that Contrary Extream, which they seem most both to fear, and oppose.
Besides: This I have ever Observed, That many Rigid Professors have turn'd Roman Ca∣tholiks, and in that Turn have been more Jesui∣ted than any other: And such Romanists as have chang'd from them, have for the most part quite lea∣ped over the Mean, and been as Rigid the other way, as Extremity it self. And this is there be not both Grace, and Wisdom to govern it, is a very Natural Motion. For a man is apt to think he can never run far enough from that, which he

once begins to hate; And doth not Consider therewhile, That where Religion Corrupted is the thing he hates, a Fallacy may easily be put upon him. For he ought to hate the Corruption which depraves Religion, and to run from it: but from no part of Religion it self, which he ought to Love, and Reverence, ought he to depart. And this I have Observed farther: That no one thing hath made Conscientious men more waver∣ing in their own mindes, or more apt, and easie to be drawn aside from the sincerity of Reli∣gion professed in the Church of England, than the Want of Uniform and Decent Or∣der in too many Churches of the Kingdom. And the Romanists have been apt to say, The Houses of God could not be suffer'd to lye so Na∣stily (as in some places they have done) were the True worship of God observed in them: Or did the People think that such it were. istrue, the Inward Worship of the Heart, is the Great Service of God, and no Service acceptable with∣out it: But the External worship of God in his Church is the Great Witness to the World, that Our heart stands right in that Service of God. Take this away, or bring it into Contempt, and what Light is there left to shine before men, that they may see our Devotion, and glorifie our Father which is in Heaven? And to deal clearly with Your Majesty, These Thoughts are they, and no other, which have made me labour so much, as I have done, for Decency and an

Orderly settlement of the External Worship of God in the Church. For of that which is Inward there can be no Witness among men, nor no Ex∣ample for men. Now no External Action in the world can be Uniform without some Ceremo∣nies. And these in Religion, the Ancienter they be, the better, so they may fit Time and Place. Too many Over-burden the Service of God; And too few leave it naked. And scarce any Thing hath hurt Religion more in these broken Times, than an Opinion in too many men, That because Rome had thrust some Unnecessary, and many Su∣perstitious Ceremonies upon the Church, therefore the Reformation must have none at all; Not considering therewhile, That Ceremonies are the Hedge that fence the Substance of Religion from all the Indignities, which Prophaneness and Sacri∣ledge too Commonly put upon it. And a Great Weakness it is, not to see the strength which Cere∣monies (Things weak enough in themselves, God knows) adde even to Religion it self; But a far greater to see it, and yet to Cry Them down, all, and without Choyce, by which their most hated Adversaries climb'd up, and could not crie up them∣selves, and their Cause, as they do, but by them. And Divines of all the rest might learn, and teach this Wisdom if they would, since they see all other Professions, which help to bear down their Cere∣monies, keep up their own therewhile, and that to the highest.
I have been too bold to detain Your Majesty so

long; But my Grief to see Christendom bleeding in Dissention, and which is worse, triumphing in her own Blood, and most angry with them, that would study her Peace, hath thus transported me. For truely it Cannot but grieve any man, that hath Bowels, to see All men seeking, but as S. Paul foretold, Phil. 2. their own things, and not the things whichPhil. 2. 21. are Jesus Christs. Sua, Their own surely. For the Gospel of Christ hath nothing to do with them: And to see Religion so much, so Zealously preten∣ded, and called upon, made but the Stalking-Horse, to shoot at other Fowl, upon which their Aym is set; In the mean time, as if all were Truth and Holiness it self, no Salvation must be possible, did it lye at their Mercy, but in the Communion of the One, and in the Conventicles of the Other. As if either of these now were, as the Donatists of old reputed them∣selves, the only men, in whom Christ at his coming to Judgment, should find Faith. No (faith S. Ag. Epist. 48. S. Augustine: and so say I with him) Da veniam, non Credimus. Pardon us, I pray, we cannot be∣lieve it. The Catholike Church of Christ is nei∣ther Rome, nor a Conventicle. Out of that there's no Salvation, I easily Confess it. But out of Rome there is, and out of a Conventicle too; Salvation i not shut up into such a narrow Conclave. In this ensuing Discourse therefore I have endeavour'd to lay open those wider-Gates of the Catholike Church, confined to no Age, Time, or Place; Nor know∣ing any Bounds, but That Faith, which was once (and but once for all) deliver'd to the Saints.

S. Jude 3. And in my pursuit of this way, I haveS. Jud. 3. searched after, and deliver'd with a single heart, that Truth which I profess. In the publishing whereof, I have obeyed Your Majesty, discharg'd my Duty, to my power, to the Church of England, 1 S. Pet. 3. 15. Given account of the Hope that is in me; And so testi∣fied to the world that Faith in which I have lived, and by God's blessing and favour purpose to dye; But till Death shall most unfainedly remain,

