


My Lords,
THe Name of Bishop Lati∣mer
is of all good men had
in great Veneration,See his sweet memorial in the Book of Martyrs. and
therefore it is not to
be doubted, but your Lordships will
afford him a Favourable Reception:
Where should the Labours of a Re∣formed
Bishop and Martyr, find a

safer Patronage, then under the
wings of the Bishops of the Reform∣ed
Churches? You succeed him in
Place and Dignity, tread also in the
steps of his Zeal and Diligence. The
Tongues and Pens of men are very
busie with you; but be confident, if
you be clad with the Zeal of your
Quondam Brother, they will be as
loath to part with you, as they are
now willing to be rid of you: For
who is he that will harm you, if ye be
Followers of that which is good? Pe. 3. 13.
Your Reverend Brother tels you in
these Following Pages, that, though
in the time of King Edward the
Sixth much was done in the work
of Reformation, yet all was not done
that was necessary: The greater rub∣bish
of Popery was thrown out, but
(saith he) the House is not clean
swept yet: The Broom is once more
in your Lordships hands, sweep clean,
we beseech you, out with the dust of

Ceremonies and Superstition, as well
as with the Garbidge and Filth of I∣dolatry.
Take not from a Thred to a
Shoe-latchet, lest Rome should say,
I have made England rich, If Or∣naments
and Ceremonies (though
judged indifferent) be so necessary,
can no other be pitcht upon, then such
as are found in the Idols Temple?
Why should the Spouse of Christ be
arrayed in the Attire of an Har∣lot?Rev. 17. 5
Your pious Brother pleads very
heartily for the Ordinance of Preach∣ing,
lifting it up above all other
parts of Worship, and tels you more
then once, Take away Preaching, take
away Salvation; a Sentence most
worthy the mouth of a Bishop, and fit
to be engraven on the doors of your
Palaces, and Porches of your Chur∣ches.
And your Lordships know what
that Jewel of Bishops said, Opor∣tet

Episcopum concionātem mori:
Oh imitate the zeal and Forwardness
of your Famous Predecessors, both
in your Persons and Clergical
Charge.
My Lords, by a Series of merci∣ful
Providences, we are brought un∣der
the Government of the best King
in the world, whom one of your Bre∣thren
not undeservedly stileth,Bish, Rei∣nolds. A
Prince of the greatest suavity:
His Majesties Gracious Declaration
for the ease of tender Consciences,
(like a silken Thread) hath tied a
faster and closer knot of Love and
Loyalty upon the hearts of his Sub∣jects,
then all the Cords and Cables
of your severest Canons; had your
Lordships seconded his Majesties
Clemeney, with a Profession of your
future Moderation and Gentleness
towards Ministers and People, how
well had it savoured?
My Lords, Barnard gives you

good Counsel, in Serm. 23. super
Cantica.
Audiant hoc Prelati, qui sibi
commissis semper volunt esse for∣midini,
utilitati raro. Discite sub∣ditorum
vos esse matres debere,
non dominos, studete magis amari,
quam metui; & si severitate in∣terdum
opus sit, paterna sit, non
tyrannica, Matres fovendo, Patres
vos corripiendo exhibeatis: Man∣suescite,
ponite feritatem, sus∣pendite
verbera, producite Ube∣ra,
pectora lacte pinguescant, non
Typho turgeant. Quid jugum
vestrum super eos aggravatis, quo∣rum
potius onera portare debea∣tis!—.
You live, my Lords, in a dis∣cerning
and jealous age;England so called formerly by the Pope. you are like
to find the good old Asse more skittish
now, then in former times. Your
Fathers made our yoke grievous, let
it be your Glory, to make the heavy

yoke they put upon us, lighter, and
we will serve you.
Let not all the trouble seem little be∣fore
your eyes, that hath come upon us,
on our Kings, on our Princes, on our
Parliaments, on our Ministers, on this
Famous City, and on all this People.
We cannot be deaf to those sad
Complaints (His Late Majesty, our
dear Sovereign hath left behind him)
of the Vulgars violence and tumults
in the dawning of our late unhappy
Differences: Whence blew the wind
that raised the noise and madness of
those raging waves? Came it not out
of your Quarter?
Remember, and forget not your &
caetera Oath,Then sad∣ly com∣plained of. Innovations in Wor∣ship,
corruption of your Courts Dis∣cipline,
the decay of the Soul-saving
Ordinance of Preaching, the swarm∣ing
of scandalous and idle Clergy,
the steighting and silencing of pious
and painful Ministers. These (my

Lords) with much more, were those
Vapours (which being not purged
out, but) by your countenance pent
up in the Bowels of the Kingdom,
caused that hate overturning Earth∣quake.
After this Earthquake (through
the working of our good God)1 Kings 19. 12. a still
small voice is heard, a voice of peace
from his Majesty, speaking peace to
all his people.
A Voice of Praise from his Peo∣ple,
rejoycing and blessing God for
such a King.
Beware my Lords, you step not
back into your old Circle, and conjure
up again the dangerous spirit of this
mobile Vulgus.
My Lords,Sir Har∣bottle Grim∣ston's first Speech in the Banquet∣ting house at Whitehal. His Majesty hath bin
twice crowned since his Happy Arri∣val,
once, by the Commons of Eng∣land,
with a Crown of Hearts, and
lately, by the Nobles of England,
with a Crown of Gold. It is much

in your hands, to continue and en∣crease
the Glory of the first and best
Crown.
The Management of that Indul∣gence,
His Majesty in His pious
Declaration, offers to His Subjects,
is like to be committed to your Care:
Be tender of His Majesties Honour,See His Majesties Speech to the Lords House.
before the People (of which His Ma∣jesty
is very tender) Clip not His
Royal Bounty. Let Ministers and
People under your Charge, tast the
Fruit of it in its greatest Latitude.
What if you decrease in some irregu∣lar
excesse? If His Majesty encrease
His Dominion over the best part of
His Subjects Possessions, their
hearts,The Kings Declara∣tion mentions some that censure His Majesty for want of Zeal to the Church, because he presseth not a gene∣ral Conformity to Lyturgies, &c. let it be no Grief of heart to
you.

This you may observe (in that
which is here dedicated to your Ho∣nours)
was the genuine Temper
and Bent of the Spirit and Labours
of,

