



SIR,
I Ought to take notice (as I think all the Intelligent do) of your Generous In∣clination, and free Readiness to com∣municate to the Royal Society, and thence to the Public, whatsoever is, upon sure accompt, suggested for the welfare of any of his Majesties Domi∣nions. And those Hortulan Affairs are not the least of our Inland Commodities; and they have been the seri∣ous engagement of the said Royal Society from the first Year of their Institution; and have prospered exceed∣ingly in many parts of England, and in some parts of Scotland and Ireland.
The great Example of his Majesty, and of our Nobi∣lity, and generally of our chief Gentry, hath prevailed from the East all over the West, so far as to encompass Oxford. And the stop is said to be about Cambridge: And here are those Expedients proposed, which may be effectual to remove all Obstacles. And, if the Gentry about Cambridge shall be pleased to accept of them, and henceforth to be stirring in the business, as is here di∣rected, they may soon overtake all that's done about Ox∣ford, and advance more in five years, than hath hither∣to been done in twenty, though it is not little that hath been done of late. For these Arts, and our Experience, and more Expedients also, do grow daily.
One said, that if we had one skilful and diligent Nur∣sery-man, who had a complete Nursery of all sorts of good fruit, and of the best Vines that agree best with this Climate, and Mulberry Trees, and wholsom Trees for the avenues of Cities, Towns, and fair Mansions; That one such Nursery within ten or fifteen miles in all the Vales of these three united Kingdoms, would make all these Plantations spread apace, and amount to the va∣lue of Millions yearly. I answered, That it was now do∣ing: And every reasonable man easily apprehends, how a noble Orchard may be raised together with such a com∣plete Nursery, under the same inspection, and the same care; and the one grow on and prosper the better by the association of the other. And I shall here shew, How a younger Brother of ordinary capacities, who hath but so many Acres of his own as belong to every Cottager by Statute, may thence easily and speedily raise a consi∣derable gain, for the maintenance of his Family, and entertain himself with the sweetest and most innocent of Earthly pleasures. And it is great satisfaction, and in∣trinsic comfort to an ingenuous Mind, when he can truly say, that all the good Vines, and other best fruit in all the Neighbourhood, and for some miles about him, are the product of his industry; and when he can justly claim a posthume reputation for real services done to his Country.
And here I shew, How any Gentleman may freely furnish all his neighbourhood, even Cottages (who cannot send to Mr. Rose) with the best Vines: I say, freely, and at less charges yearly, than the usual price of a Flaggon of good Wine. Yet I know not how it should disparage our Nobility, to suffer their Gardeners to sell generous Plants, as their Woodmen sell Timber, and Fuel in their Woods and Coppices, and their Tenants sell Corn and Cattel in the Market. I am sure, that many in

Wiltshire, Hampshire, Dorsetshire, and Sommersetshire are obliged and the richer for the famous Garden of Wil∣ton, and for the goodly Nurseries about Salisbury. And his Majesties Gardiner, Mr. Rose, was an obliging Ex∣ample for his sale of the best Vines, and the fittest for our Climate.
By this progress, and by these rules, we cannot fail of good Nurseries within Ten miles in all our Vales. And this I can prophesie, that where the Tenants have not Orchards, and others have, they will shortly fail to pay their Rents. If they cannot be trusted to preserve and to cherish Orchards raised at the Landlords charge, they should be compelled to raise Thickets, as is here taught; that Orchards may the sooner and the ea∣sier be there raised when a Tenant comes that may be trusted: Otherwise the Lands of Gentlemen will fall, whilst the Lands of small Freeholders are raised in value.
There is no need, I should say▪ much to invite the Con∣sumers of their Inheritance, and the Desertors of their Country, to put their hands to push on this affair, since the Ingenious Author of the Gentlemans Recreation hath said enough to call them out of their B—houses, and scurrilous P—houses: And the polite Author of the Planters Manual speaks good English to the Esteminate Phantasticks. For, if none of the Rural recreations, Hunting, Hawking, Fowling, Fishing; nor any of the Amenities, profits or pleasures of Gardens, Vineyards, Orchards; nor spicy and fragrant Groves, can reclaim the Prodigal, I have no more to say to him, but only, if he understands Latine, mind him of the old style, about 1500 years ago, twice recorded against such Romans as became degenerate:





Omnes enim (sicut M. Varro jam temporibus Avorum conquestus est,) Patres-familiae, falce & aratro relictis, in∣tra murum correpsimus, & in Cireis potiùs ac Theatris, quàm in segetibus & Vinetis manus movemus; attonitique miramur gestus Effoeminatorum, quòd à natura sexum vi∣ris denegatum muliebri motu mentiantur, decipiantque ocu∣los spectantium. Mox deinde ut apti veniamus ad ganeas, quotidianam cruditatem Laconicis excoquimus, & exucto sudore sitim quaerimus, noctésque libidinibus & ebrietati∣bus, dies ludo vel somno consumimus. Ac nosmet ipsos du∣cimus fortunatos, quod nec Orientem solem videmus, nec Occidentem: Itaque istam vitam socordem persequitur va∣letudo. Nam sic juvenum corpora fluxa & resoluta sunt, ut nihil mors mutatura videatur. At mehercule vera illa Ro∣muli proles assiduis venatibus, nec minùs agrestibus operi∣bus exercitata, firmissimis praevaluit corporibus, ac militiam belli, cùm res postulavit, facilè sustinuit, durata pacis la∣boribus; semperque Rusticam vitam praeposuit Ʋrbanae.



Thus much of our old Date, and with twofold Au∣thority, in defence of the Gentlemans Recreations, and of our Agrestic labour.
SIR,

