



My Lord,
IT is not for Protection this little Treatise presumes to
present it self to your view, let its own Innocency and honest Design
be its Guard; its Errandis only to represent the most na∣tural
Causes of the Poverty of your Country, by discovering not only the grand
Robbers of its Treasure, but the lesser Theeves that creep in at every
window, and pilfer every House, and pick every Pocket, whereby not only the
noble and wealthy, but the mean and poor are daily made poorer; and it
chuseth to make its Address to your Lordship, as the chief Concernee, of a
Subject, in its Prosperity, as being Heir to the highest Honor and most
no∣ble Patrimony in this Ile, and from thence will probably be in the best
Capacity, after a few more years have ripened your pregnant Parts, to do it
good or hurt; and amongst the other He∣roick Vertues you derive from 
your most noble Ancestors, it is wish'd and hop'd this may be
in∣tail'd, that you are a true Lover of your Country, that it may be said of
you in after ages, as of Mordecai the noble Jew, He was next to
the King great amongst his people, accepted of the multitude, seeking
the Wealth of his Country: your Predecessors have sav'd you a
labour as to the raising your own House, one Stone more would make that
top-heavy, all you have left to do is to keep that in repair, and to finish the
Structures they have begun for the Wealth and Prosperity of your Country; for
as they have been called to the highest Im∣ploys by their Prince, so have
they not disdained to stoop to the meanest Service for the Im∣provement 
of the Trade, &c. of their Country, the many
charge∣able Attempts made by them for the erecting and incouraging
Manufactures, &c. Chappellizod, Clonmell, Carrick, and about
twelve places more, where Attempts have been made by their Exam∣ple and
Countenance, will tell the next age of their unparallel'd Incouragements to
improve the Manufactures and Trade of Ire∣land; and this little Book
will inform them why they succeed∣ed no better. I am not unsen∣sible the
scornful useless Wits of this Age will insinuate to your Lordship,
Mercantile and Me∣chanick Studies are below your Dignity; but let me reply,
they have but depraved Fancies that tell you so; ask your most noble 
Grandfather why he hath admit∣ted such free access. and spent
so much time in conference with men of Mechanick and Mercan∣tile Rank and
Breeding, he will tell you, it was that he might un∣derstand the Interest
and Intrigue of Trade to promote it, as the on∣ly means to improve the Wealth
of his Country; and both divine and prophane History informs us, most of
the useful and bene∣ficial Arts, wherewith the world flourisheth, were the
Inventions of famous men: It is recorded to the praise of Tuball
Caan, a Prince in his time, that he was the first In∣structer of
every Artificer to work in Brass, and Iron; &c. and of holy
Noah, the last King of the old World, that God instructed him to
be his chief Ship-Carpenter,Genes. 6.14.
Bezaleele and Aboli∣ab were Princes of their Tribes, whom God
filled with wisdom, un∣derstanding and knowledge in all man∣ner of
Workmanship, to devise cunning works. to work in Gold and
Silver, and in Brass, in cutting of Stones, and carving
of Timber, Exod. 31.45. So Solomon, Israels most
glo∣rious King, was the Inventer of all those curious Works he made to adorn
both Gods House and his own, and the Con∣triver of his Ships to manage his
Traffique with Ophir for Gold, whereby he became the wealthi∣est Prince in
the world; and so great a veneration had the anti∣ent Heathens for profitable
and useful Arts, they attributed the Invention of them to their Gods; so
that most acute Wit, andcompleatest States-man of his age, Sir
Henry Wotton, in his Cha∣racter of the Grand Duke of
Tuska∣ny, dedicated to King James, to the rest of his
Qualifications, as that he was a wise and wary Prince, solidly not formally
so, &c. saith, He was a great Cherisher of manual Arts,
whereby he drew to him from all parts the most exquisite Artificers, gave
them settled Pensions, and placed them in several compart∣ments of his
Palace, where he would come often to see them work for his own delight, being
in truth the greatest Oeconomist of his age; and as he had much of the
Prince, so did he not dis∣dain to have something of the Mer∣chant:
and our brave Prince Ru∣pert hath increas'd not lessen'd his Fame
in the Field of Mars, by sullying his Hands and smutting 
his Face in the Forge of Vulcan: That Glory of his Country
for Wit and Learning, the Lord Ba∣con, did not spend his time in
Phi∣losophical Theory, but in the practical part of manual Arts, as the
Incorporation and refining of Mettals and Minerals, &c. vide his
Phisiologica from pag. 91. to pag. 146.
And in his Speech to the Par∣liament, saith he, I hope, my
Lords, my midnight Studies to make our Coun∣tries flourish, and out-vie
European Neighbourt in mysterial and beneficial Arts, have not so
ungratefully affected your Intellects, that you will delay or oppose this
Affair, since your hono∣rable Posterities may be enriched there∣by p.
132.
The despising the Study of Mechanick Arts is only the pro∣duct
of Romantick Fancies, who more esteem the Composer of Plays
than the Inventers of Works, though they are no more useful in a Commonwealth
than Fidlers in a Country Parish, to incite to Idleness and Debauch∣ery.
Titus Livius tells you, they were first designed to
appease the angry Gods in a time of great Mortality; and well they became the
Worship of such beastly De∣ities, whose Worship consisting in Antick
Gestures and Garbs, with Mimick motions directed with Musick, mixt with
abomi∣nable Immoralities, especially their Bacchanalies, &c.
But saith he, The Actors were not base Comedians, or
Professors of the infamous Players Craft, who aregrown to this
Foolery and excessive Sumptuousmess, as can hardly be de∣frayed by the
most wealthy Kingdoms, but by the Noble Youth of the City; Livius Supplement.
pag. 205, 206. Vertuous Heathens are the Re∣proach of vicious
Christians, who retain a greater veneration for Moral than they for Divine
Pre∣cepts; if Christians would retain half the veneration to the Divine
Precepts of St. Peter, Paul, &c. that Heathens gave to the Moral
Precepts of Seneca, Socrates and Plutarch, Preciseness
would not be the Reproach and Prophane∣ness the Applause of these last
and worst times of this doting old World as it is: saith the de∣servedly
admired Orinda,

For since its grown in fashion to be bad,
And to be vain, or angry, proud or mad,
While in their Vices only men agree
Is thought the only modern Gallantry,
How would some brave Examples check the Crimes
And both reproach and yet reform the Times.
But however Romantick Fan∣cies and Composers of Plays are now
admired by a Generation of men, who are like those Boys that are fond of
their play, but hate their Books: yet Inventers and Improvers of manual Arts
have ever been esteemed the Patrons of the Honor and Wealth of their Country,
by all that esteem pub∣lick profit before private plea∣sure.
Sir, it is not the Art of the Tradesman, but the Knowledge of
the Statesman I recommend to your Study: For though it be not necessary
your Lordship should understand when Leatheris well tanned, or
Wool well or∣dered, or Flesh and Fish with their products well saved, nor
when Cloth & Stuff is true made, yet it is very convenient, your Noble
Self, and others like to be concerned with you in State Af∣fairs, should be
acquainted how much the right Managing those lesser matters tends to the
Credit and Wealth of your Country, and that the Labour of the poor, when
rightly improved, produ∣ceth greater Wealth to a Coun∣try than the Revenue of
the rich, as is evident in the Chapter of Manufactures.
And as your Lordship may be eminently serviceable herein in your
publick station, when you come to be a Chief Minister of State, so at
present by your lead∣ingExample in being the chief Member of that
honourable So∣ciety, proposed for curing all our Mercantile maladies in the
Chap∣ter of Corporation-Trade, few sober young Gentlemen but would
esteem it their Honour as well as their Interest to be ingaged with you in
a work so beneficial to their Country, and convenient to themselves; for it
is the Glo∣ry of Princes and Nobles to im∣barque themselves in Designs for
the publick Weal of their Coun∣try, wherein your Lordship hath Royal as well as
Noble examples in the members of the African and Canary
Companies at London, &c. and it is recorded, to the Honor of the
Lord Chancellor Cromwel, after his grateful Requital of his old Friend
Francis Friscobald, adecayed Banker of
Florence, that he highly importuned him to stay and erect a new Bank
in London, offering to go a share with him to the value of 60000
Duckats, a considerable Sum in those times.
And this work of improving Ireland in Trade and
Manufa∣ctures seems to be reserved for the Age your Lordship is to act your
part on the publick Stage; for, as I demonstrate in the first Chapter,
Ireland was never ca∣pable of it until the year 1660. and since then
many hopeful Attempts have miscarried for want of discerning the Defects in
their Foundation, for which Experience since then hath supplied Remedies,
which this little Book proposes; that as your most Illustrious
Grandfa∣therhath had the Honor to regu∣late and settle the real
Estates of this Kingdom, a work of that weight and difficulty, few Heads or
Hands but his own could have performed so, to the general sa∣tisfaction of
all the different op∣posite Interests; so will it pro∣bably be your
Lordships work to build upon that well laid Foundation, by improving the
personal Estates of Irelands Inha∣bitants, which nothing but the
propagating its Trade and Manu∣factures can do, and that is a
Work will prosper in no hand but that of Interest, as is
asserted in the Chapter of Irelands Interest in its own
Government: and none will question but your Lordship hath the greatest
Interest in Irelands Prosperity of any Subject in theKings Dominions; and as your Interest, so your natural Genius, if
your observes mistake not, in∣clines you to Seriousness, a tem∣per this
frothy age needs your ex∣ample in; and it is hop'd by them that love you, it is
not only the gravity of your paternal Educa∣tion and Example, but the pow∣er of
your own innate solid Hu∣mour, that hath preserved you to this age so
spotless, wherein too many young Noblemen are ig∣nobly vicious, to the
reproach of their Dignities: titular Honour abstracted from Vertue is but the
shadow of Greatness, vertuous and heroick Actions are the sub∣stance of
it.


Juvenal. fol 279.Is there
in Greatness so much good as will
But only serve to counterpoise the ill?
Each Crime is so conspicuously base,
As he that sins is great in Birth or Place.

Herbert.But who will honour him
that's Honours shame,
Noble in nothing but a noble Name?
Honour consists in VVorth, not Blood,
The Great weigh nothing if not good:
The men whose Vertue is thir Birth
Have been the greatest men on Earth.Which
Campion in his Epistle to Robert Earl of
Leicester, the Dar∣ling of his Princess, and Glory of his Country
in his time, affirms; having enumerated the excellent Qualifications of his
Mind, and love∣liness of his Deportment, saith;
these are indeed the Kernels that shine through the Shell of your
Nobility, this is the Sap that preserves the Bark of your noble Tree, these
are the Sub∣stance that make you worthy of those Or¦naments wherewith you
are attir'd, &c. therein placing the worth of this great Statesman,
not in his high Birth or glittering Titles, wch were even of the
highest Dignities atCourt, but in his noble and vertuous
Qualities shining through the glass of titular Dignities: vitious great
ones are apt to measure their own Fame by their own
Shadows, and by the Flatteries of Sicovants about them, when the
better such speak of them, the worse the ver∣tuous think of them; as a
good man once said; Lord what evil have I done that this wicked man
praiseth me? the judicious will not judge of others so much by their
per∣sonal Carriage, as by their Com∣pany; when we observe the Ra∣vens and
Crows are gathered to∣gether croaking we conclude there is Carrion neer that
place, it is the unhappiness of vicious Potentates to have all the Beasts
& Birds of prey following them by their ill scent, and to have 
swarms of Flesh-flies buzzing their praise, as if every vice
were a vertue; but it is determined by a more unchangeable decree than that of
the Medes and Persians, that the Name of the wicked
shall rot.Prov. 10.7.
Histories acquaint after ages with their Vices as well
as Vertues, and tell the world what cruel Tyrants, the Nimrods,
Pharaohs, Herods, &c.
What gross Idolaters, Ahab, Manasses, &c.
Nay prophane Histories pen∣ned by Heathens record to
po∣sterity what beastly Drunkards, &c. Great
Alexander and his vali∣ant Captains were, that his Dar∣ling
Ephestion, and soon after him∣self drunk themselves dead
whilst young.
What effeminate leacherousSots, Sardanapalis,
Galba, &c.
What traitorous Villains to their Country, the Catalines,
&c.
What lascivious Goats, the Tarquins, Caligula,
&c.
What bloody Persecutors, Do∣mitian, Nero, &c.
What vile Apostates, Julian, &c.
Though the most vicious of Popes in their life time usually
enjoy the flattering Titles of Sa∣cred and Holiness, &c. who
tho' Devils incarnate are worship'd as Gods, yet after they are dead that
irrevokable divine Sentence Matt. 10.27. is executed, What they do
in secret shall be published on the House-tops:
Genebr. Onusoph. Platina,
&c.Histories of their own tell us who were Atheists, who
Blasphemers,, who Conju∣rers, who Sodomites, who usurp∣ingTyrants, Murtherers, infal∣lible Hereticks, and who sen∣sual
lascivious Adulterers. Now the Wise man, who tells us, A good Name is
better than great Riches, intends it not only whilst we live but after
death, the righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance:
present Applauses are the fading Garlands of all Potentates, good and bad,
but future Fame is on∣ly the Crown of the vertuous: which your famous Father
now wears, and will do, to the shame of his Successors that shall
dege∣nerate from his Character, as is declared in the ensuing Poems, pick'd
out of the several Prints upon his greatly lamented Death.



HIs Parantage th' alike ascendant Pow'rs
Of a long Line for samed Ancestors,
In Ormond's Heir the last firm Link he bears
Of one unbroken Chain drawn thro' 4 hundred years,
A Chain which from such ages held so fast,
Must thro' the whole Platonick circle last,
Till wondring time to th' Ormond praise shall
tell,
That greatness truly stands that never sell.




His Love to our Religion still was great,
Which he prosest, not as a trick of State,
Lest he should Favour or an Office want;
His Life as well as Faith was Protestant.




At Charles his feet, Charles was his Polar
Star,
All his ambitions Circle center'd there;
His Loyalty and Courage were so pair'd,
As if one motion and one life they shar'd:
And three whole Kingdoms Glory but in few
Like him, great, loyal and experienc'd too;
In him alone our Prince was richly blest,
Had Death spar'd him, Charles might have spar'd
the rest;
In his untainted and firm Loyalty,
His constant and oft prov'd Fidelity,
What to his Prince, what to the People due
His honest searching Judgment knew:
Betwixt these two so equally he mov'd
That he by both was equally belov'd.




In Camp ne'r Hector did out-brave
Deaths whistling Messengers to th' grave,
So daringly would he engage
His proudest Enemies in their rage
That who e're once his Courage try'd
Either submitted, fled, or dy'd.
No fear of Death could e'r his Courage stay,
Wherever dangerous Honour led the way;
As if his Hand still the same Trident boe,
When Charles his Thunder shook the Belgick
shore;
Whilst Ossory within his floating walls
His valiant sea-born Sons to Honor calls;
Or let him 'gainst th' insulting Gallick foe
Thro' lanes of death to mouths of Canons go;At Mons.
Then turn their roaring throats to their own dooms,
Thro' their own hearts unload their sulph'rous wombs.




Heer Ossory, let Mons thy deeds
proclaim,
And sing an English Generals deathless
fame,
Flanders last Battel sought and won by thee,
A Battel 'gainst a glorious Enemy,
Flusht with success, and long with Laurels
crown'd,
Perhaps before untaught to quit his ground,
A Foe who with his Arts of war prepar'd
Batt'ries and Trenches, and all Natures guard,
Encamp'd with all the advantage of the Field,
Did only to victorious Courage yield;
Raising that Siege thou didst such wonders do,
Raise the universal Siege of Flanders too;
For to that one determinating Blow
The Northern Peace does her foundations ow:
For proud Frances fury, uncontroll'd,
Unbounded, like a fiery Deluge roll'd,
Till Ossory did that great day appear,
And bid the Conflagration finish there,
Flanders her Peace did to thy Sword assign,
Whilst the lib'ration of a World was thine;
The Belgick Lyon from his toyl set free,
And the long plagues of War dispell'd by thee.




He didn't grasp Commands to scrape up Gold,
When he was chief, all Offices were sold
'Tis true; for what d' you think? for skill in Arms,
For Vigilance and Courage, those only Charms
Wrought on his Soul; he that could pay good store
Of Sterling-merit, needed pay no more.




His Years were few, and may be quickly told,
But multitudes of Conquests speak him old,
Conquests so many, and so speedy too,
That after-times will scarce believe them true.
VVhy should we then complain he's gone too soon?
He perfected his greatest work at noon:
So were the minutes of his life imploy'd,
That no man ever longer life enjoy'd:
In hours his active Soul did more atchieve,
Than others that whole tedious ages live.




In Peace's cooler climes he flourisht too,
Shining and sweetning every air he drew;
His Vertues led a Court, as well as Camp,
And taught 'em Honour of the noblest stamp.
So courtly to his Conversation made,
That in his Face all manly Graces play'd.
Tho' fate and thunder did his Arm surround,
The fires were lambent which his Temples crown'd;
Whilst with those gentle, courteous airs he smil'd,
Calm as Loves Mother, than her Son more mild.




Glory his Breast did fill, but never swell;
Never such Height was so accessible:
No Greatness so familiar, and so free
No Temple to the humblest Votary.




How many wronged wretches, poor and blind,
Will grope in vain their Remedies to find?
What will the lame maim'd Seamen do, whose Chest
Was Patron Ossory's most munificent
brest?




To all, as their deserts were, he was kind,
Still with right Judgment and unbiass'd Mind,
Great without vanity, and without ends just,
Humble tho' honour'd, faithful when in trust;
The dangerous fruits of too great Praises he
Knew well, and to decline them still was free.





Your bleeding Wounds, who shall hereafter dress
With an indulgent tenderness;
Touch with a melting sympathy
Who shall your wants supply?
Since he, your good Samaritan is gone,
O Charity! thou richest boon of Heaven,
To man in pity given!


For when well meaning Mortals give,
The poors and their own bowels they relieve;
Thou makest us with alacrity to dye,
iss'd and
bewail'd like thee large-hearted Ossory.





Well might they love him, one so just and good,
Much greater by his Vertues than his Blood,
Who justly still ambition'd a good Name,
Yet lov'd his Country more than he lov'd Fame.




Here, Muse, his Praise like thy Parnassus
frame
On two twin-mounts of Greatness build his same,
Thy King his Royal Standard, born by thee,
Could not want Swords, nor they want victory.
Thy Name would rouse all hearts, so strong a charm
Lodg'd in a Banner wav'd by Ossorys arm.
But stay, these humble Praises are too small,
To say he led, sought, vanquish'd, triumph'd, all,
When his Heroick Vertues spread so far,
The universal darling Son of War,
When ages shall in monumental Brass
Write thy recorded Praise till times last Glass,
And with such zeal preserve thy hallow'd Shrine
Till the expir'd Worlds last Ashes mix with thine.




Lament, lament you that dare Honour love.
And court her at a noble rate
(Your Prowess to approve;)
And blush not to be good, when you grow great,
Such mourners suit his Vertue and his State,
Cannons go weep out flames, Culverins go cry
And roar from every Ship and Battery.
With such a Fall our Ossory expir'd,
Ossory as far lamented as admir'd.




Shrink ye crown'd heads that think your selves secure
And from your mouldring Thrones look down,
Your Greatness cannot long endure,
The King of terrors claims you for his own,
You are Tributaries to his dreadful Crown:
Renown'd, Serene, Imperial, most August
Are only high and mighty Epithets of dust.
In vain, in vain, so high
Our tow'ring Expectations fly,
While the Blossoms of our Hopes, so fresh, so
gay,
Appear, and promise Fruit, then fade away.





Oh that our Lords would their lost time redeem,
And not so much admire as copy him!
Be good like him, if they'd like him be great,
And be his peers in Vertue as in State.


No further shall I strive for to express
Thy mighty Deeds, weak Praises make them less.


Plebeius observes, the Romans, to
inflame their Noble Youth to aspire to Honor, would often shew them the
triumphal Sta∣tues of their Predecessors, which is the design of annexing
these Poems to this Epistle to pro∣voke your Lordship to imita∣tion.

When without your cost, or your great Sires consent,
Is rais'd to him a stately Monument:
When Tombs and Statues crumble all a∣way,
And gilded Marble Monuments decay,
His History will mortallize his Fame,
To after-ages his great Deeds proclaim:
His Fame is so much fam'd, that he
Can never here forgotten be,
Till Ireland its self become
To its own Woods and Bogs a Tomb,
Till timeless time all things devour,
By Dooms day Conflagrations showr.
It was a high piece of Pru∣dence in the Romans to lower
the value of Pecuniar Rewards, and raise the esteem of Honor to the height,
in regard a Prince or State by long Wars may drain their Treasury low in
Coyn, but the Fountain of Honor can ne∣ver be drained dry, whilst it is not
spilt on unworthy persons, which (though it doth not lessen the bulk,
yet) debaseth the Allay of Honor: A private Roman Souldier refused
a Chain of Gold, as a Reward of his gallant Service, from Libienus,
CesarsLieutenant General, saying, that he would not have
the Reward of the covetous, but of the ver∣tuous.
When Marcus Marcellus built a Temple to Honor and Vertue,
he made a pertition; so that none could come into the Temple of Honor, but
they must first pass through the Temple of Vertue.
Sir,
That your Noble Breast may be as this Temple always close shut
against all sorts of vitious Votaries, and that your Life may be, as your
Fathers, a patern to all young Gentlemen of truly Noble and Honorable Actions,
that your Example may be a Re∣proof to the vitious, and a Praiseto the vertuous, that you may live the Joy and dye the Grief of your
Country shall be the Pray∣er of

