



My Dear Friends,
VIctory over death, as it was one of the blessed fruits of our Sa∣viours death and resurrection, and is one of the glorious priviledges of those that believe in him; so if it had been represented unto you by the hand of that happy Comprehensor, who now tri∣umpheth in the accomplishment of it, might have appeared like Apelles his Picture drawn by his own hand, or like Cesars Con∣quests by himself recorded in his own Com∣mentaries.
But that the Discourse upon it fell in∣to an hand so unsuitable to the subject, the

misfortune is imputable to the charity of him that made his survey of the person with the charitable eye of a Friend, and com∣mitted a matter of such weight, like a beau∣tiful Face to a sorry Limner, or a rare Atchievement to an unskilful Herald, only because he had a kindness for him.
That the representation of this Victo∣ry appeareth without the Walls, where it was once divulged, stands charged upon your candour, that entertained this sudden pro∣duction with more friendliness than the Pa∣rent had for it.
I shall not mention either the shortness of the time alotted for the composure, or the intervening occasions that disturbed it; nor yet the little leasure I had for reviewing and transcribing the Notes; but leave it to the courteous interpretation of those, that by knowing how to do far better, do know also how to bear with the imperfections of others.
For your own parts, I look upon your re∣quest for making this publick, as the desire of true Friends to retain the Picture of a deceased Brother, when the Prototype is re∣moved from them: Or like the ambition of the primitive Christians, to preserve the memory of the Martyrs and Confessors, that were gone before them, and had taken hea∣ven by violence, Mat. 11.12.
He hath run his part of the Christian Race, and hath delivered the Lamp to us that are left. God grant that we may not be slothful, but followers of him, and of all others, who through faith and patience do inherit the promises, Heb. 6.12.
Though I know you have other and grea∣ter matters to draw you to hasten home∣ward, yet I presume this will make an ad∣dition to the rest, that you may be joined to our good Friend that sleepeth, and to the

rest of that general Assembly, and Church of the First-born that are written in Heaven, even to the Spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23.
I doubt not, but you have those comforts from Gods good Spirit, that will support you under so great a loss: And that this small memorial of our Reverend Friend may be a mean to stir up you, and his late Parishioners, and all others that may cast their eyes upon these lines, to fight the good fight of Faith, that they may at∣tain victory in the great conflict, and finally attain everlasting life, is the hearty Prayer of

Warmister, May 22, 1676.
