



My Lord,
WHEN I hear by many Persons, not indifferent Judges, how Poets are censur'd most, even where they most intend to please; and sometimes by those to whom they address, condemn'd for Flatterers, Syco∣phants, little fawning wretches, I confess of all undertakings, there is none more dreadful to me than a Dedication. So nicely cruel are our Judges, that after a Play has been gene∣rally applauded on the Stage, the Industrious malice of some after Observers shall damn it for an Epistle, or a Preface. For this Reason, my Lord, Alexander was more to seek for a Pa∣tron in my troubl'd thoughts, than for the Temple of Jupiter Ammon in the spreading Wilds, and rowling Sands. 'Tis certain too he must have been lost, had not Fortune, whom I must once, at least, acknowledge kind in my Life, presented me to your Lordship: You were pleas'd, my Lord, to read it

over, Act by Act, and by particular praises, proceeding from the sweetness, rather than the justice, of your temper, lifted me up from my natural Melancholy, and Diffidence, to a bold be∣lief, that what so great an understanding warranted, could not fail of success. And here I were most ungrateful, if I should not satisfie the judging World of the surprize I was in. Par∣don me, my Lord, for calling it a surprize, when I was first ho∣nour'd by waiting upon your Lordship: So much unexpected, and indeed, unusual affability from Persons of your Birth, and Quality; so true an Easiness, such Frankness, without affecta∣tion, I never saw. Your constant, but few Friends, show the firmness of your Mind, which never varies, so God-like a Vir∣tue, that a Prince puts off His Majesty, when he parts with Resolution. In all the happy times, that I attended you, un∣less business, or accident, interpos'd, I have observ'd your Com∣pany to be the same. You have Travell'd through all tempers, Sail'd through all humours of the Courts unconstant Sea, you have gain'd the gallant Prizes, which you sought, your se∣lected, unvaluable Friends: And I am perfectly perswaded, if you traffick but seldome abroad, 'tis for fear of splitting upon Knaves, or Fools. Nor is it Pride, but rather a Delicacie of your Soul, that makes you shun the Sordid part of the World, the lees and Dregs of it, while in the noblest Retirement you enjoy the finer Spirits, and have that just Greatness to be above the baser. How commendable therefore is such Reservation; how admirable such a Solitude! If you are singular in this, we ought to blame the wild, unthinking, dissolute Age; an Age, whose business is senseless Riot, Neronian Gambols, and ridi∣culous Debauchery; an Age that can produce few Persons, be∣side your Lordship, who dare be alone. All our hot hours,

burn't in Night-Revells, or drown'd in Day-dead-sleep; or if we wake, 'tis a point of reeling Honour joggs us to the Field, where, if we live, or dye, we are not concern'd; for, the Soul was laid out before we went abroad, and our Bodies were after acted, by meer Animal Spirits, without Reason. When I more narrowly Contemplate your Person, methinks I see in your Lordship two of the most famous Characters, that ever Anci∣ent, or Modern, Story could produce; the mighty Scipio, and the retir'd Cowley. You have certainly the Gravity, Tempe∣rance, and Judgment, as well as the Courage, of the first; all which, in your early attempts of War, gave the noblest dawn of Virtue; and will, when occasion presents, answer our ex∣pectation, and shine forth at full. Then, for the latter, you possess all his sweetness of humour in peace, all that Halcyon Tranquillity of Mind, where your deep thoughts glide, like si∣lent Waters, without a Wrinkle, your hours move with softest Wings, and rarely any Larum strikes to discompose you. You have the Philosophy of the first, and which, I confess, of all your qualities, I love most, the Poetry of the latter. I was ne∣ver more mov'd at Virgil's Dido, than at a short Poem of your Lordships; where nothing but the shortness can be dis∣lik'd. As our Church-Men wish there were more Noble Men of their Function, so wish I, in the behalf of deprest Poetry, that there were more Poets of your Lordships Excellence, and Eminence. If Poetry be a Virtue, she is a ragged one; and never, in any Age, went barer than now. It may be objected, she never deserved less. To that I must not answer; but I am sure, when she merited most, she was alwayes dissatisfied, or she would not have forsaken the most splendid Courts in the World. Virgil, and Horace, Favourites of the mightiest Emperour,

retir'd from him, preferring a Mistress, or a white Boy, and two or three cheerful drinking Friends, in a Country Village, to all the Magnificence of Rome: Or if sometimes they were snatch'd from their cooler pleasures to an Emperial Banquet, We may see by their Verses in praise of the Country Life, 'twas against their Inclination; Witness, Horace in his Epod. Be∣at us ille qui procul, &c. part of his sixth Satyr, his Epistle to Fuscus Aristius; Virgil's Georgie, O Fortunatos nimi∣um bona si, &c. All render'd by Mr. Cowley, so Copiously, and Naturally, as no Age gone before, or coming after, shall equal, though all Heads join'd together to out. do him. I speak not of his exactness to a Line, but of the whole. This then may be said, as to the condition of Poets in all times, few ever arriv'd to a middle Fortune, most have liv'd at the lowest, none ever mounted to the highest; neither by Birth, for none was ever born a Prince, as no Prince, to my remembrance, was ever born a Poet; nor by Industry, because they were alwayes too much transported by their own thoughts from minding the grave business of a World, not of their humour: Whereas, even Slaves, the Rubbish of the Earth have, by most prodigi∣ous Fortune, gain'd a Scepter, and with their vile Heads, sul∣ly'd the glories of a Crown. Praise is the greatest encourage∣ment we Camelions can pretend to, or rather the Manna that keeps Soul and Body together; we devour it as if it were An∣gels Food, and vainly think we grow Immortal. For my own part, I acknowledge, I never receiv'd a better satisfaction from the applause of an Audience than I have from your single Judgment. You gaze at Beauties, and wink at Blemishes; and do both so gracefully, that the first discovers the acute∣ness of your Judgment, the other the excellency of your Na∣ture.

And I can affirm, to your Lordship, there is nothing transports a Poet, next to Love, like commending in the right place. Therefore, my Lord, this Play must be yours; and Alexander, whom I have rais'd from the dead, comes to you with an assurance, answerable to his Character, and your Vir∣tue. You cannot expect him in his Majesty of two thousand Years ago, I have only put his illustrious Ashes in an Urne, which are now offer'd, with all observance, to your Lordship. By,
My Lord,

