



My Lord,
WIth an Assurance I hope becoming the justice of
my Cause I lay this Tragedy at you Lordships
Feet, not as a common persecution but as an
Offering suitable to your Virtue, and worthy of the Greatness of
your Name. There are some Subjects that require but half
the strength of a great Poet, but when Greece or old Rome
come in play, the Nature Wit and Vigour of foremost Shake∣spear,
the Iudgment and Force of Johnson, with all his bor∣rowed
Mastery from the Ancients, will scarce suffice for so ter∣rible
a Grapple. The Poet must elevate his Fancy with the
mightiest Imagination, he must run back so many hundred Years,
take a just Prospect of the Spirit of those Times without the
least thought of ours; for if his Eye should swerve so low, his

Muse will grow giddy with the Vastness of the Distance, fall at
once, and for ever lose the Majesty of the first Design. He
that will pretend to be a Critick of such a Work must not have
a Grain of Cecilius, he must be Longin throughout or nothing,
where even the nicest best Remarks must pass but for Allay to
the Imperial Fury of this old Roman Gold. There must be no
Dross through the whole Mass, the Furnace must be justly heat∣ed,
and the Bullion stamp'd with an unerring band. In such a
Writing there must be Greatness of Thought without Bombast,
Remoteness without Monstrousness, Virtue arm'd with Severi∣ty,
not in Iron Bodies, Solid Wit without modern Affectation,
Smoothness without Gloss, Speaking out without cracking the
Voice or straining the Lungs. In short my Lord he that will
write as he ought on so Noble an Occasion must write like you.
But I fear there are few that know how to Coppy after so great
an Original as your Lordship, because there is scarce one genius
Extant of your own Size, that can follow you passibus aequis,
that has the Felicity and Mastery of the old Poets, or can half
match the thought fulness of your Soul. How far short I am
cast of such inimitable Excellence, I must with shame my Lord
confess I am but too too sensible. Nature 'tis believed (if I am
not flattered and do not flatter my self) has not been niggardly
to me in the Portion of a Genius, tho I have been so far from
improving it, that I am half affraid I have lost of the Princi∣ple.
It behoves me then for the future to look about me to see
whether I am a Lagg in the Race, to look up to your Lordship
and strain upon the track of so fair a Glory. I must acknowledge
however I have behav'd my self in drawing, nothing ever pre∣sented
it self to my Fancy with that solid pleasure as Brutus did
in sacrificing his Sons. Before I read Machivel's Notes upon
the place, I concluded it the greatest Action that was ever seen

throughout all Ages on the greatest Occasion. For my own En∣deavour,
I though I never painted any Man so to the Life before
Vis & Tarquinios reges animan{que} superbam
Ultoris Bruti, fascesque videre receptos?
Infelix uctunque ferent eafacta Minores!
No doubt that divine Poet imagined it might be too great for
any People but his own, perhaps I have found it so, but John∣sons
Catiline met no better fate as his Motto from Horace
tells us.
—His non plebecula gandet &c.
Nay Shakespear's Brutus with much adoe beat himself into
the heads of a blockish Age, so knotty were the Oaks he had to
deal with. For my own Opinion, in spite of all the Obstacles my
Modesty could raise, I could not help inserting a Vaunt in the
Title page, Coeloque, &c.
And having gain'd the List that he design'd,
Bold as the Billows driving with the Wind,
He loos'd the Muse that wing'd his free-born Mind.
On this I arm'd and resolv'd not the be stirr'd with the little
Exceptions of a sparkish Generation, that have an Antipathy to
Thought, But alas how frail are our best resolves in our own
Concerns. I show'd no passion outward, but whether through an
Over-Conceit of the Work, or because perhaps there was indeed
some Merit, the Fire burnt inward, and I was troubled for my
dumb Play, like a Father for his dead Child. 'Tis enough that I have
eas'd my heart by this Dedication of your Lordship. I comfort
my self too whatever our partial Youth alledge, your Lordship

will find something in in worth your Observation; which with
my fature Diligence, Resolution to Study, Devotion to Vertue,
and your Lordships Service, may render me not altogether un∣worthy
the Protection of your Lordship.
My Lord,

