



Honoured Sir,
WHen I lay faint and weak in my bed, un∣der a dispiriting and wasting Di∣stemper of the Yellow Jaundies; by the holy dispensation of the all-wise God, an unknown Messenger comes from an unknown Benefactor with a Token of value, who determined, that his left hand should not discern what his right hand did;Mat. 6.3. but the Eye of God saw both. Though, Sir, my Tongue as yet hath not found you out, yet I hope my Pen may reach you. Should I never arise to that happy Cog∣nizance; yet I could not suffer your kindness to lie hid under the clods of ingratitude; but heartily return a publick Testimony by these Papers, which I have enjoyned the duty of di∣ligent
searching out the path to the same hands, and to kiss them in the dark by a private reception. Aelian reports of Democritus, that great Thracian Philosopher, [] That he most earnestly coveted to lie hid, though a great Benefactor to the world by his learned Studies. You have traced his foot-steps in tram∣pling-upon the airy bubble of vain glo∣ry; desiring to be good rather then seem to be so. Kindnesses done to o∣thers with a single Eye to God, are consecrated into Free-will-offerings: For with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.Heb. 13.16. Lamprid. in Sever. Lug. B. p. 378. Alexander Sever the Ro∣man Emperour, when an Embassadour had presented his Empress with Two Oriental Pearls, of price invaluable, caused her to dedicate them to the Tem∣ple and Statue of Venus, judging the too splendid to hang in the Ears of Mortals. Happy persons, that pre∣sent of their gain and substance to the God of the whole Earth!Mic. 4.13. Cold water in the name of a Disciple shall be warm'd at the Hearth in Zion, and run to account. Nay it will turn into
a more precious Liquor then Gold po∣table, and prove more Cordial then all Earthly Treasure. Suidas relates,Suid. p. 1197. That Hercules us'd to succour the op∣pressed before he was entreated; and being of a generous temper wrencht the three Apples of Anger, Pleasure and Covetousness from the mouth of the Dragon of Lust: to intimate that no covetous man can be truly beneficent or noble minded, especially to relieve the indigent with unexpected kindness, and to reap no harvest but the satiating of an enlarged heart;Upton de milit. offic. p. 172. like the Princely Eagle that disdains to eat of his prey alone. Though kindnesses are to be given freely, and not put to the usury of return, either by open praise, or secret requital; yet who will plow upon the rocks, or scatter his precious seed upon the sands. The whole circle of Nature teaches the duty of Gratitude. The wise Athenians enacted a Law,Valer. max. l. 5. c. 3. hat ungratefulness should bear an action in their Courts; and the Ro∣man state made a Decree, that Wo∣men should take the upper hand in streets, because two Noble Matrons had prevail'd with Coriolanus their
Son and Husband, not to invade their City. From whom, during their abode in Britain, it's likely that Custom might be deriv'd to us.
To contract: Let this little Trea∣tise be hung up like a votive Table in the Temple of praise, and your Honou∣rable Name be engraven on the bowls of the Altar,Acts 10.4. when your Prayers and Alms rise up like Incense for a memo∣rial before God. If any demand, why these Characters came in so late for Sculpture upon the Marble Pillars? Know, that some showers and storms of afflictive providence from Heaven detain'd the Votary.
If others of uncandid breasts doom these Lines precarious, I hope I may safely reply, they are of a more gene∣rous Off-spring, and like the Lark which sings praises in a May mor∣ning, flies up towards Heaven, dis∣regarding tatling Travellers. Their vitious breath, like that of Cats, brings Hecticks to such as hug them, and distills corrosive Salt upon their own Lungs. The cheerful Rose with a ruddy blush smells sweetly among the prickles of Envy, and much
sweeter when set among rank O∣nions.
I know not your Noble Personage, nor can divine whether my Pen be pluck'd from so dextrous a wing as to fly to your bounteous bosom, and utter complaints how I have weltred in the shame of silence. I bless God 'twas a seasonable mercy, and I trust some secret mercy of more inestimable value will in due time find you out. I magnifie God,Prov. 30.8 I am in Agurs sta∣tion, and for those that have strength∣ned it to help some charge, I beg the blessings of the God of Jabez;1 Chron. 4.10. en∣larging my grateful thoughts towards the Heavenly Mansions: and as the Speakers before the Conference in Pla∣to's Timaeus went to prayer; so let this Preface lift up its hand toward his Holy Temple: That the scent of your name may be fragrant as the Field which the Lord hath blessed:Gen. 27.27. Eccl. 9.8. That your Head may lack no Oyntment, and your Garments be always white and odoriferous, taken out of Cedar Chests of the growth of Lebanon:Num. 24.6 That the perfuming Trees of Lig∣naloes of the Lords planting may grow
thick and shady about your Taberna∣cle, as in their native and genuine Soil: That the Spices of Eden, and the Heavenly Indies and Diamonds more orient then those of Borneo may lade your Vessels: That a grea∣ter then Solomon, even the true pro∣prietor of the Isle of Ceylon (the ancient Ophir) would invest your Soul with Faith,Psal. 45.9. Rev. 3.18. that true cloth of Gold; with the meekness of our bles∣sed Saviour, more soft then the Oyls of Zant, or the Silks of Smyrna: That your hopes of Glory may flower more pleasant and lovely then the beautiful Blossoms of the Pistachia in the Gardens of Syria, and send them as experienced Tokens to your Children, as holy Jacob did to his be∣loved Joseph.Gen. 43.11. Rev. 2.8. That the first and last who was dead and is alive, would wreath your Temples with a Crown of Life, and keep you from hurt by the second death. That the wealth of the Terra Incognita, the Land of Promise may be your inheri∣tance, so little known to rambling Mortals that pant after the dust of Aegypt.Suid. in Dioclet. That the fatness of Hea∣ven
may drop down upon your heart;Deut. 33.13, &c. the dew and the deep which coucheth beneath may run by your roots, the precious fruits thrust forth by the Sun and Moon, and the chief things of the Eastern Mountains, and the choice things of the lasting Hills, and the costly things of the Earth and its ful∣ness from every corner; above all, the good will of him who dwelt in the bush of Horeb defend all your flourishing Mercies from flames of wrath; and like that marching Pillar of Fire, con∣duct you to that City above, whose builder and maker is God, where your feet may tread that malleable pavement of transparent Gold,Rev. 21.18. and your thirst after righteousness quencht with the Living Water of the Well of Jacob,Joh. 4.14. that Water of Paradise which issues from the Throne of God,Rev. 22.1. and be reple∣nisht with those 12 sorts of Fruits which hang upon the Trees of Life, and drink abundantly with the beloved Spouse of Christ,Song 5.1. of the spiced Wine of the Kingdom, in the presence of the Father and his Holy Angels, at the Marriage Supper of the Lamb.

Febr. 8. 1676.
