



My Lord,
WHen an Universal Consternation spreads through the King∣dom, and the Peace which every man enjoys, becomes dreadful to him; when Mens minds in this dead calm of State, are as busie, as 'tis fear'd, the hands of some wou'd be in the Tempest of a Battel, to see a Poet plotting in his Chamber quite another way, painting fast as vigorous Fancy can inspire him, drawing the past World, the present, and to come, in a narrow space, is an Image not unworthy a grave Man's Con∣templation. It is the business of poor Poets to be the diversion of Mankind; pleasure is their being. I think I may call 'em the Mistresses of the World; which if granted, I am sure 'tis easie to prove their Gallants very brutish, for they generally loath them as soon as they are enjoy'd: The best of 'em come under the severest lash of the greatest Men; nay, the least will be shoot∣ting their Bolts, and when the Mastiffs worry 'em, the little urs will be barking; the whole World censures, and ev'ry da∣ring Poet that comes forth, must expect to be like the Almanack Hero, all over wounds. For my own part, I have been so harsh∣ly handl'd by some of 'em, that my Courage quite fail'd me; nor wou'd I now appear in Print, but under the Protection and Patronage of your Lordship. Your Illustrious Forefathers, and indeed all your Eminent Relations, have always been of the First-rate Nobility, Patrons of Wit and Arms, magnificently brave, true old-stampt Britains, and ever foremost in the Race of Glory. Not to unravel half your Honourable Records, I challenge all the Men of Fame, to show an Equal to the Immor∣tal Sidney, ev'n when so many contemporary Worthies flourish'd, I mean Sir Philip, the Name still of your Lordship, true Rival of your Honour, one that cou'd match your Spirit, so most ex∣travagantly great, that he refus'd to be a King. He was at once a Caesar and a Virgil, the leading Souldier, and the foremost Poet, all after this must fail: I have paid just Veneration to his Name, and methinks the Spirit of Shakespear push'd the Com∣mendation.
That there are in your Lordship all these Excellent Grains which made this Perfect Man, I think my self bound by reason to tell the World, which to my particular observation and cer∣tain knowledge has done you wrong. I must acknowledge, that your boiling Youth has made great Salleys; and so did Alexander, and our Great Fifth Henry: Your Spirit complains as Alexander's did, for Action, who grudg'd his Father's Con∣quests, as if his Soul was pent, and wanted Elbow-room, re∣solv'd to go Abroad o're Walls, if not through Doors; and Men of Sense laugh at your precise Fellow, your Cynick in a Tub, who thwarts the course of Nature, and is never pleas'd, but when he sees grey Heirs upon a young Head. If to be truly Va∣liant, ev'n in cold Blood, Magnificent as the old Nobility, in∣finitely Charitable, modest as Humility it self, the fastest Friend upon Earth, where your Lordship is pleas'd to fix the Honour; if these Ingredients can compound one admirable Man, then may your Lordship stand forth a Monument of lasting Honour. Perhaps for this I shall incur the notion of a Flatterer: Flattery indeed is a Catholick ill, it passes through the World, and suits with all Complexions: 'Tis an insinuating Poyson, a Iesui's Powder, which seems to intend the Cure of the Disease it pro∣motes; I am confident, all those who have the honour of your Lordship's Acquaintance, will tell me I have said too little. Let it suffice, that I imitate the best of Poets in a short but hearty Acknowledgment of my Obligations to your Lordship.
Therefore I hope, as your Lordship's Great Uncle shone upon the mighty Ben. with a full Favour, (though my best Merits are not the ten thousand part of his smallest labours) your Lordship's infinite goodness will accept of my honest in∣tentions, which to your Lordship's Service shall ever be hum∣bly offer'd,

