



Honoured Sir,
IT pleased the Lord in his holy Wisdom to afflict me with a Fever in the moneths of July and August, 1684. and in his own due time to command its departure. As an offer∣ing of praise and thankfulness to the Majesty and Mercy of God I thought of composing this Tract, though under the remaining weakness derived from an autumnal distemper: yet thereby I humbly hope some benefit may arrive to broken and tempted Spirits. For though my mouth be shut and silent as to Publick Ser∣vice, yet I should greatly rejoice, if my heart could be opened in Print, to help and towards heaven. The Dedication is proper to your
most noble person, if you please to accept, what would be an infringement of dut not to pre∣sent to you▪ who have so often refreshed me and mine in my privacies and retirements, kindnesses not to be bured in the grave of in∣gratitude: but to be acknowledged before the Sun. Your Library was also most kindly open∣ed to my use: wherein stands many an ancent Author, calling aloud for converse, and reach∣ing out his auxiliary hand and pointing at the state of Cristiant in former and purer ages. There did I first consider of the con∣signation of the Canon of Scripture which is toucht upon in these Papers but might be much more amplified and adorned: had I more con∣stancy of abode and supplies of the yet re∣maining Records of the first five hundred years that have happily survived the flaming fury and rage of the barbarous Goths and Van∣dals and other wasters of both the East and Western Empire, which might have conduced to the compleating of such a work. But we must wait the times of Divine Wisdom in appointment of any such happy seasons to view those desirable monuments.
But why print? and why on such a subject?
and why now? I answer to the first and third because being interrupted in my greatest work, I would gladly be some way useful in my generation: It may be, some that mourn in secret, and others that are as yet not called, but under the Election of Grace may attend and meditate on these things. Tho Preaching or Printing prevail but little with this de∣generate age, (Jer: 6.29.) though the Bellowes be burnt in the fire, and the lead consumed which was appointed to purify the drossy Oare: yet with Jeremy and Esay, and Pau we must in our several ages keep on, where God opens the door of opportunity for us, tho Israel be not ga∣thered, let the Labour of faithful Workmen wait for its reward from the Lord of the Har∣vest. Tho we for our Labour of love be ac∣counted as the shavings and off-sconrings of all things to this day: tis but for this life: (1 Cor 4.13) tho all the filth and garbage of the tongues in the streets of Ashdod be flung into our Carts, we must carry away the burden patiently, and meekly wipe off the soile from our names and faces. Tho our presence be a burden to many houses, and our testimony less minded than the piping of Children in a Market place, (Luk 7.32.) yet our Lord commands us to
persist, till he relieves us. But that which I must every where own, Worthy Sir, give me the favour I pray, and leave to testifie: that your reverence in hearing and accepting of their messages, as of the Lord's Embassadors hath been alwayes very exemplary, and I hope will return into your bosom with a Prophets re∣ward who have been an Obadiah to them in the time of spiritual Famine.
But Secondly, Why on such a Subject?
I Answer, Tho many have written, yet tis inexhaustible: besides methods may vary, and variety breeds delight, if joyn'd with brevity. If I have laid the foundation of such a Discourse in the beginning a little deeper than usual upon the Divinity of Scri∣pture, and the Deity of our blessed Lord: I hope and beg that the Learned, Wise and Pi∣ous would not count that or any part, a di∣gression too improper: heartily wishing, it may succeed like Austin's going providentially out of his way in a Sermon and beyond his intention,Posidonius in ult. Au∣gustin, Cap. 15. p. 869. Tom. 1. as if he were sent on purpose to find out and convert Firmus from the Manichees, as it proved.

There be many, that understand not the na∣ture of Faith, tho so often writ upon, still affli∣cting their Spirits, as not having that Grace, because they feel no assurance: To such I prin∣cipally direct and bend my stile, hoping and praing that no Soul toucht with inward sin∣cere remorse for sin: but reading and rumina∣ting on so many drect and positive promises, both to beginners and back-sliders, (Isai. 57.18.) will dare to despond, but come in freely to lay hold on the golden Scepter of mercy, and thereby of eternal life. As for the Basilisk of Envy, I commend it to the piercing ee of Heaven, under whose protection I wrote these lines. Plin. l. 29. c. 4.
And now, worthy Sir, (not to be prolix) I most hubly beg all the mercies of the new Covenant to be your portion, and that the noble vine on your house side may spread Branches like Josephs (Gen. 49.22.) Ps. 128.3. by the well & run over the wall; that your Sons may be as Olive plants grown up in their Youth, (Psal. 144 12) that your Daughters may be as those Marble corner Stones, polisht after the similitude of Solomon's Palace. That you may see your Childrens Children walking in the Truth and
peace upon Israel, (2 Ep. Joh. 4.) and after these daes in the valle be received to the mount of transfiguration in Glory:

Abbots Langly Jan. 16. 1685.
