



May it please your Grace,
IT was the Prophecie of His late Majesty, that Incompa∣rable and Divine Prince, of glorious and eternal memory, to His Son our now most gracious Soveraign, whom God hath nourished, preserved, restored, and blest by Miracles; blest in Himself, and the great miracle of Clemency to His people; in the 27th Meditation of His , That none will be more loyal and faithful to You and Me, then those Subjects, who being sensible of their own Errors and Our Injuries, will feel in their souls vehement motives to Re∣pentance, and earnest desires to make some reparations for their former defects. Now feeling in my soul vehement mo∣tives to Repentance, and earnest desires to make some Re∣parations for my former defects, I resolved on some publick compensation, and accordingly composed this Sermon, which I preach'd first to the University of Cambridge, where it was received Ambabus ulnis with an open bosome: Next
to this famous City, at S. Paul's, whither I had been summo∣ned (without Text or terms) by the Angel of that Church, the now Lord Bishop of London, who heard me with an exemplary Attention, and Paternal affection, and afterwards received, embraced and blessed me, Encouraged and Com∣manded my Sermon to the Press, for publick benefit. The Auditory, (though greater then had been known in the me∣mory of man) yet was composed into a spirit and posture su∣table to the Majesty, Holiness, and Presence of that God in whose House we were. I did with much fear address my self to this service, (finding so much Reason to distrust my own Abilities:) but now with a Joy answerable to that Presence and Influence I had from God in speaking, and that Incou∣ragement I had from all Degrees of men (especially from that excellent Person, the Lord Bishop) to Printing, I now publickly make this offering to your Grace, to whom I not onely owe Canonical Obedience, but an account of all the ser∣vice I doe in the Church; in which service, Loyalty and duty to His Majesty and my Superiors (and to teach men so) is eminently involved. I well know, I have incurr'd some mens Censures by speaking my Conscience in Points they relish not, and am like to displease others who are wont to condemn before-hand: But as I rejoyce to offend any for their good, so I am affraid to please any for their hurt. However I have spoken what I believe, and thereby have delivered my own Soul. But lest the Medicine I have prescribed should turn to a Wound, I have tempered the truth with meekness and moderation, as well knowing that hard Arguments and soft words will prevail where the Sword cannot. Speaking and Printing have their several Graces, as God is pleased to set
them on by his presence and influence. This Sermon was blest with right Reverend, right Honourable, and Ingenuous Auditors; the Ear was kind, though the Eie may be severe. It hath this in it, that it was Seasonable; Pills well Acuted purge the better. What was once wrote to Egidius Abbot of Noremberg concerning David's words in  18. Ps. may be said of the words of my Text, They are Verba le∣genda, & vivenda, Living words. I cannot think the Ser∣mon worthy a publick view: yet having obtained (through God's blessing) the Approbation of the University and City, and chiefly of that Religious and grave Prelate, the Lord Bp of London, by doing some good (I hope) I do therefore in all humility present it to your Grace, through whose wise Con∣duct, Sedulity and Paternal Condescentions, such changes are wrought upon the Once Seduced, that they are not now afraid of the Bishop, but ashamed of themselves, and of their own in∣justice, ingratitude and perjury, in Covenanting against them.
The Present I now make to your Grace is slender; yet, to speak in S. Jerome's words, Nobiscum bene agitur, si obtulerimus pelles & Caprarum pilos, It is well, (where we have no better) we offer according to our Ability, and that is, Cor Humiliatum & Contritum, which your Grace (cum Deo) will not despise, but own, accept, and honour. However it be, I humbly offer it in those submissive words and manner S. Aug. hath taught me, Domine Deus, quae∣cunque dixi de tuo, agnoscant & tui; siqua de meo, & tu agnosce, & tui, Whatever, Lord, I have spoken that is from thee, own it in the hearts of thine; and what I have spoken that is from my self, forgive it, and let it be by thine forgiven.

I cannot say, at the Preaching this Sermon any contra∣dicted, but rather rejoyced and glorified the Word of the Lord, Act. 13.48.
Herein I content my self, that I have with clearness and sincerity quitted and discharged 1.
 my Duty to God, , the searcher of Hearts; 2.
 to his most gracious Ma∣jesty, the best of Kings, blest in himself, and beloved for his Wisdome, Righteousness, and wonderful Mercy, who delights not in the noise of Chains and Fetters, but rather wishes with Theodosius, Se potuisse vel mortuos à morte revocare, That he could recover the worst of his Subjects to their duty and happiness.
3.
 To the Church of England (my Indulgent Mother) the best Reformed Protestant Church in the World, in whose Bosome I desire to live and die a Penitent, and Regular Son.
4.
 To your Grace (the Glorious Ruling Light, and most Spiritual Father of this Church of England, under whose great Name (which alone will give it Protection and Va∣lue) I send forth this Sermon into the World.
May that God who hath raised your Grace to the highest service in this Church, give you the greatest success, and fullest Satisfaction in himself, that your Glory here may be the Pledge and First-fruits of your Crown hereafter.

