



My Lord,
VVHen I call to mind what I have observ'd of your Wit and Judgment, the truest and most impartial I ever knew, my thoughts of writing after my loose manner to your Lordship are a little dash'd, and the meanest of 'em has the sense to tell me, I ought to be as curious and correct in a Dedication to one Man, as in that of a Play to a whole Nation. There is no doubt a Transport in ev'ry Poet who writes an Epistle, but for the most part they are

dazl'd with the Eminence of their Patrons, and at best we can but call it an Awful Delight. But I profess, what those to whom I am disagreeable, will impute to want of Modesty, I make this Tragedy an Off'ring to your Lordship with as much freedom, pleasure, and per∣fect satisfaction, as ever Mithridates receiv'd when he found himself in the Arms of his Fairest Mistress. You stand Equal with the Greatest, and your Quality shou'd cause a Dread in the hardiest Writers: But on the other hand, there is such an innate sweetness of temper, such a most remarkable goodness in all your Actions, a Chara∣cter peculiar to you more than any man alive, that the meanest, modestest of Poets may approach you. Me∣thinks I feel a sort of chearful springing Pride, when I see your Lordship stand forth to this last Birth, which sure if I had ever any lovely, is much the Fairest Child. Happy Fortune must attend it, and Heav'n and Earth be pleas'd where you approve. I accost you, my Lord, without Formality, and wou'd appear before the severest Judge in the plainest Garb, or rather nakedness of thought; as some, and those not of the least courage, go to the most bloody Test of valour, all unarm'd. An o∣ver-care in things of this nature does often turn to af∣fectation, and what was meant a Guard, proves an En∣cumbrance: We may stiff'n our imaginations with making 'em too quaint; and polish, till we are nothing else but gloss: I am infinitely pleas'd, to be as plain as I can, nor care I how it pleases others, tho I am sure it does, that I have laid this Play at your Lordships feet. All my Acquaintance that wish me well applaud my choice;

for I may safely affirm by the judgment of the Town, without being censur'd for a Dawber, there's not a man whom all men love but you, you are beheld in all the Company you Honour, as if you were the Genius of that Prince who was call'd the Delight of Mankind, and are ador'd with all the love and admiration which e're the Noble Titus found in Rome. Ziphares is an imperfect Figure of your self; I cast him in your Mould, and fa∣shion'd him as well as my weak Fancy cou'd, to that Perfection the Court so universally allows you: When I design'd to draw him for the Ladies, endearing, soft, and passionately loving, I thought on you, and found the way to Charm 'em. And 'tis most certain, he who obliges those Fair Criticks to be of his Party, has the surest Cards that ever Poet plaid: I cannot but own the Ho∣nours they have done me, and entreat your Lordship to secure 'em my Friends. There is yet a greater Honour I wou'd beg of your Lordship, and so important, I can∣not name it without apprehension: Mithridates being in your hands, desires to be laid at the Feet of the Queen. Her Majesty, who is the Sublimest Goodness, and most merciful Vertue that ever blest a Land, has been pleas'd to grace him with her Presence, and promis'd it a∣gain with such particular praises, the effects of her pure Bounty, that shou'd he not express his Gratitude almost to adoration, he wou'd deserve another Fate, when he is next represented, than what he has hitherto receiv'd.
I have endeavour'd in this Tragedy to mix Shakespear with Fletcher; the thoughts of the former, for Majesty and true Roman Greatness, and the softness and passionate

expressions of the latter, which makes up half the Beau∣ties, are never to be match'd: How have I then endea∣vour'd to be like 'em? O faint Resemblance! As Pizarro says of the Mexicans,
—And those who now remain,
Appear but as the Shadows of the Slain.
It may be objected, I broke the Scenes in the beginning of the Third and Fifth Acts; those who are so nicely curious to be offended at this over-sight, may for their satisfaction leave 'em out, and the Play will be entire. I apply my self to your Lordship, as Montaign does to his Reader in his Chapter of Books; I will, says he, love the Man that shall trace me! For I have many times found fault with an Expression, as I pretended was in a Play of my own, and had it dam'd by no indifferent Criticks, tho the immortal Shakespear will not blush to own it. But I am confident your Lordship will find me out, and I desire to be so found a Refiner on those admira∣ble Writers; the Ground is theirs, and all that serves to make a rich Embroidery! I hope the World will do me the Justice to think, I have disguiz'd it into another fa∣shion more suitable to the Age we live in; for if I cou'd perswade my self there were nothing of mine extraordi∣nary in the Play, I wou'd not have dedicated it to the best of Men.
—Mediocribus esse Poetis,
Non dii non homines non concessere columne.

Here you must give me leave to tell the World, that Pillars and Altars too ought to be rais'd to your Lord∣ship, if the greatest Genius of Poetry deserves em: Your thoughts in some select Poems I have seen, are rich and new, as the Golden American World, your Expressions justly strong, your words Emphatical, as chosen men for an Enterprize of Glory: As it was observed of the Army of Alexander the Great, every Souldier look'd like a Commander, and every Commander like an Alex∣ander; so in your admirable Draughts, all things are so excellent, we know not where to fix; we stand on Hills of so vast a breadth, that the Valleys are not seen; it looks like Heaven all about us, and Fancy is lost in the infinite Beauty of the Prospect: Your Writing dazles with clearness and Majesty; you draw, like Holbin, without Shadows.
—Qui Genus humanum ingenio superavit & omnes
Praestrinxit stellas, exortus uti Aetherius Sol.
Your Images are so great, we look like Dwarfs be∣neath you; and then so lively represented, tho of dead, low Objects, animated by your Genius,
—Credas simulacra moveri
Ferrea, cognatoque viros spirare metallo.
What e're you stamp is Royal, other Pretenders to Satyr but file and wash, they live by the Clippings of your Wit, and dip their Silver in your Bath, to make it

pass for Gold. Self-preservation bids me say no more of your Lordships Poetry, lest I dam my own, who aim at nothing so much as the Honour of being thought by your Lordship,
My Lord,

