


Reverend and Learned,
IT was not long since my happiness and honour, through the gra∣cious Providence of God, to enjoy a Fellowship for several years in that your goodly Seminary of all polite Literature; wherein I hope several hearts are under Divine hewing and squaring for the service of God in his Temple. During my continuance there, I received many favours from you in those Academical preferments which I then enjoyed: Your great love therein I cannot but gratefully acknowledge, and constantly bear in minde, having been greatly ani∣mated and encouraged to the discharge of those Employments by your aid and assistance. Since that time, it hath pleased the All-wise Maje∣sty of heaven to place me as a Labourer (though most unworthy) in his Vineyard. Most stately and magnificent is the Fabrick of God's house therein scituate, yeilding admirable delight to such whom Free-Grace is vouchsafed to give spiritual eyes to discern it, far surpassing the splen∣dour of its ancient Type, The Temple of Solomon; which was once the wonder of the world. Some spare hours from my constantly returning services I have through mercy enjoyed, wherein to take some solitary turns among the beds of Spices, and there to refresh my thoughts with the view of the corresponding Parallels. After several retirements, ha∣ving taken some small survey thereof; I conceived it my duty (which I owe to your Foundation) to present the first Essay of this my impolished draught thereof to your view, earnestly craving of you to undertake the Patronage of your Incumbent in this work. I confess I should have ac∣costed you in the language of the Gowned Nation; but I seriously pro∣fess, I had no design (when the whole work was finished except the ninth chapter) to have appeared publikely in it, having resigned it up as a piece of service to a friend, for the company of a larger Treatise of his written in our Mother-Tongue upon a subject of this like nature; and thereby I should have passed through the world with more contenting secresie. But since some urgent providences (well known to several of my friends) have over-ruled me to walk without another's shelter, I thought it no un∣safe course to pitch upon your Candid and Learned Protection. Obliged Duty challenges the tender of my respects, and former experience lays the foundation of your expected Favour. The natural love and affection which I ever found planted within me toward that place of my Educati∣on (even as I have generally observed I know not what Genius [may I so term it] or affectionate tincture to run in the veins of such as have been bred at Wadham) strongly invites me to the former, and I cannot dispute the equitable return of your kindness in the latter; being grounded up∣on past experiment. I shall mean-while not cease to breathe out hearty

Prayers towards the Golden Mercy-Seat, That all within your Walls may be set up for standing Pillars in the House of God, that your hearts may be flaming Altars, your Tongues golden Harps, and that Gar∣ments of praise may be your Covering. That the great High Priest would please to sprinkle your Consciences from all dead works with his own most precious blood, and that he would carry your Names engra∣ven upon the Stones of his Brest-plate continually before the Father. That Holiness, Vertue, all savoury and wholsome Knowledg, and what∣soever is Praise-worthy, may flourish and be ever verdant within your Walls. That golden Crowns of Learning, imbellish'd with sparkling Diamonds of Grace may adorn your Heads and Hearts, and give forth a most Orient and Radiant lustre in the Schools of the Prophets. That not only the Lamp of Knowledge shining out of the Sanctuary may il∣lustrate your mindes with Scripture discoveries; But that also the Soul satiating Bread of life from the golden Table (as of old it was the Priests every Sabbath) may be your portion. That ye might all taste of the hidden Manna, that Aaron's Rod might fragrantly blossome among you, and that God would write his Laws, according to the tenour of the New Covenant, not in Tables of stone, but the fleshly Tables of your hearts. That your hope may be fixed within the Vail, sure and stedfast; whither the Fore-runner is entred for all the Saints. It would be one of the choice joys of the Lovers of that place, to hear concern∣ing you, that Mercy and Truth have met together, that Righteousness and Peace have kiss'd each other: That all profaneness and unholiness being utterly rooted up and cast out to the Dunghil, there may such pro∣ceed from thence, as may prove Truth's able Champions against the Goliahs of Errour; and persons of cementing and healing Tempers, to soder and salve the Schisms and Rents in the Church: that Trees of Righteousness may be transplanted out of your pleasant and fruitful Nursery into the Garden of God, which may yeild all manner of fruit in due season. That silver streams of consolation may flow from your Spring (being seasoned with the salt of Grace) to refresh wearied souls, and abundantly to water the dry and thirsty places of Immanuel's land. That God's Urim and Thummim may be with you, enabling such of you as are consecrated to God, to teach Jacob his Judgements, and Israel his Law: That you may burn the spiritual Incense of sweet smelling Pray∣ers before him, and offer up the whole burnt Sacrifices of the Divine Ordinances upon the glorious Altar within his Gospel Temple.

