


Honoured and Dear Sir,
THis little Tract was hatcht by the warmth of your de∣sires: it hath broke shell too hastily: It looks but callow and speeds to your bosome for wing and protection. The bonds of nature, grace and promise oblige it from me. I wish it 'twere worthy your view, might help your faith or raise your joy. I shall wrap my Preface under the digna∣tion of your paternal leave in a
Testimony, a Request, and a Prayer.
My Testimony respects a grate∣full acknowledgment of your singu∣lar goodness, unwearied kindness and tender love from my birth up∣ward. When reason budded, your wholsome and godly counsels ever dropt as rain,Deut. 32.2 your speech as dew, as smal rain upon the tender herb, and as showres upon the grass. The warmth of your affection cherisht me under the divine influence in∣to a flower: your wisdome then transplanted me into the nurseries of grace and learning, and at length to the Muses garden at Oxford. It was ever your pious care to place me under the shadow of holy Tutor I magnifie God and thankfully acs knowledge your prudence and love. My body indeed was ever but ten∣der and weak: your affections strong and vigorous, your charges great, your sollicitous thoughts were ever wakefull, that no unkind storm
might blow upon me. I prosper'd for God was with you, your prayers went up, his blessing came down, and lo, by the grace of God I hope your labour hath not been altoge∣ther in vain in the Lord. You watcht me and the Lord us both, and hath kept us as the apple of his eye, and hath blest us together ma∣ny lustres of years. There's none like theDeut. 33.26. God of Jesurun, that rideth on the heavens for our help and in his excellency upon the skie. The eternal God be your refuge, and underneath the everlasting arms.
Dear Sir, my Request follows. The God of Heaven hath sprung a branch out of your roots, and gi∣ven you to see a grand-son of your own bowels. Blessed be his name, who begins to speak concerning his servants2 Sam. 7.19. house for a great while to come. Will you please to give him a principal share in the lifting up of your hands to the holy Ora∣cle;
that the Covenant may ne∣ver depart out of his mouthIsay 59.21. nor the mouth of his seed (which the Lord graciously grant him) nor the mouth of his seeds seed for e∣ver. Will you please to lay your hands on his head and say of him as holy Jacob to Joseph?Gen. 48.15. The God, who fed me all my life long to this day, the Angel, who redeem∣ed me from all evil, when I came over Jabbok from Laban my hard Uncle: Bless the Lad & let my name be named upon him: let the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, over shadow his heart. Will you please to blesse him in the name of the mighty God of Jacob, that his dayes may be long? If it seem good in the eyes of the divine wisdome, that he may grow to a multitude in the midst of the earth and see peace upon Israel, that his smel may be of a field, which the Lord hath blessed:Deut. 33 12. Let the Lord cover him all the day long, let him
dwel between his shoulders.
He is design'd for the Sanctua∣ry: if the Lord please to accept and gift him, and to blesse his times with seasons and places of wholsome and pious literature. Bee pleased to blesse him as a freewill offering in the name of the Lord, that your little Samuel may be girt with a linnen Ephod to minister before him in Shiloh, to burn incense and whole burnt offrings upon his Al∣tar: that grace being poured upon his heart and lips, he may have the tongue of the learned to speak a word in season to weary souls.
Honoured Sir, My humble Prayer remains that the great God of Heaven would please gracious∣ly to support your spirits under the weakness of age, that you may ne∣ver want the staffe of Jacobs faith to lean upon, in the hour of wor∣ship; that your sleep may be sweet in Bethel upon the Corner-stone, and afterwards may ascend the Se∣raphicall
Ladder after the great Angel of the Covenant into Hea∣ven, that over all your sacrifices of prayer and praise that Angel of the LordJudg. 13 19. may do wonderfully; that at evening-tide, the covenant of free-grace may shine full in your face like the2 Sam. 23.4. light of the morning, when the Sun is arising, even a morning without clouds and that your assurance may spring like the tender grass by clear shining after rain, thatLuk. 2.28. Simeon like you may take Christ in the arms of your faith while living, and that Christ may warm your heart in the armes of his love, when dying; That you may sing aloud that lovly Song, Now let thy Servant depart in peace: For mine eyes have seen thy Salvation: that having seen him here as a Prince of peace, you may see him there as the King of glory
If the following papers may con∣tribute any thing: I rejoyce, wait∣ing
that blessed time, when all our joyes shall be full and noneJoh. 16.22, 24. take them away, when Christ shall see us again, andHeb. 9.28. appear the second time to our Salvation. When the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world [] shall al∣soRev. 7.7. wipe away all tears, not only from standing in, but springing out of our eyes, when the tear-fountain shall be dryed up, and thePunctum lachry∣male. Bar∣tholin. A∣nat. p. 344. conduit stopt.
Here's little, but sinning and suffering, mourning and praying, there shall be nothing but holy en∣joying, rejoycing and praising. Here we2 Cor. 5.2, 4. groan being burdened with clay-tabernacles, which set heavy and weighty upon us, since the animal spirits are much ex∣hausted by length of dayes and the sorrows of this frail life. And yet we groan, but not simply to be un∣clothed, not meerly to put off our clay; but to be clothed upon, after our clay is baked in the earth into
a transparent Porcellane Taberna∣cle, fit for glory. When Mortality shall be swallowed up of life, and our vile bodiesPhil. 3.21. shall be changed and fashioned like his most glori∣ous body; then shall we ever follow the Lamb with agile spirits whereever he goes, leading us to the living fountains of waters. The Lord graciously make us all fit vessels for the Temple not made with hands, by the imputation of his Sons righteousness, that after a holy life, we may sleep peaceably in Jesus and reign triumphantly with him.
Most honoured Sir, I humbly commend you into the bosome of this blessed Lamb and Prince of Life to be presentedEphes. 5.27. without spot or wrinckle unto himself. To this Lamb-like Shepheard of Zion, that his crook and his staffe may comfort you. That goodness and mercy may follow you all your daies and you may
dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.
So prayes, humbly and earnestly begging your fervent petitions and blessings from the fountain of Is∣rael, upon

July 30. 1669.
