





ROM. 15.14.
I Trust you will admonish one another in the fear of God.
1 Thes. 5.12, 13.
Love them that admonish you, and be at peace among your selves.
2 Thes. 3.15.
Count him not an enemy that offends, but admonish him.
Jer. 42.19.
Know certainly that I have admonished you this day.
Exod. 18.19.
Hearken now unto my voice, I will give thee counsell, and God shall be with thee.
Job 21.16.
The counsell of the wicked is far from me.
Psal. 1.1, 2.
Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsell of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornfull; but his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law doth he meditate day and night.

Psal. 16.7.
I will blesse the Lord who hath given me counsell. And 73.24. Thou shalt guide me with thy counsell, and then re∣ceive me to glory.
Prov. 8.9.
They are all plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that finde knowledge.
Psal. 31.15.
My times are in thy hands O God.
Job 10.20.
Are not my dayes few.
Job 14.1.
Man is of few dayes.
Eccles. 1.4.
One generation goeth and another cometh.
Gen. 27..
I know not the day of my death.
Eccl. 3.2.
There is a time to be born and a time to die.
Eph. 6.1.
Children obey your parents.
Phil. 4.17.
I desire fruit, that may a bound to your accompt.
Joh. 14.3.
That where I am ye may be also.
2 Sam. 122.3.
I shall go to him he shall not return to me.
Eph. 4.5, 6.
One Lord, one faith, one baptisme, one God and father of all, who is above all, and through all and in you all.
Math. 6.10.
Thy kingdome come thy will be done on earth as it is in hea∣ven.
Job 14.14.
All the dayes of my appoin∣ted
time will I wait untill my change come.
Joh. 9.4.
I must work the work of him that sent me to day, the night cometh when no man can work.
Amos 4.12.
Prepare to meet thy God O Israel.
Eccl. 11.3.
Where the tree falleth, there it lies.
Matth. 25.3.
They that were foolish took their lampes and no oyl with them.
Heb. 3.7, 8.
Wherefore as the holy Ghost saith, to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.
Mark 13.37.
What I say unto you I say unto all, Watch.
Prov. 4.1.
Hear ye children the instru∣ction of a father, and attend to know understanding.
Isa. 38.19.
The father to the children shall make known thy truth.
Prov. 22.6.
Train up a childe in the way that he should go, and when he is old he will not de∣part from it.
Gen. 18.19.
For I know him that he will command his children and his houshold after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord to doe justice. Psal. 133.
Prov. 1.7.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, but fools despise wisedom and in∣struction.
And ver. 8. My sonne hear thou the instruction of thy fa∣ther, and despise not the law of thy mother.
Joh. 15.17.
These things I command you, that you love one another. And 13.34. A new commandement I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved you, that ye also love one another.
1 Joh. 4.24.
He that loveth God, loveth his bro∣ther also.
1 Pet. 1.22.
See that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently.
Acts 7.27.
Ye are brethren, why doe ye wrong one another.
Job 1.21.
The Lord gave, the Lord hath ta∣ken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord.
1 Tim. 6.17.
Trust not in uncertain riches.
Eccl. 5.13.
There is a sore evil which I have seen under the Sunne, namely riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt.
Matth. 6.20.
Lay up for your selves treasures in Heaven.
Rev. 8.13.
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.
1 Joh. 2.15.
Love not the world, nor the things of this world.
Phil. 3.15.
As many as be perfect be thus minded.
James 1.27.
Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the
fatherles and the widow with some relief in their afflictions, and to keep himself un∣spotted from this world.
Joh. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures.
Matth. 22.19.
You erre, not knowing the Scriptures.
Psal. 127.5.
Except the Lord build the house, they la∣bour in vain that build it.
Heb. 11.6.
He that comes to God, must beleeve that he is, and that he is the rewarder of them that diligently seck him.
Eccl 2.26.
For God giveth to men that is good in his sight, wisdome, knowledge, joy.
Psal. 30.1.
I will extoll thee O Lord, for thou hast lifted me up. And 68.4. Sing unto God, sing praises to his Name, extoll him that ri∣deth upon the heavens.
Psal. 39 5.
Man at his best estate is altogether vanity.
1 Sam. 2.7.
The Lord bringeth low and lifteth up.
Psal. 18.2.
The Lord is my rock and my fortresse, my deliverer, my God, my strength in whom I will trust. Ver. 30. As for God his way is perfect the word of the Lord is tried, he is a buckler to all those that trust in him.
Luk. 2.14.
Glory to God on high, on earth peace.
Joh. 14.23.
But the hour is coming and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the father in spirit and truth.
Psal. 34.18.
The Lord is nigh to them that are of a broken heart, and saveth those that be of a contrite spirit. And 51.17. A broken and a contrite heart O God thou wilt not despise.
Mal. 3.3.
Offer to God the sacrifice of righteousnesse.
Psal 116.17.
I will offer unto God the sacrifice of
thanksgiving, and will call upon the Name of the Lord.
Job 4.7.
Who ever perished being innocent? And 22.30. He shall deliver the Iland of the innocent, and it is delivered by the purenesse of thy hand,
Rom. 12.1.
That you present your bodies a living sa∣crifice, holy and acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service.
1 Cor. 6.9.
Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost that is in you.
a Gen. .27.
God created man in his own Image.
b Heb. 13.15.
By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is the fruit of our lips.
Matth. 4.10.
Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.
Rom. 10.12.
The same God over all is rich unto all that call upon him.
Psal. 50.3, 10.
I will have no bullock out of thy house, nor he-goat out of thy fold; for every beast of the forrest is mine, and the cattell upon a thousand hills.
Psal. 109.22.
For I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.
Psal. 22.22.
I will declare thy Name unto my brethren, and in the midst of the Congregation will I praise thee. Ver. 25. My praises shall be of thee in the great Congregation, I will pay my vowes before them that fear thee.
Psal. 40.8.
I delight to doe thy will O God, yea thy Law is in my heart.
Matth. 6.10.
Thy will be done (O God) in earth as it is in Heaven.

Heb. 10.7.
I come to doe thy will O God.
Prov. 5.21.
For the waies of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings. And 15.3. The eyes of the Lord are in e∣very place, beholding the evil and the good.
Exod. 20.7.
Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his Name in vaine.
Psal. 139.20.
Thy enemies (O God) take thy Name in vaine. And 145.2. Every day will I praise thee, and I will blesse thy Name for ever and ever, And 99.3. Let them praise thy great and terrible Name, for it is holy. Levit. 22.2. Speak to Aaron and to his sonnes, that they profane not my holy Name, for I am the Lord. And Psal. 111.9. Holy and reverent is his Name. And Ezek. 39.25. I will be jealoas for my holy Name.
Eccl. 8.2.
I know it shall be well with them that fear God, that fear before him.
Jer. 10.23.
O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps.
Prov. 29.25.
The fear of man bringeth a snare, but he that putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe. And 30.5. God is a shield to them that put their trust in him.
Rom. 8.28.
We know that all things work together for good to them that love God. Matth. 10.19, 30. Are not two Sprrrowes sold for a farthing, and one of them shall not fall to the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your head are all numbred.
2 Cor. 1.3.
Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort.

Psal. 23.4.
Thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.
Isa. 66.13.
As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you, and ye shall be comforted.
Isa. 6.16.
Thus saith the Lord, Stand ye in the wayes, and see and ask for the old pathes where is the good way, and walk therein, and you shall finde rest for your souls.
Rom. 8.10.
And if Christ be in you the body is dead because of sinne, but the spirit is life because of righteousnesse.
Psal. 119.71.
It is good for me that I was afflicted that I might learn thy statutes. And 126.5. Them that sowe in tears shall reap in joy. Jer. 22.13. I will turn their mourning in∣to joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoyce for their sorrow.
Lam. 3.25.
It is good for a man that he bear the yoak in his youth.
1 King. 3.9.
Give therefore thy servant an under∣standing heart, that I may discern betwixt good and bad. Psal. 119.34. Give me un∣derstanding and I shall keep thy Law, yea I shall observe it with my whole heart. And v. 73. Give me understanding that I may learn thy Commandements. Dan. 12.10. None of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand.
Gal. 5.17.
For these two are contrary one to another.
Job 9.20.
If I justifie my self my own mouth will condemn me; if I say I am perfect it shall also prove me perverse.
Psal. 37.27.
The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he delighteth in his way. And 50. 23. Who so offereth praise glorifi∣eth God, and to him that ordereth his
conversation aright, will I shew the salva∣tion of God.
Psal. 119.67, 71.
Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I learned thy word. It's good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes.
Psal. 68.3.
Let the righteous be glad, let them re∣joyce before God, let them exceedingly re∣joyce. And Prov. 29.6. In the transgres∣sion of an evill man there is a snare, but the righteous doth sing and rejoyce. Psal. 38.13. For I will declare my iniquity and be sorry for my sinne.
2 Cor. 7.9, 10.
Now I rejoyce, not that you were made sorry▪ but that you sorrowed to repentance, for ye were made sorry after a godly man∣ner. For godly sorrow worketh repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of, but worldly sorrow worketh death.
Jer. 10.24.
O Lord correct me but with judgment, not in thy anger, lest thou bring me to no∣thing. Psal. 119.33. Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes and I shall keep it to the end. And 143. 8. Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my soul to thee.
Deut. 8.5.
Thou shalt also consider in thy heart, that as a man chastiseth his sonne, so the Lord thy God chastiseth thee. Psal. 94.12. Blessed is the man whom thou chasten∣est O Lord, and teachest him out of thy Law. Heb. 12.6. For whom the Lord lo∣veth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every sonne whom he receiveth.
Matth. 22.29.
You erre not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God.
Joh. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, for in them you think you have eternall life, and they are they which testifie of me.

2 Tim. 3.16.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousnesse.
1 Cor. 2.10.
But God hath revealed them unto us by his holy Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea the deep things of God.
Rom. 10.6.
Say not in thy heart, who shall ascend into heaven, that is, to bring Christ down from above? who shall descend into the deep, that is, to bring Christ up from the dead? but the Word is nigh thee, the word of faith which we preach.
Matth. 7.15.
Beware of false prophets.
Eph. 4.14.
That we be no more children, tossed to and fro by the sleight of men, to every winde of Doctrine whereby they lie in wait to deceive.
Mich. 6.8.
He hath shewed thee O man what is good, and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to doe justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.
Rom. 11.33.
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdome and knowledge of God, how un∣searchable are his judgments, and his waies past finding out.
Psal. 4.5.
Offer the sacrifice of righteousnesse, and put your trust in the Lord. And 104. 33. I will sing unto the Lord so long as I live, I will sing praise unto my God while I have any being.
Matth. 6.20.
Lay up for your selves treasures in hea∣ven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves doe not break through and steale, for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

Prov. 13.13.
Who so despiseth the Word shall be destroyed, but he that feareth the Commandement shall be rewarded.
1 Pet. 3.16.
Having a good conscience, that whereas they speak evill of you as of evill doers, they may be ashamed that falsly accuse your good conversation in Christ.
Isa. 26.3.
Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose minde is stayed on thee, because be trusteth in thee.
2 Chron. 25.2.
And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart.
Matth. 5.8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
1 Tim. 1.5.
Now the end of the Commande∣ment is charity out of a pure heart and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.
Psal. 107.43.
Who so is wise and will observe these things, even they shall under∣stand the loving kindnesse of the Lord.
Deut. 4.9.
Take heed to thy self and keep thy soul diligently, and teach them thy sons and thy sons sonns.
Matth. 5.19.
Whosoever shall doe and teach them, shall be great in the kingdom of heaven.
Prov. 28.9.
He that turneth away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayers shall be an abomination to the Lord.
Rom. 10.17.
Faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God.
1 Tim. 4.13.
Give attendance to reading.
Psal. 1.2.
In his Law doth he meditate day and night. Read the whole Psalm.
Psal. 55.17.
Evening, morning and noon will I pray.
Luk. 6.38.
Give and it shall be given to you again.
Eccl. 1.4.
One generation passeth, and ano∣ther generation cometh.
1 Thes. 5.10.
Who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep we should live toge∣ther with him.
1 Cor. 1.20.
Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? Hath not God made foolish the wisdome of this world? Ver. 27. God hath chosen the foolish things of this world, to confound the wise: and the weak things of this world, to confound the things which are mighty.
Phil. 4.17.
I desire fruit that may abound to your account.
Psal. 103.15.
As for man, his dayes are as grasse: as a flower of the field so he flourisheth.
Heb. 11.16.
But now they desire a better coun∣try, that is a heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he hath prepared for them a City.
Psal. 90.1.
So teach us to number our dayes (O Lord) that we may apply our hearts unto wisdome.





PSAL. 90.10.
The age of a man is threescore years and ten, if strength continue till fourscore years, yet is that strength but labour and sorrow, it suddenly faileth, and we are gone.



ECCLES. 12.12.
By these my sonne be admonished.
ECCLES. 4.13.
Better is a poor and a wise childe, then an old and foolish King, who will no more be admonished.



Children,
MY desire is to speak very plainely to you, in a low and common stile, that so the meanest capacity, may receive and understand my meaning. You are they that are very near me in my generation, and for vicissitudes, and perhaps multitudes of times (although, to speak properly, not much time, for our dayes be few and evill) you are to passe and sojourn with me in my pil∣grimage: and as my journey drawes towards an end, nearer the grave, the undoubted portion of mortality, so your journeys likewise become shorter, and who knowes the hour of his disso∣lution, for our times are in thy hands O God. My accompt is great for you, and my care is great of you (especially for the good of your eternity,) and my commands are therefore great unto you, that with your best abilities you assist me in it, and heartily endeavour to further my good accompt of you in the day of triall: let our great and diligent care be, so to spend our time, that we may live together (in the true and per∣fect service of our good God) for our eternity: Let us take here comfort in those our friends who are gone, or shall go out of this world, before us, [prae∣missi non anussi,] who lived and died in the same faith and belief with us, and whose lives (as we may judge) have answered their profession, that we (in the eternall mercy of the eternall Fa∣ther in Christ Jesus) shall upon our dis∣solution, meet them again, Rev c. 2. (we being as they were, constant in all good duties to the end) and never part one from the other, nor from the per∣fect service of our Creator for ever: This may be (in some part) our hope and joy; but our great rejoycing must
alwaies be, willingly and joyfully to submit to the will of God, and to his pleasure for ever. This is not to be the work of a day, but of all the dayes of all our lives; for a day soon passeth away, and mortality is alwaies at hand; therefore beware of unprepa∣rednesse, for if the tree fall ill, so it lies; upon this moment (as it were) dependeth eternity; if then thou hast not oyl in thy lampe the door of mer∣cy is for ever shut; and who knows what a day may bring forth: there∣fore seriously consider, fill your holy lampes with the burning oyl of piety and watch. And know, in case any of you become a Parent, that you owe unto your Children, not only ma∣teriall subsistence for their bodies, but much more to contribute spirituall things unto their better part their souls: and be sure you principle them aright in the beginning of their daies, so soon as they can doe or apprehend any thing, let it be good; and from the true principle of loving and obey∣ing our good God, even for his own sake, which will conduct us to the right loving of our neighbour. I humbly blesse our good God, that hath endued all of you with capacities and naturall endowments, in some measure capable of the best instru∣ctions: and withall I humbly crave his powerfull spirit upon your wills to improve them, and I trust your best compliances shall not be want∣ing. Be sure you imbrace and hold fast true love one towards another; and although you had severall Mo∣thers, yet let your love and unity be one, in faith and truth; and the One eternall God will undoubtedly give you the incomprehensible blessing both of temporall and eternall peace: and will strongly fortifie you against
any dejection at the deprive∣ment of any temporall blessings, whilest you truly consider the uncertainty of them, the diffi∣culty in well using of them, and the danger if abused: and that nothing is worthy our serious thoughts, but what accompanies us to our eternall habitation, and goeth with us to that admirable, perfect and happy estate we shall most certainly arrive unto, if we wean our selves from these worldly impediments that here deface and clogge our souls, and only endeavour and esteem that good which tends to the good of our eternity. The in∣ward endowments of the minde are by far more excellent than the outward adornments of the body; therefore let the bot∣tome and foundation of all thy endeavours be laid in pure and undefiled religion, truly groun∣ded upon the sacred Scriptures rightly understood [Sint cast a deliciae meae scripturae tuae, nec faller in eis, O Deus meus, nec fallam ex eis. August. Confess.] For except the Lord build the house the workmen labour but in vain. We must all acknow∣ledge and beleeve a most sacred heavenly Deity; for whosoever come to almighty God aright, fitting for his mercifull and sa∣ving acceptance, must first know and beleeve that he is, and that he is the rewarder of them that serve him True religion consisteth in the knowledge of God and of our selves, (for it is a relative action between both,) the office thereof is, to extoll God to the utmost of our
power, and to beat down man as utterly lost, and then to furnish him with means to rise again; to make him feel his mi∣sery and his weaknesse, to the end he may put his whole confidence in God alone. Religion should knit and unite us to the author and prin∣cipall cause of our good, and re-unite us to our first cause and root, where, if we continue firm, we are thereby pre∣served in our perfection: and contray, if we se∣parate▪ we instantly faint and languish: True Reli∣gion doth make us give all honour to almighty God, and receive all be∣nefit to our selves. Glo∣ry be to God on high, and peace with men on earth. Almighty God must be served with our hearts and spirits; it is the service answerable to his nature, he is a spi∣rit, then worship him in purity of spirit, this he requireth and it plea∣seth him; the Father de∣sireth such worshippers: the most acceptable sa∣crifice unto his sacred Majesty, is a pure, free and humble heart, this he will not despise: A pure heart is a sacrifice to God, an innocent soul, an innocent life. A holy man is a true sacri∣fice to God, his body is
his Temple, his soul is his a Image, his affections are his b offrings, his solemne sacrifice is to imitate, serve and implore him. God is rich, and therefore giveth unto us poor, and therefore aske. Although all true worship be from the in∣ward spirit, yet neverthe∣lesse we must not contemn or disdain outward and publick service, which must be an assistant to the inward truth, by observing ceremonies, orders and cu∣stoms, with moderation, without vanity, ambition, hypocrisie or covetousnes, as they may and doe tend to the advancement of true devotion in us; alwaies remembring, that God will be served in spirit, and what is performed by us otherwise, is rather for our selves then for God; for humane respects and for∣mall observances, then di∣vine verity, which rather belongs to manners and customs then the thing it self. Our vowes and pray∣ers to almighty God should be alwaies with this submission; Thy will be done O Lord, and not mine: [Tua voluntas Domi∣ne mea sit, & mea voluntas tuam semper sequatur, & op∣timè ci concordet, saith a pi∣ous and ancient Father.] Take great heed of asking any thing against the de∣termination of his revealed will: his will is that we
ought to fit our selves to re∣ceive. We must think, speak and deal with almighty God, as if all the world did behold us, and live and con∣verse with the world, as if God did behold us. We must take great care, not (upon any slight occasion, or cursorily) to use the most sacred Name of God, but with premeditation, obe∣diently and reverently to speak and use it; his Name is holy, and all honour is for ever due unto it. The di∣vine providence being well learned by us, doth admini∣ster sufficient upholding comfort in all the chances and changes of this life: We are most thankfully to ac∣knowledge and submit to this providence, which dis∣poseth all things to the best, to them that truly and obe∣diently acknowledge it, without which a Sparrow falls not, and with whom our hairs are numbred: this is the staff of life, the blessed stay of comfort, on which we safely rest in all the pas∣sages of our pilgrimage: this inward spirit works quite contrary to the out∣ward man, it makes us tru∣ly say, Thy will be done (O God) and not mine; and not only say so, but hearti∣ly and thankfully rejoyce that so it is, knowing that it is best and only good for us: this clears thy soul of grief and trouble, and fills thy heart with joy and gladnes;
knowing that is done which is only good for thee, and that thy will is not done; for had it been against di∣vine providence, it would have produced thy utter ru∣ine and destruction, there∣fore for ever blesse that most gracious providence that hath avoided it. Be di∣ligent to finde out the good of necessity, it is a sweet herbe, but growes not in every garden: it is an espe∣ciall branch of true wis∣dome, and teacheth to take every thing by the right end; the righteous and the wicked, the wise and the foolish, the true contented and discontented, doe all the same things, but not af∣ter the same manner, not with the same apprehension, understanding and judg∣ment, neither intending or conducing to the same end and purpose, and therefore the operation in them is not the same, but quite contra∣ry. Nothing in this world is perfect, therefore there is both good and evill, a right and a wrong use of them, the first tending to true joy and comfort, the latter to sorrow and discontent. Correction (upon search) discovereth sinne, and mo∣veth to repentance and pre∣vention. Not to rejoyce (af∣ter serious thoughts) at the chastisements of Gods pro∣vidence, is a very evill signe of a wicked heart: we must be truly sorrowfull for sinne
which is the only cause of correction, not for the cor∣rection; for the cause of the disease, not for the cure. Be∣fore I was corrected I went astray, but now have I learned thy word. O blessed and sweet correction, that leads and holds us in the way to eternall happinesse: if cor∣rection bring thee not com∣fort, with resolution (by the gracious assistance of al∣mighty God) and joy in amendment, search nar∣rowly thy wayes, for it is greatly to be feared, they lead thee to eternall death. Correction is the sweet beams of Gods love to soften us, that so we may receive the marks of his sa∣ving mercy: take great heed thou be not as the Spi∣der upon the Flower, that gathereth poison, nor as clay to the Sunne, which is hardened by it: but be thou as wax softned and fitted for impression; and as the Bee, that gathereth honey from the Flower. I advise you to labour much in the Scriptures, especially be ve∣ry perfect in the new Te∣stament, they are the medi∣cine of life, and in them rightly understood, is salve for every sore, and sound counsell in all occasions. Labour to be a good text-man, for Scripture inter∣prets it self, although in some places there seems li∣terall contradiction, yet the holy Spirit trieth all, and
findes all, holy, right and good, tending to the all and only good, our temporall and eternall peace, which cannot be taken from us. Psal. 34.10. The Lyons shall want and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any thing that is good; that is to say, they shall have all good, spirituall and tem∣porall, including in this word good, all such tem∣porall things as may be ne∣cessary to salvation (for whatsoever is contrary thereto, is neither good nor profitable, but bad and pernitious) and therefore God doth not give tempo∣rall felicity to all his ser∣vants, but only to such of them as he knowes (with the help of his grace) will use it well to his honour and glo∣ry, and to such it is a furthe∣rance of salvation; whereas to wicked men, though it be also Gods gift, yet it is not properly counted Gods gift to them, but evill and pu∣nishment; not a blessing but a curse, not felicity but mi∣sery, by reason that it makes them more insolent, proud and licentious, and by con∣sequence increaseth their damnation: this is the plain meaning of the Psalmist, and accordingly will one Scripture interpret another. Again Psal. 37.4. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desire of thine heart. What is that think you? plenty, credit, vain
honour, ease, full tables, riches, &c. No, no, but that in the want or fullnesse of these things you shall rest in God, and therein have your full desire, that your will being u∣nited to the will of God; you shall desire nothing but what is sutable to his will and pleasure, and whol∣ly rejoyce in your will, that the will of God is done, which is only good, and the best for you. Search not too curiously into Gods Ma∣jesty and mysteries, lest thou be oppressed with the glory of them. Take great heed of infecting thy judgment with false doctrine, be alwaies most humble in the sight of God, and offer unto him the chastity of an inward minde. Ne∣ver cease from good works during life, but lay up the treasure of all thy love in heaven, and be assured that for thy well doing, thou shalt have thy reward of true joy and peace in minde and conscience in this life, as a heavenly gift (when earth perhaps denies thee any) and perfect peace for thy eternity: and further know, that who doth a work never so good and laudable in it self, if he doe it to gain the ap∣plause of the world, more then out of duty and obedience to almigh∣ty God, he shall have his reward, that is perhaps the vain-glory he looked for, a worldly reward, but not my reward, that is, the most blessed and glorious reward of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, a heavenly reward, which he hath laid up eternally for his blessed Saints and servants in heaven. My wishes to you are, that you will every one of you seriously observe my drift herein; and that you will not only read and practise it, in the
best construction for your souls good, but that you will teach o∣thers so to doe, especially your Children, if God shall give you any; and to this joyn hearing, reading, prayer, meditation, bles∣sed alms and charity, and all other Christian duties, in true love to almighty God for his own sake, to your neighbours for his Com∣mandements sake, and both for obedience sake unto his sacred Majesty. Consider, that as one ge∣neration goeth, so another com∣eth, and it shall be only well to the righteous; be righteous then and our good God will surely blesse you, and in the best time of his providence will bring us all together to eternall peace in Christ Jesus. Children I do not com∣mand you to study, read or love this book above others (by far more learned Authors) because of any oratory, wit or learning there is shewed in it; but because in its right construction (I trust) it is pious, true and honest; and comes from a near related heart, that truly desires and hopes (in the sweet and saving mercy of our good God) to live with you all in the eternall and perfect welfare of your souls and bodies, when our short, dangerous and various con∣ditioned pilgrimages in this world are ended; and that truly endeavours and desires the per∣fect welfare of your souls and bo∣dies, and the true conversion of both into the sincere love of our Creatour, more then all the world besides: therefore seriously consi∣der this, and the Lord give you perfect wisdom from heaven in all things. Amen.



