



Loving Father:
HOW much I am ob∣liged unto you both for my being and well-being, I desire now to testi∣fie unto the world; for though to requite your love and bounty be not within the sphear of my Activity, yet since the A∣postle Quicquid est, quod dat Patri Filius, utique minus est, quia hanc ipsam dandi faculta∣tem Patri debet. Seneca lib. 3. de Be∣neficiis. Patri∣bus & Diis non possumus retribuere ae∣qualia Arist. 8. Ethic.  1 Tim. 5.4. commandeth Children to learn to requite their Parents,

and Nature it self hath taught the unreasonable The Fowl which teach∣eth children to requite their Parents is the Stoak from  natural affect∣ion, and she is called ; hence cometh  when children stu∣dy to requite theire Parents Creatures this les∣son; I shall endeavour, (God as∣sisting me with his grace) to pay that three-fold debt, of rever∣ence, obedience, and gratitude, which all children owe to their Parents: As Aeschines therefore, when he saw his fellow-Scholars give great gifts to Socrates (be∣ing poor, and have nothing else to bestow) did give himself to Socrates, professing to be whol∣ly devoted unto him: so I shall ever devote my self unto your service, to whom (next under God) I owe my self, and those abilities I have, both natural, and which through Gods blessing up∣on your liberal education, by a double apprentiship in two Magdalen-Hall in Ox∣ford, and the Middle Tem∣ple in London. famous and flourishing Societies I have acquired. To expresse

therefore my due observance, and gratefull recognition of your for∣mer care, and cost, and withal to give you some account of the fruitful spending of my time, I here present unto you some Choice Observations concerning the twelve first Caesars, Emperors of Rome. A work (as I conceive) both delightful, and useful, and therefore to you (I hope) not un∣welcome; as Geographers express the whole world in a little Map, so have I laboured Graphically to describe these great Monarchs of the world in a little model, neither strictly tying my self to any one Historian, nor relating all the passages of their lives, but excerping out of the most prin∣cipal Tertul. Euseb Eccles. Hist Iosephus. Plutarch. Taciti Hist. & Annal. Aurel. Vict. Eutropi∣us, Pliny, Soli∣nus, Seneca, Macrob. Sa∣turn. Suetoni∣us, with Ca∣saub. Animad∣vers. Eras. Apotheg. & Chiliad. Authors, such things of them as were most memorable. Amongst all which Writers

(though I confess Tacitus his stile is elegant, & full of wise senten∣tious Est oratio Taciti mirum in modum ar∣guta, & pru∣dentiae plena. Bodin. l. 4. de Method. Hist. Apophtheg.) I have chief∣ly followed Suet. 1. because my worthy Mr. William Pemble.Tutor (whose memory I shall ever honour) made choice e∣specially (of that History) to read to his Pupils. 2 Because his Phrase is pure and polite, and himself a faithful Historian: Of whom it is recorded (as I think) by Erasmus, that he wrote the lives of the Romane Emperors, prorsus ea libertate, qua ipsi vixerunt, with the same freedom that they lived. Alex. ab Alex. Genial. dier. lib. 1. c. 1. calleth him sincerissimum scriptorem, and Ludov. Suetonius Tranquillus Graecorum & Latinorum scriptorum di∣ligentissimus, at{que} incorrup∣tissimus, res duodecim Cae∣sarum videtur mihi integer∣rimè exponere; qui in optimis Principibus nec vitia, nec suspiciones vi∣tiorum tacet: in pessimis vero colores virtu∣tum non dissi∣mulat.Ludov. Vives de tradend. Discipl. lib. 5. Tranquillè & aequaliter fluit, rebusque unicè addictus orati∣onis ornamen∣ta non negli∣gens, sed secu∣rus praeterit, & tamen hunc ipsum ornatum velut umbram non id agens trahit. Fa∣mian Strada. lib. 2. Prolus. Histor. Vives, incorruptissimum. And I desire to write as freely and unpartially of them, since I may say of them all, as Tacitus doth of some of

them, that they were Mihi nec be∣neficio nec injuria cogniti; only I shall herein fail, that I write not of these Emperors, Stylo Impe∣ratorio, with a high and lofty stile. Iulius Caesar is here placed in the forefront, he being the first Em∣peror. Ab Imperio dictus Im∣perator, cui commissa erat belli adminstratio. Vt perpetuum Im∣peratoris nomen alicui assignare∣tur, id ab Julio Caesare originem traxit, quem Suetonius tradit praenomen id perpetuum a Senatu accepisse. A Julio Imperatoris ap∣pellatio ad successores derivata. Vossii etymologicon linguae latinae. For this title was at the first given unto him, that had fought valiant∣ly for his Country, and slain many enemies; Iulius Nature meant Caesar for a Conque∣ror, when she gave him both such courage, and such courtesie, both which put Marius into amaze. They which durst speak to him, (said he) were ignorant of his greatness; and the which dust not, were so of his goodnss. Caesar (having brought the greatest part of the then known world into the sub∣jection

of the Romans) was the first that was saluted by the title of absolute Emperor, and all the Emperors succeeding were cal∣led Imperatores & Caesares from him, Mat. 22.21. Yet because he ruled but a few months, and be∣cause the monarchical Govern∣ment was in its vigour under Au∣gustus, others make Augustus the first of the Romane Emperors, and Augustus the last. Dunbar in his fifth Century of Epigrams hath these verses of Iulius Caesars and Pope Gregories refor∣ming the Kalendar.
Caesar Gregoriusque annum dum jure reformant,
Deformant regni res sine jure, sui:
Scilicet antiqui facies a Caesare regni
Versa est, a Papa Pristina religio:
Malo reformari civilem a Caesare flammam,
Maloreformatam Gregorii{que} fidem.
The Emperors after Iulius Cae∣sar were called Augusti,Imperatores omnes ad Vitel∣lium praecipuè Caesarum ge∣nus, adeo lite∣ris exculti fue∣runt, ut nicunc∣tis vitiis Au∣gusto excepto nimii fuessent, tant aedotes mi∣nora flagitiae texissent Aurel. Victor. in Vitellio. Vide Grotii Epist. Principi Con∣daeo, Martiano Capellae De nuptiis Phi∣lologiae & Mercurii prae∣fixam. from Octavius, the second Roman Caesar, who revived the good laws, and reformed the bad. But the Emperors succeeding him, having more care to be great than good, rather raged than reigned, and the decrees of some of them viz. Tiberius and Caligu∣la, are wittily termed furores non judicia. Quatuor Principes ferro interempti, (saith Tacitus in his History) four of these Emperors were slain with the Sword, Gal∣ba, Otho, Vitellius, Domitian: which three first Plutarch compa∣reth (in regard of their short reign) to Kings in a Tragedy, which last no longer than the time that they are represented on the stage. Iulius Caesar, and Caligula

were also slain, Claudius, and Ti∣tus were poisoned, Nero slew him∣self, Augustus Cae∣sar died in a complement; Livia, conju∣gii nostri me∣mor, vive, & vale.Tiberius in dissimulation; as Tacitus saith of him. Iam Tiberium vires & cor∣pus, non dissi∣mulatio, dese∣rebant.Vespasian in a Jest, sitting upon the stool, Vt puto Deus fio.Galba with a sentence, Fe∣ri, si ex re sit Populi Roma∣ni; holding forth his Neck.Bacons last Essayes in 4. Augustus dyed in a comple∣ment, Tiberius in dissimulation, Galba with a sentence, Vespasian with a jest, yet he died peacea∣bly in his Bed, which no Empe∣ror since Augustus ever did. The Macrob. lib. 1. in somn. Scipion.Timeo incusto∣ditos aditus, timeo & ipsos custodes. Heathens shadowed the sting of conscience by the Eagle or Vulture that fed upon the heart of Prometheus, and by the three Virgins which they called Furies, following men in a hide∣ous form, with burning torches in their hands, which some of the worst of these Heathen Empe∣rors really felt after their bloody cruelties, and verified that old Maxime;he must needs fear ma∣ny, whom many fear. See in the Book of him, and Domitian. Caligula (though he contemned the gods as they called them) yet at the

least thundering and lightening would run under his bed, an co∣ver his head. Dion in Nerone. Our English Chronicles report of King Richard the third, that having imbru∣ed his hands in the Blood of two Orient Princes, he ne∣ver after had quiet in his mind, his bo∣dy was privi∣ly fenced, his hand ever up∣on his Dagger, his counte∣nance grim & gastly, his sleep unquiet, for he rather slumbred than slept. The night before the Battel fought in Bos∣worth-Field, he dreamed a terrible dream.Credo non erat somnium, sed Conscientia scelerum. Po∣lyd. Virgil. Nero that monster of Mankind having killed his Mo∣ther Agrippina, could never after endure the worm and sting of conscience for his foul fact, but confessed that he was often haun∣ted with the apparition of his mo∣thers Ghost, and tormented also with scourges, and burning tor∣ches of the Furies. We may take notice of many Moral vertues also in the best of these Heathens. Iulius Caesar, Augustus, Vespasi∣an, and Titus that mirror of hu∣manity, and see in them the truth of that old Maxime, Magistratus virum indicat a place sheweth the man; and it sheweth some to be better, some to be worse. It was said of Caligula, that there was never better servant and

worse Master: Omnium consensu capax Imperii, nisi imperasset, saith Tacitus of Galba: but of Vespasian he saith, Solus Impera∣torum Vespasianus mutatus in me∣lius. But lest I shall be upbra∣ded, with the City of Myndus, for making my Porch too big, here will I cast Anchor, ever re∣maining


