



My Lord,
IT was an elegant Passage of a Reve∣rendMr Vines his Sermon preached at the Funeral of the Earl of Essex. Divine, now with God, spo∣ken to your self, and other Lords and Gentlemen of this Nation, in a great Assembly, That Anti∣quity of Race is but a Moss of time growing upon the back of Virtue, and that Nobility is often-times the creature of a Princes fancy; which when there is no intrinsecal worth to be the supporter of it, is but Nobility by Parch∣ment. A Heathen could say, Nobilitas sola est atque unica Virtus, Virtue is the only true Nobili∣ty; a Christian should say, Grace is the greatest No∣bility, Acts 17. 11. Your Lordship hath a good name amongst the good Ministers and people of this Land for adhering to the Truth.
Malice it self cannot but acknowledge (saith worthy Mr Burroughes in his Epistle Dedicatory to you before that excellent Book of the Excellency of a

Gracious Spirit) that Goodness in the strictness of it, and natural Excellencies in the eminency of them, have a blessed conjunction in your Honor.
I would commend the second Epistle of John to our great Ladies in these staggering dayes, especially the 1, 2, 4, 9, 10, and 11. verses. In times of general contagion it will be our wisdom to have our Antidotes ready.
I have had the honour formerly to be a little known unto your Lordship, which makes me take the boldness to make you the Patron of the first-fruits of my labours upon the Old-Testament.
I was the last who dedicated a Book to that great Light of all the Reformed Churches, my Lord of Ar∣magh▪ The Subject of that Book was of Religion and Learning, a work needfull for these times, when Lear∣ning is so much decried, and the true Religion in the power thereof so little imbraced. I have since the pub∣lication thereof received a Letter from a great Rabbi of one of our Universities, testifying his high esteem of it, and wish it may finde the like approbation with the religious and learned, who are best able to judge of it, and for whose sake it was principally intended▪ That work of mine was kindly accepted by him, to whose Pa∣tronage I had good reason in many respects to commend it. All the Books of Scripture should be diligently per∣used and studied by all Christians, these five Books are full fraught with many precious Truths, and if any be∣nefit shall accrue to the Church of God by these my La∣bours, I shall greatly rejoyce. Thus craving your Lord∣ships pardon for my presumption, and wishing you and yours true felicity, I subscribe my self,

