



SIR, May it please your Highness.
HAving had the Honour to wait upon Your Highness at Tolon, in France, and from thence to be remanded by Your High∣ness into Italy, about some affairs concerning his Majesties Service in those parts, whiles I was abroad: I should be most grossely incivil, if I should
not tender those due respects of Service, which I am able to express to Your Highness, now I am come home. Not that I do, or can imagine Your Highness, any ways, to stand in need of my Service; But that by my Ser∣vice to Your Highness, I may the better serve my self and have better esteem in the eys of others. Multa ideo habentur sancta, (saith Pliny, in his Epistle to Trajane the Emperour) quia Templis sunt dicata▪ And I see it verified by ex∣perience, that many men are accounted great, and in reputation, because they have relation to, and are in the Service of great men. But alas! What service can I perform to Your Highness? I can do nothing, now, but pray; and that I shall; , as Na∣zianzen sometimes, in another case; first to God for Your Highness, that he would bless and protect You; then to Your High∣ness for my Self, and this poor mis-reported Sermon; that You would please, according to Your wonted goodness, to cast an eye of favour upon me, and protect it. The occa∣sion of its composure was, the happy news of His Majesties happy return into his King∣doms, whiles I was abroad: and the oc∣casion of its dedication to Your Highness, is,
the unhappy entertainment it hath received from the Pulpit, since I came home. There I conceived it, here I preached it: So that, though it was a Forraigner in its conception; yet it is a Denizon in its production. The Subject of it, is, Our Sions Return out of Cap∣tivity, by reason of His MAJESTIES Return unto his Throne. And the duty it doth enforce to my self and others, redeem∣ed out of our former Captivity, is our thank∣ful joyfulness, and joyful thankfulness to God for both. It hath met with much mis-apprehension, and sinister inter∣pretation, by some, that are not well-wish∣ers to Sions prosperity: but would rather She should remain in Captivity and in mise∣ry, than be blessed with the present liberty and felicity, which, through Gods blessing she doth enjoy (and long may she conti∣nue in the enjoyment of it!) by the pros∣perous Raign of his SaCRed Majesty; And so, by reason of their malign aspect to, and dis-respect of the Church, they do as much as Malice and the Devil can suggest unto them, asperse, traduce, and calumniate, all such as are Conformable, and Orthodox Church-men. For vindication therefore of
my Self, and this Sermon, honestly intended, but maliciously traduced, I have been necessi∣tated to make it publick, which I thought should still continue private; and to pre∣sent it to open view, as to correct the mis-apprehension of some that were pre∣sent when it was delivered, so to pre∣vent the depravation of others that were absent, and so mis-informed. And thus, coming from the Pulpit to the Presse, in the plain dresse of Loyalty and Christi∣anity, I do, with all submission, ad∣dresse my self, with it, to Your Illu∣strious Highnesse; And do humbly be∣seech Your Highness, that as You have been a Peerlesse Champion of both, a∣gainst the Enemies of GOD, and the KING; so You will vouchsafe it, now fleeing in these robes for refuge to Your Quarters, a favourable acceptance, and a gracious Protection. And thus shel∣terd under Your Highness tuition, it will go abroad secure from all black-mouthd aspersion. In confidence of which Princely Favour, according to Your innate godnesse, I do further addresse
my self to the Throne of Grace, and shall continually sollicite the Prince of Princes, with my Prayers, that he will still grace Your Highnesse, with encrease of Honour here; and for e∣ver honour Your Highness, with the perfection of happiness hereafter. So prayeth,
SIR, 



