



Most Gracious Soveraigne;
I Hope this Dedication of
these my Collections con∣cerning
all the Kings of
England to your Sacred
Majesty, from the first of
them (of whom there is any
thing credible in story) to the decease of
your Royall Father, will not be interpreted
either a fruit of ambition or over-bold
presumption. I have had the honour for∣merly
to dedicate Books to very eminent
Societies and Persons, but never to any so
signally eminent and publike a Person as
your Majesty. And should not have taken
the confidence to have begun now, but that
(in regard of the Argument I treat of)
I thought there was an obligation upon
me; and that of right such a Work was to
be presented onely to Him, who is the just

and unquestionable Successour to all those
Kings I here mention.Beda to King Ceolwolph. Speed his Hi∣story of Great∣brittain to King Iames. I finde it usuall with
those who either wrote Chronicles in ge∣nerall,
or the reigns of some particular Prin∣ces,
to inscribe the Name of the King or
Prince then living to their Works.Howe his An∣nals, or Conti∣nuation of Stow and Ba∣cons Henry the 7th to your Father when Prince. I wish
my Observations were as choice, as the
subject is sutable. Since Cadwallader, the
last King of the Britains, there was none
born Prince of Great-Britain but your Majesty.
Hactenus Anglorum nulli was there∣fore
the Motto on the Medals made in me∣mory
of your Birth-day the 29th of May
1630, with three Laurels upon them be∣tokening
three Kingdoms. May your raign
be as prosperous and happy, as your birth
was glorious andIt was illu∣strious both in respect of the bright Star which then appeared at high-noon in the presence and sight of all, (See Stella meridiana) & also in respect of your near alliance to the greatest rin∣ces of Chri∣stendom. illustrious; your deli∣verance
by Sea at your entrance into Scot∣land,
and your escape by Land at Worcester-fight,
and after in England; and your hap∣py
restitution to your Kingdom, was won∣derfull
and conspicuous. Kings have their
regal Titles and Ornaments. To the
Kings of Spain from the time of Alphonsus
King of Castile, about 800 years agoe, for
expelling the Arians, was given the Title
of Catholike, as Michael Ritius a Neapoli∣tan
writeth. To the French King the Title

of most Christian from the time of Philip
the Emperour, about 400 years since,Doway Notes on Iosh. 3. 8. as
recordeth Nicol, Gillius. To our King
Henry the 8th of England for his Book of
the Sacraments against Luther, Pope Leo
the 10th gave the Title, Defender of the
FaithSee Dr Basire of Sacriledge., which his Successors have since
enjoyed, though in another sense than it
was first intended. Henry the 5th reigning
amongst us, his Subjects gave him the Ti∣tle
ofMontacuii Antidiatribae ad Diat. 1. Bulengeri. Grace. Under Henry the Saint, the
6th, Excellent was added to Grace: Under
Henry the 8th the acclamation of Majesty
began; a little after excellent Majesty, most
excellent, and at last Sacred Majesty, which
now is generally used.
Hookers Ec∣clesiasticall Policy. l. 8. It is by di∣vers Charters granted to the Church of Westminster, to be locus Coro∣nationis Regis, & repositorium Regalium. Li∣ber Regalis. The Sword presents the Princes pow∣er, the Crown their glory. B. Bilson in his Sermon be∣fore K. Iames at his Coro∣nation. Kings are crowned, enthronized, and
anointed; the Crown was a sign of a Mili∣tary
dominion; the Throne of sedentary
or judiciall; the Oyl of Religious and sa∣cred
power.
A King by vertue of his Kingly Office
hath two things to perform;

1. To govern,
2. To defend.

His Governing also divideth it self into
two branches;

First, To direct,

Secondly, To recompence.

He directeth, by appointing what shall
be done and forborn of all his subjects in
his Jurisdiction.
He recompenceth or requiteth, by pu∣nishing
those which disobey the Laws, with
such punishments as himself thinketh good
to appoint, and to signifie to them in his
penalties by which he ratifieth his Laws;
and by rewarding those which keep the
Laws, with such rewards as he seeth fit to
specifie in his Statutes, and in generall, by
making them partakers of the wealth,
peace, quietness and happiness of his go∣vernment.
He defendeth his subjects against the
hostility of open enemies, and the injuries
of their fellow-subjects.
It was an excellent speech of Henry the
Great, King of France, your Grand-father
by the Mothers side; When I was born there
were a thousand other souls more born, what
have I done for God more than they? Learn∣ed
King Iames your Grand-father by the
Father, in his Book dedicated to Prince
Henry, would have him to remember, that
he differed not in stuff, but in use, from the
rest of the people; and that by Gods Or∣dinance.

Kings as well as others are bound
to read the Scriptures,See the  of Worcester  Sermon at the Coronation. Deut. 17. 18, 19, 20.
and some think that Book of the Kings
and Chronicles especially worthy their di∣ligent
perusall: others would have them
study well the 101 Psalm. Next the Scri∣ptures,
Ecclesiasticall History is to be pre∣ferred;King Iames commndeth Caesar above all proe Writers, both for the sweet slowing of th style, and the worthiness of the maner it self.
some highly commend Polybius
as usefull for Kings to read; and Causabon
dedicating it to Henry the 4th King of
France, much magnifieth that Book, and
likewise the reading of History in gene∣rall.
The Chronicles and Annals of their
own Predecessors, surely must needs be
both delightfull and profitable for them.
Your Majesty may observe many things
in them well worthy imitation: in Learn∣ed
and valiant Alfred, how thriftily he
spent his time, how he encouraged Learn∣ing
and Learned men; in little Edgar,
great Canutus; William the Conquerour;
the many worthy Henries andHenry the first, the fifth, the seventh, the eighth. Edward the first, the third, the sixth, e∣specially, who first began our happy Reformation in Religion. Edwards;
your own wise Grand-father and Father
of happy memory. Yet in the whole se∣ries
of the Kings and Queens of England
(as others have made severall parallels of
some of our English Kings) I have not
found a fitter parallel in every respect for

your Majesty than Queen Elizabeth. I will
not speak of her skill in the modern Lan∣guages,
and how she often answered Em∣bassadors
her self, nor how gracious and
gentle a Princess she was to her very ene∣mies;
wherein your Majesty is not un∣like
to Her. What troubles and hazards
did she undergo, before she came to the
Crown? with what joyfull and generall
acclamations was she received into this Me∣tropolis?
I need not apply this to your
Majesty, its sufficiently obvious to every
vulgar capacity how you agree herein. Af∣ter
her Coronation,At the Coro∣nation of King Ioash, the High-Priest delivered him the Testimo∣ny, not only that he might know and do it himself, but take care (as much as lie in him) that it might be known and observed by the people. Dr Hardy his Apostolicall Ly∣turgy revived, on 2 King. 11. 12. Read the Scriptures di∣ligently, and with an hum∣ble spirit, and in it observe what is plain, and believe & live according∣ly. Dr Ier. Tay∣lors Letter to a person newly converted to the Church. being presented with
a Bible, as she passed by the little Con∣duit
in Cheapside, she received the same
with both her hands, and kissing it said;
That it had ever been her chief delight, and
should be the rule by which she meant to frame
her Government. Your Majesty in your
entring into the City, at the presentment
of the Bible to you by the Reverend
London Ministers, used this speech,
worthy to be written in Gold; I thank
you for this Book above all other gifts,
and assure you, I shall make it my first care
to set up Gods Worship and service; this is
the Book must guide us all; and I will make

it the rule of my Life and reign. Queen Eli∣zabeth
was a couragious and stout spirited
Princess. In 88, when the Spaniard was
coming, she went to the Army at Tilbury-Camp,
riding with a Truncheon or baston
in her hand to the severall Companies, and
by her presence and speech encouraged
both Commanders and souldiers, saying
to them as I have heard; If her brother
Philip came, she would give fire to the first
Piece against him: I might alledge the testi∣mony
of your greatest enemy, in confirma∣tion
of your Majesties valour at Worcester-battle.
Kings bear a double image of God, as
they are men and as they are Magistrates.
The Scripture saith;2 Sam. 23. 3. Those which rule
over men should be just, ruling in the
fear of God. OneMolinier in his Essay. saith; They should
labour to be more religious and pious toward
God than ordinary persons, because of the
great need they have of his illumination in
their counsels, of his conduct in their en∣terprises,
of his force in their executions,
and of his provident care in their va∣rious
occurrents, dangers & difficulties.
The Kings seat was so set in the Temple,
that all might see him there, Ezek. 46. 10.

2 Chron. 6. 12, 13.All that we beg at the hands of our Superiors, is a liberty to wor∣ship God ac∣cording to his word, that we may have no thing imposed upon us, but what we may be directed in our compli∣ance with, by the rule of Scripture; we desire that men may not command where God is silent. The Ex∣aminat. of Dr Heylins History of the Refor∣mar. of the Church of Eng∣land. Those of the Presbyterian judgement, that out of a reall tenderness cannot comply in all particulars, will beyond doubt receive from his Majesty such savour and indulgence, as may abundantly suffice to their relief. Mr L'estrange his Holy Cheat. p. 78. of the 2d Edition. 2 King. 11. 14. & 23.
3. that by his example the devotion of
his people might be stirred up. God ha∣ving
done such great things both abroad
and at home for your Majesty, ex∣pecteth
great things from you. I shall
humbly implore the Almighty, that he
would so guide you in all your wayes,
that you may make his Interest your
great interest, by reforming what is a∣miss
in Court and Kingdom, by pro∣moting
his pure worship, encouraging the
power of godliness, and all such as walk
according to Scripture-rule, are peace∣able,
and hold the Fundamentals; by
discountenancing Atheisme, errour, and
profaneness, the fruits of abused peace
and prosperity, altering the old speech for
the better,
—Exeat aula
Qui vult esse pius; into impius.
So shall White-Hall answer its name, and

your Majesty approve your self to be, what
your Father desired, Charles the Good,
which is the earnest prayer of

