


Much Honoured,
IT was a Conjecture, which I had al∣most called a Prophecy, in the Ser∣mon Preached by One of You, on the THANKSGIVING Lately Celebra∣ted by The Ʋnited Brethren, for the Sig∣nal Mercy and Presence of God, that has appear'd in their becoming; Two
 Sticks Made One, You have done That in this Agreement that promises great Advantage unto our Brethren abroad; it is like the Beams of the Sun, which Dffuse Light and Heat unto Thousands at once. I may humbly presume now to inform All of You, That there are I suppose Thousands of Saints no less than Thousands of Miles distant from you, who are like to Rejoyce in the Sacred Light and Heat, with which this Blessed Agreement of yours inspires them. When that Noble and Equally well Tim'd and well Fram'd Work of Accommodation, wherein You have so much Laboured, was once Prosecuted unto that Effect, which your eyes have seen, doubtless the Angels in the Caeles∣tial Regions, were making their Joyful Acclamations thereupon; the Angels I say of whose Intimate Acquaintance with what is done among the People of God, we do not want Assurances; the News quickly Reach'd Heaven, and the Shouts upon it were, Glory to God in the Highest, because there is on Earth Peace, and Good Will among men. But let me
 also suggest this further Joy unto, The Counsellers of This Peace, That the Christians in the American Regions, who dwell in such an Haemisphaete that some think the Apostle means Ʋs by, Things under the Earth, do now send back the loud and long Echo's of your UNION. As he that heard a Story of two very Faithful Friends, most passionately Ex∣claimed, Ʋtinam Tertius essm! so the Churches of New-England are ambitious of a Room in all that Friendship into which they who are Studious of, A Re∣formation according to the Word of God, are by the Perfect Bond of Charity now Cemening of themselves. But that which raises this Desire of these Church∣es into a sort of Demand, is, Their ha∣ving now so long Professed and Practised Those very Principles upon which our Europaean Brethren do now Ʋnie, and Exhibited a standing Instance of that Ʋnion after which Your most Evangeli∣cal Souls have been Aspiring. Not on∣ly have those of the Scotch and the French Communions, been admitted un∣to a Transient Communion in these
 Churches, when they have come with due Testimonials for it; but also in our Stated Communion, the Name of PRES∣BYTERIAN and CONGREGATIO∣NAL [Yea, and EPISCOPAL too when Piety is otherwise visible] and I may add, the Name of, ANTIPEDO-BAPTIST, likewise, is of no Conside∣ration; both, yea all together do, As one man carry on the Affairs of our Lords Ecclesiastical Kingdom; and the Substantials of Religion (perhaps Cri∣tically sometimes Nam'd only become the Terms of Sacred Fellowship. From the Constitution of a Little Zion, here, which has more than a little of Hea∣ven in it, you have had that Invitati∣on, Come up hither! and now that God is causing you, To come out of your Graves, (a thing that's doing when, The Two Sticks become One in the Hand of God.) I do most ardently sollicit for your Prayers and Cares before the Lord, that we may not by any Effects of our Degeneracies, be put into Ours, or be made indeed, Things under the Earth. While the Authority of England has
 (and may it ever have) Reason to ac∣knowledge the New-Englanders among the most Loyal Subjects in the World; I hope You will not forget that here is a Country in a manner wholly consisting of your most Hearty Brethren; I know you cannot. It may be some Recom∣mendation for us, That your Names and your Books are precious even to the furthest Nooks of these Colonies; We Read you, Prize you, Bless God for you; and with Yours, the Venerable Names of ADAMS, ALSOP, ANNESLY BARKER, BATES, BAXTER, BUR∣GESS, COLE, COLLINGES, CRA∣DOCK, DOLITTLE, GILPIN, GRIF∣ITH, HAMMOND, HURST, LEE, MAYO, SLATER STEEL, SYLVES∣TER, VEAL, VINCENT, WILLIAMS, WOODCOCK; WOODE, and others, et Surviving Men of God, besides ma∣y others now Aslep in the Lord, are mong us, all of them, As an Oyntment cured frh. When any of those Pil∣ars in the Temple of God, happen to fall y the Stroke of Death, even the Ground  America shakes at the Fall: So did
 it Lately at the Translation of the most Excellent FLAVEL, who, as we hear Stole from you, that Week, that he had been Moderator in a General Meeting of Ministers at Exeter, where Solemn Thanks were directed unto You, as Three of those Worthies, who not by War but by Peace had signalized your selves un∣to the English Israel. But it will more powerfully plead with you for us, if we let you understand, which I now do, That New-England is in a large part but just the very same that you would have your own particular Flocks to be, and that whoever attempts the Ruine of these Churches, intends the very same for every one of yours. I was a severe Persecution, that a while since drove the fist Planters of this Ter∣ritory into the most Horrid and Squa∣lid of all Desarts, which with a vast Expence of their own Treasure, Sweat and Blood, is now become somewhat Habitable. It can scarce enter into our, or indeed into any Honest or Humane Heart, that any should now thro' the Sea, go to follow the poor Children of
 those First Planters here, with a Perse∣cution for their Non-Conformity to such things as the Errand hither was a peace∣able Secession from. Nevertheless I do again see cause to be your Petitioner, that you would not let this little Out∣cast, be cast out of your most useful Thoughts at the Throne of Grace. Tho' No man care, for us, Yet (Ye blessed Sons of Peace!) You do; and One of you by a tedious Absence from your Interests among us, to attend an Agency, in the Courts of two KINGS now Successively on our behalf; have given a Memorable Demonstration of it. May, My God think upon all of you according to all that you have done for this People.
But while I thus ask the Favour of your Intercessions for my Country, you will permit me to ask your Bless ng on my self; inasmuch as you that are, The Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof, are all of you Fathers unto me. One of you is Naturally so, and I rec∣kon it among the choicest of my Ad∣vantages; the other. Two of you, are
 Spiritually so; for if ever I have g beyond, The Almost Christian, or if ver I have Try'd, The Good of Ear Obedience; if ever I was inflam'd fo The Blessedness of the Righteousness, or ever I Learn d the Art of, Delighti in God; your Invaluable Writings ha had their Influences thereupon.
Wherefore, MY FATHERS, havi here withal brought you, some of Vnison ['tis Plain, Mean, poor Ne England Venison] I pray you, Th your Souls may Bless me;

