



Sr.
BY the special Disposal and Provi∣dence of the Almighty God, there now comes abroad into the world, a little History of several very a∣stonishing Witchcrafts and Possessions, which partly my own Ocular Observation, & partly my undoubt∣ed Information, hath enabled me to offer unto the publick Notice of my Neighbours. It must be the Subject, and not the Manner or the Author of this Writing, that has made any people desire its Publication; For there are such obvious Defects in Both, as would render me very unreasonable if I should with about This or Any Composure of mine, O That it were printed in a book! But tho there want not Faults in the Discourse, to give me Discontent enough, my Displeasure at them will be recompensed by the Satisfaction I take in my Dedication of it; which I now, no less properly than cheerfully make unto Your Self; whom I rec∣kon among the Best of my Friends, and the Ablest of my Readers. Your Knowledge has Qualified You to make those Reflections on the following Relati∣ons, which few can Think, and tis not fit that all should See. How far the Platonic Notions of Dae∣mons which were, it may be, much more espous∣ed by those primitive Christians and Scholars that we call The Fathers, than they seem countenanced in the ensuing Narratives; are to be allow'd by a serious man, your Scriptural Divinity, join'd with Your most Rational Philosophy, will help You to

judge at an uncommon rate. Had I on the Occasion before me handled the Doctrin of Daemons, or lanch∣ed forth into Speculations about magical Mysteries, I might have made some Ostentation, that I have readd something & thought a little in my time; but it would neither have been Convenient for me, nor Profitable for those plain Folkes, whose Edification I have all along aimed at. I have therefore here but briefly touch't every thing with an American Pen; a Pen which your Desert likewise has fur∣ther Entitled You to the utmost Expessions of Re∣spect & Honour from. Though I have no Com∣mission, yet I am sure I shall meet with no Crimina∣tion, if I here publickly wish You all manner of Hap∣piness, in the Name of the great Multitudes whom you have laid under everlasting Obligations. Where∣fore in the name of the many hundred Sick people, whom your charitable and skilful Hands have most freely dispens'd your no less generous than secret Me∣dicines to; and in the name of Your whole Countrey, which hath long had cause to believe that you will succeed Your Honourable Father and Grandfather, in successful Endeavours for our Welfare; I say, In their Name, I now do wish you all the Prosperi∣ty of them that love Ierusalem. And whereas it hath been sometimes observed, That the Genius of an Author is commonly Discovered in the Dedica∣tory Epistle, I shall be content if this Dedicatory Epistle of mine, have now discovered me to be,
(Sir) 
