


Sir
YOu cannot but Rememember, and I should
not have this Occasion of Telling you
so, if you did not well Remember,
That many months are not passed since
You encountred a Dangerous Fever; by which
the Vital Ty between what must Return to God
that gave it, and what must Return into the Earth
as it has been there, was very near burned asunder
in you; But God had then mercy on You, and not on
You only, but on me also, lest I should have had sor∣row
upon sorrow. It was a darker Time in your
House, than (thro' Grace) with your Soul, when
we beheld You lying under what look'd like an
Arrest laid on you by the cold Hand of Death,
and saying, I shall go the gates of the Grave, I am
deprived of the Residue of my years. But the Bless∣ing
which if you study to be a Blessing you can ne∣ver
want, was then your priviledge; even, To
be much pray'd for; and behold, the Effect of those
our Applications to the God of your Life! On
that very day when your faithful and worthy

Pastor the Reverend Charles Morton, with your
pious Neighbours were together praying for You,
we had our Answer, and You are yet alive. The
living, the living, they shall praise God; and You
have a blessed Opportunity, I hope not without
some Inclination to be doing so. Twas from such
an Inclination, that your Vowes did accompany
our Prayers, and your Sickness expired in Reso∣lutions,
To endeavour the doing of something for
the Service of the Churches here, and this particu∣larly,
By the Publication of some little Book, ac∣commodated
unto the Designes of Practical Godli∣ness
in the Persons and Houses of this professing peo∣ple.
Tis pitty indeed that ever any special Trou∣ble,
or any special Mercy should befal us, without
producing some special service to the Name of our
God, upon whose Orders and Errands every such
Dispensation comes. Accordingly, you have com∣manded
me to give you certain Discourses, which
You thought agreeable to your serious purposes;
and These are They. Unto You first I ought to
make the Dedication of them; because it is by
your Desire and Expence that they are to pass un∣der
any further Dedication; they are now there∣fore
no longer Mine but Yours, and to be Enti∣uled,
The Writing of a Wll-willer to Religion, af∣ter
he had been sick, and was Recovered of his Sick∣ness.
These Composures are singled out from o∣ther
Effects of my Daily Studies, not because of
any singular Excellency adorning of them; for

they are but the first, rude, untranscribed Notes
of Sermons uttered in my ordinary Course of
Preaching more than once or twice commonly
in a Week; and strangers abroad in the world
may without the least wrong to me, believe,
That New-England is a Countrey wherein there
are every week in the year delivered more than
Two Hundred Sermons, to be preferred unto the
Best of These. But these are by You pitch't up∣on,
because they are most Expressive of the Re∣solutions,
and Exercises and Experiences, which
your self would choose to recommend unto the
Children of your People; and tho they may
amount to no better than Goat's hair and Rams∣skins,
it was thought they might be accepted
among, Small offers to the Service of the Taberacle.
There was once a great King, to whose Tri∣umphs
while many others made their more no∣ble
Offerings, a poor man in some Transport of
Affection, having nothing else, took up his
palm-full of water from the street, and offering
of That, Received from the generous Conquerour
a Gracious Recompance. Even such a King is our
God! Sr. You have chosen to fetch a Thank-Offering
for Him, from such a Kennel, such a Pud∣dle
(alas, it is no better!) as the Head and
Heart of the greatest Sinner in all the Rising Gene∣ration.
But I can only say, Tis as welcome from
me to You, as I believe, tis from You to Him that

made us Both. It is indeed a peice of Self-Deni∣al
that your Commands have obliged me unto;
for whatever others may think of Appearing in
Print, my own Opinion of it is, that unless a
man be extremely unacquainted both with him∣self,
and with the world, he will be rather A∣fraid
or Asham'd of it, than Taken with it; Let
him that wants Humbling become an Authour,
and he shall have it, if mean Thoughts have not
made him utterly Vnsensible. Nothing but a Re∣spect
unto the Interest of God and of Truth, and
a Resolve to go cheerfully thro' much Contempt,
Obloquy, Detrectation, can make any considerate
Person to Salute mankind in the Quality of a
Writer. But Since it is my Duty to be (like ho∣ly
Bradford) alwayes doing Good, with Tongue,
or Pen, or Purse, I should account it my Honour
if my Pen may be employed for any Advance∣ment
of Practical Godliness, tho' it Cost me ne∣ver
so many Temptations, as it must cost me
not a few.
Accept then, Dear Sir, the Little Book which
You have called for; I may more fairly speak
it than he of old unto his Father, I have done
according as thou badest me; arise, I pray thee,
Sit, and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless
me. The Blessing which once Caleb gave to a
Son-in-law as I do not Want, I need not Ask;
But the Blessing which I am now Craving is,
That of your Prayers on my Behalf, to the Eter∣Eternal

Father, for such Gifts, and Graces, and
Improvements, as tis His Work alone to bestow up∣on
us; and especially that I may be preserved
from the Sins and Snares which Ministers in their
younger years are most endangered by; of which
I have long thought PRIDE (the natural
Effect of Self-Ignorance and Small Experience)
to be the principal. The Prayers of one so Re∣lated,
have an Authoritative Blessing in them;
and that I may further earn them, I take the li∣berty
to mention my own Supplications unto
the God of Heaven for Yourself. May the
Almighty God Long preserve your Life, and
give your Hoary Head to be found in the way of
Righteousness. May You have before you the
Exemple of that Nehemiah who was, A man
come to seek the welfare of the Children of Israel; of
that Cornelius, who was, A Devout man, that
jeared God with all his House, and pray'd to
God alwayes; of that Treasurer, who made
the Bible his perpetual Companion, and Beleeved
with all his Heart: and as You have Oppor∣tunity,
Do Good unto all men. May the Death
(I dare not say, the Loss) of your Ten Chil∣dren,
the last of which going from you made
a Tenth Wave in your Tryals, only promote
your Vnion & Communion with Him who is Better
than Ten sons; and may you enjoy in the House
of God, a Place and a Name better than that of

sons & daughters. May all the Storms besides those
which the Adventures of your younger years up∣on
the Atlantic Ocean, made you betimes acquain∣te
withal, in an unstable & a tempestuous World,
prove so many fresh & fair Gales, to be friend your
late but sure Arrival unto the Rest which remains for
the people of God; Wherein the Anchor of your
Hope, is already Cast, and where to You are
with the more-than-half Furled Sails of Time
hastening apace, after him that said, I desire
to loose Anchor and be with Christ, which is by
far the best of all. Tis by these Prayers that
I would approve my self,
Sir,

