



SIR,
WHen the Sons of the Patriarch, were Tra∣velling into that Country which was the Garden of the World, he ordered them, To take of the best of the Fruits of the Land, and carry a present unto a Great Person there. 'Tis into the Paradise of the European World, that a Little Book is now Travelling over the Atlantic Ocean;
Hei mibi, quod Domino, non licet ire suo! And tho' it carry not of the best of the Fruits of the Land; for it may without wrong to Me, be tokl you, that many parts of the Land afford far bet∣ter; yet the Fruits which it carries, have this Ra∣rity to Recommend them, That they grew in the midst of the barren Winter; but considering with my self, to whom I should make a present of these Fruits, the Character which YOU have among the Reformed Churches of God, a thousand Leagues distant from the Island of your Abode, presently determined this DEDICATION.
Might we in this American Wilderness, more enjoy the Presence, as I hope we cannot but enjoy
the Good Will of persons, like You, Accomplished, we should have a Compensation made us, for all the desperate Hardship, of our Winters; but in the mean time we will Invite you to partake with us in our WINTER MEDITATIONS, when we cannot have you to partake with us in our Winter Difficulties.
Altho' the Lines are fallen to You, in the Plea∣sant Places, of a more Temperate Climate, yet the White Mantle of Snow at some Times covering that Happy Island also, bespeaks for it the old Name of Albion; and if at such Times, the Lessons which then we have here had at our Fingers Ends, may give You as Acceptable an Entertainment as they would a Seasonable One, my Satisfactions will even make me forget the Time of the Year.
A most Excellent Pen, long since did publickly describe You, as a Person, who were by Your Faith In Cacumine Olympi constitutus, supra Ventes et Processas; above the Blasts and Storms of this Un∣quiet World. But. I perswadè my self, that a Treatise produced in the Months, that are full of Natural Blasts and Storms, will have in it nothing Disagreeable to that Serenity of Soul, wherein Your Faith has placed You.
The Day comes on apace, when the World which was once Drowned, propter Ardorem Libidinis, will now be Burned, propter Teporem Charicatis. I have here made for a few of my Friends, an Essay, To fetch out one Cord by another; and albeit it would not be easie for to find All that should Less Need the Admonitions of this
Essay than You, yet, I believe, that Few will Receive it with so much Candor, Goodness, and Kind Resentment.
A Renowned Person once got himself an Immortal Sirname, only by an Invention, to come fairly at a Common Enemy, over and thorough Interposing Snow-drifts. I am here en∣deavouring to help my Neighbours with an In∣vention how they may Encounter their Spiri∣tual Enemies, the Flesh, the World, and the De∣vil, not only In, but even By, the circumstan∣ces, when God, Says to the Snow, Be thou upon upon the Earth. By this Undertaking, I have neither Pursued, nor Deserved, any further Name for my self; and yet I am upon this Occasion ambitious, to Earn and Wear that Name of,

