



May it please your Excellency.
THE Station in which the Hand of the God of Hea∣ven hath disposed His Ma∣jesties Heart to place your Honour, doth so mani∣festly entitle your Lordship to this in∣suing Narrative, that its being thus Pre∣sented to your Excellencies Hand is thereby both Apologized for and Justi∣fied. I believe, had the Writer of it, when he Penned it, had any Knowledge of your Excellency, he would himself have done it, and withal would have amply and publickly Congratulated the
People of New England, on account of their having such a Governour, and your Excellency on account of your be∣ing made Governour over them. For though as to some other things it may possibly be a place to some Persons not so desirable, yet I believe this Character may be justly given of them, that they are the best People under Heaven; there being among them, not only less of o∣pen Profaneness, and less of Lewdness, but also more of the serious Profession, Practise, and Power of Christianity in proportion to their number, then is a∣mong any other People upon the Face of the whole Earth. Not but I doubt, there are many bad Persons among them, and too many distemper'd Humours, per∣haps even among those who are truly good. It would be a wonder, if it should be otherwise; for it hath of late Years on various accounts, and some ve∣ry singular and unusual ones, been a Day of sore Temptation with that whole People. Nevertheless, as I look upon it as a Favour from God to those Plantations
that he hath set your Excellency over them, so I do account it a Favour from God to your Excellency, that he hath committed and trusted in your Hand, so great a part of his peculiar Treasure and precious Jewels, as are among that Peo∣ple. Besides, that on other accounts the Lord Jesus hath more of a visible Inte∣rest in New England, then in any of the outgoings of the English Nation in Ame∣rica. They have at their own Charge not only set up Schools of lower Learning up and down the Country; but have al∣so erected an University, which hath been the happy Nursery of many useful, Learned, and excellently accomplished Persons. And moreover, from them hath the blessed Gospel been Preached to the poor barbarous savage Heathen there, and it hath taken such root among them, that there were lately four and twenty Assemblies in which the Name of the Lord Jesus was constantly called on, and celebrated in their own Lan∣guage. In these things New England outshineth all the Colonies of the Eng∣lish
in those goings down of the Sun. I know your Excellency will Favour and Countenance their University, and also the Propagating of the Gospel among the Natives; for the Interest of Christ in that Part of the Earth is much concerned in them. That the God of the Spirits of all Flesh would abundantly replenish your Excellency with a suitable Spirit for the Service to which he hath called your Lordship, that he would give your Honour a prosperous Voyage thither, and when there, make your Excellency a rich Blessing to that People, and them a rejoycing to your Excellency, is the Prayer of
April 27. 1697.
My Lord,

