



Ever Honoured Sir,
THE Ensuing Sermon, deli∣vered
in a Neighbour-Congre∣gation,
under Afflicting impres∣sions
from the sudden Death of an only
Child, with a bestowal of some Cor∣rection
and Enlargement since upon it;
I know no fitter Person than Your self,
to Present unto; Your Self, I say, Who
have had several Infants carried hence
unto the Father of Spirits, in the Cha∣riot
of the same Distemper that fetched
mine away. Books or Thoughts on
such a Subject as that which is handled
here, have been often offered by me unto

others, that were Mourners; and being
made a Mourner my self, I thought it
a fit occasion for me, to Write as well
as Think more particularly, the things
that may be serviceable to the sorrowful.
Nor have I many Friends in this Evil
World, whose Edification I can pursue
with more Alacrity and Activity, by
such pains as these, than Yours. I have
often felt the Power, and almost as of∣ten
the Sweetness of that perswasion,
My God will never hurt me. Vnto
Your self, that I may recommend the en∣tertainment
of that Comfort and Codial,
under the Death of so many dear Children
as you have been call'd unto the Resignati∣on
of, is the end of my putting these Me∣ditations
into your Hands. I cannot with∣out
some Affection read Gregory Nazi∣anzen,
in his Funeral Oration on the
Death of his Brother, giving this ac∣count
of his Aged and then Living Pa∣rents;
My Father and Mother, (says
he) who are both Lovers of their
Children, but more Lovers of their
Saviour, after they had in spite of all

the Moths, and all the Thieves, and
all the Devils too in this World, laid
up in a better World, a Rich Inheri∣tance
for their Children, they have
now sent one of their Sons before, to
take Possession of it. If your Modesty
and Humility will not permit me to re∣cite
this as a Charecter of, let me how∣ever
propound it as an Employment for
Your self, and your Virtuous Consort.
You cannot use too much care to secure
unto your Children an Inheritance
among the Saints in Light; and for
those which are departed, you may be joy∣fully
assured, That they are made parta∣kers
of that Inheritance. What fur∣ther
possession of this Waste Wild Ame∣rica,
the Lord Iesus may take yet before
the Time of the Restitution of all
things, we cannot Positively say; only
we may probably hope, that he has a
Glorious Interest shortly to be erected
and maintained in these utmost parts
of the Earth. But this I am sure of,
There are some rich plots of Ground in
this Continent, which in the Approach∣ing

Day of God will yield no small
Sheaves of pure Grain unto the Al∣mighty
Raiser of the Dead. This last
Age has produced in these Western In∣dies,
those Dormitories, which are fill'd
with precious Dust, united unto the Son of
God. Part of that Honour able Dust hath
proceeded from your happy Loins; Your
deceased Children are part of the Turf,
with which the Lord Iesus, as it were,
takes a Livery and Seisin of this New
World for himself. Sir, Be encouraged
to go on, abounding in the Work of
the Lord; and go on, to believe it your
Felicity, That you shall go to your
glorifi'd Infants, and they shall not
Return unto you.

