



MY LORD,
THis Discourse was preached in faith, and it is in humility cast at your Lordships feet. It was judg'd by some (in the day that it first saw the light) like Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver. The complexion of your Affairs is (through the admirable goodness of God) far different from what it was in the day that my Soul travailed with these Meditations. A golden Vial of Contempt (from the hand of the Lord) is poured out upon the heads of your Ene∣mies: and the glorious Success that the Lord hath crowned your Army with, may seem to render the en∣suing Exhortation (Cease from man) unseasonable, Tet (my Lord) if it be judged useless to every other purpose, it may serve as a Testimony of my Fidelity and Affection to the Commonwealths Cause.Grotius B: Aub Maurerio Epist, 25. Dulce est a∣micorum fidem ex auxiliis cognoscere, etiam cum jam eorum usum spe celerior victoria intercepit.
But I am bold to hope (the Blessing of the Lord ac∣companying of it) the publication will not be in vain even at this day; For I have heard by the hearing of the ear (and experience it but too much in mine own breast) that the desire of glory is scarcely laid aside (even by good men) till they put off their mortality: Cupido gloriae etiam sapientibus novissima exu∣itur, Strada lib. 2. proloc. Acad. 2. It is easier to con∣quer Armies abroad, then subdue Lust at home. Adeo excellentibus ingeniis,Livius de Fabio. citius defuerit ars ut seipsos regant, quam ut hostem superent. Though the publique Enemy have been made as stubble be∣fore your Sword, yet there are darts in the hand of Satan, which if they be not quenched by an opera∣tive Faith, will strike through the Liver of the State. The dart of Pride glorying in your own coun∣cel or strength, is a deadly dart: If you attribute any thing to man,Haeret lateri lae∣thalis arundo. Virg. you will destroy in one moment the glorious Fabrick which the Lord hath been so long in building, and cemented with so much precious Blood.
It is observed of Timotheus the Athenian, who having done many great Services for the State in his Government, and giving an Accompt thereof to the People (according to their custom) concluding every particular with this Clause, And in this For∣tune had no part: that he never prospered in any thing he took in hand afterward.
My Lord, The face of the ensuing Discourse is set against the Wisdom and Strength of man, as they are (falsly) judged a foundation of Confidence, and if your Lordship cast an eye upon it, you will
there finde the Lords end in the terrible Work that he hath wrought for you in Righteousness, viz. That the Lord alone might be exalted in that day. The Man of the Lords right hand, the Chosen man will prove but a lye if he be leaned on. I desire to render the honor that is due to the precious Instru∣ments that the Lord hath made use of for the car∣rying on of this great Work from the beginning: and mine eye runs down in secret because of the wormwood and gall, the bitterness of some mens spirits against them; Yet I dare not say of any In∣strument (no, nor of all) as Florus of Marius, Actum esset de Repub: nisi illi seculo Marius con∣tingisset, The Commonwealth had been destroyed, had not he or they been raised up. The Speaker, the General, your Lordship, with the rest that are faith∣ful for the Lord in Parliament and Army, are po∣lished Shafts: but the hand that made you such, can do as much for, and by a Stake out of the hedge.
When the Lord had prepared a Gourd to be a shadow over Jonah's head, the Text saith, So Jonah was exceeding glad of the Gourd: and immediately it follows, But God prepared a Worm when the morning arose, and it smote the Gourd that it withered, Jonah 4.6, 7. Your Army is a Choice Gourd, it hath been hitherto (under God) a Sha∣dow from the heat: Confidence in them will breed the Worm, and cause them to wither when the Sun ariseth. But I forget my self too much in tres∣passing upon your Lordships precious time,
In publica commoda peccem
Si longo Sermone morer tua tempora.
Horat. 2. Epist 1.
That the Lord who hath called you to an high Place, would keep your heart in a frame of exalt∣ing him, that he who hath made you eminently faith∣ful to the Commonwealth, in the great Concern∣ments thereof, would instruct you to be faithful to your own Soul in the Concernments of Eternity, is, and shall be the continued prayer of,
MY LORD,

