



Gentlemen,
A Request from One of you, was that which I esteemed a Command, for my Preaching of a Sermon fill'd with Coun∣sils and Comforts to part of the Forces now under your auspicious Conduct. I was too dull to apprehend it either an Impudent or an Improper thing for me to do That, While I found a Minister (and Him none of the oldest neither) charged with a very great Solemnity, Preach the Word, Be in∣stant in season, out of season, WATCH thou in all things, fulfil the Ministry.
That which most wants an excuse is the Printing of it; which is a Service that I have not been so much a Voluntier unto. But the Reasons that pro∣duc'd my Labour in Preaching, which were, my Desire to save the Souls, and mend the Lives, and promote the Edification of those, for whom my Hearts Desire and Prayer to God, is, That they may be Happy; and my Ambition to Encounter and Abolish what I can, the Unchristian Temper of those who take advantage from the other Difficul∣ties and Entanglements of the Country, to refuse do∣ing their part in carrying on the Indian War; the same Reasons have procur'd my Consent to Printing of this Little Sermon.
As I never can endure that mischievous Imperti∣nency, of making the first or chief Exercise after our Hearing, to be upon that Question, How did you like the Sermon to day? So I am not much concer∣ned about the Reception and Entertainment which may be given to this poor Sermon by the Readers of it. My not having more than half a day to prepare it in, made it incapable of being thus written, till since the Delivery of it; and it is now written, as near as well could be to what it was when Spoken: without many more Additions, I suppose, than may somewhat Ballance the Omissions made in the Transcription. The Substaneous and so much Ex∣temporaneous uttering of a Sermon, indeed I am so far from accounting a matter of Applause, that I do esteem it Evil and Sinful, and never free from Blame, unless Gods Providence, and not our Election have made it Unavoidable▪ nor is any thing in the world

more fulsome and nauseous, than for a Preacher to value himself upon such a Crime, as his not spen∣ding much time in Study. I do therefore beg par∣don, that I offer you what is no better Studied; not without expectations, that whether you pardon me, or no, there are those that will make me run the Gant∣lets of their Censures for it; and yet had I never so much leisure for study, I would not, I could not offer you a more Needful Thing than the Matter, how∣ever I might offer you a more Curious thing than the Method of this Discourse. Accept the Sermon as a Little Messenger now sent into the Camp, after my Brethren, with a little parched Corn, to refresh them, against their Facing of the Philistines; and I beseech you, let none of them have their Anger so kindled, as to tell me, Why camest thou down hi∣ther? I know thy Pride; for give me leave to say it, What have I now done? is there not a Cause?
Gentlemen! It is the War of the Lord which you are now Engaged in: and it is the Help of the Lord, that we are at Home affectionately imploring for you. We have made a fair and just purchase of our Country from the Natives here; not encroaching on them after the Spanish Fashion, in any of their Properties and Possessions. Yet they are now mo∣lesting of us in the Enjoyment of what our God (be∣cause our Right) hath made our own; which my Pen cannot mention without Jehoshaphats Ejacula∣tion, We destroy'd them not, but behold how

they Reward us, to come to cast us out of thy Possession, which thou hast given us to inherit. O our God, Wilt thou not Judge them? I be∣lieve, I am perswaded, and Confident, He will. But your Wisdom and Courage is now to be Employ'd in order thereunto; and we all wish you such large mea∣sures of Both, as the matter does require. Yow are some of you, such as in the former War, ventu∣red as far as any men Alive; and the God of Ar∣mies then blessed you, not only with safety, but with a success also, which we should be very unworthy if we should be unthankful for. As you have thereby learn'd what a Treacherous. Barbarous, Dangerous Enemy you have to deal withal; so you are not with∣out a gracious Invitation to Trust in God for your fu∣ture preservation; You may animate your selves with such an Hope as that, The Lord that delive∣red me out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, He will also deliver me out of the Hands of the Philistine. Your for∣mer Deliverances whereof the Honourable Wounds upon some of you are perpetual Monitors and Memori∣als, are a Dish of Leviathans Heads well drest, for your Faith to feed upon. Feed and Fight now with a strong Faith; By That you may wax Valiant in fight, and turn to flight the Armies of the Aliens.
Gentlemen! Your Forces are Happy in you; none of you being that Debauched sort of Captains, which will Drink and Swear and Curse and pro∣fane the Sabbath and at the same time give out that

Perilous Word of Command, Follow your Leader; alas, whither do they Lead them! But I assure my self that you are such as have long since Listed your selves under the Banner of the Lord Iesus Christ; [Let His Banner over you be Love!] and are concerned that all your men may under that Banner oppose the Lusts which war against their Souls 'Tis the design of this Publication that you may be as Happy, in your Forces; and that those For whom and With whom you are every day pouring out your Prayers to the Lord of Hosts, may not want En∣couragements to any of those Combates, in which you would see them all Victorious. You are in the Head of Companies, whom you are generously willing not only to Live, but also to Dy withal; and the chief thing that I am pursuing is, That whether Death join you to them, or part you from them, You may meet them all e're long at the Right-hand of the Lord Jesus Christ. I have had many Fears upon my Spi∣rit, lest the wonderful Deafness to, and Contempt of the Everlasting Gospel found in the Rising Gene∣ration here, may not cause the Lord Iesus to say, That He will not have pleasure in our young men; but that he will take them off, and lay them waste by the plagues of a destructive War. To pre∣vent such Omens, may be motive enough unto many such endeavours as you are here treated with. May These Warnings reach some of them that had slighted too many others heretofore! I have done when I have told you, That I hope you have not all your Forces with you; all the praying people of New-England

have Embarked themselves with you, and assist your present Expedition. It was not at all Displeasing unto His Majesty, our most Gracious and Illustrious King WILLIAM, to hear those words in a Speech made unto Him by one concerned for us, It may be Hum∣bly spoken to Your Majesty, The very Prayers of your poor Subjects in New-England, may do Your Majesty as much Service as an Army of Forty Thousand Men. 'Twill surely be a satisfa∣ction unto you, to think what an Army of Prayers (quasi manu facta, as Tertullian expresses it) is every day besieging and beseeching of Heaven for your Prosperity. We are no ways tainted with a Po∣pish Fancy, of I know not what, Protection to arise from the Bodies of the Dead Saints that are inhum'd among us; though a very Rich Crop of them will be afforded by this little Spot of Ground, at the Re∣surrection of the Just. 'Tis foretold of Antichrist, He shall honour the God of Mahuzim, besides, (for so I read it) the God which his Fathers knew not,: Besides, the Lord Iesus Christ whom they despise, our Neighbours, the French, like other Papists, have their Mahuzim, that is, their Defen∣ders, or Guardians; and those are the Saints De∣parted. Hence even some of the Ancients (or shall I call them by a contrary Name? for, Antiqui∣tas seculi est Juventus mundi) themselves, be∣times became so vain, as to count the Reliques of the Dead Saints, the Towers and Ramparts of the places that Enjoy'd them; and the Dead Bodies of two Apostles in the City made the Poet cry out,

A Facie Hostili duo propugnacula praesunt.
But instead thereof, you have the Prayers of Li∣ving Saints to increase your Protection in the worst of your Adventures. I hope they may make you Forty thousand strong. Our Lively Prayers to the God whom our Fathers knew, will be the best Mahu∣zim or Forces for you; if we do but choose and love and serve the blessed God of our Fathers, and Re∣form the Sins that have provoked Him to Avenge with a Sword the quarrel of his Covenant; which O that our God would enable us unto!
Gentlemen, Tho I am neither a Souldier, nor the Son of a Souldier, yet you will allow me that have heretofore published my concern for Military Persons by the pressing of Military Duties, to continue my Affection thereunto; and to per∣form some part of my Devoirs unto yourselves, by now subscribing my self,

