


THE Devil Calumny (saith the Learned Erasmus) doth so rage against all Men, and all Things, in these Days, that it is not safe setting out any thing unguard∣ed. If Integrity of the End may plead for my Ʋn∣rtaking, I may presume you will not deny it Patronage: Its ief Defign being to free both the Art, and You the Artists, om the erroneous Judgment of Irregular Phancies; and to aken the lazy Drowsiness of Others, that are loath to be row∣d out of Phancy's pleasing Dream: There being a sort of elancholy, and drowsie Scribes, that can phancy nothing but entaurs, and Minotaurs; and the best of Characters by these hancy-Mongers, are condemned as Flat and Stiff, if they are
not set off by some of their monstrous Fictions. But let the delight to guild their baser Mettal, whil'st Gold shines in i Native Lustre. Writing is, by the Learned, acknowledged fo an Art, though, I think, it was never yet proved; and by som (who are reckoned for Masters of Writing) only for a Phancy: judge, these last can never be thought, by well-grounded Artists Masters of that Art they deny the Method of; and especially,  the following Lines be well considered: Wherein is first proved That Writing is an Art; and then shew'd, how far Phancy  to be considered therein. The First, That Writing is an Art I prove thus: The Practice of a certain Method, that's a Art. But Writing is the Practice of a certain Method; Ergo Writing is an Art. Of the Major, or First Proposition, An∣stotle, in his Sixth Book of Ethicks, calls that an Art, which is th Practice of a certain Method. And Velcurio, in his Comme∣tary upon the Universal Philosophy of Aristotle, Lib. I. cap 9. thus defines Art: Ars est habitus animi intellectu a quisitus, constans ex certis Regulis, per Experientiam pr∣batis, & exercitationem Cognitis. And for the Minor,  Assumption, it is clear, the several Forms of Characters, b∣ing only legible, and distinctly known by their certain Ʋse an Form. Also, observe, that every thing is performed by A Natural Power, or Habit. First, By Art, when the Acti prosecutes a certain Method. Secondly, By Natural Pow when it's performed meerly by the Instinct of Nature. Si Luscinia secundum Naturalem potentiam non secundum A∣tem, tamen optime canit. Thirdly, By Habit, when it only by Custom and Exercise. Sic mediocriter periti num∣rant, loquuntur sine Arte adjuti Exercitatione. No M can be Master either of Natural Power, or of Habit: Not Natural Power, for that's the Gift of God alone, as Ovid:
Est Deus in nobis: agitante callescunus illo
Sedibus Aethereis Spiritus ille venit.
Not of Habit different from Art; for every Habit consists ei∣ther in the Mind, or in some Member of the Body: And what is performed by Art, is according to the Intellective Habit of the Mind; as Velcurio: Artis vocabulo utimur pro ha∣bitu animi intellectivo, secundum quem, homo facilius & melius potest aliquid intelligere, agere, & praesertim facere, vel fabricari. And the Members of the Body are incapable of Instruction. Quod nemo didicit nemo docere potest. Now then, it must follow; No Art, no Writing; No Method, no Master. And, Arts being different, it will not be amiss to give you the Definition of the Art of Writing.
Writing is an Art, which, by the Exercise of the Pen, makes Words legible. Now, every Art consists of Two Parts, (viz.) of Method, and Practice: 1. Of Method, in a compendious, and certain way and means of Art, delivered by Rules, Precepts, and Institutions. 2. Of Practice, in an Exercise and Ʋse of the same. The next to be considered, is Phancy; wherein you may observe, That there is nothing in the Ʋnderstanding, ex∣cept it be first in the Sense: for as common Sense judgeth of Shape, from the outward, sensible, material Shape; and Phan∣cy not only conceives the same material Shape, but also feigns and imagines like Idols, or such Shapes of the Intentions. So the Ʋnderstanding receives the perceived Shapes, or devised by Similitude, from Phancy altogether immaterial; and feigns and judges them more significantly and clearly, whether or no they be Good or Bad. As every Letter or Character is first conceived in the Sense, and feign'd and imagin'd, before it e made by the Pen; so the Ʋnderstanding judges of the Cha∣racter, when it's made into an outward material Shape: So hat, from hence may be observed, That Understanding is the Judge of Phancy; and then, consequently, Phancy cannot be Judge of Writing. Phancy has one more Office considerable n the Art of Writing; which is, more deeply to impress up∣n it self the Shapes offered from common Sense, in the Ab∣sence of the Object: as after the viewing of an excellent Let∣ter,
a deep Impression of its Form remains upon the Phancy, in Absence of the Copy.
Now, these Premises being granted, and my self being the First, who not only hath proved Writing to be an Art, (and so, consequently, to consist of Method and Practice) but have also prescribed such a Method, as will regulate every Chara∣cter of each useful Hand: I am not afraid to challenge my Priority, nor to conclude with my Anagram;
Calamus est mihi honos.
