



THe publique Catechizing of Children by way of familiar Dialogue in short and plaine Questions & Answers, though it be scrupled by some, as if it wanted Scripture warrant: yet such as acknow∣ledge children to be members of Christs Kingdome and Church, (as all but Anti∣paedobaptists doe) Mar. 10. 14. they cannot deny, that (being members of Christs house) the Stewards of his house must (in faithfulnesse to Christ, and them) dispence a portion of Spirituall food to them in due season, Luke 12. 42. And evident it is by daily experience

that long Discourses (Sermon-wise) runne over Childrens heads (like water over a Mill, that grinds no meale at all) and passe their capacity. No way of instruction is so proper for them, as that which the Prophet describeth as most suitable to the understanding of children, line upon line, here a little and there a little (Isai 28. 9, 10.) which can no way so conveniently be dispensed, as in briefe and familiar questions and an∣swers put into their mouthes.
But as this way of short and familiar catechizing is the fittest portion of young childrens bread: so there is a larger Doctrine of Catechisme, contai∣ning the whole body of Divinity, which being solidly compacted together, and evidently confirmed from Scripture light, and familiarly delivered to the apprehensions of Gods people, it will be a seasonable portion for children of riper age: not only for their further building up in the faith and obedience of the doctrine of the Gospel: but also for their establishment in the truth, that

they be not pluckt away with the error of the wicked. Hence Luther had his major as well as his minor Catechismus: and Beza his larger confession of the Faith as well as his shorter. Yea the Apostle Paul (whose example was now precedentiall, as being indeed Authen∣ticall and binding to imitation) he com∣mitted to Timothy a platform of sound and wholsome words, in Faith and love: which he commanded and char∣ged him, not onely to hold fast himself, 2 Tim. 1. 13. but likewise to commit the same to faithfull men, who might be able to teach others also, 2 Tim. 2. 2. This charge, as it then was (and alwaies will be) weighty, and seasonable: So never more important and necessary, then in this capritious and fastidious age, when men will nor suffer whol∣some doctrine, but having itching eares and wits, doe turn away their hearts from the truth, and are given up to such empty and windy notions, where∣in it is hard to judge whether Arro∣gancy or ignorance be the more predo∣minent:

arrogance of higher attaine∣ments in Christ, or ignorance of the true Christ, and of life in him.
Now for casting in some helpe, (by the grace of Christ) to prevent the spreading of such a gangrene of vanity and apostacy; and to establish the peo∣ple of God in the truth of the Doctrine which is according to godlinesse: Our reverend brother (according to the precious Talent of wisdom, and found judgement given unto him, &c. out of his faithfull love to the flock of Christ) he hath compiled this ensuing plat∣form of wholsome Doctrine, in way of a larger Catechisme: wherein you shall finde the summe of the Doctrine of Christian Religion, with pithy solidity and orderly dexterity digested toge∣ther; and with clear evidence of truth confirmed from the holy Scriptures: and both with such familiar plainnesse of savory language, as (by the blessing of Christ) the simple-honest-hearted Reader may be informed and establi∣shed in the highest truths, and the most

intelligent may be refreshed and com∣forted, in revising and recounting the treasures of wisdome and knowledge which they have received and embra∣ced, and the grounds upon which they have believed; and all may be led on in the constant profession and practice of the faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
So we commend this ensuing Trea∣tise to the diligent perusall of the Chri∣stian Reader; and both it and thee to the rich blessing of the grace of Christ, and rest

