




Worthy Sir.
IF this ESSAY be pardonable, then I humbly beg your Pardon, and Prayer. If this TRACT be pro∣fitable, then I also beg your Perusal, and Patronage.
Some derive RELIGIO from Relegando; to remove; or sever one from another.
Some, from Relegendo; to read a∣gain; or gather together again.
Some, from Religando; to tye hard; or to bind fast.
Some, from Relinquendo; to leave, and to forsake.

Now, RELIGIO (docenda) non (coercenda) est: There is a certain Thing going up and down in the World called Religion; which (how dressed soever it be) loseth not its Being. HE, who is an infinite Good, as wel as an in∣finitè God; who is infinite in Attribute, as wel as in Essence; and who hath Bowels of Mercy, as wel as Beams of Glory, hath not left it without a Witness (more or less, sooner or later, living or dying) in the Bosome of every Individu∣al; to be (like the Star to the Oriental-Sages) a Directrix unto ISH and ISHAH, in the Pursuit of it, The Reason (saith Basil) why Julian, and all other Apostates slight Religion, is, because they do not understand it. Most (if not all the learned men in the world) have found, that the NOTION of God, and Religion, is the first engra∣ven (in) and the last defaced (out) of the Minds of Men. The Sacred Scrip∣ture proves it's own Divinity; though Divinity (in this last of the latter Days) be a greater Drug than a Romance, Play, or Ballad. There is a Religion of which I may write emphatically: This is the Religion of the BIBLE, or the
Christian-Religion. And that I may leave an Emphasis upon it, this is (the) Religion of Religions.
Sir; of this Religion (thorough the God of Grace, and the Grace of God) am I with your Self. The two grand Ends of this Religion are the Honour of God, together with the (present) and (future) Felicity of Man. Of (this) RELIGION I may write with the greatest Confidence, and Innocency, that the Commonalty should value it as Silver; that the Nobility should prize it as the Gold of Ophir, and of Uphaz; and that Majesty should estimate it a∣bove the Topaz of Ethiopia. Some look upon this Religion as a needless Paren∣thesis of Life; but Christian-Religion is the Interest of a Person, and the Inte∣rest of a Nation. Tullius Hostilius (the third King of the Romans) spake like Himself, when he said, RELIGION doth but effeminate mens minds, and make them unfit for noble Susceptions. But, what the Ark was to Israel, that Religion is to a Nation: And what the Pairadium was to Troy, that Religion is to a Person; Place; People. Chri∣stian Religion (as Justinian, and the Ci∣vilians
truly say) is the general, and u∣niversal LAW of NATIONS. The most barbarous People in the World, have often made Laws to put such to Death as denyed all Religion.
Sir; as God is the best of Beings, so Religion is the best of Blessings. The Earle of Leicester, left this Testimony behind him concerning true Religion, that the sincere Profession of it had in it SWEETS, and JOYS, that COURTS were Strangers to. The Religion of the Gospel periods the Jew∣ish-Religion, and totally subverts all o∣ther Religions. 'Tis pity, that this Re∣ligion (and that in England the Region of Religion; should be now made as a meer ECCHO; and that Enosh (a mi∣serable and mortal Man as the word sig∣nifieth) should speak of it as of the Lace∣demonian-Nightingale, Vox et praeterea Nihil. The Religion of (most) upon our Borders, and of (many) in our Bowels, is this: He that shal assassinate a King (in Zeal to their Religion, and to serve Mother-Church) shal be canonized for a Saint. This Religion may be called Rebellion against Heaven and Earth; against God and Man. A Religion to
be abhorred, and abolished, by all that are not of it; which resolves to propa∣gate it self every where per FAS et NEFAS; by (secret) Plots, and (open) Violence; by Fire and Sword; by Fraud and Force. But the Religion of the Gospel hath this to say for it self above all Religions, that it is no Deb∣tor to the Sword, either in a civil, or in a military way: Neither the Sword of Justice, nor the Sword of War, can lay any Claim to this Religion, as a PRO∣DƲCT of Theirs. All other Reli∣gions (save the Religion of the Bible, which is the Book of Books) as they have been founded by the power of the Sword, so they have fallen by the same power. But, as the Subtilty of Phi∣losophers, and the Eloquency of Ora∣tors, did not assist in the Christian-Religion; so, no Religion (but this Religion) did ever prevail in the World without humane Help: For the Po∣licy of Julian, and the Power of Dio∣clesian, could not put a Period to its Progress.
Sir; GRACE, sometimes runs (as it were) in a Line. The great Doctor of the Gentiles (2 Tim. 1.5.)
writes of an unfeighned Faith; ; (of a Faith not hypocri∣tical, as the word signifieth) that was in Timothy; which dwelt first in his Grand-Mother Lois, and then in his Mother Eunice. Here is a sincere Faith, which is a Grace, and that dwelling in the Grand-Mother. Mo∣ther, and Son. I cannot see so far as your Grand-Father, or Grand-Mo∣ther; but I can look back unto your Honorable FATHER, who (though dead) yet speaketh; and whose Name lives now he is dead. I can al∣so look back unto your honourable MO∣THER, who is a Glory to her Sex; and whose Works praise her in the Gates. Let the Truth of Grace (suc∣cessively) run in your Line, as to every Individual, if it be the Will of that God, who hath no other Patent for his Power, but his Pleasure.
But Sir, lest this Epistle should smel rankly of Prolixity, and render it self tedious to a Person of your Quality and Quantity; of your Birth and Bulk; I shal humbly conclude.
That You, and your honoured Lady (under such a Character for RELIGI∣ON,)
may appear one Spirit, as ye ap∣pear one Flesh: That you two (who are ONE) may live long together; may live wel together; and the longer ye live together, the better together ye may live: That the only Contention between you may be, which shal love (a) CHRIST most; which shal live (upon) a Christ most; and which shal live (unto) a Christ most: That you two (while ye live) may live together as Heirs of the grace of Life, that your prayers may not be hindred, 1 Pet. 3.7. That you two may be like that choice Couple, and precious Pair (Luke 1.6.) Who were both righ∣teous before God; walking in all the Commandments, and Ordinances of the Lord, blamless; that so when your TIMES shal go into ETERNITY, your SOULS also may go into GLORY, is the Cordial Cry of
Honoured Sir,

