



Dear Children,
'TWas Jacob that said to Pha∣raoh,Gen. 33.5. These be the Children which God hath graciously given thy Servant. Oh that I could say, Ye are the Children, which the God of Grace, hath indulged the Grace of God! Grace is a Pearl of that worth and weight, that the whole Universe is not able to weigh against it. The Topaz of Ethiopia is but a Pebble to this Pearl. 'Tis Grace that entitles and entails Glory; Grace is Glory in the bud, Glory is Grace in the flower; Grace and Glory differ not in kind,Non spe∣cie sed gradu. but in degree; Grace is Glory Militant, Glo∣ry is Grace Triumphant. 'Tis the same state in another stature: when Time shall go into Eternity, then Grace shall go into Glory.Ioh. 4.14 The wa∣ter
that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of water, springing up into ever∣lasting life. As it is true, no Sun, no light; no tree, no fruit; It is as true, no Grace, no Glory; no Holi∣ness, no Happiness. If (therefore) a Grave-change do antecede a Grace-change, wo, wo, wo to that soul for an Eternity.
Good Parents, good Tutors, good Masters, and good Guardians, (with whom children are) are a great mercy. 'Tis true, godless Parents may have godly children; Amnon had a Jo∣siah, Abijam had an Asa. But when the Mother is an Hittite, and the Fa∣ther an Amorite, the Daughter sel∣dom proves an Israelite. 'Tis as true, godly Parents may have godless children; Adam had a Cain as well as an Abel; Abraham had an Ishmael as well as an Isaac; Isaac had an Esau as well as a Jacob; Jacob, as he had by (Rachel) an advancing Joseph, so by (Leah) an abasing Simeon. Now,
though Parents cannot entail their personal perfections, or imperfections, upon their posterities; for, as the child cannot go to Hell for his Fathers sin,Eze. 18 Mar. 16.16. but for his own; The soul that sinneth shall die; so the Child cannot go to Heaven by his Fathers Copy; he must believe, or be damned, yet the Children of Believets are nearest a blessing, and their probabilities for mercy are fairest. Such children have great Advantages above others: They have a stock of prayers, and Tears a going: they have the exam∣ple, (of) Parents, and instruction (from) Parents.Gen. 18.19. Did not Abraham read Divinity-Lectures to his Fami∣ly? Was not Monica a fervent and frequent, a cordial and constant Sup∣pliant, at the Throne of grace, for her Son Augustine, and was not the suc∣cess sweet? Train up a Child in the way that he should go, and when he is old, he will not depart from it.Pro. 22.6. Grace, ns (as it were) in a Liue.
When I call to remembrance the un∣feigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois:2 Tim. 1.5. and thy Mother Eunice, and am per∣swaded is in thee also. The Children of Parents (truly gracious and godly) are under promise. I will poure wa∣ter upon him that is thirsty,Isa. 44.3. and Floods upon the dry ground: I will poure my spirit upon thy seed, and my bles∣sing upon thine Offering. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, saith Jehovah,Isa. 59.21. my Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the mouth of thy Seeds Seed, saith Jehovah, from hence∣forth, and for ever. A mans Chil∣dren are himself: the Child is a Fa∣ther multiplied: Those Children, are not lost to their Parents (when they die) who are not lost to God (while they live.)
Children, the Glory of God should
be our first and last: &  this should be the white in our eye, at which we should level every Arrow; this must be propounded as the utmost and ul∣timate end of all our actions; Now, (next unto this glory and your good, together with the good of others) for two Reasons have I prepared this for the Press, that the Press might pre∣pare it for your perusal.
1. Because God was pleased to give a welcom to a little Tract of mine, that was formerly printed, Entituled, Love, to the Life.
2. Because, I have little, if any thing else, to leave you. I am reduced to an astonishing ebb; I have but a very little Meal in my Barrel, and Oyl in my Cruse; but blessed be God for a Chum; for a Drop. He that de∣serves nothing should be content with any thing: Nature is satisfied with a little, Grace with less: Take this (therefore) that hath for its Title, A Paternal Gift for a Paternal Portion.
It was the Charge of a worthy Minister,Mr. Bolton upon a dying bed, to his Children, that they should not dare to meet him at the last day in an un∣regenerate state.Mat. 25.34 41. Oh, that I may not meet you in a Christ-less, and Grace∣less state then! Oh! the thoughts of these words cause me to tremble, lest Christ should say to Parents, Come ye blessed, and to Children, Gbye cur∣sed.
Now,Gal. 3.26. that ye may be all the chil∣dren of God by faith in Christ Iesus; that ye may not have Oil (onely) in your Lamps,Mat. 25.4. but (also) in your Ves∣sels;Rev. 3.1. that ye may not have (onely) a name to live,2 Tim. 3.5 but (also) the nature of life; that ye may not look one way and row another:Gal. 2.20 Having a forme of Godliness, but denying the Power there∣of; that ye may not hang on the out-side of the Ark, but have a life from (Christ) and for (Christ), and (with) Christ;2 Co. 5 15. that the eternal God may be your Refuge, and underneath
you everlasting armes;Iohn 17.24. that the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,Deut. 33.27. may be your God, Guide, and  blessing your souls, and this M unto your souls, humbly, and heartily prays,
Dear Children,

