



MY LORD,
PIety and Policy, Church and State, Prince and
Priest are so nearly and naturally conjoyned in a
mutual Interest, that like to Hippocrates his
Twins, they rejoyce and mourn, flourish and pe∣rish,
live and dye together. Sound Reformed Catholick
Protestants deny justly such a Subordination of the Prince
to the Priest, as by any direct or indirect over-ruling Power,
the Crown and Scepter are under any coactive (directive
we acknowledge) over-ruling Power of the Mitre, and
that Kings by any Church-man or men whatsoever, Pope or
Presbytery, are censurable, dethronable, deposable. Notwith∣standing
it is certain, Religion hath a mighty Influence
upon State, Governour, and Government, that from the
happiness and quiet of Religion issueth forth necessarily the
happiness and quiet of the Civil State. The Heathen did
see this, that Religion rightly ordered is the Base and Bot∣tom,
upon which King and State are founded; Religion
is the cement of all Societies, ; it
bindeth Families together,Eurypides in Bacch. and Cities too, and
is their greatest splendour and ornament;Idem ibi∣dem. .
That one saith
Religion is : and a

Christian to the same purpose, Religio & ti∣mor
Dei,Plutarch. Lactant. de ira Dei. cap. 1. solus est qui custodit hominum
inter se Societatem; Religion and the Fear
of God, and nothing else preserveth all Socie∣ties
amongst men; Religion teacheth Kings how
to rule, and Subjects how to obey, maketh Obedience com∣plete,
universal, entire in all things, not partial in some
things onely; it teacheth our Reverence, Service, and Obe∣dience,
not to be outward with Eye-service,
but sincere,Rom. 13. for Conscience sake, as in the
sight of the Lord.Plutarch. Religion hath a powerful
influence upon Laws; the Heathen who term∣ed
Religion the Cement of all Society, calleth it too,
, the Cement, the Strength, the Vigour,
the Life of all Laws. This made Zoroaster authorise the
Laws by Horomasis, Zamolxis by Vesta, Trismegistus by
Mercurius, Minos by Jupiter, Charondus by Saturnus,
Draco and Solon by Minerva and Apollo, and Numa
Pompilius by Aegeria. Religion is the Nurse
of the Quiet of State and Common-wealth;Xenophon. in Cyropoe∣dia, lib. 8. l. 16. in qualibet. de Episc. & Cleric. C. Theod. Iustinian. Novel. 42. Trismegi∣stus apud Lactanti∣um, l. 2. In∣stit. c. 16.
.
If all living
in one Society and Kingdom were pious and
religious, none would wrong themselves or o∣thers.
Take it more fully from a Christian Em∣perour,
. If
Religion be preserved in Peace, it rights and fa∣cilitates
all the rest of the Government. Religion
is the Walls, Strength, and Safeguard of King
and Kingdom; . Overthrow me Sion,
Civitatem Veritatis & Sanctitatis, and you cannot but

overthrow Ierusalem, Civitatem justitiae: all this is much
more and solely verified of the Christian Religion: a strange
Wonder then it is, that so many Achitophels and Achans
in the World should promise to themselves, undertake to
Christian Kings, by sacrificing the Church, undoing the So∣lemnity
of the Service and Worship of God, destroying
Christ his Ordinances, robbing him of his Patrimony and
Right, to establish King and Kingdom, Peace and Quiet
in the Land. How is it probable or possible, Religion be∣ing
the Base and Bottom upon which all Happiness of
King and Kingdom are grounded and founded, the Cement
and Bond that tieth all together; the Rule of Right ruling,
the Mother of entire and hearty Obedience, the life of Laws,
the use of Quiet, and Strength of all Defence, that it be∣ing
disordered, King, Kingdom, and State can be well,
and enjoy any kind of Happiness?
If neither the Dictate of Nature, nor sacred Truth reveal∣ed
in holy Word should confirm this Truth; the sad and
doleful Experience we find, we feel this day in the Achel∣dama
of these Kingdoms, has laid it open to our Eyes in
Letters of Blood, that he that runneth by may read it.
Consider how since the Sacred Hierarchy, the Order in∣stituted
by Christ for the Government of his Church, consti∣tuted
by the Apostles, and continued against any pre∣valent
Opposition for fifteen Ages and upwards, with∣out
Interruption, hath been opposed, that in some places
it is totally overthrown, in other places disgraced,
weakened, and threatned with Abolition of Root and
Branch, what is the Condition of Sovereignty and Sub∣ject?
You shall find that the Course against it hath been
a preparatory Destructive to Royalty, to the Liberty
and Propriety of the Subject. Many are deceived, and
think it skilleth not what Government be in the Church;
it is enough if the Essentials and Fundamentals of Faith
and Worship be preserved. They are infinitely deceived,

no Society can subsist without Government, and if you destroy
the Government, neither can the sound Faith, nor the true
Worship be long maintained. The Apostle intimateth this,
Col. 11. 5. that he joyed to behold their Order, and the
stedfastness of their Faith in Christ. First, their Order;
then the stedfastness of their Faith in Christ, implying,
where right Order is non maintained, stedfastness of Faith in
Christ cannot continue: A Holy Father to this pur∣pose
saith well,Gr. Naz. Orat. de mod. in disp. ser∣vanda. ,
Order is the Mother and Security of the Being of
all things that have Being. Do we not see that the
Order and Government of the Roman Church
doth this day preserve their Humane Inventions
and unwarrantable Superstions, in such Safety, that, alas,
Truth doth not prevail much upon them are within her Com∣munion?
and on the other part, our Disorder, and not set∣led
Government, maketh us lose too too much, and gain too
too little.
Look a little upon the Parallel, and consider how since E∣piscopacy
hath been infested, and way too much given to a
prevalent Faction, what malign Influence this course hath
had upon Sovereignty, and it will make it appear, that the
Mitre cannot suffer, and the Diadem be secured. It was
maintained, that Episcopacy was none of Christ's Instituti∣on,
it was onely the positive constitution of man. Hath not
Royalty been thus entertained? Do not our Sectaries im∣pudently
maintain, that Kings are the onely Extract of the
People, having their Being and Constitution by derivation
from them? Do they not hold, that howsoever Episcopacy
is a tolerable government of the Church, yet it is mutable,
at the pleasure of the Church? And do they not answerably
aver, that the collective or representative Body of the Com∣munity,
may, upon any real or fancied Exigent, mould them∣selves
into an Aristocracie or Democracie? Others more de∣sperately
have reached higher, and give out, that the Sacred

Hierarchy is Antichristian, against Christ and his Scepter,
(not being able because of their Ignorance to difference be∣twixt
Christian Hierarchy, and Romish Hieromonarchy.)
Have not the Authors and Abettors of these Paradoxes in
Divinity, invented and vented as blasphemous Principles
against the Lord's Anointed in Policy? Do they not magi∣sterially
determine that Kings are not of God's creation, by
authoritative commission, but onely by permission, extort∣ed
by importunity, and way given, that they may be a scourge
to a sinful People? Nor is this all; these late distempers
have produced Creatures not of Christ's making, Ruling El∣ders,
who are adopted to be Ecclesiastical Persons, with e∣qual
Power with men in holy Orders, to decide and deter∣mine
in matters of Faith, Worship, and in the exercise of
the Power of the Keyes; nothing kept from them but liberty
to Preach publickly, to baptize, and to consecrate the blessed
Eucharist. Answerable to this, find we not, that they have
erected a coordinate, a coequal, a corrival Power with
Sovereignty, and have made Regnum in regno, two Sove∣reigns,
a thing incompatible with Supremacy and Monar∣chy?
the persecution of Episcopacy has been so hot and cru∣el,
that I dare say, look upon all Persecutions recorded in
Ecclesiastical Story, none can parallel this, if ye consider it as
it is cloathed with all its circumstances, and attended with
its consequents; Episcopacy, after the most exact and solli∣cit
Tryal, is onely the Crime, except you will add the So∣lemnity
of the Publick Worship intended and attempted, to
vindicate God's Service from prophaneness and contempt,
and to restore it to its ancient true beauty, to the shame of the
Roman Church. Men innocent, men well deserving of the
Church and Kingdom, have been cast out, their Estates seiz∣ed,
their Houses rifled and plundered, their Blood thirsted
after, their poor Wives forced to fly, some into mountains and
wilderness, some by Sea, some one way, some another; their
poor Children forced to starve, or beg at best; O barbarous

and inhumane Cruelty, more beseeming Cannibals than
Christians! When the Lord's Prophets were hurt and
wronged, was the Lord's Anointed not touched? Tell it
not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askalon,
lest the Daughters of the Philistims rejoyce, lest the
Daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. The best of
Kings, in whom malice it self, how quick-sighted soever,
cannot find any thing blame-worthy, (except it be a Crime
to be too good and transcendently clement) hath been forced
to flie from his Palaces, could not find Safety in that Ci∣ty,
enlightened and enriched by his royal Presence, to the
Admiration and Envy of the whole World. His royal
Consort necessitated, for personal Security, and in a pru∣dential
way to provide for strengthening her Lord, the best
of Husbands, to flie beyond Seas. That Royal Fami∣ly,
those Olive-branches, the Pledges and Hopes of our
continuing Peace, divided one from another, and to this
day remaining so. His Revenues, his Casualties seized
by those have sent out Armies and Arms against him. His
Forts, his strong Holds taken from him, his Royal Navy
employed to destroy him, keep all Encouragement of Allies
from him, and to divorce personally (if they could) those
royal Personages in whom we are most happy, if we had
Eyes to see it whom in Heart and Affection the Devil and
his Malice cannot divide, notwithstanding it hath been
shrewdly endeavoured. More of this kind might be added,
but of purpose I forbear it.
If we will consider what private men have gained,
since God and Religion have been wronged, we will
find we have made an unhappy Choice, a miserable
Change. No man hath Protection or Direction by Law, no
known Law hath place, we are all oppressed and tyranni∣cally
over-ruled by an arbitrary Power, placed in a wrong
hand; all Religions (if I may call Sects so) are tolerated,
except the true Catholick Reformed Religion; and all

Heresies buried long ago in Hell, are revived, in number
like to be more, and in their nature more ugly than all re∣corded
by Epiphanius and St. Austin; our Sectaries agree∣ing
only in the destructive part, to make away Truth and
the true Government, to spoil Churches, rob Christ of
his Patrimony, abrogate the Solemnity of the Worship, de∣stroy
ancient Christian Monuments: but in the positive not
one agreeing with another; Ephraim smiting Manasseh,
and Manasseh, Ephraim, and both of them against Judah.
Hath any now the Liberty of his Person? are not the best
of Subjects, the best of God's Servants kept in Prisons,
like to Jeremie's Dungeon? What Property is reserved?
Since Christ's Patrimony hath been despoiled, who can say,
This I have? They command what portion, what quota
they will, and in the end he will be a Malignant at Pleasure,
that hath any thing to maintain this Rebellion. If S. Au∣stin
were living now, he might well say, Quod non capit
Christus, hoc rapit fiscus. What stately Houses have
been spoiled? What rich and princely Furniture hath been
destroyed? What Blood of Nobles and generous Gentry
hath been shed? More in this uncivil Rebellion, in this
short time, than in many years in long continuing Wars in
many Countries beyond Seas: this Loss cannot be valued,
it infinitely surpasses all other Losses besides. And yet give
me leave to say it, if we will look upon the Pressures and
Sufferings of the Subject, the only Effects we feel of this
glorious so much talked of Reformation, they will transcend
highly all Grievances complained of in the successive Reigns
of seven Sovereigns. And the greatest of all Iudgments have
fallen, upon us, that some sort with the Prophet Hosea, We
have no King, because we feared not the Lord, what then
should a King do to us? They have spoken words, swear∣ing
falsely in making a Covenant: thus Judgment
springeth up as Hemlock in the Furrows of the Field.
Hos. 10. 3. 4. A Redress of these Disorders, a Remedy

of these Evils, we need not to expect, till we turn to God
by Repentance, and Moses and Aaron be again rightly
seated in their Power, their Place.
My Lord, I have put Pen to Paper to right our gracious
Sovereign, to undeceive his Subjects, making it appear, that
his Right is independent from man, solely dependent from
God: that Monarchy is the most countenanced, the most
authorised Spece of Government by Almighty God; that
the conveyance of this Right is not by Trust from the People;
and have cleared, what are Jura Majestatis, the Preroga∣tives
inherent in the Crown, incommunicable to the Subject;
and how Sacred his Person and Charge is, that they cannot
be opposed, are not to be resisted. A task it is above my
strength. In the Imperial Law it is a crime mixt with Sa∣crilege,
to argue the Right and Power of the King; nor was
it allowed to every vulgar and ordinary Pencil to draw the
Picture of Alexander the Great: and we see what advan∣tage
the Seditious and Factious have made of the escapes of
some Pens: Notwithstanding I am necessitated to meddle with
it, with no less constraining and unavoidable necessity, than
that made the young dumb Prince speak. All men are tied
to the maintenance of Sovereign Right, none amongst men
more than Church-men; it is a necessary truth, as aptly, plen∣tifully,
and purposely set forth in Gods Word as any else,
Prince and Priest were once joyned in one Person, and are so
tied that Alterius
Altera poscit opem res, & conspirat amicè.
We find onely three Office-bearers anointed by God, King,
Priest, and Prophet; who then more tied to maintain the
Lord's Anointed and his Right than Priests and Pro∣phets?
God hath honoured Kings to be the Nurse-fathers
of his Church; nor when we reflect upon by-gone Story,
find  that ever the Church had either Beauty, Plenty, or
Progress, but under Monarchy; and view this day the con∣dition

of the Christian Church under any other Government
than Monarchy, and we will find her condition but sorry
and poor. It is the onely Government which is most connte∣nanced
and magnified in Holy Writ. And I dare to say,
that none or all of them who ever writ purposely of Poli∣ticks,
or in an Historical way laid down Political Maxims,
whether it be Plato in his fancied Republick, or Aristotle
in his Politicks, or Cicero, or Livie, or Dionysius Halicar∣nasseus,
or Cornelius Tacitus, or who besides, either by
Art or Story, is most renowned this way, have given us so
fully, so apertly, the Right of Monarchy, the true prescript
of Government, and perfect Rule of Obedience to the Subject.
The Ancient Fathers and Martyrs, whilst Emperours were
Heathenish and Persecutors, have delivered this Doctrine,
pleaded the Sacred Royal Prerogative of Emperours, and
with other Truths have sealed this with their Blood. Who
can deny then, but it beseemeth a Divine most of all men
to maintain or write of this subject? A wonder then it is
that some Smatterers in Divinity writing in this subject, do
borrow Principles from old Poetical Fables and Toyes, make
premises, and infer Conclusions, not onely destructive of Mo∣narchy,
but also contradictory to that Truth Scripture hath
revealed. Like to them are our Pettifoggers in the Law,
(I reverence Learned Iureconsults, who deserved well in
this subject) who cry out, what have Church-men to do
to dispute the King's Right? that belongeth to us, who are
versed in the Laws of the Kingdom, and know what Pow∣er
the Law alloweth the King, what not; these Ignaroes,
who are better versed in the Statutes and Acts of Parlia∣ment,
than in the Acts of Christ and his Apostles, may even
as well go about not to authorize the Book of God, except
it be warranted by their Law, as to aver that the King
hath nothing immediately from God, nor no Sacred Right
but what He hath by Law. More learned Lawyers than
they can be, as Bodin, Barclay, and others, have treated of

this matter, and made as good Vse of Scripture and Holy
Fathers writing, as any other Warrant besides.
It is more than evident then, that no men are more obli∣ged,
no men may be more fitted to maintain the Royal Pre∣rogative
of Kings than Divines. But Officiis quis idoneus
istis? I confess my weakness, my insufficiency, and am for∣ced
to have recourse to a Patron worthy of it, and able to
maintain it. I could hit upon no subject more worthy of so
great a Personage as you are, nor a Patron so worthy, so en∣abled
to maintain it and its poor Author, as your Lordship.
Nobles are amongst Subjects the first-born; the ennobled
amongst the Romans had a badge of a Moon or
Crescent,Plutarch. in Probl. Prob. 72. in Plutarch's judgment not so much to
signifie the instability or frailty of their Place
and Honour, as to put them in mind to be obe∣dient
and loyal to their Prince, the Fountain of their high
Dignity, as the Sun is to the Moon; for your high Nobili∣ty
by a long continued race transmitted to you from most
noble Ancestours, to write or recite it, were as to light a
candle to add light to the Sun in his strength, in his verti∣cal
point, and that transmitted so from them, and derived
to you, that in that whole Stem, the Root and all Branches,
who inherited the Honour, not any tainted with Disloyalty.
Nay; their Honour is higher, some of them have had the
honour to dye in the highest Bed of Honour, to lose their
Lives and great State and Honour for Loyalty to Royalty
This is nothing yet but , the splendour of Birth, the
glory due to those of whom you are descended.
Nam genus & Proavos, & quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco.
True Nobility, besides these, requireth not onely the inhe∣ritance
of Riches, (for that is but Antiquae & inveteratae
Divitiae, as Athlary writ to the Senate of Rome)
with the inheritance of Honour,Cassiod. l. 8. Var. c. 19. for that it is a
Body empty of a living Soul; but it is to inhe∣rit

the Noble Honour of Noble and Generous Ancestours.
Nobile (saith Aristotle) id est quod ex bo∣no
genere prodit,1 de nat. anim. c. 1. generosum quod à sua na∣tura
non degeneravit. Herein you all meet,
for Honour and Virtue do contest for the Excellency, but
Virtue truly hath the Eminency. In you is verified that of
the Lyrick Poet.
Fortes creantur fortibus & bonis:
Est in juvencis, est in equis Patrum
Virtus; nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant aquilae columbam.
Malice it self, how ingeniously witty soever, cannot preju∣dice
you in this, whose Piety is admirable, whose Wisdom
and Prudence is above Age, above the ordinary and all your
Equals, a master of your Passions, and so experienced in
matters of State and Government, that it is a wonder to
them who know you, and incredible to those that have not
been eye and ear witnesses. Your Heroical magnanimity
speaketh it self in your Heroick Martial Acts, admired not
onely by excellent Commanders, not onely for Courage, but
for Prudence and rare Government; by which you gained so
much, that the valiant Annibals and Scipioes there would
rather sacrifice themselves, than expose You to Danger; and
yet you would not act the General, but by doing the vali∣ant
Acts, contemning Dangers and Death, beseeming in∣feriour
Officers, but worthy of the greatest Caesar. Who
can consider aright that more than admirable piece of
Prudence in that Treaty of Cessation in such a time and
such a case, where You were so assaulted with two of
the worst extremes of Opinions, enraged both of them
with the same degree of madness, but must say that is
true Cicero said de nat. deor. Nullus unquam magnus
vir fuit sine afflatu divino: The intelligent and bet∣ter
sort must confess, that without a great mercy to us

and more than ordinary Favour from God, this could not
have been effected: The better sort are confident, the happy
Effects of that Work will make many Souls live, and Your
Honour live for ever. These are the Load-stones of all the
Honour, the Love and Zeal which have necessitated me to
take recourse to Your Honour's Patrocine, that what is de∣ficient
in me, and this poor trifling Treatise, may be com∣pensed
by that eminent Worth and Perfection is in You. I
do confess, I have so many ties by personal Favours received
above my desert, that I were the ingratest of Christians if
I did not acknowledge it; yet give me leave to speak truth,
notwithstanding all these Endowments, if I had not seen,
and were not assured, that in none in this Age there can be
seen more true discreet Zeal to Christ's Church, and Loyal∣ty
to Your Master, our most gracious King, I had never presu∣med
to go this way. I see it, even there and then, where and
when Satan had erected his Throne, and Antipas, God and
the King's faithful Servant did fuffer.
My Lord, God hath sent You to us for a comfort in these
worst of Christian times; who knoweth but at this time
You are set at the Helm to help the Lord, right his Anoint∣ed,
and to save a poor Church threatned with ruine? Go
on in Your Piety and Devotion, with these Heroical En∣dowments
God hath enabled You, and be assured God will
heap Honour on you and your Noble Family for ever, and
reward you with an uncorrupt, undefiled, and Eternal
Crown of Glory: Which shall be the fervent and constant
Prayers of

