



Madam,
WHere great Debts are con∣tracted by insolvent persons it is usual to compound for a little ra∣ther then lose the whole. The many great and undeserved favours you have conferred upon me have so far outdone, not only my power to merit, but my capacity to requite, that un∣less your Honour will admit me to some small composition, and so to pay as I am able by a grateful acknow∣ledgment, I must always be in arrea∣rage to your Nobleness, being no other way solvent then by hearty resentment.
I know Madam, it is no pleasure

to you to hear of your name from the house-top, who have so carefully kept secret the works of your Right hand from the knowledge of your Left. Let them therefore stand recorded in the Prayers of your Favourites, and more durably in the notices of God until that day comes that shall both reveal them, and reward them. For the time of divulging such matters to the world (as Mr. Ambrose said in an Epistle to your Honourable Grand∣father) will be best at the end of it, and best done by him who shall ren∣der to every one according to his works.Mat. 16.27.
In the mean time being importu∣ned to make this discourse publick, to whom should I Dedicate it but to your Honour? That you may not altogether miscarry in the purchase, who have bid so high for the unprofi∣table respects of one made very in∣considerable

by the present complexion of times and providences, but much more by his own personal unworthy∣ness.
The thing, Madam, which this treatise hath in design is to vindicate and promote (if God will speed it to that purpose) Obedience to the great Redeemer of the world in all, espe∣cially in young ones, in a true and timely subjection to his Yoke. It being the great and open sin of the present day, to profess him in word, but in works to deny him, by such as the Holy Ghost brands with the infamous Character of abo∣minable, disobedient,Tit. 1.16. and to every good work void of judg∣ment. Never was that of the Pro∣phet more verified then by the children of this Generation,Isa. 53.3. He is despised and rejected of men. Not only by Jews, Heathens and Maho∣metans,

but (which is more sad) even by Christians (if they deserve that name) almost of all sorts. It is not only the sin of the poor, that they are foolish,Jer. 5.4. and have not known the way of the Lord; but of the great men also, who though they have known the judgment of their God, yet they have al∣together broken the Yoke, and burst the bonds. The wise slight Religion as a foolish thing; The Nobles of the Earth think them∣selves degraded by stouping to this yoke: The Rich men that should count all things dung for Christ,il. 3.8. do prefer the dung and dross of the earth before this Pearl of price. The Voluptuary will not be per∣swaded to leave his swinish delights for all the pleasures of Godliness. Oh how few are the sincere followers of the Blessed Jesus! This is, and

ought to be for a lamentation.
Our lot is cast in a very brut∣ish age, wherein reason is buryed in sense, judgment extinguished in ap∣petite, and wickedness reigns with re∣putation; He who dares not be pro∣fane is a coward, and that is but a dull soul that cannt burlesque the sa∣cred Scripture, and make a jest in Bible. Or if he skills not to direct the poysonous arrow of a spiteful tongue at the Religion and Worship of Jesus Christ he is no ingenuous Ar∣cher. So that our times are much of the complexion of those which Sene∣ca unmasking the face of their cor∣rupt State, doth thus decypher, The news of Rome take thus, the Walls are ruined, the Temples not visited, the Priests are fled, the Treasuries robbed, old men are dead, young men are mad, Vices are Lords over all; The

Dictator faults the Consul; the Consul chides the Censor, the Cen∣sor blames the Proetor, and be∣cause no man will acknowledge himself in fault, we have no hope of better times.
Madam, what an honour is it to you, when the days are thus evil, to be devoted in heart and soul to Je∣sus Christ! It is recorded to the ever∣lasting renown of Josiah, that good Prince,2 Chron. 34, 3. that while he was young he began to seek after the God of his Father. So did your Honour. Goodness is no diminution to great∣ness. On the other hand it is charg∣ed as a reproach upon the Nobles of Judah,Nehem. 3.. That they put not their necks to the work of the Lord. Greatness gives no immunity from service. Nay the higher God hath exalted you, the more you become a Debtor to his goodness. The God

in whose hand thy breath is,Dan. 5.23. and whose are all thy ways hast thou not glorified, was a sad charge brought against one greater then your Honour. It is the stand∣ing law of Heaven,Luk. 12.48. To whom∣soever much is given, of them much shall be required. Where your Honour allows the greatest wa∣ges, there you expect the greatest fi∣delity and service; and so doth the great God.
Wherefore Madam, let holi∣ness to the Lord be written upon all your Honour, and all your enjoy∣ments, whatever is intrusted with you ought to be devoted to him, or it can never be rightly injoyed, nor duly improved. God hath honoured you to be the fruitful mo∣ther of hopeful children, but remem∣ber Madam, that as they derive ho∣nour from your loyns in regard of

your Station in this world, so they derive guilt and pollution upon ano∣ther account. And what is world∣ly honour stained with a damning guilt? which makes them children of wrath even as others.Eph. 2.3.
There is a nobility that is Divine, and of a Heavenly Original, which hath Religion for the Root, and God for the top of the Kin. In comparison of which all other No∣bility is but an empty shadow, and all worldly grandure but as those ap∣ples that grow upon the banks of the dead Sea, which under a tempting outside contain nought but dust. This honour derives not from the first birth, but the second, and is peculiar to them only who are born not of blood,Joh. 1.13. nor of the will of the Flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Would your Ho∣nour have those pleasant branches

thus inobled? I know it is the matter of your Prayers, and let me beg you to joyn thereunto your utmost indea∣vours by a strict and pious educati∣on; the common want of which hath stained the present age with as de∣bauched a Nobility and Gentry as ever any time brought forth. And Madam, if to all this you shall add the winning motive of your own ex∣ample, so walking in all the Precepts of Christ, and in all the virtues of the Holy Spirit, that they may be won into the ways of God by the beauty of your feet, O what an ho∣nour and rejoycing would this be to you in the near approaching day of Christ Jesus. How many children have been brought into love with the ways of God by the holy example of Godly Parents. And many more have perished by the contrary, who are now cursing the Parents that be∣gat

them, and the loyns that brought them forth.
I no way doubt of your Honours ready acceptance of this Present, how mean soever it be; Seeing it is a great bravery of mind as well to ac∣cept little kindnesses (from them that have no better within their reach) as to confer great ones; For as by the latter you oblige love, so by the former you incourage duty. Thus the full Sea stocks Clouds richly, while they pay again but by drops. We have a pattern of it in God him∣self, who as he gives the greatest Boons, so he doth not disdain the least returns, though they are made in Mites.Luk. 21.2, 3. Goats hair and Rams skins are as acceptable an Offering from them that were no better provi∣ded, for the building the Taberna∣cle,Exod. 23.4, 5. as Purple and Scarlet, so as it came from a willing heart.
Madam, it is for the compleat∣ing the Temple of God in your soul that this Offering is made; and though it is neither Purple nor Scarlet yet, such as it is, it comes from as willing a mind as ever Isra∣elite offered, from him that brought Gold and Silver, to him that brought Goats hair and Rams skins. And if your Honour be dispositioned like my Master you will accept of payment in Mites, where it is the utmost and the All that is within the reach of a short arm. But though it cannot reach so far as I would, Prayer can; For how inca∣pable soever we are of other offices of respect and gratitude, yet in Prayers and good wishes we stand next to immensity and infinite∣ness. And it is nothing less then the great things of both worlds sum∣med up in the blessed injoyment of God





himself, here much, and hereafter much more, that can be an answer to his Prayers who without ceasing bows the knee to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ for this Blessing for you Madam, and your Ho∣nourable and Honoured Relations, as becomes
Stepney Novemb. 15th. 1682.
Madam, 
