




Much honoured and well-beloved in our Lord,
THe high Opinion he hath of you
(who desired me to dedicate
these Sermons to you) com∣mands
me to make good my compellati∣on,
by bearing a particular respect to
that worth, and love for those Graces
and Profession in you, which were suffi∣cient
to determine the Publisher of these
Sermons to the choice of you to be Coun∣tenancers
of them, now printed and ex∣posed
to publick View, which you first
heard from your own privater Pulpit.
The Publisher makes the Church somewhat




a debtor, but Mayfield very much a
debtor to him for his care of your spi∣ritual
profit and advantage: to which
end these Discourses (delivered in such
plainness (as becomes the truth) and
with such clearness as may capacitate any
amongst you to read, understand, and
gain by them) are set before you. That
of your faithful Monitor, now dead,
might be said (as is in somewhat diffe∣rent
sense said of Abel,) Being dead, he
yet speaketh, Instruction unfolding that
which many would else not discern, Cau∣tion,
that you avoid what he knew was
dangerous and might prove deadly,
And Exhortation, perswading you to
weighty instances of obedience and con∣stancy.
If it be, as doubtless it is, a
Truth that the Legal and Mosaick Rites
were the Gospel vailed, this piece de∣serveth
your serious perusal; for it takes
the vail from off the face of Moses, and
doth with plainness and brevity explicate
many of those divine Riddles and hea∣venly
Hieroglyphicks, on whose out-side
too many of the Jews (like unexperien∣ced
Children gazing on Pictures,) deter∣min'd
their eye inapprehensive of the
import of them. I would give you some




account of the Subjects handled in this
ensuing Treatise, but it is publisht that
your reading might inform you. Nor will
I doubt your readiness to view that with
your eye, which, I believe, much pleased
your ear. And I hope your desires to pro∣fit
by it, wish my Epistle brief, that you
may be taken up with the seasonableness
and pertinency of the Subject. A piece
which, I assure you, doth very particular∣ly
express the temper of its Author, who
could have walked abroad (as easily as
most) in a gorgeous dress of rich learn∣ing;
but he was as well versed in this part
of self-denial, and resolved to practice it,
as he was vers'd in Authors, and knew
how to use them. He preacht it to you,
that you might understand it, and his
Son-in-law hath taken care it should be
printed, that you might read and re∣member
it. I wish that, among the
many eagerly snatcht occasions men take
to publish their own Conceptions More
would take this course, and print, for the
use of particular places; some of the
choice and profitable Sermons of their
own Ministers, as soon as might be after
their death, when, in all likelihood, the
mourning remembrance of their dead




Minister will enhance the value of his
living Sermons, whilst the sense of their
loss, in the death of his person, would
increase the care (of some at least) that
they lose not his Counsels, Exhortations,
Reproofs and Comforts which (by this
means) do survive him. I know many
are so obstinate in their Vnbelief, and so
unperswadable to Obedience, they will
not promise to believe or obey, unless one
arose from the dead to witness to the Pro∣mises,
and to require their Obedience.
God shew them mercy, opening their
blind eyes, and perswading their hard
hearts! If there be any such among your
Inhabitants of Mayfield (and alas! in
so great a Parish there are too too many,)
Behold here is that which of all courses
seemeth to come nearest to such a conde∣scension.
Though your Minister be not
sent from the dead, yet providence
sends (as it were) from his Grave: And
if you will not obey Commands, nor
follow Counsels, nor be warned by Cauti∣ons
in his writings, you would not be
perswaded if he came from the dead.
But of you in particular I have no jea∣lousie,
to whom this Epistle and the
Book is dedicated. Instead of perswa∣ding




you to read it (of which I am
perswaded you are very forward of your
selves) I shall adventure (and, I hope,
with no more boldness than success) to
move you to bestow many of these Books
among your poorer Neighbours, who
will gladly read Mr. Maynard's Book,
when perhaps they have as little mind to
read other mens Works as they have
knowledge of their persons. Promote
knowledge of Christ, and saving Grace,
by the means which are most likely to do
it; hereby you shall (through the blessing
of the Lord) turn many to righteousness,
and shine as the brightness of the Firma∣ment
for ever, which is that great thing
that (with hope of success) is for you
all, and for the rest of the Church∣of
God, the prayer of
From my Study in
the house of the
Right Honourable
the Countess of
Manchester, at Walt∣ham-Abbey,
April 3.
1674.

