




Beloved,
WHat the meaning of that provi∣dence was that called me to the occupation of my Talent amongst you this Summer, will be best read and understood by the effects of it upon your own souls: The kindly increase of grace and ho∣liness in heart and life, can onely prove it to have been in mercy: where this is not the fruit of the word, there it becomes a judge∣ment. The word travels with life or death, salvation or damnation, & bringeth forth one or other in every soul that hears it; I would not for a world (were it in my power to nake the choice) that my labours, which were meant & designed for the promotion of your immortal souls, to the glory of the other World, in a present persuance of the things of your peace, should be found to have been a Ministration of Death and Condemnation, in the great day of Iesus Christ. Yet this (the Lord knoweth) is the too common effect of the most plain and pow∣erful Ezek. 47.11.Preaching of the Gospel, The waters of the Sanctuary, do not always heal where they come, for there are mirie and marish places that shall be given to salt.  The same word () is elsewhere in Scripture rendered barrenness,Ps 107.34, he turneth a faithful land () into barrenness so that the judgement denounced upon these miry and marish places, is that the curse of barren∣ness shall rest upon them, not∣withstanding the waters of the Sanctuary over-flow them.
Jude. 12.It is sad but certain, that the Gospel inflicteth a death of its own as well as the Law; or else how are those trees in Jude, said to be  twice dead, plucked up by the roots. Yea that which in it self is the greatest mercy, through the interposition Rom. 5.8 of mens lusts, and the efficacy of this cursed sin of unbelief, tur∣neth to the greatest judgement, as the richest and most generous Wine makes the sharpest Vine∣gar. Our Lord Christ himself, the choicest mercy that the bow∣els of a God could bless a perish∣ing World withal,Ioh. 3.16. whose com∣ing (himself bearing Witness) was on no less errand then that of eternal life and blessedness to the lost and cursed sons of Adam;Ioh. 10.10 Yet to how many was he  a stone of stumbling,Isa. 8 14. and a rock of offence; Yea, a gin and a snare, and that to both the houses of Israel, the onely profes∣sing people of God at that day, in the World. And is he not a stone of stumbling in the Mini∣stry of the Gospel to many pro∣fessors to this very day, upon which they fall and are broken? When he saith,Mat. 11.6 blessed is he who∣soever shall not be offended in me, he doth therein plainly suppose that both in his person and Doctrine the generality of men would be offended in him.
Not that this is the design of Christ and the Gospel, but it comes so to pass through the cor∣ruptions of the hearts of men whereby they make light of Christ, and stand out against that life and grace which the Lord Iesus by his blood so dearly purchased, and is by the Preach∣ing of the Gospel so freely ten∣dered; the wilful refusal whereof, will as surely double our damna∣tion, as the acceptance thereof will secure our eternal Salva∣tion.

Mat. 11.23.Oh consider it is a thing of the most serious concernment in the World, how we carry our selves under the Gospel, and with what dispositions and affections of heart and soul, seasons of grace are entertained; this being taken into the consideration to make it weight, that we are the nearer to heaven or to hell, to salvation or damnation, by every ordinance we sit under: boast not therefore of Priviledges injoyed with neg∣lect of the important duties there∣by required. Remember Caper∣naums case and tremble; as many go to Heaven by the very gates of Hell, so more go to Hell by the gates of Heaven, in that the num∣ber of them that profess Christ, is greater then the number of them that truely close with Christ.

Beloved, I know the Preach∣ing of the Gospel hath proselyted many of you into a profession; but I fear that but few of you are brought by it to a true close with the Lord Christ for Salvation, (I beseech you bear with my jea∣lousie, for it is the fruit of a ten∣der love to your precious souls) most men are good Christians in the verdict of their own opinion, but you know the Law alloweth no man to be a witness in his own case, because their affection usual∣ally out-acteth conscience, and self-love baulketh truth for its own interest.
The heart of man is the great∣est impostor and cheat in the World, God himself adjusts it, Supplante tivum cor prae omui Jeremy 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things. Some of the deceits whereof you will find
discovered in this treatise, which sheweth you that every grace hath its counterfeit, and that the highest profession may be where true conversion is not.
Ezek. 13.22.Mat. 12.20.The design hereof is not to break the bruised reed, nor to quench the smoking flax, not to dis∣courage the weakest beleiver, but to awaken formal professors. I would not sad the heart of any, whom God would not have made sad, though I know it is hard to rip up the dangerous estate and con∣dition of a professing Hypocrite, but that the weak Christian will think himself concerned in the discovery. And therefore as I Preached a Sermon on sincerity, among you, for the support and encouragement of such, at the end of this: so I did purpose to have Printed it with this, but who can be Master of his own purposes, that is (as I am) under such daily variety of providences; your kindly acceptation of this, will make me a debter for that.
The dedication hereof belongs to you on a double account, for as it had not been Preached, but that love to your souls caused it, so it had much less been Printed but that your importunate desire procured it: and therefore what entertainment soever it findeth in the World, yet I hope I may ex∣pect you will welcome it, especi∣ally considering it was born under your roof, and therefore hopes to find favour in your eyes, and room in your hearts.
Accept it I beseech you, as a publique acknowledgement of
the ingagements which your great and (I think I may say) unpa∣ralleled respects have laid me un∣der, which I can no way compen∣sate, but by my prayers, and if you will take them for satisfaction I do promise to be your remem∣brancer at the throne of grace, whilst I am

