



Dearly Beloved,
TO you of Right belongs the Dedication of the en∣suing Narrative, partly by reason of your quondam interest in him who is the subject of it, and partly by reason of your present interest in him who is the Compiler and Publisher of it. The Apostle tells the Corinthians,1 Cor. 3.22. That Paul, Apollo, and Cephas, were theirs; and they that labour, or have laboured amongst you in the Word and Doctrine may be said as truly to be yours. When you read what is here written of the memorable, and praise-worthy actions of your Reverend Pastor now deceased, you
will be ready to say, as she did of Solo∣mon, That the one half is not told you, for you have fully known (as he tells Timothy) his doctrine, manner of life, purpose,2 Tim. 3.10. faith, long-suffering, charity, patience. However, enough is here said to set the world, and you, a Copy to write after. And oh! that you may not only know,, &c. Tu ve∣ro haes exemplar ad quod te formes, actiones omnes, me∣us quibus, praesens fuisu. Grot. in lcum. but diligently follow (as the Apostles words may be construed) his doctrine and manner of living. Be ye followers of him as he was of Christ. Brethren, my hearts de∣sire, and earnest prayer to God for you all, is, that you may be saved; that he,2 Cor 11.2, 3. and I, who have endeavoured to espouse you to Christ, may present you as a chaste virgin unto him; but I fear least by any means as the Serpent be∣guiled Eve through his subtilty▪ so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. I have somewhat against some of you, but I wont reveal that upon the house-top. This worthy servant of God, to his dying day, would make honourable mention of the people of Kingston; and as he reported,
so I have for many years experienc't, that they are very courteous and kind to their Minister. He said it, and I subscribe it, That a Minister (if it be not his own fault) may live as comfortably in King∣ston, as in most Parishes of England. And I do here make an open, and grate∣ful acknowledgment of your accumulated kindnesses to me, and mine; and do wish that I were in a capacity to serve you, as I have serv'd you, in the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Yet still I shall not be wanting, as my present circumstances will allow it, to farther your Souls health and wel∣fare; and in this short Epistle, give me leave to stir up (may I say) your pure minds by way of remembrance,2 Pet. 3.1. and to recommend to you some Rules of the new Creature, and Covenant, in the practice whereof you will find peace.
I. Make Christ the main end of your life, let all your actions as the lines of a circumference meet in him as their cen∣tre. Live to him that dyed for you, and with whom you hope to live for ever. Read 2 Cor. 5.15. Phil. 1.20, 21. You
meet in Scripture with several abstracts and abridgements of mans duty; some∣times 'tis said to consist in his fearing God, and keeping his Commandments; sometimes in his loving God with all his heart, &c. and his loving his neigh∣bour as himself: and may it not be sum'd up once again, and affirm'd, That it main∣ly consists in a mans believing in, and living to the Lord Jesus Christ?
II. Live as those that must shortly dye. Let your opinion of sin, and of the world, be the same now, as it will be then; and remember who sayes, That if a man dye, he shall not live again,Job 14.14. and make the use of it that he doth. Some have said, That if the damned in Hell were suffer'd to come again upon the Stage of this world, they would Act over the same Part they have formerly Acted; but I am not bound to be of their belief: but this I believe, That it shall never be put to the tryal, and that no man will be allow'd a second edition of his life, to amend the errors of the first.

III. Keep your selves clean and un∣spotted from the evils of the times in which you live, as fishes in salt water re∣tain their freshness, so do you in evil dayes hold fast your uprightness. Be not cor∣rupted by the ungodly practises of some, nor leaven'd by the unsound opinions of others. Beloved, believe not every spi∣rit, but try the spirits, whither they be of God, because many false Prophets are gone abroad into the world. You are in daily danger of being misled, watch and pray, least you fall into ten∣tation, and the snares of the Devil. I am jealous of you with a godly jealousie. The God of all grace who hath call'd you to his eternal glory by Christ Je∣sus, make you perfect, stablish, strength∣en and settle you.
IV. Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure. Let this be past controversie whither you are con∣verted and born again. Don't satisfie your selves with a meer peradventure in this matter; 'tis not wisdom to put it to the hazard whither you shall be sav'd, or damn'd to all eternity. You may run a
venture in other things, but not in this. Seeing assurance is attainable, as undou∣btedly it is, never be at rest till you have obtained it. You would be sure in other cases, why not in this case? the com∣forts and advantages of having it, will pay you for all your pains in getting it.
V. Grow in grace, and in the know∣ledge of Jesus Christ. Growth in grace, is one of the best evidences of the truth of grace; the true Christian is a thri∣ving Christian. If there be no growth, there is no life. Pictures and Images are alwayes the same. You desire other things should thrive and prosper, why not your Souls also? You would not come be∣hind others in Temporals, why do you let others go so far before you in Spiritual things? How many of later standing, and lesser means, have made great pro∣gress in the wayes of God? 'tis not enough for you to grow, but you must grow apace. The Vine in the Vineyard, the Cedar in Lebanon, the Calf in the Stall, are all of them Scripture-emblems of a Believers growth and increase.

VI. Let brotherly love in particu∣lar continue and abound. This is the old and the new Commandment. There is no duty more prest in the Word of God, and no duty less practis'd by the people of God. Surely the end is at hand, because of the flaming out of sin, and of the freezing of love. These last dayes have introduc't a great many love-killing principles, that former Ages were ignorant of: we want the Apostle John amongst us, or some of his spirit, to stir up Christians to love one another. Remember wherein the duties of brother∣ly love consist, in relieving, instructing, admonishing, exhorting, comforting, and bearing with one another. He that sayes he loves his brother, and lives in the neglect of these, is a lyar, and the truth is not in him.
VII. Let your Conversation in the world be with simplicity and godly sin∣cerity; this is the way to have favour with God, he hath pleasure herein;2 Chron. 29.17. he desires truth in the inward parts, and reckons sincerity for perfection; yea, this
is the way to have rejoycing in your selves. Sincerity affords comfort in eve∣ry condition of life, and in the hour of death. A sincere person, if he lives in trouble, he ordinarily dyes in peace. He's sure to find acceptance for all his services, and indulgence for all his of∣fences. Oh that it may be said of you, as of another in Scripture-story, that you are men and women without guile.
VIII. Set the Lord alwayes before you. Remember he sees you when you are most out of sight; his eyes are never off from you, let your eyes be ever to∣wards him. One thought it would awe the Romans, and make them serious, if they did alwayes apprehend that Cato was in company with them. It would certainly have a good influence upon our hearts and lives, if we did apprehend that God was alwayes at our elbows, and that his eyes are upon all our wayes and doings. It is an excellent preser∣vative against sin, and provocation to duty, to carry a remembrance of God about with us into all places and com∣panies.

IX. Fill up all your particular rela∣tions with duties. Relative duties are better known, than practised; nature it self teacheth them, the very Heathen have excelled herein; surely if our righteous∣ness must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, it must not fall short of that of Heathens and Infi∣dels: it sounds like a contradiction, for one to be a good Christian, and a bad husband or wife, father or child, master or servant, &c.
X. Promote the power and practice of Religion in your several Families. Re∣member who said he would walk in his house; not only in Gods, but in his own house, with a perfect heart;Psal. 121.1. resolve with Joshua, not only to engage your per∣sons, but your houses and families in the service of God. Of old, the Fami∣lies of Christians were call'd Churches, but now many of them are rather Syna∣gogues of Satan, than Churches of Christ: not Bethel's, but Bethaven's houses of vanity and sin. It is com∣monly said, That Governours of Fami∣lies,
as well as Pastors of Churches, have curam animarum, the charge and care of Souls; and if any perish through your neglect, their blood will be required at your hands. How many of your Chil∣dren and Servants may say to you an∣other day, bloody Parents, and bloody Masters you have been to us; and may they not now say, Fathers, Masters, care you not that we perish? Oh let your Fa∣milies be instructed; do I require this, or doth God require it?Deut. 6.6, 7, 8, &c. Eph. 6.4. who will one day require an account of your doing of it. Let there be morning and evening sacrifices of praise and prayer offered up to God in your dwellings. God forbid there should be one prayerless habitation in Kingston.
XI. Walk humbly with God.Micah 6.8. This is the main thing that he requires of you; without this, let your other excel∣lencies be never so many, they are of no account with him. A proud persons gra∣ces and good works do him hurt; whil'st an humble man is made better by his evil deeds, a proud man is made worse
by his good deeds, Oh pray God, that saith he will give grace to the humble, to give you that excellent grace of hu∣mility. You may be brought low, and yet not be lowly; many are humbled, that are not humble. Plectuntur sed non flectuntur. Salvian.
XII. Follow the good examples of others. There are many patterns for imitation in Scripture, there's the ex∣ample of our Lord Jesus Christ himself, be as he was in the world. The Word of God aboundeth also with many other excellent instances and presidents; it shews you many evil examples, which are as Sea-marks to forewarn you; and ma∣ny good examples, which are as Land∣marks to direct you: you have other ex∣cellent patterns too besides those upon re∣cord in Scripture. Take, my Brethren, your old Pastor, whose Life I have here delineated, and who hath spoken to you in the Name of the Lord, for an example of patience, and all other branches of piety. Therefore is the story of his Life and Death dedicated
to you, that it may be imitated by you: But of this I spake somewhat be∣fore.
Let us remember here, That I am wri∣ting an Epistle, and not a Treatise; er∣go manum de tabula. Though it were easie to give you many dozens more of such directions as these, I have been lon∣ger, because, though I have often Preach't to you, yet I never wrote to you before. As I have often suggested the counsels of God to yous ears, so I would set some few of them before your eyes. I have an ardent affection for you; you have had Ministers that have Preach't, and liv'd better than I have done, but never any that lov'd you better than I do. I love your Souls, and their eternal welfare, and would be loth to meet any of you at Christs Tribunal in an unregenerate and Christless condition; I would not the many Sermons I have Preach't to you, should be at that day, as so many Bills of Indictment against you.
Finally, Brethren, farewell, be of one mind, live in peace, and let me close
this Epistle, as Jude doth his, build up your selves in your most holy faith, pray in the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life: Ʋnto his grace and favour I commend you all, and subscribe my self

Nov. 29. 1672.
