



SIR,
IT is not my practice to plead any thing for your Majesty with zeal, un∣till I find it a matter of some importance; and my self likewise convinced that I can∣not answer my own Arguments: By this rule, when I first saw the Bishop of St. Asaph's Book, I took some pains to persuade my self, that it contain'd no∣thing prejudicial to that right of precedency, which is due to your Royal Race, as the most

Ancient Monarchy which we know. But finding that there was no way to secure this prece∣dency to the Royal Family, a∣gainst those consequences which necessarily arose from his Posi∣tions; I thought it my duty, at that time, to answer his Lord∣ship's Book, as I do now Dr. Stil∣lingfleet's: especially, since they, in overturning the an∣cient settlement of the Royal Line in Scotland, destroy one of the great Foundations, whereby your Majesty's Grandfather, your Father, and your Last Parlia∣ment, have farther engag'd, and encourag'd the Loyalty of this your. Ancient Kingdom: Wherefore, Sir, these Reverend Divines will now, I hope, hold me excus'd, in regard that I pleaded first for them, with my

self, before I pleaded against them, for your Majesty: And if I could have found any man to have satisfied me, as to the incon∣veniences arising to the Crown in these Points, I had never prin∣ted that Book in defence of the Royal Family, and of my Native Country. But, now humbly to sa∣tisfy your Majesty as to the dan∣gerousness of these Positions (e∣ven supposing the Authours in∣nocent of any ill design, as I am apt to think they are) and to convince them, how impartial I am upon any National Ac∣count; I beg leave to mind your Sacred Majesty, that some of our Own Historians having erred with as little ill design as they, touching the Suc∣cession of King Robert the Second; An Argument was

drawn from it, in favour of Bastards, and was much boasted of by the Enemies of the true Royal Line, and thereupon, I did, to the satisfaction of all indifferent men, refute our own Historians in that Point, as, I hope, I do now these Gentlemen in the Points controverted. Scarce any thing, Sir, can be thought inconsiderable, wherein a Crown is concern'd; or any conse∣quence so remote, but should be adverted to, in a Season when a long Rebellion has so far debaucht the Inclinations of too many of your Majesty's Subjects: But cer∣tainly, nothing can be thought in∣considerable, which Kings and Parliaments have judg'd so use∣full for establishing the prece∣dence of the Sovereign, and for confirming the Affection and

Loyalty of the Subject. And the Doctor's way of telling us, (in place of all other defence) that the Irish carry up the Royal Line Praef. pag. 5. within six degrees of Japhet, and so we shorten it, is not se∣rious enough in a Subject we ought to treat of with venera∣tion; since the Doctor, in the Chap. 5. pag. 267. & passim. same Book, does but make him∣self merry with Offlahertie, the Assertor of this pretended Anti∣quity.
Sir, the agreement of Men of different Professions, almost at the same time, against the Royal Line, is very remarka∣ble; some endeavouring by their Swords to cut it short at that end which lay next to them; Whilst others, by their Pens, have undertaken what dero∣gates from its glory, by lopping

off its remoter end; which I'm sure lay far out of their way: And I wish, that as your Ma∣jesty has most successfully defea∣ted the one, by your Victorious Arms; so I may be so happy, in your prudent Reign, as to contri∣bute somewhat to disappoint the other, by what I have said in vindication of its Antiquity.
Sir, The dutifull inclination I have to serve your Majesty, is, I confess, much heightned, by the Royal Obligations you have been pleased to lay upon our Nation; not onely in your gra∣tious protection of it, but in the glory you have added to that Royal Family, under which we have been so long happy. Your Majesty owes your success (next to that mercifull and miraculous providence which still attends


your Sacred Person and Family to your own wise Conduct, and to the great Iustice of your Cause; and not to your Councils or Servants, though it is your Majesty's good∣ness to be as kind to them as if you did. And therefore, Sir, I am so far from valuing my self, upon any success I may, or can pretend to have, in pleading for your Majesty, either in Print, or at the Bar; that I shall still a∣scribe whatever advantages I may gain that way, to the Ius∣tice of your Majesty's Cause, without arrogating any part of it to my own Skill or Eloquence.
And now your Majesty having by your own Royal Influence, and the Prudence of your proper Con∣duct, overturn'd in so short a time all the Designs of a Rebel∣lion, so deeply rooted; And by


your gentleness and clemency o∣vercome the obstinacy of your most inveterate Enemies, which is by far the more wonderfull Victory, thereby contracting into one year the glories of a long Reign: I can never have the vanity to imagine, your Majesty should yet any way need the mean assistence of,

