



THE outward ornaments of Youth are
Beauty, Tallness, and Strength of the Bo∣dy,
but Grace and Wisdom are the ornaments of
the Soul and Mind: But Beauty without
Grace, is but like a fair sign that hangeth at the
door of a foul house; and Witt without Grace,
is but like meat that tasteth sweet in the mouth,
and breedeth ill blood in the Veins: and bodily
strength, and comliness of Stature without
Grace, it is but like so much Moss upon the body
of a Tree, when there is no fruit upon the boughs.
Absalom had a fair body, and a defiled Con∣science,
St. Augustin receiving a witty Epi∣stle
from Licentius, a young No∣ble
Man,August. Epist. ad Licent. and perceiving he had a∣bused
it too loosely, returneth this
answer to him. If thou hadst found
a Golden Cup, wouldst thou not have
given it to some Publick use? God hath given
thee a Golden Witt, a Soul of Gold, and yet thou
usest it an Instrument of Sensuality; take

heed of making it a vessel of abomination, and
of presenting thy Soul as a Sacrifice to Satan,
Diabolus cupit a te ornari, the Devil desireth
to make thee an ornament to him, and thy witt
and parts, the credit of his Court and Cause:
Young Men many times have sharp Witts, but
as the fire, in green wood is smothered by the
vapours, that it cannot shine brightly; so holy
Wisdom in youth is often smothered by Tempta∣tions
and Concupisences.
Naturalists say, That the Butterfly spend∣eth
the most part of her Life in painting of her
Wings, so do many young men in guilding of
their Brains. Youth is, (as the Hebrew word
signifieth) the choice age of a Mans
Life: and a young Man is called, a
choice or chosen one. 1. Because a
Young man was rather chosen than an Old,
chosen to most employments of action, and Youth
is the time which a man would chose to live in.
2. Because youth is a time wherein a Man is to
chuse what course to take, and it is the choicest
time for the service of God. Remember thy
Creatour in the daies of thy youth, or of thy
choice, saith Solomon. That is, in such daies,
as either thou wouldest chuse, or else, such daies
wherein thou art best able to make thy choice;
then are we called upon to remember God.
Take it in that double variation. 1. In such

daies, as a man would chuse, whilst things yet
go well with him, before the evil daies come, &c.
Flourishing Youth and true Devotion, are sel∣dom
companions: Youth, (unless sanctified) is
full of vanity, serious in trifles, and trifling
in serious things. Or, 2. In such dayes as we
are yet able to make our choice, Death bed De∣votion
proveth but little worth; then do we rather
dream of God, than indeed do remember him.
Good reason it is that the Young Man should
remember his Creatous. 1. Because uncertain
of the future of his own life, uncertain whether
he shall ever live to old age; a Soul should not be
hazarded upon such uncertainties. 2. Be∣cause
the young man commonly forgetteth God,
is most tempted by Satan, most violently hurried
away with Passions. Youth is full of folly,
falsehood, frowardness, of high conceits of their
own worth and sufficiency; full of inordinate
and excessive love of liberty; full of wantonness,
it is carried with strong affections upon weak
grounds; it is stubborn, impatient of counsels,
and just reproofs, Jerem. 31. 18, 19. It is
given to Prodigallity, Luke 15. 12, 13. It is
impudent and shameless, addicted to sensuality.
It is the Emblem of a Young Man, to have a
wing on one Arm, as if he had a desire to fly up
to Heaven: but a clog on the other arm, to shew
how the vanities and pleasures of the World do

clog his desires of Heaven. 3. Or it may be Young
Menare called upon to remember God, because
riper age is furnished with most abilities; a strong
body, a pliable mind, a riper judgment, affecti∣ons
free: Religion is not of so easie a per∣formance,
but it will ask a man his best. Or 4.
it may be, what is gotten in Youth, sticks fastest
by us, as a Vessel retaineth a long time, that
odour wherewith at first it was seasoned. God's
service should never be given over, and there∣fore
learned betimes. Nebuchadnezzar would
have young Men stand before him, the King of
Heaven much more. Thy Creatour will not
highly value thee, unless thou hast been bred
up in his presence even from thy youth.
It is a most commendable thing for Young
Men to be couragious, and resolute in resisting
Sin. Some Heathens and Infidels have been
not able in this kind. S. Augustin bringeth in
Polemon thus speaking concerning himself.
I was an Infidel, a young Man,
deprived of the Knowledg of the
True God resigned over to all
sorts of Intemperance,St. Augustin saith of this, Non human operi tribue∣rim, sed di∣vino. Epist. 130. Wine,
Love, Play, Rashness, were the
Chariot, which drew my Youth
to downfal. I was no sooner en∣tred
into the School of an Hea∣then
Philosopher, But behld

I was wholly changed. He upon the Words
of a man, layeth down his flowery Crowns which
he bare on his head, his Riots and Drunkenness.
How unseemly then is it, for Young Men
that are called Christians to go on in Riot, and
Wantonness, after so many enlightnings, so many
forcible instructions, and so many powerful
convictions and inspirations? St. Ambrose like∣wise
brings in one Spurin thus speaking. I
was a Gentile, (saith she) bred in the corrup∣tion
of an age, where vertue was declining,
and vice on the top of the Wheel: I was endow∣ed
with an excellent Beauty, which by right of
natural force gave me the key of Hearts; and
I seeing it was too much affected, courted by
wanton eyes, and served for a stumbling-block
to chastity; I purposely made scars in my face,
extinguishing with my Blood the flames of those
that sought me; for I loved better to seal my
innocence, as, with the seal of voluntary defor∣mity,
than to possess a Beauty that served only
as a bait for anothers Lust. How may this
give a check to the vanity of those women a∣mong
us, who in their youth paint themselves
with an ill intention, seeking to gain that by
Imposture, which they cannot gain by truth?
and not satisfying themselves by adulterating
their Beauty, spare not to discover in their
Breasts and Faces the Impudence of their

Fore-heads. Oh! what will such with all their
curiosity, answer to this Paynim, when her
Blood and Scars, her Beauty disfigured, which
served as a Sacrifice to her Chastity, shall ac∣cuse
them before the Tribunal of Christ!
Cassian commendeth a Christian young
Man, who having renounced worldly vanities,
and betaken himself to an austere kind of Life,
having received a packet of Letters from his
Father, and diverse of his dear
Friends,Cassian In∣stit. Lib. 5. ca. 32. he durst not look upon
them but threw them into the fire
with these words: Be gone ye
thoughts of my Countrey, and
burn for company, for fear lest ye tempt me to
look again toward the things which I have for∣saken:
He feared (as the story saith,) that
by the reading of their lines, and the sight of
their Names, he should have been perswaded,
to warp towards their Company, and the
vanities of the world again.
Oh how ought all young men, that have had
good education, to take heed how they abuse it,
and the many instrumental means which God
hath granted them for the exercise of vertue;
otherwise they shall pay the loss thereof in the
length of a corrupt and miserable Life, and
their bones in old age, shall be filled with the
follies of youth, which shall rest with them

even in their Tombs, and drag their Souls in∣to
the bottomless Precipice, from whence there
is no recovery. Many young people run on in
much evil in the time of youth, adding sin to
sin: but (as one saith) youthful sins may prove
ages terrours. Many prophane young men that
drink and quaffe, play and make sport, and
further one another in sin, what do they therin,
but as Abner said to Joab, 2 Sam. 14. Let
the young men arise, and play before us?
Observe what play this was. Then there arose
and went over Twelve Men of Benjamin,
which pertained to Ishbosheth, the Son of
Saul; and Twelve of the Servants of David,
and they caught every one his fellow by the
head, and thrust his Sword into his fellows
side; so they fell down together. This was
their play. So it is with young men many-times,
when they come into company, by their licen∣tiousness,
and drawing one another to sin, what
do they but take the Sword, and thrust into one
anothers bowels? and Labour (what in them
lieth) to destroy each other for ever?
Oh how careful should Parents be, in the
well nutring and educating of their Children,
who are not only the living goods, but also
pieces of their Parents? In Athens it was a
custom, never to pole their Children till they
were taught, and then to burn their hair, as a

Sacrifice to Apollo. How should Parents
take heed of cockering their Children in sinful
wayes: Indulgence of Parents, is the refuge
of Vanity, the bawd of Wickedness, and the bane
of Children. Look well to it ye Parents,
(saith St. Hierome) That your Children ca∣rouse
not in the cups of Babilon. The Sin
and evil examples of Parents, is like rust
which cleaveth close to their Children, and the
greater they are upon Earth, so much the more
malice and precipitation it hath; such children
will one day complain at the Tribunal
of God,Cyprian de ap∣sis. of the persidiousness of their
Parents, saying, our Fathers and
Mothers have been our parricides,
saith Cyprian.
Ye fond Parents, behold Eli the Priest, from
whose lips passed so many brave Oracles, who
shined in the Tabernacle of God, and in the
mean time for permitting youthful follies, and
nbridled liberty in his Children, to become
the Object of God's just displeasure: behold
him cast from the Priest-hood, as a rotten
Member, and his House deprived of that ho∣nourable
dignity, and all his Posterity Con∣demned
to die in the flower of their age: His
two Sons Hophn and Phinehas, slayn in one day,
his Daughter in Law dead in Childbed, and
the Ark of God taken by the Philistines, and

dishonoured by Infidels: And lastly, himself
buried as it were, under the ruines of his Coun∣trey,
as the last Victim of Gods Justice.
Eleazar is a fit pattern for all aged persons
to follow, of whom mention is made in the
Book of Macchabees, That being assaulted
with all sorts of Batteries, Banishments, and
Torments, to make him counterfeit but one sole
Sin against his own Law, he said to himself,
ut alas! The whiteness of that venerable
Hair with which thy head is covered, after 
hath grown hoary in the exercise of thy Re∣ligion,
hath it not yet taught thee, where the
poynt of honour lyeth? It is not enough for
Eleazar not to counterfeit impiety, but to pro∣fess
vertue even at the price of his Blood.
Now God grant, I may not serve as a
stumbling-block to the youth of this City: since
God will make this day, a Theatre of my con∣stancy;
I will not be-lye the Law of my Ma∣ster,
nor dishonour the School in which I was
brednd brought up.
Memorable is that story of Polycarp, that
constant Martyr of Christ, and Disciple of
John the Evangelist, as he was brought to the
fire to be burnt, the Proconsul having most
earnestly solicited him to recant, and renounce
his Faith with promise of liberty, I have (said
he) these Fourscore and six years served Jesus

Christ, and I ever found him a good Master;
therefore, I will not now Blaspheme my King
and Lord; I will never do it. Many other
words of admirable constancy and fortitude
were uttered, then by this old Disciple, and
faithful Martyr of Jesus Christ, which made
him regardless of his Life, and resolutely to
suffer Death for his Name.
Let none of us then offer the blind and the
lame in sacrifice to God, nor offer that to him,
which we would not offer to our Prince, Mal. 1.
7. 8. This were to make God's Service a Spit∣tle-House
or Hospital, to maintain us in our
age, when we have spent our strength in the
service of Sin and Satan. This is not to leave
sin, till sin leve us. What Noble Man would
be willing to give entertainment to an old serv∣ing man,
that hath spent his strength in the
service of his Enemy? Why then should we
think, that having given the flower of our
youth to the Devil, that God will accept of the
bran of our old age? Therefore every one
like young Timothies, and Josia's should be∣gin
to serve God betimes: and all parents
should present their Children to God betimes,
even as Samuel, whom his Mother offered to the
Lord very young, who ministred before the
Lord in his side-coates. Youth is not only more
capable, but more curable than old age, If sin

get hold of youth, it is more easily cured in youth,
than in men that are old; as a green wound
is more easily healed, than an old festered sore,
which hath dead flesh in it. A man may al∣most
aswel give Physick to a dead man, as
cousel to many an old man. If sin grow to an
habit and custom, custom being another nature,
makes it as ordinary to men as to eat and drink.
But if any of us have spent the flower of our
youth in vice and vanity; Let the fruit of our
age only savour of vertue. Indeed an old man
of youthful behaviour, is more ridiculous
than a wanton toying young man: Let every
man then (especially old men) put their houses
in order and prepare for Death: when Death
is between their teeth, it is too late to provide
remedies for the Terrours thereof.
