



Gentlemen;
I Was the more Willing, when Desir'd, to Publish the follow∣ing Discourse, Because I thought I might thereby have an Opportu∣nity
of giving a Public Testimo∣ny of your Chearful Concurrence with, and Encouragement of, those Persons, who are United in a So∣ciety, in order to Assist you in the Necessary Work of Reforming such as are Enemies, not only to themselves; But also to the Town and Corporation in which God hath Placed you, for a Time, in the Highest Station: And also, that I might take this Fair Occasion Faithfully to put you in Mind of your Duty.
'Twas the Saying of Solon, That in his Time, there were ma∣ny Good Laws made; But there wanted One more, to make 'em put
those in Execution. 'Tis too evi∣dent, the Good and Wholsom Laws of this Realm against Immo∣rality and Profaneness, are not put in Execution. Where the Blame doth Principally lye, I will not, at present, Enquire; But ra∣ther Pray, that Forreigners may have no Occasion any more, to Ac∣cuse our Famous Nation, of Be∣ing the Best in the World to ake Laws, and Worse than any to Exe∣cute them: And that you in parti∣cular may not be found  in this Respect, when you are called to Give an Account of your Stew∣ardship.
Let the Censures of Crical
Readers be never so many, or se∣vere, either concerning my Dis∣course it self, or the Publication thereof; I have this to Comfort me, That my Sincere Desire, and Endeavour also (tho' never so mean) was to Promote the Common Good: And if you can say so, when your Publick Office is ended with the Year; or if before that, Death should bring you a Quietus est, and summons you to give up your Accounts, you will do it with Joy, and not with Grief.
Tho' you have not the Sword as well as the Mace, born before you in State, as some other Magistrates have; yet you have a Sword put
into Your Hands by God Him∣self, which you must not Bear in vain; But therewith Protect the Good, and Punish the Bad. The Worldly Honour and Profits that you Reap by Virtue of your Office, will only serve to aggra∣vate your shame and loss in the end; If when God weighs you in the Ballances of his Justice, you are found wanting, and it shall appear that you have made no use or a bad one, of all your Interest and Authority.
The Laws of the Land Oblige you, under Great Penalties, Im∣partially to Punish such Crimes a you your Selves are Witnesses of
And you can't refuse to take the In∣formation of Others: But if you have no Better Principle than Fear of a Pecuniary Mulct, to In∣fluence you, The Common Good is not Likely to be much Promo∣ted by you. Consider therefore the Oath of God is upon you. The End and Usefulness of your Office, The Wellfare of your Neigh∣bours, and Your own Safety, are Obligations upon you to Pre∣vent, or if that can't be, to Pu∣nish such sins as are Destructive to private persons, and Whole Communities.
Give me leave to desire your Serious Perusal of the First Di∣rection,
towards the End of the ensuing Discourse, p. 10. Par∣ticularly, beware of such sins your Selves, that you cannot Avoid pu∣nishing Others for, if any Call for Justice. And, methinks, it must be with an Aking Heart, and a Trembling Hand, that a Vici∣ous Magistrate Signs a War∣rant for the punishment of those Vices he Loves and Lives in him∣self.
Let your Zeal for God Pro∣voke and Encourage Others: And as you have the Praise of Good Men, and, I hope, the Approbati∣on of God, which is far greater; For the Good you, or any of you
have done already: So let your Ef∣forts against Vice, towards the Conclusion of your Office, be the strongest.
That God would please to Bless and Prosper this Whole Town and Corporation; and, in parti∣cular, your Persons and Families, is, and shall be, the Prayer of,
Gentlemen, 
