




Dearly Beloved,
HAving design'd to write some∣thing for the use of your Ser∣vants, I could not do better than to put the little Book into your Hands, to whom God has committed the Charge of them; and I have herein the high∣est Example, even of God himself, who gives first his Commands to Ma∣sters of Families, to be by them handed down to all in their Houses: as, for
instance, in the great Commandment about the Sabbath, he does not speak to Servants immediately, but makes their Masters the trustees of his Will, saying, thou shalt do no manner of work, neither thou — nor thy Man-Servant, nor thy Maid-Ser∣vant, implying that they must cause them to observe the Commandment; and indeed for this cause were Fami∣lies, as well as all other lawful Socie∣ties, or dain'd, that the Salvation, even of the lowest members thereof, may be the better furthered under the Govern∣ment therein. But alas, how little do men think, when they take on them the Government of Families, that God has committed to them a Charge of Souls? if they did, how durst they take a Charge that they are not able to perform, by reason of their Igno∣rance, or never mind, by reason of their willfulness? if you did believe, that every Servant you take into your House, will add to the dreadfulness of your account, if he perisheth through
your fault and negligence, could you then be so indifferent in your choice of them, as too many be? I remember, David saith, His eyes were upon the faithful in the land, that they might serve him, Psal. 101.6. but we have Masters that chuse Servants as they do their Horses, if they be strong and able for their work, they mind no more, though you would not bring in a scabbed Sheep into your Flock: yet are there not that bring in drunken, swear∣ing Servants, with the plague of pro∣phaneness upon them into their Houses, and lay the infected Wretches with their dear Children and other Ser∣vants? Can you as easily perform your duty towards obstinate stubborn Servants, as towards those which are good, or at least pliable and willing to be instructed and admonished? Is not so great a Blessing or Curse, as a good or bad Servant will prove to your Fa∣mily, enough to make you pour out one Prayer for God to direct you in the choice? It is hard that you cannot en∣quire
into the Education that they have formerly had, or at least into their pre∣sent inclinations to good or evil. Do not lightly take into your Families a Companion of Fools, whose customs and habits of sin have been visible in their former Conversations, unless you have good evidence or ground for hope of their reformation. But the misery again of it is, when Masters are as bad as the Servants: He cannot en∣quire after the Godly disposition of Ser∣vants, that is about to bring them in∣to a cold Prayerless Family; nor can He ask them whether they are willing to be instructed, who is himself so ig∣norant that He cannot, or so careless that He never intends to instruct them. But I am perswaded better things of some of you, and things that ac∣company Salvation. And He that is devoted to God himself will engage for his Family too, as Joshua, Ch. 24.15. As for me and my house, I will serve the Lord. God himself gives testimony of Abraham, I know him
that He will command his — Hou∣shold after him. Christian Families are frequently called Churches for the worship of God perform'd therein. Every Master is a Priest in his own Family, and I have often thought his obligation to teach and govern his Servants, is much greater than that of a Minister to any particular Family in his Charge. You have an opportunity to know their tempers and temptations, that we have not, and by your nearness to them, can take every Servant by himself, and deal with him as his case requires: by your constant continuance with them: and having the power of rewards and punishments in your hands, you may more easily perform your duty towards them, if you have hearts to it. I know you are counted Good Masters in the places where you dwell; and I cannot say the contrary as to outward things, for ought I know, the most of you (if not all) give unto your Servants that which is just and equal, in necessary provision, both in health and sickness,
in faithful discharge of your Contracts in their Wages or Salary, in prudent ordering of their work and business. And it is not the hard labour of Ser∣vants that I pity them for, so that they are not unnecessarily expos'd to cold or wet, that may endanger their health; or so tyred with the World as to be un∣fit for Family, or secret Prayer, or other duties. For indeed, it is for the Servants Souls that I am pleading with you. There is not any poor Boy or Girl that you keep, but has a Soul as pretious as Lords and Ladies, and cost as dear a price. What have you done for the Souls of them that are under your Roof? Let Conscience speak, if you should give your Servants no meat and drink, all the Country would cry shame on you; but is it not a worse shame and greater Cruelty to starve their Souls? Do you keep Servants with rational Souls, only like your Hor∣ses, to eat, and to drink, and to work? If any of you are not able to instruct them, be deeply humbled presently, and
get others to instruct them. Ought you not to have required their attendances on publick Catechizing, and their sub∣mission thereunto? I am sure the Church lays no less a penalty than Ex∣communication upon you if you refuse; and is not your instructing them the way to increase in knowledge your selves? What if the poor ignorant Servants, that you made part of your Houshold, should follow you from place to place, from House to Field, and cry after you to instruct them? What if they should tell you with many tears, that they are likely to die without knowledge, and that they are convin∣ced, that Christ is coming in flaming fire to take vengeance on them that know not God— Would you not in∣struct them? And if you say, but my Servants have no such sense, no such desire: Why then, are they not the more miserable? Have they not the greater need? And does not their case cry as loud for pity, as their voice can do? Have you no bowels of compassion,
on perishing Souls? If not, at least have pity on your own, and let not their blood be on your heads. Family-Duties, and Instruction (if carefully minded) would have prevented much of that disorder that is in almost all Parishes, which now is not so easily cur'd; but it requires all your care and diligence to restrain that wickedness, which igno∣rance has caus'd. What saith the Law? Deut. 22.8. When thou buildest a new house, thou shalt make a Bat∣tlement upon the roof, that thou bring not blood upon thy house, if any fall from thence. Family-Du∣ties, Prayer, Reading, singing Psalms, repetition of Sermons, Catechizing of Servants, &c. are like so many Fen∣ces, or Battlements on one side; Com∣mands, Reproofs, Corrections, and Re∣straints from sin, are Rayls, or Bat∣tlements on the other; and if you set not these Battlements on your Roof, woe be to you, if any fall from thence; and if you say, I do not push them down, I do not force them, or require
them to take such courses, I would not have them fall. Nay, but this is not enough, you must set Battlements, to prevent their ruining themselves: If you say further, but if I do set Battle∣ments, they may climb over them, and do what I can, will run on to their destruction; why then, their blood will be on their own heads, and you have delivered your house from the guilt thereof. By all this you may see to how little purpose your complaint of wicked Servants has been. When your own Purse is touch'd by unfaithful Ser∣vants, you feel it: You might have known it before, when you saw how a∣verse they were to knowledge, &c. that they that were not faithful to God, were not like to be faithful to you; that if you suffer'd them to haunt evil Com∣pany, and break the Sabbath, and to live in riotous Courses; that these Ex∣travagancies would call for Money, and where should they have it but by de∣frauding you: And if your grief be indeed for the sin of your Servants a∣gainst
God, I beseech you look inward; it may be, your selves were Servants once, and you liv'd in carelessness to∣wards God, and unfaithfulness toward your Masters, and now God is visit∣ing your sin upon you: And what comfort can you hope for in your Fami∣lies, till that guilt be remov'd? And if you are in earnest, why are you as indifferent about the Servants you chuse, since you have had this experi∣ence of their wickedness, as you were before? Nay, why after trial of their obstinacy, do you not rid your hands of them? You know David's resolution, Psal. 101.7. He that worketh de∣ceit shall not dwell in my house, he that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight. But if any keep a debauch∣ed person, a Drunkard, prophane Swear∣er, obstinate against God, and Good∣ness, for a second Year, because it may be, he is strong and able to do his work, I note that Man (as there are noted Families in the Apostles sense, 2 Thes. 3.14.) and assuredly your sin will
find you out. But if you will be zea∣lous for God, and against sin in your Families, how much may some of you do towards the promoting Religion in the Countrey, and what a Colony of young. persons may from time to time go out of your houses, to bear up the Name of Christ in the places where they dwell? What a blessing of the Lord will be within your Tabernacle? What comfort in your Relations? What joy in Afflictions, and even Death it self? Your House shall be built by Wis∣dom, and established by Under∣standing, Prov. 24.3. that this lit∣tle Book may something promote this main design of Family-Godliness, is the Prayer of

