




My Lords, and Gentlemen,
HAving lately obtained the freedom of retire∣ment within these Walls, (at vacant hours from medical employ) for fresh Air, and quiet recess: the benefits re∣ceived
thereby, obliges me to this publick acknowledgment: and in testimony of my re∣spects, to the Honourable and worthy Members of this So∣ciety.
And in conformity (quoad posse) to the designment of this foundation; I spent such oppor∣tunities afforded me here, in con∣templation of Law: I mean the Laws of Nature, imposed upon all Nations: which Statutes, not being well known to the most; and not so well regarded by any as they ought: hence, thousands have untimely perished; and that, most unnaturally, as felo's dese: and few there are, but by une∣ven,
and irregular courses; do abbreviate the term of their du∣ration here; in not yielding due obedience to the Institutes and Injunctions of Nature, most con∣servative of human Being.
Which considerations, put me upon this necessary work; to cau∣tion all; but especially to warn such; as have no prospect of the danger, that daily attends them in most; if not all their Acti∣ons, and Customs.
And that this Fountain of Law, may run with a double stream; I have broke up ano∣ther Spring of wholesom Laws, issuing out of this goodly Fa∣brick; to serve this Learned So∣ciety;
and from thence to be de∣rived, as communicative to the whole Kingdom.
And you, My Lords, that have put your Shoulders to the Government; that you may the better support the incumbent weight in your Stations; and longer be enabled to serve your King and Country: this Me∣thod of Nature's Institutions, duly observ'd, and conformed to; will contribute no small assist∣ance to your bearing up against; and longer to keep off, the de∣clensions of human frailty.
And whereas your Lord∣ships command, and distribute Justice between Man and Man;
restraining and punishing exor∣bitances committed upon one a∣nother: this transcript of Laws (from the Book of Nature) di∣rects and commands, every man to be just to himself; laying be∣fore him also, the penalties and sufferings to be sustained, for not being ; so good, as his own friend; and self preserver, from intestine ruine: the con∣duct of the little World, being delegated to Nature; she hath in her power, both rewards and punishments.
And that the two great Lu∣minaries in this Orb; whose radiant influence, of Equity and Law, streams through the King∣dom;
that these our lights may not be extinct, by too hasty fate, and darken our Horizon: their diurnal motions being adequate and parallel, with the course of Nature here exhibited; their visible durations may be long protracted, for the good of many.
And now descending, with re∣gard to all the worthy Members of this Body: here is for you, a Manual of choice and whole∣som Flowers; pickt out of Na∣tures Garden: whose virtues (by their daily use) will so per∣fume your lives; the fragrant scent whereof, will make you sa∣voury, and acceptable in con∣versation,
and exemplars to all mankind. Here is temperance and sobriety; equanimity and moderation; measure and me∣thod; times and seasons; for all your Actions, and Cessations.
And that you may be perite, in all States and Politicks: here is the exact Government of the Microcosm; and the primitive Laws of Nature: composed, not for an hour or two's diver∣sion in reading; but for constant use, and daily practice, during the whole Term of your lives: that all your actions and cu∣stoms; vicissitudes and inter∣missions; may be regulated by this platform.

And yet a little further; be∣holding with affectionate care, the young and hopeful Plants in this Nursery of Learning and Education: that they may not warp, and grow crooked; nor untimely fade and wither; these, being daily watered and refreshed, with the wholesom streams of this useful Conduit; they may so thrive in growth and soundness; that in process of time, they may become tall and goodly Cedars in our Lebanon; strong and fit for Pillars in the Govern∣ment.
That this Designment and Labours, may be thus success∣ful;
and answer the ends pro∣posed; is the hearty well wish∣es, and shall be the future en∣deavours of
Your Lordships, And Gentlemen, 
From my Study, in the Inner-Temple Novemb. 1. 1682.
