



Reverend, and much honoured in the Lord,
AS this Sermon had not been Preached, so nor had it been made publick, but in obe∣dience to your Call; which I the more wil∣lingly complied with, that I might thereby give Testimony to my readiness of promo∣ting that good Design abroad, which you have made so happy a progress in at home.
You no sooner had appointed me to this Work, but God pointed me to the Text; which I found so suitable to the Occasion, that I resolved to do the utmost my short Arm could reach to, in improving it to the blessed ends of Love and Ʋnion, that I might thereby shew my self to be not only , but ; and indeavour with all my might that the Heaven below might be made like the Heaven above, a quiet and peaceable Ha∣bitation.
To intermeddle in Matters of Strife is in common Cases deemed a thankless Office, and he oft times feels most Fists who steps in to part the Fray.Naz. Orat. de Pace. . But the Goodness of this Ʋn∣dertaking is such, as will richly Recompense for the greatest Inconvenience that can attend the Attempt; and if it should not find Success among Men, I am satis∣fied that it will not want a Blessing from God.
None can, with any colour of Reason, be prejudiced at this happy Ʋndertaking of yours, which is not in the least intended to countenance any Carnal or Worldly Design, but to serve the great Interests of our Lord Jesus, and promote that Kingdom of his which is not of this World.
Many there are who call every kind of Compliance baseness, and a betraying of Principles; but so long as our Consciences tell us, that what we do is in Obedi∣ence to the Command of Christ, the peace we shall find within will more then pay the Charge of all unjust Cen∣sures from without. Men of such rough and sowr Spi∣rits are ready to think God to be such a one as them∣selves; As the Lacedaemonians, being a Warlike Peo∣ple,

represented their Gods all in Armour. But God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.
Who doth not desire to see the Church of Christ in a flourishing state? It was one of Austin's wishes, to see Romam in flore. And should it not be every good Man's wish, to see Ecclesiam in flore? When the Temple is purged, and a Separation made between the Sanctuary and the profane Place, (Ezek. 41.20.) then the Glory of the Lord will fill the House, Ezek. 43.5.
God hath eminently appeared among you hitherto in carrying on this blessed Work, therefore it greatly con∣cerns us to hold him fast by Endeavouring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, lest this Silence in Heaven should be but for the space of half an hour.
How should the consideration of the Coming of the Lord, which now draws very nigh, put us all upon pro∣moting this Work. Will it not be a very uncomfortable thing to be found in our Divisions in that day? There∣fore we ought not to stand at a distance, but upon such Reasons as will justifie our dissent, and be approved of by the impartial Judge.
The Lord pour out a richer measure of the Spirit of Love upon all that fear his Name, and shew to them that  which none can find, but they who are taught of God. The Inquiry after which, in order to walking therein, was the chief Design of this Discourse. Such as it is it is now yours, not only by my Act in the Dedication, but by your own in the Publication. And

therefore as it humbly begs your Patronage because it needs it, so it earnestly calls for your Observance because of the importance of the Design of it, which is to strengthen the Staff of Bands now put into your hands by God; and this nothing can do but a constant and con∣scientious practice of those Principles upon which your Ʋnion stands.
And now Brethren, as that Rod out of the Stem of Jesse (upon whom the Spirit of the Lord rests, the Gir∣dle of whose Reins is Faithfulness) hath so far fulfilled that comfortable Promise, as to cause the Wolf to dwell with the Lamb; let it also appear that he hath bowed your Spirits to such an intire Resignation to Truth, as that a Child may lead you. And then the Counsels here given will be as readily imbraced, and as carefully pra∣ctised, as they were faithfully tendered by him who great∣ly rejoyceth to be known by the pleasing Title of one (tho the meanest) of the united Brethren, and

