



Right Reverend and Honourable,
YOu may easily excuse me for using your Name upon this, when you think what stead it stood me in upon another occa∣sion. I were very stupid, if I did not know the worth of it; and then it is no wonder, if I am loth to part with it. This (my Lord) made me finde favour in the eyes of a King; and then how can it but make me finde acceptance a∣mong (unless it be, because they be) His less intelligent Subjects. And if the Gospell it self, that is above all humane Patronage, be Dedicated to the most Excellent Theophilus; then surely what is of so inferiour a nature as this dis∣course, had need look out for one that is Venerable indeed to coun∣tenance it.
But this is not all the reason. The truth is, I was too big with a sense of your undeserved kind∣nesse to go long undelivered; and still finding a word hindering sur∣prise upon me when I was before you, I pitched upon this way of thanking you, for though such E∣pistles use to come out for the pie∣ces sake that followeth; I had al∣most said, this piece that follow∣eth had not come out but for the Epistles sake. This I thought once to stuffe with the deep re∣sentments I have of what you have done for me, but that is so trivial and ordinary a returne; I looked upon my self as bound to scorne it, and endeavour some∣thing greater.
I well perceive by those truly Episcopal Memento's you gave me, what will be more acceptable to you, viz. to take heed to my self and to the Doctrine in the place with which my Soveraign upon your recommending, hath entrusted me. And therefore up∣on this occasion, shall venture be∣fore the world to tell you, I did not more willingly with my Pen subscribe the Churches Ar∣ticles before, than I shall endea∣vour with my paines, to tran∣scribe my Diocesans charge after my institution, that the soules of the people may not be starved on deceived, my Mother the Church despised or scandalized, your Lordships condescending as∣sistance censured or repented of.
I shall onely add my hearty and constant prayers, that your light may be long burning and shining in this crooked and per∣verse Generation; and cease, though not to thank, to trouble you,

