



Worthy Sir,
THe Publication of this crude discourse, is a sufficient argument how incapable I am to resist friends importunities. I am not insen∣sible, that there are too many defects in it, and I know those of maturer & better seasoned judgements, may finde more: But they that are the most judicious, are the least censorious. Wherfore upon a supposition that I might be prevailed with, to wave such things as these, yet notwithstanding I might have reasons e∣now to oppose all entreaties; I will not repeat what I have so often urged upon this occasion, viz. My just desire of a close re∣tirement, and naturall aversion, from any thing that might draw many eyes upon me. Besides all this, I have often reflected (with a more than common disturbance) upon the miserale disease, and distemper of the age we live in; the generality of men among us being compounded of Opinion and Passion, as of a Soule and Body: what one approveth, another disliketh; what one affecteth, another distasteth. It is very sad, but it is too true, a Spirit of giddinesse and distraction is gone out upon the Inhabitants of this dis-joynted Nation; and what the Angell of the Lord said to Hagar concerning Ishmael, is true of each particular Division and Separation; their hand is against e∣very Man, and every Mans hand is against them:Gen.
16.12. each by an uncharitable partiality inveighing against, and condemning of every one but themselves. And thus preudice, a low and sinfull prejudice, unworthy of Men, much more of Christians, is the ascendant upon most mens Spirits. And they that are the most obscure, no question taste, but those that are most pub∣lick, shall be sure to drinke a double portion of this bitter cup. But woe to him that maketh the Crosse a stumbling block. As we should not doe the least evill, that the greatest good may come of it, that being to distrust Gods power, as if he could not effectit; so neither should we refraine from the least good, for the greatest evill that may come of it, that being to distrust his good∣nesse, as if he would not divert it.
Sir, Your Daughter was the occasion, that emboldneth me to make you the Patron of this Sermon. I must confesse, I could have wished that my libamina, the first-fruits of my labours to the world, had been something more generally usefull for the building up of Soules in their most holy Faith, and promoting of the power of godlinesse: this reacheth onely the particular duties of the Husband and the Wife. But these indeed are ma∣ny, and exceeding weighty. The Spaniard hath a proverb,
There is more required in Marriage, than two paire of Legs in one paire of Sheets. It is not to be attempted with a bruitish and sensuall minde. O that all that are tyed in this sacred knot, would consider in good earnest, and lay to heart what it is the Lord requireth of them! I should thinke my selfe exceeding happy, and account it a mercy to give thankes for, Evening, Morning, and at Noon: might it please the Al∣mighty, to accompany with his blessing, these weake endeavours of the unworthiest of all the labourers in his Vineyard, to make them instrumentall for the rectifying and remedying those dan∣gerous abuses in choosing of those vile miscariages that are too frequent in living with this relation.
The seed I sowed in that Judicious Auditory, that was assem∣bled upon this occasion was good, (O that it might bring forth much fruit!) pardon the hand that cattered it, it was unskil∣full. I then drew a Copy, (O that all whom it may concerne, that now shall look on it, would write after it!) not excepting at the unhandsomnesse, but pondering the usefulnesse of it. These are the hopes and prayers of
Sir,

