


My Lord,
THough learned ens in most countries of Europe, have travelled successfully these many years, in discovering the impostures of Rome, so as it might seem sufficient to let the world enjoy the tractates al∣ready extant on that subject; Yet the sedulity of the ministers of that Church, in proposing Sophisms, often, and long ago confuted, in a new dress, as if they were new topicks, yea unheard of demonstrations, thereby to ensnare unwary Readers, doth impose a necessity up∣on sincere Lovers of Truth, for undeceiving the simple, to resume old Grounds from Scripture, Antiquity, and reason formerly improved by our renouned Heroe's. This had the stronger influence upon me to write these curso∣ry animadversions upon a Popish Pamphlet, otherwise of small significancy; because some through a lazy humour, will not, others being immersed in worldly entanglements, hardly can peruse the large volumns of Chamier, Whit∣taker, Calvin, Zanchius, Jewel, Usher, Junius, Chem∣nitius, Gerard and other Champions for the Truth;
yea some are smitten with such a fancy of Novelty, tha nothing doth relish with them, unless it come smoaking from the Press.
I shall not deny, but I was likewise moved with a just indignation, against the disputing party among Romanists, many of whom, being byassed with inte∣rest, seem to violent their own consciences in obtrud∣ing impostures on the World: Can it be supposed, that men of such raised parts, and eminent learning, who can∣not but be sensible from their own failours, of the weak∣nesses attending humane intellects; should believe the infallibility of the Papal chair in Dogmatical decisi∣ons, seeing those who often sit therein are known, neither to be men of greatest learning and Piety, nor ever did God since the foundation of the World, entail infallibili∣ty upon an elective succession of persons, chiefly when se∣cular interests, and intrigues of Policy have the chief stroke in the election? Can they believe an universal Mo∣narchy over all Princes and Churches to be setled by a di∣vine donation on the Bishop of Rome, seeing Scripture hath no vestige of that fifth Monarchy, unless it be in the Apocalyptick predictions, and the Fathers of the ancient Church have not spared to contradict the Popes of Rome in their Dogmatical definitions? Can they believe the lawful∣ness of Image-worship, (whatever Metaphysical distincti∣ons they have coyned to put a fair gloss on the matter) it being so expresly prohibited in the decalogue, and no pra∣ctice thereof occurring in the Chatholick Church, for three Ages and upwards after Christ, whereof those great An∣tiquaries cannot be ignorant? Can these great masters of reason, believe the prodigius figment of transubstantiati∣on, which may vye with any of the Fables of Apuleius, Ovid, or Aesop, and is so luculently repugnant to the com∣mon sense and reason of all mankind, that a great man a∣mong themselves, going to Mass, is reported to have been
so ingenuous; as to say, Eamus ad communem errorem? Can they justifie the Lawfulness of half Communions, without fighting with their own consciences, these being confessedly opposite to the primitive institution, and to the known practice, not onely of the Catholick Church, but also of the Roman, for many Ages? who would not be mov∣ed with indignation, that men should upon designe, abuse their parts and wit to cheat the World? I know not how to reconcile these men to themselves, unless it be supposed, that because they received not the Truth in love, they are given up to strong delusion, and . I grant Bellarmine, Barronius, Perron and others of that Cabal have said much for an ill cause. They have indeed shew∣ed themselves to be men of great parts, but of very evil consciences. They who devote their endowments to the pa∣trociny of heresie, would remember that errors in religion are such creasy and burdensome superstructures, that the strongest shoulders must needs shrink under them
My bowels in the mean time do yern toward the sequaci∣ous multitude in the Roman Communion, who in the Sim∣plicity of their hearts surrender themselves, to the conduct of such teachers, How grateful is it to these who love easie methods of Religion among whom are not only those of the meaner sort of people, but also many of greater quality) to be fred from serious inquiries after divine truths, by an im∣plicite submission to infallible guides? and having once in∣trusted their faith to those teachers, how secure do they judg themselves, being taught by no meaner Casuist, then Cardi∣nal Tolet, that its not onely safe, but also meritorius, to be∣lieve the doctrines taught by their teachers though false on the matter, untill they know that the Roman Church tea∣ches otherwise. Thus the leaders of these deluded people cause them to err. Nor will the pretended infallibility of their teachers, be sufficient apology for them at the great day. This rather will be their condemnation, that upon such a
pellucide and improbable pretence they should have made small account of the truely infallible Canon of holy Scrip∣ture, which God hath charged those to search who would find eternal Life, Joh. 5.34. From this search, nothing doth more deterr people, then the thorny and litigious debates, raised by School-men and Controversists, as if men be∣hoved turn Scepticks in religion, if they did not implicit∣ly intrust the conduct of their Faith, to a Romish infalli∣ble guide. But, blessed be our God, its not a matter of such insuperable difficulty, to find out the truth of Religion, in the holy Scripture, as they who design the inslaving peo∣ples consciences, do pretend; If prejudices once being laid aside, men would apply themselves sincerely to the use of appointed means. For the wisdome of God hath, with a perspicuity accommodated to the weakest capacities, re∣vealed these things which are necessary to Salvation: ac∣cording to that of Hilary, In absoluto & facili est Aeter∣nitas, Non per difficiles questiones nos ad vitam Aeter∣nam vocat Deus, and a greater then Hilary, the A∣postle of the Gentiles, 2 Cor. 4.3. If our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; and a greater then hoth, our Saviour Christ, Joh. 7.17. If any do the will of God, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God. One thing I am sure, its much more easie to find out the true re∣ligion in Scripture, then by any means whatsoever to at∣tain a rational evidence of Papal or Council infallibili∣ty, which yet ought to be presupposed, before an implicite submission to Pope or Council.
Among the many evils of this generation, nothing should more awake the friends of Truth, zealously to appear for her interests, then the indifferent neutrality as to this or the other Religion, which seemes to be possessing the minds of many. This I conceive to be a woeful effect, partly of mens irreligious practices, and partly of the Sceptical Queries of Romanists concerning the divine
Original of the Scriptures; as if they would rather shake men out of all Religion, then that they should not give up themselves to their implicite superstition. These and such like accounts induced me to draw these lines, yet with a real indifferency whether they should be published or not; as not doubting but the same things had been, and would be treated of by others of greater abilities, and to more advantage.
Only, It may seem strange, how I of another Nation, and living at so remote a distance, should adventure upon this address to your Lordship: I must therefore humbly crave leave to give an account of this my presumption. These Papers having been carried by the hand of a friend into England; and without either my knowledge or design, hav∣ing the good fortune to arrive at your Lord-ships hands; I was told that your Lordship was pleased not only to cast a glance of your Noble eye upon them, but also, out of your affection to the Truths therein asserted, to entertain some thoughts of causing print them. Ʋpon notice hereof, I reflected on the saying of that learn'd and excellent Gentleman, Sir Charles Wolsely in his dedication to your Lordship of his judicious tractate of the Reasonableness of Scripture belief, That the hazard, whereto his Papers were exposed by your first view, would sufficiently in∣ure them to all future dangers. Lest therefore, My Lord, I should incur the hateful stain of ingratitude, I can∣not but deeply resent that this small Treatise, hath been ho∣noured with so Noble, judicious and impartial a Censor. The deference also I have to your Lordships profound judgment, hath animated me not a little, to consent with more freedome, to the exposing of it to the verdicts of a Critical World. The Reader cannot expect from me new dogm's; for though the Virtuosi deserve honour, who en∣rich the World, with new Phylosophical inventions; yet new opinions in divinity sound harshly, and as Tertul∣lian,
noted long ago, Quod primum, verissimum. Yea hardly can either new argument or new notion be now expected on the Popish controversies, seeing they have been agitated upwards of 150 years, by the most learned heads in Europe. My whole design was to shew that the old grounds of our Divines did abundantly confute the new gaudy flourishes of Romish emissaries: Wherein, if in any tolerable measure I have answered my undertaking, I hope your Lordship will not be offended to have your name superscribed thereto. So confiding that your Generosity will excuse this boldness of a stranger, I shall not cease to pray that grace, mercy and peace may be multiplyed on your noble family, and that all the Nobility in his Majesties dominions, may account it their honour to be zealous for the reformed Religion (which, however it be mis-represented by Romanists, is the truely Catholick faith) and Exemplary in the practise of Godliness. I say no more, but subscribe my self.
Aberdene Jun. 17. 1674.
My Lord, 
