



RIGHT HONORABLE,
It was not any supposed Worth in these Papers, which moved me to consent to the pub∣lishing
of them. But because our Romish Adversaries had the confidence, openly to triumph in City and Coun∣try, (though I hope without ground,) as if their Cham∣pion Master Dempster, had left, not me only, (which had been no great matter,) but also the Religion of PRO∣TESTANTS, at a great losse and disadvantage. Who, Who am I, the meanest of the thousands of ISRAEL, that any infirmities of mine, whether supposed or reall, should be charged on so GLORIOUS a CAUSE, which is the invincible Truth of the Most High GOD, & may bid a defyance to all the Goliahs and Hoasts of Romish Philistins? Hath not the Reformed Religion, stood as an impregnable Rock against all the assaults both of Speculative and Prag∣matick heads and bloody hands, which have been kept at worke these many years, in opposition thereto by the See of Rome? Who then, that is but one remove from madnesse, can imagine that the insignificant scufle of this Iesuit should endanger it? I freely confesse, what I have said, or can say, is infinitly below the dignity of the CAUSE which I mantaine, yea, and exceedingly short, of what eminent Lights in the Reformed Churches have said, and can further say in behalfe of our Religion. Must it not argue either height of prejudice, or pitifull shallowness, to impute whatsoever deficiencies of such an one as Me, to Religion it self? Wherefore Reverend, Learned, Pious & Iudicious Persons, (with whome I did communicate all these Papers when they were exchanged,) have judged it sit, that all should be faithfully published, that the World might have a new demonstration, on how small grounds
(to say no worse,) our clamorous Romanists can triumph, as if they were more then conquerours. Well may that saying of Austin, in Psalm. 32. Be accommodated to them, Non remanet iis nisi sola infirmitas animositatis, quae tanto est languidior, quanto se majores vires habere aestimat. There only support is, the infirmity of an high or overweening stomach, which is so much the more feeble, as it overvalueth its own strength.
It hath been the usuall artifice of Hereticks, when they could not conquer Truth by their captious argueings, to load the assertors thereof with reproaches. Austin com∣plained of such dealing, both from Pascentius, a champion of the Arrians, tom. 2. Epist. 174. As also from the Donatists, tom. 7. in Epist. ad Donatist. post collat. What wonder then, though Romanists who are so Hereticall in their Doctrines, be Acted by the same Calumniating Genius? Learned Doctor Prideaux, lect. 9. de visib. Ec∣cles. §. 11. Hath been at the paines to present his Reader with a multitude of instances of most impudent Calum∣nies, wherewith Romanists have aspersed faithfull wit∣nesses of truth. I will not rake in that dung-hil. Only let me remember you, that Romish practises of this nature were long agoe so known to the World, that learned Doctor Featly, before that he and Doctor Francis Whyte, engaged in their disput with Fisher and Sweet, two Iesuits, could easily presage and foretell to the pitcher of the field, that whatever were the issue of that combat, and at what∣ever disadvantage the Iesuits should be left, yet he and his Colegue Doctor Whyte, should be conquered in effigie,
and led in triumph in many a Pageant at Doway, Bruxels, Rhemes, and Rome, as afterwards fell out. Yea so impu∣dent were the Romanists, that Doctor Weston told at Sainct Omers, to a Protestant Lord, who had been present at the disput, viz. to the Earle of Warwick, that the two Iesuits had acquitted themselves so admirably well, and with so much advantage to the Romish interest, that two Earles, and an hundreth Auditors were gained to the Church of Rome, and of these Earles this noble Lord to whom the Doctor spake, was affirmed to be one; who could not but smyle as these ludibrious Legends. For the Earle well knew, there were not near an hunder persons present at the Conference, nor one PROTESTANT staggered thereby. Yea, the person for whose satisfaction that conference was principally intended, though before he had his own doubts, yet after the debate, professed that he was fully resolved as to the Reformed Religion. All this is testified by judicious Doctor Featly, in the Relation of that Conference. Should it then seem strange to any, that the tristing debate wherein I have been lately en∣gaged with this Iesuit, hath been so grosly misrepresented by men of these principles? Who could have expected any thing else? Doe men gather grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? Yet as to my own particular interest, I could have borne all their reproaches, remembring that of the Ancient, Quisquis volens detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi meae. But judicious Lovers of Truth finding Re∣ligion it self to be thrust at through my sides, laid bonds upon me to give the World a faithfull account of that
whole transaction; though otherwise, I could willingly have destined these poor Papers, so farre as they concerned me, to perpetuall silence.
Since therefore, Very Honorable, this scufle with Mr. Dempster fell out under the intuition of your Authority, I judged it incumbent to me, to present you with this brief ensuing account thereof. As you in your Civil Capa∣city, and we your Ministers in our Ecclesiastick Lyne, tra∣velled to suppresse Error and Vngodlynesse in this CITY, We had frequent opportunity to deal with Persons of a Popish perswasion. When we did demonstrate to them that the present Romish Religion was False, Impious, Idola∣trous yea, and (notwithstanding all its high pretences to Catholicism,) grosly Schismatical. These poor straying Soules, being nuzled up in ignorance by their Romish Guides, under a pretence of the Implicit Colliar Faith, could make little other Reply, then that, though they could not answere us, yet there Priests and Learned Men could argue the matter to the full. We often in compas∣sion to these misled Persons told them, that not the Priest only but the People also should be ready to render a reason of the hope which is in them with meekness and fear. 1. Pet. 3.15. That though the seduceing Priest shall receive a larger measure of Damnation, yet misled Soules who wilfully persist in their Error, when truth is convincingly pro∣posed, will also Dye in their sins. Ezech. 3.18. Matt. 15.14. And therefore, that it highly concerned them to examine the proposalls of their Priests. We did adde likewise, and I hope without vanity, that had we opportunity of
speaking with these Learned Men, of whom they talked so bigly, we should be ready to give a rationall account of the Truth which we professe, and of the Falshood of Popery. Hereupon (as we have since been credibly in∣formed,) after many Consultations betwixt the chief per∣sons of the Romish profession in this Place, and traffiquing Missionaries, Mr. Dempster was chosen as the Champion who should encounter the Ministers of ABERDENE, whom they concluded to assault by a supprizall.
When the Popish Party are about this secret contrivance, it fell out, that as I was preaching upon the Doctrine of Repentance, from Acts 17.30.31. I gave this transient advertisement to my hearers, That the Popish Doctors had not only corrupted the dogmaticalls of Christianity, (as we had frequently demonstrated,) but many of the Practicalls also. I did instance from the Subject matter which I was handling, that many of their great Doctors doe teach, That when a man hath sinned haynously, he is not bound to repent presently, in so much, that their great Cardinal de Lugo, tract. de paenit. disp. 7. sect. 11. § 1. num 169. speaking of this Doctrine, sayes, that it is Sententia verior & communis jam omnibus Theologis uno vel altero recentiore excepto. That this Doctrine is now received by all their Di∣vines, except one or two Neoterieks. Nay, great Doctors among them, as their famous Vasquez, tom. 4. in 3. part. quaest. 86. dub. 6. Mantaine, That the precept of Repentance binds only, per se, in articulo mortis, In the article of Death. I shall not here mention other of their absurd Positions in that matter, whereof I have given some account in my
Reply to the Iesuits eight Paper, page 158. 159. &c. The discovery of this their Doctrine concerning Repentance, which hath so direct a tendencie to Ungodlynesse, seem∣ed to have such a reflexion on their Popish Religion, that a Gentle-Man of that Profession (whom I doe very greatly honour, and whose Conversion I sincerely wish,) judged himself concerned to send a challenge to Me by a friend: Shewing That he wondered why I should thus wrong their Doctors; yea, he was so confident of my mistake, that the Messenger said, that he promised to turne. PROTESTANT if I would make good what I had asserted. I told the Messen∣ger that I was sure of a Convert, if the Gentle-Man would stand to his word, and if he would be pleased to come to my Study, his own eyes should be judges, whether I had wronged their Authors.
Within a few dayes hereafter, when the Secret contri∣vance (as seemes,) was ryp, and Master Dempster with much study had put his Syllogisme into its goodly frame, and committed it to writing, (only the misery was, that he forgot to study the Confirmation of either of the Propo∣sitions thereof,) the Gentle-Man of whom I was lately speaking, accompanyed by another of that Profession, was pleased on the 18. of Aprile 1666: to make Me a visit, my Reverend & Learned Colegue, Mr. GEORGE MELDRUM being then with Me. He did bespeake us both to this purpose. You may remember, (said he,) that you have said in conference with persons of our Profession, that you would not shunne to argue the Controversies of Religion with any of our Learned Men, and now you may have opportunity of a free
communing with a Catholick Scholer (so the Iesuit was de∣signed,) at my Lodging, if you be pleased to goe along with Me. We answered, that we were not unmindful of what we said, and should be as ready through the help of GOD to performe, whensoever occasion did offer. But I behov∣ed first to answere another challenge sent by him to Me; some dayes befor, as if I had wronged Popish Authours cōcerning the Doctrine of Repentance. And therefore, I offered pre∣sently to make good what I had affirmed as to that thing, by produceing their own Authours. But he would not so much as speake to that particular: Only he insisted u∣pon the other Proposition. Whereupon we told that we should never decline a communing, either upon that par∣ticular, or any other Question of Religion with any person whatsoever. But because such Conferences might be ex∣ceedingly misrepresented, it were edul that Circum∣stances were cautiously ordered. It was therefore agreed upon by mutual consent, that there should be none pre∣sent but six of either side, and all to be silent except the Disputants. Yea, the six which should be of the Popish side, were by name expressed. The day being now farre spent, and the advertiseing of our Friends requiring a time; it was also condescended, that our meeting should be to morrow in the afternoon, at this Gentle-Mans Lodging. When we had given notice to some discreet Persons of Our Religion, concerning this challenge, they looked upon the place as unfit, upon many accounts. Wherefore I wrote a letter, desiring the meeting might be at some other place, especially, where bookes might be at
hand, if any testimony which we cited should be denyed. But when we were so far from obtaining this, that our de∣sire was interpreted, as if we were declyning the Conference, and distrusting our CAUSE. We resolved to goe to the Gentle-Mans house upon whatsoever disadvantage, take∣ing along with us no more then the definit number of Persons eondescended upon. When we came into the Lodging, we found (contrary to promise,) a great multitude of both Sexes.
The Champion (whom we afterwards understood to be Mr. Dempster Iesuit,) being set in a great Chair at the head of the Table, and a Popish Youth, who had been educated at the Scots College in Paris at his elbow; as a Scrivener, (who was none of the Persons communed upon,) we complained of violation of promise, in bring∣ing us to such a publick Convention, which in the end prov∣ed tumultuary, The clamours of the Excommunicated Women being louder then the Iesuits Arguments. The Iesuit answered, that was but a circumstance. But it was replyed to him, that PROTESTANTS had too many dear bought experiences of the Perfidy of Papists. If they were not faithful in Circumstances, we had cause to jealous them much more in Substances.
This passing. I publickly declared before all present, that I had received from such a Gentle-Man two Challenges, One, as if I had charged upon Popish Doctors eoncerning Repentance that which they doe not mantaine. The Other, to debate the Controversies of Religion with this person, who appeared as Champion for the Romish interest;
Which my Reverend Colegue and I were ready to doe, not against him only, but against the whole Conclave of Rome, if there present. As to the first, I repeated to the Iesuit, what I had charged upon many of the chief Doctors of the Present Romish Church, concerning the Doctrine of Repentance, viz that they mantaine, That when a man hath sinned haynously he is not bound to repent presently. And required him, as one whom I presumed to be acquaint with their writings, to declare, whether it was so or not? And if he would deny it, I offered instantly to prove it a∣gainst him. The Iesuit answered he came not either to answere Questions, or Objections against the Romish Religion; but only to impugne the PROTESTANT Religion. It was Replyed to him, we were not affrayed of his Impugnations, but matters behoved to be managed orderly. The Reli∣gion which we professe, being not only the Truth of GOD, but also established by the Law of the Land; We could not betray our Trust, by suffering it only, or in the first place to be impugned. But he should have all, which in Reason or Iustice could be desired. Let him answere us either two or six Arguments against Poperie, we should answere as many propounded by him against the Religion of PROTE∣STANTS. And this previous question concerning Repentance, being of a matter of fact, might soon be at an end. So as not to impede the General discuss of the Truth of Religion. But the Iesuit peremptorly insisted upon his Declinatur, That he would answere nothing, neither Question nor Argu∣ment, but only impugne
Here it pleased a Grave & Iudicious Person, who lately
before had born Principal Charge in the Magistracie of this Town, G. G. P. (whom we found in the Lodging with others at our coming,) to interpose himself thus. I am a PROTESTANT (said he,) nor have I any scruple concerning my Religion, yet I could willingly hear the contro∣versies of Religion fairly debated. But I cannot be witnesse to have the PROTESTANT Religion only called in question, or in the first place. But it seemes a most just and reasonable proposal which is made, that so many objections be first moved against the Popish Religion, and then as many a∣gainst the Religion of PROTESTANTS. This the Iesuit pertinaciously declyned, stil affirming that he would only impugne. Whereupon our PROTESTANT Friends thought it was fittest for us to be gone. And indeed we were once at the door removing, untill these of his own Party being ashamed of his tergiversing, perswaded him at length by their importunity first to be Respondent.
We returning, (and the Iesuit shunning to debate with my Reverend and Learned Colegue Master GEORGE MELDRUM who had offered to impugne him,) the Iesuit was againe desired, First to Answere to the Question of fact, concerning the Doctrine of Repentance, and then Arguments of more general concernment should be pro∣pounded. But he refuseing to answere to that question, unlesse it were framed into an Argument against their Reli∣gion, I told that for gaining of time. I would frame it into an Argument against their Religion, though it would oblige Me to a more general accusation of their Church, as to that particular, then I had delivered in the Pulpit. Yet
to extort an Answere from him I would doe it, hoping afterwards to have liberty granted, to propound other Arguments against their Impious, and Idolatrous Religion. The Thesis which I undertooke to prove, was,
That the Popish Religion is Impious. My first Argument was framed after this manner:
The Religion which teacheth, that when a man hath sinned haynously, he is not bound to repent presently, is Impious.
But the Popish Religion teacheth, that when a man hath sinned haynously, he is not bound to repent presently.
Ergo, the Popish Religion is Impious.
After that this Argument was several times repeated to the Iesuit, he denyed the Major. Whereupon I tooke Witnesse of all that were present, but especially of the Gentle-Man who had sent the challenge to Me, that the Iesuit had admitted the Minor, viz. That the Popish Religion teacheth, that when a man hath sinned haynously, he is not bound to repent presently (Which was the only thing which I intended to have cleared by this Argument, and was more then I had affirmed in Pulpit, of that particu∣lar,) And that he only denyed the Major, that it is an Impiety to teach so. Then I would have been at the pro∣pounding of a new Argument. Had not he and that Par∣ty, as seemes to drive of time, and to keep Me from pro∣pounding other Arguments against their Religion, by
their clamorous outcrying, cōstrained me to insist on that which I never intended, namely, The confirmation of the Major, which of it self, might seem evident enough to any who had any sense of Godlynesse. It would be too tedious in this Epistolar discourse, to rehearse to your HONOURS all that was said in Confirmation of that Major. Only I shall briefly relate to you the Result of it. The Iesuit in end was reduced to say, That when a mans Soul, or Body, or his Neighbours Soul are in extreme danger, he is not bound presently to take care of any of them. Which whether it sa∣vour of Atheism, intelligent Christians may judge? Yea some of the Hearers, who were not called by us (speaking of that busines,) could make no better Apology for the Romish interest, then to say, That the Iesuit behaved himself like one who resolved to betray the Romish Cause.
Then I propounded another Argument, which indeed was the first that I designed against their Religion, (the former being only occasionally put into a Syllogistick frame to extort an answere from him, in reference to the Matter of Fact, whereof I had been challenged,) after this manner.
The Religion which destroyeth all certainty of Faith, is Impious.
But the Popish Religion destroyeth all certainty of Faith.
Ergo, the Popish Religion is Impious.
Though the Iesuit would make no Answere at all to this Argument, yet I proposed a Confirmation of the Assumption,
(which was the only proposition, which he could deny,) from the Tridentin and Florentin Canons, which make the efficacy of all Sacraments to depend upon the intention of the Priests who officiat. From which it followeth, that seeing they cannot have Certainty of Faith concerning the Priests intention, all certainty of Faith must be overturned in their Religion. They cannot certainly know who is Pope, Bishop, or Priest, (Ordination with them being a Sacra∣ment,) or who is Baptised; and consequently, they cannot know who is capable to be a Constituent member of a Council, or to celebrat the Eucharist, and so they can∣not have certainty of Faith, that their Hosty is transubstan∣tiated, even according to their own Principles, of that they have either Pope, or Council, on whose Authority to build their Faith. To this Argument, the Iesuit refused absolutly to answere, desiring that he might have liberty to impugne. But it was replyed to him, that my Argu∣ment was already tabled, to which if he would answere, I should answere him other two according to my first pro∣posal. And this was so much the more reasonable, be∣cause my first Argument, as I ever declared, was only to extort a declaration from him, concerning a matter of fact. Sundry also of our PROTESTANT Friends, (with∣out whose advice, I resolved not to move in a matter of such publick concernment,) advised that I should ad∣mit of no Arguments from him, unlesse he would answer this Argument which I had last proposed. But still he persisted in his Refusal to answere my Argument. Whereupon it was told him, neither would I admit of any
from him, untill that which I had propounded were an∣swered. Yet had he been very zealous to impugne, might he not at lest have vocally propounded his Ar∣gument? Did I not propound a second Argument a∣gainst him, and hint also at the confirmation of the Propo∣sition, which might have been questioned, though he re∣fused to answere thereto? Could I stop his mouth, more then he could mine? All he did was to hold a Paper in his hand, (wherein it seemes, he had his poor naked Syllogisme,) and to call upon the Scrivener to writ. But he never told what should be writen. It is generally supposed, and I believe truely, that the Paper which the Iesuit had in his hand, was the First Paper which he transmitted to me the next night, and is in my Reply thereunto, I hope sufficiently examined. It resembled every way his first Paper, which I have by me, and it is more then probable that his first assault would be with that long studyed Achilles, especially, seeing in all his following Papers he could never frame one Syllogism more.
Matters being at this point, the Iesuit said he would send a writen Paper to me, which I told him, by the help of GOD, should be answered. Hereupon these ensuing Papers betwixt him and me were exchanged, which I shall submit to the candid censure of the unprejudiced Reader. Only the tenth and last Paper was not tran∣smitted to him, the occasion whereof was this. Shortly after the Iesuit sent to me his tenth Paper, dated May 14 1667. He got out of the Nation. A Reply to it was lying
drawn by me in Iune 1667. And when I was intend∣ing to transmit it to him, severall Persons did advertise me that he was gone over Sea; yet, as afterwards I per∣ceived, they made the rumour to goe, that he was gone, sometime before he was really gone, to make me (as seemes,) lay aside thoughts of returning an answere to his Tenth Paper. I thereupon desired to be advysed by judicious Friends, what was fit to be done in such an exigent; whose judgements did all harmoniously concurre in this, that all the Papers should be Printed, together with a Reply to his tenth Paper, that the World might have a full account of this whole Encounter, which had been so much noysed abroad. Though I had a great a∣versation from appearing in Print, especially, with such trifling Papers, yet in end the Importunity and Autho∣rity of Friends prevailed. And the rather because the Papists made afterwards rumours sometime to goe that Mr. Dempster was dead, somtime that he was alive, so that I could not certainly know what was become of him. But whether he were liveing or dead, the Misrepresentations of this matter were still animated by the calumniating Genius of living Papists, for confutation whereof, their clamours laid a necessity upon me, to publish faithfully the Papers exchanged betwixt us.
There be some two or three things in these Papers which perhaps may seem to require an Apology. As first, It may be offensive to some that there should be so much writing on so little purpose. This can be no more irk∣some to a Reader, then it was tedious to me in writing.
But the nauseating repetitions of the Adversary constrained me either to resume the same things, or to disdaine to give him any Answere. Yet whether I have not given to him a large enough field, had he had courage to adventure out of his trenches, others may cognosce. This I confesse was one of my tentations to chastise him some-what sharply. least peradventure I might afterwards be judged Socius Criminis.
It may Secondly be enquired, why I was not as speedy at all times in my Answeres to him, as he was to me. I believe the frequent incumbency's of duty which your HONOURS know dee weekly return on me, in School and Pulpit, might sufficiently apologiz for me in this matter. But I have this further to adde. At the first, upon expectation of some significancy from the Adver∣sary, I concerned my self to use some diligence in re∣turning my Papers, I believe not inferiour to him, though I had more to doe. But afterwards when I found nothing but frothy emptinesse in his scriblings, it became a Probleme with me, whether to answere him at all. Here∣upon I would purposly throw by his Papers for a time. But lest my utter silence should make him overvalue what he had said, I would at a spare houre, mould him an answere. When I thought of the dispatch he some∣times used, (though yet sundry of his Papers be antedated a considerable time before they were delivered to me,) it brought to my minde the story of the conceited Painter, who bringing a Picture to Apelles, to raise the esteeme of his Artifice, told that he had done it in so short a time. I
guessed said Apellès at your great haste by your foule work. Festinans Canis caecos parit catulos. Is it not an easie matter to dispatch quick Replyes, when what is most material is answered with silent Preteritions? Others may consider, whether the Iesuit have not de∣meaned himself as it's reported of the Dogs of Egypt, that for feate of being bitten with a Crocodyle, they dare not take a full draught of the Rryer Nilus, but satisfie them∣selves with transient lappings. Indeed his Papers and Quaker discourses, as some vvhere I have told him, re∣quired no great study. He would doe well the next time to minde that advyce of Socrates .
There is a Third exception, which may be taken at the acrimony vvhich I have used in some of these Papers. I sincerely professe, I take no pleasure therein. I love rather hard Arguments then hard Words. I acknowledge the Truth of that saying of the Comick Poet, Bacchae Bacchanti &c. But there be two things, vvhich I hope vvill in great measure plead my Apology in this also. The First is, that these smart expressions had their first ryse from the Iesuit and not from me. In evidence whereof, let a Momus peruse my First Reply, if any uncivil expression be found in it: Yet what scurrilous and dung-hil e∣loquence the Iesuit useth in his next Paper, vvithout any provocatiō is obvious to any Reader, But next, I appeale to all rationall Persons, vvho shall peruse these Papers, vvhether he gives not just cause for smart Language, by his nauseating Repetitions, shameful Preteritions; and impudent Calumnies, (for vvhat I knovv,) vvithout a
parrallel. In so much, that sometimes he vvould inscribe his Papers vvith a splendid Calumny, affirming, that I had disovvned all vvhich I had said before. So he did in his sixth Paper. When these his Papers were disse∣minated among the Popish Proselyts, (without my An∣sweres) who tooke all the Iesuits bold Assertions for Oracles, and were ready thereupon to clamour through the Country, would not such dealing have moved the Choler of a Person of ordinary Meeknesse? It was the saying of a great Iurist, Non irasci ob eas causas, I ob quas irasci oporteat, stultoru est. Yea Aristotle af∣firmes it to be an Act of meeknesse, . And Plutarch was not afraid to say, . Yet if either Master Dempster or any for him will hereafter prosecut this De∣bate in a Rationall and Civill way, they may be assured of as Courteous and Civil Entertainment as they shall give. But leaving these things.
I have made bold to superscribe your HONOURS NAMES to these Papers. Your known Affection to the True Reformed RELIGION, and your zeale for promoting the wel-fare of this Famo CITY, the Happynesse whereof is more wrapt up in the Interest of Religion, then in any Earthly concerne, suffer me not once to doubt of your Willingnesse, to undertake the Patrociny of the Truths herein asserted. The Obliga∣tions are so many and so great, which ly upon me from this CITY, and from the MAGISTRATS and COUN∣CIL'L thereof, especially these twenty and one yeares
last bygone, wherein I have been, through Mercy, offi∣ciating, though weakly, in the publick Ministry of the Gospel among you; beside the Personall respects which I owe to your selves, who at present doe possess the Chair, that you may justly challenge a Proprietie in all my per∣formances. It is therefore become a Probleme with me, whether this poor Present which I humbly tender to you, ought not more properly to be termed the Payment of a just Debt, then a SYMBOL of GRATITUD? But under whatsoever notion you shall be pleased to ac∣cept of it, I shall surely be the more deeply addebted to you. I adde no more, only the GOD of all Grace and Truth rebuke a Spirit of Errour, Prophanesse and Idolatry, which hath Alas! fermented too too many in this Place That this City may become a City of Righteousnes, a Faithful City, wherein Mercy and Truth may meet to∣gether, Righteousnes and Peace may kisse each other, and the Cognizance thereof may be, IEHOVAH SH AMM AH, The LORD is there. I conclude with that Apostolical supplica∣tion, in behalf of you our Governours. The very GOD of Peace sanctifie you wholly, I pray GOD, your whole Spirit, Soul and Boe preserved blamelesse unto the comming of our LORD IESVS CHRIST. So prayeth he, who is

