



To a Church of Christ in Wapping near London; Grace, Mercy and Peace be Multiplied.
I Could not (dearly beloved) but judge it my Duty, to Dedicate these Sermons unto you: part∣ly, because you are my peculiar Care and Charge in the Lord, unto whom I do ow my Labour and Pains; and also by reason of that joint Request you were pleased to Attack me with∣all, viz. that they might be made Publick; giving me good assurance that they might be of great use for the good of Christians in this place. I have here (though it be against my own inclination) answered your desire; Let this undertaking be at∣tended with your serious and solemn Prayer, that your hopes of good may be accomplished. What I have wrote in my Epistle to the Readers, many
of you can testifie, you well know what a long time of Silence I have had; how desirous I was to live in peace; that alwaies being esteemed a Jewel of great price with me, hop∣ing that the dust that hath been rais∣ed to the darkening of the Air a∣mong us, might have fallen without any attempt of mine to suppress it; but the violent effort of the Pulpit, and the furious Reports of the Press, have something awakened me from that ease and quiet, I should have been glad longer to have solaced my self withall: But alas it was time to be something alarmed, when the flames were inkindled about us, and our little Field in danger of being consumed, here is one that hath put this place even into a Conflagration. I shall (I doubt not) fall under the lash of many censuring Tongues, for this small endeavour, to vindicate this one exploded (though precious) Truth of Christ. You have had ex∣perience of my spirit and deport∣ment, and cannot from the strictest
observations you have made of me, but say, that so far as may be, I have been willing to live in peace with all men, and what care I have taken to preserve peace in the midst of and round about you. It would be matter of much comfort to me, may this little Essay be instrumental to reduce this place into somewhat a more sedate and calm temper: My Practice (ever since the Lord was plased to call me amongst you) hath been to give perpetual demonstrati∣ons that I live, and can walk with all that are sound in the Faith, and of an unblameable Conversation. I found you fixed upon that Noble, Evangelical Foundation, which I have endeavoured to build upon. Your laudable Principle is, that U∣nion with Christ, is the great ground of our Communion one with ano∣ther; let us magnifie God, for what we have found of his Gracious Pre∣sence and Blessing, since we came together, and stand in that relation as we do one to the other. I do with
much importunity request your Prayers, that I may daily have a re∣membrance from you at the Throne of rich Grace: Watch against all designs of men that lye in wait to deceive, and to disturb our peace: Study much the Covenant of Grace, blessed be the Lord that he hath not only ingrafted you, but also your Seed into it. You that have Chil∣dren, plead the Promises of the Co∣venant with God for them: Take heed of such Principles, that do ine∣vitably exclude your dear Babes out of the Kingdom of God, and render their Salvation (provided they ex∣pire in their infancy) not only im∣probable, but in any ordinary way impossible. Beg the Lord to put a stop, and to give a Check to that lying malicious spirit, that like a spiteful Ghost walks in this poor di∣sturbed spot. I doubt not, but what I have here transmitted from the Press, will be attended with the same opprobrious Censure it met withal from the Pulpit; many ignorant and
rash hot-headed Professors did se∣verely judge me, and my Sermons, that never heard them; and so I do expect many will that shall never read them, pour out their profound invectives against them. I must ex∣pect no better quarter, than honest Mr. Giles Shute, who by many was cast and condemned, that never read his Books, neither were able to pass a right Judgment upon them. I do heartily wish, that a greater number of my Anabaptist Neighbours, would labour more after the life and power of Religion; and Study to know their own hearts better: then I pro∣mise my self they would not be so prompt, and ready to undervalue and condemn others, as they be. I cannot but admire to see what a change is upon their spirits, words, and actions: in our late times of re∣straint they could be glad (many of them) to partake of my poor pains, and sometime since; but I do not so much wonder at them, as at their Teacher, who ever since the last
breaking forth of our Liberty, hath so much inveighed against all that are not of his opinion, and hath laid so much stress and weight upon his Notion, about Baptism, that hath distilled such bitterness into the spi∣rit of many, that they be turned very sowre and morose, to those that cannot imbibe their Sentiments. I bless the Lord, that I can say, I have not been the Incendiary among us; I lay still Six or Seven years till all was (from Pulpit and Press by Mr. Collins) put into Flames about us: It is next to a wonder to me that any should be so impudent, as to accuse me to be the Author of all the trouble that doth annoy us, not∣withstanding my long silence, and that little opposition that yet I have made against a turbulent spirit: that he might discover the uttermost of his bitterness, I must have him several times, to pronounce in his Pulpit before all his Congregation, an open Challenge against me. I do expect that so soon as these Ser∣mons,
shall have an access to his hands, that we shall hear sufficient∣ly of his tumultuous spirit: I have made a few remarks (as you may see) upon his bold and undigested Doctrine, rashly and ignorantly thrust forth into the World; giving you but a few Gleanings, to that Harvest, I may (if occasion be of∣fered) present you withall. I make no question, but my challenger will quickly fill our Ears with his An∣swers, be it so, the Lord (I hope) will enable us to make our reply: I desire that he would remember, the nature of his Challenge, that it was a single Duel, without propounding any Seconds, that he hath engaged me in. Stand fast in the Lord (my dearly beloved) as ye have received the Lord Jesus, so walk ye in him, as ye have received how ye ought to walk, so walk at all times, and a∣bound yet more and more; while some, and that not a few, are cry∣ing up an Opinion not necessary to Salvation; let your Zeal run out
after those Truths of the Gospel in the believing, and practising where∣of, you may obtain Salvation, and greatly rejoyce in the day of our Lord Jesus. Love one another; pity and pray one for the other; live in peace and love; and the God of Love and Peace shall dwell with you. Finally, my Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; I commend you to God, and the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them that are sanctified; that he in order thereunto, would be pleased to ful∣fil all the good pleasure of his Good∣ness within you, and the work of Faith with power, is the hearty de∣sire of him, that is

