



My Lord,
YOur incessant pains, and sin∣cere endeavours both by Coun∣sel and Elaborate Tractates, do sufficiently discover you a true English Prelate, and able Patron of the Prote∣stant Cause. And your great vigilance and integrity in your high and holy Calling, hath given you a just esteem in the hearts of good men; and wrought a belief in your Diocess, that things are well done if they gain your approba∣tion. Which forces me to give you the trouble of hearing, that about a month before the death of the Learned and truly Reverend Dr. Michael
Honywood late Dean, and now the just grief of the Church of Lincoln; he was pleased to inform me with some Re∣sentment of the too great Progress of Si∣mony in this Nation; bewailing the fatal Consequences of it to the Church, and commanding me to say something (if possible) to stop its growth. To which I answer'd, but with two sad assurance of truth, that I had travail'd less in the search of that Subject than in most others that a Divine is obliged to know. And besides was so valetu∣dinary, that in few days time I used to hear some soft Footsteps of approaching Mortality: which (though he knew to be true) yet his warm heart would not retreat, but permitted me only to be a little shorter. Two days after, I was advised to travail about sixty miles, to a Spaw for health; which I did: and at my return, was saluted with the most unwelcome News of the Deans death: so that I was forced to
share in the common sorrow. Though (not to dissemble) 'twas some ease to me, that I was delivered from my pro∣mise to him. But about five weeks since, a common Friend, conscious to my Obligation, demanded an account of Simony; as promised to the Decea∣sed: I answer'd, that death had cut the Band of that Promise: He replied, that the Deans life or death was no condition of it; and the reason of performing, was the same now as before. I submitted; and do now humbly pre∣sent these weak Lines to your Lordships view; desiring (if they are thought of any use) they may pass your Diocess under your Protection. I know the design is useful, though the ill handling may offend. If your Lordship think them useless, be pleased to receive them to that sure Sanctuary of Secresy and Silence; which will be most safe for
Bass.
Dec. 2d. 1681.

