



I Know nothing (Sir) more incon∣sistent
with right Reason, or which
deserves more to be Reform'd a∣mongst
Learned men, than their way
of Dedicating Books: And that we
may the better understand what ought
to be done in this Age, let us look back
into what was done by the Antients.
The Poets did indeed invoke their
Gods or the Muses in the beginning of
their Works, but that was rather to
obtain their assistance, than to bestow
upon them Panegyricks; but their
praising the Gods was a safe Subject
in which they could not exceed: And
therefore, though these Invocations
were the first occasion of writing Dedi∣cations
to Mortals, yet Flattery in this
made them mistake their Model so
far, that at last some of the Poets did
likewise invoke the Assistance of their

Emperours, as if they had been Gods
as well as Patrons.
Others of the Poets did very anti∣ently
Dedicate their Works to Men al∣so,
as Hesiod who was older than Ho∣mer,
dedicates or rather addresses his
first Poem to Perses; but 'tis very ob∣servable,
that he and others in such
like Addresses rather excite the Per∣sons
to whom they address to Vertue
and Glory, than magnify them for ha∣ving
attain'd to the perfection of either
or both. Yet some of these Poets have
left us Dedications so excellent, that
they are as little to be imitated as
censur'd, such as:
Hor. Epist. 1. Lib. 2.
Cum tot sustineas & tanta Negocia solus:
Res Italas Armis tuteris: moribus ornes:
Legibus emendes: in publica Commoda peccem,
Si longo Sermone morer tua tempora, Caesar.
And others of them, such as Virgil,
end their Poems with very decent and
delicate Complements, as that which
closes the 4th Book of his Georgicks,
Haec super arvorum cultu pecorum{que} canebam,
Et super arboribus: Caesar dum magnus ad altum
Fulminat Euphratem belo, Victor{que} volentes
Per populos dat Jura, viam{que} affectat Olympo.

which exceed, in my humble Opinion,
the fam'd and large Dedications of
Grotius and Causabon.
It was usual amongst the modest An∣tients,
to address their Books to such
as they thought able to correct them,
seeking rather Advice than Patronage:
And thus Plutarch tells us in the
Life of Lucullus, That Scylla ha∣ving
wrote an History, sent it to Lu∣cullus
to be corrected;. and
the Greek word used there,
seems to me to import only adlocutio.
And I think that the Antients have
found Protection and Patronage even
in those Addresses wherein Advice
was sought for; who durst have cen∣sur'd,
as Tully observes, what Brutus
or Pomponius Atticus approved?
Some also prefixt modest Prefaces,
wherein they acknowledged the Fa∣vours
done them, and told the occasion
of their Writing, as Vitruvius to Au∣gustus;
others did thereafter in imi∣tation
of the Writers of Tragedies
and Comedies, address themselves in
a Prologue, as Valerius Maximus to

Tiberius; and this I think he did▪
to give his Fancy scope, as a Poet, to
praise with the Latitude that Poets
take; for that is the first Debauch
I find committed of this kind,
for he could not have said greater
things to a worse Man.
To shun which Excess, some gave to
their Books the Names of the Muses, as
Herodotus; or of men of great Merit,
as Plato did in his Socrates, or Tully
in Laelius, &c. or else omitted all Ad∣dresses,
as Thucidides, Livy, Salust,
or at most extended not their Addres∣ses
beyond a mere Compellation, such
as that in St. Luke to Theophilus,
by which possibly may be meant any
Christian under this appellative Name,
rather than a particular Patron or
Friend, as some Books are now addres∣sed
to the Christian Reader, in imi∣tation
it may be of him; for 'tis ob∣servable
that the Church-men imi∣tated
this , of St. Luke,
and thus Origen dedicates his Book
against Celsus, with this Compellation,
: And Eusebius names

his Patron .
At last the word Dedication was
brought in by Flattery, and Books
were dedicated to Men in imitation of
their dedicating Temples, Statues, and
other things to the Gods; nor did this
extravagant way of excessive praising
ever appear till the World was under
Tiberius corrupted in all its Morals.
This depraved Custom was also much
heightned by the Panegyricks, made by
Pliny to Trajan, and by Eusebius to
the Great Constantine, who thought
that they might more justly praise the
good than others might impious Empe∣rours,
tho' I am afraid the Eloquence
which charms us in those two Discour∣ses,
shall never be able to account for
the ill Example they have given.
My design in all this is to shew, That
we can as little justify our Flattery by
the Practice of the Antients as by the
Principles of Reason, by which they al∣ways
regulated their Eloquence; And
therefore it seems to me, that Dedica∣tions
should be brought back to the an∣tient
Model, either of a naked Com∣pellation

which satisfies abundantly
Friendship, or of acknowledging Fa∣vours
which satisfies gratitude, or of
exciting the persons to whom we write,
to deserve those praises which are now
most unjustly bestow'd upon them, which
is a Christian Duty. And I cannot but
observe three very ill Consequences
which arise naturally and necessarily
from our late Dedications; the first is,
That they learn men to lye and flatter,
and Custom hath almost legitimated
this Crime, and made it a Duty Se∣condly,
They have poison'd the very
Fountains of Truth so far, that Poste∣rity
can hardly distingnish betwixt
those who have deserv'd well or ill,
Flattery thinking always fit to supply
by its excessive praises, what is wanting
in due merit; and therefore by how
much their Patrons deserve ill, they
praise so much the more, and the on∣ly
mark of Vertue in an Author or Me∣rit
in a Patron now is, that there is
no extraordinary thing said in any
Address to the one by he other; for
who can believe an Author speaks truth

in his Book, who lyes and flatters in
its very beginning; or that a Patron
has any modesty or common sense, who
suffers himself to be so imposed upon?
If the Patron believe what the Au∣thor
says, he must be a fool; and if he
believes him not, he must think the
Author one; and since they who lye im∣probably,
are thought fools in all things
else, why not in this too, in which they
exceed the most Romantick Travel∣lers,
for they only would impose on us
in things which we know not, but these
in things wherein we cannot but disco∣ver
them? and I wonder why they do
not as well praise the French King for
having found out America, or for hav∣ing
vanquisht Alexander the Great,
as for those things which they of late
ascribe to him in their Dedications.
Thirdly, Our late Dedications have
really corrupted the Eloquence of the
Age; for whereas the true Ornaments
of Eloquence are to be natural and de∣cent
in expressing our Thoughts, these
Dedications have blown our style into
a Tympany, and have ruined it's natu∣ral

Beauty by fulsome and ill placed
daubing Paints: Which
made Chrysippus,. as
Laertius tells us, de∣cry
all Dedications
to Kings and Prin∣ces,
lest they should en∣tice
men to Flattery;
but this were to run from
one Excess to another.
I Design, Sir, nothing in this Es∣say,
but to hold out a Lanthorn to those
who are ready to split on a Rock; and
I wish rather that this may be one of
the Works that may follow me,
than one of those that may bring
me Reputation: And I send this
to you as Lucullus did to Scylla
for Correction; or as Cicero did
to Atticus, as a token of our Friend∣ship,
and of my just esteem of your
Piety and Learning.

