



My Lord,
THIS following Treatise, is a Subject that lies so wholly whithin Your own Province of Honour, that it pretends a kind of Right to lay it self at Your Excellencies Feet For though in general it relates the happy Manageryof the last Years Successes in the North of Ireland, yet since that cannot be done without publishing some just Testimonials of the Courage, Fidelity, and Services of my Worthy Friend Collonel John Michelburn, methinks it is a piece of Duty (as the Pendant always attends the Flag) to usher his Bannoret under Your Standard. And truly there's some farther Plea for my presumption, in this Dedication, viz. That I may justly avow, that Collonel's Early Endeavours in the Kingdom of Ireland, were at least the Phosphore to Your Excellencies brighter Sun. His forward Hand gave the first fair Earnest for the Irish Successes, when in his Exemplary Northern Services, his Preservation of London-derry, I may properly say, like a true Forlorn Hope, he held the Ene∣my in play, till Your Excellencies heavier Mass of Glory could come up to sweep the intire Victory. A Victory indeed, in which the World must do You this publick Justice, that the whole last Years Renown was entirely Your own. For whilst in all the other Scenes of War, as Germany, Flanders, Savoy, &c. Fortune in a manner kept whollyneuter, and the rest of the Neighbouring Heroes only stood at a Bay, Your Excellencies more Active Arme held the most prevailing Sword, and only play'd the Conquering Game, whilst an entire Vi∣ctory follow'd no Chariot but Your own.
And as long as the Compleat Reduction of Ireland fills so large a Page in the English An∣nals, Your Excellencies never dying Merit must stand Chronicled with so fair a Character, that they must give You this peculiar Renown, That you made not War a Trade: You felt the Cause You fought; and in the Service of England, consulted the Interest of Christendom, whilst the Expedition of Your Triumph is possibly the brightest of Your Lawrels.
But alas! 'Tis not my Province to be Your Ex∣cellencies Herauld or Historian; there's no occasion for my poor Pen to attempt what all Tongues are already full of. 'Tis enough that with the Fame You have all the Vertues of a Conquerour, and as such, this Gentleman's Cause can not come before
an Abler, or Properer Judge; the Assurance of which Justice, is the occasion of this Confidence from,
My Honoured Lord,

