



MY LORD,
THe Innocence of the Clergy of our Church, as by Law Establish'd, whatever their Pretences are to the Contrary, is indeed the greatest Scandal and most real Of∣fence to the several Dissenting Parties.
While the Vices of a Clergy-man are Notorious, Hypocrites have somewhat to amuse the Vulgar with,
when they live within the Rules of the Church, those of the Contrary Parties are consequently a∣shamed, as having no Evil thing to say of them.
But that Shame soon breaks out into a Malicious Rage, and where the wish'd for Crimes are not to be found, some employ themselves, under the Prince of Hell, to forge Lyes, and affix them boldly, sew∣ing up Men in the Skins of Bears and Wolves, and then exposing them to be torn in Pieces by Dogs.
The Blessed Jesus met with this Dealing from Obdurate and Hypocritical Jews, the Christi∣ans of the First and Purest Ages, from Pagans, and the Lawful Clergy to this day, and in our Refor∣med Church meet with it from pretendedly Pure and Moderate, but really Apostate Protestants.
That Veneration with I, upon the most unpre∣judiced and deliberate Study, have entertain'd for the Church of England, has made me too a Sharer in that Glory of suffering by the Words and Actions of Ill-Men, whose greatest Pique against me is, That Bad as I am, I am not yet Bad enough to Associate with them.
Ill Will therefore employs all its Care to trace my Errors, and besides the Dull and Bashful Scurrility of Senseless Libels, and the utmost force of Belins∣gate Rhetorick, it has betray'd it self so far, as to declare, that nothing but the Fear of Humane Laws secur'd my Life.
This is indeed a very odd Method of Refining upon Religion, and perswading any that Men of
such Warm Tempers have attain'd to Extraordina∣ry Degrees of Spirituality; there was so little of this in the Practice of our Saviour and his Apostles, and the best Christians in all Ages, that for my part, I count it a real Breach of Charity and an Affront to the Gospel, to reckon such among the Proselytes of Christianity.
I have to the utmost of my Power endeavour'd to advance such Principles as were most necessary to make Men Truly Good in their several Relations, Devout and Pious towards God, Obedient and Submissive to their Lawful Superiours, Uniform and Reverend in their Publick Church Services, and Charitable and Peaceable one among an∣other.
Others have done this better, having carried on that Great Work with Greater Abilities, but none with Greater Sincerity or under Greater Discou∣ragements than my self.
Had these Doctrines been Ʋniversally entertain'd, we should have heard of no Separatists or Fana∣ticks, no Plotters, no Traitors, no Rebels.
My Lord, He deserves not the Name of a Mi∣nister of the Gospel, who is afraid to speak in the Cause of his God and of his King. Never was any Prince the Subject of so many Miracles, as Ours; and were not the Sons of Separation Mad as well as Blind, He, whom God has so oft and wonderfully pre∣serv'd, might at length be free from the Plots of Traitors, and among the most desperate Villains be believ'd Invulnerable.
The Preachers of Loyalty might prosecute their Great Masters Work in Peace; and if the Affection of the Dumb Son of Croesus was to be lov'd and ad∣mir'd, for setting his Tongue free to save his Royal Fathers Life, the meanest Gospel Minister might ex∣pect some Favour for speaking Plain, when the Cruel and Barbarous Hands of Traiterous Hypocrites are lifted up against the Dear and Sacred Life of his Soveraign.
Such an Occasion gave Being to this Discourse which now puts it self under your Honours Protection, and that which bears so Great a Name in its Front, must be by All concluded Loyal: The Author owns the Weakness of the Ʋndertaking, and therefore the Boldness of the Address; but is so well acquainted with your Goodness, that he dares not doubt of Par∣don for
My Lord,

