



WHen I observe the vicissi∣tudes and changes God makes upon the world, it puts me to a stand how to call men honourable.
But considering the noble Titles that God himself gives to men in Au∣thority, Psal. 82.6. as, I have said, ye are Gods, having the most ancient Author, I shall not erre to call you Honourable.
This last age is a time wherein Truth is much increased, arid much contro∣verted, and that glorious liberty Truth brings in is much abused by mis-con∣struction.
And indeed the mist is yet so great which makes most men stumble, for
want of day-light; yet our good God hath promised, Esa. 30 26. That the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold, and such as will not see, shall see, and be ashamed: I have more then ordinary ground to believe your zealous affection to Truth, which works in me a boldnesse to pre∣sent this small Book to your view: it is but a blossome of the tree of life, which may prove sweet to the tast, and plea∣sant to the eye, if divinely understood; for I judge your minds like to that no∣ble speech of Artaxerxes, who said, It became a noble mind as well to accept small things from others, as to give great things to them: Nay, God himselfe gives the greatest good to man, and accepts the smallest returnes from them; so I trust the smallest volume may be read by you as well as the greatest.
Yet would I not use your names for Patronage, not accounting any Booke worth a Patron, which hath not Truth to patronize it, which if this had not,
I should be as unwilling to set your names as my owne before it; but knowing you are as desirous to know Truth, as my selfe to search after it, you will do well to follow the wise Be∣reans, to try all things.
I confesse, when I duly ponder how all Writings in this Age are glossed upon, by the opinionative phansies of men, most speaking not as this Truth requires, nor yet as the Author meaneth, I then had some thoughts to have kept these things in my breast, where they first burned, rather then send them abroad to be descanted upon by mans judge∣ment.
But finding the fire to kindle, it must breake forth; and having greater arguments from the Author of Truth, then its controverter, knowing that no Truth is the worse because men dis∣relish it; and from that sweet com∣fort and delight I had then in wri∣ting it, I thought it better to lay
my selfe open to any censure, then to conceale any thing which may (by the Divine Power) conduce to the casting downe of darknesse in its Principles.
As for that Trust God hath now after so many contests, put into your hands, you will do well in all your af∣faires, to looke up unto the Author of this Honour, and the end for which he hath thus exalted you; and if you act according to his directions, which is for truth, righteousnesse and a just liberty, as I have great hopes God hath now given you this Power for this end, that those poor dark Countreys where the light of our good God hath not yet shined, that you may be restorers of paths to dwell in, furtherers of the Gospell, and in doing these things God may fulfill that promise to us by you, as to be Nursing-Fathers to these Orphan-like Countreyes: and me-thinks I see God pointing out glorious things by you,
in being active men, for good: There∣fore joyne hand and heart together, forget, all selfe-injuries, or other mis∣takes.
And truly then I may boldly say to you, even to you, without any flattery, that your Honour will be more then a bare Title, it will be emblazon'd in the divine Heraldrie, where your names in no Age shall be rooted out, for such is the memory of the just.
I need not tell you how God in these eight yeares last past hath out of weak∣nesse brought strength, made those things that are not to confound those that are, and now he goes [Psal. 8.2.] out of the mouth of babes and sucklings to shew forth his praise; you have seen this in some measure already, the same God that opens and no man shuts, keep open your eyes still, least any among you be found to despise the day of small things; how my indea∣vours,
or rather the Lords leading me in the making knowne those Truths: how they will speed amongst others, I know not.
Yet it will be a comfort to me to hear that you bid them welcome.
For, I have learnt not to esteem truth the lesse, because frowned upon, nor the greater, if smiled on; but here is my joy and glory, to see the Truth of God held forth in the world, whether it be received or re∣jected.
I feare I have troubled you with too large an Epistle to so small a Book, but consider that Love writ it, and so read it.
I beg from my heart, that as you are honourable, so you may be kept hum∣ble, and must from the love of God tell you plainly, that I rather desire you may lose your Honor, then lose or want hu∣mility, which (in some respect) is the Crown of blessings.

Yet in every state I shall sooner for∣get my owne name, then not remember my self to be

