



My Lord,
HIstories in general are like so many Re∣gisters, and Records of time, that convey to us the knowledg of what passed in the Ages before us, and there∣by helps us to look back, with
Pleasure upon the great Acti∣ons, and Noble Atcheivments, of our Worthy Predecessors; which renders the reading of them very Pleasant, and De∣lightful.
The History of the Holy War, has not only been the a∣musement of the Learned Pens of other Nations, but of a
Dr. Fuller. Celebrated Author of our own, which tho' written in a less critical time than this, where∣in that War seems to have a new resurrection, was receiv∣ed
with the general approbation of all lovers of History. But this Excellent History being now rare to be found, several Persons, who were extreamly delighted, with its agreeable variety, wherein no History, in the World does excel it; mightily Importuned me to revive it or else to write, a more Brief and Compendious account of that Religous War, that so it might be rendered the more Capable of an Ʋniversal Reading, the latter of which, I was upon
their persuasions, prevailed up∣on to undertake; But having performed the Task imposed upon me;, I found my self at a loss, for a Suitable Person to whom I might address, to own and Patronise the work, till at length I happily pitch'd my thoughts upon Your Lordship.
To Dedicate it, is made necessary by Custom; and to De∣dicate it to Your Lordship, as necessary, by the nature and design of the Book it self.

My Lord, it is a discourse of War, and therefore to have offered it to any other than a Soldier, and a Brave Son of Mars, had been an unpardonable Folly, and a Sacrilegious Robery of the God of War. And among all the Brave Commanders of this Honourable City, I find none whose Courage and Vali∣our, Prudence, and LOY∣ALTY, bears a better sound then Your Lordships; Not only in the Opinion of Your Fellow Subjects, but of
the King too, for it was the singular Wisdom and LOY∣ALTY, which you have Manifested upon all Occasions, that Recommended You both to his Majesties Gracious Choice, and the Peoples Ʋni∣versal desire for the Chief Magestrate of Englands Me∣tropolis. Wherefore I Hum∣bly Beg, You will be Pleased to Accept of the Dedication; and Permit this History to pass into the World, under the shelter of your Lordships Name, and Approbation, and
Pardon the Authors Pre∣sumption, in aspiring to so great an Honour.
Although for an Atonement of the ambition of this offering, I can only urge it is the Histo∣ry of the Holy War, where∣in those of our Nation gave as large a Testimony of their Courage, and Bravery against those Infidels, and Enemies of our Faith, as any Nation whatsoever.
Which Consideration may Peradventure prevail upon
Your Lordship, to allow it as a sufficient Expiation for the pride of this Oblation, E∣specially in a Person who is with the most Profound Zeal and Respect,
My Lord, 
