



YOu that are truly Noble, and the best
Deserving Gentry, who are alwayes blest
With honour'd vertues: that doe ever stand
For peace and truth, the freedom of the Land;
I do not aime at you, nor shall my laies
Sound ought of you, except it be your praise.


But unto you, who are the ushers in
Of fowle abuses, whose accursed sin
Drawes fools to sale, each from example cry,
If Gentlemen may do so, why not I?
Your learning fits you for't, your poyson'd wit
And beastly Logick, from the infernall pit
Prescribe you rules, to find a neater way
To Pluto's Court: your blouds, bound to convey
Your lusts on freely, and your means you make
To beare your charges to the boyling lake.


A yeoman foole goes slily, with one whore,
You rush on boldly, carrying halfe a score:
Your 'state will beare it, and your noble birth
Attones the ill, being higher stuffe then earth.


Rich fare provokes you, and you drench your dust
With costly liquors, which do gender lust.
Your idlenesse invites you to receive
Temptations gratis, never to bereave
The flesh of pleasures. And your rich attire
Doth tempt allurements, your expresse desire
Not Bungler-like: and your attendants go
Along with you, can low-borne fooles do so?

You dive for new delights and make a trench,
To bury jurdice, like the baser French,
Who from their full-mouth pride and armes of steele,
(Being pockifi'd) to prove themselves gentile;
Despising chastity, you love such weeds
That harbour snakes, and praise him that exceeds
In choicer evills. You perhaps had rise
From Brokers, Jaylors, Tapsters, or the dice
Might help your grand fathers, you might be screw'd
From userie, extortion, or be brew'd
In  liqaor; or some misers wheat
Sav'd from his mow (till mouldie) made you great:
You vainly spend what they with curses got,
Rais'd quickly with your names, so soon you rot.


To tax the females here, or draw their shapes
That keep their dogs, their monkies, and their apes,
To make them sport, or those that swell with pride,
And are too good for all the world beside
To looke upon, Religion is too base
For flaming furies, is not now the case.


You should have liv'd from such corruptions free,
And prov'd sweet patterns of humilitie;
Preferring goodnesse, loving purer theames
To stop the tide of basenesse in the streames.
Do good with your estates, your wit, your art
Should make you carefull, to prevent the smart
Which follies buy. I doubt what I reherse,
Will make you slight my subject, or my verse.
Yet read the book, and pay for't, if you fret,
They will not give you trust to run in debt.

