




SIRS,
GREAT Britain is acknowledged by all the World, to be Queen of the Isles, and as capable to live within it self, as any Nation; having not only all things necessary for the Life of Man, but also Abundance, Materi∣als,




and Stores; of Manufactures and Com∣modities to a Superfluity for Transportation; and is comparably situated for a Royal Bank of Credit, that all Trade offers it self to all its Ports and Harbours. The Soil of our Country being exceeding rich, abounding with all things necessary for Peace and War; as Grain, Horses, Beeves, Sheep, Flax, Wooll, and other Trafficks; Also Mines of Tinn, Copper, Lead, Iron, Coals inexhaustible; and no Nation in the Ʋniverse but partakes of its Woollen Ma∣nufacture more or less, and of its Linen: Paper of all Sorts, and Silk now made in England to great Perfection; and our Seas every where filled with Shoals of Fish, as good as Ready Money, to fetch in all Foreign Commodities. Now shall the God of Nature give us such great Blessings, and we be want∣ing on our Parts to improve them? Doubt∣less we may aggrandize our Trade with an in∣estimable Account, if we would our selves, and make our Territories as Rich and Populous as we please, under so Wise, Glorious, Valiant, and Good King and Queen, and Govern∣ment as we have; had we publick Spirits (as we ought) to give Countenance to Brave Actions of Industrious Men, and did truly
mind the Business of Trade and Populacy as much as we do Pleasures and Luxury.
Your Banks will beget Trade and People, and they will beget Riches; and then honest Pleasures will come of course. Riches are the Conveniencies of a Nation; but Trade and People are the Glory and Strength of the Kingdom. If we once come to be good and industrious, in Fearing and Serving God, in being obedient to our Good King and Queen, loving and charitable to one another; we may expect God's Blessing upon our Forces by Land and Sea; and no Nation can exceed us either at home, or in foreign Parts; we having so many Materials to employ our People, and our Nation hardy and ingenious enough to work and raise all sorts of Manufactures within our selves, which now we have from abroad.
If we did but take care to catch our own Fish, work up our own Growths, perfect our own Manufactures, as Linen, Woollen, Pa∣per of all sorts, thus doing will make us in∣finitely Rich to Eternity. Our Country being surrounded with our Neighbour-Natives, and of most Concern and near them, we are de∣signed for all manner of Riches, and to be the Seat of Empire, being a Land so plea∣sant,
and London so Great and Glorious that it invites all People to come over and stay here.
Our Country thus accomplish'd with all Blessings, as to Fertility and Ingenuity, a lit∣tle help will make it the most Glorious Place in the World, and His Majesty the most Potent Prince in Christendom.
I have hinted here at the chiefest Advan∣tages we are capable of: these, I am sure, will do England and Ireland's Work effectually, if truly encouraged; and we shall be ten times Richer in the third Part of an Age, by the Help of these Banks, if you employ your Time, and the Money of the Bank to Publick Uses and Accounts; as may be di∣rected in such Contrivances, as may tend to the General Good of all.
I beseech you, Imitate His most Sacred Majesty, and his Royal Consort, who are ne∣ver weary in doing Good, but are ready at all times to encourage Trade, Ingenuity, and Discoveries, beyond any former Princes: And let Their great Wisdom and Goodness be your Example.
To conclude; If you should happen to read this little Brat, if you think it not for the Publick, cast it from you; but if per∣swaded,
from the Reason of the thing, that it will, in some measure, accomplish the End after mention'd; then you are as much sound, and perchance more, to promote the thing, than my self. All Men are satisfied  Bank will be very advantagious to a Na∣tion, especially to a trading People, situate as  are: But the Great Question hath for∣merly been, How to raise a Stock or Fund that shall be credited by all; but now this Grand and Old Obstacle is removed, as hath been fully manifested, and made visibly appa∣rent to all Gain-sayers, by some Thousands of Persons, in their voluntary and ready subscri∣bing near Eight hundred thousand Pounds in four Days. I hope the Thing will suit most Mens Interests; but if I am mistaken in my Measures, I humbly crave Your Par∣dons, and subscribe,

