



SIR,
THE way of Dedicating now most in fa∣shion, seems to me to stand in as great need of a Reformation, as does our Poe∣try. For, as we take nothing to be True and Genuine Poetry, but what is Light▪ Frothy, and has a wanton Air throughout it; so the genera∣lity seem to stand persuaded, That an Epistle De∣dicatory loses its End quite, if not stuff'd up with gross and open Flattery, sufficient to call a Blush into any modest Reader's Cheek. But here it is a hard matter to judge Whether the Impudence of the Author▪ or the Vanity of the Patron (who be∣lieves all true that's said of him) does contribute most to carry on this notorious piece of Folly
Now, (Sir) though our Early Friendship, and Intimate Acquaintance was the Reason that pre∣vaild most upon me in presenting this small Essay to You; yet, to speak truth, there was another Mo∣tive too, which made me the more desirous of it,

and that was merely upon the account of running counter to the generality of Dedicating Poets, to try if a particular Example might have any small Influence in correcting the Poetical License they take upn such like occasions: For here I was satis∣fied that I might come off without the least flatter∣ing Glance, with one who (though young) has Ex∣perience enough to understand, that Personal Re∣spect is not to be estimated by the fine Complements and Flourishes of a Fanciful Pen. And for my part, I think if our Poets go on at their old Rate but a little longer, we shall be apt to interpret Epistles of this sort as we do Dreams, by the contrary.
The great Scandal that Poetry has of late been subject to, together with the respect I always had for it, gave occasion for the following Reflection. For as I was considering how much this Art was esteemed amongst our Forefathers, and how Vene∣rable, nay, almost Sacre, the Name of a Poet was then; Surely (thought I) the Former Honour, and the Present Disgrace the Muses lye under, could never depend on the different Capricio's of two divers Ages, but there must be some more reasonable Ground for this matter, which if once discovered, will give a very fair opportunity of restoring Verse to its Primitive Dignity. Some there are who suspect, That the want of Genius in our Age has given Poetry this deadly Wound: But they will soon find their Mistake, if (laying aside the blind Veneration we have for Antiquity) they compare the Ancients and Moderns in any sort of Poetry, excepting the Epic. So that we must seek out for some other

Cause more probable than the former. And what others may spy, I know not; but I think the great Difference lies here, That Poetry is now no longer the Fountain of Wisdom, the School of Virtue; it is no longer a fit Trainer up of Youth, a Bridler of the Passions and exorbitant Desires: But on the contrary, he is reckoned the Ablest Poet, that is most dextrous at conjuring up these Evil Spirits, to disturb the Calm and Quiet of the Soul. And this (if I mistake not) is that which hath de∣form'd so great a Beauty, and cast an Odium on that most excellent Art, which was once the Pride of Conquerors, and Envy of Philosophers.
What I have transiently remark'd in the follow∣ing Verses, will I doubt not) be dislik'd by many of our Rhiming Sparks; for take but the Liberty of Writing Immodestly from 'em, and you have quite dismounted them off their Pegasus; they are quite Tongue-tid; 'tis with them, as Horace says it was  the Reign of the old Comedy, Chorusque, Turpiter, obticuit, sublato jure nocendi.
What I have said against Love upon the Stage, I would not have apprehended so, as if I would have that Passion quite exploded; for I think it one of the fittest Passions for Poetry, and capable of very great Ornaments; but then I would have it very nicely and delicately handled; and what might give the least Offence to the severest Modesty, always cast in Shades; for it is then only that this Passion is not to be allow'd, when it goes beyond its bounds; and that is, when the Poet's Strokes are too bold, and his Colours too glaring.
I was told (which I my self afterwards found to be true) that a great Part of my Design was already performd in the Preface to Prince Arthur. How∣ever, that did not trouble me in the least, for I was very glad to see my self of the same Opinion with so eminent an Author; since I had laid a Rude Draught of my Reflection the last Summer, which I then shew'd several of my Acquaintaince. How∣ever, the World may think this a Sham, and I am very willing to be thought indebted to so creditable a Person for what I have said.
I shall make no Apology for the Tediousness of my Epistle, since you are too often guilty of the Contrary Vice in writing to

