



DUring the Twenty Years I had the Honour to Serve in the Ministry among you, I could not but Contract Acquain∣tance with many, and Friendship with some of the Inhabitants. However I
am not such a Flatterer of my self, as to imagine, I want Enemies: Con∣sidering that, besides the Natural fick∣leness of Peoples Affections, how li∣able they are to Change from the supervening Contingencies, occasioned by the different Aspect of Affairs, and the various Turnings, that hapned in so long a tract of time; in which Persons in Publick Posts, are often hook'd in, to be interess'd by some singular Emergents, more than by Choice or Inclination.
Yet this I will say, whatever Ene∣mies I may have, Mistake on my part more than Design, and some unfortu∣nate Circumstances or unlucky occa∣sions on the other side, more then ill Nature, made them become such. For although at a distance now from you, I cannot but bear witness, that in the several Parties among you, there are Persons of Piety and Prudence, of Learning and Discretion, of Breeding and Integrity; who will not be easily biass'd by Humour, or Opinion, to malicious Apprehensions, slanderous Expressions, or unjust Practices.

I never loved the uncharitable, cen∣sorious, unchristian way too pre∣valent in the Discourses and Writings of some of the Age; Who charge the faults and miscariages of particular Persons of different Interests, or Per∣suasions from them, on whole Socie∣ties. 'Tis said that all the Florentines are not Wits, nor all the Switzers Block-heads: No more do I think that all the Episcopalists are Saints, or the Presbyterians Reprobates; verily I be∣lieve that whosoever of either of these Fears God and works Righteousness,
Acts 10.35. is ac∣cepted by God, and should be so by Man likewise. The Jewish vanity of confining the favour of heaven to Times and Places, is transplanted a∣mong Christians; and this with the sowrness of their tempers too much transcribed by many, who sacrifice all Offices of Charity and Humanity to their Narrow Opinions; not con∣sidering that these are due to all that in every place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ, our Lord,
1 Cor. 1.2. both theirs and ours.
Although I began the Course of my Ministry among you when I was
very young, before I arrived to that Consistency of Age prescribed by the Canons; the necessity of the Church in that juncture, and the Indulgence of my Superiours, more than any Pre∣maturity of my parts, suspending the Obligation of the Ecclesiastical Law; Yet my Early Endeavours in the work of the Gospel met with welcome Reception, and while I continued in that Station, my pains by the Bles∣sing of God became in some degree helpful to the Spiritual Benefit of some of you; so that I may presume in a manner to say with the Apostle;
1 Thess. 2.1. That neither my entrance, or abiding with you were in vain.
I confess it was uneasie to me, to leave the Post I was in among you; for I had a strong Conviction upon me to Serve in the Ministry, to which I was Called, and for which, through the Grace of God, I acquired some Fitness by ingenuous Education in your Ʋniversity; and where, if I did any good through the Divine assi∣stance towards the Conversion, or Confirmation of any, in the great truths of Religion, or Practice of
Godliness, I might in my more Ma∣ture Age, have Riveted the same, and promoted it to further Accomplish∣ment; and possibly have made up the defects of my General, or Per∣sonal Vocation in the inconsiderate, as well as inconsiderable past part of my Life, by a more serious Ap∣plication of my self in my latter Days to the Duties of both.
I freely declare I was loth to Re∣move from a place, to which I ow'd any small measure of Breeding, or Learning I was endowed with; and where, after my Running through the ordinary Stages of Students in your Schools, I soon became a Publick Teacher of others; and spent the best portion of my time in some Reputa∣tion and Returns of Affection from the finest of the Inhabitants. Where I could not walk the Streets without the Regret of some for my not Com∣pliance, the Compassionate wishes of others for my Return, and the Ex∣press Counsels of many to conform to the Establishment then. Where, I could not pass without often inter∣ruption from the kind Approaches of
the Children of honest Neighbours, and the Affectionate Civilities of their Parents. And I cannot but acknow∣ledge the weakness, or shall I rather call it the Natural tenderness of my Constitution such, that I was not a little softned, and my Resolutions made somewhat fluctuating with the Fondness of of the Younger sort; and there is something in their way of expressing their liking, which as it is more ignorant and unaffected, so it is better and more easily felt, than is eloquently described; and is more impressive than the studied Comple∣ments, and artificial Addresses of o∣thers of riper Age; and is frequently the Eccho of the Parents Example and Respect, as well as the Result of instruction and discipline.
Besides that some whom I had Baptized and frequently Catechis'd, had been Married by me, (and many more likely would have been so, had I continued longer) who received me into their Houses with equal De∣grees of Affection and Esteem, so that the kindness of Young and Old went very near to preponderate my Inten∣tions
of coming away. All which begot in me a flattering expectation, that if I had stay'd with you until old Age had seized on me, since I spent my Vigour and Strength among you, you might have been the more easily Induced to bear with the Decays and Infirmities of my declining State. But 'its possible it might prove otherwise; Peoples present favour is but a very un∣certain Security of their future Kind∣ness. I have known the best of Ma∣gistrates, and the ablest Ministers, have their Hosanna's turned into Crucifige's; not only from the muddy Mob, but from those who look upon themselves as of a finer Clay: Yet often when the Maggot takes, the Populacy become the servil Instruments of their Ingrati∣tude, and the prostituted Tools of their Insolency, against their Civil Governours, and Spiritual Directors. Persons Respect and Love to their Pastors in great Cities, like the Morn∣ing Dew vanishes before the Abilities and Parts of their Teachers come to their Noon, or begin to Decline; and who knows but divine Providence foreseeing it, would prove so to me,
upon my longer staying among you: And for other wise Ends permitted my Removal so, lest I should meet with such an afflicting Disappoint∣ment.
My maintenance among you was not Mean, and the necessities of my Family required my Continuance in my Charge, for their more comfortable Sustenance; and I doubt not but I could have made my Incomes greater by following this gentile Method of Writing, which I found formerly so successful towards the increase of my Fortune; and I could that same way have attracted the favour of some befriending Planet to better my Conditi∣on still.
These were all Pulbacks to detain me, but when I Muster up these, why should I Omit to make, grateful menti∣on of
He succeed∣ed me in the Coledge Church of Edenbo∣rough, and was  of the first General Assembly held in that Kingdom since  of the Presbyterian Government there. Mr. Hugh Kennedy his Invitation to joyn with him, and of the earnest Request of the leading Men of the Presbyterian perswasion in the Parish,
to the same purpose. I do not Nar∣rate this with that Feminine Vanity, some silly Dames reckon up the num∣ber of their Courtiers; who take e∣very transient Glance, for one of Hy∣mens Messengers, and construct every civil Complement an Amorous In∣trigue: But I do it, to shew that I am not led by humour or partiality, so far as to neglect thankful Returns to obligeing Overtures, from whatso∣ever Corner they come. And although I could as little comply with their de∣sires, as with the principles, by which they were Acted; yet since they thought them best, and the other was calculated so much for my worldly ad∣vantage, and they were so very In∣dustrious to engage me in their Inter∣est, by which I would in all probabi∣lity have bettered my Temporal Con∣dition, above what it is for the pre∣sent, or I expect it to be in haste; I cannot but conclude it an Instance of good Will and Esteem; for which the Living have my thanks, and I'le pay some tribute of acknowledgment to the Memory of the Deceased.

I may add without any Ostentation, and appeal to the experience of some of you, that the inoffensiveness of my Conduct, and Carriage in my general Conversation, and particularly in my Behaviour with, and towards Dissent∣ers, conduced to state me so fair in the good likeing of the Neighbour∣hood, and to procure me the favour of the Magistrates who have Governed the City, since the Scene of Affairs turn'd so propitious to that Party: My Gentleness formerly in reference to Re∣cusants, bearing down the prejudices which some thought might duly e∣nough be fastened on my Principles: The goodness of my Parishioners, and the discretion of them who then bore Rule among you, would not allow them to transfer any hatred they had at my disproving Sentiments of their Government, to my Person,; so that through their beningn Temper, the difference of my Opinion was no Ob∣struction of their Benevolence. And as I made not diversity of Judgment the Standard of my Deportment to∣wards others of different Perswasion from me, nor would I be provoked
thereby, to any rash Treatment of them, when it was in my power to create them Trouble: No more did they upon the Revolution, make my dissenting from their Maxims, any hindrance of their kindness towards me. And this want of distinction in the acts of their Generosity distin∣guishes them with Honour, and a greater Sense of true Christianity in not only many of their own, but even of our party too.
This appeared in the Gratuities which your Common Council twice be∣stowed on me, when the circumstances of Affairs, and my discontentedness with them, would not permit me to tarry longer in the Exercise of my Ministry among you. And I cannot but Record with Gratitude the Civility with which Sr. John Hall of Dunglass then head Provost, used me; and since I hear he is Dead, I must do the Justice to his Memory, as to declare he kept that sereness of Disposition and equa∣lity of Mind, that modesty of Car∣riage, and humility of Deportment in in his Elevation, which was his Orna∣ment when he stood on the same Level
with his Neighbours. He was of a∣nother Ballast than those who are transformed unto Starchness and Inso∣lency, by the increase of their Estate, or the Dignity of their Station, in his Publick Ministrations and private Transactions; plain, upright Dealing was his Policy, and at Home as well as Abroad, Religion was the Compass he Steered by.
I must likewise mention with Ho∣nour and Respect the Worthy and Ge∣nerous Gentleman Sr. Archibald Muir of Thorntown, who succeeded Sr. John Hall in the great Trust of chief Ma∣gistrate in the City, and at this Instant for the second time, in regard of his more then Ordinary Merit, and singu∣lar Abilities. is invested with the same Power and Dignity again, who by the calmness of his Temper, and the di∣scretion of his Behaviour, the prudence of his Conduct, and his Justice in the management of his Authority, forci∣bly attracts to him the good Opinion, Esteem and Affection of all Impartial and unbyass'd Men of both Parties.
Nor can any thing less be expected of a Gentleman of his Birth and Pedi∣gree,
being Descended of the Ancient Family of Rowallan, whence many of our Kings have derived their Blood.
The longer I Live in the World, I am fully convinced, as our Proverb Runs,
Fortes cre∣antur for: i∣bus, et bo∣nis: Est in Juvencis, est in equis pa∣trum Vir∣tus: nec imbellem feroces. Progene∣rant aqui∣lae colum∣bam. Ho. Od. lib. 4. Od. 4. It's happy to be the Hawk of the right Nest. It's Felicity to bring with our Extraction, the Seeds of Gentility with us to the World; for this ad∣vantage of Birth, lays a good founda∣tion for what Improvement, Art, Edu∣cation, or Experience may Superadd.
Me thinks I hear some of my Friends ready to say, it seems strange to them, I Blazon at this rate with some Elogies, these who since the Revolution have born Charge in the good Town; while I pass over with silence those who for∣merly, during the last Reigns, were In∣trusted with its Government; under whose Protection I and the rest of my Function enjoyed our Places, for many Years, with Freedom and Safety.
Therefore to avoid all suspicion of Ingratitude as well as Injustice; let me cast back my Eyes on the former times, and say that in those Days there were those by their Birth, Prudence and Vir∣tues, brought additional Lustre to the
Honourable Offices they sway'd in the City, as all who know and heard, (and who did not far and near, at Home and Abroad?) of Sr Andrew Ramsay of Abbots-hall, must bear witness. Indeed if ever the Ministers and the Inhabi∣tants of the City, had Reason to Mag∣nifie the former Days above the latter, it was in the space of his Saturnian ma∣nagement of Affairs: How justly may he be called the Nehemiah of that Age, he took such Care of the House of God, and its Offices, by increasing their Provision, that they did the Work of the Lord with cheerfulness, and alacrity; so as it may be well said of him, he Loved our Nation, and Built us a Synagogue. Indeed we may ap∣ply to him, what the Prince of the Roman Poets saith,

Aurea, quae perhibent, illo sub rege fuerunt
Saecula; sic placida populos in pace regebat.
Deterior donec paulatim ac decolor aetas,
Et belli rabies, et amor successit habendi.

Virg. Aen. lib. 8. v. 314.

With his mild Empire, Peace and Plenty came:
And hence the golden Times deriv'd their name.
A more degenerate and discolour'd Age,
Succeeded this, with Avarice and Rage.

Dryden.

This worthy Nehemiah for Sixteen Years together was Provost, or Lord Mayor of the City of Edinborough, his Birth rais'd him beyond the level of some of his emulous Competitors in the State, and his Envious Adver∣saries among the Citizens; by which he preserved the honour of the Pro∣vostry from Contempt of the insolent, who bore themselves haughtily on score of their Pedegree; as by his integrity and care he defended the Revenues of the Good Town from the Encroachments of the Covetous. His Policy fitted him for his King's Service and his Countrey's good in the honourable Post he had as Member of his Majestie's Privy Council; which he he held till his Death. His Abilities qualified him for the Bench. His wise Conduct and assiduous pains about the Cities concerns made him be con∣tinued so long in the creditable station of it's Chief Magistrate. Nothing but a singular concurrence of Endow∣ments peculiarly adapted to these se∣veral, different, Eminent Offices, could make one Man capable of them all, and at one time; and manage each
of them in their turnes, with such a signal dexterity, as discovered he had a soul large enough for all these great Employments; and too ample for any one of them.
Here was a kind of Triumvirat in one Man; the Provost, Senator, and Councellour, and he so consideratly well divided his time in the exercise of each of these Trusts, that the one never interfer'd with the other; his attendance on the duties of any of them never made him slack or negli∣gent of those of the other; the care of the Provostry never hindred the business of the judge; nor was ei∣ther of these an impediment to the application of the Councellour, for the King and Countries Interest. In the City Council none more exact; in the Privy Council none more acute; on the Bench none more just, a Vigilant Ma∣gistrate, an upright Senator, and a Faith∣ful Counsellour; and in all a good Chri∣stian.
I would have set down some things more relating to the Magistrates du∣ring the former Reigns but that I am afraid to be tedious. I have made some
Remarques on the sordid methods by which in that time some obtained the Provostry; and on the blemish of their conduct in that consider∣able Employment, but they are scat∣ter'd in some loose papers now at distance from me. I remember in imitation of some of Lucian's Dialogues, I have formed one betwixt Sir Andrew Ramsay's Ghost, and those of some un∣just complainers, and selfseeking Compe∣titors; who after his voluntary relin∣quishment of the Chief Office in the City worm'd themselves into it, for which neither their birth nor breeding had qualifi'd them; nor had they the courage, uprightness, or parts to em∣ploy it aright; for it is certain these who compass their Dignities fairly and justly, are likeliest to improve them to better purposes, with more honesty and integrity. And if pro∣vidence bring me and these scattered sheets together, it is possible for cau∣tioning the present and succeeding Age, against such sinistrous ways, I may suffer them to flie abroad.
It might have been expected that something in this long introduction
should have related to the following discourse; and so I did design, but now I cannot, at least not so largely, run out that way; since this Preface has increas'd beyond my aim, several things crouding themselves into my mind, while my hand was writing, and I must now curb its further ex∣cursion; lest this small Essay prove but an Appendix to the initiatory E∣pistle;
 as Diodorus Siculus blames some, who as it were tack't their Curtail'd O∣rations to their longwinded preliminary Addresses, wherewith they intended to Captivate the favour of Hearers, or Readers, and to avoid this censure, or the more trite, of making the Gate lar∣ger than the City, or the Portal than the House, I shall hasten to a con∣clusion.
Nor will I nauseate the Reader in imitating these trifling methods some Fencers for applause, or famae negotiatores use, who look one way that they may hit another; as some writers conten∣ding for Fame think by a kind of Rebound to catch it more greedily, while they cast down themselves and there performances so low, with their
sham vilifyings, as the homeliness of the Dress, the plainness of the stile, the sim∣plicity of the Phrase, &c. and I know not what. Nor shall I alledge for publishing this Essay, the threed-bare pretence of the importunity of friends, preventing of false copies, &c. Nor will I blame the shortness of time,
Hoc ipso placere cu∣piunt quod placere con∣temnunt, & mirum in modum laus dum vitatur, appetitur, Hieroni∣mus. for what is crude or raw in it. I look upon these and such like little Artifices, wherewith some would conceal their Ambition to be in Print, and fish for commendation to their Attempts; as on these thin Mourning Vails, or Patches, by which fair Females design the increase of their Charmes; only with this difference the vanity and ostentation of the one are more pal∣pably perceived to a lothsome degree while the beauty of the other, like Diamond set in Jet, is more bright and shining.
I shall say nothing of it, but that it is the product of Melancholy thoughts on my present disastrous Condition; which had been pub∣lish'd soon after I came to this Re∣tired Place where I now am, but that being intrusted in loose sheets to a
certain deserving Person, it fell by and could not be found; which put me to a second, or rather a new trouble: But now you have it such as it is; and I'll make no Appology for its Defects;
—Sed va∣tem egregi∣um cui non sit publica vena A∣nxietate carens ani∣mus facit, Juven. Sat. the afflicting Circumstances of my Stare, which have somewhat pinion'd my fancy, and flatted my expression; may with considering Per∣sons supersede me this task; I shall only say, it is like, if I had enjoyed the society of my Old beloved Com∣panions, viz. my Books, the subject had been better managed; for I con∣fess my self an insufficient Artist with∣out these tools; to which were they now by me I could transfer out of Boetius, (for he and Buchanans Para∣phrase on the Psalms are my Vade Mecum's in my Solitary Rangings,)
Gloria foelicis olim viridisque juventae,
Solantur maesti nunc mea fata senis.
I shall conclude with this one Re∣flection, which though it might have been Incorporated into the Body of the Treatise, and enlarged on; yet
may be admitted Room appositely e∣nough in this place.
Pilgrims and Strangers affect so∣litude and retirement; being ashamed to make others witnesses of their Sighs and Sobs, they give vent to their groans under shady Trees, or in bushy Caverns; in the silence of Fields, or solitariness of Woods; there they Ruminate on the con∣dition of their own Countrey; if it be overrun with any Calamity, they bewail its Fate, help it with their Prayers, or bedew its misery with their tears, or if in a flourishing State, they rejoyce in its prosperity, and what Male-treatment soever they meet with from it, they cannot but wish well to it; the strength of their natural affection preponderating the Resentment of any hard measure they may meet with from it. And any revengful thoughts which come bubbling up in their minds against the particular instruments of there mis∣fortune, are swallow'd up in the ex∣pansion of their concern for, and ex∣tent of their love to the Common welfare of their Counrrey.

Thus I have seen devout Pilgrims very serious by the brinks of Brooks and banks of purling streams,
Ille verè dolet, qui sine teste dolet. in the Covert of Woods, or cool shade of Grottos; where the consideration of their ab∣sence from there heavenly Country lay heavy on their hearts, while they did sit, or walk intent on their Me∣lancholy Musings; groaning under the thoughts of their distance from it; nor could they receive any satis∣sactory respite from their Moans, or comfortable Remedy to their Langui∣shing, but from the solace the well grounded expectation of a happy re∣turn thereto, ministred to them.
And as I can without vanity pro∣fess I have in some degree transcrib∣ed this part of the Pilgrim's Cha∣racter, in reference to my heavenly; so I am not ashamed to confess, I have spent many hours by night and day, in pensive thoughts, and sorrow∣ful reflections on the present afflict∣ing circumstances of my own and others Condition, who have left their native soil, and of these my Fathers and Brethren who still remain in a suf∣fering State, in their Earthly Countrey.

And although in my early walks, the Chanting little Choristers of the Air, and the Musical nocturnal lodgers of the bushes, have often contended by their sweet inartificial Antiphonies, which of them by tick∣ling my Ears, could divert me most; and the Embroidery of flowers, the Beauty of Meadows, the Mixture of Colours, in all the different objects of sight, seemed to strive which of them by attracting my Eyes, could ease my mind best: Yet in the midst of all this agreeable variety of Nature's Delicacies, and Medley of charming Delights, which puzzl'd my Senses into a pleasant Controversy which of them was most gratifi'd, our Countrey man Buchanan's Paraphrase of the 137 Psalm afforded me most diversion: The suitableness of the matter hitting the Calamitous State of the Episcopal Cler∣gy of the Scotish Church, and David's divine strain mixt with the high Fancy and dress'd with the Elegancy of this admirable Poet's Phrase, affected me with a wonderful Ravishment in time of my troublesome damps; and my frequent reciting it over, surnisht me
such satisfaction in my solitary Re∣cesses and Mournful Soliloquies, or Meditations, upon the Banks of Welton and about the Arbours of Watford; and first suggested to my mind the ex∣pediency of spending some thoughts on the few heads of the ensuing Treatise.


Dum procul à patria maesti Babylonis in or is,
Fluminis ad liquidas forte sedemus aquas;
Illa animum subiit species miseranda Sionis,
Et nunquam patrii tect a videnda soli.
Flevimus, & gemitus luctantia verba repressit;
Inque sinus liquidae decidit imber aquae.
Muta super virides pendebant nablia ramos,
Et salices tacitas sustinuere lyras.
Eece ferox dominus Solymae populator opimae
Exigit in mediis carmina laeta malis:
Qui patriam exilio nobis mutavit acerbo,
Nos jubet ad patrios verba referre modos.
Quale canebamus, stetrat dum celsa Sionis
Regia, finitimis invidiosa loc is.
Siccine divinos Babylon irrideat hymnos?
Audiat & sanctos terra profana modos?
O solyma, O adyta, & sacri penetralia templi,
Ullane vos animo deleat hora meo?

Comprecor, ante meae capiant me oblivia dextrae,
Nec memor argutae sit mea dextra lyrae:
Os mihi destituat vox, arescente palato,
Haereat ad fauces aspera lingna meas:
Prima mihi vestrae nisi sint praeconia laudis:
Hinc nisi laetitiae surgat origo meae.
At tu (quae nostrae insultavit laeta rapinae)
Gentis Idumaeae tu memor esto Pater.
Diripite, ex imis evertite fundament is,
Aequaque (clamabant) reddite tecta solo.
Tu quoque crudeles Babylon dabis impia paenas:
Et rerum instabiles experiere vices.
Felix qui nostris accedet cladibus ultor:
Reddet ad exemplum qui tibi damna tuum.
Felix qui tenero consperget saxa cerebro,
Eripiens gremio pignora cara tuo.

The pleasure I took in poring on this Paraphrase and often repeat∣ing of it in my retired wandring cir∣cuits, through the Fields, made me request from the Ingenious Mr. Thomas Yaldin Fellow of Magd Coll. in Oxford, this Translation which the Concurrence of my Worthy and singularly Obliging Neighbour Mr. Charles Allestry, Minister of Daventry, prevail'd with him to grant as the Reader may perceive by the Let∣ter prefixt to it.
