



SIR,
THE only Considerati∣on that engag'd me to Publish this Work, was my Desire to please You, and to secure that Interest in Your Goodness, with which You are pleas'd to Honour me. I con∣fess my Resolution was a little shock'd, when I reflected on the Dangers and Discourage∣ments to which an Author ex∣poses himself, by appearing in so Nice and Knowing an Age: But my Reluctancy was quick∣ly

overcome by the sense I had of my Obligation to give You this Mark of my Acknow∣ledgment and Respect.
When His Grace the DUKE of ORMOND, Your Grandfa∣ther, did me the Honour to commit the Care of Your E∣ducation to me, I labour'd with all the Application I was capable of, to discharge that great Trust with suitable Di∣ligence and Fidelity: And, to speak only of Your Travels, I may say without Vanity, that I was very careful to make You receive all that Pleasure and Advantage You might desire or expect from 'em. My present Attempt is but a Continuation of my for∣mer Care: My chief Design in the Publication of these

Letters being to refresh and preserve the Idea's of what You then observ'd, and to make that Satisfaction lasting, which, perhaps, Time would have insensibly destroy'd.
I hope, SIR, You will re∣ceive favourably this Effect of my Zeal and Affection to Your Service. If You were as severe a Critick, as You are an exact Judge, I might just∣ly despair of pleasing You: But all my Fears vanish when I reflect on that peculiar Sweet∣ness of Temper, and that Na∣tural Inclination You have to consider Things on the most Advantageous side. This Thought inspires me with so much Confidence, that no∣thing less than Your Modesty, could over-awe me, and re∣strain

the Impetuosity of my Desires. I would give You all the Praises You de∣serve, and think my self ob∣lig'd to take this Occasion to proclaim the Generosity, Pro∣bity, Courage, Moderation, and all the other Vertues which I have so often admir'd in You, if I were not sensible that I could not do You Justice without offending You.
And therefore all that I shall say on so alluring a Sub∣ject is, That those admirable Perfections are a part of Your Heritage, as being inseparably united to the Illustrious Blood that fills Your Veins. True Nobility, and Greatness of Mind have been always entail'd on Your Family. The Repu∣tation of His Grace the late

DUKE of ORMOND is spread over all Europe, in the most Glorious manner imagi∣nable. And the EARL of OSSORY, Your Father, ap∣ply'd himself with equal Care and Success to the Imitation of so Noble a Pattern: That Great Captain was at once the Terror of His Prince's Enemies, the Joy and Love of the People, the Delight of the Court, and Admiration of Strangers. The Honour which I had in Your Company, to approach several Sovereign Princes, gave me the Oppor∣tunity to learn from their own Mouths, how highly they e∣steem'd him, and with how sensible an Affliction they re∣ceiv'd the News of the un∣timely Period of so bright a Life. His Grace the DUKE

of ORMOND Your Brother, is, with You, SIR, the Wor∣thy Successor of those Hero's. You are both unwearied Pur∣suers of Glory, and You lose no Opportunity to signalize Your Valour and Conduct. I offer up the most ardent Pray∣ers for Your Common Prospe∣rity; and I entreat You to believe that I shall always re∣main with an unalterable Pas∣sion, and profound Respect,
SIR,

London, Jan. 1. 1691.
