


Honourable and Right worthy Patriots:
GIve me leave I beseech you; under your name to present to the World, the humble and hear∣ty acknowledgement we owe to Almighty God, the Kings Majesty, the Right Honourable Peeres, and you the Knights and Gentlemen, now most sea∣sonably assembled in Parliament, for the many great and worthy things that have been done by your meanes for the pub∣like good.See the Remon∣strance, publi∣shed Dec. 15. 1641. Who have eased our backs of that illegall burden of Ship-money, Coat, Conduct-money, and other military charges. Supprest all Monopolies, Taken away arbitrary government, the root of these evils. Much quelled evill Councellours, and other malig∣nant persons, by execution of justice on some, imprisoning others, and causing others to fly, out of the consciousnesse of their owne guiltinesse. Setled a trienniall Parliament in-stead of a trienniall Visitation, and provided for the continuance of this,A wonder of mercy. till all our greivances are heard and redressed, and all evils be removed, which is of unspeakable consequence, because they secure a full operation of the remedy, and afford a perpetuall spring of remedies for the future. Put down the High Commission Court, which in some respects (through the abuse of some, and over-ruling of others, was made too like the Spanish Inquisition, which suspended, silenced, and outed many of the most able and godly Ministers out of their li∣vings and freeholds, and so undid many a whole family; a Court, which indeed at first was erected to suppresse Papists and Popery, as the Spanish Inquisition was to curb the blasphemous Jews; but was now, as that, turned against pious Protestants; Have put down the Star-chamber; Taken away other Courts, the forges of misery, oppression and violence; Dismounted the Canons that were moun∣ted to batter down Religion and the power of godlinesse together with the late cursed Oath in them; Damned the Oath ex ossicio, by means whereof they tortured many consciences with strange qua∣ries and forcing unnaturall self-accusations. Freed Church-wardens from a dangerous Oath. Limitted the immoderate power of the Councell Table. Punished and terrified some Ministers and others
that were of scandalous life, or Authors of Innovations in doctrine and ceremonies. Reduced the Forrests by good Laws to their right bounds. Reformed the incroachments and oppressions of the Sta∣nery Courts. The extortion of the Clerk of the market. The com∣pulsion of the Subject to receive the order of Knighthood against his will, or paying sines for refusall. Recalled the banished Exiles that had undergone the brunt, the chief let in the Prelats way to Rome. Setled a happy peace betwixt us and our Neighbour Nation, which the malignant Enemies of both, endeavoured to imbroile in civil wars which are grievous, yea which is worse, of Protestants against Protestants, one servant against another, and one brother a∣gainst another, till both were consumed. Opened the Presse for publi∣shing the good and profitable labours of the godly; And inhibited popish bookes and pamphlets tending to reconcile us and Rome, or rather, as the truth is, to reduce us to Rome. Order for weekely lectures. Order for banishing Romish Priests and Jesuites, the grand Incendiaries in Church and state; And for securing the Papists, the professed enemies of King and Kingdome, Church and state. Removed the Bishops from voting in Parliament, and all Clergie men from temporall offices, which like a false byas in a boule, wheel'd them quite out of the way of preaching. Ʋoted downe Deans and Prebends, which were (many of them) too like the drones which eat up the hony which the painfull Bees should live on. And since by severall Acts of both Houses, abolished the Hye∣rarchy roote and branch; The sole seat of Antichrist as some lear∣ned men do conceive. Ordered the suppression of Innovations in all Churches and Chappels in and about the worship of God. The removeall and abolishing superstitious pictures, images, crosses and other Reliques and Monuments of Idolatry and Superstition. The advancement of Gods holy word in all parts or the Kingdome. Pas∣sed other Acts also for the removing and punishing scandalous, cor∣rupt and malignant Clergy-men and blind guides; And sequestring their Benefices for the maintenance of godly and painfull Ministers, in which there hath been an happy progresse made already, wher∣by you have refreshed the bowels of many of us, and the soules of thousands of the people, blessed be God and you for it! against Plu∣ralities and Non-residency, For the due sanctification of the Sab∣bath, cryed down by the Popish and prelaticall party in their prea∣ching, printing, and practise. You have Given libertie to tender consciences, burthned with unnecessary and scandalous Ceremo∣nies,
Opened a way for godly Ministers to exercise their ministery, to which God and man hath set them apart, so that many thousands may heare the joyfull sound againe in their eares, who were depri∣ved of such blessed silver Trumpets, instead whereof they had but Rams hornes, (too good a comparison for many of them) which many times sounded as terrible an alarum in their eares, as they sometimes did to them of Iericho. You have procured from His Royall Majesty a Monthly Fast, published by His Majesties Procla∣mation, in which like the New Moones Fast or Feast of Trumpets, the silver Trumpets of the word are sounded, and the sacrifice of prayer and praise are offered up unto God. Your great care for the safety and peace of the Kingdome, For the reliefe of now gasping Jreland, For supply for our Armies, Ordinance for securing Malig∣nants the Papists great friends, and sequestring their estates that they may not be imployed against, but for the publique good.
The oath for discovering of Papists,Pits were dig∣ged for the Righteous, gal∣lowses provided for Mordecai's, because they would not how to Hamaus, dens of lyons for Daniels, be∣cause they would not leave praying,; fiery furnaces for the three children, because they would not wor∣ship the golden Image; dunge∣ons for Iere∣my's, because they would preach the truth with boldnesse. Mr Cal Feb. 23. in his Serm. a very necessary instrument; You have given a call to our deare brethren of Scotland, who we hope through Gods blessing, will be a great meanes of reducing publike enemies to due obedience, or justice, and setling an happy peace with truth in this and the other Kingdome. Called an Assem∣bly of grave, learned and godly Divines, in whose good (though slow yet safe) proceedings we much rejoyce. Your indeavours to suppresse erronious opinions tending to libertanisme, which we humbly desire may be more vigorously prosecuted before it be too late. The happy concurrence of the Right Noble Peers, with the truly honourable House of Commons in their Honourable procee∣dings. Whose faithfulnesse to God, their King and Country (when many rotten and treacherous hearts have deserted the Publike Cause, their trust, and consciences) makes you so much more ho∣nourable in the eyes and hearts of all the godly and well affected in all the 3 Kingdomes, I may say in all Europe, and them more infa∣mous to all ages. The happy and timely discovery of many grievous snares, broken by your great vigilancy and industry and the pre∣vention of many most desperate designes against this Kingdom, so that our Isacks are delivered and the Rams are caught in the bush, and as the wise man saith,Pro. 11, 8. The Righteous is delivered out of the trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead. And to name no more the renewing of our Nationall Covenant, to which adde also, our late solemne league and Covenant, for which, we hope, the present and future generations will have cause to blesse God for you and
our Renowned Brethren of Scotland (so prudently made and com∣mended to us by your Honorable House) to bring back againe all Israel to worship the Lord their God in Ierusalem, who were too many of them making a Captain and turning back again into my∣sticall Egipt, which Covenant gave the rise to this ensuing plaine, unpollished discourseThis was published for∣merly with the Epistle, and now at the re∣quest of some, some what al∣tered in the E∣pistle chiefly. Homo sum, er∣rare possum, e∣reticuesse no∣lo. (fitted and intended only for a country Au∣ditory, where it is a commendation to speake in the most plain and vulgar terms) which in all humility I present unto you (worthy Patriots) not as Patrons, for if it be the truth of God, as I trust it is, he is the Patron of it and will defend it: if any errour be found in it, I disclaim it, and think the work it self too slenderly performed, for so judicious persons as you are known to be, but only, as his hand∣full of water to a greatArtaxerxes. Prince, the widdowes mite, a little goats hair, as a testimony of my humble observance and thankfull acknow∣ledgement of the unwearied labours, continuall care and zealous endeavours of the Noble Peeres and your selves (who still continue faithfull and cordiall with this present Parliament) for the publick good, as also for the particular favour of divers worthy Members of your House towards my selfe.
And surely if you go on with all good speed to procure and adde these things to all the rest, which are humbly desired, viz. To pro∣vide for the comfortable subsistance of those godly, painefull ortho∣dox Ministers, who lye under much discouragement and distracti∣on through a miserable incompetency. And Provide, That Priests and Jesuits be quite banished the Land. And that Church Papists (the most dangerous enemies and underminers of Church and state) may be discovered by the late Oath in your ordinances for Sequestrations. And also all other suspected persons, And that the Lawes be duly executed upon Papists. That Notorious offenders in Church and Common-wealth whatsoever they be, especially wic∣ked Counsellours and desperate opposites to the Parliament, (the Achans that hinder the indeavours of Joshua and I srael, the great Remora to the publike undertakings, and the great cloud that hides the face of God from us) be speedily tried, censured and punished according to the qualitie of their crimes; for what successe can be expected so long as the Achans live? That Idolatry and Superstition, especially the abominable Masse be totally rooted out of this King∣dome, as you have in part done, blessed be God:Rome, Iezabel mysticall, Re∣vel. 2.20. and 18.5. For what peace so long as the whoredomes of Jozabell remain in this Land. That evill Councellors, the raisers and fomenters of the great troubles and
distempers of the Kingdom, and of the absonce of His Royall Maje∣sty from His Parliament, &c. (which all good Subjects are great∣ly greived to see) to be removed from His Royall Person with the first opportunity. That distressed Ireland, whose condition is very much to be lamented, especially since the late horrid Cessation, be speedily releived with an ample supply, where, as here, the blood of many thousand sonles cry to Heaven for vengeance, and to you for help against the mighty. That the peace of the Kingdom, that the power and priviledges of Parliament, the lawfull Rights and Liberties of the Subject be firmly setled. That considerable places be fully secured by approved men, and so trading quickned, to the relief of many thousands that now languish greatly under want. That none may be put into the Ministery or admitted to places in the Ministery, or in the Militia of the Kingdom, or any other places of trust, but such as do willingly take the late solemne League and Covenant, though some have made no conscience of violating that solemne obligation. That the blessed work of Reformation, with all good spedd, go on and be perfected. That the Sacrament by some good provision may be kept from being polluted by unworthy per∣sons, and all Ignorant persons be for their soules good compelled to learn the grounds of the true Protestant Religion. And that hence∣forth one patterne containing all the fundamentals of true Christi∣an Faith and Obedience were made, which would be of manifest and good use. That your grave wisdom with the advice of the learned and godly Divines Assembled, would be pleased with all convenient speed to provide, that the people might have a sure rule to walk by in their worship of God, according to the word of God, that their minds may be setled and consciences quieted to a cheer∣full obedience, which would be a great inducement to many to joyne with us, who otherwise, I feare, will hardly ever be perswa∣ded, That the residue of dumb, scandalous and Malignant Clergy men may be speedily and thorowly proceeded against, and godly and learned orthodox men placed in their roomes. And that your wisdome would think of some good way for the admitting of godly and hopefull young men (who have prepared themselves and are willing) into the Ministery. That the lawes and Ordinances a∣gainst swearing, drinkennesse, whoredom and prophanation of the Lords day, (crying sinnes, with which the land is filled, defiled, and under which it mourneth) be duly and strictly put in executi∣on, by appointing and inabling speciall Officers therunto. That
you with the reverend Assembly of Divines would with all speed hasten the work of Church Reformation in point of Government and Discipline, as well as Doctrine and worship, That you would go on vigorously in the prosecution of your late Solemne League and Covenant and the Ordinance of both Kingdomes, published January 20 1643 and particularly for the thorough suppression and rooting out of all Sects, Schismes and erroneous doctrines, destruc∣tive to sound doctrine and the power of godlinesse, and tending to libertinisme and disobedience to God and man. That our Armies may be quickned to be more active & follow opportunities which may be of unspeakable consequence: That reproachers and scorners of godlinesse and conscience by nick-names may be questionable and severely punished by a law: That you would be exceeding cautious of confiding in them about Treaties, who keep no Faith. That Armi∣nianisme and Socinianisme, the enemies to free grace, and Romes De∣coy-ducks to bring in Popery be timely & throughly supprest. That seandalous and Popish Magistrates that regard not the Execution of Justice, be removed, and approved just men, fearing God and ha∣ting coveteousnesse and unrighteousnesse, be placed in their roomes in all places. That Contemners of your former good Orders be se∣verely punished▪ Wakes and unnecessiry Ale-houses and Play-houses the very nurcerics of vice and randevouz for all prophane wretches, be suppressed. That the joynt consent and happy concurrence of the Noble Peers with your House, may be still continued. Especially that they and you would use all possiole meanes and speed, that His Royall Majestie may have a right understanding of your just de∣sires and proceedings, and would with the Prince be graciously pleased to returne to His Parliament.
All which I mention not to shew you what to do, impute not such folly to your humble servant, but in all humility to spread before your wisdoms, what is by many thousands heartily desired & hum∣bly craved, according as in your pious and deep wisdom, shall seem most agreable to the rules of piety, true Christian prudence and po∣lity, which surely will compleat the blessed work of Reformation begun, make this a most slourishing Church and State, amiable to our God, glorious to our friends, terrible to our enemies, and make you and your Posterities renowned while this is a Nation.
And because your difficulties be very many and great, therefore heare a word of encouragement from him who greatly honours you and your Assembly, and whose duty it is ex efficio speciali, to
teach, instruct, exhort, reprove, &c. The cause you are about is e∣minently good and of great importance, God and all good men are on your side, and though your adversaries be many, mighty and po∣litick, yet God, your Master whose work you are about, is stronger and wiser then they all, and one Jacob can do more with God for you, then 400. Edowites can do against you. And though our ene∣mies should prevaile yet ten timesSee my View of the Solemne League, p 5. &c. more yet cast not off your con∣fidence in God, but remember that when we are lowest, then are we neerest deliverance, and when our enemies are highest then are they neerest destruction. And Honoured Worthies you have found God going along with you, so scattering your enemies, and furthe∣ring his worke, even by their wicked plots and oppositions, that you should now greatly dishonour God and the cause, if you should suffer any thing to discourage you, or make you feare the perfecting of the long and much desired work of Reformation in its due time, only if Religion and the worship of God, and the discipline of Je∣sus Christ be first setled, then other evills how great soever will va∣nish away, till then it cannot certainly be expected.
It is true, it is not possible it should be done in a trice, the great∣nesse and exactnesse of the work, the great deale of rubbish in the house of God, both wretched persons and things; and the great oppositions which great and good works meet with, must of neces∣sity make the work long. Wherefore, Noble Senators, arme your selves with patience and resolution, alwayes look as upon the work with one eye, so at Gods glory and the publick good and upon Gods power, wisdom, goodnesse, promise, and faithfullnesse with the other, regard not the person and face of any, but Justice, Gods glory and the Publike good, and doubt not of a desired issue in due time, which is the humble and hearty desire of him who is resol∣ved, to his utmost power, and to the last breath (God inabling) by all means lawfull to maintain and defend the true reformed Prote∣stant Religion, against all Popery and Popish Innovations, the Kings Majesties Person and Royall Posterity and Legall Authority, the power and Priviledges of Parliament, together with their persons in all their just and good proceedings, the lawfull Rights and Li∣berties of the Subjects, &c. And endeavour the Reformation of Re∣ligion, &c. according to our late solemn league and Covenant against the enemies of God, the King and State, and shall till death remain,

