


MY ambition of dedicating this to your Royal Highness, proceeds not from the more than or∣dinary encouragement it receiv'd from you, when it appear'd on the Stage: tho' of thirty times it has been acted, you seldom fail'd to honour it with your presence. 'Twould be presumption in me to examine why you did it that Grace; and vain-glory to attribute it to the merits of the Play, since the best have not receiv'd the like honour.
Nor does the envie of Criticks force me to invoke your Princely Patronage; it were as vain to think the name of a Patron should shield it from their censures, as it would hinder the rude rable (if engrav'd on the front of a house) from breaking the windows. The malice of these, and the rude∣ness of the others may lead 'em to do either, without con∣vincing them they are guilty of any disrespect. And Criticks stand up as zealously for the liberty of their Tongues, as Fana∣ticks for liberty of Conscience; and rail as spitefully against Plays, as that perverse Generation does against Magistrates and Governours.
The third common pretence of Authors I likewise disown: I boast not of any particular favours receiv'd; blessings flow from Princes, as light does from the Sun, which shines on all at once. They oblige not Persons, but Nations: Of that great Vertue, SIR, you stand a glorious Example. You en∣gag'd your self in our intestine dissentions: You was the thun∣derbolt of War; the enemies where-ever you came, or fled or fell before you: You threw your self into the storm to

save us; and when it had shipwrack'd the best of Monarchs, your Piety led you to exile with the Son: when his Coun∣try and Subjects forsook him, you did not; but with him shar'd the dangers and hardships of banishment, till Heaven (which laid the yoke of tyranny for punishment on our rebellious necks) was pleas'd to restore him to us, or ra∣ther us to our King. The Sun had it been so long absent, could not be more welcome; with him like a train of glorious Lights, return'd the Royal Family, and not long after your Royal Self; after you you drew a chain of Blessings, Freedom, Peace, Religion, Unity, which ever since we have enjoyed: What foes we have abroad, we need not fear, whilst we have your Counsel for Conduct, and your Sword for Execution. You still like Englands Angel Guardian stand ready to defend it; and so long as we have either Memory or Gratitude, e∣very tongue must speak your fame, and every heart dedicate it self to you as a Trophee, owing to your gallantry. What a noble stock of Virtue must you have so entirely to captivate the hearts of a Nation, to which you was born a stranger! Who, when they hear your name, or see it here prefixt, will not repeat it, and say, You are the Heroe of the world; then in a transport run o'er your mighty Deeds and Actions, which make you famous above mankind in our present Annals, and will with excess of Glory bear your name to after Ages? How just an occasion have I here, to say all that can be said of man without danger of being thought a flatterer? But, Sir, were you less than what you are, I could say more: Now all is truth, nor can that truth be contain'd in an Epistle. And I know the perfect Heroe blushes as much at the narration of his Virtues, as the Lady exactly Beautiful at the relation of her Perfections: Praise seems to lessen both, for 'tis thought we rather speak what they should be, than what they are. Virtue ought to find Imitators, and Beauty more admirers than commenders: Nor would I give the most malicious any ground to think you can be flatter'd; or that I hope by flattery and insinuation to make attonement for this presumption: Your Virtues drew it on you; those Vir∣tues

which have so much oblig'd our Nation, engage all hearts to pay our thanks as tribute to you: Involv'd in the common fate, I take this occasion to attest my acknowledge∣ments, and to beg your Royal Highness to look upon this, not so much the Dedication of a Play, as of a Heart. That o∣ther Poets stand at an awful distance, argues not my rudeness, but the greatness of my zeal which prompts me to believe that the boldness of performing so great a Duty, is not a crime e∣qual to the forbearance; And I shall account it my glory to have led the way, where others made a stand.

