



THE Design of the ensuing Treatise being the Promotion
of a Part of Physico-Mathematical Knowledge in the
English Nation; I know not to whom I can more pro∣perly
present it, than to that noble Body of English
Philosophers, whose Foundation by the Royal Charter of King
Charles II. is to this very purpose. How far, and how success∣fully
you have hitherto prosecuted the end of this excellent Instituti∣on,
'tis needless for me to declare: since the literate World is alrea∣dy
so abundantly stored with your learned Labours, and useful Di∣scoveries;
whereof I could here recount a List of many Hundreds
published by several Members of the Society. But I design not a
Panegyrick, but an humble Address for your Favour and Counte∣nance
to my present Endeavours: And this I hope for, with the
more Assurance, having already seen your favourable Acceptance
of many Offerings of this kind, and your ready Incouragement of
all such Philosophical Inquiries, as tend to the use of Life, or Ad∣vancement
of Arts and Sciences.
And on this Occasion I cannot omit expressing my Sence of that
excellent Method of Experimental Philosophy, which now, by your
Example and Incouragement, does so universally prevail, and is so
highly advanced all over Europe, and other Parts of the World.
'Tis wonderful to consider, how the Schools were formerly over∣run
with a sensless kind of Iargon, which they call'd Philosophy;

and which men studied with the greatest Labour and Assiduity, that
they might attain the name of Wise and Learned. This certainly
was the greatest Cheat was ever imposed on the mind of Man:
But why say I, imposed? Men drew it on themselves, and run
their own Heads into the Noose: and when they had intangled them∣selves
in a thousand ridiculous Disputes about empty Questions, they
vainly thought they had attained the Perfection of Philosophers;
whilst they had no Ideas in their Minds answerable to those Noises
they made with their Tongues; but took more pains to deceive both
themselves and others, than is requisite for the Propagation of true
Knowledge. And indeed we may well imagine, that, had the former
Ages of the World been at half that Labour and Study for the Ad∣vancement
of real Knowledg, which they spent in promoting ver∣bose
Stuff; Manking by this time might have been by many De∣grees
more wise, and consequently more happy even in this Life;
for Wisdom only makes men so.
But in this last Age the generous Undertakings of the Philoso∣phick
Societies of Europe (to whom your Institution has shewn the
way, and been an illustrious Example) have dissipated these dark
Mists, and have abdicated this kind of empty Stuff; which had
crept into even Natural Disquisitions; and like a Leprosie had quite
over-run the whole Body of Philosophy, deforming its Beauty, and
ruining its Strength. Men are not satisfied now with noisy Words,
and nothing else; but require more solid Foundations of Knowledge,
and believe no farther than they can find good Proofs.
This great Change, which Philosophy or the Prosecution of Know∣ledg
in general has received of late years, is manifest in all its Parts;
but in none more than in natural Enquiries. To these you have
given a clearly new Turn, wholly different from the Methods, by
which they were formerly prosecuted in the Schools. And how
advantageously the Change has been made, will be evident to any
that considers the one and t'other Method.

The Commentators on Aristotle, (who was certainly himself a most
diligent and profound Investigator of Nature) have rendred Physicks
on heap of froathy Disputes, managing the whole Knowledge of Body
and Motion,Consult Magirus, Eustathi∣us, Zanar∣dus, Col. Complu∣tensis Com. &c. the com∣mon Na∣tural Phi∣losophy Books read in our Col∣leges. of Animals, Plants, and Minerals; of Celestial, Aerial and
Terrestrial Bodies; by Hypothetical Conjectures, confirm'd by plau∣sible
Arguments of Wit and Rhetorick, ordered in a Syllogistical form;
and answering Objections in like manner: But never studied to prove
their Opinions by Experiments. By which Method they were as igno∣rant
of the Properties and Affections of Natural Bodies, as if they
were not at all the Subject of their Disquisitions. And yet these
were the great Dictators of Physicks for many Ages in our Colleges
and Schooles; and no one was accounted worthy the Name of a Phi∣losopher,
that would not on their Authority Jurare in verba. He
that could Dispute and distinguish, about Sympathy, Antipathy, oc∣cult
Qualities, Antiperistesis, and a Thousand such other fantastick
Terms, was reputed a great Proficient, and deeply vers'd in Natures
Secrets: tho all the while perhaps he knew not any one of the admi∣rable
Phaenomena of the Magnet, or was not at all versed in the
History of any one Branch in Nature. They'd rumble out indeed
the Definition and Divisions of Comets; but knew nothing of the
Laws of their Motions, or other Affections. They'd tell you the
Tides depend on the Influence of the Moon; and when you proceed
farther, and ask, what is this Influence? They'll yet give you a Word
for it, and say, 'tis an occult Quality: If you inquire, what an oc∣cult
Quality is? They'r at a Stand, and having no farther hard
Word here to fly to, are forced to confess 'tis a Quality they know
nothing of. Had they not better at first have plainly confest, they
know not the Cause of the Tides? no surely; For tho this had been
more becoming modest Philosphers, it would not so well captivate the
Vulgar, and gain to themselves the Repute of deep Knowledge.
Yet this verbose Philosophy is that, which for many Generations
prevail'd in the World: This it is, which is injoyn'd to be read and
studied in our Colleges and Academies, by the Statutes and Charters

thereof: which in this Particular, to the apparent Hindrance of the
Advancement of real and useful Knowledge, do yet remain unaltered
in our Universities: wherein the first years of young Students may be
imploy'd with much more Advantage by prosecuting other Methods.
And, My thinks, it were now full time (after so happy a Refor∣mation
of our Errors in Religion, and purging our Seminaries of
Learning from the Fopperies and Superstition of a false Worship) to
begin a Reformation of our Human Literature, by establishing more
useful Methods of Education, especially for the Employment of our
more tender years.
But tho this weighty Undertaking has hitherto been deferr'd in
them (the Reason whereof I leave to the Consideration of the learn∣ed
and reverend Heads of our Universities) yet the strong Wits of
many in this last Age have broken all these Fetters; And have hap∣pily
advanced the true Method of prosecuting Knowledge upon solid
Foundations.
This is manifest in every Branch of Learning. Logick has put
on a Countenance clearly different from what it appeared in formerly:
How unlike is its shape in the Ars Cogitandi, Recherches de la
Verite, &c. from what it appears in Smigletius, and the Commen∣tators
on Aristotle? But to none do we owe for a greater Advance∣ment
in this Part of Philosophy, than to the incomparable Mr. Locke,
Who, in his Essay concerning Humane Understanding, has re∣ctified
more received Mistakes, and delivered more profound Truths,
established on Experience and Observation, for the Direction of Man's
mind in the Prosecution of Knowledge, (which I think may be pro∣perly
term'd Logick) than are to be met with in all the Volumes
of the Antients. He has clearly overthrown all those Metaphysical
Whymsies, which infected mens Brains with a Spice of Madness,
whereby they feign'd a Knowledge where they had none, by
making a noise with Sounds, without clear and distinct Sig∣nifications.

Natural Philosophy is now prosecuted by Observation, Experi∣ment,
and History thereof. And indeed if we consider it rightly,
there is really no other sort of Natural Philosophy, but this only.
For by Natural Philosophy, or Physicks, do we mean any thing
else, but the Knowledge of the Properties and Affections of Natural
Bodies? And is this to be obtain'd any otherwise, than by Experiment
and Observation? Can any Man Dispute me into the Knowledge of
the Magnet's Attraction, Direction and Variation; or of the Phae∣nomena
of the Mercurial Baroscope without Tryal and Experiment?
Can any Arguments prove that a little Sulphur, Nitre, and Charcole
should produce such a quick and strong Blast as Gunpowder, before
they be actually put together and tryed? Men might have disputed
to all Eternity, before their Gibberish could discover the Use of that
ordinary despicable Substance, Iron-Ore: To which, for ought I see,
(as a most ingenious Author has observ'd) we are beholding for all
the Politure and Plenty; all the Learning, State, and Magnificence
of the World, beyond the Rudeness, Wants, and Ignorance of the an∣cient
savage Americans: Whose Natural Endowments and Provisi∣ons
equal those of the most flourishing and polite Nations; But they
wanted the Advantagious Uses of this contemptible Mineral. So that
he, who first discovered the Use of that one poor Mine; or Tubal∣cain,
that first taught the way of working in Iron, may be deser∣vedly
celebrated as the Father of Arts, and Author of most of the
Conveniences of Human Life.
I know some will say, that by Natural Philosophy is meant not
only the Knowledge of the Properties and Uses of Natural Bodies;
but also the Assgning the true Reasons or Causes of these Properties.
But in this Particular we are to proceed with great Caution. I
know the Mind of man is of that inquisitive, prying Nature; that
upon any Appearance offer'd to the Senses, it immediately falls to the
search after the Cause producing this Effect. But indeed in Natu∣ral
Disquisitions, 'tis generally (I may say almost alwayes) to no
purpose. We may make plausible Conjectures, and some sort of fea∣sible
Guesses; but others perhaps may make others, and these also

equally probable. But these deserve not the Name of Natural Phi∣losophy;
they serve only for Chat and Diversion. For the omnipo∣tent
Contriver of the Universe has order'd Natures Operations to
be performed by such ine Springs, secret Motions, and inexplicable
Ways; that Man in this Life may well despair of attaining the inti∣mate
Knowledge thereof; and must therefore content himself with the
Contemplation of plain matter of Fact, in which he cannot be decei∣ved.
But yet, that we may not wholly suppress this inquisitive Hu∣mour,
but may only keep it within just Bounds: It will be granted,
That whatever immediate Cause can be assigned to an Effect; and it
can be proved so to be by some convincing Experiments; and these
be often repeated, and diligently examn'd, and found to agree and
conspire together; we may be allow'd to found thereon an Hypothe∣sis
or Supposal of this Cause, but no more. We must not positively
establish it as the undoubted, adequate Cause; for this we may miss
after our most diligent Inquiry. However the Experiments we use
and demonstrate to sense, for the establishing our Hypothesis, shall be
allowed as unquestionable Verities; and shall be embraced as so ma∣ny
Steps of Advancement in the Knowledge of Nature.
But of the Uncertainty of Assigning Natural Causes I shall give
but one Instance, and that perhaps as strong as any we shall meet
with in Philosophy. We are apt to think, that the Cause of the Sus∣pension
of the Mercury in the Torricellian Experiment is undoubted∣ly
the Gravitation of the Air: And we prove it by a most convin∣cing
Experiment; for putting the Baroscope into the Pneumatick En∣gine,
exhaust the Air, and the Mercury immediately subsides. But
when we consider it a little farther, we shall find, That hereby we
have obtaind little more certain Knowledge, than plainly the matter
of Fact of this latter Experiment, and not the adequate Cause of the
first Experiment enquired after. For we can only conclude from hence,
that the Equipoise of Liquors is the Cause of the Mercury's Suspen∣sion:
But what is the Cause of this Equipoise of Liquors, or the
Cause of the Gravitation of any Liquors, or any Bodies? That is,
What is the Cause of Gravity in general is clearly unknown to us;

and consequently the ultimate Cause of the Mercury's Suspension is
not hereby discovered. 'Tis true indeed, by this Experiment we have
most probably arriv'd at the Knowledge of one Link more in the
Chain of Natural Causes; but this is not conclusive; this puts not an
end to the Enquiry: For so if one looking at a Pendulum Clock should
enquire, Why the Pendulum does not cease by degrees from vibra∣ting?
And he were answered, That it is kept in motion by the next
immediate Wheel that beats on the Pallats: And this were offer'd to
be proved by Experiment; for stop the motion of this Wheel, and the
Pendulum soon ceases: Would he not presently be satisfied, and go
away secure, that he had discovered the Cause of the Continuation of
the Pendulum's Motion? And yet certainly he has mistaken one single
Link for the whole Chain. For if he proceeded farther; and had
enquired, What moved this Wheel? He would find, the next Wheel,
and so onwards to the Weight or Spring. But here he's at a Loss;
for what moves them, is absolutely unknown.
As to most other Reasons in Natural Philosophy, that usually pass
as satisfactory, and are received as Accounts of Nature's Proceedings:
We shall generally find them little more, than farther Illustrations of
the Matter enquired after in some different Words. Thus if it be
asked, What is the Reason the Sun casts a shadow from some Bodies,
viz. those we call opaque, and none from others, viz. Transparent
Bodies? 'Tis answer'd, Because by the opaque Body the Rays of
the Sun are stopt in their Progress, and hindred from enlighting
that Part of the Ground or Floor that is behind the Body: In the
Transparent Body the Rays pass freely. This would be taken by se∣veral
as deep Reasoning; and yet is really no more than Tautology;
as if we should say, the Sun casts a Shadow, Because he casts a Sha∣dow.
But it gives no Account of the Opacity of one Body, and Trans∣parency
of another, which truly the Question requires. If we ask,
How Fire burns? 'Tis answered, by exciting a violent Motion in the
Parts of the Combustible Matter: Which indeed is no more than the
same thing in different Words. But how Motion is excited or commu∣nicated
by one Body to another, is absolutely inexplicable. Yet these

Kind of Verbal Reasons do generally pass in Talk, and serve to a∣muse
as well as the best.
Since therefore we cannot expect to arrive at the intimate Know∣ledge
of Natures Operations: Let us apply our selves to know as much
of Her, as we may be certain of. And this only is in Matters of Ex∣periment
and Tryal; wherein by the infallible Guidance of our Sences,
we cannot be deceived. For tho, Experimentum periculosum,
be an ancient Aphorism; yet we must consider of what Experiments
it was pronounced, viz. of those in Medicine and Disease. It a∣grees
not to all, when diligently enquired into, and often repeated.
But when we meet with any Experiment that is thus fallacious, we
are not to rely on it; yet of this we may be sure, and lay it down
as a discover'd Certainty, that sometimes it hits, sometimes it
misses; and in this Truth we cannot be deceived, seeing we have so
often found it.
But I have lanch'd out thus far, before I was aware: I must re∣cover
my self, and beg Pardon both for this Digression, and for telling
you Things which you very well know already, at the same time when
I offer you a Petition. But my Desire of propagating this useful Me∣thod
of Philosophy will excuse my Fault, and at the same time will re∣commend
me the more to your Favour, who are the great Patrons thereof,
and in Account whereof your Name is deservedly celebrated all over
Europe.
Permit me therefore to lay this Offering at your Feet, it being the
Explication of one of the most noble Instruments of Experimental Philo∣sophy.
Not that I think thereby to add any think considerable to the
vast Treasure of Curiosities you already possess: But that I may have
an Opportunity of declaring to the World, how much I am
 April 17. 1690.
