


Much Honoured and Well Beloved,
IF I had any other design to serve by this Address, than what was in my view when I preached the follow∣ing Sermons, I would perhaps re∣commend them to the favour of some particular Patron; but I ra∣ther lay hold of this opportunity, that I may acknowedge (in as pub∣lick

a manner as is possible for me) the many kindnesses that I received amongst you, when I was allowed to preach the Gospel in my Native Country. I was unanimously and cheerfully nam'd to the Govern∣ment of the College of Edinburgh, without my knowledge or inter∣posal, by the Sr. Tho∣mas Ken∣nedy. Lord Provost and Town Council. I retain a grateful sense of it; And this is the princi∣pal reason why these Discourses do now appear. I am not so extra∣vagantly foolish, as to think that the present Age needs any of my Composures: if they are innocent and well meant (though attended with many other imperfections) they may promote good thoughts in some who heard them with Pi∣ety and Attention. They are on∣ly calculated for their Meridian. Most men have different Tasts for

Books, as well as for other things, and what is sincerely intended, may sometimes be read with greater success, than more accurate Trea∣tises.
The World is very vain, and changes its Faces and Figures every moment, yet true Religion is inva∣riable, as the Author of it; and therefore we are to steer our course towards Heaven by those great Truths that are uniformly received amongst all Christians; and to take heed, that we do not separate from the Catholick Church of Christ, her antient Rules and Con∣stitutions by which she was pre∣served in the Primitive Ages. For it is certain, that God did not suffer the Universal Church to deviate from the Apostolical Discipline, when as yet she was furnished with





no other Weapons to pull down Idolatry and Superstition, than her Unity, Prayers and Universal Cha∣rity. There is nothing more oppo∣site to Piety and Devotion, than Pride and Vanity; and to despise the Wisdom of all our Predecessors, is, not only arrogant, but impious. The multitude and variety of later Sectaries (especially in the Isle of Britain) have advanced Atheism to a prodigious Impudence; and it is impossible to recover the World (now sunk in Folly and Irreligion) but by the extraordinary Zeal of good Men. The decays of Piety in our days appear openly amongst all Ranks and Orders; and this must be imputed in a great part to that Itch after Novelties, which hath so fatally overrun these Nations. Am∣bition and Faction, hath almost re∣mov'd the distinction between

things Sacred and Prophane; yet it is certain, that the wrath of man wor∣keth not the righteousness of God; and those pretended Reformations that are managed with Noise and Tumult, have ordinarily no other effects, than Sacrilege and Confusion. We are very apt to have other thoughts of God and of our selves, when we ap∣proach the Gates of Death, from those which we have entertained in the days of health and prosperity; and if then we have the least sense of the World to come, we cannot but distinguish true Zeal to advance the Power of Godliness, from the insidious arts of grasping Earthly Dominion: the first is pure, calm and humble, merciful and compas∣sionate; the other being from the Earth, is agreeable to that Spirit that prevails in the World.
OUR Saviour founded the Church a distinct Society from the World, and therefore armed it with Spiri∣tual Laws and Censures, that she might be preserved by those Di∣vine Helps, though all Earthly Powers should endeavour to crush her; and experience witnesses, that she hath been more Victorious o∣ver Lewdness and Infidelity, by her Patience and Sufferings, than by all her Secular Intrigues and Political Methods. When she stands upon the immoveable Pillars of her first foundation, her outward Splendor may be eclipsed, but her inward strength is made more firm and lasting by the Counterbatteries that are raised against her Peace and Prosperity. Truth is not ashamed and therefore it is Weakness and Pusillanimity to deny it in the face

of Danger and Persecution; especi∣ally when the most Sacred Founda∣tions are daringly invaded and trampled upon: and though Ec∣clesiastical Politie be thought now a-days as mutable as are the incli∣nations of the people, yet they who consider things more maturely must see, that the antient Faith cannot be preserved amongst men, but in its Original Vehicles of Primitive Order and Constitution; and when the Apostolical Government of the Church is overthrown, a multitude of Errors and Delusions creep into the World, that destroy the inward Power of Godliness, as well as the outward Beauty of Publick Wor∣ship.
I AM heartily sorry, that our Country should be the Theatre of so many Complaints and Disor∣ders,

and that the immediate Ser∣vants of the Sanctuary, both Bi∣shops and Presbyters, should be run down with Clamour and Vio∣lence, for no other reason that I know, but because they are sepa∣rated from the World to the pecu∣liar Services of the Living God: notwithstanding of all this, we ought to possess our Souls in Pati∣ence, and to believe, that not a hair of our head falls to the ground with∣out our heavenly Father. And this one Truth may compose our Spirits against all Storms and Disasters, and teach us to resign our selves with∣out struggling to the disposal of Heaven. When we are sincerely humbled for our Sins (both Nati∣onal and Personal) he will visit us again in the multitude of his tender Mercies: and therefore it is more our duty to look unto him that

smites us, than complain of our Oppressors. It may be, that they themselves who have been most active in our Calamities, are some∣what sensible of their Cruelty; and if not, we heartily pray, that God would bring into the way of Truth all such as have erred and are deceived. The present Desola∣tions of our Church may be palli∣ated with many little Excuses, but all the Rhetorical Colours imagina∣ble can never hide the Conse∣quences of so monstrous a Change.
WHEN we are surrounded with Difficulties on the right and left hand, we must make our requests known unto God by Prayer; for he is a present help in time of trouble. We may meet with Crosses from the smallest things and occurrences; and perhaps our Afflictions are fre∣quently

multiplied, that we may be taught to run unto God, who can either mitigate or remove them, or by them exercise our Patience and Magnanimity. God knows all things, but he seems to take notice more particularly of such things as we feel, and recommend to his Infi∣nite Goodness and Compassion, so willing He is to have us depend on Him by the closest adherence.
THERE is nothing more per∣nicious to true Christian Practice, than wrong Principles.Mat. 6.23. Take heed therefore that the light which is in you be no darkness. The fear of God makes men move with a reasona∣ble Steadiness in all their Actions; and nothing else yields true Peace at the hour of Death; A Conscience void of offence towards God and towards Men, is the surest Anchor against all

our Fears and Conflicts. God con∣tinue his Presence with you, that you may seriously lay to heart the only One thing necessary. This is sin∣cerely prayed for by

