


Honorable Sirs,
SIn hath an ill name all the Scriptures over, and it hath not its name for nought; it never had a good look from God, God doth as it were strive for comparisons,

to set out the vilenesse thereof: its zek, 16.6. h. 24. 11, 12. om. 3. 13. zek. 16.8. compared to the bloud, & pollutions of Infants, to the crruption of rotten Se∣pulchers, to the scum of a seething pot, and what not? all which are but sha∣dowes of its deformity, the substance thereof is beyond compare: yet laies ex jubet, gra∣ juat, praeci∣ Deus quod e praestat. Christ his skirt over the uncomly sin∣ner, to make him an heavenly beauty, never asking ought with him, but what he ha's promised to worke in him; and this is the fruit of his crucifixion, re∣surrection, ascension, and reigne, the acceptation of the person, and ablation of the sin; do's not this make us won∣der? why cry we not out, who made us to differ? Lord! How 'ist that thou shewest thy selfe to us, and not unto the world? That was a good hn 14. 22. zianzen. rist hath  ubera as ll as his bera, ways  consolati∣, as well as rection. saying, Lord, I am an Instrument for thee to touch; but our steeled hearts, till touched with this Loadstone, are neither drawne nor driven: Christ ap∣pears, Lawyer-like, in Heaven, for his owne Clients, to nonsuit all the Devils accusations, and make his darts dint∣les: who's the great Master of Requests

there, but he, who's near us in incar∣nation? and can he know us at a di∣stance, in the businesse of intercession? this is that Jesus, who gave both vertue, and value to his own death, both to sa∣tisfie, sanctifie, and save; this is he, of whom we may well say, as writers of the Jasper; its easier to admire, then Serm non va let exprimere, experimento opus est. Chry∣sostom. declare it, and far more easie to say what he is not, then what he is; and truly, there shall be a succession of Christs name and fame, till he hath gi∣ven up to his father, his all at last, with behold here I am, and the children thou Heb. 2. 13. Amor Dei est ecstaticu sui nec se sinit esse juris. Propter te domine, propterte. Quic∣quid agas, prop∣ter Deum agas, do all for Gods sake. Qui misit uni∣genitum, immi∣sit vultum, quid tandem tibi negaturus est? Bern. hast given me; O! that his love would beget its owne likenesse, that many might have an aptnesse of reception, for the heavenly influence, image, and im∣presse; if we give not him our affecti∣ons, are not all for God, our actions will be abortive, still borne.
What! that the flesh should be cloa∣thed with the Spirit, and sin covered with grace, doe's not this attract love? what will do it then? besides this, after once Christ is ours, we are armed against all crosses, outward or inward. Credit

God should we then, who giving great things, gives, in those gifts, a grant of the lesse; we may take his bare word, and trust him, and that against sense, oh. 6.35, 36. Hic credere est dere. August-Nunquam con∣usi Deo consisi. Deut, 32.36. in things invisible, and against reason, in things incredible; for true trust in this Trustee, is a remedy before the re∣medy comes; that being brought, and made present to faith, which is di∣stant, and as it were lost to sense; Thus Abraham, and others saw afarre off, what by faith they embraced as it were at hand. No such Midwife as faith; it hath delivered, even graves of their The Word is ompared to oney, who's ature it is to urge green ounds, hough it ause paine to he exulce∣are parts. ulera purgat,  mordet, ex. Apho problem. dead, and gathered one contrary out of another, Honey out of the Rock. Hence absent joyes are present, wants are ple∣nitudes, and calamity is beguiled; as good society, deals with the time. Na∣zianzen rejoyced that he had some∣thing of value (viz. his Athenian learning) to loose for Christ. Anexa∣goras, being asked wherefore he was borne, repli'd, Ut Coelum contem∣plar, that I might busie my thoughts about Heaven; Hierome to comfort an afflicted Hermite, wish'd him to take

a few turnes in Paradise, by medita∣tion, In Paradiso mente d'eam∣bulare tam di in remo non eris. Fox, act san mon p. 1484. and assured him, so long as he had that in minde, he should not be sensible that he was solitary, and alone. This day, said Master Bradford Mar∣tyr; I thinke, Hearty Hooper, Trusty Taylor, and Sincere Saunders, end their course, and receive their crowns; the next am I, which hourely waite for the Porter to open me the gates, after them to enter into that rest; God for∣give me my great unthankefulnesse, for that exceeding great mercy. Thus like Rivers, all saints run into the Sea, Je∣sus Christ, their Ocean sweetnesse, even into him, who is savourest to the saints in deepest distresse, and helps men for∣saken of hope: 'tis he that made Mar∣tyrs goe as merrily to dye, as ever they did to dine; who then can turne his back on sweet Christs bleeding em∣bracements, and kick at his naked bowels?
But this, even this alasse! is the Cordolium (hearts grief) of the gra∣cious, that this Lambe is prized onely of a few, the most are but pictures of

Piety; There's something more I would  ad stias, Christi os ad Leoner, d ignem, ad nem, said. e primitive ersecutors, ertullian nd now the apists. mnis Christi∣us crucianus. uther. eb. 2. 10. omentaneum  quod cruciat ternum quod electat. elch. Adam-appy was at tongue  the primi∣ve time, that ould somd t aliquid avidicū, any∣ing of Da∣ds doing, uch more ppy is he  speaks t, aliquid hristi, any ing of hrist from perience. mind you of, abaion of sin sweetens our sufferings, prompts and heartens us to bear them; every Christian is a Cru∣cian, Grace is in continuall conflict with corruption, onely glory makes a totall conquest; this Captaine of Sal∣vation was made perfect through suf∣fering for sin, that he might bring many sons to that glory: sufferings hurt not when there is an assurance our sins are Sepultur'd in the Saviours wounds. Master Knox a little before his death, rose out of his bed, and being asked wherefore, he, being then so sick as he was, would do so? he replyed, that he had sweet meditations of the resurrection of Christ that night before, and now he would go into the Pulpit, and impart that to others, he had felt in his owne soule. The neerer any thing is to its center, the stronger and swifter it moves; the wine of the spirit of God, and the water of life is strongest in Saints, when drawing to an end. Spi∣rituall motions are quickest, when na∣turall ones are slowest; most sensible are

they when the body begins to be sense lesse, most lively when Saints lye dye∣ing, the Sun shines most amiable to∣wards the descent; and rivers, the neer∣er they runne to the Sea, the sooner are they met with the tyde; O 'tis won∣drous sweet to ponder the doings and sufferings of Christ, by which he hath made some sinlesse, all fair and comely in his owne ornaments. Truely Saints should rise with their Saviour, and thinke on their own countrey, their fa∣thers house, and meditate the heaven∣ly mansions above, more then inferi∣our good; This world's but their place Fugiendum es clarissimam pa∣triam, ibi pa∣ter, ibi omnia. Plotinus. Discupio solvi tecum{que} O Christe manere. Portio fac reg ni sim quota▪ cun{que} tui. Pareus a little before his death. Ʋlteriùs was the Emblem of Charls the Fifth. of commoration, heaven's their place of conversation, that hath foundati∣ons, but earth hangs on nothing, as Job hath said; and a sanctified fancie climbes upon creatures as on a Ladder to Heaven; Saints have Heaven afore∣hand, in praetio, in promisso, in primitiis. Some, have their non ul∣tra, are not winged for heaven, but the gracious have their ulterius, still on, on, farther yet; and their sublimius, yet higher still, their profundius,

still deeper, and the deeper, the sweeter, if we dive in the Ocean Christ; and a Christians motto should be, None but Christ, none but Christ, as said amberts cts and mon. the Martyr, when he held up such hands as he had, with his fingers ends flaming  the more paine, the more gaine, said Igna∣tius, I had rather be a Martyr, then a Monarch, its to my losse if you bate me any thing of my sufferings said Gor∣dius; emporalia Dei vis imensa n pereunt, sed rturiunt. ishop of illaine. oh. Manlij. . com. p. 539. ist holy war. things laid out for God do not perish, but flourish, our dyeing com∣forts are alive in Christ our life and theirs. The passion-dayes of Mar∣tyrs were called, Natalitia salutis, salvation birth-dayes, the day break of eternall brightnesse.
The next thing is that we lissen and comply with the motions of the graci∣ous spirit, and withdraw our consent  Saint in the ays of sin il, nisi coa∣us agit, do's othing with  good will. from reiteration of sinne interceded for and by us forsaken; a sinne which is directly against the sonne, though 'tis true in depraved nature, the act and consent goe both to evill, the stub∣borne

voice whereof is, I doe evill and will do it, yet in grace, though the act go sometimes to sin, the consent is absent, and its mournfull voice is, the evill which I would not that doe I; in Glory, the act and consent goe both to good, and all good, and neither of them to any evill, the triumphant voice of which, is, the evill which I would not, I doe not, and the good which I would, that doe I.
Sirs, We live in an age wherein there's a succession of raw and uncon∣cocted conjectures, and conceptions, Sinceritas sere∣nitatis mater. Rev. 3.4. of good and evill; be you instant and constant with God, for soundnesse of judgement, and sinceritie, which is the Mother of serenity; now alas! Pseudo-Christ▪s have brought forth Pseudo-Christians, yet happy is the man that defiles not his garments, hee shall walk with God in white, for hee's worthy.
Let fallen brothers be restored in the Spirit of meeknesse, set in joynt againe, as the Greek word is; as Chyrurgions Gal. 6.1. and bone-setters, who handle their pa∣tients

tenderly, from whom this meta∣phor e hodiè, & go cras, he ll to day,  may I to orrow. Bern.  Tim. 2.8. antillùm tan llùm adhuc usillum, hrist will me ere ng. is taken; some, saith the Apostle, have erred concerning the truth, or as the word is, have missed the marke, like unskill full Archers, or inconside∣rate Marriners, by mis-reckoning of one point, have missed the Haven, and run on the Rocks; airie contestors, and empty strivers, that have not onely cumbred, but almost covered, this part of the earth; but stand you fast, quit your selves like men, be strong, hold fast what you have received of the Lord, let no man take your crowne, and pray uando Chri∣s Magister  am cito dici∣r quod doce∣r. August. you may ever lie and live under the dew of Christs lips.
Honorable Sirs, You have honored God, and God hath honored you; I hope Theodosius his opinion is yours, eronimus. r, laudat a∣lator, sed non  verus ama. who would rather be Membrū Chri∣sti, then Caput Imperii, a member of Christ, then the head of the Empire. Suis quisque laudibus favet, I thinke not true of your Honours, Sine blanditia dico, I flatter not, but I am

ambitious to animate your courage and candor for God.
I blesse God, I judge it a greater mercy to imitate, then to encomionize vertue; many future generations will better expresse the worth of such wor∣thies works, than can the extentions of my Pen, when the History of common-wealths Patriots, shall be made extant.
Finally, You have here stamped the impresse of my obliged respects; to allow Phil. 1.7. Sanctior est copula cordis quam corporis. Illi linguarum ego aurium Do∣minus. Tacit. fie on a Zoilus hee'l carpe at an Homer. Quem in inti∣mis visceribus habeo ad convi∣vendum, & commoriendum, said Bradford. in a Letter to Lawrence Saunders his fellow Martyr, Act. & Mon. fol. 1483. an oblivion of your love to me, and the truth, would be ingratitude in the high∣est degree; I have you in my heart, and that not without cause; nor doe I for∣get how you held your selves concern'd in all my sufferings, under the lash of lewd tongues, neither that incourage∣ment which in the course of my Mini∣stery I received from you; truly, thank∣fullnesse is not measured of God, or good men, by the weight, but by the will of the retributor: I assure my selfe that a pub∣like acknowledgement of your publike favours towards me, will be as kindly

taken as given; And if by these la∣bours, which are not unto lassitude, you may reape a yet farther profit, from your very humble servant, and loving friend and debtor, you will glad his spirit who is,
And resolves to be, through the strength of God, an unfained friend to you▪ and all the members of mysticall Christ, un∣till days are lost in the ancient of dayes.


