



Right Honourable,
VNexpressible & uncon∣ceivable are those cordi∣all joyes, which proceed from the in-commings of Jesus Christ upon the Soul, and her out-goings towards the Messiah againe; For is't not an hea∣ven on earth, so to commerce with Christ? what, but this may bee com∣par'd to that Heaven above, where God gives out himselfe in fullest mea∣sures, begetting like motions and o∣perations in the glorified Saints? What gives the Saints mercies and morsels a right relish save this,Mea non prosunt sine me, nec tua prosun sine te, Bern. Christs comming in upon as hand in hand with them, and making them good to us? and can any thing but his absence mar the tast of mercies? what
shall I say? he that hath Christ wants not,Is habet omnia, qui habet haben∣tem omnia. he that wants Christ inherits not what he seemeth to have. What's good to us without God?Tolle meum et telle D. and what can be bad to us when we enjoy him?Quid si sine domo, et non sine domino, sine veste, si non sine fide, sine sibo, sine lecto, et non sine Christo? what the Father said of Joy, that may I say of the Joy-maker, and much more. There is so great a sweetness in heavenly joy, that if one small drop thereof should fall into Hell, it would swallow up all the bitterness of that Tophet.Tanta est dulcedo caele∣stis gaudij, ut si una guttula difflueret in infernum, to∣tam a maritu∣dinem infer∣ni absorberet. Aug. Christ being had, makes bitter things sweet, rough things smooth, and massie things light: Oh! what a Jesus have we? do's not the Saints lothnesse to bee rent from him, speake out sweetly what an one he is, to such as sit under his shade with delight?Qui semel Christi dulce dinem gusta∣verit deficile ab illo sepe∣rari sustinet. Bern. Oh the power, purity, immensity, and perenity of his love, mercie and goodness! how precious a thing is't to have, and to bee had of such a precious Christ? Certainely time will discover it, 'twill be known at the time of his glorious appearance to judg the secrets of closest hearts, &
to be honoured of all that believe: Of which number, I take the boldnesse to repute your Honour, to be in the front among persons of Honour. And what do I more then revive the anci∣ent report which hath gone forth con∣cerning your Honour, many yeares since?Simulata non diu du∣rant. what bad men say it skils not; sure I am, good men speak you a man of a moderate spirit, one who loves truth for the truths sake: how you have done, & do still countenance the god∣ly part of any party, I need not tel the World: but that which do's most en∣noble your Honor, and make you most famous, is God's speaking out his ap∣probation of you, to your own soul; for that only is Circumcision, wch is of the heart, & he is a right Christiā, whose praise is not of men only, but of God. Sir, I humbly present you with this small Treatise, & why should I doubt of your favourable ac∣ceptance, in whose noble breast such wisedom & ingenuity is found? Let him doubt that lists; for I will not: the book is your honors, such as it is, &
if men mestake not, it discovers hid∣den secret passages, and proceedings, betwixt Christ & the Soul: & what's more reviving to a spirituall person? In a word, this is but a small acknow∣ledgement of your Honours worth, yet future opportunities may cause to abound: goe on in wel-doing noble Patriot, and prosper, recon∣cile the differences of Saints, doe ju∣stice, love mercy, & walk humbly with God; you may doe much good by your good example; For, as the Father spake, an Excellent Lord is better then an excellent Law. Thus shal you live so, as that you need not feare to die, and propagate Gods glory with your own name & fame to future ge∣nerations. Now that it may be the lot of your honorable self, with your noble Consort, and all your Posterity, to prize Christ, live in him, be saved by him, & stated in everlasting glory with him, shall be the desire & pray∣er of him who is,

