



May it please your Highnesse,
IN this discourse I plead
the cause of the Publique
and Poore of your true-hearted
County of Leice∣ster,
and the Counties ad∣jacent.
Else (had it been any thing of
private interest) my hand and heart
would have trembled to have put any
thing into your hands, to turn off your
eye but a few minutes, from the won∣derfull
weighty affaires of these three
Nations; which are all Incumbents up∣on
your Highnesse and Councell. The
onely wise, great, good God support
you with his owne wisdome, counsell,
and strength. Though the main of my
businesse is for soules, even to get out of

them selfe, world, sinne and Devil, and
to get in God, Christ, grace and the
Gospel: Yet I have borrowed some
weeks (which by double pains, I blesse
God I have repayed) to wait upon Par∣liaments
formerly,Chari parē tes, chari li∣beri, chari quo{que} amici, sed omnes omnium cha∣ritates com∣prehendit pa∣tria. Tullius de officiis. and now upon your
Highnesse and Councel with Petitions,
to prevent the ruine of my Countrey
(which is dear unto me) so endeavou∣red
& indangered by self-ish men truly
delineated in these Papers: whatsoever
specious pretences may be made to the
contrary of Regulated Inclosure, and of
a may-be Inclosure, without ruine either
of Publick or Poor. In these Inland Coun∣tyes
wofull experience tells us, It is not
so. And that Inclosure is now making, is
likely to be in time as desolating as any,
if not speedily prevented by your
Highnesse and Councell. Such Incol∣surists
in the very making of them, ha∣ving

no respect to the Publique, or
right in Law, or the Consciences of
men. As in the severall Petitions from
Leicester-shire now before you it ap∣pears:
which Petitions your Highnesse
(our hearts rejoyce in you, and blesse
God for you) without delay heard, and
referred to your Councell: which also
they have read and committed to the
Lord Viscount Lisle, Sir Gilbert Picke∣ring,
Mr. Strickland, and Charles Wolsley
or any two of them, who are speedily to
speake with the parties that attend the
businesse, and to consider of the matter
therein contained, and to offer to the
Councell what they shall conceive fit
to be done thereupon. And as your
Leicester-shire Petitioners have petitio∣ned
your Highnesse, and Councell-men upon
earth; so they daily Petition the High
God of heaven to incline your hearts to

relieve the oppressed of these Inland
Counties. And truly God hath set it
upon my Spirit, That you are (Hester
4. 14.) Come to the rule of this nation for
such a time as this. And my soul wrestles
with my God that you may still be ser∣viceable
to God, and his Church, the
Publique and the Poore, till you goe a∣way
hence and shall be seen no more,
and then be gathered to our Christ, who
then shall say, Mat. 25. 35, 36. &c. Come
ye blessed of my Father, receive a kingdome
prepared for you from the beginning of the
world. I was hungry and you gave me meat,
thirsty and you gave me drinke, naked and
you cloathed me, &c. Amen saith the soul
of him who is

