



Worthy Sir,
THE Dedication of Books to Persons of Integrity & Autho∣rity, hath been of antient ac∣count in the Church of Christ. Saint Luke had his Theophilus, a man of Luke 1. Acts 1. power and preheminence, whose Name he prescribeth to his Books of the New Testament. Indeed few such Stars have remained fixed in the Churches Firmament; Piety being often over∣born by State-policy: too many are of Gallio's mind, they care not to inter∣meddle with these things; or as the

King of Navar said, They will go no further in this Sea than they can come safe to Land. Hence not many Wise, not 1 Cor. 1. 26. Mr. Bolton. many Noble are called; And some great by Birth, and Noble by Blood are a no∣torious blemish to an honourable House. Like Sepulchers they are painted with∣out, Tacitus, l. 1. c. 10. yet have putrefaction within; or like the Apothecaries Pills, are gilded Nobilitas Heroica est Emi∣nentia quaedam notabilis, &c. per quam ho∣mo fit per adoptio∣nem Fi∣lius Dei, Sponsa Christi, Templum Spiritus Sancti, Gres. Tract. de Nobil. Joh. 1.33. Mr. Bolton in his Ser∣mon of this Sub∣ject, p. 214 on the outside, but have poyson within. Intus Nero, foris Cato, Loquitur hic ut Piso, vivit ut Galonius.
That is ever the best in this kind, when God is the top of the kin, Religion the Root, the holy Scriptures the Rule: when the person is made by Adoption the Son of God, the Spouse of Christ, the Temple of the Holy Ghost; this is that Heroica Nobilitas, without which all other is little worth. It is not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of Man, but of God. Hence it was that Beatus Laudovicus, would be called Lodovicus de Pisciato, rather than to take greater Titles to himself; Why? there he became a Christian; and for this cause the Bereans are said to be more Noble than the Men of Thessalonica, bet∣ter born, more Gentlemen, more No∣ble

by birth or blood: this was not by Act. 17.11.  gene∣rosiores, Beza. reason of Naturals or Morals, but for their spiritual Regeneration, readiness to receive the Gospel, and their search∣ings into the Scriptures daily.
Now (Noble Sir) the Kings Majesty hath conferred a double Honour upon you in making you his High Sheriff of his Counties of Worcester & Stafford for two years together. It put me in mind of what was said concerning Mordecai; What shall be done to the man that the King Hesth. 6.6. delighteth to honour? Since therefore Pro∣motion comes not by Purchase, but by Psal. 75.6. Providence; and all Dignity confer∣red by God, calls for Duty from Man; Go on, Sir, to do worthily in Euphra∣tah, and be famous in Bethlehem; like a true plant of Renown growing in the Ruth 4.11. Churche's Garden, and gathering strength by being incorporated into this Body, and by receiving nourish∣ment from the true Root; walking in the fear of God, growing in favour with your Prince, and getting further friendship with his People, by your rea∣diness to do good, and by being rich in good works, willing to communicate; thereby, laying up for your self a good 1 Tim. 6. 18.

foundation for time to come; And in a word, improve your power against Im∣postors, who go about to impugn and oppose the Divine Authority of the Ho∣ly Scriptures.
Antisthenes the Philosopher, was wont to say, that a man should lay up such provisions as in a shipwrack might swim Plut. out with him, such Treasures as may pass and be current in another world, and will follow a man thither: So treasure up the Word of God contain∣ing precepts, promises and prohibitions in the table of your heart, that you may with that good Housholder bring forth out of your treasury things new and old.
And this was one end I proposed to Mat. 13. 52 my self, in the Dedication of these my mean first-fruits to you; which come abroad, not so much by a voluntary choice, as by a kind of necessity to mid∣wife (I may so speak) a poor Em∣brion, that otherwise would have lien as dead in its Mothers womb; As also to stir up your pure mind, to a serious search and enquiry into the Holy Scrip∣tures. which are the invariable Canon of Truth, the Cubit of the Sanctuary, , Irenaeus. the wise mans Star to lead to Christ.

Basil saith, the Bible is a Physitians . Athanasius In the life of Basil. Shop of Preservatives against poyson∣ous Heresies, a patern of profitable Laws against rebellious Spirits, a Trea∣sure of costly Jewels against beggarly Elements, and a Fountain of most pure water springing up unto Everlasting Life.
Men of Noblest Birth and Royal Blood, recorded in History Sacred or Civil, have highly prized the Word, and preferred it before their outward Priviledges and Possessions.
King David counted it more to be desired than refined Gold, and Honey Psal. 19. 10 Psal. 119. 72. Job 23. 12 from the Honey-Comb. Job the great∣est man of the East, esteemed it more than his daily Bread and bodily Food. Our King Edward the Sixth, when he was Crowned, they put three Swords into his Hand; he said, there was one yet wanting, the Word of God, the Sword of the Spirit.
Charles the Great, was said, to set his Crown upon the Bible. Theodosius the Elder, to write the New Testament with his own hand, which he counted a choice Jewel. Theodosius the Younger, learned much of the Scripture by heart;

as also the Lord Thomas Cromwel did. Queen Elizabeth of blessed Memory, kissed the Bible presented to her, and laid Speeds Chron. c. 24. p. 838. it to her breasts, and said, it had ever been her delight, shew would frame her Go∣vernment according to it. The Lady Jane Grey in her Letter that she left her Sister Katharine, saith of the Greek Testa∣ment, this is a Book which though it be not garnished with Gold, yet it was See her Letter. Acts and Monum. in wardly more pretious than Rubies; It is the Law of the Lord, the Testa∣ment left to us wretches, which will lead you in the paths of eternal Life, &c.
Time would fail me, if I should go about to shew you what account the Fa∣thers, Confessors and Martyrs of Jesus Sacrae Scripturae tui sunt sanctae de∣liciae mei, Augustin. Christ made of the Scriptures; As also our famous Orthodox, Modern Di∣vines; Dr. Prideaux left these Verses behind him, written upon his Bible.
This sacred Volume in whose precious leaves
The Mysteries of Heaven in treasures lie;
The Object and the Subject of each Christian eye,
Who lives by this, by death shall never die.
Here shines the Sun of grace diffusing wide,

His quickning rays on all from side to side.
Here God and Man do both embrace each other,
Met in one Person, Heaven and Earth do kiss.
Here a pure Virgin doth become a Mother,
Who bore that Son, who the worlds Father is.
Here true bliss cometh flying from on high,
To hawl Man out of Hells dark Empiry.
John a Wigord.
Take one taste of those few among the many famous verses written by Mr. Clark. See his Di∣vine Poem or Poeti∣cal Medi∣tation, p. 622. In his Mir∣ror.
This Book, these Sentences, these Lines,
Each Word and Letter,
To me is better,
Than Chains of Pearl and golden Mines.
'Tis Heaven transcrib'd and glory pen'd,
Gods Truth no doubt
Was copied out,
When he this Gift to man did send,
J. C.
You see, Sir, with what a Cloud of Witnesses you are compassed about, for your conduct & incouragement in your way towards Canaan your heavenly Country, that you may taste of the hid∣den

Mannah, and read and rumina upon this Bread of Life, and Food  your Faith: And as by much porin and pondering upon the Statute-Law of the Land you may become a wise an able Justiciary; so hereby a true an intelligent Christian, and the better ac¦quainted with your own heart: For th Scriptures are so penned (as Athanasiu saith) that every man may think the speak, de se in re sua, of him in hi Affairs. Indeed there is little good  be got by reading the Scriptures curso¦rily and carelesly, but if you do it duel and diligently with attention, affectio and supplication, they will have such a influence upon the Soul, and such a Erasmus in his Pre∣face upon Luke. efficacy, as is to be received from no o¦ther Book that can be named: hereb how hath the proud heart been humbled the hard heart softned, those boisterou and predominant passions and affection subdued, and every thought captivate into the Obedience of Christ; so tha the Man hath become of a Lion a Lamb of a Leopard a Lamb, of a Swine  Sheep.
Who sees not at this day, that th nauseating of this Bread of Life hath

brought many men to spiritual leanness, set them upon dangerous precipices of pride, till they have fallen into the dead sea of practical Atheism; whereas a se∣rious searching out of the Will of God revealed in his Word, is an effectual Dr. Stil∣lingfleet in his Epist. to Origin. Sacrae. means for the maintaining a powerful sense of Religion in the souls of men. Be sure therefore to make a diligent search into the mind of God, as it is here manifested; For the dignity of the Scriptures, and the Majesty of Christ, who is the Author and the matter of them, mutually look one upon another as the Sun doth on the Stars, and the Stars on the Sun: for as the excellency of the Sun appears by the glory of the Stars, to which it giveth light; so the Majesty of Christ is manifest in the Scri∣ptures, to which he giveth credit: And as the Pearl by the often beating of the Sun-beams upon it, becomes glorious; so we by beholding, as in this Glass, the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory. 2 Cor. 3. 18.
It happily may be expected from some, according to the Custom of such 2 Cor. 9. 10, 11, 13. Dedications, that I should speak of your

personal worth; but I well know your modesty would by this means be  o the blush, and some disaffected persons might count me a parasite: I shall there∣fore turn such Praises into Prayers, that he who is able to make all grace abound in every good Work, would multiply your Seed, and increase the Fruits of your Righteousness, that others may glorifie God for your professed subje∣ction to the Gospel of Christ; this is, Sir, and shall be the hearty Prayer of

Wetherock-hill Novemb. 4th 1674.
