



Honoured and Beloved,
THe Ensuing Word is the Lords, is Mine, is Yours, and is to be lookt at as a Message from the Lord, by me, to your selves, (to your selves I say, nextly and immediately, yet not so restrictively, but that all others in like capacity with your selves; yea all Christian Rea∣ders into whose hands it shall come, may look at themselves as concerned therein)
It is the Lords as part of his Counsel, Mind and Will: some of the great things of Gods Law lately Preached, now written to you.
It is mine, as an Instrument (however nworthy) in the omposing, then dis∣pensing, now publishing of the same.
It is yours, as I was called by you to this work, a Servant to you therein, and as by this presentation it is now made more especially yours.
As the Lords, you are most solemnly Commanded; as mine, most humbly in∣treated; as your own, strongly obliged to peruse, understand, receive and pra∣ctise what is heresent you.
I could not think any thing of mine worthy of the publick view; but seeing your selves thought otherwise, and others, whom I honour and rverence were like minded with your selves; I thought meet to submit to persons of better judgements. And therefore have permitted it to pass the Press, being not able to be inexe∣rable to the Importunity of my Friends, nor daring to be disobedient to the Com∣mands of my Superiours, and the desires of Superiours (in Case, and in this Case) I account Commands.
The Lord expected that all the Israelites in the Wilderness should contribute something toward the building of the Tabernacle; and that none might plead Povery as an Argument for heir Exemption, ordered their bringing and pro∣mised his accepting of Goats Hair and Brass, as well as silk and silver, Chittim Wood as well as precious Stones, (see Eod. 25. 1-8) I was thence encoura∣ged to bring my Oblation, when called for, of what was under my Hand. He that ha's received but one Talent must lay it out, not wrap it up. The Lord is no hard Master, he accepts according to what a man a', not what he hath not, (2 Cor. 8. 12.) and men should do the like. If what is here done may (though but in the least degree) promote the work of the Lords house among you, or else∣where, I shall attain my End, and be abundantly rewarded for my Labour.
If any that were mine Auditors should object the difference between the
 Sermon as then preached and now written. I must own it, and add that it was of foce, not choice, my Memory not serving me at any Time to Remember Words, nor at all Times things in hi popr plaes. You have it in the Press a it was intended for the Pulpit, and at you should have had it there (at least for the Substance) if I could.
As for my manner of speaking in he using of many Metaphorical Expressi¦ons, and Allusions unto the Calling, Postes, and motions of Souldiers, and this often in your most common and familiar Terms and Phrases, though it may possibly grate upon some Critical and captious Eas, yet I hope it will be at least excusable or tolerable to your selves, It being done chiefly for your sakes. My aim being to Spirituali your Calling a Souldiers, and to el you a littl of that much of Heaven hat is therein contained, I had no readier way bfore me to do it then this. Hd  ben to hndle the same Head of Divinity on ano∣ther occasion and befoe aother Audiory, I could and should have sought out other words, but t matters were Circumtanced, I am willing o blieve that these may not be to the Charitable and teachable, altogether uncceptable. My Auditory, Subject, Occasion being Military, and my Text Metaphorical, if my discourse had not been in Terms and Language somewhat answerable, it had not been suitable. I conceive a man should tae Measure of his Theam to out our his Language by, and make it up something according o the de of his Auditory, I do not mean so as to please mens Humours, but to suit their Condi∣tions, provided alwayes he keep ithin the Bounds of a Scripture mode and Cut. Edification was my End, and Familiar plainness one of the mean con∣ducing thereto. If some things seem bunt and homely, yet I hope they are all the words of soberness, and may have teir use, if soberly and seriously read and improved. Nor is such manner of speaking on like Occasion without the Warrant of Scripture Example
I End with two Requests, First, that you will vouchsafe acceptance of this pre∣sentation as a Token and Testimony of the Sense I have on me of my Obligati¦ons to you for your favourable onstruction and kind Entertainment of my poor Labours already manifested by you: Next that you will joyn with me in sevet Prayer to the Lord of Hosts that he who nly can, would teach us all to profit, hel us so to run that w may obtein, so to fight, not as those that beat the Air, but ba down, and keep down sin and the rest of our Spiritual Enemies, lst while speaking to others, hearing or reading what comes from others, any of us should be cast away. To his blessing I commend you and these Endeavours for on, and remain

