




REVEREND MOTHER,
This deuout Book comes to you of right being your na∣tural sisters excellent Goods, and there is no other heire left to it but your desruing self besids I know few or none do any way retend to it, but you and your Religious ock who exactly trace by true practice ô Practice, diuine practice the only eans) the same holy paths this booke reats of. Take and acccept of it therfore

R. MOTHER: I guesse I need not much inuite you, for I dare say it wil be most deare to you, and most highly estee∣med by you, and yours. If it chance to fal into the hands of any such as may reiect, or cry it down: (as some few did the Ideots Deuotions of the same Spirit lately set forth) it wil (as that did) but receiue the greater luster thereby, and be more highly prised, by how much it may be misprised by such sensual persons as relish not the Spirit of God, or whose vain and flashing wits as it were spurn at the Diuine, and true heauenly Vvi∣sedom. That it hath some hands set in th margin, and diuers characters in many places to point out certain matter and make them more remarakable, is no but that in a maner euery line and syllable is most remarkable and worthy t be obserued. And that some places o Scripture are quoted in the margin, an not al, is becaus those be the more clea plain and vnmingled texts, though th whole Book hath nothing in it almost bu Scripture.
And if there be somewhat in the latter end the very same with what is said in the preface, it wil not much annoy since good aduise cannot be too often rtpeated.
I will say nothing of the admirable graces and guifts of the Authour (let the Book speak them) becaus I should seeme thereby to praise, and extol you (her natural Sister, and imbued with the same natural and supernatural guifts) then which nothing would be more vn∣grateful and distastful vnto you. How∣soeuer R. MOTHER giue me leaue to inuite and incite you and your Holy Company to go on cheerefully and cou∣radgiously in these sacred and secret Paths of Diuine Loue. VVith your Beauty and Fairnes intend, proceed prospe∣riously and reign. Let the wisemen, or rather wits of the world laugh at you. They senseless think your life Mad∣nes, and your vvaies dishonourable. Be not I say dismayed. For your Truth Mildnes, Iustice; and your Right hand (which is is your Spiritual Praier) vvil marueillously conduct you. So

desirous to be partaker of yeur holy Pray∣ers, and committing you to the Diuine Protection, I rest euer
R. MOTHER,

