



Worthy Sir;
YOƲ may wonder at my boldness, in presuming to prepose your Name to this popular Sermon, and im∣perfect draught of the Life and Death of Mr. HALL, who may seem a stranger to you: and in∣deed I do not remember that I saw your Face, since the time, that the Lord (who sets the bounds of our habitations) had cast our Lot toge∣ther in a pleasant place, in a time of Jacob's troubles; where we only heard the Voice of Christs Turtle-Dove, and had not those dreadful

Allarums of War, under which other parts of the Kingdom trembled, and the very pillars of it tottered.
That which now encourageth me to this Attempt, is, that I took no∣tice of your constant attendance upon the Ordinances of Christ, and your readiness to sympathize with the sufferings of Sion, and the respect you had to the godly Pastors of the Church; in particular to the person spoken of in the ensuing Narrative, betwixt whom and your self, it is said, there was a near alliance; but doubtless, there was an intimate friendship and alose familiarity con∣tracted; the remembrance of which, I hope, still liveth in your heart, hap∣pily no less than Jonathans did in the breast of Davids, or Basils in Nazianzens.
As therefore Epaminondas de∣fended the body of his fast Friend Plutarch. Pelopidas, whom he supposed was slain and saw lying upon a heap of

dead men: so I supposed you would be ready to defend this poor Piece written concerning your deceased Friend, of whom, though I have said somewhat, yet not the one half that I might. Tou would not think me to be partial, should I say of him what Nazianzen did of Basil aforesaid; Antiqua probitate, sim∣plicitate{que} praeditus & eruditis pie∣tate, & piis erudition is laude ante∣cellens; Some that were more emi∣nent for Learning, he excelled in Piety; and some that were more See Mr. Leys Epi∣stle to his Com. up∣on 2 Tim. as also Mr. Cala∣my's Epi∣stle. famous for Piety, he excelled in Learning: And indeed, he was held to be by such as well knew him, and were able to judg of mens parts and piety, both learned and religious.
I have no more to say concerning him in this place; I only beg your pardon and Patronage, together with a share in your prayers, that what is said in the ensuing Leaves, may

find acceptance with God, and fa∣vour in the eyes of his people.
And my earnest desire and prayer to God for you, is, that he who holdeth your soul in life, and hath lined it out to or beyond David's span, would give you much joy and peace in believing; That whilst your Body is descending towards the Common Mother the Earth, your Soul may ascend as towards the top of Pisgah, to descry the Holy Land; that the nearer you come to the pit of corruption, the more pre∣pared you may be for that place of perfection; and like a Tree plan∣ted in the Courts of Gods House, you may bring forth Fruit even in old Age; This, (I say) Sir, shall be the prayer of

