



My Lord,
WHat things single are usu∣ally thought sufficient to determine ones choice of a Patron to any publick Writing, whether it be private Obligation from particular Favours, or the Desire of leaving to Posterity a just and honourable Te∣stimony to the Parts and Vertues of some excellent Person, or the design

of obtaining the Patronage and countenance of such a Person, to what we adventure to make publick, as is able by his Learning, Judgement and publick Repute to protect it from Injury; all these do so hap∣pily conspire in your Lordship, that I should have thought it an Omission unpardonable if I had not taken this opportunity of paying your Lord∣ship this due respect, and of doing that right to the Truth I here pro∣fesse as to put it under the wings of so fit and able a Patron.
Which still ought to be done with the greater alacrity, there being that Providentiall Coincidence of things, that I should have a Book ready in the Presse at that very time that our Gracious Sovereign did think good to conferre upon your

Lordship that great Honour and Trust of being Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. Which conjuncture of Cir∣cumstances could not but excite me with greater readinesse to make your Lordship this congratulatory Pre∣sent upon your new Honour. Which all good Christians that know the inflexible uprightnesse of your spirit, and cordiall adherence to the Apo∣stolick Faith and just Interest of Reformed Christendome, cannot but congratulate.
For this it is indeed, My Lord, that has begot in me a more special esteem of your Lordship, that in this instable and uncertain Age you have with that steadinesse of minde and clearnesse of Judgement stuck to the Truth and Purity of the Protestant Religion, as discerning the vast dif∣ference

betwixt it and Popery, which yet too many now-adays, either be∣cause they are removed too great a distance from all Religion, or else because their sight is extreme∣ly dim in matters of this nature, can not, or will not, discern. But this is spoke with a more particu∣lar regard to the second part of this small Volume I present your Lord∣ship withall.
But the first also has its speciall sutablenesse to the Circumstances your Lordship is placed in. For by how much more power any one is intrusted with by any Protestant Prince, by so much the more he is concerned to understand how sacred a Province he undertakes, and how expresly that Religion and Professi∣on is owned in the Holy Prophecies

Christ has delivered to his Church, above and against the barbarous and idolatrous Tyrannie of the Church of Rome. Which things are set out with that plainnesse, evidence and easiness in this Ex∣position of the Epistles to the Seven Churches that I hope no impartial Reader can fail of being made ex∣ceeding sensible of the Sacrednesse of the Protestant Religion and In∣terest by the perusall thereof. Be∣sides, that there are some notable Hints in these Oracles for the more happy and secure management of the Affairs of Reformed Christen∣dome.
I shall onely name that passage to the Sardian Church, Remember how thou hast received, and heard, and hold fast, &c. The Verse runs

out into a dreadfull Commination of heavy Judgements to the Angel of the Church of Sardis for his loose∣nesse and slipperinesse in those points of Apostolick Doctrine which the Reformers had recovered into the knowledge of so great a part of the world. And amongst the things that they had heard, that voice of the Angel, Apoc. 18. Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, &c. was not the least articulate. Whereby the Church of Rome was openly decla∣red to be that Babylong the Great, the Mother of Fornications and the Abominations of the Earth; as also the Pope with his Clergie to be that notorious Antichrist.
This the Sardian Church had re∣ceived from their Evangelicall

Predecessours. And it had been their everlasting establishment ne∣ver to have for got it, never to have let it die, or smothered it. But what mischief the halting betwixt two Opinions is apt to doe, and the not taking notice how sacred a thing the Protestant Religion is in the sight of God, and how rejectane∣ous that of the Church of Rome, I believe neither your Lordship nor any one else that has his eyes opened either into History or the Affairs of the world can be igno∣rant of, or, if he be a good Chri∣stian, make the observation with∣out regrett and sorrow.
But the Prospect of what is to come is more pleasing and com∣fortable; which is the state of the Church of Philadelphia, into

which the Sardian Church, that is to say, Reformed Christendome or the Protestant Churches, are to passe, as being the next succes∣sive Intervall. Which therefore cannot but be a Note of main im∣portance for all Reformed States and Kingdomes to stear their Af∣fairs by, namely, to bend their course thitherward whither they are pointed to by the Finger of God himself in his Holy Oracles. For they sail as it were with winde and tide whose carriage of Af∣fairs approaches the nearest to the purpose of Divine Fate. Which is lively pourtray'd all along in this stupendious Book of Prophe∣cies written by S. John.
The most pleasing and enra∣vishing part whereof is that which

is typify'd or prefigured by the Church of Philadelphia, the Church of Brotherly love. Which is the next Scene Divine Provi∣dence has designed to introduce. And which all those do most grosly oppose who for difference in matters not revealed in holy Scripture, nor necessary to Salva∣tion, think they have pretense e∣nough with all unchristian keen∣nesse and bitternesse of spirit to reproach and inveigh one against another, to nourish the highest Animosities, and to watch all op∣portunities of persecuting, rui∣ning, and trampling one another into the Dirt.
As this is extremely unchristi∣an in it self, so is it also diame∣trically opposite to that Dispensa∣tion

that God intends to intro∣duce into his Church as the chief∣est Blessing he has in store for her, and is as it were knocking at the door to enter, if the lovd noise of hot and quarrelsome Brawls about matters of smaller moment (as indeed all things are exceeding small, unlesse of A∣postolicall Institution, if they stand in competition with that Royal Law of Love,) did not drown the voice thereof, that it cannot so easily be heard.
But assuredly, my Lord, the letting this Philadelphian Dis∣pensation in, or the approaching as near unto it as we can, will prove the most effectuall healing and consolidating the Interest of Reformed Christendome, as well

in the whole as in the parts there∣of, as we can desire or expect. Which therefore I humbly conceive, that all persons the more Power they are intrusted with in any of the Pro∣testant Dominions, are the more ob∣liged to consider by how much more they are obliged to endeavour to promote the Interest of their Prince and Countrey whose Affairs they administer. And therefore the right understanding of the Vision of the Seven Churches so mani∣festly giving this aim for the pro∣sperous steering of Affairs, I thought this my Exposition of the said Churches no unsutable Pre∣sent in these Circumstances to be made unto your Lordship. Of the Usefulnesse whereof I having spo∣ken more particularly in my Pre∣face,

I leave the whole to your Lordship's judicious and favou∣rable perusall, and wishing you all good Successe in the great Charge his Majesty has intrusted you with, I cease to give you any farther trouble then in subscribing my self,
My Lord,

