



SIR,
THE Great deserved fame that followed this noble work of yours (the due recompense of all eminent performances) engaged me to peruse the same, with much eagernesse of minde, and yet with no lesse attention; I being one of those, that professe themselves much more willing to learn, then able to teach. And that you may see some specimen of the fruits of your labour and my

proficiency, I thought fit to present you with these few Observations. Which, considering the barrennesse of the Matrix, (as you Chymists love to call it) in which they were con∣ceived, may bee termed rather many then few: And that imputed to the alone vertue, or Magicall Multiplica∣tion, or Theomagicall fecundity of your Divine Writings, not at all to the sterility of my disfurnished Braine. Which now notwithstanding, having gathered both warmth and moisture from the heat and luxuriancy of your youthfull phansie, findes it selfe af∣ter a manner transformed into your owne complexion, and translated in∣to the same temper with your selfe. In so much that although I cannot with the height of a protestation in the presence of my glorious God (as your self has gallantly done (in pag. 50. lin. 17. of Anthropos. Theomag.) af∣firme that the affection and Zeal to the truth of my Creatour has forced

mee to write, yet I dare professe in the word of an honest man, that nothing but an implacable enmity to immorality and foolery, has moved mee at this time to set pen to Pa∣per. And I confesse my indignation is kindled the more, having so long observed that this disease is grown even Epidemicall in our Nation. viz. to desire to bee filled with high-swoln words of vanity, rather then to feed on sober truth, and to heat and warm our selves rather by preposterous and fortuitous imaginations, then to move cautiously in the light of a purified minde and improved reason. Where∣fore I being heightened with the same Zeale of discountenancing of vanity and conceitednesse, that your selfe is of promoting the truth, you will per∣mit to mee the same freedome in the prosecution thereof. For as wee are growne near akin in temper and comple∣xion, so we ought mutually to allow each other in our actings alike, according

to our common temper and nature, and the accustomed liberty of the Phil∣alethean Family. In confidence where∣of, till wee meet againe in the next page, I take leave and subscribe my selfe,

