



Reader,
1. I Suppose thou wilt expect some∣thing should be said of this en∣suing Discourse also, though it needs not be much. The occasion of writing it, and the fitnesse of joyning it to the foregoing Exposition of the Se∣ven Churches, will discover themselves to thee in the perusing of the Treatise it self.
I must confess I have treated of this Argument elsewhere, namely, in my Part 1. Book 1. Ch. 5. to the 17. Chap. Mysterie of Iniquity. But it is a Subject of that great Importance, that it deserves an entire Treatise apart by it self, and that girt up in the most close and convictive method that may be: that those that are sanable or preservable from this dreadfull sin of Idolatry may finde the efficacy of our Antidote; and those whose minds it cannot alter may (however) be found without excuse. And there is this considerable here above

what I have done already on this Sub∣ject, that here is such an expresse Ap∣plication made of the Theorie to the grosse Errours in this point and foul Mispractices of the Church of Rome.
2. Those of ours that speak the most favourably of that Church cannot but declare them guilty of Material Idola∣try, as they call it. And questionlesse there must be something among them very like that great Sin, if there be any truth or sense in the Visions of that Di∣vine Volume of the Apocalypse. For the order of things and demonstration of the Synchronisms do necessarily cast those Visions that represent the concern∣ed as Idolatrous (Chap. 13. and 17.) upon the Church of Rome, (as also Ch. 2. v. 14—20;) and they can belong to none else in the Propheticall scope of the Visions, Time and Place and the Order of things having so unavoidably fix∣ed them upon her. Wherefore even ac∣cording to Divine suffrage they are guilty of Idolatry in one sense or o∣ther, or come so nigh it, that the Spirit of God in a jealousie, to exaggerate

their Wantonness, speaks to them as such, to deterre them from those suspec∣ted ways, and dangerous approches to so horrible a Crime.
And grant it were but thus, yet both in the Vision of the Apoc. 2. 20. Seven Churches, and in that of the Apoc. 18. 4. Whore of Babylon, the people of God are expresly called un∣to and encouraged and commissioned to forsake the Church of Rome's Commu∣nion. So that the Protestants have not the least guilt of Schism upon them for leaving her, no not upon this more fa∣vourable Supposition.
3. But, alas! alas! this smooth Hy∣pothesis is but a pleasing Dream arising from the softnesse and sleepinesse of the carnal minde, and the love of those things that must passe away as a Dream or Phantasm of the night. Let God be Rom. 3. 4. true, and every man a liar, as the A∣postle speaks. And truly the Spirit of God would scarce speak true, if what is spoken of Idolatry so broadly and so expresly in those Visions (insomuch that they have been understood of the Heathen Idolatry even for this very

reason by learned and able Interpreters) should, now we are necessitated to un∣derstand them of Rome Christian in her apostatized condition, not amount to the Charge of any proper and for∣mal Idolatry at all.
4. But the desperatenesse of their case is, that if they were not represen∣ted by these Visions as Idolatrous, that is to say, if these Visions had never been writ, or now they are writ, though they were to be understood of some others, and not of the Church of Rome; yet appealing to the nature of the thing, to the true Notion of Idolatry properly and formally so called, and to the ac∣knowledged Doctrine of their Church expressed in the Council of Trent, and their universal Practices abetted by pub∣lick Authority, this alone is sufficient to demonstrate them to be Idolaters pro∣perly so called. Which is the scope of this present Treatise.
5. Which therefore doth confirm and corroborate, and place beyond all ex∣ception, the Orthodox Protestant In∣terpretations of those Visions that con∣cern

the Church of Rome: which in this last Age have been made so clear, and every way so natural and congru∣ous, that this one thing granted of their Idolatry, there cannot be the least scru∣ple of the truth and congruity of the rest of the Applications.
6. And I cannot but adore the faith∣fulnesse of Divine Providence, that has furnished his Church with these Oracles to be the Guide of the Faithfull in these latter Ages, which are as it were the dregs of those times which the Spirit of Prophecy has set no good character up∣on; wherein there is such an Inunda∣tion of Wickednesse and Prophanenesse, that there is scarce any Faith to be found upon earth. But that Church which has deluded the world with so many Ficti∣ons could never forge those Prophecies that are so punctually true, and so cut∣tingly set out all her grosse Miscarria∣ges, and as expresly foretell her Ruine, unlesse she will humble her self, and pluck in her horns, lay aside her bold boasts of Infallibility, and be content to be taught to cast away her Idols, and be

cured of her Dropsie and unnatural thirst after the bloud of the Saints and the bloud of the Martyrs of Jesus.
7. Nor can I on the other side suffi∣ciently admire the stupidity of some of our own, and their grosse ingratitude to Divine Providence, that have so slight a regard to a Book of that mighty weight and moment as the Apocalypse is, and think it such a subject, as that any good Wit must needs mis-place his time if he meddle with it: which is more then a Pagan irreverence to so holy and so im∣portant Oracles. The Romans of old had another esteem for the Verses of the Si∣bylls: Nihil enim ità custodiebant neque sanctum neque sacrum quem∣admodum Sibyllina Oracula, as Dio∣nysius Halicarnasseus testifies. And it was an high honour to be the Keepers, much more the right Expounders, of them. But that which God of his mercy offers to all, such is either the idlenesse, frivolousness or profaneness of the spirits of men, that it is scarce accepted of any.
8. The truth is, most men are loath to be , to be messengers of

ill news to the greatest, that is to say, to the corruptest, part of Christendome; but rather affect the glory and security of being accounted of so humane, of so sweet and ingratiating a temper, as that they can surmize well of all mens Reli∣gions; and so think to conciliate to themselves the fame of either civil and good Natures, or of highly-raised and released Wits, (though it be indeed but a spice of the old abhorred Gnosticism,) that can comply with any Religion, and make a fair tolerable sense of all.
9. But these are such high strains of pretense to Wit or Knowledge and Gen∣tility as I must confess I could never yet arrive to, nor I hope ever shall: though I am not in the mean time so stupid in my way, as to think I can write thus freely without offence. And yet on the contrary, I can deem my self no more uncivil then I do him that wrings his friend by the nose to fetch him out of a Swound.
10. I am not insensible how harsh this charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome will sound in some ears, espe∣cially it being seconded with that other

of Murther, and that the most cruel and barbarous imaginable, and finally so se∣verely rewarded with an impossibility of Salvation to any now, so long as they continue in Communion with that Church. But, I believed, therefore I 2 Cor. 4. 13. spake, and have no reason to recall my words, or to have concealed the truth, that their fishing may become lesse suc∣cessfull in these parts; and that it may be with my Countrey-men according to that in Salomon, Surely in vain the Prov. 1. 17. net is spred in the sight of any bird. And therefore this is to open their eyes, that they may see what snares of destru∣ction are laid for them; and how those that promise others liberty are them∣selves 2 Pet. 2. 19. the servants of corruption; and how they that take upon them to be the onely Absolvers from sin are themselves held fast in the snares of eternall death, and do as necessarily illaqueate all o∣thers therein whom they proselyte to their Religion: so far are they from gi∣ving them any effectual Absolution.
11. I doubt not but many will be prone to cry out, This is a very rude

piece of Uncharitablenesse to all Roma∣nists. But I say, it were a most perfidi∣ous kinde of Civility, even to them them∣selves, (to say nothing of the Injury to our Church and Countrey,) to declare otherwise. But if this be the main Odium that sticks upon so true and usefull a Conclusion, that it is so far estranged from the spirit of Charity, hear but this brief Parable, Reader, and then I will leave it to thy self to judge, and conclude.
There was a certain Knight bravely mounted, as it might seem, and in goodly equippage, in bright armour, a rich scarf about his shoulders, and a large plume of feathers in his Helmet, who was bound for the Castle of Health, seated on an high Hill, not unlike to the Do∣micilium Salutis in Cebes his Table, which therefore he easily kept in his eye. But the way he was in being something stony and rough, and leading not so di∣rectly as he thought to the desired Castle, he diverted out of the way, and descen∣ded into a green Plain; but not know∣ing whether it was all passable to the Castle, called to some Loyterers there

in the field, to enquire of them; who came right willingly to the Knight, scra∣ping many legs to him, and desiring him to tell his demands.
12. There was an old Shepherd likewise not far off, who, by that time this idle people had got to the Knight, had come down to him also. Friends, said he, to those men he called, Is the way passable and safe through this green Plain to yonder Castle? pointing to the Castle of Health with his Warder. Ve∣ry safe, may it please your Worship, said they; and, shrugging their shoulders, and scraping many legs, asked a Largesse of the Knight, pretending they had been at common work not far off. Whereupon the Knight put his hand into his pocket, and gave them liberally. But are there no Bogs, said he, nor Lakes betwixt this and the Castle? Some small inconsidera∣ble Sloughs it may be, said they; but you will meet with the Holy Society of the Wipers every-where, who will be ready to wipe you as clean as a Clock before you come at the Castle. And being so excellently well mounted as we see you

are, namely, upon that famous Steed renowned over all the world, the infal∣lible-footed Aplanedo, so good an Horse as that he never stumbles, your Worship need fear no disaster at all: Besides, the Beast, God blesse him, has a Nose like any Hound, and by a mi∣raculous sagacity, without any Reason or humane Literature, with an un-er∣ring certainty he can smell out the right way, and so secure you from all dan∣ger. To say nothing how excellent he is at the swimming any water, and how he can tread the very air, he is so high∣metall'd and light-footed. Onely be sure to keep fast in the Saddle.
And then, Sir Knight, said the Shep∣herd, if the wind blow fair, the plumes in your Helmet may help to support you both; but if not, some Angel from Heaven may take you by the Crest of your Helmet, as he did the Prophet Habakuk by the hair of his head, when he carried him through the air from Judea into Babylon.
13. The Knight looking back, (for he was not aware of the Shepherd at

this time,) What coneed  man is this, said he, that talks this phanciful∣ly? May it please your Worship, he is a Shepherd, said they, and has a Flock on yonder little Hill hard by; but he is one of the most self-conceited old fools that ever your Worship met with in all your days: he thinks that all skill and knowledge lies within the compasse of his baldpate and wrinkled fore-head, though few or none are of the same opinions with himself. Sir Knight, said the Shepherd, I pretend to no skill nor knowledge but what is certain∣ly within mine own ken; but what I know, I love to speak freely. And I tell you, Sir Knight, unlesse you be stark staring mad you will never follow these mens counsels, nor venture over this Moor to that Castle: for you will be swallowed up horse and man into a fa∣thomlesse Lake of ill-sented mire, for all the nice nostrills of Aplanedo. You was in a more hopefull way before, though something rough; but it is so streight before you come at the Castle, that you could never have got through, un∣lesse

you had left Aplanedo behind you. He's an old cholerick Dotard, said those other fellows; be but sure to keep the Saddle, and we dare warrant your Worship, (our lives for yours) that Aplanedo will carry you safe through all dangers.
Wherefore upon the renewall of the high conceit the Knight had before of his Steed, and those confident Anima∣tions of his mercenary Counsellers, he set on in a direct line toward the Castle over this Moor; the Shepherd looking after him to see the event. But the Knight had not rid two or three bow∣shots from the place, but the Shepherd saw them suddenly sink horse and man into the ground, so that they were both buried alive in the mire.
14. Whereupon fetching a deep sigh after so Tragicall a spectacle, he re∣turned with a sad heart and slow pace towards his Sheep on the top of the Hill, drailing his Sheephook behinde him, as they do their Spears at the Funeral of a Souldier: whom his Dog followed with a like soft pace, hanging down his head,

and letting his tail flag, as if he had a minde to conform to both the sorrows and postures of his Master. But those other false Companions had somewhat before this got to a lone Alehouse not far off, to spend the Knight's Largesse merrily with a bonny young Hostesse, and in plenty of good Ale and Cakes to celebrate his Funerall.
15. Now, Reader, I dare appeal to thy judgement which of these parties, the old free-spoken Shepherd, or those mercenary Flatterers, had the greater share of Charity; and to determine with thy self in what a sad condition those of the Church of Rome are, who, having the opportunity of being better instructed, as the Knight had, are yet led away captive by such cun∣ning Deceivers. Which is the main State of the Controversie. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they John 15. 22. had not had sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin, saith our blessed Saviour, in the Gospel. The rest of the Riddle, Reader, I leave to thine own unravelling, and bid thee Farewell.
