



BRethren and Beloved in our Lord Jesus, these Sermons as they were preached a∣mongst you, even so was their Publication earnestly sollicited by some of you, at whose request I have yeelded to that I de∣signed not in their Preaching, nor inten∣ded to have done long since that task was finished: But remembring I am not only a Debtor to Jew and Gentile, but more especially to you also, not onely by one means, but by every means, to endeavour your furtherance in the Faith, I judged my self obliged to help you with that Print∣ed, which the Lord gave you in Preach∣ing: And I may safely say, so near as I could, your Eys now have only what once
your Ears heard. As to you my Belo∣ved, whose importunity prevailed upon me to undertake this Work, know two Arguments prevailed upon me to Answer your Request; The one, My Love towards you; the other, My desire of your Spi∣ritual and Eternal Welfare; and if my Labour of Love for your sakes may provi∣dentially extend or reach to the advantage of any others that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, I therein shall and will rejoyce. I need not here give you any account of the Nature of this Treatise, you well know, it is to open both the Wise-Preach∣ers and the Wise-Hearers Work and Busi∣ness; you know I need the one, and I al∣so judge you want not need sufficient to learn the other: As to the Method it is and ought to be plain, as best becoming Gospel-Mysteries; 'twas Truth, not Humane Wis∣dom or Eloquence that I designed to mani∣fest; and surely should I thus have acted, I should have pull'd down with one hand what I was setting up with the other, and so should have been found a transgressor: As to my often hinting of any thing mind∣ed in this Discourse, know the nearness of the Phrases in the Text one to another con∣strained it, except I should have broke the
bounds, and dealt partially with the Text; and my thoughts are, that Plenty may e∣ven conduce to Profit: And as for those Phrases, Titles, and Denominations of Persons, which in this Discourse may seem unto any tender ear to be plain, harsh, or reproachful to any, know this, I have wa∣rily considered to fasten them only on per∣sons really deserving such names; and al∣though I have herein followed the footsteps of the Saints & Penmen of the Scripture, yet have I abated, rather than exceeded their practice; as is most evident, if you consi∣der of some expressions wherein how great or learned or seemingly pious soever some sinners were, yet both Christ himself, and the Prophets and Apostles, have spoken very home and hard against such Persons, stiling them Hypocrites, Devils Children, Wolves, Dogs, Lyons, Foxes, Vipers, painted-Sepulchres, whited Walls, Princes of Sodom, Rulers of Gomorrah, Adulterers, Adulteresses, and such like, as the Scripture witnesseth; wherefore marvel not at my freedom of expression to sinners of the same dye. And lastly, My resolution was to avoid the re∣proof due to such as give flattering Titles unto men; and as Elihu saith, Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's person; neither
let me give flattering titles unto men; for I know not to give flattering titles; forin so doing my Maker would soon take me away, Job 32.21, 22. And further, If any sup∣pose I have in this Discourse affected and discovered a Spirit of singularity, and di∣versity of Opinion from the most of even pious, judicious, and sober men of this Age. I Answer in uprightness, 'twas not affectedly but constrainedly done, and I suppose even such Objectors will not de∣ny, 'tis better differing from men, how wise soever, than from Christ; and since all men know but in part, and Prophesie but in part, that may be Christ's Truth which is not acknowledged or understood by many; is it not written, Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil; neither shalt thou speak in a cause, to decline after many, to wrest judgment, Exod. 23.2. and as Paul saith, I believed, therefore have I spoken, 2 Cor. 4.13. I shall willingly receive bet∣ter information, and then speedily change my present apprehension. Lastly, If any Object against the largeness of this Tract; my Answer is, 'Twas my desire to have pre∣vented it, could I with fidelity and pru∣dence have effected it; and the truth is, I have denyed my self, and slipt over some
Particulars, which might more largel have been insisted on, that this Exception might have been spared: And now my dearly Beloved, whose importunity begat me this labour, Let me now crave leave, before I conclude this Epistle, to request a few things of you. First, My Brethren, if you meet with any Advantage, Content, or Comfort, by perusing these Lines, pray give all the praise and glory to God, whose hand alone hath wrought it, and whose Spi∣rit hath revealed it; and think often upon 1 Chron. 29.10, to 16. Secondly, Pray be not only knowers of these Truths, but do∣ers of the same. Oh, be not only so prin∣cipled, but so practising; also let the height of Holiness in this Discourse discovered, be your main business to attain, so shall I not want a good reward for this my labour. Thirdly, Labour to train up and educate your Families in this good knowledge of the Lord, and shew them the good old way, wherein they should walk with God, as Moses adviseth, Deut. 4.9.10. saying, Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy Soul dili∣gently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the dayes of thy life; but teach them thy Sons, and thy Sons Sons: Especially the
day that thou stoodest before the Lord thy God in Horeb, when the Lord said unto me, Ga∣ther me the people together, and I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to fear me all the dayes that they shall live upon the earth, and that they may teach their Chil∣dren, with 11, 19. Fourthly, Wonder not, neither be stumbled, if you find these Truths evil spoken of, scorned, traduced; but remember, this was to be expected in such a day as this. And, lastly, Forget not him that you have prevailed upon, but in all your supplications remember me, and pray for me, both night and day, that I may be faithful to the Death, that I may be fil∣led with the Spirit, that I may be abundant in the Work of the Lord, and that my La∣bours may be acceptable and succesful a∣mong the Saints, that so I may finish my course with joy, and not with grief, ac∣cording to the Will of God. And thus with my Prayers for you also, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them which are Sanctified.

