



Honoured SIR,
PRAISE given to the Des∣cendants of Hero's, is due more to the Spring, (gene∣raly speaking) than to the Stream, whilst Personal Merits chal∣lenge it as their own Right: But 'tis your Due, Sir, on both Accounts, for the Honour of your Family, and your own Glory in the Republic of Letters, is known to the whole World. The small REMAINS therefore of the Learned Dr. Henry

More, cannot meet with a fitter Pa∣tron, than the Learned Sir Thomas Pope Blunt. The Brave and the Learned Sympathize with each o∣ther, so that you cannot be unwil∣ling to be the Living Protector of our Dead Hero. 'Tis confess'd, that these Letters of his are not so Accurate and Excellent as his more Elaborate Works; but then it must be remember'd, that they are Pri∣vate, and Familiar Letters to his Friend, the Reverend Mr. Elys, and therefore only design'd easily to ex∣press his Thoughts upon such Oc∣currences as occasion'd their Wri∣ting; his Love for the Reverend Divine they are directed to, and a Vein of Piety runs through 'em: and 'tis not improbable that the Doctor did not think they wou'd ever have been Publish'd. But his Friend, being highly sensible of the

public Merit of the Doctor, rea∣sonably suppos'd that any thing of so great a Man wou'd be acceptable to his Friends and Admirers; that is, to all the Learn'd, who cannot but admire him with Descartes; who in one of his Letters to him, declares, he never Converst with any Man with greater Satisfaction. If we cut all away from the Letters of Ci∣cero and Pliny, that is not extraor∣dinary, their number wou'd be much lessen'd: by which we find how well satisfy'd the World is with any Thought or Word of a Great Man. But I'm sensible, Sir, this Apology for Dr. More's LETTERS will be judg'd very superfluous; and there∣fore I'll not enlarge the Imperti∣nence on the account of the other Familiar Letters of this small Vo∣lume, the Names of the Great Men who wrote 'em, will more than justi∣fie

'em. And as for those Contro∣versial Letters, written by the Re∣verend Mr. Elys, you'll grant, I'm sure, that they prove their Author both a Learned and a Pious Man; Qualities that will recommend his Performances better to your Protecti∣on, than what I can say, who have no share in the Present I make you, but the Propriety in the Copy, gi∣ven by my Friend Mr. Elys; and the Value I have for the Author's concern'd in it, because I cou'd not hope any thing of my own wou'd be so worthy of your Patronage, who are so Celebrated and so Lear∣ned a Critic, as your Works de∣monstrate. And this gains you the Esteem, whilst your Generous Affa∣bility purchases the love of all Men, as well as of,
Sir, 
