


Eugenius,
THe reason why you heard not from me sooner, is because yours arrived to my hands later then I exspected. It was so hot, it seems, that none of my acquaintance had so hard and brawny fingers as to indure the dandling of this glow∣ing coal till its conveyance where you would have it. It is a brand from that fire, that hath not onely cali∣ned, but so vitrifed Eugenius that it hath made him transparent to all the world. All men may see now through his glassy sides how unevenly and disorderly his black heart beats and pants; they need not feel his pulse to find his distemper AEsops fair water but a little warmed hath proved a very ffectuall Emetck, for thee, O Philalethes, and hath made thee vomit up thy shame and folly in the sight of the world, as his Accuer did the figs before his Master. So that that which you falsly supposed me to have edeavoured, you have fatally brought upon your self, above the desire, I should think, of your bitterest enemies; I am sure be∣yond the expectation of me that am your reall friend. I did not endeavour your personall disgrace, but the discountenancing of that, which in my judgment is the disgrace of your person and many other persons be∣sides. And now that you have done me the greatest despight you can imagine, and show'd your malice to the full so that in the court of Heaven and accord∣ing to the doctrine of Christ you are no better then a murderer, yet for all this I am benignly affected t you still, and wish you as much good, as I do those that never endeavoured to provoke me. And really I speak it from my soul, if it lay in my power to do it,

you should find it. But for the presnt, I could in my judgement do nothing more proper, considering all cir∣cumstances, then what I have done, and still do, in advertising you of what is for the best. And truly, (looking upon you in some sort as a Noctambulo, one that walks in his sleep) that Book which hath proved so mischievous a scandal, I intended onely for a stumble to wake you, (that you might shrugg and rub your eyes, and see in what a naked condition you are,) not a stone of offense for you to fall upon and hurt you. But you are fallen and hurt, and yet do not awake, as if Mercuries rod, or I know not what other force of Magick, still held fast your eyes. You onely mutter against the present disturbance, as one shogged while he dreams upon his pillow, but you still sleep. You cry out as one cramp'd in your bed, but your closed sight can not discern whether it be a friend in sport or for better purpose, or whether it be your foe to torture you. Awake Eugenius! Awake, Behold, it is I, your sportfully troublesome friend, or what you will in due time acknowledge, though in this present drowsie hu∣mour you puff at it, and kick against it,
Your carefull and vigilant brother

