



SIR,
THE Great deserved fame that followed this noble work of yours (the due re∣compense of all eminent performances) engaged me to peruse the same, with much eagerness of mind, and yet with no lesse at∣tention; I being one of those, that professe them∣selves much more willing to learn, then able to teach. And that you may see some specimen of the fruits of your labour and my proficiency, I thought fit to present you with these few Observations. Which, considering the barrennesse of the Matrix, (as you Chymists love to call it) in which they were conceived, may be termed rather many then few: And that imputed to the alone virtue, or Magicall Multiplication, or Theomagical fecundi∣ty of your Divine Writings, not at all to the steri∣lity

of my disfurnished Braine. Which now not∣withstanding, having gathered both warmth and moisture from the heat and luxuriancy of your youthfull fansie, findes it selfe after a manner transformed into your own complexion, and trans∣lated into the same temper with your selfe. In so much that although I cannot with the height of a protestation in the presence of my glorious God (as your selfe has gallantly done (in pag. 50. lin. 17. of Anthropos. Theomag.) affirme that the af∣fection and zeale to the truth of my Creatour has forced mee to write, yet I dare professe in the word of an honest man, that nothing but an inplacable enmity to immorality and foolery has moved me at this time to set Pen to Paper. And I confesse my indignation is kindled the more, having so long observed that this disease is growne even Epidemicall in our Nation. viz. to desire to be filled with high-swolne words of Vanity, rather then to feed on sober Truth, and to heate and warme our selves rather by preposterous and fortuitous imaginations, then to move cautiously in the light of a purified minde and improved Rea∣son. Wherefore I being heightned with the same Zeale of discountenancing of Vanitie and con∣ceitednesse, that your selfe is of promoting the Truth, you will permit to me the same freedome in the prosecution thereof. For as we are growne neare akin in temper and com∣plexion,

so we ought mutually to allow each other in our Actings alike, according to our common Temper and Nature, and the accu∣stomed Liberty of the Philalethean Family. In confidence whereof till wee meete againe in the next Page, I take leave and subscribe my selfe,
A Chip of the same Block

