



SIR,
A Poetical Dedication is one of those Accidents, I had almost said Diseases, which few persons of extraordinary Merit and Fortune can escape, e∣specially in this Town: soon or late it fixes on the most Conspicuous, and too often defaces the Beauties which it touches. The Apologies that usher in most addresses of this nature, sufficiently show, that they are thought a trouble even by those who presume to make them. It may well then seem strange, that I should own this, and at the same time dare to approach in that very manner a Person for whom I would express the greatest Respect. Yet, Sir, these Considerations, instead of deterring me from the at∣tempt, are perhaps the chief Inducements that embolden me to make it: For You are of too generous and obliging a Temper, and too great a Favourer of the Muses in gene∣ral, and more particularly of Dramatic Performances, not to be expos'd to the danger of having some of them forc'd upon You, by way of Dedication, beyond a possibility of escaping such a Compliment. Therefore, Sir, I flatter my self with the thoughts of having a better Pretence to do You that civil Violence, than many others, who per∣haps wou'd not use You so gently, but wou'd rudely in∣vade Your Character, and put You to more pain tha my tender Respect will suffer me to do. For 'tis but too common with some Authors in a manner to dissect their Patrons, and read tedious Lectures over every indivi∣dual



Qualification. Now, Sir, I am not inclin'd to run into such a Fault: My Zeal may indeed make me afraid of saying too little, but my concern for the satisfaction of the Person to whom I write, makes me still more fearful of being thought guilty of saying too much; if yet too much can ever be said of such merit as seems above the reach of Flattery; Praise is a Tribute due to Vertue and acceptable even to the highest Powers: We offer up our Incense, and they shower down their Blessings. But a vulgar and unskilful hand sometimes prophanes the Rites it would perform, and no common Expressions can illu∣strate uncommon Desert. Shou'd I say, that where-ever You appear, You captivate the hearts of one Sex, and raise the Envy and Admiration of the other, 'twou'd be but what is universally own'd, tho' no more than what has been said to many: And shou'd I wave Your outward Graces to speak of those Nobler Accomplishments of Your mind that only wait Occasions to signalize Your Life by a Ge∣nius peculiar to Your illustrious Family, I could do lit∣tle more than enumerate the Endowments of the living Ornaments and springing hopes of their Country. For, tho' most men have discernment enough to admire, very few have Capacity to commend. In an extraordinary Sub∣ject, I wou'd say something new and worthy of it; but, in so beaten a path as Panegyric, 'tis next to impossible to make Discoveries; and little more than to give a new turn to old Thoughts is what can be done, even by Masters of Wit and Oratory. Thus, Sir, I please my self with the hopes of being the more excusable in not aiming at that Theme; since, after all, the greatest Artists might be reduc'd to speak like the rest of the World that would do Justice to Your



Character. Besides, some shining Truths, as well as Merit set off to advantage, are like those sparkling Diamonds which so much exceed the common magnitude, that they are sometimes suspected of not being what really they are. So blind some People are, not to consider, that a noble Soul looks most like her self in a graceful ha∣bitation. Certainly, Sir, had Yours been to have cho∣sen her Dwelling, she cou'd not have pitch'd on one more worthy such a Guest. A transient sight of such Perfecti∣ons may create Envy, but even that Envy must Convert it self to Esteem and Love upon a nearer view: For that Discretion, that Prudence which secures You from the dangerous Attacks of insinuating Designers, when joyn'd with Your sweetness of Temper, and other Qua∣lifications, must blunt the Darts of the most repining Ma∣lice. The Judgment that attends Your kind disposition to oblige, never hinders it from becoming a diffusive Good, and only heightens the Favours You bestow, by Your Modesty in concealing them. Fortune is more oblig'd to You, than You to her. She has been thought one of those noble Pro∣digals who had rather be lavish of their Gifts than just in the payment of their debts; but we must cease to accuse her of Blindness, when we see how deservedly she has heap'd her Favours on You. May You live to possess em long, and those richer Blessings, those native and acquir'd Treasures that so singularly set 'em off; and may You ever believe me to be, what I am ambitious of appearing,
SIR,

