



Gentlemen,
THat Beasts have spo∣ken is not my Inven∣tion, but appears by the accounts of many Au∣thors,

amongst whom Co¦nelius Gemma in  first Book De Divin Naturae Characteristmi and the 8th. Chapte writes thus, Bruta qu¦dem aliquando huma voce profari, ac futura pra dicere, certum est. I primis exempla Asinae B¦laam. Plinius locutum ga¦lum gallinaceum dixit A urbis conditae DCLXX w Eusebius bovem in subu¦biis Romae paulò ant Tullii mortem frustra s

urgenti, dicentem, quod on frumenta, sed Homi∣es essent propé diem de turi Ao. urbis DCCX. nd in this Age, Father oseph a Carmelite of St. Mary's, and barefooted Apo∣le to the Kingdoms of the Malauri, in his first Expe∣ition to the East-Indies, ives you an account of the Properties of many Terre∣rial, and Volatile Animals, nd amongst the rest affirms, That the Kings-Fishers in hose parts spoke so well that

he himself at first believ 'em to have been Boys. A moreover, that Beasts ha writ, Horo in his fourteen Hieroglyphick and first Bo relates in these words: E apud Aegyptios natio qu¦dam & genus Cynoceph lorum qui literas norù Quapropter ubi primù in sacram Aedem ductu fuerit Cynocephalus ta bellam ei sacerdos Appo¦nit, unà cum scirpeo stile atque attramento, nimi¦rum, ut periculum faciat

sitne ex eo Cynocepha∣orum genere qui litera∣gnari sunt, & an lit∣eras pingat; pingit itaque n eâ tabella litteras &c. But now because to some of the wisest Criticks, it may seem ridiculous for me far∣ther to affirm that Beasts are capable of Titles; I shall give you an example of a Dog, who hearing himself call'd Sir, immediately forgot his natural Fierceness. 'Tis related by Justus Lipsius, (an Author of undoubted Re∣putation)

in the first Ce¦tury of his Epistles A Belgas,Ep. 45. in these word Memini historiolae facet cui Autor Petrus Cieca ait se cum aliquot sodal¦bus egressum ad Indo vestigandos. Canem ce¦mitem habuisse ad ist longo usu doctum: Ecc Femina vetula appare fugit in montes, canis a sequitur, & jam praehen∣debat; illa in genua se ab jicit, canem Dominum appellat, & blande orat

ac paenè adorat. Ille pla∣tus an contemnens crus llit & foeminam illam ermingit atque sic abiit. When therefore Beasts oke, they also made use of e Post reciprocally to com∣unicate their thoughts and terests, and writ a great any Letters, which if they ad been all Printed they ould undoubtedly have ex∣eded the number of those of e like Nature, which now∣days so unreasonably stuff Libraries.
Now I having recove these few from the hands Time, with a great deal pains, and industry, do pres to Dedicate 'em to you G¦tlemen of the Academy of Curious, rather than  single great Man. But would not have you persw your selves that they  those that Ferrante Pa¦vicino promis'd to the le¦ned World so long time si for his ingenious Pen wo disdain to be employ'd ab such mean Compositions.
And now if to any of you, rs, the stile seems low and ean, I must desire you to member they are Letters, d therefore writ to immi∣te common Discourse, and pply the defects of Absence. lso that they were the Works  Beasts, and writ at a time en there was no eve to be found to parate the Flower from the ran.Academia del∣la Crusca.
Accept therefore I beseech , of my humble Acknow∣dgments in this poor pre∣sent,

which deserves at le some Mercy, tho' it be w¦thy of no Praise, since it Dedicated to your Mer And I promise your Curi¦tyships, if you can give  any Encouragement, a Tr¦tise of something more pr¦table and pleasant. In  mean time, live healthy a happy, and pardon me, if y can, since I am but lit Charge to you.

