



Reverend Sir,
I Beg your Patronage to this new Brood, which I found in England, though (as I suppose) its origi∣nal Father brought it to light in another Land: I found it cloathed in Latin Apparel, and I have put an English Coat upon it; and I hope that thereby it may be kindly received by many that are in England, who have a savour of the things of God; as for others, that know not God, I doubt whether they will cast their Eyes upon it: But if any that are such, take a fancy to look upon it, God grant it may do them good, and that they may be thereby drawn to the Love of Christ Je∣sus, being allured by his sweet Entisements and Invita∣tions. It was sweet to me in the Original, and I hope it may be so to others in the Translation. I hope you will not be offended that I have made a Dedication of this Book to you without your Consent; for if I had re∣quested you to give your Consent to accept of a Dedi∣cation, I doubt whether you would have given it; but having dedicated it to you unawares, I hope you cannot be angry for my giving you that, which, before it was given, you had no occasion to refuse. What success it may have, I am uncertain; but I suffer
it to range and seek its fortune in the World, as the Levit of Bethlem-judah did, who wandered up and down to see if he could find a place, and at length was kindly entertained by Micah, and afterwards was made a Father and a Priest to a Family and Tribe of Israel. But if any desire to know why I made this Dedication to you; there were many Causes why I should do so: One of which is, The great Kindness that you have shewed to my self: Job said, the Blessing of him that was almost ready to perish came upon me; and I made the Widow's Heart to sing. What Misery was I in, through Poverty and Ne∣cessity, when your Kindness, and Charity, and Liberali∣ty, did afford me such seasonable Relief, that it resembled upon many accounts a Resurrection from the dead? Therefore I gladly embrace this Opportunity of giving a publick Testimony of my Thankfulness, that hath a long time lain hid in my Heart, and is now triumphantly glad to shew it self in the Light of the Day, and the Sight of the Sun. Moreover, your Name being in the Frontispiece of this Book, I hope it may allure many that have sat under the shadow of your Ministry, to pay some Deference of respect to it, and not to grudge the charge of Buying it, nor the labour of Viewing it.
Sir, your Name is famous in England; for in the Suc∣cess of your Ministry you have surpassed many others of your Brethren, that are elder than you. You are like young Elihu, that in Wisdom excelled the Friends of Job, that were aged and gray-headed Men, much elder than Job's Father: And in external Honours God hath exalted you above many of your Brethren; so that your Name is as young David's was, much set by, before he was exalted to the Throne and Dignity of a King.

 Sir, what I have said to you, I have not said in Flat∣tery, but in the Sincerity of my Heart; and therefore I hope these external Testimonies of the Thankfulness that was a long time hid within my Heart, cannot of∣fend you.
The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

