


Right Worshipfull,
THe consideration of the weight of Duty that lieth upon us, to Commemorize to future Generations the memorable passa∣ges of Gods Providence to us and our Pre∣decessors in the beginning of this Planta∣tion, hath wrought in me a restlesness of spirit, and ear∣nest desire, that something might be atchieved in that behalf, more (or at least otherwise) then as yet hath been done. Many discouragements I have met with, both from within and without my self: but reflecting upon the Ends I have proposed to my self in setting out in this Work, it hath afforded me some support, viz. The

glory of God, and the good of present and future Genera∣tions. Being also induced hereunto, by the considera∣tion that your selves (especially some of you) are fully acquainted with many of the particulars, both concern∣ing Persons and Things, inserted in the following Nar∣rative, and can on your own knowledge assert them for Truth. Were it so that any other had travelled in this kinde, in such a way as might have conduced to a brief and satisfactory intelligence in particulars relating to the premises, I would have spared this labour, and have satisfied my self in perusal of their Works, rather then to have set pen to paper about the same; but having neither seen nor heard of any, especially respecting this our Plantation of New-Plimouth, which God hath ho∣noured to be the first in this Land, I have made bold to present your Worships with, and to publish to the world something of the very first Beginnings of the great Actings of God in New-England, begun at New-Plimouth: wherein, the greatest part of my intelligence hath been borrowed from my much honoured Uncle, Mr. William Bradford, and such Manuscripts as he left in his Study, from the year 1620, unto 1646; whom had God continued in this world some longer time, and given him rest from his other more important Affairs, we might probably have had these things from an abler Pen, and better digested, then now you may expect. Certain Diurnals of the honoured Mr. Edward Winslow, have also afforded me good light and help: and what from them both, and otherwise I have obtained, that I judged suitable for the following Discourse, I have with care and faithfulness related; and have therein more

sollicitously followed the truth of things (many of which I can also assert on my own knowledge) then I have studied quaintness in expressions.
I should gladly have spoken more particularly of the Neighbouring United Colonies, whose ends and aims in their Transplanting of themselves and Families, were the same with ours, viz. The glory of God, the propagation of the Gospel, and enlargement of His Majesties Dominions; but for want of intelligence, and that I may not prevent a better Pen, I shall onely make mention of some of their Worthies that we have been most acquainted with.
I shall not insist upon the Clime nor Soyle of the Country, its Commodities or Discommodities; nor at large on the Natives, or their Customes and Manners: all which have been already declared by Captain Smith, Mr. Higginson, Mr. Williams, Mr. Wood, and others. What it is, and what my aims at Gods glory, and my good affections to the place and people of whom I treat, may make it, I present your Worships with; Humbly craving your favourable aspect, and good acceptance of my poor Endeavours; and that my self and it may finde protection and shelter under the wings of your pious Patronage, to defend us against such criticall and censorious eyes and tongues, as may either carp at my expressions, or misconstrue my intentions. The ample experience I have had of your undeserved Favour and Respect to me, in my many years Service of the Publick, and my observation in that time, that you have desired something of this nature might be done, hath encou∣raged me hereunto: your good acceptance whereof, shall ever oblige me to answerable returning of grati∣tude,

and administer to me further cause of thankful∣ness, That God hath given me an Habitation under your just and prudent Administrations; and wish for a Suc∣cession of such as may be skilfull to lead our Israel in this their peregrination; and when God shall take you hence, to receive the Crown of your labours and travels. So prayeth,

