



My LORD,
I Have often wonder'd how it comes to pass, that the Sacred Order of Bishops should in this Island meet with so many unreasonable Adversaries; when in all the Reformed Churches be∣yond the Seas, we are counted the only happy Nation, who en∣joy the Purity of Doctrine, with the Primitive Government. And I confess my wonder is the

more increased, when I con∣sider that the Romanists look on our Church as their most dange∣rous Enemy, because we have not only the External Glory of a Church, but a continued Suc∣cession of Bishops (which some amongst them are so ingenuous as not to deny) and yet these men amongst us, who so ve∣hemently cry down Popery, and so highly admire even the mis∣fortunes of the Reformed Church, do by a strange Antiperistasis, assist their Enemies, and despise their Friends. It was a good Observation of that great man Archbishop Land, That Caia∣phas the High Priest, advised the crucifying of our Saviour, that the Romans might not take away their Name and Nation: and yet that Counsel so Magisterially given, so

deeply laid, and so wickedly contri∣ved, brought on them that sud∣dain destruction they hoped to a∣void. And have not we, My Lord, found by sad Experience, the in∣ference that Great Prelate made, fully true? Since the Papists have not only had a great harvest amongst us, but all sort of dam∣nable Heresies have, like a flood, broke in upon us, and Atheism hath so prevailed, that if God, out of his Infinite Mercy put no stop to it, that Prediction of our Saviour will in our dayes be true, That Faith shall scarce be found upon Earth!
But since the times are now come,. Ep ad Corin∣thios, Pag. 57. which St. Clement more than 1600 years ago foretold, That there should be contention a∣bout the name of Episcopacy. And since Reformation and Purity are

the Pretenses (though Interest or Sacriledge are the true Reasons) of Separation amongst us: I have, in obedience to Your Graces commands, put out a Book written some years since by the late Learned Bishop of Durham, that all men may see, the great Lights of the Reformed Church beyond the Seas are so far from approving the Practices of our Dissenters, that they com∣mend and admire our Episcopal Government; and therefore I cannot but hope, that either these men will return again to the bosome of their forsaken Mother the Church, or have so much Ingenuity to desist from deceiving ignorant People with the great Authority of the Reformed Church.
And now, my Lord, I must humbly beg Your Pardon, that

I prefix Your Great Name before this Discourse: But since 'tis the work of a famous Bishop, and in defense of that
Order of which in our Church Your Grace is the worthy Primate, I cannot but hope acceptance; and am very much pleased I have an occasion offered me to let the World know how much I am

From my house at Easton Manduit in Northampton∣shire,
March 26. 1669.
