



Most Noble and Illustrious!
ACcept the Devotion of an humble Votary, who truly honors the Name you bear and beautifie; presuming it will be no Soloecism to join in one Dedication of Honor, whom God and Nature have conjoin'd in so near a Relation of Blood. Besides, it is here an inno∣cent Policy, (though in Religion no right Piety) by offering a Suppli∣cation to the Mother, to make more acceptable to the Son; and by making an oblation to the Son, to become the better accepted of the Mother: For thus, I have a Patronage secur'd by a Mediation, which will not be denied. And indeed, it is auspicious this, that confuting Schism, I have an United Patronage for my protection. But, that the Inscription of Your Names may appear neither insolency nor insinu∣ation; be pleas'd to know, the main design of this Dedication is, to be a Monument of Gratitude to the happy memory and excellent merit of that Illustrious Personage, JAMES Duke of Richmond and Lenox, &c. the deceased Husband and Father: In whom Vertue gave Honor its perfect tincture: He was truly FAITHFUL and RELIGIOUS; A Title which doth eternize his Name and Person. Now, that from him my former Labors received approbation, and my self encouragement, I cannot acknowledge on a fitter Scene, nor perpe∣tuate in a firmer Record, then this of a Publick Dedication.
Thus (Madam) you see what tribute of Thankfulness I owe to your deceased Lord: And to whom shall I pay the debt, but either to the Executrix, or the Heir? the Heir to his Fathers vertues and goodness, as well as Honors and Estate. And here I cannot but congratulate that enlarged comfort your Grace hath, in beholding the fair hopes of this tender Youth, so green and flourishing; his Heroick disposition sheweth of what Stock he comes; A Generous Plant, which watered by a skil∣ful hand, and cherished with an Heavenly influence, will doubtless grow up to be a lofty Cedar in our Libanus, whose leaves will shade, and boughs will shelter; being as spreading, as tall; as good, as great; as vertuous, as honorable. And thus, whilst after-Ages blush at the Prodigies of this, they, reading your Name (My Lord) upon record, shall adore the Providence, which hath preserv'd, in You, a Nursery of Heroick worth; which, maugre all the malice and mischief of degenerate Times, shall flourish to Posterity; and bless After∣dayes with that, we deplore as lost in ours, Piety, Prudence, and Honor, the truest Patriots of a Nations happiness, and the Churches peace.ESME, the Name (as it is antiently ob∣served) of the most eminent∣ly successful Lords of this Illustrious Family. May your Person (My Lord) be as prosperous, as your Name's auspicious: A Name that speaks Nobility of the best stock, Antient Descent; and of the fairest impression too, Vertue and Valor. I will not presume to instruct your tender Age, knowing well in what Artists hands you are for the Jewels polishing: Only, what is presented may happily contribute to the right informing of your Noble Youth, that no False Light of our Days Impostures may seduce you to become a Proselyte of Heresie and Schisme; but as a true Disciple of the Holy Jesus, you may be firm in the faith, religious in your life, blessed in your death, and glorious to Eternity.
Now, as I have begun, so I shall close my Dedication, with an happy Union; not declaring only mine own thoughtt, but even Fame's report; That you are (Madam) an happy Mother, in so good a Son; and that you are (My Lord) an happy Son, in so good a Mother. And see the Cedar's shade! I joy my self as happy too, in so good a Patro∣nage: For, in all humility I devote my self,

