



My Lord,
HAving receiv'd your Lordship's Letter to Preach the Visitation-Sermon at Campden, I was not long in resolving what Points of Doctrine to in∣sist upon.
The Duty of Prayer took up my Thoughts in the first place; one of the principal Duties of sinful Men, though now accounted (if we may guess by their general Practice) the least of Chri∣stian Obligations. I am much afraid, that they who are negli∣gent in coming to the Publick Divine Service, are not more forward in the performance of this indispensible part of Reli∣gion elsewhere.
Though Common Prayer is now become a scandalous thing in the Opinion of some (wo unto them by whom the offence cometh) yet I am persuaded the more frequent use good and wise Men make of it, the higher esteem they must have for it.
Discoursing once about the Excellency of our Service-Book, (as some Men call it by way of contempt, as if Book-Prayer was altogether Antichristian) with a Minister of the Presbyte∣rian Communion, upon his Accusations of it in General, I de∣sir'd him to instance in some Particular. After some pause, he at last pitch'd upon these Words; Give Peace in our Time, O Lord, because there is none other, &c. God be praised, by the Courage and Conduct of His Present Majesty, King William, we have the Blessing pray'd for: but, as the Lear∣ned
Bishop Stillingfleet says to Mr. Baxter, in his excellent Book of the Unreasonableness of Separation, on a like occa∣sion; at this rate some Men may want Causes to defend, but they can never want Arguments.
That I take occasion in the second place to Discourse upon the Duty of Thanksgiving, Gratitude at this time more par∣ticularly obliges me, and all of us of the Reform'd Persuasion. For I take it to be past all doubt, that we of the Church of England, and Protestant Religion, were not long since in imminent danger of losing the publick Exercise of it.
In my third and fourth Particulars I aim at the Honour due to the Clergy, upon the account of their Office; and shew that they ought to preserve themselves from Contempt, by a Demeanour suitable to their Sacred Office. That this of ours is a despicable Deanery of Clergy-Men, we dare challenge our greatest Adversaries to prove. Bishop Nicholson us'd to call it his Beloved Deanery; and I hope we shall all deport our selves so as to find the like Approbation in your Lordship, our Diocesan.
That Sober, Religious and Learned Ministers should be any where despis'd, must proceed from a gross and barbarous rude∣ness of Men, mixt with an Atheistical Genius: Wherever Men have been truly well Bred, sincerely Virtuous and Pious, they have paid their due respects to God's Ministers.
That your Lordship may long enjoy that Happiness, where∣ever you are concern'd, as you justly merit it by your Love to the Church of England, which among sundry other Instances you have signally demonstrated, in your late Encouragement of the Minister of Cirencester, is the very hearty wish of
My Lord, 
