



SIR,
AS Beauty in Distress has always found Protection
from the Generous and the Brave, to throw
herself into honorable Hands and hospitable
Walls, she seeks a Patron here; fearless even of greater
Dangers than those she has happily escap'd, when Your
condescending Goodness emboldens her to aspire to
Favours which her humble Thoughts wou'd scarce per∣mit
her to expect. But while my fair Unfortunate rests
secure under so auspicious a Roof, my unhappier Hero
will inevitably be lost there: He'll find that Sweetness
of Temper, that Gracefulness, that Tenderness of
Soul, and every lovely Qualification so much above
him, that, where he enters with Pride, he will sit down
with Envy. He will find You dividing your equally
grateful Conversation betwixt the gravity of the Wise,
the gayety of the Witty, and the easy sprightliness of the
Fair, and entertaining the Solid, the Ingenious and the
Beauteous, so as to improve the first, cheer the second,
and charm the last. For, as none seems to have
more studied the Art of pleasing those whom the
Best deserving wou'd please, so a particular Genius of
Gallantry distinguishes You from most of those who
make any considerable Figure among the Beau monde.
You wisely consider that by such a Spirit the best Men

have been inspir'd with Sentiments productive of the
noblest Actions, and 'tis cheifly owing to such Examples
as Your self, that 'tis kept up in this degenerating Age,
when so many seem fondest of estranging themselves
from the most harmless Recreations and Improvements.
More happy those, who, like You, are convinc'd, that,
by a pleasing Converse with the other Sex, ours insen∣sibly
gains that graceful Deportment, that elegant Po∣liteness,
and those Accomplishments which the ingenious
Fair seldom fail to impart more effectually than the most
lavish Nature itself, and even that Love of Glory,
which a desire to please 'em awakes or rather inspires in
Hearts. In that ingaging Society, Learning soon loses its
Pedantry, Youth its Indiscretion, and Bravery its
Roughness; and Man becomes with Ease and Pleasure
an absolute Master of those Graces that change a rude
Mass into a perfect Gentleman. But I ought not to dwell
on the Praise of others, while I have so fair an oppor∣tunity
to enlarge on Yours. The Character which
You have still maintain'd, is what the ablest Pens might
be ambitious of Drawing; but what Colours of Speech
shall Rethoric, or Poetry it self, that bolder Paint∣ing,
use, to do Justice to the great Original? If
like too many others you had need to borrow some
Glory from the reflected Lustre of your Ancestry, the
remotest Ages wou'd supply you with hereditary Marks
of Honor, while we trace up Yours long before the Con∣quest,
and find among the many noble Branches of so
Illustrious a Family, some of your Ancestors enriching
your Scutcheon in the Holy Wars by extraordinary At∣chievements
of Honour. and the acquisition of Laurels be∣fore
the Walls of Jerusalem; and one particularly, killing
in single Combat the Champion of the Saracens before
the King and the whole Army, to the immortal Glory
of his Name and Country.
But we need not look so far back as to Chronicles
and Monuments, when we have living Objects of Ad∣miration;

before us Artful Painters, when they wou'd
copy such, endeavour to set every Perfection in its truest
light, and either to veil, extenuate, or throw into
shades those defects of which Nature is so seldom free;
they strive to heighten every grace, yet so as to preserve
the original Likeness, and give an advantageous Idea
of what they represent. While thus they flatter Nature,
I could only wish the first of these Talents, conscious
that I should have no occasion to exert the others, to
give a just Idea of your Accomplishments. But extror∣dinary
Qualifications are yet more uneasily describ'd
to the Eyes of the Mind, than extraordinary Features to
those of the Body, and I have not so much of the Au∣thor,
but that a Sense of Modesty and my own Incapa∣city,
check my presumptuous Desires. Besides, even
Truth it self begins to cease to please the most deser∣ving,
when it makes too bold with their Praise; and the
illnatur'd World is apt to term that Flattery, which often
is but a just Acknowledgment, and the Incentive, and on∣ly
Reward of Vertue in this World; the want of Merit
of most Men making 'em displeased to hear the Worth
of others, and their Envy and uncharitable Thoughts
charging the fairest and most lively Complexions with
using Artifice. For my part, I hope never to seem so
imprudent as to debase with Flattery the real Worth
which I wou'd extol; I know that thus to add imagina∣ry
Virtue to the true, is like the injudicious laying paint
on a good Face, where some natural Beauty is wanting,
this only serves to disgrace the other Charms, and make
Deformity more conspicuous. Yet, without so much
as attemping a slight Sketch of your particular Endow∣ments,
(tho most Poetical Dedications have more of the
Picture than of the Epistle) to whom shou'd aspiring
writers make their Court, but such as You, by whose
countenancing Generosity, Poetry, Music, and other
ingenious Arts are incourag'd? You, whose known Zeal
for those whom you espouse, and Humanity to all the
world, make every one fond of sharing your Smiles.
'Tis as You influence those whom we are proudest of

pleasing, that even our most labour'd Pieces must expect
to be receiv'd; and as You supply us with Instructions
and Examples, that we are enabled to succeed. 'Tis
not from the vulgar Order of men that we must learn to
write to the Heart, to touch the Soul, to trifle agreeably,
be witty without Affectation, solid without Dulness,
lofty without Bombast, and familiar without Meanness.
But I ought to finish this Address, lest I usurp some
of those Moments which are due to your more enter∣taining
Diversions; and as the Business of this Epistle is
not more to secure to this Tragedy the Honour of your
Patronage, than to assure You of the deep Respect of
the Author, I cannot conclude better than with a So∣lemn
Protestation of being eternally, with the utmost
Veneration.

