



SIR,
MEn are now grown so universally jea∣lous of what is of∣fer'd 'em, that not so

much as a Book can have any credit in the World without security. This humour, Sir, has drawn the trouble of this Ad∣dress upon you. Not that I am so vain, as to expect you should An¦swer for my performance▪ but because I know the World will not venture absolutely to condemn, what you are pleas'd to Patronize. It is so custo∣mary for Writers to give great Encomiums of their

Patrons, tho' never so ndeserv'd, that it fre∣uently renders even a ust Character suspected. Tis true, most that have f late appear'd in Print, whether by Imprudence, or Design, have made choice of such Men, that the Author, and his Pa∣tron, look like two Bank∣rupts bound for one ano∣ther. But, Sir, I am so far from apprehending a∣ny such Censure upon this occasion, that I doubt

not, but even those th shall despise my Labo and condemn my Perfo¦mance, twill approve m choice of you, and a¦low of my Judgment.  dare not, for two Re¦sons, attempt you Character; for if I di all that have the Honou to know you, would a¦cuse me of Deficiency and those that have not would suspect me of Flat¦tery: Two faults, in my opinion, no less obvious

than inexcusable. I am not Ignorant that Dedi∣cators, like Lovers, are commonly expected to say fine things, without regard either to Reason, or Merit; but I am consci∣ous, I speak to one, as much above Flattery, as beyond the reach of my Panegyrick. The World may indeed justly won∣der, to find at so few Years, such opposite Qua∣lities reconcil'd; as the spirit, vigour, and warmth

of Youth, with the self Command, Sagacity, and prudent caution of ma∣ny Years Experience. I might very easily enlarge on a Subject so copious, and be Rhetorical with∣out the help of Inventi∣on. But my Task must here be much harder; while I contract my Thoughts, for fear of a contradiction, scarce a∣voidable, which is, by saying at once too much and too little: Too

much; to be credited by Strangers; and too little, to do you Justice. But to be more particular in your Character, were Im∣pertinence, since you, like the Sun at Noon, need no description to be distinguish'd.
This Piece is original∣ly Italian. A Country, in all Ages, Celebrated, as much for the Wit of its Inhabitants, and the subtility and delicacy of their Imaginations, whose

spirits seem to be refin'd by the very Air they breath in, as its Ancient Conquests, or the pre¦sent Fertility, Salubrity, and Pleasure of its Soil and Climate. But why do I thus presume to talk to you of Italy or its Peo∣ple? Who, besides your natural Advantages, are so much the better Judge, by having been an Ho∣nour to your own Coun∣try in theirs, and are so well known to, and ad∣mir'd by 'em.
The Design of this Book is very good; and had it been as fortunate∣y Executed, as it was well projected, I see no rea∣on why it should have been Inferiour to any of the Mythologies of An∣iquity, or latter Ages. But to deal ingenuously, in my opinion, the Au∣thor has not been so hap∣py in the Conduct of his Design, as in the Inven∣tion of it. But he has this, for his excuse, that

it was writ above twenty Years since. Neverthe¦less, the judicious Rea¦der, will meet with a grea many prettynesses, to re¦compence his Curiosi¦ty, and here, and there Strong, Sound, and man¦ly Satyr. Nay, he wil every where, find the true Spirit, and delicacy of an Italian; enough to recommend it to our Lan∣guage, and Perusal. I should say something, now for my own perfor∣mance,

but that I'll leave o the Censure of others, who will be sure to judge for themselves, as it is but reasonable they should. I can only add, that I have endeavour'd to correct some Faults in the Original, as much as was consistent with the Expedition design'd; and where there were none, I have done my best to do the Author Justice.
As for the Reception it is like to have in the

World, I am little sollic¦tous about it, and valu no Man's Censure, Your only excepted, any far¦ther than it may preju¦dice an honest Book sel¦ler who has endeavour'd in this Translation, to humour the Novelty hunters of the Age For on his profit de∣pends my chiefest satisfa¦on; unless it be in plea∣sing, and being approv'd of by you, the severity of whose Judgment, I

cannot but apprehend and fear, notwithstanding the greatness of your Na∣tive Candour. Yet I hope you'll let my Respect attone for the meanness of my Abilities; and Ex∣cuse, as well the Failures, as the Presumption of him, that will be proud to submit to your Cen∣sure, and no less to Sub∣scribe,
SIR,

