



My Beloved Friend,
AS it hath pleased the God of Infinite Mercy to incline our heart to seek after him in our ten∣der years, and to give us a clear perception of those things which per∣tains to Eternal Life and Salvation, so hath be also, (Glory to his Name in the Highest!) given us cause to testifie to the truth of that promise,Pro. 8.17. Those that seek me early shall find me.
And altho' secular concerns may sometimes be ready to prevail, yet in retired and serene Speculations of mind, the vanity of all created ob∣ects is discerned, and the Soul meet∣ing

with nothing of Satisfaction here below, Soars aloft to a Supream being, its proper center and place of rest; from whence is beheld the World, with all its fulness, as only filth and dregs, and unworthy for an Immor∣tal Soul, to be wholy imployed in: In such contemplations being exer∣cis'd, amidsts various occasions for thoughts of another kind, I have many times been fully sensible of the blindness that is over the Hearts of Men, who are preferring transitory and earthly Goods, to real and dur∣able Riches, and that are seeking more earnestly for Treasure here be∣low,Matth. 6.19, 20.33. than to lay it up in Heaven, where Moth or Rust cannot corrupt, nor Theif break through and Steal; and desires have been rais'd to obey the precepts of Jesus, who said, First seek the Kingdom of Heaven and the Righteousness thereof, &c.
And that such desires may be strengthen'd and encourag'd let us wait upon the Lord, let us trust and

repose all our confidence in him, and he will provide for all our wants, all our necessities of what relation soever shall be supplied, and we shall be up∣held through all occasions of falling, that we may pass through: But Oh that we may not presume to think of security by a God that we do not know, let us feel after him, in whom we live, move, and have our being;Acts 17.22.31. he is not far from any, altho' they may be who∣ly Ignorant of it: But he is imper∣ceptable to the Carnal in Heart, they are wholly strangers to him, he be∣holds them a far off: But let us meditate on his Laws, that we may be partakers of his Blessings, and let us be low and humble, that we may inherit his Glory,Prov. 3.34, 35 who scorneth the scornful, and giveth Grace unto the lowly in Heart.
To the improvement of my recei∣ved Talent, are these following Me∣ditations produc'd; and I expose them to publick view; not to be taken for a Methodical comment, or learn∣ed





exposition: For as I am too young, and uncapable (were there occasion) for such a Work, so am I Old enough to see, that too many of the Books, a∣broad in the World, of such a kind, prove more to the confusion then con∣firmation of the Readers, especially when they treat of places hard to be understood. But those comprehensive words that I make the Subject of my thoughts;Eccles. 12.13, 14. as it is one of the most full, so tis of the most easie and intelliga∣ble places of Scripture, which I chose to exercise my privat Meditations on; not designing (at the first) that they should appear in this publick manner: And if any, remote from God should hereby he induced to ap∣proach the throne of his Grace, and return from the evil of their ways, then shall I think the Publication hereof to be done in a happy Hour: But if it be so unsuccessful, as to work no such effect, yet my comfort is, that it has been a greater benefit to my self, than it can be a hurt to any.
And that thou (Pious Reader) maye'st be further encouraged, I pre∣sent thee with these following metu∣cally exprest Cogitations.
Contemn the World, its Glory all desise,
It is too base for noble minds to prize;
How vain and empty is its three fold Treasure,
Compris'd in Honour, Profit and in Pleasure?
We know such Honours base, and such esteem
Is set, not as we are, but as we seem;
Tis like a new Blown, but a fading flower,
Of small continuance, and of smaller power;
It gives no real content, no lasting peace,
But as a blast of Wind doth puff and cease;
If lean'd upon, 'tis but a broken reed;
And only doth our crasy fancies feed.
But not our Souls, they must have food Divine.
That's suiting to their , els they pine.
And then for profit; how can we obtain,
A real, sufficient, and a sollid gain;
That will to such a lasting profit end,
As will not fail to be, a comfort in the end.
This lower Region will not yeild, I'm sure,
One grain of gain that always can endure;
We know such Earthly pe's esteem'd for Wealth.
That can't afford our crasy Bodies Health;
Much less can all its combin'd force prevail,
To yeild content, when final fears assail.
The troubled Soul, which rowls in sorrow now.
And from its high flown Seat, in forc'd to bow▪
To th' pale attacques of Death, whose mighty power,
No strength of Riches can defer an hour.
But Pleasures limits seem of most extent,
As to afford a joy without relent;
And Peoples minds are wrapt so far therein,
As not to deem the worser of 'em Sin;
So swiming in this Sea of vain delight,
Are plung'd into that dark and dismal night.
Of an Eternal Woe, a just reward
To those that think their Souls not worthy of regard
But Oh let's flie the cause of such neglect,
That so we mayn't be cursed by its sad effect.
And with an Elevated Soul aspire,
Above these mean delights to something higher,
That, to a Soul enflamed with Celestial fire,
Seems worthy of pursuit, and of a great desire?
And as one glimps thereof, does Elevate the Soul,
In what an extasie will all our Spirits roul;
When that most dazeling Glory shall appear,
To Principate our joy, and end our fear?
Then shall we sound eternal Hymns and Lays,
Of Anthems, Songs, and never ending Praise,
Unto our great Creator, whom we must
Admire at in his Love, to make of Dust
Poor Creatures; and at last to make 'em blest,
By the enjoyment of an Everlasting rest.

Baldock, Hertford-shire, the 20th of April, 1699.
