



TO all True Christian People that do or shall hereafter come to believe in this Third and Last Spiritual Commission, is this ensuing Treatise directed, with love and peace to you be multiplied: It being a Legacy left you by the Lords last True Porphet, for your further establishment in Truth: As also it is left for a Convincement of the Seed of Reason, when he is in the dust; that by these Acts they may see how he hath been slan∣dred, reproached, and belied, persecuted and imprisoned without a Cause.
For how many Lying Reports hath been not only flung upon them, but also upon the True Believers of them; saying, That we own neither God nor Devil, Heven or Hell; and all be∣cause they see us use no outward glittering shew in fruitless Forms of Worship; whilst we worship an invisible Spiritual, yet personal God, in Spirit and Truth, which the World knows nothing of.
For this we know and affirm, that the Doctrine of this Com∣mission of the Spirit is of as great purity and power, as to Godliness, as ever any was, and as they were themselves, ever kept innocent from the breach of the Morral Law, as to Act; Even so the Fruits of their Doctrine is of the like efficacy in the knowing seed of Faith, by which they have dominion over Sin, as in respect of Act.
And altho' this last Prophet in his Answer to the Nine Asserti∣ons, hath shewed his great mercy and clemency to some corrupt Natures, yet it is but to such who act not so far; as the breach of

the Morral Law; as to borrow Money, and not to pay it again; or to be passionate and hasty natur'd, overcome with Strong Drink, or the like, and tho' these are evil, yet reach but to the Borders of the Law, being Frailties in Nature, which disturb the peace of the Mind, for in such things, as the Apostle James saith, We of∣fend all: But where there is true Faith, it prevents the Act; as this Prophet saith in one place, among many his Words are these, Faith, saith he, overcomes all Sin, Death and Hell, within a man's self, and that none but such shall be admitted into the Kingdom of Heaven. And the Prophet Reevs Doctrine is thus, saying, All those that are led by the Voice of the holy Spirit of Jesus, do work Righteousness in their bodies whereby they die unto Sin. Again, saith he, in another place, The Light of Christ in man doth convert from the Ruling Power of Sin. And in a Third Place, which is not yet printed saith, That they that are led by the Spirit of Faith, are kept from the commit∣ing of sin: I do not say, saith he, that they have no Motion to sin, but the Spirit of Faith purifies their hearts, giving them power against those Motions, that they commit not the Act; and from hence it is, that all that are born of God, know the Voice of God, and hath this Power over Sin, as I have declar'd, said he.
These Doctrines of the Prophets are absolute and possitive, and do give great light into several Scriptures, as Matt. Chap. 5. ver. 28. 1 John chap. 3. ver. 9. and ver. 15. in these places we are to distinguish between the Motion and the Action of Sin: This may also give light into Rom. chap. 7. how that Paul spake there as to his state by Nature, as also of the strife and strugle between the two Seeds of Faith and Reason, until the Law of Faith was quickened, and power by it attain'd, and then had he dominion o∣ver Sin, as Chap. 8. and so came to have peace with God, and with his own Conscience, and Assurance of Eternal Life.
And from hence comes the Grounds of true Worship, and flows forth all spiritual Praise, as David said, O how sweet is thy Law: This sweet Law is the Law of Faith; and he or she that is truly possessed hereof, can seal to those words of the Prophet Reeve, which saith, That he that is born of God, his Language and

Practice is such as speaks forth the Power of Godliness, to the confounding of all glittering Tongue Hipocrites, and Faithless Formalists
Now let all True Believers know, that under every Commission this is made the ordinary way of Life and Salvation; yet to pre¦vent an objection, this is confessed by us: That tho' there is this power in Faith, as aforesaid yet the Lord for the Tryal of his Creature, may suffer some of his Chosen Ones to fall in the time of a Commission; and for the prise of his Free Grace may grant them our Repentance, or s nd Free Pardn; for thus writes the Prophet Reeve in a Writin not yet printed.
The Lrd, saith he, leaves some to their own strength, through which he rebels against the Light that is in him, to the wounding of his own Soul; to the end that he may learn, that the power, by which he is preserved from the  of Sin, and so from eternal ruin, is not in himself, but in the Living God that made him. Therefore the Scripture here and there piteth frth one that the Lord hath left for a seas n to manifst his Prergative Power ovr his Creatures, and afterwards doth his God head Spirit move him to a second Free Pardn, wherein he raiseth that Soul to a highr and greater measure of Grace, Wisdom and Humility than it had before; which fulfils that Saying of Paul, Where Sin abound∣ed, there Grace did superabound. And this was fulfilled both by David and Paul.
Here we see that if an Elect Vssl should once fall after his knowledge and belief in Truth, that his second Pardon doth raise him to a higher degree of Grace, Wisdom and Humility then he had before: This by the Prophet is made a true Tryal to know whe∣ther a repentance or conversion from the Act of Sin committed be real or fained; as also that a second fail or relapse will prove dan∣gerous; because it is rare to find a Third Pardon, and a Third in∣crease of Grace to that Pardon.
Thus it is made clear that the Doctrine of this Commission of the Spirit it hath power of Purity in it, and n ne that is truly born of God can dispute against it, but rather fear to offend, as the Prophet Reeve saith, That a true born Saint is afraid of

his own evil thoughts, much more of evil words or deeds against God or man.
Again we see by this Book of the Acts, that these two Prophets were jointly chosen of God, and made equal in Power and Autho∣rity; for the Prophet Reeve saith, That his Fellow Witness had as great power as he had himself: And further said, That he was the Lords last High-Priest: If this be granted, then it must follow, that there can be no Salvation to such as shall reject him, or his Writings, altho' they pretend to own John Reeve.
Moreover the mighty sufferings that these Prophets have un∣dergone for their Testimony sake are admirable; yet notwithstand∣ing all opposition, providence preserv'd them so, as that they both died in their Beds in peace; and not only so, but this last Prophet liv'd to see the downfal of many of his great Enemies, and of his Persecutors and Judges.
Now to come to a conclusion of this Epistle: When the Prophet had wrote this Book of the Acts, he kept it by him, not letting any to see it; but about two Weeks before he died, it was put in∣to the hands of one of us, that was his true Friend, and ancient Acquaintance; in order to be printed after his death: Which now with the assistance of some Friends, through providence it is per∣fected, and is recommended to the whole houshold of Faith, which I doubt not, but it will be accepted of being a true Copy from the Original, there being nothing here printed but what is really his own; only you are to know that there are some things omited that are of a Temporal accompt, as a dispute with Mr. Leader con∣cerning Eclipses and the hight of the Visible Heavens; with some other particulars which, things are left out, because of the great∣ness of the Charge, for all cannot be Printed that is Writen, for it is evident that altho there is above a Hundred Sheets of theirs in print, yet is it not past a Third part of what is Writen by them two Witnesses, for in the Year 1682 Mr. Delamaine did Trans∣cribe so many of their Works, and bound up in a Book as contained 1052 pages in Folio, in which Book, and in what is printed al∣most all the Scripture hath been Interpreted that are of concern∣ment to Salvation, But whether it may enter into the Heart of any that are Rich to be stirred up to Print the same, or whether the

Powers of the Nation may permit it We leave to Providence.
But before I conclude, it is Requisite to give you an Acompt of the Prophets Death and Burial which was thus upon the First of March, 1697. the Prophet was taken with an Illness and Weak∣ness, upon which he said these Words, Now hath God sent Death unto me: And presently after was helped to Bed, and tho' he kept his Bed, yet we could not perceive that he was Sick, only Weak and he lay as if he slept, but in such quietness, as if he was nothing concerned with either Pain or Sickness.
So that it was meer Age that took him away, which was the 14th day of March, he then departed this Life with as much peace and quietness as ever any man did, being about 88 Years of Age, so that he had that Blessing, to come to the Grave in a full Age, like as a Shock of Corn cometh in at its Season. Upon the 16th day his Corps was remov'd to Larsimus Hall, and on the 17th day was from thence Attended on with two hundred forty eight Friends accompanying him to Bethleham Church-Yard, where he was Buried by his Fellow-VVitness, which was accord∣ing to his own appointment.
And thus was the Lord's Last Prophet brought to his Grave in peace, without noise, or without tumult, though thousands of Spectators beheld it, and there they are both to remain until the coming of their Lord, their King, and their Redeemer the Lord Jesus Christ, the High and Mighty God, and our God, and blessed are they that know their Voice, and wait for that day, and are not offended with these things. Farewel.

