



My Lord,
THE General good Character the World gives of your Honour and Virtues, has embolden'd me to beg your Favourable Protection of this Comedy: And though it be a hard matter for so young a Pretender to escape the industrious Ill Nature and Malice of the Town, yet I shall have this satisfaction, that if they'll not allow me a Judge of Poetry, they must of Persons; and they cannot impartially disapprove of my choice in a Patron.
Indifferent Authors in most Ages have been incou∣rag'd and preserv'd under the Clemency of the Nobi∣lity,



in hopes they might be better: But the severity of our Wits would have the first Plays which are now written, equal to the best of Ben Johnson, or Shakespear: And yet they do not shew that e∣steem for their Works which they pretend to, or else are not so good Judges as they would be thought: When we can see the Town throng to a Farce, and Hamlet not bring Charges: But notwithstand∣ing they will be Criticks, and will scarce give a man leave to mend; like the rigid Precepts and manner of the most Famous Master of Westminster: Who, though he has bred the greatest Men of Parts and Learning in this Age; yet I believe, if the Impati∣ence and Spirit of his Knowledge could have sub∣mitted to the slower Capacities of his Scholars, he might have made many more.
Poetry, I must confess, has ever been my Delight, as Honour and Goodness, your Lordships. And the▪ I can never expect to be as perfect in the first, as you are in the last; I am sure of two good supports from such Excellencies; and which your Lordship ne∣ver omitted expressing to those who have seek'd your Protection.
Your early Gallantry for the Liberty and Wel∣fare of your Country, in so needful a time (and where



the small number of Volunteers magnifies your Lord∣ships being one) proves the Spirit of your Predeces∣sors is left behind 'em: And though this Nation has heartily mourned the loss of one of 'em; Yet the death of a good Subject, like that of a good King, is best dispens'd with by the Publick, when his Virtues shine in his Offspring.
I would avoid the Censure of Flattery, and of ty∣ring your Lordship with the Commendations which you justly deserve: but perhaps may not desire. I have only this to say, that it is not to be doubted, but the Spirit which has inspir'd this Noble Underta∣king of waiting on your Prince, will merit a Provi∣dence to preserve your Person. And as you will be a Credit to his Camp, may you return to be an Or∣namemt to his Court. And as you are the Pride of our present young Nobility, may you be a Pattern for the future. Then I shall wish for the fancy of Mr. Cowley, with the Judgment of Mr. Dryden, to express my Sence of your Worth: But in the mean time, I humbly entreat your Lordship would accept of the Hearty well Wishes, and perfect (though distant) Respect

