



My Lord,
I Humbly▪ Dedicate my first Endeavours for the Stage to your Lordship, whose powerful Patro∣nage so generously supports it. The Ancients thus devoted the first Fruits to their Tuelary Divinities. 'Tis true that what I offer comes from a foreign Plant, and is not ripen'd to that Delicacy that shou'd recommend it to your exquisite Taste: Yet I hope your Lordship will be kindly prejudic'd to a lik∣ing of the Fruit that was produc'd where you reign. While your Wit and Judgment aw'd me no less than your Greatness, your indulging Smiles embolden'd me to the honour of this Address. 'Tis to that condescend∣ing Goodness that I presume to Devote this Essay, as an Earnest of what I will strive to do, to gain a better Title to your generous Encouragement. Nor cou'd I easily have secur'd a Patron to so general a

Satire, had I not happily fix'd on your Lordship, whom all allow to be not only free from the Defects it exposes, but eno'd with all their opposite Perfections. Thus your very name will stamp a value on the Piece, and recommend it to the most Difficult, who will fear to mislike what they'll know has been grac'd and made authentic by your favourable Reception.
Here, my Lord, the Custom of Dedications calls upon me, prompting me to put on the Poet, to draw the Patron; and though most Performances of this kind are as full of Flattery as the Plays are of Satire, I might attempt your Lordships Character without being obnoxious to that Censure. But what Pen will dare engage so Lofty and Difficult a Theme? Some of the Best have modestly declin'd it, and been reduc'd to speak like the rest of the World, who strive to give some Idea of your Lordship, by that of The Fine Gentleman; a Character you maintain among the Brave, the Witty, and the Fair, by so undisputed a Title as confirms you a living honour to your great Ancestors, even to the glorious Name of Boyle, that has so long been an honour to this Island and its Neigh∣bour. There are sublime Beauties that admit of no shadow, which, like the Sun, dazzle even while ad∣mir'd by Reflection: Things so conspicuous are not to be illustrated with Ink. Besides, I ought to consider that I speak of you to your self; and tho' you still most unwillingly suffer your self to be mov'd out of your admirable temper, 'tis known how dangerous 'tis to make you exert your Patience beyond the Bounds

you prescribe it. The Bravest are the most modest; thus Praise too often offends those to whom 'tis most due, and they shun it no less than they seek to deserve it. This Consideration, my Lord, checks my presumptuous Zeal, and confines me to a silent Admiration of that Worth, which, as it endears you to all mankind, makes me am∣bitious of being known,
My Lord, 

