



SIR,
NOvelties, and their Introducers, have generally most need of powerful Patrons: Yet while I make bold to Dedicate to You a Dramatic Entertainment, that may be said to want a precedent, I dare not presume to recommend it to Your Protection. There are some ill Customs in the Business of the Pen, as well as in that of the Sword. Methinks a Dedicator, who strives to en∣gage a Man of Honor blindly to take his Part against those that tax him with Faults, resembles a mad llow, who would draw in a Gentleman to be his Second, upon a trivial quarrel, in which 'tis great odds but he is in the wrong. In either Duel, instead of getting satisfaction, both Principals and Assistants are often wounded, and many times the latter most. Neither the Fondness of a Parent, nor even the Vanity of an Author, can make me think any thing that may be call'd mine in the following Sheets worthy the honor of Your Patronage; and

the rest, for which I am oblig'd to others, its Merit will, I hope, secure it a kind Reception.
Yet be pleas'd, Sir, to permit the whole to appear grac'd and countenanc'd with Your Acceptance: I will not say, it will fright Envy and Ill-nature from using this as ill as they do better Pieces; for I find, they are no respectors of persons, and far from being so fearful as some Writers wou'd have them be thought by their Patrons, they make nothing of a Breach of Priviledge, misusing even what claims the Protection of Lords, nay, Majesty itself. But this I dare affirm that Your Name will advance the Reputation of these Scenes; for those Per∣sons that are acquainted with your Character (and there are but few of the better sort but know and respect it) will not be able to imagin that any one durst presume to Dedicate to You an undeserving Piece; and shou'd they mislike this in the reading, they will, I fancy be inclin'd to suspect their own Judgment, rather than that of the Writer.
But, Sir, while this may protect me from the Severity of others, it cou'd never secure me from Your juster Censure, were not Your Goodness as celebrated as Your Judgment, and Your indulgent Disposition to pardon Faults as great as Your Skill to discover them. You pity those unfor∣tunate Men upon whom the Curse of Poetry is entail'd, kindly considering, that a Muse, like a Mistress, tho pleasing at first, is seldom long so to the man that's wedded to her, or indeed to any others, especially when he's forc'd to reduce her to be a Houshold Drudge This, Sir, em∣boldens me to hope, that if You condemn the weakness of my Performance, You'll at least approve my Zeal; since I do not offer this to You as a Thing worthy Your Ac∣ceptance; but merely as an opportunity to publish the Ve∣neration

I have for your extraordinary Merit. Were it not much more difficult to commend than it is to admire, I wou'd now, like some modern Writers, assume a Poetic Licence to turn an Epistle Dedicatory into a Panegyric; Conscious that what is Flattery in some, might be con∣strued just praise when said of You. Neither shou'd I be stinted to the Encomium of Generosity, tho that's the Soul of every noble endowment, and a virtue seldom forgot in Dedications. Yours; like the Sun's kind influence, is still dispens'd, even while the power that exerts it is unseen; and therefore a bare hint of so diffusive and known a Good wou'd be sufficient; the rather, because I shou'd have a large field for praise in Your other Virtues; many of which are naturally inseparable from that. But shou'd I enlarge on the sweetness and evenness of Your Temper, on Your engaging and discreet behaviour with Your Equals, Your condescending affability to Your Inferiors, Your Humani∣ty, Your Moderation in a flourishing Youth, and what's more difficult in an ample Fortune, Your knowledge of Men as well as of Books, and every accomplishment that gains You the esteem of our Sex, and the Love of the o∣ther, Your friends might yet justly accuse me of having said too little, while Your Modesty alone wou'd tax me with having said too much.
I had almost forgot its strict injunctions, and my pro∣mise not to make You uneasy with Your Praises; so diffi∣cult it is to be silent when a pleasing Theme and opportu∣nity combine to make us speak. Yet what I must deny my self, will, I hope, be the task of better Pens. Why may not Deucalion's and Pyrrha's being safe upon Parnassus, when the rest of the world perished by the Deluge, be thought

to imply that the Muses friends will be preserv'd, while o∣thers shall be swept away by inundations of ignorance and oblivion? if so, your Name shall live, and may even trans∣mit this faint essay to posterity.
But tho I must curb my fancy, I may give a loose to my wishes, for a long and happy Continuance of that more real Life which you so wisely know how to use. May your Years still rowl on smoothly, and attended with new pleasures; may your Desires be crown'd, and may I still be happy, in being thought,

