



IT will appear very strange to those who know the nearness of Blood that is betwixt us, that I should appear in Print against you; and I do con∣fess, it is not without some regret, that I am constrained so to do: If you would have been contented to have delivered what you did con∣ceit, concerning Amicia, the Daugh∣ter of Hugh Cyveliok, Earl of
Chester, as an uncertainty onely (as you have done that of Roger, Son of the said Earl Hugh) you know I would have rested satisfied with the Judgment of those many know∣ing and unconcerned Persons that have dissented from you therein, and would never have given you and the Reader the trouble of any one of these Lines. But since you were so fond of divulging this your supposed new Discovery (notwith∣standing your being descended of her) as to determine her in your late published Book, absolutely to be a Bastard; and did also many years since, without any other oc∣casion at all, send a Paper tending to the same purpose, to a then De∣puty Herald (though at that time you did wholly mistake the state of the Case) I hope it will not be
taken ill if I endeavor to give her a publick Vindication.
I might here take occasion to tell you, that I very much wonder, when you mention Ralph Main∣waring, Cheif Justice of Chester, and his Son Roger, and William Mainwaring Younger Son of the said Roger, (which William had Over or Higher Peover by gift of his said Father) that you do not take notice that they were all three Knights, you having seen proof thereof by many Deeds, where the word Dominus is prefixed to each of their names, which was not (that I know of) used to be done to any in those elder Ages, but those that were Knights (Clergy Men onely excepted) and accordingly in the 330 and 332 Pages of your Book, you own Sir Thomas Mainwaring of
Warmincham, to be a Knight upon the like Proofs; as also, why you have not in the descent of the Main∣warings of Peover, set down Ranul∣fus that is mentioned in Domesday Book (whom you truly suppose to be a Mainwaring) as also all the other Mainwarings that were be∣fore the aforesaid Sir William Main∣waring, in regard they held Over-Peover, or the most part thereof, as well as they held Warmincham. For, that Tadetune which Ranulfus in Domesday Book is said to hold in Mildestric Hundred is Warmincham, it appearing by Ancient Records, that Manerium de Tetton & Mane∣rium de Warmincham est unum & idem Manerium; and it is also clear, that Ranulfus was a Mainwaring, because, though he be there named without a Sirname, as Odard or Hu∣dard
(the owner of a part of Dut∣ton) and many others were, yet the Sirname of Mesnilwaren or Main∣waring (for that name in Records and Deeds is written very many ways) was as appears in your Book Pag. 111. used in the days of King William Rufus (as it also was ever since) and all the Lands that the said Ranulfus had in Cheshire which are mentioned in your Book, Pag. 422, 423, 426, 427. As also all the Lands that Ranulfus held in Norfolk were enjoyed by the Fami∣ly of the Mainwarings.
I might also here take notice of your mistake in the 336 Page of your Book, where you blame the Herald for making, in Queen Eli∣zabeths time, for the then Sir Ran∣dle Mainwarings Coat Barry of Twelve pieces Argent and Gules (for
which you cite Guillims Heraldry) but that was the mistake of Guillim, and not of the Herald, as appears by the Pedegree then made, which you have often seen. For, the Coat which the Herald did then allow the said Sir Randle to have a Right unto (as well as to those two placed in your Book, P. 331. and 333. the first whereof, though cut right, is by you blazoned amiss) was Ar∣gent six Barulets Gules, which Coat you take notice Sir Roger Main∣waring did Seal with; and the di∣rect Line of the said Sir Roger Main∣waring presently failing (Sir Thomas Mainwaring Eldest Son of the said Sir Roger, having issue Sir Warine Mainwaring, who had issue a Daughter and Heir) I know no rea∣son but the Mainwarings of Peover, who (as is confessed by you Pag.
333.) are now next Heir-Male to the Mainwarings of Warmincham, have a good right to the Six Barn∣lets with which Sir Roger Mainwa∣ring of Warmincham, Father of Sir William Mainwaring of Peover did Seal, as well as they have to the Two Bars, which Sir Thomas Main∣waring of Warmincham, Brother of the said Sir William Mainwaring did bear.
I might in like manner here, let you know that I do suspect you have branded several Persons in your Book with Bastardy, without direct Proof thereof. And although I shall not concern my self for any, but some of those which are by you mentioned, when you write of the base Issue of Hugh Cyveliok; yet if I make it appear that you have there without any certainty
aspersed two other Ladies besides Amicia. I hope you will have no just cause to blame,
SIR,

Baddeley, Feb. 27. 1672/3.
