



Honoured Sir!
I Here present you this Epitome of
the whole Art of Warr, and re∣commend
it to your serious Inspection
and Approbation; Depending more
upon the Worth of the Subject, than
my own Deserts: 'Twas chiefly de∣sign'd
for the Vse and Benefit of Young
Gentlemen and Others that delight
therein: And though 'tis but small in
Bulk, yet great in Matter; and at this



time of as good use, when the greatest
part of Europe are engag'd in Warr.
What can be more Acceptable in a
time of such Eminent Action, than
Plain and Practical Instructions in
the Military Arts, here comprehen∣ded
under these two Heads, viz.
Military Discipline, and Fortifica∣tion.
Sir, I need not endeavour to
inform you of its most excellent use,
under the Fortitude of whose favour∣able
Aspect, this small Piece craves
a shelter from the Malevolent Rays
of Detractions. These are the Arts
Mathematical (or Branches thereof,)
and in the Mathematicks the two
main Pillars are well known to be
Arithmetick and Geometry; and
these also have the Preheminence a∣bove
all other Arts, because they leave
no Hole to creep out at, or any Querk
for Descent, but an Everlasting Ad∣dition



of new Inventions to what has
been happily demonstrated before.
This last Age doth enjoy the Benefit
of more admirable Inventions, than
many former Ages; and we see daily
that new ones are still added, both
in the Art of Warr, as well as di∣vers
other Arts and Sciences. Have
we not in our Age seen the spots in
the Sun first discovered by the fa∣mous
Galareus, with his most excel∣lent
Telescope Observations; also
his Conversion upon his own Axis,
the Lateral Guardians or Satillites of
Saturn and Jupiter, the various Pha∣ses
of Mars, the Horns of Venus and
Mercury, the Mountains and Seas of
the Moon, the Generation of Comets,
cum multis aliis? But I fear I have
run out too far for this small Trea∣tise.
Sir! 'tis the Censure of You
alone which I value, the Popular

voice, like other Agents, never acting
beyond their proper sphere of activi∣ty.
Thus craving the Continuance of
Your Favour and Respect, I shall
ever remain,
Honourable Sir!

