



CUstom, when it is inveterate, hath a mighty influ∣ence: it hath
the force of Nature it self. The Bar∣barous custom to breed Women low, is
grown general amongst us, and hath prevailed so far, that it is ve∣rily
believed (especially amongst a sort of debauched Sots) that Women are not
endued with such Reason, as Men; nor capable of improvement by Education,
as they are. It is lookt upon as a monstrous thing, to pretend the contrary.
A Learned Woman is thought to be a Comet, that bodes Mischief, when ever it
appears. To offer to the World the liberal Education of Women is to deface the
Image of God in Man, it will make Women so high, and men so low, like Fire
in the House-top, it will set the whole world in a Flame.
These things and worse then these, are commonly talked of,
and verily believed by many, who think themselves wise Men: to contradict
these is a bold attempt; where the Attempter must expect to meet with much
opposition. Therefore, Ladyes, I beg the candid Opinion of your Sex, whose
Interest I assert. More especially I implore the Fa∣vour of your Royal
Highness, a Person most Eminent amongst them, whose Patronage alone
will be a sufficient Protection. What I have written is not out of humour to
shew how much may be said of a trivial thing to little purpose. I verily
think, Women were formerly Educated in the knowledge of Arts and Tongues, and
by their Education, many did rise to a great height in Learning. Were Women
thus Educated now,I am confident the advantage would be very
great: The Wo∣men would have Honour and Pleasure, their Relations Pro∣fit,
and the whole Nation Advantage. I am very sensible it is an ill time to
set on foot this Design: wherein not only Learning but Vertue it self is
scorn'd and neglected, as pedan∣tick things, fit only for the Vulgar. I know
no better way to reform these Exorbitancies, than to perswade Women to
scorn those Toyes and Trifles, they now spend their time about, and to
attempt higher things, here offered: This will either reclaim the Men; or make
them ashamed to claim the Sovereignty over such as are more Wise and
Vertuous than themselves.
Were a competent number of Schools erected to Educate Ladyes
ingenuously, methinks I see how asham'd Men would be of their Ignorance,
and how industrious the next Genera∣tion would be to wipe off their
Reproach.
I expect to meet with many Scoffes and Taunts from
incon∣siderate and illiterate Men, that prize their own Lusts and
Pleasure more than your Profit and Content. I shall be the less concern'd
at these, so long as I am in your favour; and this discourse may be a
Weapon in your hands to defend your selves, whilst you endeavour to
polish your Souls, that you may glorify God, and answer the end of your
Creation, to be meet helps to your Husbands. Let not your Ladiships be
of∣fended, that I do not (as some have wittily done) plead for Female
Preeminence. To ask too much is the way to be de∣nied all. God hath made the
Man the Head, if you be edu∣cated and instructed, as I propose, I am sure
you will acknow∣ledge it, and be satisfied that you are helps, that your
Husbands do consult and advise with you. (which if you be wise they will
be glad of) and that your Husbands have the casting-Voice, in whose
determinations you will acquiesce. That this may be the effect of this
Education in all Ladyes that shall attempt it, is the desire of

