


Dear Hearts,
I Doubt not of your kind acceptance, and Christian improve∣ment of this honest Essay, to lay the Axe of God's Word at the Root of the Provocations of God's Sons and Daugh∣ters. Are not you sensible of the woful (though but parti∣al) departures of your God from your own Souls, and from the Land of your Nativity? Are not you lamenting after the Ak?
1 Sam. 7.2. Zach. 11.10, 14. Hos. 13.1. Are not you afraid that God is breaking England's staff of Bands, by breaking its staff of Beauty? that even death will follow offending in Baal? Yea, do not your hearts tremble at the very thoughts of what will farther ensue God's taking away the Chariots and Horsemen of your Israel?
2 King. 2.12. And would not you take the direct course to re-injoy the smiles of your dearest Hus∣band, and to prevent England's cutting down? Yea,
Deut. 32.19. are not you convinced that the Provocations of God's Sons and Daugh∣ters go nearest to his heat? and that there is no hope even of their Salvation, so long as vain thoughts of escaping utter ruine,
Jer. 4.14. without true repentance do lodg within them? And are not you therefore resolved,
Mat. 3.10. that seeing God hath laid the Axe to the root of the Trees, you will now in good earnest lay the Axe to the root of your own Sins? that you will make it your main busi∣ness to promote in your own Souls, yea and in others too, not only more humiliation for, but more reformation of what hath been amiss, as knowing, that humiliation without reformation, is like the Word of God in the Letter, which kills, and not quickens; it accents sin, and not lesseneth it; it continues judgment, and not removes it? For your help therefore herein, I have endea∣voured to detect and caution you against the miscarriages opposite to Faith in God; which, I dare say,
Ephes. 6.17. 2 Chr. 18.30. are the Root of all your other Miscarriages: By the sword of the Spirit, and that as welded by the skilful hands of several of England's Worthies, to whom you are refer'd in the Margin; I have fought neither with small nor
great, but with your King-sins: It is said of Christ, In the day of thy wrath thou shalt smite through Kings.
Psal. 110.5. And is not this the day of Christs, yea, of your wrath against your sins? Is not Christ, yea, are not you angry with them, and troubled for them? O then! shew that you have the Spirit of Christ in you; smite through Kings, I mean only your Kingly-sins; and then I am sure none will be able to stand before you: Scuh you will find your sins opposite to Faith to be; each of them hath many followers, and therefore may be called Gad, Behold a Troop comes. I have indeed purposely waved speaking of the Miscar∣riages opposite to Faith, with reference to its immediate object, Jesus Christ; not only because those are more taken notice of by convinced Souls in these days, than these with reference to its ultimate object, the Deity through Christ: But because those are most excellently handled by the Reverend Author of the late choice Gospel-Glass, Ch. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, to which I shall once more refer you, and shall detain you no longer from making use of this Axe. But whilst I am whispering a word or two in the ears of such, as from the Miscarriages of some (and not all) Professors, in which they are not countenanced, but for which they are condemned by Religion and Profession, are so unrea∣souable as to fall foul upon Religion and Profession
O that such would seri∣ously read ju∣dicious Mr. A. Furgess's 71 Serm. in his most ex∣cellent Com∣mentary on Joh. 17. I shall only tran∣scribe for them one passage, fol. 377. Would it not have been (saith he) horrible impiety, to have broken out against all the Apostles, and Christ himself; saying, Look what they are; It's as the Pharisees said, a company of Impostors and Deceivers, they are all for their own ends, they are all covetous, and though they pretend Religon, yet they are Hypocrites; and though they condemn the gross sins of the World, yet in secret they can be a bad as any? would not such a tongue shew that it was set on fire of Hell, that should belch out such things?. It is tru hereby offences do come, and wo be to him by whom offences coe. Whosoever shall offend,
Mat. 18.7. Mat. 18.7. 1 Pet. 2.7. Joh. 16.1. i. e. lay a stumbling-block before one of Christs little ones, it had been better a milstone were hung about his neck, and he thrown into the Sea. Wo be to such Professors, that by their being spots, open the mouth of Blasphemy. But wo be al∣so unto all those that take offence against Religion and Profession, thereby. Wo unto the World because of offences. Such will be found at last to be Blasphemers against God, and runners in the broad way to Atheism and Damnation. Christ is a stone of stum∣bling, and a rock of offence, only to those that perish; to them that believe, he is precious. This is hinted that none may be offended, By your Faith's helper,

Dec. 23. 1667.
