


IT had not beene a question in Morall Philosophie whe∣ther Heroich vertue may be in women, had you (most vertuous Si∣sters) lived in that age. For as in the dayes of that ever renowned Queen Elizabeth, a Scholler merrily argu∣ing upon that theme, made this Syllogisme.


Regina Elizabetha est mulier,
Sed virtus heroica est in Regina Elizabetha,
Ergo virtus heroica potest esse in muliere.

The major needed no proofe, and the minor hee bid the respondent denie if hee durst; so now may I make the same argument:

You two most excellent Ladies are women
But in each of you are Heroick vertues. Erg. &c.

The major is manifest, the minor none that knowes you can denie. Nature is predominant in births: and great inclinations to vice or vertue come into the world with children from their parents disposi∣tions: How can the issue then of such ancestors bee otherwise then endowed with admirable qualities? Look on all sides of your Genealo∣gie in the direct, and collaterall lines, both of Consanguinity and affinitie we see refined and eminent spirits. Doe not great Straffords excellencies survive his fate, and do

they not daily revive in your most honorable brother. Was not your Right Noble Mother a rare patterne of vertue. And what Encomium shall I find worthie of that bound∣lesse Ocean of eminently qualified Nobilitie the Countess Dowager of Clare your most honoured Grand∣mother, truly learned her selfe, and a Patronesse of Learning, A Modell of Oeconomie to all Ladies of this age (absit dicto invidia) and whose piety makes her already in her con∣templations, a cittizen of heaven. Your right honorable Vncle the Earle of Clare; his pious and ver∣tuous sister the Lady Elinor your Aunt. Your most honorable cosen the Lady Clinton, whose nature, vertues, and matron-like wisedome in her youthfull age deserves admiration. I will not to your selves relate your owne, for

coram laudare vituperare est: and I feare lest those who know you not, being not able to conceive nature could produce such perfect∣ly mature fruits upon such tender stemms, should falsely taxe me with slattery; I will therefore con∣clude, with humbly beseeching you to accept of this my small gift, and suffer my weake translation to see light under your Patronage. It is a small token of gratefull acknow∣ledgement of the manifold oblige∣ments wherewith I am everlasting∣ly tied unto you. Divers imper∣fections there may be, to which I humbly desire you to give this fa∣vorable construction, that I would have done better if I could, and presented you with a greater gift had I had it. Live long and happie crowned with your owne worth on earth, and with glorious immorta∣lity

in heaven; which shall bee the continuall wish, and hearty prayers of

