



MADAM,
FOnd of the Vanity of having your Ladyship's Friendship, I
cannot rest easie with the vast Blessing, unless the World know me
favour'd by a Person so extraordinary: And whilst the Town is big to
see what a Genius so proportionate can produce, whilst Sir Thomas
Skipwith and Mr. Bet∣terton are eagerly contending, who shall
first bring you upon the Stage, and which shall be most
applauded, your Tragick or Comick Strain, I cou'd not refuse the Vanity (my
Soul whisper'd to me) of stealing you from the expecting Rivals, and
dexterously throw you first into the World, as one that honour'd me with
your Friendship before you thought of theirs. Doubtless, you will speak
me a vain-glorious Rascal, and un∣worthy of that Esteem I betray. Perhaps
you may most justly object, These Letters which I expose, were not
proper for the Publick; the Droppings of your Pen, fatigu'd with Thought and
Travel. But let them who are of that Opinion ima∣gine what Ease and Leisure
cou'd produce, when they find themselves (as they necessarily must)
so well entertain'd by these.
That Honour, Esteem and Friend∣ship I had for Sir
Roger Manley, (who has left a kind of Immortality behind him, in his
Books, his Me∣mory, and his extraordinary Daugh∣ter:) That old and true
Kindness, which grew up with you, and made me with Veneration and Wonder
heedfully observe what others neg∣lected as Childish, I confess, has
most warmly oppos'd your Design of Writing Plays; and more, that of Making
them Publick. I wou'd have had a happy Nature, such as yours, taken up with
more Sublime and Elevated Thoughts; and Time better spent, than in such
Trifles. But since I cou'd but combat (not overcome) your Desires, my
Friend∣ship engages me to serve what I cannot approve; and I have thought 
this one Way, by giving the Town a true Taste of your Thoughts
and Sense; I say, a true Taste; for here you cannot but be suppos'd to
speak for your self.
Shou'd I follow the Business of all Dedications, which is
Encomium, mine must be as boundless as the Theme: I shou'd tell
the World, how separate you are from all the Weakness of your Sex; what a
No∣bleness and Generosity of Temper is yours; how distant from the Shadow
of Interest, or mean Design: How have I heard you (compassionate∣ly)
regretting the Miseries of others, and never your own, but when they
prevented your exalted Charity to them!
And now let us descant a little upon the Injustice of Fortune,
that has not (with Nature) made you her choicest Favourite. Why
did she not place you in a Station as exalted as your Merit? Why thrown your
Chance in the Country, who might have adorn'd a Court, and taught a Nation?
Herein all cannot but commend you, suiting your Inclinations to her Caprice;
and by withdrawing from the Possi∣bility of tempting others, put it be∣yond
your own of being tempted.
Now, Madam, 'tis time to ask your Pardon for venturing to make any
thing of yours publick, without your Leave: 'Twas what I knew I shou'd never
procure, and therefore have presum'd upon that Sweetness of Temper, which
never shews you vindictive against an Enemy; most obliging to your
Friends, and hap∣pily calm to your self. Years of Friendship,
and Veneration, can plead mine no Design of exposing you; nor can my Life
be easie, when it has lost the Relish of being esteem'd

