



THe inserting your Honours names in this Publication, so little needs an Apology, that it had much more needed one not to have done it. Your deeply inward Affection to the Excellent Author; your most singular and just value for his Person, Ministry, Con∣verse, and Memory, as they were too great to be fully exprest, so they are to be wholly conceal'd, and buried in silence.
Those acts of your Beneficence towards him, wherein love is wont, the sin∣cerer it is, alwaies the more to affect privacy; it were a rude violence to offer at disclosing. But its paths in that so long-continued Friendly commerce with him, unto which your Honours were pleased to condescend, could not be hid. Any eye might observe the frequency of your kind visits, the familiar freedom you gladly allow'd him at your House, as at his own home; and that when the season invited you to your pleasant Countrey-recess, it was also the more pleasant to you, if his Affairs could allow him there to divert, and re∣pose himself with you.
In the very common and piercing affliction of his Death, which enter'd into the Souls of many; none that were not of his nearer Relatives, had a great∣er share than your Honours, or in the bitter sorrows caused by it.
Your part may be hoped to be as peculiarly great in the advantages and con∣solations, which he that bringeth light out of darkness, is pleased to attend and follow it. The decease of any such person (besides that 'tis otherwise also instructive) is a further enforcing repetition and inclucation of a common, but very apt and powerful Argument, both for the increase of our Faith concerning another World, and the diminution of our Love to this. To the former purpose, the Argument from this Topick, cannot but be very con∣victive unto such whom the forelaid serious apprehension of a Deity hath pre∣pared and made capable of it unto others; to whose grosser minds, that most important, and so easily demonstrable thing, is doubful; one may despair any thing should be certain, that they see not with their eyes. But who that be∣lieves this World hath a Wife, Holy, Righteous, Merciful Ruler, that disposes all things in it, can take notice that the best of men die from Age to Age, as others do; and allow himself to think no difference shall be made hereafter? And that God should order the collecting of so great a Treasure in one Man; not to say of general Learning and Knowledge, but of true Goodness, Grace, Sanctity, Love to himself, and to men for his sake (his very image, and the lively resemblances of his own holy and gracious nature) to be for ever buried in the dust? Or who would not rather conclude, (as that blessed Apostle) that, when the World is passing away, and the lusts of it, he that doth the Will of God (being thus tranformed into it) abideth for ever? 1 Iohn 2.17.
And for that other purpose, Who that beholds what was of so great va∣lue, forsaking our World, and caught up into Heaven, would not less love an

Earthly station, and covet to be Consorted with the holy Assembly above▪ Every such assumption ought to diminish with us the retentive Power of this World, and sensibly add to the Magnelism and Attractiveness of Heaven. Doth not God expresly teach, and prompt us to despise a World, out of which he plucks such excellent ones, plainly judging it not worthy of them? The general Argument to both these purposes, tho it hath not more strength in it self, from the death of this or that particular person, (when we foreknew that such must die) yet hath more Emphasis and efficacy upon us, as the instances are repeated; especially when we have a present occasion to consider the death of some one of great value, thoroughly known to us; as this Worthy Person was to your Honours. For it is not, then, a cold, faint Idea we have of such a ones worth, (as that is which is begot by remote and more ge∣neral report) but have a lively remembrance of it, as it appeared in numerous vivid instances; and thence do, with the more spirit and assurance, con∣clude such excellencies too great to be for ever lost, or be an eternal prey to Death and the Grave; but therefore, that he is certainly Ascended, and gone into a World more suitable to him: Whence also the manifold endearments (which were the effects of former very intimate Conversation) recur afresh with us, and carry up our hearts after him thither, making us wish and long to be there too.
But the Wisdom and Mercy of Providence seem, especially, to have taken care the Church of God on Earth, should be some way recompenc'd for the loss of so considerable a Person out of it, by those so generally acceptable and useful Works of his that survive him. Your Honours Iudicious, and very com∣placential gust and relish of any thing that was Reverend Dr. Mantons, make you the more capable of the larger share, and fuller satisfaction in that recompence. And were it known how great a part of them hath had a second birth, or Resurrection, by the diligence of one depending on you, that rescued them from the obscurity of a private Closet, as from a grave; and who, tho deservedly favoured by you upon other accounts, is undoubtedly much the more upon this also: You would be esteemed to have the more special title to them, as well as capacity of advantage by them.
There is, however, enough to make it decent and just, That wheresoever these Writings shall be read, your kindness to their Author should be told for a memorial of you; and whatsoever your interest was, or is in him, and his labours; it cannot be a lean wish unto you, To desire your benefit may be proportionable; Which is most earnestly desired for you, with the addition of all other valuable Blessings, by

