



Gentlemen,
I Know not how better to express the sense I have of your great Kindness, in making so free a Choice of me to those Relations, in which I now stand to you, than by lodging this Plain Discourse in every one of your Hou∣ses. I earnestly request, that it may be attentively read, and well considered of by all those in your Families who can read; and may be read to such as cannot read themselves. And if I can prevail to have it examined Impartially, with∣out all prejudice, and with the same Honest Design, with which it was Written, and Preached, I may modestly hope, that it will, through God's Blessing, produce at least some visible good Effects.

We have already (praised be God for it) daily Prayers in many Churches of this City, which afford us great choice of Hours; at some, or other of which, certainly most Men may, and the most Wise and Pious Men will find, or make leisure, from their ordinary business, openly to own their De∣pendance upon, and pay their Publick Acknowledgments to that God, who both at first made, and hath since so Graci∣ously Redeemed them, for himself; and who every day Main∣tains, Preserves, and Blesses them. And I question not but that we should soon have Prayers likewise every day in most, I believe in all our Churches, if the Parishioners could be per∣swaded to come, and give Countenance to their Ministers, who are now discouraged from the Attempt, by the Shameful, Scandalous Thinnes of their Congregations on Wednesdays, and Fridays, when they are read.
Though I confess my self to be of Opinion (and that upon some Experiment, as well as upon good grounds of Reason) That even in those Churches where there is the smallest Appear∣ance at those times, there would be twice, perhaps in a little while, Ten times as many at Prayers every day, were they once so setled, and Mens Minds duly awakened to the Con∣sideration of their Duty, and Interest, as now come on Wed∣nesdays, and Fridays. Since the better any good thing is weighed, and understood, and the more constantly it is practi∣sed, the more it will gain upon us; and the nearer it comes to an Habit, the harder it will be to forbear it.
I should not need to add, were it not to prevent (if it be possible) all manner of Pretence to Cavil, That what is here advanced, manifestly enough appears to be Calculated for Cities, Market-Towns, or such Populous Villages, in which both the nearness of the Church, and the Nature of Mens Em∣ployments may conveniently afford them so valuable a Pri∣vilege, as is that of Consecrating some part of every day, to
the Honour, and Publick Worship of their Dear Lord, and Master. Nor should I otherwise here say, because I have so often done it in the Body of this little Treatise, That I do all along press this Duty with the Exception, or Allowance of a Just, and Good Reason. That is of such a Reason, as a Prudent, and Pious Man, whose Mind is seasoned with that Genuine Principle of Divine Life, the Love of God, and all the Graces of his Holy Spirit, and influenced by a lively sense, and proportionable care of his Chief, and Lasting con∣cern, that of his Immortal Soul, shall deliberately judge to be a sufficient Excuse for his Absence at that time; all the Circumstances of his Person, and Place, and necessary, or warrantable Occasions, being fairly accounted for.
What I affirm, and urge, is this, That the Common-Prayers of our Church ought to be every where, and at all times frequented by all those of its Members, who can do it with that conveniency, which Christian Piety, Prudence, and Charity shall state, and agree to be such. And that 'tis every Man's Duty to be present at them, so often as his oc∣casions, and condition of Life, so determined, will permit.
And this Truth, I think, were there no other Argument for it, may be clearly made out by the General Laws of our Religion, such as are those which Command, and Invite us, To seek first the Kingdom of God. To do all things to the Glory of God. To let all things be done to edifying; That is, to the Building up, and Advancement of the Church of Christ. To think on (in order to practise) whatsoever things are Honest (or Venerable, and Worthy, ) whatsoever things are Just, (and such certainly is the daily Publick Homage of an Intelligent Creature, to his Great Creatour) whatsoever things are of good Report. To live to the Lord, with one Mind, and one Mouth to Glorifie God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. To
give Glory to God in the Church (in the Assemblies of Christian People) by Jesus Christ throughout all Ages. To shew forth the Praises of him who hath called us out of Darkness into his Marvellous Light; as being there∣by made a Royal Priesthood: Of whom, as we are such, God now under the Gospel requires constant Service, in the Publick Assemblies, as he did the Sacrifices of the Levitical Priests. (Dr. Ham.) These General Rules, or Maxims of Christianity, being all of them easily applicable to the Subject I Treat of, I thought good to mention here, for the farther Instruction, and Conviction of those whom the Prejudice of a different Education, contrary Custom, Party, or other lit∣tle Inducement, may be apt to mislead, and make unwilling to discern, and own, what they are not willing should betrue.
But whatever the Event may be in reference to those who thus choose to stand in their own light, I shall have, at least, the Satisfaction of having now done what in me lay to per∣swade you to the Practice of a Religious Duty, which, if un∣dertaken upon the Principles, and performed by the Measures of true, and Ʋndissembled Piety, will very much tend to the Honour and Glory of God, the Credit, Growth, and Ad∣vancement of Religion; the Establishment of our Church, the Peace and Welfare of this Kingdom; and our own great good, both in this Life, and in that which is to come. That it may please God so to Bless this little Treatise, as that it may be some way instrumental to the promoting his Glory, the ge∣neral Interest of Religion, and their particular Advantage who shall read, and duly consider it, is the earnest Prayer of,
Gentlemen, 
