


MY LORD,
MAriana's History of Spain has been an Offering worthy the Acceptance of two Kings. Its first appearance in the World was in Latin, in the Reign, and under the Patronage of the Mighty Monarch Philip II. of Spain, from whom it met with so favourable a Reception, as encourag'd it, when made Spanish by the same hand, to aspire to no less Protection than the same great Prince's Son, Philip III. then Sovereign, not only of all Spain, but of the East and West-Indies. This same History now first brought to speak English, I presume to present your Lordship, as the worthiest Patron I could make choice of, for a Work, that has hitherto been thought, deserving the Acceptance of Kings. Nor do I think my choice inferiour to my Au∣thors, not that I mean to bring the Dignity of Crown'd Heads into a Parallel with other Honours, but because Kings, tho' they are above all other Men, as to their Character; yet they may be, and are of∣ten inferior to many in the Beauties and Accomplishments, both of Body and Mind. Philip II. was more a Politician than an Historian, and Philip III. had more of the Saint than of the Scholler; the Fa∣ther made it his only Study to over-reach other Princes, and gain some Advantage upon them, the Son rather aim'd at Heavenly than Worldly Learning. Thus it appears neither of them had those parts your Lordship is possess'd of, to render you, if not so powerful, yet a more worthy Patron. Their Power might shade their Ignorance, but your Lordships Judgment and Learning will exert it self even a∣bove their Power. They might receive the fawning Flatteries of their Subjects; but your Lordship is so far above being Flatter'd, that it would be a very difficult Task to give a true Estimate of your real Abilities. I will refrain enlarging upon this Subject, lest Malice or Envy, should interpret that a Reflection upon others, which is only a faint Expression of what is your Lordships due. I must desist from all that looks like Praise, as well, because I can't in a small compass express so much as is known to the World, as because it is an under∣taking much above my reach to give a Character of your Lordship, or to express the worth of your Noble Ancestors. Persons so truly Great, are above all Flattery, and mean Objects are rather expos'd to scorn than extoll'd by it. Your Lordship stands highly visible among the first, among those I mean, who having attain'd to the utmost pitch of Honour, can receive no Addition of Glory from the best of

Pens. This makes my Task in approaching so able a Judge, the more easie, which others, perhaps, may think the greatest difficul∣ty. Much Study and Accurate Language, they say is requisite to ex∣press our selves duly to Persons of eminent Parts, who are able to discover the least Imperfections, and expect to be treated according to their Merit. I confess, the ablest Pen can never exceed where there's true worth; but at the same time, it must be allow'd, that those who deserve most, are generally contented with least. Thus we see the Greatest and Best of Men are nothing pleas'd to hear their own Commendations, because, tho' never so real, Modesty makes them look like Flattery in their Eyes, and they easily connive at Faults, which are not willful, because the sweetness of their Temper makes them rather commiserate then expose the Failings of others. This is a Generosity, without which, no Man can be call'd truly Good, and he that is not Good, can never be truly Great. Tyrants, and others, rais'd by infamous means to mighty Titles, may according to the mistaken vulgar Sense of the World, be call'd, and look'd upon as Great, in respect of their Power or Riches; but only those are really so, and will transmit that Name to Posterity, who either rise by Noble and Vertuous Actions, or being Nobly Born, preserve that Nobility un∣blemish'd. Your Lordship has Worth to be above Flattery, Gene∣rosity not to be puff'd up with due Praises, and Goodness to over∣look Faults. I am too sensible of my own weakness, not to think so able a Judge may discover many in this Work, for of this Epistle I do not speak, it being only design'd to beg Pardon for the rest. The Work I own deserv'd an abler Undertaker; but there is something of Glory, even in attempting great things, tho' the Success don't an∣swer, and it is Honourable to favour and encourage such Attempts. Sci∣pio deserv'd no less Commendation for favouring Ennius, than August∣us did for encouraging Virgil, and Your Lordship in Patronizing this Translation, tho' it prove inferior in value, will do no less than the two great Monarchs I mention'd at first, in giving their Protection to the Originals. The less my Merit appears, the greater will be the Demon∣stration of his Goodness, who supports my Weakness. The Mighty Ar∣taxerxes accepted of Water a Country-man brought him in his Hands, and stoop'd to drink of it. History ought to be pure as Water, without any Partiality to disturb, or discolour it, such has my Author been gene∣rally accounted, if the course way of presenting of it in the hands of my unpolish'd Stile make it appear the less valuable, Your Lordship will be pleas'd to consider it was the best Vessel I had to serve it up in, and to look upon it as the best mark I was able to give of the profound Respect I owe, as
My Lord,

