



Christian Reader,
WHEN first my Thoughts were exercised in drawing up some Reasons, to justifie our keeping the first day of the Week a Sab∣bath; they were only designed for Private Use and to serve a particular Occasion, that called for them. But since the Providence of God, has lead my Meditations farther into this Subject from other Considerations, and by means of a Book late∣ly Published by Mr. Tho. Bampfield for pressing the seventh day (or Saturday) Sabbath as the Duty of all Christians to keep Holy in Obedience to Gods command: I have Thought it needful to present this Treatise, for the ea∣blishing of those that are unsettled in their Minds about it, and for their Advantage who through the tolderness of their Consciences are exposed to divers difficulties, be∣cause they cannot see that Liberty to be lawful, which others take in making the Jewish Sabbath a working day.
To help therefore those sincere Christians (tho but few in number) that are intangled with this Yoak of Bon∣dage; I have considered diver. Authors on their seventh∣day Sabbath, as besides the two Books of Mr. Edw. Sten∣nets, Mr. H. Soursby and Mr. M. Smiths Mr. VVill. Sel∣lers, Mr. Theophilus Brabourn, and the aforesaid Mr. Tho. Bampfields two late Treatises, which tho I have not dire∣cted the following Discourse in Answer to any one of
them (except in some particulars) yet the Ingenious Reader may find, I have taken Notice of the Chiefest Grounds and Arguments for their Sabbath contained in them all. And if the Lord will graciously bless my well∣meant endeavours for their right Information, and hereby remove that bar between them and others, or if any Benefit shall be received from this Improvement of my Talent, I desire He may have the Praise to whom alone it is due. However, thô we or others may differ in some particulars, thrô the various Sence we have of the Mind of God revealed in his Word; yet as through the Grace of Christ, we abhorr that which is Evil, and cleave to that which is good, with a Holy Detesta n of all apparent Transgressions of the Law, consistent with Love and Pity to mens Persons; and as we are Children of one Father, and Co-heirs of Eternal Life through Faith in Christ that worketh by Love, we ought to be united in kind Affections to one another. And were our diffe∣rences managed more in Brotherly Charity, and by the gracious Conduct of the Holy Spirit, controversial Discour∣ses would be more acceptable, the Reputation of Religion and our mutual Peace and Love would be better preserv∣ed; which as I speak this more in general, than desigh∣ing any particular Reflection on my aforesaid Brethren, so I desire always my self to watch, and labour to abound in this Grace of Love, which is the Bond of Perfection.
To Conclude, I have in the following Tract not only made the best Improvement I can of several things that others have wrote before me, but as the Lord hath in∣lightned my Understanding, I have added such Matters, which I believe may be useful to clear the Case in hand, hoping he will graciously Bless my Labour to your Ad∣vantage.

