



Right Worshipful and Worshipful,
YOVR commands, as they
will be a just Apology for this
weak discourse, so they cannot
but give it some Title to
your favourable acceptance. Your At∣tention
spake your Affection to it in the
Preaching: and your more than ordinary
Iudgments commanding it to the Press
will be its best protection against those
Censures, it is now expos'd to. I hope
it has already received its first Impressi∣on



in the Loyal hearts of many, that heard
it from the Pulpit: And I doubt not but
this publication will help to imprint it in
the hearts of others, who tho they were
absent, were more concerned in the de∣sign
of it. Writing,Voces signa sunt, per quae praesentibus lo∣quimur, inven∣tae sunt literae, per quas posse∣mus & cum absentibus col∣loqui. Aug. de Trin. l. 15. c. 10. saith St^ Augustin,
hath this advantage above speech, that
by it we speak as well to the absent, as to
those that are present. So that such, whose
guilt might possibly keep them this day
from our publick Assemblies, may by this
means be brought to a kind of Ocular
confession. Our, advice to his Son. late Gracious Sove∣reign
(whose Charity was equal to the
greatest ingratitude of his enemies) is
pleased to tell his Royal Son, That the
most of all sides, who did amiss in the
late Rebellion, did so not out of ma∣lice,
but misinformation and misappre∣hension
of things, and that none will
prove more Loyal subjects than those,
who being made sensible of their errors



and their Princes injuries, shall feel in
their own Souls most vehement motives
to repentance, and earnest desires to
make some reparations for their former
defects.
That theseNullus vir∣magnus sine a∣liquo divino afflatu. Senec. Prophetick words of our
Royal Martyr, may the better attain their
due impletion, is the present design of the
ensuing discourse: and will alwaies be
(as hitherto it has been) the constant
endeavour of Your known and eminent
Loyalty.
I shall not stay You longer in the Porch
of a Dedication, than till I have ac∣knowledg'd
to the World Your many and
signal favours towards Me; which as
they command my most hearty prayers for
the prosperity of this Famous Town, so
they give You an undoubted Title to
the Subscription of
Right Worshipful and Worshipful,

