



Sicelides Musae Paulo majora Canamus.

THe Pen of a Balzaac, or a Cleaveland, will be scarce lofty enough to write of thee, Dick Pet∣tingall, who from a Page art exalted to be Secretary and Courtly servant to thy own Mistress: Thou didst do her more then eye-service, Dick, where ere she pikt thee up. 'Twas to be feared the many How-doe-you's and Good-morrows sent by thy love-smitten Ma∣ster, would instruct thee sometime or other to speak a word for thy self. To hold the door deserves now and then admittance into the Conclave: what hinders, but that a pimp (in defectu) may be a Coadjuor? Like Master like man, is a very good Proverb, and Moll is as good in the dark as my Lady, and Dick as Hall. With what a battery of language dost thou storme that Castle, which surrendred at a parley of Harry Martens: Thy great Guns play'd night and day, before the sweet Rendition. Curst theif! what Qualmes she put thee in, before thou hadst made use of Astolphos storie, thy self, poore Lad, wert Orlando Furioso! but at last, what can hold out for ever?


Casta est quam nemo rogavit.
Importunity is as prevalent as Gold; but Dick, learn these verses against the courting of your next Lady (if Madam Mary may not be totally yours now.)
Pulveris aurati pluvia sit sparsa papyris,
Rescribet Danae solicitata veni.
Sprinkle your amorous lines with golden dust,
And courted Danae sayes, my Dick, we must.
What store of this golden powder hath beene strewd upon her let the lost Manours of that exhausted Collonel speak, whose Father did disinherit him in leaving him so vast a Fortune, as the Poet sings,
Exhaeredavit te Philomuse Pater.
The Estate that's left an unthrist Son,
Is but a disinherison.
For there are more calamities to an estate, then there are stormes and tempests, as you may read in Plautus, where a Glycerium, a Philocomasium, a girl in En∣glish are found Calamitas bonorum Hamaxagogae, foras Gerones, one girle, Dick, is Waggoner, and Teams to draw a grand fortune into a small center; such as Dick at present I leave thee in, till thy soul awake, and thou see the danger of the pit thou hast so long laid wallow in. Accept of this good counsel, which is bestowed gratis, from

