



SIR,
No triall doth so illustrate the truth and power of that Religion we professe, as doth our patient and cheerefull suffe∣ring of adversity. No adversity doth so sensibly affect us as doth the parting with our intimatest & entirely beloved friends. No friends are comparable to such as are united to our selves by the bond of Conjugal af∣fection; like Nathan's Ewe Lamb eating of our own bread,2 Sam. 12.. drinking of our owne Cup, and lying in our bosome. Now these Circumstances, as they doe the more aggravate your losse, so will they the more renowne your ver∣tues, if you can so farre master your passions as to beare them moderately: which you may the better doe by following S. Pauls counsell in this case to his Thessalonians.1 Thess 4.13. Bee not ignorant concerning those that are
asleepe, that yee sorrow not as others which have no hope. Where the Apostle doth not say peremptorily, sor∣row not, for that was with the Stoicks to deny you naturall affection: but sorrow not without hope, least with the Hereticks you deny your selfe a Resurrection. The spirit of God directs you to a meane in mourn∣ing which will best sute with your sables, that is, to weepe as if you wept not.1 Cor. 7.30. So you shall shew your love by your teares, and your faith by your moderation.
And truly Sir, amongst the most I know, you have least cause to exceed in sorrowes for the death of your deare consort: if you please seriously to consider, how that nothing deplorable or grievous hath befal∣len her, more than what hath commonly happened to beleevers, while in the meane time, God wonderfully manifested his goodnesse in sundry remarkable mer∣cies towards her, which hee hath ofttimes withheld from many of his choysest children. That she dyed, that she dyed young, that she dyed a stranger in this Kingdome; that she was troubled with some doubt∣ings before; and that she hath left you destitute since her death, as it is all you can object to minister mat∣ter of griefe unto you, so let me assure you, that there is no particular of it, either new or strange.
1. As for death, Debemur morti nos nostraque. It is as good a debt as any the world knowes, for the levying whereof there is an extent upon all mankind, and a statute enacted primo Adami,Heb 9, 27. and recorded by S. Paul, Statutum est omnibus semel mori, It is appointed for all men once to dye. Hence homo (a common name to all men) is ex humo from the ground, and Adam signifies but Red Earth, of which both the Prince and the Peasant
are alike Elemented. And though there be diversities amongst us while wee live, some like Nabuchadnezer have golden heads, and some like Chrysostome have gol∣den tongues, yet we all stand luteis pedibus, on seet of clay, for so sayes the Prophet,Dan. 2.32.33. What man is he that shall not see death?
2. And though long life be accounted a blessing, yet is not a short life to bee esteemed a curse, since God conferres length of dayes to some (sayes S. Austin) to shew that they are his gift, and denyes them to other, some that we may know how that he hath better gifts than this: yet cannot he by this deny all be said more to breake promise with his people (when for a long life on earth, he payes with an eternall life in heaven) then Herod with Herodias if (promising but the halfe) he had given her the whole Kingdome. , whom God loves hee dy's young, said Me∣nander: God (whom hee makes most account of) those he soonest taketh, said Euripides; and Nazian∣zen tells us, hoc nobis adfert longius vitae spatium, quòd plura mala partim videmus, partim perpetramus, partim su∣stinemus, This is all the benefit of long life, to see more evill, suffer more sorrow, and commit more sin.
3. Nor was she the onely stranger who departed this life remote from her native Countrey. Adam her first Father by generation,Heb 11.9. 1 Pet 3.6. and Abraham her faithfull Father by regeneration, (whose daughter she was made by doing well, sayes S. Peter) dyed both in a strange land. So that if you begin with David to complaine and say she was a stranger,Psal. 39.12. you must add moreover, as were all her Fathers, & then the strangenesse will be taken a∣way, and with it your complaint also. Trees trans∣planted
ofttimes become more fruitfull, and so did she: whom God perceiving to beare so well, hath re∣moved into his Celestiall Paradise, where being plan∣ted (as saith the Psalmist) in the house of the Lord, she shall for ever florish in the Courts of our God,Ps 92.13. and grow greene to eternity.
4. And as for her doubtings, they may the more confirme your assurance of her happinesse, for the Divell never makes warre against those of his owne kingdome, who are as securely his owne as temptati∣on can make them: those whom he tempts to doubts and despayre are such whom himselfe doubts and de∣spayres of.Luke 11.21. Our Saviour tells you, while the strong man armed keeps the house, the things which hee possesseth are in peace; but when Satan assaults the Fort without, it is a certaine signe hee is not yet within, nor hath any command of that Castle which he holds not in quiet obedience.
5. Besides, you are not the first in this kind of losse:Gen. 23.2. Gen. 35.19. thus Abraham was forced to forgoe his Sarah, thus Iacob his Rachel: others have had their share in the like sorrowes, and company is some comfort though it be in misery. Demonax the Philosopher see∣ing one immoderatly to bewayl the death of a friend, he wished him in a great multitude, to looke about if he could find one man exempted from the like acci∣dent, which fayling to doe community in the case returned him better composed.
And as these arguments are prevalent to mit igate your griefe, so are there others as equivalent to pro∣mote your comfort. How many have there beene of Gods deare children, who have gone out of the world
(as Israel went out of Egypt) in hast, having their lives snatched from them by the hand of sudden death, while God gave unto your beloved wife, time of re∣pentance and preparation? How many whose Sun of saving assurance hath even set in a cloud of doubts, and distrust full thoughts, (for ought that hath beene visible in our Horizon) while God restored her to the joy of his salvation, to both your great rejoycings, making her to say with the Prophet,Psal. 94.19. In the multitude of the sorrowes that I had in my heart, thy comforts have refreshed my soule. How many through the ma∣lignity of their diseases, have beene dissolved on such distempered and distracted fits, that Charity her∣selfe hath been faine to looke backe, and take a view of their lives, before she durst passe her verdit of their deaths. When her dissolution was so cheerefull and Christian-like, that whosoever had beheld it (though unacquainted with her life) yet must needs have given her that testimony which the Centurion gave our Sa∣viour:Math. 27.54. Surely this was the child of God. How comfor∣tably may you recount Gods goodnesse towards her at the very point of her departure, both for the man∣ner and the time of it, not so much as faltering in her speech, nor fayling in any of her intellectualls, as ma∣ny others have done, but continuing all in their won∣ted vigour, while she continued her life. S. Iohn,Revel. 1.10. is said on the Lords day to be in the spirit, and she on the Lords day resigned her spirit, and that in a most memorable instant: for no sooner were you & your friends retur∣ned from commending your owne selves to God in the Church, but you were immediatly called to re∣commend her soule to God, from the Chamber, so
where you ended your Sabbath of temporall rest there she began her Sabbath of eternall rest. And I may tru∣ly say,Exod. 8.19. digitus Dei hic est, the finger of God was in it, or to speake in the Prophets phrase, this was the Lords doing,Ps. 118.23. and it was marvailous in our eyes. Suffer me then to comfort you, as S. Hierome did Heliodorus, Ne doleas quod talem amiseris, sed gaudeas quod talem habueris, sor∣row not so much that you have now lost, as give thanks to God, that once you had so vertuous a com∣panion who lived so piously, and dyed so peaceably. And you may also comfort your selfe (in the absence of her, your selfe united) in the words of David, for the death of his child himselfe divided. You shall goe to her,2 Sam. 12.23. she shall not returne to you. And that you may assu∣redly follow her, to those joyes whither she is gone before and already entred: Be it your care, while you trafficke in this troublesome world, to imitate that wise Merchant in the Gospell to pursue and purchase that one pearl of inestimable price,Matth. 13.45.46. Math. 6.33. namely the Kingdome of Christ and the righteousnes thereof. That so having fought the good fight, kept the faith, and finished your course,1 Tim. 6.19. 2 Tim. 4.8. you may lay hold on eternall life, and receive that Crowne which the Lord, the righteous Iudge hath con∣ferred on her, and promised to you, and all that love his ap∣pearing. Now that both you and yours, may con∣stantly persevere in this course, and bee everlastingly blest with this Crowne; shall bee the dayly prayer of

