



SIR,
THe exceeding love you bare to this Author [your dear friend and faithful Pastour] to∣gether with that respect which your love unto me hath Commanded from me, have caused the Dedi∣cation of what was his, and what is mine unto you. The Subject [though it may be not so profitable to you] is of great concernment in our dayes, wherein the old Serpent to the end he might have free passage for the Doctrines of Divels, hath by the mouths and pens of men Cryed downe the Civil Magistrates power in matters of Religion; which Stratagem of his may it prevail [and I wish it had not prevailed too much] then as Mr. Cotton saith, Rejoyce ye Hereticks, Idolaters, Seducers,Answ. to bloody Tenet c. 33. go on and make havock of the Sheep of Christ like ravenous wolves; you may now doe it [impunè] without fear or danger.
It had been well if this Author could have been prevailed with, to have published his many spiri∣tuall



and practicall Sermons upon Prov. 4.23. in which worke and Preaching of Christ he tooke most content. I know boah your selfe and others urged him to it, and could he have wrought with his hand (by writing) as he could with his head and lungs, we had enjoyed them. A labourer he might well be called, few such Labourers hath he left behind him: we say men cannot worke that doe not eate, but he could worke when for many weekes (yea monthes) he could not eate, his worke was meate to him. a Christian was his pro∣fession, and Christianity was his practice; Bookes, he told me never taught him to preach Christ, but yet how well acquainted was he with Christ, his sermons declared, and that excellent sentence of his when we were discoursing with him about his death at your house. I cannot say as he, I have not so lived that I should now be afraid to dye: but this I can say, I have so Learned Christ that I am not afraid to dye. Faith he preached, by Faith he lived, by Faith he died; he answered the Apostles exhor∣tation to Timothy, 1 epist. Cap· 4.12. Be thou an ex∣ample of the Believers in Faith, &c. amongst all his other graces, this Gemme did shine most glori∣ously: what you have lost by the removal of such a friend you know best: I know he was an Instru∣ment by whom the Lord conveyed much Com∣fort unto you in your pilgrimage: yet this is some comfort, that while you had him, the Lord gave you a heart to improve him, and so improved him, that I doubt not what is said of Abel in ano∣ther



case, He being dead yet speaketh;Heb. 11.4. it may be said of Mr. Marshal, though he be dead, he yet speaketh to you. It will not be long, but the peo∣ple of God shall be freed also from this evil [which our honoured friend was wont to say, was one of the greatest outward evils] the loss of friends: you are hastening, and in a good way [I doubt not] to that place, where you shall meet with your dear and christian friend again, and with many others gone before you; the Lord hath kept you hitherto steady, sound, unshaken, in these times, holding fast to the old truths, [which I esteem an honour in these daies] hold there still [good Sir] for they must stand in stead when we come to dye. I shall add no more, but crave your acceptation of what I have presented,

