


SIR,
THese Letters of Yours to Yours, had not seene the world, if you your self had not given just occa∣sion for the incivilitie. There was a time (I would it had never been) when you voted and principally caused the Sacred Letters of your Soveraign, and his Queen (the Cabi∣net as it was stiled) to be made publick. There was a time (would it had never bin) when at Longworth you tore in pie∣ces, with your own hands, the Kings Commission of Array. Pretty devices these (Collonel;) but now you see the times of retaliation are come: I am very glad they are come, that such rebellious and inhumane persons may be in their kinde requited. I know your genius of old, being of long acquaintance, ever since you liv'd in Aldersgate-street, under the tuition of the then call'd Blew-nos'd Romanist your Father, who was the best Civilian in our Horizon, and a Sin-swinger, as they er∣med him: yet you, Collonel, were not under his verge, though you then deserved his censure as much as you doe now: How could it be otherwise expected, but that that vast estate (for he had but 40 l. per ann. of his own) should be expended, dissipated (as Mr.Noy said in another case) in such cases as you found out. This last, I could have wish'd Casus omissus, but you thought otherwise, and return'd the



streames to the Sea, that is, your ebb of expences reflux'd to the Sins and Venerie from whence their Flood was. Pious use's money was spent in impious, and the Commutation fee spent upon Community. Let these Letters stand a charge for ever against you, higher then that for your life, and testifie what a Reformer you and your fellow-Governours of this Nation were like to be; who, if they were all so well decy∣phered, I believe we should finde them as true as your self to the Smock, or your Page Dick, Pettingall. Blessed Refor∣mers! Noll and Hall, or Hall and Noll, Ingeniosi nequam, Madam Lambert, and Mary Ward, and Old Nick take you, if you were not Ad perdendam Rempublicam & Regem maxime idonei.
Well Sir, you are now in the Tower, keep there, and if you can recant, repent; and now your nose is out of date, die however like a Roman. Forsake Mall and Presb. and all the Witchcrafts of your life, and from a Martin-mar-King, and mar-Prelate, turne a true S. Martin, that is, a Convert: which is the wish,

