





The Author wisheth all happines, submitting these his Philosophical answers to their grave censure.
THe things here presented, and which shall be hereafter presented of the like nature, will vindicate mee from both suspition in you, and ex¦pectation in the Reader, of a dedicatory piece of flattery: I every where mani∣festly using a Philosophical freedome.

 so ill a servant either to  Honours, or to noble truths, which are the choice food of refined minds, to make this address unto you for the pro∣tection of any thing which may deserve a black censure. Let every line bear its own fate in its own bosom. Only being well assured, that these things in diffe∣rence, and thus discussed between me and some friends; as they have been contrarily taught by persons worthily had in singular veneration, both in the present and former ages; so they con∣cern some heads of Philosophy, which are of no small consequence unto true learning; and besides, lying deeper in the pit of obscurity then the first fadom, they ought to receive the ablest deci∣sion; I knew not therefore how more candidly to strip my self of any con∣cern pervicatiously to defend any thing in these papers, then by laying them and their fate at the feet of so noble and able Judges. Possibly the thanks of pri∣vate

friends may have begot in me a  opinion of some of these things the they may deserve: your judgment may correct the errour of their indulgence. As all that desire to learn, ought to wait upon you and your honourable so∣cieties, as being together with the famous Universities and our Law Colledges, I mean our Innes of Court, as the soul and spirits of the Nation; so these Pa∣pers wait upon you, not presuming in the least to inform, but submissely cra∣ving rather to learn of you what they ought to think of themselves: according to the noble method of Philosophy in some of your societies lately instituted and pursued, not seeking for a preca∣rious allowance, as a Rogue and Felone may find refuge and safety at an holy sanctuary; but (however without the overweening dotage of self opinion) either by their own fair truth and clearness to be justifyed, or else willingly to embrace the flames, which their er∣rours

have deserved. I know you will par∣don the hasty rude dresse, or rather na∣kednes, (best suiting the pursuances of truth) in which these Answers to the questioning letters of some private friends, were first of all conceived: which without falsiifyng could not after∣wards be altered: and their highest ambi∣tion then was only private satisfaction, though now, except I will leave those, for whose satisfaction they were first written, unsatisfied, they must pro∣ceed to put themselves upon the test for publick, either justification, or dis∣allowance. The which I am the more ea∣sily perswaded to, observing it a method allow'd and practiced both by antients and moderns to preserve and deliver scattered points of Philosophy by way of Dialogues and Epistles. And indeed this method hath this special advantage in it; we may in a word present what we have to say that is new, without loading the Reader with an unsavoury

crambe, which hath been a thousand times before in the press. As if these pa∣ters be able, which I leave to your se∣rious censure, to justify themselves: it is scarce possible for them to fall into the hands of any Reader, who shall not herein, if he read them diligently and with understanding, find, not only somewhat which is new, but as well that is memorable, and beyond all doubting, certain, and perhaps neither by himself formerly thought of, nor possibly every where in that vast Ocean of Books, which are in the world, to be met with. In these philosophical op∣positions, till I be called to account, I have for the honour I bear them, spared those great and venerable names both moderns and antients, which I have herein opposed: it being my method in private, to pursue what is publickly in you exemplary Viz. to weigh controver∣sies and questions in philosophy, not by parties and factions, time and conti∣nuance,

or number and opinion, but as near as possibly I can, by observing how the scales bear between the oppo∣site reasons: and I wish the method might be so happy, as to become more common. For the same reasons I have suppressed the names of my ingenious friends, in opposition to some of whose thoughts these things were first of all written. Every day make your names more illustrious for clearness of judgment in the mysteries of nature. Being the desire of all, and doubtless expectation of most and particularly of your Orator and servant

