



THe mercies which God hath shewed to
these two Nations of England and Scot∣land,
giving us such great cause and
matter of Thanksgiving, causing our
sheafe to arise and stand upright, ma∣king
us with Saul higher by the shoulders then all
our brethren; these mercies (I say) deserve so to be
recorded, that posterity should be compelled to read
and admire them: but who is sufficient for this thing?
It was said of Claudian, that he wanted matter suit∣able
to the excellency of his wit: but where is the
head or heart suitable to this matter?Psal. 106. 2. Who can utter
these mighty works of the Lord, who can shew forth all his
praise? For my own part had I put my self upon this
work to utter these mean conceptions upon this great
subject before so great and honorable Audience, I
might justly have been condemned for abusing both
the one and the other. But you were pleased to com∣mand
my service in preaching on the day of your
publique and solemne Thanksgiving, it may be be∣cause
I was then neer at hand, and after your Reverent
attention had testified that you received them as the
counsell of God, you were further pleased expresly
to desire me forthwith to print and publish what in
my weaknesse I then delivered, I suppose for the bet∣ter
memoriall of these great deliverances; I could

have pleaded much, why these poore notes should
not be exposed to publike view; Treatises to be read
by all, should be long meditated, often reviewed:
Excellent pictures should be engraven in brasse, and
not cast in clay: the setting forth these mercies, and
quickning up answerable Thankfulnesse are above the
Abilities of any man, much more beyond the capacity
of my self, the weakest and unworthiest of many thou∣sands;
But your Order left me not at liberty to do
what I desired, you have thus made them your own,
the more facile I shall hope to finde you, and all In∣genuous
Readers towards my weaknesses, which not
presumption but my obedience hath made thus pub∣lique.
This further encouragement I have, little
things have been accepted with God and man in testi∣moniall
of Thankfulnesse; a female, a Turtle, a handfull
of wheat-floure by God himself; a handfull of water, a
bunch of grapes, &c. by great Kings and Emperours.
And even under this Notion also I humbly present
you with this ensuing discourse.
I have no more to say for my self, but much I have
to beg of God, that you (Noble Senatours) and the
Right Honorable Lords, who joyned with you in this
peace-offering, may wholly consecrate your selves to
advance his glory who hath done these great things
for us all, that your faithfull endeavours to do what
is behind, joyning with your Thankfulnesse for what
is past, the event may be answerable to your desires,
even the glory of God, and the good and safety both of
Church, and Common-wealth, which is the daily
prayer of

