


Good Reader,
THE Booke which we here under∣take
to answer, is so full fraught
with bitter invectives, false asper∣tions,
hyperbolicall confidence,
selfe contradictions, and such like
extravagancies, as that we have
thought fit to lay them all before thee in one full
view by way of preface, rather then to interrupt
our following discourse by observing them as they
lie scattered in the booke it selfe. Suffer us there∣fore
to give thee notice of these few particulars.
First, wee are deepely charged and accused not
onely to the ordinarie Reader but even to the Kings
Majestie himself, of misallegations, misinterpretations,
mistranslations, and false quotations, and that in such
an high nature as that the Authour calles God to wit∣nesse,
before whom he is shortly to give an account that
hee never saw any Author that would dare to professe




Christian sincerity so fowle to overlash. And this is not
once or twice but often repeated with great asseve∣ration
& exclamations. Which when we first reade
(being conscious of our innocency and fidelity) we
could not but stand amazed and wonder to see our
selves so unexpectedly and wee hope undeservedly
transformed into men (or rather monsters of men)
so transcedently perfidious, and so supersuperla∣tively
unfaithfull and wicked. And indeede, if to be
accused to a fault bee a sufficient argument to make
us guilty, wee must needes bee for ever branded
with such an high measure of ignominy, as that it
is not a whole sea of water that will serve to wash
off the filth of such accusations. But wee doubt
not but that the ingenuous peruser of this booke
will finde that as it was the glory of one of the
Cato's that hee was thirty times accused and yet
never sound guiltie: so it will be our honour and
credit when hee shall see that all this clamour and
noyse is but a bearing of false witnesse against his
brethren. Si accusasse sat est quis erit innocens. It
was the the wicked counsell of Matchiavell Ca∣lumniare
fortiter & aliquid adhoerebit. This counsell
the Papists have made use of in answering of Pro∣testant
writers, and the Bishops themselves in
their answers to some of the unconforming Mi∣nisters
bookes. And we have good reason to thinke
that the Authour of this Defence hath trod in the
same steps. For after all his generall exclamations
and accusations, there are but foure places in which
hee undertakes to prove us false. The first is for
halfe citing of Hieroms testimonie. The second




is for abusing Nazianzene. The third is for mis∣interpreting
Origen about Lay Elders. The fourth
is for foysting in Cyprian. True it is, hee tells
us of want of fidelity in citing the Counsell of Anti∣och
and Ancyra, of misalledging of Whitakers, of
misenglishing Tertullian, and of guilty trans∣lating
of Iustin Martyr. But hee doth not so
much as endeavour to make good what he tells
us, and therefore we cannot but beleeve that hee
used more Machiavelisme then honestly in such
aspersions. As for Authors which hee himselfe
hath both misalledged and misinterpreted, wee
doe not onely say it, but the Reader shall finde
it demonstratively proved in the ensuring trea∣tise.
Secondly, if to be railed upon, reviled, slight∣ed,
and scorned bee sufficient to bring men into
discredit, then certainely, we must be esteemed
as  as the dung,
of scouring, and filth of the world. For ne∣ver
man since Mountagues Appeale, wrote with
more scorne and contempt. Wee are caled
Vaine, frivolous, Cavillers, insolent, spightfull, ri∣otous,
proud, false, unjust, triflers, factious, Brother∣ly
slanderers, sullen and crabbed peices, Lyars, egre∣gious
and palpable calumniators, wilfully shutting
our eyes against the truth such as the Readers may
be ashamed off, witlesse, malicious, uncharitable,
envious, frivolous wasters of unseasonable words,
swelling up a windy bulke with groundlesse excep∣tions
against our eyes and conscience, tedious and
loose disputers, Patronizers of branded Heretiques,




impotent, weake, and absurd men, grossely ignorant,
such as fowly over-reach, men of weake judge∣ment,
and strong malice; commonly spightfull,
and seldome witty, violent and subtile machina∣tors
against, and disturbers of Gods ordinances,
some whole sections meere declamations, worthy
of nothing but of contempt and silence, ill bred
sons of the Church, spitting in the face of our
Mother, fomentors of unjust dislikes against law∣full
goverment, making wickedly false suggesti∣ons,
wanting witt and grace to understand the true
meaning of the Jus Divinum of Episcopacy, wor∣thy
to be punished for their presumption, & dis∣obedience,
men that make no conscience by what
meanes wee uphold a side and winne a Proselyte.
These are the flowers with which his defence is
garnished, and the titles with which he honours
those whom hee calles his Brethren. Wee
will make no other Apologie for our selves,
but what Austin did in the same kind, who
when hee was told that his railing adversarie
was to hard for him, hee said it was and easie
thing that way to conquer Austin, but the
Reader should perceive it was Clamore not
veritate, by loud crying not by truth: And
what Hierom saith against Helvidius, Arbitror
te veritate convictum a maledicta converti.
It is a signe of a man not able to stand before
the truth, when hee betakes himselfe to re∣proachfull
language.
Thirdly, if multitude of daring protestations
and bold asseverations be sufficient proofes of ar∣guments




propounded, and if confident slight∣ings,
and scornefull denyalls bee sufficient an∣swers
to us, and our arguments, never any man
hath better defended Episcopacie or more
strongly confuted those that oppose it. In
his very first page hee begges the question,
and affirmes his cause to bee Gods cause, Gods
truth, and if his opposers were as many Legi∣ons
as men, hee would meet them undismayed,
and say with holy David; Though an host should
encampe against mee, my heart should not feare,
but with just confidence I gladly fly to the barre
of this high and Honorable Court, (And yet by
his leave hee thought it his best wisdome to
fly from this barre, and to dedicate his book
to the Kings Majestie alone, and not to the
two houses:) And in another place hee saith,
the Apostles practise is so irrefragable for them, that
if wee doe but adde the unquestionable practise
of their immediate successors: hee knowes not
what more light can bee desired for the mani∣festation
of the truth of his opinion. In his E∣pistle
to the King hee saith, That if hee doth
not make it appeare that wee have abused our Rea∣der
with false shewes of misalleadged antiquities,
and meerely colourable pretences of proofes, let the
blemish of his reputation leade way to the shar∣pest
censure upon his person. (Iust like the Au∣thour
of Episcopacie by Divine right, who is
so confident against Lay Elders; That hee
offers to forfeit his life to justice, and his re∣putation
to shame, if any man living can shew




that ever there was a Ruling Elder in the world
till Farel and Viret first created them: (And
yet hee could not but know that Arch-Bi∣shop
Whitgift (as well seene in Antiquitie as
himselfe) confesseth that there were Ruling
Elders in the Primitive Church. Thus also
doth Bishop King; Saravia himselfe thinkes
the governement of Ruling Elders to be good
and profitable.) In his answer to our argu∣ments,
sometimes hee tells us that wee prove
nothing but our bold ignorance and absurd incon∣sequences:
Otherwhile hee saith, Poore ar∣guments
scarce worthy of a passe. These are tri∣fling
cavills not worth the answer. Verball ex∣ceptions
which will sinke like light froath. Meere
declamations worthie of no answer but contempt and
scorne. forbeare Reader, if you can to smile at
this curious subtilty: What Cabalisme have wee
here? Our quaeries are made up of nothing but
spight and slander. His ordinarie answer toour
Testimonies out of Antiquity is: This Authour
is misalledged. That Father abused. This Coun∣cell
shuffled up with little fidelitie. Away with your
unproving illustrations and unregardable testimo∣nies.
And this is all the answer hee gives.
Throughout the whole booke he endeavours
to render us to the Reader as destitute of all
learning, as if our reading had never gone be∣yond
a Polyanthea. Hee calles us boldly igno∣rant.
And that wee would make the Reader be∣leeve
that wee had seene a Father. And that we
would seeme to have seene the Canon Law. And




that it is enough wee can shew a little reading to
no purpose. But in all these and many more
such like Sarcasmes and vaine Rhetoricati∣ons
hee doth but act the part of his Hierarchi∣call
predecessors whose chiefe answers have
beene scoffes and scornes; and therefore
what learned Rivetus saith of Bishop Mounta∣gue
may with as much truth bee averred of
this namelesse Author. Montacutius vir certe∣doctus,
sed admodum praefidens, & tumidus a∣liorum
contemptor, & suggillator. And in ano∣ther
place.Apol. pro Sancta Ma∣nic. pag. 77. 95. Non potest vir ille sine convitijs
quemquam a quo dissentit vel in levissimis nomi∣nare.
But what strength and weight there is
in such kinde of arguments and answers, let
the wise Reader judge.
And yet not withstanding all this confidence &
Thrasonicall boasting we desire thee to observe:
Fourthly, That if the whole booke
were divided into foure parts, there is one
quarter of which he makes no mention, but
passeth it over either with scorne or silence.
And where our arguments are strongest there
hee slides away without answering, which
cannot but make the judicious Reader beleeve
that hee thought the yron to hot for him, and
therefore would not touch it least it should burne
his owne fingers; as himselfe saith pag. 21.
And even in those things wherein hee under∣takes
to answere us we cannot but give notice
that wee have confitentem reum, and in effect
the cause granted in those things which are




most materiall. For when wee prove from
Scripture the Identity of Bishops and Presby∣ters
both in name and office, he tells us with
a little varying of our words; Wee idly
loose our labour. It neede bee no scruple to us:
It is in expresse termes granted, when we prove
that there are not three degrees of Ministery
in the Scripture (to wit, Bishops, Presbyters,
and Deacous) hee answers, it is granted; you
speake of the Apostles writings, but I of their
successors. Hee granteth also that the Primi∣tive
Bishops were elected by the Clergie, and
people. That Bishops ought not to have sole pow∣er
in Ordination, and Iurisdiction. That they
ought not to delegate their power to others. That
the ordinary managing of secular imployments is
improper for them. And hee doth almost grant
that there were Lay-Elders in antiquity. For
whereas the Author of Episcopacy by Divine
right affirmeth, that the name of Elders of
the Church in all antiquity comprehendeth
none but Preachers, and that therefore they
onely may bee called Seniores Ecclesiae, though
some others may have the title of Seniores
populi, because of their civill authority. This
Author acknowledgeth that besides Pastors,
and besides the Magistrates and Elders of the
City there are to bee found in antiquity Se∣niores
Ecclesiastici. Indeede hee saith, that these
were but as our Churchwardens, or Vestry men.
But how true this is, the Reader shall see in
due place: Lastly, hee grants that all that wee




say in the Postscripts about the Popish Prelates is true,
Celari non potuit negari non debuit. And for what we
say of the Protestant Bishops he denies not the
truth of it only he chides for taxing all for the fault
of some.
And in these things wherein hee doth diametri∣cally
oppose us, hee doth frequently contradict
himselfe and his best friends. In his Epistle dedica∣tory
hee professeth that he taxeth not our ability, yet
in the same Epistle hee calles us impotent assailants,
and afterwards. Men of weake judgements and strong
malice. And Men that would seeme to have seene a Fa∣ther.
And that all that we say is nothing but bold ig∣norance.
Pag. 94. he saith, That to acknowledge an
Ordinary Evangelist is a phancy and a dreame. And
yet elsewhere he makes every Preacher of the Gospell
to be an Evangelist. In his Remonstrant and in his
defence he saith, that Bishops had beene every where
throughout all the Regions of the Christian world. And
that all Churches throughout the whole Christian world
have uniformely and constantly maintained Episcopa∣cy.
And yet elsewhere he denies that ever hee said,
That Bishops were every where, and confesseth that
there are lesse noble Churches that doe not conferre to
Episcopall Governement. Pag. 161. hee tells us, that
for 1600 yeares the name of Bishops hath bin appropri∣ated
(in a plain contradistinction) to the governors of
the Church: But in other places he often grants that
the Name was confounded, and ascribed to Presby∣ters
are well as Bishops. In his 36. pag. he saith, That
in his Remonstrance hee made no mention of Diocesan
Bishops, whereas all know that he undertooke the
defence of such Bishops which were petitioned a∣gainst




in Parliament, whom none will deny to bee
Diocesan Bishops. In his 5. pag. (speaking of the
changing of Civill governement mentioned in the
Remonstrance) he professeth that he did not aime at our
Civill Governement. Let but the Reader survey the
words of the Remonstance pag. 8. and it will appeare
plainely ac si solaribus radijs descriptum esset. That
the comparison was purposely made betwixt the
attempts of them that would have altered our Ci∣vill
governement, and those that indeavored the al∣teration
of our Church governement. And where∣as
he bids as pag. 135. to take our soleordination and
sole jurisdiction to sole our next paire of shoes withall,
yet notwitstanding hee makes it his great worke to
answer all our arguments against the sole power of
Bishops, and when all is done, allowes the Presbyter
onely an assistance, but no power in Ordination nor
jurisdiction. Lastly, in the stating of the question
he distinguisheth betweene divine and Apostolicall au∣thority,
and denyeth that Bishops are of Divine au∣thority
as ordained immediately by Christ. And yet
he saith, That Christ himselfe hath laid the ground of
this imparitie in his first agents. And that by the evi∣dence
of Timothy and Titus, and the Asian Angels (to
whom Christ himselfe wrote) he hath made good that
just claime of the sacred Hierarchy.
This is the summe of that (good Reader) that we
thought fit to praemonish thee of. Wee now dis∣misse
thee to the booke it selfe, and commend thee
and it, to the blessing of God.
