




Honoured Sir,
IT is receiv'd for a truth of the greater magnitude, 12.19. by One, whose Professi∣on renders his conceptions unsuspect∣ed of any bias by interest; That the Gospel it self, and the Ministers there∣of are ever weighed in the same bal∣lance of human judgment; and the estimate of both, whether of honour, or contempt, always alike. The sin∣cere esteem you have for the Duties of the Gospel, doth not only mani∣fest the certainty of that Maxim; but also lay open the Root, out of
which, your pious regard for the Mi∣nisters thereof, doth grow and pro∣sper. Both which, daily thriving by the Celestial showers of Divine Grace falling on your heart, are be∣come so conspicuous in the World, (like a City set on an hill, that cannot be hid) that it hath engag'd my weak endeavours to contribute something to the present imitation, and future memory of your Vertues.
Sir, I am confident (whatever others may do, yet) you will not esteem your self unconcern'd, in the purpose, and benefit of this Collection: For who can do so, that believes, That it is appointed to men once to dye, and after that, the Judgment? Much less then, a Person, who dyes daily: whose contemplation minutely suggest unto him the memento's of mortality; and whose life is an en∣tire design to prepare for death. Did other foresee what kind of thoughts would suprize them at that woful day, (unless their spirits are congeal'd
by some narcotick stupidity) they would deem it as much beneath the sagacity of men, as the wisdom of Christians, to leave the most impor∣tant business of their life, to be hud∣dled up in a few tempestuous hours, encumbred with sorrow, pain, an∣guish, horrour and amazement in themselves, and others. And who is there that can make a death-bed so well, that an Ʋlcerous Soul may lye easie on it, under the throws and pangs of a wounded Conscience? It is to this (almost) insuperable task, that I have adventured to set an help∣ing hand; (rather indeed endea∣vour'd to prevent the huge difficulty of that work) to bring out of the Se∣pulchre of a crucified Jesus a preci∣ous Relique, as I may say; some part of the Napkin, that was bound about his head (as an Handkerchief, or A∣pron from the body of an Apostle) wherewith to stanch the blood; re∣spite, and avert the death of a sinner; yea, bring to him pardon, life, and
immortality, instead of it. And who is he, that dares reject a medi∣cine (how desperate soever be the state of the Patient) the ingredients whereof are gathered out of the Gar∣den of God; the Book of Scriptures? Who shall limit that mercy, that is above all his works; the supreme ef∣fect of Divine Omnipotency?
And now, Sir, though I do not altogether despair of the prosperous success of this charitable enterprize on others; yet thus much I can safely promise my self (which will abun∣dantly recompence the little trouble I shall give them) that it will free my Brethren from all umbrage of ingrati∣tude to so sincere a Lover of the Cler∣gy: and put the World in mind; how great a price is to be set on Vertue, and Goodness, when set-out, and imbellish't with Greatness: This being the Com∣pass, whereby the inferior world of men do steer their course and is the Anchor of Church, and State, under all the , and Vicissitudes of For∣tune.
