



THE Apostle hath an Observation, that they which sleep,
sleep in the Night: and the dreadful frame is suited
to the state of ignorant and benighted Souls; but that
they who are of the Day, (though they do not sleep
as do others) should slumber in the Light, is justly wonderful.
The Spouse saith, she slept, but her Heart waked: but the sad∣ness
of our case is, that our Hearts are asleep. When the Son of
Man comes, indeed, shall he find Faith on the Earth? As the
People of God by Persecution have been at their Wits-end; so by
the long delay of Deliverance, they are almost at their Faiths-end:
and they that have obtained Faith in the Cross, find it difficult to
attain to Faith in the Kingdom. It is worth a serious Enquiry,
why the Doctrine of Christ's Kingdom hath met with so cold a
Reception, especially when as the time of the End draws near,
many have ran to and fro, (i.e. by comparing Scripture with Scrip∣ture;
for which the following Discourse is so highly valuable) and
Knowledg in these things is much increased. Our Blindness, I
conceive, is but too much caused by the Dust that hath been raised
by some who have driven furiously in by-paths; amongst whom I
reckon those most blame-worthy, who have advanced Phancy so far
above Faith, as to run into carnal Notions of sensual Enjoyments,
more suited to a Turkish Paradise, than the Kingdom of Christ:
their Carnality hath made this Doctrine to grate in a Christian's
Ears, to whom one Hour's Communion with God, is preferred a∣bove
all the Pleasures that the World can afford. The next to these

are they who have drawn, or wire-drawn, strang Consequences from
this Doctrine, to establish seditious Principle and Practices a∣gainst
the Powers that be: whereby some hae gone beyond the
filthy Dreamers, who despised Dominions and spake evil of
Dignities. To these we may adjoin some grea and good Men, of
whose Works many have complained, that thy have darkned (in∣stead
of enlightning) their Eyes; when they have too considently
asserted the personal Presence of Christ on Earth for a thousand
Years: whereas it is not said that Christ shall reign with the Saints,
but that they shall reign with him then, even as they suffer with
him now: but especially, when they have retended to determine
Day and Hour; and so by their frequent Mistakes and Disap∣pointments,
have exposed Themselves and heir Labours to Con∣tempt.
Let us then take the Doctrine as refined from all this
Dross, and it will appear pure Gold. The nly doubt is, whether
the asserting the Nearness of this bright Day, be not equivalent to a
fixing the Day and Hour, and on the same Account dangerous. I
humbly conceive that the Scripture doth abndantly make the dif∣ference;
in which we are not only forbidden to pry into Secrets,
which the Father has in his own Power; but we are command∣ed
to go by Scripture-Signs: that as no Man knows the one, viz.
the Day and Hour; so when we see such and such things come
to pass, all may know the other, viz. the Nearness of it. I de∣sire
to be ashamed of my own Darkness and Vileness, that I have
not attained to that Evidence and Perswasion of our being now
come to the time of the End, that I know some of the dear
People of God have arrived unto: But I bless God for what I
have seen, and I could wish I had words to declare it to the World,
that they who live in the daily Expectation of the coming of Christ,
are the most lively zealous Christians, that ever I have known or
heard of in these latter Days; the wonderful Impressions which they
have upon their Spirits about it, are soul-ravishing, inflaming their
Hearts with Love to him: They are Soul-replenishing, that they
even overflow and run over in all their Discourse, with the most

affectionate speaking of Christ, and for him; whereby they are
rendred some of the most useful Saints upon Earth: and whereas
all Enthusiastical Opinions are wont to puff up, these Impressions
have tended to make them the most humble and lowly Christians
that ever I came near. As the Generality of Christians are with∣out
these Expectations, so by woful Experience we know how cold
we are in our Hearts and Lives, in our Converse and Families: We
stand in need of the Notes of some Boanerges, some such awakening
Discourse as is here presented to you. Though we come behind
other Christians, as to the Plerophory they are raised up to; yet
by Grace we are assured, that the Lord is not slack, as some
count Slackness. We abhor the Malignity of the Scoffers, that
say, Where is the Promise of his Coming? We fully know, that
he that shall come, will come (in his own time) and will not
tarry. This is enough to rouse us from our Security, and to make
us prize a Discourse that is more than ordinarily suited to the a∣wakening
of a drousy World: This is enough to make
us more fervent when we pray with the Church,Form of Pray∣er for the Monthly Fast. A. D. 1690. THAT
THE KINGDOM OF THY DEAR SON MAY COME
QUICKLY; AND THAT ALL HIS ENEMIES BE∣ING
MADE HIS FOOTSTOOL, HE WHO IS THE
LORD OF LORDS, AND KING OF KINGS, MAY REIGN TO
ALL THE ENDS OF THE EARTH. Though I am engaged by
Promise to say nothing of the Author, (which indeed is not neces∣sary
in any place where his Name is known) yet I take it to be a
point of Justice to him, and to the World, to say thus much of his
Work; that this Sermon was preached in a Country-Church (I am
perswaded) without the least Design of being made Publick, and
that the Copy was written out and sent to the Press (though not
without the leave, yet) in the Absence of the Author: so that the
Judicious will easily believe, with what Advantage it would have
come forth, if it had been on purpose prepared for publick view,
and the Copy had been corrected by the Author's own Hand. Vp∣on
the whole, seeing the Author has withdrawn his Name; you

must ascribe all the Praise to the Grace and Assistance of our
coming Saviour, and all the Faults to the poor Publisher, who
having nothing of his own worth offering, is glad that he has credit
enough to borrow such a Piece, to cast into the Treasury: and does
only beg this great Bounty, That when any Souls are raised into
a lively frame by this Sermon, and are blessing God for the Au∣thor,
they would also put up one Prayer or Groan for the quickning
of him, who was instrumental of conveying it unto them.

