


MADAM,
IT is so high a Pre∣sumption in me to beg Your Majesty's Acceptance of the ensuing Translation, that were not Your Royal Clemency as extensive as Your Power, I could not hope for Pardon. There
are but few Authors, whose Writings can with∣out Arrogance intrude upon those small porti∣ons of Time, which the weighty Cares of Your Royal Station permit Your Majesty to call Your own. Nevertheless the consideration of Your Majesty's Indulgence to all Your Subjects induced me to think that, as the Almighty Being, whose Vice-gerent You are, re∣gards not so much the value of the Sacrifice, as
the sincerity of him that offers it, so Your Maje∣sty will be graciously pleas'd to forgive this Of∣ficious submission of one, who hath nothing to re∣commend himself, or what he Addresses to Your Great Name but an unfeign'd Loyalty.
The same Motive that first incourag'd me to at∣tempt the Translating this Historical Tract, inspir'd me likewise, in a great measure, with the Ambi∣tion of laying it at Your





Majesty's Feet: Not on∣ly because it was written by an Author of an esta∣blish'd Reputation, but also because it bears so visible a Resemblance to the late Happy Revolu∣tion, that plac'd Your Sa∣cred Majesty on the Throne of these King∣doms. The Parallel, I must confess, agrees not in all particulars. Genoua bears no proportion to England, nor Doria to His present Majesty, whether we consider his Character
or the Actions he per∣form'd. And besides, Eng∣land hath receiv'd a far more signal and valuable Deliverance by His Ma∣jesty's Arrival, than Genoua did by the means of her Great Benefactor. Their Civil Liberties were for a while under an Eclipse, & their Constitution was very much alter'd by that Faction that sided with the French: but their Religi∣on was still the same with that of their Oppressors; nor had they the dismal
Prospect, that we had continually before our Eyes, of the sad Choice of being either Martyrs or Apostates. And our Ingratitude, as well as Folly, is far worse than that of those Genoueses, who were so fatally blind∣ed by Avarice, Ambition, or Revenge, as to mistake the Traytor for the Pa∣triot, and lend Fieschi their Assistance to destroy Do∣ria, and enslave them∣selves. But herein our side of the Parallel falls very
short of that Conspiracy. For, to our great Comfort, the Enemies of Your Ma∣sty's Government are not likely to bring their De∣signs to so dangerous an Issue: They have not a Fieschi to lead them, nor a French Army so near at hand to second them, nor are they in them∣selves so numerous and powerful.
May the Great God of Heaven and Earth every day lessen their Number,








and their Power, and their Malice, and still preserve those Sacred Lives on which the Glory, Hap∣piness, and Security of England does depend, from all Dangers, and from all Treacherous At∣tempts: May the Con∣stant Care of Heaven de∣fend Your Majesties Go∣vernment against all Op∣position and Designs, Prosper Your Arms with Victory, and Your Coun∣sels with Success, and long continue to us the Bles∣sings
we now enjoy by the Addition of many Periods of Years to Your Majesties Happy and Auspicious Reign: May all Your Subjects endea∣vour to express their Sin∣cere and Loyal Affecti∣ons with as much Zeal and Vigour, as shall be always shew'd in Your Majesties Service by,
MADAM,

