



My Lord,
WE Have at last, with your Favour and Encouragement, Erected an Organ in our Parish Church A thing which I have almost these Ten years endeavoured to do; and had once obtained the Recom∣mendation of it from your Lordship's worthy Predecessor, the late most Reverend Arch-Bishop of York▪ This seemed at that Time to be Embraced and Subscribed to with great Affection by the whole Body of our Corpo∣ration; but the want of Sincerity in some, or a vigorous Prosecution in others, under the Everlasting Pretence of the Badness of the Times, gave a Discouragement to the Design, however Useful and Beneficial it
was. And so for that Time it came to No∣thing.
But now I hope our Tempers are chang∣ed for the better, and that they are not so bad, as they may be Represented to be; which, our continual Aversion to this sort of Church-Musick, would give the World too great cause to Suspect: We have there∣fore taken the best Course to Remove such a Suspicion, and to shew, That we Resolve with our utmost Zeal and Diligence and Sincerity to Serve God, according to the Methods of our Excellent Constitution, in his own House of Prayer; and by the help of the Organ to raise our Affections and Ex∣cite our Devotion thereto.
This being the first Erected in your Lord∣ship's Diocess (out of the City) since the Great Rebellion had destroyed the Use of them in many Places. I could not but judge it most proper to Dedicate this Discourse, which was Preached to a very Numerous Au∣ditory, at the Time our Organ was first made Use of, to your Name, under the hap∣py Influence of whose Government, we en∣joy so much Safety and Defence in our pre∣sent Establishment.

The Subject indeed deserves your Prote∣ction, while it already has your Encourage∣ment: But the Blame of the Composition must lye at my own Door, and I have no mind to add to that by making an Apology for its Publication.
I could not indeed well avoid the giving leave to some Friends to Transcribe a Copy who desired it; unless, I should seem to shrink from a Justification of what I delivered to them from the Pulpit, which I think too mean a Thing, both with Respect to the Dignity of my Office, and the Argument I have undertaken to defend. Therefore I chose rather to Gratifie them this way, than to give them that Trouble, which I am sure would make it less Answer their Expectation.
My Lord,
It is now highly to be wished (if such a Wish be not too great in our days) That all others who possess the same Station and Dig∣nity in our Church with You, were as zealous and hearty in Promoting the Interest, and Defending the Rights of its Constitution. It would make some of us happy beyond our Expectation, and others beyond their Design,
if not against their Wills. Then we might see our Excellent Establishment and Old Eng∣land flourish in our Time, as they did in that of our Forefathers.
May you still go on with a Primitive Zeal and Courage to support this best Part of Christianity; For, if this be ever suffered to fall, we have too much reason to think, That little elfe but Anarchy and Confusion, if not Atheism and Profaneness, will quickly follow. Past Experience of this will, I hope, sufficiently forewarn us against future Dan∣ger. And that the former may never again be tried, nor consequently the latter ever more be felt in our Land, is and shall be the constant Prayer and Endeavours of,
My Lord,

Tidcombe, Sept. 24. 1696.
