


SIRS,
WIse and Good Men are al∣ways wont to look at, and consider the consequences and ends of things; where our divi∣sions and separations will terminate, is but too obvious; things cannot long stand in this posture, our vain jangling will come to the Umpirage either of the sharpened Sword of the Law, or the terrible Law of the Sword; the one is grievous, the other intolerable, upon which Party soever it shall fall; for the ill influences of Religious Quar∣rels are such upon the Civil Go∣vernment, as will oblige that for Self-preservation, to prevent the last by the use of the first, and
by timely severities to obviate fu∣ture miseries.
I have yet seen nothing offered by Dissenters which will not ne∣cessarily increase, rather than cure our Divisions; and above all, that Toleration which is so warmly pleaded for by those Nonconfor∣mists, who pretend to give an old Answer to a new Sermon of Dr. Stillingfleet's, is certainly the most intolerable. It is a Door which will let in infinite Divisions, and Subdivisions, Errors and Here∣sies, and by giving people liberty to go either to Church or Conven∣ticle, will give the lazy, profane, and Atheistical liberty to go to nei∣ther, to the great dishonour of God, and the inevitable decay of Chri∣stian Religion; it will infalli∣bly give the Papists all the advan∣tage
these following Papers disco∣ver; they desire to introduce Po∣pery, upon the ruine of Protestant Religion; it will oblige the Su∣preme Magistrate to act against his own, and the publick Conscience of Christianity, and to establish Ini∣quity by a Law. For such are the Doctrines and Practices of some Dissenters, in the judgment of all but themselves, and of all Dissen∣ters, in what they oppose one ano∣ther.
I know not how they come now to unite so close against the Episcopal Party; for I know their Breaches are incurable, and the time was when Presbytery was as much Babylon to Independents, as Episcopacy was to the Presby∣terians, and so of the other Sects and Schisms, which makes some
people apply that of the Psalmist to this Confederation, Psal. 83. a∣gainst the Church of England.
For my own particular, I know but one Remedy for these growing Evils, and that is, to permit the Sovereignty to lodge where God Almighty has placed it, and to sub∣mit to it for Conscience sake. I think the Authors of the Politi∣cal Catechism allow his Maje∣sties Power to be of God; He is the Minister of God for our good. Now who is to be judge of the goodness and fitness of laws, Religious, Moral, or Political? ei∣ther the Prince or the people: If the people, then is not the King Su∣preme, contrary to St. Peter, 1 Ep. 2. cap. 13. If the King be the Um∣pire in the case, every private Con∣science is bound to submit to the pub∣lick
Conscience, which is the Law of the Nation; which the King, with the advice, and by the consent of the wisdom of the Nation, has judged, and therefore established for the publick good. So that the Contest of Dissenters appears to be for Empire and Sovereignty, and who shall be the Supreme Judge of the Goodness and Ex∣pediency of Laws;Answer to Dr. Stilling∣fleet's Ser∣mon. and they do very ill to quarrel at Clergie-mens Coaches and Liveries, who them∣selves are grasping at Crowns and Scepters. And if any or many pri∣vate men shall not judge these Laws so good as those they would have im∣posed, they ought to submit, and study to be quiet, and not make the greater Duty of Mercy and Peace of the Church submit to the Sacrifice of what, may be, is but
Opinion, and still sub Judice.
I have a Theme before me too copious for an Epistle, and shall therefore, that I may not transgress the bounds of one, dismiss the other. I only offer these following disco∣veries of the Danger to which Protestant Religion and these Nations are exposed by obstinate Separation, to your cool and re∣tired thoughts, and hope you are too good men and Christians to e∣steem me

