



Dread Soveraign!
AMongst the Numerous Re∣turns of Gratitude, that flow from great Bodies of Your People in all Parts of Your Dominions; for Your Majesties Gracious and most Healing Declaration for Li∣berty of Conscience; Vouchsafe to admit this mean Discourse to be humbly De∣dicated to Your Immortal Name.

For which, if any censure me as highly presumptuous, I must (with Submission) alledge that it was Your Gracious Clemency that not only Encouraged, but in a manner Enforced me thereunto: For since Your Majesty has been the Glorious Instrument in the Hand of God, of Delivering us from those Shackles upon Conscience, and the many Insupportable Ri∣gors whereunto the Penal Laws, and their severe Prosecution, had long expos'd us; I could not think we should fully discharge our Duty to the Almighty in that respect, without some particular Expression of Thankful∣ness to Your Majesty his Vicegerent: And withal, to Evidence the Sincerity of our Hearts, I was not un∣willing to declare publickly what Doctrine and Senti∣ments we Endeavour to Impress upon our Hearers on this happy Occasion.
For however Dissenters may have been Mis∣represented, It has always been my Principle unfeigned∣ly to Obey that Precept of our Blessed Saviour, To give unto God, and unto Caesar each their due. Thus as I Preach'd the following Sermon to demonstrate that I fear God, and desire to improve all his Pro∣vidences to the great Ends of Christianity; so I offer these poor Papers as a standing Testimony that I sin∣cerely Honour the King.
In which Application, I forget not your Majesties Grandeur, nor my own Groveling Condition: Yet I
cannot induce my self to apprehend a Frown from that Face which has spread such Irradiating Smiles through∣out more than three Kingdoms; or that Your Majesty can be Angry, tho the meanest of your Subjects thank you for those Favours they can never be enough sensible of. He that would not a Beggar should bow to him, must with-hold his Hands from giving Alms. Had Your Majesty restrain'd your Goodness, Your Throne had been too Dreadful for the Ap∣proach of such a Shrub as I. But now that You have dilated Your Clemency in so extraordinary a manner to every Corner of Your Territories, whilst the Lofty Hills are Ecchoing Your Just Praises, You cannot (for the Harmony's sake) be offend∣ed that the Humble Valleys bear a part in the joyful Chore.
'Tis (Great Sir!) on these Considerations that I humbly beg leave by this Dedication to Express my own Thankful Acknowledgments, together with those of that Little Flock whereunto I am more peculiarly elated, for the Invaluable Happiness we enjoy through Your Majesties Benignity.
Now that that Great GOD (who enclin'd Your Royal Heart to this Blessed Work) may be a Glorious Canopy of Protection over You, and bless You with the Dew of Heaven, and Fatness of the Earth And that as He has given You (to the
Joy of Great Britain) a Crown here, He may fit You (by His Grace) for a Better, an Immar∣cessible Crown hereafter; Is and shall always be the dayly and most Fervent Prayer of

