



SIR,
NOW you have wrested the following Lectures out of my hands, I do but fairly leave them there, whence I cannot recover them. So that this which I prefix, is not so properly a Dedication as an Abdication. I must confess I never knew you guilty of Extortion but in this Act.
I loath their Cunning, who by debasing and disabling, secretly design to raise the price of their own labours: And do it this way,;  (as the Ora∣tour speaks, though somewhat in another case) with much more Artifice, then professed Hucksters do. But verily these Sermons (being preached, by such an one as I do really ac∣count and know my self to be, in my constant weekly course upon the Lords Day, and indeed a great part of them twice a day, when I had no Assistant with me, having besides the Wednesdays Lecture on my weak shoulders, and many other Ministerial Employments, not without frequent Avocations and diversions, which in so great a place are unavoidable) will be adjudged by discerning men unfit to have appeared to the world, in such a way as this is. And herein I shall heartily agree with them.
Now seeing you alone are faulty here, I Dedicate the Book and Blame to you: And, if the Sword of wounding tongues be bent at me, as being troubled with the Epidemical distem∣per of the Times, an itch of being seen in publick; you ought in justice to step in between, and say as Nisus in the Poet,
Virg. lib. 9. Aeneids.Me, me, adsum qui feci: in me convertite ferrum.
And, I am confident you will be my Compurgatour in this, that no Opinion of any thing in these poor labours worthy of the Press hath had any Influence on this Publication.
There is besides an apparent disadvantage, which I am very sensible of,Mr. Ath. Brges. viz. That in this Tract I follow One of so great Accomplishments: who being next the Light, and of a far more perfect Stature then my self, must needs cast back a shadow on me: Unless I be so far behind him, that his sha∣dow will not reach me. But if it do, I shall (as Ionah in ano∣ther case) rest very quietly in that shadow.
The Subject handled is a choice and precious One, as any in the Book of God without Exception. This Prayer being as it were a little piece, that dropt off from the heart of Jesus Christ (as once Eliahs Mantle from his body) as he was taking leave of his Apostles and the World together. When He was even going forth to suffer, He (Swan-like) sung this dying Song, and poured out this precious Prayer, being about to pour forth his very blood and life with it. And this he did not for his Apostles only then about him, but for us also: even for us, who should in after-times believe through their words. A man would think our blessed Saviour, when He had such a Task to undergo, and such a business to dispatch, should have been wholly taken up with the preapprehension of his instant Death and Passion: That this should have de∣tained or diverted Him from other thoughts; especially from taking care of such poor Worms as we are. But that when he was drawing neer to such a Conflict with the Wrath of God, and the Indignities and Wrongs of men, He should have us in his heart: That our dear Friend, who loved us and gave

Himself for us, should think of us, and pray for us, and speak of us to God the Father with so high affection when his own Soul was heavy to the very Death: Such a Prayer made by such a Mediatour, at such a time as that was, must needs be worthy of the choicest and exactest Observation of the Church in every Age to the end of the world.
Some Antiquaries tell us of the Diptyches,Lindan. Annot. in Liturg. S. Petri. pag. 39. much in use in the Primitive Church: Which were two leaves or tables bound together, on the one of which was a Commemorati∣on of divers famous and renowned Worthies departed in the Faith of Christ; and on the other a Commemoration of the like Personages yet alive. Much Honoured Sir,Joseph. Vice∣com. Obfervat. Ecclesiae. Dae Missae Appa∣ratu. Tom. 4. lib. 7. cap. 17. I shall pre∣sent you here with a new sort of Diptyches, the Tables more exactly answering one another. The one containing a Com∣memoration of a dying Christ, and shewing how He pray'd on Earth: In which you may also see what is contained in the other Table; and how he prays for us in Heaven, who ever liveth to make Intercession for us. So that if you desire at any time to know, how Christ persues the business, and pleads the causes of his poor Church at the right hand of his Father, you shall do well to have recourse to this Chapter, which may be very fitly called a Counterpart of our Saviours Intercession.
And truly, for my own part, I must freely and ingenuously profess, that I had never known so much of Christ and of his tender Care and Love of poor sinners, had I not studyed these Emanations and Effluxes of his precious Soul, had I not seen his Breast open in this Chapter, and the Names of the twelve Tribes transcribed out of the Breast-plate of the Typical into the heart of the Typified High Priest.Fox Act. & Mon. ad An∣num 1558. And as the Queen of England sometimes said, That if they opened her when she was dead, they should find Calais written on her heart: So when I had the happiness to open Christ in this Prayer, (though with a most unskilful hand) I found the Church engraven deeply on his Heart, and saw such things as cannot be uttered. The Lord give you and me to know more of that Love which passeth knowledge, and to return more Love to Him, who pray'd for us, and dyed for us. We may easily

exceed in loving other things and persons. We may love more then we are loved, we may love more then we should love. But here our hearts may take their full swing, there is no fear of over-loving Jesus Christ. For as Bernard sweetly speaks of our Love to God,Bern. De dili∣gendo Deo. Modus Deum diligendi est sine modo diligere: The same may I as truly say of our Love to Christ; The measure of loving Christ, is to love him out of measure: So hath he loved us,☞. and so should we love him.
There are especially two great Boons which Jesus Christ begs of his Father for Believers in this Prayer: That they may be one here, and that they may be in one place hereafter. This Nation seems not to be under the dint of the Influence of this Prayer at this time, in which the Lord hath suffered such a spirit of Division (a spirit that our Saviour never prayed for) to possess his own people: So that his Body lies a bleeding, the members being miserably rent into pieces. He bled indeed sufficiently upon the Cross in his Natural Bo∣dy, but there was suddenly a Consummatum est to that. When will there be a Consummatum est to this, in his Mystical Body? When will Christ say, It is enough? When will the stream of blood that ran there, stop this which runs here? When will there be an end of these , these after-afflictions of Christ, which now he is sat down at rest on the right hand of the Father, persue him thither, and will not suffer him to be quiet in his glory?
It's true, the Body of our Saviour in these Nations, bleeds not now by cruel Persecutors hands, as it hath done in for∣mer Ages, blessed be the Lord for ever. But, which is more unnatural and doleful,Bella per Ae∣mathios plus∣quam Civilia campos. Luca. lib. 1. it bleedeth by it self: one Mem∣ber bleedeth by another; one member bites and devours another, and it seems they will do so, until they be devoured together. Though Jesus Christ hath made them nigh to God, and nigh to one another, by his blood, as the Apostle shews at large, Ephes. 2 12, 13, 14. This Cement (woe alas!) this rich and costly Cement will not hold. A trifle, a Conjecture, a suspicion, an opinion, a notion raised by Art and phan∣sie will do more to sever, then the blood of Christ to so∣der. All the wit, and art, and skill, that God hath given

men for better purposes and higher ends, is now laid out by some to make or to maintain parties.Bern. in Ca. Serm. 33. I will not say as Bernard doth, Omnes amici, & omnes inimici; omnes necessarii, & omnes adversarii; omnes domestici, & nulli pacifici. But surely it is much at this rate.
Now the God of Peace himself give us Peace alwayes, and by all means. And Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace, who doth so often and so importunately beg it of his Father for his people, as you may see in this Chapter, give us to reap, in our dayes, the blessed fruits of this Prayer: That they that are but one Body (according to the first branch of our Saviours Prayer) may have but one Heart and one Soul in that Body, that there may be no Schism in the Body. And they that are to be in one place (accord∣ing to the second Branch) may keep in one way to that place, that they may not fall out by the way, so far at least as to divide, to part Companies, and part ways; that they may neither fail of coming in the end to one place; nor lose the benefit and comfort of one anothers Company and sweet Communion in the way thither.
And in that blessed place I hope ere it be long to meet you. And though the Sea divide us each from other for a little time on earth,  for an hours space, and that in face or sight, and not in heart, as the Apostle speaks:. 1 Thess. 2.17. Facie non Corde. Ambro∣sian. yet through the red Sea of the blood of Christ, leaving all our sins behind us (as Israel the Egyptians) drowned there, and dead upon the shore of this world, we shall pass on to the Heavenly Canaan, where Jesus Christ our Head is, and where he prayes so earnestly that we may be. Amen, Amen.
Now in the mean time till we get thither, because I find by many warnings, that I am like to go before you and prevent you, as the Apostles phrase is, I put this Book, such as it is, into your hands. And as our Sa∣viour, when He was no more in this world, as his own expression is, being as good as gone already, did leave behind him this Divine Prayer, as a Memorial of his ten∣der

Love to all his people:Sic parvis componere magna sole∣mus. Virg. Eclog. 1. So (if it be not odious to compare things of so vast a disproportion) I shall desire to leave behind me (who am even going too) this my unworthy Exposition of the same Prayer, as a Memorial of his dear respects to you, who is resolved to live and dye

