



Dearly Beloved!
AS the Lord Jesus Christ is most pretious to your Souls, his Name being as Oyntment poured forth, and His Love better than Wine, Song 1.2, 3. So hath every Truth of his, a due Value and Esteem with you. Whatsoever hath the Di∣vine Impress upon it, ye readily em∣brace;

but not that, which is  Tradition of Man. Hence it is, that ye are for a Church of Christs  Erection, for a Ministry of his own Cal∣ling, and for Ordinances of his own Ap∣pointing. 'Tis both your Desire and Endeavour to follow Christ fully, and therefore cannot admit of any thing in Doctrine, or Worship, that is not exactly consonant to his revealed will. Ye are so tender of Christ's Honour, which shines in all his Commands, that ye cannot deviate knowingly the least tittle from any one of them. O what an Awe Christ's Authority car∣rys with it! Ye are the sheep that hear his Voice, the servants that do his will, and the People that are o∣bedient in the Day of his Power. Blessed are ye that make his word your Rule, and resolvedly do practise accor∣ding thereunto!
The Author of this Short and Plain Discourse, was a True Lover of our Lord Jesus, and his Holy Ap∣pointments, he Steer'd his whole

course, by the Compass of the Word, making Scripture-Precept, or Exam∣ple, his constant Rule in Matters of Religion: Other Mens Opinions or Interpretations were not the Stan∣dard by which he went; but through the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, he labour'd to find out what the Lord himself had said in his Word. And therefore throughout this Little Book, he still keeps close to the Scriptures, Vouching no Authority for what he delivers, but from thence.
What Approbation this Piece hath found, may appear from hence; that since the First Edition of it here in England, it hath been Reprinted in Holland, was also lately Translated into Welsh, and now growing scarce, and much asked for, the Bookseller hath been Advised to give it ano∣ther Impression. In which there are few material Alterations or Additi∣ons, the Author's own Phrase, and Method being generally preserved.
The Lord, who is able to give seed to the Sower, and to bless the seed Sown, Prosper this Plain Dis∣course to every soul that shall read it, which is the hearty Desire of,

