



IT was the desine of your dear Husband (while yet living) that I should per∣form the last Office of Love, to a Deceased Friend, in preaching his Funeral Sermon. The honour that I bore to him, not the ambitious humor of appearing in Print, ha's made me willing (against my own inclination) to expose these poor worthless Meditations to pub∣lick view. This I have done the rather, that thereby I might be an Instrument to perpetuate the memorial of so worthy and mitable a Christian, and to commend his practise to posterity. And for so doing, I look't on that passage of Solomon, as a sufficient warrant, Prov. 10.7. The memory of the just is blessed; yea, the
righteous (saith David) shall be had in e∣verlasting remembrance, Psal, 112.6. Wicked men though they be like Nim∣rod, mighty hunters before the Lord, (Gen. 10.9.)he great Oppressors, and dare do this before the Lord as if they would provoke him to his face; and though they have been the terror of the mighty in the land of the living, as the Prophet speaks, Ezek. 32.27. Yea, though they use all means possible to perpetuate their memo∣rial, calling the lands after their own names, Psal. 49.11. as Absolom reared up a pillar, and called it Absoloms place, 2, Sam, 18.18. and Cain built a Citie, and called it after the name of his Son Enoch, Gen. 4.17. and some men at this day can build Hospitalls with the money which they have got by force and fraud, and crushing the needy: Yet all this will not make their memory last; the name of the wicked shall rot, and their Re∣membrances shall be like ashes, Job 13. 12. that is, Those things by which they would be remembred and mentioned a∣mong the Sons of men, (as Wealth, and Honour, and Power, and Greatness) shall
be but as ashes of no value, but trodden under the foot of men; but the remem∣brance of the godly, even when they themselves are dead, shall still be kept alive, with men to be renowned, and with God to be rewarded: How precious is the memorial of Moses and Aaron, though dead so many hundred years ago? The Spirit of God sets a Star of Ho∣nour upon them, Exod. 6.27, These are that Moses and that Aaron.
And certainly, among all those Christi∣an Vertues, which do en balm the memo∣rial of the dead, there is none of a more sweet and fragrant savour, then the Grace of Charity. Witness the Speech of our Saviour, concerning the woman that an∣nointed his feet with precious ointment, Matth. 26.13. Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this Gospel (shall be preached in the whole world, there shall also this, that this woman hath done, be told for a memorial of her, Maries name now smells as sweet in all the Churches of Christ, as her ointment did in the house where it was poured out; such an honourable remembrance did blessed
Paul leave as a Legacy, to Onesiphorus, and his family on the same account; 2 Tim. 1.16. The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for he oft re∣freshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain. And Greg. Nazianzen speaking of Rahabs entertaining the Spies has this remarkable Passage, . Her chari∣table hospitality conduced not only to her commendation, but to her eternal salvati∣tion.
I knew not to whom the Dedication of this Sermon so properly belonged, as to your self, who was so nearly related to that eminently charitable Citizen, whose death occasioned the preaching of it. Such as it is, I here present unto you; not that the view of this Monument should renew your sorrow, but that the frequent Commemo∣ration of those vertues wherewith God was pleased to enrich him, and the pious fruitful and exemplary conversation wherin he walked before you, might not on∣ly moderate your grief for the loss of so dear a Husband, but also provoke you, and all that knew him, to tread in the same steps,
according to the counsel of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6.12. Be followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises. The Lord Jesus reveal himself more fully and graciously to your soul, fill your heart with joy and peace in believing; sweeten your outward loss with those inward comforts of his Spirit, which may enable you feelingly to say with the Psalmist, In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts de∣light my soul, Psal. 94.19. And this will be better to you then the comfort of all Relations; yea, it will be Marie's por∣tion, that shall never be taken from you: And that it may be so, is, and shall be, the hearty prayer of

