



Noble SENATOURS:
I See You are pleased to have not onely Bezaleel's and Aholiab's
Ex. 31.2, 6 (choyce and skilfull workemen in that reverend Assembly of Divines) imployed in purging and beautifying the house of God; but you will have some other poore Labourers also set on worke, to bring stones and mortar to the build∣ing. And truly, had not I looked above my selfe, at that great God, who when we are faint and feeble, doth gird us about with strength
1 Sam. 2.4., The waight of the worke, together with the sense of my owne extreame unfitnesse, to carry the Name of God before such an Auditory, might
have overwhelmed me with sinking discourag∣ments: But if Gods power may get glory by my weaknesse, I will rejoyce in my Infirmities
2 Cor. 12.9.. I hope, there is none shall have so low a conceit of my poore parts or paines, but I my selfe shall have a lower.
The marke I levelled at in this plain homely piece, now presented to your view, was the pres∣sing and promoting the Worke of Reformati∣on, which how it ha's been retarded (since we entred into that Solemne sacred League) I need not tell you. Sure I am, if either Atheists or Papists, Neuters or Hereticks, Sectaries or Seducers, Hypocrites or carnall Gospellers, can doe the Devils worke, viz. either persecute the Woman, or stifle her Childe in the birth, or de∣voure it as soone as it shall be born
Rev. 12.4.; this Male∣childe of a long expected, much desired Refor∣mation, shall never be brought forth to light. But looke about you, for God looks on you, nay, God looks within you; Hee exactly views (as my Text will tell you) every one of you, how you Act your parts on the Stage where he imployes you.
The Lord ha's holpen you to carry on your Worke (the preservation of a poore distressed distracted Kingdom.) Therfore he now expects
that you should help him to carry on His Work, even That for which you have lifted up your hands to the most high God. Let it never be said of any of you (sitting in that honourable As∣sembly) what was said of the Nobles of Teko∣ah,
Neh. 3.5. They put not their necks to the work of their Lord. God forbid, that occasion should be given to fasten that complaint on any of you which the Apostle utter's with some regret,
Phil. 2.21. All seeke their own, not the things which are Je∣sus Christs. Certaine it is, the more we seeke our selves, the more we lose our selves; the more we deny our selves, and our own ends, and our owne honour, the more will God honour us both in our persons and in our places. O that the zeal of Gods house might even eat you up
Joh. 2.17.! O that your hearts were so fired with a burning Love to Jesus Christ, and his Government, that you might say with David,
Psal. 132.4, 5. I will not give sleepe to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eye∣lids, untill I finde out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.
Never was Parliament so lifted up to heaven in extraordinary discoveries of Gods providence and protection, which have beene as a Pillar of a cloud by day, and a Pillar of fire by night, to
conduct you through the Wildernesse of a Bloo∣dy Warre, bringing you from Shittim to Gil∣gal
Mic. 6.5., even to the skirts of Canaan: Therfore that which Joshua spake to the Israelites, when (up∣on the fresh memoriall of God's miraculous mer∣cies towards them) he renewed a Covenant be∣tween them and their God,
Josh. 24.25, 27. This Stone shal be a witnes to us, for it hath heard all the words of the Lord which he spake unto us. The like may I say to you; All the Mercies, Victories and Deliverances vouchsafed to you; all the Promi∣ses, Protestations, Covenants and Engagements lying on you, wil witnes either for you, or against you, at the great day of your Account.
The Lord Jesus Christ still stand by you; Let his everlasting arms be alwayes under you, and so establish your hearts in his truth and feare, that he may delight in you as polished shafts in his own quiver, and happy instruments of fur∣ther advancing Temple-work, the compleating whereof will be to you a Name of Renowne, and to us the joy of our hearts, and the crown of our hopes. It is and shall be the constant pray∣er of

