



MADAM,
THe design of this Treatise is no other, then what all must own to be the great busi∣ness, and general concern of mankind, which is, to be well read in the difference between things temporal and eternal. This is the Subject; this the Title of the Book. The original (which hath already passed, there the test of ten Editions) we owe to Spain, and to the pious and learned labours of the late Eusebius Nieremberg, who hath often
obliged the world by the like fruits of his zealous Pen. After having been read and approved in divers other langua∣ges, it hath now learned to speak Eng∣lish, having been lately translated (by a noble and worthy person, Sir Vivian Mullineaux) for the service of the pub∣lick; and accordingly resolves (if it may be but so happy as to deserve the gracious favour of your Majesties roy∣al Patronage) to adventure abroad for the benefit of all pious and well-dis∣posed, whether Catholique or Prote∣stant Readers. All which may be here duly informed, as of the difference be∣tween things temporal and eternal, so of the different and cautionary wayes they ought to pursue in dividing themselves and their hearts between both. Time and Eternity are points of good and wholesome use to all wise and intelli∣gent contemplations. Time indeed got the start of Man at the Creation, and is five dayes elder then he. Neverthe∣less Man still lives in hopes, he shall at long-run overtake, and even out-live
Time. And this shall be when the ge∣neral Resurrection shall have restored him to his better and glorified self, and all that is mortal in him shall have put on immortality.1 Cor. 15.53. Man then being like to prove the longer liver of the two, Time cannot (nor indeed any thing that shall perish with Time) be that great end, for which Man was finally ordained. That onely can be Man's end, which hath none it self; and that is Eternity: a happy Eternity; the last article of our Creed, and the last end of our Crea∣tion. Sure then it behooves us to be wary Gamesters, when Eternity is at stake: and not carelesly to throw away our affections at a venture, or heedles∣ly to engage our hearts, here and there, upon every slight invitation from sense and fancy: but to proceed advisedly in the choice of our object, and in the difference we make between things Tem∣poral and Eternal; This very difference being the nice pin, and ticklish point, which shall unappealably decide the
case of all we have to hope or fear in the world to come, by giving sentence at the last day of our final weal or woe. For we are to be judged by our affe∣ctions; and every man shall stand, or fall by the verdict of his own heart. So that the main point, which shall dif∣ference our dooms, is the different ap∣plications we make to things temporal, or eternal, causing this man's lot to fall to the right hand, the others to the left. MADAM, this address is farr from pretending to the usuall Panegy∣rick strain, in complementing the great name, whose Patronage it implores: or enlarging upon those truly-Christian, and Princely accomplishments, (your great and eminent vertues,) which more adorn your Majesty, then Majesty can your Person. These are a subject for a higher undertaking, then this small De∣dicatory dares pretend to. Onely, with your Majesties permission, thus much I shall make bold to say, that your he∣roick and exemplar piety, attended
with so many other rich endowments of grace, clearly speaks you Mistress of a Soul throughly acquainted with the Difference between things temporal and eternal. Hence it is, that none of the most courting allurements of this life, however great in themselves, can seem truly such to your greater heart. Your Christian ends and designs take a nobler flight: they are not limited to the nar∣row bounds of a visible Sphere; they act upon motives fetched from another world, and harbour not a thought, which can sit down, and fix on this side Eternity. Though I love not to be pa∣radoxical, yet methinks the Prophet Daniel hath a word of comfort and en∣couragement for your Majesty, even where it might be least expected from the outward letter, to countenance the application.Dan 12.3. They that instruct many to righteousness, shall shine as the starrs for ever and ever. So speaks this great per∣son, and Oracle of Judah. Here is a boundless promise, and Heaven stands
engaged for the performance; not one∣ly the single happiness of shining like the starrs for ever: but the double bles∣sing of for ever, and ever. I humbly conceive, this so highly-rewardable teaching and instructing others to righ∣teousness, may, without violence to the Text, be taken in a twofold sense. For, not onely the useful and practical Do∣ctrines of the Divinity-chair, the Prea∣cher, and the Man of elocution, but also the pious, though silent deeds of the good Liver, are our Teachers and Instructors. For that person (especial∣ly if a publick person) instructs well, who lives well: and the good dumb work hath oftentimes more of the per∣swasive faculty in it, than either pen or tongue can match. This, Madam, is your Majesties case: this, your, nay our happiness, if we understand it a∣right. Your life is a noble School of Vertue, and reads us a fair Lecture of a more then ordinary Christianity, far beyond the cold instructions of Book
or Pulpit. They onely utter words; you speak examples. England hath heard, and the holy Altars have often witnessed the fervour of your Majesties devotions; whilest you spend whole nights in paying the faithful homage of heart and knee to the greatest of all Majesties, Almighty God. So that the severe duties of Prayer, Watching, Pe∣nance, Mortification, frequent Retreats to a more free and undisturbed con∣verse with Heaven, are now adopted Court-Vertues in the sanctity of your Majesties Royal Person. All which makes me say, that such, and so eminent∣ly-instructive a life will (if the Pro∣phet please to lend me his expression) entitle your Majesty not onely to one, but (were it possible) to a plurality of Eternities. Live then,So the vulgar Edition renders it, in per¦putuas aeternita∣tes. (most pious Prin∣cess) live, and be still your great Self; great in Majesty: greater for for piety: and greatest in the contempt of all temporal greatness, compared with eternal. May the same sweet Provi∣dence,
which hath led up so noble a Merit to a Throne, for a Royal Con∣sort to Soveraignty, long preserve you in your high Orb, there to shine as a leading Pattern of true Vertue and Piety to our Nation. And when our sins shall envy us the happiness of your Majesties longer residence upon earth, and the inexorable Decree shall sum∣mon you to pay the common debt, which all of us (Prince as well as Sub∣ject) owe to the sin of our first Parents, May you then, being translated hence to the embraces of your Creator, experimentally finde the true diffe∣rence between things temporal and eternal, in the blisful vision and fruition of our great All our all-mighty, all-lovely, all-glorious God; who is all wonders at one sight, all joyes and comforts in their sourse, all blessings in their center; the end of all labours, the re∣ward of all services, the desire of all hearts, and the accomplishment of all hopes and wishes. May he then be to
your Majesty all this, which is here briefly expressed, and infinitely more, which is beyond expression; And may he secure all these blessings to you for ever, and crown them with his glori∣ous Attribute of Eternity. This is the no less hearty, then dutiful prayer of
MADAM 
