



Right Worshipfull;
EVery thing according to its per∣fection is valuable, and the more glorious the more estimable. It is not the greatnesse of any thing that ought to purchase it esteem; nor must the smalnesse or littlenesse of a vertuous crea∣ted substance decrease its worth: But great things as joyned with the glorie of their perfection, are so and no otherwise of great and high esteem: and little things are no otherwise valuable, then according to the glorious beauty of their perfection. Here, Right Worshipfull, I present you with things great and small, but with none without their vertues. They are created substances of the most enduring nature, which this our part of the subce∣lestiall world doth contain: The glory

of those which shall here find beautified with externall grace, will feed your eyes with much pleasure in beholding: and their internall vertues, and the symboles whereby by them are discovered to us the glorious excellency of super-celestiall things, will in the right consideration of them no lesse feed your spirit with delight, then doth their externall beautie and perfection please your eye, when it doth behold their glory. Every one out of their common apprehensions of worth, and out of that mean perception which they have of things dignified above o∣thers with beauty and with glory, esteem them valuable: Gemms and Jewells are thus dignified with externall glory, and enricht with internall symbolical vertues. For this cause with those that have but mean and common apprehensions of their worth, they are esteemed. And for their symbolical resemblances of super-celestiall things, amongst the wisest of ancient times they have had upon them an high estimate of value and of worth. Surely, we live not in the most unknow∣ing

times of the world; nay, never was this part of the world fuller of know∣ledge then now it is, wherein many are blest with excellent gifts and endowments by which they are enabled to enquire more throughly into the nature and cau∣ses of things, then ever. Amongst these who know the true nature of things, sure∣ly, nor gemms, nor jewells, nor any other vertuous thing shall want their due e∣steem. Nor with you, Right Worship∣full, I am sure, can that which is truly vertuous want its value.
It is a Philosophick axiome, Inest sua gratia parvis; I have here taken the pains to open the small cabinets of this excel∣lencie, that I may discover the true vertues which are contained in many smal things and little creatures. This I have done, first, by a search and diligent enquiry in∣to the causes and natures of Gemms, and into such qualities as may possibly from thence in them arise: Then by partly ac∣quainting Anselmus Boetius with the Eng∣lish tongue: In the doing of which, I have endeavoured, according to what I

find in Scripture, and according to what I find in other Authours, to take away that confusion about the species of gemms, which doth cause them to be hardly and difficultly known of what species and kinds they are. And withall, I have not onely laboured with Boetius, but also with divers other Lapidists, to shew the true way of discerning factitious and ar∣tificiall stones or gemms, from those that are really and truly the works of nature, that so the fallacies and sophistications of Artists, being clearly and perspicuously manifested and discovered, nature may not be belied in the glory of her own na∣turall workings and actions.
This is the summe of that pains which I have here taken, which together with my whole endeavours in this kind, Right Worshipfull, with generall good intenti∣ons, I dedicate to you, that under your protection it may in the light detect fals∣hood, and discover truth to many.

