



Right Honorable,
A KING and a Prophet greet you well. And yet it is the same Person under two names, who under either notion I presume shall be welcome. For you have a King in your heart, and admit the Prophet into your bosome. The great services you perform to the one, and the great affections you bear, and real courtesies you do the other, hath emboled me to pre∣sent these my Meditations unto your protection, I shall lesse fear the ri∣gid Censures of others, if in your Lordships deep judgment I have con∣tributed the least mite that may help forward devotion. You are the great Moderator of the rigor of the Law, and therefore what I cannot claim in justice, I humbly beg in equity, that is, a favourable sentence for expo∣sing these my crude conceptions under your Name, and I am enough ho∣noured, if no dishonour be cast upon you, by fixing your Honors name to a Work so unworthy.
This indeed I had not done, had not your Lordships favour in parti∣cular obliged me to it. 'Tis by your Lordships influence upon me, that I glimmer as a little Star in the Church, and that I yield a more vigorous luster is your Lordships endeavor, for which I have little to return but thanks in this poor acknowledgment. That you are a Patron to the Mu∣ses in general, is too large; and universal Propositions are as Catholica, Ca∣tholick medicines, that cure few. That you have been a Patron to my studies, puts life into my old blood not to be faint and weary. A vice to which old age is subject, that is, to waste and go out, except there be oile in the Lamp.
That I no sooner medled with this subject, was, because I durst not: The Mysteries herein contain'd, and the Art in the delivery were so su∣perlative, that I always held them fit for a mature judgment, which by length of years and observation is heightned in old men, till they wrack upon dotage. Besides, I have observed, that the best of Expositors have presented their thoughts upon the Psalms in their riper years, and made them one of their last works. Heavenly raptures they met with in this
Book, which raised their spirits and hearts, and beforehand prepared them to that place, to which they did approach. I have therefore writ∣ten after their Copy, and brought it to light, as the child of my old age, and then, 'tis supposed there may be many infirmities in it, which that your Lordship cover with your mantle, will be a signal Act of charity.
The Motive that chiefly was most powerful with me to undergo this task, were those Meditations and Devotions of others, which I used and perused upon these Hymns, These to my judgment (weak I confesse) re∣lish'd more of the Composers own Cenius, than of Davids spirit To re∣medy this, I conceived no better way, than to compose the Prayer in Davids words, which for the most part is here done, and though the or∣der of the Verses be here often inverted, yet this is done for the better Connexion of the whole. The scope and intent of the Psalmist is strict∣ly observed.
Pray and Sing we ought with understanding, and that is not possible till we understand, what we Pray or Sing: Now to beget this knowledge in those, whom I do desire to animate and render devout in those duties, the easiest way I could think on, was, to present the whole Summe of every Psalm in a brief Synopsis. This consideration produced that Analy∣sis, which I here offer. How happily or unhappily this is perform'd, I leave it to your Lordships exacter judgment.
And yet there was another reason, which cast me on this Subject. The face of the times were sad and cloudy, and our Mother the Church in a mourning weed, as Rachel lamenting for her children, because they were not: and yet upon the promises of God there was hope of a resurrection. As then those, who accompany their dearest friends to their last home, though covered over with vests of sadnesse, yet mourn not as men without hope: So I in this doleful and general funeral, as it were, of this our Mo∣ther, followed her to the grave (as the bitter and enraged enemies of hers hoped and boasted) with a sad heart and waterish eye: and yet in this depth of sorrow I received this comfortable assurance, that the day of re∣surrection would appear for Zion, that her walls would be rebuilt and flourish; which beyond my expectation, (God be blessed for it) I have lived to see, and by your Lordships favor enjoy a large and honorable portion in it.
Now that I might have somewhat suitable, and at hand ready to ex∣presse both these passions. I could not find any part of Scripture so apt and pertinent, as this little Epitom of the whole. By which I have been taught to grieve and hope, to lament and joy, to complain to my God, and comfort my self in the deepest of those complaints with those lively and inspiriting encouragements, which this Swan of Bethlehem hath left, to be sung by all the good people of God in their extremities. The whole is Davids, the Method only mine, and if it shall find a Candid interpre∣tation from others, and a favorable acceptation from your Honour, you shall oblige me to remain, what I am,

