



SIR,
IT is very great pity, that those who pretend to Religion, should be given to Faction, as if Religion (I mean true) which is but one) could Patronize Division; as gross a mistake as Pope Adrian's Interpretation was of St. Grego∣ry's Liturgy, which was preferred to that of St. Ambrose, because it was torn into a thou∣sand bits and scraps; whereas the other remained whole, and therefore by him judg'd unfit to be used. Who could believe that a Pope should be guilty of such a construction! Sure I am, he hath given the same measures to many of his Sons and Daughters, who (though they pretend Liberty of Conscience) yet are very angry that their own small conceits about Religion (which are divers, and contrary each to other) cannot be counte∣nanced

by Law; and will rather chuse to have a thousand Religious lyes imposed, (since they can∣not have their wills) than that Religion to flou∣rish, which is at present Established. But as God is one, and his Name one; so is it requi∣site, that the solemn Worship, which all pay to him, in their publick addresses, should be but one, that with one heart and lip his praise may be ex∣alted by all: This was the ancient and primitive Sacrifice which the Church did acceptably offer up, Acts 2.46, 47. And they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and single∣ness of heart, praising God, &c. And you will easily perceive, Sir, that Religion in the Fountain (where the water is living and pure) differs far from what she is called at the foot of the hill, after her streams have passed through the corrupt brains of a confused multitude. It's a melancholly, doleful sight, to observe a vast number of phrantick persons, pretending to the height of skill in Religious Chymistry, as if their inspired noddles were the only limbecks to extract the spirit and quintessence of Religion;

as if they only knew the secrets of the Kingdom, and have been taken up into the third Heaven, ravished with joys unspeakable, fed with hidden Manna. Some of these are to be pitied; such (I mean) as are humble, willing to be informed, who have been cheated out of their good designs, by the subtilty of wicked men: the rest deserve the lash, and ought to be scourged into better manners. The great design of these Religious Quacks, is to set men at an infinite distance from the solemn service of Almighty God: and the first lesson they teach their Children and Pro∣selytes, is, that our Liturgy is Popery, that our Ministers are Antichristian, that we have all re∣ceived the mark of the Beast. Some of their Novices I have met with, who instead of discour∣sing, have turn'd over their Bibles, always turned down at certain places; amongst the rest, to be sure the 13 Revelat. 16, 17. must be one: Would to God they were cut off, that hunt after souls to destroy them; that creep into houses, to lead captive silly women. No severity can be too great for those who exercise cruelty and tyranny over them, for whom Christ has shed his most precious blood. I confess, Sir,

that an Address of this nature can no way be suit∣able to a Dedication; nor had either it, or the ensuing discourse ever seen the light, if the desire of the Right Honourable the Judges, with the select and choice company of Knights and Gentle∣men of the Grand-Jury, had not been as forcible as a Command, which I cannot but mention as an excuse to my appearance in Print; For how could I deny so general an expectation, without Impu∣tations of disrespect?
To your self, Sir, give me leave to plead the design of this Preface, to be a Chaos to that which followeth, hoping that some of those persons, who have taken up their Religion upon trust, will be perswaded to reflect upon themselves, and judge how inconsistent it is with true Piety, to absent themselves from the publick Worship of God, and be reckoned amongst those who break the peace, spoil the beauty, discourage the friends, incourage the enemies of our Church. That the God of Heaven would succeed the good design of this Paper to his own glory, the comfort and ad∣vantage of our much-despised and neglected Mo∣ther; That he would pour out of his blessings,

both Temporal and Spiritual, upon you, and your truly religious and devout Lady, shall be the daily prayer of him, who is glad of an opportunity to declare to the World, that he is

