



AS it is very Possible, that nothing will be less Welcome to you than these Papers, so contrary both to your Inclinations, and what you believe your Interest: So, it may be, nothing is less customary than De∣dications of this Nature. But since I neither propose to my self the Hopes of any Patrons Beneficence, nor can submit to such unmanly Comply∣ances, as are usually the Effects of such Hopes and Expectations; I have rather chosen to Address my self to you; where even the Hope of a Cha∣ritable Reception is scarcely to be ho∣ped
for, as the Reward of my Charity: And where the Flattery of Swelling Hyperboles would prove as false, and unsuccessful to me, as to Millions, who have made large promises to themselves of Recompences and Grati∣fications, for that Gentiler way of Beg∣ging: And of all the World, it would be most Pernicious to You, who have been too long accustomed to your own, and the dangerous Flatteries of your Party.
There is nothing that is at all times more Welcome to the World, than Peace. Pacem te poscimus Omnes. But most Men would be Conquerors, and oblige the World by giving it upon their own Terms: And there are but few who will be content to receive it as Christians, upon God's Terms and Conditions. Here I have endeavour∣ed to Manifest the true Foundations of a solid and a lasting Peace: Which are Faith, Ʋnity, Government, and Obedience to the Laws of God and Men. A Peace capable of rendring
the Ʋniverse Happy; and any par∣ticular Society of Men prosperous here, and Glorious hereafter in the Peaceful Regions of Joy and Immor∣tality.
I am not ignorant of your Plea of Zeal and Sufferings. But must the Church of England be allowed nothing for hers? Has not She, by your means, been forced to drink the very dregs of your Animosity; whilest like the Children of Edom, in the day of her Calamity, You cryed, Down with her,Psal. 137.8. Down with her even to the ground? Did you ever suffer such Persecution from Her, as She has suffered from you? Whose Zeal therefore or Afflictions must intitle them to the Character of the truer Church? Would you Establish the Worship of God in Spi∣rit and in Truth? So would She, only with this Difference, that what you would effect by the Rude Me∣thod of Force and Violence, the Power of the Sword; She labours
to do by the Power of Perswasion, and the Spirit of Meekness; as her Treatment of you now She is in Power, so far from Retaliation, or Revenge, does abundantly testifie, to the Shame of your former Cruelty, and present Obstinacy, and endeavours to compass and effect her Ruine. Is She therefore Criminal for endea∣vouring that Lawfully, which you would, and do, and as you perswade the World, are bound in Conscience to do, Per fas & Nefas, either Law∣fully, or Unlawfully, it matters not? is not the same Obligation of Con∣science, and far greater and a truer Conscience upon her? And if one must be satisfied, whose rather, Hers which is True and properly Consci∣ence, or yours, which is only your Private, and uncertain Opinion, clothed with that Venerable Name? Your Way of Establishing this Wor∣ship has been notoriously guilty of Rebellion, Disorders, Confusion, and many Evil Works. The Civil State
of Affairs has been ruin'd and over∣turn'd; Houses have been made De∣solate, and left without Inhabitant; Churches have been robbed, defaced, abused, demolished; Holy things set apart and dedicated to the Ser∣vice of God, and so made Holy, have been prophaned. The Church of Eng∣land is innocent of any such Crimes: The infamous Brand of Rebellion, Sedition, Tumults, Sacriledg, or Ra∣pine, were never burnt upon her hand: She indeavours to prevent this for the Present and the Future, by teaching all men their just Duty towards God and towards Man, and obliges them to the Performance of it: You call this Persecution, and Hate her for it. This may be Zeal in you, but it is not according to the knowledg of God.
She imposes some Methods and certain Directions, in their own Na∣ture confessedly indifferent, only in order, and with no other Design than for Decency, avoiding Confusion, and
to bring all Christians to maintain the Ʋnity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. You refuse these Means, and there∣fore the Great End of Christian Reli∣gion, and Religion it self. You pre∣fer your own Way and Means before Hers; and by Obstructing Peace, pretend that her Impositions are in∣conducive to those Excellent Ends; when as in Truth, it is not their want of Efficacious aptness, but your want of Will, and your traversing them, by an obstinate Disobedience, that frustrates their desired Effects.
You quarrel her Commands, and call them Traditions of Men, and Will-Worship; when in reality yours is so: And it is perfectly, because you are not permitted to have your own Wills in the Worship of God, that makes you Accuse Her of what you are most horribly guilty of your selves. She appoints nothing but what is agreeable to the Will and Word of God, and the Primitive Usage of the Church: You term
those Determinations, Antichristian, Popish, Superstitious; As if God Al∣mighty, whose Word and Rules She follows, where he does not please your Humour, or suit your Interest, or Designs, were Popishly inclined; As if the Scriptures in declaring for Episcopacy, were Antichristian; As if the best and purest Ages of the Church, and the whole Succession of Saints and Martyrs were Super∣stitious; Because many of them Bi∣shops, and all of them Worshipping God, at least as to the Main, accord∣ing to Her Way and Method. Whereas, it is you that are Popish, while you endeavour to Obtrude upon us your own Infallibility; It is you who are Antichristian, who ruine the Foundation of all Christia∣nity, Faith, Government, a Catho∣lique Church, Obedience, Charity, and Unity; It is you who are Su∣perstitious, (if , a need∣less Fear of any thing in Religion, be Superstition,) whilest you start
at an Innocent Rite, as if it were a Goblin; And for fear of a Ce∣remony, run from the Church, as if it were hanted with Evil Spi∣rits: And though you strain as if you were afraid of being Choak't at these Gnats, yet you can swal∣low the Camel of plain and bare∣fac't Disobedience; That goes smoothly over your Palate, be∣ing gilded over with the Title of Religion. You call Rebellion, Refor∣mation; Schism, and Separation, Godliness; Division from the Church, Communion, and Union with God. You put Darkness for Light, and Worship the blackest Crimes, and Vices, in the habit of Vertue, Piety, and true Religon.
Thus, whilest you spie the Moat in your Mothers Eyes, and would pull that and them too out, to make her see clearly, you never consider the Beam that is in your own: And whilest you Vehemently accuse others of Worshipping God
in vain, according to the Tra∣ditions of Men, you never re∣gard how you make the Command∣ments of God of no Effect by your Tra∣ditions.Matt. 15.6. God says, Honour the King, and thou shalt not speak Evil of the Ruler of thy People; Obey Magi∣strates, &c. Your Traditions say, Dishonour him by Disobedience; Insinuate Jealousies and evil Sur∣misings concerning him and his Government. Your Actions are a thousand Tongues, and every Tongue a Trumpet to Proclaim your thoughts. And however with your Lips you may pretend to honour the King, and with your Mouths to draw near to God, your Heart is, in reality, far from both: Your Will is your God, the Idol of your Heart, which you set up and Worship.
For what, I pray, is your way of Worship, but Tradition from the Heads of your Party? Is there ever a Word in Scripture for your long
Extempore Prayers, full, not of To∣lerabiles ineptiae, with which Calvin charges our Liturgy, but of Intoller∣able Tautologies, vain Repetitions, rash Expressions, and indigested Mat∣ter? Christ is Positive against them; Use them not, says he, as the Hea∣thens, who think to be heard for their , their much speaking. The Wise King, who had Survey'd all the Vanities of the World, makes this not only a Vanity,Eccl. 5.1, 2. but a dangerous Rashness, and a Sacrifice of Fools. And yet you use it, commend and applaud it, as the only way pleasing and acceptable to God.
Is the Scripture clear, that there ought to be no Bishops in the Church? Or that Lay-Elders, who understand neither Sense, nor it may be English, and in some places, who cannot write their Name, should yet be im∣powered to Define and Determine in Matters of Faith? Are you any where forbidden to wear a Surplice; or to use the Sign of the Cross; or to
bury Christians in hope of Charity, and Resurrection to Eternal Life? Or to pray in set and appointed Words, which is true praying by the Spirit, when we pray with under∣standing also, knowing what will be said? If these be not Gods Commands or Prohibitions, they are Yours; and if they are not in Scrip∣ture, as I am sure they are not, they are not only the Commandments and Traditions of Men; but of Men, who have no Power to Command, or Impose the most indifferent thing. And yet you perswade all Men, every where, that they owe Obedience to these; forgetting that God is to be Obeyed rather than Men; and that he commands you to Obey those that have the Rule over you.
If you will be Followers of God as Dear Children, you must, if it be possible, and as much as in you lies, be Followers of Peace with all Men; much more with your Superiors, both in Church and
State: But this is very possible for you to do. And that it is not only Possible, but Honest, and Neces∣sary, and your Duty, the Ensuing Papers will plainly inform you: To them therefore I refer you; they were designed for you; And if you will Esteem me your Enemy, because I tell you the Truth with∣out Flattery, Interest, or Partiality, yet I had rather be so Esteemed, than be so in Reality; by Skinning over your Festred Gangreen with words smooth as Oyl; Whereas in Truth it ought to be laid open, to prevent the further Eating of the Canker. And this is the only way that I know, to approve my self to be,

