



Reverend SIR,
NEither the Ambition of honouring this
Discourse with your Great Name, nor
the Vanity of thinking this slender
Oblation a sufficient discharge from those strong
Obligations whereby I stand endebted to you, were
the Motives which determin'd my Choice in this
Dedication. I intend only hereby to express my
great Veneration for your Worth, and my Grati∣tude
for that Particular share which you have been
pleas'd to vouchsafe me in your Favour.
As for the Discourse which now beggs your
acceptance and protection, I am not unsensible that
much of it lies out of the common road of thinking,
and may upon that Score incur the Censure of those
narrow-spirited Theorists, who confine their Specu∣lations
to the limits of Antiquity, resign up the

natural Prerogative of their understandings to the
Tyranny of dead Authors, and prefer Lead and
Copper so it wear the Stamp of Authority, be∣fore
the finest and noblest Metal that has not the
luck to be a Coin.
But Sir, I need not fear your disapprobation
on this account, whose active. Soul has long
since travers'd o're the whole Field of Truth,
and whose temper is so unprejudic'd and even-pois'd,
as to receive the most Novel Hypothesis (were
it possible for any to be such to you) without start∣ing
and amusement, and if true, to imbrace it,
tho with the Censure of Singularity.
And here Opportunity tempts me to run a long
Descant upon your great Worth and the Variety
of your Intellectual Accomplishments, but I con∣sider,
that should I with the Athenian Oratour
imploy Ten years in a Panegyric, I could add
nothing either to your Fame or to your Satisfaction,
and besides I fear I shall sufficiently abuse your
Patience in the following Papers, and therefore
I am the more concern'd to spare your Modesty
in this.
But I forget how sacred your hours are, and
have perhaps already too much reason to beg your,
and the Worlds, pardon for disturbing an excellent
Meditation. For which offence a speedy Conclu∣sion

will be the best Apology. I end therefore
with this humble Request, that whatever your judge∣ment
be of this Present as to other respects, you
would not fail to think it a sincere Testimony of
that vast esteem which you most deservedly have
in the heart of
(SIR,)

All-Souls Col∣lege
Mar. 31.
