


May it Please Your Excellency!
IT is recorded in the Holy Scriptures, that the Gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, though it was of great importance and concernment to all People; yet it pleased God that it should by one of the

Evangelists be directed in a special manner to a single Person, called the most Excellent Theophilus, as in Luke 1.6. I write unto thee most excellent The∣ophilus, that thou mayest know the certainty of those things wherein thou hast been instructed. Theophilus signifies, A lover of God. It is conceived by learned and pious Interpreters to be the proper Name of an Eminent Person, who had been Converted to the Christian Faith at Antioch, where the followers of Christ were first called Christians; and the title [Most Excellent] given to him renders it very probable, that he was in a chief place of Magistra∣cy in that eminent City, if not Governour of the whole Province; for we read not of that style [Most Excellent] given to any but such as were Governours of Provinces, such as Faelix & Festus, who were successively Governours of Judea, as in Act. 23.25. Claudius Lysias, to the most Excellent Governour Faelix &c. So, why might not this Theo∣philus be Governour of Syria? by the special Pro∣vidence of God raised up to such a Dignity, that by the influence of his Example and Authority he might be a means under God for the Propagation and Progression of Christianity unto many others.
In like manner this Ensuing Sermon containing one great end of the Gospel of Christ, viz. That all Christians should Serve the Lord in Holiness and Righteousness before Him all the dayes of our lives,

Luke 1.75. It is now presented to Your, Self as to our most Excellent Theophilus in concurrence with all New England, bowing down themselves before You as to our Governour sent from God and the King. We give thanks to God for Your safe Arrival;
Per varios Casus, Per tot discrimina rerum.
Now as God hath been with those Worthy men, whom He hath graciously vouchsafed to bestow on this People, to bear Rule over them; particularly, the Honorable William Stoughton Esq. Lieu∣tenant Governour, and our Worthy Patriots assisting in Council; whose Integrity we can't but remem∣ber at all times with Gratitude: So we pray for Gods gracious Presence with Your Excellency, and His more abundant Blessing upon Your Person & Government, that the end thereof may be attained; that this People may live a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness & Honesty. The good report of Your Personal qualifications, Your Publick appear∣ing for Securing of the Liberties of our dear Eng∣land, and Your good beginnings of Reformation at New-York (where You first landed) have filled our hopes and raised our Expectations, that You are sent from God, and are coming amongst us in the Spirit and Power of that Excellent Governour Nehemiah, of whom it was said, He was a man that came to seek the Welfare of the Children of Israel, Neh.

2 10. Wch was a grief to their Enemies, but matter of great rejoycing to that good People in their afflicted and low condition.
This People of New England are a People whom God hath Signally owned & blessed in our first & former times; our Fathers coming into these ends of the Earth not upon any Worldly design, but meerly on the account of Religion; they had much of the gracious Presence of God with them in their Planting and Building Work, and in lay∣ing the Foundations in Church & Common wealth, and in the additional blessings of Heaven & Earth, and Sea & Land; So that from a day of small things, New England in a few years was grown up to be a thriving and flourishing Plantation: But alas, we their Successors have not answered the Lords Expectation, or our own Profession, but as we have been multiplyed & encreased, so we have Sin∣ned, and provoked the Lord to anger against us, so that of late years He hath Severely witnessed against us by the variety of His Judgments in a Successive way, and for a long time; So that we are at present an Afflicted & poor People, greatly diminished, impoverished and brought very low, through Oppression, Affliction and Sorrow: as it is in Psal. 107. from v. 33 to 42. And as yet it was said of the People of Israel, when they were in a distres∣sed condition, that the Lord gave them Saviours, Neh. 9.27. And with respect unto the latter dayes it is

foretold, That Saviours shall come up on Mount Sion, and the Kingdom shall be the Lords, Obad. the last v. This hath been frequently done in these latter times in some degree as might be shewed in many instances; it may Suffice to mention Your Grand∣father of blessed Memory, who was raised up under God with an Heroick Spirit to be the Saviour of Ireland, in the day of their distress in 1641. and we hope in God that He hath sent Your Self amongst us as a Saviour to New England, bringing with You an Olive Branch of PEACE, as a good Omen, that the deluge of our Calamities is abated, and our hopes encreased, that yet New England may live in the sight of God; and that under the Sha∣dow of Your Government we may yet be revived, and the work of God amongst us be renewed by degrees unto a more flourishing Condition than hitherto; that it may be said, the Lord bless thee O Habitation of Justice and Mountain of Holiness; which is the Subject matter of the following Sermon.
This Elaborate and Pious Discourse of my Re∣verend Brother & Colleague in the Work of the Ministry here at Salem, was Preached at Boston on the Anniversary day of Election, according to our Custom from the beginning: He was called to this Service by the Honorable the Lieutenant Go∣vernour and Council; and the Publishing of it was Desired & Ordered by the General Court. There is something in the Text Prophetical & something

Didactical. It is agreed upon by all Sober Divines and Christians, that we are not to expect a full un∣derstanding of the Prophecies until they be fulfilled, and that there may be a gradual and partial fulfill∣ing of sundry Prophecies at several times; and yet some special Time be intended for the eminent & full accomplishment of them: Also, that not the Prophecies but the Precepts of Scripture are to be the Rule of our Actions. It belongs to God to fulfill with His Hand what He hath spoken with His Mouth, and that in the times and by the ways & means which are known unto Him, but unknown to us; it belongs to us to observe His Commandments concerning our present duties, whatever the case be, leaving all future Events to God. Deut. 29 29. Yet are Prophesies a ground of our Faith, Hope and Prayer, relating to their Ac∣complishment: and so far Prophesies are doctrinal, Dan. 9 2, 3. And it is the doctrinal part of the Scriptures that mainly concerns us to direct us in all cases in the way of our duty to God & men, as the Reverend Author according to the Wisdom and Grace given unto him, hath declared unto us with much Evidence from Scripture light. Hence it is without question the duty of the Church and People of God to be an Habitation of Justice and Mountain of Holiness, at all times & in all places of the World: and because God hath foretold and p omised that it shall be Eminently & Conspicu∣ously so at some times and in some places in these

last dayes that are come and coming upon the World, therefore we are to aime at it and endea∣vour after it, in all the wayes of our duty, that it may be so with us in that measure as the Lord shall please to grant the same unto us; for it is certain, so far as we attain thereunto we shall be a People blessed of the Lord: For these two, Holiness towards God, and Righteousness towards men, are like unto the two Pillars in the Temple of God Jachin and Boaz, which did signify the Strength and E∣stablishment of the welfare of the Church & Peo∣ple of God, while they continue in the Righteous and Holy wayes of the blessed God.
This duty of endeavouring that New-England may be an Habitation of Justice and Mountain of Ho∣liness, though it is incumbent upon all, yet it is in a special manner committed to and betrusted with Your EXCELLENCY according to that High Station which GOD and the KING have set You in: and then it is required of all orders and ranks of men; both Magistrates, Ministers and People (every one in their own place) that they move regularly in concurrence with Your Lord∣ship in all things that may conduce unto that end: Though it may be SIR, You may sometimes meet with difficulties in Your way, and find things amiss that cannot presently be amended. So did Solomon, who though he was the wisest of Kings with a most prudent Council, and a morigerous

People; yet out of his Experience he informs us, that which was wanting could not be numbred, or that which was crooked could not be made streight: and therefore he gives this advice to others, Consider the work of God, for who can make that streight which He hath made crooked. Eccl. 7.13. And therefore it will be no wonder if You should find it so. Yet let me tell You from the Word of the Lord, that the same Encouragement which the Lord gave unto Joshua, for the Substance and Scope of it, be∣longs unto any of His Servants whom He sets in the place of Government over His People, viz Be thou Strong and of good Courage in observing all the Commandments of God, so shalt thou make thy way pros∣perous and thou shalt have good Success, for I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee, saith the Lord. Josh. 1 from v 5. to v. 10. compared with Heb. 13.5. And when it may be said in any difficult case wherein there is duty to be done, Arise for this matter belongeth unto thee (as it was said unto Ezra, Chap. 10.4.) I hope in God it will also be said by all this Peo∣ple (as it was then expressed by some in the Name of the rest) We also will be with thee, viz. That You will have the Hearts and Prayers and endea∣vours, of all the good People of the Land with You in whatsoever may have a tendency to the making of this our New England, to be an Habitation of Justice and Mountain of Holiness; the Lord grant that it may be so.
Finally, being Old and full of dayes, having sen all that the Lord hath done for New England, & all the Changes of Times that have passed over it from the beginning unto this day: and now waiting daily for my own great Change, I cannot but express my hearts doing and praer to God for New-England, Return O Lord, graciously Return to the many thousands of NEW-ENGLAND, and cause thy, Face to Shine upon it, and give unto this thy People a Heart to be continually returning to thee, and keeping thy Commandments, that thou mayest make them and keep them to be for ever, an Habitation of Righteousness and Mountain of Holiness, blessed of the Lord: And for Your Person. That the God and Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST would Bless You with all Spiritual, Temporal and Eternal Blessings in Christ Jesus, and in relation to Your Government, that He would pour down His Spirit upon You, and make You a Minister of God for good unto this Peo∣ple, and give You to be like unto David, who led and fed the People in the integrity of his heart, and by the skilfullness of his hands; and like unto Solomon, of whom it is said, in Psal. 72. In his dayes the Righteous did flourish, the Moun∣tains did bring Peace to the People, and the little hills by Righteousness, and there was abundance of Peace. That in after times it may be said, Be∣cause the Lord loved this People therefore He

set Your Lord-ship over them; and that You left New-England better than You found it: And so the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with Your Spirit for ever, AMEN.

Salem, June 20. 1698.
