



MY LORD,
SINCE the Great Grotius and Sir Matthew Hales, sometimes softned their severer Studies with Verse; I hope Your Lordship will not think a plain English Preface the more unworthy of Your Pa∣tronage, because of the Rhimes that follow it.
Certainly we are bound by the most Sacred Ties, to use all Means in our Power for the Preservation of the present Government, with which the Protestant Religion throughout Christendom may expect to flourish or fail, as to its visibility. And as Your Lordship's Sword is ready, under our Glorious King WILLIAM, again to do Wonders, whenever this Noble Cause shall draw it; permit me in the mean while, under Your Lord∣ships Banner, to offer this Earnest of my utmost either natural or acquir'd Force in its Service, against a sort of Enemies below Your Lordships In∣dignation.
Some of them, being Men of Letters, will yield to no Authority, but what they find in Books; and were it not for the Invention of Printing, would almost have been depriv'd of the use of Reason: For these, I hope, I have brought both Weight and Measure, and prov'd to them, that our Go∣vernment is as Legal, as it may be Happy, if they please; and, I doubt not, will be, whether they please, or no.
With others, no Arguments are of any moment, but as they work upon their Hopes or Fears; and Reason in them is always subservient to Sense or Interest: These, if they have not Religion, at least are Superstitious, and as the Poet has it, are the Men who tremble and look pale at every Flash of Lightning: Every cross Accident is with them a Presage of more, and Hi sunt qui trepidant & ad omnia ful∣gura pallent. disposes them to change their Side; and time was, when by looking up to the Fane over the Horse-Guards, one might know who they were for. If these Men can be persuaded, that the wonderful Successes which his present Majesty has met with, have been plainly foretold, and that no less are pro∣mis'd yet to come; if they do not assist, they will not dare to oppose: And till they can either fix an Imputation of Forgery upon the Predictions here collected, or evade their Agreement with known Events, the Government has them sure.
I must confess, I believe it will never be well with this divided Nation, till Men act, like Your Lordship, upon more generous and steady Princi∣ples. Whoever espouses Truth only while it is prosperous, is beholden to Chance for his Honesty, as some have been for their mistaken Loyalty, with

which specious Pretence, they have varnish'd over a long Series of the most Vid. the Lord Delamere and Sir Ro. Arkyns upon the Lord Russel's Trial, and Mr. Hawles's Remarks upon that and others, &c. illegal and barbarous Actions, that ever were the Reproach of any Civiliz'd Nation.
Ʋnder that Rage Your Lordship suffer'd; and not to have suffer'd, would have been enough to have brought Your Fame in question; when it was hardly possible for one of so great a Figure to live in safety, without such shameful Compliances, as our English Spirits were never guilty of in the darkest Ages of Popery.
These things, I am confident, Your Lordship would be loth to remember against any, now likely to represent themselves fair to a Prince newly come from abroad, were it not for the manifest Tendency, I may say, Effects, of their Principles: And till they either publickly repent of, or condemn those Doctrines, upon which such Actions are grounded, Your Lordship may well apprehend a Relapse into the former State.
The Absurdity of their Notions is not a more proper Subject of Laughter, than the Guilt is of Punishment; yet had they the Ingenuity, by a free Con∣fession, to stop the spreading Contagion, I dare say, few would have the ill Nature to upbraid them with their Faults.
I am sensible that I have rais'd many Enemies, by the Freedom which I have taken with them; yet methinks that Caution and Discretion which has with-held others more able, who look more at Times and Seasons than Things, is little less than Criminal; at least, they deserve no Praise, who will not make or enter a Breach, till cover'd with Crowds. Sure I am, many la∣mented Worthies have been condemn'd in Form of Law, and censur'd by the thoughtless higher and lower Vulgar, because of the Pusilanimity or Treachery of others, or fatal Lethargy of —Sed quid Turba Romae? sequitur fortunam ut semper, & odit Damnatos— the Times; in short, have been thought Fools and Tray∣tors, because they could not Prophesie.
Yet, as Your Lordship has declin'd no Danger, where the Cause of Your Religion or Country call'd, permit me, tho' not to aspire to the Imitation, to profit by the Example.
Many Men above Fears, are Slaves to Ambition or Gain, perfect Merce∣naries, and fight for Pay; they think the World but a Stage to scramble on, and he that gets most, tho' to the ruine of Thousands, is with them the Bravest Man. If Your Lordship had been of this Mind, Your Valour might have carv'd out a Fortune enough to have bought a Nation to Your Side.
But that Trust which His present Majesty has repos'd in Your Lordship, is more valuable, than the Indies given by unthinking Multitudes or Mo∣narchs; and I doubt not but Your Lordship will, in Execution of so high an Office, shew that Bravery of Nature, Fidelity by Principle, and Skill both in Civil and Military Affairs, from a long well-improv'd Experience, as may sufficiently satisfie all reasonable Men in the difference between the Ministry of the last Reign, and This.
For my own part, since my early Zeal for the Service of Your Lordship and the Publick, in truth, of the Publick in Your Lordship, has entred me of Your Retinue, permit me the Glory of declaring to the World, that I am
(MY LORD)

