



SIR,
THE great Obligations, I had to your Honour afore I parted from Scotland, claim with much reason to some Fruit of my Labour. Be pleased then to accept of a little work of mine from Flanders.
I am confident the Subject will please

you, because it is sutable to your Devo∣tion, and to the piety of your most Noble and ancient Family.
Our Saviour by the occasion of the Jews seeking him for Bread, spoke to them of the Bread of Life, and I, by the occasion of three sheafs of Corn, I find in your Scutchion, or in the Honours of your House, will speak to you, in reference to the Subject of this little Book, of the Bread, termed by the Church, the Bread of the strong, I mean of the most Holy Sacrifice, and Sacrament of the Altar.
Ligor ne dispergar saycs your motto, I am bound lest I scatter, your glorious ancestors being united and tyed together in the Faith of this Sacrament, were not scattered by the Enemies of their Souve∣raign, when helped by the miraculous valour in a Child of the house of Duglas, they galantly brought Queen Mary out of the Bondage of Lockleven, and lodged Her safely the first night in my Lord SE∣TON'S own House at Netheree in West Lothian. They keeping still Faith to God and their Soveraigns, after this action

spread even under Persecution, as Cama∣moile trodden down, both to more Wealth and Honour.
'Twas for the Vertue of the SETON'S, that Noble Motto invia virtuti via nul∣la, no way hard or unpassible to Vertue, was given them. And where, I pray, in their perswasion then, and still in yours is the seat of Vertue but in this Bread of the strong?
If the Prophet Elias refreshed with that Bread, which was only a Figure of our Sacrament, walked fourty days and as many nights, wonder you that those great Men, of whom you have the Ho∣nour to descend, receiving it often were quickned to generosity, and Christian Duty to King and Country?
Sir CHRISTOFER SETON by RO∣BERT A BRUCE, sutnamed the Good, merited for his Devotion to the Sacrifice of the Mass, to have after his Death the daily Sacrifice offered for him, and this was perform'd by the same King ROBERT, whose Sister he had Married, for he found∣ed a Chapel near Dumfrice, call'd Chri∣stel

Chappel, and a Preist to offer Sacri∣fice in it for the Soul of Good Sir Chri∣stofer, as he out of a loving respect was pleased to call him. This renowned Champion dyed at London as Honour∣ably as Cruelly by the hands of the En∣glish, whom he had often stoutly op∣posed and pestured in the service of his Country.
But why was Christofer the first his Predecessor call'd more Devout than Wor∣ly? But because his Heart was power∣ully, tho sweetly, drawn to this Sacra∣crament, as Iron to a Load-Stone? Hoc specialiter, sayes Thomas a Kempis l 4. de imit. Ch. c. 1. Devotorum corda tra∣hit, this Sacrament draws by a special way the hearts of Devout People; and thus from a special respect to this Sacra∣crament a Man worthily obtaines the tittle of Devout.
Lord George the third a Prudent Man, and very Familiar with King James the third, devided his Devotion to the Altar with his Lady Dame Jeane Hepburn, called by the History a Noble and Wise

Lady Daughter to the Earl of Bothuel.
O Lord, said, the Royal Prophet, I have loved the beauty of thy House, Psal. 25. Were not those two great Souls in∣flam'd with the same Zeal, when striving as it were who might do best, they set themselves to decore the Colledg-Church of SETON?
The Lord paved and seiled the quire; and the Lady aised an Ile on the North∣side, and having taken down that on the the South side, Built by the Devotion of Dame Catherine Sinclar, rebuilded it again with proportion to make a perfit Cross, and founded two Prebends to serve the Altars. The Lord, not to speak of other Ornaments, gave it a compleat Sute of Cloth of Gold: And the Lady compleat Sutes of all the Colours of the Church, for Advent, Lent, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins; for all the solemn Feasts of the Year of Purple and Crim∣son Velvet richly flower'd with Gold, white Damask, &c. Not forgetting a Sute of black Vestiments for the Dead with other fine Chasubels. Also a great

Silver Cross, a Silver Eucharist Ciborium or Remonstrance for the B. Sacrament with a fair Chalice Silver and Gilt, all for the Majesty and Decorement of the Al∣tar.
Some may think I had done better in a Dedicatory, to busie my Pen in describing the Courage of a Governour of Barwick of the House of SETON, who in cold Blood chused rather to see his Son violent∣ly put to Death, than to faile in his trust to King and Country, and in such like sign∣al actions admired by Men, than in re∣hersing these liberalities made to the Altar, which are but petty things in the Eyes of worlings.
But my ayme is not so much to shew the worly grandeur of your Family, as the Devotion to this Mystery, (which makes the Subject of my Book) of the great ones in it. This their Devotion made them truly great. Take from a Man the sense and respect he has for God, and for what relates to him, and what is he with all he has, or may possess? little, a nothing an object of contempt. As God dismaly

at last slights them who slight him, and what regards his Honour, so he stupen∣diously glorifies them, who have made it their work to seek his Glory. 1 Samuel 2. v. 30. Live then for ever Souls nobly af∣fected to contribute to the Majesty of this daily Sacrifice, which is upon Earth God's greatest Glory.
O change of times and manners! where is he or she in Scotland now a dayes, who make it their study to imitate those fore∣mentioned Noble Persons? What a loss is the want of such for the House of God! How many poor Families, monasteries Churches, and Altars mourned at the Death, especially of that pious Lady?
If the monastery of Seins in Burro∣mure nigh Edinburgh were standing, it would tell you 'twas hither she retired her self after the decease of her Lord; to at∣tend in solitude with more freedom to God. I am now defac'd, she is Dead, who having chiefly founded me; while she lived, conserved me, and decored me.
SIR, can you forget, or not respect the memory of so much piety? To which

they were powerfully moved by the belief they had of the adorable Sacrifice of the Altar. As often as you see the three Cre∣scents in your Arms, remember that you must increase or grow as they did in a li∣vely Faith of this Mystery, which is the seed of Divine Love and Charity to your Neighbour. I know you have hazarded something already for your Faith, but if an other occasion be given you, mindful of one of the Noble Motto's of your House, hazard yet further, in what is prudently acknowledged to be the Ser∣vice of God, there is no danger to be re∣douted, or so much as apprehended. Your very name SET-ON minds you of generosity in what you act for God, or may undertake for the Service of his Vice-gerent upon Earth, the King.
God and you know best what hope you have lay'd up in Heaven, as the Apostle speaks to the Colos. 1. v. 5, But much of Your Charitie the World has seen. I am the Subject of a notable part of it, and Witness of your sheltring poor Strangers, considering distressed Tenents, clothing

the naked, feeding orphelins, visiting the imprisoned in Person, the sick by almes, entring some fore-lorne into the number of your domesticks, and honestly burying the Dead, that had no Friend or Relation, able to do that Duty. Such actions done in the Spirit of Christ, make savour at present in the Eucharist, the sweetness of the hidden Manna there, and will Crown hereafter the Christian in the solemn day of the general Resur∣rection.
Infin, Since the Treassures of your Arms being Flower Delucies, as good as tell you, you must flowrish, strive to flowrish in the Faith of your an∣cestors. Ambulo in fide, sayes the Author of the Imitation of Christ, l. 4, C. 11. exemplis confortatus Sanctorum, I walk in the Faith of the Real Body and Blood of Christ in the Eucharist: comfortably held in it by the example of the Saints, this Faith gives Men a Victory over the World making them fear, esteem and Love only this God of Love, (a Love surprising in this

Mystery) And being fully satisfied, with the expected possession of him, breath now after the Loveliness of his Eternity. This flowrishing condition, I cordially wish you as I am
SIR,

