



SIR,
IT is a Custom in all Coun∣tries,
when any man hath
taken a strange Creature,
immediately to present it
to the Prince: Where∣upon,
I having taken one
of the strangest that (I think) any part
of Your Highness Dominions hath these

many years produced, do with all sub∣missiveness
make bold to present him
bound hand and foot with his own Cords
(as I ought to bring him) to Your High∣ness.
He need not to be sent to the Tower
for his mischievousness; there is no dan∣ger
in him now, nor like to be henceforth,
as I have handled him; For, should he
break loose again (as who knows what
wild Creatures may do!) and get abroad
to infest the Stationers, and infect your
People, I that have found him out once,
may soon meet with him again to keep
him in order. He seems to be a Leader of
that savage Herd, which would make the
Prince or Magistrate but a Man of Straw,
or like a Wooden Head, or a Golden
Neptune fixed over the Stern only for a
shew, but not at all concerned in the steer∣ing
of the Ship.
I in all humility crave Your Highness
pardon for this Attempt, it being indeed
my Adversaries fault, whose example in
making bold to trample upon Your good
Name and Authority, hath taught me so
much confidence, that I presume to set

Your great Name before this Book, and
to offer you the trouble of perusing it,
at such a time, when the Affairs of Three
Nations lie all before you. If it be worth
the reading at all, it is because the matter
concerns you; It defends your Authori∣ty,
and vindicateth one of your best and
most Christian Actions, together with the
Reputation of those Honourable and Re∣verend
persons your Commissioners from
common prejudice, and from the foulest
Imputations that the mouth of Folly and
Envy could breath out into the open air:
and though this poor Mite can add no∣thing
to the Treasury of your Highness
Princely Wisdom and Knowledge; yet it
will serve to call many things to your re∣membrance,
much to your Observation—
When I heard how industriously this
Book of Mr. G. hath been dispersed, and
how high a prejudice arose among the
more undiscerning sort, by the fine words
of the Charmer, I thought this business
to be my duty, and I have done it as I
could: Where the gravity of the matter
merited it, I have observed a Stile accor∣dingly

serious; in all other places I have
treated the man like himself; not that I af∣fect
it, but because it was necessary, and
the most proper way of Return, for due
correction, to intimate unto him, and his
admirers, as well the insolency of his
Spirit, as the lightness and vanity of
his pretended Arguments. In the re∣futing
of them, I have given him his
own to the utmost, allowing him fair
play, by reciting some of them whole, the
rest by parts in their full strength and
force, which is more than ever he yet
gave to any adversary in Print, it having
been his manner upon the like occasion,
to trifle about the Out-works, but ne∣ver
fall upon the main Fort, nor take the
least notice where the strength indeed of
an Argument lay.
If this Address prove unseasonable, I
shall watch to redeem my Error by a more
eminent service, upon some happy Occa∣sion,
which certainly I cannot want, see∣ing
your Highness proceeds in the noblest
paths of Christian Piety, to leave Posteri∣ty
an Example, what Great Things 'tis pos∣sible

for man to do with a vertuous minde
in the height of Honour and Fortune.
May you live long in this State, with the
favour of God, and good will among
men, to the glory of the most High, and
the rejoycing of all the People under your
Highness Protection: So prayeth,

July 8. 1657.
