


SIR,
NOw at length I return you some of those Papers which you was pleased so kindly to commit to my trust: viz. Six Sermons of your Brothers, I say not the best I could pick out, (for indeed all that he composed were singularly good and useful) but such as either he chose to preach in the most publick places, or else were more particularly desired by some of his friends.
Had he himself designed or pre∣pared these Discourses for the Press,

they would have appeared much more accurate and exact, than now perhaps some passages in them may seem to be; nor durst I venture to make any considerable alterations. However as they are, I doubt not but they will be highly acceptable to all serious and devout Readers, and I am sure they are far above the contempt even of the Criticks, and Wits of the Age.
Of such great moment are the Subjects here treated of, so plain and familiar is the Stile, so weighty and sound the Arguments, that there needs no other reason to be given of these Sermons being made publick, than that they are so excel∣lently fitted to do good. Unless you, Sir, give me leave to mention this one; that these Papers will be a lasting Evidence and testimony to your self and others his dear Re∣lations

of the incomparable worth, sweet temper, and undissembled Piety of your Brother; since you may by them to your no little satis∣faction easily perceive, what a very considerable man he was like∣ly to have proved, what good rea∣son you had to love him as you did, and how amply your great care of his Education was recompensed and fully answered by those extra∣ordinary improvements he made of himself in so short a time, though under much indisposition of body, and of late Years labouring under a tedious incurable Disease: I may well call it incurable, since it resi∣sted even all your skill and pains, and in spight of all you your self could do, at last prevailed against him, whose life above others you so passionately wished and desi∣red.

But here I think my self bound to add, that he will be apt to do great wrong to the memory of our Author, who shall make a judg∣ment of his Learning and Abilities onely by what he may find in this little Book. Preaching, perhaps, was his least Talent; a Work he but lately entered upon, and by the By onely performed. You know, Sir, he observed a just and prudent Method in his Studies, and had laid in a great Stock of useful Knowledge of all kinds, designing all along not so much to fit himself for these Pulpit Exercises, as to be a General Scholar.
And indeed such he was, there being few parts of Learning in which he had not made a consi∣derable progress. On which ac∣count he became most eminent∣ly serviceable to Queens Colledge;

his known merits and prudence drawing many young Gentlemen and others under his care, to their own singular advantage, and the credit of that Royal Foundation.
Nor was he onely admired in, or useful to his own particular Col∣ledge, but so remarkable was his Worth and Goodness, that his Friendship and Acquaintance was desired by many others. His Lear∣ning gained him every where Au∣thority and Respect, and his good Nature and most obliging Carriage won him the love and favour of the whole University; so that he was the Man, of whom I never heard any one say an ill word.
It is difficult for me here to for∣bear; so pleasant is it to me to think of my Old Friend Mr. NEEDHAM. And I know I shall be sufficiently blamed by his Acquaintance for

saying so little of such an excellent person. One will tell me, that at least his wonderful modesty and perfect freedom from all manner of pride and conceit; another, that the briskness of his fansie, and the pleasantness of his humour and con∣versation, whilest he enjoyed any measure of health; a third, that his admirable Patience, and Indif∣ferency as to this World; others, that his faithful and truly friendly temper; that these with many other of his excellent Vertues ought to have been duly rehearsed and com∣memorated. Every one that knew him will find fault, that something or other, for which he was exem∣plary, is now omitted.
It was the saying of a great Ro∣man, when he was asked why his Statue was not erected in the Mar∣ket-place, as well as of many others

of far less note and desert; that he had much rather people should wonder and enquire why he had no Statue, than that any should ask why he had one. I had much rather be censured for falling infinitely short of what my Subject might justly challenge, than that any one should upon this or any like occa∣sion, accuse me of Flattery or Com∣plement.
After all I must confess, Sir, I have one private selfish design in this De∣dication; which is, to take this oc∣casion most thankfully to acknow∣ledg your great undeserved favours and kindnesses to me, which I can put on no other account, but your own goodness, and that your Bro∣ther would please to call me his Friend.


