



THE more Useful your Relation or Friend was to the World, and Delightful to you, the more Conspicuous will your Graces appear, in a becoming Submission to the Will of Him, who hath now remov'd him to a Better Place. We can't part with such in whom we have Pleasure, without Pain; nor can such as have been united in Affection, part without a Sigh

and a Groan. To have no Sense of what we suffer, or to part with our Friends as if we su∣stained no Loss, is Stupidity, and not Submission; but while you feelingly complain to God, to show your Affection, beware of complaining of him, or censu∣ring his Dispensations, for he is accountable for None of his Ways; as he can't deny us that Mercy which we have Merited, so he can't take that from us which we have not Forfeited; there∣fore it becomes you to say with David, I was Dumb, I o∣pened not my Mouth, be∣cause thou didst it. Psal. 39. 9.
What I have said of him, will appear to the Impartial, his Circumstances being considered, to be a due Debt. If any of you

think I have said too little, blame your selves, for not ma∣king Choice of a more Skilful Hand, to represent him in his full Lustre. If any blame me for saying so much, that's ow∣ing to the Living, who made it needful, and not to my Inclina∣tion. If to think and speak Ill of others is (as a Great Man hath Asserted) not only a bad thing, but a sign of a bad Man, sure I am, it's a very difficult thing to find a good Man in Conversation, when speaking Ill of others is so much in fashion. It is a pity, when so many of all Parties seem to be bent for Division, that such should ap∣pear agreed and united only in this, to think the way to do Christ Service, and promote their own

Opinions, is by endeavour∣ing to blast the Reputation of each other; I wish rather all Parties could learn to be Con∣scientiously strict to their own Principles and Perswasions, in Practice, and at the same time do all the Offices of Love and Kindness to each other, notwith∣standing our Differences, as be∣comes the Disciples of a Meek Jesus.
As for this Discourse, it is a Theme that is so often Preach'd and Published, and Calculated chiefly for Practice, that I must not expect, it will suite the Gust and Relish of such Airy Christians as despise all Practical Discourses; but if it may be Blest of God, to assist and excite any of you, or others,

so to number their Days, that they may apply their Hearts to Wisdom, my De∣sign is obtained; which that it may, is the Earnest Prayer of,

