


MY LORD,
THESE Lives of Cornelius Nepos, which I now Pre∣sent your Lordship in English, have had the good Fortune to survive in their Original (the Latin) seventeen hundred years: And tho the Observation of the Excellent Lord Bacon be very Ingenious, That Time is like a

River, which bears up the Stubble and such light things, but lets the more weighty and substantial sink; yet must this be taken for a Si∣militude, and as such is only ap∣plicable to the Abuses which the Authority of precedent Ages, as well as other Humane Con∣cerns, is and may be subject to. For to suppose, that those things which have past the Test of the wisest and severest Ages, have at last nothing of intrinsic value in themselves, but owe the long possessing of Fame to a Hit of Fortune, to the Humour or tame Obsequiousness of a long Succession of Admirers, is so bold an Attempt upon the Rea∣son of Mankind, that he that makes it must either have much of the God, or a great deal of

the Fool; By invincible Argu∣ment to demonstrate the Mi∣stakes of the Learned World in all its Stages, requires a Soul of a Divine Perspicacity, clear from those Incumbrances that have misguided the Prospect of other Mortals. To oppose a single capricious Opinion to the collected Force of so many Men's Judgment, looks like the Hero in the Play, or the Knight-Errant in the Romance; who with two Legs and two Arms, Fights and Routs whole Millions. I do not (My Lord) Apologize for our Author, as if He need beg a Blessing from Antiquity, or want∣ed the Testimonials of Precedent Ages to support his Credit; had he been Written in this time He is Translated, there is worth e∣nough

in Him to recommend Him to all Lovers of History. Cornelius Nepos Liv'd in an Age, that had the greatest Taste of Good Sense of any possibly since the Creation. Eloquence did not then consist in the gaudy Trim∣ming of Metaphors, or the forc'd acuteness of a short cut Period, but Good Sense naturally and cleanly Express'd, was the Lan∣guage Augustus and his Court in∣courag'd. Our Author cannot in∣deed pretend to the Politeness of Cicero, but yet He has nothing but what is Manly and Strong; and if my weak Judgement informs me right, there runs through his Writings a Gentile Vein of speaking unaffectedly, which de∣clares Him a Man remov'd a∣bove the Pedant or Plebeian.

Here it must be Confest, He is now and then rough in the Period, and negligent in the Ex∣pression; but the judicious Quin∣tilian allows this to be sometimes a Beauty; and 'tis the opinion of most Critics, that if there be any fault in Tully himself, 'tis that He is too Set and Formal in his Stile. There are some Faces that are very exact in the Symmetry of their Parts, and the mixture of Colour, and yet they are not pleasing; While on the other Hand, there are others in which Nature seems to have made a∣greeable Mistakes; Eloquence is only the Beauty of Language. in which a too formal obser∣vance of Exactness is disgustful. There is as much difference be∣tween the Gentile practise of

Rhetorick, and the heavy Regu∣larity that arises purely from the attendance upon its Rules, as there is between the Gentile Address of a Gentleman, and the fulsome Compliment of a School-Master. Such is his Stile, that it seems to give Cornelius Nepos a pretence to the Patro∣nage of your Lordship, whose Ancestors have reflected greater Honor upon Learning and Learned Societies, than They could ever receive from them. 'Tis in the Great Name of the Bartu's, we meet the two great∣est Ornaments of Mankind con∣joyn'd, Learning and Nobility; and in that Generous Noble Blood, not only Honor, but Wisedome are convey'd. The reason Petronius Arbiter gives,

why good Sense and true Rea∣son were in his Age in the de∣cline, is, Because every Man must fish with such baits he thinks will take, but says the same Ingeni∣ous Author, We have lost the generous Palate; Had your Lord∣ship Liv'd in that time, there could have been no occasion for this general Complaint. In your Lordship a Virgil or a Ho∣race might have found an Agrip∣pa or Maecenas, who did not on∣ly receive the Compliments of those Great Men, but under∣stood their Worth. Our Au∣thor has in short drawn the Greatest Heroes that Athens, Sparta, Thebes, Corinth, and even Afric it self could boast, and 'tis to Him that Rome does owe its Atticus. It often happens, that a

Prince is better represented by his Coyns, then by his Statues; so without detracting from the just praise of others, Nepos may possibly give as lively an Idea of an Alcibiades or Themistocles, as those who have drawn out their Descriptions to a greater length; For as in Mens Faces, so in their Actions, there are certain pecu∣liar Airs that distinguish one from another; if you hit these, you give the Character as ef∣fectually, as if your Canvass was as large as the Object, and you took in every Hair. The design of History is to instruct by Ex∣ample, and Correct the Infirmi∣ties of Life; to Trace out the Roads by which Great Men arriv'd at Fame, and the Rocks they have split against. All the

reward We can pay to defunct Virtue, is a grateful Remembrance of it, and Vice is a Detestation to Posterity. Phocion's Beneficence will be an Eternal Monument: Eumenes his unshaken Loyalty to the Posterity of his Prince will never be forgotten: And Al∣cibiades his tender Passion to an ungrateful Country, will last as long as Sense remains in the World. Such Examples may afford Your Lordship's leisure Hours a Divertisement, but can∣not pretend to Direct. The Hi∣story of your own Family is a Treasure of Greatness and Bra∣very, which affords Instances (of both Sexes) for every Vir∣tue and Duty of Life. And here we cannot enough Admire the inimitable Gallantry of Katha∣rine

Dutchess of Suffolk, whose Zeal to the Protestant Religion at least came up to the Example of the most Primitive Confessors; who supported all the Variety of Her numerous Afflictions with the Meekness of Her own Sex, and the Courage of Ours: While every Country prov'd more Hospitable to that Admirable Lady than Her own; and Fo∣reign Nations thought them∣selves oblig'd to Reverence that Virtue which we could not Bear. Nor need I instance in those Heroes of your Family, to whose Noble Atchievments the Great Henry of France was so highly obliged, and the Dutch owe so great a part of their Li∣berty. Nor perhaps was the very attempt of Civilizing Ire∣land

an undertaking of less Gal∣lantry and Spirit, since 'tis easier to Create then Restore. When at length the unhappiness of an Headstrong Nation recall'd them from Forreign to Domestick Wars, with how much Cou∣rage, how much Loyalty did the Heroick Lindsey espouse his Royal Masters Interest! He de∣spised both the Allurements and Forces of a Faction, then almost Irresistable, and receiv'd the Assaults of the Rebellious Army, as unmov'd as an Isthmus does the shock of contesting Waves. He oppos'd his Person to the most eminent Dangers in the Defence of oppress'd Majesty, and dyed like one that had a true value for Life, and knew how advantageously a few mi∣nutes

of Life were chang'd for an Immortality of Fame.
To be Nobly Born is (My Lord) questionless one of the greatest worldly Happinesses kind Heaven bestows; and Nature for several Ages seems to prepare and refine the Blood of a Fami∣ly, that She may at last work out and introduce one Perfectly Great Man. That this is Your Lordships Case we have reason to beleive, in whom all the Vir∣tues that are thriftily divided a∣mongst others, are United. Well then may Cornelius Nepos be Proud of Your Lordship's Name to Lead up his Horoes, and pro∣tect those that were, while they liv'd, the Patriots of their Country.
Each Virtue takes its propor∣tion from the Exigences of time

and Place. He that stands upon the secure Shore, and undaunt∣edly views the ungovern'd rage of the Ocean, does not, on this account, deserve the Praise of a Valiant Man; but He is the Master of true Courage, that all the time sedately stemms the Ship; endeavors to be safe, yet fears not to meet Death in its most dreadful shape. Amongst the polluted spawn of Pamphlets which have crawl'd about du∣ring this Ferment of the Go∣vernment, there have been a few who have compared it to a Ship toss'd by dangerous Waves. Let the design of these Parable-Makers be what it will (as in most of them it has been bad enough) yet the similitude is to the purpose; and Your Lordship

has had no small share in pre∣serving this leaky Vessel from De∣struction. 'Tis an observation too well known among Politi∣cians, That the Virtue of a Prince may sometimes turn to his De∣struction; of which we have had a sad Example in the Blessed Martyr Charles the First, Who Suffer'd, and Dyed for being Good; and the same Jews that acted that sad Tragedy, designed a second up∣on the Son of his Loyns and In∣heritor of His Vertues; As if they were resolv'd by repeated Ex∣periences, to revoke that Axiom of the Moralists, That the Natu∣ral effect of Benevolence and Good∣ness, even in this World, is a reci∣procal Love and Felicity; and so it is in all except the Fanatick, whom both the Father and

Grandfather of our Gracious Prince, assures Us, that no Bene∣fit can oblige. And really the Fanatick is no more to be com∣prehended within the general Rules of Reason than the Brute; because as this acts according to the instinct of its Nature, which often carries it contrary o the principles of a Rational Creature, so the Fanatick is mo∣ved by the giddy Impulse of Enthusiasm, which has abun∣dance of more points then the Compass. This is that Monster who ever since His Majesties Happy, Happy Restoration, has endeavour'd to lay an open and easie way to the Destruction of the Government, by endeavour∣ing by their unreasonable Ca∣lumnies to make the chief Mini∣sters of It Contemptible to the

People. They have been indeed, like cunning Artists, a long while heating and preparing the matter; and in Seventy-eight, when they found the Bent and Byass of the People work'd into a Temper, then it was, that Corah shew'd Himself and pronounc'd, That the Prince and the Priest had donspir'd together against our Li∣berty. This carry'd on under spe∣cious pretences, put the People into a fit of down right Mad∣ness, and when the Zealous A∣larum was made on that side of the imaginary point of the Com∣pass whence Popery was to come, the Fanatick had just planted his Colours on the con∣trary part of our City. 'Tis e∣nough to confound a Man and make Him (if possible) to for∣swear being in the same Class of

Nature with these sort of Ani∣mals, to consider the unaccoun∣table Whims in their Proceed∣ings. All that dyed for Dr. Titus his Plot with their last breath asserting their Innocence were not believ'd, because, Popery allow'd Dispensations for Lying, and could easily elude, not only the Dictates of Christianity but of Nature too; And now it comes to the Fanaticks turn to Hang, one would think on such an occasi∣on they should not only sing Hopkins very heartily, but speak true too; and yet all these un∣fortunate Gentlemen that dy'd, having, in part at least, acknow∣ledg'd the matter of Fact for which they were Condemn'd, tho they seem to deny the Guilt of it, the Brethren matter it not; and yet could these beleive, that

a Mad-man with a Fire-ball up∣on a pole, set London into flames.
My Lord, we had felt the dis∣mal effects of this mixture of Villany and Madness, had not the most Wise Conduct of His MAJESTY (assisted by such Loyal and Courageous Hands as Your Lordships) deliver'd Us from the Dreadful Precipice, which we saw and trembled at. The Fable of the Viper, which the kind Country-man having warm'd into Life, stung its Be∣nefactor, was by Antiquity thought to express Ingratitude in its highest Extent. The Faction outgoe this; They hiss at and wound a Prince, who is not only so far their Redeemer, as that He restor'd them to Life when they were Dead in Law and Justice, but shew'd Himself

of that Forbearance and Cle∣mency, that He seem'd to deli∣berate whither he had best re∣venge their Insolence, or fall Himself. Such extraordinary Goodness deserv'd the Expence of all the Miracles Heaven could lay out for its Deliverance!
We who are happy in living near Your Lordship, felt the warm Influence; The same Plague of Republican Principle, which had infected the Capital City of this Fortunate Island had gain'd too great a Party among the Citizens of this place. The very Men that eat Our Bread were keenly prepar'd to have in∣vaded those Sacred Seats which support them, and have conti∣nually rescued both them and their Predecessors from Beggary. Affronts are not to be measur'd

by the real Loss we undergo, but that uneasiness of Spirit they bring upon the Men that suffer them; To be slighted by a Su∣perior is a thing we may calmly (tho with some grief) submit to; to be neglected, contemn'd, and trod upon by an Inferior, who depends upon Us for his very Breath, is so insufferable Usage that nothing but the Meekness of a Primitive Confessor could forgive it. And how have the Gownsmen deserv'd this? Because we are Popishly affected, by Religi∣ously observing the Oaths of Allegi∣ance and Supremacy; because we were Pentioners of France, and undermin'd the Fundamental Laws of the Nation, by asserting one of the most Sacred Essentials of the Government, the LINEAL SUC∣CESSION, which could neither by

the Dispensation of a Pope or the Power of Parliament be alter'd. Your Lordship (tho Personally Affronted by this ingrateful illi∣terate Society) durst stemm this Torrent, which threatned an easie Ruin to all its Opposers; and possibly, that the very Brutes that graze and fatten upon the Hill of Parnassus, have not made Food of Us its Inhabitants, is in no small measure due to Your Lordships Care. Which the In∣genious Gentlemen concern'd in this Translation (who did me the Honor to Commission me, tho of all Men the most unfit, to recommend it to Your Lord∣ships Patronage) do grateful∣ly acknowledge; and it was not the vanity of having a Name prefix'd to two or three Leaves done into English that

prompted them to joyn in this small concern, but the desire they had to make a publick Resentment of those many Fa∣vours Your Lordship has been pleased to bestow upon this Our Sacred Learned Athens.
And now having Executed my Commission to the utmost of my small Abilities, I must not in good manners trouble Your Lordship any further then to beg leave to assure You, that I am with all imaginable Respect,
MY LORD,

