



THOMAS NEESHAM, Clerk▪ Devoteth himselfe; Dedicateth this Sermon, and wisheth all health and happinesse in this world and the next.

MADAM.
YOur Ladiship hath lost a Hus∣band, and laments him; I my self likewise have lost a Pation, and lament with you. I would to God, and doe wish it from my soule, that you might finde ease by my grief, and have your sorrowes mitigated by my bearing part, which hapily you may, and in all reason should, for if every thing else be the lesse when it is devided and shared amongst others, why not your griefe, wherein you

have not onely my self but many others to share with you? To sorrow for the dead is as naturall as death it selfe; wee can∣not, wee must not deny nature her due passions and affections, onely take heed, your sorrow be not boundlesse, immode∣rate, endlesse. Saint Paul will allowe you to mourne, but to movrne as one without hope of a glorous resurrection, hee will 1 Thes. 13. not. If he whom you bemoane were utterly lost, and never to be revived, you might bee the more passionate, and weepe for him, as Rachel for her Children, with bitter lamentation; but seeing hee hath but onely exchanged his lodging and re∣signed this on earth for another (a better) in heaven: if you should now bemoane him above measure, it were to envy his prefer∣ment, and to shew your self injurious to him, (if not to God;) you could not but thinke of such a day, and forecast within your selfe of such a destiny, that either you must part from him, or he from you. I cannot be perswaded, that this affliction did surprize you upon a suddaine, for such a faithful and experienced Disciple (as your self) would and did without all question

(put cases of this nature) suspect casualties, weigh uncertainties, foresee afflictions, and prouide for them. Now is the tryal of your providence, your patience, your fortitude, now is the time to bring forth that store, that you have gathered, and to practise that Christianity, that you have all this while so Plausibly, and praisably professed; the chiefe use of weapons is in war, and of Christianity in conflicts and trialls, he that manages his afflictions with wisdome, and beares the crosse with patience when it lies upon his owen shoulders, is undoubtedly the best Christian.
Let your temper and moderation (good Madam) appeare in this difficulty that the world may see the fruits of your Religion, that you can as well advise your selfe, as give advice to others; & wisely digest your owne Pressures, as well as prescribe reme∣dies for other mens. It is not our happinesse alone, to be thus afflicted, but of many others, nor is it the condition of your fami∣ly onely, to be lyable to the stroke of death; but of all in the world; this may a little revive your drooping Spirits, and adde

something to your comforts, that there hath no temptation taken you, but such as is common to men. How many thousands shares with you in the like affliction? for husbands to loose their wives, and wives againe their husbands, is a common thing, you cannot in reason be justly offended, or grieved at that, wherein you are not singu∣lar, but have the greatest, and the most, to be your companions. I should be loath that the remembrance of thse things should la∣den your thoughts a fsh, or rub up that fore, which wisedome and time hath wel∣night skind over, that is not my intention, I aime at nothing lesse, then the remēbrance of your griefe it is physick that I prescribe, and if it should chaunce to cause any little distemper in the patient, you will not (I presume) blame the phisitian but the pati∣ents constitutions, every thing works ac∣ording to the disposition of the receiver, nothing comes amisse to a rightly disposed Christian: I know you are wise, and hath learned with holy Job, to receive both good and ill, at the hand of the Lord. And with patient Paul, into whatsoever condition

God shal cast you therewith to be content, it cannot be denied but that your sufferings are som what and such as deserue commisse∣ration and condolement, yet nothing to what God in his seveere justice could and might inflict upon you. You have not yet resisted into blood: sire and faggot and the sword, and such intollerable afflictions, (as some of our fore-fathers have felt the smart of) are not your portion, it is but a shallow water, in respect, that you now wade over, yet look (I beseech you) to your footing, and give God the praise, that if he should call you hereafter (which God for∣bid) to more swelling waves, and expose you to more violent temptations, you may be able to withstand, and having done all to stand as the Apostle speakes.
But I would not willingly be tedious, my intentions at first, were not to write much, only some short Epistle and no more; for being importuned by him, who had power to command me, to send your Ladiship a copy of this poore Sermom, that was preached at the funerall of your noble Husband, and my honorable Patron,

I could not for shame send it bluntly with∣out some small preface, to make way for it, and usher it to your Ladiships hands: it is not such matter as can much informe your Judgment, but yet (happily) worke upon your affections; what ere it be, it is presented to your private cabinit, to your owne selfe; yours it is, and so is hee that made it, that preacht it, who will not cease to pray for your good Ladiship that God Almighty would blesse you with spirituall blessings in heavenly things; give you the spirit of wisdome, and the fear of the Lord; endue you with Courage, Constancy, Pati∣ence, meeknesse and every good grace; that he would crowne you, and all yours, with peace, plenty, welfare, health and happinesse of soule and body: this is, and shall be the unfained desires and harty prayers of him, who humbly wisheth to be esteemed

Stokedawbernon, Apil 20. 1640.
