

To the Right Worshipful the very Vertuous and Religious Lady, the Lady Deborah Robinson, Wife of Sir Leonard Ro∣binson,
Grace, Mercy, and Peace be Multiplied.
Much Honoured Madam,
I Beg your Pardon, and do crave your leave to joyn your Ladyship with your Honourable Hus∣band in this my present Dedication, whom the Lord by his Providence hath long ago joyned together in that Holy Ordinance of Matrimony, and hath made you (by his gracious Blessing upon you) the happy Pa∣rents of sundry hopeful Children, which are called an Heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the Womb is his Reward As Arrows are in the hand of a Mighty Man, so are Children of the Youth, and happy is he that hath his Quiver full of them, they shall not be asha∣med, but they shall speak with (or Hebr. subdue) the Enemies in the Gate, Psal. 127.3, 4, 5.
Madam, That it is no untrod∣den Path to Dedicate Labours of this sort unto Ladies, may thus be made apparent to you; for First, We find upon Record, how the very bo∣some Disciple of our dear Redeemer
(John the Divine) did Dedicate his Second Epistle unto the Elect Lady; who was undoubtedly one very Eminent, both in high favour with God, and in an Honourable Estimation among the Churches of Christ; and he Dedicates it to her Children also, saying, that he re∣joyced greatly at their gracious car∣riage and Conversation, by their walking in the Truth, 2d Epistle of John, ver. 1, 2.3, 4. where both the Holy Mother, and the Hope∣ful Children had the Apostolical, both Salutation and Dedication, &c.
Secondly, The Ancient Fathers of the Church have walked in their Days the same way of Dedicating their Labours to Elect Ladies of their Times; more especially Hie∣rom, who most highly commends the Noble Ladies of his Day, name∣ly, Eustochium, Salvina, Celan∣tia, Paulina, and the like; there∣fore it followeth that I am not singu∣lar, walking any unbeaten Path in this Common Road of Dedication. And, Madam, I have Dedicated this Volume to your Ladyship's hands upon a double account.
The First is, because your Name is Deborah, which in the Hebrew Language doth signifie an Honey-Bee, a most curious, cleanly, and laborious Animal; and 'tis a won∣derful Work of the God of Nature, that so much Art, Ingenuity, and Industry should lie couched up with∣in the small compass of so little a Corpusculum. But above all, it is to be wondred at her Conversing so
much in fruitful Fields, and in the gayest Gardens, where her Sa∣gacity is exercised to admiration, in her distinguishing stinking weeds (which she disdaineth) from the most Odoriferous and Fragrant Flowers which she fastneth upon, and embraceth them with earnest∣ness; all the time sucking Honey out of them, until Crura Thymo plena, her Thighs be loaded with Thyme (as Virgil saith) and then flyes she home to her Hive to pro∣mote the common good.
Bear with me, good Madam, in this Harangue concerning the Bee; for I verily believe, that your Name and your Nature (especially your New Nature) have an happy har∣mony in you. No doubt but you make it your exercise, you recrea∣tion (as the Phrase is, Act. 24.16.) to read the Sacred Scriptures duly and daily, yea, and the soundest and most savoury Authors that do write upon them; wherein you meet with many choice Spiritual Flowers, out of which, by your Divine Art of sucking (as the Prophet's Phrase is, Isa. 66.11.) your Soul doth ex∣tract most Heavenly Honey to nou∣rish it up to Eternal Life. Where∣as on the other hand, all idle and Addle-brain'd Authors your Soul ab∣horreth as the Bee doth stinking Weeds.
The Second account is, that my former Volumes found such accept∣ance with you, as that you was plea∣sed to say you would not want them for Gold. I wish this work of mine may find no worse entertainment.

Good Madam, that you may still be indefatigable in reading the holy Scriptures, &c. You have the Vir∣gin Mother of our dear Redeemer for a most excellent Example, who (as Sabellius saith of her) did spend a∣bout the third part of her precious time in reading thereof; that she was much conversant in them, and throughly acquainted with them, is very manifest in her Magnificat, Luke 1.46. which is mostly made up of other Holy Scriptures. This is the way to become blessed among Wo∣men, as that blessed Woman was.
I shall now add no more, but my Prayer to God for you, that the word of Christ may dwell in you richly, Col. 3.16. And that the Father of Lights (who commandeth Light to shine out of Darkness) may give you the Light of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. As likewise that you may see all your Children, the work of God's hands, in the midst of yours and their Houses, that so your face may not look pale, but that you may glorifie the Lord God of Isra∣el, Isa. 29.22, 23.
Which is

