



Right Honourable, &c.
'TIS a most Conspicuous and unde∣niable Truth, that You are the grand Patriots and present Pa∣trons of all that is near and dear to us, both as we are Men and as we are Christians: You are our blessed Zerubbabels (which signifies Born in Babel or far from Confu∣sion; the good Lord grant, that however ye might be born in it, ye may be graciously re∣moved far from it) Or our sweet Shezbazzars, (which signifies Joy in Tribulation, the good Lord make you no less to these three Nations) whom God hath raised up (in this critical conjun∣cture of Babylonish Confusion) as Saviours upon Mount Sion to judge the Mount of Esau, or Ro∣mish Edom; that the Kingdom may be the Lords, Obad, v. 21. Even a Kingdom of Righteousness and true Holiness; wherein the Crown may be placed upon our Lord Christs (not Antichrists) Head, Cant. 3.11. 1 Chron. 29.11. Isai. 33.22.
that there may be a , a divine or ho∣ly Government; and that the Temple of the Lord (which hath been burnt and broken down) may be built again, that the Lord our God may dwell amongst us. It must be acknow∣ledged, that (as Zerubbabel or Shezbazzar had in his way, so) you have in your way great Mountains, Zech. 4.7. Mountains of Prey, Psal. 76.4, 5. Yea, destroying Mountains, Jerem. 51.25. Though Babylon be called there a de∣stroying Mountain, and seated upon a Rock that is unaccessible and not underminable, yet God hath promised (for your encouragement) that he will level it and lay it low enough, v. 28. This destroying Mountain God will make a burnt Mountain, like a great heap of Rubbish and Ash∣es, as this City lately was when burned down by Babylonish hands; the Lord will Retaliate, and pay Rome with her own Coin, as it is fore∣told of her, (that Radix omnium malorum.) Rev. 17.16, 17.
Tota eris in Cineres quasi nunquam Roma fuisses,
Wo, wo, wo to her, God will make Rostmeat of her Flesh, and burn her (for an old Bawd) with fire: this destroying Mountain shall be de∣stroyed, when God cometh to Thresh those Mountains and beat them as small as Dust be∣fore him, Isa. 41.15. Oh that you may be a new sharp Threshing Instrument (having Teeth)
in the hand of the Lord, to mash in pieces those mighty Mountains, and to level the loftyest of them (that are set aloft, and overtopping the poor feeble Jews, Nehem. 4.2. the Seed of God) and to bring them to the lowest place (which is fittest for them) to wit, the Footstool of Christ: Surely every Mountain (though never so great) shall become a Plain, or a Champiagne Passable Path, the mouth of the Lord hath spo¦ken it, saying: Who art thou, O Great Mountain? before Gods Zerubbabels thou shalt become a Plain, Zech. 4.7. which is the Virgin Daughter of Si∣on's lofty Interrogation, insulting over the de∣filed and defiling Daughter of Babylon, notwith∣standing her Greatness and Haughtiness, 2 Kin. 19.21. There is no Mountain so strong but it may be moved, if not removed, by an Earth∣quake, when God terribly shaketh the Earth, Hag. 2.6. Nah. 2.3. Babylon meddles not with her match, in meddling with a matchless God, who is more glorious and excellent than all Moun∣tains of Prey, Psal. 76.4. All Mountains melt at his Presence, Nah. 1.5. Psal. 114.3, 6, 7. He that giveth the gift of Miracles whereby to remove Mountains, 1 Cor. 13.2. must needs have that power much more himself; A quo aliquid tale est, illud est magis tale. The Rab∣bins say, that the Pillar of Glory (which was Israel's Conduct from Aegypt to Canaan) stub∣bed up every Bush, and levell'd every Mountain that lay in their way to the Land of Promise.

Right Honourable, The Lord of Hosts be with you, and the like Pillar of Provi∣dence (to do the like Offices of Love for you in your difficult Work) go before you: As the Temple (lately burnt) cannot be built again, until those Mountains of Rubbish (which lyes upon the ground) be removed; so the Temple of God cannot be Repaired by you (our Zerubbabels) untill this work be done: Your Present and Primary Work is to remove Mountains of Rubbish, the [] that which now Letteth will Let, until it be taken out of the way, 2 Thess. 2.6, 7. The Spirit of the Lord be upon you, that (as you have already given many hearty lifts at the Rubbish, so) you may not only effectually remove it, but be able also to cast it all into the Brook Kidron, 2 Chron. 29.16. and 30.14. and 2 Kin. 23.12. Oh! what good man will not assist you in casting such Trash into the Town-ditch, (such a sordid place was Kidron,) that you may go on and Prosper (as A∣sah, Hezekiah, and Josiah did,) in the Name of the Lord. What true Englishman will not say, [The blessing of the Lord be upon you, Psal. 129. ult.] And say, [God speed your Plough,] that hath so much fallow ground to break up before you, that you may not sow among Thorns, Jer. 4.3. Alas! you do meet with much Fallow Ground, a Mispah with its Snares, a Tabor with its Nets, Hos. 5.1. A Beth-Aven, much Land of darkness, all Fallow Ground in England, although
it was ploughed up in Edward the Sixths, and in Queen Elizabeth's time, &c. The Plough of the Gospel must go oft over the Land, be∣fore it be fit Soil for the Celestial Seed, from the best of Sowers, the blessed Seedsman, the Lord Jesus: 'Tis for Wo and Lamentation, that our Land is grown fallow again, and should it not (by your Plough) be broken up, our Na∣tion would soon be broken up: The breaking up of those bloody Romanists may prevent the breaking up of this blessed Nation; should those cursed Thorns be suffered to grow up again with their sharp Pricks, (as they did after the first Ploughing by Edward the Sixth in the Ma∣rian days,) Oh! what dreadful Flames, Burn∣ings, and bloody Cruelties would fall upon us? Witness that [Praelibamen] or Foretast there∣of, not only in those frequent Fires, but also in that Barbarous Murther of Sir Edmondbury God∣frey, before the Power of the Nation was made over to them.
My Lords and Gentlemen, Ploughing Work is a Work of great difficulty, especially among tall, overgrown, deep rooted, and churlish Thorns; rending and tearing up of Fallow Ground, and turning it upside down is a Work of great Difficulty; yet the Removens prohibens, removing Remora's hath most hardness in it, when this is done, the Action will prove less difficult than the Agitation; the Contrivance will be harder than the Accomplishment. The
second Ploughing of Fallow Ground is more easie than the first, and the third is more easie than the second; the Ardua as well as Arcana Imperii are now before your Honours: You are got into a Wood, Wilderness, and Laby∣rinth, (no less is your Generation-work God hath called you to) and were I as worthy as Jo∣nathan, I would do that Office of Love, yea duty for you, which he did for his dear David, when he went into the [Wood] to him, and strengthned his hands in God, 1 Sam. 23.16. by minding and reminding you of the Promises, Providences, and Protection of your God: My Cordial Prayers to God for you shall be con∣stantly, that you may be coming out of the [Wil∣derness,] leaning upon your Beloved, Cant. 8.5. and going thence with our English Israel towards the Land of Promise; yea, and I doubt not but you have a better Threed than that of Ariadne, which helped Theseus out of the [Labyrinth,] even the Wisdom of the wonderful Counsellor, to extricate you out of all those Popish In∣treagues you are now involved in. And that I may the better Strengthen your hands in God, I cannot hide from you those Presaging Provi∣dences of Gods Prevalent Actings, in tendency to our deliverance from Popery at this juncture of time; all which buoys up my Faith above my Fear, and (I hope) may do yours.
The first Presaging Providence is, Great Discoveries do presage great Deliverances▪ God
hath marvellously brought to publick light those private Popish and Diabolical deeds of darkness: Prevision is [tantamont] Prevention, both in Sacred and Civil History; praevisa jacu∣la minùs-feriunt, et premoniti, premuniti; fore∣warn'd, forearm'd, and Darts foreseen are dintless. God hath shot three Arrows, (as in David's Case, 1 Sam. 20.21, 22.) three Wit∣nesses, Mr. Oats, Mr. Bedlow, and Mr. Prance, Arrows all, not to wound us but to warn us, that the intentions of Bloody MEN were for our utter destruction. Thus when Mordecai was Informed, or [Jadang, Hebr.] came to know of the bloody Decree, this was Gods means to break the Neck of cruel Haman's wick∣ed design, Esth. 4.1. &c. Thus also the marvel∣lous discovery of the Powder Plot (in this Land) was (in Gods hand) the marvellous dis∣appointment of it: And surely 'twas no bad Argument, which Sampson's Mother used to his Father Manoah, If God would have destroyed us, he would never have discovered these things un∣to us, Judg. 13.23.
The second Presaging Providence is, Divi∣sion is the Mother of Destruction: (God forbid it should be amongst us, sicollidimur, frangimur, if we clash we break,) but now (praised be God) 'tis found among our Enemies: The Lan∣guage of Babel-Builders is divided and con∣founded; oh how do Priests and Jesuits now divide and discover Priests and Jesuits, &c.
Hereby their Nimrods or cruel Hunters with all their cursed Chamites, are dispersed from their Babel-Building, Gen. 11.7, 8, 9. Our Lord saith, If Satans Kingdom be divided against it self it cannot possibly stand, Matth. 12.25, 26.
The third Presaging Providence is, A Be∣ginning hath a Presaging Tendency to the End. To this Zeresh (Haman's Wife, and probably a prudent Woman) spoke shrowdly and perti∣nently, saying: If Mordecai be of the Seed of the Jews before whom thou hast begun to fall; thou shalt not be able to stand but thou shalt surely fall be∣fore him, Esth. 6.13. Principium per media tendit ad finem: Haman was but barely begun to fall a little below Mordecai in honour. Hence his final Fall was foretold, either by Divine Instinct as the Sybils and Caiphas, or only by Humane Prudence, drawing this notable Conclusion from the common custom of Rising and Falling Favourites: And may not we inferr also, that seeing some of Gods and the Kingdoms Adver∣saries have certainly begun to fall before you (the true Mordecai's of our day) they shall not be able to stand, but shall surely fall before us: Oh that it may be a final and an irrecoverable Fall.
The fourth Presaging Providence is, Per∣secution of Protestants peaceably dissenting, is much turned into Justice upon Papists bloodily de∣signing: Whereby the Lord intimates, he will perform with his Hand what he hath promised with his Mouth, to wit, of taking the Cup of
Trembling out of the hand of Sion, and of put∣ting it into the hand of Babylon, (Isa. 51.17, 22, 23.) to make her drink the very dregs of it, Rev. 14.10. Babylon shall drink not only unto drunkenness but also unto madness, she shall Spue and Fall and rise no more. Jer. 25.18, 21.
The fifth Presaging Providence is, A chang∣ing the Kings Word: This was a Praesage of De∣liverance to Gods Triary, the three Nobles of Babylon, that the Kings Word or Counsel was changed; they had been taken into the Kings Council, Dan. 1.20. and 2.49. but afterwards were impeached and cast into the Furnace: Those Servants of the most High God, were not only delivered, but promoted to their for∣mer and greater Honours, Dan. 3.28, 30. In concurrence herewith, the Kings Word (or Counsel) is now changed, some Persons of Ho∣nour (who have been highly honoured, but afterwards Impeached and cast into the Tower) are again Promoted to be of the Privy Council, and one▪ (as another Daniel) to be President thereof: The Rising of New Favourites is al∣ways the Fall of Old ones, as Mordecai's was of Haman's. No doubt the same God that hath changed the Kings Word (or Counsel) can influence his Heart as he did the Heart of Cyrus, Ezra 1.1. The Kings Heart is in the Hand of the Lord, Prov. 21.1. to turn it as easily as the Ploughman doth his Water-course with his Paddle, or the Gardiner with his hand.

The sixth Presaging Providence is, The migh∣ty Turn which is wrought upon the Spirit of the Na∣tion in General: 'Tis expresly said, that the [Sibbah hebr.] Circuit, Revolution, or turning about of the Spirit of the Ten Tribes was from the Lord, 1 Kin. 12.15. As the Heart of the King so the Hearts of the Kingdom are in the Hand of the Lord, and he ordereth all disorders, Judg. 9.23. 1 Sam. 8.19, 22. There is a Cry in our Ears at this day, Oh Wheel! And there is a Wheel within a Wheel; Ezek. 10.10, 13. 'tis the Father of Spirits that sets on or takes off the Spirits of People, and vox Populi est vox Dei.
To Summ up all, the seventh and last Presa∣ging Providence is, God hath put his Hand to the Plough, and he will not look back, Luke 9. 62. The Wheel (of Providence) goes streight forward, and returns not as it goes, Ezek. 1.9, 12, 17. But to the Place whither the Head looks, the Wheels fol∣low it: They turned not as they went, Ezek. 10.11. God positively Protesteth, When I begin I will also make an end, 1 Sam. 3.12. When he once begins his Execution of Justice, [quod Verbis minatur, reipsa praestabit,] he will perform with his Hand what his Mouth hath spoken, and go through stitch with his Work, he will neither dally nor desist till it be done; and assuredly none can deny, but the Great God hath begun this his Great Work (called his strange Work, Isa. 28.21.) and God will Accomplish his Fury, Ezek. 5.13. for All his Works are perfect, Deut.
32.4. He is not like the foolish Builder in the Gospel, that lays the Foundation and hath not wherewith to finish, Like 14.28, 30. But the good Work that God hath begun, he will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6. Notwith∣standing the pauses that Providence makes in its Passage and Progress, such are but as so ma∣ny Parenthese's which never interrupt (but rather Illustrate) the Sence of a Sentence. Sometimes 'tis the Method of Providence (in order to the fulfilling of Promises) to step back∣ward; as David, after he was Anointed the first time by Samuel, was brought to Saul's Court to drive away the Evil Spirit from Saul, which could not but give him some hope of the Crown God had promised him by Samuel, yet after this was David brought thence to his Country Life of being a Shepherd. Not∣withstanding Gods Providence, as the Battering Ram (that steps backward) comes on with greater Force again. Now,
My Lords and Gentlemen, Having all these Presaging Providences (humbly Proposed, not peremptorily and Dictator like Imposed) for your Encouragement; Arise and be doing for the Lord is with you, 1 Chron. 22.16. The sound of Gods goings is gone out before you, (the Footsteps of his Anointed, Psal. 89.51.) and you may hear an hurrying noise upon the very tops of those tall Cedats (you have impeached) in the Tow∣er; therefore now must you up and at it; and
(with holy David) bestir your selves (like Men, yea like Gods) against those uncircumci∣sed Philistins, 2 Sam. 5.23, 24. That the Lord may give you the Gift of Miracles, not only for Removing those great Mountains that lye in your way, but also to cast out those seven Unclean Spirits (mentioned in this Treatise) out of the Land, so as never to return upon us any more, Mark 9.25. That God may be your Arm every Morning, Isa. 33.2: And that the Arms of your Hands may be strong by the bles∣sing of the Everlasting God of Jacob, Gen. 49.24. and that your Bow may abide in strength, until you have shot the Arrows of England's Delive∣rance, 2 Kin. 13.17. So Prayeth,

