



My LORDS,
IT hath been the humor of most Writers in our Age, to magnify their Patrons so far above the Sphere of Nature, as to make of them more than Demi-Gods; and with those servile glitterings of Flattery have they endea∣voured to be for ever cherished in the Breasts of the Great. But my Lords, as it is against my Temper to dip my pen in such fashionable oyl, so am I sensible your virtues need not that varnished Lustre, But Truth needs no Gloss, and She hath taken care to illustrate your worths to the whole Nation. It is She that saith you have ever appeared active

for the publick safety, without the least shadow of any sinister design. It is She that saith it was your wisdoms unravel∣led the black and damnable Conspira∣cies of our Enemies against our Gracious King and Government, and prudently endeavoured to defeat those mischiefs which were coming upon us; and for your Recompence, their Revenge Shrowded you in a bewailed Confine∣ment for a time; but now you are freed from that injurious Eclyps, and now your Innocencies Triumph again. The hand of Providence hath wonderfully sha∣med and confounded the Nation's and your Enemies, who may now blush at their Actions, and, holding down their Heads disconsolately, cry out, the Snare we have laid for others, we are fallen into our selves. I question not, but these sor∣did, whymsical and ridiculous Contri∣vances of theirs, have created many Con∣verts, and that those whose eyes were but half open before, do now see as plain

as the Sun is visible to them at Noon, that Plots, and no Plots, and Protestant-Plots too, are all but one Hellish, Popish Plot, however curiously the Roman Anatomists have endeavoured to dissect it.
My Lords, it may be thought a great presumption in me, to offer you a Play which never run the Risk of an hiss on either of the Theaters; some will say it ought not to pass Muster for that very reason: But my Lords, I can boldly affirm say that this is not the first Play that hath been published & not Acted on the publick Stage. Mr. Dryden's Fall of Man tho' an excellent Poem, yet never ap∣peared there. I could name many more, had I not other reasons perhaps more im∣portant, for the non-acting of it at either of those places, the Subject being not a little Satyrical against the Romanists, would very much hinder its taking, and would be far more difficult to get play'd than Caesar Borgio was: or if it should

chance to have been played, might have found a colder entertainment than Tegue O Divelly, The Irish Priest, at the Duke's Theatre, merely for the Subjects sake. The Reasons I have humbly of∣fered your Lordships, will, I hope, gain your approbation in the necessity of its not having been offered to be Acted at either of the Houses.
And tho' your Lordships Wisdoms may esteem Plays as no other than plea∣sing vanities, so judg this not worth your Grave perusals: Yet I will be bold to in∣form you, that you will find here some Truths, as well as Truthless Fancies. It therefore implores your favourable ac∣ceptance, as the Author doth your Par∣dons, with a Candid Construction of his presumption, who subscribes himself
My LORDS,

