


AMongst all my small Acquaintance, I have not had the Happiness to know personally any person of Quality (though undoubtedly, some such there be out of my reach) so much conversant and so exquisitely vers'd in prophetick Mysteries like your self, and consi∣dering That Prodigies (which this portable pocket-book treat∣eth upon) are a kind of mute (yet speaking) Prophecies, I made bold to Dedicate it (quale quale est) to your Worship, being experimentally Assu∣red, That you are a lover of Learning, and a candid Patron to all Abstruse Essays, well knowing that in magnis voluisse sat est, & Difficilium, facilis est venia. Sir, your Candour, I presume, will incline you to pardon me in the whole, in as much as I have been constrained throughout this whole Work to tread all in untrodden paths, finding none walking in the same way and Method before me: You will find the Labour (such as it is) the more elaborate, in finding out Sacred (which are least obvious to Exceptions) as well as Civil Parallels to present Prodigies; and in making such (I hope) Innocent Descants upon them, as the Matter doth require▪ Sir, I look upon you as one above many for Discoursing about the Signs of the times: both the Signs of Divine Anger and of Divine Favour. Signum & Signatum sunt correlata. Every Sign must have the thing signified, no Sign is so dumb, but it speaks something which only the wise do understand, Hos. 14.9. 'Twas Daniel only and not the South-sayers, That could Read the Handwriting upon the Wall, and give a Right Interpretation of it. Dan. 5.8, 11.12, 15, 16. Such as seek to Sorcerers, deserve no better than a Disappointment, the lowest fruit of their sublime Folly, None of those Wizards of the world (though they might have Deep Reaches in Humane Affaires) could give the Sense of that Divine Oracle, that work was reser∣ved for a better man than they: Stultorum plena sunt omnia; Store of such Fools (no better than Dust heaps) are found in every Corner, who either know not the mind of God in mystical matters, or Stumble at it. There be too many Atheists, who do extenuate and undervalue all Prodigies. Heathenishly ascribing them to Dame Nature only, whereby they do dangerously Darken the Power and Provi∣dence of the Almighty God. but there are not many wise, wise-hearted, and wise un∣to Salvation. They are few that Understand the Signs of the Times. 'Tis Objected, Prodigies are common Things, therefore cannot be special Presages of future E∣vents, or of the End approaching. I Ans. (1) 'Tis very observable that the Palmo∣ni Hamadabbat or Prince of Preachers preached upon Prodigies those signs and wonders which did presage the Destruction of Jerusalem, and of his last Comming, occasioned by his Disciples asking [When shall these things be, and What sign will there be when these things shall come to pass, Luke 21.7. Mat. 24.3. & Mar. 13 4. &c. No sooner had Christ prepared them with due Cautions concerning themselves, but he declared what was satisfactory to their curious question. (2.) The very first Text that Christs Apostles preach'd upon (after Christ was gone from them, and the Spirit come upon them) was concerning Prodigies which the Prophet Jel foretold God would shew in the world, ch. 2. ver. 30, &c and the Apostle Peter handled that Text so powerfully as to prevail with 3000 Converts at one Sermon, Acts 2 17.19.41. Shewing how New Testament times do unvail and Accomplish the vaild Prophecies of the Old. (3) 'Tis the concurrent Opinion of our best Protestant Authors, that there be some Special Signs of the Times (call'd Sacramentis & M∣raculis cognata, near a Kin to Sacraments and Miracles) which are more than Na∣tural, even of a Divine Ordination, declaring how the Great God stands affected towards poor man, in respect of his Favour or Anger: See Polani Syntagma 6. ca. 48, & 59 & many Classick Authentick Divines. (4) 'Tis likewise as concur a Sentiment of God Hist ri (both Ancient and Modern) that Prodigies do mostly
Portend the Futurition of some extraordinary Events, as, Herodotus, &c. and Lucan. l. . telleth, how the sad calamities of Rome were presaged by many strange Pro∣digies in Heaven, Earth and Sea, singing or saying, Thus
— Superique Minaces
Prodigiis terras implērunt Aethera pontum
Igneta obscurae vidèrunt Sydera Noctes,
Ardentémque polum flammis, coelóque Volantes,
Obliquas per Inane Faces, &c.
All which do signify, that the whole Fabrick of the Universe had put upon it (by the Angry God) a most frightful Face and Aspect, and Heaven, Earth and Sea did conspire together to chastize the Pride and Luxury of Rome at that Time, and Claudian saith, That after Caesars Victory over Pompey, not only the Heavens drop'd blood, but also pits and pools flowed with blood, as a praesage of Caesars Stabbing, cum multis aliis, &c. (5.) Pliny, l. 2. c. 58. saith, The Heathens were startled at the Prodigys of his time, in so much that they had their solemn Sacrifices for Diver∣ting the Evils portended by them; And will not those Dictates of the dim light of Dame Nature in these blind Heathens rise up in Judgment against our Atheists, who scoff at all those wonderful signs so terrifying in themselves, and so testifying God's wrath for Man's sin? Alas, they had not God's Heifer to plow withall (which we have) yet could they Unriddle those Mysteries (call'd , God's prodigious preachments) better than many of us: their very natural Religion was a dark Imitation of the true Divine Devotion, though the Devil (God's Ape) did impose upon them therein much Superstition. If against this, it be alledged what is said, Jer. 10.2, 3. Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not Dismayed at the Signs of Heaven, as they are, for their Customs are vain. I Answer (1.) God Cautions his people there, (going Captives into Chaldea then) that they learn not the vain Astrology and Idolatry of the Chal∣deans in their Country. (2.) That Astrology which pretendeth to read Fates and Fortunes in the Heavens, ascribing all to Stars and not to God, is Idolatry, condemn'd there by Jeremy and by Isaiah ch 47: 12, 13, &c. (3) Jeremy speaks of Natural and ordinary Signs of Heaven which the blind Heathens were dismay'd at (Desying God while they Deified them) as if the Issues of their Affairs depen∣ded on them: VVherefore Gods people should not be so: If there were no other Reason but that only, Matth: 6.32. but there be other Extraordinary Signs, dreadful Apparitions, whereby God warns his people of some ensuing Wrath, as appeareth from Joel, Christ and Peter, &c. (as above) God doth not forbid us to mind them and to be affected with them. Especially considering this is Gods last way of speaking to us, as it was to Pharaoh, when God had said sostly to him at first, Let my People go, &c. he hardned his heart, then God spake more severely to him by Signs and wonders: So now, our Barnabas's hath been rejected, God sends his Boanerges's and preacheth to us by Prodigies, and such as are more than Ordinary without a Parallell for this Soo year, and so attended with such concussions of Kingdoms (e'n Popish one against another, &c) which seem to put an Accent on them and though there have been frequent Prodigies, yet may they be Signs of the last times, as a Disease is a sign of Mortality, though a Man recover sometimes, yet ceaseth he not to be mortal but dyeth at last; So those signs (though oft seen) do not cease to be Signs of the Approaching End: and former Prodigies, might have other Praesages and signi∣fications, as those in 60, &c: what hath befaln ever since, such as, Plague, Fire, &c. I speak to a wise man (skilful in Mysteries) who will judg candidly what is sayd by,
From my Study this 10 of May, 1681.

