


My LORD,
I Beseech You Pardon my Boldness, that (Poor) I do take upon me to Interrupt your Lordship in your so Great Affairs and so Emergent Occasions, as the Sa∣ving of a Sinking City and Nation, most justly Challengeth: Were I as Wor∣thy as Jonathan, 'tis no less a Law writ in my Heart to do for your Lordship what he did for David, [In going to him into the Wood, to Strengthen His Hands in God,] I do here Present to your Noble Hands as Noble and Necessary a Prospect as this lower World can Afford, to wit, GOD wageing War against the DEVIL, from the Beginning of the World to the End thereof, and God all along (as is most meet) Obtaining the VICTORY: 'Tis a pleasant Spectacle to behold Christ and Antichrist contending for Mastery: To be an Universal HISTORIAN, (as I presume your Lordship to be) is the most Effectual Means to make Wise for both Worlds: Hence Plato Derives Historia, [,] from Stopping the Flux of Humane Extravagancy, History being the Wit∣ness of Time, the Light of Truth, the Life of Memory, and the Doctress of the Life of Man: As it is a continued Kalendar of most Remarkable Actions in former Ages, so it holds forth Caution, Counsel, and Comfort, to follow∣ing

Generations; Quid Divinius, Nôsse omnia? To be a good Historian, is a good way to be both Wise and Good, as Contracting a Blest Composition of all those Perfecti∣ons perused in every Age, and leaving a Transforming In∣fluence behind them: History makes Wise (1) to Secular Affairs, as it is a Knowledge of Things past, whereby we may Judge of Things present, and make Probable Conje∣ctures at Things to come, seeing there is no New thing under the Sun. The self-same Scenes are Acted over and over again upon the Stage of the World, 'Tis onely the Per∣sons (that Act them) which are changed; therefore the Re∣presenting in an Historical-Glass, what hath been before, is a plain Praemonition of what shall be Hereafter. 2. Wise to Salvation: The Great God hath been making a Large Comment (even in Capital Characters) upon his own Text, Gen. 4. 7. If thou dost Well, shalt thou not be Accept∣ed? and If Ill, Sin lies at thy Door: and upon that Text, Isa. 3.10, 11. Say to the Righteous, It is well, &c. and Woe to the wicked, and tell them so from me, saith the Lord. As the most Wise God made Two Great Luminaries (the Sun and Moon) to give Light to the World, so hath he Ordain∣ed Two Great Lights (the Word of His Promise, and the Work of his Providence) to Enlighten his Church: as the Moon borrows Light from the Sun, wherewith she looks up∣on the World with greater Splendour: so the Work of Pro∣vidence (as to us) Receives Light from the Word of Pro∣mise, whereby the Church is more Illuminated. What is the Work of Providence, (upon all Ages, Places, Families, Persons, &c.) but the Accomplishment of the Words of Pro∣phecy and Promise: All the Actings and Emanations of Providence, are a standing Comment and a clear Inter∣pretation of Abstruse Prophecies, and of Ʋnfulfill'd Pro∣mises: All Occurrences (whether Great or Small) in the World, are but the Accomplishment of what God hath Prophecy'd and Promis'd in His Word: Solomon Saith, The thing that hath been, it is that which shall be, Eccles. 1. 9, 10, 'Tis True, there hath been some Extra∣ordinary Actings of God in the World, (such as Noah's

Deluge, the promulgation of the Law, the Suns standing still and going back, a Virgin bearing a Son, &c.) shall never be again: Yet all Ordinary Occurencies are alike in all Ages, from a Two-fold Ground. 1. All Natural Cau∣ses and Effects continue as they were at the Beginning, Na∣tura nihil Molitur Novi, Nature Produces no New Species of Creatures, though there may be some Accidental Defect or Superfluity in the Matter. (2.) All Humane and Volun∣tary Actions, Counsels, and Contrivances, (having the same Principles to Produce them, and the same Objects to Draw them forth,) are the same in Substance, as Heretofore, and therefore must have the same Tendency: As Face An∣swers to Face in a Glass, so doth the Heart of Man to Man, Prov. 27. 19. that is, The Counsels of the Hearts, and Courses of the Lives of Men in one Age, do exactly Answer unto those of another, As it was in the Days of Noah, even so shall it be, &c. Matth. 24. 31, 39. A Man may as in a Mirror take a Shrewd Prospect of Future Events by for∣mer Instances. It must therefore be acknowledg'd a mighty Loss to Mankind to Bury the Knowledge of former things in the Grave of Unmindful Heads, or Unthankful Hearts.
My Lord, You are WISE (I would say) as an Angel of God, to Discern Dexterously, and Improve Practically, what is here (Quale, quale est,) Presented to your Lord-ship, 'tis a CHURCH-HISTORY, being an Orderly Com∣memoration of Things past, with the Circumstances of Time and Place in Distinct Descents and Distances for the better Help of Remembrance, Affection and Application: wherein your HONOUR may turn aside with Moses to Be∣hold the Bush ever Burning ▪in the Flames of Her Adver∣saries Fury▪ yet never Consumed, Exod. 3. 3. because the Good will of him that dwelt in the Bush, did preserve it, Deut. 33. 16. That Excellent Emblem of the Church had a Complication of Wonders, as 1. There was a Flame of Fire, else how could the Bush be Burning? 2. There was Light, else how could Moses behold it? 3. Yet no Heat, else the Bush had been Consumed: It was the Angel of the Co∣venant, that either Qualify'd the Fire to have Light with∣out

Heat, or Consolidated the Bush, so, as not to become Combustible: 'Twas the presence of Christ that made the Fiery Furnace a Gallery of Pleasure to the Three Nobles of Babylon. The Church is the onely Salamander that can Live in the Fire by Vertue of that Promise, Isa. 43. 2. No Flame can Consume her. And to Behold a Lilly in the midst of Thorns, Cant. 2. 3. Though one Churlish Thorn can Scratch in pieces 10000 Tender Lillys, yet is so Mar∣velously Preserv'd in the midst of many and mighty Ene∣mies, It could never be Cut up by the Sword of Persecu∣tion, or Burnt down by the Fire of Martyrdom: And to Behold all along a most Harmonious Consort, and a most Con onant Coincident Correspondency betwixt the Words of Gods Mouth, and the Works of Gods Hand. Lastly, Your Honour may behold how the Church hath been (and will be) Secured by a Divine Power, Promise, Prophecy, and Providence, against the Fraud and Force, Craft and Cruelty, Power and Policy of all her Foes, that notwith∣standing all their Stratagems and Strength, the Issue hath ever been the Destruction of All the Designers, leaving a Fatal Monument of themselves to Posterity behind them; yet the Church is still preserved: That your Lordship may be , do Worthily in Ephratah, and be Famous in Bethlehem, (as you Hitherto have been) and that you may have Safety in this World, and Salvation in the World to come, is the Hearty Prayer of

