



THE Bosom and best Beloved Disciple saith, [I write to you Young Men, because ye have overcome the wicked One, because ye are strong, and the Word of God abideth in you, &c.] 1 Joh. 2.13, 14. And poor I (the least of Saints, and greatest of Sinners) write accordingly unto you, that it may be so with you in this present Time, as it was with those Young Men in the Primitive and A∣postolical Times: What they (through Grace) did, and Had the honour of,
the same ye ought to do, and have the like Ambition, both for Valour and for Victory: Solomon saith also, That the Glory of Young Men is their Strength, Prov. 20.29. The Hebrew word there for Young Men, signifeth Choice men, to wit, for Military Em∣ployments, which may be understood in a Mystical as well as in a Literal Sense, seeing there is a Spiritual as well as a Temporal Warfare, Isa. 40.2. 1 Cor, 9.7. & 2 Cor. 10.4. & 1 Tim. 1.18. There is the Figurative Fighting, the good Fight of Internal Faith, 1 Tim. 6.12. 2 Tim. 4.7. Heb. 10.32. As well as that which is Corporal by External Force: Nor can Young men be reputed more truly Valorous in any Heroick Exploits, than in Van∣quishing the Prince of Darkness.
O ye Young men, your Strength is indeed your Glory, and you are prone to Glory in your Strength as your pe∣culiar Priviledge above all other Ages,
but forget not that word of Wisdom which tells you [Let not the mighty man Glory in his might, &c. but let him that glorieth Glory in the Lord] Jerem. 9.23. 1 Cor. 1.31. And re∣member to use your strength well, not in Quarrelling and Duelling (as those Youngsters at Helketh-Hazzurim did, who sheathed their Swords in each others Bowels, for a Play and Pastime, 2 Sam. 2.14.16.) Not in Vanity or Vil∣lany, &c. but in following your par∣ticular Callings, (as well as in fight∣ing for your native Countries, as those Young men of the Princes of the Pro∣vinces did, 1 Kings 20.20. from ver. 13, 14, &c.) As you are Strong Young men; more especially in pursuing your General Calling, as you are Strong Young Christians. Thus Young Ti∣mothy became a good Souldier of Je∣sus Christ, 2 Tim. 2.3. not dreaming of any Carnal Delicacy, but Enduring Hardship, and living so abstemiously among the luxrious Ephesians that the
Apostle was constrained to prescribe him Physick, 1 Tim. 5.23. As Godly Ti∣mothy's daily Task was to war a good marfare, so it ought to be yours.


First, Make Religion your business, not a By-business; let it be jour Al∣pha and your Omega, that must be in the Beginning and in the Ending, yea and in the Middle also of all your Act∣ings. Inure your selves so to it as to make it your familiar Exercise or Re∣creation, Acts 24.16. Yea bestirr your selves lustily in it, as your business of greatest Importance,1 Tim. 4.7.
Secondly, Arm your selves with the whole Armour of God, both that part which is Defensive (as the Girdle of Truth, the Helmet of Hope, the Shield of Faith, the Breast-Plate of Righteousness, and the Shoes of Peace and Patience) And that also which
is Offensive, as the Sword of the Spi∣rit, and Darts of Prayer, Eph. 6.12, 13, to 19.
Thirdly, In this Armour fight ye the good Fight of Faith, 1 Tim. 6.12. Be men of God, ver. 11. and Quit your selves like men, 1 Cor. 16.13. Be more than men, be strong, 2 Tim. 2.1. in the Grace which is by Je sus Christ. Be Strong Young Men, Re∣sist the Devil and he will flee from you, James 4.7. 1 Pet. 5.9. Satan is therefore but a Coward, who (like the Crocodile) when you follow him, he fleeth you, but if you flee from him, he followeth you.
Fourthly, In this Armour also do ye war a good warfare, 1 Tim. 16.18. against those Fleshly Lusts, which war against your Souls, 1 Pet. 2.11. That like the Syrians, are commanded by their Master to war with neither Small nor Great, but with the King of
Israel, 1 Kings 22.31. All their Spite is against the Soul, to destroy it and its Grace and Peace. If such a Chast and Chastened peice as Mortified young Timothy was bid to Flee youth∣ful Lusts, 2 Tim. 2.22. How much more you in these debauching daies, and in your slippery Age, as slippery as Glass.
Fifthly, Tremble to turn This Ce∣lestial Armour into Carnal and Ef∣feminate Amours: If you embrace Vice in your Youth, 'tis a thousand to one but you will refuse Vertue in your Old Age: Trees that blossom not in the Spring, will hardly bear fruit in Autumn. Besides, is this fair dealing to give God the Devils leavings? How can God like to be Gleaning at last where the Devil hath been reapimg all your Time? to say nothing of the Strains and Cramps of Conscience, which you will carry with you to your dying Day, as possibly you may do some strains and cramps (while young and presumptuous) in your body.
Sixthly, But to be short, consider what Solomon (in his sapiential Ser∣mon, concerning the most soveraign good) saith by his most emphatical Irony for deterring all youngsters from per∣suing sensual pleasures [rejoyce O Young-Man in thy youth?] Eccles. 11.9. That is [Do if thou darest] As God said to Balaam [Go since thou wilt go.] Numb. 22.20. But know that thou goest upon thy death. Thus this Ironical Concession inti∣mates that Young-Men have strongest Inclinations to, and the stoutest Abilities for all kind of sensuallity, and they are most impatient both of reproof and re∣straint, therefore do they indulge their own jolly and frolick humours, in take∣ing their full of delights: In eating drinking, being madly merry, &c. Let them do so (saith Solomon) but at their peril. [But know, &c.] O this stinging [But &c.] marrs all their mirth, and is a Cooler to the Youngsters courage; one thought of
an after reckoning spoils all his sport, [For all these things] which are ac∣counted but Triffles and Tricks of Youth, [God will bring you to judg∣ment,] either in this life (as he did Young Absolom and Adonijah, Hophni and Phineas, Nadab and Abihu, and other Young Men, or however in the next life. Your Death Day shall unavoidably become your Dooms Day, then God will force you to appear before his dreadful tribunal, (though never so much against the hair and against the heart) thereto receive the direful sentence of [go ye cursed &c.]
Young-Men (of all men) are aptest to put the evil day of death and judgment far from them: But this avails not any, yet undoes many, lul∣ling them aslep in the cradle of securi∣ty. For (as Bernard saith) Senibus mors in Januis, Adolescentibus in insidiis, Death is at the Door for old Men, yet lays in ambush for the young,
and breakes oft in without knocking at the door, it oft comes like the lightning or thunder, both blasting the green corn, and breaking yea burning down the newest and strongest buildings.
Lastly. Let it be your care and your Conscience to Remember your Crea∣tor in the days of your youth, before the evil days of old age come upon you, Eccles. 12.1. Sure I am, the strongest obligations to this Duty lays upon you; for God is the first Author both of your being and well being, &c. To forget him therefore (as the Wicked do and so are turned into Hell, Psal. 9.17.) is most Unnatu∣ral, Inhumane, and Disingenious: Doe yo Remember your Maker prac∣tically, so as to fear and love him, and faithfully serve him: Thus this Young-Man your pattern and my sub∣ject here (I am perswaded) did: You must accordingly serve God with the best of your time and strength, while you are most able to do so, and
have the best oppertunities, for possibly you may not live till old age. Go forth to gather Manna in the morning of your life, in the flower of your age, this will be most acceptable to God whose Soul desireth the first ripe fruits, Mic. 7.1. And who will remember the kindness of your youth in your remembring him, Jer. 2.1. This will be most Comfortable to your selves, knowing that you have mortified (in part through grace) those impetuous passions, and inordinate affections, which drowns so many thousands of Young-Men in the pit of perdition: O be not like the Circassians (a kind of Mongrel Christians) who divide their lives betwixt sin and devotion dedicating their youth to rapine, and their old age to repentance, Bre∣erwoods inquiry, Pag. 135. But cursed be that cozener (faith the Pro∣phet Mal. 1.14.) that hath a male in his flock, yet offereth to the Lord a corrupt thing. God likes not those
loiterers, that think to come into his Vineyard at the last hour of the day, to serve God then, when they can serve their lusts no longer. That would put off their Creator with the Dreggs and Snuffs of their time, when the Tempter hath taken the cream & best: though your memoryes lay in the Hin∣der part of your Heads, yet may you not put off the Remembring your Creator to the Hinder part of your Lives, and possibly that may be Now, for assoon goes the Lambs skin to the market, as the old Sheep, let this young-Man, be a Pattern for your Practice: That your first fruits may sanctify the whole lump, Rom. 11.16. that you may be the blessed Hope of another generation, 1. King. 20.14. and that you may be delivered from wrath to come 1. Thes. l. 10. Yea and be accounted worthy (with this dear one deceased) to inherit Glory is the unfeigned desire of an Old Servant of Christ.


