



Right Honourable,
THe Etymologist, Defines nobilis, quasi prae Aliis Virtute notabilis, and the Heathen Sage saith, Nobilitas sola est, atque Ʋnica Vir∣tus; The Antiquity of a Noble Race, is but the
matter of true Nobility, 'tis Vertue that is the
Form which quickens it, and gives life to it: If Nobility (which is but the Moss of time) do not grow upon the back of Vertue, it wants its true Supporter, and soon dwindles into nothing: Quoe nos non fecimus ipsi, Vix ea nostra Voco. 'Twas once a tart Sarcasm, Meum Genus a me Inci∣pit,  tuum Verò in te Desinit: Antiquity of Pedegree, is only a Nobility by Parchment. That Nobility is most truly Divine, where God is the top of the Kindred, and Religion the Root of it: Tantus quisque est, Quantus est apud Deum. My Lord, this happy Conjunction of Honour and Vertue in your Lordship, (I speak without Va∣nity) doth plainly declare you an Honourable Patriot, yea, and in this sad conjuncture of Affairs, you have shone forth (through the good hand of God upon you) as a Star of the first Magnitude in our British Hori∣zon, now when Hell and Rome have been
Clubbing their most sublimated Wits to destroy King and Kingdom, Employing their deceitfull Dalilah's to cut off the Locks of our Land, and their crafty. Ʋlysses's to steal away our
Palladium, to wit, our Religion (which is both our Ornament and our Muni∣ment) from us. Then did the Lord raise up your Lordship as the Atlas of England, to support a sinking Nation: it would be prodigious ingratitude not  to acknowledge it: Undoubtedly, my Lord, God hath given you (I speak it not with the stinking breath of a sordid Sycophant) a great Soul in a little Body for some eminent Genera∣tion-Work, and all your former Suf∣ferings and present Diseases, serve but (as a dark Soil in a well drawn Pi∣cture) to set off your splendour and excellency: God hath given you a pro∣found Judgment, and a most charming (not an effeminate) Eloquence, which is hitherto an effectual Instrument (in the Lords hand) to conjure down those Incarnate Devils that Beelzebub and his Eldest Son (the Pope) have raised up amongst us. Your Lord∣ship hath not been like the Nobles of the
Tekoites, that would not put their neck to the Lords work, as if it had been below their Greatness, Neh. 3.5. but rather like the Nobles of Israel, who digged Wells with their Staves of Honour for the common good, Numb. 21.18. You have done Wor∣thily in
Epphrata, and is famous in Bethlehem, God hath wip'd off the
 Scandalum Magnatum, Psal. 37.6. Go on (noble Sir) as another Joseph, Da∣niel, or Nehemiah, to save much Peo∣ple alive from the hands of Popish Cut-Throats, Nulla infoelicitas frangit quem nulla Foelicitas Corrumpit▪ let your
Goodness so Sanctifie your Great∣ness, that you may improve this upper-Ground whereon you stand, and hold not your Peace for our inlargement in this day, Esth. 4.14. The work of your day is to pull down this cursed Antichrist, (here treated on) and to set up our blessed Christ in his Throne, wherein that you may be daily more signally and more singularly usefull, is the Cordial Prayer of

