



My Lord,
ANtiquity of Pedigree may most truly be stiled, the worthless Moss of Antient Times, and is too often found to be only a Nobility by Parchment. The Etymologist doth define Nobilis, quasi prae aliis Virtute Notabilis; inti∣mating, that the more Noble in Title a Man is, the more Notable in Virtue he ought to be 'Tis the saying of one of the Heathen Sages, Nobilitas so∣la est atque Unica Virtus, signifying, that Titles of Honour should be the sha∣dows of Virtue; hereupon a morose Philosopher affirmed, that Honours without Virtues are but the Mask of Vices. A Noble Genealogy from Antient Times, is but the matter of true Nobility; 'tis Virtue only that is the form and soul of it, which doth ani∣mate and quicken it, and without which it is no better than a dead car∣cass, that soon putrifieth into stench, and dwindles away into nothing, when Honour is not found growing upon the back of Virtue, and is not born up by it, as by is supporting Pillar. Hereupon it was once a most tart Sarcasm of one (who rose to Honour by Virtue) to one (who ended his Ho∣nour by Vice) Meum genus à me inci∣pit, Tuum verò in te desinit; and the witty Poet singeth, Quae nos non fecimus ipsi, vix ea nostra voco. The Platonick Definition of Nobility, is [] in English its sense is, that the best Gentility is a virtuous exercise of generous Manners: Upon this account, the Men of Berea were called [] that is, better Gentlemen, or more Noble than those of Thessalonica, Acts 17.11. Assuredly that Nobility is the best, and most truly Di∣vine, where God is the Top of the Kin, and Religion the Root of it, &c.
Now, My Lord, those happy Con∣junctions (I speak without vanity) are
most happily found in your Lordships, both Parentage and Person, in whom Honour and Holiness had their mutual and reciprocal Splendour. For first, I had the happiness to have a personal and particular knowledge of your Ho∣nourable Descent from a truly honou∣rable and holy Father, Coll. Rookesby, who was pleased to dignifie me with a Call of being his Chaplain, and whom I thereby became acquainted with, &c. to be a truly Noble and Reli∣gious Patriot of the late designed, and so much desired Reformation, &c. as also from a godly Mother and Grand∣mother, both which I very well knew to be grave Matrons, and Mothers in Israel, and cordial well-wishers (in their capacities) to the power of Godliness. And secondly, as to your own Person, I have known your Lordship long to be an unfeigned Friend of our Lord the Bridegroom and of his Royal Bride the Church, Tantus quis{que} est, quantus ille est apud Deum; All Honours are well measured by the nearest approach to the King of Kings, who is the best Fountain of the truest Honour; there∣fore the right valuation of every Man amongst Men, must be according to the valuation which that Man hath with the great God. This or that Man be∣comes not to be honourable, because he commendeth himself, or is com∣mended by his fellow-creatures; but 'tis he whom the Lord commendeth, 2 Cor. 10.18. The Custom among the Jews and Persians, was to call their most honourable Courtiers [Men of the King's presence.] Thus haughty Haman was so characteriz'd, and after him Modest Mordecai had the same Cha∣racter. How much greater Honour it is to be a Man of God's presence, to be one of God's Neighbours, as the Hebrew phrase is, Lev. 10.3. the Lord is Neigh∣bour to all them that fear him, Psal. 34.18. God complains of his evil Neighbours that do dishonour him, Jer. 12.14. when he had made them as Gods in high places, Exod. 22.28. but God promiseth, that they which honour him, he will honour them; but they which despise him, shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Sam. 2. v. 30.

My Lord, because your Lordship is one that honours God, therefore hath he honoured you, and hath lifted up your Head (as another Joseph) above your Brethren. The Judge of all the Earth (as God is called, Gen. 18. v. 25. and Psal. 94.2.) hath advanced you to that Honourable Station of a Judge, which is the resemblance of his own Infinite Grandeur and Glory. As one of the Twelve Famous Pa∣triarchs of Israel was called Dan (which signifieth a Judge in Hebrew) because he was to Judge the People, Gen. 49.16. So your Lordship is raised up at this Day to Judge the Mount of Esaus, &c. Obad. v. 21. even a com∣pany of Incarnate Devils, who lately conspired to Assassinate the Sacred Person of our Righteous Soveraign, &c. the Lord (whom you do sincerely serve with the best, of your Service) hath exalted you to shine among the Stars of the first Magnitude in our English Horizon, and to serve your own Generation (as David did, Acts 13. v. 36.) by the will of God in your Ge∣neration-work; yea and that in such a Day, wherein Hell and its Imps have been clubbing their most Subli∣mated Wits to destroy both our King and our Kingdom, yea, and to cut off the Locks of our Land, wherein our strength doth lie, as was done to Sam∣son by Delilah, and to steal away our Palladium from us, as Ulysses did from Troy, namely, our Religion, which is not only an Ornament, but also a Mu∣niment and Safe-guard to us. Your Honour's honourable work now is to bring those Pests to condign Punish∣ment. The Moralist saith, He that will be truly generous and noble, must serve Philosophy, how much more to serve Theology, and the Call of the Gospel, wherein the Creature doth most eminently serve his great Crea∣tor: Deo servire, est Regnare, saith the Father: And David did account it his greater Honour to be the Servant of the Lord, than to be the King of Israel, Psal. 18. title. My Lord, I cannot but admire, that, notwith∣standing your providential Lameness,
(which, like a dark foil in a well-drawn Picture, serveth to set off its Beauty) the Lord still enableth you to Ride your Circuit, and what he calls you to, he qualifies you for it, even for that Noble work of Judging the World. The Apostle saith [Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the World of sinful men, yea and the fallen Angels also?] 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. You are not like to those Nobles of the Tekoites, who would not put their Necks to the Lord's work, Nehem. 3.5. but ra∣ther like those Nobles of Israel, who digged Wells with their Staves of Ho∣nour for the common good, Numb. 21.18. That the Lord may still be with you, as he was with those Judges, Judg. 2.18. that you may still walk in the way of that wise Counsel which good Jehosaphat gave to his Judges, 2 Chron. 19.6, 7. and so be still more signally and singularly signifi∣cant in your high Station, is the cor∣dial prayer of

