


To the Right Worshipful and Worthily Honour∣ed Sir Leonard Ro∣binson, Knight, and Chamberlain of this Famous City of Lon∣don.
Grace, Mercy, and Peace be Multiplied.
Noble Sir,
YOU are one for whom the Great God hath done both great and good things, both in respect of your in∣ner as well as outer Man; for as the way of the Righteous is above to the Wise, Prov. 15.24. having their feet where other Mens head are; they are upper-region Men, born from above, as  the Greek signifies, John 3.3. So likewise the Lord hath lent you a marvelous lift (relating to your outward Estate) in seating you upon high, to bear so great a Figure in this so Great a City; what can be said in this case, but that God is good to his Servants, not at all an Austere Master, Luke 19.21. but he gives large Wages for little work, and is most liberal in his Retributions, for he is faithful, 1 Cor. 10.13. and abideth faithful, 2 Tim. 2.13. and will faithfully perform what he hath promised, Heb. 10.23. saying, [he will honour those that honour him, but they that de∣spise him, shall be lightly esteemed] 1 Sam. 2.30. and promising also [in all thy ways acknowledge God, and he will direct thy Paths] Prov. 3.6. God will surely own those that own him, and such as do avouch the Lord to be their God, he will like∣wise undoubtedly avouch them to be
his Servants and peculiar People, Deut. 26.17, 18.
Now Sir, though I must say with Elihu [I know not to give Flattering Titles to any Man] in so doing, my Maker would soon take me away] Job 32.21, 22. I have as little Art in it, ('tis quite out of my Road) as any Heart to do it, lest my Ma∣ker should suddenly snatch me a∣way in that dangerous sin of Flat∣tery, therefore I dare not so much as seem to do so; yet notwithstand∣ing we are commanded [to render unto all Men their dues, Honour, unto whom Honour is due,] Rom. 13.7. Hereupon I cannot but declare it openly, that ever since I had the happiness to be acquainted with you for many years, you have dared to own the good ways of God even in the worst of times; this I must te∣stifie to the World upon my perso∣nal knowledge. And your Lord (whom you have sincerely served, and openly owned) hath likewise owned and honoured you after a most signal and singular manner; not only in advancing you above the heads of all your former Brethren, but also in Exalting you so highly in the very hearts of our Famous Citi∣zens, amongst whom you are Uni∣versally valued, and by whom (which is more and better) you are most entirely beloved. A Demon∣stration hereof was evident at your last Election to your high Office, by their loud and long Acclamations for a Continuation, a Continuation of your person in that place of so great a trust, after a whole years trial of your truth therein.
Worthy Sir, I very well know, since Divine Providence hath devol∣ved this Dignity (filled top full of most weighty Affairs) upon you, that now you have somewhat else to do than to read any Books, much less such a large Volume as this is; yet am I not ignorant, that there is such a Spiritual Tincture upon your Spirit, as hath made you not a little inquisitive after the great Mysteries
of Godliness, 1 Tim. 3.16. and after the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make you wise unto Salvation, 2 Tim. 3.15.
Besides, you well know 'tis a great truth, that the particular calling of no Man (no not of the highest Em∣ploy, and most perplexed with dif∣ficulties) ought at all times and al∣together to justle out the General Calling, which is of absolute and in∣dispensible necessity, and Man's chief end and errand into the world; 'twas the prophane speech of that bloody Atheist Duke de Alva [he had so much business and labour upon Earth, that he had no leisure to look up and mind Eclipses in Heaven, &c.] You have learnt better Lessons in Christ's School, Eph. 4.20. there is a dividing aright for God in both those Callings, which Cain did not, and therefore was accursed; there is a right rendring both unto God, and unto Caesar, without any injury to either of them, Matth. 22.21. there is a time for all things, Eccl. 3.1, &c. Moreover, Arcus nimis intensus rum∣pitur, the Bow that stands always bent, is soon broken. All men must unstring their bow sometimes; some lucid intervals are necessary to man's nature, which desires some diversion, and will soon evaporate without some repose. Now there is do diver∣sion more connatural to the Mind of Man, and more refreshing to his Spi∣rit, than is the reading of History, and of all Histories none are compa∣rable to the Sacred History; where∣of it may be said as David did of Goliah's Sword, [there is none like that] 1 Sam 21.9 the very History is dressed up in that grave and lofty stile (treating all along upon the weightiest matters) must needs be more pleasant to the head of Man, than a thousand Romances; but the deep Mystery thereof (walking all along with the History of it) cannot but be likewise very profitable to the heart of Man, especially to the honest and good heart, Luke 8.15. 'Tis a duty incumbent upon all per∣sons
even of all degrees, sorts, sizes and sexes [to search the Scriptures for Eternal Life.] Joh 5.39. And Al∣phensus King of Arragon did not look upon that labour as below his Royal Dignity, (who (as Panormitanus rela∣teth) did read over the whole Bible (with Lyra's Notes upon it) no fewer than fourteen times. Nor did that No∣ble Aethiopian Eunuch despise that grand Duty (so solemnly Commanded by our sweet Saviour as above) yet was he sensible that he needed an Inter∣preter, Acts 8. ver. 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, &c. Few such Princes or Nobles (I fear) are found in our days.
Right Worshipful,
Your many free Favours, and kind Love tokens you have sent me in my low Estate, lay a strong obligation up∣on me to make this publick acknow∣ledgment under my own hand; I dare not, I may not, I cannot be unthank∣ful; Ingratum si dixeris, omnia dixeris, say the Antients, Ingratitude includeth all kinds of evil in the Womb of it; therefore doth our Lord put them well together [the Ʋnthankful and the Evil,] Luke 6.35. Tho' I have nothing to present your Worship with at present (in testimony of my gratitude) save only this part of my twenty years labours, and tho' it be dish'd up in a sorry Earthen Vessel (or in a vile Oyster-shell, as the Greek , 2 Cor. 4.7. sig∣nifies) yet doth it treat upon the most precious treasure, the Scripture of truth, which therefore (I am sure) will be more acceptable to your pious and generous Soul, than was that handful of water the Souldier presented to his Emperor Artaxerxes, when his ability could ob∣tain no better a present for his General. All that I can now add to this my Present to you, is my most cordial Prayers to God for you, and all yours, praying over that precious promise of God [the libe∣ral Soul shall be made fat, and he that wa∣tereth others, shall be watered also himself] Prov. 11.25. That the God of that Promise may perform it to you, fulfil∣ling with his hand what his mouth hath spoken there, and do as he hath said, is,

