



Honoured Sir,
THere are two dangerous Opinions in the World, against which, as a∣gainst two Rocks, we may suffer Shipwrack, Pelagianism on the One hand, and Calvinism on the other; these are the Scylla and Charybdis, between which if we do not steer our Course evenly and care∣fully,
we may Ruin and Ʋndo our selves: Pelagianism pleads too much for a Natural Power and strength in man; it ascribes too much to man, and makes him by Nature Omnipotent; it makes a God of him in Po∣wer and strength: And Calvinism, like Medusa's head in the Poet, turns men in∣to stones, robs them of all their Powers and Faculties, and determines them irresistibly to all their Actions, by a Necessity no less unavoidable, than the falling stone moves towards the Center; the latter of these Opi∣nions wrongs Nature in defect, by allowing her no strength, which by Consequence must make men desperate; the first wrongs Na∣ture in Excess, by allowing it too much strength, which must needs blow men up with too swelling a Confidence; and both of them do equally destroy the reason of our Application to God for strength; for neither will the man that is well in Conceit, nor yet the desperate, apply himself to a Physician; because the
one cries there is no need, the other, there is no help. The former of these two, namely Pelagianism, sets up and trafficks upon its own Credit, and depends upon the large stock of its own natural Abilities; and scorns to own the Grace of God so far, as to take it into a share and Partnership with it: The other, namely Calvinism breaks, when it needs not, and then declares it self a bank∣rupt, and pretends Insufficiency, that so it may upon easier terms Compound with God for its debt of Obedience; because the Abso∣lute Decree of Reprobation hath taught men to fancy they have no power, it also makes them to have no Will to obtain Salvation; They are of opinion, that the Goats are more numerous than those few Sheep, which are within the little Fold of the Absolute De∣cree of Election; which is diametrically Opposite to St. Pauls Doctrine, 1 Tim. 2.4. That Christ will have all men to be saved; and as contrary to St. Peters 2 Pet.
3.9. who affirms, that the Lord is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance; and ha∣ving so good Seconds as these, I shall not need to fear to enter into the Lists against the As∣serters of that unjust Decree; A Decree too Arbitrary and Tyrannical to be Enacted by the just, gratious, and merciful King of Kings; A Decree, as Arbitrary as that Go∣vernment, their great Patron Calvin set up at Geneva, after the Expulsion of their Law∣ful Bishop; to whose both doctrine and dis∣cipline your great Reason and Learning have always made you a professed Enemy; so that I assure my self that you will kindly accept of, and not pass your Decree of Reprobation a∣gainst this discourse now devoted to you by
Honoured Sir, 
Ansty, Octob. 25. 1682.
