


LIft up your drowzy Heads unto the dawning Light,
Heavens have forbid an Everlasting Night;
And though you have a long time been forlorn,
Yet now rejoyce, to see th'approaching Morn.
You bave been toss'd among the Raging Waves;
The Algerines did hope to make you Slaves:
But your Chase Guns, when they were all in laughter,
Did split their Bottoms, between Wind and Water.
Courage, brave Lads, never despond no more,
Your Loyal Ship is now come safe to shore:
Your Valiant Captain now hath foil'd all those,
Who were the Churches, and the Kingdoms Foes.
Those ill bred Vapours, which do hover here,
With so much rage, within our Hemisphere,
Th'Informing Tribe, a shame unto our Nation,
To suffer such to blot your Reputation:
The Dog, the Fox, the Tyger, and the Bear,
Which did your Loyal Hearts so oft in pieces tear,
From day to day, and what they heard o're Night
In Screetch-Owl Barns, next Morn was brought to light,
And stampt for Currant by the Tory Crew,
Although as false sometimes, as Heaven is true.
Such is the boldness of these Romish Varlets,
To make Black White, Vermillions to be Scarlets.
But here they're met with such a Cornish Hug,
As you will find will make them alwaies shrug;
And doubtless, will make some pull in their Horns,
Rather than undergo such future Scorns.

Your stripling Friend here with his nimble Pen,
Hath charm'd Old Towzer close within his Den,
From biting any more. His crazy Head,
By Hocus Pocus new, is brought to Bed:
Although sometimes perchance he'l bark again
At these, who shall come near his ratling Chain.
Yet now he may discharge his Elder Gun,
You have a Broom, who hath him quite out-done.
The Play house sure a Plague-house is become,
Pester'd with Plague-sores by the Pests of Rome,
Spurting out still Poison most pestilent,
Sometimes Prophane, and sometimes Turbulent.
When Popish Priests were out of Pulpits Thrust,
In Pious Edward's Reign, Invectives Curst,
They pester'd Stages with, to Ridicule,
His Reformation; hence to Charm that Dev'l,
Stage-Playes were Damn'd by Statute Royal-Rule:
Oh that our Powers would Reinforce that Law,
This Cursed Cockatrice to keep in Awe,
From Hatching Fiery Serpents, who wag their Wings,
Strike Loyal Protestants with Fatal Stings.
Playes are a Nasty Nurse to Vice, the Devil's Ground,
Where He possesseth All within his Round:
Where wicked Wits, with their Leud wanton Acts,
In Satan's Ord nance soon beget base Fects;
God's Ordinance they're not, His Institution,
God never gave them, nor his Benediction.
Tories take heed, lest their Contagion catch you,
And Tyburn-Tippets do in time Dispatch you.
Though Doctor Spratt a Sword-Fish seems, and wou'd
Conjure your Coats to Swords, while circl'd stood,
Save you, nor can Enchanted Swords, nor Falchions,
New News from Bedlam gives you solid Cautions.
N.C.
