



May it please your Grace,
I Once thought this Trifle capable of affording me Diversion, yet, though I much desire it, I cannot think it Worthy of meriting your Grace's Patro∣nage. The Piece it self in many places being of no Value, and the Performance in the Translation is so every where, which is the reason I prefix neither your Grace's Name nor my Own. The thing I am most proud of in the World, is your Graces Favour and Acquaintance; and is what I will ever glory in upon all other occasi∣ons; yet, resolving, never publickly to own my self a Scribler. It is not just your Name, for which I have so much Venera∣tion, should be placed before that, which I fear may bring my own Sence into Que∣stion:
However, there is this advantage in being Concealed, that your Grace can∣not be censured for your Friendship, to a Person Ʋnworthy of so much Goodness. I wish I were able to give your Grace a more particular Account of this Tract; but I could never learn any thing of it, but that it came from Holland. It was shown me many Months since, and then Translated. It is a Collection made up of Panegyrick and Scandal; and if in some places it is more favourable than the base Character deserves, the Collector is not to blame, who doubtless was a French Man; and, though he be severe enough upon his Princes, is yet much a Boutan∣nian, whose Servile and Ʋncleanly way of Honouring their Grand Monarque (described by Mons. Tavernier) deserves to be Proverbially applied, not only to many of the French, but their Slavish Mimicks.
I guessed this would not be Ʋn∣grateful, if made English, to shew what blessed People those were, whose Conduct and Government, not long was so much admired by some of their Neighbours. The
Vertues of those Pillars of the Church of Rome, here mentioned, was yet a greater Inducement, and made me huddle it over the quicker (to which, I hope, the In∣correctness will be ascribed) that it might get into the World, when their Impudence and Tyrany was most Rampant here. That it has lain thus long, I matter not, let him look to that, who is to get by it (if he can.) The Observations on Mons. Tu∣renne, I imagine, by the Style in French, to be done by a different Hand; the few things mentioned here, are otherwise re∣lated then in his Printed Life: And I doubt not but your Grace, whose delight is Arms, Honor, and the good of your Country, will be pleased enough with the matter, and pass over the defects of Expression. As to the Reasons of Mar. Turenne's shame∣ful Apostacy, I differ from the Author; for whether he were Cheated into it, like many others, by the Bishop of Meaux's New Popery, or led by some other mo∣tives, very unlike the rest of the Chara∣cter of his Soul and Ʋnderstanding. I know not, but cannot help thinking, it is the most villanous Blot in his, or any
other reasonable Mans Life; and as in∣capable of an Apology, as the Heresie he embraced, is of an honest Defence: Thus, Sir, whilst I am incognito, I have taken the liberty of an Impertinent Masquera∣der, and talked more than comes to the share of a Dedicator; but since I am no needy Mercenary one, I think my self the less bound up to their Methods: Yet were I not sensible that your Grace has with your Wit and Judgment, a wonderful Con∣desention and Obligingness, I should not have thus presumed; but your Grace finds that it is the Fate of those, who are universally Admired and Beloved, to be as often Importuned, as Pleased; and if I have trespassed on good Breeding, I beseech your Grace, to believe it to be the Zealous effect of both my Inclination and Choice, ever to Honour you, and be with respect,

