



My Lord,
WHen I preached the ensuing Sermon, I designed nothing less in the world, than the Printing of it; nor am I yet so vain as to think it worthy of the Press. This is a critical and censorious age, wherein none indeed should present their labours to the publick view, but such onely, whose great abilities may prove serviceable to the Common good.
But as for this plain Sermon, it hath nothing at
all to recommend it, but your Lordships approba∣tion at the preaching of it, together with those worthy Gentlemen, the High Sheriff and Grand-Jury of the County, who afterwards requested me (as the world may see) to print it: I shall thereore make no other apologie for appearing now in publick, but say, it was their request that cau∣sed it. These being all persons of worth, and true Loyalty (which appears by their Address lately made to his Majesty) I could not but bend my inclinations (though with much reluctancy) to satisfie their desires, and chuse rather to expose my self to the Censures of the World, than deny their unanimous and importunate request.
I wish (though I much doubt it) that it may have the same effect, as was by some of them in∣timated, who used this as an argument to me, That the printing of it may be for the publick good, whereas the preaching could reach onely a few that were then present. I was likewise informed by some others of them, that they heard it reported, this was but the Copy with some little variations of a printed Sermon. But ala! that did not at all move me, I lookt upon it onely as the imperti∣nence of some peevish Zealots, whose usual method it is to make something to cavil at, rather than want exercise for their reviling faculties.

Having thus shewed the World the true and onely reason that moved me to print this short di∣scourse; for such indeed it is, and the reason of that was, because I thought brevity most suitable to the occasion for which it was designed: I am now onely to beg your Lordships pardon for pre∣fixing so great a Name before a Tract of so little worth; it was onely the experience I have had of your Lordships goodness, that emboldened me to do it; and therefore I was no sooner prevailed upon to print this Sermon, but I resolved at the same instant to offer it (how mean soever) to your Lordship's Patronage: and I hope in some sence I may justifie the doing of it, because the sole design of this Sermon (how meanly soever perfor∣med) is to set forth our duty to God and the King, and therefore most proper to be dedicated to your Lordship, the most exact observer of both. If therefore your Lordship please to accept and favour it, I shall think my self and it secure, notwithstan∣ding all the Censures of the World. I value them not, but shall rest satisfied in this, that I have made some, though but a weak acknowledgement of that duty and service I owe your Lordship, but more especially that your Lordship will vouchsafe to accept such weak performances.
And therefore that Almighty God would bless
your Lordship, and your most excellent good Lady (from whose joynt benevolence I have received ma∣ny and great favours) with long life, and much pro∣sperity here, and with eternal bliss and happiness hereafter, is, and ever shall be the Prayer of
My Lord, 
