



IT is an undoubted Truth, pro∣nounced by Truth it self, That except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3. That Flesh and Blood can∣not inherit the Kingdom of God,1 Cor. 15.50. nor corruption incorruption. Such is the connexion betwixt Conversion and Salvation, Holiness and Happiness, That I may truly say, (yet not dero∣gating from the infinite worth of his Sufferings) that Christ cannot save an unconverted Soul; he saves none from Hell, but whom he saves from their sins; nor will free-Grace it self save a graceless person. It is therefore one main Piece of a Mini∣sters

imployment, (whose work is the salvation of souls) to endeavour the bringing of men from Self to Christ, from sin to holiness; to deal with them, as Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech them by us, even to pray them in Christs stead, that they will be recon∣cil'd to God, 2 Cor. 5.20. In order to this great End, nothing seems to me more effectually conducing, then the discovery and removal of those things, which are the ordinary impe∣diments of Conversion, amongst which these two are very common.
1. Some think they are past hope, they are in their own apprehensions out of merci's reach; and therefore, either desperately, or despairingly throw away their own souls.
2. Others think they are past fear, that they are escaped the wrath to come; say, as Agag. 1 Sam. 15.32. Surely the bitterness of death is past; when, alas, they do but de∣ceive

themselves with a vain shew, and are but in a cleaner way to Hell.
The first of these is incident to gross Sinners, when it pleases God to awaken their Consciences, and cause a Dart of Conviction to stick in their hearts; Yea, the least sin disco∣vered, and set home to purpose on the soul, is apt to work this way: Nor can I think that those Ranting, Roar∣ing Desperado's, who spend their days in Riot and Excess, and com∣mit all uncleanness with greedi∣ness, are altogether free from such thoughts.
The second is the common Remora of the Formalist's Conversion, who flatters himself in his own eyes, till his iniquity be found hateful. Now to discover to the former, their grounds of hope, upon their Humble, Penitent return to God; and to the other, the cause they have to fear least they be cast off by God, seems the most

probable rational way to prevail with them, in order to their Conversion and Salvation.
This was the Design of these poor Labours, when Presented to your Ears from the Pulpit; and upon the same account are they now Presented to your Eyes from the Press. If thou art (Reader) in either of these con∣ditions, (and how great a part of the Christian World will be found in the one or other of them!) here is something in this small Treatise, that may, by the blessing of him that teach∣eth to profit, be of use and advantage to thee. Or if thou be an Israelite in∣deed, thou wilt find something that may suit thy condition, and that may put thee upon more vigour and acti∣vity in Gods way.
I shall not trouble you with any Apology, either for my self or the Work; weaknesses (the Lord knows) abound in both: Nor is it the design of this poor Labour to satisfie thy Cu∣riosity,

or please thy Fancy, but (which is far higher) to profit and edifie thy Soul. That this may be the Fruit of it, is the hearty prayer of him, who desires to be, and earnestly beggs thy prayers that he may be

