


SIR,
AS I shall constantly endeavour to approve my self sensible of my late Lord Bishop of Lin∣coln's great Favours in general, so in particular I think my self happy in your Friendship, which I have not a little Experienced ever since my first admission into the Church of Lincoln, by vertue of his Lord Bishop's Patronage.
When I was with you at Lincoln in May last, you were pleased to enquire about the late Bishop of Lincoln's Original MSS, which were entrusted with my Brother Chaplain and my self; and to express your Concern very much, that such poor Scraps of Learning should be Printed under the Authority of so great a Name as Doctor Barlow's was; and that the Genuine Remains which were Extant, did not only injure the Memory of him that was a Learned

Father of our Church, but occasion'd some Persons to censure and condemn those whom he had left his Legatees for his Papers: I did then assure you, that we that had the Bishop's MSS had taken all ima∣ginable Care of them, having never parted with any of them, nor gave consent that any part or par∣cel of them should be Printed; and that what had happen'd was altogether without our knowledge. And thus much I gave you for truth under my own Hand, in a Paper which I left with you; the Substance of which I read to the Reverend Doctor Gardiner, our present Sub-Dean, who was equally concern'd with your self, that any thing should pass abroad under our late Bishop's Name and Character, which might in the least prejudice the Church and his Me∣mory. I then satisfied you both, that one Sir P. P. and the late Vicar of Bugden, were the confederate Ped∣lars, that have endeavour'd to impose upon the World so much varnish'd Ware, for the sake of Twen∣ty Guineas gave for the Copy; as his Wife in∣form'd a Reverend Friend of mine.
Soon after I left Lincoln, I met with the late Minister of Bugden, who confess'd he did commu∣nicate the Directions to a young Divine, which ush∣ers in the rest of the Remains to Sir P. P. which MSS I told him was not compleated; for being ad∣mitted sometime to a freedom of Discourse with his

Lordship, upon my mentioning once the Printing of his , he was pleas'd to say, That he fear'd his Directions were imperfect; for having written them at several times, they requir'd a care∣ful Review, and more Time than he had then to spare for such a purpose; but said he hop'd to be more at leisure to consult hereafter, what was pro∣per to be done: My Lord in a few Months after died, without perusing his own Original MSS. or Correcting of any Copy, that had been taken after it: And many of those Copies which were wrote from the Original were imperfect; my Lord com∣manding oftentimes that only some part of his Di∣rections should be copied out, which, said he, may be sufficient for some who are very curious in Books, or perhaps not able to buy many.
At my return hither I delay'd no time to acquaint Mr. Brougham with the ill Consequences which I apprehended might ensue, upon our suffering so much Injustice to be done to our late Lord's Me∣mory, without any Advertisement, or Notice taken of it by us, who were jointly concern'd in our own Vindication, as well as our Lord's: I desir'd him (since he had all the Bishop's MSS. in his custody at Queens College Oxon.) to consult them that were useful for our present purpose, in exposing the Defects of the Genuine Remains; he readily answer'd my Re∣quest,

and return'd me the following Letter which I send you; and being confident you will be pleas'd with the design of doing Justice to the Memory of a Learn∣ed Prelate, which has suffer'd in the Publication of little things, whilst the more weighty Effects of his indefatigable Pains and Study have (according to his own Inclinations and Will) been kept from being made Publick.

Middleton-Stony, Jun. 23. 94.
