



AT last, SIR, Fortune has put it in my pow'r to pay you some acknowledgement for the many obligations you have laid on me; and I shall have the less reason to complain of her, if you receive this Present with as much pleasure as I give it; of which I shou'd not despair, had I taken any other method in send ng it to you. But what might have been welcome from a Friend, will not, I fear, be so agreeable from an Author. Tho your inclination for the Drama, your acquaintance with the Art, and the incouragement you have given those who devote them∣selves to it, are sufficient to warrant this Liberty in me, was I not otherwise secure in your Friendship. I can ne∣ver believe you will condemn in publick, what you ap∣prove in private, and the Protection of one who knows how to defend what he thinks deserves it, is certainly more valuable than the greatest Name or the highest Qua∣lity. I had rather have the world convinc'd, that their fa∣vour to this Play is reasonable, than by taking sanctuary in the Degree or Interest of my Patron, forbid 'em the free use of their Understanding, and arbitrarily exact a Judgment from 'em, which in any other presence they would recant or dis∣own.
The Poets have generally been careful not to Dedi∣cate their Poems to those who knew their true value: This would not at all have answer'd their design. They chose out some persons who wanted very thing more than Money, and they have seldom mis∣carry'd in what they aim at most. Flattery is always sold to these to the best advantage; and since it costs 'em no∣thing but a few Pieces, which they cou'd not tell how better to dispose of, the Trade has considerably advanc'd;

and those who deal in't, have commonly found their ac∣count by it. Fame is not the Mistress they Court: To talk of a future Reputation when a present Supply is to be rais'd, wou'd to them seem Silly and Extravagant. Indeed I think they are very much to be excus'd; for a man must have little Stomach to hear of an Immortal Name, when his own puts him in mind of Mortality.
This has fixt a scandal on these Addresses, but like other good things, they ought not to suffer because they are abus'd; and while we are in a Humour of Reformation, 'twould be well if some amendment was begun in this too. That Authors wou'd make choice of Gentlemen, where they may be as liberal as they please of their Panegyrick, and yet preserve their Sincerity. Perhaps 'tis difficult to find many such Subjects, but that there are such, you are yourself an undeniable instance. You have given us a fair proof, that Business, Letters, Pleasure and Virtue, are not incompati∣ble; and that Wit, Judgment, and Good Manners, are not confin'd to the narrow limits of Convent Garden. If to be Idle is to be Useless, if Detraction is a Vice, Affectation Folly, and Pride a defect of the Soul, how many Wits and fine Gentlemen will at once lose their Characters? You have on the contrary, preferr'd Care and Industry to Riot and Profusion, tho you might with others have pleaded the excuse of an ample Fortune. Your Wit does not support itself by Satyr, nor your Judgment by Malice, nei∣ther does your good Humour lose you any thing in the esteem of all that know you; tho Spleen and ill Nature are grown so fashionable, that in some places you will be thought ridiculous, if you are not troublesom. But I for∣get this Epistle is to go farther than your own Family, and to bring you into others, who may not be so fond of this Theme as I am; for there is nothing so tedious to Mankind in general, as an Encomium, where they are not rhemselves concern'd, let it be never so Just and Impar∣tial.

