



SR Lancelot Oldisworth of Ha∣lifax in York-shire, Kt. took to wife Bridget, daughter of VVilliam Ramsey of the same Coun∣tie, Esq. Their son was Maurice.
Maurice Oldisworth, Husband of VVinifred daughter to Steven, the brother of VValter Stapleton, L. Bp. of Excester, had issue Lan∣celot.
Lancelot Oldisworth married Alice, daughter of Thomas Frie
of Devon-shire, Gent. he begat Maurice.
Maurice Oldisworth took to wife Gennet, daughter of Iohn Philpot L. Mayor of London. His son was Lancelot.
Lancelot Oldisworth was Hus∣band to Margaret, daughter of Andrew Foord of Cornwall, Esq. He begat VVilliam.
VVilliam Oldisworth married the daughter of Nicholas Read of De∣von-shire, Esq. By whom he had Maurice.
Maurice Oldisworth his wife was Iane, daughter and Heiress unto Iohn Sydenham of Somerset-shire Esq. Their son was Thomas.
Thomas Oldisworth married a daughter of Morgan of Pennicoyd Castle in Monmouth-shire, by whom he was Father of Nicholas.

Nicholas Oldisworth having married Marjo∣rie, daughter of Davis of the city of Glouc. had by her Edward.
Edward Oldisworth was in Q. Maries daies a Colonel in Flanders: In Q. Elizabeths daies he married Tace, daughter to Arthur Porter of Newark in the County of Glouc. Esq Their son was Arnold.
Arnold Oldisworth, Clerk of the Hanniper, married Lucie, daughter and Co-heiress of Francis Baxtu, Treasurer to Mary Quen of Scotland. By Lucie he had Edward.
Edward Oldisworth of Bradley in the Parish of Wotten under Edge in the County of Glouc. Esq married Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of George Masters of Ciren-Cester in the Coun∣ty afore said, Esquire. Their only son was Robert:
Robert Oldisworth of the said Bradley in the said Parish of VVotton under Edge, Esq took to wife Elizabeth, daughter of William Clotterbook of Kingsstanely in the County of Glouc. Gent. and had issue VVilliam.

William Oldisworth (the only child that e∣ver the said Robert Oldisworth, or Elizabeth his wife, had) was buried Aug. 31. 1674 both before he was married, and before he was full 21 yeares old.


Good Madam,
The more inferiour this slender Stemm is unto the generous Croft of Crofts Castle; the more numerous those weeping eyes were, which I then beheld when the last Branch of this Stock was untimely cutt off; And (above all this) the more narrowly I search into the mul∣titude of sorrows which I am apt to imagine Abraham, the Friend of God, wrestled with; The greater Impression abideth engraven upon my heart, while (with true joy and much plea∣sure) I frequently ruminate how tender a mercy the Preserver of men dayly vouchsafeth both unto my Lord Bishop of Hereford, and unto your Ladiship, in continuing the Life, and in prospering the daies of Sr Herbert Crofts, your Isaac. To bury that Heir which is an only Son,
 to mourn for such an only Son, as is an only child, is (I see) A two-edged Woe! Neverthe∣less, by Faith the Father of the Faithful duel∣led, the Father of the Faithfull vanquished, even this Triall.
Madam, If either my conjectures concerning Abraham his temptations, or any Descant of mine upon his exemplarie faith, can assist your Ladiships growing in grace and in the knowledg of our Lord and Saviour IESVS CHRIST; I shall willingly sacrifice this Sermon to cen∣sure; yea, I shall bless God for granting the re∣quest of








To the Vertuous Mrs. BRDGET THORP, VVidow.
BRing her forth that she may be burnt: When What paper I now expose,Gen. 38.24. I two years since rashly condemned unto the Presse, such ano∣ther unjust Judge, sa Judah was, was I. Dear Cousin, I will not say that a Gift in your Bosom did corrupt my Judgment,Sept. 2. 1674. for then your Purse would pay for it.
The truth is, to have me at that time passe that sentence, you were not; to have me now execute that sentence, you are, the importunate widow
Let me cease to honour such as are Widows indeede, if I do not from my heart reverence and highly e∣steeme you, for You glorifie God: Whom I should dishonour, should I conceal that it is for His sake, and onely for His sake, that you require this Sermon from


