



Right Worshipful,
YOu have here the Travels of a young Gentleman,
who went along with the Embassie, sent by the
Duke of Holstein, into Muscovy and Persia. That
it was his resolution to see the other parts of Asia, appear'd
by the express permission he obtain'd from his own Prince,
before his departure, to do it. For the particular descrip∣tion
we have of Persia, we are indebted to Adam Olearius,
the Author of the Ambassadours Travels into Muscovy
and Persia, which I dare affirm to be such as is infinitely be∣yond
ought came abroad of that part of the World before.
What our present Author Mandelslo gives of it, is only
what lay in his way between Ispahan and the City of Ormuz.
But of his departure from the former, the motives upon
which he went, and the assistances he receiv'd from some of
this Nation, be pleased to receive this account.
His acquaintainces with some English Merchants at Ispa∣han,
the Metropolis of Persia, heightned in him the design
of these Travels into the East-Indies; their recommendati∣ons
conducted him first to Ormuz, and afterwards thence to
Surat. The kindnesses he receiv'd from the English Presi∣dent,
and other Merchants he met with there, were such, as
not only ingag'd his stay some time, but also found him the
conveniences of divers Caravans, with whom he travell'd
into several parts of the Mogul's Country, and particularly
to the Court of that powerful Prince, where he had staid
longer, had not an accident, which happened at Ispahan, du∣ring
the time of the Embassy, occasion'd in his sudden remo∣val

thence. But what further Observations he might have
made of those parts, are supply'd not only by the said Olea∣rius,
but also by the person who rendred his Work into the
French, out of which, as being the most compleat, this Tran∣slation
into the English is done. Having continu'd among
the English Merchants at Surat, till the Ships bound for
England were ready for their departure, he comes thence,
along with Master Methwold, who had newly resigned his
charge of President to Mr. Fremling, at the Ceremonies
whereof he was present. Being come to London, he found
the same person, and others of the East-India Company as
liberal of their kindness and hospitality, as they had been in
those parts where he grew first acquainted with them; and
such they continued, till his desires to wait on his own
Prince, and put a Period to his Travels, occasioned his re∣turn
into his own Country.
The civilities and endearments he receiv'd from them,
were indeed such, as not only, then, oblig'd the Person, to
whom they were shewn, but have, since, engag'd all those
who have made any advantage of the Travels occasion'd
thereby. It was therefore a noble and necessary gratitude in
the Author, to make the frequent acknowledgments he does
thereof in several places of his Work. It was a commendable
compliance with his humour, in those who put it into other
Languages, to propose both, as examples to their Countries.
But for my part, I conceive there lies the greater Obligation
upon me to make this address of my Labours herein, in that
I am to let the World know, whose incouragements it is ob∣liged
to for these Travels, and to celebrate in our own Lan∣guage
and Country what was so nobly and generously done
by some of your illustrious body in the more remote parts
of the Universe, and shew withall what induc'd me to this
presumption of assuming the quality of,
Right Worshipful,

