



Sir,
THat I do inscribe these my summary Collections of some few of the Exorbitancies, and of the arbitrary, illegal and per∣nicious Practices of the late unhappy Reigns, to your Name; will, as I hope, be forgiven; when you re∣flect upon your own dear bought share, in the melancholy and
tragical Transactions, upon which I have spent my thoughts.
The Names of the late Earl of Shaftesbury; & of my Lord Russel & Col. Sidney and other great Men (who were run upon, and destroyed bya Race of Men, who were raised to the Bench, from being the Scandal of the
Bar; and by ignorant, corrupt and partial Jury-Men) will be re∣membred with eternal honour. And by consequence it must be yours, that you were my Lord Russel's en∣deared Friend; That you served as Foreman of that great Jury which guarded the
Earl of Shaftesbury's Life, and that you expressed your self with some transport of Joy, at the hopes of the brave Colonel Sid∣ney's deliverance; and that the sham Protestant Plot was confounded.
That from hence immediately your late Troubles sprung, is fresh in every Bodies remembrance; but 'tis not so well known, that you had the guilt of Original Sin upon you; you were a Barnardiston, descended of a Family well known, and highly esteemed in
Suffolk and Lincolnshire for many hundreds of years past, & which no History remembers to havebeen
clouded, but in times, when the Laws of England have suffered an Eclipse.
Your never to be forgotten Father Sr Nathaniel Barnardiston, was in the worst of times (those in which we have lived, excepted) a Champion, & a Reso∣lute
Assertor of the English Liberties; He, in the year
1626, when King Charles the first, in a most arbitrary way,
required money by way of Loan; (with many other good Patriots) refu∣sed to subscribe and lend; and was thereupon, as a
refractory Person (as was the Language of the Privy Coun∣cil of that day) confined (far enough from home) in the County of
Sussex; however, he stiffly adhered to his honest resolution against that arbi∣trary attempt; and continued un∣der confinement, till the beginning of the year 1628, when that King's straits necessitating a Parliament, the Gentlemen imprisoned for refu∣sing the Loane-Money, were thenreleased, and generally throughout the Kingdom, elected to present the Grie∣vances, and assert the Liberties of the People, in that Parliament; as was Sr Nathaniel Barnardiston, for his
County of Suffolk.
Sir! The Remembrance of this, when you were first invited by that County, to represent them in Parlia∣ment, upon the death of Sr Henry North, might in (all propability) pro∣voke a great
Minister of State to say, that there was reason of State, why you must not be Knight of your Shire; and therefore he would appoint an easie Gentleman (whom he could manage)
Sheriff, to keep you out; and so he did as long as he could; at a time, when that Parliament was corrupted, to such a degree, that the Fate of the Nation seemed almost to depend upon the Vote of one or two good Members; your Country, had upon that occasion, a manifest demonstration of your Fidelity andZeal, in their Service; you did wor∣thily assert the right of that
Election (than which there never was any more clearly made) & after a tedious and very expensive attendance, in prosecuting your Complaint of that abuse; your Election was affirmed in the
House of Commons; tho' opposed by the united power, of
Tories, Pen∣sioners and Papists; you then came into
Parliament at a most Critical Juncture, When the Protestant Reli∣gion, and the Laws were eminently beset, and dangerously threatned; you did most faithfully and unweari∣edly labour there for some years, a∣gainst very great Discouragements; It being in that day a mighty con∣quest, if the true English Gentle∣men of that
House, could, for the sa∣ving of the Kingdom, carry a
Questi∣on by five or six Voices, against the numerous
Pensioners, who were there listed; and fed, and paid, to betray their Countries Liberties.
Your demeanour and great desert in that day of
England's Distress, merited a Title to the Hearts of your
Country-Men; who with very little opposition, if not with an una∣nimous Voice, Elected you, for one of their Representatives to the three succeeding Parliaments; in which, your avowed Opposition to Popery, and undaunted Adhesion to the Bill of Exclusion; as the only expedient for securing the Protestant Religion, markt you out to the Popish Rage.
These (Sir.) were in truth your heinous actual transgressions; These provoked Jefferies (whose Talent lay in facing all things down with Noise and Impudence) to discharge a load of Slime and Choler at you; your Crimes were complicated; and they lie under a very great mistake, who think, that your
Imprisonment and Fine of 10000 l. were only for wri∣ting to a Friend, what you believed, and all good Men passionately de∣sired.
Having thus mentioned your great Oppression, I shall take leave (not for your own, but) for the Reader's Information, to insert the Reasons upon which the House of Lords, did lately reverse, that un∣just and wicked
Judgment upon you.
1st. The Information in this Case, being grounded upon Letters, which in themselves were not material, but made so by Innuendo's, their Lord∣ships declared, that Innuendo's, or supposed or forced Constructions, ought not to be allowed; for all Accusations should be plain, and the Crimes ascertained.
2dly. That the Fine of 10000 l. is exorbitant and excessive; not warranted by legal Precedent in for∣mer Ages; for all Fines ought to be with a Salvo Contenemento; and not to the Parties Ruin.
3d. That the demanding Sureties for the good Behaviour, during Life; except in very great, and very of∣tenrepeated Crimes; wherein the Publick Peace of the Realm is very much concerned; is contrary to the Liberty of the Subject.
Sir! to detain you no longer upon a subject so well known, as is that of your own Sufferings and Desert, I know not whether I ought to apo∣logize, for my frequent using the name of Tory; I am conscious, that Names of Discrimination and
Re∣proach, are offensive to the Ears of good Men; therefore to explain my self; I intend not thereby to expose the well-deserving and pious Mem∣bers of the Church of England; but I mean the
Men, who, (being forsaken of common Sense and Honesty) seem∣ed ready to renounce the name of Protestant; and gloried in Ranting, Damning, Swearing Loyalty; The Men, who encouraged and triumph∣ed, in the Murders of late committed amongst us; and who, to this hour, go on to palliat and excuse, if notto justifie them; The Men, who cry∣ed up a Popish Successor, as the only means to preserve the Church of Eng∣land, and who are now for calling him back.
These were Men, who would have finished the Ruin of the Nati∣on, in the Dissolution of its antient and well Established Government; and in the Blood of its best
Patriots; They gloryed in calling themselves Tories; their
Guide and Patron, did, in their name, thrust out & stigma∣tize all the sober and moderate Men of the Church of England, with the Name of Trimmers, & bestowed up∣on them this Apothegme, That a Trimmer is worse than a Rebel. Whoever recurs to the Original of that Name, in the
Observators; will find that it pointed at first, at two honourable and never to be forgot∣ten Protestants, of your Neighbour County, the late Lord Townshend and Sr John Hobart, of
Norfolk; andquickly after, Dr Fowler, Mr
Smithee, and many other Reverend Divines of the Church of England, fell under that Denomination: Now surely 'tis not a Crime, to call such Men as these by the name which they appropriated to themselves; and 'twere Foolish, to esteem Men of their practices, to be of any
Re∣ligion.
In some cases a Man ought not to be over-patient; and it must move any one, to hear a Learned Lawyer at the Bar, at the time when
Popery had actually ascended the Throne, in this manner, to caress a Tory-Jury; Gentlemen! I cannot but with much Sorrow remember to you, and I know you all remember it too well, that there was a time when the City of London, was so far corrupted, that it was become a Refuge and Sanctuary for high Treason; when there was no Justice to be had for the King there; when Men lodged themselves within,those Walls, as a Protection for their Conspiracies; We all remember the time, when Indictments
were perfer∣red, and a plain Evidence given to a Grand-Jury; even to the publick sa∣tisfaction of all that heard it; and yet they have refused to find the Bill; and not only so, but were so abetted by the Rabble; that it was scarce safe for the Judges to sit upon the Bench; These are things none of us can for∣get, but must be perpetually remem∣bred; to the shame of the Authors and Contrivers, of them.
And must it not provoke a Man, to hear the following
Doctrine from the Pulpit, upon the sad occasion of the good Lord Russell's death (of whom one of the best
Divines now living, did truely say, that an Age would not repaire that loss to the Nation) viz.
Cuting of Throats would have been counted only a Scotch
way of Triming, and the destruction of Princes, to beno more but a perfecting the History of the Reformation.
They who cannot rise up to all the heights of Conformity; can yet strain a point upon occasion, and rise up to all the heights of Rebellion and Barbarity; and had not God
marvelously interpo∣sed; these squeamish Conscience Tray∣tors, would have shewed the truth of this.
Is it not astonishing (at this day, when the
Parliament hath declared, that my Lord Russell, Colonel Sidney and Sr Thomas Armstrong, were murdered) to heare an Irish Arch-Deacon (who fled hither upon the score of Religion, and is a Principal Man∣ager of our Charity, to the Irish Pro∣testants) publickly ridicule, the death of the first two; (by telling us in an upbraiding way, these are your Martyrs) and affirm, that the last dy∣ed justly and according to Law? Would such men as these, satisfie the World, of their Ingenuity andRepentance, these extravagancies undoubtedly, ought to be put into utter
Oblivion; now, that Heaven has wrought for us, a most signal and miraculous deliverance; but, which is to be lamented, those very Men, who carryed us to the very brinck of destruction; are not onely remorseless, but many of them do make it their business, (by
drinking Popish Healths; wishing success to their
Arms; and spreading false Newes) to infect and debauch the Kingdom (especially the City) and to traduce, maligne and undermine the Government, under which, the divine Providence, has so mercifully placed us: and therefore, they who have given such high provocations and done so much mischief; and do still remain impenitent: ought not to esteem themselves unkindly used, by some tart expressions.
Sr! That I may be justied with you, who I am sure would believethe best of every Man, and make the best of all things; I have said much more then I did intend upon this occasion, and hope you will for∣give it.
You have very signally, and hear∣tily lent and laid out your self in your Countries service; that service was not onely difficult and hazard∣ous, but it had proved fatal, had not Heaven interposed for your de∣liverance; and therefore, all true Lo∣vers of old England's welfare, must wish, that no false Insinuations may lessen you in the esteem of Good Men; you have been a publick Good, and that obliges me to be,
Sir!  February 10.
1689.
