



I Crave your pardon, for so long detaining that which you have so desirously ex∣pected. And now, that I do expose it to publick view, when I cast about in my thoughts, to whom to dedicate it, I could not but retain a grateful memory, of the many noble favours, whereby your
worthy relations, viz. yourMrs. An. Philips of Monta∣cute. Mo∣ther and yourMrs. Ma. Speake of Whit∣lackinton, both in Somerset∣shire. Aunt did ever oblige me. Neither must I be so irreligious, as not to have a more then ordinary respect, for thatProv. 31.30. Phil. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. c 4.14.16. 1 Thes. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 2 Thes. 1.3, 4. Philem. 4.5, 6, 7. Rev. 2.2, 3, 9, 19, &c. Acts 9.36. true piety and goodness wherein they excel. But when I remember, that you have so fairly written after their copy,2 Joh. 1.4. 3 Joh. 3, 4, 5, 6. that the vertues of both are visible in you; so that any thing redounding to your just praise, will tend also to their honour; and seeing your first pregnancy gave me this occasion of presenting you with my thoughts on this subject in a short scheme, which I have now thus en∣larged; and you were pleased (as your courteous manner ever was) to accept it with that thankfulness, as if it had been some greater matter, and as if it had been of some use to
you in that condition. Therefore I humbly crave leave of those my ob∣liging friends, to dedicate this piece to you onely. And had I no other errand to appear in print, this were enough; to tell the world for their imitation, that he must tra∣vel far, and seek long among our Nobility and Gentry, that shall finde any of more ingenuity, of more devo∣tion to God, more obedience and re∣verence to Parent, more courtesie and reality in affable conversation, more prudence and modesty in your speeches, and deportment, more re∣spect to pious Ministers, more happy in your memory to retain what you heard, more pious in your retention to commit it to writing next day for your private use, then you were in your single estate, and the flower of
your age; a season wherein others of your quality doe minde some lesser things in jest, but nothing in earnest. This made you amiable in the eyes of all that knew you, but especially to him, who is now your yoak-fellow,Rob: Sey∣mour Esq of Hanford in the County of Dorset. a Gentleman of whose worth many say so much, that I need say nothing. And indeed in the judgement of all that know you, what can be said more for the proof of his wisdome,Prov. 18.22. Ch. 19.4. Ch. 12.4. then his making such a choice? Yet, I doubt not, but hisEph. 5.25. ad 33 Mar. 19.5. 1 Pet. 3.7. tendernesse and faith∣fulnesse to you, and his most happy immunity from the gentile vices of this degenerate age, will give you reall cause of continuall thank∣fulnesse, to that good providence, which first wedded your hearts to∣gether. But that which addes to
your fame, and doth, indeed, crown all, is,Per∣severantia tantùm e∣lectorum est. Bern. Ser. parv. Serm. 61. 1 John 4.0, 19. Cant. 5.16. your perseverance. Your married estate hath not marred your pious disposition. Your love to husband and children, not aliena∣ted your love from him, who loved you first, and is himself altogether lovely. Your commands and cares over your own servants hath not made you negligent of your Master in Heaven; nor your dome∣stick family-affairs, diverted your conscience from livingEph. 15, 16. as a member of the houshold of Faith, and the family of God. Go on, I beseech you (for I know your Christian wisdome and mode∣sty will turn my commendations into admonitions) I beseech you, I say, to go on, and to let the world see, that Piety is not inconsistent withGratias deo qui ha∣rum rerum & gloriae transitoriae gloriosum in vobis est operatus contemp∣tum. Bern ep. 23. Gal∣lantry,
that it is not (absolutely) impossible, for a Camel to goe through the eye of a needle, that one may be a Gentlewoman, or a Lady, & yet Elect; that noble dispo∣sitions do yet remain in (some) noble breasts; that some there may be, who are both rich in the world, and rich towards God. And let me further intreat you, to be alwayes learning that lesson, which can ne∣ver be too exactly learnt, viz.Esto rebus ac facultati∣bus tuis in vitâ hâc uti velis, dummodo tui vel mo∣riens non obliviscaris & ad ejus cultum at{que} honorem referendam tibi sub∣stantiam tuam me∣mineris, cu∣jus te mu∣nere accepisse cognoscis. Salvianus ad Eccles. cath. lib. 2. p. 407. to know how to abound, and how to be full, how to use this world, as not abusing it, and to rejoice, as if we rejoiced not, for the time is short. It is but a little time ere he that shall come will come. Wherefore, the Lord burn up within us the remainders of our dross and tin, that when this dros∣sie
degenerate world shall be consumed by fire,2 Pet. 3.7. ad 14. there may not be found so much of the world in our hearts, as shall make us fit fewel for everlasting burnings. He give us more believing apprehensi∣ons, and lively affections, after the everlasting enjoyment of himselfe, in that Heaven of heavens, where they neither marry,Mar. 12.25 nor are given in marriage,2 Cor. 5.16. Rev. 7.16. where they know none after the flesh, where they hunger and thirst no more, where they have perpetual light, yet no use of Sun or Moon,Rev. 21.27 or any sublunary comforts, but are as the Angels of God (i e.) fully at rest in their de∣sires, because with the Lord,1 Thes. 4▪ 17. Ps. 16.11. who is the center of spirits, in whose presence is fulness of joy, and at whose right hand are such plea∣svres
for evermore, that they ne∣ver thirst after the present delights of the sons of men, but scorne the very thoughts of any mortal enjoy∣ments; & I am much mistaken in my conceptions of Eternity, if it prove not some addition to my joy be∣fore God for ever,1 Thess. 2.19, 20. Phil 2.16. if this book of mine (whoever else disregard it) may be (as I hope it will) an in∣strumental cause of reall addition to your grace, a help to your joy in believing, & a support to you in the time of need. But, this I leave wholly to the powerful blessing of that God, whose I am, and whom I serve. And, God forbid that I should sin against him, in ceasing to pray for you, that you may be inwardly fill'd with all the fulness of God, and may outwardly shine, not in
costly array, but (which beco∣meth women professing godli∣nesse) in good works,1 Tim: 2.9, 10. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5. that the dayes of your tranquillity may be lengthened, that you may see your childrens children, and peace upon Israel,Prov. 31.28, 29. that wherein other daughters have done vertuously, you may strive to excel them all; that so your children may rise up and call you blessed, and your husband also may praise you; that you may patiently run your race, and faithfully finish your course, that when you have confli∣cted with all the dangers and incon∣veniences of your pilgrimage, you may receive the end of your faith, and, in a good old age en∣ter into rest. If my tongue doe not alway use these very words, yet my
soul shall thus pray for you without ceasing, till I my selfe shall cease to be, till when, I crave leave to sub∣scribe,

