



MY LORD,
THere are many Reasons which ought to have kept me from troubling your Lordship with this Address, but I am willing some∣times to believe there are Others that will a little excuse my Presumption▪

I have been long tempted to use the first Opportunity that should offer, to express my particular Veneration for You. I wish, My Lord, I had now been happy in a better occasion, or that you would not take an Opinion of my Respect and Esteem for You, from the meanness of this Present.
Authors of all Ages are generally fond of their own Productions; but the Oldest and Youngest are most In∣fected with this Vanity. Yet I am not so partial to this my first Essay, but I know it wants many Perfections to be fit to come before You. If it Di∣verts you when you are pleas'd to be free from the Publick Concerns, which so often Employ You, 'tis the utmost of my pretences; I shall be proud of its good Fortune, and have no cause to re∣pent I had the Courage to own it.
Your Lordship has sufficiently prov'd that the Gallant Man, and the Man of

Business are not incompatable; No Man ever discover'd so early such a vast Capacity for the Business you have undertaken. And since you consent∣ed to be chosen a Member of the House of Commons, None ever appear'd more Sollicitous for the Publick Cood, or knew better how to promote it than your Lordship. You have joyn'd the Vivacity of Youth, with the Wisdom and Temper of Age, and already se∣cur'd your Self a Character, which o∣thers have been Labouring for whole Ages with less success.
But your Thoughts in affairs of high∣est consequence, however weighty in themselves, never sit heavy on you; you are not discompos'd by them, or prevented from a moderate Enjoyment of those Pleasures, which are the Pro∣piety of men of your Wit and Quality.
Those who have the Honour to be intimate with You, and are acquaint∣ed

with the sweetness of your Dispo∣sition, and Your unaffected easiness to Your Private Friends, give us such idea's of You, that to be silent here, would be an injustice to Your Merit; however faulty we make our selves by it to Your Lordship. I can now almost please my self, that I am no better known to You; for certainly my Dis∣cretion could not restrain me from con∣sulting my own, more than Your Lordships pleasure, in dwelling on this Subject.
The World have so High an Opini∣on of Your Worth, that they will ex∣cuse me for speaking of You, tho 'tis even in a Dedication; They will only blame me for concluding so soon; but 'tis that only which can give me any hopes of procuring Your Pardon.
Such indeed frequently abuse a Man of Quality, with unseasonable Praises who have servile ends to promote by

it: but my design is purely to express my Zeal for Your Lordship. I have not yet Learn't to Flatter, and it miscarries so often of late, that the Vilest Authors begin to be asham'd of it.
Most of these Poems, which I hum∣bly Dedicate to You, were Written by a Person in Love, in those Hours which he devoted to the Contemplation of his Mistress: Your Lordship, who is so well with the Fair Sex, must have been sensible of that Passion, which makes us think not always so justly as we ought, you will then pity the Errors you find here, If you can't excuse them; but I Tremble, my Lord, when I think there is not one inconsiderable enough to escape you. Yet tho I leave Your Lord∣ship with these apprehensions of your Justice, I would not wholly dispair of Your Mercy.

