



Sir!
YOu are no more able to deli∣ver your self from the Per∣secution of a dedication, than you were, in your single Person, to stem the dreadful deluge of Popery and Tyranny, which very lately brought Old England within an Hair's breadth of that utter Ruin that was manifestly impending.
Indeed, when I first took the re∣solution of inscribing your honoured Name, to the first part of my Scrib∣lings, I purposed to have petitioned your Licence so to do; but at the time when the thing was finished,
I was at such a great distance from you, that I had not opportunity to do it, and therefore (being no near∣er to you at this time) I do implore your Pardon for my Presumption therein, and for my repeating that Transgression; and do hope that you will the more readily grant it; when I have made this publick Ac∣knowledgement to the World (in case any thing I have said be deemed offensive, which I hope there cannot) that Sr Samuel Barnardiston was no way privy to the writing of the First, or of this Second part of these Stories; and that I can (upon very good ground) say, that he doth not, to this day, know who is the Collector of them.
Sir! He who is not allowed to use a Sword in his Countries quarrel, may surely be indulged in crying out Murder, Treason; when he sees a Pistol at his Prince's head, or a Dagger at his Heart; and having, with grief, beheld that very same
Toryism, which murder'd the best of Men, my good Lord Russell, and many others of our best Patriots; to be rampant and impudent; and as ir∣reconcilably bent against the true Government of England, which the glorious and most miraculous pro∣vidence of Heaven, has lately de∣volved upon our undoubted right∣ful King and Queen, as it was a∣gainst our late blessed Martyrs for the English Liberties; I could not withhold my self from attempting the service of my Generation (ac∣cording to my mean capacity) in exposing those Principles and Pra∣ctices which but t'other day had brought the Kingdom to the very brink of irreparable ruin; especially, when I see at this very day, the Men who had suck'd in that Poison, Design∣ing and Plotting (not to allure, but) to dragoon us into French Bondage.
The truth of it is (Sr.) I was much irritated to the prosecution of this Work, by what I met with in
my return from the late Tryal of Skill in Essex; when those most worthy Gentlemen, Colonel Mildmay and Sr. Fran. Masham were elected Knights for that County; I have heard that it hath been an old Observation, that tho' many Honourable, Reve∣rend and Worthy Persons, have fre∣quently voted against your self, in Suffolk; and against Colonel Mildmay in Essex; yet, that it hath been rarely seen, that a Tory has voted for either of you: And it is well re∣membred, that at the time of the mighty strugling between Popery and Christianity in the Critical Year of 1681. the then Lord Chief Ju∣stice Scroggs sent for many of the Gentlemen of Essex, and told them that whatever they did, they must not chuse Mildmay.
But I have digressed, what I was saying, is,Rigby was one of the Good and True Men, whom the great Care of Sr. Dudley North had returned to pass upon my Lord Russel's Life, and he stood in that Pannel within two of Oneby, who was last sworn. that one Mr. Rigby of Covent Garden (I name him because he stands indicted in
Essex for the Crime I am mentioning) returning from voting at that Ele∣ction (upon the 11th of March last) & being to a high degree enraged, that Colonel Mild∣may and Sr. Francis Masham were chosen (for you must know he was of t'other side) said, that 'twas no matter who carried the day there; But if the King would not do as they would have him (innuendo himself, & he knows who besides; But I am most certain my Lord of Oxford doth not) They would make a King that should do as They would have him: And, this being upon the Eve of the Fast appointed by their Majesties Proclamation, he proceeded, adding, We must keep a damn'd Fast to mor∣row,This most Loy∣al Disciple of Sr. Roger's, and design∣ed Jury-man for my Lord Russel, (taking Pet be∣cause Colonel Mild may was chosen a Parliament Man) must now by all means have a King of his own ma∣king, and 'tis six and twenty to one but if the Silly Woman had pled∣ged him K. James's Health, but the next Glass had bin to our Lord Lewis, King Elect. but we will eat Roasted Beef and
be Drunk. He then put a glass of Wine into a very Civil Woman's hand, say∣ing, Drink King James's Health; and upon her an∣swering him, No, I deny that, but I will drink the Wine; he said, Damn you for a Bitch, would it might poison you where you stand; and added, A Bitch to deny a Gentle∣man such a Request, She deserves to be Sacrificed.
Sr. I cannot upon this occasion of Health-drinking, hinder my self from remembring the Case of Mr. Elias Best, a substantial Citizen (but one who had been an Ignoramus Jury∣man, a great Reproach, and an un∣pardonable Crime in that day, as
you (Sr.) very feelingly know) He was indicted for the Frolick of drink∣ing to the Pious Memory of Honest Stephen Colledge, and condemned to a Fine of 1000 l. to stand Three Times in the Pillory, and to give Sureties for the Good Behaviour for Life. Upon this Judgment he was imprisoned Three Years; to the loss of good Trade, and to the ruin of his Health and his Estate; and when almost ready to expire, he was graciously pardoned, upon payment of 200 l. to the Empson and Dudley of the late Reign; Graham and Bur∣ton: 'Tis well for Mr. Rigby, that the accursed Practices of that day, are not to be Presidents, in the present benign and most merciful Reign.
Sr! I have no sinister nor mercen∣ary end in emitting these Papers to publick view; I write not for re∣ward (for I gave away as many scores of the first part of this Tract, as the Printer gave me, and have not one for my self,) and I should be vaine, to
the highest degree, to expect ap∣plause, for so confused and ill digested a Work, as this is; But I have with a good will (tho' in a very feeble manner) brandished my Pen for the service of that good old Cause which I ever loved and must love, should it cost me my life, I mean the Liber∣ties of England; and it hath deeply wounded me, to hear and know so many instances as I do, of the unpunished (nay, of the uncheckt) Se∣ditious and Trayterous discourses and boastings, of the Factious and Male∣content Party, which I encounter; (I mean not Papists, for I know not one Person avowedly so, about Lon∣don) as tho' the whole Nation were ready (as the Men I talk of vainly flatter themselves) by a unanimous and universal consent, to degenerate and apostatize to Popery and Slavery: But Methinks they should be too early and too quick in their expecta∣tion, that the English Nation should no sooner see the Yoke of the Oppres∣sors
in a most wonderful manner broken, by the immediate hand of Heaven; but it should tamely sub∣mit unto (nay Court, with them) the intolerable Yoke of France; and that at a Juncture when it is thrown off, by a Bigotted Popish Prince, who has been for a long time an unhap∣py Instrument in the hands of the Bloody Tyrant of France, to the op∣pressing and destroying the most anti∣ent, pure and best Christians upon the Face of the Earth, the Vaudois.
That we have such a Race of A∣nimals, walking, and that with no more than two Legs apiece, amongst us; is too well known to be deny∣ed or dissembled; and one would think that their Practices, which are so grosly evil, and eminently dangerous, should not be counte∣nanced or defended; but (which is to be lamented) they have their powerful Abettors and Patrons; and therefore, 'tis to be wisht, that their Edge may be blunted, and their ef∣fronted
Impudence duely censured.
Sir! As to these Collections (if that may be any invitation to your throwing away a very few hours upon their perusal) I do assure you, that I have made them, with all due regard to Truth; and am not con∣scious of one Mistake or untruth in the whole Work; my Care in that point has put me to much trou∣ble and some charge; for where I doubted, I have travelled to receive true and certain Information of mat∣ters of Fact; and such Materials as I wanted, which were upon Record, I fetcht from thence; and therefore, the certainty of matters here told, must atone for the want of Method and delighting Language.
I had the Promise (and so I thought assurance) of some things, at least as valuable, as the best things in this Tract can be esteemed to be; but some Men are too zealously intent and busie in their private Affairs, to be publick-spirited (though I remem∣ber
the time when they were emi∣nently so) & therefore, (to touch that Point no further at present) I shall only say, I have done Ʋt potui; and wish that some other Person, who could have done this to more advan∣tage had undertaken the Task; I am (what I alwayes was, and ever will be)

July 10th, 1690.
