


MY LORD,
UPON my Perusal of Guzman in Ma∣nuscript, I thought it a piece of Justice to the World, as well as to the Me∣mory of your Lordships Honorable Grand-Father, the most Ingenious and Accom∣plish'd Earl of Orrery, to see it Published with the Volume of his other Plays. I was surprized to find, that the Author of the Black Prince, Harry the Fifth, and Mustapha, should have a Genius for Comedy, when he condescended to that Task. The Tale of Guzman appears to have been a Spa∣nish Design, and therefore naturally grave; but the Spirit of my Lord Orrery's Wit was sufficient

to quicken the Mass, to enliven and beautifie it to that degree as renders it an Entertainment for an English Reader. The Intriegue is carried on with Variety of Accidents and Pleasant Circumstances, and (which is the Life and Perfection of Comedy,) wound up into a natural and surprizing Conclu∣sion. I have very seldom seen so many Chara∣cters of Persons and separate Interests managed with so much Conduct, as not to perplex the Tale, but every Thing serviceable to the Progress of the main Design. The Reputation of Mustapha has been established by the Approbation of all sorts of Spectators, and will continue a just Model of Tragedy, as long as the Stage shall last. The Story is magnificent, the Characters and Persons of the Noblest Rank, which are all maintained to their Dignity, and preserved in their proper Colours; The Business of greatest Importance; The Expression and Sentiments Just and Noble; The Passion and Distress wrought up to such a Height, as commands our Attention and Affe∣ctions.
The Noble Author of the ensuing Comedy was furnish'd within himself for any Performance of Wit, forasmuch as no Man of his Time better under∣stood Men and Things. He was not only an Ex∣ample of Ingenuity Himself, but a great Encoura∣ger of it in Others. Indeed there was no sort of Merit that escaped his Patronage. Poetry was but one of his Accomplishments. As for his other Qualifications, derived to him from his Predeces∣sors, those he supported in his own Person and Character, and transmitted them with Advantage to your Lordships Honorable Father, who has again resign'd them as Hereditary to your Lord∣ship. That Sweetness of Temper, that Principle of Justice and Generosity, which are already con∣spicuous in your Lordship, give sure Promises,

that you will maintain the Honor and Reputati∣on of your Predecessors. The World and Time are yet before you, and you have already obtain'd so great an Interest in Mankind, as to have every Body's good Wishes. For my own part I am ob∣liged, not only upon the promising Hopes I have conceived of your Lordship, but likewise upon the Alliance you have to our most Honorable Eng∣lish Maecenas, to whom the Acknowledgments of the Muses are eternally devoted, neither will it ever be determined, whether he is more a Favorer of them, or their Favorite. I have already ac∣quainted your Lordship with the Occasion of this Address, and cannot despair of your Lordship's Acceptance of the following Piece in Print, which (I question not) will be favorably received by the World. I would only farther beg leave to say, that I am, with all Respect and Sincerity,
MY LORD, 
