



Madam,
WHen I had last the Honour to Wait on Your Royal
Highness, You ordered me to write another Part
of Parthenissa, and You gave me leave at the
same time to Dedicate it to You.
Only Your Commands, Madam, could have
made me Undertake that Work; And only
Your Permission could have given me this confidence.
But since Your Royal Highness appointed me to Obey, it was
proportionate to Your Goodness to Protect me in my Obedience;
which this Dedication will. For all my faults in this Book
cannot be so great as His, who shall Condemn what has been Writ∣ten
for You, and is by Your own Allowance humbly addrest to You.
Nothing less than Your Name could be my Sanctuary; and
nothing more than Your Name can make it inviolable.
If ever Your Royal Highness can give away so much of Your
time as must be Imploy'd in reading this Tome, You will find in it
the Fairest, the Greatest, and the most Vertuous Princess of Asia,
so much divided between what She ows to her Quality, and her
Obedience, and what She ows to Her Inclinations, and Her Gra∣titude,
as possibly Your Royal Highness may oblige Her at once,
both with Your Pity and Your Kindness.
But, Madam, She has Commanded me to assure You, That if
You will Honour Her with the Last, She will neither desire, nor
need the First. Your Concernments for Her Misfortunes will put
a Period to them; since She cannot lament any Cause, which will
Produce for Her so Advantageous an Effect.
I did once design to have Ended Her story in this Book; But
the Vicissitudes of Her Fate were so many, and so various, that
I could not confine it within so narrow a compass. Nor was I
Over-much solicitous to do it; For since I limit my self in the
main Events to the Truth of the History, I was Apprehensive,
Madam, that the ill Result of Her Destiny might have given You
as much trouble, as the ill Stile in which I should have related
it.
But, Madam, rather than to Apologize, for having Written no
more, I should humbly beg Your Pardon for having Written so
much.
And since nothing can be a nobler Motive to forgive an Offence
(especially where the Person offended is equally merciful and ge∣nerous)
than Ingenuously to acknowledg it; I will confess, That
being to draw the most Excellent Princess of that Age, I took for
my Model the most Accomplisht of ours. And to make the Por∣traicture
of the fair Mithridatia, I attempted, Madam, to make
it resemble Yours.
But I find the Coppy so unlike the Admirable Original, that
I could not go more beyond my duty in the Design, than I am
come short of my intention in the Event.
But, Madam, though whoever had been possest with my Am∣bition,
must have fallen into my disappointment; for 'tis one of
Your Noblest Advantages, to be above description; Yet I am so
far from being grieved at my fault, as I rejoyce that I could not
avoid committing it: Since I had exceedingly rather want, than
have the Power to describe You.
As much as Your Royal Highness Transcends the Pontick
Princess in all the Gifts of Nature, and Excellencies of the
Mind, May You by so much surpass Her in all the Services of
Fortune, and the Felicities of Power; And may you be inclin'd
to extend one evidence of the Latter, by pardoning the confidence
of laying at your Feet this Tribute now Paid you by
Madam,

