



SIR,
DID I own the Wisdome and Wealth of Seneca, as truly as I do the highest Affe∣ction he pretends to in his Epistles: This had contained Matter no lesse su∣table to the Greatnesse of your Judge∣ment, then the Obligation I must ever acknowledge I owe to your Goodnesse.
But since I am restrained from the First by Birth, as I am from the Lat∣ter by Fortune, You may yet be wooed

to a more charitable acceptance upon this Consideration, That though the Present be small, it was not filched from Epicurus, or any other Magazin of Knowledge, then what lyes inclu∣ded within my own Invention. Which proves This I send you, as absolutely mine, as ever it was Theirs (if any such be) that may have Disco∣vered it before I was born. For being acquitted by my Conscience of all Theft in this kinde, I take the Re∣citements of others Opinions, as relating to no greater a Shame in me, then those are Obnoxious to, who en∣riched us with Guns and Printing, be∣cause some maintain they were used in China many Thousand Yeares before. The ranconter being no lesse Happy then his that stumbled on it at first.
I confess I have been so basely abu∣sed by Books, as that I entertain none but upon high Commendations. And those rather New then Old, however

the world is pleased to look a squint up∣on them, as lesse-deserving, though some have appeared of late to Admi∣ration, and so farre Transcendent as I feare our Period is neere. Ignorance and Barbarisme, being commonly the last subdued before a generall De∣struction.
Knowledge hath been ever taken for an infallible Portent of Ruine found, So busie a Companion, as she leaves nething unpryed into, in Heaven or Earth towards the Heights and Depth's of which she is not continually rolcing her Con∣jectures and casting her Darts; tena∣ble through no Opinions long, but what she remaines feuer'd to with the strong Chaynes of the Mathema∣ticks I Study no lesse Naturall then Necessary. The imployment of Chil∣dren, in their exactest Innocency, be∣ing to make Howses and raise Pyes of Dirt. So as if this inclination were

encouraged, and supported through the Direction of discreete Teachers, These Buds might come in Future to yeeld (without tormenting and subduing their Spirits) more wholesom Fruite, then the crueller Culture of the Schoole was ever found yet able to produce.
But I hold it no Prudence here to give a Second blow, by which the Ido∣laters of Former Customes may be tempted to a like Severity in case I should mistake; as 'tis very possible I may. The Land-skip I endeavour to draw being darkned through Igno∣rance, Superstition, and what is more dreadful, a thick and obscure Cloud of different Judgements so long em∣braced for the Goddesse of Truth, as none can prosecute the Contrary, though never so farre off, under hope of a milder penalty, then to be sent away Naked, and Wounded, which can∣not but be thought an uncivil kind of

Justice, and unsuteable to the Primi∣tive and richer ages of the world: Where then as few were denyed to search as we sinde now able to deter∣mine. Every Sect of Philosophers domineering in his Station.
Yet rather then betray Naturall Reason into their hands who desire to cut off all farther Traffick with the Land of Knowledge, I shall leave these Paradoxes, Problems, Queres, Conjectures, or what you please to call them, wholly to your Disposure. Being resolved neither to be dejected, nor elated through their Destruction or Preservation. Onely I am consi∣dent if they can passe with the smallest degree of Your Approbation, it may prove a safe Conduct in Justice a∣gainst the severest Censures of others, No lesse then a perpetuall testimony that I am

