



MY LORD,
THe Honor and Obedience, which is justly due, and ought to be given to Magistratical Authority, doth many times influence Men to do that, which the sense of their own Ʋnworthiness and Im∣perfections doth reasonably disswade them from: Ʋpon which Account, this Sermon is Presented to Publick View, with ma∣king its First and Humble Approaches to Your Honour.

For where should it properly go for Maintenance and Protection, but to that Mansion-House, from whence issued forth the Order, which caused it to appear thus habited from the Press.
This Discourse indeed al not the Ho∣nour of Your Lordships Presence, that be∣ing prevented by Your Lordships much condoled Sickness: But now it lies under and before Your Lordships eye, not only to be read and examined, but to be taken care of and Defended.
MY LORD,
The Times are Dark and Slippery, wherein a Wise man can hardly find his way; and a Strong Man walk without fear of stumbles and falls: how much more the Ignorant and the Weak?
In compassion therefore to such, I en∣deavoured all I could to furnish them with the Best Guide, and Surest Rule for their Conduct and Support.

And if Men would be but as ready and earnest to follow this Advice, which St. Paul gives for their outward Carriage and Conversation, as they are to observe what the Learned gives them, for their Healths and Estates; I am confident Our Clouds of Fears and Jealousies would quickly Vanish: Our Storms of Strifes and Contentions would gather into a Calm; And Our God would defend us from all sorts of Enemies, or else force them to be at Peace with Ʋs.
In short, I have only this to crave, that my Readers will perufe this Sermon, with the like Good meaning and Honest mind, as it was Preached and seemed to be Heard. And be so kind to me, as to co∣ver its faults with Charity, and so kind to themselves, as to put the rest in practice with Diligence and Perseverance.
To the zealous prosecuting of which, we

(of this City especially) have a double In∣couragement and Obligation; The First is the Direction of one that was an Infallible Apostle; The other is the Exemplary Pat∣tern of Your Lordships Piety, Prudence and Peaceable Conduct: To whose Fame and Merit, I Offer this as my First-fruits, with Hearty Prayers for Your Lordships Perfect Recovery, and all Possible Assu∣rances, that I Am

St. Bartholomews the less, April. 18. 1681.
