


My Lord,
I Confess the Obligations that your Lordship hath laid upon this Kingdom in general, and upon my self in particular, call for greater Acknowledgments than have yet been paid by the one or the other. As for my self, my Lord, I have had nothing but Affronts and Afflictions, and your Lordship hath vouchsafed to stoop to share with me in them; and since your Lordship hath been pleased to own me in my Sorrows and Cares, I am thereby in∣couraged to Address my self to your Honour for your Patronage and Protection. This Book, my Lord, is another demonstra∣tion of Rome's detestable Practices, under which we must again groan, if we do not with one Consent oppose Popery, to cut it off Root and Branch, and use all lawful means to prevent its introduction into this our native Country. We have again de∣tected the Contrivances of the Romish Interest against our Re∣ligion and Liberties, therefore, my Lord, I humbly conceive, That those that appear for a Popish Successor, are for Popery by wholesale, let their Pretences be what they will against it by retail, and would at once betray our Land to Rome's Tyran∣ny and Witchcrafts, and are content for the Gust of a sweet Morsel to sell all, even God, their King, Religion, and every thing that may conduce to the Peace, Welfare and Advantage of King and Kingdom: all which appears by their slighting, nay opposing the kindness of God our Saviour in this great Dis∣covery of their intended Malice against us, and by their fawning and flattering with Jesebel, whose Whoredoms and Witchcrafts are many: they incourage and abet the devilish Interests both of

Rome and France, to the great Confusion of Prince and People, by which means the Gospel of our Lord Christ is more affronted in the Houses of those that profess and call themselves Christians, than by the Congregation of those Blasphemers, who from a Prin∣ciple of Ignorance do with the loudest Calumnies reproach it. These, my Lord, are the Traytors whom Judgment doth follow in this World, and Eternal vengeance in the next. My Lord, I am sure your good Lordship hath not been unacquainted how the People have been deceived by these false Prophets, therefore once more I pray your Lordship still to continue your Zeal and Affection to the Protestant Cause, and the Interest of your Country, in which Harvest your Lordship heretofore hath been and now appears to be a true labourer, not only in Word, but by your Lordship's Care, Diligence and unwearied Activity.
To this end God Almighty bless your Lordship with all Blessings both of Heaven and Earth, Body and Soul, so that both King and Kingdom may joy and rejoyce in you. I shall say no more, but protest I will in all good Conscience do my part; I will appear more Loyal to my Prince than those who by their accustomed Oaths say they are so, and will from my Heart, and with all the skill I have, oppose this Romish Dragon, and all its Votaries. I shall now humbly take leave to subscribe my self,
My Lord,

WHITEHALL, Nov. 5. 1679.
