



GREAT SIR,
THIS Narrative of the present Horrid Plot against Your Majesty and Government, which was first heard, and narrowly discussed before Your Sacred Majesty and Council, and afterwards by Both Houses of Parlia∣ment, with universal assent to the power of Truth herein, is at last to appear abroad, for the satis∣faction of these Nations, and Europe perhaps, touching the mystery and consequence of such Designs. I hope I have good equity on my side, to presume to dedicate the same to Your Royal Name and Patro∣nage, and to no other; because I am well assured, both the rise and progress thereof, hath wholly sprung from an inbred indelible love and loyalty to Your Majesty and Kingdoms, as its support and success to be owing (under Gods extraordinary and miraculous appearance for his people in its defence) to Your Majesties Gracious pardon of several human frailties in the management.
Great and many are the Arts and Hoverings that have been, and may yet be used in vain both at home and abroad, to suppress and traduce the Evidence, by those who are more zealous and industri∣ous not to be thought or suspected, rather than really not to be ve∣ry Traytors and Rebels against their King and Country; whose many past Treasons and Encroachments upon several Princes, for these last Thousand years in the World, will prove their inclinations for fu∣ture,
whereof there are as many tragical instances against Your Ma∣jesties own Family and Person, within fresh memory (and to be made out by new proofs out of their own mouths and Records, if need) as against any other of Gods Anointing and Appointment.
Your Grandfather King James, though he escaped their Powder, is well known not to have escaped their Poyson. Your other Grandfa∣ther, Henry the Fourth of France, was basely and villainously stabbed in the Heart, which he had designed and bequeathed after his death unto them, notwithstanding all the Indulgences and Immunities that the heart of man could wish or desire, which he had granted them in his life. Who besides these, were the first Authors and contrivers of the late unnatural War, by their known diabolical art of inflaming Parties and Passions against each other, and of Your Royal Fathers unspeakable Sufferings and barbarous Usage? It was these that brought Him to His end, and fourished Swords, and triumphed over his dead Body, whom they durst not approach when living. What shall I say of Him who then cryed out, Now is the Enemy of God and of his Church fallen? I believe Your Majesty hath been well-informed of the Trayterous Executioners, but hardly at all of the Putney-Projectors, who were in most, if not all the Councels that contrived his ruine. What broke the Ʋxbridge-Treaty, but the Romish Interest and Policy? Who continued to baffle all designs of peace and settlement to this Nation, and prosperity to Your Majesties Family, but those Incendia∣ries? It may not be inconvenient to remind with what zeal and in∣terest they did perswade the Scots in 1650, to impose that upon Your Majesty which Your Royal Law hath forbidden others; for the ef∣fecting whereof, some Thousands of pounds were spent and given by them. After Your Majesties escape at Worcester, how did they, above all men, endeavour to betray and sacrifice Your Majesty into the hands of Your Enemies? And who was it that was to pay the Thou∣sand pound promised for Your being discovered and taken, but Father Joseph Simmonds, and Father Carleton Compton, both Jesuits? It's true, that one or two of the Komish perswasion, amongst many loyal and faithful Protestants, male and female, might then have contributed to Your Majesties deliverance: But have not such been well lessened and reproached, and called Fools by their own party for this grain of Loyalty, more owing to their English Blood than Romish Prin∣ciples?
The Popish Lord is not forgotten, or unknown, who brought a Petition to the late Regicides and Usurpers, signed by about Five hundred principal Papists in England; wherein was promised upon condition of a Toleration of the Popish Religion here by a Law, their joint resolution to abjure and exclude the Family of the Stu∣arts
for ever, from their, undoubted right to the Crown. Who more disheartned the Loyalty and patience of your best Subjects, than their confident Scriblers, White and others? And Milton was a known frequenter of a Popish Club. Who more forward to set up Crom∣well, and to put the Crown of our Kings upon his head, than they? Give me leave to tell Your Majesty, that his new fangled Government was contrived by a Popish Priest, and Lambert, a Papist for above these Thirty years. Who betrayed Your Majesties Secrets and Coun∣cels during your Exile, but they, even the Benedictine Monks, where∣of a whole Convent was maintained with a large Annuity by the late Usurper for such use and purpose? And heManning. that was caught and executed by Your Majesties Justice for such treachery, was of the same Red-Letter, and had Masses sung for him after his death, as an usual Reward and Plaister. After Your Majesties escape from Eng∣land, what promises did they make to Cromwell, to perswade the French King for Your banishment out of France? and what interest they made use of in order thereunto, can be made appear to their disgrace. I shall leave it to Your Majesty to call to mind their usage of your Royal Person when in Flanders: And a Noble Peer surviving, is able to speak aloud what was there intended against You, to pre∣vent Your Majesty from Your right to Reign over us. The present Relation upon Oath, and most true to a tittle, and Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's usage, is sufficient to convince all unbyassed Judges, how lit∣tle they have flagged or degenerated from their wonted hellish Princi∣ples and Natures.
How little therefore the Criminals concerned in this Plot deserve from Your Majesty, the World will better judg, if they will but consider how graciously Your Majesty hath dealt with them, and con∣nived at them, while the rigour of the Law was let loose upon Your other dissenting Subjects, who yet continued more quiet and loyal under their Pressures and Provocations, than these under Favours and Caresses. Hath not Your Majesty hazarded the hearts and affections of Your best Subjects, and much of Royal Honour, in appearing for the late Indulgence with frustration, to win and oblige, if possible, these everlasting holy Cut-throats?
But what Arguments of Clemency and Grace can perswade them to be true to their Natural, who profess Allegiance out of Consci∣ence to a Foreign contrary Soveraign? Or how can Your Majesty ex∣pect Truth and Sincerity, where Treasons and Lyes are virtues and merits? They are by an orderly Conspiracy wholly governed by Priests, their Priests by their Bishops, and their Bishops by their Popes; the sum of whose Religion, or ungodly Ambition rather,
or that which we call Popery, consists, in a word, in an Antichristian pretence of a Fifth Monarchical Soveraignty over all the Kings and Princes of Christendom, as is of late irrefragably demonstrated by the Right Reverend and Learned Bishop of Lincoln; yea in an higher Usurpation upon Christs eternal and peculiar Soveraignty over mens hearts and judgments, as is likewise evinced by another worthy Pen and Sufferer, in his Treatise of the right Soveraign of the heart. They therefore that brutishly and traiterously surrender their Souls over into implicit slavery to an Impostor, what Allegiance can they reserve inviolable with all sober and true Christians, either to King, or Christ, or Conscience?
I question not, Great Sir, but that he in whose hands are the hearts of Princes, will in time fully convince Your Majesty of all their un∣worthy principles and practises, and of my integrity too, how strange soever some open or secret Papists, whom time also may discover, have endeavoured to represent me. Till that time I commit my Cause to the most Righteous and All-seeing Judg, with a resolution to persevere through his assistance in my truth and testimony, against all discouragements or terrors, or blandishments either, to the last gasp.
And next to Christ and the Truth, I shall with the utmost of breath and power, according to my Oath and Duty, in what place and sta∣tion soever I am, endeavour to be found ever loyal and true to Your Majesty in all Your Rights and Honours, as all good Subjects and Christians ought, and as I find this Noble and Loyal Parliament are resolved to be to an hair, or an expression; and therefore cannot for∣bear to pray to God out of my sincerity and zeal for publick Peace and Concord between King and People, That seeing Your Majesty must highly trust some or other for Your necessary ease and help, that God would put it into Your Majesties heart more to trust and rely upon Your Two Houses of Parliament (who will be most true to Your Laws, and consequently both to You and Your people) than to any single Minister or Ministers whatsoever, unaccountably, who may pretend to more Loyalty, or more comply with any humour, or human frailty of Your Majesties, but are not true friends either to Your Majesty, or their Countrey, or themselves therein; but erect and prefer an Imperial Paramount self-end, or lust, before all; which Your Majesty by their Art must be brought unworthily to serve and pro∣mote, to publick disturbance always, and the confusion of them∣selves and their posterity, most an end, by Gods just venge∣ance.

It's a false suggestion which such Tempters use, That a King that rules by Will, is more Great, or Glorious, or Strong, than a King that rules by Law. The quality of the Retinue best proves the State of the Lord; the one being but a King of Slaves, while the other, like God, is a King of kings and hearts. No Prince was ever more absolute to have what he wished, than Queen Elizabeth, who wished for nothing more than the Subjects Rights and Welfare.
Your Majesty being so often marked out for destruction by these Conspirators, is, and ought to be as great a proof and demonstration to Your people, That the Papists themselves hold You not their friend, as any Act of Parliament against Tongues; but especially Your ge∣nerous Resentment and proportionable Royal Indignation against these Assasinates of Your Person, and Destroyers of our Cities, Mur∣derers of Your Subjects, Corrupters of Christianity, and Disturbers of Mankind.
But nothing will make Your Majesty so amiable and acceptable in the eyes of God and man, and Your Name and Memory blessed and glorious for ever, as the Copying of the Laws of our Saviour in your Life, by a decent paternal Example before the Sons and Daugh∣ters of Your people, to increase the Fear of God and its consequences amongst us: it being the chief End and Work of all Supreme Pow∣ers, To suppress Vice, and encourage Virtue amongst their Charge, ac∣cording to St. Paul, Romans 13, which is best done Abroad, when first and effectually begun at Home in Your own House and Family, according to the same Apostle, 1 Tim. 3, by Banishing all Vicious li∣vers from Your presence and converse, and advancing the Virtuous in their stead: By the neglect of which principal part of their Royal Trust and Office, Princes depose themselves, as useless before God and their own Consciences, whatever may be their State or Glory in fact, and by human Laws and Power before men.
That Your Majesty therefore may long live to be a great Asserter of Laws, of the Laws of Christ in Your own Soul, to Your eternal, of the good Laws of this Land, to the temporal high Peace and Feli∣city of Your Majesty and People, and abound in all the blessings of this and the other Life, Health, Grace, Wisdom, Wealth, Power, and Victory over all your Enemies and Temptations, shall be ever the study and Prayers of

