



My Lord,
DEdications are grown things of so nice
a Nature, That it is almost impossi∣ble
for me to pay your Lordship those
Acknowledgments I owe you, And not
(from those who cannot Iudge of the Sentiments
I have of your Lordships Favours) incurre the
Censure either of a fawner or a flatterer. Both
which ought to be as hateful to an Ingenuous Spi∣rit
as Ingratitude. None of these would I be guilty
of, and yet in letting the World know how Good
and how Generous a Patron I have, (in spight of
Malice) I am sure I am honest.
My Lord,
Never was Poetry under so great an oppression
as now, as full of Phanaticism's as Religion,
where every one pretends to the Spirit of Wit,
sets up a Doctrine of his own, and hates a Poet
worse then a Quaker does a Priest.
To examine how much goes to the making up
one of those dreadful things that resolve our disso∣lution.
It is for the most part, a very little French
breeding much assurance, with a great deal of talk
and no sence.
Thus he comes to a New Play, Enquires the
Author of it, and (if he can find any) mkes s
personal misfortunes the subject of his alice o
some of his Companions, who have as ttle it
and as much ill Nature as himself; and so to e
sure (as far as he can) the Play is damn'd.
At night he never fails to Appear in the
With-drawing room, where he picks out some that
have as little to do there as himself, who mustring
up all their puny Forces damn as possitively, as if
like Muggleton it were their gift, when indeed
they have as little right to Wit, as a Iourney man
Taylor can have to Prophecy.
Wit, which was the mistress of former Ages, is
become the Scandal of ours; Either the Old Satyr
to let us understand what he has known Damns
and decryes all Poetry, but the old; or else the
young affected Fool that is impudent beyond Cor∣rection,
and ignorant above instruction, will be
Censuring the present; tho he misplace his wit as
he generally does his Courage, and ever makes use
of it on the wrong occasion.
How great a Hazzard then does your Lord∣ship
run in so stedfastly protecting a poor Exil'd
thing that has so many Enemies! Bt that your
Wit is more Eminent than all their Folly or Ig∣norance,
and your Goodness greater than any Ma∣lice
or Ill Nature can be. I am sure (and I must
own it with gratitude) I have tasted of it much
above my Merit, or what even Vanity might
prompt me to expect; Though in doing this, I shall
at best but appear an humble debtor, who acknow∣ledges
honestly what he owes, though to keep up
his Credit he must be forc'd to borrow more; For
my Genius alwayes led me to seek an interest in
your Lordship; and I never see you, but I am
fir'd with an Ambition of being in your Favour:

for all I have receiv'd, the highest return I am
able to make, is my acknowledgment, in which
I can hardly distinguish whether my Thankful∣ness
or my Pride by the greater, when I subscribe
my self

