



Mr. Bentley,
I Have often (during this Plays being in the
Press) been importun'd for a Preface; which
you, I suppose, would have speak something
in Vindication of the Comedy: Now to please
you, Mr. Bentley, I will as briefly as I can speak
my mind upon that occasion, which you may be
pleas'd to accept of, both as a Dedication to your
self, and next as a Preface to the Book.
And I am not a little proud, that it has hap∣pened
into my thoughts to be the first who in
these latter years, has made an Epistle Dedica∣tory
to his Stationer: It is a Complement as
reasonable as it is Just. For, Mr. Bentley, you
pay honestly for the Copy; and an Epistle to
you is a sort of an Acquittance, and may be
probably welcome; when to a Person of high∣er
Rank and Order, it looks like an Obliga∣tion
for Praises, which he knows he does not
deserve, and therefore is very unwilling to part
with ready Money for.
As to the Vindication of this Comedy, be∣tween

Friends and Acquaintance, I believe it
is possible, that as much may be said in it's
behalf, as heretofore has been for a great ma∣ny
others: But of all the Apish qualities about
me, I have not that of being fond of my
own Issue; nay, I must confess my self a very
unnatural Parent, for when it is once brought
into the World, E'en let the Brat shift for it
self, I say.
The Objections made against the merit of
this poor Play, I must confess, are very grie∣vous.
First, Says a Lady, that shall be nameless,
because the World may think civilly of her;
Fogh! oh Sherru! 'tis so filthy, so bawdy, no
modest Woman ought to be seen at it: Let me dye,
it has made me sick: When the World lies, Mr.
Bentley, if that very Lady has not easily di∣gested
a much ranker morsel in a little Ale-house
towards Paddington, and never made a Face at
it: But your true Jilt is a Creature that can ex∣tract
Bawdy out of the chastest sence, as easi∣ly
as a Spider can Poison out of a Rose: They
know true Bawdy, let it be never so much con∣ceal'd,
as perfectly as Falstaff did the true Prince
by instinct: They will separate the true Metal
from the Allay let us temper it as well as we
can; some Women are the Touch-stones of
filthiness. Though I have heard a Lady (that
has more modesty than any of those the Cri∣ticks,

and I am sure more wit) say, She won∣der'd
at the impudence of any of her Sex, that
would pretend to understand the thing call'd
Bawdy. So, Mr. Bentley, for ought I perceive,
my Play may be innocent yet, and the Lady mi∣staken
in pretending to the knowledge of a Myste∣ry
above he; though, to speak honestly, she has
had besides her Wit a liberal Education; and 
we may credit the World has not buried her
Talent neither.
This is, Mr. Bentley, all I can say in behalf of my
Play: Wherefore I throw it into Your Arms,
make the best of it you can; praise, it to your
Customers: Sell ten thousand of them if possi∣ble,
and then you will compleat the wishes of

