



My Lord,
THE Treatise I now Humbly offer to Your Lordship in English, has met with a very great and general Applause in French. A Second Edition of it was desired in less than two Months after the first, and it is already Translated into more Languages than one: But that which ought to weigh more than any other Commendation, is the high value Your Lordship sets upon this Book; for if the most Accomplished Writers are the best Judges of other Mens Works, there lies no
Appeal from Your Lordship's Judgment con∣cerning the worth of this. I have heard Your Lordship deliver Your Opinion of this Performance in a very particular manner, and reckon it among the best Books that this Age has produced, and that in all re∣spects, both for Piety and Learning, good Sense and true Judgment.
Your Lorship thought fit that so valua∣ble a Work should be put into English. You were pleased, My Lord, to commit this Translation to my care, and I could wish I had been as well qualified for that Office, as I was desirous to discharge it to Your Lordship's Satisfaction. But I am Conscious of my want of Abilities in this as well as in all other things, and I fear the Work of the Reverend and Worthy Author, who honours me with some share in his Friendship, has lost several Beauties and Graces by passing through my Hands. However, My Lord, I have rendred his Sense as faithfully as I could, and that is all I would be accountable for to the Reader; for if among that Variety of nice and Tender Subjects which are touched here, the Author mixes any thing which does not suit with every Bodies Notions▪ it is his Province and not mine to defend it. He lives in one of the remotest Countries in which the Protestant Religi∣on
is received, and in what he writes, he had his own Neighbourhood chiefly in View; so that his main design was to cor∣ect things within his reach, to which the State of that Church, which is now in eminent danger, led him. But I leave to your Lordship to judge, whether that which he thought proper for his own Church, may not be likewise of good use to o∣thers.
And now my Lord, I do gladly embrace this opportunity to make a publick Acknow∣ledgment of the extraordinary Obligations your Lordship has laid upon me. A Post in the service of the Church is not the grea∣test Favour I have received at your Hands: I reckon my self much more beholden to your Lordship for the benefit of your Ex∣ample and Instructions, which I have enjoyed several Years in your Family. But here I must make a full stop, and how much so∣ever I am inclined to say a great deal upon the subject, yet I know your Lord∣ship too well, to venture on it; for what∣ever I may think I know I must say no∣thing.
The best return I can make for the large experience I have had of your Lord∣ship's Kindness and Generosity, is to put up my most hearty Prayers for the long
Continuance of your Lordship's Life and Happiness, and for the lasting Prosperity of your Family; this I do my Lord as truly as I profess my self, with all possi∣ble Respect.

