




SIR,
THE Dedication of Books un∣to Persons of Worth and Honour hath secured it self from the Impeachment of Censure, by taking Sanctua∣ry in the Usage of all Times and Ages. Herein therefore, as none is needed, so I shall make use of no Apology. But the consideration of some Circumstances (needless to be repeated) seem to render an account of the reason of my particular address unto You in this manner, necessary. This therefore I shall give, but briefly;
Ne longo sermone morer tua tempora —
That which principally in this matter I resolved my thoughts into, was a design to answer my own in∣clination and desire, in Testifying a respectful Ho∣nor to a Person who in a place of Eminency, hath given so fair an example of a singular conjunction in himself, of Civil Prudence, and all manner of useful Literature, with their mutual Subserviency unto each other; an endeavour whereof, the Wis∣dom of all Ages hath esteemed needfull, though few individuals have attained unto it. For where∣as a defect in Learning, hath tempted some, other∣wise Prudent and Wise in the Management of Af∣fairs, unto a contempt of it; and skill therein, hath given unto others a mistaken confidence, that it alone is sufficient for all the ends of Humane Life, an Industrious Attempt, for a furnishment of the Mind with a due mixture of them both, hath been greatly Neglected, to the no small disadvantage of Humane Affairs. It cannot therefore seem strange, nor ought any to be offended, that one who dares profess a great Honour unto, and Admiration of both these Endowments of the mind of Man, should express them with that respect, which alone he is capable to give, unto Him, who in a Place of Emi∣nent Trust and Employment, hath given a singu∣lar instance of their happy conjunction, and readi∣ness to Coalesce in the same mind, to enable it unto a regular and steady pursuit of their common ends. Whether I shall by this address attain that end, or no, I know not; but this is that which principally I aimed at therein: And to the Reason whereof I leave the Judgement of my undertakings. But yet I may not omit, that your favour hath also given

me particular grounds for this confidence; and such as have been prevalent against those impressions of discouragements, which I am naturally very liable to admit of, and receive. Your Candid Esteem of some former Endeavours in this kind (and which when carried without the Verge of those Lines of Communication, within whose compass Men and their Writings are Judged by Party and scarce otherwise, have received a fair acceptance in the world) were no small encouragement unto me, not to desert those wearisome Labours, which have no other Reward or End, but the furtherance of Publick Good; especially having this only way left me to serve the Will of God, and the Interest of the Church, in my Generation. It was also through the countenance of your Favour, that this and some other Treatises have received Warrant to pass freely into the world; which though I am uncertain of what advantage they may be unto any, by reason of their own defects, and the prejudices of others; yet I want not the highest Security, that there is nothing in them tending to the least disadvantage unto those, whose concernment lyes in Peace and Truth in these Nations.
For the Treatises themselves, which I desire here∣with to represent to some of your Leisure hours, I shall not offend against the Publick Service, in detain∣ing you with an account of them. Their Subject Matter, as to its Weight, Worth and Necessity, will speak for it self; the main objects of our present Faith, and principal Foundations of our future ex∣pectations, our Pleas and Evidences for a blessed Etrnity, are here insisted on. And whether the

Temptations, Opinions, and bold Presumptions of many in these dayes, do not call for a renewed con∣sideration and confirmation of them, is left to the Judgement of Persons indifferent, and unpreju∣diced; the manner of their handling is submitted unto yours, which is highly and singularly estemed, by
March 20. 1667.


