



I Need not give any other account of
my Publishing this ensuing short
discourse, then that which was al∣so
the ground and reason of its
preaching, namely your com∣mand.
Those who are not satisfied therewith, I
shall not endeavour to tender further grounds of sa∣tisfaction
unto, as not having any perswasion of
prevailing if I should attempt it. Prejudice so
far oftentimes prevails even on good soyls, that
satisfaction will not speedily thrive and grow in
them. That which exempts me from solicitousness
about the frame and temper of mens minds and
spirits in the entertainment of discourses of this

nature, is the annexing of that injunction unto our
commission in delivering the word of God: it
must be done whether men will hear or whether
they will forbear. Without therefore any plea
or Apologie, forwhat ever may seem most to need
it in this Sermon, I devolve the whole account of
the rise and issue it had, or may have on the pro∣vidence
of God in my call, and your command.
Onely I shall crave leave to adde that in my wait∣ing
for a little leasure to recollect what had I deli∣vered;
out of my own short notes and others (that
I might not preach one Sermon and print another)
there were some considerations that fell in exciting
me to the obedience I had purposed. The desire I had
to make more publick at this time and season the
Testimony given in simplicity of spirit to the inte∣rest
of Christ in these nations, and therein to the true
real interest of these Nations themselves, which was
my naked designe openly managed and persued with
all plainnesse of speech as the small portion of time
alotted to this exercise would allow) was the
chief of them. Solicitations of some particular
friends, gave also warmth unto that consideration.
I must further confesse that I was a little moved by
some mistakes that were delivered into the hands
of report, to be mannaged to the discountenance of

the honest and plain truth contended for, espe∣cially
when I found them without due considerati∣on
exposed in Print unto publick view. That is
the manner of these dayes wherein we live. I know
full well, that there is not any thing from the be∣ginning
to the ending of this short discourse that
doth really interfer with any form of civil Go∣vernment
in the world, administred according to
righteousnesse and equity: as ther is not in the Gos∣pel
of Christ or in any of the concernments of it. And
I am assured also that the truth proposed in it en∣wraps
the whole ground of any just expectation
of the coutinuance of the presence of God amongst
us, and his acceptation of our endeavours about
the alotment and just disposal of our civil affaires,
let other lay what waight they will or please, upon
the lesser differences that are amongst us on any ac∣count
what ever; if this shield be safe, this prin∣ciple
maintained and established, that is here laid
down, and the just Rights of the Nation laid in a
way of administration suited unto its preservation
and furtherance I, shall not easily be cast down
from my hopes, that amongst us poor unprofitable
unthankful, creatures as we are, we may yet see
the fruit of Righteousnesse to be peace, and
the effect of Righteousnesse quietnesse and as∣surance

for evermore. For those then who shall
cast their eye on this paper, I would begg of them
to lay aside all those prejudices against persons or
things which their various contexture in our pub∣lick
affaires may possibly have raised in them. I
know how vain, for the most part expectations of
prevailing in such a desire, by naked requests, are
But sick men must be groaning though they look for
no relief thereby. Wherefore commiting it into that
hand, wherein lie also your hearts and mine, I shall
commend it for your use unto the Soveraigne grace
of him who is able to work all your present works
for you, and which is more, to give you an inheri∣tance
among them that are sanctified.
So prayes

