



SIR,
THE Wise man tells us, that no man knoweth Love
or hatred, by all that is before him. The great
variety wherein God dispenseth outward things in
the World, with the many changes and alterations,
which according to the counsell of his will, he
continually workes in the dispensations of them, will
not allow them nakedly in themselves, to be eviden∣ces
of the fountaine from whence they flow. Seeing
also, that the want, or abundance of them, may e∣qually
by the Goodnesse and Wisdome of Cod, be or∣dered
and cast into an usefull subserviency, to a
Good infinitely transcending what is, or may be contained in them, there is no ne∣cessity,
that in the distribution of them, God should walke according to any con∣stant
uniforme Law of procedure, all the various alterations about them, an∣swering
one eternall purpose for a determinate end. Of Spirituall good things,
there is another Reason and Condition; for as they are in themselves Fruits, Evi∣dences
and Pledges of an Eternall unchangeable love; so the want of them, in their
whole kind, being not capable of a tendency to a greater Good than they are, the
Dispensation of them, doth so farre answer the eternall spring and Fountaine from
whence it floweth, as in respect of its substance and being, not to be obnoxious to
any alteration. This is that which in the ensuing Treatise is contended for. In the
middest of all the changes and mutations, which the infinitely wise providence of
God, doth daily effect in the greater and lesser things of this World, as to the
communication of his love in Jesus Christ, and the mercifull gratious distributi∣ons
of the unsearcheable Riches of his Grace, and the hid Treasures thereof pur∣chased
by his bloud, he knows no repentance. Of both these you have had full ex∣perience.
And though your concernement in the former, hath been as eminent as
that of any person whatever in these latter Ages of the World, yet your Interest in,
and acquaintance with the latter, is, as of incomparable more importance in it

selfe, so answerably of more value and esteem unto you. A sence of the excellency
and sweetnesse of unchangeable love, emplying it selfe in the Golden oyle of di∣stinguishing
spirituall Mercies, is one letter of that new name, which none can
read, but he that hath it. The Series and Chaine of eminent providences, where∣by
you have been carried on, and protected in all the hazardous worke of your Ge∣neration,
which your God hath called you unto, is evident to all. Of your preser∣vation
by the power of God through Faith, in a course of Gospell Obedience, up∣on
the account of the immutability of the Love, and Infallibility of the Promises
of God, which are yea and Amen in Jesus Christ, your own soule is only possessed
with the experience. Therein is that abiding joy, that secret refreshment, which
the world cannot give. That you and all the Saints of God, may yet enjoy that
Peace & Consolation which is in believing, that the eternall Love of God is immu∣table,
that he is faithfull in his Promises, that his Covenant ratified in the death
of his Sonne is unchangeable, that the fruits of the purchase of Christ, shall be
certainly bestowed on all them for whom he died, and that every one, who is real∣ly
interested in these things, shall be kept unto salvation, is the ayme of my present
plea and Contest. That I have taken upon me to present my weake endeavours in
this cause of God, to your Highnesse, is so farre forth from my perswasion, of your
Interest in the Truth contended for, (and then which, you have none so excellent
or worthy) that without it, no other considerations whatever, either of that Dig∣nity
and Power whereunto of God you are called, nor of your peculiar regard to
that Society of men, whereof I am an unworthy Member, nor any other personall
Respects whatever, could have prevailed with, or emboldened me thereunto. Sancta
sanctis. The things I treat of are such, as sometimes none of the Princes of this
World knew, and as yet few of them are acquainted with. Blessed are they who
have their portion in them. When the urgency of your High, and important Af∣faires,
wherein so many Nations are concerned, will lend you so much leasure, as to
take a view of what is here tendred, the knowledge which you have of mee, will de∣liver
you from a Temptation, of charging any weaknesse you may meet withall, upon
the Doctrine which I assert and maintaine. And so that may ruune and be glori∣fied,
whatever become of the nothing that I have done, in the defence thereof, I
shall be abundantly satisfied. That is the Sheild which being safe, I can with con∣tentment
see these papers dye. Unto your Highnesse, I have not any thing more to
adde: nor for you greater thing to pray, than, that you may be established in the
Assurance and sence, of that unchangeable Love, and free acceptance in Christ
which I contend for: and that therein you may be preserved, to the Glory of God,
the Advancement of the Gospell, and the Reall Advantage of these Nations.

