



SIR,
YOur generous mind fra∣med by nature to vertue and vertuous actions, is so well known to Souldiers and Scholars, that as Mars gives you Bayes, so the Muses do give you Books.
Quis ergo generosus? Ad virtu∣tem bene à natura cō∣positus. Sen. l. 5. p. 44. The consideration where∣of hath emboldned me (though a stranger) to offer to your protection this translation of Ovids Elegys, who I think was even rocked in his cra∣dle by the Muses and fed with sugar and
Heliconian water, which made him have so sweet a vein of Poetry. So that the name of Ovid is a suffi∣cient commendation for any work of his; if my English can but like theEccho send back the soft Musick of his lines. And indeed if he write best of love that hath been in love; and that there is a certain
 or efficacy in his words that feels the affection; I doubt not but my own sorrow hath learn'd me how to translate Ovids sorrow. For I con∣fess I was never in Fortunes books, and therefore am not much indebt∣ed to her, neither do I care for her frowns; but I am grieved for one who is my brother, in mis-fortune, who is
exul in Patria, being enfor∣ced to let that skill and experience which he hath gotten abroad in Marine affairs, and which hath been approved of both by the Eng∣lish and Dutch Nations in several long voyages, lie dead in him for want of employment, which is the life of practical knowledge: And though he must be compelled by his present fates to accept of the im∣ployment of foraign Nations, yet if a way might be opened unto him he is more willing (as he is bound by duty) to serve his native King and Country, which desire of his Iknow your generous disposition cannot but cherish, and approve of my love towards him. This book
Ovid sent to the City of Rome a ap∣pears by die first verse, Parve nec in∣video &c. and I am now to send it forth into a City abounding with Criticks, and therefore it desires your worthy patronage and de∣fence; for which (if Ovid lived) he would make his fluent Muse express his thankfulness: But I for any favour which you shall shew unto this translation, must acknowledge my self bound un∣to your vertue, which I wish may shine forth in prosperous actions, until your fame be equal to Caesars, who banished
Ovid.

