



My Lord,
IT was a received Maxim in the Roman Judicatories, To Con∣demn no Man till he were admitted to answer for himself, which being agreeable to the Laws of Natural Justice, and the pre∣vailing Sentiments of Mankind, I doubt not, but will pass with Your Honour, for an equitable Rule of Judgment.
The Rector of Bury hath Publish'd a horrid Charge against a great Body of People, the Dissenting Protestants, of Corrupting the Word of God, by Printing the Word
Ye instead of We in Acts 6.3. and presumes to
shelter himself under your Great and Ho∣nourable Name, by which he hopes to render it uncontestable, and to give it a more general Acceptation in the World.
Now, My Lord, since he Appeals to Cesar, to
Cesar he shall go. All the Favour we desire, is a Full and Fair Hearing of our Cause, which will bear the strictest Disquisition of a severe Judicature.
Our Accuser saith, the first Corruption happen'd in the Year 1638. when the Presbyterians were in the Ascendant, and that it was then begun, and continued ever since in several Editions to promote the People's Power of setting up their own Teachers.
But I have clearly Prov'd, that the Presbyterians were in no Pow∣er then; that they are as much against the People's Ordaining Mi∣nisters as the Bishops are; that there were far more corrupt Editi∣ons of that Place under King Charles II. when the Press was intire∣ly at the Devotion of the Bishops, than in the Year's between 40. and 60. when the Anti-Episcopal Party had the Power of the Press.
I can find but Three Corrupt Editions during the long Parliament, and I have met with Three and Thirty under King
Charles II. which I humbly Present to your Lordship's wise Consideration, not doubting but the Interests of Truth have the Preference in your E∣steem to the insinuating Artifices of officious Servants.
The Rector, who Honours himself with the Title of your Lord∣ships Chaplain, knowing its below your Greatness to examine his Matters, and presuming your Lordship would take all upon trust (as one would think a Noble Person might rely much upon the Word of a Chaplain) thought he might impose herein upon your Honour, as no doubt he hath upon many others: But the Duty we owe to all, and to Persons of Honour especially, as well as our own necessary Vindication, hath obliged us to Expose the Falseness of his Accusations, and to recommend this true Narrative of the Case to your Lordships Exact and Impartial Judgment.
I humbly crave your Lordships Pardon for this Address, occasi∣on'd by that of the Rector's, in which he very rudely Prostitutes your Honour to the Patronage of the vilest Calumny.
I leave him to your Lordship's just Censure, and wish him more Sincere Affection to the Truth, more Deference towards his Supe∣riours, and more Charity towards his Neighbours, especially in a Conjuncture, when our Civil as well as our Religious Interests do so loudly Call for the Exercise of 'em.
But I must not tire your Lordship's Patience, and therefore shall only add an Apprecation of all Blessings to your Honour, and beg leave to subscribe my self.
Right Honourable,

