



Most Gracious Souveraigne.
BEfore I begge your sacred Majestyes patroni∣zing this mite, which shal be conneighed into your natur all soyles, for as wel correction to your enemies, as also the cherishing of the star∣vinge and dying people therein, who have layd long greived and languishing under an arbitrary power. I beseech you to remember the advice given to your royal Father of blessed memory by a wise man. Make not knowne the cheifest of your determinations to an open councell (al thoughstyled a privy councel) least you faile in the disigne, vera, amicitia, tantum modo est inter bonos mali nec interse amici sunt, nec cum bonis, Neither doe any thing of great concernmēt in councel of a civil freind, in vvhich your Majesty cannot be safe in the execution thereof unlesse it be concealed: Civilem amicum sic habeas ut putes posse in imicúm fieri. Admire not (Gracious Sr.) that in a corner of the earth I vvhis∣per this councel unto you, for had your sacred Father beleived the same he had never beene so unhappy as to be murthered by his ovvne people (nay by som of those he made his bosome freinds) and consequently your royal selfe had not beene exposed to such termes as your ovvne soule, better knovves then any. But
vincit qui patitur. No I vvrit this smal ensueing trea∣tise unto your Majesty that you may have an insight of vvhat you haue done, and the better you vval discerne vvhat is to be done, by remooving al sychophauts vvho lay parsonally in the breast of your Fathers and your Majestyes, but there harts in the treasury of both your knovvne enemies. Latet anguis in herba! and stil the seeds of those adamites are ingendring in your councels which (gracious Prince) I hold my selfe bound induty to make knowne to your Majesty, & thereby give a ca∣veat to you for the future, seing the glory of God & the good of my Soveraigne, and 3 commonwalths at stake If your Majesty should discountenance the worke, my comfort remaines that the frowe of my Prince may turne to the favour of my God nec mendacii utilitas est diuturna, nec veritatis damnum diu nocet, neither shal flattery stil hold in credit, nor truth alway continue in disgrace. No no (Great Sr.) none but such as joyne with your Enemies (knowing you to be Heire apparent of so great a monarch (who was not only defender of the faith, but martyre thereof) dares be tacite (especial∣ly) when the christian fayth lyes wallowing in the blood of its owne saints over the whole earth in your Maje∣steys being so unlawfully kept from that Scepter, which usvally did protect the innocent, and detect the nocent: which that it may once more be put in the hand of your righteous selfe the vicegerent of the Lords, I here on my bended knees offer unto the most high my hum∣blest praiers for your Majestyes safety, and in throning (not doubting but your gracious goodnesse will grant protection to these my desires) and that as dayes
multiplies on your haires and yeares on your people, that the weisdome of God and savour of your owne subjects may be joyned with the helpe of al christian princes (making it there owne cases) to the restablishing of your Majestyes 3. Crownes. This suit wil I never give ouer, in al others, I wil remaine

