



My Lord,
I Am oblig'd to offer to your Lordship these fol∣lowing Papers, which will the rather need a good Patron (such as your Lordship) because the Times are Censorious, and many mis-guided peo∣ple are ready to clamour against a man that shall ad∣venture (though out of pure Charity) to direct them contrary to their own minds. Maximus Tyrius ob∣served long ago, that Man is , Such a morose, querulous and Squeamish stomach't thing, that he will cry out at what∣soever crosseth his Humour, whether it be wrong or Right. I do not doubt, but it may be my Lot to receive such Returnes from some; and, as to mine own particular, I do not care if it be, especially since Cla∣mouring is again become a Mode. I am sure, the De∣sign of this little piece is Honest; for it aimeth at Peace and unity, which in these uncertain and tottering times is the only Expedient to secure the interest of our Religion against a Forreign Enemy.

Many even of different perswasions in other things, are agreed in this. But the great question is, what are the beast Means for the compassing of so Excellent an End? And some (to use their own Expression) are for setting the Church doors wider open: meaning, that they would have some of our Usages and Constitutions thrown aside, because they are not fit for their Tooth, unless it be to bite at. But were this thing fairly Practi∣cable, I beleive 'twould be as ineffectual in its issue, as 'tis unreasonable in it self. For how impossible is it, to satisfie Desires that are still craving? we could never yet tell (nor can they themselves) what will really stint them; only some have told us in general Terms, that they would have every thing down, which is not of Primitive use; of which they themselves must be judges too: So that if they will please to conclude a∣gainst the whole frame of our Discipline and Govern∣ment, away it must, or else they will not be satisfied.
Concessions hitherto have been so far from being Advantageous to the Church, that (like General In∣dulgences) they have only made ungrateful Spirits the more Bold and Insolent, so that they hope at last to get into the Saddle. Those five Reverend Divines, who were fain to lay their Noddles together to give birth to Smectymnuus, among other Huge Reasons for the Abolishing of our Liturgy, urged this for one, because, forsooth, it had already undergone some Al∣terations. As for instance; whereas in King Edward the Sixth's time, days of Abstinence were called Fish-days, afterwards that word was altered, and

Fasting days was put in its room. From which Mighty Argument those great Logicians and Magi∣sterial Divines did strongly conclude, that the whole Service-book might be laid aside. Find the Conse∣quence He that can; but sad and long Experience hath shew'd us, what advantage designing and insatiable Men will take of every little thing, to make it a Pre∣cedent, and to plead for more still, that after the re∣moval of this pin and that, and so on, the whole Fa∣brick may at last tumble upon our heads.
Would to God this design was not on foot now, But however some endeavour to stop our Mouths, yet we have Eyes as well as They, and there is too great Reason to conclude, that many (that is to say, some Atheists, some Jesuited persons, and some whose low Fortunes and Interest (together with their Malice) engage them to be Factious) do directly level their aim at the Ruine of our Establish't Church.
We are so charitable as to hope, that many of our Dissenters are better conditioned. But as in the late Troubles, the Rebellion went further than the first Raisers of it did intend (for they hoped to force the King to buckle to their Terms, when others behind them did resolve to force Him, and Monarchy, to the Grave) so we have grounds to believe, that now while one party desires an accommodation in some matters, others make use of their Help and Assistance, with an intent to overthrow all.
This unadvised concurrence of our over zealous Bre∣thren in this Juncture, though it be of most evil conse∣quence,

yet is the more to be pittied, because they im∣prudently strive against their own securities. For it is evident to any indifferent Eye, that the great Ram∣pier against the Church of Rome, is the Church of Eng∣land; whose Doctrines are a certain Antidote against poysonous Principles from abroad, and whose Govern∣ment and Discipline do tend of themselves to Order and Unity at home.
Yet certainly it is want of Judgement and clear in∣sight into the Nature of our Establishments, which hath made some so passionately to oppose them; because they will not give themselves the leasure to read and consider those Books which all along, have been writ∣ten in defence of them, by learned and good Men, who saw of what vast use they were to the interest of the Protestant Cause. And though I may not expect, that my little pains will be taken notice of (much less, prove successful) when the labours of so many great men have been lost; yet I had some reasons to induce me to discourse purposely of the Antiquity of our usages; the rather, because a wrong and groundless notion runs a∣bout, that all our Constitutions were Originally bor∣rowed of the Romanists; so that whosoever now is a strict Conformist, is looked upon by the heady rabble to be Popishly affected, and stands fair to be knockt down, when opportunity shall serve (which is the main thing wanting.)
Not to dissemble with your Lordship, I did not long ago, discourse upon this Theme in the Pulpit. And finding the subject so acceptable (and in a manner a new

thing, even) to intelligent and sober persons, I had some strong invitations to publish those short Collections, which I had then made. But knowing the Niceness of the subject, and the Capricious humour of some men who lie upon the Catch, I found it necessary to take all into pieces, and to throw aside some things, and to add many more, and more largely; so that my task was like the mending and altering of an old House, which is ma∣ny times so troublesome and chargeable, that a new one may be built at a cheaper rate.
And now, my Lord, I hope the world will not con∣demn me for entitling this (though inconsiderable) Piece to your Patronage. Every Creature would lay its young in a secure place; and so would I, mine. And though that be enough to excuse me (in point of pru∣dence) for seeking the best shelter, yet my obligations to your Lorship, do moreover require me (in point of Du∣ty) to express my Gratitude in some little measure; though I confess, 'tis much more easie to contract a new debt to your Lordship, then to make any tollerable ac∣knowledgement of an old one.
That God would preserve your Lordship in honor and safety, and make your great cares and indeavours successful to the good of this poor Church (that is, to your Lordships own hearts desire) as it ought to be the Prayer of every honest and sincere Protestant, so it is especially of him, who is
 Octob. 13th. 1679.
