



My Lord,
IN Obedience to your Lordship's Order, I have now made this plain Discourse publick. That which I beforehand most assuredly expected, has since accordingly befallen me, upon my Preaching of this Sermon; which hath brought me under the gentle Discipline of the long-ago-erected Phanatick-Office▪ that is, (if there can be any need to explain my meaning) I have been bitterly Cursed and Railed at, and both my Self and my Discourse vilely aspersed, with an hundred Lies and Slanders, and most ridiculous and malicious Misrepresentations. And, indeed, since I must needs be venturing to tell these Men their own (though out of never so charitable a Design) how could I expect to escape that, which has been the never∣failing

Portion of all others, who have yet done the like? or think to come off, without having a Cast of their Office? Nor have I now therefore the least reason, to take it ill that I should be thus treated by them, according to the constant Methods of their pro∣per Trade and Mystery. For, to Rail and Slan∣der is the only way, which this sort of Men yet ever knew, of requiting those Persons, who speak to them Home-truths, and give them sober Counsels. This is their only significant and most substantial way of Com∣mendation, in these Cases. And under this Notion, I can assure them, I have now learn'd to take all their present Treatment; which I do therefore not only readily forgive; but, over and above, return them hearty thanks for the same; professing withal, that I will still carefully endeavour (according to their Rules of judg∣ing) never to deserve less, from their hands. If their Design, herein, has been quite contrary, and they far enough from having any Intention to gratifie me, I cannot tell how to help their being defeated; they must e'en bestow their Lies elsewhere, for the future. For for my part in these Cases, I shall ever look upon such course Complements as the greatest Credit and

Courtesies, that these Men are capable of doing me, till I see they come once to have a more real Kindness for their own Souls. In the mean time, in point of Gratitude for what I have already received, I think my self obliged to ac∣quaint them, with this secret, viz. That, if they have indeed a mind most effectually to shame, vex and disoblige me, their only way will be, to speak well of me.
As to the Discourse itself, I shall only say thus much; that though there are now several things added, and more enlarged upon, yet there is nothing at all omitted of what was delivered before your Lordship. And I must now leave it to all impartial Readers, to judge, whether in the whole, there be any thing (of my own) either so prophane or ridiculous, as that any one, who is not himself troubled with over moist a Brain, shall need (as some very gravely pretend they did, at the hearing of it) to sweat for me.
My Lord, I have no more to add, but that no man shall more heartily Pray, for your Lordships Happiness

and Prosperity, for the successfull Government, Peace, and true Welfare of this City, than

