



My Lord,
SEldom do some men make any Comments, but they chuse me for their Text. Since I presented to your Grace a little Sermon preached on the 30 of January, Factious people have accused me of Partiality, for not Publishing this that was Preached on the 5th of November last; and thence the Charity of our Modern Blessed Saints, (who like the Old Nestorians are—nati ad Calumniandum—rarely gifted in those two Virtues, Lying and Slandering) hath concluded, that I am a secret friend to the Popish Interest.
Which manifest and gross injury I have yet the less reason to repine at, since so many thousands of men who are far my betters, have an equal share of it, so that all who are not given to change, all who are not weary of a Happy Peace, all who Dread to be Slaves again to their Fellow-Subjects, all that are true friends to the Government Establisht in Church and State, all that love the Person and acquiesce in the Wisdom and Counsels of the King, all Ranks and Degrees of men, even Peers and Pre∣lates, who Abhorr the seditious practises of Ambitious Re∣vengefull and unquiet Spirits, are Libell'd under the notion of Tantivyes, Popishly affected, Papists in Masquerade, Irish Bog-trotters, and under I know not how many Nick names more.
Little do they consider in the mean while, how they Dishonour the Reformed Religion, and what great Service they do the Romanists, when they call every Honest man a Papist, and make Knavery to be a Characteristical note of a TRƲE PROTESTANT.

And though the Sons of the Church of England be thus tra∣duced as unfaithfull to their Mother, yet we hope the indifferent world will consider, that none but they have effectually undertaken the defence of the Protestant Cause all a long. And 'tis obser∣vable, that since the discovery of the late Popish Plot, whereas the Church of England hath both by Preaching and writing industri∣dusly Laboured against Popery, the Dissenters have Laboured with all their might and main against the Church of England; which when men of Judgment and Integrity shall consider, they will soon discern who they are amongst us, that are the best friends to the Church of Rome.
As to mine own particular, My Lord, I do sincerely protest as in the presence of the Eternal and Omniscient God, that I have ever liv'd, and by Gods grace am resolved to dy a true member of our Church as it is now Establisht. And for the rest of my Brethren, the Conformable Clergy, they cannot be suspected but either by Ignorant or by Ill men; it being impossi∣ble for those, who give their Ʋnfeigned Assent and Consent to our Liturgy, to entertain any kind or favourable Opinion of those Errors and Corruptions, which we justly Condemn in the Roman Church.
Therefore, to deal truly with your Grace; the onely Reason why this Sermon was not Publisht before, was, because I looked upon it as so inconsiderable a thing in comparison of what has been done by men of Great Learning and True Worth, that I could not take the confidence to shew it the World. Some discourses may be fit enough for the Pulpit, which may not be so fit for the Press; and such I conceive this Discourse to be. However since 'tis going abroad, it will not take up much room in the World; and this advantage I gain by it, an opportunity of presenting my most Hearty Service and Duty to your Grace, and of professing my self, what I am, My Lord,

March 16, 1681.
