


Right Honourable,
I Can call God and the Con∣gregation over which God and you have set me, to wit∣ness, that according to my Du∣ty,

I cease not to pray for an encrease of your Success and Pro∣sperity, Righteousness and Mer∣cy. That as by the former you may augment your Treasures on Earth, so by the latter you may secure your Treasure in Heaven. Or as the Apostle speaks, lay up to your selves a good foundation, that you may lay hold on Eternal Life, 1 Tim. 1. 6. 18, 19. And can say withall, as in the hearing of my great Lord and Judge, I have faithfully en∣deavoured in my place the Pro∣motion of true Religion and Vertue amongst all sorts; espe∣cially the Younger; knowing what advantages attend on Ear∣ly Piety; and how much the Hopes and Happiness of our

Church and State depend upon a sober and Religious rising Ge∣neration. Consequently, how much it concerns us all to look to the well seasoning of those Youth that are committed to our Charge, as we tender the future good of the Kingdom wherein we live. And when I consider how too sadly true those words of the Poet are (which agree well with those of our Saviour, Math. 7. 13.)
—Mundi pars maxima nigros
Tendit ad Inferni manes, ubi luctus & irae.
That the most goe the worst way. And the many Setters we have in this Age, whose design is to pervert Youth, and

draw them on to Atheism, Po∣pery and Prophaneness; I judg∣ed it my duty to endeavour their Safety and preservation. To which end, I have in this small Essay (to avoid prolixity) summed up what Arguments I could to prevail with them to be Religious betimes; shew∣ing them both the Necessity, Reasonableness and Advantage of an early Dedication of them∣selves to God.
Multa ferunt anni venientes commoda secum,
Multa recidentes ademunt. Hor.
And that Youth affords them many Adjuments and Opportu∣nities for Heaven, which old Age will deprive them of.

Now my Reasons (Right Honourable) of Craving your Patronage of so small a work, are these.
My great Obligations to you, which I am willing to take this Opportunity to acknowledge to the World: A great part of my Encouragement and Main∣tenance in the place where I am, arising from your Boun∣ty.
And because I know your countenance of this Undertaking will render it much more ac∣ceptable to those for whom it is designed. The Hand oft-times commends the Gift. If there∣fore you shall pardon my pre∣sumption, and Recommend it to the Youth you have relation

to, and influence upon, both at Home, and in Foraign parts, I hope God will send his Blessing with it, and make it successeful, that you may see an hopeful Progeny rising up to inherit your Vertues, as well as Riches. Which that you may, shall be the Prayer of
Popler, April 24. 1680.

