




MY Soul hath stil in remembrance the grievous shakings and rendings that have been in this Nation, which entred deep into the bowels of it, and made every heart ake, and every mind astonished. This Nation was setled in religi∣on and outward peace, in such a way as was pleasing to most: but yet there was a spirit within, which had been long groaning under oppression, whose sighs and cryes entred into the ears of the Lord; and he arose up in his fury and jealousie, and rent the heavens, and rent the earth, so breaking the very foundations of both, that men generally were amazed, and wondred what would become of all. The former Religion was almost buried in confusion, and in dan∣ger of being utterly lost: a long-spun corroding war were we en∣tangled in, which administred no hopes nor likelihood of peace. The hand of the Lord reacheth through all these dominions; Mastracy, Ministry, the common people, the people of God (both such as were accounted so, and such as were indeed so) the line of confusion was stretched over them all; they did all reel and tot∣ter like a drunken man, as if they had been so to fal, as to rise up no more:
But behold how suddainly and unexpectedly was there a settle∣ment of al again! The Nation setled in peace, Magistracy setled, Ministry setled, the common people setled; and those which were shaken in their Spirits, got into their several waies in religion and setled again. Thus there was a general healing of all again save onely of a few, whose Spirits God had so reached, that their wound was incurable: and unless somewhat of God had been brought forth, which the world cannot know (nay the religions spirit of man which is below, can no more reach it, then the common spirit of the world) they had remained miserable, lost, scattered, and confounded to this day. But the Lord hath in infinitemercy visited them, in the season of distress; and there hath a little foolish thing broke forth (at which all the wise, and religious in the Spirit of this world cannot but stumble) which hath administred relief, and discovered the foundation whereupon they also can settle. So that

now there is as it were an universal settlement, as every creature is gathered into that center, which is proper and sutable to its Spi∣rit to bottom on.
Now this I have to say to all; Let every one look to his foun∣dation, for the Lord can arise again, yea and will arise again and shake once more; and then the heavens and the earth which have not a true foundation, cannot but fall. If the earth be not founded upon and settled in righteousness, its present establishment will not stand: if the heavens be not founded upon and setled in truth, they will melt and pass away before the fire of the Lord. There is a spirit that mourneth deeply to the Lord, groaning in∣wardly, and his ears are open to it, and he will plead the cause of his seed: and the Churches and religions, wherein the seed of the Serpent can live and flourish, shall wither and come to an end. Dust is already become the Serpents food; the Spirt of man in all his exercises of religion, knoweth not the bread of life: but the dead feed upon the dead, and the dead spirit of man loves to have it so. But this cannot continue, for the Lord hath been at work all this while, and when he brings forth the people which he hath been forming, and their religion, the religion of man will appear what it is; and shame and sorrow will be the portion of all who have pleased themselves therein, and trifled away the day of their visitation.
Be wise now therefore, O ye wise ones; be religious, O religious ones! Open the eye and ear that hath been shut, shut the eye and ear that hath been open: Stumble no longer, least ye fall and rise no more. I know ye cannot see, for the wrong eye is open, and the Lord hath designed to hide his wisdom from that eye. If it be pos∣sible for you, become poor in spirit, least ye at last prove to be the rich, whom the Lord will send empty away. Sell all apace, that ye may have wherewith to buy the Pearl. Ye have not known the appearance of the Lord, but in your wisdom have disdained it, and he hath disdained to make use of you in this great work; but it hath been pleasant to him to lay stumbling blocks before you, that ye might fall and be broken. The children, the fools, the blind can see the way, and enter into life: but ye that are men, that are wise, that have both your eys, that can judge in religion, and de∣termine what is Orthodox and what erroneous, yet cannot.

O hear, that your souls may live! Ye know not how short your time is, the day of your visitation passeth away faster then ye are aware. The cry hath long gone forth, Behold the Bridegroom cometh, and his Spouse hath been preparing for his bed. Ye must off with your old Garments, and have the new Garment on, ye must have the true oyl in your Lamps, or the door of the Kingdom will be shut upon you, and there will be no entrance for you. In plain terms, ye must part with all your Religion which ye have gathered in your own wisdom, which hath grown up in the Aposta∣cy, and which onely can make a fair show in the dark, but cannot endure the searching light of the day of the Lord; and ye must purchase the true religion, the true righteousness, the true inno∣cency and purity of Christ: the old must be done away, truly done away, and the new come in the place; so that flesh and self may be quite destroyed, and nothing but Christ found in you, and you found no where but in Christ, if you enter into his Kingdom: for no unclean thing can enter. Therefore put away pride, and passion, and enmity, and fleshly reasonings; and seek out that which is pure, and enter into it, and take up the cross against all that is contrary, that so you may be wrought into it, and found in it. And turn from all imaginings, and conceivings about the meanings of Scripture, in the uncertain and erring mind, and come to that which is infallible. And know the silencing of the fleshly part, that the spiritual part may grow in the wisdom, that so ye may learn in the spirit, and know the word of God, and be able to speak it.
My bowels are toward you, and in bowels hath this been writ: not to anger or shame you, but to provoke you to jealousie against that dark and evil spirit, which leads you to destruction, under the guise and appearance of a light and good spirit. Nor is it to glory over you, for my soul lyeth down in shame and sorrow before the Lord, and the reproach of my own Apostacy and seeking re∣lief from the world (turning from th Lord, who had wounded me, to earthly vanities for ease) will not easily be covered. The Lord had been kind to me in breaking of me in my religion, and in visiting me with sweet and precious light from his own spirit, but I knew it not. I felt, and could not but acknowledge a power up∣on me, and might have known what it was, by its purifying of my heart, and begetting me into the image of God: but I confind it to

appear  a way of demonstration to my reason and earthly wise∣dom, and for want of satisfaction therein, denyed it and rebelled against it; and so, after all my former misery, lost my entrance, and sowed seeds of new misery and sorrow to my own soul, which since I have reaped. So that I have no cause to boast over others, but to lie low in abasement of spirit. And what I write, is not in any dominion or authority of my own, but to bring others unto that dominion and authority, which it is good for me, and for every one else to be subject to. The Lord strip us of our own understand∣ing, and of that righteousness which is but ours (though we have called it his) that so we may be gathered into, and receive his un∣derstanding, and be cloathed with his righeousness, and feel his rest and peace. And happy is he that loseth all to gain this; but he that keepeth what he hath too long, shall in the end lose all, and yet not gain this neither. Therefore be no longer wise in the eye of flesh, or according to what man calleth wisdom, but be truly wise.
