



THe fall of Babylon being decreed in Heaven, and declared on Earth, and the time said to be neare at handThis is one of the things of which John saith, They must shortly come to passe, Rev: 1.1.8., so many hundred yeares agoe, as have past since the revelation was given to JohnMuch neerer now.; Why should it be thought beside the work of this day, to seek her down-fall? and to cry aloud unto Gods people to come out of her? Hath not God, and man of late yeares, appeared against her oppressing powers, spirituall, and civill, in these Nations? Her maine Pil∣lars, the Archbishops, Bishops, &c. with their grand supporter, where are they? Did not the sure word of Prophecy against Babylon, take hold of them? since those Pillars have been removed, hath not that un∣happy building, been as a falling house, out of which many thousands of Gods people have hasted forth? the Lord going before them by many wonderfull, sig∣nall providences, opening a wide doore unto them. If the remnant of old, who preferr'd Jerusalem above their cheife joy (which holds forth a true Character of Sions lovers) were so bold in her behalfe, to tell the daugh∣ter of Babylon to her face, Thou art to be destroyed, calling

them happy who should be the Instruments to reward her cruelties to Gods people, Psal. 137. If they speak thus, whilst yet remaining captives, let it not seeme strange, if we, who are in so great a measure delivered, doe in the same spirit of faith, declare openly the ap∣proaching fall of the daughter of mysticall Babylon; which (that wee may not shoote at rovers) I have in the ensuing Quaeries laboured to discover, the mother, and her daughter, the mark at which those arrows are shott. The mother being more notorious for her bloody persecutions, and filthy abominations, may soone be discovered; her daughter, having putt on a new dresse, appeares fresh coloured, and well-liking, and hath her lovers amongst great, if not good men. They who drinke of her wine, and eate of her dain∣ties, praise her beauty, as shee is now reformed. Shee hath (it seemes) painted her face with more art, and better successe, then Jezebell, or else some have had lesse zeale then Jehu, who having no great power on his side, yet commanded (that) painted Jezebel to be thrown downe. With this Jezebel the daughter of Babylon, men formerly of great note for zeale, and pie∣ty, (preferring peace before purityThe wisdome that is from a∣bove preferres purity before peace, Jam: 3.17. Its first pure, then peace∣able; the wis∣dome from be∣neath is quite contrary, oppo∣sing truth under a pretence of peace: in that true wisdome, they who have acted of old, and of late, are accounted trou∣blers of Israel.) become confe∣derate to oppose a thorow reformation, who seeme well content with the old garment, some new peices put to it, which (as our Saviour saith) makes the rent worse; they cannot beare to have the axe laid at the roote. How doe many in our dayes, like Herod, heare good men gladly, till their lusts and wills be crost? their hearts cleave to some worldly interest, which, (being as the right eye) they will not part with. Such can take Law and Covenant in their mouth, pray and preach well, with much excellency of speech, but their spirits may be discerned by this one thing, They like not to reform, or to be reformed, with a tho∣row

reformation, which is the onely right reformati∣on according to the word of God; to which our so∣lemn Covenant binds us, as also (with subordination thereunto) to the example of the best reformed Chur∣ches; which are such undoubtedly, as stand at greatest distance from Antichristian pollutions. Is the Religi∣on of this Nation so reformed? if not, why doe they not presse forward? Nay, doe not many sit downe, and take up their rest, as if they had attained, and as if the worke were perfected? Hath mysticall Babylon been rased to the foundation thereof? If not, ought not that remnant of Gods people, who retaine their first zeale against Babylon to proceed to pray against her, as the remnant of the faithfull of old against the Children of EdomIs it not the duty of Gods elect to cry day and night for vengeance upon Babylon, see Luk. 18.1.7. and 8 verses., Psal. 137.7. Remember, O Lord, the Children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem: who said, rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof; Let us take heede of con∣cluding such prayers, though put up by godly men of like passions with us, to be the fruite of their passions, and peevishnesse. If here were need of further Apo∣logy for this work, and for the Saints zealous praying and declaring against Babylon in a right spirit, sufficient might be offered (not onely to justifie the practise, but also to invite thereunto) from this one conside∣ration, that the glory of God, and the comfort of his people are so highly concerned in her fall, as the Scrip∣tures largely shew. Oh what joyfull Hallelujahs shall be sung by the Saints, when they shall see the judge∣ments of God on the great Whore which corrupted the Earth, Rev. 19.1, 2. &c. If men of great light see not how this matter concernes the glory of God, Is it not because they study to promote their owne interest more then his? have they no better insight into the things that make for their owne glory? It is the joy of my heart, in the midst of many causes of griefe, that

God will forme, yea he is forming a people for him∣selfe which shall shew forth his praiseAnd the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord, Psal. 102.18. Esay 43.21.. The naked single designe of the people of this new Creation shall be that the Lord, the Lord alone, may be exalted: which (if the Author know his heart) is the one thing aymed at in spending those Arrowes upon Babylon, as also in those endeavours for reformation in appa∣rell, wherein opposition is made against one (not the least) of her evills. That which is added in those Quaeries to the Quakers, serves for the discovery of Sa∣tan, transforming himselfe into an Angel of light. It is no new thing for scornfull men to set light by plain testimonies against their abominations, and lay a snare for him that reprooveth in the gateIsay 29.20, 21., making a man an offender for a word; if such shall count mee vile for this work, I shall not thinke it strange. If the Lord shall make it appeare that the least of the poore of his flock receive light, and reape benefit hereby, and give the glory to him; I shall rejoyce therein. Although my service to Christ in this, or any thing I can doe, be but small, I am comforted in beleeving that there shall a time come, and that its not farre off, when God shall reward his servants, not onely the great, but the smallRev. 11.18.. The high esteeme I have of the prayers of the Saints, together with a deepe sence of my need of fresh supplyes of grace, put mee upon this humble suit to you, who are the seede of Jacob, that after your suppli∣cations to the Lord for all Saints, hee may obtaine a speciall remembrance, who is unworthy to be ac∣counted

