




Gentlemen,
AS long and laudable Custom bears the Force of a Law, by virtue of which, every Minor Scribler, even the poorest Dabler in Dramaticks, lays his Brat at some Great Man's Door: In Chal∣lenge therefore of my Native English Liberty, I take the Privilege of this present Dedication. 'Tis true, the general Class of Paper-dawbers have hitherto arrived at no higher Confidence, than affixing some sin∣gle Great Name to a Play; whilst I, by a bolder Assurance (possibly a little more pardonable in a Comedian) have here marshall'd a whole Roll of Quality in my Frontispiece.
Truly, Gentlemen, in this Presumption I know not what Trespass I may have made in Good Manners; however the World must justifie my Politicks in this Management. For by this Conduct, instead of one worthy for my Patron and Protector, I have hook'd in a whole Battalion of 'em to Champion for me. And therefore undoubtedly this Piece must come safe into the World under so many Shields of Ho∣nour. Besides, from the warm Influence of so many Noble Patrons, if (to speak like an Astrologer) 'tis a Blessing to have the Aspect of a kind Star at our Nativity; certainly this must be much more happy to peep into Light under the Smiles of a whole Constellation.
Nay, Gentlemen, not to be too bold neither, but a little to extenu∣ate my Presumption, I have found out an old State-Distinction for a very substantial Apology, by which I make you All this Present, viz. Not in your more exalted Capacities of so many Persons of the highest Character and Quality, (that Consideration would have kept me at a more awful Distance.) No, Gentlemen, I attack you only as an Ho∣nourable Society over a cheerful Glass; where, all Greatness laid aside, and Mirth, Wit, and Gayety, the only Reigning Ascendants amongst You, I thrust in my Comick Phyz under that easier Access: The Hos∣pitable Door stands open, and from that Pasport I make my Intrusion.
Now, Gentlemen, according to the true Poetical Mode of Dedica∣tions, I shall be very Oratorical in the Praises of all my Noble Patrons: But, truly, as my Panegyrical Talent is none of the best; and to do Justice to so fair a List of Honour, in an Encomium upon all and sin∣gular Your select Characters and Vertues, is a Work beyond my reaeh: Nay, and what's another great Argument for my Silence upon that Sub∣ject, viz. That so large a Theme before me would out-swell the Bulk of an Epistle Dedicatory, and consequently (as my Bookseller tells me) make my Portico bigger than my House. I shall therefore shorten that part of my Dedication, and come to a nearer matter in hand, (which
is) the Merits of the Play. The Merits of the Play! — Hold a lit∣tle— Whereabouts do they lie?— Merits! Yes positively Merits, and very considerable ones. For look ye, Sirs— St. George was the Patron of England. (Right.) And he made it a peculiar Point of Honour and Gallantry to take the Weaker Side. (Right agen!) Now as 'tis the Top-Glory of every Heroick English Great Soul, to follow their own leading British Worthy, and copy from so famous an Origi∣nal. Ergo, The Weakness of my Muse gives her a justifiable Title to Your Noble and Generous Patronage; and from that Desert she claims Your Protection. Besides, when your Great and Celebrated Authors Dedicate an OEdipus, an Alexander, or a Mourning Bride, or any of those Gigantick Offspings of the Muses; methinks, in those Atlas Piles of Wit and Heroicks, they overload their Patrons with the Present they make them. It looks as if a Gardner should send you the whole Cargo of a May-morning Market in Covent-Garden (enough to stifle you with Sweets) when, in my simple Judgment, 'tis much better (a lighter and easier Nosegay) to present you with a Pink or a Rose-bud, as I do.
As to the but indifferent Success and Reception of this short-liv'd Play, (not to want a Crutch for a Criple) I must take the modish way of imputing it to Misfortune. Its being hurried up a little too hastily, made it appear to some Disadvantage in the Performance. It is enough to disparage the Good Ayer and Charms even of the Beaus themselves, to appear in too rude a Dishabilee.
With all this Plea for my Introduction to Your Good Graces; now, Gentlemen, if, at your next Full House at the Rose, you shall gene∣rously please to pass an Affirmative Vote in my Favour; or, what's more generous, to carry it with a Nemine Contradicente; then (to boast no more of my own) the Merit shall be all of Your side; and I shall, in all Duty bound, ever subscribe my self,
Gentlemen,

