


TOLLERATION (for these ten years past)
has not been more the Cry of some, then
PERSECUTION hath been the practice
of others, though not on Grounds equally rational.
The present cause of this Address, is to solicite
a Conversion of that Power to our Relief, which
hitherto has been imployd to our Depression; that
after this large experience of our innocency, and
long since expir'd Apprentiship of Cruel Sufferings,
you  pleased to cancel all our Bonds, and give
 of those Freedoms, to which we are
 English Birthright.

This has been often promised to us, and we as
earnestly have expected the performance; but to
this time we labour under the unspeakable pres∣sure
of Nasty Prisons, and daily Confiscation of our
Goods, to the apparent ruin of intire Families.
We would not attribute the whole of this seve∣rity
to Malice, since not a little share, may justly
be ascrib'd to Mis-intelligence:
For 'tis the infelicity of Governors to see and
hear by the Eyes and Ears of other men; which
is equally unhappy for the People.
And we are bold to say, that Suppositions and
meer Conjectures, have been the best Measures, that
most have taken of Us, and of our Principles; for
whilst there have been none more inoffensive, we
have been mark't for Capital Offenders.
'Tis hard that we should alwayes lie under this
undeserved imputation; and which is worse, be
Persecuted as such, without the Liberty of a just
Defence.
In short, if you are apprehensive, that our
Principles are inconsistant with the Civil Govern∣ment,
grant us a free Conference about the Points in
Question, and let us know, what are those Laws,
essential to preservation, that our Opinions carry
an opposition to? And if upon a due enquiry we

are found so Hetrodox, as represented, it will be
then but time enough to inflict these heavy penal∣ties
upon us.
And as this Medium seems the fairest, and most
reasonable; so can you never do your selves
greater Justice, either in the vindication of your
proceedings against us, be we Criminal, or if
Innocent, in dis-ingaging your service of such, as
have been Authours of so much Mis-informati∣on.
But could we once obtain the favour of such
debate, we doubt not to evince a clear consist∣ency
of our Life and Doctrine with the English
Government; and that an indulging of Dissenters
in the Sence defended, is not only most Christian
and Rational, but Prudent also. And the con∣trary
(how plausibly soever insinuated) the
most injurious to the Peace and destructive of
that discreet Ballance, which the Best and
Wisest States, have ever carefully Observ'd.
But if this fair and equal Offer, find not a
place with you, on which to rest its Foot; much

less that it should bring us back the Olive Branch
of TOLLERATION; we heartily embrace and
bless the Providence of God; and in his Strength
resolve, by Patience, to outweary PERSECUTION,
and by our constant Sufferings, seek to obtain a
Victory, more glorious, than any our Adversaries
can atchive by all their Cruelties.

Vincit qui patitur.

Newgate, the 7th of
the 12th Moneth, call'd
February, 1670.

