




VEnerable Antiquity (most Learned Tanchius) had so honorable an Estimation for the first Inventers of Arts and Sciences, that some they Cano∣niz'd as Gods: To the Honours of o∣thers they erected Statues as a perpetual Memorandum of their Great Ingenuity. Nor undeservedly. For whereas our great Grandfather Adam by his Sin was reduc'd from the most happy to the most miserable Condition, the Omnipotent himself thundering against him and all Mankind this Resolution, viz. In the Sweat of thy Face shalt thou eat thyBread. The Inventions of Arts and Disciplines were then very necessary. Quibus isti morbo & malo afferetur. Therefore it may seem one great Reason, (if not the only) why the Fathers be∣fore the Flood lived so long, was, Be∣cause they might fully understand and learn Arts and Sciences. Now if such great Honours were conferred on them, who being greatly help'd by Longevity, found out Arts and Sciences; deserve not they Commendation, who not having the advantage of such long Life, raise them (and that with augmentation too) from the Dead to Life again? (For what do they otherwise, who restore lost Arts to Light again?) 'Twas great indeed to find out Arts, but very great to restore and augment them. I shall mention only the Spagyrick; and who knows not that that so Ʋseful, so Divine, and so Necessary an Art has for many Ages lain, as 'twere (almost) in a dead Sleep? And who but a blind Man cannot perceive it now restored to its former, nay, far greater Glory? But by whom I pray? If I, learned Tanchius, mention you amongst it's particular Fa∣vourites, who'l contradict me? Deser∣vedly then do Learned Men reverence you. For my part, I'm bound to it for two no little Reasons. The First, For the same Reason all wise Men do,
viz. For your great Parts and Learning. The other, Because you were pleased to count my Name worthy the mention in your Book De Lapide Philosopho∣rum. I should be ungrateful then, were I not, in token of the Estimation I I have for your self, to present you with part of my Labours. Accept then this following Dialogue concerning the true matter of the Great Elixir, written by one Arislaus a very old Philoso∣pher, as also its Preparation, far more precious than common Gold or Silver. This is the Aurum Vivum of the Philosophers, vivifying other Dead Bodies; yet the matter of this our Stone is but one Ingredient, containing in its self the Power of all forcible Waters, [as appears more plainly in the Apologe∣tic Introduction] containing whatso∣ever is necessary for Nature in, from,and by its self, as in the Dialogue and following Pages you may see; which Dialogue I devote, Dedicate and Pre∣sent to your self,
ut sit Antidorum illi∣us quod ad te accepi, &c.
Learned Sir, Vale.
