


A Certain Person in your Parts hath lately troubled himself and the World with a Book entituled An Account of Familism as it is revived and propagated by the Quakers; and this dedicated to Sr. J. Covert, Knight and Barronet, &c. How ill he spent his time in Writing it, and how unadvised he was in Publishing it, an impartial Perusal of this small Discourse will briefly yet abundantly manifest.
I come not to you for Protection (a thing he and his Cause wanted) but for Impartality and Ju∣stice; Truth is sufficient to patronize and defend her own Cause from the Lash of Envy, without the weak Auxiliaries of Humane Force; She gives Sanctuary to all that take to her for Refuge, but is all-sufficient to her own Relief from the deepest Pres∣sure, and most inveterate Prosecutions of her impla∣cable Enemies. And though the Evil Disposition of

the World to receive her Apologies, seems to conspire with the Indefatigable Endevours of Her Adversa∣ries to traduce Her; yet her own Purest Innocency & Unwearied Patience hath ever in the End broke forth to that clear Conviction of its Opposers, as hath prov'd at once both their Confutation and their Shame.
And let it seem no Riddle to you, that I write so as∣sured of Truth on our side, There is no Objection our Adversary has made to the contrary, we shall not easi∣ly remove. Our Meaness in Quality, Breading, Literature and Fortunes in the World (badges of Reproach with him) will rceive an ample Parallel from the best Persons and Times, and is so far from making to our Overthrow, that if the Scripture and other Story be to be credited, they tell us, that not many Wise, Learned or Noble; Not that they are excluded, but as Persons stumbed at the Cross of Christ, and the Simplicity of the Gospel, through the Power that Greatness and Plea∣sure have with them, they exclude themselves.
But since Great and Rich Men have Souls to be saved as well as Poor, it is equally their Concern to inform themselves of that Way which most assuredly leads to the Rest that is Eternal. I confess the Varie∣ty of Sects in the World to be a great Discouragement, especially when we consider with what Confidence each Party pleads the Truth and Divine Original of his own Perswasion; But Men are not to be satisfied

with Pretence but Evidence: Education is too short, nor will Tradition reach far enough to ascer∣tain any Man of the Verity of his Perswasion.
Could the two first have done, there had been no need of Relinquishing the Roman Church, who was neither wanting in Pretences, nor an Educati∣on prejudic'd enough against all Reformation; And if Tradition had been all-sufficient, the Direction of God's Unerring Grace, and the necessary Convi∣ction of Mens Reasons, might have been spared.
For if Men are to believe what is recommended for true, because Recommended, and not because True, we are to believe we know not what, and shall be to seek so far for a Reason for the Hope that is in us, that in Reality we can have no other Answer to give, then that such or such told us so, and therefore we believe it: But if the Ground of our Faith ought to be more sure and better founded, it will stand us greatly upon to examine, What is the Reason we have▪ to render for our Faith & Hope in God, and that Belief we have of Holy Scripture? If we erre here, our Build∣ing is insecure; and the Danger is, that we shall not only one day loose our Faith, but, which is worse, our Souls too. This necessarily brings Man to a more In∣ward Search and Testimony, some Divine Princi∣ple in Man, planted by God himself, which gives to believe that God is, and that he is a Rewar∣der of them that fear him.
This the best Heathens, as well as Jews & Chri∣stians, have highly venerated, and many are the Testimonies they have left upon Record, to the Di∣vine Original, and excellent Use of it, both to know God, and our selves; And truly it was this Holy Principle in all Ages that hath attended Mankind with those Checks, Reproofs and Directions, by which he hath had any Discerning of what should, from what should not be done. This is that which has gi∣ven him the certain Sound and true Relish of what God has ever required at his hand, as said the Prophet Micah, God hath shewed thee, O Man, what is Good, and what he requires from thee; to do Justice, love Mercy, and walk humbly with thy God, Mic. 6, 8. In the Psalms thus, Thou givest thy Mouth to Evil, and thy Tongue frameth Deceit;Psalm 50.19, 20, 21. Thou sit∣test & speakest against thy Brother; These things hast thou done, and I kept Silence; Thou thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thy self, but I will Reprove thee, and set them in order before thine Eyes, saith the Lord. And the Apostle Paul tells us, What ever may be known of God is manifested within. And what can that be by which God so manifesteth himself, but what Moses called the Word nigh, in the Heart, that the Children of Israel were to o∣bey; That Job calls Light, which the Wicked

rebel against, not loving the Wayes there∣of: The like doth Christ in John, when he com∣plained, that Men would not bring their Deeds to be examined by it. In all Ages hath the Al∣mighty more or less pleaded his own Cause in the Con∣sciences of all People by this Divine Principle of Light, however variously denominated; And what ever Faith or Hope Man has, not grounded upon the Discoveries, Convictions and Directions of This, it is a by-rote Faith, Hope, and Religion.
Therefore I beseech you to whom this Discourse, is more particularly dedicated, to consider of us, not by Tradition, Education, Religions establisht by Human Laws, or Imperial Decrees, but by that Understanding this Immortal Law and Everlasting Foundation of Virtue (as Heathen Plutarch calls it▪ will afford you to judge us by.
It has been Man's Venturing to wade into the Holy Scriptures without this Divine Principle, that has caused so many fearful Miscarriages about Religion. Something in Man prompts him to Religion, but Man being not wholy guided by that which so inspires him with Religious Desires, hastily spoils all with the Intermixture of his own Fancies and Conceits; and because He is assured that What first inclined him was Right, he sticks not to stile his own Inventions Orthodox; and then Impatient of Contradiction, with a Fury, as great as his Ignorance, endeavours

the Overthrow of what ever stands in his Way, and refuses to receive his Mark in his Forehead, or in his Right Hand. This has occasioned so much Trumpery in Religion; Ceremonies, Shew, and meer Formality have swallowed up the great∣est part of It: Now were Men brought to God's Heavenly Gift in themselves, it would reclaim and leaven the Mind, chain the Affections, and bring Religion into Holy and Sel-denying Living, and erect an Holy Regiment in the Heart and Soul, by which the Heavenly mage would be renewed, and Man become as one born again, with∣out which Translation, there can be no entring into God's Heavenly Kingdom.
This the first Protestants made to be their Rea∣son of their Revolt from Rome: For though 'tis true, that they charged the Papists with making God's Tradition (the holy Scriptures) void by their nu∣merous dark Traditions; yet That which begot that holy Loathing of Rom's Superstitions, Idolatries and Will-Worship, was God's Grace in their Hearts; & their best Argument against Rom's Assault was this, The Scripture which I believe from the Testi∣mony of the Spirit of God in me, & which I can only understand from the Illumination thereof, owns no such thing, and therefore I reject it.
Such as converse with Luther and his Followers, Zuinglius and his Followers, will find this to have

been the Foundation of their whole Work. And our own Martyrology is full to our Purpose, particularly Tindal, Times and Philpot.
I omit to mention a whole Cloud of Witnesses, be∣cause I intend not to dwell here; only this I would be at, and I intreat you all to weigh it, If any thing can give to understand aright, and enable to practise those things of God, which it is necessary for Man both to know and do, then God's Light, Grace or Word in the Heart? What else can give us to relish the Divine Authority of the Scriptures themselves, or to believe the Things therein treated of to be undeni∣able Truths? Indeed, the Want of This has been a great Occasion of Atheism; for Man making, pra∣ctising and enacting That for Religion, of which People has had no Assurance in themselves: But if they should speak their Hearts, 'tis more probable, They do not believe it, but instead thereof deride it, and so under a Shew of Religion, live as Men with∣out God in the World.
To prevent which, and to bring Men to the true Un∣derstanding of what God expects from them, in order to that great Account they are to give unto Him at the Revelation of his Righteous Judgments (when he will judge the Secrets of all Men by Jesus Christ) we do exhort all to Christ's Pure, Unerring Light in the Conscience,Joh. 8.12. 1 John 1.5, 6, 7. which is suffi∣cient to daily Understanding & Duty, that

what they believe and profess in Matters of so high Importance, They maybe convinced in their very Con∣science, by the good Understanding the Inspiration of the Almighty gives,Job 32▪8. of the Truth and Necessity thereof; and not suffer themselves to be carried away with the Torrent of Fathers, Councils, Synods, Doctors, Scho∣lars, National Constitutions, &c. (big and most times untrue, and too often empty Words) without that inward Conviction and Testimony of God's Good Spirit in Your Own Consciences, the old Protestant, and only primitive Ground of Tru Faith and Obedience.
I know, and shall alwayes acknowledge, that in the time of Ignorance the Almighty winked, and that in every Age he has expressed his Regard to those under the various Forms of Religion ever in the World, who have been Sincere-hearted and of Sober and Con∣scientious Conversation; But I must also tell you, that by how much the more, needless and unwar∣rantable Customs, Will-Worship and Human Religion built upon the dark and uncertain Conjectures of Men, are receeded from, and the Minds of People engaged in a diligent attendance upon that Divine Principle which only can clear up their Understandings, and give them an ex∣perimental Knowledge of the True God, and that Way of Worship and Service which may

be most acceptable with him, by so much more certain will they be of the Truth of their Religion, in as much as they have over and above all external Record, the Assurance of Unquestionable Con∣victions in their own Consciences.
Thus God, that made Heaven and Earth, knows, we came to receive that Knowledge of him, Which we now expose our selves to all Hardships, to mantain.
We profest God; but like our Neighbours, in Works we denyed him. We worshipt him after Men's Conceivings, insomuch that I may say, we wor∣shipt the Unknown God in a False Way. No doubt but we were stockt with the Common Talk of Religion, but the Cross of Christ we were Strangers to. His Blood we extolled, whilst by Wicked Works we trod it under Foot; And believ'd our selves Saved by it, Who were Uncleansed from Sin. The whole End of His Coming we esteemed the top of all Love; but never knew enough of It, truly kindled in our Hearts, whereby to work such Faith and Resignation, as could give us Victo∣ry over the World. Thus were we, Jews-like Children of God whilst we crucifyed the Son of God; and of the Seed of Abraham, whilst the Serpents Seed reign'd; Heirs of the Kingdom, yet not born again; Free, yet the Bondslaves of Vanity. Oh! at this time of day it was that God ound us out, and broke in upon our Souls with his Righteous

Judgments for Sin, and laid Judgment to the Line, & Righteousness to the Plummet, with∣in us, the Book of Conscience was Opened, and great Fear surprised us, and Deep Sorrow fell upon us, which brought that sudden and Strange Change, that made us both the Derision of Prophane, and Wonderment of Sober Men.
The Author of the Account of Familism, for want of more Skill, and Seriousness, calls it the Hypochondria, as if it only had been a Flux of Me∣lancholy overpowring the Strength of Reason, and carrying the Understanding captive at the Impetuo∣sity of its Fancies. But having been thus made sensible of the Terrors of the Lord for Sin, and be∣ing brought into a True Understanding of that Reli∣gion and Worship which most please God, some of us were constrained, and in Conscience bound, to go forth into the World, and publish these Tidings of Judgment for Sin, and Conversion through Righteousness wrought by the mighty Pow∣er of God in the Conscience, that all might be awakened to try their Works, Faiths, Worships and whole Religions, whether they were of God or Men; or they had been doing their own Wills, or the Will of God; that so they might be brought to experience God to be a God nigh at hand, reconciled in Christ, blotting out Sin, and renewing a Right Spirit within, by which

their Religion might not longer stand in the Tra∣ditions of Men, nor only Education of Parents, but upon the Convictions and Operations of God's Grace in the Conscience. And thus is all that Christ did without, brought nigh and home to the very Soul. The Seed of the Woman is known to Bruise the Head of the Serpent; Christ, the Light, and Lamb that taketh away the Sins of the World, not only to take away Sins past through Remission, but Cleanse from the Nature, Root and Ground of Sin, by His Holy Blood, which sprinkles all Consci∣ences that wait and walk in the Light (the Just Man's Path) from Dead Works, to serve the Living Lord God in Uprightness for ever.
For this Cause are We brought out into the World; & behold the Vessel we are embark'd in, our Lading and the Country we make for! The Vessel, Truth; the Lading, Faith and Good Works; Our Souls, the Passengers; and the Country, the Land of Everlasting Rest.
This I could not but present you with, that no En∣deavours of our Enemies may be able to lodge a False Character of us and our Principles with you; Though I must faithfully tell you, that I should wrong my own Reason, as well as your Judgment, and speak against my Conscience too, if I should let in one Thought of this Man's Ability to do us any great Mischief with you: for, out of no Insult, but in Real Truth, I take

Him for a very Unskilfull Pilot on our Coast, a Man unacquainted with our Concerns; and a most In∣competent Person for an Antagonist.
Accept (for I can ask no Excuse for) my Plainness, I have not fawned, I never could, and now much less: These Matters not only deserve, but require greatest Plainness. And Men that believe they shall have to do with God, after they have left having to do with Men, ought to act with greatest Circumspection and Sincerity. Remember your Original; remem∣ber your End; and know assuredly that but Breath is in your Nostrils; and for every Deed done in this Mortal Body, whether it be good or whe∣ther it be evil, will God, the righteous Judge require an Account from You before his great Tribunal, where may you all be able to answer with Joy: I am

