



Dread SIR,
WIth all that humble Reverence that becomes a Low but Loyal Sub∣ject and Servant to his So∣veraign Lord and Master, cast I at Your feet this pre∣sent Address. Those Stars

that move in the Lowest Orb, receive their light and lustre from the Sun, as well as those that wander in a more exalted heaven; and therefore, may possibly be capable to return some grateful Influences, though not in so great a quantity, yet in a quality as pure and candid.
However, all my courage could not have inspired me with a presumption to pre∣sent any thing of mine to so glorious a Majesty, had it not born in its Frontispice the name of HENRY THE

GREAT, Your Royal and Renowned Grandfather; a Prince of so Sublime a Vir∣tue, of so Heroick a Cou∣rage, of such Activity in War, and such Prudence in Peace, that he justly became both the love and terror of the age he lived in.
And, Great Sir, give me leave to tell you, that never did the Life of any Prince since the Creation, bear so equal a Parallel with Your Maiestie's, as that of this Re∣nowned King. If your mise∣ries and misfortunes have exceeded his, God hath made

it by evident Demonstran∣ces appear that he intends to make your Glories and Hap∣piness as far surpass those of your Royal Grandfather. You both had Leaguers arm∣ed with Rebellion, Obstinacy and Ambition, under a Cloak of zeal to Religion, to oppose you; and you both, assisted by a Miraculous Providence of Heaven, overcame them. You both by Arms long strug∣led for your Rights: but as if God had intended you both for true Fathers of your Countries, and the Founda∣tions whereon he would settle

an absolute happiness in your Kingdoms, so long af∣flicted with Civil Wars, and those terrours which attend them; he brought you both to spotless Thrones, unbe∣smeared with blood.
How soon was France redeemed from those plagues it so long had endured, at the entrance of the Great Henry into the Chair of Royalty, who as a Rising Sun, darted forth those Salutiferous rayes which shone upon, and en∣riched the remotest parts of his Territories! How soon were all Factions dissipated!

and how soon did he by his Prudent Conduct reconcile the most obstinate Spirits! In fine, in how short time was France, from a Den of Atheists, Theeves, and Rob∣bers, become the Nursery of Piety, Arts and Industry!
England (Dread Sove∣raign) suffered under the same Fate her neighbour∣ing Sister had long since been Subject to, when Hea∣ven was graciously pleased to restore you to your Crown: And you have already made us not onely hope, but see, that you have designed to

restore to us such happinesses, that we cannot justly envy those which France enjoyed under her beloved HENRY. How well have you setled both our Church and State? How well have you reconci∣led our Dissentions? with how much too great a mercy (give me Sir leave to fear so) have you pardoned the most obstinate of your enemies? and how may we hope (if the malice of those obstinate Spi∣rits yet disturb not our Tranquillity) to enjoy under your Government the most happy and flourishing daies

that ever Great Britain be∣held!
But Sir, that I may con∣clude, and not seem tedious to your Majesty; may the God of heaven inspire into the hearts of your people a true sense of your goodness and paternal love to them; may he correct the improbous malice of those who yet dare to be your enemies; may he incline you still to prose∣cute such Maximes of good Government, both in Church and State, as may make both equally Flourish; may he Augment your Glories, and

raise them above those of your Grand-father, HENRY the Fourth; may he bless us all, by giving you a long and happy Reign; and when that misery (though late) arrives us of losing you, may we yet be made blessed in that Succession from your Loynes that may endure for ever. Thus Prayes,
SIR, 
