



Sir,
IN obdedience to the
charge which you
have beene pleased
to lay upon me. I
have translated this
admirable story, wor∣thy
to be knowne of
all men, and of singular use to convince
the Atheists and halfe believers of these

times: Most of which will perswade
themselves that there is no such thing
in the world as any spirituall, immate∣riall,
intelligent substance; And some
of them will say that which most of them
thinke: That if they could have any
certainty that there are Devills, they
would believe also that there is a God.
And Satan to confirme these pretenders
to the title of strong wits in their per∣nicious
unbeliefe, will scarce once in an
age discover himselfe in any visible
or audible manner, but either to the
rudest poore people and the most bestial
natures in some remote barren heath,
or if he converse with Magicians, whose
wit is of a forme somewhat higher, it is
onely in secret conference; that the con∣fessions
of the first sort may be ascribed
to the fumes of grosse and terrestriall
melancholy, as the onely Devill that
frameth meetings and dances of witches
in their braines; and that the profession

of the other sort may be imputed to
the imposture of wicked men, such as
all Magicians are. Likewise when
they are told of persons possest or obsest
with Devils they ascribe those disorders
to sicknesse or juggling. And the truth is
that the Devill doth most harme where
he is least seene, heard, and suspected.
Wherefore I verily beleive that he hath
not in many ages done more wrong to
his kingdome, then in disclosing himselfe
so plainely and sensibly as he did in the
passages here related: for thereby he hath
left no shift for the unbeliefe of reasoning
Atheists. And though this was a witty
Devill, yet (in that respect) he was not
well read in the Politiques of Hell.
Many relations are extant of manifesta∣tions
of Daemons: the most certaine are in
the history of the Gospell, how the De∣vils
spake alowd out of possessed bodies
in the presence of great multitudes,
which they did constrained and frigh∣ted

by the presence of the Lord of life,
their Soveraine and their Judge. But
no history either sacred or profane an∣tient
or moderne relateth such a volunta∣ry,
publique, continued, and undeniable
manifestation of the wicked Spirit as
this doeth. For this familiar conversati∣on
of the Devill was not with Magicians
and witches but with godly men: And
it was not in a corner, or in a desert, but
in the midst of a great city, in a house
where there was daily a great resort to
heare him speake, and where men of
contrary religions met together: whose
pronenesse to cast a disgrace upon the
dissenting parties did occasion the nar∣row
examining and the full confirming
of the truth thereof, both by the Magi∣strate,
and by the Diocesan of the place.
All these particulars and many more
have beene related to my Reverend
Father when he was President of a Na∣tional
Synod in those parts by the man

that was most concerned in them, the
Author of this booke, a religious well
poised and venerable Divine, who (if
he be a live still) is above 80 yeares of
age. He writ this relation when it was
fresh in his memory, yet did not publish it
but 41 yeares after, in the yeare 1653;
being compelled to it by the many vari∣ous
and therefore some false relations of
that story which were scattered abroad.
With this he set out a Treatise about
Demons and witches which he intituled
Demonologia, a booke worth reading.
His behaviour in all these passages was
prudent couragious and godly, for he
allwaies resisted the Devill in his seve∣rall
postures, whether of an Angell of
light or of an open enemy of God. He
was tempted by the evill Spirit some∣times
to curiosity, sometimes to covetous∣nesse,
sometimes to feare, sometimes to
jesting and merriment: But the good
man was alwaies alike, grave, constant
and serious, in rebuking Satan and using

the weapons of righteousnes against him
on the right hand and on the left. And
he was not disappointed of his trust in
God, for in all the time of that persecuti∣on
God permitted not that stirring De∣vill
to doe him any harme, or to any be∣longing
to him, either in their persons or
goods, and in the end of a hundred dayes
God dispossest the Devill of his usurped
hold. My labour in translating these few
sheets is so inconsiderable that I would not
have put my name to it, but that you thote,
Sir, my knowledge of the truth of this hi∣story
by the relation of my Reverend
Father would be some confirmation of the
certainty of it. I have it at the second
hand, yet from a sure hand. But your
selfe, Sir, had from the Authour him∣selfe
a more immediate information,
Which being prefixt before this narra∣tive,
gives it a free and uncontrolable
passe to be admitted into the beliefe of
the most severe and judicious readers.

Neither will they have a lesse opinion
of the utility then truth of this relati∣on,
when they see that a person so high in
learning, so deepe in judgment, so reall in
godlinesse, so exemplary in good workes
hath judged it to be of principall use for
the convincing of unbelievers, and the
confirming of those that are in the faith.
Thereby also I shall reape this benefit to
my selfe, that the world shall know I am
honoured with your commands, and that
I delight to approve my selfe
Sir,

