


IF Arts and Disciplines (Most Famous Prince) could of them∣selves speak, truly they would give great thanks unto thee and thy Father, a most excellent man; neither would they lesse gratify themselves with this honour, the which, at this day, by your judgment concerning them, they have attain∣ed, very reat.
For this is a clear witnesse, how much ye have made of them; because both being of so great a Noblenesse, he would have thee be brought up in the Besome, and Lap of them; Thou hast held the delights and pleasures of the Court, inferiour to the company and familiarity of the same. This is, I say, a thing altogether Noble, and Honourable unto our Learning, that thou, a child of a Kingly stock, and towardnesse, dost accustome thy self in handling those; not that thou callest forth the Masters of them home unto thee, or receivest them in the room of a delight, and pleasant Narration, but that thou thy self of thine own accord commest daily to their houses; neither in performing the Duties of Schollers, dost take any thing proper to thy self above others. Wherefore either of you both get unto your selves an everlasting name, and fame; and also do give an example to this and the following Age, in what great esteem henceforward they ought to be accoun∣ted; That that may be plucked out of the opinion of men, which seemeth to have made many of that rank, either openly, or by a silent custome and judgment, to elieve: that as every one is born in the highest place so he is to have the least commerce with those idle and sloathfull studies. But if anyone shall dare to boast for the future; not of Alexander the Great, not of Charls ou Countryman, not of the rest (whom from the remembrance of Antiquity we are wont to produce) but, by that thy more modern, and the practise of thy most famous Parent, he shall be refuted. By this honour therefore, as I have said, how very great thanks should Sciences, if they could use speech, professe themselves to owe unto you both, and also they who can do this, their Favourites, and Lovers, shall plentifully, and abun∣dantly do it; and they shall joyn the commendation of this praise to others, the standing Corn, and matter of which, they have finished in thy most fa∣mous
Father; but in thee nothing lesse, and they trust will be agreeable to these good things of Birth and Nature, which thou bearest before thee. The which hope, conceived of thee by the opinion of all, those so many tokens of excelling Vertues, which thou hast even at that Age, do render confirmed, and sure. I know not what altogether Divine thing there is in you Prin∣ces, and a higher towardnesse then the common capacity, which separateth you from the common sort, and plainly sheweth that ye were born unto the Rule of Men, and to take in hand great and difficult matters. And as in the Bee's kind, some signs are put on their Kings, whereby they are ea∣sily known from the rest. Or as the successours of the Spartans were made remarkable by a Launce; The Polopidans by an Ivory shoulder; The Seleucidans by an Anchor, others by other naturall marks: So there is wont to be in Great men some excellent thing; whom the will of God, who governeth not so much the condition of a stock, as all things, and setting down to every one his own rank, lifteth up above the Lot of other men.
Those same things we have learned to be in Thee; first of all a sharp, and excelling wit, of which there is such a speedinesse to comprehend all Arts, that now it being the Eleventh year of thy Age, thou holdest the chie∣fest seats of Learning and industry in the School of Eloquence, a Mind al∣so stirred up with the pricks of praise and glory; often Combats with the Adversary concerning all kind of Learnings; neither are the Conquests and Victories more seldome then the contentions. Whiles thou indeed ob∣tainest the chiefdome among thy Equalls, of all things, wherewith that Age is wont to be adorned; and, whether by the perswasion of thy father, or of thy own accord, thou attainest that, which unto a certain Prince (with Homer) going to Warfare, his father is read to have commanded him—




Alwaies to be the best i'th Train;
Other's exceller, and remain.

That, being a Child, in this shadowy, and sporting encounter, thou ma∣kest a flourish with those Triumphs, which afterward in a ripe Age thou shalt carry back from lawfull enemies, and battels. Unto these, which commonly seem more gorgeous, those many better things happen; A cer∣tain flower of integrity, and comelinesse, besmeared with the spots of no Vices, a teachable nature, and pliant and bending to the will of the fa∣shioner, as also pure Manners, and lovely, and, toward all, even the low∣est, the greatest gentlenesse, and courtesy of talk. Lastly, a diligent lo∣ver of Christian Piety, and Worship, without guile. These, and others of like sort, great of themselves, yet in thee they are but the seeds and begin∣nings, with which thy mind waxeth by degrees ripe, and is perfected unto the grace beseeming a Prince.
But I have not determined here to make a solemn cry of thy praises. That, when there shall be need, the which I had begun to speak of, it shall behoove all chiefly, who follow after Learning's Studies, to agree, and endeavour together for that end: and also above all, our Society shall need
to do it: unto whose education, thy Father (never without praise to be named) hath passed thee over. The which when he did, he gave together therewith, a pledge and token of his singular esteem and affection of it; and likewise he obliged Its faithfulnesse towards thee, that by what means it could, it should imploy it self both for the enlarging thy renown, and also for helping, and stirring up thy studies. I therefore, who, because I am of that Fellowship, and a lover of liberall Arts, do think my self held by the law of both duties, I judged that I must perform my duty in that very thing, by fathering this Work on thee: within which all History from the beginning of the World unto the times of our Age, with as much brief∣nesse, and diligence as I could, I have contained. For so I thought I might chiefly profit thy studies; whose chief part is placed in the knowledge of History, and Antiquity. But Wise men rightly deliver, this to be not onely comely for Princes, but very profitable. Whether because the civill learning of Prudence is taken out of that, while men learn from others ex∣amples and chances, with no pains of theirs, and danger, what in mana∣ging their own, or common affairs, is to be held, and avoided; or from so daily a changeablenesse of humane affairs, and fortune, which they gather from thence, and the downfall of Empires, and Cities, they are wont to make little regard of those, and, both in defending them, or requiring them, to give a mean to their desires; and passe over their purposes unto the fruit of sound and constant glory, which by vertue and godlinesse alone is received. That this is even the most excellent use of reading History, especially that grave Author Otho of Frisingia, doth (not once) admonish, chiefly in these words, which he hath placed in the end of his second Book. All these evills of things, nodding, or shaking (as I may so speak), the day∣ly deaths of mortall men, ought to send us unto the true, and remaining life of eternity. Thou shalt gather out of this our book the same kind of fruit, of manners, and life, not onely more profitably, but also, which is the good∣nesse of thy Wit, more pleasantly, than that of science, and knowledge, of which there is especially a forcible love in Children. And hence, last of all, from those two duties towards thee, which I have said to be owing from me with the whole society, there will be made another consequent, that although there being as yet no private Deserts of thine; of thy most illustrious Fa∣ther, surely there is toward me, as also toward our Society, common to both, I will in like manner pay the Honour, and Observance due from me by this (what sort soever) commendation of thy name.
ILL. C. T. 
