



Much Honoured SIR,
THE Treatise here ensuing, being calculated, not one∣ly for the weal of greater Communities, as Nations, Cities, Towns, but also of lesser Societies, as Families, yea and par∣ticular persons: In tenders of my ser∣vice to your Self, and your so worthily Honoured Lady, I make bold here, what it is, to present it: and the rather, be∣cause it pleases the Lord, by a distemper, which so often renews its onsets upon you, to give you so frequent memento's of that Turn, which Moses declares to be the inevitable fate of all indefinitely. Thou turnest man to destruction, and say∣est,Psal. 90. 3. return ye children of men. Thus we

run here a short round, and soon come to our races end; fetch but a turn, as itComparat our∣sum vitae no∣strae gyro▪ &c. Calv. in loc. were, and then return back again. Now may the Lord be pleas'd so to sanctifie those frequent memento's of your bo∣dies turn to destruction, as to advance more and more thereby that happy turn of conversion, here treated of, and so thereby bring you more and more un∣der the shines of his face, and comfortable displayes, and refreshing beams of his fa∣vour. I have often thought, and some∣times upon occasion declar'd, that how¦ever things appear to common sense, yet certainly that is best for us here, that state, that condition, those dispensations, be they what they will, though never so afflicting, that are most effectual, and have the fairest and most essential influence, as to the advancing of our spi∣ritual good here, and our eternal happi∣ness hereafter; that is best for us in our way, and where we take up onely for a while, that doth advantage us most at our journeys end, and where we must stay and abide by it for ever; that, not which pleases us best for a moment, but profits us most for ever, for things are here, and

are so to be counted of here, as they relate to eternity, and as to what is spiritual and everlasting, which being the main and chief, and that which is of greatest con∣cern, is in every thing to be the rule of the rest. And because afflictions many times are most conducing here, hence the Lord is pleas'd often to afflict those most here, which he intends most good to hereafter. And truly let our present condition be what it will here, if the Lord does but please to mould it for our eternal weal hereafter, it is an act of in∣finite mercy. Lord, lance here, searDomine hîc ure, hîc seca, mod in aeter∣num parcas. here (cry'd Austin) so thou spare but here∣after; so truly it matters not much what God does with us here, so he spare but hereafter. And by what he does with us, or to us here, does but the more fit us, and the better mould us forFeliciter in∣felices, infe∣liciter felices. himself, and glory hereafter. How many are happy in being seemingly miserable, while others are miserable in being see∣mingly happy? because their seeming happiness hinders their real; for havingPsal. 55. 19. no changes, therefore they fear not God: so that to live still in prosperity, as is said of Nabal, and not to experience those1 Sam. 25. 6.

changes as others do, nor be in those trou∣bles as others are, as is said of the foolishPsal. 75. 5. and the wicked, is no such desireable state, as many deem, but dangerous. It is said of our Edward the fourth, Never lived Prince whom adversity more harde∣nedDifficile est in honore esse si∣ne tumore, in praelatione sine elatione, in dignitate sine vanitate. Bern. to action, nor prosperity softened to voluptuousness. Edward the sixth was wont to say, No danger to the godly, unless by wealth & prosperity. And we see David himself, though a man after God's ownPsal. 30. 5. heart, yet in his prosperity he grew se∣cure. It is said of Moab, He hath beenJer. 48. 11. at ease from his youth, and he hath settled on his lees, and hath not been emptied from vessel to vessel; neither hath he gone into captivity, that is, he hath not been hur∣ried up and down from place to place,Non immuta∣vit habitatio∣nem, non suit edibus suis pulsus, &c. nul∣lam adversita∣tem▪ expertus est. Theodoret. is locum. as Israel was, &c. and what follows? therefore his tast remained in him, and his sent is not changed: his pride, impie∣ty, and impurity still continued: for it is said, he magnified himself against the Lord, and we have heard of the pride of. 26. 29. Moab, &c. Even as Wines not being drawn off their lees, and put into other vessels, are not meliorated, but retain their first tast and sent. So we read of

others, who being settled on their lees,Zeph. 1. 12. and not being emptied from vessel to vessel, they say in their hearts, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evill, that is, they grew stark Atheists, boldly scorn God and men, deny God's providence, and make as if he was a very Idol, and regarded not, nor took notice of the af∣fairs of men; and others, because God kept silence, and did not punish them,Ps. 50. 21. they thought God such a one as themselves. Now certainly, it was better our lives were made up of nothing but changes, than to come to such a pass, and not to have our souls blest and enrich'd with so great a good, as the fear of God, which is said to be the treasure of Kings, andIs. 33. 6. which the Lord hath declar'd to man from heaven to be his wisdom, and which,Job 28. 28. issuing forth into obedience to God's commandements, Solomon, the wisest King that ever was, and one inspir'd by God, hath concluded, and left upon re∣cord,Eccles. 12. 13. to be the whole and all of man. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, quia hoc omnis homo, vel hoc omne, homo est. Fear God and keep his commandements, for this is the whole duty of man. It is in the Hebrew onely, this all man, that is,

as it may be rendered, this is all man, or all this is man, man indeed, and this on∣ly is truly and properly man, that which speaks man indeed. And without this, man at his best state, as to the very quint∣essence, and greatest confluence of allPsal. 39. 5. other things, is but altogether vanity. And this was that which King David his fa∣ther, when he was to dye, left him in charge for to do, as whereby to shew himself a man, which he therefore the rather commends unto others: Now the1 King. 2. 1, 2, 3 days of David drew nigh, that he should dye, and he charged Solomon his Son, say∣ing; I go the way of all the earth, be thou & eris in virum, i. e. praestate▪ vi∣rum. Pisc. strong therefore, and shew thy self a man: and how must he do it? And keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes, and his com∣mandements, &c. And we can never indeed shew our selves men, unless we do this, but are as brutes. Man that is inPsal. 49. . honour, and understandeth not, i. e. so as to fear God, and depart from evill, which is the onely true wisdom and understan∣ding, is like the beasts that perish. And God is said to tread down such as dirt, and—119. 118, . . to put them all away as dross yea to take

them away as dung, till it be all gone,1 King. 4. 10. though never so great, but the godly he hath set apart, as persons of honour forPsal. 4. 2, 3. himself, to be for his honour, and high and excellent uses here, and then to be happy in and with himself for ever here∣after. And O that the Grandees and great ones of the world would at length know, and be throughly convinc'd of this! that this is man, and this is true greatness, and grandeur indeed, To fear God, and keep his commandements, to pay to him, who is their maker, owner, and benefactour, all due observance; to look upon the study and glory of God as the importantest imployment, and accor∣dingly to give up themselves to it; to have honourable apprehensions, and highest estimations of him, strongest affections towards him, and wholly to devote and dedicate themselves to him; to have the very drift, aim, and bent of their lives for God and his glory, and heaven and salvation; so to serve, honour, and please God here, as to come to enjoy him for ever hereafter. And as for the honours and profits of the world, and the sensu∣al pleasures and delights of the flesh, to

contemn them, and the rather, whenNemo dignus nomine homi∣nis, qui unum diem velit esse in voluptate. Tullius. Major sum, & ad majora na∣tus, quam ut mancipium sim corporis mei. Seneca. that a very heathen could say, that he deserv'd not the name of a Man, that would wast but one day in pleasure; and another, that he was greater, and born to greater things, than to be his bodies bond∣slave. And when Titus the Emperour, though a Pagan, sitting on a time in company, could cry out, O my friends, I have lost a day, in regard he had spent it without doing some good. To thinkO amici mei perdidi diem, &c. that book worthiest reading, which is of God's own inditing, and which King Alphonsus is said, notwithstanding all his other imployments, to spare time to read fourty times over, and that with Comments and Glosses; and which Queen Elizabeth, after her Coronation, being presented with, receiv'd with both hands, and kissing it said, that it had ever been her chiefest delight, and that it was a book she would often and often read over. To be looking, not so much to the things which are seen, for they are temporal, but the things not seen, for they are eternal, and to give them the pre∣eminence; to be thinking where you shall be thousands of years hence; and

after your fluctuating condition for a few moments here, what must be your standing and eternal estate for ever hereafter. To judg, that but for the concerns of Gods glory, and your soul's here, and the fruition of that future good hereafter, it was not worth the while to have been born. To have the resolves of your hearts continually to obey God, and their desires to enjoy him; not onely to know what is virtuous, but to be virtuous, the actual possession of one virtue being preferrable to the bare speculative knowledg of all. The more God honours and does for you, the more to honour and do for him, and not to be like those great persons and wits, who unmindful of that 1 Cor. 4. 7. are (asThe Honourable Robert Boyl. an Honourable person expresses it) like those ungrateful clouds, that obscure the Sun that rais'd them; and so do they the glory of that God, who advanc'd them to that height: but to resemble and be like those winged Cherubims in the Tabernacle, whom (as the same Honourable person expresses it) all the Gold and Jewels that glittered about, and all the clouds of incense that fum'd

before them, could never divert from a fixt posture towards the Ark of the Te∣stimony, which contain'd the law and the mercy seat. So to be still eyeing of God, and to have your whole life no∣thing else as it were, but a continual at∣tendance upon him, and a converse with him, and having made him your portion, to devote all you have, and are, to him and his service; and as you receive more than others from him, so to work more for him. It was an excellent speech to this purpose, that of Henry the Great, King of France, and savour'd much of true grandeur, and nobleness of spirit indeed: When I was born (says he) there were thousands of others born be∣sides, what have I done for God more than they? and so that of King James, in his book dedicated to Prince Henry, that he would have him remember, that he differ'd not in stuff, but in use from the rest of the people, and that by God's or∣dinance, Kings as well as others were bound to read the Scriptures. This is 17. 18, 19, 20. now the true grandeur, and that which exalts great ones indeed, and renders them the glory and delight of the places

where they live; as is said of Titus, before mentioned, that for his virtues, and his sweet and prudent government,Deliciae huma∣ni generis. Princeps bo∣nus, orbis a∣mor. he was stiled the delight of mankind; and his Motto was, All the world falls in love with a good Prince. It is said of King Ed∣gar, that he was a man indeed but of little stature, but his excellent virtues stiled him honor & deliciae Anglorum, honor & rosa Regum, Anglici orbis flos & decus, &c. And the love and favour of Religion made our Edward the sixth, to be called another Josias, and occasio∣ned that lugubrous Epicede at his death.

—Vester corruit omnis honos.
Nam Regum decus, & juvenum, flos spes{que} bonorum,
Deliciae seculi, & gloria gentis erat.
Dignus Apollineis lachrymis, &c.

Although Gold (as one well observes) comes from the earth, none despises it; and though dross and rust comes from the Gold, none regards it: the virtuous coming from mean parentage are ho∣nourable, and the vitious from noble,Tota licet v teres, &c. are contemptible. The very Heathens

had such a notion of virtue, as being the—Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus. Juvenal. onely true Nobility; it's Virtue, not Es∣cutcheons; grace, not race or place, that truly ennobles: and how much more then piety, called in sacred Writ, the glory of God, Rom. 3. 23. the life of God, Eph. 4. 18. the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and what indeed is Godliness, but God∣likeness, a sparkle as it were of the divine nature, a ray of the very glory of God himself, a sacred and heavenly impress of God upon the soul, framing it and the whole man to live according to God. It is the souls application of it self to God, as. its end, and in its actings as its exemplar; a following of God, and bringing of a man to be after his own heart; and there∣fore as God is the best of Beings, piety must needs be the best of blessings: and it is the presence or absence of this, which, as the main, makes a man indeed something or nothing, great or mean, honourable or vile, truly happy or mi∣serable. What are glorious garmentsQuid prodest esle, quod esse non prodest? upon a dead carcass, sweet flowers up∣on a dead corps? and such are riches and honours, and learning without re∣ligion. And hence it is said of Augustus,

that the name of piety was more estee∣medGratius ei suit nomen pieta∣tis, quam pote∣statis. O religio glo∣riosa, mirabi∣lis, quae mens cogitare? quis intellectus ple∣ne cognoscere, quae lingua suf∣ficienter, & dignè extollere te potest? O Margarita praefulgida, ru∣tilantior auro, splendidior So∣le, tu thesaurus super autum, Angelis & Deo hominem red∣dens confor∣mem, res no∣bilissima sub coelo, in coelo. &c. Bernard. of him, than the name of power; and this made Bernard to break forth into such high encomia of piety. O pie∣ty, glorious, admirable, what mind can think, what intellect can understand, what tongue can sufficiently and worthi∣ly extoll thee! O shining pearl, more bright than gold, more splendid than the Sun, a treasure above Gold, rendring man like unto Angels, yea God himself, the no∣blest thing under heaven, yea in heaven. And when this shall come to be the bles∣sing of Nations, and what the Scriptures tend to convince of, great ones shall come to be convinced of too, and ac∣cordingly steer their course, viz. that we cannot be happy or wise, but by being good, nor avoid the greatest of miseries, but by avoiding of sin; then shall Nati∣ons be advanc'd, and lift up in true gran∣deur indeed, and then we may (as the forementioned Honourable person ex∣presses it) expect to see indeed the gol∣den Age elsewhere then in Poets dreams. And now that this may be more and more the blessing of You, and your fa∣mily, and that its grandeur and glory,

which is the glory of heaven, of An∣gels, yea of God himself, and that all your changes, and daily experiences of your frailty and mortality, may be more and more influenc'd, to be subser∣vient to the promoting of that which is the whole and all of man, as also that all spiritual blessings especially, may be more and more multiplied upon you and all yours, is and shall be the prayer of him who is
SIR,

