





AS Clouds are dispell'd, when the Sun mounteth in its Vertical Lustre and Glory: so the noisom Mists of Vices, and
vicious Varlets are dissipated, as well by the bright beams of
 Virtue, shining forth in the Lives and Manners of
Good Magistrates, (such I take your Lordship, and some others to be) as by the Sword of Justice it self; which, as you well know, is not to be born in vain, but to be used with Legal and Regular Se∣verity against Offenders, especially incorri∣gible Ones. Now, What, or Who greater Of∣fenders and Delinquents, nay, Who can be reputed more destructive & pernicious Ad∣versaries to any
Protestant State or King∣dom, than Blood-thirsty, murdering, City∣burning, All-destroying, plotting Papists? What can we term the whole Rout of their Clergy? especially their
Jesuits (those Infer∣nal Furies) less than the
Common Ene∣my of Mankind! for as much as they de∣light to prey upon all of their own kind, that are not of their Execrable Religion! which yet, neither the Fiercest Lyons, Cruellest Tygers, Savage
Bears, nor Rave∣ning  Wolves were ever guilty of: for these State-Mountebanks are never idle, but alwayes in action, and perpetual Mo∣tion, to perpetrate the greatest Villanies and
Mischiefs imaginable.
My Lord, your Care, Diligence and
Vigilance, concerning such Persons and Things, together with your prudent Con∣duct in matters of great Importance (by which we injoy
good Order and Tranqui∣lity) must needs be very acceptable to all good People, as indeed they are, and will make you, deservedly, famous to Posterity: And it is hoped, that your
good Exam∣ple may raise in your Successors, a
gene∣rous and candid Emulation, to tread the same Paths of Honour, Justice and Pru∣dence, by your Lordship so regularly trackt∣out for them. I say, Justice, that true Child of Virtue, that Stay and Staff of
Peace, that great Maintainer of Honor, for, as
Justi∣tia▪  sine prudentia plurimum poterit, so, Si∣ne Justitia nihil valebit Prudentia: A wor∣thy
Apothegm, of thrice worthy Cicero.
My Lord, If my Fancy deceive not my Judgment, I know not to whom I should with more Reason make a special
Dedication of such a Book as this, and at such a
Juncture of Time, than to the Prime Optimate of the
Primest Protestant CITY in the World, as LONDON is, and is acknowledged so to be, even by its most implacable, irrecon∣cilable, restless, sworn and instructed Ene∣mies; who gnash their Teeth, yea, pine away through mere
Madness and Malice; not only to behold such a glorious
Resurrecti∣on from the Womb of Confusion, and late vast Heaps of her own Rubbish & Ruins, but also the
Detection of their (Still Con∣tinued) PLOTS; wherein the great GOD is chiefly to be aspected and magnified!
The Several Popish Delusions and
Di∣visions, displayed in this little Book are not vulgarly known, I am certain; and there∣fore, I presume, will be the more welcome to the
Ignorant: which, though they will be no News to Your
Lordship, and others: yet, I humbly crave your Acceptance, and Patronage of this Work: Which, I know, will find more
Enemies than there are Words in it, as shall my self, for exposing it, who cordially wish all Health, Hap∣piness, Safety and Prosperity to your Self, City and
(Protestant) Citizens: to whose Service and
Defence of the Protestant Cause, I have with the same
Ardency wholly devoted my best Endeavours, and All that I am
Octob. 23: 1680.

