



My Lord,
TO open the Grave of an Impious Tyrant, and to revive the memory of his detestable Villanies, may be censured as a design to infect the presentAge, and to instruct by an accur∣sed Example those who want onely the Arts, not the desires, of do∣ing Mischief. But if the unhappy Issues of such perverse Counsels can∣not secure this History from such an Effect, (to which even the Sacred Stories and the most wholesome Laws are obnoxious through the Corruptions of men, whereby they imitate that which is proposed to their Hatred, and follow Their Practices whose In∣famies they abhorre, and whose Ruines they tremble at;) yet the Compiler hopes by the Dedication of it to
Your Honour to free himself from such suspicions. It being not to be supposed, that He intends to teach, but to
dis∣cover the Impostures of Tyrants, and to warn the Credulous world to arm themselves against those Monsters, whopresumes upon the Patrociny of so great an Assertor of Piety and
Ju∣stice. For (My Lord) neither the Nobility of Your Family nor the Plenty of Your Fortune have so much commended You to the Admiration of men, as Your inflexible zeal to Righ∣teousness and Truth. This was that which drew You forth to follow that court in Persecution and Dan∣ger, whose Honours and Pleasures in times of Peace could not allure You from Your Retirements. And Your uncorrupted Faith to that Righ∣teous Cause wherein all Just Govern∣ment was concerned, I have heard force from the
Adversaries of it an Elogie not beneath that which the brave
Fabricius by his Vertue wone from his Enemy, that The Sun might sooner forsake hiscourse then My Lord of Southam∣pton
depart from Justice. So that when the Popular Fury had over∣whelmed the greatest part of our Nobless in contempt, the Chiefs of that Faction testified an Observance almost Religious to You, as to an In∣violable Sanctuary of true Nobility and Honour. And they seemed to treat Your
Lordship as the Conque∣ring Romans did the Captive Gods, whom, even while they chai∣ned, they did
supplicate with Sa∣crifices to remove to their triumphing City: so while they restrained Your Liberty, and invaded Your
Rights, they did even then with a sollicitous Reverence
court Your approbation of their successful Crimes. But as Your Lordship despised their in∣juries, so You slighted their cares∣ses.And though You seemed un∣concerned in their Oppressions, yet I have seen Your Indignation then swell'd high, when they profaned Justice by pretensions to it, and blasphemed Religion by imputing their Impieties to the ducts of the Immaculate Spirit and just Provi∣dence of God. As these Vertues, My Lord, are Your
Glory, so I humbly crave they may be my Pro∣tection: And that as I was con∣firmed and heightned in a detesta∣tion of Unjust Usurpers by Your great Example, so under the shel∣ter of Your Honourable Name I may endeavour to render them Odi∣ous to others. Since, that the Wick∣ed should be exposed to the Publick Hatred, as that the Good should be rewarded with all that affection whichis due to the Benefactors of Man∣kind, is equally the Interest of Ver∣tue. All whose concernments being so dear to Your Lordship, that God, as well for His own Glory as for the advantages of Good men, may long continue You as a
Light in this per∣verse Generation, and prosper all Your Counsels, is the constant pray∣er of
My Lord,

