



Brethren,
I Should doe you and the Author an unexampled injury, should I detain this Dedication from you, since neces∣sity on the one side, and equity on the other compels me to it: Necessity, in regard no other persons will patronize him; and equity, because you have been co-partners with him in all his misdemean∣ors; so that you are by most well-Princi∣pled men term'd, A Trinity of Traytors; but our author minding the Publike good, hath thus inrolled his name in the Cata∣logue of Wits, and desires to wipe off all the obloquy people have cast upon him, by leaving these Remains to after-ages, that

those which make him the subject of their discourses, may by remembring his Jeasts forget his Crimes; he hath long enough been covered with the Knaves-Coat, and therefore now puts on the Fools; for that as Mr. Nedham saith, Is the only way to pre∣ferment, and a Ladies Chamber: and with∣out controversie, the Levite may laugh, or cause laughter, as well as the Layman. Se∣mel in anno ridet Apollo. The God of Wis∣dome may frollick it sometimes, why then may not he unbend himself with moderate mirth? Non seria semper: he that with He∣raclitus whines away his time, I judge more culpable, then he that with Democri∣tus shakes it away with laughter. I have long time known this second Scoggin, and have been an often hearer of him, and I finding his Discourses so much of Wit and Mirth, could not but rake these embers to∣gether. There are amongst them several Pulpit-flashes, for indeed they are collect∣ed out of many of his Sermons, by the pen of a ready writer; they are the Cream of his Applicatory part: and since his Ho∣milies would be too voluminous, and pro∣bably

impertinent. I have made this Pub∣lication, that his Memory may survive his ashes, and you likewise to whom it is De∣dicated have a share in his Immortality. And beleeve me, let the World say what it will, Archee was a fool to him, as appears by his fulfilling the Proverb, Fortune favours Fools: for he got a good Estate; & so did our Author too, You'l say: but Fortune playes the Strumpet, He got it like a Fool, and must loose it like a Fool: Icannot for∣get that Lesson he said the Heathen taught him, and indeed it concerns you all:
— Non Lex est justior ulla,
Quam veris Artifices arte perire sua.
But you must know, A Fools Bolt is soon shot, and it is no matter what they say, that matter not what they say, I am sure no Heathen could exceed him, for a Heathen in teaching him taught a man, but he would preach to Horses, Even till they broke their Halters; and tell me which is the hardest task, for a Heathen to make him cry, or he

to make a Dog laugh. I remember he was once in Company with some Ladies, and was extreme bashful; whereupon a Gen∣tleman reproved him in this wise, Fool, at 'em; and ever since sprung up that Pro∣verbial word, Fool a-tum. This being all, Dear Brethren, I remain,

