



I Will honour them that honour me, saith the LORD. But who can tell what shall be done unto them whom the Lord will honour? Certainly, those do honour him, who serve him religiously. They who are careless of Religion, do pretend that they cannot serve God, because there be so many Religions, and they cannot know which is the right. But if they were unfeignedly desirous to know, they might be resolved; since our Lord, who is gracious, mercifull, and abundant in goodness and truth, leaves us not in the mist or unto uncertainties; but at several times, and in divers waies, hath spoken unto the Fa∣thers by the Prophets; and in the last daies hath spoken unto us by his Son, and hath commanded all men to

hear Him: He is the Way, the Verity and the Life; none comes unto the Father but by Him. On which words Chrysostom writes thus; It is as if our Saviour had said, I am the Way; that is, By me ye shall come: The Verity, because assuredly those things shall be which I have pro∣mised; neither is any lie in me: And the Life, because Death cannot hinder you from me: And since I am the Way, ye need not another Guide: Since I am Truth, I speak no false thing: Since I am Life, although ye shall die, ye shall injoy what I have promised. And Cyrill. Alexandr. on the same words saith; By three things we shall come into these Heavenly mansions; by the action of true verity, by right faith, and the hope of eternal life: of all which, none is the giver, none is the fountain, nor is any the cause, but our Lord Jesus Christ; for he hath given commandments above the Law; he hath shewed us the Way: And he is also the Truth; that is, the true streightness and determination, the uprightest rule, and the best square of faith: And he is also the Life; for none but he can restore unto us that life, which we hope shall be in holiness and blessedness without perishing: He cer∣tainly shall raise us up, though we die, from that curse for sin, and bring us into Heaven; therefore all excellent things come, and shall be unto us, through him. But those Worldlings say, The Word of Christ is large, and so ma∣ny things are in it, that we cannot search them. Never∣theless He directs all men to search the Scriptures; and the Evangelist teacheth, that those are written that we might beleeve that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that beleeving, we might have life through his name. Yea in that written Word he hath certain rules and notes,

whereby the true Religion may be known. Certainly, that is the most true Religion, which ascribes most glory unto God, and most transcends the natural reason of men, and most elevates the hearts and affections of men to∣wards God and Heaven. By application of those un∣doubted and unquestionable principles, each one may understand, that among all Religions the Reformed is the only true Religion; for not only our Profession in the ge∣neral, but all the branches of our Doctrine, are grounded on God's written Word; and tend unto God's glory, tran∣scend our natural reason, and lead men to think continu∣ally of God, and to hope for blessedness in Heaven by Christ alone. And amongst those who profess this Reli∣gion, they are most devoted unto God, and most constant in their profession; who aim most at God's glory; who are most acted by supernatural principles; who do most think of God, and whose hope of felicity in Heaven is most active: And such as seek but their own or other mens interests, or be led by political or human reasons mainly, are the wavering Professors. On the other side, all other Religions, though they pretend the glory of God, they are not truly grounded on God's Word; but are underpropped with natural reason, and tend to earth∣ly mindedness; as appears by induction of the particu∣lars wherein they differ from us; some aiming at the ad∣vancement of mens abilities, and others at worldly ho∣nour and gain. This is clear in the Romish Religion; for what else is the advancing of man's ability without or with a little help of God? their Justification by works? their Deifying of the Pope above all that is called God? their equalling of Mens Traditions and Decrees with the

Sacred Scriptures? What else is their Mass, their fancy of Purgatory, &c? Here it is remarkable what is written by their Jesuit Cardinal Bellarmin, de Indulg. Lib. 1. Cap. 12. Sect. Rationes; We see (saith he) that the amplest Indul∣gences are given for a very slight cause; as, when plena∣ry Indulgence is given unto all who stand before the Door of St. Peter's Church, and the Pope blesseth all the people solemnly. And Sect. Observandum, he saith, That standing before St. Peter's Porch is a very light and slight cause, if it be considered absolutely in it self; and never∣theless it is a weighty and just cause, because that fre∣quency of the people, at that time, is a fit and usefull means of protesting their Faith concerning the Head of the Church, and it serves for the honour of the Aposto∣lical See; which [honour] is the end of that Indulgence. So he. The Pope then and the People do aid one another mutually; for the People confirms the Supremacy of the Pope by their presence, and receiving that Indulgence; and He, by dispensing his Indulgence so liberally, con∣firms the People in their Superstition and Pharasaical opinion of Works. But what is there for the glory of God or promoting Piety? They are wont to object se∣veral pretences of their Religion, which may be reduced into ten. 1. The stateliness of their Churches, in com∣parison of the emptiness and baseness of others. 2. Their Unnion and Harmony when others fall into Shivers. 3. Their Antiquity, and others are but of Yesterday. 4. They press us to acknowledge, that the Church of Rome was once true: And then they infer; therefore they are the true Church as yet, since the true Church cannot perish, nor be changed in the Essentials. 5. They

call for the time, place and persons, when, where, and by whom the change came. 6. Where did our Church lurk so long? 7. The Authours of the Reformation had no Commission to attempt it. 8. They vaunt of their suc∣cession without interruption. 9. They glory of the sub∣stance of Religion, which cannot be deemed to be still with them. 10. They bewitch the people with ambiti∣ous ostentation of innumerable Friers; who, amongst them, have renounced the World, that they may at∣tain Eternal Life. All these pretences are clearly refuted by Io. Calvin. Lib. de Scandalis; and after him by Io. Cameron, Lib. de Rom. Ecclesiae praejudiciis, in a direct and dogmatical way; but they are (as it were) sensibly demonstrated to be but idle words, by Histories, where we see them all confuted; not only by such as did separate or were cast out of the Roman Church; but even by such as lived and died in it, without any separation, except in judge∣ment. The Papists cannot deny, but plainly confess, that their Church was corrupt, both in the pretended Head and Members, in respect of Manners, so that a Reformation was necessary; but they deny the corru∣ption in Faith or Doctrine: And they say, Though the Popes were wicked men, yet they wanted not their power of Jurisdiction, and of dispensing the sacred My∣steries. Unto the first part the Apostle saith; When some have put away a good Conscience, they make ship∣wrack concerning the Faith. On these words Chrysostom saith; That is truly said; for where the Life is rebukable, such Doctrine must needs follow; and so ye may see ve∣ry many to have fallen into the Pit of Miseries, and to have returned into Heathenish Rites; for lest they be

tormented with the fear of evils to come, they indea∣vour every way to perswade themselves, that all things are false which our Religion teaches; and so they turn from the Faith. Accordingly the Histories shew, that some Popes have denied the Immortality of the Soul, and have called the Gospel of Christ, a Fable. As for the Pope's Jurisdiction, it was not so from the beginning as it is now, neither Ecclesiastical nor Civil; for other Bi∣shops had power, within their own Diocies, without dependance upon the See of Rome; as the Bishops of Millan, of Ravenna and others, in Italy; and the Bishops of other Nations: And Pope Gregory the I. (as others before him) did acknowledge the Emperour as his Lord, and himself his Servant; afterwards the Pope did salute the Emperour as his Son; and by degrees they made the Emperours their Vassals, Servants and Lacqueys: So that if Peter and Paul were alive on Earth, they would certainly deny the Popes to be their Successours; be∣cause they differ (besides many other Articles of the Faith) so far in the point of subjection; or rather, exal∣ting themselves above all that is called God; yea cer∣tainly, they would call the Pope the Antichrist, accord∣ing to what they have written in 2 Thess. 2. and 2 Pet. 2. The Romanists say, That in this point they have ad∣vantage against us; because the Antients have written, that Antichrist must be one Person, of the Tribe of Dan, sit in Jerusalem, &c. Truly it is no marvel, that in the primitive times the most learned were mistaken (I ex∣cept the Apostles) concerning the Antichrist; since the prophecies could not be throughly understood, before they were in some good measure accomplished. But if

we inquire the judgement of the learned and prudent men, in the middle times, concerning the Antichrist, and generally of the corruption of the Church, we may receive more sure information; and certainly those are the best Witnesses of what was done in their daies. A good number of their Testimonies, in all ranks, I have compiled, for this end, in this Book, which is humbly presented unto Your HIGHNES; first trusting that under Your Patronage others may the more willingly look up∣on it, and be informed in the Truth; and then, with con∣fidence, it shall be graciously accepted; because
Saepè Tibi Deus hic, saepe legentur Avi;
with the same travel of reading in Your tender years, Your HIGHNES may learn, both the condition of God's Church in former times, and the lives of Your Glorious Ancestours, Emperours and Kings, of whom You have Your Illustrious Descent; and so from them You may know how to serve God, and how to deport Your Self in all the daies of Your Pilgrimage, that You may be glo∣rious in Heaven, and the following Ages may have Your example, outvying and outstripping (if possible) all the Williams, Charlses, Henries, Jameses, Adolphs and others in Christian Prudence, Righteousness, Prowess and Temperance. So prayeth

