


SIR,
THough it be a very customary thing, many times, for no other reason, but to shew a man's special acquaintance, to make all Addresses of this Na∣ture to some great Duke or other, yet I have de∣clined that common Road, as well knowing, that if there be no intrinsick value in the matter addrest for, the greatest Prince is no more able to protect from Censure than the Mayor of Quinborough; yet, as if there was some Spell in the point too, I am not ashamed of my choice; for there was a time within the Ken of many now living, when there was never a Duke in England, and no complaining in our Streets, yet then there was a Mayor of Quinborough; and that time may happen again, without Natures inversion, yet then the Mayor of Quinbo∣rough

will bear as considerable a Figure in the Government as ever. I shall now take upon me to say something, which pos∣sibly has not occurred to your reading, of Corporations, they being as so many Idols, adored by many in the Nation, they are all alike in their Original Constitution, small ones dif∣fering from great ones, as little Devils do from the higher Orders, viz. in respect of capacity to do hurt; and are all like so many Commonwealths in a Monarchy, being absolutely in∣dependent of the Crown, as to bearing Places and Offices of Trust in all their several and respective Districts; for though all Offices, Civil and Military, determine at the Death or Demise of the King, yet your Worships administrative Facul∣ty and Jurisdiction, with all your Clan, continues without the least recess or interruption; neither is it in the power of any Prince, according to the common Dispensations of Royal Will and Pleasure, to alter the meanest Officer amongst you: What induced the Crown of England to those Acts of Grace at first, I shall not take upon me to offer at; I will onely tell you, that they are like the Hanse-Towns of the Empire, and if they had the same strength, as may be guess'd from what happened of late years, would be as unmanageable; for if the Crown had as many independent Regalities, except for a little Ho∣mage when they list, it would be then counted natural to pre∣serve themselves by a common League in their Immunities, to which Corporations would in no mean methods contribute: But since the providence of the Crown has provided better for our Peace, it's the most prudent for them all to mind their Trade, the thing for which they were first imbodied, and leave the conduct of State-affairs to them, whom God and the Law has intrusted to that Noble end.
Now to induce all you little Commonwealths thus to your duty, I shall press an argument from Gratitude: You may re∣member, that by the Act of Regulation, which was binding even to your Immortal Power, the Commissioners which were

of the Kings nomination, had power to put out sans number or reason, the respective members that constituted a Corporation, and no penalty upon their not putting others into their places, what would have followed upon the disfranchisement of all the members, which was absolutely in the Commissioners pow∣er? even a dissolution of that Body, and by consequence a for∣feiture of all their Lands to the Crown; I do not see what could have hindred such a design, had it not fallen out un∣der a Prince who is above all the temptations of tricks: Then the Loyal City of Coventry had lost nigh 3000 per annum, which had been but just for their abetting the late Rebellion; as likewise the good Towns of Leicester, Nottingham, Nor∣thampton, and Glocester, &c. might have been reckoned with for their especial zeal in the precious Cause; and which had been more considerable, the superintendency of publick af∣fairs had been put into the Justices of the Peace, which are all alterable, as it is fit all other offices to be at pleasure; and truly if such a thing had happened, you would have fallen un∣pitied, for your ways are not like others, your Dispensations savour too much of Partiality, none can have common right a∣mongst you, especially in your remote and poorer Corporations, where a Sack of Malt, or a Bushel of Wheat, shall throw a Mist before the Magistracy; and if any of you get a trust, you decide the controversie, if any happen, as Philip of Macedon did that betwixt two petty Princes, who determined all for himself: to adjust this, Ile tell your worship a story, the great Devil had been out about in the world upon the affairs of his calling, and as he thought, had made one sure and considerable set; so he return'd home, and met a little Mephostophilus of the black Society going out, and told him he might stay a little at such a place, for there lay an Usurer irrecoverably sick, that could not scape his clutches for he was endowed with all the villanies of a miserable Carl, as Whore and Bawd both, take unreasonable brokage for his own money, never mist

taking all extremities upon forfeitures, without respect either to Age or Sex, never paid any poor man any due, though never so dearly earn'd, &c. In fine, he had the Conscience of a Pawn-broker, or a Catchpole Serjeant: The little Devil was much pleased at the prospect of his easie imploy, but he found at his return the account wrong stated, and mist of his prize accordingly; which the great Devil enquiring about the cir∣cumstances of at his return, with no small wonder was an∣swered, that a Divine had been with him, some hours before he died, and had over-ruled him to give all his Estate to charitable uses, and so he was slipt up to Heaven. who has he made Trustee? said the great Devil; a Mayor, and twelve Aldermen, says the little one: well enough, quoth the great one, we'll have all them. Though this be but a Story, yet there's a Moral in the tail of it, for I could give several instances where Corporations have performed their trusts at such a rate, as will entitle them to a journey into those Low Countries; and to say truth, the Fox-furr'd Magistracy do not generally distinguish betwixt  and , right and rightly, so much talked on by Tully, or Seneca; but by whether, or both, or neither, is not much material to you or me, and are com∣monly very tender of doing right against a Member of their own, which they call a standing by, or adjusting their Li∣berties.
But now your worship may say this is a Satyr upon Cor∣porations, and therefore, when I addrest to you for Patronage, I took a wrong sow by the ear. I must and will submit all things to your better judgment, but give me leave to add something, that may not be unuseful in the circumstance of pre∣sent affairs, from the male administration inseparably annext to Bodies Politique, (where as the Bishop of Quinque Eccle∣siae complains deservedly of the packt Council of Trent, votes are numbred and not weighed) and very unlikely to be other∣wayes. I am afraid the East India and African Companies

practise doth not at all make against what I shall offer, whose methods so are uneasie to those unfortunate men, that have any concern amongst them without great purses, that the greatest Extortioner or flee▪Flint in nature, would singly be ashamed on, yet in the croud every thing passes for Justice.
Now least your worship should have your Spouses longing to know what I would be at, I tell you that all Societies of men in∣corporated together, though by the strictest tyes of religion, and Justice are to be postponed to the Government of a single per∣son: you'l say then how shall we be safe in our concerns, if one man be the sole Judge of good and evil? I grant, where a De∣spotical power is exercised, as it is almost in all Monarchies but here, the Subject is intirely in the Princes power, but that being a thing so extravagant and contrary to the Law, it were impious to fear it, considering the benignity of our Prince: But what I say now is by way of comparison, that a Despotical Go∣vernment, nay, and under the greatest Tyrant in nature, is to be preferred before any sort of incorporated power; for the Tyrant may reform as Manasses did; however he must die, and his Successor may make amends for his extravagancies: The wicked Achaz was succeeded by the good Hezekiah; whereas an incorporated power, called by what name you will, never did amend, and which is the insufferable plague of it, is im∣mortal.
If now the greatest Tyranny of a Single Person be to be pre∣ferred before the government of many, how religiously in com∣mon prudence and justice to our selves ought we to acquiesce under our present condition, the happiness of which I shall neither trouble you nor my self to enlarge upon.
You may say now all this is foreign to the matter in hand; if so▪ I cannot much deny it, but only I being the first that made this kind of address to your Worship, I do the boldlier take upon me the part of a Libertine, in the way of it, as being unwilling to tye my self up to any form soever, we must now say somewhat of the discourse, pretended to be answered, viz.

The Dialogue betwixt Cit and Bumkin, it hath a great vogue Weekly Packet Vol. 2. num. 39. pag 312.in the World, for an Author of no mean account, gives this indelible character, Those that will bestow twelve pence on two Books brim∣ful of sense, good nature, and discretion, let them purchase both first and second Part of those learned discourses Cit and Bumpkin. But now Authors vary, whether this great craracter was figurative or no, to incline to the affirmative, there is an Advertisement subjoyned, how a Gentleman may live by his fingers ends, scribble thread-bare extravagan∣cies two and forty times over, and each time answer them himself, and so (for want of another Adversary) reply, rejoyn, surrejoyn all alone toties quoties as his pinching necessities shall require, written originally in that Babylonish language by Quevedo's Ghost, translated by Don Splutterado Knight of the craving Fob.
But it is now fit that I should give your worship a rea∣son of my undertaking; the chief thing induced me to it, was the just disdain I had, that such a Pigmy should at∣tacque so boldly, and by so opprobrious names, such consi∣derable orders of men as he brings under that name, of which there is some account given in the following Colloquy. Now if his friends object, that the language is too tart upon him, let them consider his own methods of using others, but he may be more excusable for it than his Opponent, considering the A∣cademy of Newgate, which though, as be says, is famous for breeding politick men, yet for polite and soft language it,s not inferiour to the Nunnery of Billings-gate.
You may object Sir, if you please too, why no sooner? when some Authors write Books as fast as Jugers spue Ribands: but you may see by that your Worships Oratour does not write for daily bread, whatever others do.
I should not have said much more in this case, but that there is lately printed an abusive Paper, called, Popery in

Masquerade, in Skeldry; which by the Authors favour, I think a great friend to the Author of Cit and Bumpkin, by his listing Dick and Tom, the pretended answer to that Discourse, amongst those Pamphlets he calls seditious; and therefore I must animadvert a little upon the thing it self, as likewise upon that method: As to the thing or print it self, it is sufficiently libellous and scandalous, for it is not so much a dumb narrative of what's past, as a Scheme of what he would intimate is at present designed: That it is not a narrative of what's past I offer this, the things are so mistimed, for he dis∣plays all the Rabble of Sects, upon a consult joyntly petition∣ing, & J. Presbyter Chairman; now he that knows any thing, must know (and that Author is old enough for a personal know∣ledge in that Case) that those Sects of Muggletonians, Quak∣ers, especially J. Naylor (who suffered his punishment by order of a number of men called a Parliament in the Protectorate of Oliver) were not so much as heard of, when John the Presby∣ter was Chairman; nay the Independents themselves were not lookt upon as considerable at that time, tho' afterwards they supplanted their elder Brother, & at such a rate that the time wherein he layes his hopeful harmony for petitions, the Presby∣terians had as little power perhaps as they have now: But to make your Worship the better able to understand my observa∣tions upon his Plate, I must give you a short description of it, first he sets the Presbyterian in a chair in a ridiculous dress, assisted by all the rabble of Sects, as Adamites, Ranters, and what not, as Counsellors, then he brings the petitioners, which are only Swash and the Elders maid, the Colchester Quaker & the Mare petitioning against Bishops, Service-Book, Popish Lords and evil Counsellours, and thanks given them by the Presbyterians, which by the way is a great want of Charity in him, for tho' those of kind petitions was only the result of minds that desired nothing but matter for quarrel, yet none of the four are like our articles of faith necessary to salvation, &

might if the Government had thought fit, have been altered at pleasure, without breach, either of Gods Law or mans, therefore t ose Petitioners ought not in common good manners, tho, they deserved a very severe re∣primam, to be so ranked; for those kind of Best alitie were never charg∣ed, which the well natured Author would intimate ought to be upon the decryed Party.
But observe it all along, he is a Gentleman of singular manners as well as discretion, to bring in the Colchester Bridegroom petitioning against Popish Lords, when there is now an Act of State to that purpose, viz. to take away all Legislative power from them, as if that solemn Act which has been gratiously granted at the petition of three Estates, was to be run into ridicule by every Buffoon at pleasure, but, I suppose, he stands Candidate to succeed his friend B. H. in his late Eminency.
But now to go on with the description, he makes all these petitions to be addressed to the Presbyter, and thanks returned to the Petitioners. On the right hand aloft he sets a Cabal of Raskals, as it were in a consult, opposite on the left hand he sets little Alderman Isaac Pennington, & the Pope, under them the Capital letters of Solemn League and Covenant, un∣der that, according to his usual scurrilous way, a piece of Holy Writ, Jer. 60. 5. which he scoffingly would seem to apply to that wicked Combina∣tion or Covenant. On the right hand below a company of ill looks Ras∣kals with banners, having Alderman Gourney, Strafford, and Bishop Laud chained amongst 'em, Magna Charta, Bible, and Councils, &c. underfoot, under all the head of the late King of blessed memory. On the left, opposite to it, a great ear'd Knave spewing of Canons and Common Prayer, &c. his head supported by a plump Harlot. Nigh a little Table in the middle of all a little Rascally fellow for Secretary beset with pot and pipe, and Monkey by him as Assistant, with a great many other gim∣cracks not worth mentioning, but I onely observe that the excise is by its Companions as the Directory Ordinance ranked amongst those wicked grievances. I wonder why it should for sure the Animal doth not think, that ever that duty will be taken way. Ʋnder all a great deal of Poetry both good bad and indifferent in the kind. There are only two verses, that I remark upon, as now very well timed and tinctured with Jesuites loyalty, he makes a Company of Fellows say thus,
Our design's this, to change the Government,
Set up our selves and do't by Parliament.
A very excellent argument for the sitting of that Court but suitable enough I suppose, to his design, but he might do well to discover such a contrive∣ment if he know it for else misprison of Treason must be his lot; if he know nothing, but only out of his singular good nature & piety guesses at things,

there is a piece of Salust very applicable.
Est locus in carcere quod Tullianum appellatur.
From what has now been offered, or from their own better understand∣ings, none will, I think, suppose, that this piece of painting is any thing historical, but rather a project now pretendedly in agitation.
As now I have said somewhat of his witty and elaborate piece, so I'le say a little of that way of libelling, it is a libel as much as writing, & as much punishable, but yet, I think, a man may safely put a case of that nature, as thus, Admit a Painter draw Oliver newly established in the Protectorate, environed with all his Myrmidons, all publick officers & foreign Ministers addressing to him, the area of the Cut bestrowed with all the remarques of a ruined State, as a Crown and Scepter re∣versed, the Magna Charta, the holy Bible, Acts of Parlia, all thrown about a great Church orethrown, the 3 Estates, the loyal Gentry and Nobility looking through prison grates, &c. and at the lower end of all a little dapper fellow with a Chamlet Cloak over his shoulder to cover a base Viol, making his honours like a mannerly School-Boy, & telling one of the Pages of honour, that he desires to make an humble oblation of Musick to congratulate his serene Highness's assumption of the Go∣vernment, as well as to chear and refresh his mighty spirits, as an argument that he had quit that unfortunate side, as might appear by a label out of his mouth, some unlucky body would guess a certain Gentleman that lives in the high way to the Paddington Tree, to be meant by it: Admit again a Painter to draw a pretty well tim∣bred Gentleman set in his scribling laboratory in a thinking po∣sture, and a doughty man of war flourishing an ireful sapling over his manly shoulders, which put him into such a posture, as Aeneas was in when he was ready to be piss himself in the storm,
Duplex tendens ad sydera Palmas Talia voce refert. Which may be Englished, thus.
He lifting up his mutton fists on high,
Strike not he said before you tell us why,
De mortuis nil nisi bonum, says the angry man of war, for this little Author had been bespattering the great Coke for which he was with such indignation rebuked. To go on with this Skeldry, admit a Painter should draw a grave antiquated Sq; about the great clymacterick run∣ning away with a young Lass in the lawful way of marriage, Paraph. of Phaed. to Hippol. by the Club.with her Purse inside outwards as an emblem of wealth, and the old Gentleman poetizing concerning himself, as might appear by the ingenuity of the delineatour at this rate,

Love-pangs in youth with Art we did remove,
But now in riper years with rage we love.
And to say truth, the Gentleman had in his youthful days as many remedies against banging himself for love, as Lukeners lane, the Old Cherry-Garden, or Madam Bear her Damosels (a Lady as famous in her Generation for those intrigues, as either Mother Gifford or Betty Buley of late and happy memory) could afford. I say, and it like your worship, some would say it was knavishly meant.
But lest you or some wiser Reader should object at the impropriety of making a Piper sometimes talk like a Scholar, it cannot be worse than to make a Bumpkin a Politician, a Canting Knave, and yet so ignorant in Religion as to talk of the Ten Tables. But when all's done our Lucian will call me a Libeller, as he does every body, that's not exact according to his own model, and I believe would not forbear a man that should write against the vanity of spending night after night at Langtrilow, and losing twenty pound at a time to a Company of Sophistresses, for want of an Assistant to convey the beloved Pam.
But the Reader may say this is severe upon some Body, but when that somebodies methods are considered, it may not be deemed improper, accor∣ding to an old piece of Badge footed Poetry in Manuscript, in answer to an abusive Scot;

Skelton Laureate
After this rate
Defendeth with his pen
All Englishmen
From vile Dundass
That Scottish Ass.
Dundass so drowzy,
So scab'd and lowzy.
Thou sayest in thy rayles
We Englishmen have tayles,
Behind in my hose
I have a rose
For thy Scottish nose.

And so I kiss your Worships hands, and remain

