


RIght Honourable, and Right
Worshipfull, whereas I have
lately published a Christian∣ography,
or a description of
many great Churches of
Christians in the world: some
of which are for extent, larger then the
Church of Rome in Europe, for time more
ancient, for succession as continual, for faith
more sound: who believe with us the church
of God to be Catholike, as it is in the Apo∣stles
Creed, and not as it is set downe in the
new Trent Creed confined to Rome, who

renounce the Popes Supremacie, some of
them excommunicating him for a Schisma∣tick
and Heretick.
Who receive the holy Communion in
both kindes, they all drinke of Christs cup,
and abhor the Romish decree, made contra∣ry
to Christs Institution.
Who make no Images to be worshipped.
Who doe not acknowledge the figment
of Purgatory, nor use any Prayers to be deli∣vered
from the fained paines thereof.
Who have their Prayers in their owne
tongue, and mutter them not in latine as the
Romists doe.
Who forbid not Marriage (the prohibi∣ting
of which is called by St. Paul, the Do∣ctrine
of Divells.) Their Priests may and doe
marry.
Who hold not popish Transubstantiation.
Who prohibite not Lay-men the reading
of the holy Scriptures commanded by Christ
himselfe.
Who doe not joyne with Christs Inter∣cession
the suffrages of Saints: nor with his
Justification the merit of workes: nor with
the Satisfaction Papall Indulgences.

These points with some others, which the
ambition and avarice of the Romists hath
lately hatched, they renounce with us.
This worke I purposing to perfect and
consummate to the glory of God, the great
profit of the Church, & establishing of mens
consciences, they seeing the unity and agree∣ment
of the holy Churches in the world with
us: Behold suddenly a numerous company of other
Hereticks stole in upon us like the locusts, Rev. 9.
As the unpure Familists who blasphe∣mously
pretend to be Godified like God,
whereas indeed they are divellified like their
Father the Divell.
The illuminated Anabaptists who blasphe∣mously
affirme the baptisme of children to
be the marke of the Beast, and to come from
Anti-christ.
The Donatisticall Brownists, who in times
past hid themselves in holes; now lift up
their heads, and vent openly their errors, in∣fecting
our people.
The Antinomians, who teach as I find, such
a faire and easie way to heaven, viz. That a
man need not be troubled by the law before
faith, and that faith is not a going out of

himselfe to take hold of Christ, but onely a
discerning that Christ is his, and that after
this, such a man must see nothing in himselfe,
have nothing, doe nothing, need no sorrow
nor repentance, nor bee pressed to duties,
need never pray unlesse moved by the Spirit:
If hee fall into sin, never the more disliked of
God, nor his condition the worse: and that
hee must abide in the height of comfort,
though hee fall into grosse sin. The novel∣ty
of this doctrine takes so well, or rather ill
that multitudes of simple men and women
dance after their Pipes, they run after these
men as if they were mad, crowding the Chur∣ches,
filling their doors and windowes.
The Independents trouble also our poore
Church, who pretend that they have a per∣fect
modell of Church government, which
Almighty God hath revealed to them, which
many like better then the government of the
Reformed Churches, being perswaded that
in Independency they may have liberty to
doe what they list, having no government,
hoging to be as free as their Teachers, who
will have none at all.
The Arminians also an after-brood of the

Pellagiant, broach their erroneous opini∣ons.
The Sabbatarians affirm the old Jewish Sab∣bath
to be kept, and not the Lords day.
The Anti-sabbatarians would have no perti∣cular
Sabbath at all, but every day to bee a
sabbath to a Christian man.
The Traskites, who would have us observe
many Jewish ceremonies.
VVe have also Millenaries who affirm that
before the day of judgment Christ shal come
down from heaven, and reign with the Saints
upon earth 1000. years, in which time they
shall destroy all the wicked, binding their Kings
in chaines, and Nobles in linkes of iron.
VVee have Hetheringtonians, who hold a
hodg-podg of many heresies, troubling our
peoples brains.
VVe have also Socinians, who teach that
Christ dyed not to satisfie for our sins: and
also his Incasnation to be repugnant to rea∣son,
& not to be sufficiently proved by Scripture,
with many other abhominable errors.
Wee have Arians, who deny the Deity of
Christ.
We have an Atheistical Sect, who affirme

that mens soules sleep with their bodies un∣till
the day of Judgement.
Wee have Atheists too many, as among
others, one was committed by a Justice of
Peace, who mock'd and jear'd at Christs In∣carnation.
His Father was burnt at Thoelouze
in France; he scapeth unpunished among us:
too many others we have.
They preach, print, and practise their he∣reticall
opinions openly: for books, vide the
bloody Tenet, witnesse a tractate of divorce
in which the bonds are let loose to inordi∣nate
lust: a pamphlet also, in which the soul
is laid asleepe from the houre of death unto
the houre of judgement, with many others.
Yea, since the suspention of our Church-government,
every one that listeth turneth
Preacher, as Shoo-makers, Coblers, Button-makers,
Hostlers and such like, take upon
them to expound the holy Scriptures, in∣trude
into our Pulpits, and vent strange do∣ctrine,
tending to faction, sedition, and
blasphemie.
What mischiefe these Sectaries have al∣ready
done, we that have cure of soules in
London find and see with great griefe of heart:

viz. Our Congregations forsaking their Pa∣stors;
our people becomming of the Tribe
of Gad, running after seducers as if they
were mad; Infants not to be brought to the
Sacrament of Baptisme; men refusing to re∣ceive
the holy Communion, and the Lords
Prayer accounted abhominable, &c. A Vo∣lume
will hardly contain the hurt that these
Sectaries have in a very short time done to
this poore Church; and doth not the Com∣mon-wealth
suffer with the Church?
Whence are all these distractions? Who are
the Incendiaries that have kindled & blown
this fire among us but these?
Considering with my selfe the former
happinesse of this Kingdome, and the sud∣den
change that is betide it, it being fallen
from the height of prosperitie to the lowest
ebbe of misery, and this not by the incursi∣on
of a Forreigne Nation, but by its owne
children, who imbrue their hands in the
bloud one of another with no lesse inhuma∣nity
then Cannibals or Men-eaters, with∣out
any reluctation at all; the Sonne against
the Father, and the Father against the Son,
being involved in a most cruell Warre with∣out
any hopes of Peace.

And moreover (which is worst of all)
when I consider that some of our Clergy∣men
(who should like Moses stand in the
gap to appease Gods anger) doe increase
the same, not onely by blowing the fire, but
by their Errors and Schismes which they
broach and foment among us; by which they
doe as much as in them lyeth to put mens
soules in as great danger as their bodies.
And considering againe how wee are in∣volved
in a most cruell Warre without any
hopes of peace, may not I cry out with the
Prophet; O that my head were full of water, and
my eyes a fountaine of teares, that I might weepe
for the slaine of my people!
But all this being Gods permitting, let us
with patience possesse our souls; let us trust in
him, depend upon him, and in his good time
hee will deliver his Church, and turne all
to the best; and in the meane season every
man doe his best to quench this fire. For
my own part, these sad considerations made
me leave my Christianography, and write an
Hesiography to describe the Hereticks and
Schismaticks of this time, in which I set
downe their beginning among us; their he∣reticall

opinions and errors, confuting them;
and also relate how other Princes and Com∣mon
wealths have suppressed them, and
how severely some of them have beene pu∣nished
among us.
I know my reverend Brethren have not
beene wanting to oppose these Hereticks in
writing and preaching, in season and out of
season, using all meanes to suppresse these
Heresies, having to that end chosen speciall
men to preach several Lectures in severall
places; But without your helpe and the as∣sistance
of our Religious Patriots assembled
in Parliament, they doe, and will increase
upon us doe what we can.
This Treatise I present to your Lordship,
and to this Honourable Senate. What can
bee more sutable or fitter for you, Servants
of the most high God, then that which ten∣deth
to the glory of God, Edification of his
Church, and vindication of the truth against
the illusion of Sectaries and Heretikes?
What is more correspondent with the
duty of Christian Magistrates then to assist
Gods cause with your politicall Authority?
A question may be asked whether it be law∣full

for the Magistrates to use the sword a∣gainst
Heretickes? To this I answer; such
whose Heresies are blasphemous in doctrine,
or dangerous to the State, deserve death,
the reason is, because they corrupt the faith.
If such as poyson waters and fountaines at
which men and beasts drinke, deserve Capi∣tall
punishment, how much more they that
as much as in them lyeth goe about to poy∣son
mens soules?
Yea, St. Augustine saith in his fifth Tra∣ctat
upon Iohn; Quantum in ipsis est Christum in
homine occidunt.
The forenamed St. Augustine indeed wa∣vered
concerning this point for a time, as he
confesseth in one of his Epistles: but when
he saw the City wherein he dwelt was re∣claimed
from Donatisme by the Magistrates
sword, he retracted his opinion.
And expecting the like successe in this ho∣nourable
City, I doe implore your helps, &
that for Iesus Christs sake: and I pray you
give me leave to put you in mind of the Co∣venant
we made in the presence of Almighty
God the searcher of all hearts, with a true
intent to performe the same, as wee should

answer at that great day, when the secrets of
all hearts shall bee disclosed, viz. That we
should in like manner without respect of
persons endeavour the extirpation of Pope∣ry,
Prelacy, Superstition, Heresie, Schisme,
Prophaenesse, and whatsoever shall bee
found to be contrary to sound Doctrine and
the power of godlinesse, lest wee partake in
other mens sins, and thereby be in danger to
receive of their plagues; and that the Lord
may be one, and his Name one in the three
Kingdomes.
And this I beseech you in the name of
God to take in hand, laying aside all humane
reasons.
Let not Gods cause goe to racke, nor by
worldly policies and humane reason be pro∣tracted
or retarded.
The Turke will not suffer Mahomet to be
blasphemed: as we are Christians let us stand
for Christ.
How dangerous the fostering of Heretikes
hath been, histories declare, viz. Almighty
God sent down fire from Heaven and consu∣med
Antioch,Paulus Dia∣con. Lib. 15. being a Nursery of Heretikes:
And also how the earth opened & swallow∣ed

Nicomedia, the meeting place of the
blasphemous Arrians: also in the Commen∣taries
of Sleidan,Theodo. lib. . cap. 6. how the Anabaptists mee∣ting
first in Conventicles, surprized Mun∣ster:
and how hardly Amsterdam escaped
them, Lambertus Hortensius writeth.
The plague is of all diseases most infecti∣ous:
I have lived among you almost a Iubile,
and seene your great care and provision to
keep the City from infection, in the shutting
up the sicke, and in carrying them to your
Pest-houses, in setting Warders to keep the
whole from the sicke, in making of fires and
perfuming the streets, in resorting to your
Churches, in powring out your prayers to
Almighty God with fasting and almes to be
propitious to you. The plague of heresie is
greater, and you are now in more danger
then when you buried five thousand a week:
You have power to keep these Hereticks and
Sectaries from Conventickling and sholing
together to infect one another. Fire is dan∣gerous,
many great Cities in Europe have
been almost ruinated by it: I have seen your
dilligence and dexterety in quenching it in
the beginning: your breaking open your

Pipes for water making floods in your streets:
your Engins to cast the water upon the hou∣ses:
your industry and paines is admirable.
Heresie is as dangerous as fire, use your
best endeavours to quench it before it con∣sume
us.
Thus not doubting Right Honourable, &
Right Worshipfull, of your best endeavours
to suppresse these Heretikes and Sectaries, by
whom not only many poore soules are infe∣cted,
but also the holy name of God is blas∣phemed.
I cease, most humbly entrea∣ting
Almighty God to blesse this Ci∣tie,
and to give unto you the frui∣tion
of all temporall felicities
in this life, and the never∣failing
fulnesse of bles∣sednesse
in the life
to come
