


May it please your Grace,
I Am comman∣ded by the Royal Society to Print the Dis∣course, which I made

before them, upon the last Meeting-day of their last year, and next before that of their Anniversary E∣lection: Because, as Drapers cut Patterns of their whole Cloth out of an End, not be∣cause the End is bet∣ter than the rest, but because it may be best spared; so (I suppose)

the Society are con∣tent, that this Exer∣cise pass for a Sample, pro tanto, of what they are doing; for that the same may be con∣ceived to consist of three parts, viz. The first being an Endea∣vour to explain the Intricate Notions, or Philosophia Prima of Place, Time, Moti∣on,

Elasticity, &c. in a way which the meanest Member of adult Mankind is ca∣pable of understand∣ing: The second be∣ing, to excite the World to the study of a little Mathema∣ticks, by shewing the use of Duplicate Pro∣portions in some of the most weighty of Hu∣mane

affairs, which Notion a Child of 12 years old may learn in an hour: And the last being, without Chymerical Specula∣tions, to consider such points and proper∣ties, even in Atoms (such, whereof per∣haps a Million do not make up one visible Corpusculum,) as may

give an intelligible Account of the Ne∣xures, Mixtures, and Mobilities of all the parts of the Uni∣verse.
In like manner, 'tis the Profession of the Society, to make My∣sterious things plain; to explode and dis∣use all insignificant and puzling words;

to improve and apply little small threds of Mathematicks to vast uses; and yet not to neglect, the finest Consideration, even of Atoms, where the same is necessary. The which purposes of theirs, I venture to say, do as much differ (both as to dif∣ficulty and dignity)

from what is com∣monly called Wit (and which takes with far the greater part of Mankind,) as the skill of Drawing and Painting a Cloud or Periwig doth from that of Designing or Painting many com∣plicated Figures of Men and Beasts in some one Table,

wherein each is per∣fectly to express some particular passion, and all standing together to contain the true and entire Spirit of the Story represent∣ed: For, in the latter, precise exactness is indispensible, where∣as in the former, not onely liberty always, but even extravagan∣cy

sometimes is not onely tolerable, but laudable. And when I have said this; I withal say, that there is one Glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another of the Stars, which may all consist toge∣ther, without de∣stroying or malig∣ning each other. And

all these several Glo∣ries shine steddily in your Graces Firma∣ment.
Being, I say, ap∣pointed to publish this Exercise, I have presumed to dedicate it to your Grace. First, because the So∣ciety have been plea∣sed to order it to be published; (I dare

not say, as approving it, but as committing it to Examination.) Secondly, because your Grace doth not onely love the search of Truth, but did en∣courage Me 30 years ago as to Enquiries of this kind. For about that time in Paris, Mersennus, Gassendy, Mr. H Monsieur

Des Cartes, Monsieur Roberval, Monsieur Mydorge, and other famous men, all fre∣quenting, and cares∣sed by, your Grace and your memorable Brother, Sir Charles Cavendish, did coun∣tenance and influence my Studies, as well by their Conversati∣on as their Publick

Lectures and Wri∣tings: Much of which honours and helps I ow unto your Grace, and have a fresh re∣membrance of them. Thirdly, because my Lord Ogle being now about to carve a sig∣nificant Figure upon my Lord his Son, by his careful Education of him, I thought it a

service to his Lord∣ship, as well as an Expression of my Thanks for his for∣mer acceptance of my Endeavours, to call upon him, not onely to instruct my Lord his Son in some Ma∣thematicsk, but also to store and stock him with variety of Mat∣ter, Data and Phaeno∣mena,

whereupon to exercise the same; since Lines & Num∣bers, without those, are but like Lute∣strings without a Lute or a Hand. For, my Lord, there is a Political Arithmetic, and a Geometrical Iu∣stice to be yet further cultivated in the World; the Errors

and Defects where∣of, neither Wit, Rhe∣toric, nor Interest can more than palliate, never cure. For, Fal∣sity, Disproportion, and Inconsistence can∣not be rectified by a∣ny sermocinations, though made all of figurate and measured periods, pronounced in Tune and Ca∣dence,

through the most advantageous organs; much less by Grandisonous or Eu∣phonical Nonsence, farded with formali∣ty; no more than vi∣cious Wines can be remedied with Bran∣dy and Honey, or ill Cookery with enor∣mous proportions of Spice and Sugar:

Nam Res nolunt malè administrari.
These are the Rea∣sons, why I have put your Graces Name to this Treatise; though there is a contrary reason, why it should have wholly shun'd your Graces sight and knowledg: which is, That your Grace might not perceive

how little progress I have made in thirty years time upon those Studies. However I hope your Grace will take what I have done for an Argument of my patience and per∣severance in these pleasant, though pro∣fitless, Employments, and see, that no hete∣rogeneous Cares and

Troubles have or can quench my affections to Philosophy, as no distances of Time or Place have made Me less than formerly,
 Ult. Decemb. 1674.
