



MY LORD,
THE Celebrated Au∣thor of the follow∣ing Treatise, had not only the Honour to be known to Your Grace's Grand-Father, the late Illustrious Duke of ORMOND, but was likewise held by Him in that just Esteem, which he never fail'd of expressing towards Men of

Learning and Ingenuity. This was a sufficient Encouragement to me (having the Manuscript-Copy deliverd into my Hands by a Worthy and Intimate Friend of the Authors, to di∣spose of it to the Press for the publick Benefit) to Address it to Your Grace's Patronage. You are so true a Successor in all the generous Virtues of Your Ancestry, that I can∣not doubt of Your favour∣able Reception of this Post∣humous Work. Your Gene∣rosity, that takes all occasi∣ons of exerting it self towards the Living, cannot fail in do∣ing

Justice to the Memory of the Dead. More especial∣ly to such Persons as in their Life took care to oblige Poste∣rity.
The usefulness of the en∣suing Discourse at this time, when there is so fair a pro∣spect of a new Settlement in IRELAND, were suf∣ficient to recommend it to Your Grace's Protection. Your Grace's Interest in the Re-establishment of that King∣dom (tho it be considerable) yet is much less than your Share in the glorious Enter∣prize towards its Recovery.
You had the Honour of ac∣companying His MAJESTY in an Adventure that shall shine in the Annals of Fame, as long as the Boyne shall main∣tain its Course. But a sin∣gle Gallantry appear'd not sufficient for the Heir of OR∣MOND and OSSERY. You have since accompanied our Royal Master to other Shores, to be partaker with him in new Scenes of Action, Under∣takings of no less Consequence and Importance, than the De∣liverance of Europe. This will afford sufficient matter for Pa∣negyrick, and oblige the Mu∣ses

to place you in the same high Rank of Renown with Your Noble and Heroick Pre∣decessors. In the mean time, be pleas'd to permit this useful Treatise to wait on you to the Camp, and bring you the hearty wishes of all good Men here, for Your happy Expe∣dition, and Your safe Return, which is desir'd by none with a more particular Zeal, than by

