


Christian Reader, and beloved Friend,
HAving in my Family, according to my weak ability, read over the Scriptures of the A∣postles which precede this Book of the Re∣velation; and coming at last unto this Book of pro∣phecy: I had many thoughts arising in mine heart, whether I should adventure to meddle with it, or undertake to read it, as I had done the former Scrip∣tures written since the manifestation of Christ, or not. Manifold discouragements were ready at hand, and presented themselves to hinder me therefrom: As to say, 1. The appearing difficulty of the things therein contained. 2. Mine own childishness (not in age so much, as) in understanding the first and more fundamental things of the testimony of Jesus, which is the Spirit of prophecy, Rev. 19. 10. and too too great carnality and fleshly-mindedness; of both which I was a little made sensible, though too

much defective therein. 3. The strange and contra∣ry apprehensions of those very few learned Men, whose Writings I have, each to other, concerning the meaning of the Holy Ghost in this Book. 4. My great aloneness, and want of such helps, and help∣ers in the Lord, as with whom I might with pro∣fit, comfort, and confidence have conferred; and by whom I might have been assisted. These, and such like considerations, were before me, and had much impression upon me; so as while I mused on, and consulted them simply, I was almost determined to make no entrance into the reading of this Book.
But again, on the other hand, many arguments also contained even in the beginning of the Book it self, did, some of them, encourage me to make some entrance into it; and however to consider and read the three first Chapters, which appear more easy to be understood: and others in reading them, embold∣ened me to make further progress thereinto; as to in∣stance some of them a little.
1. The Title of the Book: It is called, [The Re∣velation, &c.] to import and signify, that it is not a sealed Book now, but an opened, and revealed Book: Indeed, had it been like the words spoken unto Daniel, Dan. 12. 4, 9. Or like to that Book before it was opened, spoken of, Rev. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Or like to what the seven Thunders uttered, Rev.

10. 4. It had been great sawciness, and high pre∣sumption in me, to have intruded, or curiously pry∣ed into it: But it's Title is, The Revelation, &c. Rev. 1. v. 1. and ch. 22. 10.
2. The consideration whose this Book is, carries motive in it; to move us to look into it, viz. It is Jesus Christ's, ch. 1. 1. one's who is an admirable lover of us. And it is his:
1. Given to him who is the Saviour, and upon whom the Spirit is put immeasurably, for the good of all Men, and especially of them that believe: Given to him by God the Father, when he was exalted in our nature to the right hand of God: who then gloriously received gifts in the Man, and for Men, &c. Ps. 68. 18. Acts 2. 33.
2. And it was given unto him, to shew, viz. to bring forth into light, that it might be understood. Now this encouraged me to pray unto the Lord: And to call in some of my friends to joyn with me in praying unto him, and in his name, to reveal mine eyes to behold these wondrous things of his Law; Remembring what gracious promises he had confirm∣ed by his precious blood, and propounded in his Gospel, to that end, Joh. 14. 13, 14. and ch. 16. 23, 24.
3. The minding to whom he was to shew it, viz. unto his Servants, even to the Churches▪

with some of which there were faults, and great ones also found, ch. 1. 1, 4, ii. and ch. 22. 6, 16. and the persons called upon to hear and understand it, to wit, he that hath an ear; as at the close of every of the seven Epistles to the seven Churches in ch. 2. and ch. 3. &c. contributed something to∣wards mine undertaking to look into, and consider this Book.
4. The person unto whom he sent and signified it by his. Angel, viz. to his Servant, John, who bare witness, &c. Rev. 1. 1, 2. one who was a Man sub∣ject to like passions with others, and an unlearned and ignorant Man, &c. [see the notes on Rev. 1. v. 9.] This also was not unuseful to me.
5. The blessedness pronounced indefinitely on him that readeth, and on them that hear, &c. ch. 1. 3. without the exclusion of any who desire to fear his name; put strength and resolution into me, to make some entrance into, and progress in read∣ing this Book. And indeed, the whole Preface contains forcible and plentiful encouragements to search diligently into this Book of prophecy; and such as are not ordinarily, if ever, found in any o∣ther Book, or Epistle, in the Bible, in the beginning thereof.
These, and such-like considerations, moved me to wave my discouraging thoughts, and not to be im∣peded

thereby; But to put my foot into those waters, and wade therein, as God gave me opportunity, and ability.
This I desire of thee, that thou take no one thing I have said on trust from me, because I have said it: I have been harmed my self by so doing from others; and oft seen cause to let go what I so receiv∣ed, and may still further see cause so to do: Be warned by my harme; and read over and over a∣gain, and weigh diligently with the Text, and Testi∣mony of Christ, what thou readest: And what con∣sents to wholesome words therein embrace, and hold fast: and what dissents therefrom reject: And what is doubtful let alone, till further light, or help be afforded. And the Lord give his blessing to what is consonant to his word therein, and discover to me and deliver me from all my mistakes and evils in heart and way: And make these Notes as profitable to thee, as they have been painful to me, I mean to my flesh, Eccles. 12. 12. I desire to be,

