



SIR,
THE way of Dedicating now most in fashion, seems to
me to stand in as great need of a Reformation, as does
our Poetry. For, as we take nothing to be True and Ge∣nuine
Poetry, but what is Light, Frothy, and has a wan∣ton
Air throughout it; so the generality seem to stand persuaded, That
an Epistle Dedicatory loses its End quite, if not stuff'd up with gross
and open Flattery, sufficient to call a Blush into any modest Reader's
Cheek. But here it is a hard matter to judge, Whether the Impudence
of the Author, or the Vanity of the Patron (who believes all true that's
said of him) does contribute most to carry on this notorious piece of Folly.
Now (Sir) tho our Early Friendship, and Intimate Acquaintance was
the Reason that prevail'd most upon me in presenting this small Essay to
You; yet, to speak truth, there was another Motive too, which made me the
more desirous of it, and that was merely upon the account of running coun∣ter
to the generality of Dedicating Poets, to try if a particular Exam∣ple
might have any small Influence in correcting the Poetical License they
take upon such like occasions: For here I was satisfied that I might come
off without the least flattering Glance, with one who (tho young) has
Experience enough to understand, that Personal Respect is not to be esti∣mated
by the fine Complements and Flourishes of a Fanciful Pen. And
for my part, I think if our Poets go on at their old Rate but a little lon∣ger,
we shall be apt to interpret Epistles of this sort as we do Dreams,
by the Contrary.
The great Scandal that Poetry has of late been subject to, together
with the respect I always had for it, gave occasion for the following Re∣flection.
For as I was considering how much this Art was esteemed
amongst our Forefathers, and how Venerable, nay, almost Sacred, the
Name of a Poet was then; Surely (thought I) the Former Honour,
and the Present Disgrace the Muses lye under, could never depend on
the different Capricio's of two divers Ages, but there must be some
more reasonable Ground for this matter, which if once discovered, will
give a very fair opportunity of restoring Verse to its Primitive Dignity.
Some there are who suspect, That the want of Genius in our Age has

given Poetry this deadly Wound: But they will soon find their Mistake,
if (laying aside the blind Veneration we have for Antiquity) they compare
the Ancients and Moderns in any sort of Poetry, excepting the Epic.
So that we must seek out for some other Cause more probable than the for∣mer.
And what others may spy, I know not; but I think the great Dif∣ference
lies here, That Poetry is now no longer the Fountain of Wis∣dom,
the School of Virtue; it is no longer a fit Trainer up of Youth,
a Bridler of the Passions and exorbitant Desires: But on the contrary,
he is reckoned the Ablest Poet, that is most dextrous at conjuring up these
Evil Spirits, to disturb the Calm and Quiet of the Soul. And this (if
I mistake not) is that which hath deform'd so great a Beauty, and cast
an Odium on that most Excellent Art, which was once the Pride of Con∣querors,
and Envy of Philosophers.
What I have transiently remark'd in the following Verses, will (I
doubt not) be dislik'd by many of our Rhiming Sparks, for take but
the Liberty of Writing Immodestly from 'em, aud you have quite dis∣mounted
them off their Pegasus; they are quite Tongue-ty'd; 'tis
with them, as Horace says it was in the Reign of the old Comedy, Cho∣rusque,
Turpiter, obticuit, sublato jure nocendi.
What I have said against Love upon the Stage, I would not have ap∣prehended
so, as if I would have that Passion quite exploded; for I think
it one of the fittest Passions for Poetry, and capable of very great Orna∣ments;
but then I would have it very nicely and delicately handled; and
what might give the least Offence to the severest Modesty always cast in
Shades; for it is then only that this Passion is not to be allow'd, when it
goes beyond its bounds; and that is, when the Poet's Strokes are too
bold, and his Colours too glaring.
I was told (which I my self afterwards found to be true) that a
great Part of my Design was already perform'd in the Preface to Prince
Arthur. However, that did not trouble me in the least, for I was very
glad to see so Eminent an Author of the same Opinion with me; since
I had laid a Rude Draught of my Reflection the last Summer, which
I then shew'd several of my Acquaintance. However, the World may
think this a Sham, and I am very willing to be thought indebted to so cre∣ditable
a Person for what I have said.
I shall make no Apology for the Tediousness of my Epistle, since you
are too often guilty of the Contrary Vice in writing to your

