



I do not in the least presume to inform Your Judgments, or to supplicate your Charity by the Boldness of this Dedication. The Wis∣dom of the Nation cannot be Ignorant of all matters Foreign or Domestick, that concern the Ho∣nour, Safety, and Advantage of it. And you have already exprest such a feeling Commiseration of the Calamities of Ireland, that it would seem an Offence unpardonable, to solicit your Compassi∣on by an immodest Importunity.

You have Testify'd your Tenderness, in promo∣ting the Brief, and General Collection, for the Relief of the Distressed Protestants of Ireland.
You have Signaliz'd your Zeal to the Protestant Interest, by a deliberate Contrivance, and a ready Expedition of the Pole-Bill, appropriated, and ap∣pointed only for the Reduction of Ireland.
You have Published your Resolution to inte∣ress your selves in the Cause of Ireland, by a No∣ble Promise to supply the KING with what shall be further requisite for the Recovery of it.
You have Vouchsafed a Generous Regard to a multitude of Exiled Gentlemen (of whom some sea∣sonably and prudently withdrew, others with great Hazard and Difficulty escaped; but all Voluntarily dssierted then Houses and Estates, because they would not strengthen the hands of the Papists, or contribute to a French Ʋsurpation or the Exclusion of the English Right and Title) by designing some competent Provision for their necessary Support pro∣portion'd to their respective Sufferings; and by so affectionate and repeated Addresses to His Majesty in their Favour (who tho he needs no Interces∣sion for the Care of His Subjects, yet He loves and delights to seem perswaded by His Parlia∣ment) you have made them your Votaries, you have obliged them by everlasting Bonds of Gratitude, and they shall be recommended to Posterity as the first that ever went under the Honourable Character of Pensioners to the Parliament.

You have demonstrated your Abhorrence of all clandestine Practices, by a strict Inquisition after the Authors and occasions of the procrastinated Relief of Ireland. and the Miscarriages of particular Men in their Trusts, and Imployments: Whereby England, is put to an After-game, and obliged in their own Defence to retrive that Kingdom, at the hazard of many Lives, and the Expence of a vast Treasure, which by the very Countenance, and appearance of a small Succour had been easily, cheaply, and safely assured and preserved Nay under your Protection, I will speak out the Truth: When London Derry had shut their Gates against the Irish, and Iniskillin soon after refused to admit a Popish Garrison; when the Protestants in Dublin were Numerous, Rich and Stout; when in Munster, the Earl of Inchiquin (with many others) was very apprehensive of the im∣minent danger, and ready with the least Assistance from England, to secure the Protestant Interest there: When the Lord Kingston in Conaght out stript the Deputy, and made up his Musters of Horse and Foot before him: when forty thousand brisk men were upon Watch and Ward in Ulster; and the Earl of Tyrconnel (utterly irresclute what Measures to take) said to a Person of Honour (who urged him to lay down the Sword, and Submit to the English Govern∣ment) What would you have me do? I see no Commission to demand the Sword, would you have me cast it over the Castle Walls? I say in this Juncture, any one eminent Person, attended with a small Party, and furnished with a reasonable Pro∣portion of Arms and Mony, had without blows, or
slaughter, secured the Kingdom of Ireland, in their Allegiance to the present King and Queen; and with much Ease prevented, and curbed the insultory Insurrections in Scotland.
But alas! while the Parliament are busie in dis∣coursing, and debating the Business of Ireland, the Clergy are for the most Part silent; the one Votes for them, but I do not hear, that the other Prays for them; the miseries of Ireland are Remembred in the Parliament-House, but Seldom mentioned in the Pulpit; being omitted in their Addresses to the Throne of Mercy, by a very regardless Pre∣terition.
For my Part, I had neither taken upon me the Confidence to make this Address, nor given the world the Trouble of this undigested Pamphlet (hudled o∣ver in hast, and without the Advantages of Study, Books, Advice, or Retirement) but that a sort of Men no way considerable in number, or Interest, per∣verse in their Humor, as Flattering in their judg∣ments, assume a Liberty to retail their raw and un∣concocted Notions in Cossee-Houses (where Men pre∣tend a Priviledge, to say any thing but their Pray∣ers) and with as little Charity as Discretion, to arraign the Judgment, and censure the Actions of the Irish Protestant-Refuges, and severely to up∣braid them with their Banishment and Poverty, as the disserved Effects of their own Perversness, in not Submitting to him; who deserted the principal Kingdom, and restless himself in that which is Sub∣ordinate. Nay, some have proceeded to that degree of uncharitable Frenzy, that they have belched out
their balsphemous Curses on poor bleeding Ireland: Sinking it into the Sea with their Execrations, and disparaging it as an incomber'd Estate, not worth the Redemption. Would God! it might please the King to undeceive this murmuring Crew, by Commanding them on the Expedition with Duke Schomberg, or Count Solmes; that they may see the Country they so much despise, and be convinced how little Reason they had to undervalue it. And I am humbly of Opinion, that it would conduce much to the regaining that Kingdom, if the King would think it fit, to imploy the Gentlemen of that Country upon that Service. It is not to be imagin'd, how far Loyalty, whetted with self-Interest, will go, or what Exploits may be performed by such as fight with a double Courage, to serve the King, and to recover their Own.
Thus far I have pleaded for my Country, let me now be a Suitor for my self. If a glowing Zeal, for Religion; an anxious Sympathy with my Friends; and a pungent sense of my own Sufferings have transported me into any Impertinency: I humbly implore Pardon from the Honourable House of Commons, for the Rudeness of this Address.

