



SIR,
AMongst other disadvantages, to which the posthume publication of deceased mens works is subject, one is, that the publishers are com∣monly suspected to have dealt in∣juriously either with the Au∣thours themselves, in ascribing that to them which is not theirs, or with others in u∣surping that interest unto which they might pretend a better title.
That no such suspition may take hold on me by occasion of these ensuing Expositions, I presume to present them unto you, who best know how I may be justified by the re∣verend Authours own-hand written copies, and last will and testament. Nor am I willing that any thing of his should passe into the publike through my hand, untill I have made an open acknowledgement of the speciall in∣terest
you had in him whilest he lived as his Patron, and still have in all his paper posterity as the principall guar∣dian to whom he commended the tuition thereof. For these I dare not attempt to say any thing concerning the subject matter of them as in way of commendation, be∣cause it is no other but the sacred Word of God which he himself hath magnified above all his name. Psal. 138.3. and therefore if I should goe about to speak to that purpose at all, it must be with such a promonition as that in the Satyre quicquid dixero minus erit: and such commendations do commonly incurre as justly they may, the censure of disparagements. But for the Method observed in the handling thereof (how meanly so∣ever esteemed of by many who peradventure never took the pains to look into it) I dare be bold to say, that no true Artist can upon serious consideration except a∣gainst it, but that he must secretly condemne himselfe of too too wilfull prejudice and partiality. For change but the termes, and instead of Doctrine or Observation write Theoreme or Proposition, instead of Explication, Constru∣ction, instead of Reason, Demonstration, and instead of Use and Application, Corolarie or Conclusion, and you will presently think that you see so many Divinity Pro∣blemes Mathematically handled, and i may be conceive as I do, that he who chose to use his method first in the course of his Ministery was a farre greater Artist, and knew better why he should do so then many of those that either effect an ignorant imitation of him, or care∣lesly cast a causelesse scorne upon the method it selfe, for some mens inconsiderate misusage of it. The Authour of these ensning Expositions was none of them as you, and
many more well able to judge, can witnesse with me, and these amongst others of his writings may testifie, which through your hand, and under your name I consecrate unto the common treasure of the Church and publike be∣nefit of all that love to look into the inside of the holy Scripures, not curiously minced and mangled, or care∣lesly torn in pieces howsoever, but artificially dissected and laid open to the view of all, even indifferent capaci∣ties: to whom to speak so plainly, that they may be edify∣ed, is the best use of art, and an harder matter in St. Hierom's opinion
(Epistolâ ad Nepotianum) then to astonish and amaze them with a multitude of words the easiest thing of a thousand, and that which it may be they strive most to do, that can or will do nothing well.
Verba volvere & celeritate dicendi apud im∣peritune vulgus admirationem sui facere indocto∣rum hominum est, saith the learned father. And a little after, Nihil tam facile quàm vilem plebecu∣lam & indoctam concionem linguae volubilitate decipere quae quicquid non intelligit plus miratur. But of this convincing preacher (as one that you know was used to call him) it would be hard to say, whether his own understanding in the sacred Oracles of God. or his diligence and dexteritie in making them obvious unto the understanding of others were more remarkable. Once I am sure that these amongst other excellent endow∣ments wherewith he was eminently qualified, both made his life so dear unto you, and still preserve his memorie so precious in your esteem, that I make account you would impute it unto me as an impertinent presumption if I should pretend mine own engagements, or any other in∣ducements
whatsoever to excuse my boldnesse in seeking to honour any of his papers with your publike patronage, you having professed your selfe honoured in that he left you the private owner of them, as he did him to be your servant in the publication of that which should be thought fit for the presse, who acknowledgeth himselfe in many respects obliged to be

