



Most Gratious and Dread Soveraign,
THat which never had been ex∣pos'd
unto a wittily-mista∣king
and crooked world,
but in a dutiful submission
to Your Command; may at least for This,
if for no other reason, be justly offer'd to
Your Protection. And this is don with
a steady, though humble confidence of
successe; because THE DEFENDER
OF THE FAITHIude 3. which was once
deliver'd unto the Saints, cannot pos∣sibly
chuse but be so to Him, who does ear∣nestly

contend for the very same, be∣cause
for no other Faith than That
which was from the Beginning. If
for This I have contended with as much
earnestness from the Pulpit, as The
Romanists from the Presse do contend
against it; I have not only theIude 2. 3. Exhor∣tation
and Authority of a Text, but the
Exigence of the Time to excuse me in it.
Now as the Romans in the Time of
the second Punick War, could not
think of a fitter way for the driving of
Hannibal out of Italy, than Scipio's
marching with an Army out of Italy into
Afrique, giving Hannibal a Necessity
to go from Rome, for the raising of the
Siege which was laid to Carthage; So
could I not think of a fitter Course to dis∣appoint
the Pontificians in their At∣tempts
on Our Church, than thus by ma∣king
it their Task to view the Infirmities

of their Own. To which effect I was exci∣ted
to spend my self, and to be spent,
(If I may speak in the phrase of our Great
Apostle,2 Cor. 12. 15.) not from an arrogant Opinion
of any sufficiency in my self, (who am
one of the Least among the Regular Sons
of the Church of England,) But as relying
on the sufficiency of the Cause I took in
hand, & especially on the Help of the All∣sufficient,1 Cor. 1. 27.
who often loves to make use of
the weakest Instruments, to effect the
bringing down of the strongest Holds. Cor. 10. 4.
I suppose my Discourse, however inno∣cent
in it self, will yet be likely to meet with
many, not onely learned, and subtil, but
Restless enemies; Men of pleasant Insi∣nuations,
and very plausible Snares;
nay, such as are apt (where they have
Power) toEo san loco Haereses sunt, ut non tam arte & Industriâ, quàm Alexan∣dri gladio, ea∣rum Gordius Nodus dissolvi posse, quasique Herculis clavâ feriendae, quàm Apollinis Lyrâ mitigandae vi∣deantur, Staple∣ton, in Epist. De∣dic. operis de Iustif. sub finem. confute their Opponents
by Fire and Faggot. But when I consider
how well my Margin does lend Protecti∣on

to my Text, (for I reckon that my
Citations, which I could not with Pru∣dence
represent out of a Pulpit, are the
usefullest part of my whole Performance,
because the Evidence and Warrant
of all the rest;) I cannot fearfully appre∣hend,
what Wit or Language (or ill
us'd Learning) can do against it, so far
forth as it is arm'd with Notoriety of
Fact in its Vindication; and hath the
published Confessions of those their
Ablest Hyperaspistae, who cannot cer∣tainly
by them of their own perswasion,
with honor, or safety, be contradicted.
If they are guilty in their Writings,
it is rather their own, than their Readers
Fault; Nor is it their Readers, but
Their misfortune, if they are found So to
be by their own Concessions. Nor can
they rationally be angry at their Rea∣der's
Necessity to believe them; especi∣ally

when they write with so becoming a
proof of Impartiality, as that by which
they asperse and accuse Themselves. If
it finally shall apear, They areLuke 19. 22. con∣demn'd
out of their mouthes, (as Go∣liah's
Head was cut off by David, not
with David's,1 Sam. 17. 51. but with Goliah's own
Sword,) and that I am not so severe in
taking Notice of their Confessions, as
They have been unto Themselves in the
Printing of them, (for I cannot be said to
have revealed any secrets, by meerly
shewing before the Sun, what They
have sent into the Light,) I think, how∣ever
They may have Appetite, They
cannot have Reason to complain.
I have intreated of many Subjects
within the Compass▪ of an hour, on each of
which it would be easie to spend a year.
But I have spoken most at large of the Su∣premacy
of the Pope; as well because it

is a Point wherein the Honor and Safe∣ty
of Your Majesties Dominions are
most concern'd, as because it is the
chief, if not only Hinge, (I haveEtenim de quâ re agitur cùm de Prima∣tu Pontiicis a∣gitur? brevissi∣mè dicam, de Summ rei Chri∣stianae, id enim quaeritur, debe atne Ecclesia diutius consistere, an verò dissolvi, & concidere. Bellarm. in Praef. ad libros de Sum. Pontif. Tom▪ 1. p. 586. Edit. In∣golstad. 1590.
Bellarmine's assertion for what I say,)
on which does hang the whole stress of
the Papal Fabrick.
If herein, as I have obey'd, I shall also
be found to have serv'd Your Majesty,
The sole discharge of my Duty will be
abundantly my Reward; because I am
not more by Conscience and Obligati∣on
of Gratitude, than by the Volun∣tary
Bent and Inclination of my
Soul,

