



My Deare Countrymen,
I Here present you with a Discourse,
which by a threefold Title you
may properly call Yours. There
having been nothing but your In∣treaty,
(which with me shall ever
obtain the force of a Command) in a just con∣formity
to which, it was both pen'd, and preach∣ed,

and is now committed to the Presse too. Next
to the reverence which I bear to the work it self,
(I mean, The1 Thes. 1. 3. labour of Love, and theMat. 5. 9. . beatifick
office of making peace,) which cannot chuse but
carry with it its own Reward, I was chiefly incou∣raged
to the enterprise in which you were pleased
to engage me, by your being so much at unity a∣mongst
your selves, & so Religiously intent on the
good of others. For in how many things soever
there may be a, &c. Iam. 1. 26. seemingness of Religion, I am sure
its, Iam. 1. 27. Purity consists in these two; The Relief of the
needy in their afflictions, & the keeping of ones self
unspotted from the world. For the taking of both
into possession, I think I cannot direct to a bet∣ter
course, (either for brevity, or clearness,) then
that we measure and deal out our Love to others,
by that natural proportion we commonly beare
unto our selves. This being the scope of that
. Jam. 2. 8. Royal Law, to which as many as are Christians
must needs be subject. I say they must, so much
the rather, becauseGal. 6, 7. whatsoever a man soweth,
that shall he reap. And with what measure weMat. 7. 2.
mete, it shall be measured to us again. As tis the
mercy of good men, which is said to. Jam. 2▪ 13. triumph
over Gods Iudgement, so there is judgementIbid. and Mat. 6. 14, 15.
without mercy for them that shew little or none.
This I desire may be considered by a peculiar
sort of professors, who hate and persecute their
Neighbours under colour of Devotion and zeal to
God. As if it were not sufficient, simply to break
Gods Commandements, unless they be broken a∣gainst
each other. For if the same God that saith,
[Thou shalt not worship a graven Image] doth also

say in the same instant, Thou shalt love thy Neigh∣bour
as thy self,] Then sure to persecute a Neigh∣bour,
in pretence of affection and love to God, is
to take up the second Table in anger, and to dash
it in pieces against the first. And what is that (in
effect) but to make the Law its own Transgres∣sor?
Such men are told by an Apostle, That
they, Iam. 1. 26. deceive their own hearts, and feed them∣selves
with such hopes as will but nourish them to
destruction, whilest they imagine that. Ibid. such Re∣ligion
will ever stand them in any stead. And to
shew them the thickness of that Fallacy, which
(by the Sophistry of the Flesh) they are made to
impose upon themselves, was not the least of
those ends, at which I levell'd my Meditations.
For no sooner was I invited to entertain my dear
Countrymen, with the first and chiefest Course
in a Feast of Love, but straight I reflected upon
the Character which Christ had given to his Dis∣ciples,
just in the Close of his FarewellJoh. 13. 1, 2. Supper,
(which was indeed aVers 4, 5. 14, 15. Love-Feast) by which they
might certainly be known to be truly His. I
knew the Character of a Christian was to be
sought▪ most fitly from Christ Himself; And
that Love was that Character, which Christ had
left upon Record. Not such a Love of one ano∣ther,
as was the. Luk. 11. 39. Ravenous Love of the Scribes
and Pharisees, wherewith they lov'd the Widows
Houses, so far forth as to devour them, and. Luk. 23. 14. eat
them up. Nor such aProv. 12. 10. cruel kind of Love, as was
that of the. Herodot. in Melpom. cap. 26. p. 233. Confer ejus∣dem. Lib. 1. c. 73. p. 30. &c. 119. p. 51. Canibals in Herodotus, who glutted
themselves with the flesh of men, because they
lov'd it as well as Ven'son. For when professors

are transported with such an unnatural kind of
Love, as gives them an Appetite to, Eph. 5. 15. bite and, Eph. 5. 15. de∣vour
each other, (as the Apostle speaks to the E∣phesians)
or to eat up Gods people as if they would
eat Bread, (as thePsal. 53. 5. Royal Prophet thought
fit to phrase it,) It hath a tendency to nothing,
but mutual Ruine.
Whereas the Note of distinction, whereby
to know a sincere and a solid Christian, is such a
divine kind of Love as tends to unity and peace,
and so (by a consequence unavoidable) to mu∣tuall
safety and preservation. If we are. Eph. 3. 17. rooted
and grounded in such a Love to one another, as
was the Love of Christ unto us all, we shall be
known by theMat. 7. 16, 17 fruit web ear, to have beenRom. 11. 19. graf∣ted
into Him, who is indeed theJoh. 15. 1. true Vine. We
shall not only do toQuod tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne fece∣ris. no man, what we would
that no man should do to us, (which was the
motto a Heathen Prince would needs have
carved in all his Plate) But. Mat. 7. 12. Luk. 6. 43. what we wish that
All men would do to us, we shall earnestly en∣deavour
to do to all men. We shall love them
for Gods sake, whom, for their own sakes, we
cannot love. If we are meerly weak Brethren, we
shall manifest (by our meekness) that we are not
wilful. And if strong, we shallRom. 15. 1. bear the Infirmi∣ties
of the weak. We shall walk in. Colos. 4, 5. wisdom to∣wards
them that are without, (I mean the ene∣mies
of Christ, both Iewes and Gentiles.) That
we may neither be in danger of being corrup∣ted
by their secular and sensuall bairs, nor heigh∣ten
their prejudice to the Gospel, by any matter
of scandall in our Converse.
I shall never forget what I was told (about
eight years agoe) by aPhilo . p. 539. . learned Jew, That
Godliness and Honesty, or the Love of God and the
love of men, are a kind of Twin-Sisters, which
every Creature is to espouse, who is not so wed∣ded
to the world, as to admit of aIsa 50. 1. Divorce from
the CaelestiallLuk. 5. 34, 35. Bridegroom. It was never al∣low'd
unto the Iewes, toDeut. 23. 7. abhorre an Edomite,
or an Aegyptian; or to reckon any man as an
Enemy, (although he werePhilo . p. 548. scaling the City-Walls)
until he had absolutely refused their so∣lemn
offers of Reconcilement. And I do now the
rather take this occasion to recount the things
which I have learnt, both as an Instructer of the
Ignorant, and as an humble2 Pet. 1. 12. Remembrancer to
men of more knowledge, (not only to You of mine
own Country, to whom I make this Dedication,
but to as many as shall not disdain to read me,
let their Place and their Principles be what they
will,) if peradventure by any meanes, I mayRom. 11. 14.
provoke to Emulation, them that are mine own
Flesh, (as the Apostle spake in another case,
which yet was of kin to the case in hand,)
and become instrumental to, &c. Ibid. . Jam. 5. 20. save some of
them.
If in any thing I have spoken, I seem to
have spoken somewhat Austerely, I here declare
my self free from all particular Reflections, upon
any man's person, alive or dead. My Proposi∣tions
are universal, as well as true; and my se∣verities
to sin lie all in common. As many as
find themselves guilty may make particular Ap∣plication
of my Reproofs, so as they have it in

their Remembrance, that I have made none at
all.
I have one thing to beg (as from all my Rea∣ders
in generall, so) in particular from you, Sirs,
for whose particular satisfaction my work is
done; even that you will labour to be the bet∣ter
for all that is offer'd to your acceptance.
That,2 Thes. 1. 7, 8. when the Lord Iesus shall be revealed
from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming
fire; taking vengeance on them that know not God,
and that obey not the Gospel of Iesus Christ, you
may be able toWisd. 5. 1. stand and to appear with great
boldness; as wearing his Livery, which is Love,
and as owned thereby to be his Disciples. To the
sure protection of whose Providence, and to the
wise direction of whose Grace, you all are hearti∣ly
commended (without any Ceremony or
Complement) by

