



Most Honoured Sirs,
THE Reasons for the Honour and Service which I owe to eve∣ry of your Persons, are more than I shall declare, or than you desire should be declared. I should not have grac'd these few Sheets with your Names, but that I hope to make some advantage of them, for those that shall be in such unhappy Circumstances of the

Prisoners, who were the occasion of my preaching upon this Argument, by pro∣posing you as Examples to Gentlemen of Quality and Goodness, who shall bear the Office of High-Sheriffs as you have done.
The first of you, considering the Charge committed to you by the Law, of the Bodies of Prisoners, and the Pow∣er you had over the Prison, judged it to be a great Duty to take care of their precious Souls, as if they had been a part of your Houshold. Having a large room in the Hearts of able good Mini∣sters, you made use of it, and easily obtained their pains of Preaching Week∣ly in the Prison. They were all Li∣censed Preachers, and of Eminency in the Country, beside the Reverend Dr. Ford, then Minister in the Town: But before your Year expired, this Light in the dark place was put out by one, who should rather have set up Light in it, if you had not. It could not be for not reading the Liturgy, which all did;

nor for want of a Liturgy, for the Goaler had got A.B. Laud's, which was sent into Scotland, and put that King∣dom into a Flame. This, Sir, you so tenderly resented, that had it not been so near the end of your Shrievalty, you would have tried his Power in that House, which was as your own for that year. But then, as about three years before, and after, it was the Policy of Rulers to countenance no more preach∣ing, than would consist with the Design then subtily covered, but afterwards re∣vealed: Great care was taken that Zeal in Religion should not disturb the Quiet of the State; and they were made use of to put out the Candles, who were of all men most obliged to keep them burning, in Conscience to God, and Love to Souls. There was then in the Goal a large Room next the great Parlour, which look'd to the Street, and a Pulpit in it, with a Gallery above Stairs at one end of it, as I remember, and other Conveniences for the Prison∣ers

and others, (tho then it was hard for any of the Town to get admittance, except they were Friends, or could make acquaintance in the House) and there was Six Pound per Annum paid to a Preacher, (for preaching once a Month as I remember) given by Sir Francis Nicholas, and your old Acquaintance in Em. Col. And my sincere Religious Friend Mr. William Holms received it many years for Preaching there. But since the dreadful Fire, there is a very fair House built, that stands in good Air, open to the Fields on one side, which make a pleasant prospect; well contrived for all Offices and Ʋses; but there is no Room proper nor fit for preaching. I presume the Salary is paid, but it is more than I know, that there is as much as one Sermon in a year preach∣ed for it.
After the Fire, the Goal was remo∣ved into a strait House; and since that, more good may have been done in the Prison than I can tell of, by private Vi∣sits,

especially by the Excellent Dr. Co∣nant, who was much taken up in those private Exercises of his Ministry; but the Office of Salvation, as Martyr La∣timer calleth the preaching of the Word, hath been shut up there: And I wish that some like to your self may open it again, and others keep it open.
The Second of you in few years suc∣ceeded your Elder Brother; and there being no extraordinary Goal in your Year, there was no extraordinary pains to be taken, especially remembring how that compassionate Act of your Brothers was check'd and controul'd; and you must needs have undergone a Contest with the same Power, which was so lately exerted against the ordinary great means of Salvation, then in the same person, whom you at a publick Table heard speak contemptibly of Preaching, and therefore could not expect the fa∣vour of a Connivance from him. But, Sir, be pleased to take a share in this little Present, because of the Encou∣ragement

you have given me, speaking very kindly of my Performances in this kind, when you have heard first from others, and then took a particular Ac∣count of them from my self.
The Third of you succeeded the Se∣cond, the very next year, if I am not much mistaken; and when you saw your time, revived the Exercise, and set up most of the same Lights which had been taken down before in the same place, to shew the involuntary Inhabi∣tants of it a way to prevent and escape their greatest Dangers. And you met with no Interruption. It is happy when poor Prisoners fall under the Care and Custody of such Men, as know that there are immortal sinful Souls in those Bo∣dies, of which they must give an ac∣count by their Place. The greatest of their Miseries is, That they are shut up from the publick Light and means of Salvation, therefore mercy on their Souls is the greatest mercy that can be shewed unto them. And when all Acts

of Charity shall come in remem∣brance, even this to the Souls of men, upon which commonly least Cost is be∣stow'd, will be found the greatest. The Lord God of Grace put it into the Hearts of Gentlemen to be thus merci∣ful to Souls in Bonds, whether in Pri∣son or out of Prison. And, Honoured Sirs, whatsoever you have done, or have procured the doing of, in this ex∣cellent kind, will turn to your best ac∣count. The Objects of all other Cha∣rities are mortal Bodies, but the Ob∣jects of this are immortal Souls; and to help to ransom them from the power of Devils, is a nobler Work than to ran∣som Slaves from Heathens, whose great∣est misery is, that they are in the hands of the Enemies of Christ: Yet tho out∣ward Charities must by no means be neglected nor intermitted; for there is a Charge to be laid upon rich Men, to be rich in good works, 1 Tim. 6.17, 18. And upon all and every man,, 2 Cor. 8.7. Every man according as

he hath purposed in his heart, so let him give, &c. yea, even he who laboureth with his hands, that which is good, that he may have to give to him that needeth, Ephes. 4.28. But yet Baskets of Spiritual Alms are the most precious; and what is done, as directly tending to the everlasting Salvation of poor Souls, comes next to the love of Jesus Christ to Souls. You have given an Example in this, as in many other kinds; the Prison hath been emptied and filled since your time, and most of your Preachers are gone before you: You are honoured with Age, I pray God enable you more and more to honour him, who only hath Immor∣tality, with your Age and Abilities of doing good.
But to return to my purpose. The next year after, the third of you, a Gen∣tleman of another County was made Sheriff in this, whose Estate was little known in the County, and so great a Stranger, that he was directed by ano∣ther

where to find out a Preacher. The Preacher humbly desired him to carry on the Work of preaching in the Good as you had done, assuring him, he should find Ministers, though Strangers to him, that would freely bestow their pains. He took the motion kindly; but living out of the County, and taking ill to be put into that Office, who had but very late∣ly serv'd in another County, he did no more than just what was necessary in attending upon the Judges. Soon after, besides the Inconveniency of the Prison after the Fire, Gentlemen were pickt out for that place of Trust, who were carved and fitted for the Service of the Court; (and they were active men, till the Eyes of some of them being opened, they turned their Backs upon the Court, and their Faces upon Nottingham) and the chief Persons of Quality were divided, and most of them endangered by that famous Presentment of the 52, (whereof but one was a Papist, and he was sure enough of protection and favour,

whatever became of the rest) and while the Country was broken into Parties, there was no regard to such private and pious Exercises as I am speaking of: And all other Exercises, besides read∣ing the Service, and giving the Sacra∣ment, was next to keeping a Conventi∣cle, if not as bad, in the Sense of some of the most favoured Clergy, whose Af∣fections or Interest made them drink down Notions and Objections against the prime Duty of their Office, in which there was little new, and nothing could be strong against it. The chiefest of their Objections were long ago answered either materially or formally, by those Reverend Men, Mr. Attersoll on Phi∣lemon, and Mr. Hildersam on Psal. 51. Lect. 152. and on John. Sec. 60. And by Mr. Rob. Bolton, Saints sure and perpetual Guide p. 205. &c.
If I could turn my Wishes into Pe∣titions, I would beg for poor Prisoners these following Benefits.
I wish, 1. That able and holy Mini∣sters of Experience, would frequent these close places, to try if they could not recover some that belong to the Election of Grace out of the Chains of Infideli∣ty and Impenitency. Many a Soul hath been called out of a Prison to Grace and Glory. And Holy Men have made it a business to find them out in Goals. Holy Latimer the Mar∣tyr hath transmitted this of St. Bilney as he called him, and himself also to our notice; Now after I had been acquainted with him, [Bilney] I went with him to visit the Prisoners in the Tower of Cambridge, for he was ever visiting Prisoners and sick Folk. Latim. 1. Serm. on the Lords Prayer. Holy Bradford, when he was Prison∣er in Southwark, was wont to visit the Thieves on the other side the Prison. Learned Mr. Perkins preach'd once every Lords Day to the Prisoners in the Sessions-House in Cambridge, whi∣ther the Goaler brought them, till he

was called to preach in a Church in Town. And so that Reverend and Experienced Exemplary Divine Mr. Richard Rogers, was a Visitor of Pri∣soners, as may be seen in Practise of Christianity, Of visiting the Sick, p. 698. Edit. Fol.
2. I wish that all High Sheriffs would be so zealously affected towards the Salvation of poor Prisoners, as to take care to provide the best means and helps to save their Souls from Hell; and in particular, that they would pro∣vide well for them, and grant them as much time as they can between Sentence and Execution, that they may not be hurried out of the World under Dark∣ness, and Confusion upon their Souls. Then we may press hard upon them, Turn or Die, when hopes of Life are taken away. Some Learned Men have written against a Late or Death-bed Repentance, with much Severity; and it must be acknowledged to be a very great Sin to neglect Salvation; and I

have been under a Temptation to ne∣glect them, because I had so much to do with hard Heads and hard Hearts, and but a little time to do all in. But as I have the great Examples of Divines more exercised and experienced than the former, so I have found that God has been pleased to make the fear of Death a means of Salvation: And why may we not think it to be much more effectual than an Affliction, out of which a man may escape alive? But here is no hopes of Life; and Afflicti∣ons have been sanctified means of Con∣version; therefore so may the fear and apprehensions of approaching Death and Judgment be. This request is the same in effect that zealous and holy Latimer made to King Edward the 6th. Serm. 4. Here I take occasion to move your Grace, that such Men as may be put to Death, may have Learned Men to give them Instructi∣on and Exhortation. For the Reve∣rence of God, when they be put

to Execution, let them have Instru∣ctors, for many of them are cast a∣way for lack of Instruction, and die miserably for lack of good preaching. And the fore-cited Mr. Rogers hath these Word: And this I can say, I have my self visited ma∣ny Prisoners after they have receiv∣ed Sentence of Death, in whom I saw as good Signs of saved persons, as ever I beheld in such as died in their Beds, not having tasted of Re∣pentance before. And it were to be desired, that as Joshua pitied A∣chan, when he should be stoned to Death for his Offence, so that he brought him to confess his Faults with hope of Pardon; so that such woful Prisoners might be provided for, that they might die with com∣fort. p. before-cited. There is more to be said and done, than Prepare your self, and I will give you the Sacrament.
3. I humbly desire that High Sheriffs would give encouragement and leave to

willing Ministers to visit Prisoners at all times, and especially the last men∣tioned time, and command to their Officers to receive them to such an end, and for such a Work: And this I de∣sire not, because I have found any dif∣ficulty or disrespect, (but the contrary) but, that none may be thought to intrude into anothers man's Province, or que∣stioned for exercising out of his own Parish. I may not be much suspected for making this motion with respect to my self so much, for my distance and manifold occasions at home may excuse me from doing much this way, except when particularly called or desired. And here I have a convenient place to make my most humble and thankful ac∣knowledgments to the Honoured Tho. Catesby, Esq; for his leave and encou∣ragement given to me and Mr. D. to take pains with the last that were Executed: And also I give my publick Thanks, with the Offer of my best Services, for the like leave given us, by the very

worthy John Creed Esq; our present High Sheriff.
4. And I would that such piously af∣fected Sheriffs should not think this to be any Augmentation of their Charge; for it is sufficient reward to have the Testimony of a good Conscience for a sincere endeavour to save them that have destroy'd themselves. But seeing Sir Francis Nichols gave that pious Example, it would become persons of Estate and Piety to add something to it, which might be an augmentation to some Minister in Town, that shall best deserve it; by taking most profitable pains for it, and that Gift of Sir Fr. would be enquired after.
5 I wish, that every apartment in the Prison, both for Debtors and Cri∣minals, might be provided for with good Books, a fair Quarto Bible, a good full Catechism, or Body of Divinity, such as Usher's Sum and Substance of Christian Religion, a good Treatise of Conversion or Regeneration, and of

Holy Living, of Judgment and Life to come. I will not name any, because I would not direct unasked, but leave the choice to any well-devoted Benefa∣ctor. It is a great Inducement to men that have nothing to do, to read, or to hear the reading of good Books, especi∣ally on the Lord's Day, when they have them provided for them. These should be booked down, and left in safe Cu∣stody when any go away.
6. I wish all the Masters of Prisons were such as he was, Acts 16. for their own, and the sakes of them who are un∣der their Charge. It is a place which would require Prudence, Gravity, Mer∣cifulness, and a Hand or Gift of Go∣verning the ill bred and corrupted part of Mankind, with a Temper of Mercy and Rigour. I have heard some say, they did not look to fare so well at home, as they did in this Prison: O then, that there were nothing wanting for the Life of their Souls! Be kind to the few that are well inclined, and so∣ber;

be severe toward the prophane and debauched; let not a Prison, a place of Correction for sin, be a School and a Shop for sin.
7. I wish that were done, which might not be impossible to see done: There are some (too well bred for such a place) that can read; let some pri∣viledg or reward be given to such, espe∣cially to the more sober and serious, for reading to them that cannot; and let such as cannot, and have no employ∣ment, be bound to hear reverently some time every day, but inexcusably every Lord's Day. The loss of Liberty, and impairing of Health is great pay for the madness or pleasure of sin; but to suf∣fer the punishment of eternal Fire is too great for men to expose them to, without effectual application of all possible means to save them from eternal Death.
8. And because I would not be mis∣taken, as if I were all for publick preaching; I do humbly conceive that there is much good to be done by private

and particular Conferences with parti∣cular persons, for one man's case may differ from anothers. But then this must be well managed and well follow∣ed, and requires more time, and there∣fore more proper for Ministers that live near, and may visit frequently; but when Ministers come from a distance, and cannot make frequent Visits, preach∣ing must needs be best. And why may not leave be given for preaching in the Sessions-House, seeing there is no room convenient in the Goal, and that there is so short and so safe a passage from the Prison to the Bar? Why should it offend any man now to preach in a Ses∣sions-House, when it was so ordinary at Cambridge, a Shire-Town, and an Ʋniversity? And why may not preach∣ing be so publick, that many people may hear, who are much affected on such oc∣casions?
Honoured Sirs, If I were to make any of these Petitions to any of you, you would grant me these, or teach and

advise me to make better. I have but one humble request to every of you, That you would pardon my making of your Honoured Names publick, without your leaves or knowledge; and that you would accept this little Present: And one Re∣quest I have to make to God for you in particular, and for all your Honoured Relations and Families, my most obli∣ging Friends, That you may all so have the Son, and the Beginnings, and Fore∣tastes, and First Fruits of Eternal Life here, that you may have it in its ful∣ness in Heaven.
Honoured Sirs,

