



Honoured Sir,
THE only Relation that drew me to presume of fixing
your Name to this Discourse, was that of a Scholar
to his Master, when I had formerly the Happiness
of being under your Inspection, in order to the ha∣ving
Natural Reason ripened and mellowed by some artificial Ad∣vancements.
The Experience I had then of your Candor, gives
me now just Encouragement to hope, that in offering these Papers,
which are the first Fruits of my enquiry yet abroad, I presume not
amiss. I had thoughts (having indeed brought it to some perfecti∣on)
of presenting you with another thing, differing from this
both in Kind and Language, and by way of gratitude to have re∣payed
it to one whom I esteemed it best due; (from whom I had
distill'd on me those kind and gentle Effusions, at my first ad∣mission
to the Ʋniversity, and therefore have reason to deplore
nothing more, than my own voluntary and untimely departure
from their warmer Influence) but, Sir, as we breathe here be∣low
in a contigent Air, and are not quick-sighted enough to pierce
through the Clouds of that Caliginous Night, under which all
Futurity lies obscured and concealed, many unsought Accidents
may obtrude themselves on us; and when they come, instead of
giving us a Diversion, they are then as unwelcome, as before

they were unthought of. And while a Man is detained under the
severe Discipline of some dark Providence, there is nothing bet∣ter
to clear up, and soften his Disposition, than mildly to impart
to another what is at present so great a Burthen to himself;Animum scribendo lenire, Erasm. as
when the Stream swells, and threatens the adjoyning Bank, it
receives a sudden check through the conveyance of some hidden
Sluce. But I hope you will not think (most Courteous Mecae∣nas)
as I am not so vain to imagine, That this mean Present is
sufficient to disengage me from those higher Obligations, whereby
I shall ever stand indebted to you. I have only this to beg, that
you would Honour me with some part of your good Esteem; and
in the mean time accept of these juvenile Productions, as a pre∣sent
Testimony of that Respect which is still owing, till you are
gratified with the compleater Issue of a more improved Ability.
And while I address to you, if you retain your wonted Candor,
(as I have no reason to suspect the contrary) I need not doubt
of your Generous Condescention; but am still perswaded to hope,
that the height your great Abilities and Disquisitions have raised
you to, is not above the Intreaties of a Client, but rather like
some fruitful Limb of Nature, you will bend the lower for being
well laden. And being thus encouraged, while I study for a clear
discharge at my present Post, I shall not forget to approve my
self,
Burton near Sherbourn,
Septemb. 28. 1691.

