



My Lord,
THis Play has a double Reason for seek∣ing Shelter under Your Lordship; I Writ it, and for our Irish Stage, and You are the chief Friend which either has: But I shou'd be Cautious in De∣claring what 'tis probable the World may Con∣demn in you; since in the Humour the present Age is, for a Man to own that he thinks Plays even law∣ful, 'tis almost enough to bring his Principles of Morality and Religion into Question. But, My Lord, the Firmness of yours is so well known, that I shall have no Reason to for bear saying, you have an Esteem for Plays; and I may, with Safety to

your Reputation, Applaud you for it, since I am Confident the greatest Zealot wou'd slacken his Fury against the Stage, and join with you in Sup∣porting it, did he know how earnestly you Wish it Reform'd from the Corruption of Manners, to the Encouraging Virtue, and Exposing Vice; and with what Decency, Modesty, and Good Breed∣ing, you wou'd have it Regulated. You may re∣member you Caution'd me to observe these Things, when I first acquainted you that I had a Design to Write this Comedy, and I have attempted to Obey you. I wish Your Lordship had given me farther Instructions; then, this wou'd have appear'd more Perfect and Correct to the World, and an Offering more Worthy you. As it is, I present it to you with Courage, because I know, the Errors your Judgment discerns, your Goodness will Excuse, and what you cannot Excuse you will at least Forgive. I only Wish there may be something in it which may prevent your Blushing while you Protect it, and shall very readily own the Faults the Criticks find in it; I have not yet heard them, but without doubt there are many, and therefore I think my self the more obliged to those who have been so particu∣larly kind to this Play. They have sufficiently evi∣denced how Inclinable they are to Encourage Wit and Poetry, by being so Favourable and so Generous

to my weak Attempts on both, who have so little of the one, and so unskill'd in the other. I shou'd be extreamly pleas'd, if my Success wou'd move any other who has a happier Genius, to divert this Town with some Performance of this kind. But it is my Satisfaction and Pride, that tho' he shou'd Write better, he cannot meet with more Encouragement than I have done. And since I own my Weakness, and yet boast of Success, you may be assur'd, that as I think my self Answerable for the former, so I know the latter is owing to your Lordship; another Proof of your accustomed Goodness, and a fresh Obligati∣on to me. But this is a Subject I must not pursue, for tho' the acknowledgment of Obligations is but a small Return, yet I know you th ; and therefore tho' Silence is a Pain to the Grateful, yet I choose to be uneasy to my self, rather than offensive to your Modesty, which I know will not Pardon my Publishing, what you will not allow me even to men∣tion when we are together. Give me leave only, My Lord, to assure you that I have a just Sense of your Favours, and that tho' I had ne're receiv'd one, yet I shou'd ever have been
My Lord, 
