



Madam,
TO speak my sense of your many Favours, with my re∣verent esteem of your Approbation, and how in∣clinable I have been to yield obedience to your Commands, the greatest expression that I can make, hath been hether∣to the least that I think is due. And now I am sorry I can prove by no better Argument, (at the present,) how great a deference and submission I think is due to your Judge∣ment, than by my having preferr'd it before mine own, in permitting that Sermon to lye in common, which I had on∣ly intended for your inclosure. For though the thing hath been desired by several persons of Quality, besides your self; yet the principal end of my Publication, is not to gratifie their desires, whom I could civilly deny, but to comply with your reasons, which I cannot pardonably resist. The very piety of your Reasons having added to them so great a po∣wer, that what was skill in Aspendius, in me would cer∣tainly be guilt, should I (through Avarice or Envy) reserve any thing to my self, by which your charity doth 1 Cor. 13. 7. believe I may profit others.
Indeed considering we are fallen, I do not onely say, into an iron age, but into an age whose very iron hath gather'd rust too, wherein the most do so live, as if they verily thought they should never dye, (at least had forgotten that they are dying, and being dead must be accountable2 Cor. 5. 10. for what is done whilst they are living,) it may be labour well spent, to trig the wheels of their sensuality; and that by thrusting into their eyes such sad and seasonable objects, as may make them consider their latter end. It was a cu∣stomeDeut. 32. 29.

with some of old, (or else my memory is a deceiver,) whensoever they intended a sumptuous Feast, to put a death's-head into a dish, and serve it up unto the table: which being meant for a significant, though silent Orator, to plead for temperance and sobriety, by minding the men of their mortality, and that the end of their eating should be to live, that the end of their living should be to dye, and the end of their dying to live for ever, (for even the Heathens who denyed the resurrection of the body, did yet believe the immortality of the soul,) was look'd upon by all sober and considering guests, as the wholesomest part of their entertainment. And since it is true (what is said by Solomon) that sorrow is better then laughter, for by the sadness of the countenanceEccles. 7. 3. the heart is made better; whereupon the Royall Prea∣cher concludes it better of the two, for a man to go into the house of mourning; I cannot but reason within myVers. 2. self, that when Vers. 4. the heart of fools is in the house of mirth, whose customary language is such as this, [Come† Wisd. 2 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. on, let us injoy the good things that are present, let us crown our selves with Rose-buds before they be wi∣ther'd, let none of us go without his part of voluptu∣ousness, let us leave tokens of our joyfulness in every street, let us oppress the poor man that is righteous, and let our strength be the law of justice,] there can be nothing more friendly, or more agreeable to their wants, than to invite such men to the house of mourning, and there to treat them with the character of the life of man (which being impartially provided will serve as well as a deaths-head) during the time of his floating in a valley of Tears.
For this is usefull to teach us all, not to be amorous of a life, which is not onely so short, as that it cannot be kept long, but withall so full of trouble, as that 'tis hardlyIoh 14. 1.

worth keeping. Nor by consequence to doat on a flattering world, which is so little to be injoy'd, and its injoyment so very full of vexatious mixtures. Again it is usefull to in∣courageEccles. 2. 12. us, not to be afraid of a man that must die, andIsa. 51. 12. Mat. 10. 28. whilst he lives, can but kil the body. Nor to scruple at the paying that common debt, which we owe to religion, as well as nature; that God may give us an Mat. 25. 2. acquittance, as well as nature: we having received an ensurance from the in∣fallible undertaker, that the way to save and prolong a life,Mat. 16. 25. Mar. 8. 36. is religiously to lose it, or lay it down. Again 'tis usefull to admonish us, (after the measure that we are negligent) to Mat. 25. 16. Luk. 19, 15. trade with the talent of our time, for the unspeakable advantages of life eternall; and to be doing all the work we can, because the night cometh, when we shall not be ableIoh. 9. 4. to work more. Lastly it mindeth us, as to be doing, be∣causePhil. 4. 5. our Lord cometh, and is at hand, so to be vigi∣lant and watchfull, because we know not Mat. 24. 42. what hour. In a word, the more transitorie, and the more troublesome, the life of men shall appear to be, by so much the better will be the uses, which we are prompted to make of its imperfe∣ction.
And here it comes into my mind, to give you my thanks by my observance of the seasonable counsell you lately gave me, not to lavish out my time in shaming the adversaries of truth, (by way of answer or reply to their meer imper∣tinencies and slanders,) but rather to spend it in such pra∣cticall and peaceable meditations, as are likelyer to for∣ward their reformation. And though it was not your opi∣nion that I could use my time ill, in writing continuall vin∣dications of the lately persecuted doctrines of Iesus Christ, but onely that you thought I might use it better; yet my opi∣nion doth so fully concurr with yours, that even as soon as my leasure serv's me to pay my Readers what I have promi∣sed, (that men may learn to love God, by thinking him free

from their impieties, and may not reverence their impi∣eties, so far forth as they think them the works of God,) I shall direct my whole studies, as you have charitably advised. And indeed I am the fitter to take your Counsell, because I want a fit enemy with whom to combate, since three or four of the ablest have quit the Field, and as it were bowed to the truth of the things in question. For though they have lately sent out a Teazer, who (they hoped) might tempt me to loss of time, not by disputing in any measure against a line of what I have publish'd, but one∣ly by opening a noysome mouth in a very wide manner against my person, and (which is infinitely sadder) against my He saith expresly, 1. that whatever God foresees, and doth not prevent, (which is all the wickedness in the world) he may be justly said to Cause. (p. 9) 2. That Gods absolute will is the prime cause, and necessarily productive of every action of the creature, p. 10. (and so no less of our worst, then of our best actions 3. That God cannot be freed from being the author of sin, by such as acknowledge his prescience, p. 9. (so that either he cannot believe Gods prescience, or cannot but believe him the Author of sin . That he cannot deny God to be the author of sin, or to will the event of sin, p God too; yet this doth signifie no more, then that they are stomackfull in their affli∣ctions, and like the metalsome Cynaegyrus in no particular but this, that when his hands were out off, he pursued the enemy with his teeth. A printed Pamphlet comes to me, sub∣scrib'd and sent by Edward Bagshaw, (with your pardon be it spoken, for 'tis not handsome in your presence to mention the name of so foul a thing) which neither the gravity of my Calling, nor the price I put upon my time, nor the reverence I bear to your ad∣vice, will permit me to answer in more then two words. For whereas it amounted to these two things, to wit, his railing against God as the * Author of sin, and his railing a∣gainst me as a grievous sinner, (without the† P 2. l.  to be com∣pared with l, 2. offer of any proof,  the one, or the other,) To the first I say, No, to the second, Nothing. As for his blasphemies at large, his inconsistencies with himself, his frequent confessions that he is ignorant of what he presumeth to affirm, his impotent slanders, his most

unsavoury scurrilities, his pique at my cassock and my cap, his evil eye upon my Rectory, and female Readers, (to the honour of your sex, and shame of ours,) last of all for his impe∣nitency and resolutions to persevere in his crying sins (a∣gainst that person of all the world, whom, next to God, and his parents, he ought to have had in the greatest reverence,) I shall leave him to the mercy of one or other of my Disciples; who be∣ing as much his Iuniors, as he is mine, may have youth enough to excuse, if not commend them, for cooling the courage of so prurient and bold a writer. But for my self, I have determi∣ned, so to profit by what I preach in the following Sermon, as not to leave it in the power of every petulant undertaker, to dispose of my hours in altercation. They that look to live long before they Psal. 16. 10. look upon the grave, may trifle out their time with better pretensions to an excuse; but I who have lost so much already, and have also had (as I may say) so many trials for my life, (at that bar of mortality, the bed of sickness,) which makes me consider it as a perishing and dying life, can∣not think it so much as lawful, to dispute it away with an itching adversary; who, however insufficient to hold up his quarrell, is yet too restless to lay it down.
But I proceed to that subject (from which my thoughts have been kept by a long parenthesis) of which I love to be speak∣ing on all occasions that can be offer'd, because I find so much in it, of which I cannot but speak well; and no less to the honour of his memory, then to the profit and pleasure of his survi∣vers. He was certainly a person, who liv'd a great deal of life in a little time; especially dating it (as he did) from the me∣morable point of his renovation. When I consider him in his childood at the university of Oxford (I am sure some years before you knew him) exciting others by his example, to mind the end of their being there; how strict and studious he ap∣peared throughout his course; how much farther he went be∣fore, (in point of standing and proficiency,) then he came

behind others, in point of years; how much applauded he was by all, for his publick exercises in Lent, both as an Oratour at the desk, and as a Philosopher in the Schools; how (like the brave Epaminondas) he added honour to his degree, which yet to us (of his form) was all we were able to at∣tain; when I reflect upon his progress through much variety of Learning, through every part of the Mathematicks, especi∣ally through Algebra, the most untrodden part of them; and when I compare with all this, the great sobriety of his temper, his unaffected humility, and (after a publick aberration) his perfect return into the way, out of which (for some years) he had unhappily been seduced; last of all when I remember, how whilst nothing but prosperity made some in the world to hug their errour, he hated his so much the more, the more he had prosper'd by its delusion, (which was an argument of the most generous and christian temper,) I think I may fitly af∣firm of him, what was said by Siracides concerning Enoch, that being made perfect in a short time, he fulfilled aWisd. 4. 13. long time.
I do the rather think it a duty, to praise him after his de∣cease, the less he was able to endure it, whilst yet alive. And I conceite my self the fitter, to speak a little in his absence of his perfections, because so long as he was present, I onely told him of his faults. (Never leaving him as a Monitor, untill I thought he left them.) For having found him my noble Friend, and (which in honour to his memory, I think it my duty to acknowledge) my very munificent Benefactor, I could not be so unkind a thing, as not to afford him my repre∣hensions, (yet still attended with respect) in whatsoever re∣gard I could think them useful. And 'twas the mark of an ex∣cellent judicious spirit, that he valued me most for my great∣est freedom in that particular. Even then when our heads were most at enmity, (by the over great influence of his Fa∣thers persuasion upon his own) there still remained in both our

hearts a most inviolable friendship. And yet the chiefest in∣stance of mine, was onely my often having been angry with what I conceived to be a sin; against which (by Gods goodness being sufficiently convinced) he grew at last to be as angry, as friends or enemies could have been. He had impartially con∣sidered that sacred Aphorism, that to refuse instruction, is to despise one's own soul. And he who could not be thank∣full for being chid, was judg'd by him to be unworthy of any honest man's anger. Nor can I imagine a solid reason, why he was careful in time of health, to be speak my presence in time of sickness, (of which you are able to be his witness) unless be∣cause he did esteem me the most affectionate person of his ac∣quaintance, by his having still found me the most severe. To conceal his great failing, (which was so far scandalous, as it was publick, and apt to be hurtful by the reverence which many men had to his example,) and only to speak of the best things in him, were rather to flatter, then to commend him. But yet as the Scripture hath said of David, that he did what was right in the eyes of the Lord, save onely in the1 King. 15. 5. matter of Uriah the Hittite, so I think I may say of your self-departed, that unless it were in that one unhappiness, of ingageing himself in an ugly Cause, (which yet be seriously re∣pented, and so was fitted for that early, but most exemplary death, which happily opened a door to his immortality,) his greatest vice was but this, that he modestly concealed too many virtues.
The remarkable manner of his departure did most re∣markably resemble Sir Spencer Compton's, (a person so sin∣gularly qualified by grace and nature and education, that however his extraction was highly noble, I may confidently say it was the lowest thing in him,) who dyed at Bruges about the time, wherein the man of our desires expir'd at Com∣pton. Never did I hear of a more heavenly valediction to all the contentments of the earth, then was given by these two at

their dissolutions. Never yet did I heare, of any two fare∣wells so much alike. Never were any more admired, by those that saw them whilst they were going, or more desired, when they were gon. How your excellent husband behav'd himself, I have but partly related in the conclusion of my Sermon. For though I may not dissemble so great a truth, as my strong incli∣nations both to think and speak of him to his advantage; yet in my last office of friendship, I did religiously set so strict a watch over my tongue, as that I rather came short in many points of his commendation, then went beyond him in any one. And could I have had the possibility to have kept him company in his sickness, which I as earnestly endeavour'd as he desir'd it, (but his sickness was too short, and my journey too long, for either of us either to give, or to receive that satisfaction,) I might have perfected that account, which many witnesses enabl'd me to give in part.
Having thus far spoken of him to you, I must only speak of you to others. For such as reject what they deserve, I think it a Panegyrick sufficient, to make it known they will have none. Having dedicated my papers to a person of your en∣dowments, for whom to approve, is to patronize them, I also dedicate your person (with the hopefull particles of your self) to the peculiar protection and grace of God. And as the heirs of that Family, which you were pleased by adoption to make your own, have already been Lords of that seat for more then eighteen Generations, (which I can reckon,) so that the person whom I commemorate may inherit also that other blessing (as an addition to that blessing which God hath gi∣ven him in your self) conserred in favour upon Jonadab the son of Rechab, [Not to want a man to stand before him for ever,] is no less the hope, then the prayer of himIer. 35. 19. who think's himself obliged, as well to be, as to write him∣self

