



MADAM,
TO speak my sense of your many Favours,
with my reverent esteem of your Approba∣tion,
and how inclinable I have been to yield obe∣dience
to your Commands, the greatest expression
that I can make, hath been hetherto the least that I
think is due. And now I am sorry I can prove by
no better Argument, (at the present,) how great a
deference and submission I think is due to your
Judgment, than by my having preferr'd it before
mine own, in permitting that Sermon to lye in
Common, which I had only intended for your
Inclosure. For though the thing hath been desired
by several persons of Quality, besides your self;
yet the principal end of my Publication, is not to
gratifie their desires, whom I could civilly deny,
but to comply with your reasons, which I cannot

pardonably resist. The very piety of your Reasons
having added to them so great a power, that what
was skill in Aspendius, in me would certainly be
guilt, should I (through Avarice or Envy) reserve
any thing to my self, by which your charity doth1 Cor. 13. 7.
believe I may profit others.
Indeed considering we are fallen, I do not only
say, into an iron age, but into an age whose very
iron hath gather'd rust too, wherein the most do so
live, as if they thought they should never dye,
(at least had forgotten that they are dying, and
being dead,2 Cor. 5. 10. must be accountable for what is don
whilst they are living,) it may be labour well spent,
to trig the wheels of their sensuality; and that by
thrusting into their eyes such sad and seasonable ob∣jects,
as may make them consider their latter end.
It was a custome with some of old,Deut. 32. 29. whensoever they
intended a sumptuous Feast, to put a deaths-head
into a dish, and serve it up unto the Table: which
being meant for a significant, though silent Orator,
to plead for temperance, and sobriety, by minding
the men of their mortality, and that the end of their
eating should be to live, and that the end of their
living should be to dye, and the end of their dying
to live for ever, (for even the Heathens who deny∣ed
the resurrection of the body, did yet believe

the immortality of the Soul,) was look'd upon by
all sober and considering guests, as the whole∣somest
part of their Entertainment. And since 'tis
true,Eccles. 7. 3. (what is said by Solomon) that sorrow is
better than laughter, for by the sadness of the
countenance the heart is made better; where∣upon
the Royal Preacher concludes it better of
the two,Verse 2. for a man to go into the house of mour∣ning;
I cannot but reason within my self, that
whenVerse 4. the heart of fools is in the house of
mirth, whose customary language is such as this,
[Wisd. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Come on, let us injoy the good things that
are present, let us crown our selves with Rose∣buds
before they be wither'd, let none of us go
without his part of voluptuousness, let us leave
tokens of our joyfulness in every street, let us
oppress the poor man that is righteous, and
let our strength be the law of justice,] there can
be nothing more friendly, or more agreeable to their
wants, than to invite such men to the house of
mourning, and there to treat them with the cha∣racter
of the most troublesome life of man,
(which being impartially provided, will serve as
well as a Deaths-head,) during the time of his
floating in a valley of Tears.
For this is usefull to teach us all, not to be amo∣rous
of a life, which is not only so short, as that it
cannot be kept long,Joh. 14. 1. but withal so full of trouble,
as that 'tis hardly worth keeping. Nor by conse∣quence
to doat on a flattering world, which is so
little to be injoy'd, and its Injoyments also so full
of vexatious mixtures.Eccles. 2. 12. Again 'tis useful to in∣courage
us, not to be afraid of a man that must
die,Isa. 51. 12. Mat. 10. 28. and whilst he lives can but kill the body.
Nor to scruple at the paying that common debt,
which we owe to Religion, as well as Nature;
that God may give us anMat. 25. 21. acquittance, as well
as nature: we having received an ensurance from
the infallible undertaker, that the way both to save,
and prolong a life,Mat. 16. 25. Mark. 8. 36. is religiously to lose it, or lay it
down. Again 'tis useful to admonish us, (after the
measure that we are negligent,) toMat. 25. 16. Luk. 19. 15. trade with the
talent of our time, for the unspeakable advantages
of life eternal; and to do all the work we can,
because the night cometh,Joh. 9. 4. when we shall be able
to work no more. Lastly it mindeth us, as to be
doing, because our Lord cometh, and is at hand,
so to be vigilant and watchful,Phil. 4. 5. because we know
notMat. 24. 42. what hour. In a word; the more transitory,
and the more troublesome, the life of men shall
appear to be, by so much the better will be the

uses, which we are prompted to make of its im∣perfection.
And here it comes into my mind, to give you my
thanks by my observance of the seasonable counsel
you lately gave me, not to lavish out my time in
shaming the adversaries of truth, (by way of an∣swer
or reply to their meer impertinencies and
slanders,) but rather to spend it in such practical
and peaceable meditations, as are likelier to for∣ward
their Reformation. And though it was not
your opinion that I could not use my time ill, in
writing continuall vindications of the lately perse∣cuted
doctrines of Iesus Christ, but onely that you
thought I might use it better; yet my opinion doth
so fully concur with yours, that even as soon as my
leasure serves me to pay my Readers what I have
promis'd, (that men may learn to love God, by
thinking him free from their Impieties, and may
not reverence their Impieties, so far forth as they
think them the works of God,) I shall direct my
whole studies, as you have charitably advised.
And indeed I am the fitter to take your Counsel,
because I want a fit enemy with whom to combate;
since three or four of the ablest have quit the field,
and as it were bowed to the truth of the things in
question. For though they have lately sent out a

Teazer, who (they hoped) might tempt me to loss
of time, not by disputing in any measure against
a line of what I have publish'd, but only by open∣ing
a noysome mouth, in a very wide manner
against my person, and (which is infinitely sadder)
against myHe saith expresly, 1. That what∣ever God foresees, and doth not prevent, (which is all the wicked∣ness in the word) he may be justly said to Cause. (p. 9.) 2. That Gods absolute will is the prime cause, and necessarily productive of eve∣ry action of the creature, p. 10. (and so no less of our worst, then of our best actions.) 3. That God can∣not be freed from being the au∣thor of sin, by such as acknowledge his prescience, p. 9. (so that either he cannot believe Gods prescience, or cannot but believe him the Author of sin.) 4. That he cannot deny God to be the author of sin, or to will the event of sin, p. 2. God too; yet this does
signifie no more, than that they are
stomackful in their afflictions,
and like the mettlesom Cynaegyrus
in no particular but this, that when
his Hands were cut off, he pursued
the enemy with his Teeth. A Prin∣ted
Pamphlet comes to me, subscri∣bed
and sent by Edward Bagshaw,
(with your pardon be it spoken, for
'tis not handsom in your presence,
to mention the name of so foul a thing,) which
neither the gravity of my Calling, nor the price I
put upon my time, nor the reverence I bear to your
advice, will permit me to answer in more than two
words. (and in these I shall imitate the most judi∣cious
Mr. Hooker.) For whereas it amounteth to
these two things, to wit, his railing against God
as theP. 2. l. 19, 20 & p. 9. l. 18. to l. 22. p. 10. l. 23, 25. to be compared with l. 32. Author of sin, and his railing against me
as a grievous sinner, (without the offer of any
proof, for the one, or the other,) To the first I say,

No, to the second, Nothing. As for his blasphe∣mies
at large, his inconsistencies with himself,
his frequent confessions that he is ignorant of
what he presumeth to affirm, his impotent slanders,
his most unsavoury scurrilities, his pique at my
cassock and my cap, his evil eye upon my Re∣ctory,
and female Readers, (to the honour of
your sex, and shame of ours,) last of all for his
impenitency and resolutions to persevere in his
crying sins,) against That person of all the world,
whom, next to God, and his Parents, he ought
to have had in the greatest reverence,) I shall
leave him to the mercy of one or other of my Dis∣ciples;
who being as much his Iuniors, as he is
mine, may have youth enough to excuse, if not
commend them, for cooling the courage of so pru∣rient
and bold a Writer. But for my self, I have
determined, so to profit by what I Preach in the
following Sermon, as not to leave it in the power
of every petulant undertaker, to dispose of my
hours in altercation. They that look to live long
before theyPsal. 16. 10. look upon the grave, may trifle
out their time with better pretensions to an excuse;
but I who have lost so much already, and have had
(as I may say) so many Trials for my Life, (at
that Bar of Mortality, the Bed of Sickness,)

which makes me consider it as a perishing, and dying
life, cannot think it so much as lawful, to dispute
it away with an itching adversary; who, how∣ever
insufficient to hold up his quarrel, is yet too
restless to lay it down.
But I proceed to that Subject (from which my
thoughts have been kept by a long parenthesis)
of which I love to be speaking on all occasions that
can be offer'd, because I find so much in it, of
which I cannot but speak well; and no less to the
honour of his memory, than to the profit and
pleasure of his survivers. He was certainly a per∣son,
who liv'd a great deal of life in a little time;
especially dating it (as he did) from the memora∣ble
point of his renovation. When I consider him
in his Childhood at the University of Oxford (I am
sure some years before you knew him) exciting o∣thers
by his Example, to mind the end of their
being there; how strict and studious he appeared
throughout his course; how much farther he went
before, (in point of standing and proficiency,)
then he came behind others, in point of years; how
much applauded he was by all, for his publick
Exercises in Lent, both as an Oratour at the
Desk, and as a Philosopher in the Schools; how
(like the brave Epaminondas) he added honour

to his degree, which yet to us (of his form) was
all we were able to attain; when I reflect upon his
progress through much variety of Learning, through
every part of the Mathematicks, especially through
Algebra, the most untrodden part of them; and
when I compare with all this, the great sobriety of
his temper, his unaffected humility, and (after a
publick aberration) his perfect return into the
way, out of which (for some years) he had unhap∣pily
been seduced; last of all when I rememember,
how whilst nothing but prosperity made some in the
world to hug their errour, he hated his so much
the more, the more he had prosper'd by its delu∣sion,
(which was an argument of the most generous
and Christian temper,) I think I may fitly affirm of
him, what was said by Siracides concerning
Enoch,Wisd. 4. 13. that being made perfect in a short time,
he fulfill'd a long time.
I do the rather think it a duty, to praise him af∣ter
his decease, the less he was able to endure it,
whilst yet alive. And I conceive my self the fitter,
to speak a little in his absence of his perfections,
because so long as he was present, I only told him
of his faults. (Never leaving him as a Monitor,
until I thought he left them.) For having found
him my noble Friend, and (which in honour to

his memory, I think it my duty to acknowledge)
my very munificent Benefactor, I could not be
so unkind a thing, as not to afford him my repre∣hensions,
(yet still attended with respect,) in
whatsoever regard I could think them useful. And
'twas the mark of an excellent judicious spirit, that
he valued me most for my greatest freedom in that
particular. Even then when our heads were most
at enmity, (by the over great influence of his Fa∣ther's
persuasion upon his own) there still remained
in both our hearts a most inviolable friendship.
And yet the chiefest instance of mine, was only my
often having been angry with what I conceived to be
a sin; against which (by Gods goodness being suf∣ficiently
convinc'd) he grew at last to be as angry,
as Friends or Enemies could have been. He had
impartially consider'd that sacred Aphorism, that
to refuse instruction, is to despise ones own soul.
And he who could not be thankful for being chid,
was judg'd by him to be unworthy of any honest
mans anger. Nor can I imagine a solid reason,
why he was careful in time of health, to bespeak
my presence in time of Sickness, (of which you
are able to be his witness,) unless because he did
esteem me the most affectionate person of his ac∣quaintance,
by his having still found me the most

severe. To conceal his great failing, (which was
so far scandalous, as it was publick, and apt to
be hurtful by the reverence which many men had
to his example,) and only to speak of the best
things in him, were rather to flatter, then to com∣mend
him. But yet as the Scripture hath said of
David, that he did what was right in the eyes
of the Lord,1 King. 15. 5. save only in the matter of Uriah
the Hittite, so I think I may say of your self∣departed,
that unless it were in that one unhap∣piness,
of ingaging himself in an ugly Cause,
(which yet he seriously repented, and so was fitted
for that early, but most exemplary death, which
happily opened a door to his Immortality,) his
greatest Vice was but this, that he modestly con∣cealed
too many Virtues.
The remarkable manner of his departure did
most remarkably resemble Sir Spencer Compton's
(a person so singularly qualified, by Grace, and
Nature, and Education, that however his extra∣ction
was highly Noble, I may confidently say it
was the lowest thing in him,) who dyed at Bruges
about the time, wherein the man of our desires
expir'd at Compton. Never did I hear of a more
heavenly Valediction to all the contentments of
the earth, than was given by these two at their

dissolutions. Never yet did I hear, of any two
farewells so much alike. Never were any more
admired, by those that saw them whilst they were
going; or more desired, when they were gon.
How your excellent Husband behav'd himself, I
have but partly related in the conclusion of my
Sermon. For though I may not dissemble so great
a Truth, as my strong inclinations both to think and
speak of him to his advantage; yet in my last
office of friendship, I did religiously set so strict a
watch over my tongue, as that I rather came
short in many points of his commendation, than
went beyond him in any one. And could I have
had the possibility to have kept him company in his
sickness, which I as earnestly endeavour'd as He
desir'd it, (but his sickness was too short, and my
journey too long, for either of us either to give, or
to receive that satisfaction,) I might have perfe∣cted
that account, which many witnesses enabl'd
me to give in part.
Having thus far spoken of him to you, I must
only speak of you to others. For such as reject
what they deserve, I think it a Panegyrick suffi∣cient,
to make it known they will have none. Ha∣ving
dedicated my papers to a person of your In∣dowments,
for whom to approve, is to patronize

them, I also dedicate your person (with the hopeful
particles of your self) to the peculiar protection
and grace of God. And as the Heirs of that Fa∣mily,
which you were pleased by adoption to make
your own, have already been Lords of that seat for
more than eighteen Generations, (which I can
reckon,) so that the person whom I commemorate may
inherit also that other blessing, (as an addition to
that blessing which God hath given Him in your
self,) confer'd in favour upon Jonadab the son of
Rechab,Jer. 35. 19. [Not to want a man to stand before
him for ever,] is no less the hope, than the prayer,
of him who thinks himself obliged, as well to be,
as to Write himself,

