



TO no others than you (fair Ladies) ought this Book to address it self, if it be true, that every thing does natu∣rally tend to its proper sphere. You will here find a Register of your own Triumphs, it were therefore injustice to suffer these painted Sheets to bor∣row their lustre from any other patro∣nage than your bright selves. You ever prove exquisite Artists in your own Profession, and can with great dexterity varnish over your imper∣fections,

whether natural, or casually acquired in the exercise of your own Vocation: Your Author is sensible of failings in both these kinds, and see∣ing he wants artifice to give his na∣tural, or adventitious parts a fair gloss, to impose at once, as you do, on the eyes and understandings of men, he desires your kind assistance to pass his Ware as fresh, sound and beautiful, because it is with all pos∣sible zeal consecrated to your service. Though I never had the honour to receive any marks of your favour, or to be signalized by wearing your badge, yet I have here boldly adventured to desire your favourable Protection, as if I were an old Servant, that had lost my Blood in fighting your Battels, and endured the fatigue of many dan∣gerous Sieges: if my ignorance does not permit me to pay my De∣votion in the usual form; it is ho∣ped you will accept of this Rhetorick, as an atonement for my want of Faith

and Charity at the Worship of your Shrines. If my youthful inexperi∣ence has hindred me from placeing your honourable Ensigns in the right place, where some people on the sunny∣side the Globe, do their Jewels: if I have not honoured you with a flat Nose, pray be pleased (fair ones) to accept the Tribute of a flat Pen. It would however be a little hard to expect this rigorous duty of your humble Servant, because I have weak Ee that may soon require the  and of Spectacles, which cannot be supported if once the Bridge were ta∣ken away. You have at this instant got the Maiden-head of my officious scribling Instrument, as you have some years since, the Virginity of ano∣ther Quill. The Ink of this is black and smutty, but that of the other was of a more innocent and pleasing colour; though after having been im∣proved by your conversation, it changed once its native Simplicity

for the variety of all the colours in the Rain-bow, or the greater diver∣sity of a Peacock's Train. There is another difference between these two Alembecks: Bacchus makes the one to flow in exuberant and fruitful show∣ers; but he cruelly seals up the o∣thers mouth, that it cannot drop into one tear.
I have wisely chose your protection for this Book, because I would not be thought to expect the ten Guinea's Fee for a mercenary Dedication: All the world will clear this from any guilt of that nature, seeing it is directed to Ladies, who seldom express their generosity in these terms. I have like∣wise thought it a piece of providence to make you patronize this minute Volumn, to save my Pen the trou∣ble of acting the Sycophant in a long and nauseous Epistle, according to the modern precedents. You have with∣out the help of an Author, made your selves famous in the World: your

Vertues are conspicuous to all Eyes, and palpable by all hands too: your perfections are the common Theme of the people, and your graces are daily exposed to publick view. Who can enough admire your Christian humility in being willing to edify with your Do∣ctrine, the dregs of men? your af∣fability, in being all things to all men that come in your way? and your hospitality for opening your doors to Porters and Car-men? Your charity is sufficient to cover a multi∣tude of sins, as diffusive as that of the Sun, to every body that will appear abroad, or dares but once to ask the Question; you are at all times inclined to mercy and forgive∣ness, if your Votary will express his sorrow in a golden Tear. The Bloo∣dy Sacrifice is the last part of this Ce∣remony, and still subsequent to the rich oblation: but which is most of all, your Chastity is no less remarkable than your other Vertues. Your Lusts

and Carnal affections are wholly mortifyed, and you are become by your industry and fervent applicati∣on as insensible of sensitive plea∣sure, as if you were made of Wood or Stone: surely you have in this particular, out-done the severest Moralist, or the most Holy of the Primitive Fathers, who never could subjugate their Bodies to that de∣gree you have done, as not to be once prickt with the Thorn in the Flesh. You have methinks taken the same course to arrive at this meri∣torious piece of supererogation, as the Fruiterer does to save his Raisins; He makes his young Ap∣prentice surfeit at his first dayes sitting behind the Counter, that he may be sure to have no gusto that way for the future.
I protest (sweet Creatures) to you stored with all the moral Vertues, and not deficient in one Theological Grace, saving that you may seem sometimes

to want Faith: Some think you should believe your Customers on the Credit of their word, after having received good store of their ready Money. In∣stead of this you look on things with a providential Eye, as Rats do the fall of a ruinous House, or a rotten Ship: you can foresee the downfal of any Servant, and leave him, as Hea∣ven sometimes does, to himself. Whilst the Gentleman is willing to purchase the Soil at any rate, you suffer him to sow the Seed; what he commonly reaps, you are best able to give an ac∣count of: and he that would grind with you, must pay the Toll before hand, even before he is permitted to bring his Grist to the Mill. However if you are a little void of this believing qua∣lity, if you have no large proportion of faith, you are so well stockt with good works, that you may be excused the want of this unactive Grace. Na∣ture has been in all points extream kind to you all, that are indeed so wor∣thy

a part of her own Sex; she has been more than partial in endowing you with such capacious talents, which the scantlings of our curt under∣standings can never reach. Poor ig∣norant man can scarce penetrate be∣yond a superficial discovery of that pro∣found Fountain of Knowledge where∣of you are Mistresses: and by a strange unheard of Parodox, those precious mines of solid learning are in your tender virginal years most inacces∣sible to the best efforts of feeble man.
The Author hopes you will not treat him after your usual manner, but that you will excuse him from that rigorous impost you exact of Strangers, and admit him into the Pit without the necessity of coming with a golden Ticket. If you become free of your amorous caresses, he pro∣mises to regulate himself to the vul∣gar Proverb, which forbids us to look a gift-Horse in the Mouth. He says, he'll take you all for fair, vertuous,

and honest; tho in so doing, you your selves will swear he is troubled with a very adventurous and implicit Faith, large enough for himself and you too. If the following leaves do supply the room of a Pack of Cards, to increase your Tribute, by cheating the loving Gamesters; it is hoped you will grant me liberty to trade, though I cannot properly as one of your body politick, yet very well as an interloping Mer∣chant. This is a Priviledge the meanest poetical Dawber claims from both the Theatres, who possibly never appears on the Stage after his own night, nor ever thought of, unless by the baulkt Bookseller: if I have merited no better of you than some of these Gentlemen do of the Stage, may I be eternally banished your Par∣nassus, may I dye anathematized in a full Convocation of the Trading La∣dies; and lastly, may Whetstones-Park scorn to save my longing, with the favour of a single Kiss.
The only way I know to save the credit of my green Quill, is to make it resemble as much as possible those patterns of per∣fection, that are made the subject of the following Discourse. A little of that sharpness you inspire into your Lovers Ʋrine, would give my periods a grateful relish: and a small pro∣portion of that Mercury, you procure for the Salivation of your faithful Ser∣vants, would sublimate my fancy be∣yond the feculent dregs of matter, which at present doe strangly retard its moti∣on. But why should I borrow any of these transcendent qualities from your amorous Slaves, seeing they have them but at second hand; they are in them but a faint reflection of that light, the Fountain whereof springs from the charming centre of your Microcosm. My last Prayer shall therefore be, That as I have chose you for a Theme, so I may in all points imitate these fair I∣dea's; may every line be as poignant as an embrace of yours, and each Sen∣tence,

like you, carry a sting in its tail.
In fine (Ladies) it is hoped, I have like a faithful Dedicator done your pro∣fession, and my self what right, the rules of Justice and Reason could prescribe. I have been only wanting in two parti∣culars essential to a Dedication, those are flattery, and fragments of Latin or French Verses: your modesty so notorious to all the World, has super∣seded the one, and my own inabilities have saved you the trouble of the o∣ther. Since then it were a sin to part Modesty and Plain-dealing, nay im∣possible, because the moral Vertues are linkt together by a strong Chain, I presume you may be thought the fittest Patronesses for

