


My Lords,
Your Lordship Candour, and the Sleightings of others, have, by a strange Concurrence, begot and strengthned this Resolution, that this Discourse shall appear in Publick.
Be it as Those say (which yet I hope will never be true) that 'tis a tottering Church which I labour to Support; so much more Cause is there, I should set to my Shoulder, and be full as Kind to my Dear Mother, as
that Ludian Prince to his Father; let the ap∣pearance of Her Danger unty mine, and All Her true sons Tongues to Plead for Her. Though Her foundations will, I doubt not, ap∣prove themselves more firm than to be shaken with One Blast, however Impetuous.
For my self, I am so farre a Charitable and Chatholick Christian, as to wish, with that great Prelate, Who acquits Our Church from Criminal Schism, that Such termes of Com∣munion might be pitcht upon, as might bring the Whole Christian World into One. And therefore I strike not at the Tenets of any Society, further than they direct their Style or Designes against Ʋs. And here, if I shew that We strive as much as any, to give Glory to GOD, and to settle on Earth, Peace and Good Will amongst Men, I hope I make it appear We have found the Way to the True Church; And therefore Trouble none for Comming thither, or Continuing there. And withal, that No Kingdom should be Jealous of Such a CHƲRCH within it, that gives to Each, their Due; to God,
His; to Caesar, His. Kings Prerogatives We stickle for, and amongst these, That they have a Right to be both Fathers and Sons to the CHƲRCH: For those of Bishops also, But not to Exalt 'em Over those who are in most particular manner Gods Anoyn∣ted. We would neither lift up the Chair at Canterbury above the Throne at White-Hall, putting KINGS to Sweat for it, that they might procure a Good Arch-Bishop, who would be their Quiet Neighbour (a pas∣sage which our British Antiquities has suffici∣ently observed): Nor would we bring in anew, those described in Lysimachus Nicanor, to Act old Tragedies over again, in any Dress.
And if it be Agreed upon by All, that when All Estates have a Due share in the Government, there is the Best Crasis, that suits directly with that Christian Communion and Communication of all Church Members which we Preach; and so will, upon Good Principles, Restrain Inferiour Degrees from Enchroaching upon Superiour, and Superiours from Preying upon them.

This I know to be Your Lordships busi∣ness. God bless You in your Good Endea∣vours: So Prayes,
My LORDS, 
