



Sir,
THe Face of Things in our British World, which the giddy Phaetons of the Times had lately confounded into a Chaos, doth not onely seem so strangely, but so mi∣raculously alter'd, since the Book I now send you was first engaged in the Press; that had not the Stationer and the Printer put it wholly out of my power, (before your Letter of good news was so much as written) I had laid my Spunge upon several passages and expressions, which however they are of eternal ve∣rity, were yet much fitter when they were Penn'd, than now they are come into the Light. For then I took it to be a Time, wherein 'twas proper to engage in a De∣fensive war. But now I hope it is a season, wherein the Lamb shall lye down by the Wolf in peace, and the once-affrighted Kid commend the neighbourhood of the Leopard. Then I thought it was a Time,Isa, 11.▪ in which the enemies of God, and of his Anointed, (both King, and Church,) were to be conquer'd in∣to obedience by dint of Argument and discourse.

But now I hope the Time is coming, in which the ene∣mies I speak of will face about, and turn Friends. Or if they are backward to reconcilement, and will not forgive us for having suffer'd, as fearing our Suffr∣ings have been greater than they think we are able to forgive; I think our noblest way will be, to confute their fears with our moderation; and so to pull them in to us by cords of Love.
I know there are certain Ciniflones, who blow the Coals of Dissension with greatest Fierceness, when they see them most likely to be extinguish'd. They represent the suffring Party as men that breath nothing but venge∣ance, and therefore not to be trusted with old Injoy∣ments, but still to continue the suffring Party; And so because they have been injur'd for some years past, to be Incapable of Justice for time to come. But if there are here and there a few, who lose the benefit of their sufferings by their Impatience, as I am not able to excuse them, and think them punished with their sin; so must I hold those other men (the envious Cole-Blowers I spake of) to be more incapable of excuse, in that they charge on so many thousands the indiscre∣tion perhaps of Twenty or Thirty persons, who perad∣venture do onely SAY that they are some of the Kings Party. For the Rule to measure His Party by, must be the Nature of their affections; which so far as they are differing from what they are known to be in Him, so far themselves must be known to be none of His. And His are Fatherly affections, as we may judge by his choice to lose the Benefit of his Right for so long a Time, rather than force his way to it by forreigne Help.
And truly (Sir,) I can say it as a very great Truth,

That as when our David ws even hunted, and forc'd to fly into the 2 Sam. 15., 23, 28. Wilderness, it seem'd a kind of Dis∣loyalty for us to prosper, (at least so farr, as to dwell a Home,) And all our comfort was even this, that we were not guilty of being safe, (at a time when it was difficult to be safe and Innocent, both at once; so now that we hope he is returning to his Jerusalem in peace, and his people with joy to their antient Loyalty and Allegiance, I am not able even to wish, much less to use my least endeavour, that our Enemies may suffr as heavy things as they Inflicted. I wish them depri∣ved of nothing else, but what will kill them if they re∣tain it. I wish them Health, and prosperity, and perfect Liberty of conscience, as well as of person, and of purse. But (more then these) I wish them Loyalty from this time forward; I wish them unani∣mity and uniformity in Religion; I wish them the Grace of Restitution to every person whom they wron∣ged; I do not wish with Saint 1 Cor. 5.5. Paul they may be de∣livered up to Satan for the destruction of the flesh; but that their spirits may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. And so I hope I may boldly say, I wish them no worse than I wish my self. For I earnestly wish, and make it my prayer to God Almighty, that I never may prosper in any ill course, either by error of Judgement, or guilt of Practice. More than this (I thank God) I do not wish to my greatest ene∣mies, and less I cannot wish to my dearest Friends. I wish our David may prove the Centre, for our Affe∣ctions to meet and concentre in, from the most oppo∣site points of the whole circumference. Whatever our Distances may have been, (and still may be as to some opinions,) I wish at last we may unite, and be

one in him; And so Remember how we agree in Love and Loyalty to our Soveraign, as to forget how we differ in other things. All the Revenge that I de∣sire, is that of Joseph towards his Brethren; who▪ though they had stripped him of his clothes, and cast him cruelly into the pit, and cheaply sold him to the Ishmaelites, (Gen. 37.) yet he requited them no worse then with food and raiment. Nay casting his Arms about their necks, he suffer'd his love to run out into tears and kisses. (Gen. 45.) If we look backward, I must profess, I have been many times engaged in such pen-combats as now I publish. But looking forward I suppose, that I shall run with the Foremost to Love and union.
Some may otherwise conjecture, by what is said in my Appendix, at such a Time. But 'tis for want of Con∣sideration, that my whole performance was both extor∣ted by the Adversary, and dispatched by my self, and also committed unto the Press, before I could hear of any Endeavours to reconcile the Pens of dissenting Bre∣thren, or but to make a cessation of such like Arms. Sure I am, I am as ready as any one of my Brethren, to sacrifice any thing to Peace, excepting righteousness, and truth, the love of God, and his glory. I shall be willingly bound up from ever speaking, or writing, or injoying any place in the Church of God, (if my Superiours can but imagine how that maytend to the pub∣lick good) rather than lay the least Block in the way of unity; which now is attempting a return to such a Babel as ours hath been.
But (besides) my contention will be believed to have been such, as mine Adversary in time will applaud me for, when he shall find my Rudest twitches were but to

snatch him from a Praecipice. As soon as Mr. Hick∣man shall be convinced, that though for a sinner to hate God, and to murder men, are as positive entities, as any actions to be imagin'd, yet they cannot but be reckon'd among the worst sorts of sins, and therefore cannot (without impiety) be said to be any of God's creatures, or God himself, (which yet Mr. Hick∣man hath often taught,) I say as soon as he shall discern, not onely how dangerous and sinfull, but how irratio∣nal and sensless his errour is; he will as heartily thank me even for this very Book, as I would thank that man who should pluck a thorn out of my eye. Besides that my aime in what I have written, hath been the same with that of the most moderate Doctor Sanderson; For (to express it in See his Ex. cellent long Preface be∣fore the se∣cond Edition of his fist Semons S. 24. his words) I have not written a∣gainst the moderate, but onely the Rigid-Scotized-thorow-paced Presbyterians. Of them Mr. Hick∣man can be but one. And even with him I am as rea∣dy to be upon just as good Termes, as with my neighbour Mr. Barlee I long have been. Let him onely forbeare to wound me in the Apple of my eye, nay in the tenderest part of my very soul, by dishonouring God, and his Anointed, (long before whose restau∣ration, (which is but hoped whilst  am writing,) I had sent my Vindication of his Supremacy to the Press, and which had certainly been as publick, as now it is, though the Republicans had prosper'd in their Ca∣riere:) Let him, I say, but do that, and my work is done. If I shall ever again appear, in the behalf of any one of the five controverted points, it will be likelyest to be in Latine (as being the Scholars Mother-tongue) and onely in order to reconcilement.
Now that the God of peace and unity will make us at

unity and peace within our selves, enlightning our heads with that knowledge which is the mother of humility, and inflaming our hearts with that zeal which is accor∣ding to such a knowledge, and thereby making up our breaches as well of judgement as of charity, (or at least of charity, if not of judgement,) that we may all be held together by the bond of unity in the truth; shall be as heartily the endeavour, as it is the frequent and fervent prayer, of

Brington,
May 2. 1660.
