



THough I could not well answer your former Rea∣sons why I should publish a true Copy to anticipate a false one, yet I was willing to be obstinate in a case of this nature; wherein to vindicate my credit, did seem (to me) too great a prejudice to my ease; and was thought (by some friends) to be a hazarding of my safety. And as I have never been delighted to lye busking in the Sun, so of late (more especially) I have been even so Amo∣rous of living retiredly in the shade, that I would fain have provided for my Peace and Quiet, as more conside∣rable to me then my Reputation. Not that I dare be so wedded to ease, or safety, as guiltily to court them by sloth, or cowardize; nor that I dare be so indifferent to the good opinion of good men, as not to desire to be ve∣ry well thought on; but because I had resolv'd to sit and smile upon my sufferings, and to purchase the continuance of my beloved obscurity and repose, by that which I thought a lawful means; even the burying my self amongst my books, and living under the protection of passive si∣lence. But having put my Judgement into other mens hands, and more especially into yours, and being perfectly conquer'd by your this weeks letter, who was but disor∣der'd by your last, (against which I must confesse I did ra∣ther stand out, by an affected deafnesse, then any real dissent) and being now no longer threatned by bare report, but by one who professeth (under hand and Seal) to have

been writing against papers which he cals mine, (adding, that he intends to make them publick) I finde my self brought to such an unfortunate Dilemma, (either of ha∣ving a false copy printed, or else of printing a true copy to discountenance the false,) that I must pitch upon this latter as the lesser evil. And so your wishes and my fears are come upon me; whilest I lie under a necessity of go∣ing abroad into the world, meerly in order to my very privacy and peace. For the very same Letter which threatens the publishing of papers falsly bearing my Name, cals me the Grandchilde of Pelagius, the Enemy of God, of Christ, and of his Church, with more such , then I will ever repay in kinde. The greatest revenge that I will seek, shall be (in love to his person) to conceal his Name. I hope my Soul hath been dieted with cleaner food, then to break out at the mouth into such exulcerate Erysipelas. And that I shall get moderation by those very means, by which I finde some men have lost it. And though I hope it doth not lie in the power of any man to infect my Name with such a Leprosie, as to make it loathsome to such persons by whom I desire to be ap∣proved, yet have I hated the publication of this my scribling, for fear some young or old Trojan should make it an Apple of Altercation. For you know this Age is full of Salamanders, who never live so pleasantly as in the Fire of Contention: in hopes to expire and to be buried (like some Pausanias or Herostratus) in the Armes of Fame, though not of Glory. And truly this is the reason, why I have suffer'd so long in so deep a silence; even hating the means, because abhorring the effects, of a Vindication; and desiring that what I built upon such controverted subjects, might be (like Solomons Tem∣ple) without the least noise of Axe or Hammer. If I

had lookt upon my self with so much reverence, as to have made my self beleeve I could be publckly useful, I would have fasten'd upon a subject which should have been fitter, and more easie, more profitable and pleasant, and every way more acceptable to my self, and others. I have been very attentive to that preaching of Siracides, Search not the things that are above thy strength, butEcclesiasticus 3, 21, 22, 23. what is commanded thee think thereupon with reve∣rence, &c. And whilest I consider, that God will ren∣der to every man (not according to his opinions, but) according to his works; I do not think it so good a task,Rom. 2. 6. to make men orthodox Christians, as to make them ho∣nest and sincere ones. If I had been one of those, who prefer the Truth of opinion to the Truth of practise, and hate a man more for the least Error of his Judge∣ment, then for the greatest obliquity of his Will, I might indeed have been forward on such a Subject. But because I have seriously observed, that whilest men scamble too eagerly after the Truth of Religion, they (in the heat of Contention) do lose the practise of it, I have passed the hardest censure upon my present necessity, and have been (hitherto) the unkindest man in the world to mine own Publication. But you (Sir) are to thank me for my misfortune, in submission to whose Judgement, I have offered violence to mine own. I may be a stranger to my self through the deceitfulnesse of my Heart, but if my Heart doth not deceive me, no man living hath gone to Presse with greater vanity, then I go now with self-de∣nial. I am sure my aversenesse to this publication hath extorted from me an unproportionable length both of this my Letter to your self, and of my Paraenesis to the Reader; which makes a Portal too large for the littlenesse of the Cottage to which it leads. Which as I first sub∣mitted

to your Judgement, so must I now commit it to your disposal, and withal commend it to your Protection. I say to your Protection, because (whilest the Presse is so prosti∣tuted, and the Age so prurient) it is not likely to be the safer for being innocent. It was not the modesty of Su∣sanna that was able to secure her from the Indictment of the Elders; and 'twas the innocence of Joseph, which made his Mistresse pronounce him guilty. But had I ima∣gined (as I did not) that my private Notes would have been so vitiated and exposed, when I deliver'd them as whispers into one man's Ear, I would infallibly have us'd them as Virginius did his vertuous Daughter; that at least they might have gone unpolluted out of the world. But since they are unhappily condemn'd to live in spight of all my endevours to have supprest them, (Pro suppli∣cio est, non potuisse mori,) and that you will have them rather to be shew'd by me, in their natural shape, then by any strange man, in any uncharitable disguise; I hope that you will secure me from farther trouble, by undertaking its vindication against any pragmatick person, who shall pos∣sibly abuse either them, or me. For the temptation must be greater, and the necessity more urgent then I hope it will be, if I draw at either end of the Saw of strife. But you have leisure as well as skill; and you are able to forget your rank and Quality, in favour to him, who does honour your vertues and Erudition, above your Fortune and your Bloud. And who is not more by obligati∣on of Duty, then by the peculiar inclinations of his Soul,
Sir,

