



MADAM,
FRom the beginning, it hath been one of the great designes of hell, (for pro∣moving of which, the old Serpent and his seed, from time to time, have imploy∣ed all their wit and might) to raise slan∣ders and cast reproaches upon holiness, circumspection, tenderness and zeal for God, as if these were opposit unto generosity, magnanimity, society, ease, joy, delight, satisfaction, profit, promotion, and to what not? And the enemy of all righteousness hath so far prevailed, by this subtile stratagem, with poor, foolish, vain, blind men, as to make them judge light to be darkness, and their happiness to be their shame and misery. What age might not joyn with the famousSalvian wrote about the year, 460. Salvian, in his com∣plaint concerning his time? That the Noble and great ones were forced to be evil, lest they should be (1) accounted vile; and to become Sathans slaves, lest they should lose the honour of their Nobility. Yea, have not meer Moralists observed, and how pathetically doCicero lived after Caesar came to the Empire. Cicero,Seneca was Nero's Master. Seneca,Juvenal wrote his Sa∣tyrs about the year, 90. Ju∣venal and others lament this folly and madness, and have left it on record, as the blemish and reproach of the age in which they lived? That vertue (2) was envyed, and all was filled with treachery and deceit; that there was no place left for shame, honesty and goodness; that the wicked were accounted honourable, and the vilest men were promoted, while the good and virtuous were despised as base, singular,
humourous, and (saith Seneca) as (3) foolish, useless and selfish creatures. Ah! what an evidence is this of SathansSee here Part 1. ch 9. pag. 352. power, to lead2 Tim. 2.26. captive at his will, those who are once catched in his snare? And did not sad experience convince us, hardly could we imagine, that they in whom are any re∣licts of reason and discretion, (I need not add conscience and religion, that god of this world having blinded their minds, lest the light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.4.) could be thus fascinated and so far be∣witched? Ah! is it credible, (were it not that2 Thess. 3.2. unbe∣lievers are unreasonable) that those whoLnk. 16.8. are so wise in their generation, such State-politicians, and so active in pro∣claiming their own knowledge, prudence and parts, yet should be such strangers unto, and ignorant of, that which floweth so manifestly from the first principles of reason, and which nature it self teacheth and so convincingly holdeth forth to all men: I do not say, that that dark lantern is able fully to discover the right way, yet it may serve to confute the mad∣ness of such a prejudice against true virtue and holiness. Time would fail me, if I should endeavour to transcribe what Plato, Euripides, Cato, Cicero, Juvenal, Plutarch, and many other Heathens have written to this purpose; nay, the whole Works of Plato and Seneca may well bear this in∣scription, An Apology for Piety and Virtue. And what is the scope of Juvenal and Perseus their Satyrs, but to declaim against the vices of their time? We shall then only from those rich Gardens, collect and gather some few Flowers, con∣taining some known principles of moral Philosophy, in op∣position to the former calumnies which are so easily believed, and to the course which is so generally followed by blind Atheists. Ah! (saith the Satyrist) virtue and goodness is the only true Nobility; he deserveth no praise, whose praise is only from his Ancestors; since (as Seneca (5) obser∣veth) the womb and the grave are two great levellers, all be∣ing alike as to their birth and death; and therefore none can be more noble or magnanimous then another, but he who hath the most generous spirit, and who is most eminent in virtue and goodness; and he (as Plato saith) must be most
base and miserable, who is most wicked and flagitious. And accordingly, Euripides (6) well concludeth, that it is a great abuse to call profane, godless wretches, noble and excellent, albeit they had never so many followers and great possessions: And hence the old Romans did so situat (7) the temples of virtue and honour, that there was no access to that of honour, but by the other of virtue; and thus also, honour from the great (8) Philosopher and great (9) Orator, is commonly described the reward of virtue.
And as thus the good and virtuous are the only honou∣rable and noble, So they are (according to Cicero) the only rich and happy: (10) true wealth consists not in moveables, what can be lost or taken from us, is (saith he) neither mine nor thine: and virtue is that only treasure that cannot be removed; he who driveth that trade needs not fear storms or pirats by Sea, nor robbers and perils by Land; nay, (as Euripides saith) death cannot take away its (11) praise or reward, but that will follow us when we must leave all earth∣ly pleasures, honours and injoyments.
Ah! Madam, is it not lamentable to consider, how many great ones do bury all their Honour, Nobility, Parts, Riches and Possessions in the grave of infamy and reproach; and leave no other Trophies behind them, but the stinking sa∣vour of their debauchery and profanity? upon whose Tombs there can truly be put no other ingraving, but that here lyeth such a one, who was the discredit of his holy profession, and the shame (12) of an ancient and noble family. How few be they, who, by their practice, do not verifie the Poes sad ver∣dict? Greatness (13) and goodness do seldom meet together: and should I not rather have said that word of truth, not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, &c. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29. What will the worlds Gallants be able to say in the day of accounts, for their op∣posing the way of piety and virtue which hath gotten such a testimony from Pagans? And therefore do we now offer this brief lecture of Divinity from these Moralists, that it might appear, that none can forsake and oppose the way of righteousness and holiness, but he who hath cast off both
reason and humanity, and who doth become a brute, lest he should be a Saint. Ah! how1 Cor. 1.20. foolish andHence Se∣neca inferreth, that we should rather pity the wicked as so many fana∣ticks, and con∣temn their contempt, then be angry with them, or take pains to con∣vince and con∣fute them; for (saith he) why do ye bear the madness and phrensie of one in a di∣stemper, but because he knows not what he doth? So, &c. mad is the wisdom of this world, the world it self being judge? (14) If the Word of God had only born record, that the Saints are the excellent in the earth, Ps. 16.3. and the only worthies, of whom the world is not worthy, Heb. 11.38. that godliness is great gain, 1 Tim. 6.6. and the only true treasure that cannot corrupt or be taken away, Luk. 12.33. &c. If (I say) these divine Truthes were only held forth in the Scriptures of truth, scoffing Atheists who have cast off the fear of God, might be the more secure; but while short-sighted nature, by it's dark candle, hath disco∣vered, and moral reason attested the same, and so convincing∣ly condemned the way and course of those desperat misers, they must either renounce their understanding and discretion, and take with their brutishness and stupidity, or confess themselves to be self-condemned; and (15) that contrary no less to their own knowledge and light, then to religion and duty, they maintain a war against the heavens, and abase their noble soul to serve their lusts, becoming swinish Epi∣cureans, led by sense and their carnal appetite, in making their pleasures their idols, and the world and their belly their god.
But such (haply) will say, well then, we injoy our plea∣sures, and lead a merry jovial life, while they who are ac∣counted Saints are sad, dumpish, sullen and broken-hearted creatures. Ans. This is an old slander raised on the way of life, by such as are strangers to true joy, peace, satisfacti∣on and contentment, and hath proven a great stumbling block in all ages; and this was one of the great topicks which Sathan did mainly urge about the time of reformation from Popery, when his kingdom began to totter and shake; and the popish Factors then frequently inculcated, that the Cal∣vinian spirit was a melancholick spirit. But, ah! where∣fore should they be sad2 Sam. 13: 4. who are Kings sons, and heirs of an immortal Crown? joy is their portion and allowance, and it is their priviledge to rejoyce alwayes; their joy and peace is secured to them, devils and men cannot rob them of it, Their wayes are wayes of pleasantness, and all their paths
are peace, Prov. 3.17. Phil. 4.4. Joh. 14.27. Joh. 16.22.24. &c. But, alas! how can they rejoyce who are destroy∣ing their own souls, and rushing head-long upon everlasting woes and misery, who ere it be long will cry (but in vain) to the mountains and rocks to fall on them, and hide them from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6.16. But we may not insist, only let us hear what the Pagan Moralists have said to this purpose; The wicked, (16) notwithstanding all their out∣ward and seeming mirth, joy and delight, have (saith Juve∣nal) a judge, witness and tormenter within, whose lashes and strokes are more grievous and terrible, then any punish∣ment invented on inflicted by Caeditius or Rhadamantus, and the most strict justiciaries and cruel executioners: there is (saith Cicero) no punishment comparable to that which accompanieth sin, either for greatness or continuance; (17) for not only shall the wicked be eternally vexed in hell with the infernal furies, but also here they have their domestick fiends alwayes to attend, and their own guilty consciences to tear them, and the sense of a deity night and day to distract them as with madness; no solitariness nor society, no might nor wealth, no eminency nor greatness can bring ease or re∣lief: and though there be some difficulty in walking in the narrow way, yet the conscience and remembrance of a well ed life is (saith he) (18) most sweet and full of delight. Hence the Emperour Albert 1. his Symbol was, What is best (19) and most virtuous, is most pleasant and full of joy s where the gloss from Corinficinus hath this paraphrase, The best kind of life is to be chosen, (20) which custom and use will render most easie and pleasant. But, ah! the flagitious by custom in sin, have so hardened their heart, and filled it with such prejudices against the way of righteousness, that they go unwillingly to work; and no wonder though holi∣ness appear difficult and a grievous burden to them; for (as the Comedian saith) (21) there is nothing so easie, but it will become heard and unpleasant to him who undertaketh it unwillingly.
Ah! Madam, what matter of lamentation is it, that so many who are called and would be accounted Christians, should come so far short of Heathens, as to oppose that for which they have so zealously pleaded, and by their practice, destroy what they with so much industry have built? I am confident your Ladyship will joyn in this sad complaint, and that such a warning and testimony, against those who are concerned therein, will be very acceptable. But I will not now take upon me to hold out any directions or perswasions to your Honour; nay, though you had importuned me to that effect, the bounds of this short Epistle would excuse my silence: but I could wish that excellent Epistle written some hundred years since by that zealous AncientJerom lved in the 5. century. Jerom, to the noble Lady Celantia upon her earnest desire, were transla∣ted, that it might become a directory to all Ladies, who ac∣count it their greatest honour and happiness, that they are (as the Apostle John calleth that Lady to whom he wrote) elect, beloved in the truth, and of all them that have known the truth. I will not transcribe what is there held forth at length, but among these many grave and profitable directions, this eminent Minister of Christ obtesteth that pious Lady, not to boast of that (22) nobility she hath from her Ancestors, but rather to rejoyce in this, that she is of a royal and heavenly descent, (which will appear to be the only true nobility in thatMal. 3.17, 18. day the Lord makes up his Jewels, and puts a perpetual difference between the precious and the vile) that she is born of God, and an heir of the immortal crown of glory; and that she is freed from the base slavery of hell and sin, and hath chosen such a Master, whom to serve is to reign. (23) O! Madam, we have an honourable, but not a hard Master; our very work and imployment is our honour and happiness; hisMat. 11.30. yoak is easie, his burden is light, and his1 Joh. 5.3. com∣mands are not grievous; but ourJoh 1 12. Rev 1.6. &c. priviledges are great and many, and ourPs. 19.11. Eph. 3.10. 1 Cor. 2.9. reward far exceeds all that we can desire or conceive: and what is our great work, but to main∣tain a communion with himself, and inPhil 4.6. every thing by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, to make our requests known unto him? Which singular priviledge (rather
then duty or task) being the subject of this Treatise, I humbly offer to your Ladyship the practical Volumn there∣of, divided into three Parts, which (as having the same scope, and being of the same nature) we would not separat in the dedication, but rather beg pardon for bringing so small a Pre∣sent (as to my pains therein) to your Honour. But, Madam, here you have a soveraign remedy for all diseases, a Gatho∣lleon and never failing medicine, brought from the paradise of God, and a branch pluckt off that tree,Rev. 22.2. the leaves whereof are for the healing of the nations: when all Phy∣sicians become of no value and can do no good, this will work the cure; and all other Medicines without this, will in the issue prove corrosives, and fewel to feed a worse disease, and aMal. 2.2. compared with 2 Tim. 3.4, 5. curse in stead of a blessing. I am not ignorant, that not only Poets of old (24) have fancied, but also seve∣ral Chimical Physicians, and of late the learned Dr. Van Helmont and Osuala Grembs have seriously asserted and la∣boured to prove, that there is a Panacea and general remedy which may suffice for expelling and curing all diseases; and when I first read in that great Orator and Philosopher Dr. Helmont, his general remedy for all Feavers, and saw the In∣gredients specified under such names, as the most judicious Physicians whom I consulted, either professed they understood not what he meant, or were not able to convince me that they hit right in their conjectures, I was so anxious, that had I not known that work to have been opus post-humum, I verily think, that in the vacancy of the Colledge, I might have undertaken a voyage of purpose to have seen that great Symmist of natur's mysteries, and heard his mind and learned from himself: but though I had obtained my aim, how poor a purchase had I made? how uncertain are the conjectures of the most able and experienced Artists? and how unsuc∣cessfull often are the proper remedies of best known dis∣eases? and how short a while did Paracelsus himself live, who yet could speak of a remedy and diet that might per∣peruat the life of man? and yet, for a litle knowledge of this nature, what diligence and pains will men undergo? But, here is brought to your Ladyships hands, a compleat
and perfect Panacea, not for one kind of disease, but for every malady; ye have the receipt sent from heaven, Is any afflicted? let him pray, Jam. 5.13. and ye have the word of the great Physician to assure you of it's success, and him∣self undertaking the cure and recommending the use of it, Ps. 50 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee; here a remedy not only for bodily, but also for soul-diseases; in every season and occasion, in every state and condition, this hath place; we may use it in the time of health and prosperity, as well as in sickness and adver∣sity; as here it will remove, so there it will prevent, and hold off the rod and the curse; it will purge and sanctifie mercies, and purifie and prepare the heart to receive, enjoy and improve them aright, 1 Tim. 4.4, 5. It is profitable for all things and at all times; it will not, like other Medi∣cines, lose it's vertue by frequent using, but will prove as suc∣cessfull to morrow as to day, we can never use it in vain, Isa. 45.19. Here a subject well worthy of our meditation, diligence and inquiry; concerning which, I hold forth no other lesson, then what I desire daily to be learning and practising, and to mourn for my dulness and negligence in following this heavenly trade, and that my heart hath not been more enlarged in writing and preaching such heavenly, necessary, sweet and soul-establishing Truths.
And now, Madam, I presume to offer to your Ladyship, my mean labours in this fruitfull field, not that I might take occasion to proclaim your honour, knowledge, &c. (as your Ladyship would not allow nor permit, so neither were it very suteable for me to undertake such a task) but that I might intreat your honourable patrociny and favourable acceptance, and might make a publick acknow∣ledgement of what I owe (but am not able otherwayes to pay) to your Ladyship; and that I might, as a Mini∣ster of Christ, exhort and excite your honour to abound more and more in the practise of this spiritual and soul-enriching work; thus your Nobility, Possessions, great Parts, &c. will prove great blessings indeed, and you bless∣ed in the use of them, and when all creature-enjoyments
will take wings and flye away; which is the earnest de∣sire, and shall be the prayer of him, who hath laid hold on this opportunity, to testifie that he is,
MADAM,

Dron, 20. Jan. 1664.
