



MVch Hond deare Sr
I had yours of the 20 of May in its due tyme: and noe sooner had I receiued it (such power of a commande haue your ciuile de∣sires ouer me) but I tooke pen in hand to returne you an answer which had bene longe agoe with you, had not my continuall infir∣mitie rendered me litle fitt for speedie complyance.

I am not without a deepe re∣sentment, to obserue that you flill permitt inconsiderable doubts, cast in your way by I know not whom, retarde you from fixing vpon, what alone can make you eter∣nally happie. You say in particular that you haue mett with so many loose and beastly cases among Ca∣tholike authors, that you haue much adoe to beleeue that holinesse is practised, where so much licen∣ciousnesse is taught. But I praye, are they taught in our councells? Doe you finde them in our Decre∣talls? Haue you heard them in our Pulpets? Meete you with them in our Catechismes? What are you startled at? If the braines of some few riotous children run ouer into extrauigances, must the good, mo∣ther haue their excesses pinned on
 her sleeue, while she neither teaches them, approues, nor conceales them? Nay while she expressly condemnes, and prohibites them with a heauie curse vpon them? Must the good wheate be reproued for á litte chaffe? Or Christs feild be disowned, because the enemye ouer sowed cocle in it? This your ingenuitie will not iudge reason∣able. And therfore, what I haue formerly said; (to witt, that san∣ctitie is a marke of the Catho∣like Romane church exclu∣siuely to all other churches) I must still persiste in. Yes, she hath alwayes bene eminently knowne by that bage to all the world. She is holy in her heade Iesus Christ, who placed her vpon the rocke, and washed her in his owne pretious bloode: she is holy in that holy
 spirit who was sent to sanctifie her, and to teach her all truth: Holy in God the father, authour of all holynesse, to whom she is dedicated: Holy in all her doctri∣ne, in her sacrifices, in her Sacra∣ments; in her discipline; in her pious members, á mongst whom there is neuer wanting numbers of persons famous for sanctifie. Holy in fine, in her continuall prayers to God, and charitable practises towards her poore neigh∣bour. Which two alone I will one∣ly vrge at present, as being aboun∣dantly satisfactorie, if compared to your cold practises, to make appeare where charitie is in her raigne, and consequently, where sanctitie is to be found, since it is indeede noe other thinge then cha∣ritie. Noe S. I neither know,
 nor seeke for, any other holinesse then charitie it selfe. It is that which is the end of the lawe; that the fulnesse of the lawe; that the lawe it selfe. Lex Dei cha∣ritas est, saith S. Augustine. The scripture commands nothing but charitie, nor reproues it anythin∣ge but cupiditie; and in these two it compriseth all Christian moralls. And as charitie is all, so all that it is conuersant about, is God and our neighbour; God, to loue him for his owne infinite goodnesse; and our selues, and neighbours, because it is his pleasure and com∣mande. Obserue, I beseech you, in the ensuing discourse whether we or you make it more absolutly their businesse to comply with these two duties; and thence you will easily iudge on which side charitie,
 that is sanctitie and holynesse resides: and at the same tyme con∣clude with S. Augustine, against your selfe indeede, but to your aduantage, that there can be noe charitie (that is sanctitie) among you, because you hate vnitie. Non habēt charitatem, qui Eccle∣siae non diligunt vnitatem. And againe, they haue noe charitie, who are cutt of from the communion of the Catholike church. Non habent charitatem qui ab Ecclesiae Catholicae com∣munione praecisi sunt. de Bap. contra dona. l. 3. c. 16. Be¦cause, saithe he, in the same place it is the proper gifte of Catholike vnitie. Out of the Catholike com∣munitie then noe vnitie: without vnitie, noe charitie, if charitie be wanting all things els profit not
 assures S. Paule. Cast your selfe then, deare S. into the bosome, com∣munion, and vnion of the Catholike church, where charitie truly rai∣gnes, and where vnder her happie raigne, the least things profit to eternall life. Thither are you ar∣dently inviteed. There, with open armes, are you cordially expected, by
Hon S.
Iuly 20. 1666,

