


Right Honourable, &c.
YOU, that are advanced by your most Illu∣strious Leader, whom his Royal Highness vouchsafes to command, and condescends to be your Captain General, (whose early Prowess asto∣nish'd the World, and continued Victories have made

the Earth and the Sea shake; when his Friends were amazed at his Heroical Attempts, which at once awed and confounded his Enemies; to whom Courage and Conduct, both at Sea and Land, seem as natural as they have been familiar: His Name only is too au∣gust and awful to be mention'd in such a Dedication as this, to which common Custom has entitled many) may safely lay your Commands on me, who being always train'd to strict Obedience, cannot reject the Orders of my Superiors, without offering violence to my self. Though my Judgment therefore, in relation to my Dis∣course had before you, does not altogether correspond with yours, (especially as to the Publication) yet I am resolved to submit my Will, because it seems neither discreet nor safe for me to disoblige so Honourable a Society, in which every Commander has the skill of a General, and he that marches in the lowest place of Dignity among you,De Coronâ, cap. 11. De Idolola. cap. 19. understands Discipline sufficiently to Command. Though Tertullian, therefore, questi∣ons the Practice of Christians warring against others, not dreaming that they would Arm against themselves: And Arnobius vindicates our Saviours Innocence,Adver. Gent. lib. 2. whilst at the same time he evinces his Power, because he did not propagate his Doctrine by the Sword; did not beat out the Brains of Men, that he might put his Precepts into their Heads; Challeng'd not any Tem∣poral Authority, nor spread his Legions over the World

to dissolve the Peace of Humane Societies; as if, like Draco, he would write his Laws with Blood. And even to propagate our own Religion, we confess our Weapons must not be Carnal. Yet that Christians, not∣withstanding, upon other Accounts, did not conclude Wars unlawful, when, by assaulting others, they de∣fended themselves under the Command and Conduct of their Prince, appears by that Lightning Legion mentioned by Eusebius; who, being in Arms,Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 5. and be∣fore the Enemy, by their devout Prayers obtained Rain to refresh themselves, and Lightning from Heaven to discomfit their Adversaries, when the whole Host might otherwise have perish'd. And,Tertul. Apo. cap. 37. Eucher. E∣piscop. Lug∣dun. besides others interspers'd in the Army and Garisons, we know there was a The∣bean Legion, (as well as the former Melitin) all Christians, who became as Glorious and Renowned Martyrs, as they were Valiant and Victorious Soul∣diers; never before equall'd by any, nor probably will ever be again, considering their Cause, Number, and the Place to which they innocently retired; every one of which readily suffered a tame death from the hands of the Executioner, rather than either to Sacrifice to an Idol, or Rebel against their Lawful Sovereign. This following Discourse does therefore justifie De∣fensive Wars, when our own Prince calls us to our Arms; in which, as he is Judg of the Cause, so he becomes only responsible for it to him who is above the

Highest; and we that are Subjects escape Guilt, if we behave our selves with Faithfulness and Courage. Those that are mercenary under another, have their Case different; with which, my Discourse not medling, I shall have nothing to do in the Dedication. The Ser∣mon, perhaps, might make a rattle from the Pulpit, when assisted by the help of a good Sounding-Board, a swift Delivery, and your Commendations: But I fear, for all, t'will appear to be charg'd with white Powder only when coming from the Press, and not carry a good Report far: However, since your Com∣mands are that it must be printed, it becomes your own, and you are bound to defend it; for you having so dearly paid for it, I can no longer call it mine; Justice therefore presents it to you, from him who is
Right Honourable, &c.

