



Honoured Sir,
HAving an unexaminable opportunity of publish∣ing such Tracts as this; And having formerly, by your Father been presented to the Rectory of the Parish of Gatcomb; in the Bounds of which, your Mansion House is seated, and in which you live, having the right of Advowson undoubt∣edly in your self; I cannot but pre∣sent

these Papers to you, as being the Inheritor of your Fathers Estate, and Vertues too, and of his great kindness to me in particular, which you yet on all occasions continue, and increase by succeeding heaps of favours. I need not relate the Loyalty of your Fami∣ly, it bearing date with its Antiquity, and has been so manifested to the pre∣sent World, that a Memorial of mine would be its disparagement, and up∣braid the memory of mankind. All know, whose brains are not sunk in∣to Oblivion, how you would have re∣deemed King Charles the First, that most Pious Martyr of ever bles∣sed memory, when he was a Prisoner in Carisbrook Castle, from the present insolence of the worst of men, to whom, by violence, he was enthral'd, and the designed mischiefs that were likely to befal him from persons that thirsted after Royal Blood, who

were most monstrous and irreconcilea∣ble enemies to mankind and Caesar. You had prudently laid your design, and were honestly ready, accoutred, and prepared, and at your Post at the appointed hour. But, alas! all miscarried, through the base trea∣chery of other men, to your misfor∣tune, and much bigger grief. Af∣ter this you were forced to wander, and exile your self; And 'twas hap∣py for us that survive your misfor∣tune, that you came off so. Since the return of our present and most gracious Sovereign (with whom you were also expell'd, by the rage and malice of a Pack of unreasonable and malicious men) your great modesty, and unalterable affection to the Island in which you make so considerable a Figure, (in which I have the privi∣ledge, and honour, of a Native) has been the only cause of your not being

removed into a larger Sphere. But now, your age, and the greatness of your Merits, together with your old Protestant Church of England Prin∣ciples, to which you are honestly, and severely addicted, will hardly permit you to suffer an exchange in this World (though I alwayes wish'd it) 'till you advance to the Glory of the next. I dare not any longer be thus burdensome to your modesty and con∣tentment, that covet retirement in de∣fiance of all your very large capaci∣ties; But yet, Sir, give me leave to pray, from the true resentments of a grateful mind, that the great God, who is far exalted above all Beings, would continue to preserve your most Loyal and exceedingly devout self; Your most Vertuous and extraordina∣rily pious, and modest Lady, and the two (Gentile and excellent Branches happily sprung, and nourished too,

from You, who are the root of both, much longer than I, in this World, shall be capable of remaining,
Dear SIR,

London, Nov. 1. 1683.
