



Worthy Sir,
NExt to the glory of God, the maine white at which all actions ought to be levelled: I have ever held the care of preserving, advancing, and promoting the common good, the welfare of Church and State, is most noble, necessary, and best beseeming a Christian. A thing acknow∣ledged by most, but practised by few, I had al∣most said none, and if I had, the Apostle would have borne me out, Phil. 2.21. All seek their own, and none the things of Je∣sus Christ.
Truly it hath been matter of no small griefe, and trouble unto me of late, to behold and take notice of the strange declination, and degeneration of mens spirits (to speake nothing of the Epidemicall disease of cursed Neutrality, long since spread through the whole Kingdom) the lukewarme, heartlesse, indifferensie, the palpable partiality, the grosse dissimulation and hypocrisy of those, who pretend wholy the common cause, and intend nothing but their private ends, discover themselves every where too apparently, in these times of the Church and Kingdomes greatest calamity. A clearer proofe whereof we cannot have, then dayly experience, for who sees not how many of those, who with much zeal and impe∣tuous violence, were all for the publique, whilest pay and profit, honour, and applause, good successe and victory attended the cause of God, but when it and those were parted, how shamefully have they deserted it in the open field. The more then certainly to be admired, and for ever honoured, are those, who continue con∣stant in the publique service, and will not leave the cause, no not when that seemes to leave them, and theirs, to the mercilesse fury of the enemy; Who are so far from cooling by disasters, that they are but as the frost in winter, to the fire, which serve to intend their heat and resolution; Of which number, Sir, the Town and County that chose and sent you hither, esteeme you to be; Who, of all that were chosen throughout the whole County of Nottingham,
onely stand for the welfare both of it and the whole Kingdom. The Lord who hath hitherto graciously kept up your Spirit; Will I doubt not, blesse and prosper you, and at last crowne your faith∣fullnesse, and unwearied constancy.
It was your request, and the importunity of divers Friends caused me to preach this Sermon; But the sending of it to pub∣lique view, was by the earnest sollicitations, and undeniable in∣treaty of many, both Friends and Strangers; yet not without your consent and approbation; And indeed the rather do I full fill their desire, and present it to you because it is well known to all that know you, that your practise is a lively expression of what I preached, which I wish for the imitation and encouragement of others, may be as publique as this paper; my discourse shewes what in these times, should be done, your example and practise lets the world see what is, and may be done.
Another necessity also is laid upon me, to commit this short and unpolished Sermon to the Presse. Divers that heard it preached, professed they were much affected with it, and told me, that it a∣wakned and roused up some, that were grown cold, and indifferent, to zealous resolution, to set upon the work of the Lord with more diligence, and therefore they concieved, that if the preaching, much more the printing might be of singular use in these cold declining times. Now if I had refused herein to satisfie them; My mouth would have been stopt with this Dilemma and unanswerable ar∣gument. That seeing my Theame and whole discourse, tends wholy to invite and urge all sorts within their spheares to be as serviceable as may be, for the promoting of the publique; If the printing may conduce more to this end, then the preaching, there would have been a manifest jarre betwixt my preaching and pra∣ctise, if I had denyed. Well, the blessing of God go with it, and make it effectuall for the encouraging of the faithfull and con∣stant, the inciting and awakening the drousie and indifferent, the shaming of the Neuter, and the discovery of the hypocrite. Sir, This is the prayer of him, who in what he is able desires ever

