



Sir,
MAny Learned Men have complained that Mr. Bla∣grave's Mathematical Jewel, (as he calls it) both the Instrument and the Book are rarely to be found. That the Book also by reason of the Interpolation of Gemma Frisius his precepts is longer then needed, and by reason of the Authors frequent interruptions by vexatious Suits in Law is somewhat confused; whereof himself com∣plains in his Preface to the Reader, and in the Conclusion of the Fourth Book, and elswhere, wishing an amendment. At your request especially I undertook the reformation of that Treatise, which now at length I have simshed. Gem∣ma Frisius was the first that brought this Instrument to some good perfection, calling it Astrolabium Catholicum, but he did that by a Cursor and Brachialum which Mr Bla∣grave happily devised to perform by a Reet and Label with more ease and delight. I have no designe to deprave the la∣bours, or to obscure the Names or Fame of those ingenious Men, by whom this Instrument was contrived, and advan∣ced to so great perfection; but as Mr Blagrave said when he took upon him to reform Gemma Frisius his Treatise; so I say of my last Edition of the Instrument after both, Facile est Inventis addore. Surely if men deceased have any knowledge or regard to what is done after them in this
World, and could have communication with those that re∣main here, I suppose Mr Blagrave's Ghost would give me, thanks for doing that which he heartily wished to be done but for want of leasure left unfinished: and I should like wise thank him by whose means I became acquainted with this excellent Instrument: which, next to the Sphear or Globe it self, is the best Instrument, in my judgement, that ever was devised for Astronomy: and for the easier making and portableness, is to be preferred before the Sphear it self.
My aime hath been throughout this Treatise to Write Plainly, Methodically, and with as much brevity as might consist with perspicuity, remembring that of the Poet, Bre∣vis esse laboro, Obscurus fio. How far I have attained my Intention, the Reader will judge. If this work shall be found usefull to the World, the thanks is due to you, who first ingaged me in it, and for the furtherance thereof took the pains to delineate the Instrument for me with your own hands, in Brass Plates of fifteen inches Diameter; which I esteem very highly, both for the exactness of the work, and for the work-man's sake, to whom for more then twenty Years past I am also many other wayes obliged. I confess I have been somewhat slow in performing my promise to you, because this Treatise hath taken up onely my spare hours, which by reason of infirm health, and more necessary emploiments, are not many.
Sir,

Ecton Apr. 1. 1658.
