



Honour'd Sir,
THE presumption of Dedi∣cating this Novel to you, may perhaps be thought the effect of the Assurance of an Author, having not the Happi∣ness to be known to you, yet is that Guilt (if any) abundantly its own justification; since Public Merit, as well, as Public Infamy, is free to the consideration of all men; and when you had once given so many proofs of your Virtues, and Generous Inclina∣tions, you gave ev'ry Man a right to Praise, and Admire them. If I have anticipated the Duty of your
 Friends, 'tis their fault alone, in leting a Stranger pay the first Public acknowledgments, due from all Lo∣vers of Excellence.
The World, indeed, will judge what a Stranger says, to be more sincere, since that must be the result of Public Fame, whose good word is never purchas'd but by Public De∣serts, whereas a Friend may be suspected of Bribery, and of sacrifi∣cing to Gratitude, not Truth. I must confess the Altar I offer my Vows at, deserves a Nobler Victim, but I was too jealous of the Honour of being the first that cast an Off'ring of the Muses at your Feet, to delay it till time had furnish'd me with one more worthy your acceptance; and the Gods themselves, had not always their Temples smoking with the August Sacrifices of Bulls with their gilded Horns, but often receiv'd the hum∣ble Oblation of a poor grain of Corn. As Tibullus pleads with his Patron Messala.

—Alcides Deus ascensurus olym pum,
Laeta Molorchaeis posuit vestigia tectis;
Parvaque coelestes pacavit mica, nec illis
Semper in aurato Taurus cadit Hostia cornu.
If the Heav'nly Powers wou'd have accepted no Sacrifice without the awful Pomp of Temples, and Hecca∣tombs of slaughter'd Animals, they must have been for ever without any, for the first Offerings made to 'em, were simple and plain, till time and repetition improv'd them to Solemni∣ty: Thus, Sir, tho' I put this small Trifle under your Patronage; 'tis not without a design hereafter of endea∣vouring at something of a greater Excellence, if you permit but this to divert your more leisure and unbended hours; and then I may give the World a juster Character of You, than I can pretend to do here, where I shall say no more, than what's already known to the conversi∣ble part of the Town. But Fame,
 and common Conversation, are too en∣vious, or too regardless observers of Excellence, to be just and particular in their account, passing no farther than a superficial view of what's most visible and obvious.
Yet, Sir, the Ʋnanimous Voice of all that know you, allow you the most considerable advantages of Fortune and Nature, Riches and Beauties of Body and Mind. And the Beau∣ties of the Body must be confess'd the Favours of indulgent Nature, since they are not universal, and have such extraordinary Prerogatives annex'd to 'em: For they irresistably subdue the Coy Hearts of the Fair Sex; the Noblest Pleasure of the Sons of Adam, and so esteem'd by Heav'n that be∣stow'd it; and what's more, ravish ev'n the affections of Men, drawing them to partiality ev'n in things o∣therwise indifferent. So great a Power has an Object grateful to the Eye, on the Judgment of those, who have no after Pleasure in expectation
 to bribe 'em. This is witness'd by the Divine Maro.
Tutatur favor Euryalum, Lachry∣maeque decore,
Gratior & pulchro veniens in corpo∣re virtus.
'Tis evident, Sir, I speak not here of those Female Charms, to which all the World allow the Title of Beau∣ty, but that Masculine Proportion in all the Parts and Features of the Body, that's eminent in your Person.
Tho' I have confin'd my self to Generals, yet those have given me a Theme of Contemplation, Charming as the Enthusiastick Raptures of the biggotted Devotes, when Exalted Fancy raises them above the World, for certainly nothing but the highest influence of a Present Deity cou'd make any Man embrace Virtue in this Age, where all the Noble At∣tributes, that dignified Hero's of Old, and made Men pass for Gods, are now a most ridiculous jest. To Act Justly, and Generously is e∣steem'd
 no better, than egregiously to play the Fool, and e'ry Cockscomb that has not ev'n Wit enough to be a Rascal, shall shelter himself for his awkerd attempts at Villany, under that of my Lord Rochester, viz. That to act Justly in the World, is to play fair with known Cheats.
In such an Age as this, where e'ry one is satisfy'd to swim down the stream of the general Follies and Vices, to stem the impetuous Cur∣rent, and be singular in Honour and Generosity, shews you, Sir, to be a bold Man, and gives a Poet hope that you will not be asham'd to espouse the Cause of the deserted Muses, when all pretences to Wit, and Poetry are scandalous, and be∣low the Thoughts of a Gentleman, tho' without the Poets Quill the greatest Actions dye: This Mecaenas, Messala, Corvinus, Gallus (both Poet and Patron) and others of the Romans were satisfied in, which made them cherish the Muses, as the surest and most powerful Friends.

All the Honours Mecaenas, and Pollio gain'd in Rome, wou'd not have been sufficient to have rescu'd their Memory from the Oblivion Thou∣sands of their Contemporaries are lost in, their Patronage of Virgil, Ho∣race, &c. had not conferr'd Ho∣nours on them of a more lasting date
All the Noble Edifices of Au∣gustus Caesar are perished, yet the Monuments rais'd by Immortal Vir∣gil and Horace, are fresh and gay, and fated to convey that Emperor's Glory to latest Posterity. The Poets rewarding the Generosity of their Pa∣trons, with that Fame their Power cou'd never obtain. The Gifts of Kings are limited to life, but those of Poets reach Eternity. This truth inspir'd one as dull as my self with this Noble thought.
When Nature does design some mighty thing,
She makes a Poet, or at least a King.

The most Ingenuous of the Roman Nobility, gave all encouragement to the Mses. But these were but some Gra Men of the Empire, and nothing to the Government. But Wit was never taken care of by Pub∣lick Authority so much, as by the Grecians of Athens, where a Poem well writ gain'd the Government of a Province, a the Antigone of So∣phocles did the Prefecture of Samos. Wit, and Poetry, was there made a National Concern, and in reward of it, the Glory of that Commonwalth has out liv'd its Being many Hun∣dreds of Years already, and is like to be of equal Date with the World.
'Tis Encuragement indeed, that draws the Muses to the Poets help, for they fly the Poor and Necessitous, hating a Careful and an Anxious Mind, witness Ovid, whose Misfor∣tunes eclips'd the Glory of his writ∣ing, which made him say, in his De Tristibus,

Carmina proveniunt animo diducta fereno, And
Nec venit ad duros Musa vocata Getas.
They seem to have a tincture of that Sex▪ they are represented of, and are such Mercenary followers of Ease and Pleasure, that they can't be won but by the highest force to the Em∣braces of the unfortunate. To this we owe the mighty Products of Antiquity, The Works of Sophocles, Euripi∣des, Virgil, Horace, and the rest of the sacred Quire of Poets; and the reason of our falling short of their Excellence, is, because we have no Encouragement: For Martial was much in the right on't, when he said, Sint Maecenates non deerunt Flacce Marones.
But I speak not all this to plead for all the ignorant, and vain Poeta∣sters of the Times, who, by success with the ill Palates of incompetent Judges, challenge the Name of Poets, I am so far from pleading for this Race, that I think they find too much
 encouragement already, and with Ho∣race I agree, that they merit not so much as the Name of a Poet.
Descriptas servare vices operum{que} colores,
Cur ego si nequeo ignoro{que} Poeta salutor.
But Sir, I hope you'll pardon this Digression occasion'd by the Considera∣tion of the Vices of the Age, and the opposition of your Virtues to 'em, which made me hope that you wou'd arise the Muses Friend, amidst this great and general neglect of them; not that I dare presume to put in for any share in Parnassus, at least by this performance, so irregular, and incorrect; Tho' the Subject will be some excuse, that obliging not to so severe, and Regular a Dress, as a more solid matter wou'd require; Love, and the softer dalliances with the Fair, are pleas'd with a more loose, and negligent Garb; in which, if it contribute at all to your Diver∣sion, it will be the height of my Ambition, and Design, who am Sir,

