



THe God of Heaven hath called you to a work of the
greatest Honour, and greatest Difficulty, that lies
upon any number of men, throughout the whole
world at this day:Obad. ver. last. To heal the wounds of Zion,
and be her instrumentall Saviours; the Repairers of
the breach,Esay 58. 12. and the Restorers of paths to dwell in;
and to build up the old wasts, and lay the foundations, even of many
generations; To save and rescue two Kingdoms, (as you have hel∣ped
to do a third already) from most desperately-endangering ruin;
and make way,Revel. 11. 15.
in them, for that blessed Proclamation of the seventh
Trumpet, Now are the Kingdoms of this world, become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ!
To strengthen your hearts, and hands in this sacred imployment,
as this Sermon, by your call, first presented it self to your attentive
ears, so by a second command of yours, it is now tendred to your fa∣vourable
eye; and withall exposed to the publike view of all, whe∣ther
friends, or foes to the Peace and welfare of our Ierusalem, or
Neuters. In it I have laboured so to speak to every ones conscience,
that did hear it, or shall read it, as to make them 1. Sensible of
what they should have done, and what they have done; and then
2 Apprehensive of what God hath done, and means to do with the
generall, and with them in particular, according to both his threat∣nings,
and promises; and 3. by all, Zealous for God and his Church,
and confident of his grace to his Church, and all her faithfull helpers.

In the mean time, since it hath pleased him, who is the onely wise
God, and the ruler of all things; All whose paths are mercy and
truth, to such as keep his Covenant, and his Testimonies; to ex∣ercise
your humility, fidelity, faith, and patience, by tidings unexpe∣cted
from divers parts of the Kingdom; And you have so far appre∣hended
his purposes in it, as to call us all, in and about the City, with
your selves, to a solemn and extraordinary publike Humiliation,
before the Monthly day comes about: I trust, there is, and will for
ever, be written upon your hearts, that holy care which I was bold to
recommend unto you, to enquire where the cause is, why God at any
time expresses his displeasure; and that not onely in reference to the
Nation generally, or any particular persons in it, but even to your own
selves, and that as a Body; that so you may thereby be both directed,
and excited to fulfill the will of God, according to whatsoever you do,
or shall finde amisse in any.
In all which, give me leave once more, to beseech you, in the Name of God, and his Churches, to make us and your selves at once happy.
You are our Healers, and while you subsist, as we shall not be alto∣gether
miserable, so neither without your speciall faithfulnesse,
and zeal, can we attain to any setled prosperity. I shall not now in∣stance
in any other particulars, having touched upon divers in this dis∣course,
which you are now pleased to make one of your spirituall Re∣membrancers.
In it, I have taken the freedom of others, to insert a
few things, which either straits of time, or shortnesse of memory, forced
an omission of in the delivery.Whereof the chief are some enlargement, of our dangers in the first Uses, and of the Use of ex∣amination, a∣bout our hel∣ping the Church, and the insertion of the Cata∣logue of sins against the se∣verall Com∣mandments in the Use of Humiliation. The God, whose truth it is, sancti∣fie
You and us all by it, as by all the rest of his Word of truth, So
shall the Truth make us and you free from all our dangers and
fears, of all kindes, temporall, and spirituall, and finally, glorifie us
all, in and with him, who is the eternall Truth, and eternall Life, the
Lord Jesus Christ; In whom I am ever

