


great deal more comfortable and warm than a squirrel in the sleeve. But if you happen upon one, that has worn the Philosopher so long, that two or three of his Phrases are got through his pocket, and at last have insinuated themselves into his tem∣per: he proves presently a Chair-man in all companies: and if he lucks but upon a Clergy-man, he is as great a Prince, as ever Mr. Hobbs gave power to. Then, come Sir, says he, Come now for your Immaterial substances; have you ever a one about you, Sir? I hear that you are much acquainted with them: you live by the Spirit, Sir; it is a wonder that you should not have one in your pocket: I have got honest Material Mr. Hobbs in mine. I could shew you for a need, Sir, Spirit of Wine, Spirit of Salt, or Spirit of Harts∣horn: but I have enquired, and never could get, or see any Spirit of sub∣stance. Spirit of Substance! that's fine indeed. What, Essence of Essence? pret∣ty I profess. Indeed we have had a very curious time of it, a company
 of very seeing Priests, and searching Philosophers: that should go on, and on, and teach one ano∣ther such plain, palpable, and manifest contra∣dictions. Ask them how such an effect comes to pass: it is done, say they, by an incorporeal substance. Wonderfully acute indeed! that is, by no body: or by a no body body: or by a no thing thing. It was very well for this Nation, that Mr. Hobbs was born at last; and half a dozen of us, of willingness, and parts, to under∣stand him; otherwise the world had continued in a brave blind condition. It is not, Sir, to my purpose, at present, to meddle with, or examine their Masters Principles: but I much wonder, seeing they may be daily convinc'd how much he has been mistaken in his Mathema∣tical attempts; that they should take his bare word, and believe him not to be failing in his other Writings; because he confidently says he proceeds by evident connexion, and demon∣stration. And whereas heretofore it was a work of many years study, and seriousness that could entitle one but to be suspected of Atheism: now he that has but seen Mr. Hobbs's Boots, and can make but a Mouse-trap, is as fully privi∣ledg'd, as if he could pluck up the Earth by the roots, or make a man.
I believe, Sir, there may be several others that without any reason at all are ill affected to∣wards the Clergy. One thinks that whatever
 Episcopacy be, yet the Lands thereunto belong∣ing are not jure divino: another is of opinion that the Clergy must by no means ride; because they are to go, and teach all Nations. And o∣thers there be, who are therefore against Tythes, because they think they give them. But these were partly mention'd in my former: and if they were not, it is all one; for I can say no more at present, being suddenly sent for into Devonshire: where I expect to find such employ∣ment, as will certainly secure the world, from me being ever troublesome in this kind again. I am once more,
Sir,

May 2. 1671.
FINIS.
