



Honourable Worthies:
THe Lord God Almigh∣ty is the original of all Created beings, and his glory is the great end he is carry∣ing on both in Earth and Heaven. Wisdome, Grace, and Power are the Essence of God, and from him∣self he made and governs the whole Creation independently, and none can say, Why hast thou done thus? There is some parity between a Saints Soul-state, and the true Church-state: Darkness and bon∣dage precedes light and comfort; sufferings goe before rest; Abra∣hams

true Seed are in AEgypt, they Gen. 15. 13. Exod. 12. 40, 41. pass the red Sea, and wander in a houling Wilderness, before they can possess the promised Land of Canaan: and all these former deal∣ings of God with his people in Co∣venant, were written for examples 1 Cor. 10 11. and types for us upon whom the ends of the world are come. Jeho∣vab hath not usually made great promises to his people, and inrich∣ed them with his Free Grace, but he hath brought them to live upon him by faith for the performance of the word that went out of his mouth; yet as God saw the state of future times, he was pleased still to discover and fore-tell to his suf∣fering Saints the enemies fall, and the Churches advance and glory in this world. The state both of the Jewish and Christian Church, as to their sufferings, union and glory, were fully represented in Daniels Vi∣sions, and Johns Revelations. When Jesus Christ was in the Flesh hee

was frequently Preaching, and in Parables representing the Churches suffering, and raised estate, and af∣ter him the Apostles taught the same things. The Prophets and A∣postles spake not only of the Chur∣ches future sufferings under the Beasts & false Prophet, the Dragon and the Whore, but God was plea∣sed also to compute and measure the time of Saints sufferings to their promised Redemption.
In Christs fore-telling the events of time after his Resurrection, hee gives not his Disciples the number of years, but leaves with them seve∣ral fore-going signs of their promi∣sed Redemption, that both by com∣putation of time, and by signs, the Saints might the better finde the time of the Beasts reigns, and the appearing and Kingdome of Jesus Christ. Indeed Chronologies are imperfect, and I judge the very year of the Beasts fall, and Churches deli∣verance, Mat. 24. 36 cannot be asserted by man;

yet I humbly conceive, that both from computations and signs, God hath begun his Churches delive∣rance in these Nations.
The Churches Restoration is as fully promised, as her afflicted state fore-told; and when the Dragon and the Whore have had their time of tyranny over the Saints, why should we not certainly beleeve and look for promised rest? If you please here to take a view of the Kings of the Earth, and examine Antichrists plots and practices, they have fulfil∣led the Word of God by the mouthes of his Prophets, and an∣swer them exactly, as face answers face in a Glasse.
Great Senators, I may be bold to say, God hath honoured England a∣bove all the Nations of the earth, and you above many Sons of men, in making use of you to begin (and prosess your resolutions) for the e∣stablishment of Truth and Holiness in these Lands; it was only the Lords

free mercy that brought, and hath continued the Gospel in England a∣bove any Country and Kingdom in Europe; and may we not upon that ground beleeve, that appearing, and kingdom of the Son of Man promised shall here begin, and from hence run from Nation to Nation, till all the Vials of Gods Wrath be poured out upon the Churches enemies, & that great voyce out of the Temple in Heaven be fulfilled, saying, The King∣doms Rev. 11. 15. of this world are become the king∣doms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever? True∣ly the night is not yet past, and the Lords work in your hands is atten∣ded with great difficulty, yet you shall ever have a Pillar and a Cloud to guide and defend, if you keep your eye upon them. I think I may say, God now calls you to an unwonted work, the bringing in of the New 2 Pet. 3. 13 Dan. 7. 26, 27. Heavens, and New Earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness, which is the Kingdom of Saints in this World.

Carnal Counsellours, and worldly Politicians know little of the Lords designs at this day, and will doe as little in his work. God is now stai∣ning worldly glory, God is now ful∣filling promises to his Son, and his Saints, and none but the Spiritual∣wise Dan. 12. 10 understand the work before you. I beseech you look much to God, hearken after the teaching and light of the Spirit in the Churches of Christ, and so act that you may render up your account with joy, & not with fear. This is the end, and all of my desires in this little peice I humbly present you with, who shall rejoyce to bee found serviceable in his generation, to promote the great design of Jesus Christ, and shall a∣bide

From my Lodging upon London Bridge, the 4th. Mon. 1659.
