




WHat greater Good than timely preservation,
From Fire and Sword, Destruction, Devastation,
&c.
Can come to any Countrey, great or small?
Which I suppose will be confest of all,
That Heav'n hath pitch'd on You, truth to advance,
And work for us such great Deliverance;
You that kick at this Pro∣vidence, the same Provi∣dence may kick you out of all, if you don't mend your man∣ners.
None but blind Papists, will or dare deny,
Or blinder Protestants; (for such we spy.)
You came, Sir, in the very nick of time,
Even when our Foes were in the very prime;
Yea, when they wanted nothing but the word
From Hell, and bloody France, to draw the Sword,
To Kill, Burn, Massacre, (&c.) just then you come,
For which we praise the Great JEHOVAH's Name:
For which, to thank you all good Men are bound,
For which You shall for ever be renown'd.

 For all the Protestants throughout the World,
Had into woful miseries been hurl'd,
If Britain had been lost, and all subverted;
But such a Curse your comming hath averted;
Also preserv'd our Lives and Liberties,
And freed us from a Thousand Tyrannies:
Yet shall you meet with vile ingratitude,
Rubs, Censures, Cavils, and base blanditude,
&c.
Yea, and from Stars of the first Magnitude?
To Christ, the King of Kings, be all the praise,
That did your worthy noble Highness raise,
To do for him so great, so good a work,
(As great work as conquering the Turk:)
The Ld preserve You from the hands of those,
That to his Kingdom are the greatest Foes;
He bless and guide you still to do such things,
As may Record you 'mong the best of Kings.
I have heard this when I was a boy, above Fifty years ago Some have foretold of a Ninth Henry, which
Should do great things for England, poor and rich,
And for the true Religion very much.
And that he should e'er Ninety two appear,
And put the brats of Babylon in fear;
That at his Fame they would be very sad,
And fly in haste; which would make good men glad.
I may with Reason (and good reason to)
Conclude it can be no Man else but you;
Sith the event hath answer'd the prediction,
Attended also with Heavens Benediction:
The God of wonders worketh wonders still,
And with those wonders all the World doth fill.


Mira sunt Opera Dei.

He looks down from his high and lofty Throne,
And laughs at such, as cry, The day's our own.
By Babes and Children, often he befools
Great Dons and Doctors of the learned Schools.
He tosseth Kings and Kingdoms to and fro,
And maugre all their might can lay them low.
Some he lifts up, and some throws down the Hill;
The Reasons are absconded in his will.

Stat pro ratione voluntas.

He doth astonish mighty Kings and States,
And casteth at his feet the prime Magnates.
He taketh crafty Counsellors in their
Own Nets; and trampleth Judges in the mire.
Plotters, and such as bloody mischief hatch,
He doth them in their own devices catch;
He makes them fall into the pit they made
For others, because Murder is their trade.

 Inciderunt in foveam, quam fecerunt.

He can discover all their subtil tricks,
And quite befool them in their politicks.
He breaks the power of such as Tyrannize;
And brings to nought the wisdom of the Wise.
He makes the guilty flee, when none pursue;
And in his time, will pay them all their due.
He breaks and scatters Armies when he please,
And crusheth Kings and Counsellors with ease.
Their Chancellors he can infatuate,
And cause them to mistake the Rules of State;
Yea, make them in stone-doublets see their Fate.

 Their close Cabals he quickly can uncover,
And all their curst contrivances discover;
Their deeds of darkness he can bring to light,
And turn their Day into a lasting Night.
These matters to Your Highness are no news,
And which are owned by the very Jews;)
But they are too too serious and sublime,
For the debauched Bullies of the time;
The celsitude of any Theam is gall,
To such as are at Flora's wanton call.
But my Muse scorns to humour such, as of
Aethereal strains can make a jeer and scoff;
Or tread the Mazes where such Satyrs range,
As ca
heir honour for dishonour change;
Or please such curious, quaint, sly, wanton Wits,
As can be hot, cold, bad and good by fits.
One thing (Great Sir) I cannot supersede,
(Of which, in History, all Men may read)
Which ignorant or envious people have
Labour'd to hide, (for such love to deprave;)
And that is, (spite of malice, spleen and gall)
Here to record what should be known to all;
Viz. That the seven Provinces are owing to
Your most renowned Ancestors, and You,
For that high Grandeur which they now possess,
And other benefits, even to excess;
Whose noble actions fill the Trump't of Fame,
While Nero's fume and fret to hear the same:
To rank You with the Worthies of this Age,
Will envy put into a furious rage.

 But where the Truth is said, (and nothing more)
There's the less need to fear that chafed boar.
A restless passion's full of jealousies
Envy is restless.
Of Fears and Cares; it seems all ears and eyes;
'Tis always listning for one tale or other,
To undervalue ev'n his only Brother.
But noble Souls, slight what depravers say,
So virtue, while it suffers, wins the day.

 Virtus dum patitur vincit.

Your Highness in few Weeks hath done such things
As have astonish'd all European Kings.
Who could of such Catastrophe's Divine,
When Philadelphia did with sorrow pine,
And Sion trampled underfoot by Swine?
O what stupendious changes have we seen
Of late? have such in England ever been?
God hath made you the happy instrument
To introduce this healing Parliament.
By your wise conduct we have Halcion days,
Since you have Crown'd the Protestants with Bays;
Viz. Great Victories; and without blood-shed too:
This shews us what almightiness can do:
Some have the Laurel won by blood and strage,
But you in peace have climb'd the British Stage.
The Sun of Providence here shall not set,
Till it do that, which done it hath not yet.
The Wheel within the Wheel still goeth round,
Ezek. 1.16.
Turks,
False Prote∣stants. Atheists, Popes and Papists to confound:
Mean time (illustrious Prince) be pleased to
Accept this Mite which I present to You.

 Of Your good Nature, much I have been told,
Which did encourage me to make so bold
As to adventure on the Dedication
Of this small book (though with some
For fear of offending. Hesitation)
To your renowned self; wherein you may
Read your own self, (as I may truly say)
For 'tis a noble subject, fit for none
But Martial Spirits, and for them alone;
Whereof your kind acceptance (Sir) will be
A favour, and encouragement to me.
May Heaven protect and always on You smile,
And make you ev'n a Moses to this Isle;
As it hath already hath begun to do,
Who onours God, God will him honour too.
May all your Foes before you fall and fly,
And Romish rags be bury'd totally.
May God direct and guide you Night and day,
For which (no doubt) good Protestants shall pray:
And so shall I my self, among the rest,
In which and all things else, I'll do my best

 April the
10th. 1689.
