


My Lord,
LƲcretius, endeavouring to prove from the principles of his Philosophy, that the world had a casual beginning from the concourse of Atomes; and that Men, as well as the rest of Ani∣mals, were produc'd from the vital heat and moisture of their Mother Earth; from the same principles is

bound to answer this objection, why Men are not daily form'd after the same manner, which he tells us is, because the kindly warmth, and procreative faculty of the ground is now worn out: The Sun is a disabled Lover, and the Earth is past her teeming time.
Though Religion has inform'd us better of our Origine, yet it appears plainly, that not only the Bodies, but the Souls of Men, have decreas'd from the vigour of the first Ages; that we are not more short of the stature and strength of those gygantick Heroes, than we are of their understanding, and their wit. To let pass those happy Pa∣triarchs, who were striplings at four∣score, and had afterwards seven or eight hundred years before them to beget Sons and Daughters; and to consider Man in reference only to his mind, and that no higher

than the Age of Socrates: How vast a difference is there betwixt the productions of those Souls, and these of ours? How much better Plato, Aristotle, and the rest of the Philosophers understood nature; Thucydides, and Herodotus adorn'd History; Sophocles, Eurypides and Menander advanc'd Poetry, than those Dwarfs of Wit and Learning who succeeded them in after times? That Age was most Famous amongst the Greeks, which ended with the death of Alexander; amongst the Romans Learning seem'd again to revive and flourish in the Century which pro∣duc'd Cicero, Varro, Salust, Livy, Lu∣cretius and Virgil: And after a short interval of years, (wherein Nature seem'd to take a breathing time for a second birth,) there sprung up un∣der the Vespasians, and those excellent Princes who succeeded them, a race of memorable Wits; such as were

the two Plinies, Tacitus, and Sue∣tonius; and as if Greece was emulous of the Roman learning, under the same favourable Constellation, was born the famous Philosopher and Hi∣storian Plutarch. Then whom An∣quity has never produc'd a Man more generally knowing, or more vertuous; and no succeeding Age has equall'd him. His Lives both in his own esteem, and that of others, accounted the Noblest of his Works, have been long since ren∣der'd into English: But as that Translation was only from the French, so it suffer'd this double disadvantage, first that it was but a Copy of a Copy, and that too but lamely taken from the Greek Ori∣ginal: Secondly that the English Language was then unpolish'd, and far from the perfection which it has since attain'd: So that the first Ver∣sion is not only ungrammatical and

ungraceful, but in many places al∣most unintelligible. For which rea∣sons, and least so useful a piece of History, shou'd lie oppress'd under the rubbish of Antiquated words, some ingenious and learned Gentle∣men, have undertaken this Task: And what wou'd have been the la∣bour of one Mans Life, will, by the several endeavours of many, be now accomplish'd in the compass of a year. How far they have succeed∣ed in this laudable attempt, to me it belongs not to determine; who am too much a party to be a Judge: But I have the honour to be Com∣mission'd from the Translators of this Volum, to inscribe their labours and my own, with all humility, to your Graces Name and Patronage. And never was any Man more am∣bitious of an employment, of which he was so little worthy. Fortune has at last gratify'd that earnest

desire I have always had, to shew my devotion to your Grace; though I despair of paying you my acknow∣ledgments. And of all other op∣portunities I have happen'd on the most favourable to my self; who, having never been able to produce any thing of my own, which cou'd be worthy of your view, am sup∣ply'd by the assistance of my friends, and honour'd with the presentation of their labours. The Author they have Translated, has been long familiar to you: Who have been conversant in all sorts of History both Ancient and Modern; and have form'd the Idea of your most Noble Life from the instructi∣ons and Examples contain'd in them; both in the management of publick affairs, and in the private Offices of vertue; in the enjoyment of your better fortune, and sustaining of your worse; in habituating your self

to an easie greatness; in repelling your Enemies, in succouring your Friends, and in all traverses of fortune, in every colour of your Life, maintaining an inviolable fidelity to your Soveraign. Tis long since that I have learn'd to forget the art of praising; but here the heart dictates to the pen; and I appeal to your Enemies, (if so much generosity and good na∣ture can have left you any) whe∣ther they are not conscious to them∣selves that I have not flatter'd.
Tis an Age indeed, which is only fit for Satyr; and the sharpest I have shall never be wanting to launce its Villanies, and its ingratitude to the Government: There are few Men in it, who are capable of supporting the weight of a just and deserv'd commendation: But amongst those few there must always stand excep∣ted the Illustrious Names of Ormond

and of Ossory: A Father and a Son, only Worthy of each other. Never was one Soul more fully infus'd in∣to anothers breast: Never was so strong an impression made of vertue, as that of your Graces into him: But though the stamp was deep, the subject which receiv'd it was of too fine a composition to be dur∣able. Were not priority of time and nature in the case, it might have been doubted which of you had been most excellent: But Heaven snatch'd away the Copy to make the Original more precious. I dare trust my self no farther on this subject; for after years of mour∣ning, my sorrow is yet so green upon me, that I am ready to tax Providence for the loss of that Heroick Son: Three Nations had a general concernment in his Death, but I had one so very particular, that all my hopes are almost dead with

him; and I have lost so much that I am past the danger of a second Ship∣wreck. But he sleeps with an un∣envy'd commendation: And has left your Grace the sad Legacy of all those Glories which he deriv'd from you. An accession which you wanted not, who were so rich before in your own vertues, and that high reputation which is the product of them. A long descent of Noble Ancestors was not ne∣cessary to have made you great: But Heaven threw it in as over-plus when you were born. What you have done and suffer'd for two Royal Masters has been enough to render you Illustrious; so that you may safely wave the Nobility of your birth, and relie on your actions for your fame. You have cancell'd the debt which you ow'd to your Progenitors, and reflect more brightness on their memory than

you receiv'd from them. Your na∣tive Country, which Providence gave you not leave to preserve un∣der one King, it has given you op∣portunity under another to restore. You cou'd not save it from the Chastisement which was due to its Rebellion, but you rais'd it from ruin after its repentance: So that the Trophies of War were the portion of the Conquerour, but the Triumphs of peace were re∣serv'd for the vanquish'd. The misfortunes of Ireland were owing to it self, but its happiness and Re∣storation to your Grace. The Re∣bellion against a Lawful Prince, was punish'd by an Usurping Tyrant: But the fruits of his Victory were the rewards of a Loyal Subject. How much that Noble Kingdom has flourish'd under your Graces Government, both the Inhabitants and the Crown are sensible. The

riches of Ireland are increas'd by it, and the Revenues of England are augmented. That which was a charge and burden of the Govern∣ment is render'd an advantage and support: The Trade and Interest of both Countries are united in a mutual benefit; they conspire to make each other happy; the depen∣dance of the one is an improvement of its Commerce, the preeminence of the other is not impair'd by the intercourse, and common necessities are supply'd by both. Ireland is no more a Cyon, to suck the nourish∣ment from the Mother Tree; nei∣ther is it overtop'd, or hinder'd from growth by the superiour bran∣ches; but the Roots of England, diving (if I may dare to say it,) underneath the Seas, rise at a just distance on the Neighbouring Shore; and there shoot up, and bear a pro∣duct scarce inferiour to the Trunk

from whenee they sprung. I may raise the commendation higher, and yet not fear to offend the truth: Ireland is a better Penitent than Eng∣land: The Crime of Rebellion was common to both Countries; but the repentance of one Island has been steady; that of the other, to its shame, has suffer'd a relapse: Which shews the Conversions of their Re∣bels to have been real, that of ours to have been but counterfeit. The Sons of Guilty Fathers there have made amends for the disloyalty of their Families: But here the de∣scendants of pardon'd Rebels have only waited their time to copy the wickedness of their Parents, and if possible to out do it: They disdain to hold their Patrimonies by acts of Grace and of Indempnity: and by maintaining their old Treasonable principles, make it apparent that they are still speculative Traytors.

For whether they are zealous Secta∣ries or prophane Republicans, (of which two sorts they are principal∣ly compos'd) both our Reformers of Church and Sate, pretend to a power superiour to Kingship. The Fanaticks derive their Authority from the Bible; and plead Religion to be antecedent to any secular ob∣ligation: By vertue of which Argu∣ment, taking it for granted that their own Worship is only true, they arrogate to themselves the right of disposing the Temporal power ac∣cording to their pleasure; as that which is subordinate to the Spiri∣tual: So that the same Reasons, and Scriptures, which are urg'd by Popes for the deposition of Princes, are produc'd by Sectaries for altering the Succession. The Episcopal Re∣formation has manumiz'd Kings from the Usurpation of Rome; for it preaches obedience and re∣signation

to the lawful Secular power: but the pretended Refor∣mation of our Schismaticks, is to set up themselves in the Papal Chair; and to make their Princes only their Trustees. So that whether they or the Pope were uppermost in Eng∣land, the Royal Authority were e∣qually depress'd: The Prison of our Kings wou'd be the same; the Gaol∣ers only wou'd be alter'd. The broad Republicans are generally Men of Atheistick principles, nomi∣nal Christians, who are beholding to the Font, only that they are so call'd, otherwise Hobbists in their politicks and Morals: Every Church is ob∣lig'd to them that they own them∣selves of none; because their Lives are too scandalous for any. Some of the Sectaries are so proud, that they think they cannot sin; those Common-wealth Men are so wicked, that they conclude there is no sin. Lewdness,

Rioting, Cheating and Debauchery, are their work a day practise: Their more solemn crimes, are unnatural Lusts, and horrid Murthers. Yet these are the Patrons of the Non∣conformists; these are the Swords and Bucklers of Gods cause; if his cause be that of Separatists and Re∣bells. Tis not but these Associates know each other at the bottom, as well as Simeon knew Levi: The Re∣publicans are satisfy'd that the Schismaticks are Hypocrites, and the Schismaticks are assur'd that the Republicans are Atheists: But their common principles of Government are the chaines that link them: For both hold Kings to be Crea∣tures of their own making, and by inference to be at their own dis∣posing. With this difference, not∣withstanding, that the Canting party face their pretences with a call from God, the debauch'd par∣ty

with a Commission from the people. So that if ever this ill contriv'd and equivocal association shou'd get uppermost, they wou'd infallibly contend for the supream right; and as it was formerly on their mony, so now it wou'd be in their interests; God with us wou'd be set up on one side, and the Common-wealth of England on the other. But I the less wonder at the mixture of these two natures, because two Salvage beasts of different species and Sexes shut up together, will forget their En∣mity to satisfie their common lust; and 'tis no matter what kind of Mon∣ster is produc'd betwixt them, so the brutal appetite be serv'd. I more admire at a third party, who were Loyal when Rebellion was upper∣most, and have turn'd Rebells (at least in principle,) since Loyalty has been Triumphant. Those of them whose services have not been re∣warded,

have some pretence for discontent; and yet they give the World to understand, that their Honour was not their principle, but their Interest. If they are old Royallists, 'tis a sign their vertue is worn out; and will bear no longer; if Sons to Royallists they have pro∣bably been grafted on Whig stocks, and grown out of kind; like China Oranges in Portugal: Their Mo∣thers part has prevail'd in them, and they are degenerated from the Loyalty of their Fathers.
But if they are such, as many of them evidently are, whose service has been, not only fully but lavish∣ly recompens'd, with Honours and preferment, theirs is an ingratitude without parallel; they have de∣stroy'd their former merits, dis∣own'd the cause for which they fought, bely'd their youth, dishon∣our'd their age; they have wrought

themselves out of present enjoy∣ments, for imaginary hopes, and can never be trusted by their new friends, because they have betray'd their old. The greater and the stronger ties which some of them have had, are the deeper brands of their Apostacy: For Arch-Angels were the first and most glorious of the whole Creation: They were the morn∣ing work of God; and had the first impressions of his Image, what Creatures cou'd be made: They were of kin to Eternity it self; and wan∣ting only that accession to be Deities. Their fall was therefore more op∣probrious than that of Man, because they had no clay for their excuse: Though I hope and wish the latter part of the Allegory may not hold, and that repentance may be yet allow'd them. But I delight not to dwell on so sad an object: Let this part of the Landschape be cast into

shadows, that the heightnings of the other may appear more beauti∣ful. For as Contraries the nearer they are plac'd are brighter, and the Venus is illustrated by the Neighbour∣hood of the Lazar, so the un∣blemish'd Loyalty of your Grace, will shine more clearly, when set in competition with their stains. When the Malady which had seiz'd the Nobler parts of Britain threw it self out into the limbs, and the first sores of it appear'd in Scotland, yet no effects of it reach'd your Province: Ireland stood untainted with that pest: The care of the Physician prevented the disease, and preserv'd the Country from in∣fection. When that Ulcer was ra∣ther stop'd than cur'd, (for the causes of it still remain'd) and that dangerous Symptoms appear'd in England; when the Royal Au∣thority was here trodden under

foot, when one Plot was prosecuted openly, and another secretly fo∣mented, yet even then was Ireland free from our contagion: And if some venemous Creatures were produc'd in that Nation, yet it ap∣pear'd they could not live there: They shed their poyson without effect: They despair'd of being successfully wicked in their own Country, and transported their E∣vidence to another, where they knew 'twas vendible: Where ac∣cusation was a Trade, where for∣geries were countenanc'd, where perjuries were rewarded, where swearing went for proof, and where the Merchandize of Death was gainful. That their Testimony was at last discredited, proceeded not from its incoherence: For they were known by their own party when they first appear'd; but their folly was then manag'd by the cunning

of their Tutors; they had still been believ'd, had they still follow'd their Instructors: But when their wit∣ness fell foul upon their friends, then they were proclaim'd Villains, discarded and disown'd by those who sent for them; they seem'd then first to be discover'd, for what they had been known too well be∣fore; they were decry'd as inven∣tours of what only they betray'd: Nay their very wit was magnified lest being taken for fools, they might be thought too simple to forge an accusation. Some of them still continue here detested by both sides, believ'd by neither: (for even their betters are at last uncas'd,) and some of them have receiv'd their hire in their own Country: For perjury, which is malice to Mankind, is always accompanied with other Crimes: and tho not punishable by our Laws with death,

yet draws a train of vices after it: The Robber, the Murderer and the Sodomite, have often hung up the forsworn villain: And what one sin took on trust, another sin has pay'd. These travelling Locusts are at length swallow'd up in their own Red-Sea. Ireland as well as England is deliver'd from that fly∣ing Plague; for the Sword of Justice in your Graces hand, like the Rod of Moses, is stretcht out against them: And the third part of his Majesties Dominions is owing for its peace to your Loyalty and vigilance.
But what Plutarch can this age produce to immortallize a life so Noble? May some excellent Hi∣storian at length be found, some Writer not unworthy of his Subject, but may his employment be long deferr'd: May many happy years continue you to this Nation and your own; may your praises be ce∣lebrated

late; that we may enjoy you living rather than adore you dead. And since yet, there is not risen up amongst us, any Historian who is equal to so great an un∣dertaking, let us hope that Pro∣vidence has not assign'd the work∣man, because his employment is to be long delay'd; because it has reserv'd your Grace for farther proofs of your unwearyed duty, and a farther enjoyment of your fortune. In which tho no Man has been less envy'd, because no other has more Nobly us'd it, yet some droppings of the Ages venom have been shed upon you: The Supporters of the Crown are plac'd too near it, to be exempted from the storm which was breaking over it. 'Tis true you stood involv'd in your own Vertue, and the Malice of your Libellers cou'd not sink through all those folds to reach you. Your

Innocence has defended you from their attacks, and your pen has so Nobly vindicated that Innocence, that it stands in need of no other second. The difference is as plainly seen, betwixt Sophistry and truth, as it is betwixt the stile of a Gentle∣man, and the clumsy stifness of a Pedant. Of all Historians God deliver us from Bigots; and of all Bigots from our Sectaries. Truth is never to be expected from Au∣thors whose understandings are warp'd with Enthusiasm: For they judge all actions and their causes by their own perverse principles; and a crooked line can never be the measure of a streight one. Mr. Hobbs was us'd to say, that a Man was alwaies against reason, when reason wasagainst a Man: So these Authors are for obscuring truth, because truth would discover them. They are not Historians of an Acti∣on,

but Lawyers of a party: They are retain'd by their principles, and brid'd by their interests: Their nar∣rations are an opening of their cause; and in the front of their Hi∣stories, there ought to be written the Prologue of a pleading, I am for the Plaintiff, or I am for the De∣fendant. We have already seen large Volumes of State Collections, and Church Legends, stuffd with detected forgeries in some parts, and gaping with omissions of truth in others: Not penn'd I suppose with so vain a hope as to cheat Posterity, but to advance some design in the present Age: For these Legerde∣main Authors, are for telling sto∣ries, to keep their trick undiscover'd; and to make their conveyance the more clean. What calumny your Grace may expect from such Wri∣ters, is already evident: But it will fare with them, as it does with ill

Painters; a Picture so unlike in all its features and proportions, re∣flects not on the original, but on the Artist: For malice will make a piece more unresembling than ignorance: And he who studies the life, yet bungles, may draw some faint imi∣tation of it; But he who purposely avoids nature, must fall into gro∣tesque, and make no likeness. For my own part I am of the former sort: And therefore presume not to offer my unskillfulness for so excel∣lent a design as is your illustrious life: To pray for its prosperity and continuance is my duty; as it is my Ambition to appear on all occasions,

