



Generous Sir,
COntrary to the Cu∣stom of our late Dedicators, who are pleas'd to importune People of Quality with te∣dious Catalogues of those
Virtues which neither they, nor their Forefathers ever had the least Title to, and abuse them with fulsom Com∣mendations of their Wit and Judgment, of which they are so little guilty, that their Elevated Fortune ve∣ry rarely admits of Common. Sense: in laying this Tran∣slation at your Feet, I shall only take the Freedom to ac∣quaint you, the Subject is so adequate to your Capacity, and suitable to the Noble Imployment of your Time
that I could not without manifest wrong to your ex∣traordinary Endowments, address it to any body but your self, who are certainly the greatest Master of In∣trigue, that this, or any precedent Age has ever yet produc'd. This Period I confess is something long∣winded; but, Sir, you chal∣lenge this, and much more from me; it is due to your incomparable Merit, as all the World will be convinc'd, when it will shortly appear,
how finish'd an Ass, and elaborate a Coxcomb you are upon Record. When a cer∣tain Billet doux of yours to a Person that shall be nameless, which some very uncivil Persons have com∣municated to some Persons in Authority, shall Publickly instruct our Little Smatte∣rers in Love, how to raise their Thoughts to a Sera∣phick pitch, and entertain their Female Divinities with sublimer Nonsense This Modern way of Wri∣ting,
as you are modestly pleas'd to call it, is a Ta∣lent you ought to cherish, and which perhaps the neighbring Mineral Wa∣ters, and now and then a Draught of Bansted Air, may improve to that degree, as the Whole Nation may be oblig'd to Surry for a se∣cond, and more refin'd Longinus. Mac Flec∣noe, who will ever own you to have been his Worthy Maecenas, has already assur'd us, you were, by his
Endeavours, come to be a pretty hopeful, competent Atheist: You were then, I suppose, no further than Speculation; but now are advanc'd to Practice, and shew us a new Method of using the Scripture, by in∣troducing it into Love-let∣ters. Harry Martin was something too familiar with his Pigsnye: But you are as Pathetick as Inge∣lo himself, and as devout in your Expressions when you make a Cuckold, as he was
when he wrote of Repen∣tance. I should here leave you, but that I think it ne∣cessary to let all Married Women know, how vigorous an Asserter you are of their Liberties; I mean not only in your Personal Perfor∣mances, but in the Chara∣cter yon bestow upon the whole Herd of Husbands, whom you so generously call Tyrants over their Ladies. Unhappy Brutes! to fall under your Displea∣sure. But thrice happy the
Fair Sex, in having so un∣parallell'd an Heroe to de∣liver them from the Inso∣lence and Barbarity of their most Tyrannical, Arbitrary Cuckolds. The many real Favours I have formerly received from you, oblig'd me in Gratitude to make you some Return; which if I have not done so effectually as you deserve, I must needs beg your Pardon. Dear, Dear Mr. Horner,

