



Worthy Sir,
YOur Generous ac∣ceptance of the First Part, gives you a kind of Title to the Second; and I think my self bound in Honour to Epistle you again, having omitted several of your Good Qua∣lities in my former Dedica∣tion.
Besides, it is a Ju∣stice due to the Ladies, to let them know how much they are oblig'd to you, and to give them notice, that a lit∣tle of their Assistance is re∣quir'd to compleat the Re∣formation which Mr. Hor∣ner alone hath so success∣fully advanc'd. I cannot, I confess, but applaud the Enterprise, tho' I am per∣haps one of those it is de∣sign'd against; but I long for Reprisals, and my own Horns will be the less star'd
at, when I have planted as large a Pair on the Head of my Neighbour. This mu∣tual Freedom we all owe to you, Mr. Horner; you have slackned the Bonds of Matrimony, which wrung us so hard, and have rendred that Yoke more easie. You have, like a true Whigg, taken away the Prerogative of a Tyrannical Husband, and have turn'd that Mo∣narchy into a Free State: You have given us our much, our long-desir'd
Liberty, never till now so perfectly enjoy'd.
And now, Mr. Horner, it is fit to tell the World what Steps you have made in this Glorious Design, what Means you have us'd to destroy your Destroyer. But some may say, You have been too severe, you have declin'd the Old Way of making your Cuckold your Friend: Mr. Hor∣ner scorns these Common Methods, they are too Gros∣sier for a Man of his quick
Parts, too mean for a Per∣son of his Generosity. He betrays not a Friend, but subdues an Enemy; yet gives him warning to de∣fend himself; defies him fairly, and tells him, he shall be a Cuckold in spite of his Teeth. This perhaps may not be so Civil, but Mr. Bays will tell you 'tis Great.
Nor has Mr. Horner less testified his Address, in out-witting those Natural Spies, Mothers, Wife,
Cosins, &c. It is from them he hath receiv'd his chief Assistance, and hath turn'd them, as his own Cannon, against the Enemy; hath convinc'd them how ne∣cessary it is their Relati∣on should be a Cuckold, and hath unanswerably prov'd, That the onely Means to cure him of his Jealousie, is to make him Certain. 'Tis true, some have mali∣ciously prosecuted him, and, consulting their Fear, have
fil'd an Information, in stead of sending a Chal∣lenge; yet even This, in the end, will add to his Re∣putation, when it shall ap∣pear to the World, they have besought him for an Accommodation by Terms so much to his Advantage: like the French King, who hath gain'd more by making Peace, than ever he Conquer'd with his most Vi∣ctorious Armies.
But I would not impor∣tune you too much, Mr.
Horner, especially when your Adventures are a fit∣ter Subject for a Novel it self, than a Dedicati∣on: And I hear there is a Celebrated Genie lately arriv'd from France, so much pleas'd with them, that he hath already set Pen to Paper. I doubt not but he will fully make up what I fall short of, and do Mr. Horner that Justice I design him. I promise to teach him English when he comes
abroad, and shall be proud to be your Historian, tho' at Second Hand.
