



My LORD,
HOw much it concernes every man to be rightly informed in the Controversies between Rome and Us, is sufficiently evident from the great importance they have in reference to our ever∣lasting state: The Papists think the Protestant Doctrine is dangerous to Salva∣tion; and the Protestants know the Popish Do∣ctrine to be so: For although they use confi∣dently to give it out to their Partisans that their Religion is a safe way in the judgment of Prote∣stants themselves, and though in former times of ignorance God might wink at some members of

the Church of Rome that held the Foundation, although they built a great deale of Hay and Stubble upon it: Yet since the late Edition of severall new Articles of their creed, and since the contempt of that clear and glorious light of Gospell discoveries shining in the discourses and Writings of Protestant Authors. I cannot (and I fear God will not) excuse them from that hai∣nous crime of rebelling against the light or with holding it in unrighteousnesse; and as Christ said to the Jewes, they have now no cloake for their Sinnes.
What the portion is of the followers of An∣tichrist we may more safely understand from the Testimony of God then from the conjectures of men; of them we read that they shall be damned, 2 Thes. 2.12. That their names are not written in the Book of Life, Rev. 13.8. That they shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of God—and shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone—and the smoke of their Torment shall ascend evermore, and they shall have no rest day nor night which worship the beast and his image, Rev. 14.9, 10, 11.
The onely doubt is whether the Papists be followers of Antichrist, or (which comes to one) whether the Pope be Antichrist, which seemed so probable to the famous Lord Bacon that being asked by King JAMES whether he thought him so to be, it was no lesse truly then wittily answe∣red

by him, That if an hue and cry should come after Antichrist, which should describe him by those Characters by which he is deciphered in the Bible, he should certainly apprehend the Pope for him, and I desire all Papists, who would not venture their Eternall Salvation upon uncertain∣ties, to doe our cause and their own Soules that justice as to peruse the Author's of both sides viz. Whitaker and Downham on the one, and Bellar∣mine and Lessius on the other, and then I doubt not but they will conclude the notorious weak∣nesse of their cavils, or pretended Answers to our Allegations to be at least an high presumption of the truth of our Assertion, if not sufficient to put an end to all further doubtings.
My Lord,
It is no small evidence of a good cause and felicity of our Protestant people, that they are permitted to see with their own Eyes, and are both allowed and warned by their teachers, not to take matters of Salvation upon trust but to enquire and search the Scriptures and other Au∣thors whether those things be true or no, whil'st unhappy Papists like the Andabatae of old must winke and fight, and are obliged with an implicit Faith to follow their guides in spight of Christs

caution used upon the like occasion, If the blind lead the blind both shall fall into the Ditch, Matth. 15.14. Protestant Ministers bespeak their hea∣rers in St Pauls language, I speak to wise men judge ye what I say, 1 Cor. 10. 15. While Popish Priests, if they would speak out must say I speak as to Fooles, believe all that I say: A plaine signe their Gold is adulterate because they dare not suffer it to come to the Touchstone.
My Lord,
In the handling of these Controversies I thought it most prudent and ingenuous to follow the Councell which Benhadad gave to his Soul∣diers, to fight neither with small nor great, but with the King of Israel, and therefore I did not mind the branches, but have indeavoured to strike at the Root: For such is the Doctrine here dis∣cussed viz. The Doctrine of the Churches Au∣thority and Infallibility and so it is acknowledged by all the Romanists, and we are advised by them (if we mean to do any good) to attaque them in this point. I like the Counsell and therefore have resolved  arcem petere to attempt their strongest hold: All the Controversies of the Church of Rome have (what Caligula wished all the people of Rome had) one work, and that is this of the Churches Infallible Authority: while this

is safe, we do but paire their Nailes, and cut their Haire which will quickly grow againe, but if this failes, all falls, wound them here, and it goes to the heart. Whether I have done this here or no, I shall not be so absurd or arrogant as to give judg∣ment in my own cause, this onely I shall be bold to say, that I have faithfully represented the strength of the Popish cause in this great point out of their most famous and approved Authors, and such of whom it might be truly said Si moe∣nia Romae Defendi possent dextrâ hac defensa fu∣issent, and therefore if all the plausible pretences of their most considerable Writers be here remo∣ved and destroyed (which I willingly referre to the judgment of the serious intelligent and impar∣tiall Reader) I may without injustice conclude that their Doctrine is indefensible and their cause desperate.
My Lord,
The reason why I devolve the patronage of this work upon your Lordship is not onely the consideration of your reall worth and those ho∣nourable qualities resplendent in you, that true generosity, sincere friendship, obliging sweetnesse, impartiall valuation of persons accrding to their merit, not their party or opinion in little things, and other conspicuous vertues (which they that

have the happinesse of your acquaintance are wit∣nesses of) nor is it onely the known excellency and exemplary piety of your most Illustrious Lady (which nothing but ignorance or malice can deny) nor the particular obligations which I shall allwayes desire to own to both of you, but the contemplation of that great interest, which by the high capacity of your Place, and the no∣blenesse of your Estate, and the unexampled affability of your deportment, you have in the Kingdome of Ireland; which how free it is from other Venoms your Lordship knowes better then I, yet sure I am it is sadly infected with the Poison of Popish Doctrines, and therefore I thought the Antidote most needfull there, and that your Lord∣ships Authority and Influence accompanied with your zealous indeavours (which God expects and I promise to my self from you in so good a cause) might induce many persons of the Romish per∣swasion to read and consider this short Treatise, if God peradventure may give them Repentance to the acknowledgment of the Truth that they may recover themselves from the snare of the Devill.
That God would encline your heart to contri∣bute your most effectuall help to so good a work and succeed you in it and recompence you for it,

and that God would blesse Your self and worthy Lady with all the blessings you want, and merci∣fully preserve and Sanctify to you all you have, and crowne all with those inexpressible feli∣cities of another World, is now and shall by Gods assistance be the humble and fervent pray∣er of,
My Lord,

Sept. 1. 1665.
