



SIR,
THE great kind∣ness that you shewed to me immediatly af∣ter I had the happiness to be first ac∣quainted with you, hath made

such an impression upon my Spi∣rit, that I cannot but exceed∣ingly rejoyce to have this op∣rortunity, of telling to the World how much you have obliged me. In Testimony of which, I now pre∣sent you with this Treatise (such as it is) of Ejacula∣tory Prayer. Which I Know (it being of that nature that it may well be numbered a∣mongst those things that are to be lookt upon as helps and furtherance of having your Conversation in Heaven; which I perswade my self is your main design and endeavour) will be very acceptable to you. See∣ing but few (if any) have

made it their principal design to discourse fully, and particularly of Ejaculatory Prayer (for though something transiently in prosecuti∣on of other Discourses, yet not any peculiar Treatise that I know of hath been published concerning it) although many, as may well be sup∣posed, even of those who do acknow∣ledge the concernment of Prayer in the general, do not understand, at least consider as they ought, the con∣cernment of Ejaculatory Prayer in particular: I have for the Informati∣on and Conviction of such Persons Written this ensuing Treatise. Wherein I have endeavoured to e∣vince the Necessity of it; and to shew not only the Alvantages we

have for it, but also the Advanta∣ges and benefits we may have by it. I have shewn likewise the evil of neglecting it; and essayed to per∣swade to the diligent performance of the Duty, hoth for our selves and others, upon all occasions: yet up∣on some more especially, which there∣fore are mentioned, and insisted on in particular. And because Men are lyable to many a miscarriage in the discharging of it, for prevent∣ing of them, several Cautions are laid down; and afterwards several Directions given, to help in the per∣forming it. This is the Sum and substance of what this Treatise contains, which I have contracted in as narrow a Compass as I could:

seeing ordinary Persons (for whom this Treatise is specially designed) are neither willing to be at the price of buying, nor at the pains of reading much larger Discourses. I have no more to add, but that my desire and prayer is, and shall be, that the blessing of heaven may be upon your self, and your worthy Relations and that I am
SIR,

Tiverton, October 10. 1674.
