



MADAM!
AS the Effects of Love, have not only various insinuating Passages into the Soul, but also Enemies to the Injoy∣ments thereof; so likewise, were it has rooted Deep, it not only works it's way thro' by Real Actions and Imaginations in the Day; but also by Diversity of Dreams and Visions in the Night.
Nor, Madam, can I improve my time (especially the Day) bet∣ter, than by Indeavouring, Imagining, and using all possible In∣dustry, to gain the Affections of my Almahide; whose real Vir∣tues, were I to recite, would attract the whole Ʋniverse, to join with my too much Honoured Rival, to the making your passion∣ate Ponce the more Ʋnfortunate.
And, as I improve the Day, so likewise do I not altogether set aside the Night; for scarcely one Nocturnal Hour revolves, with∣out affording me some Thought, or Idea of my delicious Almahide therein.
'Twas therefore, (dear Madam!) purely for the private Injoy∣ment of as large a Reflection on my hitherto wretched Destiny, as ossibly my Grief would allow, that I took this Evening Walk, he which I fell into so Tragical a Dream; which has been in e measure, really the Condition of your distressed Ponce.

Not that my Inclination was ever Over-ambitious of shedding Blood, (tho' I grant the Constitution of Man's Body, does somewhat attribute to the Nature of his Dream) yet, let me tell you, Madam! that Ponce de Leon's Spirit is still so Generously Valiant, that he scorns to Dream in the Night, what he is afraid to Act in the Day, for the sake of his fair Almahide!
You will find, Madam! no Obscenity in it; nor any thing, but what, your own Knowledge will tell you, Ponce has all along as Ar∣d'rously explain'd in Reality: But you will Read, how deserved a Punishment has been Inflicted on a Treacherous, and Perjur'd Duke; and the Constancy of a Lady Recompensed with as great a Reward of Happiness. I could Wish indeed, that the Age we live in, was not Perplex'd with too many such Persons as the wretched Infantada; and then I'm sure, Ponce would fare far better with his Almahide.
In fine, Madam! if there be any thing therein, worthy your Acceptance, I crave the Pardon to lay it at your Feet: For, (since you'ave had my Heart already) I must modestly Confess with Ovid;
Carmina qui facimus, mittamus Carmina tantum,
Nam Chorus ante alios aptus Amore sumus.
Nought can we Poets (save our Verses give)
For Poets are th'most Amorous Lads that live.
Which, if they should merit one Smile, or Sympathizing Sigh for the distressed Ponce! he will not only esteem himself Blest for the Present, but in a fair way of being Happy Hereafter; and will Madam, Adore your Immatchless Virtues, longer than he is known to You by the Name of

