



Magnanimous Sirs!
IF I should present you with what is contain'd in the following Trea∣tise, which comprehends an Impartial History of the Ancient and Present State of Ireland, as also the Life and barbarous Actions of the Earl of Tyrconnel, &c. as binding Rules to your Ho∣nours, I should be like to that ridiculous Philosopher, who not knowing any thing of War more than some few Martial Axioms, pre∣sumed to read Military Lectures to Hannibal (one of the greatest Cap∣tains that ever Nature produc'd) your Noble and Victorious Souls be∣ing indued with such Principles of true Honour and Courage, that comprehend all Laws themselves, that direct and manage you.
I therefore only assume the boldness (worthy Sirs!) to lay the follow∣ing Discourses at your Feet, humbly begging that they may be shrowded under the Wings of your most Noble Patronage. But tho this Treatise can be of no further Service to you than barely to set forth the Lustre of your own Observations, or to bring to remembrance what you have already seen or heard in your Travels abroad, yet it may be useful to o∣thers (more especially to the Souldiers under your Command) if it meet with your Protection; for none that have heard of your Fame will dare to disbelieve ought that is Patroniz'd by so Glorious Conquerours as you have lately been in the West of England, and in other Parts: And most certain it is, That every Turn of your Head, Glance of your Eye, Motion of your Hand, Step of your Foot, is a Vexation and a Plague to your Irish Enemies (the Papists) who believe your very Sha∣dow so fatal to all their Contrivances and Aims, that whilst you live they shrivel and wither, your Breath strikes Confusion to all their Plots and Devices, and therefore no wonder they so dread your Arrival in Ireland.
And upon your Success or Overthrow the whole Protestant Religion in that Country seems to stand or fall.
But (by the Blessing of Almighty God) none can doubt of the Success of your Arms, seeing you never yet saw Fear but in the Face of an Enemy, nor never yet knew what it was not to Vanquish: Conquest hath
 always sate upon the Edge of your Swords, and Victory been written in your Foreheads.
Then, Victorious Sirs! be not unwilling to add this one to your other numerous Triumphs! What if your Enemies exceed you in multitudes of men, you surpass them in number of Souldiers. The meaning of the word (Courage) is unknown among them: And for their Officers, the best of them had rather creep into a Scabbard than draw a Sword. As for their Common Souldiers, what are they? but the very Excre∣ment of Common Prisons, with which their Army is cumber'd, not mann'd.
And as for their General (an Impartial Account of whose Life and Actions is here presented to your View) he is indeed a fit Captain for such a selected Company; It is the same Tyrconnel who is famed for a Coward throughout Europe; and I verily assure my self, that neither he dares think of mainiaining his Ground, or you of tosing your former Glories. Nay, indeed it is not Tyrconnel at all, but the shadow only of that Substance; for the Popish Religion he so eagerly embraces hath bruitified him to that degree, that he hath neither Humanity, Mercy, nor Pity left to the Distressed Protestants that you are now generously going to relieve.
Courage then, Illustrious Hero's! brave Men of Arms, be (as you have still been) Glorious Conquerours. To speak more were to detain you from Victory. Only this, Call to mind your ancient Valour! and remem∣ber that you are true English Men and Protestants, and your Enemies Irish Papists and Rebels.
And thou, O Almighty God, (who hast styled thy self the Lord of Hosts) make these worthy Commanders Success as great as their Cause is good: Teach their Hands to War, and their Fingers to fight; give unto them, and unto every one of their Fellow-Souldiers, the Strength of Sampson the Courage of David, and the Wisdom of Solomon, that they may undermine all the At∣tempts, and overthrow all the Plots of them that sight against thy Truth; yet even in the heat of Fury give them Pity, that they may rather spare than Spoil. And because Death is before their Eyes, give them Grace to be mindful of it, and prepared for it: Take their Bodies into thy Protection, and defend them; take their Souls into thy Tuition, and sanctifie them; and at last receive them into thy Glorious Kingdom, through Jesus Christ, Amen.
