



ABove a Year since came forth a Book, call'd, A Looking-Glass to Display the fair Face of Popery; which is so pitiful a thing, so stuff't with prodigious Lies and Absurdities, that all understanding Men must needs rather think it to be Contemn'd, than Answer'd; yet because in the Circumstances we are at present, it tends to create Fears and Jealousies in Vulgar Apprehensions of I know not what, to raise Disturbances in the Nation against King and Government, and it may make some impres∣sion on weaker Minds, for whom 'tis chiefly intended, I thought it not amiss, to prepare this Antidote against that Poison.
For I cannot apprehend any thing more advantagious to both your Temporal and Eternal Concerns, than to present you with a True Draught of Phanaticism, stript of its Disguises; which at present not only threatens us, but has the confidence to paint and var∣nish over it self in such pleasing colours, as to delude
 unwary Heads, into a fond opinion of its Innocency and fair Proceedings; when in truth there's nothing in the World that so infallibly tends to your Eternal Destruction hereafter, and in the mean time to make you perfect Slaves and Vassals to the Cheats and Lusts of a few base and self-designing People here on Earth.
Though the Author in a Jocose Humour makes his Readers merry with Popish Tricks, as he relates them; yet Christian Charity invites me not to laugh at, but pity Phanaticks poor Souls! so misled by Satan's subtilties, that under pretence of Piety, they ruin Religion, and for the good of the Kingdom, destroy the Government.
Here you shall find the Ways of Phanaticks in some sort display'd, their Principles detected, their Cruelties laid open; how they play the Devil for God's sake, by murthering Kings, enslaving Subjects, breaking Oaths, combining in rebellious Associations, overturn∣ing Governments, violating the Laws of God and Na∣ture, and the Rights of Kingdoms, to advance what they call, The good Old Cause, and that by a godly Ʋsurpation, as the days of Cromwel, they might lord it over Prince and People.
You may here (generous Youths and Virgins) ob∣serve the chief Lineaments of Phanaticism. A small Picture of the greatest Monster that ever plagued the World. Whom to have drawn at full length would have requir'd Volumes; but he's a sorry Mathematician
 that by the length of Hercules's Foot, cannot guess at the dimensions of his Body.
The chief Policy of Satan is by Phanaticism, to undermine our Holy Faith, the ground-work of our Salvation, to extirpate Charity, the Bond of Perfection, the very Life and Soul of Religion; 'tis a very Plot upon Christianity it self. For where the enthusiastical extravagant Fancies of these Zealots prevail, all Order is ruin'd; where their canting way of Prayer and Preaching is practis'd, Christian Religion, so full of Gravity and Majesty in her proper Dress, is made ridi∣culous; the power of Godliness is destroy'd by their empty Forms and shadows of Piety; and for the Fruits of the Spirit, which are Love, Joy, Peace,Gal. 5. 22: Long-suffering, Gentleness, Good∣ness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, we have nothing but the Works of the Flesh, as Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emu∣lations, Wrath, Contentions, Seditions, Here∣sies, Envyings, Murders, &c. as we find too true by sad Experience.
This is the true Draught of Phanaticism, which the numerous Broods of Sectarists strive to advance among us, though by never so wicked Means, as horrid Lies, Sham-Plots, Subordinations, Perjuries, Mur∣thers, Seditions, Insurrections, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Massacres, to the utter ruin of King and Kingdom;
 and had taken effect, if God of his infinite goodness to this Nation had not discover'd their Hellish Policies. We need not have recourse to Foreign Histories, the days of Charles the First, of famous Memory, and of our present most gracious Soveraign, are sufficient to teach us what is Phanaticism, and what we are to expect from Phanaticks, when once they get into the Saddle.
God of his infinite mercy in his good time make us of one Heart and Mind, as St. Luke describes the Pri∣mitive Christians, That we may not be like Chil∣dren, tossed to and fro with the wind of every Doctrin, but being grounded in Faith, and rooted in Charity, we may live in Peace and Concord, and bring forth the Fruits of Ever∣lasting Life: Which is the cordial Prayer of,

