


My dearest Daughters,
SInce the time that Providence se∣parated your Mother and you from me and your Brother, tho al my melancholy Houres have seemed to run exceeding slowly, yet those especially have been unto me the most heavy and irksom, which we were formerly accusto∣med to imploy in your Brother's and your Instruction. My Pleasure was then great, to observ your daily Proficiency in divers commendable Qualifications, under your Mother's discreet Conduct; and it was consummated in those Eve∣ning-Conversations wherin we ex∣ercised your discursive Facultys. Wher∣fore, the Interruption of that Pleasure has not a little augmented unto me the

Tediousness of her and your Absence.
Now the best Remedy that I have been able to finde for this Trouble has been to exercise my own Thoughts in the same Meditations wherin we formerly exerci∣sea yours. And after having don so som while, I resolved in my Minde to draw them up into such a Form as I or∣dinarily made the Method of my Teach∣ing. You remember, undoubtedly, how I have often told you, That our Know∣ledge is at least seemingly, if not really, a kinde of Remembrance: I mean, That there ar such Seeds of it in our Nature, as ar always ready to sprout out in the same manner, when they ar assisted by the same convenient Culture; such an Uni∣formity in our general Ideas of Things, as upon the same Hints and Admoniti∣ons, and with the same strictness of Ap∣plication, wil resolv into the same par∣ticular Conclusions. This, I say, has made me digest my Meditations into the Form of a Conference; In the first part of which (it being properly Catechisti∣cal)

the Respondent is led by a natural Order of Questions to draw his Answers out of his own Stock.
In the doing of it I have made use of your Brother's Name, and have thereby given him a peculiar Title to the thing. But as I am desirous that it may be a com∣mon Memorial of me unto al of you, when I shal be no more, I therfore make it yours also by this Dedication: And for the same Reason, I have likewise ad∣ded unto it a Copy of that Advice which I formerly gave him, in such Verse as my unpractis'd Muse then dictated.
The Subject I have treated is the most important of any Subject. And my De∣sign in handling it is to give al of you som real Help to conduct your selvs in the tru Way to Happiness: Which I take to be the onely warrantable End of any long continued Study. How far I have succeeded in that Design wil be best known by the Fruits you shal bring forth in your Liwes and Conversations. But now that those Fruits may spring

up the more easily, and without Danger of being choaked by the Weeds of Pre∣judice, I wil indeavor a little to facili∣tate the one, and remove the other, by acquainting you with som particular Rules which I prescribed unto my self in this Undertaking, and by which you may take a right Measure of the Perfor∣mance.
I have often, with Grief, reflected upon the great Differences that ar in Men's Opinions about Matters of Reli∣gion. And in seeking out the Causes therof, tho I know many have concurred, yet this has seemed to me one of the most universal, viz. Because Men have not examined things to the Bottom. They have failed in their Foundation-Work. They have too much slighted that Philosophy, which is the Natural Religion of al Men; and which being Natural, must needs be Universal, and Eternal; and upon which therfore, or at least in Conformity unto which, al instituted and revealed Religion must be

supposed to be built. They have also forsaken the Rule of Right Reason, which onely is capable to produce tru Synemetry in their intellectual Buil∣dings: And they have applyed themselves, without any Rule, to the Interpretation of Words and Phrases, which being ea∣sily susceptible of various Senses, have produced as many deformed Irregulari∣tys. Nay this Disorder has been so great, that, instead of digging in the least for their Foundation, they have frequently begun to frame their theological Systems at the highest Points of Revelation: And in that they have acted as extrava∣gantly, and uncertainly, as that Man should do, Who would undertake to frame a Roof for som Fabric, of whose Di∣mensions be had no Cognizance. Tore∣medy this Evil, I have begun my Cate∣chism at the first Principles that I could discern in human Nature, and I have proceeded to build therupou as gradually and regularly as I have been able. So that I hope the whole Business of Reli∣gion,

whether natural or instituted, wil appear in this Draught to be a steady Prosecution of one and the same regular Design, in God the Author of both. And I am sure that a right Under standing of that Truth wil give great Satisfaction to any considering Minde.
Another thing that has yet more trou∣bled me than the former, has been to ob∣serv the sad Consequences in which Man∣kinde has been involved by the foremen∣tioned Differences of Opinion. Rash Judgments and Censures, Hatreds and Animositys, Disputes and Wars. The milde and sociable Nature of Man has been therby transformed into a greater Ferocity than that of Bears and Tygers. And what is the most deplorable Conside∣ration of al, is, That these Mischiefs have been more frequent, and more violent, since the Propagation of Christianity in the World, than before: As if indeed Jesus-Christ, Matt. 10.. Luke 12.1. according to his own Expres∣sion, were not com to giv

Peace upon Earth, but Division and a Sword. Far be it from us, neverthe∣less, to attribute any such thing to the Genius of his Religion, which consists wholly in Humility, Meekness, Modera∣tion, Benignity, and other such like So∣cial Vertues. No, the Mischief arises from the Perversness of Men's Spirits, who have turned the wholsomest Food, nay the highest Elixir, into the rankest Poyson. They have not been content with the Simplicity of the Gospel, which is a plain Rule of living wel, but have sirove to out-wit one another in finding out hidden Misterys: And as any one has hit upon a conceited Distinction, he has immediatly called that Fancy the Es∣sence of Christianity. From thence have sprung the various Sects into which the Christian World is divided. And secu∣lar Interests being now interwoven with this vainglorious Humor, the distinction of Sects is kept on foot, and looked as∣ter, far more carefully than the essential Dutys of Life. This is the deplorable

State of Things at this time. And the Consideration hereof has been the Needle that has chiefly directed my Course in the management of my Subject. For having seen the fruitless Effects of al controversial Undertakings; Fruitless, I say, in any thing that is truly Good; but exceedingly too fruitful in nourisb∣ing the Seeds of Enmity and al manner of Evil; I resolved with my self, in un∣dertaking this Work, to avoid studiously al that ever is controverted by any that cal themselvs Christians; and to draw up onely a Scheme of such things as they ar al agreed in, and which lead directly un∣to Practice.
These, I say, have been the particular Rules unto which I have thought fit to consine my self, in the Conduct of my main Design. And therfore I advise you to apply your selvs onely to the making use of what I have clearly exprest, and to be very referved in drawing Inferences from my Omissions. Becaus I prosess plainly to you that I have not handled

every point that I my self judg useful, but onely such as I judg most useful, and most conformable to the foregoing Rules.
Now, to conclude, I must declare to you that I am strongly perswaded som∣thing of this Nature might be of great Use in the World, towards the healing of our sad Divisions in religious Affairs; by drawing men off from their vain Ni∣cetys, to solid and useful Doctrin. Tho I know also that any such Design would, in its first Appearance, be violently op∣posed by al those who have imbraced the Interest of any particular Sect. If this very Writing of mine should com to the Sight of any such Persons, I am confi∣dent, that, tho they should finde nothing exprest in it but what they themselvs approve of, yet the Omission of other things which they delight in, would make them condemn it. Al Sectarya ar so fond of their own Badg of Distinction, that they ar ready to cry out against eve∣ry thing which bears not that Mark, as Antichristran at least, if not Atheisti∣cal

and Diabolical. Nevertheless their Approbation, in such a Case as this, is of greater Weight than their Censure: Be∣cause in the one they al agree; but in the other they al differ. Neither Papist nor Protestant, nay nor any of the Subdivi∣sions on either side, but approve of al Instructions tenaing to Piety and Ver∣tu; which ar the onely, things here aimed at. In that they ar unanimous. But in Matters of meer Speculation, and outward Oeconomy, (which ar the Things here omitted) they ar as opposite to each other as the Poles of the Heavens. I lay hold therefore upon the Incourage∣ment which arises from their general Approbation; and refer unto them the Task of reconciling their own Differen∣ces, before I shal esteem the Considerati∣on therof to be of any great moment. Yet I do not, for al this, in any wise pre∣sume to think that these Meditations of mine ar proper for public View. An undertaking of that Nature requires far greater Abilitys in every respect than

mine ar, and a more intire and uninter∣rupted Leisure than I injoy. If God see it fitting, he wil in du time raise up som other that may perform it more wor∣thily. In the mean while, however, I hope the Endearment of a Fathers Re∣commendation wil ad som Strength unto what may be otherwise but weakly incul∣cated to his Children; and that so this present Performance wil be of som use unto wine, for whom especially I have writ it. I am,
Dear Children, 
 July the 1st. 1686.
