



Custom (which in some cases is above Law) may (perhaps) excuse me in this way of Dedication, attempting the Patronage of persons of worth and qua∣lity; and Reason tells me, It is pitty to part you, being as Zachary and Eli∣zabeth. Luke 1. 6. You may say of me, as Naomi said to her daughter in Law, The man is of near kin to Ruth 2. 20. us. And I may truly say, It is no small piece of my Ho∣nour and Happiness to be near of kin to you, if not by Con∣sanguinity yet by Affinity: and no little part of my com∣fort to be received into your house, (as before into your hearts) when I was little less then an outcast. I know you take no pleasure in your praises published; yet Di∣vines (for the most part) excuse the dumb man cured by

Christ for divulging the same (seemingly) contrary to Mark 7. 3. 6. Christs command. On this account I safely may, and justly must publish my thankfull acknowledgement for your kind reception of me and mine, with many more favours indulged to me. I know not how soon I may be called (though I lay no stress on my climacterical year drawing nigh) to appear before Christs Tribunal. I thought good to leave this pledge of my love behind me, (as Eliah did his mantle) that it may lye by you and talk with you, (when I am dead and gone, that you may be able to discern things that differ, Philip. 1. 6. not taking a pebble for a pearl. And the rather because the Heads of these poor Meditations (being repeated in your hearing) were (beyond their desert) so well resented by you, not without an eager desire of a Transcript of them. In hope therefore that your souls (and the souls of others also) may receive some spiritual benefit and advantage, I have exposed these my mean labours to the publick view. As you have therefore received Christ Jesus, so Col. 2. 6, 7. walk ye in him, Rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving. But (to be short) I shall turn my Prayses of you, into Prayers for you, as being more agreeable to my sacred Profession, and more acceptable (I doubt not) to your modest disposition; praying God to bless you, as he did the house of Obed-Edom for entertaining the Ark of God, and praysing God, if by this (or any other of Gods) means I have added (or shall be instrumental to add) one cubit to your stature: which certainly will be the Crown and rejoycing of

 Raptim ex Musaeo Feb. 5. 1661.
