



RIGHT HONOURABLE,
OF all the mistakes and misunder∣standings of men, in the grand Mysteries of our Religion, there is none that may more deservedly be put into the catalogue of popular, and (al∣most) universall errors, then the erroneous conceivings and misapprehensions of the doctrine of the Sabbath; wherein, not onely the Antient and Modern Jews, but also many Christians, both learned and lewd, did, and do alike erre: Insomuch that now

of late, the old saying is come to passe, Communis error facit jus; for we have lived to see Sabbatarian errors to be grown up into a Law, and to be confirmed. And the very appllation of Sabbath (which in the Moral part of the fourth Command∣ment, signifies Christ our Redeemer; and in the latter or Ceremonial part of the said Commandment, signifies the seventh day from the Creation, or last day of the week) to be applied to our Sunday, which is the first day of the week, and the eighth from the Creation. And this, even by many Preachers, some of them being very lear∣ned; whereby the lesse learned sort of Chri∣stians are misled into the same error with the Jews, who would see no further into the great mystery of the Sabbath, than onely the consecrating of the seventh day, as ours at this time do the eighth day: And neither of them will be as yet perswaded, to look more deeply into that most divine and gracious Law of the Sabbath.
The principall misleader into these er∣rours in our daies, is, I conceive, that otherwise pious and learned Book, entitu∣led, The Practise of Piety; the right Author whereof, I think, is concealed: A late Advice to a Son. Writer thinketh, that it hath been too oft printed, because (as he saith) it is

contrary to the Church Protestant in the doctrine of the Sacrament: pag. 513. & 515. Edit. 32. I think it far more contray to he Church Catho∣lick, in the Doctrine of the Sabbath; which word Sabbath, this Writer not onely applies to our Sunday, but also labours vehement∣ly, with multitudes of Arguments, unne∣cessary, uncogent, and also untrue, to prove it the Sabbath meant in the fourth Commandment. Seneca saih, Sen. lib 3 Cont. 22. Suspe∣ctus est judici, qui plus quam se defen∣dit. Verily, his over-many vain prooss, and superfluous pleadings, may, to a judicious Reader, make his cause to be suspected the more, either of error, or (which is worse) of designe and collusion.
For some of our own learned Writers have long ago declared in their printed Books, that the late, or yesterday use, of calling our Sunday, The Sabbath, was set on foot by that sort of men, who have made it their trade to asperse, both the Doctrine and the Disciplie of this Church, on purpose to please and accommodate those turbulent spirits, that have for a long time waited for an opportunity, to make a prey thereof. And these their instruments may justly be suspected, to carp at this Church for their own designes; as Politian saith of one of his opposits, Polit. l. 7 Epist. 2. Non ideò

me carpit, ut carpat, sed ut victum quaerat: And indeed, our Zelot Sabba∣tarians, by such practises, have of late well feathered their nests, though with the ruine of the most renowned Church in the world; but, alitèr non fiunt Floralia. And they have moreover abused the present State with this word Sabbath, whereby our Sun∣day is of late re-baptized, or Turkened into a Sabbath; which our former Parlia∣ments in their Statutes, in the daies of our fore-fathers, and untill the reign of our late gracious King Charls of blessed me∣mory, and inclusively; and the Church of England also, for weighty reasons; called by none other name but Sunday. But such things need not seem strange, when the Nobles and Worthies of David, and also the Sage and Reverend Aaronites, and their Learned Levites, are excluded from the Sanedrim.
As for the appellation of Sabbath, so misapplied to our Sunday, no authority of Scripture, can, with any colour of right reason, be alledged, either directly, or de∣rivatively, from thence. The Jews that were converted, and made up a Body of the Primitive Church, and first began the ce∣lebration of this day, did never call it Sab∣bath, nor did any Apostle so call it, nor in∣deed

any of the antient Fathers; nor was this day meant by Sabbatum Christia∣num. Origen, who is un∣truly said to have called it, The Christi∣an Sabbath, as will appear in this Chap. 4. Book.
As for the other late and new name of Lord's Day, which they would derive from , in the Apocalyps, Rev. 1. 10. because our English Translation doth so render those words, (which yet they will not bear) the right reddition whereof is not, The Lord's Day; but, The Domi∣nicall day, as our Englishmen generally ever did before, and yet do, call the Sun∣day-Letter, not The Lord's day Letter, but, The Dominicall Letter. And the We∣stern Church in all Ages, called this day, either, Dies Solis, or Dominica. For in Scriptures, the Lord's Day, , and , are all one, and are often used by St. Paul and St. Peter, and are 1 Cor. 5. 5 Phil. 1 10. 2 Pet. 3. 10. rightly rendred, The Day of the Lord, and, The Day of Christ; but in a far different signification from that, which these men now call the Lord's Day; for those words signifie The Great Day of Uni∣versall Judgment.
Besides, a judicious Reader will con∣sider, how harshly and uncouthly this ap∣pellation sounds; for when they speak of many Sundayes, they call them, Two,

Three, or Four Lord's Dayes, as if we had more Lord's daies than one. If they wil needs use the name of the Lord in calling that day, 'twere far more consonant with the phrase of Scripure, and Euphony, to call i, The Day of the Lord; which yet will not come home to their purpose.
Therefore, those prudent Satesmen, and learned Prelates, which were inte∣ressed, both in composing our Statutes, and also in compiling and authorising our Leiturgie, did, with great caution, de∣cline this appellation, and call'd it Sun∣day, as some of the most antient Fathers did before, both in the Greek and Iustin. Mart. & Tertul. Latine Church; and this, in likelyhood, before the appellation of , or Dominica, was generally received; although the word  was in some particular Churches used, before those Fathers wrote, as may appear by that authentick Epistle of Ignat. Epist. 3. Edit. Plant. Ignatius, ad Magnesianos.
Neither did those Primitive Christians, before mentioned, who first began this so∣lemnity; nor the Apostles, who approved thereof long before the Revelation was written; ever call this day so as it is now called. We find it recorded under the title of, The first day of the week, or first day after the Sabbath, Act. 20. 7. and

1 Cor. 16. 2. (, and ) but we find no mention of Sabbath, Lord's day, or Resurrecti∣on day; nor did they then call it Sunday, because the naming of the seven week∣dayes by the seven Planets, was never be∣fore, or at that time used by the Jews, nor by the Romans, their then Magistrates. Whereby it is evident enough, that the as∣signing of the first day of the week for holy assemblies, was not originally, upon con∣sideration of Christ's Resurrection on that day.
Notwithstanding, the succeeding Church did conform unto that day, because their Predecessors had fixed thereon. And they further alledged new reasons for the re∣taining of it; They considered, That Christ did indeed rise that day from the dead, That the descending of the holy Ghost at Pentecost, That the creation of Heaven, and Earth, and Light; That Manna rained from Heaven first; and all these, on this first day of the week. Bel∣larmine addeth, (if you will believe him) Bel. de Cultu Sanct. l. 3. c. 11. To. 2. That by his, and other learned mens cal∣culations, the Nativity of Christ fell on this first day of the week. These were the reasons for retaining this day, though not of instit uting it.

But, in succeeding times, the Jewish ap∣pellation of dayes, by First, Second, Third, &c. of the Sabbath, or Week, was disused, Therefore the Church affixed a new name to that day, according to the Custom of their Country, or Ordinance of the Church; and hence came the denomination of Domini∣ca, and Sunday, respectively.
We cannot with reason, account this ap∣pellation, Sunday, to be any disparagement to the solemnity of the festivall, in regard, that our Saviour himselfe, (for whose Ho∣nour we sanctifie this Day) is called by his Prophets, The Sun which shall no more Isa. 60. 20 Mal. 4. 2. Matth. 17 2. Matth. 13 43. Rev. 1. 16. & 10. 1. & 12. 1. go down) And the Sun of Righteous∣nesse, his glorious Transfiguration is resem∣bled to the Sun; his Saints are promised, at their glorification, To shine as the Sun; his owne Countenance, and his mighty An∣gell, and his Spouse, are described by the glory of the Sun: so that this Name is high, and glorious; The disusing of this word Sunday, and Dominica, of late among us, is upon some reason of State, as of some other good old words also; as, The word Kingdome, and Three Kingdomes, and Bishop, and Common Prayer, Leitur∣gy, and Letanie, are now left; And in∣stead of them, We have Common-wealth, Three Nations, Presbyters, Indepen∣dents,

Directory, Sabbath, Lords-day, &c. but od words may return again, and new words may grow obsolete, when the State seeth it needfull, as one saith,
Multa renascentur quae jam ceci∣dêre: Horace. cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honore voca∣bula; Si volet usus.
As for the warrant, and authority for hallowing, and assembling thereon; We say, That it is not grounded on the fourth Commandement, which doth not in the least mention, or meddle therewith; Neither did Christ, or any Apostle command it, as Chemnitius, a Learned Protestant gran∣teth: Exam. Conc. Trid. But we keep it, rather by vertue of the fifth Commandement, which requireth us to Honour our Parents, wherein, lawfull Magistrates are included, and their just lawes authorized: Our reasons are these, 1. The institution of the Church Primitive, 2. The Apostolicall approbation thereof, 3. The Imperiall decrees, and also, the Re∣gall lawes of this Realm, 4. The constant practise of the Church Catholick, in all ages thereof, 5. The scripturall authority for it, which is derived (as is said before) from the fifth Commandement, although not di∣rectly,

or expressely, and down-right, but se∣condarily, consequently, and collaterally in these, and the like passages: Submit your 1 Pet. 2. 13 selves to evey Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake. And, Obey them, that Heb. 13. 17 have rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls. Christ also said, If be neglect the Church, Matth. 18 17. let him be as an Heathen man, and a Publican. For these, and such like rea∣sons, we adhere to it, and esteem them so ponderous, that we account it an high inso∣lency, and pride, either to abrogate, or but to alter the day, (as some have attempted.) Thus far we agree in the thing; but we dis∣sent from the name Sabbath, and Lords day, and also from all superstition therein practised.
As touching the Mysterious Apocalyps, from which the late appellation of Lord's day is taken, by a Translation of , which is not rendred exactly to the Originall Letter, as is shewed before; Al∣though this Scripture be still confessed both by the Church Protestant, and Roman, to be Theopneust, and Canonicall; yet, it cannot be denied, that many Learned men, both Anciently, and Lately, have doubted concerning the Writer thereof, and also, have been anxiously perplexed with the ob∣scurities therein.

First, for the Writer. That he was named John, the Book often declareth; But whether he were St. John the Apostle, the Text doth not declare, nor do the Anci∣ents agree therein; in so much, that in con∣sideration of former disputes concerning the Writer, and also, of the style, phrase, form, or manner of speech therein used, Prolegom in Apoc. Beza is inclined to conjecture, that, if it were not written by St. John the Apostle, yet, that it was written by St. Mark the Evange∣list, who was also named John, because we read of John, surnamed Mark, Act. 12. 12. and Act. 15. 37.
But Beza's conjecture disagreeth with the History of St. Mark, who is recorded by Hier. in Marco. St. Jerome, to have suffered death, in the eighth year of Nero, (Origines, Alexand. p. 38. Mr. Sel∣den's Eutychius saith, he died in the first year of that Emperour) whereas, the Apocalyps was first shewed, long after, in the Reign of Domitian, by whom, St. John the Apostle was sentenced to death, in a vessell of flaming oile, as Tertullian, and Jerome, and Euseb. Emis. report, and that he came out of that vessell unhurt: And because, that sentence was executed near the Latin gate at Rome, (as other Writers say) therefore, the Church Kalen∣der recordeth this Porta Latina, on the

sixth of May, and in memory thereof, a feast is held yearly on that day, (or for it) in St. John's Colledge in Cambridge.
After this, St. John was exiled to the Ile of Patmos, where this Revelation was ewed; and after the death of Domitian, he was recalled from banishment, and reti∣red to Ephesus, and there lived, and died in the Reign of Trajan, and was there bu∣ried, and his Sepulcher remained there in the dayes of St. Jerome.
Now because there was another, named John, of that time, who was also buried at Ephesus, and that, two Monuments were there shewed, and both superscribed with the Name, or Title of John; and both re∣mained there, untill the dayes of the said, Hier. de Script. in Joanne. St. Jerome, as himselfe saith, and so al∣so saith Hist. l. 3. c. 39. Eusebius, who further addeth, Fortassis, secundus hic, erit Joannes sub cujus nomine Revelatio habetur. And Dionysius, the Famous, and Learned Bishop of Alexandria, although he was Confident, that it was written by inspiration of the divine spirit, yet, saith he, Euseb. Hist. l. 7. ap. 23. Non liquidò videtur, quodillius Joannis sit, qui Evangelium scripsit. And addeth, Fieri potuit, in illis temporibus, fuisse alium aliquem Joannem ex sanctis, cui haec revelaverit Deus. i. e. That it

did not clearly appear, that St. John the Evangelist was the Writer of the Apocalyps; but possibly, that some o∣ther holy man in those times, named John, was he, to whom God revealed those things: thus he. Neither need it seem strange, that this Revelation should be unduly attributed to St. John the Apo∣stle, seeing, we find other Revelations, as Early as this, which went abroad, untru∣ly, under the name of St. Peter, and also of St. Paul, as Hist. l. 3. c. 3. Eusebius, and in Joan. Tract. 98. Austin, and lib. 7. cap. 19. Sozomen report.
Secondly, for the obscurity of this . book; it is confessed on all sides, and parti∣cularly by Proleg. in Apocal. Beza, who acknowledgeth him∣selfe to be one of those, Cui haec mysteria valè obscura videntur; And both Mr. Selden, and Mr. I. Gregory of Oxford, two Learned men, have affirmed, from the Testimony of Bodinus the Learned French-Writer, that Calvin acknowledged, that He knew not what this obscure Wri∣ter meant. So our late Reverend Dioce∣san, Bishop Hall, called this Apocalyps, A Revelation unrevealed: and this he said particularly, in respect of the Mystery, of the Thousand years of Martyrs reign∣ing here, with Christ, Revel. 20. 4. The like he reporteth of the most Learned, and

Reverend Bishop Andrews, that he pro∣fess'd, that he had not proceeded so far, as to understand it; much lesse can we Pygmy-Theoiogues. It is now fifteen hundred years old, and not yet understood; Mr. Bright∣man hath not cleared it, nor hath Mr. Mede's Key unlockt it. Nor will it ever (I suppose) be perfectly understood, untill such a Commentary be made thereon, as Divines say of other obscure Prophecies, viz. Irenaeus l. 4. cap. 43. Prophetiae priùs aenigmata sunt, sed peractae intelliguntur. And, Aug de Civit l. 18. c. 31. Pro∣phetiae obscurae sunt, antequam fiunt: sed factas, quis non agnoscit? And, Euseb. Emiss. hom. de Nat. Martyr. Prophetiarum adimpletio est earum expositio. (i. e.) Prophecies are Riddles: the onely or best Expositor of them is their fulfilling.
Amongst the many obscurities of this Apocalyps, this may go for one; viz. What day of the week or year the Writer meant by Dominica dies. That he meant our Sun∣day, or anniversary Easter, (which is so called, from the Rising of Christ) will be hard to prove. It may possibly signifie the day of the Nativity, or of the Ascension of our Lord, or the day of Pentecost, for ought can appear; for none of these are in∣ferior to his Resurrection, either in myste∣ry, or value, or benefit to man. Or he

might mean the day of the Passion of our Lord; of which, possibly, Christ spake, when he said, Your father Abraham re∣joyced to see my day. For indeed, the Joh. 8.  Passion of the Redeemer was shewed to Abraham, in a mysterious Scene, or dumb-shew; as, when he acted the resem∣blance of Christ's Passion with his son Isaac, laying first the wood on him, Gen. 22. then, him upon the wood; just as was afterwards really done to Christ. As for his rejoycing, it is no marvell if he re∣joyced, for his own and his Abrahamites Redemption. Nor is it strange, that Christ should call the Passion-day, His day; it was indeed, the day of the Jews, of which it is said, Haec est hora vestra; Luk. 22. 53▪ but it was also the day of the Lord. We find both, Tradidit Judas, and, Tradidit Deus, Rom. 8. 32. And, Filius Dei tradidit seipsum, Gal. 2. 20. Ephes. 5. 2. Judas, for mony; but Christ gave himself for us. The day of his Passion was a day of sorrow, and also a day of joy, in severall respects. We know, that the Pri∣mitive Church solemnized the Natalitia, (so they called the passion dayes of Mar∣tyrs) with joy and feasting; and so they did also the Parasceue, or day of Christ's Passion, in St. Austin's time, as himself saith, in one of his Passion-Sermons, Aug. de Temp. Ser. 130. Propter hanc crucem, Diem festum

agimus, & Epulamur. So St. Paul gloried in the Crosse of Christ, Gal. 4. 16. And seemeth to appoint a Festivall for the Passion of Christ, when he said, 1 Cor. 5. 7. Christ our passeover is sacrificed. Therefore let us keep the Feast. Which St. Jerom reads, Itaque Epulemur. So, it is no novelty, to apply the word Dominica to the Passion; for we know, that there is another Dominica, which hath been called by the Church, more than twelve hundred years together, Do∣minica Passionis; as we find in St. Ambr. To. 5. Ser. 44. Am∣brose, and in Aug. de Temp. Ser. 107. St. Austin, and ever since in the middle-age Writers, and later Postillers: And even in our time, and at this day it is called, Passion-Sunday, which is the fifth Sunday in Lent; and is so called, onely in a memoriall of the at∣tempt of the Jews to stone Christ in the Temple, recorded, Joh. 8. 58. which pas∣sage formerly was, and now is, appointed to be read in the Gospell for that day. Therefore it may reasonably seem questio∣nable, whether the Dominica in the Re∣velation may not possibly relate to the grand Passion of our Lord. Lastly, This Dominica might possibly point at the old Sabbath-day, which was really a day of the Lord's appointing; which yet, the Writer abstained from calling it Sabbath,  the Day-Sabbath was then ut∣terly

dissolved with the City and Temple, and long before this Revelation was writ∣ten. And if there were not something of greater concernment to be considered in the Sabbath-Law, than Hallowing of a day, there can be no sufficient cause al∣leaged, why the antient Sabbath-day was not still retained; which yet ought not to be in any wise, albeit some Sabbatarians would have it, and others would have our Sunday to be the Sabbath.
These two disagreeing in the day, yet agree in misunderstanding and abusing those words of Christ, Pray that your flight Matth. 24. 20. be not in Winter, neither on the Sab∣bath day. By which words, each party would have their severall Sabbaths confir∣med and continued.
To this we answer, First, This was said to

the Apostles, when as yet they were but Dis∣ciples; and they were all dead (except only St. John) before the time he spake of came. Therefore this monition was intended, as to be declared to the Jews, whom Christ knew to be intangled in Sabbaticall su∣perstition, and that they would so persist, (as that people do to this day) for it had been no sin to fly for life on that day, even when it was a Sabbath really in force, much lesse afterward, when it was abrogated.
 2. It is said, Pray that it be not in

the Winter; surely no Jew would think it a sin to fly for life in winter, (onely be∣cause 'twas winter). But Winter and Sabbath are here joyned, to shew the reason of both to be the same, and that, not to be sin, but onely danger, trouble, and inconvenience. First, for Winter; Because the daies would be short, the waies foul, the season cold, and dangerous to them∣selves and their little ones, especially to abide in desolate Mountains, unto which vers. 16. they are directed to flye. Secondly, for the Sabbah; Because their fellow Jews, be∣ing involv'd in that superstition, would account them enemies to their Religion, and so neither joyne with them, nor afford them any succour; and moreover kill them, as they did many, upon pretence that they were flying to the Romans.
 3. is monition was meant onely to the

Jewishly-affected Sabbatarians, because (as it is remarkably observed by Euse∣bius) Hist. l. 3. c. 5 de Dem. l. 8. at the time of begiing Jerusa∣lem, not one Christian was left in that great City: they were all departed before to Pella beyond Jordan, to which they were warned by that Divine Oracle, Mi∣gremus hinc, as Eusebius thought.
 4. It is observable, that Christ upon the same occasion then said, Woe be to them
that are with child, and give suck in . 19.

those daies. he woe must signifie tempo∣rall woe of affliction, and not eternall woe; for no man will say, that child-bearing, or giving of suck, are sins, because in Scripture, both are accounted blessings. So that praying against this Sabbath-Hight, or Winter-flight, is but to pray against temporall calamities.
 5. If to fly on the Sabbath-day at that

time had been a sin, Christ would not have said, Pray that it may not be; but he would absolutely have forbidden it, as he did all transgressions of the Morall Law.
 6. The meaning of Christ was, to fore∣warn

the Jews, to dsist from their vain Sabbatizing; as if he had said, The Jews, who so much dote on their Sabbah day, and hate me, and seek my life for dissolving it, as Joh. 5. 18. What will they do when their enemies invade them on the Sabbath day? for then, they must either break their Sab∣bath by flight, or else die in their sloath and superstition. Therefore they have need to pray, that this pressure come not on them, upon their Sabbath day.
 7. They that urge his place for a now-Sabbath,

should first agree, which day they will insist on, whether Saturday or Sun∣day. 1. If Saturday, we ask, Why them∣selves do not keep it. 2. If Sunday, we say, This place will appear miserably in∣valid

to prove, because Christ never at all mentioned it, nor did any Apostle com∣mand it, (as is shewed before) nor did any of the Sabbatizing Jews then apprehend it, or to this day believe it.
For these, or for better reasons, the late Learned and Reverend Bishop of Wor∣cester, (my most dear Country) when he was Professor of Theology in Oxford, doubted not to conclude publickly upon this very place: That it is ridiculous for any to argue for a confirmation of a Sab∣bath Dr. Pri∣deaux, de Sab. Orat. An. 1622. from these words, which Christ foretold but onely as an inconveni∣ence, which would arise from the Ju∣daicall superstition.
I find also another pretty argument used of late, to prove our Sunday to be a Sabbath; for, The word Sabbath signi∣fieth Rest; therefore Sunday being a day of Rest, ought to be called Sab∣bath. If this will hold, VVhy should not our late frequent Fasting-dayes, and Thanks-givings, be called Sabbaths, which were enforced by watch-men, and under penalties, with as great caution as our Sundayes, from working and travel∣ling? Or why should not Nights, the time of generall Rest; and our Beds, the place thereof; and even our Graves, be called Sabbaths? But if the Inventer of this Ar∣gument

had considered, that the Fourth Commandment, or Scripturall Sabbath, doth not signifie onely the corporall Rest of man, but onely his spirituall Rest; and moreover, and most principally, the myste∣sterious Rest of God, (as it is said, God Heb. 4. 4. Rested) he might easily have answered his own argument with a better. For the true Sabbaticall Rest cannot otherwise be rightly understood, but onely of the Rest both of God and Man; and this Rest can no where be found, but onely in Christ the Saviour.
There is yet another scruple, occasioned by our translation of the fourth Command∣ment, which either hah, or may divert men, from the right understanding thereof; for thus our English read it, Remember to keep holy the Sabbath, &c. Hence some imagine, that to keep holy relateth onely to a Day, and not to Christ. But the more clear, and true, and unscrupulous Translation might have been, by our old English word, Hallow, or by the word, Sanctifie, borrowed from the Latine; thus, Remember that thou Hallow (or San∣ctifie) the Sabbath day. This doubt will be plenifully cleared, by the perusall of the Chap. 9. ninth Chapter of this Book.
Notwithstanding all this; it may be granted, that Christ giving that monition to pray, did fore-see and relate to some

kind of Law, whereby the Jews of that time would be girt and obliged, to keep the old Sabbath. But if we enquire by what Law, we shall find it to be neither the Moral, nor the Ceremonial Law of God, but onely a popular Club-Law, or Law of Arms; which was indeed the tyrannicall and su∣perstitious Law, of those grand Zelots and Rebells, which cruelly insulted over their Country-men the Jews, as Simon, John, and Eleazer, (of whom we read much in Jos. de Bello. lib. 8. Josephus) who then rebelled against Caesar, their Lawfull Prince at that time, (though Nero) and thereby caused the utter and finall ruine of their Ciy and Country.
If we now examine the Jewish supersti∣tions, and compare them with the practises or commands of some sabbatizing Christi∣ans, we shall find them running parallel, Buxdo f. as they are recorded, boh by our own, and by forrain Writers; as 1. If a Jew fell History of the Sab. short of home on a Sabbath-Eve, he must stay there, in wood, wildernesse, or high∣way, till the Sabbath were past. 2. A blind Jew might not carry a staffe. 3. A woun∣ded man might not wear a plaister, nor a woman a fan. 4. A Jew might not carry mony in his purse, nor knock at a door with an Hammer, or Ringle; nor wear

Clogs or Pattens; nor a Taylor his Needle; nor milk Kine, nor lift a beast out of a ditch, nor kill a flea on that day.
So some Christian Sabbatarians have Mr. Tho. Roger's Preface on the 39 Ar∣tic. taught publickly: 1. To work on Sunday, (Lord's day, they call it) or throw a boule, is a sin as great, as to kill a man, or com∣mit adultery. 2. To kill a cock, as bad as to kill a servant. 3. To make a Feast, or dresse a Wedding-dinner, as bad as for a father to cut his own child's throat. 4. To ring more Bells then one, as to com∣mit murder. They say, one may not carry provender to an Horse; a Maid-servant would not sweep her Kitchin, nor wash her Dishes; a zealous sonne would not ride for a Bone-setter, when his Father's bones were broken. Some school-men among the Ro∣manist's, have bin as eager in this super∣stition as ours; They taught, that it is as great a sinne to stitch a poor Man's broken shoe on Sunday, as to kill a Thousand men, Advers. Concil. Tri∣dent. as Doctor Tuppius reporteth. Besides all this, some of our own Sabbatarians have la∣boured, to revive, and bring in the old Jewish saturday-Sabbath. Thus hath this Sabbaticall Law, and our Christian Sunday been abused by schismaticall Demagogues, who, notwithstanding, have bin of late both permitted, and encouraged for such politick

ends, as we see, are now fully effected. The consideration whereof, moved me to endea∣vour a right understanding, and vindica∣tion of the Divine Sabbath Law.
I have also addressed this discourse to you, My most Honoured Lord, and Lady, for an acknowledgement of your many fa∣vours, to my self, and to my more dear Con∣sort in these hard times; and for a Testi∣mony of my most thankfull apprehension thereof; And also, for that I am well assu∣red, that you, My Lord, in your love to Truth, and Piety, have taken pains to in∣form your selfe in this very Mystery, by carefull attention in hearing, and by your more private readings, and conferences, besides your secret Meditations, (best known to your self). Of which Christian imploy∣ments, because I was in some part, Consci∣ous; it stirred me the more, to hasten this Work, wherein, I trust you will find satis∣faction, when your leisure will permit you to read it through.
I beg both your pardons for my tedious∣nesse in this addresse, being not so much Epistolar as Isagogical, which I so de∣signed, to be instead of an Introduction, needfull for the more easie, and unscrupu∣lous perusall of the ensuing Treatise; which I have cloathed with ordinary and coorse

Apparrel, in a low, and vulgar style, as to be the more fitly accommodated, to the ordi∣nary, or middle sort of Christians: just so, as the Books of our Sabbatarians are, whereby they have gained too much upon the easinesse, and credulity of their adhe∣rents; This book is therefore of the like alay with theirs, as one saith, Mart. l. 7. ep. 89.
Aequales scribit libros Calvinus, & Umber.
In old time, Writers were thought to pro∣cure a kind of immortality to them, whose Names they recorded in their Books; there∣fore, Plin. l. 7. ep. 33. Plinius the younger, (a man of sin∣gular worth, who procured a stay, and molli∣fying of the persecution under Trajan) de∣sired Tacitus (his contemporary) to record his Name in his History, because he thought that so, it might continue as long as the World: And before him, Ovid, by the same way, promised the like to himselfe, and to his Wife, Ovid. Met & Trist. l. 5 eleg. 15.
—Nomenque erit indelebile nostrum. And
Perpetui fructum donavi nominis—
So when Picus Mirandula wrote a book,

and dedicated it to Politian; he returned this answer, P lit. lib. 12. Epist. 5. Ago tibi gratias ob im∣mortalitatem. Just so did ips. cent. ep. 65. Lipsius to ano∣ther.
But I may not promise, or hope for any such production, or issue, by these papers, to you, or to my Lady, though I wish I could; yet I am well assured, that the Doctrine here∣in delivered, (being of the greatest con∣cernment, and comfort for Christians) is such, as ought to continue in the Church, as long as it is Militant.
Neither do either of you need any such immortalizing Pharmacum, or paper-charm for that, which your owne eminent, and shining vertues may by themselves pro∣cure; your piety to God, your sincerity, and constancy in true Religion, your mercifull∣nesse, and charitable compassion, and boun∣tifull reliefe of the poor Members of Christ; your generall goodnsse toward all sorts of people, and particularly to the now oppressed Church-men in these ad times, will be your Testimonialls, or Epistles (as the Apostle speaketh, 2 Cor. 3. 2.) and Comforts to your Conscien∣ces whil'st you live here, and Monuments or Trophies to posterity, when both of you, in a full and good old age, shall follow those Prayers, and Almes which are gone up be∣fore you, for a Memoriall before God, Act. 10. 4.

with whom I trust, you will find your names recorded with an everlasting Character, in the blessed Registry of the Book of Life. In the man time, whil'st my now aged life shall last, I will not forget to recommend you, and yours, in my Prayers to the Mer∣cifull protection of our Lord Jesus, and re∣main. My Noble Lord, and Lady,

Marsham in Norf. Octob. 1. 1658.
