



AFter having con∣sidered (my dear and well-beloved Uncle) how
 much they displease God, who waste all their Time on the Fol∣lies and Vanities of this World, spending it in trifling Sports and Di∣versions, from whence comes no Profit or Be∣nefit to themselves, or Mankind; I have determined to employ my self about the doing something, which will be (as I hope) profi∣table to my self, and acceptable unto you.
 Having then conside∣red, that we see many Papists not only curse us, but call and name us Hereticks, because we have forsaken their Antichrist, and its Traditions, and fol∣lowed the Light which God hath been pleased to afford us; We are inclined to Write something to defend us against their Contumelies, and lay them (as it is just) up∣on
 their own Backs. For they call us Here∣ticks, but Alas! they are so themselves, whilst they forsake the pure Voice of the Go∣spel, and follow their own Imaginations; as is most evident from Boniface the Third, who thought (when he was made the Uni∣versal Bishop) that that falling away, which St. Paul speaks of in his second Epistle
 to the Thessalonians, and second Chapter, had happened in him∣self. For St. Paul saith, We beseech you, Brethren, by the coming of our Lord, that ye be not soon shaken in Mind, or be troubled, neither by Spirit, nor by Word, nor by Letter, as that the day of Christ is at hand. Let no Man deceive you
 by any Means; for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that Man of Sin be revealed, the Son of Perditi∣on; who exalteth himself above all that is called God, so that he, as God, sit∣teth in the Temple of God, &c.
Notwithstanding he followed his own Proud Imaginations
 and Fancies, and did not forsake his Errors, which he knew to be very Wicked.
Considering then by your Life and Actions, that you have a great Affection to the Di∣vine Word, and the sincere Religion; I dedicate this present VVork to you, Pray∣ing you to take it in good Part. God give you his perpetual Grace, and shew his
 Benignity upon you for ever.
From our Palace at VVestminster in Lon∣don, this last Day of August, 1549.
