


MADAM,
SOme Portions of the Do∣ctrines handled in this little book, were for∣merly prepared for, and also presented to, your Ear; therefore I hold my self in good manners obliged to re∣present the same to your pious Eyes, and heart to be reviewed and ruminated.

Seeing now the Pulpits are secured, and Plut. Mora. lib. de Gar∣rulit. Ovid. Met. 8. our Tongues silenced by a dumb Spirit. So that, at most, we can be but Pen∣preachers; and that no longer then the Press will be open to us; when that also shall be shut, we must content our selves, and others with the only refuge of him in the Poet, who said, At certè caelum patet, ibimus illac. We may Eliah-like ascend up into Heaven in the Chariot of fervent prayer, (which no man can hin∣der,) and others may use their Eyes, instead of their Ears, for acquiring, and consolidating their Christian faith by perusal, of such writings as formerly have been published by our true and learned Divines, and thereby perceive the merciful providence of God in pre∣ordaining the helps of Books to stand us in stead, when Preaching should fail, which old Writers called Solacium and Medicamentum animae. 1. The Solace and Medicine of our Souls. For, as a learned man once said, Aug. Ps. 121. The Preacher is a Book to them that cannot read; So a good Book is a silent Preacher to them that cannot otherwise hear necessary truths.
There were in old time, books called

Liv. & Plin. Libri Lintei, i. e. linnen books writ∣ten by men: and there have been linnen books written by holy Women, but with the pens of Needles, such as the Cha∣ritable Dorcas wrote, Act. 9. 39. for vesting of poor Widows: Such kind of writings have been much practised in that worthy, and most charitable fami∣lie, wherein God hath planted you, to succeed your pious predecessors in their goodness and charity, who have been for many years Nursing Mothers, as your worthy consort, and his Ancestors have been Nursing▪ Fathers to poor people in many Towns round about them; not only by clothing, but also by feeding them, and providing for them by daily Almes, and large Annual Distributions, and a Perpetual Hospital, and a Free-School, and Sermons also to feed their Souls. Surely these things are gone up to Heaven for a memorial, and have in∣vited the blessings of God to rest on that Familie.
This is to me a pressing motive to present this Treatise to publick view, adorned with your name, that so it may be a thankful memorial, and acknow∣ledgement of those grand Charities,

which have issued from your one house to so many places about us; of which my self have heretofore divers times been imployed, in some part, as a dispenser; and truly I have often in my thoughts, chid my self, and others, as guilty of in∣gratitude, in that there hath not been a publick acknowledgement thereof, be∣fore God, and man from any of those twelve Towns, which have been annually refreshed by the same Charity. VVe might justly be accounted worse then Luc. 17. 17. those ten Leapers cured by Christ, if one, at least, should not return thanks.
But Christian Charity is not retarded by ingratitude, it is like God, who gi∣veth to the unthankful: Never any age produced more unthankful wretches, then this; wherein it hath been often ob∣served, that the same hands which have received relief, have been imployed in spoiling and plundering the goods of their relievers; Such foul ingratitude & spoliations must needs hinder Almes∣deeds, Eleemosina∣rios extia∣gunt Rapte∣res. Aug, de Temp Serm. 78. as St Austin observed that it did in his time, and so it doth now with many, who are thereby disabled; and would so with all, but that they know

for whose sake their Almes are given, and that the Poor are but the, Latura∣rij Chri. ibid lib. Ser. 50. Cric∣kers of Christ; for what is committed to them by Charity, is caried into an ever∣lasting Barn, and although their wic∣kedness may exclude their Persons, ne∣vertheless their testimony will be pre∣sent with God. Of such perseverance in Charity, we have a memorable exam∣ple in our Ecclesiastical History of Ana∣stasius Evag. l. 5. c. 5. Bishop of Antiocb, who lived under the Reign of the covetous and griping Emperour Justinus II. Yet this good man was so far from withhol∣ding, or diminishing his Almes, that he increased them least (said he) Justinus should take all away both from me, and from the poor. For, if men should re∣spite their. Almes until the times are quiet, and stay for a cessation of Perse∣cutions, they must expect till Satan be dead; for, as long as he liveth, Aug. in Ps. 127. (As one saith) there will be no cessation of oppressions. There is a Fable of a King; Ovid. Met. l. 11. VVho turned every thing that he touch't into Gold. This fiction was to signify, that great Potentates can make all their designs, and pretences serve their turns for supply of their Treasuries. So

we read of another (a) bountiful Prince, Rex A∣nius. whose Daughters could by their touch, turn all things into Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and were therefore called Dictys Cretens, l. 1. Caenotropae. This was to signify that Charitable per∣sons in all their indeavours for acquiring Wealth, do thereby, but labour, to ena∣ble themselves to do good to others, and such (if any) is a good covetousness. So Cic. Or. pro Rabir. Tullie reports, of C. Curius, an honest Roman Publican, that he acquired wealth, not to feed his own covetousness, but that thereby he might be enabled to do good to others, as another Heathen saith, Sen. in Herc. Oet. Hic, Solas optat, quas donet Opes. Our Chri∣stian Writers oft put us in mind of Cha∣ritable thrift. Fulg. Epist. 2. Proba a noble Lady, and Virgin would often fast, and also wear course, and cheap apparrel, that so she might save for the poor; They tell us, that the forbearing of one meals meat, That one Jewel, or Ring, or one trunck of apparrel would feed and cloth many poor Christians. Origen, Orig. in Lev. hom. 10. pronounceth a bles∣sing on them that imploy the parcimony of fasting, for feeding of the hungry: for (as one of our English Arch-Bishops used to say, in homely Latine but with a good meaning, Rog. Ar∣chiep. Ebor. Bonus Servatius,

facit bonum Bonifacium, i. e. Good Hus∣bandry, makes good Hospitality.
Charity is now (when there is most need of it,) waxen cold among us, upon another reason, viz. by the Scandals of two factions: for the Romanists say that our Solifidians have made men uncha∣ritable, by requiring only a bare Dog∣matical or Doctrinal faith. And the So∣lifidians say that Romanists have made Charity superstitious by their doctrine of Merit; certainly, both sides err; for although Almes-deeds cannot merit Heaven, nor deliver us from sin, and eternal death, so, as Christ doth; yet they may, and often do deliver from temporal Vengeance, and temporal death, as the perfect works and obe∣dience of Christ deliver from eternal punishments. The advice of the Wise, Dan. 4. 27. and Honourable Prophet Daniel was to this purpose: O King, let my counsel be acceptable to thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by shew∣ing mercy to the poor, it may be a lengthen∣ing of thy tranquillity.] The merciful distribution of Almes, is called 2 Cor. 9. 6. Sow∣ing, to signify, that as the Earth retur∣neth us our seed with increase, so much

more will God to our profit, at least, by with-holding deserved vengeance, and giving us a longer time for amendment, and happily will add, Joh. 1. 16. Grace, for grace;] so, that if the Grace of Charity be improved, he will add the grace of faith, and perseverance, as he did to the Centurion, Act. 10. 4. But then our Almes must be done without looking on our selves as if we were benefactors, and doners unto God, but as humble Debtors, or Farmers paying, and return∣ing his due rent; not with any presump∣tion of redeeming, or buying off, our Sins; but in the form of an humble Suppliant, and Petitioner, and with tears of Com∣punction, just as a good man will give some recompence (such as he can) to his injured Brother, as a Testimony, and acknowledgement of the offence, & of his sorrow: So a good Christian conside∣reth his Almes, as a part of his repen∣tance.
Such Charitable distributions are of greater concernment then some will take notice of, seeing our Saviour himself vouchsafed to be ministred unto by those devout Women Mary Magdalen, Joanna, Luc. 8. 2, 3. Susanna, and others; not for any personal

need that himself had, (for he did Mi∣raculously feed more then 5000 at one time,) but as a pattern to us; and for an encouragement, he hath declared, that, what is given for his sake to his poor members, is really given to himself; He adviseth us, Luc. 6. 30. to give to every man that asketh, this we should do, least that poor Creature that is denied, prove, to be a poor Christ, and then no marvel, if our God stop his Ears at our supplicati∣ons, when we have stopped our Ears at his; for the greatest, and most honoura∣ble Christians, are but beggers to him, and every day do, or should, of him beg their daily bread.
This Christian duty is moreover, sweetned by most gracious promises of reward, as high as any other, even with the inheritance of heaven, when it is said, Come ye blessed of my Father, &c.] A great purchase for a small price, and this, not because Heaven is Vile, or Cheap, but because our Lord is graci∣ous. The old Testament calleth this Charitableness a lending to the Lord,] so doth the new Testament, where Christ saith; Do good, and lend, hoping for no∣thing again,] for if it be demanded, Prov. 19. 17. Luc. 6. 35.

how that can be called a lending, which is an absolute gift; the answer is, that though it be a free gift to the poor, yet it is a lending to God, because he doth ingage himself to re-pay. The Fathers translate the word Lend by [faeneratur,] as lent to God upon Usury, or increase, which they call Aug. Epist. 215. immortal Usury; as if the Scripture took notice of our cove∣tousness, thereby to invite us to works of Charity for our own profit. The holy Woman Hannah said truly, The Lord 1 Sam. 2. 7. maketh poor, and maketh rich.] There is no doubt, but that one grand reason why God permitteth so many poor to be in the World, is, to give us occasions, and objects of Charity, and this for the great benefit of the charitable giver: for God needeth not our gifts, no more then he doth our prayers; We have more need to give, then he hath to receive by the hands of the poor; he could, and can make all rich; his great house, the World, is stored with provision, suffi∣cient for all his creatures; If it were not, he can supply defects, and (as Chryso∣stome notes,) he can rain down showers of Gold, and all necessaries, as we read in our own, and forrain Histories of showers

of flesh, of Milk, of Wool, and of Rivers of VVine, and Fountains of Oil, as in Scrip∣ture of Manna, and Quailes; whereby it is apparent that the precept of Almes, was intented for the benefit of the giver.
This is the reason that the Scriptures promise Treasures in Heaven, and that the merciful are blessed, and shall obtain Heb. 14. 13. mercy, that our Almes are Sacrifices, and Jam. 1 27. well pleasing to God] certainly, if Almes be Sacrifices, then, the Poor, the Sick, the Widow, the Orphant, and aged are the Altars on which his Sacrifices are to be laid: The Apostle tells us, That pure Religion, is to visit the Fatherless and VVi∣dows] verily that Religion which neg∣lecteth these duties is an impure Religion. The ancient Fathers have left us many comfortable incouragements for it: They say Ambr. The man is blessed, from whose house the poor never returns empty. Aug. That the charitable Almes-giver, when he dies, he departs with firm security and consolation. Chryst. That at the great judge∣ment, the Saints and Angels will take no∣tice of, and commend their Charities. That the poor whom they have relieved shall then openly declare them to have been their Pa∣trones, and Preservers (as is intimated,

Luke 16. 9.) That then, Mercy will stand between them and Hell, and will not suffer any of the merciful to pass that way. Thus they. But though neither Men, nor An∣gels should then take notice of them; yet it is most certain that the God of men, and Angels will acknowledge, and re∣ward their persons, and mercifulness.
And least we should be tired with long expectation of reward; The Word of God seemeth to provide for that, by promises of temporal requitals, and those Mar. 10. 30. very considerable as we read, Psal. 41. 1. as Christ in the Gospel promiseth an hundred-fold reward in this time to them that for his sake, leave Houses, Brethen, Sisters, VVives, Children, and Lands,] which promise is warily to be conside∣red, because some Millinarians would have it to be meant grosly, and literally, as if for one house, or one Father, they must have an hundred houses and Fa∣thers here, a false gloss surely; For I trow, they expect not to have an hun∣dred Wives, neither doth the promise mention Wives, though the condition do. The meaning is, That they who so part with estates, and friends, shall have both, multiplied unto them; for to them

every true Christian, Man, and Woman, shall be by love, care, and tender affecti∣on, as so many Fathers, Brethen, Wives, or Sisters, ministring comforts to them. The Fortunes, and estates of one, shall serve the necessities of the other; All the houses of the faithful shall be open to them as if they were their own houses: For therefore did the primitive Christi∣ans call one another Brethren and Sisters. Act. 4. 32. The Apostles, who left their nets, instead thereof had all the wealth of Christians laid at their feet, their wealth was com∣mon to the whole fraternity, in so much, that no man called his estate, his own pro∣priety. Gal. 4. 14. Paul was entertained by the Ga∣latians, as if he had been an Angel of God, or as if he had been Christ himself.] And this charity lasted a long time among true Christians. Tertullian for his time reports Tert. Apol. c. 39, Christianis, omnia indiscreta sunt praeter Uxores, i. e. That, all they had, was communicated to their fellow-Christians, except only their Wives, and that the heathens hereupon would say. See how the Christians love one another.
But such Charity is now hard to be found (as Christ fore-told) nor may we in these dreggs and bottome of the

world expect such temporal retributi∣ons. God hath given some, that men may know there is a reward; but he doth not so reward all here, least men should expect none other elsewhere St Ambrose saith, Ambr. de offic. l. 2. c. 16. He knew some Priests who by gi∣ving to the poor, increased more in wealth. The Roman History observeth, that the charitable Emperor Paul Diac. in Tib. c. 2. Tiberius II. was rewarded here, by finding vast hid∣den treasures, as the poor Widow of Sa∣repta was also, for relieving the Prophet; but such returns are not now to be ho∣ped, nor are we to forbear the acts of charity, although we find not such mun∣dane retributions. It is the good Coun∣sel of St Austin, That we should not thus say, or think with our selves, I will do good to some poor Christians, that so my store may increase. Aug. lib. Homil. Hom. 18. Noli hoc quaerere, mes∣sis tua seriùs venit,] i. e. expect not your reward here, for that harvest will be much later. VVhen one brought to Lu∣ther a legacy, which a certain thankful Auditor of his had bequeathed him, the poor man took it with trembling, and said Melch. Ad. in vita Luth. Metuo, ne Deus his praemiet,] i. e. he was afraid, least God did reward his labours in this world; for verily, the

with-holding of rewards in this life, is a certain pledge, that charitableness shall be rewarded elsewhere.
Madam, There is yet a more noble, and Heavenly hospitality to be practised by Christians; for the exercise whereof, I here present unto you Three Guests, worthy of admission into the Taberna∣cle of your beautiful body and Soul, be∣cause the beauty of both, was their gift, as one saith. Ovid. Forma Dei munus—They are the same Guests that were for∣merly entertained by your Father Abra∣ham. They are Travellers, yea, and Gen. 18. Wanderers, and have suffered repulses in many places of the Christian World, and by many persons among us, even as our Christian Religion hath been abused by those who professed themselves to be lovers thereof; just as Potiphars VVife Gen. 39. loved, and yet persecuted Joseph: And as the VVatchmen smote, and wounded the Spouse; even so some that should be the Watchmen of our Israel, have uncivily Cant. 57. abused these holy Guests, and thereby wounded the very head of Christianity. I am firmly confident, that you will joy∣fully admit them by faith, and accom∣modate them by charity, and piously

treat, and retain them with cheerful per∣severance. This treatise is as the knocking at the dore, which is mentioned, Rev. 3. 20. At which when you have opened, you will find that gracious pro∣mise to stand firm, which is recorded in the Gospel. That the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Comforter will come in unto you, and make their abode, and conti∣nue Joh. 14. 16, 23. with you for ever.
I crave your patience (good Madam) whilst I relate unto you one other grand motive (besides the above mentioned, and my thankful acknowledgement of your many favours,) why I have used your name in the Dedication of this book. St. Ambrose, considering those words of Christ, Math. 25. I was in Pri∣son] tells us, That in the last judgement. Christian Professors will be asked Ambr. Serm. 64. whom they have delivered out of Prison. In the beginning of the sorrows of this Land, when the unmerciful Pentephobers raged; among many others (far better then my self,) I also was imprisoned, and then first understood the words of Tertullian, who said that Tert. ad Martyr. Crcer est Domus Dia∣boli. a Prison is the house of the Divel,] So much harsh∣ness, and tedious restraint we suffered,

that truly my life was dwinling, and I was even at Death's dore; The Lady Hewet. your Dear and vertuous Mother, (who is now with God) did much comfort me by her personal visitation; But your self, did negotiate, and effect my deliverance, The said Tertullian mentioneth Tert. cont. Valent. p. 375. An∣gelam, i. e. a she Angel; verily you were the good Angel that lead me out of Pri∣son, and thereby prolonged that Life, which in just gratitude ought to serve you whilst it lasteth; and I trust, that this piece of your Christian Charity, among the rest, will be to your comfort, remem∣bred at the great day of the Lord. In Psal. 41. 1. the mean time, Davids Prophecy of blessings on the merciful, shall be my Prayer for you. The Lord deliver you in time of trouble; The Lord preserve you, and keep you alive, that you may be blessed upon Earth, and not delivered unto the will of your Enemies.] The same Lord mul∣tiply his favours on you here, and aug∣ment his own Graces in you, and in the end, crown them with Glory. So prayeth,
Madam,
Marsham in Norf.

