



MOST HONOURED SIR,
IF King David, one of the greatest Monarchs hat ever was in the World,

sound himself so much obli∣ed to Abigail for a few Vi∣ctuals, it is no mervail if I be r more obliged to You; aving received so many fa∣vours, innumerable benefits, nd civilities from your No∣e Person, while I had th onour of being one of you Renowned Family. There∣re do not think me pre∣mptuous, if I offer to yo ese Fruits of my Labours which I have judged fit an poper for the Cure of th Lnguishing Diseases of th

Corrupted Age. I hope it will not seem strange to You, nor to any others, hat I make so happy choic in presenting this my poor Industry to your Worthy Person; to whom in all re∣pects the right of it belongs; having sprung, and been partly conceived, during he time of my abode in our Family. Receive herefore, Most Noble and Worthy Patron, this my Offer, not as a thing wor∣hy of your Deserts; but as

a small token of my love and affection to You.
I do not doubt (though my Work be not much po∣lished with Eloquence, nor replenished with Courtly Expressions) but You will reap some spiritual benefi by it. Although You be most Vertuous, yet sure I am, You do not conceive your self exempt, or alto∣gether free from all the Spi∣ritual Diseases and Lan∣guishing Distempers of thi present Age. For, accord∣ing

to that of our Blessed Sa∣viour in the Evangelist, Ne∣mo bonus, nisi solus Deus; Luc. 18. v. 19. There is none (absolutely) good, save God alone. It is not therefore my intention here to ex∣tend my self in your praises, or to make any long Re∣hearsal of your known He∣roical Vertues and Pious Actions, which surpass my slender capacity to express as they deserve. I must pass over in silence the manifold Perfections and Graces with

which the Holy Ghost hath adorned You. And especi∣ally with a great Charity, which you extend and pra∣ctise daily to the Poor in se∣veral effects, both for their Bodies and Souls: And o the great Zeal and constan Practice of your Faith and Religion, which neithe Glory nor Persecution could ever shake in the least▪
Neither dare I be so bold as to honour my Pen with the Relation of your Affini∣ties and near Relations, who

were most Loyal Subjects and Chief Officers in the Service of their King; ad∣venturing both their Estates and Lives in adhering to Him. It is in vain for me to declare, How they beha∣ved themselves in the last unhappy War, how often and how valiantly they fought against those Rebels, losing their lives for the just Cause and Quarrel of their Sovereign: how often they were taken and re-taken Prisoners, your and their

Houses plundered, them∣selves wounded and left a∣mong the dead Souldiers. All these I will leave in si∣lence, with many other Va∣lourous Acts done by them; knowing your humility to be such, that it abhorreth to be praised; and other your Allies exalted in your behalf.
Therefore I will, and that most willingly, conde∣scend to your humble incli∣nation; craving pardon for this boldness in offering so

small a Token to your great Deserts. And thus, with your leave, I will cease to write, though I will not cease to wish, That all Prosperity and Happiness may never cease to You and Yours; and with this desire I remain,
Most honoured Patron

