



MADAM,
WHere the Porticoes of Palaces stand like those of Temples, and the Great and the Fair leave their Accesses unbarr'd, Exalted Ho∣nour in that condescending Goodness, is so far from lessening its Grandeur, that it rather heightens its State; when True Magnificence must certainly consist in the Numbers of wondring Eyes around it, and Crowds of bending Knees before it. This Argument, which I hope I have not mistaken, is my best Warrant for this Confidence.
I confess, indeed, in my Approach to Your Grace, I ought to consider how I find your Court fill'd with Quality, whilst that Nobler Train throngs up Your Presence, that my poor Intru∣sion is a little too presumptuous. This truly I ought to consider, did I not at the same time reflect, that on the very Scaffolds at

Coronations, there are some remoter Benches, (or to speak in my own Province) some Upper Gallery Seats, even for poorer Homagers; the Voice of Adoration, and Echoes of Triumph being not only loudest but sweetest, where all Tongues unite in the Choire; whilst the lowest Humility may make up as hearty, though not so gay, a part of the Ceremony.
From that Distant Bench, I beseech Your Grace to believe, that this Addressing Paper is handed down over the Heads of Honour to Your Grace's Feet. 'Tis true, I have dared to dedi∣cate this Trifle to Your Grace, and in it publish that piece of Boldness to the World, which how far they may forgive me, I am not so much concerned, provided Your own Descending Mercy vouchsafe my Pardon.
And thus enter'd under Your Grace's glittering Roof, my daz∣led Veneration presents me so large and so hallow'd a prospect, the concentring Worth of Two Illustrious Families, that in a long long Line from their Renown'd Originals, number their fair de∣volving Honours by Centuries. The Great Ormond, and Your bright Self, a fair last Branch of the Royal Plantage∣nets, so Noble an Union, in that successive Roll of Fame, bring up the splendid Reer to so distant a Front, Your Remoter Leading Ancestors, as requires a Travel into Annals for a full Survey; so ample Your Hereditary Glories, that 'tis a Voyage but to coast 'em.
But whither am I rapt! I am wandring into so spacious a Field, a speculation so far above me, that the Theme is too sacred for the trembling Pen of so poor a Mushroom Scribler to venture at, Your Graces Herald, and Your Panegyrist, being both an Attempt beyond my humble Talent. Besides, there's Ob∣ject

enough for my Adoration in a nearer View of Your Grace's radiant Vertues; an Influence so powerful, Greatness so prideless, Wit so elevated, Piety so exemplary; and to crown all these, Your Nuptial Glory, a Conjugal Affection, so inimitable, that a mini∣string Cornelia might be proud to hold up Your Train; And all these lodged in so Beautiful a Personage, so sacred the Divi∣nity, and so bright the Shrine. The prospect, I say, of these sublime Perfections intirely takes up my humble Devotion; with∣out looking back into Urns and Monuments, Records and Chro∣nicles, for their Glorious Derivation. But my Contemplation of those Adorable Vertues is not alone sufficient; give me leave to Congratulate their Felicities too, the attending smiles of Pro∣vidence, Vertues divine Rewarder; when, as an earnest-bles∣sing, the Great Ormond, under the Victorious Royal Stan∣dard, has made his first Entry into a Grove of Lawrels, by hew∣ing out the possession of his recover'd Patrimony, by a Sword and an Arm, worthy the Inheriting Son of so Heroick a Fa∣ther. The Continuance of whose Fortunate Successes, the rich, fair Harvest of a Field of Honour abroad, and Your Grace's no less Trophies, the Pride and Ornament of a Court at home, (a fair divided Triumph between You) shall ever be the Prayers of,
Madam,

