



THis Treatise of the most Ancient Court Leets (Right Honou∣rable) containes in it the severall Crimes and Offences there in∣quirable, as well by the Common
Law as by diverse Statutes, whereof many of this great Congregation had a Vote and interest in the mak∣ing.
Jt hath bin the work of many inter∣cisive houres, and had a whole win∣ter-Age under the over-sight of a Iudge,Sir Edward Coke. famous in his time, somtimes an Honourable member of former Parliaments. How it was entertai∣ned by him, and with what benediction it returned to the Author from him, is well knowne to a Gentleman yet li∣ving, his then Amanuensis. Since it pleased his late Majesties Attorney generall, upon a reference to him from his Sacred Majesty, dated Decem∣ber 1634.Tho. Tesdall Esquier. to recommend the exa∣mination of this worke, and the Sta∣tutes therein cited to an able Counsel∣lor,
of Grayes-Inne, who after a de∣liberate perusall and consideration had of it, did at the end thereof Cer∣tifie his opinion in these words.
I have seriously perused this Tract concerning Court Leets,13. Iuly 1636. and finde it to bee compiled with much care and diligence; And I conceive generally well com∣posed and usefull to bee publi∣shed.
Not long after this the Decree of the Star-Chamber intervening for limitation of the Presse upon some strict termes,
This little Creature had the hap∣pinesse to be reserved for these long lookt for times. The motive inducing the publishing of it is a three-fold en∣gagement of the Author.

1. Debitum reipublicae, a debt due from him to the Common-wealth, for expiation of the many lost and mis∣pent houres of pretious time.
2. Jt is debitum professionis, a debt of his calling or profession, wher∣in every man is but a Steward, and must render an accompt; Hee must not reponere talentum in sudario, but so order and improve it, that hee may be enabled to cast, if not a Ta∣lent, yet a Mite into the Common Treasury.
3.In Vita A∣turedi. It is debitum promissionis in praelo, a debt of Promise and that in the Presse. All legall promises, especially those which are publikely attested, are inviolably to be observed: Now the end of publishing it, is for the common good: For sithenoe the Leet is justly termed schola insig∣niendi
juvenes, It is very necessary that the sonnes and servants of Far∣mers, Yeomen and others versed in ru∣rall affaires, should bee disciplined in the Lawes, under the government whereof they live and have their pro∣tection. And for their better instru∣ction, J have in the rehearsall of the severall Statutes declared the paines and penalties, for the benefit of per∣sons who have not Statutes at large or abridgements. Reverend Master Crompton, in the Dedication of his Iustice of Peace, affirmeth that hee thought fit to set downe the penalties and punishments due to every offence mentioned in the charge contained in that booke, in pursuance of the Order and method prosecuted by the Ho∣nourable, Sir Anthony Fitzhar∣bert, in his treatise of that Subject, and
in imitation of the usage and custom of the Iustices of Assize in their Circuits, deeming it necessary to in∣forme the people as well of the punish∣ment, as of the offence. And if par∣vis fas sit componere magna, I have presumed to take my patterne thence, that offenders may know the proportion of their paine as well as the quality of their crime. And now, right honourable, this treatise, toge∣ther with the other annexed, the Au∣thor doth most submissively present unto this thrice Honourable Assem∣bly, humbly imploring the vouchsafe∣ment of Your Honourable Licence and safe Conduct for those innocent Twinnes to passe cheerefully into the world; That they may be disposed and imployed to that end for which they were compiled as Your Honours shall
thinke fit. The God of all Coun∣sell and Consolation be present and President in all your religious Coun∣sells and Consultations, and multiply his blessings upon this whole body, as well in all your publike, as private af∣faires; For which the Author will never cease incessantly to pray.

