




Gentlemen,
FOR Incouragement of this Address to you my worthy Friends,
I am oblidg'd to acknowledge, that a worthless Fruit, like
this, stands no less indebted to the Courteous Gardner, that lent
the warm Bed to rear it, then to the indulgent Palates that were
so favourably pleased to relish it. Your Favour therefore that ad∣mitted
it to the Stage, and the kind pardoning Audience that re∣ceived
it there, divide my equal Gratitude. I confess indeed, if I
durst, (for there was no good will wanting,) I had the same itch
with the greater Brothers of the Quill, of committing this pubish't
Bawble into some Noble, protecting Hands; had not a riseing check
of Grace, call'd a Blush, withheld me. I consider'd, possibly the
highest Quality may forgive the loss of two short hours at a poor
homely Entertainment, much easier then publickly admitting so
mean a Trifle, Dedicated and laid at the Feet of Honour. The first
of the two Favours is but a generous Condescension e'en passant.
But the prefixing a great Name in lasting Print, before so undeser∣ving
a piece of scrible, is a Concession on their side too low, and
and an Ambition on mine too aspireing. And therefore though I
durst be bold with it on a Theatre, and make 'em all my Patrons
there, my Confidence, the Talent of the ge, I wear not beyond
my Dressing Room, and durst presume upon Quality no farther.
To you therefore who were before kind to it, I now send it for
Protection; and choose you Gentlemen, my Patrons, and on my
word I know not where I cou'd have pick't out better, for to pride
my self in the choice of your Protection, and give my Patrons their
true Panegyrick. I must avow to the World, that if ever there
were a true Mecaenas of Poetry, (at least in Modern Story,) that
name properly and rightly belongs to none, Gentlemen, so much
as your Selves; and to prove this just Honour no Complement, but
your lawful due, (which indeed is more then the Laws of Dedi∣cation
oblige me to,) if the Town wou'd allow me able to read,
(as that they'll hardly do.) I'de venture to quote one stanza of
Gondibert for my Justification, giving this Account of Poetry.
Oh! hireless Science, and of all, alone
The Liberal! meanly the rest each State
With Pension treats; but this depends on none;
Whose worth they reverently forbear to rate.

Now if the World has made so little Provision for the mainte∣nance
of the Muses, (as kind Davenants too true Oracle tells us,)
I'm afraid upon due Examination, that little Bread they gather will
be found almost all glean'd from a Theatre; one kind honest Actor,
that frets and struts his hour upon the Stage (as the Immortal
Shaksphear has it,) is possibly a greater Benefactor to the Muses,
then the greatest Family of Grandees that run Pedigrees, and track
Originals up from the Conquest.
The time has been when as old Ben ended his Grace with God
bless me, and God bless Ralph, viz. the honest Drawer that drew
him good Sack. So some Modern Authors with the same Equity,
might full as Pathetically have furnish'd out one Article of their
Prayers, (not forgetting the present Props of the Stage) with God
bless Mohun, and God bless Hart, the good Actors that got 'em
their good third Days, and consequently more substantial Patrons
then the greatest gay Name, in the Frontispiece of the proudest
Dedication. Poetry thrives so little now, that I much fear the fa∣mous
Suckling himself was mistaken in his own Laureat; for there
are those wou'd be glad to find that kind rich Alderman, his Ap∣pollo
gave the Bays to, that out of all his heaped Coffers, wou'd
either give or lend, to the fairest of the nine Mendicant Sisters.
No Gentlemen, the Pernassus bears no good Crop, but upon that
part of it lying and scituate within your own Garden Walls; all the rest
of it produces only that unprofitable growth, that 'tis scarce worth cul∣tivating;
all other Poetry (Dramatick only excepted,) turns to so lit∣tle
Account, that the Toyl's as hopeless as labouring for the Philoso∣pher's
Stone; the Undertaker is certain to get nothing by it, and if he's
born to an Estate to bear his Expences in the Projection, his only com∣fort
is, he shall not be undone by it. If therefore a few stragling Cions
of Poetry now and then start up in the World, the Incouragement is so
much your own, that they wholly root with you. And if the greatest
Dons of Wit, that carry the highest merit with 'em, are in Honour ob∣lig'd
to this Confession; how much greater ought my Acknowledgments
to be, who owe my Access to the Stage, meerly to your Act of Grace.
In turning this dowdy Brat therefore into the World, a like bound
to the Midwife, and the Godfathers: Your generous administring kind∣ness
in handing it into light, and the no less generous Audience for
standing Vouchers for it, I take this Opportunity of publishing my self,
Gentlemen,

