



IT is the advice of one of the Greek Ora∣tors,Aristid. Adrian. orat. 8. that we should dedicate Temples to the gods, and Books to them that are like them, that is, to persons of Honor and Vertue.
Madam, we build no Temples, but if we can contribute any thing towards the Temple of God to re∣pair the ruins thereof, it is the highest point of our ambition and hopes. This small Treatise which

is designed to that end, you have a double right in.
1. By the general obligation you have upon the Author, whose best of services and endeavours, you may justly lay claim unto, by the constant favours, wherewith you have cherished him (for many years) through all the sceans of for∣tune: when the Countenances of others were shut up and wrapt in clouds and darkness towards him, yours was alwaies open and serene;— Vt sine faece dies. whereby you gave a silent Testi∣mony to his innocency, and raised up his Spirits when they were at their lowest dejection and abate∣ment.
2. By a particular interest you have in this work, which you (with some of your neerest and dearest Relations) have with a propitious hand promoted towards the press, especially the Counter-part of it, whereby if our Countrey-men shall reap any benefit (which is my

hearty wish) they must bless God and you for it.
It is my joy, and it will be your Crown, that you and your children like that Elect Lady (in St. John) and her children,2 Joh. 1.4. do walk in the Truth and persevere therein, in these daies of apostasie: In this hour of temptation which is come upon all this Kingdom,Rev. 3.10. to try them that dwell therein.
The principles which are here treated of, and upon which, your faith is grounded and your eternal hope is built, have been your bal∣last and anchor-hold, to keep you firm and stedfast in the day of your temptation, when you were beset with two contrary winds, one that would have fill'd your sailes for Rome, and the other that would have hurried you a clean contrary way to the other ex∣treme, for some Spirits know no mediocrity or moderation. But by the strength of your own judg∣ment

and education, and by ver∣tue of these Catholick principles of the Christian faith, which you im∣bibed in your younger years in∣stead of Romances, you have been able (through God) to defeat the designs and to withstand the sug∣gestions of those that thought to lead you away captive, as easily as the first Tempter did her,. Mat. 4.3. that was the first of sex.
In the strength of the Lord hold on your course, and finish your race, and hold fast your Crown, that no man take it from you.
Madam, I am infinitely engaged to all the fair Issue of your Body, and since I cannot requite their kindness severally, I hope it will be some satisfaction of my debt and engagement that I pay this ho∣mage to you that are the Fountain of them: as in ancient times, men payed certain rites and observan∣ces to the springs of those fair streams, which bathed their houses

and watered their lands: magno∣rum fluminum capita veneramur,Sen. Ep. 47 &c.
Indeed, so strong a pulse of grati∣tude beats in my breast, that if my power were equal to my will, I would erect a monument of brass to your memory, and unto all those,Virtus he∣roica est e∣minentia & splendor virtutis, qua homine supra con∣ditionē hu∣manam e∣levat, Pic∣col: de mor: Philoso∣phia. whose Heroick charity durst look (with favour) upon the Lords Ministers in these sad and evil days: when some others (of baser alloy) would shun them, as things blasted, and would scarce speak with them, much less for them, or succor them, in the day of their distress, like that vulgar Herd, in the Poet:
Which follows fortune,—Vulgus sequitur fortun, ut semper, & odit
Damnatos. Iuv. Sat. 10. (tis their guise)
And men condemned, allwaies flies.
But Madam, you and Yours are acted by nobler and more Christian principles than these drossie and earthly things; and I shall sooner meet with them that will envy,

and secretly repine at this chara∣cter, I give you, than such as will study to deserve the like; though I shall never envy them the praise of well-doing, where-ever I shall find the least measure of desert.
I do not know, whither I may live to finish a better Piece than this, being long since taken away from the book,Forced to be Secular Priests. by secular cares and encumbrances, to make up the breaches of a ruinous fortune, seldom retiring within my self, and that but by snatches and broken in∣tervals: I have therefore thought it best to record my gratitude up∣on these leaves rather than to leave the duty to future contin∣gencies: And instead of a richer monument which I would erect to your Vertues, I have shadowed forth my thoughts by an Hierogly∣phick or Emblem in the ensuing page, which may chance last as long as some Tombs of grosser ma∣terials, and serve to as good pur∣pose.
Now the God of peace who brought a∣gain from the dead the Lord Jesus,Heb. 13.20, 21. the great shepherd of the sheep, make you perfect in every good work to do his will: until you have finished your course with joy, and be translated hence full of daies, honour, and contentment.
Madam, this is the hearty wish of him who doth unfeignedly pray for the wellfare and happi∣ness of your whole Family, even
Your Ladyships ever engaged, 
