



SIR,
THIS Play, the Conception of a few loose hours, being committed by the Author to my Hand to Dispose in the World, I cannot Discharge the Adopti∣on I have taken of it better, than by making a Present of it here. And truly, SIR, for a Worthy Patron, You stand my Noblest Choice. Ev'n the proudest Greatness and Nobility are but Poorer Shrines to Offer at: For that Great Lord, and this Noble Lady, may Patronize a Play, and Cherish an Author: But You, SIR, in Your Higher Province, are the Sup∣port of Playing it Self. And if the Diversion of the Stage makes so considerable a part of the Entertain∣ment of the Age; without Flattery, I may tell You, That Your Self is one of the Greatest Founders of that Feast. For no Man has pusht Fairer, or ventured Franklier, to carry on the Muses Cause, even in their Mourning Days, and most Declining Circumstances; and with that Unmurmuring Cheerfulness, that You never Repined at Your Profusest Favours in their Protection.

As You stand thus Extraordinary Qualified for this Humble Address; so I avow to the World, That I intend, in this Offering, a Piece of Devotion above that of a Common Dedication. For I do not so much Dedicate the Play to You, as I do my Self. You are so much the Gentleman (a Name that includes all Titles) in Your Candour and Goodness, and the Con∣duct of Your whole Administration amongst us, that nothing but the highest ingratitude can play the Infidel with You.
'Tis true, You have Unhappily met with too many Barbarous Returns from Mumurers and Mutineers, whilst the Popular Outcry of Oppression, the too Com∣mon, though never so False, Pretence for Rebellion, has not been wanting, to too many Renegadoes to fall from You: But as the fairest Standard and the Best Cause will sometimes have Deserters; their Revolt is their Shame, not Yours. For Your True Worth, when throughly known, will be found to stand above the Reach of their false Calumny and Detraction.
And against all such poor Apostacy, I here enter my publick Protestation and Abhorrence; and here, like an Honest Subscription to a Loyal Association, declare my self,
SIR,

