



GRACE, Mercy, Peace, and Patience be unto you all from God our Father, through Jesus Christ the Son of God, and our Sa∣viour.
Beloved Brethren, Whom I love dearly, remember dayly, long for greatly, pray for earnestly, and praise God heartily: To whom I could write with my purest blood, and do send these lines from my very inwardest bow∣els; (my eyes even at the writing hereof, pouring forth teares for you as God knowes) partly out of endeared affection, but chiefly out of tender consideration, and compassion of your late and present sufferings (especially some of you) of which I am a sharer and with whom (yea for whose sakes in part) I now suffer, and
am ready if God count and make me worthy, and able, to lay down my life for so deserving a Lord as ours is, and for so dear a People as you are, to whom also I am a debtor, though at present disabled to pay that Pittance lent me for your sakes:Ps. 3.8. marg. That I swore the members of my Chur. against all Magistrates, & Ministers and went preaching se∣dition
& re∣bellion throw two Coun∣ties, whereas I was a pri∣soner above 2 months be∣fore. This is like the Ac∣cusation a∣gainst Nehe∣miah & Paul Neh. 6.6. Act. 24.4, 5, 13. yet many of you (and the Lord himself) do bear me witness that I was unwilling to be a slothful servant, or to hide my Talent in a Napkin, whilst I enjoyed my liberty, but to exercise it among you, la∣bouring day and night, in perits often, and many waies: meeting, and encountring with great difficulties, but most of al with self-dis∣couragements and weakenesses, some where∣of were known to my Observers, (as David calls his enemies) many to you my friends, more to my self, but all to God: Who yet made use of me (a nothing Creature)
in his hand among better and worthyer Instru∣ments, to call, gather, &
edify you, at which work I would have still been, had not some of our own Country men laid hands unjustly upon me, & also informed against me falsly † (as you well know) whether out of hatred to the truth I preached and professed: or that they might offer me as a Peace-offering to the Prince (they know for what, and I could tell) God will in due time discover.
Neverthelesse I desire to pitty them, pray for them, and willingly to pardon the wrongs
they have done to me, and though I cannot say I am so transported with affection,Rom. 9.2, 3. and zeal (as Paul)
to wish my self accursed from Christ for their sakes. Yet I am perswaded I could be contented with Jonas to be cast into the Sea, for the pacifying of Gods wrath to∣wards them, or their fury towards you.
But my faithful Fellow-travellers, let us not be troubled that the winde now blowes in our faces, or that like Lazarus we receive our evil things in this world;Lu. 16.15. knowing that there is no Hell to the Saints, but what they have in this present life; and that to live per∣secuted, and to die sainted are commonly inseparable; and therefore as our Lord and his Apostle
exhorted;Rev. 2.10. 1 Thes. 3.3. Heb.
10.32. 1 Pet. 4.12. Fear none of those things which you shall suffer.
Neither be moved by these afflictions, nor count them strange, for some of you, when you were first illuminated, endured afflictions; and others of you who are Summer-converts, were told that you must suffer, it being the high-way and shortest cut to Heaven. Consider then, if all your way be fair and smooth what cause you have to question it, and if any of you have the favour, and friendship of the world, let such a one suspect himself to be one of it,Jo. 15.19. for the world will love only it's own. A day of close discovery and through tryal is come, or coming upon us, and the
leaves of profession are like to hide hypocri∣cy no longer;Mat. 13.20 21, 22. and 25, 8, 9. you know the stony and thorny ground were not discovered untill the time of temptation,
nor the foolish Virgins discer∣ned till the very coming of Christ: Judas was neither suspected (nor did probably at all doubt himself) till within few hours of his death. Copper-coin may lie in the bag with gold and silver, but when it comes to the Touch-stone it is found reprobate; and Al∣comy, (as some say) will bear six fires, but not the seventh: The words therefore of Christ,Luk. 21.8. Heb. 4.1. Take heed that ye be not deceived:
and of the Apostle, Take heed least any of you seem to come short of the promise; are very seasonable. And never more need then now of Self-suspition, Self-exami∣nation, and self-searching, whether we be in the Faith, and Christ be in us, yea, or no? What we build upon, and whether we can stand before the Son of Man at his ap∣pearing: Sincerity alwaies surpassed gifts, and all flourishes of Religion in the sight of God, and that will be of greatest request among good Men henceforth; for the drosse must be taken away, to make a vessel for the Refiner;Pro. 25.4. and it's to be feared when the Churches are searched, they will be found like Sardis, to have but a few names, that keep their garments undefiled, and all
those that came in as self-seekers, will steal out again to save themselves: which, is indeed the only way to lose themselves; yet the foundation of God standeth sure,Mat. 10.39 2 Tim. 2. 19
Pro. 10.25. Esa. 4.5. Psa. 33.11. Heb. 7.24.
Psa. 89.28. Esa. 54.10. Jer. 32.40. and 33.20, 25.
and no member though never so mean or il-formed, if it be of, and in the body, and really united to the Head, shall be cut off; but all that are living stones shall continue in the build∣ing, and upon the whole glory (i. e. the whole Church, 2 Cor. 8.23.) shall be a defence; therefore be comforted, that the counsel of God, the Priesthood of Christ, and the Covenant of peace are unchange∣able, and abide for ever; which is the sure foundation of every true Christians con∣fidence, and comfort. Be not slothful in proving your knowledge of, faith in, love to∣wards, walking after, and suffering for Christ: For the visible
and seeming diffe∣rences, are little and smal between the right Christian,
and the Hypocrite therein. But in the Anointing, Spirit, Vertue, Power,
and Life within, which like the oyl in the Lamp, feeds the wick of profession.
I beseech you also in the Lord,Heb. 6.2. 2 Jo. v. 9. Pro. 4.2. 1 Tim. 4.6. 1 Tim. 1.10 Tit. 1.9.
and 2.1. (as dear Brethren) that you be not moved from the Do∣ctrin, which was delivered to you; which is the same with the Doctrine of the Apostles, called the Doctrine of Christ, good Doctrine, and sound Doctrine. In opposition to these,
are the Doctrines of Devils,1 Tim. 4.1. Mar.
7.7. Col. 2.21. Heb. 13.9. 1 Jo. v. 10. Rev. 2.14, 15,
24. and the Do∣ctrines of men, which either directly deny Christ, or much derogate from him, who is the perfect Law-giver. And that Satan, and his Instruments may the better intro∣duce their own Doctrines; they make it their design and indeavour to batter down the Scriptures (for their Dagon, cannot stand before Gods Ark.) As the Jewes make it death for any of their Religion, to read and keep the New-Testament. The Papists also, make it an Article of their Creed, that unwritten verities, (as they call them) and the Canons, and Traditions of their Church, are of equal authority with the Scriptures; & hold that they should not be translated into vulgar Languages, nor the Common-people be permited to read themContrary to Dut. 6.6. to the 10. Josh. 1.8. & Ps. 119.19. 16 105. Joh. 5.39. Act. 17.11. and 18.24.
Ro. 15.4 2 Tim. 3.16 17. Col. 3.16.17. Rev. 13. &
22.10. . Also the Quakers generally deny, the Scripture to be the Word of God,which are so called; See and compare Mat. 15.6. with Mar. 7.13. & Lu. 8-11. with Mat. 13. 37 & Ro. 10.8. with Deu. 30 14 See also Jo 10.35. Act. 4.31. & 12.49. & 13.44 46. & 19, 20 Eph. 6.17. 1 Tim. 4.5. H.S. in his book called the Everl. Rule. pa. 28. or a Rule; affirming there is no other Rule, Way, or Means, &c. but that which is manifest in men. And one of the learned'st of them, disdainfully calls the Scrip∣tures broken Cisterns, your Scripture, your Word, & your Letter;S.F. In his book cal'd Rust. ad A∣cad. pa. 115.116, 117. These 3 last instances I & divers others heard from the Parties owne mouths. and some upon that account, call it the great Idol:
others affirm the writings of their Teachers, to be of equal inspiration and Authority with it; and that which is yet worse, one woman, put her Bi∣ble under her foot, another Burnt it; and
yet these two were great Quakers, but now are turned Singers, a degree as they concieve a∣bove them. But beloved you are better taught, & I hope will still retain your love of, diligence and delight in, and zeal for this word of God: And especially to walk more according to it, then those that pretend to experience alike po∣wer with a greater mesure of perfection, than either the Prophets, or Apostles ever did. I am fearful and jealous, that this attempt, of ta∣king away the authority of the Scriptures; will end in takeing away the very Bibles from us. Therefore I exhort you again in the words of Christ and Paul; Search the Scriptures and give attendance to Reading, & be sted∣fast in those truths, which you have been taught,
(from them, by the servants of the Lord; some whereof are now glorifyed, and others through grace ready to seal it with their blood) Concerning God and his Atributes, Christ, and his Offices, the Ho∣ly Spirit, and it's manifestations,
the de∣crees of God before time, the two Cove∣nants (viz. the Law and the Gospel) the wreched state of all men by Nature, and out of Christ; the freeness of Gods grace,Joh. 5 39. 1 Tim. 4.13 in opposition to mans free-will: The Do∣ctrine of Justification, by the imputed Righteousness of Christ, apprehended, and received by Faith, Sanctification (distinct
from Justification) wrought by the Spirit in us. Perseverance, Assurance, and growth in Grace by vertue of our union with Christ, and his spiritual in dwelling and operating in us. Living Godlily, Righteously, and Soberly in this present World: Denying our selves, following Christ, shunning sin, resisting Satan, separating from the world in matters of Gods worship: not medling with, nor mingling the Traditi∣ons of men with Gods truths: joyning your selves to, and continuing in the fellow∣ship of Saints; and using carefully and conscientiously all the Ordinances of Christ, as Preaching, Hearing, and ex∣pounding Scriptures, keeping up publick, family, and private prayers, Prophesying, and singing of Psalms, Hymnes, and spiri∣al Songs in the Churches, Repetition of Sermons, Observing the Sabbath, Bap∣tism, and the Supper of the Lord; and up∣on occasion, dayes of solemn fasting, or Rejoycing, visiting one another, espe∣cially the tempted, and the sick, relieving the poor; and in case of scandal and here∣sie, to deal with offending members, by Ad∣monition, Suspention, or Excommunicati∣on, according to the Nature of the Of∣fence, and carriage of the Offender; do∣ing all your duties to magistrates, Masters,
Parents, Husbands, Brethren, Neigh∣bours and Enemies; according to the bles∣sed commands of Jesus Christ: Withall ex∣pecting the destruction of Antichrist,
the Restauration of the Jewes, the Coming, Kingdom, and Raign of Christ; & still re∣membring your latter end, the immorta∣lity of your precious Souls, believing the Resurrection of the Body, the Judging of all, and the Salvation of the Righte∣ous.
Finally, my Brethren, the hour of tempta∣tion being come upon us, let us redeem time, be watchful and sober, keeping our lights burning, our Lamps shining, our Loyns girded, our consciences awakned, & our garments unstained. Let us fear God more than men, Sin more than suffering, self more then others, living basely more than dying Christianly and Nobly. Let us wisely consider Gods works,Ps. 64.9. Esa.
5.12. and won∣ders (though others should slight them) and maintain Gods
Wayes and Cause, though they be despised by most; and let us not carnally comply with, nor superstitiously conform to the world, to save our estates, Liberties or Lives: Nor yet forsake the as∣sembling of your selves together, but edi∣fie, confirm and comfort one another; En∣couraging the weak, helping to restore
those that are faln, and to establish those that yet stand: Doing your duties comman∣ded by God, what ever danger may come thereby: Keeping your selves from error and every evil thing, by the holy spirit in you: And (as our Saviour
commands, John 14.1. be not troubled) praying also ear∣nestly, that neither I nor you may suffer for sin, or sin in suffering, not be sensless under present, or faint under future tryals. Let us cry and pray mightily to the Lord, that we may escape the evils that are com∣ing upon the world, and to stand before the Son of Man at his appearing. To that King of Kings be honour, power, dominion, praise, and glory, now and for ever, Amen.
My dear friends, If the publishing of this inoffencively intended little Book,
be well or ill; Know my love to you chiefly was the mo∣tive to it: and that of all other things, if God did please, I would choose to be doing the work to which I was called amongst you, rather than any where, or any thing else; though I were to be fed with bread & water and to carry my chains & bonds with me. And I should not count my life dear to me, so that I might have the liberty to Preach Christ, for the Salvation of my dear Country-men, and for your further edification; if not the will of the Lord be done concerning me,
and his work by whom else he pleaseth. I am perswaded he will take care of you,Esa, 65.10. Psa. 73.24. Esa.
45.27. and the rest of his Flocks; and therefore to him again I commit you, who hath promised to be your God and guide until, yea, will be in and after
death your salvation. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all Amen.
