



My Dear and Honored Sir,
ALthough I know not well, how you may Resent the Dedication of this Book unto your Name also; yet so impetuous were my inward Inclinations here∣nto, and such solid Reasons I also ad for it, as that I could not get ver the same for my Life: Whence  choosed rather to run the Hazzard

of your Acceptation, than to exp my self unto the Imputation of Ingratus, qui benefici∣um accepisse se negat, quod accepit; in∣gratus, qui id dissimulat; rursum in∣gratus, qui non reddit: at omnium ingratissimus est, qui obli∣tus est, I gratitude? which, of all Offence was esteemed by Queen Elizabet the most Unpardonable; as being Vice most Hateful before God a Man, and which Heathens have even blushed to own. I humbly the fore beg your Favorable Perusal a Acceptance of this Tractate; se∣ing no less than a Threefold Cord which is not easily broken, (viz. Af∣finity, Friendship and Affection have bound me so fast, as that could not do any otherwise, than  make this Open Acknowledgement I should have ever been Impriso ed in my Mind, had I suffered you Unmerited Kindnesses to have been Buried in Oblivion; which certainly cannot well be now; because (Scripta litera manet) what i Written, is Permanent; and Acknow∣ledgment

is the least any one can  for a Favor; and no more is this. erefore, I pray you, Sir, give me ve to tell you, That I freshly bear  Mind the The Mer∣cies of God in number are as the glitte∣ring Stars of the Firma∣ment, the Drops of the Briny Ocean, & the Sands upon the Winding Shores; the Dusts of the Earth, & the Atoms, th swim in the Sun-Beams, are not so nu∣merous as them. Mercies of God to∣ds you, which are Various for their umber, Divers for their Kind, rious for their Methods, and Ama∣g for their Circumstances: I shly bear in Mind your Familiar olloquies with me in Private,  the end, that I might Praise God your Behalf, Admire the Methods Prouidence, and Depend on God  the Diligent Use of Means for e Supplies of this Life. So that I st needs say; The Story of your ife, which oft-times you have Read to me, (to the Praise of your Con∣escension be it spoken) has afford∣ me not only Excellent Contem∣lation, when I have been in your Com∣y, but also in my Solitudes;

which compels me to say, (and I ho you will not be Offended) you were  Unworthy to be in the Role of tho whose Names I use in Page 13 &c. of this Book, as Famous  Good Works; which should I h done, it would (I know) have p ved the greatest Offence, that e was offered unto you: And therefo that which I dare not prove here  an Induction of Particulars;  there is a Certain Which I understood from others, before I did from you. Place, that do and which will Register your Na beyond a Tomb-stone.
Besides, Your Benign Influen on She, that is my Nearest Rel tion; together with her Sister,  their Two Brothers, that now  Dead; that were also Cared by y when You may (Sir) draw Comfort from Jam. 1. ult. Pure Reli∣gion, & un∣defiled be∣fore God and the Father, is this; To Visit the Fa∣therless and Widows in their Affli∣ctions, &c. Orphans; Provided for,  wisely Educated by you: and in  Things shewed your Self an Indulg Father and Mother, as well as a L∣ving

Uncle, in the Place of the eceased; by whom they were Com∣itted to you in Tender Compassions, d of whom you have Discharged your lf in Faithfulness.
Lastly; Let me not forget your illing Parting with, and ready Giving to me your Kinswoman in Mar∣age; which, next to God, I must  You in it: For I must acknow∣dge, if Love and Contentation ders a Wedded Life Happy, I ve them as much as any Man.
But lest my Affection, kindled by  Meditation on your Goodness  Many, and to my Self in particu∣, should dilte it self too far, and  displease you; I shall only say :
Though the The Gi∣ver should shut his Eyes, when he opens his Hands. Dispenser of Love ould have a Slippery Memory;  the Recipient should Engrave it  Pillars of Marble, and Pyramids

of Brass. I never could endure ( Praise God for it) to let old Kind∣nesses sleep; and alwayes did esteem it a Shameful and Unthankful Part, continually to Crave, and never t Give: And glad therefore I am, t snatch this Occasion of Testifying my Duty and Affection unto you. An since I cannot find any thing to Pre∣sent unto you, by way of Retribution as AEshines said to Socrates, Th One Thing, which I have, I giv unto you (even My Self) to be yo Servant, & Sollicitor in the Cou of Heaven; which, I know, you  Esteem beyond the Dedication of Book: For you are One, that car not to have your Name blaz'd  broad, (I speak my Conscience) y hate it; which I could easily make to ap pear in sundry Signal Instances, we it Convenient.

Your Humility should be e∣very Christi∣an's Upper-Garment. Humility (Good Sir) Com∣ands me to Conceal, and Fetters me  the Limits of fewer Lines, than you eserve: therefore, what you will not ave in Paper, shall lie Warm in my Breast.
Wherefore, (my Honored Sir) that  may draw to a Close: Seeing it as Pleas'd Almighty God, (the So∣ereign Disposer of Life and Death, in whose Hands yours and all our Times are) as yet to continue you in he Land of the Living, when many f your Dear & Near Relations have een taken away, and Are not. I be∣eech you, give me leave (if you do not ve it, I must take it) to Pray for he long Continuance of this Mercy; hat your Dayes may still be prolonged on Earth; and that you may Arrive at  far greater Age, than at present you re Arrived at. But it's probable, you ay be Impatient to be gone hence, part∣ly

from the Infirmities and Pains, that attend Old Age, and your Weari∣ness of the World, and the fore-sigh of Calamities impending on this Na∣tion; and partly from the Longings o your Soul to be with Christ: B pray, Sir, if God has more Genera∣tion-Work for you to do, patiently and quietly Wait all the Dayes of your appointed Time, till your Change shall come. Heaven will be th same many Years hence, that now it is and the longer you are kept out of it, up∣on the Doing God's Work, the bett it will be to you at last. 'Tis one  the Highest Degree of Grace a Saint can Arrive unto in this Life, to Long for Heaven; and yet in order to Ser∣vice, to be willing for a Time, to b kept out of Heaven. This was the . Theodoretus. Heighth of Paul's Grace, and the Ex∣cellency of his Spirit. Phil. 1. 23, 24, 25. For I am in a Strait be∣twixt

Two, having a Desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better: Nevertheless, o abide in the Flesh, is more need∣ful for you. And having this Confidence, I know, that I shall abide and continue with you All for your Furtherance and Joy of Faith.
Ingentis animi est, a∣lienâ causâ ad vitam reverti. Seneca has an Excellent Saying to this Purpose; It argues a Noble & Generous Mind, for one to be willing for the Sake of another, to Return to Life again.
And now (Sir) to hold you no long∣er in the Porch, (which, I know, un∣to you is tedious) I invite you into the House; and that you would be pleased to observe a Candid Eye, what is con∣tained herein: what of Good shall be in it, Esteem it God's; and what of the Contrary shall be in it, know it to be my own: I do confess, I fear, lest it may tast

too much of the Distractions of th Times: Yet I am Confident, there ar Truths in this Book, that call for  Practical Improvement; Which,  much Respect, are Presented unto you, as well as unto my Former Friend whom I have known longer than you Worthy Self; and by whom, und God, I was Preserved for an Objec of your Kindness, and at last, to b Related unto you in the Bond of Affi∣nity: Being verily perswaded, th you as well as him, will Pardon the ma∣ny Faults, and Consent unto the man Blessed Truths contained herein (which may suit Christians of all Ranks, Fa∣thers and Strong Men, as well as Babes and Children.) And so you wil further Oblige,
From my Study in Bartholomew-Close. London, Febr. 22. 1678/9.
SIR,

