


Mr. BRISCOE,
SVre none can prove a Warmer Patron to a Book, than the Book∣seller for whom 'tis Printed; nor can any one have a juster Ti∣tle to the Dedication of a Play, than he who uses to pay so largely most Dedicators. You promis'd to stand Godfather to this Off-spring of a Nameless Parent; and, as 'tis like to make some Figure in the World; we hope it will soon Recompence your Liberality to those who usher it into it: For, while other Patrons often purchase nothing but empty Air, and are swell'd with it, to the Decay of their more solid Parts; but you are for more substantial Gain, and get Mo∣ney for Paper, while they get nothing but Paper for Money.
Most Readers rather judge of the Worth of a Book, by the Name of the Bookseller that Prints it, than by that of the Great Man to whom 'tis Inscrib'd; and this must needs be thought the better, as be∣ing not only Printed for you, but Dedicated to you, who are fam'd for Printing few Things but what are Vseful and Entertaining, and who hate a dull Scribler, as much as he hates a severe Critick; or we, both Scribles and Criticks, a thin Pit, or a long Vacation. And, indeed, this Opera will require no less powerful an Interest, than yours Mr. Briscoe: For you know, that many Books are only thought bad, through the Prejudice of most Readers against their Nameless Wri∣ters, as if those Works were not worth owning; and many are thought good only for the sake of the Author's Fame. 'Thus, let the best Master of Poetry, but publish a Poem without owning it, great num∣bers of Faults will be found, which otherwise wou'd perhaps pass as Beauties. Now your Recommendation-Name, Mr. Briscoe, will infallibly supply the Want of the Authors; and thus his Modesty will only prove like those Shades that add strength to Pictures, and set the Beauties in a truer Light. For who can be supposed to understand

Plays better than you, whose Business they have been so long, and who wholly Converse with the Ingenious and Bookish-Part of the World? Who but knows, what a kind Influence depends on you, from the Superior Orbs of Wit, with which you are so often in Con∣junction? And 'tis but just it shou'd be so; for while most Libraries are made up of the Outcasts of Booksellers Shops, yours, Mr. Briscoe, chear'd by the Beams darted from the Neighbouring Spheres, is like a flourishing Garden, where every Day springs new Variety of the choicest Productions of Nature improv'd by Art; and thence the whole Letter'd World receives constant Supplies of the Useful and the Pleasing, without which it can no more subsist, than without the daily Concourse of Providence. There we borrow'd this Si∣mile, Mr. Briscoe, which, by the way, confirms our Assertion; and there many others borrow, who do not so much care to acknowledge it: There from the Grave Politician, to the frothy Sonneter, from the Courtly Critick on Cloths, to the implacable Critick on Sence; from the All-Contemning Lord of Rhyme, to the All-admiring Country Wit, All-Wits, and Wou'd-be-Wits, are seen; too happy many of 'em, in finding something too Read in the Morning, that may enable 'em to Chat over their Tea in the Evening, without being reduc'd to pass six long Hours in a Balcony, in making Criti∣cisms upon the Mobb. But we forgot that you and we are Men of Business; nor need we say any more to Recommend this Piece to you, and the Town, to whose Generous Indulgence we leave it; heartily wishing, you may sell off as many Impressions of it, as we wish our selves Benefactors on Wednesday, and Saturday next, the Visit∣ing Days of,
Monday, Octob. 16, 1699.

