



SIR,
WHEN I reflect upon the vast Endow∣ments, that inrich the Souls of Poets, and the unlimited Power of Poetry it self; how (by a Noble Conversation with the Immor∣tal Labours of Antiquity) they turn the Glass of Time, and make it often run the Golden Age agén; Poetry, whose almost Creating Pow'r, out-strips the slower Race of Nature, to the forming, if possible, of Worlds unknown, and animating even Beings yet Unborn. And if Oblivion, the sole Death of Merit, shoots her ill-aim'd Arrows at the Memory of Vir∣tuous and Noble Actions in vain; 'tis only, when they are guarded by such a Quill, whilst Deathless Worth stands transmitted to latest Ages by such Re∣cording Hands.
When I consider this, I am obliged (so poor my weak pretensions) to renounce the Name of Poet, so far from being intituled to any legitimate Favours from

any one of the Fair Inspirers, that I have rather com∣mitted a barbarous Rape upon the whole Nine.
And now, Sir, when my too daring Confidence enboldens me, to lay this homely piece at your Feet; whatever I may hope from your own pardoning Good∣ness, how will the World forgive me such a presump∣tion? However, as self-preservation, my only Ex∣cuse, has induced me to the Affixing so Great a Name to so worthless a Trifle, for borrowing the Umbrage of so Generous a Protectour: Believe me, Sir, that enter'd under your Honourable Roof, I survey such infinite Merits shine before me. But here let my Unhallow'd Pen advance no farther; 'tis enough my Veneration strikes me silent. And indeed such High Desert, is as much above the want of a Panegyrick, as I am unworthy the writing it. Not, Sir, that such conspicuous Virtues are unknown, but that I am known too much. The greatest justice therefore I can do your Memory, is to let your Name be men∣tion'd, and let this Presumption tell Posterity, that nothing could awe a Player into Modesty.
But, Sir, to speak a word of this undeserving Off∣spring that begs your Patronage. It is a common vanity amongst Dramatick Writers, to ascribe that Approbation which often is due alone to the Actors, to the Merit of their Pen, when one Man's Grimace

shall sometimes betray an Audience into a general Applause; and thus no one can be sure he is inno∣cent of Errors, till some Impartial Iudge has heard his Cause.
As the unexpected success of this Play does not add much, so neither does it take from its worth; there∣fore it is as yet unsentenc'd, and tho' perhaps its Er∣rors may condemn it, 'tis possible, a free Confession may gain half its Pardon: If your Goodness can forgive my Presumption in this Dedication, the World will pardon the Errors of the Play, since I send it abroad, under the Protection of so Honourable a Pa∣tron. To whose Eternal Service, I Dedicate both This and my Self.
SIR, 
