


Dear & Honored Sir;
THE Dedication of Books unto Persons of Worth and Interest, Service and Honor, (though often abused to Vain Flattery) is of Antient Use, and oft-times doth Secure the same from the Euroclydons of a Censori∣ous Age: And therefore, the



Custom is not to be Despised; especially considering, that one of the Luk. 1. Act. 1. 3. Pen-men of Holy Scripture hath Hallowed it by his Practice; who Inscribeth his Gospel and his Acts to Theophilus, a Person both Eminent in Religion, and So much, I conceive, is intimated in that Form of Address.  a Term, which is wont to be given to Per∣sons of Ho∣nor; as Acts 24. 3. , and Acts 26. 5. In both Places we render No∣ble. Digni∣fy'd with Birth and Place; which ever since has been Imitated by the Best and Wisest of Men in all Ages: So that I shall use no further Apology on this Ac∣count.
But the Reasons why I Address my Self to You in this manner, and Prefix your Name to this Work, are many; a few where∣of may not be needless here to Insert: viz. Your eximious Pie∣ty, Faithfulness and Zeal towards God; your laudable Love to∣wards, and Tenderness of all (under what Names of Discrimi∣nation

so-ever) that have but aliquid Christi in them, which is rare now a-days.
Sir, I speak my Conscience, That this is as an Orient Pearl shining in your Breast; and in which lies much of your Emi∣nency, viz. Unfeigned Love to the Brethren; which is one of those No Man can Love Grace in a∣nother Mans Heart, but he that has Grace in his own. Excellent Things, that ac∣company Salvation. And that your Love is Unfeigned, appears from the Spirituality, and the Universality of it: Your Love is Spiritual, because it is a Love for the Image of God, that is stamped on the Creature. In the next place; It is Universal, in that it extends to all Saints, as Saints, how-ever Distinguished a∣mong us; and not making this or that Difference in Judgment a Difference in Affection, which

too oft-times is. Saintship is the Ground of your Love; and where∣ever you Espy it, you Like it, Love it, and Admire it, though their Errors may be many; so they be not Fundamental, and Approved. Your Faith is enough to Justify this before God, and your Faith and Good Works go gether, ough not in the Act of stifying. Good Works enough to Justi∣fy it before Men: Of your Good Works, many poor Souls (besides God, Angels, and your own Consci∣ence) are Witnesses of: Among whom I may well be accoun∣ted one; who am able to attest the Largness of your Heart un∣to poor Christians, and the Fil∣ling-up that Relation, in which you stand; viz. Your Succouring me in my Tempted Condition; your Fervent Prayers, Set and Oc∣casional, Solemn and Sudden, that were made with and for me;

your gracious Words, feeling Ex∣pressions, pious Discourses, whol∣som Admonitions, divine Cordi∣als, A Simpa∣thizing Friend (as one sayes) is like a Dry House in a Wet Day. simpathizing Epistles: And lastly, which Crowned all, was your incouraging and forwarding me in that Holy Work, and Fun∣ction, where-unto God has called me; of which I must have de∣spaired, as to all secundary Cau∣ses, and outward Instruments as∣sisting of me, had not God stir'd up your Heart towards me, on the Fore-sight of what I am now (through Divine Providence) ar∣rived unto. In a word; You be∣lieved for me, what I could not believe for my self: So that my present State is an Effect of your Faith, and a Fruit of your Hope and Labor; which I desire, may be to the Glory of God, the Good of Immortal Souls, and the

Fulfilling of your Expectations, which I know, are High concern∣ing me: And well they may, because of Expence that I have put you to. Besides, Your own∣ing ‖ Some two or three Mi∣nisters, that violently as∣sail'd my Book, Enti∣tuled; The Young Mans Conflict wth. & Victory over the De∣vil by Faith, &c. Report∣ing, that it was Fictiti∣ous; which, Sir, next unto God, and my own Conscience, you your self can bear witness unto the Truth thereof; being an Eye-witness of me, when I was un∣der the Workings of the greatest part, that I declare there. If my Method and Stile, being dark and obscure, and unbe∣seeming the Matter declared in that Book, has offended a∣ny, I am sorry; and would not have done it, had I not in my Iudgment deem'd it most In-offensive: How-ever,  hear of Good, that it has done, and that almost Daily. of me against the furious On∣set of some prejudiced * Persons, (whose Names I shall conceal for the Glory of God's Sake, and their own Reputation) that would have parted between Friend and Friend, by whispering in your Ears things of me, unbecoming them of their Place to say; especially, consi∣dering me to be a Brother, though the Younger One, and the Un∣worthiest

of all. Yet none of these Things could byass your Unbyassed Disposition towards me; and by vertue of that Spirit of Discerning, which God has gi∣ven you, was more able to Judg of me, than they: And there∣fore they could not come to a Person, with whom their Tales could be more unwelcom, than with you. Whence it is, that (not∣withstanding those Jealousies, which they would have foment∣ed) you have continued your Favor hither-to unto me.
This, together with many o∣ther of your Favours, (which to enumerate, I know, would but disgust you) have obliged me to this unfeigned Expression of my Gratitude and Service, in what I may or can; especially, for your constant Countenance, your

undeserved Bounty, and your propitious Acceptance of my poor fore-past A Sermon, Preached by me on Psalm. 22. v. 1. Labors: So that, if you will but accept of this Plain and Unpolished Discourse also, it will be an Additional Favor un∣to all the former. My Confi∣dence (beloved Sir) is in your Self, and not in any thing of my Stile here, that may merit an Admission into the Cabinet of your more serious Thoughts; Matter and Method being both plain: Only this I can say for my Book; The Things contain∣ed in it are Weighty and High, though the Expressions are Plain and Familiar. And I know not of any thing here handled, but I first tried it by the Touch∣stone of the Word, and could Seal to it by my own Experience: So that what comes to the View

of your Eye, will, I question not, but be approved. Some Rheto∣rical Flourishes, that some much use, are here wanting; yet I am almost confident, that it will prove Acceptable unto you, that be my Friend, and whose Pro∣perty all along has been, to wink at small Faults▪
This Book (I hope) though it is not set out as some are, may be useful to Christians of all sorts and sizes; viz. Babes, Little Chil∣dren, Young Men, and Fathers; and I suppose, the Unconverted may find something here-in to Chew also.
When I Preached these things, it was not without good Acceptation and Success; as I have not a little Cause to presume.
The Happiness of Believers, and the Unhappiness of Unbelie∣vers

is here opened; The Nature of True One Old piece of Gold is worth a thousand New Coun∣ters; so one Old Truth of God is more worth, than a thou∣sand New Errors. Saving Faith is handled; Iustification by Faith hinted: The Potency of Christ's Intercession on the Behalf of the Elect: Believers Perseverance: Satan's Wiles Disco∣vered: Together, with many o∣ther Useful Things; All very Material, Practical and Soul∣searching.
Now these (Good Sir) do I Present unto you; not that you needed them: For I question not, but that you have Treasu∣red up every Thing, that may be of Excellency in this Book, long before my Time, that am but of Yester-day. My Desire is only (as in part I have said al∣ready) to express, what I would, if I could: And more-over, To let you see something, that God has done for me; and that your

Endeavours have not been in vain  the Lord.
What is here, was intended you sooner; but some Emergent Occasions intervening prevent∣ed: Besides, my Design was o have buried it in Oblivion; ut only, that some that were Friends to it, Revived it. If this ittle Spark may give Light or Heat to any Heart, I shall have my desire. What now remains (ever Honored Tis not the Knowing of Truth, nor the Hearing of Truth, nor the Commen∣ding of Truth, nor the Talking of Truth; but the In∣dwelling of Truth in your Soul, that will keep your Judgment Chast and Sound. Sir) but that God may Prosper you in all your law∣ful Undertakings: That his Bles∣sing, which alone maketh Rich, may be on your Head; and that you may see the Fruit of your Loins in a good Old Age, to ample Satisfaction and Comfort. God heard your Prayers in the ame Case, as he did Abraham of Old. Now Sir, you know, Mer∣cy

calls for Duty: If God h had an Ear to your Voice  Prayer, I hope you will not  fuse an Ear to God's Voice  his Commandments. 'Tis b reasonable, That those who God has done much for, shou be much in doing for him aga My Prayer shall be, that as y do out-strip many in Mercy;  you may out-shine in Life a Conversation.
I shall conclude with a Wo of Counsel or two; being as f∣loweth.
First, Let nothing lie so ne your Heart to delight you,  God and his Glory, Christ a his Merits, Grace and the Mea of Grace; the Soul, and its Sa∣vation. Let God be your chie est Deus est summum bo∣num, & om∣ne bonum in summo. Good, and his Glory th Scope you level at in all yo

Actions Natural, Civil and Re∣ligious: For this you were Born, and New-Born; and this is the End of Life Natural, Spiritual and Eternal. Next to this, Let many of your spare Hours be spent in considering the Preciousness of the Soul; to∣gether with the necessity of Sal∣vation. The Soul is a Precious Substance; for it is of a Spiri∣tual Nature, and the Principal Part of the Man: The Body is but a Casket, the Soul is the Jew∣el; and yet the greatest Care usually is to gratify the Body. The Wise-man saith; All a Man's Labor is for the Mouth: But, Sir, I hope better Things of you; and that you know, who ever are concern'd so with the Body, as to neglect the Soul, are like such, that trim the Scabbard,

and let the Sword rust.
Man is in Dr. Man∣ton in Jam. Cap. 1. 21. part an Angel, and in part a Beast; Why should we please the Beast, that is in us, rather than the An∣gel?
Our greatest Fear should be for the Soul, and our greatest Care should be for the Soul. Your greatest Fear, Matth. 10. 28. Fear not him, that can Kill the Body; but Fear him, that can Cast both Soul and Body into Hell.
There is a double Argument: The Body is but the worser Part, and the Body is alone: But on the other side, the Soul is the more Noble Part; and the State of the Body dependeth upon the Well-or Ill-being of the Soul. He is able to Cast both Soul and Body, &c.

And therefore it is the grea∣test ‖ Omnia si∣perdas, ani∣mam servar memento. Imprudence in the World, out of a Fear of the Body to Be∣tray the Soul.
But in the next place, Your greatest Care should be for the Soul. Matth. 16. 26.
What is a Man profited, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul?
'Tis but a sorry Exchange.
Sir, God has Honoured you with the Bona Throni, and the Bona Scabelli; The Good of the Throne, and the Good of the Foot-Stool. But, I suppose, you look upon all Earthly good Things, to be but Convenien∣cies for the Body, and such as will not profit, when you shall be laid in a Cold and Silent Grave: But Salvation, How Ex∣cellent is it? How Sweet is it,

as being that, without which the Soul cannot be Happy? Now, Christ and his Merits procures this JesusChrist has purcha∣sed a Salva∣tion, that is possible, ne∣cessary, rare, near & ever∣lasting. Salvation for the Soul: Grace, and the Means of Grace together, will confer Grace on that Soul, that it may be Hap∣py.
But my last Word of Counsel is this:
As I would have you to let nothing lie so near your Heart, as those Four Things afore-said, to Delight you; so I would, that you let nothing lie so near your Heart, as these Four Things, to Humble you.
First, Your Sins: You and I, and all of us have our Sins, not∣withstanding our Regeneration: A Saint and a Sinner, in some sense may stand together. The Best have the Remainders of

Corruption in them: And tho we are Here the New Man is mingled with the Old. Renewed, we are but Renewed in part: Have we been Humbled for Sin? Why? yet we have cause to be more Humbled.
Secondly, The Hiding of God's Face is another thing, that calls for Humiliation. The Face of God is the Favor of God: The shining of his Face, and the lift∣ing up of his Countenance is the Spiritual Desertions many a gra∣cious Soul in his Life time is exercised with. Manifestation of his Favor; but the hiding of his Face, is the loss of the Sense of his Favor. Now, the Shinings of God's Face no Soul on Earth alwayes En∣joyes; but at sometime or other he is a Child of Light, walking in Darkness; he hath but his Lucid Intervals. No perfect Grace, that dwells in such a Soul, a Soul that dwells in such a Body, a Man that dwells among such variety of Business, Companies and Tempta∣tions, cannot but be under much Vari∣ableness and Alterations. Settledness can be attained to in this Life: Our Day will have

a Night, our Sun-shine will have its Eclipses; Suavis hora, brevis mora, hath been an Old Saying.
But, Thirdly, The Imperfecti∣on of Grace: Grace while on Earth is Militant, and not Tri∣umphant, till it arrives to Hea∣ven. Sir, Your Faith is not so perfect, but there is Unbelief e∣nough to humble you; and your Love is not so perfect, but there is Luke-warmness enough to hum∣ble you; and your Patience is not so perfect, but there is Im∣patience enough to humble you; and your Our Faith is mixt with Unbelief, & our Humili∣ty is staind with Pride. Humility is not so perfect, but there is Pride e∣nough to humble you.
Sir, In speaking this to you, I speak it also to my self, and all, that may Read these Lines.
Lastly, The Affliction of the

Church should lie very near our Hearts. O Sir, that you and I could but weep, when we emember Zion. Psal. 137. vers. .
We Wept, when we remembred Zion.
If we are Members of the Body Mystical, there will be ome kind of Simpathy: But, Oh the Paucity of them, that zhew themselves to be Mem∣bers of the Body Mystical, by making Zions Troubles their own!
Oh the Miseries of many Chri∣stians in Germany, the Dukedom of Savoy, and other Forreign Parts of the world, who have God's Church is now rented wth. Schisms, eclipsed with Error, & op∣press'd with Trouble. been driven from their Habitations, because they would not Desert the Prote∣stant, and Espouse the Popish Re∣ligion! Besides, the Oppression

of the Church of God in Scot∣land has been great for some con∣siderable And now may be added also, The Church of God in Eng∣land, that is at this Day in great Af∣fliction. Time: When we con∣sider these Things, our Eyes should be bedewed with Tears.
God's Church is a Bleeding Vine; and the Spouse of Christ has now her Garments rowled in Blood, which is enough to make a Tender Heart to bleed: So that, Sir, you may by this time see, what should lift up the Heart of a Saint, and what should cast it down. Pray God direct us both, that our Tears may alwayes run in the right Channel, and our Rejoycing may be alwayes in the Lord.
Sir, May You, and your Con∣sort, and your young Son live long; that God may have the Glory of all you have, do and hope for: Humbly begging your

Perusal of this Treatise, in which you will find these Things more at large; And so you will ob∣lige him, that is,
From my Study in Bartholomew-Close, London, May, 16. 1678.
SIR,

