


Excellentisime,
IF the subject of this Abstract were rightly considered, it would appeare to all ingeni∣ous spirits, that the dedication of it doth properly appertaine to your Excellency, as the most experienced Commander in the Art of Warre, of all these Northern parts, as it may appeare by your Martiall atchievements; having, like a lightning, past this Summer from the North part of this Kingd me, to the utmost point of the West of it; throwing downe, like a rapid Torrent, the banks that did endeavour to stop his course: and therefore the better able to judge aright of the benefit that might redound to the State, if these Methods of Fortifications were observed in the Works of our Garrisons; and these fieldThe Arts of Defence and Assailing are tvvo of the most essentiall parts of he Art of VVar. intrenchments, and double intrenched Camps here described, were used in all our formidable sieges and pitcht battells; the neglect of which hath been one of the maine secondary Causes of the spinning out of this unnaturall Warre.
But since it hath pleased God to raise you to that emi∣nency
of place, that affords you power to rectifie these de∣fects; I have presumed to tender to your Excellency these essayes,The neglect of these in∣trenchmnts is to be rectified. containing some approved directions, for the future, of the Works of our Garrisons; and for the double intrench∣ed Camps, that we are of necessity to make use of, if we intend to give (by the gracious favour of God) a speedy and a bles∣sed period to the miseries of this poore and desolated King∣dome.
If I were not assured that you are extraordinarily well versed in the ancient and moderne Histories, I should en∣deavour by manifold instances, to perswade you to be the re∣storer (in these Northerne parts) of the Military Discipline of the ancient Romans, and of the field-intrenchments, and double intrenched Camps, wherebySee Caesars Commenta∣ries in the vvaries of the Gaules and of Africa. Caesar made himselfe the absolute Monarch of the world, as Maurice Prince of Orange was the restorer of them in the Netherlands, to his eternall fame. For certainly, it is the onely meanes, after Gods favour, to conduce these civill distractions to a spee∣dy and a blessed accommodation: but being confident that these things are familiar to you, I will refer them to your judicious consideration; and onely beseech you to be pleased, out of your gracious affability to all men, and particularly to my selfe, to be theMecaenas vvas the Empe∣rour Augustus Caesars favou∣rite, and the Patron of learning. Mecoenas to these Essayes, and to accept of them with the like affection, as Artaxerxes the great King of Persia received two hands full of fresh water, that were presented unto him by a poore Subject of his, for want of a better gift to expresse his love: So shall I for ever be obliged to remaine

From London, Jan. 1. 1645.
