


To my Worthy Friends,

Capt. William Wright.
Mr. William Rolph.
Mr. Henry Hene.
Mr. Thomas Staples.
Mr. Edward Simmons.
Mr. Sarles Goatly.
Mr. John Cooke.
Mr. Tho. Gibbs.
Mr. Tho. Bishop.
Mr. Ja. Almond.
Capt. Geo. Weller.
Mr. Henry Shers.

STEWARDS, For the Honourable Society of the Natives of the County of KENT.
GENTLEMEN,
IT was not want of Love or Respect to your Honourable Society, that made me so un∣willing to Preach before you; but having very little time at my own disposal, and know∣ing how many Learn'd and Eloquent Divines now residing in the County, had better oppor∣tunities
of performing that Duty, I was loth you should be involv'd in a discredit, which my incapacity at so short a warning, must needs bring upon my self. And the same reason made me resolv'd against Publishing this Incorrect Discourse.
It will easily be granted, that the other great and Sacred Charge in which I have the Ho∣nour to serve, will answer for me to all the World, if I don't shine very bright in the Gift of Preaching; I should I hope give a tollera∣ble account of my self, if at present I should hide a great part of that Talent, which at the same time I have a secret desire (as all Law∣fully Ordain'd Ministers ought to have) of im∣proving.
I must confess withal 'tis my Opinion, that the Advancement of Reputation with the best Judges gotten by this way of Printing Sermons, has of late Years scarce compensated for the trou∣ble; while the greatest number of Readers seek, rather to exercise their own parts, than to add to 'em.

They are not so severe upon the Preacher, as they are upon the Publisher, and therefore seeing Men are willing to Forgive, what they are too ready to Forget, I think that the Ministers of the Church of England, should content them∣selves with being generally reputed the best Preachers in the World, without giving any body the trouble of Revising their Performances: At lest till any other Church can equal the smal∣lest part of what in this kind has hitherto been extant. So that I had much rather you would have been prevail'd upon to excuse the omitting this, of which I fear, I shall never forgive my self the doing.
All that I can say for my self is, that I ought not to decline any opportunity of shewing my Respect to the County, for had I no other Ob∣ligations to it than the generous Friendship I have met with in the Noble Family at East∣well, I should think all my spare Hours very well employ'd in expressing my Gratitude.
Therefore it is no wonder, Gentlemen, if the warmth of your importunities, contrary to
my own Judgment and Resolutions, has made me to expose my self at this time to Censure; and particularly of those Men, who have a low esteem for every thing that is not elaborate and polite.
And I have still some hopes, that I shall buoy my self up; when I put into the Scale of my Apologie, the great Civilities that I have received from you in your Representative Ca∣pacity, which have for ever oblig'd me to be,
GENTLEMEN, 
