



TO keep a mean as it hath alwaies been very difficult, I know not in what it is more accounted so, then in that of writing a Panegyrick. A Reflection which I question not, Sir, but you have heard me make, since I first had the honour of your Conversation. Not that I am of that severe or morose humour of which some men are guilty, who think every thing dull or nonsence which is so spoke of one, as that it may with as much justice be applied to another. Of the reasons which made me first imagine this way of writing so difficult one was, because I never saw above two (in my judgment) good: the one that of Pliny to the Emperour, the other that of our incomparable Poet Laureat to the Duke of New Castle. These have been the only men as yet, of whom we might not with Tully, say, (pardon the pedantry) his lauda∣tionibus
historia rerum nostrarum facta est mendocior. The other reason was that I ever judg'd it as great an abuse to an Ingenuous Person, to say more of him then he deserves, as it would be to our selves to say less. However, Sir, in writing to you, I am sure to avoid one extream, since all my endeavours must needs fall short of delineating those Virtues, which a Dryden only can describe, and I admire. 'Tis only for such a Heroe in witt to express what I have only a faint Idea of, and you would have as just reason to be angry with me, if I should attempt it; as Alexander had with those bold men, who durst presume to draw his Picture, while the skillful Apelles was yet living. Had I sooner been acquainted with you, (so much I find the improvment of one year,) I might then possibly ere this been able to perform it not un∣worthy so much goodness, and from your self learn'd truly to express you: for if as most say Conversation teacheth as much as Books; I may (in a different sence then what is usual,) justly call you a living Library. But I owe my mishap to Fortune whom you held so long your Debtor, 'till Providence as if it mistrusted the ill Dispensation of so fair an Estate, re∣mov'd so many Heirs to give it to your ma∣nagement, and disposal. Nor indeed has it been deceiv'd in it's Choice. Your Charity be∣ing
universal, and not only confin'd to your Lordship. The poor of which (being by rea∣son of the largeness, very numerous) in your absence, expect your return with more Faith then the Israelites did their Manna, and are as certainly reliev'd by you. They call your coming (be it at what time of the year it will) a good time, and find little comfort in a Christmass, or Easters contribution, if you are not there to shew at once an example of Charity and Magnificence, of which there are not only living Monuments: The rebeautify'd Church of Bradfeild, with those necessary and decent Or∣naments given to it of your bounty, Ubraids our Puritanical Age with its irreverence, and tell it we have yet some true Sons of the Church left, who think God ought not be serv'd more slovenly then the meanest Prince, and that De∣cency is no Lett to Devotion. But 'tis not only your Charity we admire; how free are you from all those Debauches, which usally ac∣company a plentiful Estate, which to enume∣rate would be thought too Satyrical. You Sir, as if Nobility only consisted in Virtue (although I know not any that can shew a larger series of Noble Ancestors then your self,) are as well known by your Virtues as your Mannors, and seem wholy to employ your Estate, in cor∣recting those vices, others of your Quali∣ty
are guilty if. I could willingly expatiate of so pleasant a Subject, did I not fear I should seem to undertake that rash task, I but just now profess'd so much above me. I will now, Sir, give you an account why I choose this Sub∣ject of all others, to present to you as a Testimony of the resentments I have of all those endear∣ing Obligations you have been pleased to confer upon me. It has been seriously wished by all your Friends, (among which you have been pleased to allow me a Title) that you would speedily settle your affections on some Lady which might deserve your Love, (and really, Sir, you are to injurious to that fair Sex, if you imagine there are not any which can deserve it; I could not therefore think of a fitter expedient then this, to bring you into a good Opinion of those Creatures, which you never seem'd to favour, without shewing any great aversion for them. Here Sir, is a Lady presented to you, whom not to Love; would not only be ignoble but impious, and I doubt not (if you shall do me the honour to peruse this life,) but that the noble Agnes will revenge all those fair Females; whose charms you have hitherto so stoutlie resisted: I do not hereby intend to make the Chast Saint a Bawd to any impure Love, (for although in her life time she pro∣fess'd Virginity, yet she never question'd the
lawfullness of the Marriage Bed,) but only to animate you to the search of some Heroine, who hath all those Virtues you see that Sex is capable of: which (if our age be not too barren) that you may soon find is the Praier of,
Sir, 
