



GENTLEMEN,
THE most irreparable Calamity that ever be∣fel these Kingdoms by the Loss of a Prince, might have excused one who stood among the nearest to the Blow, from appearing in Print, even whilst his Wound is still bleeding: But seeing you were of the Opinion, that this Sermon, by the great Contribution which follow'd it, had already been instrumental, in some measure, to its chief design, and might probably be farther so when Publish'd; your Importunities prov'd irresistible, and hath given me occasion to Apologize for that part of it, where∣in I may seem to have forgot the Gravity of a Preacher.
The Juvenility of the greatest Number of my Audi∣tors may make some excuse for my wresting one Line out of Virgil; and to the more serious I hope I am account∣able for nothing else, unless possibly for the two Verses I quoted out of Homer.

Now by the first of 'em, I had a mind to express that which I thought would have been flat without some sort of Allusion; and by the latter I follow'd the Advice of the Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 38. v. 1. So that if they be not misapply'd, I need not value Censure; for Homer may appear in a Sermon, after that an Apostle has cited Epimenides. At least you may excuse me this once, when by my asking pardon for School-learning, ye see I am not over-fond of it.
For what Pride, or what Pleasure can we now take in Philology, after HE is gone, who by the Innocency and Holiness of his Life would have sanctified Human Learning to the World, to whom all the great Professors in Humanity were rising up to pay an Early Reverence; and who Himself was the greatest Master of it that ever yet appear'd at his years; Especially if we consider those great Ornaments of a Sublime Understanding, which are most properly peculiar to the first Rank of Men. But yet Human Learning is still necessary; and ye do well to encourage it more than ever, now that it hath lately lost the greatest Encouragement it ever had.
There is no Consolation left, but in that Holy Spirit, which directs such Men as you to be Publick-minded: May you always receive the Comforts of that Spirit, to whose Almighty guidance I humbly commend you, desi∣ring to be esteem'd,
Gentlemen,  
