



Right Reverend Father in God,
IN obedience to your Lordships injunctions, this plain Sermon is surrendred to the Presse, which not long since was presented in the Pulpit, upon your Lord∣ships Summons to that Service. The acceptance it then met with, and the hopes it might survive in the perswasions of the Auditory, were as much as I could wish for from it: I must deprecate (if it be a fault) my own backwardnesse that it should have gone farther.
Which backwardnesse arose not from any consciousnesse, that ought therein contained, was contrary to the form of sound words, or the judge∣ment of the Primitive Church, or more particularly of our own, which ob consanguinitatem doctrinae, as Tertullian speaks, may stand as near to the esteem of the Primitive, as any other in Christendome. Indeed these were the Guides, by which I steer'd my course; and if any thing should be found here differing from them, dictum nolo, I disclaim, Idisown it before hand. Nor was it out of any unwillingnesse, to doe service to God and his Church in the present generation, how crooked and fro∣ward
soever it may be, through his mercy I am not afraid of their ter∣rour. But it was onely out of a jealousie of my own conceptions, as too crude and weak either to bear, or bear up the Publick, or to be considerably usefull to it. Your Lordship hath been pleased to judge otherwise, whether for the encouragement of the Preacher, or for the seasonablenesse of the Discourse, though not for any great strength or beauty in it. And when I found you were resolved that way, I was not willing to be any farther guilty of what in my Sermon I had condemned in others. I began to think there was no prudence in Inferiours, like to that of obedience unto lawfull Commands, and to remember that Precept of S. Hierome to Ru∣sticus, in refernce to his Superiour; Credas tibi salutare quicquid ille praeceperit, nec de majorum sententiâ judices, cujus officii est obedire, & implere quae jussa sunt, dicente Moyse Audi Israel, & tace; and therefore resolved cheerfully so to doe, and have now in pursuance of that resoluti∣on, exposed this Discourse to the publick view, which I humbly desire your Lordship to Patronize, sith you were pleased first to command it.
The main substance of the Sermon is the same that was Preached be∣fore you, onely with your Lordships leave, I have here and there inserted some enlargements, which were at first designed, but the straits of time allowed not room for their delivery.
And now if the publication of it, may any way prove serviceable to the advancement of Gods glory, or the satisfaction of dissenters, whom I have laboured rather to convince then exasperate; or may in the least contribute towards the Churches peace amongst us, I shall have reason to rejoyce in, and to blesse God for it.
Ʋnto the promoting of which holy ends, both by your self and others, as God hath given your Lordship a large heart, and a double portion of his Spirit, so that the Work of the Lord may prosper in your hands, and the fruit of it redound to your account, in all blessings, temporall, spiri∣tuall, and eternall, shall be the daily Prayer of
My Lord,  
