



My Lord,
WHat I have here presented to your Lordships View, I did once de∣sign to have transmitted to Posterity, in a large Draught, and in a Freer Style; and to have reserved it as my last Te∣stament, to the care of my Executor, in Confidence that it would Then have Entertainment with such as should not be tempted, by Impulses of Prejudice, Interest or Malevolence, to asperse the Generous and successful Attempt of Ge∣neral Monk, towards the Restoring of our Present Sovereign, whom God preserve

long among us: But, finding that of late his Loylty to his Prince hath been dayy more and more qestioned and traduced, his Conduct abaed; nay, and that my self have been charged to my Fce with the Rude  of Forgery upon my undertakig, , in rivate Dis∣courses to Vindicte and assert His Inte∣grity and Sincerty; (knowing so well as I did upon what Grounds he first Engag'd) And this too by uch Persons, generally, as of all men in the World had the least Reson t do it: I am forced to alter my fist Reolution, as not being able to an∣swer it t the Sacred Ahes of my Deceased Lord and Patron, the with-holding of the Papers (hw rude and Imperfect soever) ay longer from the Publick. It might pobly be one Grain in the Scale also; the  that there are none (that I know of) now Living (but your Lordship and your Servant of this Memorial) that were Priy to the Mo∣tives of the Generals First Engagement, when Sir George Booth was at the Head of some Confederates in Che∣shire.
Now though true it be that, that Com∣bination took not effect: and indeed it was well for the General, nay and possi∣bly for the King and Kingdom too that it did not; yet from the time of Lam∣berts turning out of Doors his Masters at Westminster, I do avouch that my Lord did all along with a direct Eye aim at the Kings Restauration. Neither is it Improbable but that this second At∣tempt would have miscarry'd likewise, had not the Conduct of it been in the hands of a Superior Providence: For upon the Generals open Protesting in Scotland against the English Amy for disturbing the Rump; the Cavalier and Presbyterian (the then two Royal Par∣ties) became Rampant in their hopes; though neither of them altogether for∣getting their old Animosities. Where∣fore the more discerning Independents fearing an approaching Ruin (adjudging it Prudent to make advantage of these Heart-burnings) began to make fresh Court to the Presbyterian; he being of a nearer Allyance, as having fought under the same Colours and pay with them∣selves

againt the Late King. These two geat Part es comprehended in a manner the dy of the Englih ad Scotish Sub∣jects; though th of them oeraw'd, and kept under y the then Domineer∣ing Faction of the Sectaries. The former of these had been in the Field for Charles the First aganst his Two Houses of Parliament: whom He (by a Law of his own making) having ermitted to contiue Thee as uch, whether for hm or  him; it was soon foun'd y wful experience that he had lst his Crown before a stroak was stuck.
The Cavaliers (who were of the No∣bility and Gentry of England, and of whom yur Lordship was one) came in freely, and generously adher'd to the King, as ther Sovereign. And yet (which is dolorous to remember) he lost his Life by a Mockery of Justice. This was a Piece of Villany not to be Pa∣ralled in any Hstory: And Bishop An∣dres has delivered as much in his Notes upn the Sixth Commandment. Cap. 2. In these wrds. Yet never any Peo∣ple

in the World (sayes he) pre∣tended by any Colour of Legal pro∣ceedings, or shew of Mck-Justice, to touch the Life of a Prince. &c. Nei∣ther pssibly could This have enter'd his Phansie, had not the fresh death of Ma∣ry, Queen of Scots, and the Monu∣mental Lines of a Prophetical Poet (to be found in Arch-Bishop Spotwood's History) suggested the Cnsequences to his thoughts thus; that since one So∣vereign Prince had executed another equal to her self in Regalities; the case might be, when a People would do the like to their Prince. Now the Cavaliers had not only lost their E∣states, by the Fortune of War; but een their Hopes also of ever being in a Condition to appear again, by themselves, for the Recovery of their own Losses, or the Crown of England, which fell with their Masters Head.
My Charity induce me to believe that the soberer part of the Presbyte∣rins had been decoyed into a War, with the Incription of Loyalty upon their Armes, and under the plausible pretenc

of Fighting for King and Parliament. But however, they lived to repent of the Felicities of them; for, having acted their parts too far, they were forced to yield to more sutil Enginiers of State, who had a further game to play; Bishops Lands not being Booty enough, for so many sharers. Thus themselves suffer'd as well as acted a Reformation, and so went of the Stage.
Now though their Name was not so offensive to the then Parliament and Army, as was that of the Cavaliere; yet they still kept an Eye equally wake∣full over them both; Especially now, upon their finding that they were nei∣ther of them capable of concealing their inward satisfaction at General Monk's Remonstrating against the Army in Eng∣land. And indeed their Hopes upon this Occasion were so luxuriant, that some of them durst pray for his Suc∣cess; others not only Drink His Health but the Kings too; and that Publickly. Nay he had not Marched many days from hs cold Quarters on the North of Tweede, (his March being without

orders too) before the sound of Bells that welcomed us into England, had filled the Ears even of his very Offi∣cers with the noise of Jealousies and Apprehensions, touching the end of his making this long Journey. And though they had learned the Duty of Soldiers not to Mutiny, no nor so much as to expostulate with him; yet it was evi∣dent that several of them deemed there was more in the Action, then did openly ap∣pear.
But though the General was able to deal well enough with these; yet could he not overcome those of his Masters at Westminster; who did not well relish this hasty March even of their Resto∣rer. Yet they could not in gratitude refuse him and his Army the liberty of a Vi∣sit: and besides, should they by express orders remand him back to his Scotish Quarters, they could not be assured of security at home for the future, be∣cause the English Army being but new∣ly return'd to their Duty, did not ap∣pear to be fast and well-confirmed; they fearing that Ambition, in their Offi∣cers,

was rather laid a slecp, then ex∣tinguished. And indeed they did not so much as suspect General Monk to be guilty of This; his Deportment in their service being so modest, that none of them ever thought he aimed at the Go∣vernment; (whatsoever other Jealou∣sies might be buzz'd in their Ears touching Charles Stuart) And this tru∣ly ws the greatest advantage he had of them: Besides, his natural Taciturnity was such, that most of his Friends (who thought they knew him thoroughly) look∣ed upon George Monk to have no other Craft in him, then that of a plain Soldier, who would obey the Parliaments orders, as well as see that his own were. So that had not the more subtle Smell-Plots of the Council of State (Scot their Secretary amongst the rest) divined something of Mr. Nicholas Monks Journey into Scotland the Summer be∣fore; the Generals March into Eng∣land without, or rather against orders had been little suspected. But their Di∣strusts of him more and more encreased, the nearer he approached toward them.
And this he soon discovered, and was fully satisfied in upon his coming to Whitehall: For then his Authority was lessen'd by the presence of Co-General, and Impatient Hazlerig, who had much the adantage of him, as being a Mem∣ber of the same Parliament, and able to vie with him in poynt of merit; he having been their Restorer in the South at Ports-mouth, as the other was in the North at Cold-stream. Nor was Monk himself without his suspitions that he should not only lose his limb of Ge∣neralship, but be questioned for a De∣linquent, rather than honored as a Restorer. So that having no Counsel left him, but sudden Action; what he was to do he did quickly, and made the Change as swift as Comedians do theirs: For in one Week's time he Courted the Parliament and Counsel of State not with words only, but with Deeds, and such too as must render him wholly their own; Unhindg'd all the Gates of the City of London, brake some of them, pulled up their Posts and Chains; de∣feated all popular expectations of him

to such a Degree that I heard him re∣viled in the streets (Himself but hard by too) to this Effect. Is This That Monk that would bring in the King? This is the Scotish Devil. What more mischief thence? But Sir Arthur Hazlerig (on the other side) sang his Paeans, Now George (said he) we have thee for ever, Body and Soul. Nay our little Scotish Army it self was astonished; and the Officers, in doing this Drudgery, spake merry dicontents when they took up the Posts and Chains; These are the Chains and Meddals, (cry'd they) that the Parliament pro∣mised us, at Cold-stream. Many of them would not act in this Tragick Comedy, but offer'd to lay down their Commissions; which the General would not suffer them to do; but reprehend∣ed them in this style. What? will you not obey the Parliaments Orders? , as if this odious action had been unavoidably forc't upon him; and indeed by the frowns and clouds in his Face they asily perceived whereabout he was, and readily took the Hint to Cabal

into new Counsel's against such Task∣Masters. This now he accepted; for upon his return out of the City, a Let∣ter was fram'd in the night, sent the next Morning from Whitehall to the Parliament, and then he immediatly Marched his Army into the City; where he continued till he had let in the Se∣cluded Members of 1648. Thus did he free himself from the Danger that threatned him for his forward Loyalty in August before; compleat his own safety, and the first step to the Kings Re∣stauration, all at a Blow.
Although by premising these Things (my Lord) I have (designedly too) vio∣lated the Laws of Method, yet I have not forgot that I am in a Dedicatory Preface; and that my business is, to im∣plore your Lordships Patronage.
Now so Conscious am I of your Con∣dor and Goodness, that this Humble Re∣quest will (I perswade my self) without much difficulty be granted. For your Lordship may possibly still Remember that upon the first introducing of r. Ni∣cholas Monk and my self into the Kings

Presence, you were pleased to assert his Zeal, and readiness to serve his Ma∣jesty, and in what insances he had done it; particularly mentioning his Journey to Scotland, (and his Negotiation with his Brother there) as being undertaken, upon your express Commands: For he was then the Parson of your own Parish of Kelkhampton in Cornwall, which is a living of about 300. l. Pounds Per Annum: And this you had freely bestow'd on him without any other Symony then an obliga∣tion from him to serve the Publick when ever you had occasion to make use of him; you having even then an eye up∣on his Brother in Scotland, whom your Family had obliged likewise. Now Mr. Monk (who had not Learned the Arti∣fice to dissemble the merits of mean Men, (it being the first hour too of his coming to Court) was so just to me, as to en∣form the King in your Lordships Pre∣ence, that he imparted his Message, and Communicated the concerns of so im∣portat an affair, to me his Brothers do∣estick Chalain at Dalkeith; and that he found that I entertained it willingly,

and was careful and faithfull in it; with sundry other Eulogies which the honest plain hearted man thought fit to give of me to His Majesty. To This Relation the King gave such Credit, that, after he had vouchsafed me the Honor to Kiss His Hand, he was plesed to tell me, that by this he well understood, the service I had done him; and command∣ed me to make my Application to him, as oft as I desired his favor, or any Pre∣ferment. And I soon after acquainted the General with these gracious expre∣ssions of the Kings.
Bnt though your Lordship may have forgotten this; yei (I'm sure) you can never forget how far, and to what end you were ingaged, when you sent Mr. Nicholas Monk into Scotland to his Brother. And yet what has been alrea∣dy published as to this Particular, has not met with an universal Credence▪ for ma∣ny Politick and some spightul Infidels there are, who will needs look upon Ge∣neral Monks design to Restore the King, as a Postnate-Juggle, fram'd on pur∣pose to salve His Honor, and not to serve

the ends of Truth; reflecting pon it as not fit to be received into the Annalls of Histo∣ry; as a Prosperous Chance, as a Deo∣dand, not design'd to enrich this or that Particular Coast, but only by the Winds and Waves driven hither.
Let God have the Glory, for the gift was only His. But if the wrath of man shall Praise him, the Loyalty of Man shall both Praise and Please him. And Loyal he was even above the Temptation of Sovereignty it self, as did after wards fully appear: Nay and so glorious was the atchievment also, that there was more in it then the single Restauration of Charles the Second, even the recovery of lost Monarchy to the Royal Family it self▪ to whom the Diadem of Right belonged, though at that time it was left a prey to Usurpers, as they could play their Game. He Lov'd his Prince, and he lov'd his Country; and as a True English-man, judged them to have one and the same Interest. And thus his Actions justified his Declarati∣ons; which were, to reduce the Milita∣ry Power in obedience to the Civil▪ The Soldiers of England having, then,

Erected a distinct Interest from the Peo∣ple of it; Nor was it an easy matter to have reduced them; had not the Ar∣my, by His most Excellent conduct, (I will rather say by a Divine) been divi∣ded, and set at odds.
It now only remains (my Lord) tat I deliver this Memorial to Posterity un∣der your Patronage: In which I pur∣pose not to touch upon things known, and allow'd, any otherwise then barely for Method sake; the stress of the Con∣troversy not depending upon Them, but upon General Monks designed Loyalty to restore our Sovereign, and our Laws to us. Now because he was short sight∣ed, and could not discern at a Distance; it has been suggested to me (more sar∣castically then wittily) as if that Imper∣fection had reached his understanding also, and that he could not see so far, as to the Restoring of the King.
Let others (who are as tender of the honor of the late Duke of Albemarle as I am, (and ought to be) contribute to the vindicating of his Memory from this Ca∣lumny, in what proportion, and with what

solemnity of attestation they please, to gain Credit. As for my self, being of an Infe∣rior rank, I do foresee that what I shall deliver will not, by a great many, easily be believed (yea I am before hand threatned that it shall not;) whether it be upon the Score of my fidelity and secresie, in that great affair, or of the prosperous close and Issue of it in my deceased Lord, I shall not trouble my self to determine, against spite and Prejudice: But, contenting my self with the answer of a good Conscience, that I have not forged things either to great∣en his Honor, and Loyalty, or to lessen it, by relating some few passages to which I was privy, or in which I acted; (En∣vy having pursu'd even a Fly upon this fortunate Wheel of Revolution, though not making the noise of a Qualem or Quan∣tem pulverem) I shall presume to pray your Lordships protection of the ensuing Narrative, and of the unworthy Author of it; who is
My Lord, Your Lordships Obliged and Devoted Servant
John Price.
