



SIR,
IT may be said of your famous City, as sometimes of Tyre.
She is the Crowning City, whose Merchants are Prin∣ces:
whose Traffiquers are the honourable of the
Earth, Isa. 23. 8. But what became of Tyre, that noble
and ennobling City? her Crown was laid in the dust, and
her Honourable in the streets. And why? They were haughty and
knew not the Lord, neither regarded they the God of Jacob. They did
not know; in their affairs they eyed not the Crown of Righteousness,
neither were Traffiquers with Heaven, therefore they perished from off
the Earth.
Your City, as a stately Princess, wears a goodly rich Crowns on her
head, Crowns her Merchants and inhabitants with wealth and honour;
and you confess that it is not for your Righteousness that the Lord hath
spared you, but that It is of the Lords mercies, that ye are not con∣sumed,
because his compassions fail not. Lam. 3. 22. I will not ac∣cuse
you for Pride and haughtiness, for trampling under foot the glory
of England, the Preaching of the Gosple of Righteousness, nor for
Blasphemy, Heresie, Apostasie, Oppression, self-love, and self-seeking,
serving your selves upon Christ and upon his Gosple, for I have often
heard you, upon your publick fasting-daies and daies of humiliation, to
accuse and condemn your selves for these and the like City sins, onely
I grieve to see these Rebels and Traitors against God to get a Reprieve,
and I heartily wish that the day of their Execution were come: for,
the putting of these to death will be your life. For the Prophet Micah
tells you how you shall be still renowned, the Crowned and the Crown∣ing
City. To do justly, to love mercy, and to humble thy self to walk

with thy God, Micah 6. 8. You must meet God every day upon the
Royal Exchange. Here you must barter Nature for Grace, Error for
Truth, your own Righteousness for Christ; (and who will not part
with dross for Gold, Pibbles for Pearls, Rags for Robes? you must
put off (saith the blessed Apostle) concerning the former conversa∣tion,
the Old Man, corrupt through the deceitfull lusts, and be re∣newed
in the spirit of your minde: and put on the New Man,
which after God is created in Righteousness and true holiness. Ephes.
5. 22, 23, 24. Your main case must be for your religious Factorage,
and to keep up your noble Trade with Heaven. Your Merchandize
must be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently, and
for durable cloathing. Isa. 23. 18. Let Prayer continually go forth with
your loaden vessels, and the Spirit of God will Pilot ye. Then shall ye
have good Markets indeed: and Oh, the rich returns that will flow
in unto you! Blessed are the Merchants, that walk and talk with
God daily upon the Exchange. When God and the Soul are Partners,
Oh, the sweetness and fullness of that Communion and entercourse!
See how our Saviour loveth such a soul as is busied in heavenly ne∣gotiations,
when he likens the Kingdom of Heaven to such a Mer∣chant,
who seeking goodly Pearls, when he had found one Pearl of
great Price, he went and sold all that he had and bought it. Matth.
13. 45, &c. The true Christian is this Merchant; a Merchant adventu∣rer,
he ventures riches, honours, pleasures; life and all, he trades for
Pearls, that is, he seeks (with labour, cost, and danger) for heavenly
knowledge, the Pearl of great Price, or the peerless Pearl is Christ
Iesus. A Pearl is bred of a caelestial humour or dew in shell-fishes:
Christ by heavenly Influence was formed in the womb of the Virgin.
Emanuel, God with us, or God-man is this Pearl. The value and worth
of this Pearl no Arithmetician can sum up, it is infinite, of wonder∣full
virtue, most precious, A Pearl that makes Pearls, it makes vile
sinners to be Pearls and costly Jewels, Malac. 3. 17. and turns every
evil thing into Good for us, Rom. 8. 28. as the Philosophers stone
turns every thing it toucheth into Gold. This Pearl, Christ Iesus with
all his gifts, graces, virtues, merits, and Priveledges is derived to
us by the means of his ordinances. These are the Cabinets and Caskets
of this Pearl. God offers Christ in his word, he is willing to barter with
us. Come buy. Isa. 55. 1. I Counsel thee to buy. Rev. 3. 18. In it

God desires us to be good to our own souls, to receive the soul-saving,
soul-enriching Pearl, thus offered (as these Texts, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Deut.
5. 29. Luke 13. 34. do testifie.)
As there the Merchant went and sold all, so doth the true Christi∣an
sell all. That is first, he parts with the estimation of all in com∣parison
of Christ. Secondly, he hath a heart prepared actually to part
with all, if he cannot enjoy it and Christ too. Thirdly, and especially,
he parts with his sins all, not reserving a Zoar or a Rimmon, not
keeping any one beloved lust or forbidden pleasure. Yea, Fourthly, he
parts with his Affections, with all their Branches and Objects, if
they will not stand with Christ. Whatsoever comes into competition with
Christ, whether honours, riches, pleasures, yea his own life, he decli∣neth
it, and looseth all for Christs sake. And the gain of this Mer∣chandize,
no tongue is able to express.
Thus do wise Merchants traffique whilst they live here on earth, a
Countrey that is not theirs, venting their Commodities and transmit∣ting
all they can into Heaven, their own Countrey, against their Ar∣rival
and Receit there, with joyfull acclamations of Saints and Angels,
and most rich and most honourable dwelling with their blessed Redeem∣er,
soul-solacing, and hearts-satisfying friends, in perfect joy, com∣pleat
comfort, and fullness of all good things for evermore.
The Lord remove and take out of the way, whatsoever letteth you
in this blessed Merchandize, which is better than the Merchandize
of Silver, and the gain thereof than fine Gold, Prov. 3. 14. Let your
Merchandize be HOLINESS TO THE LORD Isa. 23. 18. here:
so in the ballancing of your Accompt at the last day, you shall be clear
out of debt with your heavenly Creditor, and receive a full and final
discharge, together with a full remuneration of eternal happiness to
you, and all carefull Accomptants with him, wayters and Preparers
for him.
Which negotiation and traffiquing with Heaven (O sedulous and
rich Merchant) is set forth under many other Notions in Scripture.
Amongst which is that of Watching for the Masters coming. What
it is; How this watch is to be set and kept, Motives to it, and the
Reward of it, is as laid forth in the ensuing Sermon, in which your ob∣sequious
friend (being dead) yet speaketh.
Many be the Epistles, (which whilst he lived) he wrote to you by my

hand. Accept I beseech you of my appearing his Amanuenlis once more.
And keep this by you. First, as a Remembrance of him that honoured
you, and was faithfull and diligent to serve you in your employments
in our Countrey. And Second, as a Funeral Ribband for your soul to
wear, which may daily minde you of your mortal condition, and stir
you up to get such necessaries and preparatives to go hence, that when)
you shall be no more seen on earth, you may enjoy the beatifical vision
of our Lord Jesus in Heaven. So prayeth;
Sir▪ 
