



SIR,
FOR the confidence of the present Address, if an humble Gratitude become not A∣pology sufficient, I must ingenuously pro∣fess I am provided of none. That's a Virtue (however Drolled upon by no small Witts, for a formal foppish thing) of no common veneration among the Wise and Good of all Ages; of which, whoso is destitute, has been deservedly reputed in the rank of neither.
Sen. The Philosopher having number'd several of the worst of Crimes, concludes all, with an—Infra ista omnia Ingratus. To avoid which worst of Characters, Sir, I am not a little happy of the present opportunity, of ac∣knowledging to the World, how much I stand o∣bliged to your Worthy Family: A Family Great, not only in its Antiquity, and most Noble Alliance, (if so near Relation to the
Villiers, Boteler, Marleburgh, Newport—can speak it so:) But if there be any truth in—Nobilitas sola est at{que}
unica virtus—like to be much more so, in your great Virtue, and Sobriety; which truly in a Gentleman of your Years and Quality, looks in this Age like the Poets—Rara avis—and at∣tracts not only Applause, but Wonder.
You are not ignorant, Sir, of the strange Inno∣vations the present Generation seems imposing upon all things, how Sacred or Venerable soever. The Notion of the present Virtue we find with some, differs as much from the Ancient, as the Mode-Cravett, does from the Yellow Ruffs of our Ancestors: And those Vices, which heretofore would be owned by none, but the most Profligate Ruffian, are now made the Ingredient of an Ac∣complished and Brave Man. Grace sometime was without Morality, and now Morality is made to swallow up all Grace. The most Reformed Reli∣gion (as 'twould be accounted) we find had well∣nigh banished Philosophy, and all other Learning out of the Land; but Philosophy now begins to stomach the affront, and thinks to revenge the in∣dignity, by threatning an Ostracism to Religion; which seems to bode thus much, That among so many contrasts of Opinion about both, we shall not enjoy (if some can do't) either long.

But, Sir, I crave leave to remember you of an excellent Passage of your Great Ʋncle,
Lloyd, Fair Warn. the late Earl of Marl. in his Letter to Sir H. P. That a certain thing going up and down the World, call'd Religion, though pretended and dressed Fantastically, and to purposes bad enough, does not yet by such evil dealing lose its Being. And though it requires no small Resolution to pass through the Raillery of a Frolick Age, in the Embrace of a despised Virtue; yet the Honour 'twill create you in all good mens breasts while you live (whose Censure only is truly Valuable) and the sweet Perfume 'twill leave on your Name when you dye, and that continual Feast 'twill prove to your Conscience living and dying, will, I doubt not, carry you on in all virtuous Practi∣ces stedfast unto the end: Whereby you will not only highly Accomode your truest Interest (as every Wise-Man should) but prove likewise an Example of real Greatness and Generosity, to others of your own Age and Quality (who do not a little need it) as every charitable Man would. And what is more, infinitely endear your self and all your concerns to the Great and Good God, whose loving kindness, is not only better than all the Honour and Grandeur of this World; but as
the royal Prophet tells us, Better than Life it self: Ʋnto which I take leave to commend you, with the humble Ambition of being own'd for
 St. Martins Exon.
Decem. 18. 1674.
