


THis is the first Monument of my
Wit, Most Serene Prince and
High Lords, which I readily
and thankefully consecrate to
your renowned Name in that
Language, which was once the Band of Man∣kind,
and now continues the Repertory of Sci∣ences.
It is the Ministry of Mazarine, an

Historical Abridgment of our Affairs from
the Decease of Lewis XIII. to this very day,
and the Dawn of this most blessed Age, wherein
the Sun-shine of Peace hath risen upon us. It
borrows Lustre and Protection from you a∣gainst
Detraction and Envy. Owne it, My
Lords, and communicate of your Brightness to
it: For this is within the Verge of your Pow∣er,
who are able to extol or depress with the
single Reputation of your Judgments. Vpon
a manifold Title doth this Book lay claim to
your Patronage, who will discover in our late
Transactions the Tracks of your Prudence.
For when our Country was embroiled in the
Tumults of civil Dissension, that Commander
who recovered us from a most unquiet to a most
glorious State, was Honourably Enfranchised
by You, who are so united with us by an eternal
League and common Interest of State, that
our Adversities have always been an Affli∣ction
to your Republick; and ye have with
joy received the News of this Empires good
successes, ever since the Foundation of both
Nations that are contemporary. This Work
being full of Politick Maxims and Presidents,
to whom should it more justly address than to
the most Politick Statesmen? Whom doth it
better suit than those who are the Pattern to all
the World of a perfect Government? The

whole Subject, Vertues, or Sloth. Them we re∣commend
by relating; and you are a great
instance, who have, and always have had
them. This we decry, which in all Ages you
have been clear of, either by avoiding, or re∣deeming
it. Plainly Rivals of those, who
having been daunted with no wound of For∣tunc,
after Trebia, Thrasymen, and Cannae
held out stoutly, you never sunk under mis∣fortunes;
but have obliged the Turk, the
mst Potent of Empires in the World, so often
to retreat before your Forces, and the Provi∣dence
which attends your Arms; whilest the
chief Monarchs of Europe were bloodily en∣gaged
against one another, upon trivial pre∣tences,
to the ruine of Christendom, whose
Bullwark and Admiration you are. Nor
doth the matter only invite and sollicite
your Authority, to grace the Front of this
Labour, being small in Bulk, though perhaps
that shall be eternal in duration; but much
more my grateful mind, which presents you
with your own gifts. In like manner, as
when we Sacrifice and bring oblations to God,
it is for our own, and not his benefit. For if I
am some-body, my Lords, if a Candidate of
Fame, if enrolled in the Catalogue of them, who
do not promise, but confer immortality; thanks
be to you, in whose Bosome I have been edu∣cated.

First of all, That your City Founded
by Antenor, my Nurse, the sweet Mother of
Arts, the Fruitful Seminary of Industry,
the Fat Soil of Vertues, implanted in me her
Principles: Which how greatly you esteem,
we collect from hence, because that one Vni∣versity
of Padua, hath more Schollars in it,
then whole Kingdoms besides. This taught
me to look down from the lofty Tower of a
rightly informed judgment, upon Vulgar Er∣rors;
and to discover upon true Grounds,
with what gross darkness the seeming light of
frail mortality is Eclipsed. After that I
Travelled to Venice, the joy and darling of
Heaven, the Shop of Policy, the School of
Wisdom; where I searched into the Mystery
of your Government. This doth not deliver
a Prince to be made up of wicked Plots,
falshood, and a dedolent Spirit hardned a∣gainst
all remorse of Conscience; not of subtle
Devices, or Craft, but of Sincerity and Faith;
whose venerable Name holds out among you
her right hand, the Security of the Worlds
Peace. A Republick happy in its Orders,
with which, as with Ligatures, it stands un∣shaken
without fear of fall; boasting of its
duration for 1300 years. And what won∣der,
when so many Vertues are the Poles upon
which that Immortal Frame is rolled? Laws

you have few and good; as Medicines, which
should neither be many nor divers. Suing
at Law, which is very subject to abuse, is
more restrained with you, then any where else
in the World; none are vexed with long Suits.
You have wonderful Concord one with ano∣ther,
with which Cement your State holds;
and I have confidence will hold to the Worlds
end. Superiors manifest their Greatness
only in extending Favours; and Inferiors
without grudging, render Obedience, and
rejoyce in your Grandeur. Private quarrels
you pass by for the Publick, benefit, and remit
offences in view of your Country. There is
no Contention but who shall love, that most
which is every Noblemans Treasure and In∣heritance.
No where if so great a price set
upon faithful keeping of Counsel, Nor are
Secrets any where preserved with such strict
silence; so that as other People have a great
itch of spreading reports, at Venice they
have unmovable affectation of holding their
peace; which is almost incredible in their
noble Youth, who condemn talking much, as
the companion of lying, by an inward prin∣ciple
of sound judgment, and by the rules of
their Education. Whilst Candidates, they stand
at the doors of the Court, and are admitted to
a sight of the Publick Counsel, before a Voice

in it. From the first entrance of their Age,
they are by degrees used to their Honours,
which you sharing equally, and judging of
Vertues, deprive none of their due; nor un∣der
a colour of preferment, do you exhaust the
worthy Pretendants in the Purchase. Such as
are advanced to Places of Honour, bring in
humility, not scornfulness; and as it proves
all the world over, find what they bring:
When private, you obey without Servility;
and when advanced, you command with Mo∣deration.
Young Men dive into the depths of
Prudence, because they hearken to the Old;
concealing great Abilities, under an obstinate
temperance of Words. Afterwards the avo∣cations
of youth being cast off, when they must
put on after glory; and being used to improve,
they find nothing strange or new. Ye are
covetous for the Publick Money, sparing of
your own, which you do not get to scatter, but
to maintain your state; In habit, not only
indifferent, but plain; you think it decent so
to discover the Modesty of your minds. And
in truth, Silks and Gold Lace are not Orna∣ments
of brave Men, but Arguments of light
Spirits: You excel the common sort in Ver∣tue,
in Clothes you conform with them: Your
Houshold-stuff doth not strain the rest of yor
Estate. Variety of Offices, and multitud 

Servants doth not clamour after you. With
Athenian Severity you punish Luxury, which
plundering great Estates, ingenious to destroy
it self, drives on furiously after its own Confu∣sion,
being withal the Bane of Common∣wealths,
and Ruine of States. Those that are
empty of solid goodness, glister in that bor∣rowed
appearance, and bare of Worth spread
in Pomp, and sumptuous Dishes, rather exci∣ting
than satisfying the Appetite. How ad∣mirable
is it, that you who are (upon more
accounts than one) Kings, should condescend
in your whole Furniture to the plainness of
Fellow-Citizens, and should shrowd the de∣gree
of Princes, as you all bear, under an or∣dinary
Garb. But that Majesty which you
carry about every where, especially by your
Ambassadors, who being Noble in Birth, do
every where represent the Dignity of the Re∣publick,
hath its Source from your internal
Greatness, and is that Mother of the Honor and
Reverence due, and deferred to you; which
Glory accompanies, that inflames gallant
Souls, being peculiar to the immortal God, or
his immediate Representatives, as you are.
All these things do adorn you, but the Foun∣dation
and Basis of your State is Religion, by
which Subjects are made better, and more
peaceful. You have an ancient Doctrine im∣printed

in you, and received by Tradition
from your Ancestors, that all our Enjoyments
are bestowed upon us by God, and by him con∣tinued
to us. To believe this is commenda∣ble,
but so as you believe it, that is, avoid∣ing
Irreligion and Superstition, both of them
great mischiefs. The insultations over mens
weakness, which were prevalent in times of
Ignorance, are received by you only in ap∣pearance,
who do not compel men to Faith
against their wills, but are of opinion, that a
right Judgment in Holy matters is insinuated
by God into mens minds, and that the Devo∣tion
which doth not proceed from the choice of
the heart, is unacceptable to God; but that
false Opinions are subdued by length of time,
not by the violence and commands of such as
being chosen into the Sacred Ministry, do
exasperate all things, and retain nothing of
that Office besides the Name and Revenues.
You do not take these men into your Counsels,
being aware, that such are for the most part
unsound at heart, and for audaciousness for∣midable:
of no moderation, but dangerously
inquisitive into the Designs of Princes, and
Secrets of State. Ye are indeed devout in
Religious Worship, but do prescribe its Mini∣sters
a measure of Church-Possessions. There is
a Prohibition in your Laws for the Augmenta∣tion

of Church-Livings without leave from the
Senate. For you think it an irreligious thing,
pious Liberalities should be alienated, and the
last Wills of dying Persons turned to ends, for
which they did not leave them. Between an
open neglect of Gods Service, and a slavish
fear of God, as between two Rocks, you sail
happily. From hence flourishes among you
that unmoveable and stedfast Vprightness of
Justice in distributing every one his own,
without the trifling delays and captious ad∣vantages
of the practice in corrupt Courts of
Judicature; by this means so many people are
united under equal Laws into your Empire and
Jurisdiction. This you superadd to your no∣ble
Customs; nothing among you is bought
and sold. Publick Offices are the Rewards of
Vertue; and if there be any contrary instance,
it hath been introduced through the necessity
of hard times. Your moderate Revenues,
without crying up or down the price of money,
almost the highest and lowest equally contri∣bute.
The sum growing from thence is not
consumed and lost before the true uses are an∣swered
for which is was levied, by the multi∣tude
of Collectors, and by profuse gratificati∣ons;
whilst each do stop some as their own,
and give away more lightly, as being none of
their own. You cajol them to part with a lit∣tle

money for great Occasions, never constrain
them; which is a handsom sleight in mana∣ging
matters. So that there are no complaints
in the case; or if there be, the Senate never ex∣amines
them, having no inclination to convict
misinformers. They neither hear the Accu∣sers,
nor punish the accused; thinking it disho∣nourable
to give satisfaction without occasion:
and that it is only the part of a bad Prince to
force the Conscience to Honesty. This is to be
attributed to your singular Policy, with which
as it were the Top of your Vertues, foreseeing so
many imminent dangers, ye have driven off
the threatning Clouds; always Vmpires of
the disagreeing World, courted even when di∣stressed;
and have in your Adversities per∣swaded,
that there is more relief to be had in
your Friendship, than in the spacious promises
of many Kings. And all this who would not
admire to be done with an Outlandish Army
and General. It is the Art of your Govern∣ment
to trust Strangers, not an Evidence of
your own Valours, being decayed. How warily is
this provided? it appears, lest any of your Own
puffed up with Martial Glory, should aim at
that which heretofore confounded the Roman,
your parallel State, of which in other matters
you are close Followers, especially in instances
of Mercy. That was contented with one Pri∣son,

and that often empty: I lived with you
seven years, and saw but one poor Malefactor
executed, over whom the Judge groaned, and
cryed. No Prince loves to inflict more gentle
punishments, and this he doth honourably. For
it is not Majesty whose Object is Dread, but
Cruelty; and nothing is more gallant for
Men in Dignity, than to grant pardon for
many things, to ask and need it for nothing.
We French had happy proof of this. For who∣ever
read or heard of so much meekness as we
have found. It is now above eighteen years
ago, since we have not seen the Sword drawn
but against Enemies amidst so many provoca∣tions
of severity. He that was supreme Mini∣ster
among us, and that managed the Reins of
the Publick Fate, was ambitious rather to be
thought to have found us good, than to have
made us so. Thus did he seal the Publick
Peace with shedding no high Blood: nor was
he instrumental, that for securing his Domi∣nion,
Executions of rich Delinquents should
upon their Attainder be estreated into the Ex∣chequer.
By gentleness he shamed men into
Obedience: whereupon prosperous Fortune
did succeed all his Attempts to the Envy of the
astonished World. This is he whose many Vi∣ctories,
many good Services ye have often
heard of; but especially in the blessed Aspect of

this time, wherein the security of France, and
so many honourable Advantages are to be ac∣knowledged
to have been received from him
next under God; whom as the Top of your
Glory you have enrolled in the List of so many
Heroes, whose Names mounted in the Chariot
of Fame and Honour, shall flye through the
remotest Regions: who have founded your li∣berty
in the Waters; who have given Laws to
the Sea; who have made the Pelasgi and
Amathuntis, the Court of Alcinous, the
Grange of Ulysses, and the Kingdoms where
Jupiter crept, about which at this day there is
such stubborn fighting, tributary to you. O
Blood defiled with no sordid Commonalty! and
heat of Spirit allayed with no tincture of a
meaner Bed! Though I had a fiery activity of
Fancy, I could not equalize in worthy sort the
Honours of that excellent Nation, which being
sprung from a narrow spot of Ground, having
entred the Deep in Gallies, hath spread its
Fleets parallel with the Course of the Sun. O
Country! O Empress of the vast Gulph! owne
thy Native, Beloved by thee upon the sole ac∣count
of the Name of Priolo. So may thy
people eternally possess, and eternally desire to
possess under the best Prince, the best, that is,
a quiet State: so may the Semitars fear the
peaceable Gowns: so may thy Fate never ebb:

so never may the triumphing Ottoman, that
fierce Potentate, that perpetual Attaquer of
high Vertues increase by thy Ruines, but may
thy Empire flourish without end. Dated at
Paris on New-years day. 1665.


A Thing of singular estimation and the most
remarkable in any Story: Among the French
when a King succeeded five years old, that the Queen
a Foreigner, and Mazarine a Stranger should go∣vern,
whilst the Provinces were refractory, the Peo∣ple
in Rebellion, the Princes and Parliament oppo∣sed
greatly, the Spaniard and the English watching
their Advantages. That he breaking through all
this, and having gloriously concluded a Peace,
should dye in the Kings Arms, against whom had
been raised so many Designs, so many Plots, so ma∣ny
Slanders. That is a mighty thing: wherein is
to be considered as the rarerness of the matter, so the
difficulty; for in other Stories the very Novelty
detains the Readers. Here is nothing of particular
Narrative, all is known and published: whence
follows, that only the Phrase must be attended;
wherein, being the only point expected, it is hard
to give content.

