



Sir,
IF it be a solid Pleasure to re∣flect
on those Portions of our
Life, not only which have past
away in a smooth tenour of un∣interrupted
Felicity, but rather on
such as have been exercised with con∣spicuous
Sufferings, which have been
undertaken with Justice, sustained
with Courage, and crowned with an
happy deliverance: I hope you will
not be offended at my presuming to
call you to a review of the twenty

years of Cardinal Mazarines Mini∣stry
in this Piece pretending to some
more curious Remarks on the late
French History. You were then set
to maintain a difficult Station in that
Court, during our Civil Wars, and
Tragical Confusions. It was no mean
Province to withstand the Corrupti∣ons
of a prevailing Faction: to repre∣sent
an entire King under almost a
total Eclipse of Majesty: amidst the
Spoils of your own Fortunes superad∣ded
to the Invasion of your Masters
Revenue, to retain Splendour, Hospi∣tality,
and Beneficence, of which I
must ever bear an honourable and
grateful Testimony. But, Sir, how
you could sue to that Purple which
owes nothing to the Welfare of those
Powers that would never adore it;
how you could appear before His
Eminence, not having made way by
the Tributes paid to Eastern Ty∣rants;

and could sometimes convince
him in a Royal Cause, without co∣gent
Arguments fetched from both
the Indies, is a dexterity of Address
above my comprehension. Then
was your House the Roof under
which that Ark which was born be∣fore
our Soveraign in all his Trou∣bles,
sojourned, and you like Obed-Edom
found it a Blessing to your Fa∣mily.
And at length such was the
Issue of your Negotiation, that ha∣ving
seen the Divine Goodness tri∣umph
over the opposite Powers and
Policies of men both at home and
abroad, in the Restauration of our
Rightful and Natural King, you
were by him called home to the reap∣ing
the fruits of your patient conti∣nuance
in Duty, in the Exercise of
your former Charge of being near his
Sacred Person, and attending on his
Privy Council.

Here, Sir, although your conditi∣on
stand upon the most firm Bottom
of so tryed a Faith to so gracious a
Prince, yet you well comprehend
what is a Paradox to the securely for∣tunate,
that in this Scene of Life, Pro∣sperity
is more fugacious than Adver∣fity:
for, discounting the Period of
Death common to all, the Happy en∣counter
many Enemies, whilst the
Miserable find but few Friends; or
rather because our own degenerate
Nature is more soft to comply with
the Charms of Pleasure from sur∣rounding
Plenty, though they have a
tendency to our certain Ruine; than
it is daring to put forth the Efforts of
Industry under the discouragements
of Want, which might cooperate to∣wards
our Preservation: you there∣fore
being avised that Sublunary
Happiness is not unmovable, arm
against future Contingencies, and

stand in a Posture of the same Humi∣lity,
Self-denial, Compassion, and all
those other amiable Vertues, which
are the Fruits of a well-born Affli∣ction.
Since therefore none is more con∣scious
to the Secret of France, as ha∣ving
been so long exercised in the
Policy and Civility of that Nation,
be pleased to assist at this dissecting
of the Soul of Mazarine, and perhaps
you may from thence divine the Fate
of Europe. This Author is no Cal∣vinist;
for he looks upon the Re∣formed
Religion as an Innovation of
no long Continuance, he means for
the future; but a Venetian Catholick
grafted into the Gallican Church. In
the point of Supremacy ever jealous
of Power, lest the Secular should
Lacquay whilst the Ecclesiastick rides.
The main Subject of this Treatise is
an high Commendation, and without

Exception, but upon prevaricating
Topicks; whilst he introduces a
Church-man successful in embroil∣ing
the World, and Victorious over
the most Catholick Arms to advance
the most Christian Interest. To say
the truth for or against other Opini∣ons,
no Zealot.
Non est de tetricis, non est de magna
professis. His Style argues him much
a Cavalier, so Reverent to Superiors,
as still without violation of Truth:
and therefore suspense, Oracular,
pregnant with two Senses through
the Ambiguity of Phrase, or Distin∣ctions,
with a singular Artifice of
Context, and certain Clenches inef∣fable
in any other Language. You
may, if your leisure admit, peruse
the Original with some delight. For
your whole Family, after your Ex∣ample,
is an Academy of the Politer
Literature: Yet be pleased to de∣fend

the Translation, whereby you
will encourage the Endeavours of
him, who, as ever bound, daily prays
for an increase of Happiness, and all
Blessings upon you and yours, and
accounts it among the highest Satis∣factions
this World can cast upon
him to be approved

