



My LORD,
I Have now done the thing which I re∣ceived Your Lordship's command for, and I hope that which was a Reason to me for the doing it, will be one as much to the World for the accepting it. Indeed there is nothing worthy to he Published but the Obedience; for however the Work deserves not to be read, yet Your Lord∣ship does to be obey'd; and so whereas the Ʋn∣willingness is often the Excuse upon such Occasi∣ons, My Readiness is to be mine. As the Dis∣course has nothing to recommend it but the Sub∣ject, so the Publishing may have little to ex∣cuse it but the paying a Duty to one so nearly related to the Subject of it; indeed here a Duty is paid to both. It has been always a Maxime to me, that they who seem to suffer grievous things from Providence were to have all the soft Treatment from Men, and were not to suffer there again, that from them there should be Balsom and Healing Allay, and no∣thing should be easily denied to those in Distress; and in this of Your Lordship the Loss of the
Dead should have at least that faint Supply from the Services of the Living: Therefore was this one of the Melancholy Cries of Job, Have Pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my Friends, for the hand of God hath touched me; and then follows his Wish, very like this Command of Your Lordship, Oh that my Words were now written! Oh that they were Printed in a Book! But, My Lord, there is yet an higher Reason, and that is the Hearty desire of some good to be done, though by such weak hands as mine, upon the Souls of Men, and first upon Your Lordship's, as you gave the Com∣mand and so the first Occasion for it: There is another right to the first Fruits of the Good where the Evil it self began, as we endeavour to quench a Fire at the first House which it appeared in: Where this Evil began, it dwells there still in a larger share, and so much in the most pressing weight, that there is this new reason for its dwelling there, being so heavy it cannot easily be removed. The Sons of the Patriarch carried a Present to the Aegyptian Nobleman of Balm, and that was much used by the Aegyptians upon Dead Bodies: But there is another use of Balm not only in Death, but in the Wounds before it, and thus I would present some to Your Lordship, seeing Peace it self as well as War does expose You to them. Your Lordship al∣most seemed to covet Wounds as much as others a∣void
them, and if there were that Desire, it has been largely answered in all the Costly and the Dangerous Honours of War, in all the Painful and terrible Marks of Courage; You have been always ready to spare your Conquer'd Enemies, but not Your self, and Your repeated Victories, which You wish'd to be dry and unbloody to them, seldom were so to Your Lordship. The Stroke is now in the most Sensible Part, and it is now more painful, when through the sides of another, then when first directed against Your Self; It was before in other Parts, now in the Heart, and a Pious manage∣ment of this stroke will make it not to be a Fatal one. It is not in the Field of Honour, but of Love, and in the usual place of security, in Your own House; as one in the Prophet was said to be wound∣ed in the house of his Friends. Death has often met You, when both that and Your Lordship were attended by an Army, and it could not conquer You; and therefore it came up to You face to face, and engaged You in a Personal Attack, and it has gained its design, as the Fortune of Nations has been determined by a single Combat between two Cham∣pions, when the Dispute could never be brought to an Issue by Armies. Your Lordship has born an He∣roick Part in two famous Sieges of this Age, at Buda and Namur; But You were lately besieg∣ed Your self within a fair and goodly Town (this the first surrendered by Your Lordship.) You thought
Your self sase and happy there, and it had all things within its Walls, but it was not, alas! so strong as we could have desired: Let the Surrender become very Honourable in being very Religious, when Re∣signation is as much the Duty of a Christian as the Keeping of Cities and not resigning is that of a Soldier. No Order of Men seems to shine more in History, none of the two great Nations, the Gre∣cian and Roman, are read with more glory to them∣selves, and more satisfaction to us, then Warriours, whose Conduct in their Life was equal to that in their Armies, and their Piety to their Courage: Some of that Profession we find upon Record too in the History of the Church, and there signalized with Marks of Honour greater then those which they re∣ceived in the Field. I would not read a Lecture of War to Your Lordship, as the Philosopher did to Hannibal, but I would offer things to be consi∣dered in the calmer Thought and the silent Re∣treat of Peace, and in the gloomy Shade of Mourn∣ing, and I would have said, in the pensive Lei∣sure too of Solitude, if that Company, the want whereof, makes this Solitude, would have hindered, would not much rather have promoted the best Reflections.
Ʋpon this great Reason my Obedience, I frankly own, My Lord, was as ready as if I had been un∣der the Martial Discipline and Authority of Your Lordship, as a General Officer. I was no less easi∣ly
ordered to the Press, then a Soldier is to his Post; as one of the Warlike Character, the Centurion in the Gospel declared, I say to this Man, Go, and he goeth, to another, Do this, and he doth it. We see, there is no Joy unmixt nor without its End, no Expectation steady nor without its Disappoint∣ment; no hope so great, but much rather, because so big, it may burst asunder, and into that air, which before it swell'd with. Your Lordship expect∣ed in Your Return from the Campagne all the weal∣thy spoils at home, and things yet more glorious then the Macedonian Conquerors seized in the Persian Tents, or ever the Germans (under whose Eagle you have fought) in the Turkish Camp. You designed a Triumph within Your own Gates, and You there found a Defeat. We now may learn to confide no more in the Weak and Sickly, and (we find) Dying Enjoyments of the World, to enter no more into close Allyances with Life, and with Goods of an Earthly Growth, and we may resolve that we will no more be Disappointed. We see again, as So∣lomon says, There is no Discharge in that War, the Best are to die as well as others, and we now live only to be warned and to take the warning, to con∣sider that we are determined to death by God's De∣cree, and we should be fitted for it by our Holiness; and so our Death, like that of the Best, may seem to be only a Debt of Nature, the Payment whereof makes us Free and Easie, and a sudden one, which
is to them a Favour, may not be to us a Punishment. I would not, My Lord, so much condole Your Cala∣mity, as congratulate Your Improvement of it: I would not speak so much to Your Lordship upon the Loss, because (instead of Your being swallow'd up, in St. Paul's Phrase, with intemperate Grief) I would have that swallow'd up the best way, and sunk in the Advantage, by the Blessing of him who said, I will heal him, I will lead him, and will restore comforts to him and to his Mourners.
In the mean time I am to tell the World Your Loss (which Your Lordship is too sensible of to want the being told of it Your self) and my own Imper∣fections in the following Pages, wherein the Ex∣cellent Lady has her self a Loss, and, as you were always Partners in the Goods and Evils of Life, Your Lordship too suffers here, not only by the Death, but by the Description of it in this Ʋnworthy and Artless Discourse: For all the Injuries whereof Pardon now it ask'd from Your Lordship, and from that truly Pious Memory, which now we Celebrate, by
My Lord, 
