



Isa. 45.15. & 46.9,O God THE SAVIOUR of Israel, (of Eng∣land too, antiently stiled Mat. West. An. 1055. p. 422. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 88, 89. Regnum Dei, Gods Kingdom) Thou art God a∣lone, and there is none else. Psal. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth, that I desire besides thee. Acts 17.28. In thee a∣lone I live, move, and have my being. Psal. 73.26. Thou art the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. My 1 Thess. 5.23. Rom. 11.36. Psal. 139.15, 16, 17. whole Spirit, Soul, Body, Parts, Endowments Natu∣ral, Spiritual, are only of thee, through thee: O sanctifie them wholly for, and only to thee; to whom alone I desire intirely and eternally to devote them; as Psal. 100.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Job 7.20. Gen. 48.16. due to none but thee, and that by right of Creation, Redemption, Resignation, Preservation, and that extraordinary Tribute of gratitude I stand most deeply engaged to render to thy most gracious Majesty, for those many and manifold WONDERS of Preservation, Supportation, Concomitation, Protection, Consolation, Absolution, Vindication and Restauration, thou hast (of thy free Grace) most miraculously extended

to me, (the manest and unworthyest of all thy servants) in, under, from all my former and late injurious, illegal Suffer∣ings, Oppressions, Imprisonments, inhumane close Re∣straints, Exiles, in TEN SEVERAL PRISONS, CASTLES (some of them at remotest distance from all Acquaintance, Kindred, Friends and thy publick Ordinances, under some Rude, Barbarous armed Gardians and Men of blood, of pur∣pose to destroy me, where thou wast present with me, as with Dan. 6.16. Daniel in the Lyons den, 2 Tim. 4.17. Paul in the Lyons mouth, the Dan. 3.19, 20, &c. three Children in the midst of the fiery Furnace, Jonah 1. & 2. Jonah in the Whales belly, to secure, comfort and supply me) for about ELEVEN YEARS SPACE; through the ma∣lice and cruelty of mercilesse men: Yet (blessed be thy holy name) for no other cause or crime thy poor servants consci∣ence is guilty of (his last close Imprisonments in three several Castles being without the least Examination, Hearing, Accu∣sation, Charge of any particular offence against him, or yet declared to him) but only for his sincere cordial desire to dis∣charge his bounden duty to glorifie thee in his generation, by apposing the In my Hi∣striomastix, Healths sick∣nesse, Love∣locks, Cosens Cosening De∣votions, Bre∣viate, Quench∣cole, Memen∣to, Speech in Parliament, & other Books. dangerous wrath-provoking Errors and corruptions of the age in which he liveth; by con∣tending earnestly for the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints, according Jude 3. Levit. 19.17. Tit. 1.13. to thy Commands, and for the setled fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights, Govern∣ment of his distracted Native Countrie, against all secret Underminers, open Oppugners or Subverters of them, to the uttermost of his Ability: By a consciencious inviolable obser∣vation of all those solemn sacred Oaths, Protestations, Cove∣nants and Obligations, (prescribed by those lawfull higher Powers thou commandedst him toRom. 13.1, 2.submit to under pain of DAMNATION) wherewith he hath frequently bound his soul, not so much to men as to thee, who art a most Deut. 7.9. Neh 1.5: Psa. 89.2, 28, to 38. & 110.4. & 111.5. Jer. 33.20, 21, &c. Heb. 5.17, 18. Faithfull Promise-Oath-Covenant-keeping God, especially of those

Oathes and Covenants wherewith thou vouchsafest to oblige thy self even to meer dust and ashes, both IMMUTABLE and INVIOLABLE, never violating, nor repenting of them in the least degree, and obliging men both by thine own example, and Gen. 50.5, 6 Levit. 19.12. Num. 30.2. Josh. 1.17. & 6.22. & 9.15, to 22. Psa. 15.4. Hos. 10.4. Zech. 5.4. Eccles. 8.2. Ezek. 17.16, 18, 19. Precepts to do the like, in all their publick or private Oathes, Vowes, Covenants to thee or men, under pain of temporal wrath here, and eternal exclusion from thy holy Hill: And for not daring to confederate or comply (against his Oathes, Covenants, manifold publick Engage∣ments, Conscience, Judgement and thy sacred Prov. 24.21 22. Rom. 16.17. 2 Tim. 3.1, 2, 3. Inhibitions) WITH THOSE WHO ARE GIVEN TO CHANGE; many of whose Calamities and Ruines are sodainly risen and fallen upon them, by thy Divine justice (even from those they least suspected, and most relyed on for Protection) for the manifold changes they presumed to make against their Oaths, Vows, Trusts, Protestations, Covenants, and unrighteous oppres∣sing of their dearest Christian Friends, Brethren, and thy suf∣fering Servant among others. Now allRev. 19.1, 2. Glory, Honour, Power, Salvation and Praise be for ever rendred by me and all thy glorious Saints and Angles in heaven and earth, because true and righteous are thy Judgements: and because the deliverance of me thy oppressed Servant (with∣out any wound to his Conscience, dishonour to thy name, or scandal to thy People) is exceeding Gracious and Glorious. Psalm 20.5, 6, 7, 8. Now know I, (again and again) that the Lord loveth his anointed; that he hath heard him (and others praying for him) from his holy Heaven; WITH THE SAVING STRENGTH OF HIS RIGHT HAND. Some (of his self-exalting Oppressors) trusted in Chariots, and some in Horses; but he remembred the Lord his God: they are brought down and fallen, but he is risen and stands upright: Who therefore ever will rejoyce greatly in THY SALVATION, and in the Name of his God will set up his

Banners. Psal 107.16. For thou hast broken the gates of Brasse, and cut the bars of Iron in sunder: Thou hast sent thy holy Angel and knocked off the Chains from my long-fettered hands, and made the long-barred Iron Castle Gates (wherein I was close shut up) to open of their own accord (without any enforced long-expected Petition from me.) Thou hast rescued me from more then 4. Quaternions of Soul∣diers, who most strictly garded me day and night, as they did thy imprisoned Apostle Acts 12.4, to 11. Peter, (and more narrowly than any formerly under the Prelates greatest Tyranny) and deli∣vered him out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expect∣ation of the People of the Jews; the Jesuits and Popish Priests, who marched freely abroad, not only preaching, but printing and dispersing no lesse then See the Bea∣con fired: and Nicolas Cau∣sins the Jesuit's holy Court; printed at London 1650. in folio. 19. grosse Popish Books in defence of their Religion, and condemning ours for Heresie, whiles I (their chief oppugner) was shut up so close in three remote Castles, that I could neither write against, nor discover their Plots to undermine our Church, State, Reli∣gion, nor yet send Letters to my Imprisoners to demand my liberty, unless I would first give Copies of them to my Gardi∣ans, and then trust them to send them when and by whom they pleased, nor have admission to thy publick Or∣dinances for above two years space. In thankfull Commemo∣ration of which my late and great deliverance from this Ae∣gyptian Bondage, I do here presume, in all humility to pro∣strate at thy feet, and Dedcate to thee, the Great Psal. 146.7. GAOLE-DELIVERING, PRISONER-LOOSING GOD, (who Isa. 49.9 & 42.7. saiest to the Prisoners GOE FORTH, and to them that are in darknesse SHEVV YOUR SELVES) this mean and unworthy Gospel Plea, for the lawfulnesse and continu∣ance of the Antient setled Maintenance and Tithes of thy Ministers of the Gospel, (reserved to and by thy self AS THY DEVOTED PORTION, DEBT, DUE) whereof many

now by FRAUD and VIOLENCE, endeavour Sacrilegiously TO ROB BOTH THEE and THEM; as the first fruits of my enlargement, a 1 Sam. 7.12. Second EBENEZER, Hitherto hath the Lord HELPED ME, and a lasting Monument to Posterity of my gratitude and thankfulness to thee my God, for my late restitution to so much Liberty and Freedom, as to be able, thus once more publickly to plead thine own and thy Mini∣sters cause, against Jesuits, Anabaptists, Quakers, and all other open Oppugners, Subverters of our Church, State, and secret Underminers of the true Preachers and Preaching of the Gospel, who now Psal. 83.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. like Gebal, Ammon, Amalek, Edom, Ismael, Moab, the Hagarens, Philistines, Inha∣bitants of Tyre, and armed Assur of old, have consulted together with one consent, and are confederate against thee; and have said, Come and let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. Beseeching thy Majesty most graciously to accept it, most powerfully to protect and so effectually to blesse, prosper it, and thy servant, against all these combined Confederates, that they may be no way able to Act. 6.10. resist thy Truth, Wisdom, Spirit, appearing, pleading in it, by it; but either like 1 Cor. 14.25. convicted Seducers or Seduced persons, fall down flat on their faces before it, worship thee and report, that God is in it (and in thy servant) of a truth. Or, in case of wilfull malicious obstinacy, against thee and thy faith∣full Ministers, Houses of publick worship, Truth and Gospel, Psal. 83.9, 10, 11, &c. Do unto them as unto the Midianites, as to Sisera, and to Jabin at the brook of Kison, which perished at Endor and became as dung for the earth: Make their Nobles like Oreb and Zeeb, yea make all their Princes as Zebah, and as Salmunna; who said (as these do now) LET US TAKE TO OUR SELVES THE HOUSES OF GOD IN POSSESSION. O my God make them as

a wheel, as the stubble before the wind: As the fire burn∣eth the wood, and as the flame setteth the mountains on fire; so persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid of thy storm; fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy name O Lord; let them be con∣founded and troubled for ever, yea let them be put to shame and perish: That men (these men) may know, that thou whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the most high over all the earth. Psal. 79.13. So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks for ever; we will shew forth thy Praise to all generations. And thy servant Da∣vids resolution, Psal 146.2. & 104.33. Whiles I live will I praise the Lord, I will sing praises unto my God, WHILE I HAVE A∣NY BEING, shall through thy Grace be both the Resolution and Practice of
Swainswick 1 Sep. 1653.

