



Mst gracious Soveraign,
THe 1 Tim. 6. 15. Rev 19. 16. ony potentate, and KING OF KINGS, who D 2, 21. c. 4. 25. Job 12. 19, 20, 21. 1 m 2. 8. Psa. 113. 7, 8. removeth Kings, and SETTETH UP KINGS, and rueth in the KINGDOM OF MEN TO GIVE IT TO WHOMSOEVER HE PLEASETH; ha∣ving by his own Omnipotent Psal. 98. 1. Exod. 15. 16. Deut. 4. 34. out-stretched arm, and successive Miraculous Providences, unexpectedly cut off, cast down, subverted, dipated, Dan. 2 34. 4. without hands or

bloodshed, the most Execrable, Perfidious, Trayterous Murderers of your Royal Father KING CHARLS the first, of Glorious Memory, and Unjust disinheri∣ters and proscribers of your Sacred Majestie out of all your own Hereditary Kingdoms, and some forein States by Violence, War, and inhumane Tyranny, (en∣forcing your Majesty oft to cry out with the Exiled Kingly Prophet;Psal. 120. 4, 5, 6. Wo is me that I am constrained to dwell in Mesech, and to have my habitation among the tents of Kedar &c.) who by rigorous Edicts debarred your Majestie not only of the Charitable Relief of your own Protestant Subjects, but likewise of the Christian Aid, and1 Tim. 2. 1, 2, 3. Evangelical Tribute, (due to all Pagan as well as Christian KINGS, by divine and common natural Right) of their daily Supplications, Prayers, and Intercessions to God, for your Personal Preservation, and Restitution, under severest Penalties; imposed many insupportable new Yoaks of Bondage on all your Subjects necks, and worse than Aegyptian Burdens upon their galled backs, for sundry yeares, almost to their Irrecoverable ruine, it pleased thisPs 46. 7. Soveraign King over all the earth,Num. 16. 22. . 27. 16. and God of the Spirits of all flesh, by strange Miracles of mercy, through the preparatory loyal Endeavours of some of your Majesties most inconsiderable faithfull Sub∣jects, upon the very first Reception and reading of your Majesties most gracious Letters and Declara∣tions to the Lords, Commons, City of London, Army, and Navy, immediately to bow the hearts and spirits of both your Houses of Parliament, and all your Subjects, (yea of the very Military Officers, Forces by Land and Sea, formerly raised & engaged against your Majesties Cause and Kingship,) as the heart of

one man, (as he2 Sam. 16. 9. to 16. bowed the hearts of the men of Judah after rebellious usurping Absoloms death, in the case of exterminated King David) so that they immediate∣ly and unanimously voted your Majesties speedy re∣turn, dispatched their several Letters, Votes, Messen∣gers, Fleet and Monies to your Majesty, without one dissenting voice; to hsten your Majesties return, and transport you with honour and saety, to enjoy your KINGLY AUTHORITY and PATRIMONY, contending with a most cordial aemulation, who should be first and forwardest, to bring back and conduct your Majesty (together with your Princely Brothers and Fol∣lowers) from your long most deplorable exile, to your Royal City and Palace, with all possible de∣monstrations of their publike joy, and dutifull Al∣legeance to your Majesty, and farr greater Magnifi∣cence, Solemnity, Triumph, and multitudes o Con∣ductors, than any of your most Victorious Royal Pro∣genitors enjoyed when they returned into England from their greatest Forein Conquests. And that which crowned this Miracle of Mercies, was its celerity and seson, it having both its inception and perfection with∣in the limits of one Month, and its completion on Your Majesties Birth-day (May 29.) whereon, as You were first born a Prince, You were now re-born A MOST GLORIOUS KING, and most magnificenly invested in the possssion of Your Royal Throne at Whtehall, in the presence of all your Majesties Lords, Commons, and thousands of your People there assem∣bled, who with their united Shouts, Prayers, Paises, Acclamations, Benedictions, and Panegyricks con∣gratulated your Maties Natural and Political Nativity thereon, both as a Man and Monarch; together with the new Birth and Resurrection of Your three

Uni Kingdoms and Churches of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND, and their respec∣tive Dominions, being all ised from the Graves of Dth and Misery (wherein they had for some years spce bre been inred) and were new rn AS KINGDOMS and Churches too on that joy dy,  to e celebrated by them in all succee∣ding Generations; and to have this Divine motto engran thereon. sal.  18. 22, 23, 2. The stone which the bulders refu∣sed is (this day) become te Head of the corner; This is the Lords doing, and it is marvello in our eyes, THI IS THE DAY WHICH THE LORD HATH MAD, WEE WILL REJOYCE AND BE GLAD THEREIN.
What the gant Prophet Isa 66. 7, 8, 9. Ish records of God mira Mcies towards his Church and people: Be she , she brougt forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child. Who hath heard such a thing? WHO HATH SEEN SUCH THINGS? Shall the Earth be made to bring forth in ONE DAY? OR SHALL A NATION BE BORN AT ONCE? For as soon as ZION , she brought  her childre; Was now verified bth of your Mjesty, and you three whole Kingdoms & Chur∣ches. all brought forth and born together in this one DAY. Wherefore, Ryce ye with , (with  .     . England) and he glad with her all ye that love her; re∣joyce fo joy with hr, all ye that mourned for her. Jewe's .  the A∣polgy of the Ch .
I hath been the antient  O our Romsh Ad∣versaries, against our Reformed Protestant Churches & Religin, that they are false and spurious, because theyh 16. Divi. 1 D. John White his Way to the true Chch, Sect. 42. . 44. have no micles wrght in them: And they have daily upbraided your scred Majesty & your followers, yea pierced your souls during your Exile among them,

wth this soul-piercing Quaere, * Where is now the God of the Prot stants? He can neither prve nor ∣store You to our Crowns and Kingms;    nounce your Protestant God, Chch, ,   our Romn Catholike God, Church, Rligion,   hope nor  of your reston and tht  y th Arms of your Catholike yes and subjec. But blessed and for ever   the   of ou great God, who hath now vindicated his own Glorie and Oncie against their , & wrought so many Miracles in your Maties restituti∣on, to justifie bth the Truth of the Proteant Religi∣on, Churches, & your Subjs, that all their spurious . Miracles and Impostures wherewih they abuse their  ,  their lives  the Saints. over-cedulous Proselytes, and fraught their Legends even to nsse, are no more to be compared with them, than a Glo-worm o the Noon day Sun: And their God and .  . rock is not as our God and rok, our Enemies themselves being (now) Judges.
Verily, your Majesty with all your Protestant Sub∣jects, after such a stupendious, glorious deliverance from their lae usurping Pharaohs, wrse tn Aegyp∣tian Tax masters, Burdens and servitude, have just cause to sing aloud to the God of their Salvation, this triumpant song of Moses, and the Children ofa Exod. , , 12, 13,  Israel, and King David after them; a Who is lke unto thee, O Lord, amongst the Gods? who is like unto thee, glorious in holynesse, fearfull in prayses doing wonders? Thou strtchest out thyright hand, the earth swallowed them; Thou in thymercy hast led forth thy pople, which thou hast redeemed. Sing ye unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously. Psal 1. 1, 2, 3 &c. The King shall joy  thy str O Lord and in thy salvation how greatly shall he joyce? for thou hast (now) given him his hearts desire, thou

hast not with-holden the request of his lips: For thou pre∣ventest him with the blessings of goodnesse, thou settest a Crown of pure gold on his head: His glory is great in thy salvation, Honor and Majesty hast thou laid upon him. Thou hast made him most Blessed for ever, thou hast made him exceeding glad with thy Countenance, For the King trusteth in the Lord, and through the mercy of the most High he shall not miscarry.Psal 106. 48. Blessed be the Lord God of England from everlasting to everlasting (for ths un∣expressible mercy) and let all the people say, Amen; Praise ye the Lord. Yea they all now joyntly and severally apply to your Majestie, the blessing and words of the Qeen of Sheba to King Solomon, after she beheld his transcendent Wisdom, Virtues, and Magnificence: (which far exceeded the report there∣of, as your Majesties royal wisdom and graces of all kinds much transcend their fame)2 Chron 9. 5, 6, 7. Blssed be the Lord thy God, who delighted in thee, to set thee upon his Throne, to be King for the Lord thy God. Because the Lord thy God lovd Israel (England, Scotland and Ireland) TO ESTABLISH THEM FOR EVER, THEREFORE MADE HE THEE KING OVER THEM TO DO JUS∣TICE AND JUDGEMENT, yea, to restore them to their pristine Liberty, Peace, Plenty, Traffick, Renown, Prosperity, and make them the happiest of all Sub∣jects in the world.
In the contempltion of which inchoated com∣mon Felicity, I humbly presume to dedicate to your Majesty, this now compleated Treatise of, The Signal Loyalty and Devotion of Gods true Saints and pious Christians in all ages (and likwise of Pagans) to their KINGS, both before and under the Law and Gospel; more especially within this your first Christian Realm of Britain, (wherein I have most expated) ex∣pressed

both by their publike and private Prayers, Supplications, and Intercessions unto God for their long life, health, saety, victory, prosperity, temporal, spiri∣tual and eternal felicity; and all sorts of blessings both on their Royal Persons, Queens, Pogenies, Families, Go∣vernment, Kingdoms, Armies, Counsels; by their Thanksgivings to God for their advancement to their Royal Thrones, Victories, Successes, Deliverances, Piety, Justice and Gratious reigns over them; by their loyal Ac∣clamations, Salutations, Addresses, Panegyricks, E∣pistles to them, and their dutiful Subjection and Obedi∣ence under them, which I have evidenc'd by presidents and Testimonies in all ages, (never formerly collected into one Manual) To which I have super added the antient and modern Forms of the Coronations of Christian Emperors, Kings, Queens, (and of some Pagans) with the Ceremonies, Solemnities, Prayers, Col∣lects and Benedictions used at them, especially those relating to England and Scotland, (not hitherto pub∣lished) as a President for, and Prologue to your Majes∣ties much desired and shortly-expected Coronation.
The first Part of this Treatise, I lately Printed, in January last, for Your Majesties service, to inthrone You in the Hearts, publike Prayers and Supplicati∣ons of all Your loyal Subjects, to prepare the way for Your Majestyes speedy Restauration to Your Hereditary Crowns and Kingdoms, which (blessed be God) you now actually enjoy, to their unspeakable comfort: of the accomplishment whereof with∣out Armes or Blood, I had such full assurance then and since in my own apprehensions, from the Obser∣vation of Gods admirable Providences, of Your Majesties Opposites intollerable Extravagances and Infatuations, & of Your Subjects late dutiful Inclina∣tions

tending thereunto, through the loyal Endea∣vour of some Faithfull Friends to your Majestie and your People, that I committed the Second Part of this Treatise, and all that concerns Your Coronation, to the Presse, in the beginning of April last; before any visible appearances thereof to the eyes or thoughts of others: And I repute it an extraordinary Blessing and Honour from God and your Majesty, that any of my Paper Arms and Publications (in your Majesties and others apprehensions) have been instrumental to promote this your happy, Unbloody, most joyfull Restitution to your Throne and Kingship, maugre all late Ingagements, & Oaths of Abjuration, to debar your Majestie and all the Royal line for ever from them.
I humbly beseech your Royal Majestie graciously to accept this Unpolish'd work (compiled in the midst of many publike distracting Imployments) being your Highnesses peculiar by all Rights and Cir∣cumstances, as a Publick Testimony of my Loyalty to your Majestie, and a lasting Monument of my Thank∣fullnesse to Almighty God, for hearing my many years constant Prayers, and blessing my impotent Pa∣per Artillery and endeavors for your Majesties long∣desired, and now happily accomplished Inves∣titure, not only in your Royal Throne, but likewise in the Hearts, Consciences, private and publike Devotions and Supplications of all your People. Whom this Trea∣tise, seconded with my Healths Sicknesse, (dedicated to your Royal Father many years past) and your Ma∣jesties most Pious frsh Proclamation, will instruct and excite most devoutly to pray for your Majesties Health and Happiness in their Churches, Chapels, Fami∣lies, Closets, rather than heathenishly to prophane, or abuse your Sacred Name, in drinking your Majes∣ties

Health (to the Hazard of their own and their souls to boot, through Drunkennesse and Intemperance) in Taverns, Alehouses, or at their own or others Tables, as well to Gods dishonor as your Majesties.
In fine, I shall be a daily Orator to the God of your Majesties and your Kingdoms Salvation, that all the temporal, spiritual, and eternal blessings, comprised in the several Prayers, Collects, Benedicti∣ons, Salutations, Acclamations, and Passages, collected in this Treatise, for any Christian Emperors, Kings, and Princes, may concenter in, and be abundantly powred forth on your Majesties Royal Person, Family, Kingdoms, Councils, Court, Armies, Government, Peo∣ple; that so your Majestie may be Chronicled to all Posterity (as in truth you really demerit) for the best, devoutest, holiest, justest, and most gratious of all Christian Kings that ever reigned, and your for∣merly disloyal, degenerated Subjects, by your most righteous Reign, and piousRegis ad ex∣emplum tous componitur orbis Claudian. Royal Example, hence∣forth become the most Loyal, Religious, Free, and Happiest of all Subjects in the Universe: Which is and shall be the daily Prayer of
From my Study in Lincolns Inne June 5. 1660.

