



Right Honourable,
THough true Nobility (alwayes founded in Omnes pari sorte nas∣cimur, solâ virtute distin∣guimur. Minu∣tius Felix Octau. p. 123. Nobilitas sola est ac unica virtus. Iuvenal Satyr. 8. vertue and real piety) needs no o∣ther tutelar Deity, or Apologie, but it self, amongst those Omnes boni semper Nobilitati savemus: & quia utile est reipub. Nobiles Homines esse dignos Majoribus suis, & quia valet apud nos elarorum Hominum & bene de reipub. meritorum memoria, etiam mor∣tuorum. Cicero Orat. pro P. Sext. ingenious Spirits, who are able to discern or estimate its worth; yet the iniquity of our degene∣rated Age, and the frenzie of the intoxicated ignorant vulgar is such, that it now requires the assistance of the ablest Advocates to plead its cause, and vindicate the just Rights, Privileges of the House of Peers, against the Lilburn, Overton, and others. licentious Quills, Tongues of lawlesse sordid Sectaries, and Mechanick Levellers; who having got the Sword and reines into their hands, plant all their batteries and force

against them; crying out like those Babylonian Levellers of old against the House of Lords; Psal. 137.7. Rase it, Rase it, e∣ven to the foundation thereof, and lay it for ever ver with the very dust; beholding all true Honor, worth, and No∣bleness shining forth in your Honors heroick Spirits, with a malignant aspect, because they despair of ever enjoying the least spark therof in themselves, and prosecuting you with a deadly hatred, because better, greater than ever they have hopes to be, unless they can through Those who usurp supreme Power by these illegal means, and Come not in by the Door; but climb up some other way into the sheepfold: are resolved by Christ him∣self to be THIEVES & ROBBERS; who come but for to STEAL-KILL, and DESTROY the SHEEP; and no lawfull Shepherds, Powers, Magistrates, John 10.1.10. These Christs true sheep will not follow, but flee from, for they know not their voyce. Ver. 5. Treachery and vio∣lence make themselves the onely Grandees, by debasing your highest Dignity, to the lowest Peasantry, and making the meanest Commoners your Compears.
This dangerous seditious Design hath ingaged me (the unablest of many) out of my great affection to Royalty and real Nobility, and a deep sence of the present kid tottering condition of our Kingdom, Parliament (the very pillars and foundations whereof are now not only shaken, but almost quite subverted) voluntarily, without any Fee at all, to become your Honors Advocate, to plead your Cause, and vindicate your undoubted hereditary right of sitting, vo∣ting, judging in our Parliaments; of which they strenuously endeavour to plunder both your Lordships and your po∣sterities; and to publish these subitane Collections to the world, (now enlarged with many pertinent Additions) to still the Psal. 65, 7. madness of the seduced vulgar, whom Ignora∣mus Lilburn, Overton, Walwin, and their Confederates have laboured to mutinie against your Parliamentary Ju∣risdiction, Isa. 41.25. treading upon Princes as upon mortar, and as the Potter treadeth the clay, in their illiterate seditious Pam∣phlets, whose Arguments, Pretences, Presidents, Objecti∣ons, Allegations I have here refuted by Scripture, Histories,

Antiquities, and Parliament-Rolls; the ignorance whereof, joyned with their malice, is the principal occasion of their error in this kind.
And truly were all our Parliament Rolls, Pleas, Iour∣nals, faithfully transcribed, As they are now in part, In an Exact abridgement of the Records of the Tower of London, 1657. publi∣shed by me. and published in print to the eyes of the world, as most of our Statutes are, by authority of both Houses of Parliament (a work as worthy their un∣dertaking, and as beneficial for the publike, as any I can recommend unto their care) it would not only preserve them from imbezelling, and the hazards of fire and warr, to which they are now subject, but likewise eternally si∣lence, refute the Sectaries, Levellers ignorant false Allega∣tions against your Honors Parliamentary Jurisdiction and Judicatur▪ resolve, clear all or most doubts that can arise concerning the tower, jurisdiction, privileges of both, or ei∣ther Houses, keep both of them within their due bounds, (the exceeding whereof is dangerous, grievous to the people, except in cases of absolute, real, present, urgent, not pretended necessity, for the saving of a Kingdom▪ whiles that necessity continues, and no longer; chalk o the mient regular way of proceeding in all kinds of Parliamentary affairs whatsoever, whether of warr, or peace, Trade or Government, Privileges or Taxes, and in all civil or criminal causes, and all matters whatsoever concerning King or Subject, Natives or Foreiners; over∣rule, reconcile most of the present differences between the King and Parliament, House and House, Members and Members; clear many doubts, rectifie some gross mistakes in our printed Statutes, Law-Books, and ordinary Histori∣ans; add much light, lustre, ornament to our English An∣nals, the Common & Statute Laws; and make all Lawyers, all Members of both Houses far more able than now they are, to manage and carry on all businesses in Parliament, when they shall upon every occasion almost have former presi∣dents ready at hand to direct them; there being now ve∣ry few Members, in either House, Lords, Lawyers, or o∣thers, well read, or versed in antient Parliament Roll, Pleas, Iournals, or Histories relating to them, the igno∣rance

whereof is a great Remora to their proceedings, yea oft times, a cause of dangerous incroachments of new Iu∣risdictions over the Subjects persons, estates, not usual in former Parliaments; of some great mistakes and deviati∣ons from the antient methodical Rules and Tracts of parlia∣ment (now almost quite forgotten, and laid aside by new unexperienced, ignorant Parliament Members, who think they may do what they please) to the publike prejudice, injury of posterity, and subversion of our Fundamental Laws, Rights, Liberties, in the highest degree, by new ere∣cted arbitrary Committees, exercising an absolute tyrannical power over the Persons, Liberties, Estates, Freeholds both of Lords themselves, and all English Freemen.
Your Lordships helping hand to the speedy furthering of such a necessary publike work, and your industrious, mag∣nanimous, unanimous imitation of the memorable heroick presidents of your Noble progenitors, in gaining, regaining, enlarging, confirming, perpetuating to posterity the suc∣cessive Grand Charters of our Liberties, when ever viola∣ted, in oppugning all arbitrary tyrannical Proceedings, Taxes, Oppressions, Encroachments, ill Counsellors, and bad Instruments both of Kings and Popes themselves; in inflicting exemplary punishments upon all Traytors, Ene∣mies to the publike, both in our Parliaments, and the Field too, when there was occasion, the principal whereof, I have Page 56. to 140. 188. to 194. 210. 242. to 258. 263. to 267. here presented to your view, in a Chronical method, will be a great accession to your Honour, the best vindi∣cation of your antient undoubted Parliamentary Jurisdicti∣on, Right, Power, Judicature, against all Opposites; till the accomplishment whereof, I shall humbly recommend this enlarged Plea in your Honors defence, to your Noble Patronage; who can pitch upon no better, nor readier means to support your declining Honor and Authority, or to re-indear your selves in the Peoples affections, than in these distracted, dangerous, stormy times, to ingage all your inte∣rest, power, activity, speedily to settle, secure Gods Glory, Truth, Worship, the publike Laws, Peace, Liberty, Safety of the Kingdom, against all open Opposers, and secret Undermi∣ners

of them; to unburthen the people of their long-conti∣nued, heavy Taxes, the Souldiers insolencies, free-quarters; to redress all pressing grievances, all oppressing arbitrary Com∣mittees, proceedings, contrary to the rules of Law and Iu∣stice; to right all grieved Petitioners (especially such who have waited at least seven years space at your doors for re∣parations) to relieve poor starved Ireland; raise up the al∣most lost honor, power, freedom, reputation of Parlia∣ments, by acting honourably, heroically like your selves, without any fear, favour, hatred or self-ends, by confining your selves, with the Commons House, to the antient bounds, rules of Parliamentary Jurisdiction, proceedings, and by endeavouring to excel all others as farr in Iustice, Goodness and publike resolutions, as you do in Greatness and Autho∣rity. Which that you may effectually perform, as it is the principal scope of this Plea for your Lordships; (which whether you stand, fall, or by way of Remitter, recover your antient rights again, after a violent discontinuance of them for a season, will remain as a lasting Monument to all Posterity of your undubitable just Right to sit and judge in all English Parliaments) So it shall be the constant prayer of,

From my Study in Lincolns Inne,
7. Junii 1647.
