


YOUR HONOURS earnest desires expressed in the premised Order, inevitably engaging me to com∣pile and publish to the World, A compleat History of the famous Tryall, of the late decapitated Arch∣bishop of Canterbury; I have, without other motives, in Obedience thereunto (with as much Expedition as my many other distracting Occasions, and the Vast∣nesse of the Work would permit) finished the First Part thereof; (which I here humbly tender to Your Honourable Pa∣tronage and Acceptance) comprising, The severall Orders, Arti∣cles, and Parliamentary Proceedings against him, from his Originall Im∣peachment till his Triall; together with, the Commons Various Evi∣dence; his severall Answers to it; and their Replies upon them, in main∣tenance of the First Generall Branch of their Charge of High Treason against him: to wit; His Trayterous Endeavours to alter, & subvert Gods true Religion by Law established among us; to introduce Popish Superstition and Idolatry in liew thereof; and to reconcile the Church of England to the Church of Rome, by sundry Jesuiticall Stratagems: The guilt of which black Execra∣ble Charge (wherein he most of all protested, and endeavoured to clear his pretended Innocency, both during his Triall at the Bar, and at his Death on the Scaffold, as that which did most nearly concern him in his function as an Arch-Prelate, and in his Religion as a Protestant,) was so abundantly evidenced, so firmly fixed upon his White Rochet by a various multipli∣city of unavoydable proofs, impregnable Demonstrations, (which all his Sophistry, Oratory, Subtilty, Protestations, could no wayes enervate or evade,) that it will stick fast upon him for Eternity, maugre all his own verball Apologies, during his life, or the Malignant Panegyricks, the scan∣dalous Relations of any Anti-parliamentall, or Prelaticall Sycophants since his death: Who in open affront of Your most memorable Exemplary Justice, upon this Arch-Traytor, (the very Sourse and Compendium of all our late miseries) have proclaimed him to Posterity, in their late lying Legends of his death, A most Glorious Martyr, (as the Papists did his most Tray∣terous Predecessor, Joannis de Aton. Constit. fol 149. 150. Antiquicates Ecclesiae Brit. and Godwin in his life, M. Fox Act, & Monu∣ments, p 2. 205. Becket) and already canonized him for A SAINT: perchance, because beheaded on Jan. 10. Les plus Grands du Berray rapporte∣rent au Roy, qu'il troubloit le re∣pose du publie, & qu'il S'em∣paroit contre toute la Justice de son domaine, &c. Il depublia la Bulledecernee par le Pape pour faire la guerre aux Albegiois auec tant de ze∣le & de fruict, que plusieurs a sa parole S'y croserent cou∣rageusement. La gurre eut une issue houreuse, car les Hereti∣ques furent tel∣lement deconfits qu'ils ne pur∣rent depuis se∣remetter on cam∣pagne, &c. Ri∣badeniera Flu∣res des Vies des Saincts p. 124. Saint Williams day, the Popish Arch∣bishop of Bourges in France; as great a disturber in his time, of that King∣domes publike peace, and course of Justice; yea, as grand an Incendiary of the bloody Wars against the Albigenses & French Protestants, as this Archbi∣shop was of our Kingdoms tranquility, its publike Justice; and stirrer up of

the War against the Scots; yet for all this enrolled in the Red Calen∣der of Romish Saints.
There have lately come unto my hands two Oxford Pamphlets; the one intituled: A true Relation of the Death of the most Reverend Father in God, William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, upon Tower hill, January, 10. 1644. (First Printed at Oxford, and since at Bristol, Anno 1644.) Which begins thus:
On Fryday, Jan. 10. THE REBELS MARTYRED the most Reverend Father in God, William Lord Archbishop of Canter∣bury upon Tower hill, after they had kept him prisoner above four years: And then relating his speech and Prayer on the Scaffold, it concludes in these words: Thus dyed the KINGS, and the CHURCHES Note. MARTYR; a man of such Integrity, Learning, Devotion, and Courage, as had he lived in the Primitive times, they would have given him another name: whom though the cheated multitude were taught to misconceive, (for these honoured him) yet impartiall posterity will know how to value him, when they hear the Rebels sentenced him the very same houre that they voted down the Liturgy of the Church of England; whose innocency cryes to heaven for Vengeance, upon the heads of these destroyers, who pile MURTHER upon Murther to fortifie their Covenant, that upon this gene∣ration may come all the RIGHTEOUS BLOOD, from him whose blood was first shed, to the pulling down this great Pillar of our Church; which if you con∣sider, is THE MOST GROUNDLES, MALITIOUS, SOLEMNE STUDIED MURTHER THAT EVER WAS COMMITTED IN THIS WRET∣CHED Note. ISLAND.
The later Pamphlet Imprinted at Oxford, of the same Subject, dated as the former, (inscribed; A briefe Relation of the Death, and Sufferings of the most Reverend and Renouned Prelate, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, with a more perfect Coppy of his Speech and other passages n the Scaffold, than hath been hitherto Imprinted;) thus blazons this Arch∣traytors Innocency, merits, sufferings. Page 14. 15. 25. He that had so long lived a Con∣fesser (a Popish Confessor if he please to the Duke of Buckingham and o∣thers) could not but think it release of misery to be made a MARTYR. He ascended the Scaffold with so brave a courage, such a cheerfull countenance, as if he had mounted rather to behold a Triumph than to be made a Sacrifice, and came not there to dye, but to be translated; and to say truth, it was no Scaffold but a Throne; a Throne whereon he was shortly to receive a Crown, even the most glorious Crown of MARTYRDOME: After which he stiles him, A glorious Martyr; his blood, Innocent blood; yea, thou extols his Innocency, and Canonizeth him for a Saint in a Poeticall Elegie, especially in these ensuing lines.
—Through the hand
Of base detraction practise to defame
Thy spotlesse Virtues, yet impartiall fame
Shall do thee all just honour, and set forth
To all succeeding times thy matchlesse worth;

No Annalls shall be writ, but what relate
Thy happy influence, both on Church and State;
Thy zeal to publike Order, thy great parts
For all affairs of weight; thy love to Arts;
And to our shame and his great glory tell,
For whose dear sake, by whose vile hands he fell.
A death so full of Merits, of such price,
To God and man so sweet a sacrifice,
As by good Church-Law may his name prefer,
To a fixt Rubrick in the Calender.
And let this silence the pure Sects complaint, Note.
If they make Martyrs, we may make a SAINT, &c.
And not onely these Anonymous Pamphleters, but King Charles himself, who not long before had given him an ample Pardon, as a Traytor, under his great Seal of England, forgetting what he had done herein, doth in his own See the Kings Cabi∣net opened. Letter to the Queen, dated Jan. 14. 1644. cry up this head∣lesse Arch-bishop for a Martyr; yea, deems his blood so meritorious, so Innocent; that being totally the Parliaments, he beleeves it no presumption, hereafter to hope that Gods hand of Justice, (for the Parliaments just effu∣sion of his blood) must be (thence-forth) heavier upon them and lighter upon him and his Anti-parliamentary Partie, looking now upon their cause having passed by their faults. If his blood so lately shed by the axe of Justice be already become so meritorious, as to ballance the scales of Gods Justice in this manner; we may justly fear it will in few years more grow into as great esteem at Court, as Thomas of Beckets his Tray∣terly predecessors blood, did in former times among the Prelatical Po∣pish party; who attributed more efficacy to it then to Christs, and therfore presumed most blasphemously to pray to Christ himselfe to save them, by his own, but this Arch-Traytors blood, in this distick.
Officium Bea∣tae Mariae se∣cundum Vsum Sarum, Paristis 1919. p. 12. Bishop Jewels Defence of the Apology, part 2. c. 18. Di∣vis. 1. p. 295. 296. Tu per Thomae Sanguinem quem prote impendit
Fac nos Christe scandere quo Thomas ascendit.
But as the manifold glorious Victories, miraculous Successes of the Parliaments Forces since his Execution, have experimentally frustrated this his Majesties groundlesse Hope and Presumption, that Gods hand of Iu∣stice would be heavier upon the Parliaments Party, but lighter upon him and his, by reason of his crying blood, it being never lifted up so extraordinarily, so visibly for the Parliament before, nor falling so heavily upon the King and his Partizans; as since his beheading, and the Kings overconfident relying on the Merits of the Blood of such a Traytot for successe in his warrs against the Parliament; So, I presume, the setting forth of this Hi∣story of his Tryall, will soon Un-Martyr, Un-Saint, Uncrown this Arch-Imposter, by presenting him in his Proper Colours, stript of all Disguises, and render him so desperately criminall, so transcendently Trayterous in all respects, especially in point of undermining the Protestant Religi∣on, wherein himself and his Parasites have endeavoured most of all to vin∣dicate his Innocency, that all Generations will unaminously pronounce

him, the Archest Enemy to, the most active universall Underminer of the Protestant Religion established among us, that ever breathed in English ayre; and readily acknowledge, that no Ecclesiasticall Annalls ever recor∣ded his Paralell, for multiplicity of desperate cunning Jesuiticall Stra∣tagems secretly to subvert that Orthodox Reformed Religion which him∣selfe pretended to professe; nay, propagate and patronize.
It is far below the Magnanimity of my Spirit in the least measure ma∣liciously to blast the Fame, or revengefully to triumph over, to trample upon the Ashes of a Vanquished Enemy, whom I never dreaded, or slande∣red all his life, forgave and pittied both before and at his death; the Memory of whose Capital crimes should have expired with his breath, and been eter∣nally buried in oblivion with his Corps, by me, had not Your Honors superiour Commânds necessitated me to revive, record them to Posterity since his death (as well as to give them in evidence at his Tryall,) for Vindication of Your untainted Justice, and the Common Good, to deter all others in fu∣ture Ages from the like Trayterous Practises. If any therefore deem my Expressions, concerning him or his actions, over-lavish, malicious, or re∣vengefull, let them impartially compare them with his Criminall Offen∣ces here recorded, (which they hardly equalize, or fall far short of) and then if they warrant not the harshest Epithites, the blackest Characters here bestowed on him, let me eternally bear the blame and shame: but if they be scarce proportionate to his Treasons, his grand Misdemeanors, (which must be blazoned and set forth in language suitable to their transcendent Hainousnesse, not minced, not extenuated by over-diminutive expressions) I hope none will or can be so injurious, as to charge me with Calumny, much lesse Scurrility or Revenge, who never yet particularly de∣manded, received the least farthing Recompence from him or any of his, for all the barbarous Cruelties, Oppressions, Imprisonments great Losses, Dam∣mages I sustained, eight years space together, onely for discovering, opposing, countermining (to the utmost of my skill and power) all Po∣pish Plots, Innovations, Proceedings of this Arch-Prelate and his confede∣rates to undermine our Religion, re-establish Popery among us by de∣grees, and set up an arbitrary Papall power, the better to effect the same: the onely reall cause of all my former sufferings.
Yet three things there are, I foresee may possibly be objected against me by his complices, which need some Answer to prevent their causelesse Calumnies.
The first is, That in this History of his Tryall, I have at large inserted some particular papers, passages, (especially in the Catalogue of the Armi∣nian, Object. 1. Popish Errours, vented in, and of the clauses against them purged out of late new Printed Books) which were not actually, or at least fully read at the Lords Bar; Therefore I am guilty of partiality and unfaithful∣nesse in relating the Evidence given in against him at the Bar, by these additions to it.
To which I answer. First, that all the Evidence, Passages here at large recited (with many more) were prepared and ready by me at the Bar; yea Answ. 1. the effect of every Paper, passage here recorded, was in generall terms ope∣ned, pressed at the tryall, though not all fully read and particularly urged

for want of time: which I have here more largely inserted for clearing the truth, and satisfying the Reader, the most materiall passages being onely read at large, the rest of like nature but briefly referred to in gene∣rall to avoyd prolixity, and husband time.
Secondly, that I have largely recorded none of these Passages here by way of New Additionall Evidence, requiring answer, but onely for illu∣stration or corroboration of the old, fully given in and read.
Thirdly, the Catalogue of new licensed Popish Doctrines, and of the Purgations of Passages against Popery, Arminianisme, arbytrary govern∣ment, Prophanesse, &c. wherein most of the new Additions, not fully read, are inserted, make but one intire charge, not divers; and had but one generall Answer, defence given to them by the Arch-bishop; to wit, that they were not licensed nor purged out by himself, but only by his and the Bishop of Londons Chaplains, who must answer for them, and that they concerned not him: therefore these Additions making no new charge, and receiving all the selfe same Answer & defence, no indifferent persons can justly taxe me with partiality or injustice for inserting them into this History, for the fuller discovery of his Popish intentions in this kinde, (which want of time prevented us to display so fully at the Bar, as was desired, where we had each particular ready in writing proved upon oath) it being not onely excusable, but justifiable, yea necessary in a History of this nature, which so much concernes Religion and the publick.
The second thing, which perchance will be alleadged against me, is; Object. 2. That I have not so fully, so punctually related the Arch-bishops severall Answers and Replyes to all the particulars of his charge as he uttered them viva voce at the Bar in his particular and generall Defences (who spake as much for himselfe as the wit of man could invent, in so bad a cause) and that I have made some few Additions to the Commons sodain Replications to his Answers.
To this I answer: First, that I used all possible diligence, both by friend∣ly Answ. 1. intreaty and the power of Authory, to procure the Archbishops own Notes of his Answers and Defences to the Commons charge, or authen∣tick Coppies of them, from Mr. Dell his Secretary and others; that so I might Print them verbatim to avoyd all calumnies; but I could obtain neither from them; M Dell protesting, that neither he, nor any other to his knowledge, had the originalls nor any coppyes of them; and that he belee∣ved, his Lord did burn all the Notes of his answers and defence before his death, of purpose to prevent their publication after it. So that if I have casually o∣mitted or mistaken any part of his Answers or Defence, himself or his own creatures must beare the blame, not I; who have as faithfully, as exactly as I could supplyed this defect of his own Papers, out of the Notes of o∣thers and mind own fragill memory, relating all his Answers, Defences, as neer as possible in his own termes, and pressing them fully for his best advantage, without the least wilfull omission or diminution of any one particular of moment.
Secondly, For the Commons subitane Replyes to his Answers, I have rehearsed them as neer as I could in their own termes; and made no Ad∣ditions thereunto, but onely of some Authors testimonies concerning the

unlawfulness of Images, Crucifixes, Altars, the placing and rayling in Al∣tars and Lords Tals altarwise against the Eastwall, & the consecration of Churches and Chapples; wherein the Archbishop much abused his Au∣ditory with empty flashes and confident pretences of antiquity, which Mr Serjeant Wilde at large refuted by the Testimony of Fathers & other orthodox Writers, and Mr Nicholus too, as far as the shortnesse of time permitted; to the substance of whose replies in these particulars I have added very little, but only for learning sake and the fuller clearing of the truth.
If any shall further object, that J have related his Charge intirely to∣gether in one continued Discourse, but his Answers & the Commons Re∣plies Object. 3. thereto in fractions; not in one continued Discourse, as they were delivered each day severally at the Bar, and summed up at last in the Lords and Commons House.
I answer, it is truth: and I did it for these Reasons. First, to avoyde Prolixity, & tedious Repetitions of the self-samethings: For had I reci∣ted Answ. his severall Answers, Defences & the Cōmons Replies to them as they were made at the Bar each day by themselves; and then repeated his ge∣nerall Answers, Defences in the Lords and Commons House, and Mr Brownes Reply thereto distinctly by themselves, I should have repea∣ted the selfe-samethings, with very little variation, three or four times over to no purpose; whereas now I have contracted the summe of all his Answers, Defences to each particular Charg & Proof with the Com∣ons Replies thereto into one, to eschew Prolixity and Tautologies: 2ly, I did it to prevent confusion; and for clearer Discovery of the truth, the pertinency of the evidence given in against him in each Particular: For had I contracted all his Answers, Defences into one, and represented them in one intire continued Discourse by themselves; and then have subjoyned the Commons Replies unto them intirely together, the Rea∣der could never have clearly discovered the frivilousnes, falsenes, or im∣pertinency of his severall Answers to each particular charge, or the strength of the Commons Replies thereto; nor yet so well have observed, to what particulars he gave answer, to what not; whereas now by this Perspicuous Method I have followed, in reciting his Particular Answers and Defence distinctly to each Branch of his Charge and the Evidence brought to prove it, and then annexing the Commons Replies thereunto; the Readers may with ease and delight (by comparing the Charge, Proofes, Answers, Defence and Replies together) most clearly disco∣ver the truth, weight of each Charge and Proof; the weaknesse, false∣nesse, defects, and insufficiency of all his Answers; the satisfactorines of the Commons Replies, and his undoubted Guiltinesse of all the parti∣culars charged on him. Thirdly, the Archbishop alledged sundry things in his particular Answers and Defences each day, which he omitted in his generall Defences in both Houses; and added some things in his Gene∣rall Defences, which he omitted in his particular; by reason whereof I was necessitated to collect all his scattered Answers, Defences to each particular Charge into one, for his better advantage, and the Commons Replies thereto. Which being thus compacted together, without inter∣position

of any heterogenius matter in their proper places, for the pre∣mised reasons necessitating me to this method; no rationall man can just∣ly taxe me for it, as being no wayes injurious to the Archbishops cause, nor tending to his disadvantage.
These Objections from the Arch-bishops Prelaticall partie being removed, there are two things more, wherein Your Honours and the World may justly demand some satisfaction, to exempt me from all caus∣lesse censures.
First, you may justly inquire the Reasons; why this History of the Arch-bishops Tryall, hath stuck so long in my hands before its publica∣tion, seeing it was expected many moneths since?
Secondly, why it comes forth by parcels onely, not compleat and intire, after so long an expectation of the whole tryall and procee∣dings?
To the former demand, I answer: First, that this task was by speci∣all Order, originally imposed upon those Members of the Commons House, that managed the Evidence, not on me: who totally declining it, some four Moneths after the Triall and above 2 Moneths after the Exe∣cution, this work was delegated by the Commons unto me; at which time most of the Papers, Notes, Books, Evidences, used at his tryall, were laid aside and dispersed into severall mens hands: whereby much time was spent before I could recollect and marshall them into Order, to digest this History out of them. Secondly, since the assignment of this task unto my care, I have been almost every day taken up with publike im∣ployments for the State, at the Committee of Accounts, and elsewhere, be∣sides the dayly avocations of my particular calling (my onely support since our unhappy Wars) so as I have had few vacant hours to compile it, but those I have borrowed from my naturall rest, whiles others have bin sleeping. Thirdly, I have since this undertaking, been necessitated to write & publish sundry other Impressions (uncapable of delay) in defence of the Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction of Parliaments, Civill Magistrates; and concerning Ecclesiasticall Censures and Church-Government, against Inde∣pendents, Anabaptists, others; yea to Vindicate the Parliaments just Pro∣ceedings, with mine own Innocency, against the seditious Anti-parlia∣mentary Libels, of that notorious impudent Libeller and Lyat, L. Col. Lil∣burn, who still See his late Libell intitu∣led, Innocency and Truth Ju∣stified. persevers in his trespasses, to the dishonour and scandall of publike justice. All which considered, I suppose Your Honours and others will easily beleeve, I wanted no diligence, but leisure onely for the speedier accomplishment of this work: wherein notwithstanding I have not been negligent, witnesse my publication of the Breviate of the Archbishops life, and of A necessary Introduction of his Tryall, (amoun∣ting to a large Volume) sufficient to assoyle me from the least imputa∣tion of idlenesse or negligence in this very subject. Fourthly, Adde hereunto the voluminousnesse of this First Part of the Archbishops Tryal onely, with the variety of the matter, charges therein conteined; the trouble I had in digesting, the Labour in compiling, writing, re∣veiwing, fitting it for and Correcting, Revising it at the Presse, with the

coldnesse of this last winters Vacation, when neither pen, nor Presse could worke, for sundry weekes together: and compare this with the former reasons (and the Printers slacknesse which hath delayed it very much) and then I doubt not but your Honours and all others will rather wonder, how I could possibly compleat this Voluminous Part so speedily, then question or quarrell with me, why it comes forth so slowly? it being work enough to have swallowed up all my time since the Order, had I had no other imployments to divert me.
To the second demand, I must returne this Answer: First, that I Answ. 2. published this History thus in parcells, for want of time to compleat and print it all together in due season. Secondly, that the long expecta∣tion of this Tryall, and mens calling for it every day, induced me to sa∣tisfie their longing appetites, with these First-fruits of it, concer∣ning Religion; (the thing most looked, most inquired after, both at home and abroad) till the full crop be ripened for the harvest, which will require some warmer moneths to concoct it, ere it can attain to maturity. Thirdly, The great Charge of the Stationer in Printing this first Part, (the voluminousnesse and price whereof hath, I fear, out-swelled most Chapments purses in these Indegent times) with the serious considera∣tion of the incertainty of my life and future opportunity, in these dayes of War and mortality, to finish the remainder of this Worke (which God willing I intend to compleat and publish with all convenient speed) have induced me, rather to gratifie your Honours and the World with these First fruits for the present, then to hazard the depriving you of it, or the whole History, if deferred till all were compleated.
Having answered these demands, I shall now crave liberty and your Noble Patience to raise some profitable Observations from the Subject matter of this History, not unworthy your Honours saddest thoughts.
If you consider the meane obscure Parentage of this Arch-Prelate, his grand Preferments, the great mischiefes he did in Church, State, and his Execution after all; it may suggest these profitable contemplations to your minds.
First, That God by his power and all-disposing providence can raise up Persons of the lowest place or Parentage, to the highest Pinacles of worldly Honour: according to that in the 1 Sam. 2. 8. and Psal. 118. 7, 8. He raiseth up the Poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the Beggar from the dunghill, to set them among the Princes, and make them inherite the Throne of glory.
2. That God can make the most vile and despicable persons in the world, grand Pests or Punishments to whole Kingdomes, Nations, when he pleaseth; Dan. 11. 21, 22. 1 Kings 11. 26. c. 12. 2. &c. c. 13. & 14. (even as he made Frogs, Lice, Caterpillers (the vilest creatures) a very sore plague to King Pharaoh and the whole Kingdome of Egypt, Exod. c. 7. 8. and 9.
3. That persons sodainly advanced from the lowest degree of men, to the highest pitch of honour, proove commonly the most insolent, violent, domineering, imperious, tyrannicall, and mischievous of all

such preferments, being unable to weld or mannage the greatnesse of their fortune. See Mat. 24. 48. to the end, 2 Chro. 10. 8. to 16. Eccles. 10. 1. 6, 7. Psal. 73. 6. to 13. Iob. 21. 7. to 20.
Fourthly, That grand preferments without great grace to mannage, improve them to Gods glory, and the common good, are greater judge∣ments than blessings, and for the most part, the immediate occasions of mens greatest ruin by their evill Councells, or ill managing of their greatnesse to the publike prejudice, Ps. 73. 3. to 21. Iob 21. 7. &c. Psal. 37. 1. 2. Ester c. 3. to 8.
Fifthly, That mischievous Councellours and wicked Instruments in Church, State; though never so great in power or Favour with their Princes for a season, seldome escape condigne exemplary punishment at the last: and that no greatnesse whatsoever is able finally to pro∣tect mischevous Grandees, from the hand of publike justice: Ester 7. 1 Kings 2. 28. to 35.
Let all great ones then seriously consider this, and remember Canter∣bury, lest they dye and fall like him.
If we again observe his Preferments, Actions, Proceedings and mi∣serable end as a Clergy man, we may raise these profitable observations from this History of his Tryall, which all Prelates, Clergy men may do well to consider, is oft as they thinke of Canterbury.
First, that when Clergy men cast aside or neglect their callings, and turne meer Statesmen, they commonly prove the very worst and most oppressive Persons of all others. Matth. 5. 13. 2. Thess. 2. 3.
Secondly, That one over potent Prelate backed with a Kings Royall power and favour, is able to unsetleReligion where it is best established, and embroyle, ruine the most flourishing Churches, Kingdomes in few yeares space. 2 Thess. 2. 4. 9, 10, 11, 12. Revel. 13. 2. to 18.
Thirdly, That there are no such desperate underminers, persecutors, suppressors of Gods true Religion, Saints, people, as over potent wic∣ked Prelates: And that dissembling Potent Protestant Prelates, Clergy∣men are greater Enemies to the Protestant Religion for the most part, then professed Papists: 2 Thess. 2. 4. 9, 10, 11, 12. Revel. 13. Matth. 24. 5. 11. 24. Acts 20. 22. 30. Iohn 6. 70, 71.
Fourthly, That the foulest Practises, Conspiracies against the Pro∣testant Religion may be and usually are guilded over with the most spe∣cious pretences for its Advancement. And therefore it concernes us al∣wayes to weigh and judge of men by their Actions, not their Protestati∣ons: Matth. 7. 15. Rev. 13. 2. to 18.
Fifthly, That the most hopefull designes, the most successefull Plots, Proceedings against the true Religion and Saints of God, do alwayes prove abortive in conclusion; and that the prevailing contrivances, suc∣cesses of many yeares travell in this kinde are usually, by a divine over-ru∣ling providence, oft times, like so many Cobwebs, swept down, dashed in pieces, and wholy disappointed in a moment, when they are nearest accomplishment in all humane probability Ps. 73. 18, 19, 20. Psal. 21. 11, 12. Gen. 11. 3. &c. Exod. 14. 19 to 31. Esay. 8. 9. 10.
Sixtly, That God in his infinite wisedome and justice can turne all the Plots, Coutrivances of wicked men to ruine his truth, Church, peo∣ple,

to be the proper immediate instruments of their contrivers ruine. (He taketh the wise in their own craftinesse, &c. Job. 5. 12, 13, 14.) and to the advancement of his Gospel, Cause, people, as he did in the cases of Ioseph, and Mordecay.
Seventhly, That great Ecclesiasticall or temporall Preferments and Court Favours, seldome make men better but worser then before: Deut. 6. 10, 11, 12. c. 8. 10. 19. 2 Chron. 26. 16. c. 31. 25, 26.
Eightly, That those who are Superstitious or Presumptuous in their life time, are seldome penitent, but for the most part obstinate, sens∣lesse or desperate at their deaths; and have commonly a greater care to support their crackt credits, by justifying or denying their evill actions, then to save their souls, by confessing or bewailing their guilt.
This was the condition of this Arch-Prelate who lived to survive and behold the downfall of all his Popish Plots, Innovations, Superstiti∣ons, Canons, the High Commission and Prelacy it selfe, the grand I∣dolls he endeavoured to set up and perpetuate among us; Yet all the Su∣perstitions, Idolatries, Romish Errors, Tyrannous oppressions he had maintained, practised in his life, he most obstinately justified, without the least remorse, or acknowledgment of guilt, of error, both at his Tryall and Death. Yea though he were so conscious to himselfe of all the crimes wherewith he was charged, that he procured a Pardon from Oxford un∣der the Kings own hand and great Seale, soon after the beginning of his Tryall (which made him so bold, so peremptory at the Barr;) yet lest it should imply or argue a guiltinesse in him, he chose rather to conceal this Pardon, and stand upon his plenary justification, till after his con∣demnation, then produce or plead it; not sending it to your Honors till he was ordered to be hanged at Tyburne: upon which occasion he acquain∣ted both Houses with it, to deprecate and exchange that punish∣ment for a more Honourable kind of execution on the Scaffold at Tower hill, where his head was chopped off, instead of a Hanging at Tyburne. And although all ingenious men would have imagined, that the blood of the many Soules he had starved, seduced, destroyed all his time by sup∣pressing preaching, suspending, silencing, censuring, banishing godly Ministers, Lecturers without any reall Cause, pressing the Booke of Sports, introducing Popish, Arminian Soul-destroying Errors, Super∣stitions, Innovations, Prophanations; with the blood of the bodies of divers thousands shed in England, Scotland, Ireland, by our un∣happy Warrs (originally occasioned and stirred up by him) might have been prevalent enough to relent his Adamantine heart, and draw forth teares of repentance, of compunction from his eyes and soule, yet such was his desperate Obstinacy & Impenitency on the scaffold, that he never so much as confessed or bewayled at his death these bloody crimes, nor any of those Trayterous Offences for which he was justly condemned; but with a brow of brasse and heart of stone, impudently justified his In∣nocency, nay Crimes to the utmost, without demanding Pardon of them from God or Man, though he tooke this ensuing Pardon from the King (a sufficient evidence of his guilt) which I have Verba∣tim transcribed out of the Originall passed under the Great Seale at Oxford.

CHARLES R.
CAROLVS dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae Rex fidei Defensor, &c. Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint salu∣tem. Sciatis quod Nos pietate moti, de gratia Nostra speciali ac ex certa scientia & mero motu Nostris, Pardonavimus, remisimus & re∣laxavimus, ac per praesentes Nobis, Haeredibus & Successoribus No∣stris pardonamus, remittimus & relaxamus Willielmo Laud, Clerico, Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, seu quocunque alio nomine, cognomine, ti∣tulo, cognitione sive additione nominis, artis, loci, vel locorum praefa∣tus Williamus Laud censetur, vocetur, nuncupetur, sive cognoscatur, aut nuper aut ante hac censebatur, nuncupabatur, sive cognitus fuit, Omnes & omnimodas PRODITIONES, tam majores quam minores, & Note. crimina lesae Majestatis quaecunque; & omnes & omnimodas Misprisiones et concelamenta Proditionum quarumcunque, per praefatum Willielmum Laud solum, vel cum aliquo alio, sive aliquibus aliis, qualicunque aut vbicunque, aut in aliquo modo vel in tempore factus, perpetratas vel com∣missas, nec non omnes & omnimodas Felonias quascunque, tam per vel contra Communem Legem Regni Nostri, quam per vel contra quaecun∣que Statuta, Actus, Ordinationes sive Provisiones ejusdem Regni Nostri, et accessaria quarumcunque Feloniarum, & fugam & fugas superinde factas, nec non omnes & omnimodias Subvertiones & enervationes Legum, et omnes & omnimodas Conspirationes, Confederationes, Consilia, Auisamen∣ta, Note. Offensas & alia malefacta quecunque per praefatum Willielmum Laud solum, vel cum aliquo alio, sive aliquibus aliis in Subuertione aut enerva∣tione Legum, aut assumendo Regalem Potestatem aut Authoritatē aliqualiter aut vbicunque; aut in aliquo modo aut tempore habita, facta, daa, com∣missa aut perpetrata: nec non omnes & omnimodas Offensas, Crimina, Trans∣gressiones & alia malefacta quaecunque de Praemunire, aut communiter vocata aut cognita per nomen de Praemunire, aut pro quo vel pro quibus judicium, executio, paena aut foristactura in casu de Praemunire, sive per aliquod Statutum de Provisoribus factum & editum, reddenda, exequen∣da, infligenda aut incurrenda sunt aut essent, aut fuerint per praefatum Willielmum Laud solum, vel cum aliquo alio sive aliquibus aliis, vbicun∣que aut in aliquo modo aut tempore perpetrata, facta aut commissa, et accessaria praedictarum Offensarum, Criminum, Transgressionum et Malefactorum, & eorum alicujus & aliquorum; Nec non omnes & om∣nimodas Confederationes, Conspirationes illicitas, Convocationes & Assem∣blationes illicitas, verborum prolationes, misprisiones, Jurisdictionum usur∣pationes & exercitia illicita, legum fractiones, illicitas Juramentorum impo∣sitiones, & ministrationes, contemptus, negligentias, legum violationes, mala & illicita Consilia & aduisamenta, & omnes alias offensas, crimina, malefacta & transgressiones quaecunque per quodcunque nomen aut per quae∣cunque nomina idem vel eadem appellata, vocata & nuncupata sunt, essent aut fuerint per praefatum Willielmum Laud solum, vel cum aliquo alio aut cum aliquibus aliis, qualicunque aut vbicunque, aut in aliquo modo aut in aliquo tempore habita, facta, perpetrata aut commissa; et omnia et singula eadem aut eorum aliquod vel aliqua tangentia vel concernentia, licet idem Willielmus Laud, de, aut pro praemissis, aut eorum aliquo vel ali∣quibus in Curia nostra Parliamenti, aut in aliqua alia Curia, sive aliquibus Note.

Curiis, aut coram aliquo judice vel persona, aut aliquibus judicibus aut perso∣nis, aut in aliquo modo aut aliqua via quibuscunque impetitus, judicatus, rectatus, appellatus, adjudicatus, condemnatus, vtlagatus, convictus vel at∣tinctus existet aut non existet, aut impetiri, judicari, rectari, appellari, adjudicari, condemnari, vtlagari, convinci, aut attingi contigerit in futuro. Et omnes & singulas utlagarias in aut versus praefatum Willielmum Laud ratione vel occatione praemissorum vel eorum alicujus & aliquorum promulgatas aut promulgandas; Ac etiam omnia & singula judicia, ex∣ecutiones, paenas mortis, paenas corporales, imprisonamenta, paenalitates, foris∣facturas, infamias, irregularitates, defectus seu inhabilitates quaecunque in aut versus praefatum Willielmum Laud ratione vel occatione praemissorum aut eorum aliquorum vel alicujus reddita, facta, habita, adjudicata, aut im∣posita, aut imposterum reddenda, fienda, habenda, adjudicanda, impo∣nenda aut exequenda; Nec non omnes et omnimodas sectas, querelas, im∣petitiones & demandas quascunque quae Nos versus praefatum Willielmum Laud pro praemissis, sive aliquo praemissorum habemus, habuimus, seu in fu∣turo habere poterimus, aut Haeredes vel Successores Nostri versus ipsum pro praemissis vel aliquo praemissorum habere possint in futuro; Ac Sectam pa∣cis Nostrae, quae ad Nos versus praefatum Willielmum Laud spectat vel pertinet, sive pertinere poterit, ratione praemissorum sive eorum alicujus vel aliquorum, Et firmam Pacem eidem Willielmo Laud inde concedi∣mus per praesentes. Pardonamus etiam, remittimus & relaxamus per prae∣sentes pro Nobis Heredibus & Successoribus nostris praefato Willielmo Laud, omnia et singula deperdita & forisfacturas quorumcunque bonorum et catallorum, terrarum, possessionum tenementorum & hereditamentorum suorum Nobis occasione praemissorum aut eorum alicujus qualicunque forisfacta, sive deperdita, in quorumcunque sive cujuscunque manibus aut possessionibus jam existent aut existere debent. Et eadem bona, catalla, terras, possessiones tenementa, et hereditamenta praefato Willielmo Laud damus & restitui∣mus per praesentes pro Nobis, Haeredibus et Successoribus Nostris; Ha∣bendum, tenendum, gaudendum & possidendum eidem Willielmo de dono Nostro absque Compoto, sive aliquo alio inde Nobis, Haeredibus sive Successoribus Nostris reddendo, solvendo, vel faciendo. Nolentes, quod idem Willielmus Laud per Nos, Justiciarios, Escheatores, Vicecomi∣tes aut alios Ballivos, seu Ministros nostros ratione vel occatione praemissorum sive eorum alicujus molestetur, vexetur, perturbetur, in aliquo seu gravetur. Et ulterius de vberiori gratia Nostra, ac ex certa scientia & mero motu Nostris volumus, et per praesentes pro Nobis, Hae∣redibus & Successoribus Nostris, concedimus, quod hae Literae nostrae Patentes, ac omnia & singula in eisdem contenta, bonae, firmae, validae et in Lege effectuales stabunt et existent, et abhinc nullo modo vacuae devene∣rint: Et quod allocabuntur omnibus Curiis Nostris, et alibi infra Regnum Nostrum Angliae, absque aliquo brevi seu vlteriori mandato seu warranto, li∣cet idem Willielmus Laud bonam & sufficientem securitatem de se be∣ne gerendo, juxta formam & effectum cujusdam Actus in Parliamento Domini Edwardi tertii quondam Regis Angliae, Progenitoris Nostri, anno Regni sui decimo tertio editi, non invenerit; dicto Actu de Anno decimo tertio regni dicti Edwardi tertii in aliquo Nonobstante. Et Non obstante Statutis in annis secundo, quarto, decimoquarto & Vicesimo septimo dicti Regis Edwardi tertii, & Statuto in anno decimo tertio Re∣gis

Ricardi secundi Praedecessoris Nostri edito, aut aliquo alio Statuto, Actu, provisione aut restrictione in contrarium praemissorum, aut eorum alicui quouismodo Nonobstante. In cujus rei testimonium has literas Nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Teste meipso APUD OXON, duo∣decimo die Aprilis, Anno Regni Nostri decimo nono.
By this Arch-Prelates embracing and the Kings granting of this large Universal Pardon, of all Treasons &c. himself his Prelaticall Partie, together with his Majestie and his Adherents of all sorts, are eternally concluded to plead his Innocency, proclaim him a Martyr, or Canonize him for a meritorious Saint, as they have done. Yea, his Majesties Royall care and serious endeavour to rescue such an Arch Traytor as He (impeached of High Treason and other grand Crimes by two whole Kingdomes) from the hands of common Justice, and the Supremest Judicatory in Parlia∣ment, by this Regall Charter of Pardon, when as he could not effect it by his Army Royall and force of Armes, discovers both His own unhappi∣nesse and our Kingdomes too in this, that he hath hitherto affected not on¦ly Treason, but Traytors to our Church and State, more then his faithfulest Parliament, or most loyall Subjects: which dangerous Errour, I pray God his Majesty after all his various miscarriages, disappointments, losses, by such mischevous persons, may now at last discern, reject, and never henceforth favourany such Traytors, ill Councellors, Prelates, or Archbishops more, whose extirpation root and branch, your Honours have already voted. And that no doubt upon just reasons, since the very best and learnedest in all the whole pack of Prelates, even the Primate of Armagh, Bishop Usher, (of whom most men have hitherto had a very honorable opinion, though a great servant and Instrument of Canterburies in Ireland, as ap∣peares by sundry originall Letters to him under his hand) hath extream∣ly degenerated in his Christian zeale for the Protestant Religion, even in his own bleeding Country since he turned Royalist and Cavalier; as appears by this testimony under the hand-writing of that valiant Noble Knight Sir Charles Coote; which for Poor dying Irelands sake (See the Irish Cabinet. to corroborate the late admirable discoveries from thence by the Popish Archbishop of Tuams Papers and others, surprised by this Sir Charles) I dare not conceal.
I SIR Charles Coote do hereby testifie, that being at Oxford the last Summer as one of the Agents for the Protestants of Ireland, and finding the Irish Popish Agents then to be very prevalent there, and the Archbishop of Armagh to be often present at the Debates concerning the businesse of Ire∣land, and conceiving him to have some power with his Majesty, I addressed my selfe to the said Archbishop, and besought him, that he would interpose his power with his Majesty in the behalfe of the Protestants; for if the Irish Agents obtained their desires, the Protestants in Ireland were destroyed and Popery would be introduced: to which the Arch-Bishop replyed; That was the intention, which he knew better then I did, and said, Note. WE MUST SUBMIT: Dated this 14. of Aprill. 1645.
CHARLES COOTE.
A very strange speech of a Saint-seeming Protestant Arch-Prelate. What? must we submit to the destruction of the Protestants in Ireland, and the introduction of Popery there, and not once oppose it? and will such an Arch-Prelate as he refuse to use his utmost interest in the Kings favour to withstand it, when desired? If this be the Doctrine of the zealous Lord

Primate of Ireland, that we must submit to the introducing of Popery there, (the projected design of the Primate and Metropolitan of all England and Ireland too, the better to accomplish it in England, as we have here and els∣where manifested) the God of heaven for ever deliver us from such an hypocriticall false Archiepiscopall generation of Vipers, whose heads and hopes of succession in both Kingdomes, we trust Your Honours have for ever cut off in the decapitation of this Archbishop of Canterbury, the very worst of al his Trayterous Predecessors, their crimes being all concentred in him; whose famous Triall, Judgement, Execution, shall eternize Your memorable Justice to posterity, and deter all other ambitious pragma∣ticall Clergy men, from treading in his fatall foot-steps: the sign of the Arch-bishops head, when seriously beheld, being as good, a Memento for wicked Prelates, Councellors, to scare them from his trayterous practises, as the sight of a corrupt Judges skin in Herodotus, nayled to the Tribunall, was to his successors, to deter them from bribery and injustice.
If I have done any acceptable service for Your Honourable Assembly and the Church of God, in pubilshing these first Fruits of my Obedience to Your just Desires, the favourable Acceptance of what I have already compo∣sed with much difficulty and lesse exactnesse then I desired, will be an incouragement to me (if God send life and leisure) to present Your Ho∣nours in due season with the remainder of this History. In the mean time I shall become a dayly Orator to the Throne of Grace, to make and continue Your Honourable Houses and Committees, a Jer. 31. 23. c. 50. 7. mountain of holinesse, an habitation of Justice; to Deut. 33. 21. execute the Justice of the Lord, Psal. 82. 3. to do Justice to the afflicted and needy, in ridding them out of the hands of the wicked; and to distribute equall speedy judgement to all oppressed ones who complain unto, and on all Delinquents justly convicted before Your Honours, without any respect of persons, or byasse of interest or affe∣ctions, according to the old inflexible rules of Law and Justice; that so no person whatsoever may have any occasion to take up the Prophets com∣plaint against You, (as Iohn Lilburn in his late Li∣bels; Englands Birth-right, with others. some have causlesly done) That Isa. 59. 4. 9. 14 Judgement is turned away backward, justice standeth a far off, and equity cannot enter, there is no judgement in their goings. I say 5. 7. We looked for judgement but behold oppression; for righteousnesse but behold a cry: Eccl 3. 16. Moreover we saw under the sun the place of judgement, that wickednesse was there; and the place of righ∣teousnesse, that iniquity was there: Isa. 1 21. It was full of Judgement, righteous∣nesse lodged in it heretofore, but now murderers and oppressers: Ier. 9. 22. Is there no Balm in Gilead? is there no Physitian there? why then is not the health of the daughter of our people recovered? But that al such fals clamours being whol∣ly silenced by Your care and justice, our whole Nation may unanimously trumpet forth these worthy prayses of your Houses, Committees, that Justice and Judgment are the Habitation of Your Throne (as they are of Ier. 9. 22. Gods) and that, like good King David, you all 2 Sam. 8. 15. do execute justice and judgment to all the people; judging them with just judgment, without wresting, perverting justice or respect of persons, and that which is altogether just do you (r) Deut. 16. 18. 19. 20. follow, Which will be Your Honours brightest Crown of glory, our King∣domes greatest security, our peoples most desireable Felicity; yea, is and shall be the Vote, the Prayer of

 Lincolns Inne,
Aprill 20, 1646.
