



YOUR Majesty may perchance, condemn me as guilty of a Solaecisme in Courtship, for that I formerly intituled. Your most Illu∣strious QUEEN-CONSORT (in my late Tractate of AVRVM REGINAE, dedicated to Her Highnesse) to a Le∣gal Right in possession to this most Antient ROYAL DU∣TY; and now presume to present Your Majesty (by way of Reversion after Your CONSORT) only with the Gleanings of some Records of that Subject, I have since discovered, and collected in this ADDITIONAL AP∣PENDIX.
Yet, being no Solaecisme or praeposterousnesse, but an orderly usual method in point of Law; the Lawes and Re∣cords of Your Realm, intitling Your QUEEN to the Primitive present possessory right of QUEEN-GOLD, and Your Majesty only to the uncollected Remaines and Ar∣rears thereof after Her Decease (whom God long preserve in life and health;) and that both in ENGLAND and IRELAND, as this old Record (I newly found) of Your Noble Predecessor KING HENRY the THIRD, dated in FRANCE, thus resolves.
Rot. Fran∣ciae 16 H. 3. m. 4. in Tui London. Hyber. Galfridus de Turvall Archid. Dublin. assignatus est ad recipiend. AURUM REGINAE quod ad eam pertinet de finibus HIBER∣NIAE. Et mandatum est eidem Galfrido, quod illud recipiat custo∣diendum ad opus ipsius REGINAE. Teste Rege apud Burdegal. 10 die Sept. Et mandatum est Iusticiario HIBERNIAE, quod illud ei habere faciat. Teste ut supra.
(Which is seconded by other Records Aurum Re∣ginae, p. 18.28, 29.46.145. elsewhere ci∣ted;) I therefore most humbly hope, and crave not only Your Majesties Royal Pardon of this imaginary Disorder, but likewise Your Gracious Acceptation of these Frag∣ments, which further evidence both of Your Majesties Old, Iust, Vnquestionable Rights to this GOLDEN FLOWER of YOUR CROWNS by multitudes of irre∣fragable Records. By vertue whereof Your Majestis may now as justly demand, receive, levy it of those Subjects, from whose voluntary Oblations, Fines it is due, without the least injustice or grievance, as any other branch of Your Revenues whatsoever; especially since the greatest part of this and other Your antient Crown-Revenues, have been much diminished by 17 Cr. . c. 20.12 Car. . ch. 24. two late Acts, abolishing all Fines for Knighthood, Wardships, Tenures, Licoses for Alienations, and Marriages of Wards, from which the rich∣est Veins of this Gold Mine, did formerly arise. If these Collections shall contribute any assistance to invest Your Majesties in the speedy future possession, percption of this over-long neglected Legal Revenue, (which no lapse of time can barr, or null, since Littleton, sect. 178. Hornes Mir∣rour des Justi∣ces, c. 3. Bit∣on f. 88. Nullm tmpu occurit Regi; and this Duty hath in all former ages been legally revi∣ved, claimed by and from the Mariage of every Queen, but not extinguished by the death of any;) it will be a suffici∣ent reward for the paines taken to recover it, by

