



Right Honourable,
YOur eminent zealous Sincerity, and incomparable Activity
both by Sea and Land in defence of our undermined, endan∣gered
Protestant Religion, Lawes, Liberties, Parlia∣ment,
Nation, against the many late secret Plots, and
open Hostilities of Antichristian Romish Vipers, who
for sundry yeares together, have desperately conspired, and
most vigorously prosecuted their utter extirpation, and now almost accom∣plished
this their infernall Designe, unlesse Gods infinite mercy (which
hath never hitherto beene wanting to us in times of greatest extremity) mi∣raculously
disappoint it; hath induced me to dedicate this Master-pece of
the Romanists, and Jesuites Iniquity, to your most Noble Patronage.
Wherein your Lordship may summarily behold the most horrid conspi∣racy
against our Reformed Religion, and the very life of the King our So∣veraigne
in case he comply not with them (as now alas He doth overmuch in
all things) that ever was discovered to the world: and clearly descry, who
have beene the reall originall Contrivers, Fomenters of all those late
bloody civill warres, which have suddenly transformed our peaceable, plea∣sant
delectable Edens of England, Ireland, Scotland, into most desolate ru∣full
Acheldamaes, yea Golgothaes, to the just amazement of our selves,
and astonishmet of all our Neighbour Nations: who now more lament
our present Infelicity, then ever their envied our pristine Tranquility.

It was an admirable act of Divine Providence, that a principall Actor
in this Conspiracy, sent from Rome to promote it, should out of remorse of
conscience prove the first Revealer of it to Sir William Boswell: But it
was a farre more wonderfull hand of God; that after this Plot had been
long concealed from publique knowledge by Canterbury, who smothered it;
hee should unexpectedly rayse Me up from my forraigne Close Prison of
Mount-Orgueil Castle in Jersey, (where Canterbury and his Confe∣derates
had intombed me sundry yeares, asPsal. 31. 12. Psal. 88. 4, 5. a dead man out of minde,
whom they remembred no more, reputing me among the number of those
that go down into the pit, and as one quite cut off by their hands, ne∣ver
likely to rise up again till the generall Resurrection;) and not only re∣duce
me with Honour and Triumph to my Native Countrey, restore me to
my former liberty, and Profession by the Parliaments impartiall Iustice; and
make my former and my fellow Sufferers unjust Censures, the ruine of the
Sarchamber, Highcommission, and Prelates, who censured us; but like∣wise,
beyond all expectation, send this Archprelate (though the Kings chief
Favourite) a Prisoner to the Tower of London, to which I was first of all
committed by his malice; and employ me to search his Papers there, where he
had formerly twice searched mine by his Instruments, and therehy make Me
both the Discoverer and Publisher of this second Gunpowder Plot to the
world, after a long concealment of it, (and that in a time most seasonable;)
which otherwise, in all probability, had never come to light.Rom. 11. 33. O the depth
of the Riches both of the wisdome and knowledge of God! how un∣searchable
are his Judgments, and his wayes past finding out!
This adorable strange Providence of theDan. 2. 22, 23. God of Heaven, (who revea∣leth
the deep and secret things, and knoweth what is in the darknesse, and
makes known unto us the Kings matter,) as it should ascertaine us, of his
future Protection of our Church and State against these Romish Con∣spirators,
whose trayterous Designes hee hath formerly most admirably dis∣covered,
and frustrated from time to time; So it should adde much dignity
and acceptation to this Discovory, and enlarge our gratulations to God
for it.
To his Blessing I shall in my Prayers recommend this Master-Piece, to∣gether
with your Lordships Person, and all your Heroick Endeavours for
our Religions, our Republikes security, and for ever remaine

