



HAving had the Honour on last Easter-Eve,
to present Your Majesty with a
Brief Account of my Service that
Week in the almost-accomplished
Great good-work of Paying and Dis∣banding
Your Majesties Army and Navy (which for
7. Months space ingrossed all my time from Morn∣ing
till Night, and oft till Midnight) to Your Maje∣sties
great content, and your Peoples ease from future
incessant heavy Monthly Taxes; I humbly crave
leave to prostrate at Your Royal feet my Easter-holy∣dayes
studies, to exonerate the Backs of hundreds,
and truly tender Consciences of thousands of Your
loyal, pious, sober-minded Protestant Subjects of

all Degrees, from some Exuberances in the Common-Prayer
Book, and superfluous Ceremonies, Vestments at∣tending
it, (which give them offence, and may well
be laid aside, if your Majesty and your approach∣ing
Parliament shall judge convenient) for our
Churches future peace, union in Gods publick worship,
in pursuance of Your Majesties late most Gracious,
Pious, Prudent, elegant Declaration to all Your Loving
Subjects of Your Kingdom of England and Dominion of
Wales, concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, which gave
Life and Birth to this Publication.
It is very observable, that albeit theSurius Concil. Tom 1. p. 218, 251, 381, 382. Tom 2. p. 588, 589. Tom. 4 p. 45. Bellarmine De Romano Pontif▪ & de Concilii, l. 2. c. 2. Geg▪ de Valentia Com. Theolog. Tom 3. p. 247. Dr. Iohn Whites Way to the true Church, Sect. 17 p. 45. and Defence of the Way, c. 47, 48▪ Popes of
Rome, and their Flatterers, hold themselves infallible
in their Chair, and their Church, Councils inerrable,
yet they all accord, that their Publike Missals, Li∣turgies,
though made, confirmed by their joynt ad∣vice
with greatest care and diligence, are amendable,
alterable upon just occasions. Witnesse their late
Council ofSessio 22 De∣cretum de obser∣vandis & evi∣tandis in Cele∣bratiene Missae, Sarius Tom. 4. Concil. p. 962. Trents Decree for the correction, amend∣ment
of their formerly established Catechism, Missal,
Breviary; and the subsequent amendations of them,
and institution of A NEW MASSE BOOK, by
Pope Pius the 5. with the advice of Learned men,
expressed in his Bull dated at Rome July 1557. prae∣fixed
to Missale Romanum, ex Decreto Sacro-sanctii
Concilii Tridentini RESTITUTUM; Pii 5. Pon∣tificis
Maximi jussu editum, printed at Rome that
year: enjoyned by that Bull, to be universally ob∣served,
without any subsequent addition, alteration, or
mutation, under pain of his Papal indignation: Yet
notwithstanding by another Bull of his own, dated
at Rome 17 December 1570. beginning with this

memorable Clause;Ad hoc nos Deus unxit oleo laetitiae ac haereditatis suae par∣ticipes effecit, ut ad ipsius Sacerdotium vocai tanquam Aaron, non solum ea quae ad divinum cultum pertinent sa∣lobriter disponamus; Verim etiam ea quae aliquando per Nos statuta suerant, salubrius mode∣remur, ac alis desuper disp na∣mus, prout rerum & persona∣rum qualitate pensata, conspi∣cimus in Domino salubriter expedire. For this pur∣pose
God hath anointed us with the oyl of
gladnesse, and made us partakers of his
Inheritance, that being called to his Priest∣hood
like Aaron, we should not only whol∣somly
order those things which pertain to
divine worship, but should also more whol∣somely
moderate those things which have
been formerly enacted by us, and more∣over
alter and dispose of them, as upon se∣rious
consideration of things and persons,
we discern to be wholsomly expedient in the Lord; He
did (upon this account) by reason of some difficulties
concerning the use of this New Missal, arising in the
Kingdom of Spain, tendred by some Grave men sent to
him from Philip their Catholike King, to which he
gave undoubted credit; Of his own meer motion, with∣out
the instance of any Petition tendred to him thereup∣on,
out of his certain knowledge and plenitude of Apo∣stolical
power, think fit to reform several things in this
New Missal, as to the Kingdoms of Spain, and alter,
dispense with it in no lesse than 21. particulars (ex∣pressed
in this Bull) notwithstanding all his former
Bulls and Prohibitions to the contrary. After which
Pope Gregory the 10. his immediate Successor, by
another Bull (dated at Rome 30 December 1573.)
to take away some other new scruples and differences
about this Missal in the said Kingdoms of Spain,
(upon the motion of other Delegates sent thence
from that same King Philip) granted several other
dispensations and amendments of this Missal in sundry
Particulars, comprised in his Bull; Notwithstand∣ing

his Predecessors Letters, and all and singular clau∣ses,
prohibitions, and Decrees to the contrary; Which
two Bulls of theirs, are printed before Missale Ro∣manum,
&c. Cum licentia & privilegio, Salmanticae
1589. Some thirty years after Pope Clement the 8.
observing divers Errors to be crept into this Missal
of Pope Pius the 5. by the Trent Councils Decree;
through the Printers Errors, and some alterations
in the Epistles, Gospels, Psalms according to the vulgar
Edition different from the Original Text, commanded
his learned Cardinals to revise and correct this Mis∣sal
according to the original copy of Pius Quintus:
Verum in illo munere per∣agendo factum est, ut nonnul∣la ex diligeti librorum anti∣quorum collatione in melio∣rem formam redacta, & in re∣gulis & rubricis aliqua uberi∣ùs & clariùs expressa, quae ta∣men ex illorum principiis & fundamentis, quasi deducta, illorum sensum imitari potius & supplere, quàm aliquid no∣vi afferre videantur: Miam itaque quod idem Pius 5. edi∣derat, si RECOGNITUM in nostra Typographia quam emendatissimè imprimi, & ad communem utilitatem publi∣cari justimus. which task they undertaking, put some
things into better form in the Missal it
self, and expressed some things more clear∣ly
and fully in the Rules and Rubricks;
which being notwithstanding deduced
from their principles and foundations,
may seem rather to imitate and supply
their sense, than to induce any innovation.
Which being thus revised, amended,
enlarged with new Masses for new canoni∣zed
Saints, and proper Masses of Saints,
expressed at large for the easier benefit of
those who celebrated them, he caused to
be most exactly printed in the Vatican,
and published for the common good, in the year of
our Lord 1604. as he declares in his Bull praefixed
to this Missal dated at Rome the 7. of July the same
year, with this additional Title;—Missale Roma∣num
ex Decreto Sacro-sancti Concilii Tridentini Resti∣tutum,
Pii 5. Pont. Max. jussu editum; Clementis 8.

auctoritate RECOGNITUM. ET CUM MIS∣SIS
NOVIS DE SANCTIS à Paulo 5. Gre∣gorio
15. & S. D. N. Urbano 8. ordinatis. Missae
propriae de Sanctis OMNES AD LONGUM
POSITAE SUNT PRO FACILIORI CELE∣BRANTIUM
COMMODITATE.
If therefore the Council of Trent it self thought
meet to reform the antient Roman Catechism and
Missal formerly established,Sessi 22. Decretum de observandis & evitandis in ce∣lebratione Missae, Surius Concil. Tom. 4. p. 961. into which it confesseth,
either by the vice of times, or unwariness or dishonesty of
men, many things had crept, which were far from the
dignity of so great a Sacrifice, and had need to be refor∣med,
that due honour and worship to the glory of God
and edification of faithfull people might be restored to it.
Yea, to set out a new Masse-book by authority of Pope
Pius the 5. and this Pope, within few years after,
held it necessary and expedient to make some alte∣rations,
and dispence with other things in it, relating
to the Kingdoms and Church of Spain; and Pope
Gregory the 13. within 3. years after, to dispence
with some other Formalities and Rubricks thereof
upon the same reason. And Pope Clement the 8.
(about 30. years after) held it necessary to revise
the whole Masse-book, to correct the Printers errors,
the Mistranslations of the Epistles, Gospels, Psalms
therein varying from the Original Text; and adde
new Rules, Rubricks to it, explaining, supplying the
defects of the former, together with New Masses,
for New Saints, notwithstanding all former printed
Bulls, Prohibitions, Decrees, to the contrary,
and the pretended Infallibility and Inerrability of
their Chairs, Church, Councils; Then by the self-same

Presidents and better Reasons, Your Majesty,
with advice of Your pious, learned Divines and
Parliament, who have by13 Eliz c. 12. Law established these
Articles of our Churches Belief (to which all Bi∣shops,
Ministers have subscribed)Articl 21. 34. That (not only
Popes, but) General Councils may erre, and sometimes
have erred, even in things pertaining to GOD. That it
is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all
places one, or utterly like;See Centur. Magd. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. p. 3 c. 6. where this is proved at large. FOR AT ALL TIMES
THEY HAVE BEEN DIVERS, AND MAY
BE CHANGED ACCORDING TO THE
DIVERSITY OF COUNTRIES, TIMES,
AND MENS MANNERS, so that nothing be or∣dained
against Gods word. Every particular or Natio∣nal
Church, hath authority to ordain, CHANGE
AND ABOLISH CEREMONIES OR RITES
OF THE CHURCH (and Liturgies too) OR∣DAINED
ONLY BY MANS AUTHORITY,
so that all things be done to edifying; may with much
more Justice, Piety, Prudence reform all errors,
mistranslations of the Epistles, Gospels, Psalms, and
obsolete or unfit expressions in the Book of Common
Prayer,2, & 3 E. 6. c. 1. 5, & 6 E. 6. c. 1. 1 Eliz c. 1. twice altered, reformed in some particulars, in
few years after its first Publication by Authority,
Acts of Parliament) yea, change, abolish such un∣necessary
Rites, Ceremonies attending it, which
have given just offence, & occasioned much Schism,
Dissention in our Church between the Protestant
Members of it, as well of the Clergy as Laity, ever
since its first establishment in the 3d. year of K. Edw.
the 6. till this very day, and will do so in perpetuity,
if not removed by your Majesties Piety and Wis∣dom,

according to the purport of your late Incompa∣rable
Declaration (for which the whole House of
Commons and all Your Protestant Subjects whom
they represented, returned Your Majesty their most
cordial, publike Thanks by theirNovemb. 9. 1660. Speakers own
mouth) the blessed fruits whereof they all now hope
and long to reap; not only without the least prejudice
to our Religion, Church, & main fabrick of the for∣mer
Liturgy, but with great advantage to them all.
It is a received Maxim among all Polititians, Ar∣tists,
that no human institution, Laws, Inventions,
Edifices are so absolutely exact, usefull, wholesom,
necessary, but that they may upon just reasons of
Policy, piety, sundry emergent occasions and ne∣cessities
be amended, altered, with wisdom, honour,
safety, and publick utility. Your Majesty since
your most happy miraculous restauration, have with
great prudence and glory, made some laudable al∣terations
in Your Royal Palaces, Walks, Parks, of
Whitehall, Hampton-court, and in Westminster hall it
self, as well for Conveniency as Delight (though very
noble, usefull, compleat before) without any pre∣judice
to their Structures, Foundations, Soile: And
those Bishops, Deans and Chapters who seem most
opposite to the least alterations in our publike Litur∣gy
or Ceremonies, have yet very much altered, im∣proved
their old Rents (and Tennants likewise) to
which they will not be confined by Your Majesties
late Declarations, or Commissions: yea they daily vio∣late
and dispence with the very Rubricks in the
Common Prayer Book, and several2, & 3 E. 6. c. 1. 21. 5, & 6 E. 6. c, 1. 12. 1 Eliz c. 1. 5 Eliz. c. 1. Acts of Parl.
by selling Licenses to marry all sorts of People for

filthy lucre, without asking the Banes three several
Sundayes or Holy-dayes in time of Divine service, the
People being present, after the accustomed manner; In
reading the Epistle, Gospel and second Service at the
Communion Table when there is no Communion; and
in not receiving the Communion in their Cathedral
Churches every Sunday at the least, though they have
no reasonable cause to the contrary, as the Rubricks en∣joyne
them. And may not your Sacred Majesty
then with as much wisdom, honour, and all your
Bishops and Cathedral Clergy-men with farre
more piety, justice, prudence, (in obedience to
Your late Royal Declarations and Engagements to
all Your Subjects) dispence with the Oath of Cano∣nical
Obedience, the use of Surplisses, and other Cere∣monies
for which there is no Rubrick, Statute, or
known Law of the Land; the reading of Psalms, E∣pistles,
Gospels in the Church, according to the New
Translation of your Royal Grandfather of famous
memory, KING JAMES; yea freely admit of all able,
godly Ministers ordained only by Presbyters during
the late unhappy Differences and Confusions of
Government, to Benefices, Fellowships, Lectures,
Cures of Souls, without a Re-ordination by Bishops,
as well as admit reclamed Popish Priests ordained by
Bishops in the Church of Rome, without the least
opposition, contest, for future Peace, Amity, U∣nity
between all Your Protestant Subjects of diffe∣rent
perswasions in these dividing particulars? To
facilitate, promote this much desired work, I have
spent my few vacant Holy-day hours in compiling
this Seasonable, short, sober, pacifique Examination, con∣sisting

principally of 4 Particulars (discussed in seve∣ral
Sections) to wit; the Use, and Frequent Repetition
of Gloria Patri; standing as it, and at Gospels, Creeds,
Wearing of Surplisses, with other Pontifical & Sacerdo∣tal
Vestments in the celebration of Divine Service and
Sacraments; in the last whereof (because most peremp∣torily
insisted on from pretended grounds of Scrip∣ture,
Reason by many Romanists, and some Protestant
Prelates, andPeter Hey∣lin his History of the Reforma∣tion of the Church of Eng∣land, p 91, 92, 93. History of Queen Mary, & Queen Eliz. p. 59, 60, 115, 116, 131, 132, 164, 165, 166, 176. Divines) I have most expatiated, I
hope, without the least offence to moderate sober
Christians, or your Sacred Majesty, and good satis∣faction
to all judicious Perusers.
Wee all use to alter the proportion, matter, qua∣lity,
fashion, number of our Garments, Attires, ac∣cording
to the several ages of our lives, the seasons
of the year, the temper of the Climates where we
live, and extraordinary occasions of solemnitie, joy,
grief or humiliation; not only without offence to
others, or prejudice to our healths, lives, but with
much applause, and that for the necessary preserva∣tion
both of health, life, and humane society.
The like we do in our Corporal Food: Why may
not we then use the same Liberty (by your Ma∣jesties
and your Parliaments publick Authority or
Indulgence) in the controverted Case of Eccle∣siastical
Garments, Ornaments, Food, now under
publick consideration, provided alwayes they be
1 Cor. 14. 40. decent, orderly, wholesom, andIsay 8. 20 Lu. 16. 29 Gal. 6. 4▪ 16. not repugnant, but
agreeable to the holy Scriptures?
If this poor Mite, (humbled presented to Your all∣piercing
favourable Eye, and Gracious acceptation,
as a Monument of my bounden Homage to Your

Sacred Majesty, at this most joyfull; triumphant
Solemnity of Your CORONATION, (theIn the Second Part of my Sig∣nal Loyaltie and Devotion of Gods true Saints &c. to their So∣veraigns. p. 225, &c. Form
whereof I humbly dedicated and presented to Your
Majesty soon after your Glorious return to Your
Royal Pallace) shall contribute any assistance to
the accomplishment of Your Majesties healing, uni∣ting
Design of all disagreeing parties in points of Ce∣remony,
Liturgy, Worship, (the only end of its Com∣piling
and publishing;) I shall heartily blesse God
for its good success, and alwaies continue my cordi∣allest
daily Prayers to the1 Tim. 6. 15. Rev 17. 14. c. 15, 16. King of Kings, for
Your Majesties long, most pious, just, peaceable,
glorious reign over all your Dominions upon Earth,
for the advancement of the true reformed Religion,
the protection of all real, zealous Ministers, Pro∣fessors
of it, and all Your Subjects Tranquillity,
Felicity: till You shall exchange that fadingPsal. 21. 3. Crown
of pure Gold, (which GOD himself hath now set upon
Your Anointed Head, to the unspeakable Joy of all Your
Loyal Subjects, maugre all Oppositions, Conspira∣cies
of Men or Devils to prevent it, and that with
greater Magnificence, Splendor, than any of Your
Royal Progenitors have been Crowned; which God
grant You alwaies to wear with most transcendent
Renown) for an eternal1 Pet. 5. 4 c. 1. 4. Crown of Glory in the
Highest Heavens, which fadeth not away.

Lincolnes Inne,
Apr. 23. 1661.
