


May it please your Grace,
THis Essay for the Vindi∣cation of Our Church, addresseth in just Gratitude to Your Archiepiscopal See,

with this assurance, that the Moderation of the Church of England oweth it self as much to the wisdom and admirable temper of Your Graces Pre∣decessors, as to any one thing whatsoever, next to the most Divine and supreme influ∣ences, which so signally go∣vern'd them, and the rest of our first Reformers, to follow in∣comparably the sage advice which Gregory the Great anciently sent to Your Prede∣cessor Austin of Canterbury; That of the divers usages of se∣veral Churches, he should chuse what was most religious and right for the use of the

English: for (said that Bishop of Rome) things are not to be loved for the sake of a place, but places for the sake of good things; according to which determination of that Learned and Pious Father, it may be easy now to decide, What Church, whose Primates, which Constitution deserves our love and honour most: unless any will prefer that which is extra∣vagantly corrupt, before what is most moderately and excel∣lently reformed.
Your Grace best knows, how that Brotherly Novit Fraterni∣tas tua, &c. B. Greg. Ep. ex Registro l. 12. Indic. 7. c. 3. sort of Communication was generally preserved in

the Church by other Patri∣archs, even with the Bishops of Rome, so long as these were Examples of the same Modera∣tion with S. Gregory; who with a Primitive Roman Courage, protested against the insolency of their stiling them∣selves Universal; which well enough agrees with the Sole∣cism of those who call only themselves Catholicks.
Before which novel kind of Phantastries, 'tis well known, such as Boniface the Martyr, the Apostle of the Germans, (as Baronius mentions Ad an. 726. n. 58. Tom. 9.) mu∣tually desired advice, not only from Rome, but of the Pri∣mates of England.

And whereas (even since the first Reformation) there have been Archbishops of Canterbury, who have not only, with wondrous success, govern'd, and defended Our Church, from both sorts of Ad∣versaries, but have testified to the Equity of Her Rubricks, with their own Blood; when we consider what kind of ad∣verse parties were the Authors of Their Martyrdom (even the same who have given the Reformed Church of England, Her two most extreme refining Tryals) We must acknowledge them in the direct succession with Your Grace, to be not

only the Glorious Instruments, but also the most famous Wit∣nesses and Proofs of the Mode∣ration of our Church: who bear the first Names in Her Dipticks, and deserve here first with Reverence to be mention∣ed to Your Grace: who also for your inviolable adherence to the Church in spite of suf∣ferings, must hereafter be cele∣brated among Her Confes∣sors.
There may be some account, why in this Argument such an undertaking as this (were it more worthy) should especially desire Your Patronage: not only in humble deference to the

Authority Your Grace doth sustain in our Church (to the universal joy, and serious tri∣umph of all, whose affections have not been depraved with Schism and ill nature:) but, in a more immediate reference, because to Your special Archi∣episcopal Prerogative belong∣eth the peculiar right and fa∣culty of those dispensations, which are a part of the Equity of our Church, and her liberal benignity in that , which hath been always ho∣noured as a most venerable part of Her Laws.
Since therefore unto Your Clemency, is so suitably com∣mitted,

in this publick Con∣stitution, the Custody of our Churches Indulgence and Be∣nignity; The Moderation of the Church, with more than usual confidence, returns to Your Grace for what her Ca∣suists calls Inculpata Tutela; and fears not now to be denied, since Clemency is not only the Dignity of Your Title, but Your Nature: Neither is Your Primacy in our Church more eminent than Your Mo∣deration is exemplary and known unto all: Which I presume only to mention, to bor∣row from thence a most Reve∣rend Lustre and Life to the No∣ble

Truth I have defended.
And so far as I have not improperly now asserted the Cause of the Church, in which You preside, I am sure not to sink in my trust of being sup∣ported by Your Graces good acceptance of the sincere under∣taking of
May it please Your Grace,

