




HAving had the Honour on last Easter-Eve,
to present Your Majesty with a
Brief Account of my Service that
week in the almost-accomplished
Great-good-work of Paying and Dis∣ding
Your Majesties Army and Navy (which for
 Moneths space ingrossed all my time from Mor∣ng
till Night, and oft till Midnight) to Your Maje∣sties
great content, and your Peoples ease from future
cessant heavy Monthly Taxes; I humbly crave
ave to prostrate at Your Royal feet my Easter-holy∣dayes
studies, to exonerate the Backs of hundreds,
 truly tender Consciences of thousands of Your
yal, pious, sober-minded Protestant Subjects of

all Degrees, from some Exuberances in the Commo
prayer Book, and superfluous Ceremonies, Vestments 
tending it, (which give them offence, and may w
be laid aside, if your Majesty and your approachi
Parliament shall judge convenient) for our Ch
ches future peace, union in Gods publick worship,
pursuance of Your Majesties late most Gratious, ous,
Prudent, elegant Declaration to all Your Lovi
Subjects of Your Kingdom of England and Dominion
Wales, concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, which ga
Life and Birth to this Publication.
It is very observable, that albeit theSurius Concil. Tom. 1. p. 218, 251, 381, 382. Tom 2. p. 588. 589. Tom. 4.  p. 453.
Bellarmine De Romano Pontif. & de Conciliis, l. 2. c. 2. Greg∣de Valentia Com. Theolog Tom. 3: p 247. Dr. Iohn Whites Way to the true Church Sect. 17. p. 45. & Defence of the Way, c. 47, 48, Popes
Rome, and their Flatterers, hold themselves infall
in their Chair, and their Church, Councils inerrab
yet they all accord, that their Publike Missals,
turgies; though made, confirmed by their joynt a
vice with greatest care and diligence, are amendab
alterable upon just occasion: Witness their la
Council ofSessio 22. De∣cretum de obser∣vandis & evi∣tandis in Cele∣bratione Missae, Surius Tom. 4. Concil. p. 962. Trents Decree for the correction, ame∣ment
of their formerly established Catechism, Miss
Breviary; and the subsequent emendations of the
and institution of A NEW MASSE BOOK,
Pope Pius the 5. with the advice of learned m
expressed in his Bull dated at Rome July 1557. p
fixed to Missale Romanum, ex Decreto Sacro-sa
Concilii Tridentini RESTITUTUM; Pii 5. P∣tificis
Maximi jussu editum, printed at Rome t
year  enjoyned by that Bull, to be universally
served, without any subsequent addition, alteration,
mutation, under pain of his Papal indignation:
notwithstanding by another Bull of his own, da
at Rome 17 December 1570. beginning with t

memorable Clause;Ad hoc nos Deus unxit oleo lat tiae, ac haereditatis suae par∣ticipes effecit, ut ad ipfiu, Sa∣cerdotium vocati tanquam Aaron, non solum ea quae ad divinum cultum pertinent sa∣lubriter disponamus; Veùm etiam ea quae aliquando per Nos statuta suerant, salubrius mode remur, ac aliàs desuper dispona∣mus, prout rerum & perso∣narum qualitate pensta, con∣spicimus in Domino salu∣briter expedire. For this pur∣pose
God hath anointed us with the oyl of
gladness, and made us partakers of his
Inheritance, that being called to his Priest∣hood
like Aaron, we should not only whole∣somly
order these things which pertain to
divine worship; but should also more whol∣somly
moderate those things which have
been formerly enacted by us, and moreo∣ver
alter and dispose of them, as upon seri∣ous
consideration of things and persons,
we discern to be wholesomly expedient in the Lord; He
did (upon this account) by reason of some difficulties
concerning the use of this New Missal, arising in the
Kingdom of Spain, tendred by some Grave men sent to
him from Philip their Catholike King, to which hee
gave undoubted credit; of his own meer motion, with∣out
the instance of any Petition tendred to him thereup∣on,
out of his certain knowledge and plenitude of Apo¦stolical
power, think fit to reform several things in this
New Missal, as to the Kingdoms of Spain, and alter,
dispense with it in no lesse than 21. particulars (ex∣pressed
in this Bull) notwithstanding all his former
Bulls and Prohibitions to the contrary. After which
Pope Gregory the 10, his immediate Successor, by
another Bull (dated at Rome 30 Decemb. 1573.)
to take away some other new scruples and differences
about this Missal in the said Kingdoms of Spain
(upon the motion of other Delegates sent thence
from that same King Philip) granted several other
dispensations and amendments of this Missal in sundry
Particulars, comprised in his Bull; Notwithstand∣ing

his Predecessors Letters, and all and singular clau∣ses,
prohibitions, and Decrees to the contrary; Which
two Bulls of theirs, are printed before Missale Ro∣manum,
&c. Cum licentia & privilegio, Salmantica
1589. Some thirty year after Pope Clement the 8.
observing divers Errors to be crept into this Missal
of Pope Pius the 5. by the Trent Councils Decree;
through the Printers Errors, and some alterations in
the Epistles, Gospels, Psalms according to the vulgar E∣dition
different from the Original Text, commanded
his learned Cardinals to revise and correct this Mis∣sal
according to the original copy of Pius Quintus:
Verum in illo munere per∣agendo factum est, ut nonnul∣la ex diligenti librorum anti∣quorum collatione in melio∣rem formam redacta, & in re∣gulis & rubricis aliqua uberiùs & clariùs expressa, quae tamen ex illorum principiis et fun∣damentis, qusi deducta, illo∣rum sensum imitari potíus & supplere, quàm aliquid no∣vi afferre videantur: Missam itaque quod idem Pius 5. edi∣derat, sic RECOGNITUM in nostra Typographia quam emendatissimè imprimi, & ad communem utilitatem publi∣cari jussimus. which task they undertaking, put some
things into better form in the Missal it
self, and expressed some things more clear∣ly
and fully in the Rules and Rubricks;
which being notwithstanding deduced
from their principles and foundations,
may seem rather to imitate and supply
their sense, than to induce any innovation.
Which being thus revised, amended,
enlarged with new Masses for new canoni∣zed
Saints, and proper Masses of saints
expressed at large for the easier benefit of
those who celebrated them, he caused to
be most exactly printed in the Vatican,
and published for the common good, in the year of
our Lord 1604. as he declares in his Bull praefixed
to this Missal dated at Rome the 7. of July the same
year; with this additional Title;—Missale Roma∣num
ex Decreto Sacro-sancti Concilii Tridentini Resti∣tutum,
Pii 5. Pont. Max. jussu editum; Clementis 8.

auctoritate RECOGNITUM. ET CUM MIS∣SIS
NOVIS DE SANCTIS à Paulo 5. Gre∣gorio
15. & S. D. N. Urbano 8. ordinatis. Missae
propriae de Sanctis OMNES AD LONGUM
POSITAE SUNT PRO FACILIORI CELE∣BRANTIUM
COMMODITATE.
If therfore the Council of Trent it self thought meet
to reform the antient Roman Catechism and Missal
formerly established,Sessio 22. Decretum de ob∣servandis et evi∣tandis in celebra∣tione Missae. Surius Concil. Tom. 4. p. 961. into which it confesseth, either
by the vice of times, or unwariness or dishonesty of men,
many things had crept, which were far from the dignity
of so great a Sacrifice, and had need to be reformed, that
due honour and worship to the glory of God and edifica∣tion
of faithfull people might be restored to it. Yea, to
set out a new Masse-book by authority of Pope Pius
the 5. and this Pope, within few years after, held
it necessary and expedient to make some alterati∣ons,
and dispence with other things in it, relating
to the Kingdoms and Church of Spain; and Pope
Gregory the 13. within 3. years after, to dispence
with some other Formalities and Rubricks there∣of
upon the same reason: And Pope Clement the 8.
(about 30. years after) held it necessary to revise
the whole Masse book, to correct the Printers errors,
the Mistranslations of the Epistles, Gospels, Psalmes
therein varying from the Original Text; and adde
new Rules, Rubricks to it, explaining, supplying the
defects of the former, together with New Masses,
for New Saints, notwithstanding all former printed
Bulls, Prohibitions, Decrees to the contrary,
and the pretended Infallibility and Inerrability of
their Chairs, Church, Councils; Then by the self∣same

Presidents and better Reasons, Your Majesty,
with advice of Your pious, learned Divines and Par∣liament,
who have by13 Eliz. c. 12 Law established these Arti∣cles
of our Churches Belief (to which all Bishops,
Ministers have subscribed)Atic'c 2: 34 That (not only Popes,
but) General Councils may erre, and sometimes have
erred, even in things pertaining to GOD. That it is
not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all
places one, or utterly like;See Centur Magd. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, P 3, c. 6. where this is proved at large. FOR AT ALL TIMES
THEY HAUE BEEN DIVERS, & MAY BE
CHANGED ACCORDING TO THE DI∣VERSITY
OF COUNTRIES, TIMES, &
MENS MANNERS, so that nothing be ordained
against Gods word. Every particular or National
Church, hath authority to ordain, Change and abolish
Ceremonies or Rites of the Church (and Liturgies too)
ordained only by Mans Authority, so that all things bee
done to edifying; may with much more Justice, Pie∣ty,
Prudence reform all errors, mistranslations of
the Epistles, Gospels, Psalms, and obsolete or unfit
expressions in the Book of Common Prayer,2 & 3 E. 6. c. 1. 5 & 6 E. 6. c. 1. 1 Eliz. c. twice al∣tered,
reformed in som particulars, in few years after its
first publication by authority, Acts of Parliament)
yea, change, abolish such unnecessary Rites,
Ceremonies attending it, which have given just of∣fence,
and occasioned much Schism, Dissention in
our Church between the Protestant Members of it,
as well of the Clergy as Laity, ever since its first e∣stablishment
in the 3d. year of K. Edw. the 6. till this
very day, and will do so in perpetuity, if not remo∣ved
by your Majesties Piety and VVisdom, accor∣ding
to the purport of your late Incomparable Decla∣ration

(for which the whole House of Commons
and all Your Protestant Subjects whom they repre∣sented,
returned Your Majesty their most cordial,
publike Thanks by theirNovemb  1660. Speakers own mouth) the
blessed fruits whereof they all now hope and long
to reap; not only without the least prejudice to our
Religion, Church, and main Fabrick of the former
Liturgy, but with great advantage to them all.
It is a received Maxim among all Polititians, Ar∣tists,
that no human Institutions, Laws, Inventions,
Edifices are so absolutely exact, usefull, wholesom,
necessary, but that they may upon just reasons of
Policy, piety, sundry emergent occasions and ne∣cessities
be amended, altered, with wisdom, honour,
safety, an publike utility. Your Majesty since
your most happy miraculous restauration, have with
great prudence and glory, made some laudable al∣terations
in Your Royal Palaces, Walks, Parks, of
Whitehall, Hampton-court, and in Westminster-Hall it¦self,
as well for Conveniency as Delight (though very
noble, usefull, compleat before) without any pre∣judice
to their Structures, Foundations, Soile: And
those Bishops, Deans and Chapters who seem most
opposite to the least alterations in our publike Litur∣gy,
or Ceremonies, have yet very much altered, im∣proved
their old Rents (and Tennants likewise) to
which they will not be confined by Your Majesties
late Declarations, or Commissions: yea they daily vio∣late
and dispense with the very Rubricks in the
Common Prayer Book, and several2 & 3 E. 6 c. 1. 21. 5 & 6 E. 6. c. 1. 12. 1 Eliz. c. 1. 5 Eliz. c. 1. Acts of Parl.
by selling Licenses to marry to all sorts of people for
filthy lucre, without asking the Banes three several

Sundayes or Holy-dayes in time of Divine service, the
people being present, after the accustomed manner; In
reading the Epistle, Gospel and second Service at the
Communion Table when there is no Communion; and
in not receiving the Communion in their Cathedral
Churches every Sunday at the least, though they have
no reasonable cause to the contrary, as the Rubricks en∣joyne
them. And may not your Sacred Majesty
then with as much wisdom, honour, and all your
Bishops and Cathedral Clergymen with farre
more piety, justice, prudence, (in obedience to
Your late Royal Declarations and Engagements to
all Your Subjects) dispence with the Oath of Cano∣nical
Obedience, the use of Surplises, and other Cere∣monies
for which there is no Rubrick, Statute, or
known Law of the Land; the reading of Psalms, E∣pistles,
Gospels in the Church, according to the New
Translation of Your Royal Grandfather of famous
memory, KING JAMES; yea freely admit all able,
godly Ministers ordained only by Presbyters during
the late unhappy Differences and Confusions of
Government, to Benefices, Fellowships, Lectures,
Cures of Souls, without a Re-ordination by Bishops,
as well as admit reclamed Popish Priests ordained by
Bishops in the Church of Rome, without the least
opposition, contest, for future Peace, Amity, U∣nity
between all Your Protestant Subjects of diffe∣rent
perswasions in these dividing particulars? To
facilitate, promote this much desired work, I have
spent my few vacant Holy-day hours in compiling
this seasonable, short, sober, pacific Examination, consist∣ing
principally of 4. Particulars (discussed in several

Sections) to wit; the Use, and Frequent Repetition
of Gloria Patri; standing up at it, and at Gospels, Creeds,
Wearing of Surplises, with other Pontifical & Sacer do∣tal
vestments in the celebration of Divine Service and
Sacraments; in the last wherof (because most peremp∣torily
insisted on from pretended grounds of Scrip∣ture,
Reason by many Romanists, and some Protestant
Prelates, andPeter Heylyn, his History of the Reformation of the Church of Englad, p. 91, 92, 93. History? of Queen My, & Queen Eliz. p. 59, 60. 115, 116, 131, 132, 164, 165, 166, 176 Divines) I have most expatiated, I
hope, without the least offence to moderate sober
Christians, or your Sacred Majesty, and good satis∣faction
to all judicious perusers.
Wee all use to alter the proportion, matter, qua¦lity,
fashion, number of our Garments, Attires, ac∣cording
to the several ages of our lives, the seasons
of the year, the temper of the Climates where wee
live, and extraordinary occasions of solemnity, joy,
grief or humiliation; not only without offence to
others, or prejudice to our healths, lives, but with
much applause, and that for the necessary preserva∣tion
both of health, life, and humane societie.
The like wee doe in our corporal Food: Why may
not wee then use the same Liberty (by your Ma∣jesties
and your parliaments publike Authority or
Indulgence) in the controverted case of Eccle∣siastical
Garments, Ornaments, Food, now under
publike consideration, provided alwayes they bee
1 Cor. 14. 40. decent, orderly, wholesom, andIsay 8. 20. Lu. 16. 29. Gal. 6. 4. 16. not repugnant, but
agreeable to the holy Scriptures?
If this poor Mite, (humbly presented to Your all-piercing
favourable Eye, and Gracious acceptation,
as a Monument of my bounden Homage to Your
Sacred Majesty, at this most joyfull, triumphant

Solemnity of Your CORONATION, (theIn the Second Part of my Sig∣nal Loyalty & Devotion of Gods true Saints &c. to their So∣veraigns. p. 225. &c. Form
wherof I humbly dedicated and presented to Your
Majesty soon after your Glorious return to Your
Royal Pallace) shall contribute any assistance to
the accomplishment of Your Majesties healing, uni∣ting
Design of all disagreeing parties in points of Cere∣mony,
Liturgy, Worship, (the only end of its Com∣piling
and publishing;) I shall heartily blesse God
for its good successe, and alwayes continue my cordi∣allest
daily prayers to the1 Tim. 6. 15. Rev. 17. 14. c. 19, 16. King of Kings, for
Your Majesties long, most pious, just, peaceable,
glorious reign over all your Dominions upon Earth,
for the advancement of the true reformed Religion,
the protection of all real, zealous Ministers, Pro∣fessors
of it, and all Your Subjects Tranquillity,
Felicity: til You shall exchange that fadingPs. 21. 3. Crown
of pure Gold, (which GOD himself hath now set upon
upon Your Anointed Head, to the unspeakable Ioy
of all Your Loyal Subjects, maugre all Oppositions,
Conspiracies of Men or Devils to prevent it, and
that with greater Magnificence, Splendor, than
any of Your Royal Progenitors have been crowned,
which God grant You alwaies to wear with most
transcendent Renown) for an eternal1 Pet. 5. 4. c. . 4. Crown
of Glory in the highest Heavens, which fadeth not away.

Lincolnes Inne,
Apr. 23. 1661.
