



YOUR Grace has been pleas'd so particularly to favour the Composition of the Musick in Dioclesian, that from thence I have been encourag'd to this presumption of De∣dicating not only It, but also the unworthy Author of it to Your Protection. All Arts and Sciences have receiv'd their first encouragement from Great Persons, and owe their Propagation and Success to Their esteem: like some sort of Fruit-trees, which being of a tender Constitution, and delicate in their Nature, require the shadow of the Cedar to shield their Infancy from Blites and Storms.
Musick and Poetry have ever been acknowledg'd Sisters, which walking hand in hand, support each other; As Poetry is the harmo∣ny of Words, so Musick is that of Notes: and as Poetry is a Rise above Prose and Oratory, so is Musick the exaltation of Poetry. Both of them may excel apart, but sure they are most excellent when they are joyn'd, because nothing is then wanting to either of their Perfections: for thus they appear like Wit and Beauty in the same Person. Poetry and Painting have arriv'd to their perfection in our own Country: Musick is yet but in its Nonage, a forward Child,

which gives hope of what it may be hereafter in England, when the Masters of it shall find more Encouragement. 'Tis now learning Italian, which is its best Master, and studying a little of the French Air, to give it somewhat more of Gayety and Fashion. Thus being farther from the Sun, we are of later Growth than our Neighbour Countries, and must be content to shake off our Barbarity by degrees. The present Age seems already dispos'd to be refin'd, and to distin∣guish betwixt wild Fancy, and a just, numerous Composition. So far the Genius of Your Grace has already prevail'd on Us: Many of the Nobility and Gentry have follow'd Your Illustrious Example in the Patronage of Musick. Nay even our Poets begin to grow asham'd of their harsh and broken Numbers, and promise to file our uncouth Language into smoother Words.
Once more, therefore, I presume to offer My Self and this Com∣position with all humility to Your Grace's Protection, at least till I can redeem so mean a Present by One which may better deserve Your Acceptation. Be pleas'd to pardon my Ambition, which had no other means to obtain the Honour of being made known to You, but only this. The Town, which has been so indulgent to my first Endeavours in this kind, has encourag'd me to proceed in the same Attempt; and Your Favour to this Trifle will be a good Omen not only to the Success of the Next, but also to all the future Performances of

