


Gentlemen,
YOur Learned Pastor, the Reve∣rend Dr. Tenison, having been pleas'd, to his printed Account of a Conference had between Him and Me on the 29th. of September last; in which he has not only notoriously mis-represented the Matter of Fact, but also stuff'd his whole Narrative with several false Aspersions, reflecting, not only on my particular Person, but also on the whole So∣ciety, whereof I am a Member; and on our. Holy Mother the
Catholick Church, of which I profess my self an unworthy Son: The
Dr. I say, having been pleas'd to this Account to pre∣fix an
Epistle to you, fraught with malitious Insinuations and Calumnies: You will not, I hope, think me guilty of too great Presumption, if endeavouring to clear my self from the false Accusations brought against me; I, though a Stranger, making Appeal to you, before whom the
Dr. has laid his Charge, and expect from your Judgement and Candor (however pre∣possest
 with a good Opinion of the Dr and a Prejudice against both my Religion and Order;) a fair and equitable Hearing.
The Dr. begins his Epistle to you with a Complaint of many false Reports and Papers industriously spread by some of the less sin∣cere and less generous Romanists, Now as I protest an utter Abhorrence of all such un∣worthy Proceedings, so I cannot easily be∣lieve any Catholick to have been guilty of them, without some more sufficient Testimony than the Dr's Word; of whose insincere and disingenuous Actings, his Account is a most ap∣parent Evidence. And that Letters sent both into the
North and West of England, bearing date the very day of the Conference; and im∣porting, that there were at least Eight or Ten Jesuits put to Silence, by the force of one
Dr's Arguments, manifestly shews, that the Dr. is not the only person, who has Cause to complain of false Reports, or Reason to fear, That unworthy Ends would be serv'd on the Credulous.
The Dr. to excuse the Bitterness (not to say Scurrility) of his Expressions, tells you a story of a Person, one of whose Names, as he Words it, was Gubbard, who, in the time of the Rebellion against King Charles the I. Re∣commending
 himself to the Committee at Norwich, as a Man, Who had a zeal for the same Cause, in which they were engag'd, took Possession of the Living of Mondesly, out of which the Dr's Father was Ejected for his Loyalty: That after a few years, he Preach'd up Purgatory, and other such Points, in so open a manner, That the Committee turn'd him out again; and that in a little time he (as it were) vanish'd away.
By this story, which the Dr. ushers in with his having a Motive to severe Language to∣wards that sort of men (meaning Catholick Priests) which few have besides; and closes with the Impression, it made upon him when he was young, and the raising his Suspition and Indignation ever since; he would insinuate, that this Gubbard was some Jesuit or
Catholick Priest, which he pretends to prove, by his changing his Name, his Favour with the Committee, and his Preaching of
Pur∣garory.
Catholick Priests sometimes change their Names, thereby the better to shelter themselves from the rigorous Severity of the
Sanguinary Laws, executed on them by meek-hearted
Pro∣testants, only in respect of their Function; yet if it be consider'd, that this is frequently done
 by other Persons on far different Motives and Occasions, it will seem very ridiculous to infer from thence, that the Person mention'd by the Dr. was a Priest.
Nor yet will his Preaching of Purgatory, and such other Points, evince him to have been a Romanist (much less a
Priest if it shall be consider'd, how many far stranger Opinions were in those days of Liberty vented in the Pulpit; and that many years have not pass'd, since a very Learned Member of the Church of
England,
Dr. Thorn∣dike Pre∣bend of Westminster. and dying in her Communion, desir'd an Ora pro animâ to be Engraven on his Tomb.
Now to shew, how great Favour the Priests and
Jesuits found with the Committees of those Times. I take the Liberty to inform the World, that my Father had six Uncles
Jesuits; and yet was not only himself committed to Prison by the
Rebels for his Religion, and his Loyalty to his
King; but his House was also for a long time possess'd by a Committee Minister; and two of his Brethren were for three years Edu∣cated in another Committee Ministers house at Kettring in
Northamptonshire, where they were oblig'd, being under Age, to go to
Schisma∣tical Service; though it pleas'd Almighty God of his Infinite Mercy to reduce them afterwards into the Bosom of his Spouse the
Catholick
 Church, out of which, none of our Family ever dy'd, Nor do I believe any one Family in Eng∣land was more frequently Pillag'd, or more se∣verely Sequester'd, than Ours; yet I bless God, I am so far from having my Indignation thereby rais'd against that Party, or entertaining any Hatred towards them, that I rather glory in our having had occasion to suffer for our King, and our Religion.
I here therefore Challenge the Dr. and his Adherents to make it appear, that this, or any other Committee Minister was either a
Jesuit or Priest of the Roman Church; or else must take leave to say, that his vending such like scurrilous Suspicions and Surmises at this time of day, seem directly to aim at that, of which I am unwilling to think him guilty.
Having return'd this Answer to what is most material in his
Epistle; I leave you, Gentle∣men, to judge, whether he has been so Just or Fair, as he pretends; or whether his Deport∣ment in this whole Matter is not such, as de∣serves far more severe
Remarks, than any he has hitherto undergone from,
Gentlemen,

