



RIGHT HONORABLE,
THE Creatures are the Book of Nature, as said Anthony the Hermite, who being demanded by a Philoso∣pher,Socrat. hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 18. Niceph. l. 1. c. 43. how he could possi∣bly spend his time in the Wilderness, seeing hee was destitute of Books? answered, My Book, O Philosopher, is the nature of all things created by God, which when I please, I can peruse and read. The world is Gods Library, God mani∣fested and drawn out; and all the creatures are

as Glasses, in which wee may see, and as Scaffolds and Ladders, by which we may ascend and draw nearer to him: For God is a light too strong for our sense, therefore we must (with him in the story) look for the Sun in the West, not in the East; behold the Lord as he is reflected, and refracted, first in the glass of his Creatures, and his Works: And then secondly, in the face of his dearest Son.
God in the School of Nature, useth a method so suitable and correspondent to our dulness, that our meditations should not want in the Creatures Volumes (I may say) wherein to read most excellent admonitions and instructions: In every creature are they engraven in ordinary characters, and in lesser a print; as in the Scriptures, they be written in capital letters once, the Creatures are as a bright glass, wherein we may behold our God; For as God is a glass in heaven, wherein all his creatures are seen, lo are the creatures a glass upon earth, wherein we may beholdSir John Hay∣ward, Davids Tears. and know our God. They are Trumpets of his honour, witnesses of his worth, bel∣lows

of our love▪ spur to our dulness, and judges of our unthankfulness.
There is some good in all creatures, the meanest hath a beam of Gods Majesty, yet some have more than others, the Bees moreOsld Crollii b silica chimi∣ca. than (almost) any. That a little neglected creature should bee so curious in Archi∣tecture, and in the fabrick of her hexangle Combs should observe as just proportions as the best Geometrician, we should suspect for an untruth, if wee saw it not daily practised by them.
Nicostratus in Aelian, finding a curious peece of work, and being wondred at by one, and asked what pleasure he could take to stand as he did still gazing on the Picture? answered, Hadst thou mine eyes, my friend, thou wouldst not wonder, but rather bee ravished as I am, at the inimitable art of this rare and admirable peece. I am sure no Picture can express so much wonder and excellency as the smallest In∣sect: But wee want Nicostratus his eyes to behold them.
And the praise of Gods Wisdome andRaymundus in Theolog. natu∣rali. Power, lies asleep and dead in every crea∣ture,





untill man actuate and enliven it. I cannot therefore altogether conceive it un∣worthy of the greatest mortals to contem∣plate the miracles of Nature, and that as they are more visible in the smallest, and almost contemptible creatures, for there most lively doe they express the infinite Power and Wisdome of the great Creator, and erect and draw the mindes of the most intelligent to the first and prime cause of all things, teaching them as the power, so the presence of the Deity in the smallest In∣sects.
What should bee presented to great men, but great and goodly gifts? In this perhaps many will comply with mee, but then readily deny, that a Discourse of Insects is to bee offered to your Honour; but I easily trample on such exceptions, for although the creatures herein handled, bee so small that they cannot fully bee known, and (as worthless, and useless) bee undervalued by many, yet by judicious wise men, who measure things not by greatness, but by goodness, they will not only be prized, but praised; not only magni∣fied,

but admired. In all parts of natural Philosophy, the knowledge whereof is most difficult; the contemplation labori∣ous, and the nature most obscure. I haveAldrovandd ector. (saith Aldrovandus) found that most diffi∣cult which is conversant about Insects, and that for their notable, and admirable smal∣ness, which is the reason (saith he) that no man as far as I know, hath delivered many memorable things of them: Only Ar∣stotle of the Grecians have discovered some things worthy to bee known; and Pliny of the Latines somewhat more, which he col∣lected from the Monuments of Greek and Latine Writers (which are now lost) and some few things besides there are, which later Writers have taken notice of, but all so lame and imperfect, that still much re∣mains to be added and amended; and so brief and obscure, that many still are igno∣rant and deceived.
Scaliger is very angry with Cardane, thatScalig. de sub∣til. xocit. 191. after Aristotle he should write of Bees, and add nothing new, nor true: Whereas learned Scaliger endeavouring to confute him, is guilty of many absurdities, I can∣not

but expect to hear the same reproach from some, whom I only request judici∣ously to read, and then to censure.Lpsii Praefa. ad ▪ Satunal.
Embroiderers, of threds of divers co∣lours (in the new world of various fea∣thers) make a costly and delightful Hang∣ing: So VVriters out of a thousand par∣cels, an uniform, and agreeing body; whom I have laboured to imitate, where I have failed, pardon my weakness, and accept my good will.
But my long Epistle is injurious to your Honours more necessary employments. The Lord preserve your Honours person, with your Honourable Consort, and all the Noble Branches descended from you.

