



I Shall not need (as the Custome is) to
argue the decency and fitness of
this address, nor to excuse its ma∣ny
nice and critical Solecismes,
because your absolute and unalie∣nable
Right to all the Fruits of
my Studies has made it due and
necessary; (and the Obligations of Duty cancel all
the Laws of Indecency) so that if to present you with
so mean a trifle be unhandsome, yet not to have done
it, would have been unjust. For my Studies (Sir)

are too deeply indebted to your Incouraging Directi∣ons,
to make any other repayment then by entirely
resigning themselves up into your hands, and there∣fore
I cannot alienate any thing that's theirs, from
being Yours, without being guilty at once of the grea∣test
Injustice and Ingratitude. So that though I do
but Injure your Name by concerning its Authority
in behalf of so worthless a Trifle, yet an Injury that's
the result of Duty and Gratitude, may hope for
not only your Pardon, but (such Sir is your Can∣dour)
your Acceptance too; since you cannot suspect
the Reality of my Resentments, when I decline not
so Criminal an Evidence thereof, and rather wilfully
chose to commit any Faults and Indecencies then lose
the least Opportunity to prove it.
I will not be so troublesome as to remind you of
the retaile of your Obligations, yet there is one, whose
peculiar matchlesness obliges me to as peculiar an
acknowledgment. For to your prevailing advice (Sir)
do I owe my first Rescue from the Chains and Fet∣ters
of an unhappy Education, then which 'twas im∣possible
either for you to have conferred, or for me
to have received a greater benefit, there being no Per∣fection
to be Valued at so high a Rate as a true Free∣dome
and Ingenuity of Mind: 'Tis this, that di∣stinguishes
Churches from Heards. And those men
that have laid aside the free and impartial use of
their Reasons, are just as fit for Religion as Sheep

and Oxen, for they differ only in this, that the one
are Brutes without Reason, and the other Brutes with
it. How could the Scythian have sacrificed Rational
Beings, had he not first sacrificed his Reason; or
the Egyptian adored Irrational Creatures, had not
himself been one? Onyons could never have been
Deities if Egyptians had been men; but when Rea∣son
was once banished the Temples, no wonder if
folly and superstition commenced Religion; a stock
might be a Deity when the Priest was no more. But
(Sir) the excess of my Ioy and Zeal tempt me to be
impertinent.
Philosophie may perhaps think her self hardly
dealt with, to have two of her famousest Sects call'd
to the Barre by so mean a Cleark as my self, yet I
think I have done them not a little Honour in citing
them before so Eminent a Iudge, and one so much
their Peer in all Sublime Learning and Generositie
of Soul; that their great Masters Zeno and Plato
might justly Resign the Chair, and yield their Porch
and Academy inferior to the Colledge that you Pre∣side.
Where the many good foundations, and grounds
of Polite Literature, that you alone have laid, may
well be thought the only Talismans of its present
flourishing and prosperous Condition. These Papers
therefore which were formed and hatched under your
immediate Influences, being to take their flight abroad
into the World, ought to be legitimated by no other

then that Sun, which has always shined so favourably
upon all my Endeavours. I cannot but acknowledge
that (Sir) I have one selfish design in this Epistolary
Address; namely, to bribe your affection that it may
defend me from the Power of your Iudgment. 'Tis
a very unusual request I confess, but yet 'tis mine at
present, that you would be pleased to Protect me from
your self; For I here offer to your sight that Paper
which (did I not know your Candor to be proportion'd
to your other Accomplishments) I could even wish
might escape it. And thus (Sir) by prefixing your
Name to this Pamphlet, I have not onely Rescued it
from your own Iudgment, and the Contempt of others,
but have also in some measure gratified my own Pride,
in that as many as shall chance by the sight thereof, to
understand that there's such a thing as I in the world,
may withal be informed of the Honour and Happi∣ness
I have in being

