



SIR,
I Humbly present this insuing Controversie to your Honor, because I deem you to be an able Judge, not onely in those Contro∣versies that concern the common Laws of this Land; but also in Divine Controver∣sies, and especially in this insuing Controversie, because it hath so much dependance on sundry sorts of Scripture-Laws and Covenants, in all which you cannot chuse but have a judicious inspection, as well as into the Laws of this Land; and the rather, because the Laws of England, have either in their rise, or in their use, some relation to the said Scripture Laws and Covenants.
1 This insuing Controversie hath some relation to the moral Law of Nature, in which Adam was created. And this Law, though I call it the moral Law of Na∣ture, yet I do not call it the Covenant of Nature, which God made with Adam touching mans nature in general, as my Opponent doth.
2 It hath some relation to that special positive Law and

Covenant which God made with Adam (concerning mans nature) as he was ordained to be the head of mans Nature in general; For God gave unto Adam two symbolical Trees, unto which he annexed a Promise as well as a threatning, namely, That in case he did first eat of the Tree of Life, then his Promise and Covenant (which was necessarily implyed) was, That he and all his natural posterity should be confirmed in his created natural perfections for ever; But in case he did first eat of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, then his threatning was, That both he and all his natural posterity should die a spiritual death in sin.
3 It hath some relation to the Laws of a Combate for the trial of the mastery; for at the first the Devil thought that he had got the ful victory over all mankind by drawing Eve to eat of the forbidden fruit; but God told the Devil in Gen. 3. 15. That he would put an utter enmity between him and the sed of that woman which he had deceived and conquered, and that one of her seed should combate with him, and break his cunning Head-plot, by continuing constant in his obedience, through all his ill usage; until he had made his soul a sacrifice of Reconciliation. And moreover, God told the Devil, that he should have his full liberty to provoke his pati∣ence, and to hinder him in the course of his obedience, by his ill usage, and that he should have so much power granted him, as to pierce him in the foot-saols for a sin∣ful Male factor on the cross, to try if by any ill usage, ei∣ther by fraud or force, he could provoke his patience to make him sin against the Laws of the Combate. And God also warned the Devil by his proclamed Declara∣tion, That in case he could not prevail by all his ill u∣sage to disturb the passions of the seed of the wo∣man, nor any other way to divert him in the course

of his obedience, then this seed of the woman (by the onely weapon of his righteousness) should break his Head-plot in peeces, and so should get the victory of the Victor; and rescue the spoil from his power (or at the least the best part of the spoil) namely, the Elect; and so it was prophecied of this blessed seed, in Isa. 53. 12. That he should divide the spoil with the strong, namely with the strong enemy Satan.
4 It hath some relation to the Laws of the Eternal Covenant, between the Father and the Son for mans Redemption; for God could not have declared the said Laws of the Combate for the Victory, except there had gone before hand an eternal consent, decree and Cove∣nant between the Father and the Son, for the trial of this Combate, in order to the redemption of the Elect from Satans head-plot: Therefore from this declared combate, in Gen. 3. 15. it follows by necessary consequence, that the second person did from eternity Covenant to take unto him mans true nature from the seed of the deceived sinful woman, and in that nature, as it was accompanied with our true infirmities of Fear, Sorrow, &c. to enter the Lists, and to combate with Satan for the end aforesaid. And 2. Hence it also follows by necessary consequence, That God the Father did Covenant to and with his Son, that in case the Devil could not by all his ill usage prevail to disturb his humane passions, nor could by any other way divert him in the course of his obedience, until he had fi∣nished all his sufferings, and until at last, in that obedience, he had made his soul a sacrifice, then he would accept of the perfection of his righteousness and obedience, both in his combate and also in the formality of his death, by his own Priestly power, as a sweet smelling sacrifice, and thereupon would be reconciled to the Elect, and receive them again into special favor, as Sons, by Adoption.

A learned Divine saith thus,
The fundamental grounds of Christianity, do inforce us to grant, That in the Divine nature (though most indivisibly one) there is an eminent Ideal pattern, of such a distinction as we call between party and party, a capacity to give, and a capacity to receive; a capacity to demand, and a capacity to satisfie &c.
5 From this eternal Decree and Covenant between the Father and the Son, doth result the New Covenant with the Elect; For it pleased them to agree, That all the Articles of the New Covenant, should be ratified and confirmed to the Elect by the death of Christ, and from that confirmation by his death; It is now stiled the New Testament, Heb. 9. 15, 16.
6 Presently after the Declaration of the said En∣mity and Combate in Gen. 3. 15. namely, in verse 19. It pleased God further to declare the Council of his will to fallen (but now also converted) Adam, That he should return to the dust whence he was taken, Gen. 3. 19.
And this is also further to be noted, That God de∣nounced this judicial sentence of a bodily death on him, as a just punishment for his original spiritual death in sin; and this is also further evident by Rom. 5. 12.
And secondly, The Apostle doth also further tell us, That when God appointed a bodily death to Adams sinful nature, that he also did at the very same time appoint a judgement for each departed soul, Heb. 9. 27. namely,
First, That such as dyed in the faith of their Redemp∣tion by the seed of the woman, should bee judged to

everlasting life; and so the sentence of their bodily death should at the last bee turned into a blessing to them.
But secondly, That such as beleeved nor their Re∣demption by this seed of the woman, the sentence of their bodily death should bring a greater judgement to them, because it should be an inlet to their eternal death in hell, Ioh. 3. 36.
7 Hence it also follows by necessary consequence, That when God proclaimed this Combate and victory, he did exemplifie the manner of the victory to Adam by the death of some Lamb, which God commanded Adam to offer in Sacrifice (as I have shewed it more at large in my Treatise of the Institution of the Sabbath) and ever after, God did exemplifie the same to the Fa∣thers, both before, and after the Flood.
1 Before the Flood, it is said, That Abel did offer a better sacrifice than Cain, because he offered it in faith, Gen. 4. Heb. 11. 4.
2 Immediately after the Flood, Noah is said to offer sacrifice for a sweet savor of rest unto God, Gen. 8. 21. because such Sacrifices were ordained to typifie Gods full rest, and sweet content in the perfect obedience of Christ; first in his Combate, and at last in his Sacrifice, as it is opened in Eph. 5. 2.
3 After this, God is said to preach the Gospel unto Abraham, Gal. 3. 8, 16. and how else did he preach the Gospel, but by declaring in what manner the Seed of the woman should break the Serpents Head plot? and therefore when God renewed his Promise and Cove∣nant of blessedness to Abraham (by telling him that this Seed of the woman should come out of his loyns) He gave this Testimony of Abraham, That he

did obey his voyce, and keep his charge, his Commandements, his Statutes, and his Laws, Gen. 26. 5. And that he would teach his children and his houshold after him (as all the god∣ly Fathers did) to keep the way of the Lord, Gen. 18. 19. namely, to keep the way of true Religion, or the way of Redemption by the Seed of the woman, that was promised to come out of his loyns.
4 After this, it pleased the Lord to separate Israel to be his peculiar people in Covenant; And then at Mount Sinai he gave them the ten Commandements, as a Covenant of Grace (as many learned Divines do of late rightly call it) for the regulating of their faith and obedience, in the course of their lives, toge∣ther with certain other voluntary, ceremonial and typi∣cal Laws, and with certain Judicial Laws (many of which were also typical) and these Laws in their out∣ward bodily use were called the first Covenant (of works) in respect of their lawful and legal appearing be∣fore Gods presence in his Sanctuary, but the same Laws in their mystical and spiritual use were given as a Cove∣nant of grace, and as the Law of faith, though after a while, the Jews under the New Testament, did mistake Gods end in giving them, for they did relye upon their outward obedience to them as Idolaters do, for their eternal justification and salvation.
5 Besides these typical ceremonial Laws, It pleased God to ordain some other voluntary, positive, ceremonial Laws (which were no way typical in relation to our re∣demption by Christ as the former were) but were or∣dained only for the trial of some particular mans obe∣dience in some one particular act; and such was the command of God to Saul to destroy the Amalekites ut∣terly, without sparing any thing, 1 Sam. 15. And such

also was the command of God to David, to hang up seven of Sauls sons to pacifie his wrath, though some of them, if not all of them, might be innocent of Sauls sin, 2 Sam. 21. And such also was the command of God to the young Prophet, not to eat any bread in that place, nor to return the same way that he came, 1 King. 13. 9. &c.
This insuing controversie hath relation often to some one or other of these Laws and Covenants, as also to the Law of Suretiship for life, in the case of capital crimes: In all which Laws and Covenants, your Lord∣ship cannot but have a deep inspection; and therefore I have the rather been bold to dedicate this insuing Con∣troversie to your Honours judgement.
And now my humble Request to your Honour is,
1 That where you find any thing that doth not ac∣cord to the truth in your judgement, that you will bee pleased either to vouchsafe me your Animadversions, or else to lay it aside in silence, as you do other mens Tenents that you like not.
2 That where you find any thing that doth accord to the truth (which my soul loveth and longeth after) that you will be pleased to vouchsafe it so much grace in your sight, as to protect and defend it, according to God, whereof I nothing doubt, as being verily perswaded that your Lordship doth account it your greatest honour to be every way serviceable to God, and his truth, as it is in Jesus.
And that you may be still guided in the wayes of truth and life, until you obtain the end of your faith, even the salvation of your soul. It is the hearty prayer of

