



THo' when I wrote the Preface that doth ensue, I had no pur∣pose to add any Epistle Dedicatory (most dearly-beloved and worthy Catholics) yet afterwards thinking of some other circumstances both of Matter and Time, I deem'd it not amiss to say somewhat also in this kind of Dedication, both for presenting this Work to whom principally it is due, as also for Advertisement in some few Points which the present State of your Af∣fairs doth seem to require.
2. And for the first,Cause of Dedication. Who doth not see and consider that this Treatise of the first Planting of Christian Catholic Faith in England, with the Conti∣nuance and Preservation thereof from Age to Age unto our Times, doth chiefly and principally belong to You that are Catholics at this day, most worthy Chil∣dren of so renowned Parents, most honorable Off-spring of so excellent An∣cestors, most glorious Posterity of so famous Antiquity, whom future Ages will both esteem and extoll above many of your Predecessors, for retaining That in times of War, which they left unto you in possession of Peace, and for defending that by so singular Constancy of Sufferings, which they both re∣ceived and bequeathed unto you by quiet Tradition?
3. Which Tradition being set down, proved, and declared most clearly in this ensuing Work, I do by offering the same unto you, but present you with your own, to wit, the History of your own House, the Records and Chroni∣cles of your own Family, the Pedigree and Genealogy of your own Forefathers, the Antiquity and Nobility of your own Progenitors, together with your just Title and Claim to their Inheritance, producing jointly for the same your un∣doubted Charters, Enrollments, Evidences, Writings and Witnesses, which no man with reason can deny or call in doubt.
4. And furthermore I do add in the end,The sub∣stance of the Book. for more full Complement of this whole Cause, all such former false and wrong Suits, Pretences, Pleas, In∣trusions, Surreptions, or other like Shifts or Wranglings, which any Heretics to this day (but especially these of our times) have made hitherto about the same, for shew of some Title or Right on their part to this Inheritance and Succession of yours. And lastly, I do produce also the Judgments, Censures, Sentences and Arrests of all Christian Parliaments of the World, to wit, the

Determination of all the highest Ecclesiastical Tribunals in your favor. By all which I doubt not but that your Right and Title remaineth most evident and clear to all Men of Judgment, even to the Enemies or Adversaries them∣selves. Wherefore most justly I do Dedicate this Treatise unto you, which so many ways, and for so many reasons, is your own. And so much for the first Point.
5. The second also, about the Circumstances of the present Time, is already somewhat touched in that we have said: How by God's holy Providence you are born in this time of War, Tribulation and Contradiction, instead of that large and long Peace and Tranquility which your Ancestors enjoyed in the use of that Catholic Religion for which you strive and suffer now; which thing, tho' for the present it seem unpleasant and distastful to Flesh and Blood, yet will the hour come when it shall prove a most singular Benefit and Privilege to such as have received Grace to manifest themselves by this occasion,Time of Trial. seeing that, according to the Apostle, this is one principal End, in God's Everlasting Wisdom, for permission of Heresies, ut qui probati sunt manifesti fiant, that those that be of proof be made manifest by this occasion.1 Cor. 11.
6. Wherefore seeing, as the same Apostle saith in another place, it is given to you (dear Catholics, that live in England at this day) not only to be∣lieve in him,Philip. 1. but also to suffer for him, (a singular privilege by his ac∣count;) yea, and that we may say of You, as he said and gloried of Himself and his Fellows, Vincula vestra manifesta fiunt in Christo in omni praetorio;Ibidem. Your Bonds for Christ are made notorious throughout all the Tri∣bunals and Judgment-seats of our Country. And yet further, as he wrote to his dear Thessalonians in their highest praise and commendation, You are become such Followers of Christ and his Apostles,1 Thes. 1. as receiving the Word of God with Joy of the Holy Ghost in great Tribulation, you are made an Example or Spectacle to all other faithful people in Ma∣cedonia and Achaia, for that from you is divulged the Word of God not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in all other places, by rea∣son of your Faith, which is published every-where throughout the World.
7. Seeing, I say, all this may be truly written of you, and that our Coun∣try hath gotten more honorable Renown in Foreign Catholic Nations, and the Church of God more Glory and Comfort, by this your Patience and Sufferings in these few latter years, than by the peaceable Calm of many former Ages of your Ancestors; I know no true Servant of God, that, together with the com∣miseration of your present hard afflicted state, receiveth not also particular Consolation by your Integrity and Constancy, praying for your perseverance in that most honorable Course which hitherto you have held of true Obedience to Almighty God in matters of your Soul,The hono∣rable course of English Catholics. and Loyal Behavior of Duty towards your Temporal Prince in all worldly Affairs; which course, tho' it have not escaped the calumnious Tongues and Pens of some carping Adversaries, yet is

it justifiable and glorious, both before God and Man, where Reason ruleth, and not Passion: And I doubt not but that the Wisdom and Moderation both of her Majesty and her sage Council, will rather in this Point ponder your own facts, than your Adversaries words; as also consider how rare such Examples of Patience are in these our days, where so great a multitude for so many years hath passed under the Rod of so sharp Afflictions, which is your singular com∣mendation with all wise and godly men, let Cavillers and Calumniators say what they will to the contrary.
8. But God's holy hand hath not stay'd here in proving you by these external conflictions only, but hath passed to the internal also,Internal Tribulati∣ons.Esai. 1. that he might say of you as he did of his dearest people when he meant to do them most good: Con∣vertam manum meam ad te, & excoquam ad purum scoriam tuam; & auferam omne stannum tuum; I will turn my hand upon thee, and will boil out by fire all thy rust even to the quick, and will take from thee all thy Pewter, thereby to leave thee pure Silver; he would equal you in this Point with the Privilege of his Apostles, that you might say with them truly,1 Cor. 7. Foris pugnae, intus timores; We have fights abroad, and frights at home. You know what I mean, and others will easily guess, that have heard of the late storms past: Only I will say, to your high commendation, that your moderate and sage deportment hath been such also in this Point of not admitting the scandal offered, as all men have been edified by your Wisdom and Piety there∣in; seeing fulfilled, on your behalf, that which the Holy Ghost prophesied of holy wise, and peaceable men, truly fearing God:Psal. 118. Pax multa diligentibus Legem tuam, & non est illis scandalum; Those that love thy Law (O Lord) do enjoy their inward Peace, and are not scandalized with what exter∣nal tempests soever do arise.
9. In respect of which Piety of yours, it is to be presumed that Christ our Savior hath wrought again by his Substitute (and this upon the sudden) that famous Miracle recorded by St. Matthew, St Mark, and St. Luke, of calming the Tempest that put his Disciples in fear and jeopardy: Exurgens,Matth. 8. Marc. 4. Luc. 8. imperavit ventis & mari, & facta est tranquilitas magna; He rising up, commanded the Winds and Seas to cease, and thereupon ensued a great calm and tranquility; which kind of Miracle is not lightly made among Prote∣stants, for that they want the means thereof. And therefore, as a thing pecu∣liar to the Subordination of Christ's orderly Church, and wrought by his Divine Power and Vertue, I do the more admire and reverence the same; assuring my self, that no good Catholic will ever hereafter so much as move his finger against it, but co-operate rather to the firm establishment and continuance thereof, as is most behoveful, to the end that as we are all one in Faith and Be∣lief, so we be also in Life, Speech, and Actions, especially in this time of trial. Which God of his infinite Goodness grant: To whose holy Protection I com∣mend heartily both You and my self, this first of March, 1603.



SInce the writing of the precedent Epistle, Advertisement is come, that Almighty God of his infinite Mercy hath delivered you at length (dear Catholics) from your old Persecutor, and, as we hope, will also shortly from your Persecution; His Divine Ma∣jesty be thanked everlastingly for the same. Here generally the applause is no other∣wise, than it was in old time among the Christians, upon the entrance of Constantine into the Empire after Dioclesian, or of Jovinian after Julian. But the former Example seemeth more like, for that good Constantine was of a different Religion when he en∣tred, yet of singular hope to become such as afterward he did, both in respect of his excellent Parts,S. Paulin. ep. 11. ad Severum. and of his pious Mother St. Helena. The difference of the two Mo∣thers is, That the Empress Helena did assist her Son here upon Earth, as St. Paulinus writeth, towards the Truth and Piety of Religion; but Queen Mary of Scotland and France, being violently deprived of this Life, will do it (we trust) by her Prayers in Heaven. The Comparison also is not improper in this, for that perhaps this our new King is the first that hath been absolutely Lord of the whole Island of Britanny (with the Parts annexed thereunto) since Constantine.
Gallican. orat. in Panaegyric. 1. Constantini.2. We know what Commendation a Heathen Author gave to Constantine while he was yet no Christian; and this in public Audience, at the day of Marriage with the Daughter of Maximianus Herculeus, both the Emperours being present, and hearing him:The moral ver∣tues of Constan∣tine before he was a Christian. Neque enim (saith he) Forma tantum in te Patris; sed etiam Continentia, Fortitudo, Justitia, Prudentia, sese votis gentium praesentant; Not only the Form and Beauty of your Father (Constantius) doth appear in you; but also his Continency, his Fortitude, his Justice, his Wisdom, do represent themselves in you, according to the full desire and wish of all Nations.Euseb. l. 8. hist. c. 26. Thus said he of that Constantine: Whereupon Eusebius sheweth, That the Christians of that time conceived so great Love towards him, (tho' he were not yet a Christian) as his Adversary Maxentius hearing of his coming towards Rome, was glad to feign that himself would be a Christian also, to retain somewhat thereby of their affections from Constantine.
3. We read of divers excellent Men in Christian Religion, who were presumed and foretold that they would be such, before they were Christians indeed; and this only upon the foresight of their good Natures and vertuous Inclinations; as, St. Martyn, af∣terwards Bishop of Tours; St. Nectarius, Archbishop of Constantinople; St. Ambrose, Bishop of Millain, and St. Augustin Bishop of Hyppo: albeit of St. Augustin's Conversion from the Heresie of the Manichees to Catholic Religion, St. Ambrose added another Con∣jecture also, or rather Prophecy; to wit, that the Prayers and Tears of his good Mother St. Monica, could not suffer such a Son to perish. All which you see how far it maketh for Us, and for our Hope, of this second Constantine, who wanted not also a holy Mother to Pray and shed Tears abundantly for him whil'st she lived, that he might be such as we most desire now; whereof my self amongst others can be a true Witness, and this from her own testimony.
4. And for that I cannot persuade my self that so holy Endeavors of such a Mother in such a Cause, can be frustrate with Almighty God, I do not only hope well, but do attri∣bute hereunto in great part the many Blessings that have fallen upon this King ever since; but principally His Majesty's Preservation and strange Delivery from infinite Dangers,The strange de∣liverances of His Majesty from many perils. and most imminent Perils, as all men know; so as neither Cyrus, nor Romulus, nor Moyses himself, was more strangely preserved than this King hath been since his Infancy. And for that God doth never commonly work those great Effects but to great Ends, you Ca∣tholics of England may with reason hope well thereof, especially if any thing came by his said good Mothers Intercession, who loved you all so dearly, as whatsoever she asked at God's hands for the Life and Prosperity of her dear Son in this World, a great part there∣of was meant (no doubt) for You, and your Good, if ever you came to be under his Go∣vernment, as now God hath brought you.
5. Another effect of this holy Queens Prayers for her only Son, I hold to be that other Blessing before-mentioned of so many rare Parts discovered in His Majesty's Person; which truly, tho' I have had ever in great esteem upon the reports of other men, yet hath

the same been exceedingly increased upon the late reading of a Book, written (I suppose) some years agon by His Highness, but printed in London this very year, 1603.The King's ex∣cellent Book entituled Basi∣licon Doron. This Book is entituled in the Greek Tongue, Basilicon Doron; to wit, A Kingly Gift sent by His Majesty unto the Prince, his eldest Son, (now also our Lord) being in truth a Golden Gift in respect of the excellent matter contained therein; and it discovereth so many rare Parts in the Writer, as may justly give all Catholics good hope to see one day that fulfil∣led in His Majesty which most they desire. And would to God this singular Treatise had appeared earlier to the World.
6. For setting aside one Point only therein handled, which is Religion, (wherein His Majesty must needs speak according to his Persuasion and Education in that behalf;) all other matters are such, and so set down, as you will exceedingly delight therein, and profit also thereby, if you read with attention, and ponder all well; but especially Three Points above other I noted, with no small admiration to my self, which I speak in all sincerity of truth, as in the sight of Almighty God. The first is,Three rare Points of His Majesty's Book. the great variety of se∣lect Learning, in such a Person, and so occupied otherwise, as His Majesty is. Secondly, the great maturity of Judgment, in applying the same so fitly to the peculiar Affairs of Scotland. The third is, the fervent and extraordinary affection of Piety towards God and Godliness, uttered in so effectual words, and upon so good occasions throughout the whole Book, as a man may easily see it cometh from the heart. And how highly this one Point of Piety is to be esteemed in so High and Mighty a Prince, especi∣ally in these our days, when Contentions in Religion have wrought so great coldness of Religious Piety in many Great Mens Hearts, every Wife and Pious Man will easily consider.
7. But I will go no further in this matter, lest I may seem to flatter, which I hate with my heart, and His Majesty detesteth the Vice most prudently and Christianly in this his Book: Only I will add for our common comfort, That it seemeth impossible unto me, that such a Wit, and so godly-affected a Mind, as God hath bestowed upon His Majesty, can be long detained with the vanity and inanity of Sects and Heresies, where no Ground, no Head, no certain Principle, no sure Rule or Method to try the Truth,No reason to be yielded why a man should be rather of one Sect than another. no one Reason at all can be found, why a man should rather be of one Sect than another; but only every ones own Will, and particular Judgment, grounded (as each one will pretend) upon the Scriptures, whereof yet himself only will be the Judge and Inter∣preter. Which things being of themselves most absurd, in so weighty a Cause as Reli∣gion is, that concerneth the Eternal Salvation of our Souls, it is to be hoped that His Ma∣jesty, having the former two parts of Judgment and pious Affection in that Excellency as hath been said, will easily come in time to discover the same, and therewithal the contra∣ry substantial Grounds and clear Demonstrations for the Catholic Religion, whereunto this Treatise also of the first planting of Christian Religion in our Country, may (in my Opinion) give no small help and light, if it might please His Majesty to bestow the cast∣ing of his eye upon the same.
8. Wherefore, to conclude this Addition to my former Letter, God having wrought so strangely this Change, as here is reported, with so general Peace and Applause of the whole Realm, you are to expect at His Divine Majesty's hands the Effects that are con∣form to his Fatherly Love and Care, ever hitherto shewed towards you. And as for the Person now advanced, I know most certainly, that there was never any doubt or dif∣ference among you, but that ever you desired his Advancement above all others, as the only Heir of that Renowned Mother, for whom your fervent Zeal is known to the World, and how much you have suffered by her Adversaries for the same. Yet do I confess, that touching the disposition of the Person for the Place, and manner of his Advancement, all zealous Catholics have both wished and pray'd, that he might first be a Catholic, and then our King; this being our bounden Duty to wish, and his greatest Good to be obtained for him. And to this end, and no other, I assure my self, hath been directed whatsoever may have been said, written, or done by any Catholic, which with some others might breed disgust.
9. Now, it hath not pleased Almighty God to give us our desires in the order of our wishes, but first to make him our King,1 Reg. 3. and then to leave us in hope of the other at his due time. What shall we say in this and all the rest, but, as Heli did, Dominus est, quod bonum est in oculis suis, faciat: He is Lord, let him do as he thinketh best? And with Pa∣tience, Humility, Longanimity, and Obedience, seek by continual Prayer to hasten that time of our full Joy by His Majesty's Conversion, which we trust in his everlasting Wisdom and infallible Providence is already determined to be suo tempore. And in the mean space, seeing it is here reported, that Catholics, according to their Abilities, have shewed them∣selves

in every Country both ready and forward to advance His Majesty's present Admissi∣on to the Crown, I do not doubt but they shall find the Effects of his Clemency for their delivery out of such Afflictions, Calamities and Oppressions, as lately they have suffered by the instigation principally of such people, whose Manners are most excellently and pru∣dently described by His Majesty in the second Book of his worthy Treatise, as to himself well experienced.
10. And it is no small comfort in this behalf to have a King of whom we may truly use the words of St. Paul,Hab. 5. which he spoke of Christ, Didicit ex eis quae passus est, &c. He hath learned by that himself hath suffered by the same kind of Men. And truly, tho' in his own Person he cannot be said (nor would perhaps) to have suffered properly for Catholic Religion, as You have done; yet if we respect his nearest, either in Nature, Blood, or Affection, and their Number, Rank, and Quality, that among them have suffered for the same Cause, He may be said to have suffered perchance far more than You; for that more of his Princely Blood hath been shed in England, France, and Scotland, about the quarrel of Catholic Religion, than of all other Christian Princes joyned to∣gether.
11. And forasmuch as His Majesty doth vouchsafe of his Princely Gratitude to pro∣fess in one part of his Instructions to his Son the Prince, That in all his Troubles, Streights, and Dangers, he hath found none so sure and confident unto him, as those that remained Loyal and Faithful to his good Mother the Queen, (who all for the most part were known to have been good Catholics) it is to be hoped that he will make the same Account also of You, that remained Constant and Dutiful, not only to Her Majesty while she lived, but to God's Divine Majesty also, in standing and suffering for your Conscience in Religion; which was the Mark and Badge (if you remember) whereby the foresaid famous Go∣vernor Constantius, Father to our Constantine, did try his Christian Courtiers, tho' he were a Pagan himself; rejecting those who upon his Commandment and Invitation had yielded,Euseb. l. 1. de vit. Constant. c. 11. and done against their own Religion; and retaining and honoring others, that had been Constant even against himself: Which fact Eusebius recounteth, with ex∣ceeding praise of the Man's Judgment, Justice, and Piety therein; whose Example I hope our now King will imitate, and you follow the Example of the better sort of those Christians, whom Constantius for their Constancy so much esteemed and ad∣vanced.

