



My much Honoured Friends,
IF the Printing of this Sermon needs an Apology, you must favour me with a Defence, at whose Request I have preached and published it.
The Design of the Discourse is partly to awaken careless Sinners, (if any such vouchsafe it a reading) by endeavouring
to ruine their Hopes of Favour with the Redeemer, while they persist in Ways of Ʋngodliness, refusing the Terms of the Gospel.
And there being another sort of Men among us, not far from the Kingdom of God, almost Christians, of fair Morals, seeking to enter Heaven, but not appre∣hending the right way of attaining it; I earnestly desire this Sermon may be Eye∣salve to these Laodiceans, who court So∣briety and Forms, and decline Zeal, that their Ʋnderstandings may be cleared: for the Light in them is Darkness.
May these perceive that the Morals of Heathens philosophiz'd, and the Pro∣fession of the Christian Doctrine put toge∣ther, do both come short of Godliness, and that renewing of Mind that qualifies Men for everlasting Salvation.
And as for Persons of real Godliness, I hope what I have said, may encourage
their Progress in Holiness, and minister to their Consolation. And that these may be the Successes of what you have drawn into publick View, let your Prayers at∣tend its going forth, that it may prosper, the Lord wording with it.
But whatever may be the Fruit of this Instruction, the Occasion of it hath indu∣ced no little Sadness upon your Hearts, being deprived of the Conversation of an endeared Brother. And you must be al∣lowed to deplore so great and sensible a Loss. For he that was dear to his Friends and Acquaintance, must have been much more so to his Relations, and Relations that knew what value to put upon the Grace and Learning, Religion and Breeding, Piety and Temper conspicuous in him.
To me the sight of Him was a Plea∣sure, and his Conversion always an En∣tertainment: And therefore I cannot wonder if you are in danger of grieving
over-much. But beware you pass not the Bounds God sets to your Resentments, and that your Mournings may not over∣flow the Banks of Patience, Submission, and Resignation to the Divine Will.
Remember what Job said in a very mournful Case, Shall we receive Good at the Hand of the Lord, and not Evil? You have received much Good from his Hand; your Family hath had a great Portion of Divine Favours; God hath made it an eminent Nursery of ac∣complished Preachers, who have led the Way to Heaven, and been instrumental for much Good in the Church of God. And many Temporal Blessings hath he also heaped upon you. And therefore you must the more sofily lament your Loss.
And as a mighty Mitigation of your Grievance, consider where your absent Brother is, and in what Company, and how employed! He is in Paradise, in the
Heaven of Heavens, in the Company of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and Spirits of just Men made perfect, with Angels, and with Christ, praising, loving, enjoying, and delighting in God.
Let these Things qualify your Griefs; and imitating him in his Pattern, rejoice in hope of meeting him in the glorious Mansions above. And if this short Mo∣nition may contribute, through Divine Blessing, to your Consolation under this Cloud, it will he no small Satisfaction to him who is

