



Honoured Sir,
IT being my Fortune to Live some Years in a Port, where your Immor∣tal Brother (for so his Deeds has made him) the Earl of Orrery came to take Shipping for Ireland, his Lordship

was pleas'd to shew me a small Treatise writ (I think) by the Baron De Isola, intimating it was worth Transla∣ting into English; I on my part yield∣ed a ready compliance, and his Lord∣ship was pleas'd to say it was done to his satisfaction. The Approbation of so great a Judge, incouraged me to set on farther Attempts of that kind, so that hearing by a Judicious Person, that Mon∣sieur Pascall's Works would be well ac∣cepted, I got one of the Books, and have used my Endeavours about it, and observing a Parity there is (in some things) betwixt your Honour and our Author, I thought I could not commit the so much Admir'd and Esteem'd Monsieur Pascall and his Precious Re∣mains, into safer and better Hands than the Famous Master Boyle's, nor recommend him to Travel the Kings Dominions, under a better or safer Con∣duct, than that of your Honours Fa∣vourable Approbation and Acceptance.

If the Translation has not the Advan∣tages of Art and Elegancy it requir'd and deserves, I cannot help it, the Will must pass for the Deed; much Sil∣ver cannot be expected out of a Lead Mine; I have kept to the Authors Sense as near as I could; and have given way, that any one else might have perform'd it better if they pleas'd.
Monsieur Pascall was Nobly De∣scended, and a great lover of Ver∣tue and Learning from his Infancy, Every body knows, Sir, you Eminently enjoy these Advantages.
He was call'd a Christian Philoso∣pher, and Mathematician; who knows not but your Honour deserves these Epi∣thets, by the many Learned and Profound Treatises you have Compos'd. He made all his Works, and Actions of his Life, tend to the Temporal and

Eternal good of Men: You have Em∣ploy'd your whole Life and Estate in Laborious Studying the abstrusest Reces∣ses of Nature, for the Glory of God, of Religion, and the good of Manking. as appears by your Excellent Trea∣tise of the Stile of the Holy Scri∣tures, &c.
Monsieur Pascall was Eminently Cha∣ritable, Pious, and Exemplary in his Mo∣rals, hating and reproving Vice in him∣self and others, wherein he surpast most of the Clergy: These things, Sir, can∣not be deny'd you to such a Degree; that for disapproving Vice, you ac∣quir'd the Title of Lay-Bishop; for those truly deserve double Honour who throughly Reform themselves, and do sincerely reprove Sin and Vice impar∣tially in all sorts of Persons whatsoever. The Prophets, Christ, the Apostles, and all Good Men have done so. Those who are indifferent in this regard, and that

manage themselves and Interests with a kind of human Policy, thinking there∣by to scape in a whole Skin; let such tremble, for a Monsieur Pascall and a Master Boyle will Rise up in Judgment and condemn them; such doings will not turn to Account in the End, as ap∣pears by our next Neighbours sad Ex∣perience.
I observe, and could Instance other particular Strains in Monsieur Pascall's and your Honours Works, and Life, which the World would be Proud to know; but I hold my Hand, and referr so weighty a Work to be perform'd by your Panegyrists.
It is very seldom such Vertues as were in him, are found in those of the Communion wherein he Liv'd: But when I consider and compare his Writings and Life, with a Lord Treasurer Man∣chester, a Master Herbert, and many

other Worthies that have liv'd and shin'd in the English Climate, I will not presume, but shall leave it to the Learned World to judge the apparent dif∣ferences may be discern'd.
It is true Monsieur Pascall is Dead, but his great Purity of Life and Zeal, according to what he could discern through the Mists of Superstition, and part of his Remains in this Treatise: and you Illustrious, Sir, in the Nu∣merous Issue you have enrich'd the World with: I say the Pious and Lear∣ned Master Boyle, and Monsieur Pas∣call, in their Excellent Works, do yet, and Will for ever Live and Shine, and speak aloud in the Temple of Fame, and will be rever'd in the Memory of Good Men, and thereby have acquir'd a Name better than of Sons and Daugh∣ters.

I know it is a common Practice to Expose Pieces as the Real Product of a Couper, a Carrachio, a Vandike, &c. and to impose on Men Spurious Brats for Legitimate Children, because they may have some Features of their Pa∣rents.
I dare not assure the World that the Account here given us of Monsieur Pascall's Life and Works, are a Live∣ly and Perfect Representation of him; on the contrary, having seriously consider'd the Solidity and Design of his Book, in most parts of it, I am rather apt to believe, there are many Strokes and Alterations made by other Hands, through that which some call pia fraus, that were never intended by him, had he liv'd to have seen his own Works finish'd.
It is Recorded of Epaminondas, that he earnestly desir'd he might ob∣tain

one of the Prizes at the O∣lympick Games, that his Mother might partake with him the Pleasure of his Happiness. What an exceeding great Contentment must it needs be to your Illustrious Relations, to see you for so many years successively enjoy, in the sight of all Europe, greater Honours than that so Passionately desir'd by that Famous Graecian.
You were not Content to search in∣to the Secrets and Nature of all things, in the Elements over and under us, but you at length lanched out into the Boundless Ocean, not precipitately, as it is said the Prince of the Ancient Philosophers did; but by your Rare and Indefatigable Studies: You, I may say, Inverted the Order; for the Prophet made the Waters Potable by casting Salt into them; whereas you make Salt Wa∣ters Sweet and Wholsom by taking the Fire and Salt out of them.

What Cause has all Europe to thank Heaven for the Blessing they do or may (if they be not wanting to themselves) receive by your Contri∣ving and perfecting those Engines and Materials for making Salt  water Fresh? A Secret no less Profitable than Pleasant, Almighty God was pleas'd you should discover, and in this last Age of the World communicate to Men, to refresh and Cherish them in their Sea Voyages, with what Quantity of Wholsom Water they pleas'd every Day; whereas formerly, they were oft times forc'd to spread their Tarry Sails, and with avidity catch the Drops of Rain any kind Cloud did spare them; or were forc'd to drink putrid Waters, that caus'd the Miscarriage of many Rich Ships, and the Death and loss of many brave Sea∣men.

Some boast of their Atchievements in Wars by Land, others of their Suc∣cesses by Sea, it is only the Vertu∣ous Man that feels true Content and Pleasure in controlling his own unruly Passions, by bringing them in Subje∣ction to the Rules of Right Reason, and of the Will of God.
It is said of Alexander the Great, that he wept when he heard there was no more Worlds to conquer: Time has now disprov'd that great Philosopher Hipocrates and Physicians Maxim, Ars longa, vita brevis. What part of the World, which of the Elements has not your Stupendious Wit penetrated, and still are ready with a more than Her∣culean Force, to Attempt and sur∣mount those things, that to others seem impossible to be effected.
But Words are too weak to display the least of your Merits, your own

Works will better transmit your Memo∣ry to Posterity; therefore knowing too much Commendation, though never so well deserv'd, is a burden to Modest Ears, I shall restrain my Pen from so Pleasant a Theme, and subscribe my self,
Honoured Sir,


