



Honoured Sir,
WHen a Man is upon taking a long Journey he prepares himself accor∣dingly, and Emploies what time he has to spare in settling his most Important Af∣fairs. Daily Experience shews the uncertain∣ty of Life; the World is but a Passage; how ma∣ny do we see come to their Journeys End, by the Sword, Sicknesses, and a Thousand sorts of Accidents? In the Grae there is neither Action nor Invention; therefore what I find requisite to be done, I love to do it with all my Might.

The Body with the Sensitive part relating to it, shall be gone hence and be seen no more till the general Audit, and who can tell how soon? But the Will, the Memory, the Intellective part of Man shall never Die, it shall to all Eternity be Happy or Miserable, by looking back on what it Acted in the Inch of Time was lent in this World.
Next to my acknowledgment to God for ma∣king me in his own Likeness, and for restoring his lost Image in me by his Blessed Son, I endea∣vour and desire to shew my Gratitude to all my Worthy Friends and Benefactors for their kind∣nesses to me: And amongst them, I should think my self guilty of a Crime punishable by the Judges, not to own the great Obligations I have to Sir John Hewet in particular.
It is not yet twice Seven years since my Ho∣nour'd Friend, your good Father, of his own Inclination, was the Instrumental Cause of set∣tling me in a Publick Imployment in His Maje∣sties Service, where amongst many other Pleasures and Benefits I enjoy'd, I design'd to Translate the History of the Eucharist into English, and in order thereunto, I had writ and perfected near one Fourth part of it. But that Work and Subject was of too great Weight and Purity to be hand∣led by a Publican, therefore God (who sees not as Mansees) was pleas'd to call me from the Re∣ceipt of Custom, and whn at a convenient time, and place of Retiremen  thought to have re∣assm'd my Business, seeking the Papers I thought

I had in advance by me, by some Accident or other they miscarry'd, so that not finding them, I was struck into such a damp, that I had Thoughts of wholly quitting my Design about that Book. God was not pleas' any part of the Old Materials should serve in the Building, he would have it all of a new Lump, so I set my self a work De novo, and with Gods Bles∣sing and Assistance, accomplish'd my desire, as well for my own satisfaction, as to gratifie my Friends.
I have liv'd a good while in the World, and have concern'd my self but with few Persons, nor Businesses, nor do I much desire it; I desire as Dr. Donn did, to swim like a Fish, quietly to my Long Home: Those Providence has directed me unto, are of the best sort, and Curious enough, as some very well know. What is with∣in the compass of my little Power to do, or give, or say, I do it with a great deal of Fidelity and Chearfulness: If I have not succeeded in some things, Almighty God has abundantly heard me in others, that it may be are more Expedient.
You are pleas'd to tread your Fathers Steps, in making me participate of your Favours at Waresly, at Cambridge, and in London; I freely own the great Honour and Respect I bear to your self and your Noble Family, and being desirous to make what slender Retaliation I am able for all your Favours, I draw out a De∣tachment from Monsieur Pascall's Book, (for

which the Generous Mr. Boyle will excuse me) and commit it to your Patronage and Conduct, being assured Sir John Hewet and his Friends in and about Cambridge, &c. know very well how to Exerse and Improve it to the best ad∣vantage.
Amongst some other Remarks of this present Year, 1687. I have had the Pleasure to observe the Concurrence of certain Planets that have their Course East and West, and concenter'd at the same Epoche; a Phaenomena, no less Rare than Propitious to some Illustrious Families; I do not see but the like or greater Felicities aboad them in this next ensuing Year 1688.
In these Lines you see scatter'd, at least some of my Thoughts and hearty Wishes: If I fall short of Rendering you any Real Services, I will not do so, in constantly owning to all the World, that with all Integrity, I desire to be lookt upon, as,
Honoured Sir,

