



May it please your Lordship;
THe Doctrine of Vita∣lity and Vegetation, as it is the Act of an
Om∣nipotent God, so 'tis a stu∣pendious  Mystery to Man: And
as the Divine Institu∣tion, and Legitimacy in prosecuting the
Succession of natural Causes, and pro∣pagation of Corporeal Be∣ings, was
a clear Indicati∣on of Divine goodness, and a publick Manifesto to
in∣dulge Mankind in Conju∣gal embraces; as Antece∣dents to those wise and
honourable purposes, for which Marriage was or∣dained; so the Pravity and
Corruption of the humane Nature, is visible in those notorious deviations
from the Primitive Sanction: And the eager pursuite of  unlawful
and destructive pleasures doth wholly in∣vert the appointed Deco∣rum; and
this violence of appetite continuing, the mind is dealt withall, and prepared
to an Assent, and reason proselyted to the di∣ctates of
passion.
The fatal effects of For∣nication and Adulteries, are too plainly
apparent in de∣stroying bodily health; the ruine of Families and King∣doms,
the debauching the generality of Mankind, the Production of a miserable and
obscure Progeny, the Atarchy and Confusion in Government, the loss of 
 Property in the World, the want of Education and Pro∣tection of
Parents, the A∣bolition of Religion and Devotion; and in short, the
Destruction of the Creati∣on: all which are sufficient Punishments in
themselves. Did I say Punishments? I must only call them Suffe∣rings,
Proaemial to Eternal Torments.
How will the wiser Hea∣then condemn such bea∣stial and
irrational Practi∣ces! they valued themselves highly, in hopes of their
Elysium, and Life to come, and disdained the Commis∣sion of
any thing incon∣gruous  to such expectati∣ons. The Holy
Resolution of Seneca stands upon re∣cord; Faciam omnia tanquam
Deus videret: And hence the Philosopher so much preferred his
contemplative,Aristotle. before his practick
felicity; and the Poet Claudian tells us, That Nature, meaning the God
of Nature, assigns happiness to all men.
—Natura Beatis,
Omnibus esse dedit, si quis cognoverit uti.
Now who can be so foolish, and act Antipodes to his
own Reason; as to de∣generate  into Sensuality and
uncleanness, which inevita∣bly pulls on Everlasting Misery? Whereas
nothing can more advance the hu∣mane Nature to its primi∣tive Dignity and
Happi∣ness, than Obedience to the Supream Law-giver; and nothing can gratifie
the Senses of a thinking man, but what is licenc't by the bounty of
Heaven.
God having thus admi∣rably consulted the good of Mankind, who
would not accept of such Graci∣ous Invitations, when Con∣jugal Enjoyments are
not only lawful, but indulged,  and man made an Instru∣ment to
propagate Posteri∣ty, and conferr a Religious Education to his Children,
preserve Honour and Hone∣sty, Peace, and Concord, good Government and
de∣corum in the World, and all those Placentia's and Contents of
Marriage, are but praelibations of celestial Joys hereafter.
And your Lordships ear∣ly condescension to the Ma∣trimonial
Obligation, hath encouraged this Dedication; that as your Honour is a Noble
Advocate for Marri∣age, so I have great hopes to presume, that your
Lord∣ship  will protect this piece against the licentious
hu∣mour of a depraved Age; when Marriage is decry'd, as a restraint upon
Liberty, and the beaten path of our wiser Ancestors utterly ex∣ploded.
 E Museo meo Londini, 
dieMaii, 25. 1685.
