



May it please Your Grace
TO permit these Papers to go abroad under your Name, which are writ in defence of that most holy Religion, of which your Grace is the prime Minister in this King∣dom. They contain an explication but of a very few words; yet in them lies the whole Evidence for the Christian Cause. I hope I have done something to clear their sence,
and to illustrate divers other passages in the holy Books. I have, at least, done my en∣deavour, and opened the way to the plainest and most Apostolical method of asserting the truth of our Religion. They that come after may supply the defects, and rectifie the mistakes, which they find in this account that I have given of the Witnesses to Chri∣stianity. Who speak so fully and with such Authority, that it is a matter of just wonder there should be any Infidels in Christian Countries.
We can find no other cause of it, but that in stead of considering upon what grounds our Faith relies, they scornfully presume that it hath none. If they would but lay aside their lightness, and become serious, and if they would be so humble as to think it is possible they may learn of one of the despi∣sed Ministers of Jesus Christ; I doubt not they would, with a little study, soon see him to be so great a Lord, that they ought to have a due respect to the meanest of his Ser∣vants,
for his sake. Nay, they would not envy to them such high Dignities, as your Grace worthily holds in the Church of Christ. For the Lord himself is honoured, in the honour that is done to his Ministers. And thereby they are made capable to do him still better service; and with the more au∣thority to promote the honour of his Religi∣on.
Of which how much your Grace hath de∣served, by your prudent care and vigilance for its preservation, and by the countenance and encouragement you give to those that labour in its service; posterity perhaps may be better judges than this present Age. Though that cannot be so ungrateful as not to acknowledge your great Munificence and Bounty; of which there are such publick and lasting Monuments, as declare you to be Primate of all England, not only in the dignity of your Office, but, which is more, in the generosity of your Spirit.
Long may our Soveraign enjoy such a wise Counsellor, the Church such a Prudent Go∣vernour, Learning such a liberal Patron and Benefactor, and, when through mere Age you must resign and exchange it for a higher and better place, your See such a Successor.
As for my self, if your Grace will be pleased to pardon this Address, and reckon me in the number of those, that reverence your Ver∣tues as well as your Greatness, I shall not doubt but my Design in this Work will ob∣tain your Graces approbation; and that your known Candor will pass a favourable Judg∣ment upon the weak endeavours of

