


WHEN the soul is set in sad circumstances, and cloathed with black and mournfull thoughts, it is very apt to hearken to so∣ber Counsels, and to entertain pious pur∣poses and resolutions. I imagine it pos∣sible that the sight of the Corps of your beloved Pastor, might open a wider gate then ordinary for the truths which were then propounded to enter into your hearts, and that in that sad silence of your souls they might have more of your attention, and better audi∣ence. If they found any good acceptance with you then; they come now again to ask you whether you still stand so af∣fected, and continue in the same mind, and can find in your heart upon a second motion to renew your good resolutions.
For when the soul that hath been shut up in it self, shall but open again to let in some light of mirth and gladness, all our sad and serious purposes are ready to run out at the
same door, unless we take good heed and give an express command for their stay by laying fast hold upon them. When the souls grows gay and pleasant again, it is apt to look upon its former resolves but as Melancholy fancies, or to retain only such a weak remembrance of them as we do of the shadow of a dream, or they seem as things do that we are run a great way from, and have left far behind us, which when we were present lookt as big as a Church Steeple, but now at a distance seem no bigger then the stump of a Tree. And therefore it is necessary that you ask your selves how the truths that were then plainly represented, appear unto you at ten or eleven dayes distance from them. Ask your selves I say, whether now they appear so great and weighty as its possible they might when you were very near unto them, and whether now that you are counting your mo∣ney and about your trades, you have as good a mind to reckon your dayes aright, as perhaps you had when God and you were reckoning together. If you would know your souls aright, and be acquainted with your own temper, you must take your selves in all moods, both when you are merry and when you are sad, when you are in health as well as when you are sick; and if you like the same truths alike at all times, it is an ar∣gument of a healthful constitution. So some of the Persian wise men advised that a man should consider of a business both when he had drunk liberally and when he was fasting, in the night and in the day, when he was angry and when he was well pleased, and he might be sure it was a reasonable thing if it appeared so from whatsoever station he looked upon it. In like manner I advise and intreat you to consider whether you like these things not only when you were swal∣lowed up with sorrow, but now that you have dried your eyes. Do they appear the same now to your sight, that they did when you lookt upon them through tears? can you like these things in shops, as you did in the Church? Now that
they are presented to your eyes, as when they struck your ears? Ask your souls whether they are at so much leisure as to con∣sider once more of them. Tell your selves whether any such sence of the truth remain upon them, that you will try how you like them upon second thoughts. And I pray our good God that whosoever of you taketh a review of these things, may learn so much of this Divine Art as to take an account of the dayes he hath passed, to keep a fair account of the rest of his life, and to give up his accounts with joy at the day of our Lord. I use this boldness and freedom of speech to you, because you have been used unto it by my dear friend, and because I think thereby I shall best serve both the truth and you. Let me be so importunate therefore with you as to conjure you by all the names of love and dearness, by all that is pretious and valuable to you, by the remembrance of our Lord; by the remembrance of all the servants of the Lord that have laboured among you, by the love you bear to your own souls, and as you desire after heaven, that you wil consider seriously how pretious a thing a day is, and that you will not spend it all in the business of this world, much less in sports and recreations, but let God have a considera∣ble portion of it. Some of the Heathens have carefully pro∣hibited the wastefull mispense of mens hours;
, &c. L. 2. Var. hist. cap. 5. and therefore I may well be suffered if I be urgent with you to redeem them. It is a notable Testimony that Aelian gives of the Lacedae∣monians, that they were hugely parsimon ous and even covetous of their time; spending it all about necessary things, and suffering no Citizen either to be idle or to play: In so much that when it was told that some used to walk in the afternoons for their recreation, the Ephori forbade it as savouring of pleasure, and would have them to recreate their bodies by some manly exercises which had some profit in them, and would breed them to be servicable to the Common good. How much will they shame us in the day of judgement
when it shall appear that all this thriftiness of theirs was not so much for their souls, as for the profit of their City, and we would not use half so much care for immortal be∣ings and the securing of a better Countrey which is an hea∣venly.
Ib. cap. 28. Themistocles seeing two Cocks fight when he was going to a battle, pointed his Souldiers to them, and said, Do you see yonder Combatants how valiantly they deal their blows? and yet they fight not for their Countrey, nor for their Gods, nor for the honour of their Ancestors, no nor for glo∣ry, nor liberty, nor children, but meerly to overcome and crow over the vanquished. What courage then my brave Countreymen, should this put into your hearts, on whose reso∣lution all these depend, and by whose valour they subsist? The same I say to you; Do you see how sparing and saving of their time the Old Lacedaemonians were? And yet it was not for the worshipping of their Gods, nor for the attending to their souls,
V. Wheatly of redemp∣tion of time &c. but meerly that they might be hardy Souldiers and might overcome all their enemies. How good Husbands then ought we all to be? how valiantly should we resist all Theeves and Robbers that would steal away our time from us? when it is for God, for heaven, for the safety of our souls, yea and for our happiness, peace and quiet in this world also. If this discourse may any thing quicken you, let not me be forgot in those good hours that you spend with God, and I shall not forget to pray for you, that he would provide a Pastor for you after his own heart, that will feed you with knowledge and understanding, and guide you in the good old paths that lead to everlasting life.

June 28. 1659.
