



THere being a solemn Vow upon you, made in Baptisme, to keep Gods holy will and Commandments; it is as necessary to understand them, as it is to be honest men, and not to falsifie or break your word. For an help therefore to the meanest capacities in a bu∣siness of such importance, I have drawn up an ex∣position of the Ten Commandments in this plain and familiar way of Questions and Answers: not knowing what other course to take that would be of such general use. For the Ignorant can reap little benefit by that which is purposely contrived to the pitch of the wise; but there is no man of such un∣derstanding that may not serve himself very much of that which is writ to the simple people. And to say the truth, the plainer and more common any no∣tion
is, of the greater weight and moment we shall find it, and the more every man is concerned in it. Let me intreat you then not to despise this little Pa∣per, but to read it deliberately, and ponder every sen∣tence in it: For it being so brief (that the memory may not be burdened) there is not a word superfluous, which is not necessary to the unfolding the sense of the command Search the Scriptures also whereby every thing is proved, and afterward search and ex∣amine your selves about the breach of any of these Precepts, either in whole or in part. And if the Judgments of God that lie now so heavy upon us, have begot any purposes of amendment, do not add this new aggravation of your guilt, to break those fresh Vows whereby you have bound your selves to God. And for the strengthning of them, Give your selves to Prayer, as the Psalmists phrase is Ps 109.4. Considering also seriously (as an help to that) what it is you ask of God in that form of Prayer which our Lord made, of which I have also added a short Explication. And remember withall, that all the Prayers you make will not profit you, unless they cause you to keep Gods commands better, which is the end likewise of all you believe. Read over that which we call the Apostles Creed, and you will find that every branch of it doth naturally bring forth an holy life. When you confess God to be the Creator of the World; it plainly implies his Supream Authority over you, and the obedience you owe him upon that account. When you acknowledg
Jesus to be his Son and your Lord, it lays a necessa∣ry ingagement on you to be governed by those Laws which the Father Almighty hath sent him to give us. For he died and rose again to confirm and seal them. He ascended to heaven to take upon him the government of the whole World. And he will come again to Judg both the quick and dead accord∣ing to their works. And therefore what manner of persons ought you to be in all holy conversation and godliness, that you may be found in peace at his ap∣pearing? But it is not my business now to expound the Creed; whose words are better understood▪ then it's designe; which is (I say) to lead us to the obe∣dience of Gods holy will in all things. That is it which I would gladly promote. And I earnestly beseech you that this small labour may have no small effect, but be so successfull as to excite in you such a working Faith as will save your souls.
God Almighty take you into his protection, and revoke the Orders he hath given to the destroying Angel; that you may not die, but live, to declare the works of the Lord, and to pay your Vows to the most High. Amen.
Sept. 13. 1665.
