



Right Honourable,
IT is so hard, on some occasions, to be a tho∣roughly good Christian, and much more to be such a Magistrate; that some have gi∣ven over the endeavour of it, out of a per∣swasion, that it is impossible. Which, as it pro∣ceeds from great ignorance of the Christian Reli∣gion so, would be a great disparagement to it; if our blessed Saviour, and his Apostles, had not ta∣ken special care, not only to breed in us a quite contrary opinion; but also to raise our minds to the

highest degree of confidence, that we shall be able, by the Divine assistance, to surmount the greatest difficulties.
This I have endeavoured, in as plain a manner as I could devise, to press in this Sermon; which by the desire of that Honourable Court, where Your Lordship presides, I now humbly present to Your and the publick view. Which will do the more good, I hope, not only because Your Lordship judg∣ed it very seasonable at Your entrance upon Your Of∣fice, but because I was directed to this subject, not so much by my own Prudence, as by a kind of Di∣vine Providence: which I have oft observed on the like occasions.
For, having in the common course of my Ser∣mons this year, at my own Parish, Preached up∣on some part of the Epistle for the Day, I found there was no need to go out of my way to meet with a fitting Argument; upon that Sunday when I was appointed to preach to Your Lordship. And therefore I sought no further, but applyed my self to prosecute the first words, which occurred there: and that, not with such matter as humane inven∣tion might have furnished me withall; but such as the Apostle himself suggested, in the rest of the Epistle for that day.
And indeed, they are matters of great and weigh∣ty

importance; which, though there be many of them, I have both comprehended in a little room, and also made them not hard to be remembred; because I have considered them as relating all to one and the same end; and as having, not only the same scope, but, such a dependance also one upon another, that they cannot well be separated. I am sure where they are all united, there the Divine Blessing will be; for they are the compleat Armour of God, that heavenly defence, which will certainly secure us in our station; if we will but make use of it, with a mind to be and to do what soever Christ would have us.
The first step toward which, is rightly to un∣derstand our duty; as should have been pressed more largely, if I had had room enough; from those words, be girt about with Truth. In which if we be defective, we shall miscarry, do what we can; and the more Zealous we are, the more we shall be out of the way. But it is not like∣ly we shall be defective in any material part of Christian Knowledge, if to our serious study of a right understanding and judgment in all things, we add (according to the last Advice in this discourse) most earnest prayer to God for his direction, gui∣dance, and assistance; and can appeal to Him, in such words as those of David (which are full of sincere affection) that we are heartily resolved, to

do whatsoever we know to be our duty; and that there is nothing we long for so much in this world, as to know it intirely, CXIX. Psal. 34, 35. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law: yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart. Make me to go, in the path of thy Com∣mandments; for therein do I delight.
Which that Your Lordship may alwayes do, and thereby acquit your self, in your difficult charge, to the general satisfaction of all good men, is the hearty prayer of
My LORD,

