



THese Meditations being con∣ceived and born in your House, I take it to be a piece of Justice that they should lay themselves at your feet, and come abroad into the world under your Name. (And long before this, had they come to tender their service to you, had the Press been favourable to them, and not let them stick longer there than they did in my mind, before they could be brought forth into the world.) Love hath as great a power to make ser∣vants as any thing else, and no bondman
is faster chained than he that is tied by the bands of his own affection. A Cap∣tive of that quality I must needs profess my self, having such a feeling of the obli∣gations you have laid upon me, that I am not free to love you, or not to love you; but am held under such a sweet tyranny, that I cannot so much as desire to recover my former liberty. These thoughts there∣fore being the births of one so bound to serve you, both by your favours and his own affections;Exod. 21.4. according to the Law of the Hebrews you may challenge a right in them, seeing I am yours as much as my own. I know that I am writing to you, and not of you; and that you do not expect my commendation, but my Counsel; for if you did, you would not deserve Commendation. There is so much flattery many times in these ad∣dresses, that men will not believe us when we say true, and so we displease while we study to please. The world likewise is so envious, that they never think more of our faults, than when we are praised. But yet to tell you of your kindness to me, though you do not expect it, methinks I might be allowed, were it not that then I should commend my self for a grate∣full
Person, after I have declined to commend you. But seeing that is no such great vertue that a man should be tempted to be proud of it, I shall say thus much: That of all the causes that are usually assigned of these Dedications, I can find the impulse of none so strong as that of love and gratitude. Which bids me bind my executors by these pre∣sents (if these Papers can live longer than I) to acknowledge your love, and ever be mindfull of it to you and yours. And although I may justly suspect that they have not strength enough to live to any great Age; yet if they can increase your Piety but in the least degree, that is a thing that never dies, and will be an immortal witness of my endeavours to serve you. To the study of that it is, that I do most affectionately exhort you. Do well, and you shall hear well, though mine and all other Pens lie asleep. Piety is the truest and most Ancient Nobi∣lity, as wickedness is the greatest and basest degeneracy. There is no such way to exalt your Family, as to make a strict alliance with God, and to draw him into your kindred. Nothing can so enrich your Bloud, as to contract
an affinity with the Blood of Jesus. But if earthly honour be of any value (as it may conduce to the better serving of God) you have the favour granted unto you to be noble both in your soul and body, to be allied both to the Bloud of God, and of great Men. The Saint in your name, may put you in mind to be Saints in your selves. The two Mullets or Stars in your Coat of Armes, bids you shine like two Lights in the World. The occasion of your bearing them (which if I mistake not, was because your Progenitors warred in the Holy Land) may put you in re∣membrance to strive and fight to be made free of the Heavenly Jerusalem, that City of God that is above. As these Stars were born in their Ensigns in that expe∣dition in opposition to the Turkish Cre∣scent; so let them put you in mind to keep the world still under your feet, and to scorn these mutable and moon-like things,See Cambden in Glamor∣ganshire. Nympha. fluit propius. Fons refluit. Illa re∣cedit. Iste redit. Sic livor in st & pugaa paren∣nis. as much as you do Mahomet and the Turk. There is a Spring in that Coun∣trey where your name first took root in Brittish soil, which is very low and empty of water, when the Sea flows and swells the neighbouring River Ogmar; and a∣gain ascends and fills it self when the Sea
retires out of the Channel. It will be a most lovely sight both to God and Man, to see you humble and lowly in the highest tides of a swelling fortune; and if your fulness should abate and draw back into the Ocean from whence it came, to be∣hold the elevation of your spirit, and the greatness of your mind rising above all the reach of these worldly changes. Then would you most truly imitate those Stars in your Escutchion, which are not seen in the day; and shine most brightly in the night.
But your name bids you above all things to be full of love both to each o∣ther, and towards all men. For beside that John in the Hebrew Language car∣ries in its signification graciousness and kindness; the beloved Disciple was the first of your name. Degenerate not, I beseech you, from so worthy a precedent, but imbrace with as dear an affection as two St. Johns would have done each o∣ther. That great Saint had this alwayes in his mouth, Little Children love one another; the same have you alwayes in your heart, seeing you are not onely Chri∣stians, but of the same Family, and of the same name which carries a remem∣brance
of that divine Person. The A∣thenians promised themselves nothing but Triumphs in the Sicilian War, because their General Nicias derived his name from Victory, which in the opinion of men had a good presage in it. And some of the Ancient Philosophers did seri∣ously Dispute whether there was not some secret fate or providence in it,Plato in Cra∣tilo. that men should have names given them that did so exactly-agree with their after good or bad fortune. I hope you will not think me impertinent therefore that I have urged you so much with your name, and that you will not let it be given you for no∣thing. And though that Nicias by his great overthrow did disappoint the hopes which his fellow Citizens conceived from his name, yet you will have a care that you deceive not the expectation both of God and Man from you, which is grounded upon a better foundation. Euseb. Severus impe∣rator gravis, & vir nominis si dicitur. Lamprid. I verily believe that you will endeavour to be , (as the Greeks call them) persons of your own name. And as the Apostle prays for his Thessaloni∣ans, 1 Thes. 3.12, 13. you will encrease and abound in love one toward another and towards all men, to the end that you
may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God even our Father, at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints. Let me speak to you and all others once more in the words of ano∣ther Apostle:1 Pet. 3.8. Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of ano∣ther; love as Brethren, be pitifull, be courteous. But what need I insist so long on this, who find you so full of love towards me? It is a delightfull Subject, and therefore you will pardon my vehemence in it. But though it be delightfull, yet I will refrain my self from enumerating my particular obli∣gations, because I know (Sir) that you do not do your kindnesses that they should be talkt of. And for you (Madam) who carries kindness in both your names, I know also that you love to be con∣cealed, and that your love should have none to speak of it but it self; and therefore I shall forbear to say how much (at least to me) you answer the double remembrance you have in them. It will be more acceptable I know to you both, if I turn this address to you into a Prayer to God, that he would do all this and much more for you.
And to that God of Peace from whom all good comes, I humbly bow my knees, that he would make you perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ,Hebr. 13.21. to whom be glory for ever and ever. The more particular petitions that concern you, I shall put up alone, and ever remain what I am much engaged to be

From your house at Ba∣tersea Janu∣ary 27. 1659 60
