




MY LORD,
BEing desired by some in my Parish to print the Sermon I preached on the last Fast-day, I found it necessary to prefix to it the Ser∣mon I preacht the Fast before; because this depends on that: and have presumed to prefix Your Lordships Name to both; because it is by Your Favour and Patronage, that I preached either the one or the other in that Place.
The matter of them is suitable to the occasion: For in the First I have chiefly pressed the General Re∣medy of all the evils under which we labour; in the
Second one Particular Remedy; and in both exposed the wickedness of Popery. But I have shown withal, that all we say against it, will not keep it out: unless we will so duly prize our own Religion, as to live ac∣cording to it. Which being in the general allowed, e∣ven by those who continue to live quite contrary, I see no reason why any Body should quarrel with what I have said, about one particular Duty of our Religion: unless they think that we have nothing to answer for, upon the account of our contempt of Christs Ministers, and of that Order which He hath appointed in His Church; which seems to me such a dangerous sin, that I could not think I discharged a good Conscience, if at such a time and such an occasion, I took no notice of it.
Wherein I do not plead our own Cause, as some are wont to object to such Discourses, but the Cause of Christ and of His Religion: which now lyes a bleed∣ing, and we fear a dying, by the wounds we give it our selves, through the subtile Contrivance of our Ro∣mish Adversaries. Whose Plots have been many and horrid; but their first and greatest strength (as ap∣pears by the directions given to their Emissaries) lay in this, To bring the whole Ministry of the Church of England into contempt; and to divide the People from their established Pastors, into a great many little Bo∣dies, under no Government but what they themselves pleased. And it is apparent, that by the same Popish artifice, this poysonous conceit is industriously infused
into the peoples mind; that we are looking towards Rome, if we do but tell them, that they ought not to form opinions as they think good, but guide themselves in their judgment by our direction.
But I hope the better sort are not ignorant, by this time, of their devices: and that though there be some in the Ministry who are not so fit as they should be, to direct and guide their Flocks; yet they will con∣sider, that the men who most complain of it are such, as will be guided by none at all; no not by those whose a∣bility and honesty cannot be suspected. And it is a very great Truth also, that their intemperate Speeches a∣gainst the Clergy, is the thing that hath frighted the weaker sort of them into such an apprehension of dan∣ger from those men; as hath made them guilty of the follies which have done great injury to us all.
This, My Lord, is the grief of all good Men among us, who consider the state we are in; and desine the safety, or have any love for the honour, of our Religi∣on. For we seem now to be in such a condition as Gregory Nyssen describes in his days: when things were come to such a pass, that the people neither un∣derstood themselves, from their own inward sense, what was fit for them, nor would believe those that rightly informed them. No, saith heTom. 2. p. 745. ., We are exceeding angry at our Teach∣ers, and very hardly bear their ad∣monitions: their counsels are a grie∣vance;


and their instruction in good things, we nauseate, as sick men do the medicines which their Physicians exhibite to them. If a reproof be given, we take it heavily; if we hear a rougher word, we fall into a rage; if we be thrust out of the Church, we blaspheme. This is not the disposition of Learners, nor the obedience of Disciples: but the ambitious con∣tention of seditious and rebellious people. For a Scholar, who desires to learn any common Art or Science, ought to be like a little Child: much more ought he to be like a sucking Infant, who would be instructed in Christian piety; because our Lord hath honoured that Age, as apt to receive impressions, with his commenda∣tion.
Now no Child rises up against the Characters and the Lineaments, that his Master makes for him in Wax; nor devises new Elements, by a frantick Licence innovating about making Let∣ters; but exercises his hand after his Masters Co∣py, and both in word and deed imitates what his Director delivers to him, &c. But a Chri∣stian doth not thus; though he hath heard, That except ye be converted and become like little Children, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: but when the Priest severely corrects his errour, openly contradicts; and mutters between his teeth;
and going round the Streets, and the places of publick concourse, rails and reviles; and (as it follows a little after) sits judging even me the Bishop in the Chair of the Scorner.
Now what can the end of such things be, but utter confusion? Which necessarily follows, when the unity that ought to be between the Pastors and people is quite dissolved; or the people (some upon one account, some upon another) lose all their respect for them, and love to them for their works sake.
There hath been much speech, Your Lordship knows, of a Prophecy (as it is called) of Bishop Usher, late Primate of Armagh; which hath very much start∣led many, and made them fear dreadful things: Though the certainty of it hath not been so publickly attested, as that which I have been bold to set down in the first of these Sermons. Where Your Lordship will find something that looks like a sad Prediction; which an excellent Divine and holy Man of this Church published long ago, in a Book of his upon the Creed. Which I wish were diligently heeded and laid to heart: because it directs to the way, whereby the threatning may be a∣voided; pointing to the very sin that deserves the Judg∣ment he denounces. Which if it be slighted, when we are told of it; it will be one of the worst signs that can be, his Prognostication will prove true and be ful∣filled.
But they who are appointed to stand on the Watch-Tower,
and give notice of danger, have delivered their own Souls; when they have faithfully declared the mind of Christ in this matter. Which was the greatest motive I had both to preach and to print these Sermons; which I am sure will be acceptable to Your Lordship: not only because you have a due respect to Gods Ministers; but because I present them as a to∣ken of my gratitude, and of the honour I have for Your Lordship, being
My LORD, 
