



HAving composed a Treatise, Most Reverend Father, con∣cerning the Appearing of the Chief Shepherd of our Souls (whom we look for from Heaven at the last day) I know not to whom more properly to address it, than to your Grace: whom our Lord hath been pleased to intrust with the high Office of presiding in Chief over that part of his Flock which he hath gathered within the
Fold of this Kingdom: A charge of which, as your Grace was not in the least ambitious, so all judged you highly worthy: and may well look upon it as a token God hath still some kindness for this Church (which hath been so long misera∣bly distracted, and torn in pieces by many sects and different factions) that He hath been pleased to guide His Majesty to the choice of a Per∣son so rarely qualified, both with piety and prudence, with upright∣ness and inflexible vertue, as well as with Learning and other accom∣plishments, to be the Prime Pastor of it.
This I am sure makes some Good men hope that He intends still to feed us in our green Pastures, and to lead us forth beside the waters of com∣fort: and hath moved me to take the humble boldness (among the crowds who come upon that errand)
of appoaching your Grace in this manner; to congratulate to your Grace that singular honour, and to the Church that great happiness.
For the continuance of which, as we ought to pray most ardently, so to do our duties faithfully in our se∣veral stations: and to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, wherewith in this Church, we are fed so con∣stantly, and so abundantly reple∣nished. Unto which as nothing can more effectually excite us, than the serious contemplation of his appear∣ing again to give Salvation to all the Faithful; and especially to bestow upon all Faithful Pastors (who as St. Peter speaks, feed his Flock wil∣lingly, and are examples to it) a Crown of Glory that fadeth not away: So I hope I have done some∣thing in this Treatise to draw the thoughts and the affections of those
who piously peruse it, to so lovely a spectacle.
Of this your Grace is so good a Judge, that it was a Principal motive to my confidence in this Dedication. For next to the pleasure of compo∣sing such a work, is the satisfaction of addressing it to a Patron no less Pious than Knowing: who hath ac∣customed himself to devout Medi∣tations, and feels in his own breast the same holy motions, which he sees and loves in another. This was a Reflection, wherewith that Great man St. Hierom was much delighted, when he was writing his Commen∣taries upon the Prophet Isaiah: In whose words I may more fitly end this Preface to your Grace, than he begins one of his (upon the six∣teenth Book) unto Eustochium. It is an excellent sentence of the most eloquent Orator, that Arts would be happy, if none did judge
of them but only Artists. And lest I should seem to borrow an exam∣ple only from Prophane Writers, this is the very thing which the Prophet represents in other words, Blessed is he that speaketh in the ears of them that hearken.
They are the words, I find, of the Son of Sirach, xxv. Ecclus. 9. whom he calls a Prophet only in a large sense (for in his famous Pro∣logus Galeatus he strikes this Book out of the Canon of the Scripture) because he had an excellent faculty to comprise in a few words many profitable instructions. Amongst which St. Hierom seasonably called this to mind (as he was writing up∣on the Scriptures, to one that loved them, and was well versed in them) which is one of the Ten things there mentioned by that wise man, where∣by he thought he might be made compleatly happy.

And of this happiness (to speak still in the words of that Father) your Grace hath made us partakers: having a palate to taste what is de∣vout, as well as to discern what is learned and judicious. To the later I do not pretend; but hope there is something of the former, which will recommend this work to your Graces good liking, and make it ac∣ceptable likewise to all those that love our Lord Jesus in sincerity.
To whose powerful Protection and Guidance I most humbly com∣mend your Grace; beseeching Him to strengthen you to sustain the burden of so weighty a charge, and to in∣spire you with all the Prudence, Resolution and Zeal, which are ne∣cessary in these difficult times: that by your Graces wise conduct, Gods true Religion may be so setled and firmly established among us, and sin∣cere piety, together with Christian-Learning
and Knowledge so thrive and prosper every-where; that this Church (as St. Paul speaks of that of Thessalonica) may be your joy and glory, and Crown of rejoycing, be∣fore our Lord Jesus Christ, at his com∣ing.
Which is and shall be the prayer of,
My Lord,  
