



May it please Your Grace
TO cast your eye upon the Second Part of that Work, the First Part of which I took the confidence to address unto your Grace the last year. It is concerning that ETERNALL LIFE which was with the Father, as St. John speaks; and now is manifested to us by his Son Jesus Christ, who hath published the most gracious
Purposes of God the Father towards us. The thoughts of which, as they cannot but be at all times exceeding welcome to Devout Christians, (especially to those who are faith∣full Ministers in Christ's Kingdom▪) so ne∣ver more, then when they see their Departure is at hand. In which regards I doubt not this Treatise will be acceptable to your Grace, because it contains a Description and full Assurance of that happy Life which you shortly expect. For there is nothing so re∣viving in our declining Age, as to think that the passage out of this Life leads us not to Death, but to Immortality: and that it will not take away our Happiness from us, but give us a purer enjoyment of it: Pleasure not mixed with a mortall body, but sincere and free from Grief and Sorrow. For when we shall be set at liberty and de∣livered from this Prison, we shall come thither where there is no Labour, no Sigh∣ing, nor Old age: but a Life of perfect ease and tranquillity, that breeds no trouble, nor any other evill; but is serene and clear
in an immovable Rest and Peace. Where the happy Inhabitants sweetly contemplate the nature of things; and philosophize, not for Popularity and the Theatre, but for the finding out solid and everlasting Truth.
I have but translated the words of Plato
in Axiocho, p. 370. (or of some other Phi∣losopher that hath borrowed his name,) who was much pleased in such thoughts as these: though he made but uncertain guesses at that blessed state, which our Lord hath so clearly revealed, and so strongly demonstrated; that we have reason, with never-ceasing joy, both in life and death to give him thanks for so great a Grace. For as there is nothing beyond this that the heart of man can wish; so nothing of such importance to our pre∣sent Happiness in this World. For which cause the Jews have thought fit to expunge those from the number of Israelites, who do not believe the Immortality of the Soul, and the Resurrection of the dead: and to resolve,
that they shall have no part in the World to come, though they otherwise live orderly, and observe the Precepts of the Law. For such men, they saw, opened a door to all licenti∣ousness; and could never doe so much good by any other means, as they did hurt by sub∣verting this Belief.
Which I have endeavoured therefore to establish by such Arguments, as they were ig∣norant of, till our Blessed Lord and Sa∣viour appeared: who, as St. Matthew ob∣serves out of the Psalmist, uttered things which had been kept secret from the foun∣dation of the World. Maimonides himself saith, in his last Chapter of his Book concer∣ning Kings, that at the coming of Christ, things hidden and profound shall be laid open and revealed to all. Which is true of nothing more, I have shewn, then of that which is the greatest desire of all mankind, immortall Life. Of which though I have not treated according to the dignity of the Subject; yet I am confident I have laid a
good Foundation, to be improved by the la∣bours of those who have more skill and more leisure. And it is a very great satisfaction, to have done any thing (though never so small) for the honour of our ever-Blessed Lord and Master: whom it is the highest glory in the world to serve in faithfulness and truth. For He will not fail to reward such services with an ample recompence: be∣ing a Prince so great, that nothing is beyond his Power; and so gracious, that his Ser∣vants have reason to expect the best effects of his Good will. Which may very well content us, whatsoever usage we meet withall at pre∣sent: And should mightily excite us, as St. Chrysostom often and earnestly exhorts
Homil. 87. in Matth. p. 539., neglecting the suspi∣cions, and the reproaches, and the praises too of men, to study this one thing alone; how to be conscious to our selves of no evill: which will bring us in the end, both here and hereafter, the grea∣ter glory.
The God of all Grace bless this Work to the settling and increasing this holy Faith and Resolution in all our hearts; whereby we shall also obtain the sweetest foretasts of the Joys of the future State. And may your Grace be blest with many of them, to support the infirmities of Old age; and having fini∣shed your days, have an easie passage to that better Life; and there receive from the Chief Pastour, when he shall appear, the Crown of glory which fadeth not away. Which is the hearty Prayer of
My Lord,

