


MY Intent in the ensuing Discourse, is, to contribute my Mite towards the vindicating of Free Grace; in the Dedication to testifie my thankfulness to se∣veral of you, for real courtesies; to you all, for ample expressions of undeserved respect towards me. In both which I indeavour brevity; esteeming many words but cum∣bersome, when the mind may be delivered and received in few. The sum of what I lately preached before you, and now again at your call, here present to you, appears in the Title page: which things I have breifly contended for; as conceiving them truths, once and again delivered to the Saints, & own'd through successive generations by the choycest of Saints. The substance aad strength of what Arminius & others with him, have heretofore pleaded for the contary is now Englished, by the Reverend Author of Redemption
 Redeem'd: And therefore I have all along related to some ma∣terial passages of his book without the least dishonourable reflection upon his person, whom I really honour for piety, parts, and painful∣ness (during many years past) in the work of the Lord. Though we cannot meet in the acknowledgment of these points, yet I hope to meet him in the bosome of Christ. In the mean time it concerns you, and us all, who make mention of the Lord, to pray out the per∣formance of those promises which God hath made to these latter ages; one whereof is this, that he will turn to his people a pure language; Zeph. 3. 9. they shall not speak a mixed language, one, one way; and another quite contrary, but shall all serve the Lord with one consent.
Till that fulness of time come, there will be great running to and fro in the * Prophet's sense, i e. great debating things to andDan. 12. 4. fro, even amongst the Saints: which yet in this regard will be an advantage, that hereby knowledge shall be increased. Every con∣siderable debate will either further draw out, or cleare up some truth or other. So that though the many and hot disputes of this age, be in some respects trouble some to the people of God at present yet the Remnant of Israel in after time will inherit the benefit of them.
May your City be not only as old Tyre the  whose Merchants were Princes and Traffiquers, the Honorable of the earth; but as the new Ierusalem, a holy City, a City of righteousness, a faithfull city; the Citizens, Saints, and each family a household of God. So prays

