




SIR.
Hauing obtained à copy of my deare deceased Brother Wil∣liams Manifest which in his life was presēted vnto my Father, I make bold to addresse it vnto you in print, as more legible and vsefull, to fulfill and execute the will of my Brother, who was in his life most entirely deuoted to you, and most singularly Zealous of your souls salvation: which according as my bounden duty requires I equally tender and affect.

I can not tell what acceptance it may relish with you, in respect of your olde age; yet sure I am, were you trauelling vnto Hierusalem, and should be in∣formed by him or me, though inferiour in years, of the great dangers assuredly you would fall in∣to, if you held on in the new way you had commen∣ced your iourney in, doubtlesse you would take it maruelous kindly of vs, and as an argument of our true respectfull loue towards you, that by our notice you were prevented from falling in to the hands of bloodsucking enimies, or being swalowed vp in some vnknowne gulfe in your new passage. This is now you case: you are traueling in your Resolution to the beauenly Hierusalem: but vnder fauour and without offence, giue me leaue to tell you, that if you proceede in this new way, and new Religion you are in, the perills are unspeakably great, for that all going and holding this new way ar robbed: not of their temporall wealth, nor of their temporall life depriued by drowning, but by à Diabolicall crew and an Infernall gulfe spoiled of their sowles, to their owne irrepara∣ble dammage, and the opprobrious disgrace of Christ most pretious blood spilt in vaine for them. And howbeit this new way you walke in, may perad∣nenture seeme to you to be right and secure; Yet vndoutedly except you turne out of it, in the end it will leade you to endlesse perdition. You can not be

ignorant, that the Origine of this new way, and occasion of putting our poore distressed country∣men out of the old approued path and good way, in which our auncestours walking, securely ar∣riued to heaven▪ was the sacrilegious auarice and insatiable lust of King Henry the eight (in whom alone, not I, but, Sir Walter Raulie af∣firmes, all the markes of à Tyrāt might be found in case they were lost) who as all know that are versant in the hictory and tradition of our Na∣tion, withdrew himsefe and the Realme from the obeyssanee of the Catholique Church, the old and only assured way to Saluation. Deus vnus est, & Christus vnus, & vna Ecclesia & Cathedra¦vna super Petram, Domini voce fundata Saith S. Cyprian l. 1. Epist. 8. This Henry the eight because the Bishop of Rome S. Peters suc∣cessour and Christs Ʋiccar on earth would not dispensc with him, to put à way his lawfull wife Queene Catherine of Spaine of blessed memory: he vsurped and tooke vpon him to be head of the English Church, and put àway most iniuriously his Queene. Which vnheard of arrogancy of his vsurped spirituall supremacy how God hath pu∣nished in his Successours, is too too sad, and too too fresh to rehearse. Patres nostri peccauerunt & nos portauimus iniquitates eorum, If God hath not his due in his vicegerent of his Church, it

is no wonder that Caesar wbo by the grace and fauour of God temporaly gouerneth, hath not his due obedience from his subiects, and that they vsurpe à power ouer him: In quo quis peccat in hoc punietur. And seeing so much innocent blood of Catholiques haue beene spilt, and so many Priests slaine, as Prophets sent to re∣claime her, I doe not wonder that God after so long à patient frustrated expectation of our Countrys penance and retourne, doth now bring forth the yron rod of the sword, and chastise the Kingdome with so much effusion of blood to auenge the contempt of his house the Catholique Church, the innocent members and Pastors put to death, and that the Bishops and others Who so much striued to put down Catholique Religion, should now, by the iust iudgments of God, be pul∣led downe, and haue their Church and Religion destroyed by themselues. I will set the Aegyp∣tians against the Aegyptians and the brethren shall fight against the brethren Esay 19. Vae¦genti peccatrici, woe woe to à sinfull nation, which by its hainous schisme and heresy hath forsaken God; teaching and speaking in his Catholique Church: which hath blasphemed holy Israel, and followed its owne giddy priuate spirit which seeth nothing aright: where euery one at his ple¦asure, carues & cut to himselfe à Religion out of the

Scriptures interpreted according to their owne priuate and vnwarranted spirits: as if all were Apostles, all Prophets, all Doctours all Pastours contrary to the Ecclesiasticall order and Hierar∣chy instituted by Christ our Sauiour; as witnesses the Apostle S. Paul. 1. ad Cor 12. But alas will our poore distressed country neuer rise and retourne againe to her Mother the Catholique Church, that shee may haue accesse to God as à Father? Nunquid qui cadit non resurget & qui auer∣sus est non reuertetur, quare ergo auersus est populus iste in Hierusalem, auersione conten∣tiosa, apprehenderunt mendacium & nolue∣runt reuerti? &c. nullus est qui agat poeniten∣tiam super peccato suo dicens quid feci &c. The turtle Doue, the Swalow, the Storke haue obserued the time of their comeing, but my people (saith God by his Prophet) haue not knowne the iudgment of the Lord. Hier. 8. And for as much as our poore Countrymen will not reflect vpon the manifest iudgments of God vpon the Kingdome for its reuolt by Schisme and Heresy from the Catholique Church: therfore is shee become desolate De∣solatione desolata est omnis terra quia non est qui recogitet corde. Hieri. 12. Wherfore, Deare Sir, to preuent the maine misery of mi∣series, since God of his immense Clemency hath

lent you space to returne (whilest thousands, and thousands in these calamities of our Nation are ingulfed in the bottomlesse pitt of hell) promptly obey the voice of God by the premen∣tioned Prophet Heremie Aske of the old paths which is the Good way, and walke in it, and you shall finde refreshing for your soules. Cap. 6. v. 16. But aske timely with all possible diligence, breaking with all worldly considera∣tions of honour, riches, or pleasures, for the loue of sweet Iesus, who not only endured for your sake all contradictions and opprobrious disgraces, but layd out all he was worth, euery droppe of blood, yea his most pretious life, that you might liue for euer in eternall glorie, in neuer ending plea∣sures, and the rich fruition and possession of his immense Maiesty, the All Good, the supreame Good, and the soueraigne sole Good. Let not momentary pleasure procure you an ever∣lasting paeine, nor let á short sufferance depriue you of an infinite reward. Breuis voluptas, sem∣piterna poena: modica passio, infinita gloria, Saith the Seraphicall Father Saint Francis. Therefore whilest you haue time work well for your soule, the one thing which is necessary: differre not so consequent an affaire, least forgetting God in your life, he forsake you in your death bedde, according to that dreadfull saying of S. Au∣gustine.

Hac animaduersione percutitur pecca∣tor, vt moriens obliuiscatur sui, qui dum viue∣ret oblitus est Dei. Aske then I beseech you timely of the old paths: which is the Good way, and walke in it, and you shall finde refreshing for your soule, These old paths, which is the Good way in which all the godly and holy persons wal∣ked to the heauenly Hierusalem, is the infallible iudgment of the supreame Pastours and Gouenours of Gods Church, which they followed as the guide of faith and necessary way of Salvation. In the old law it was strictly commaunded by almighty God. Exod 17. insomuch as whosoeuer should be so proud, as that he would not obey the order and commaund of the Cheife Priest, who was the iudge in Ecclesiasticall affaires, he was to die: This also in the beginning and foundation of the new law our B. Sauiour so strictly commaunded as he that would not obediently harken to the Church, he was to be reputed (not as one capable of life euerlasting) but as à beathen and publicane, that is, à person out of the state of saluation. This was the way S. Austen (whom euen the Protestants affirme to haue beene à most excellent wittnes of Antiquity, as liuing about the Primitiue times of Christs Church) tooke to resolue himselfe infallibly in doubts of Religion, as is to be seene in diuers places of his diuine workes; finally this

also is the finall and continuall way in all ages since, all Orthodoxe professours haue folowed in the determination of controuersies of faith, as is manifest by the perusall of the Ecclesiasticall Records. This way did my deceased Brother take to resolue himselfe, employing all his cares to finde out the true Church of Christ, that is the Catholique Church: which the Apostles, in their Creed, only teach vs to belieue at all times, it being true at all times, to say, I beleeue in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholique Church: and to rest himsefe touching all points of faith in her iudgmēt, she being infallible therin, as perpetually being taught by the holy Ghost all truth and no errour. He sought humbly with perseuerance, and through Gods mercifull goodnes found it out'seeke also and you shall finde. Shall you vouchsafe to peruse impartially this his Manifest I am confident it will contribute much direction to the knowledge and embracement therof, to the glory of God, the ioy of the Angells and heauenly Saints, the salua∣tiō of your soule and comfort of your best friends, among whom he is one, who will not cease to pray our Blessed Lord and Sauiour, that he will illuminate the darknes of yours, my other friends, and Countrymens soules, that he will giue you à true faith, an assured hope, à perfect Cha∣rity; and endue you with the knowledge of him:

that vnited to the Catholique Church, in all things all manner of wayes, you may accomplish his holy pleasure in this life, and in the next, enioying him with all the Saints, you may sing his mercies for euer. Which is, and shall be the dayly praier of him, who humbly begging that the necessary discharge of his bounden duty sor your soules Good, may finde pardon for his freedome, remaines euer as he professeth and subscribeth.
On the Vigill of all Saints. 1650.
HONORABLE DEARE SIR.

