



SIR,
THere are three Faults, which I have observed in many Dedications, and which I have resolved care∣fully to avoid. The first is, the Choice of an Unworthy Person to Dedicate to. The second, the servile Flattery be∣stowed on him. And the last, the Tediousness of the Epistle. The two last seem to be neces∣sary Consequences to the first; for when an Author has made
choice of a Vile Patron, he is obliged to turn Parasite in his own defence, and to defile much Paper, as well as nauseate the Reader with a multitude of Fawning Sentences, stolen out of ancient Panegyricks spoken to Wicked Heathens, who yet were better Men than those pre∣tended Christians to whom the same Praises are now applied.
I believe Envy it self cannot find place to censure the Choice I have made, and only Envy is capable of attempting it, which if it should, there is yet this Satis∣faction, that we know this Vice, tho aiming to devour and tear others, only gnaws and wounds it self. Good Men, who are the true Judges of Merit, know yours to be far above all I can offer; and yet I make no doubt but
you will look upon this as wor∣thy your Acceptance; for Gene∣rosity regards not the Gift, but the intention of the Giver. Da∣vid not only accepted of the Water brought him by the Three Worthies from the Cistern in Bethlehem, but also offered it to our Lord, because those Men had brought it with the hazard of their Lives. It was not the Water that was of such value, but the Zeal of those Men to serve him that made it precious. Accept,
Sir, in like manner here∣of, and regard not the value of the Offering, but the Will of him that offers.
Where Merit is, there can be no Flattery, and therefore should a better Pen than mine under∣take to make your Character publick, it might find Subject
enough to employ it self with∣out falling into that Vice. It is peculiar to the Unworthy, only they delight in it, and yet it is that which most exposes them to scorn. To commend Wicked Persons, by attributing to them Virtues they are wholly void of, is no other than to extol the Whiteness of an Ethiopian; for the Vices of the former are no less visible than the Blackness of the latter, and to commend them, for what is not in them is rather a reproach than a commendati∣on. But those who like you are truly Virtuous, are also free from the vanity of taking delight in publick Praises, because no emi∣nent Virtue can be long conceal∣ed, its own lustre will attract the Eyes of all Men, and therefore it needs no foreign helps to make
it publickly known. Virtue car∣ries its Reward and its Honour with it. It is better to say no∣thing, than to fall short in a wor∣thy Character. Yours, Sir, is above all Flattery, and since it can receive no accession by a just Praise, ought to receive no di∣minution through the fault of my Pen.
Sir, I am obliged to draw to a conclusion, lest I should be con∣demned for incurring the same Fault I blame in others, which is Tediousness. It will be needless to give you an account of my Author; he is well known to the World, and, I doubt not, but to you in particular. As for the Tran∣slation, it is exposed to every Mans Censure, yet if you approve of it, I shall not question but it may please; and if it please such
as are Competent Judges, it is no matter for the rest. I think, Sir, I have avoided those three Faults I mentioned at first, by choosing you to Dedicate to, by forbearing your just Commendations, lest Malice should call them Flattery, and by reducing all I had to say to this small compass. All that re∣mains is once more to beg a fa∣vourable Reception and kind Ac∣ceptance for this small Offering, which comes not alone, being well attended by the good Wishes for your Prosperity and Happi∣ness, of,
SIR,  
