


THe Gospel of Jesus Christ our
Lord (in the whole dispen∣sation
thereof) seems to be
nothing else but a Composi∣tion
of wonders, every thing
therein being matter both of
wonderment and document: And as in o∣ther
respects, so particularly in the manner
of the propagation thereof, and in the way
whereby our wise good God hath brought

it home, and setled the precious truths there∣of
upon the hearts of his chosen ones.
Though God useth a generall Uniformity,
yet is there also a particular variety of Dis∣pensation;
God sometimes stepping out of
the ordinary course of instituted means, to
meet with the darknesse, unbelief, and other
weaknesses of poor souls, especially in these
last Ages of the World, wherein there are
some rarities of Providence, whereby God
seemes to speak unto us, that he is intending
to do some new and strange thing in the
Earth.
And if you look narrowly what these
means are which God hath chosen out,1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. you
shall plainly discover that of the Apostle to
be verified all along, that they are the fool∣ish,
the weak, the base, and the despised
things of the World. He hath not chosen
armes, or armes of the Mighty ones, nor
the mouth of the Sword, but the Sword of
the mouth;Psal. 8. 2. for out of the mouthes of Babes
and Sucklings he hath ordeined strength,
whereby he effecteth wonderfull things, for
the advancement of his Kingdome here in
the World. That which comes out of the
mouths of these Babes shall accomplish his
Royall Will.
Thus it was with the Head and Captain

Generall of this Infantry, the Lord Jesus;
he was at first a Babe and a Suckling; and
the Apostles were such in their originall;
and such are all those who are theirIn idem caput, though not in eu∣dem gra∣dum. Suc∣cessours.
But this Scripture seems to receive a fur∣ther
completion, even in the Letter of it in
this instance and example, of which I shall
now make Relation. Out of her mouth the
Lord hath ordained such things should be
uttered as may (I hope through his bles∣sing)
prove instrumentall for the promoting
of some part at least of that glorious Gos∣pel-Designe
of Love towards lapsed Crea∣tures,
(which you will finde recorded in the
subsequent Relation, and that both in the
time of her extream weaknesse, as also since
her Restauration and Recovery: and because
God hath raised up one, so extraordinarily
to declare so much of his Will unto us; sure∣ly
God expects that we should more then
ordinarily improve these his dispensations,
and the rather, because such Mirabilia Dei
are usuall presages of great mutations in the
Countreys where they are acted; and if men
answer not God in such Providences, he u∣sually
gives them up to spiritual evils, and af∣ter
that to temporal Desolations. May not
Germany, Scotland, Ireland acknowledge this

with teares in their eyes? that they have
not walkt worthy of the glorious appearan∣ces
of God amongst them; and may not
England subscribe the same confession in let∣ters
written (as Draco's Lawes were) with
their own Blood? Hath not God shewed
signes and wonders in all these Nations?
And are not spirituall Judgements as gray
haires,Hosea 7. 9. visibly here and there upon us? and
is it not observable, that the Jewes before
their being given up to utter Desolation, en∣joyed
the highest dispensations that ever?
when a people are lifted up to Heaven (as
Capernaum was) with Gospel-priviledges,
and yet have much of hell in their practices;
the next news we hear of them will be, that
they are brought down to Hell by Gods Ju∣diciall
Providences.
The extraordinary works of Gods mercies
being abused, make way for extraordinary
Judgements.
But I wish & hope that others, but especi∣ally
you my dear Friends & relations, who
have been eye and ear-witnesses of these
rare actings of Providence, and whose
hearts have been so much affectd therewith)
will wisely consider the Lords doings, and
lay them upon your hearts, until your hearts
be warmed therewith, and your lives confor∣med
accordingly.

This Childe being acquainted with
some intentions of some of her Friends to
print her Speeches, answered, I wish they
may aime at a right end, a most seasonable
Item; and if we do not endeavour to have
them first printed in our hearts, and to pub∣lish
them in our lives, we shall give but a
poor account of the publication of them to
the world.
If the World must know (as we do judge
that fit, that such a light should not be set
under a bushell) what God hath done for
us: I beseech you, let's carry it so as the
World may know (to our joy and not grief)
what we do for God.
Oh let's take heed to our spirits,Mal. 2. 15. that we
do not with these sweet flowers of mercies,
as children with their Nosegayes, smell at
them and delight in them for a short time,
and then cast them away. God hath done
wonderfull things for us; Oh that it might
appear, he hath wrought wonderfull things
in us! His wonderful works do declare his
Name is neer to us; let our works declare
that his Name, his Service, Word, Worship,
and all his Institutions and Commands are
dear to us. If God walk in the middest of
us, then we should be exactly careful, that no
unclean thing be found in us.Deut. 23. 12, 13, 14▪ It did much ag∣gravat

Solomons defections from the Lord,
that they were acted after God had appear∣ed
to him twice;1 King. 11. 12. God hath not appeared
once or twice, but many times, and in sun∣dry
manners, and particularly in this Provi∣dence,
(much of God appearing in her eve∣ry
time she spake) how great will our sin be,
if after God had given us such a deliverance,Ezra 9. 13, 14.
nay so many mercies in the womb of this,
we should again break his Commands, grow
loose and mindlesse of God, and forsake
his Ordinances, and wayes, (as many do?)
Gods Works in this instance declare his
Name to be neer, and that exclusively, by
way of exclusion of all other names; and
David might mean so much in that phrase
that his Name and the names of all his gal∣lant
and Heroick Commanders were to be
excluded, that Gods Name might not be ob∣seured;
God did all in this businesse, and
therefore it's fit that he alone should be ex∣alted.
Oh let's give him that little, all we
have: let's strive to exalt him, he may be
higher in our hearts, (though not in him∣self)
and the rather, because these Providen∣cies
have fruitfully administred varieties of
advantages for the raising up of our spirits
in the exaltation of Gods glorious Name.
May not the parents of this childe say with

onderment, God raised up one out of Davids
House, 2 Sam. 12. 11. who attempted to deprive
him of his earthly Kingdome; but God hath
raised one out of our Family, who may be
instrumentall to further our enjoyment of
an heavenly Kingdom. They (I know) desire
that others would help them in endeavour∣ing
to render according to the mercies recei∣ved,
and how should they or others improve
such dispensations, but by labouring to act
faith at a higher rate, then we have done?
Faith hath two legs, whereby it comes to
Christ, (and it's called a comming to Christ,
John 6. 35.) submission and closing; in
such mix providences as these (where
God checkers his dispensations, working
Checker-work,) there will be much use of a
submitting frame of heart, to submit our
selves, children and all to the Will of the
Father of our spirits, Heb. 12. 9. and we
should improve this Providence (in raising
up this Childe) by faith, for the raising up
of the Church from under all her Convul∣sions
and prevailing diseases; many other
wayes we should improve such Works of
God, but I have already exceeded the
bounds of an Epistle.
I shall onely urge you and my selfe to
suck that sweet brest of the promise, Psalm

50. 15. you have prayed, God hath deliver∣ed,
and now he expects to be glorified, and
he promises, you shall glorifie me: Can
then our unbelief, our dead, sluggish, fickle,
unconstant and forgetfull heart hinder it?
if God say, thou shalt, who hath resisted
his Will? Oh then lie at the pool of this
promise, untill your unbelieving, unthank∣full
hearts be healed. Lie at this beautifull
gate, untill you receive an almes, and a
word Come, that shall raise up your Spirits,
that you may walk, and leap, and praise the
Lord. Let me entreat you to review this
Childes Speeches, but especially to eye God
in all his providentiall actings towards her,
untill your hearts be raised to exalt the glo∣rious
Lord in all those Attributes, which
shine forth in this Scene of his Actings; Eye
them for the strengthening of your faith, to
trust God in all your straits, to submit to
God when he is pleased to presse you down
with the left hand of afflictions, whilest he
writes a fairer copie of his Law in your
hearts, with the right hand of his holy Spi∣rits
powerful visitations;Psal. 75. 1. eye them that you
may learn to love Jesus Christ with more sin¦cerity,
and to use the world more cautelous∣ly,
lest it use (nay ride) you (as others) with
great cruelty:Cor. 7. 31 eye them, that so you may

learn to sanctifie God in your hearts, who
hath diseases and cures at his command; who
gives the opening of the mouth, and causes
the tongue of the dumb to sing,Ezek. 29. 21. and the
tongue of the stammerers to speak plainly,Isai. 32. 4.
and confirmes the feeble knees (all which
and more he hath done for this Childe:Isai. 35. 3.)
eye them also, that your hearts may be
brought in love with, and confirmed in your
love to the precious (and yet ô sad, despised)
Ordinances and Institutions of Jesus Christ,
the King of his Church, (which God hath
opened a Childs mouth to plead for;) And if
you may gather such sweet fruits as these
from off the Branches of these providen∣tiall
actings of our wise God. I shall sit
under the Tree rejoycing, that God hath
made me Instrumentall to call you forth
to so good an employment, and subjoyn my
selfe,

Sheffeild, January 20. 1652/3.
