


Sirs,
I Have real somewhere of an Hermite, who being guided by an Angel unto two Cities, saw the Gates of the first close shut, and a Devil having the Keys there∣of at his Girdle in a deep sleep, and snort∣ing, From thence he is led unto the other, (which was fair and spacious,) and finds the Gates wide open, innumerable Devils crouding and thronging in, multitudes climbing over the walls, and whole swarms of them in the Churches, Streets, Houses, Shops, walks, and all other Avenues
and places of concourse, exceedingly em∣ployed, busying and bestirring themselves to the utmost for the ruine of it, and her Inhabitants. At which wondring be∣yond measure, the Angel told him, yon∣der City is the worst of the Two, ingulpht in all wickedness and irreligion, so that Beelzebub hath no fear of loosing it, and therefore there is but one Devil to guard it, and his work so little, that he sleeps. But as for this wherein now we are, here are many Souls fearing and serving God, Religion is professed, and Religious Wor∣ship countenanced and incouraged, and the Holy Angels of God are watching over these precious Saints and their Habitati∣ons to preserve them. This hath caused Hell to break loose, and to endeavor by all means, and arts imaginable their ru∣ine, and its destruction.
Sirs, I think this be no unfitting Em∣blem of our Plymouth, wherein I trust there are multitudes of Gods dear Ser∣vants, as well as Sinners: But I fear me, multitude of Devils also, that walk in
Temples and Congregations, in Streets and Houses, in Chambers and Closets, in Ships and Shops, upon Keys and Exchange. The over abounding of Sin among us, and of late of that hainous and crying sin of Blood and Murther, (for which Two of the prime Actors (and God knows whether there be any other) have suffered condign punishment,) is too sad and clear an instance hereof. When Hannibal was at the Gates of Rome, it was more than time for the Consuls and Senate to look about them. Woe! Woe! Unto the In∣habitants of the Earth, saith an Angel from Heaven, Because the Devil is come down among you, having great wrath, for his time is short. He doth not appear in a visible shape at noon day, but walks (as his younger Son the Jesuite) in all sorts of Masques and disguises, in every habit and fashion, and among Persons of every Trade, Calling, Quality, and Con∣dition.
Now, Sirs, God having constituted you the Angel-Guardians of our Plymouth,
and made you Gods unto it, there is all reason you should be awake, and do your utmost to prevent the Stratagems and at∣tempts of Hell against it. I know no o∣ther way or means that you have, than by an exemplary Holiness in your lives, than by walking with God in your respective Fa∣milies and Callings, than by a couragi∣ous, zealous, activity for God and God∣liness, and a vigorous suppression, and im∣partial punishing of all Vice and Impiety. Would you but continue your great respects and incouragements to your Reverend and Learned Ministers, and joyn both Swords together, Temporal and Spiritual, I am confident the designs of Hell against you would be broken, frustrated, and render∣ed ineffectual.
Honored Sirs, My hearts desire and Prayer for you is, that you may do wor∣thily in your Ephrata, and Famously in your Bethlehem, that you may glo∣rifie God in your Station, and that God may reflect rays and beams of Glory upon you, For such as Honor him, God
will Honor them, but they that de∣spise him shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Sam. 2.30.
Sirs, if you will suppress all prophane∣ness, and by your Authority put out the Fire of uncleanness, if you will stop the Mouth, and Gag the Tongue of the Swear∣er, that the Roaring of Oaths and Curses be not heard in our Streets, if you will promote true practical Piety, and perse∣vere as you have begun in the conscienti∣ous discharge of your Magistratical Duty, the God of blessings will bless your persons and Families, and Plymouth shall ne∣ver be a Sodom but Zion, shall ever be a, Jerusalem for Gospel-priviledges, a Pillar and Ground of Truth, rich and flourish∣ing as Tyre for Trade and Traffick, and as formerly, so in after-times a Zoar for Divine safety and wonderful preservati∣ons.
That endeared affection I have for the Town of my Nativity, where I first drew my breath, and where I had my School-Education, moveth me to speak
and write so freely. And your true good∣ness cannot but make a candid interpreta∣tion thereof.
May Plymouth, her Magistrates and Government ever live before God! May this Famous Town be called Hephzibah and Beulah, the Delight of God, and Married unto God! Let her be called the Righteous, the Holy City! And may this be her name unto Posterity, Jehovah Shamma, The Lord is there. So prayeth, Right Hon∣ored Sirs.
From my Study in Plymouth, April 7. 1676.

