



Madam,
THE Death of God's Saints and Faithful Ministers is not at all considered by the careless World. Little do they know how much they be beholding to their Lives, and what Loosers they are by their Death. Lot was a burden to them, so thought the wicked Sodomites, whilst he lived among them; and therefore would fain have rid their City of its best and greatest Blessing. But no sooner was he gone, than wrath came upon them to the uttermost. We have lost of late too many of God's Favourites, who stood in the Gap; and had power with God to keep off Judg∣ments from us: And when as any one of
these Men of God Powerful in Prayer, and mighty Wrestlers with Heaven are taken from us, we may well cry out with the Psal∣mist, Help! Lord, for the Godly Man ceaseth; and as that Prophet see∣ing his Master Translated into Glory, My Father! My Father! The Cha∣riots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof! Blessed be the Lord, there be yet some Pious and Devout Souls in our Nation, and in this City, that when the Righteous perish do lay it to Heart, and when the Merciful are taken away do con∣sider, that they be taken from the evil to come, and are therefore weeping over their own and the Churches weakness, which hath lost so many Stakes out of her Hedge, so many Pillars out of her Temple, so ma∣ny Buttresses out of her Wall, that should support and sustain her, so many Sons and Fathers, that should instruct, cherish and comfort her. You, Madam, have
enroll'd your self among the Mourners in our Zion, and have been deeply affected with the Deaths of Godly Ministers and private Christians, which tho' timely to them, (being gathered in respect of their Age as Corn in due Season into the Gra∣nary,) yet to us that survive them, must needs be very unseasonable: Who were it the good will of God so to order it, can hardly spare them, and would most unwil∣lingly part with them in such a day as this is. But it is from the Lord, the Sole and Soveraign Disposer of us, and of all our Comforts, and we must acquiesce.
Reverend Mr. Faldo whilst living was very Dear to your Godly Parents, (who are now reaping the Fruit of their Great and Ample Charities,) and was as much prized and honoured by your self. This makes me to address his Funeral Sermon to you, and once more to offer that to your Eyes, which you twice heard in one
day with your Ears. I surprize you with the Dedication. But that hove and Va∣lue you have for all that fear God, and for the Ambassadors of our Lord Jesus, and which you have abundantly expressed to me the least and meanest of them all (an He∣reditary Vertue in you) moves me to it. The Lord give you to be a Follower of them, who through Faith and Patience have In∣herited the Promises! I am,
Most Honoured Madam, 
