



SIR,
HOw much Poesie is declined from that esteem it had some∣times arrived to, the bold in
vectives of a cheap multitude, are the but too easie instances; and nothing is so now the bu∣siness of these Epistles, as the defence of Writing: we live in the dayes of Tumult, and in the noise of Batteries.


Fluctibus in mediis, & tem∣pestatibus Urbis,
Verba Lyrae motura so∣num connectere dignor!

When no Amphion can be
heard, however able to re-or∣der the stones, and reconcile them to their breaches, the Nine had now found a no so ingenious Quarter, as the Ma∣cedonian gave to their far∣thest Relations, who (at the razing of an obstinate City) forgot not (in the wildnesse of discontent and Warre) to exempt (from an otherwise generall ruine) the whole stocke of Pindar. I have not then presumed on this De∣dication, that these sheetes de∣serve, but that they need, the
best Patronage. They are borne in an Age enough re∣solved, that the Muses make a Body Politique, but Monstrous, by bringing to it unnecessary and superfluous Members; and in an adven∣titious weakeness they will come new Argument to the tyran∣nie of Prejudice: They will therefore owe their whole safe∣tie to the Honour of your Name, and indeed Prote∣ction is but Complement to an assured sufficiencie. If you nde in some of them a too
early growth, let them finde an Excuse in their Non-age, and not passe an Exami∣nation after that of the Feru∣la. The rest have beene the Diversion of some my more indulgent Houres, and to my best Discourse, they weare no interests, but their owne: I had rather be thought to want the Advantages, than derive the Acknowledgement:


Alium qui recitet, & quae∣rit famam,
Non emere Librum, sed Silentium debet.

Where I have dealt in a Divine matter, I have not loved to loose my selfe in My∣steries, or betray my Youth to an Oracle: I have therefore onely glanced on Subjects, the fittest for Phancie, and (that alone) that, of two Mites, I might return one, a Tribute o Heaven.

Though I have in nothing else a satisfaction; I shall e∣nough receive it if you pardon the address.
Sir, 
October 19. 1647.
