


Madam,
DEdications are grown so Modish, that a Play makes as ill a Figure without one, as a Beau in the Side-Box without a long Wig.
Yet I must freely own, that the greatest Trouble this Tragedy gave me, was the fixing it on a proper Per∣son to Patronize it. Those whose Merit entitles them to these solemn Addresses, are generally unwilling to have their Names expos'd; and such who are most fond of seeing their Pedigrees, and Encomiums preix'd to a Play, do commonly fasten upon the Poet the scan∣dalous Character of a vile Flatterer.
One of my Friends advis'd me to oer this Piece to a great Lord; but not being Secretary to his Mistress, I was araid of meeting with a cold Reception. Another would persuade me to Dedicate to a Courtier; but I am either too Modest or too Proud to appear with a cringing Assurance at a Levee; and too great a Lover of Truth to commend a Fop in Favour. Another would have me Address to a Beau-Knight; but he being lately broke at Basset, and his Taylor's and Perwig-maker's Bills coming thick upon him, I was unwilling to put in for one amongst his needy Visi∣tants. Lastly, a ourth would have engag'd me to make my Achilles and Iphigenia court the shelter of some Rich Citizen; but my Muse was too aspiring to proitute her∣self to a Plebeian
Thus having review'd all Patrons of all Ranks, and m∣turely consider'd the several pitiful Means by which some Poets intrude into their Protection, I wa induc'd, for m∣ny Reasons, to lay this Tragedy on fair Diana' Shrine.
First of all, as ancient Poets tell us, the Greek Iphigenia owing its Preservation to Diana in Aulis, I hope the Person who is willing to borrow the Name of that Goddess, will likewise receive the English Iphigenia under her Patronage.
Besides, by thus prefixing your feign'd Name to this Play, I spare my self the trouble of a begging Visit, and you the Sight of a Dunning Dedicator.
But, Madam, the most prevalent Motive with me is, That I may commend you without being suspected of A∣dulation, or making your Modesty uneasy. I may freely proclaim to the World, that you make Conquests by your Beauty, and secure them by your Wit; that your Sense quals your Wit, and that your good Humour is inferiour to neiher. I may boldly say, that you are free with innocence; Modest without Afectation; and Virtuous without Pride. That at once you command Love and Respect; and that nothing surpasses the Charms of your Conversation, but your admirable way of Writing.
Nay, I might take a greater Latitude with you than any Poet ever did with his Patron, for I might tell you of your Faults, and reproach your cruel Indifference, not to say, Ingratitude. I might conirm my constant Love to you, and expostulate your broken Promises of eternal Friendship. I might remind you of your Letters, without putting you o the Blush, or incurring my self the charge of Indiscretion, since nothing can be more secret than what I now speak in Publick.
All these Advantages I find in Dedicating to my charm∣g Diana; and if she proves so kind as to bless me once more with her endearing Company, I will esteem this E∣ptle better rewarded than any I writ before. I remain with all the Sincerity of a Lover and a Poet.
Charming DIANA,

From behind the  Drury-lane, .
