



Worthy Sir,
THe manifold Testimonies of your reall fa∣vours, calls for a perpetual Commemora∣tion; and what requital can be returned, but a bare demonstration, where ability cannot correspond, or aspire to the dig∣nity of that Desert, couched within the verge of that manifestation of affection so amply disco∣vered? And to lie dormant under so much Courtesie, were to invelop my self within the Rounds of Ingratitude, and in stead of Coronating your deserved Worth (alrea∣dy bedubbed with the true Sparklings of never-fading Glory) I should Adumbrate the Lustre thereof, (which otherwise would necessarily dispel the thickest clouds) by the Satyrical Screen of Fame-defacing-Oblivion.
To enumerate the many discoveries and dawnings of your Vertues, were to comprehend a Catalogue of the Universal Genus of Atomes, within the narrow bounds of a Nutshel: Neither can the weak blandishments of a Quill, emblazon the least shadow of those Trophies, whose Glory is founded in the true Abyss of your me∣rited Renown.
Pardon this boldness, SIR, in presuming to lodge this Book within your Gates; and in making use of your Name without your consent. Let not a sinister constru∣ction, obstruct a gentle remission; nor a rigid appre∣hension, hinder the thought of a venial transgression. Doubtless, SIR, the Subject will not dishonour your Per∣son, in Patronizing it from suffering shipwrack in the
tumultuous gulfs of Contradiction and Detraction; but rather conclude, That the rayes of your Learning being dispaed upon the Imperfections necessarily accruing in the Alteration of the Garb, will put a period to what may be objected by those, whose Medulla Scientiae, is nothing else, but the true pourtraicture of that Livid Viper Envy; whose virulency is Malevolent Censure. Let such endea∣vor its Overture, whilest your finger supports it by the Chin, till it arrives with the fresh gales of your Counte∣nance, to its desired Haven, with its Top-gallant stream∣ing out the true Characters of your Honour, maugre the carpings of Zoilus. What need it to fear the trivial Ob∣jections of certain Augurs, when its Patron is both strongly fenced with the Principles of Theory, and gar∣nished with the Robes of Integrity?
SIR, you are not one whom infant Effeminacy, youth∣ful Delicacy, or voluptuous Liberty, could ever yet al∣lure your intellect and knowledge from diving into Di∣vine and Moral Arcana's.
Altius sur∣gentes, In∣nocentes li∣cet, comi∣tatur suspi∣cio. Tacit. What greater Symbole of true Gentility, then Goodness! It is not the gawdy lustre of the Purple, but the inward vertue of the Person, that proclaims Greatness; having alwayes observed you to entrain Humility and Integrity for your Retainers.
Yet if any dare to calumniate Renodaeus, notwith∣standing his Accomplishment at all assays, and his con∣verse with the most acute Judgement, he will proclaim them viva voce, to be Vox & praeterea nihil.
This onely remains, That if I have drawn him in his proper Colours, he will merit your Patronage; but if mangled, it is in your power, Sir, rather to impute the fault to the Pen, then the intention of the person, whose Ambition was ever to be accounted,
SIR,

Septemb. 8.
