



HOW unfit a Person I am to make my first appea∣rance in publick, in a Discourse of so Excellent a Man as your Brother was, You your self may best judge, who so well have known both Him and Me. You knew Him equal to what the best Mind could think, and (I had almost said) beyond what the best Tongue could speak of Him. And you know me, so little and insignifi∣cant a thing, that, if the World were to take the measures of good Reports from the Person that makes them, the Person represented would be an huge sufferer. Non eget auxiliis, nec defensoribus istis. He needed not, (because he despis'd and was above the tickle of being known and fam'd in the World) but he de∣serv'd the Pencil that gave so lively a touch upon the In∣comparable Mr. Cowley, a Person that both knows sense, and also how best to express it in his own Mother tongue. As to what hath been endeavour'd by Me, that it ventures abroad beyond the compass of our own Parish-Church,
it must be charg'd, partly upon my own forwardness to show my respects in saying something, though so much be∣neath him; and partly your Complement in telling me it was worth the while; but chiefly the instance of some per∣sons that had heard, and either did themselves, or suppos'd others might lye under the prejudice of some slanders, which the malevolent humour of this Age may have affixt upon his Name. I mean chiefly as to his living or dying in the Romish Faith. Indeed, had it pleas'd the All-wise God to have restor'd him to Himself and the World from this last sickness, it would have been very needless for any one to have added one tittle to the Memoires of himself, which he would have blest us with in his own hand-wri∣ting. For, having taken notice what entertainment those Remarks upon the Lord Rochester's death did generally meet with, and that all his Religious breathings were ac∣counted by some the raves and delirancies of a sick brain; by others, a subtle fetch at last, to take off the stench of his name, and entitle all his former lewdnesses at least to the Charity of good minds, so as they should forget them in the joy they conceiv'd at his pretended change: and by most, a pang of horror upon his Conscience under the terrors of death: either of which, if believ'd, might effectually hin∣der the advantages that such examples otherwise do natu∣rally yield; Your excellent Brother (I say) having ob∣serv'd this; did resolve (and that at a time when neither Himself nor any of us had any suspicions but that he was returning to a good state of health again to have given the World a publick account in his own unmatchable way of
thinking and expression, the sentiments he had of Religion both as to the Faith and Practice of it. This, he not only made me hope and expect upon my first suggesting the ex∣pediency of it; but afterward hinted it to a much more
Dr. Heze Burton. valuable Person upon a visit he gave him; wherein (by the way) the Dr. profest, he never found the joy and pleasure of two hours throughout the whole course of his life, in compa∣rison to what had transported him from that kind of discourse he had then been entertain'd with by Sir A. Broderick.
However, though it hath pleas'd God in his unaccoun∣table wisdom to prevent so useful a testimony from himself, and it is so weakly undertaken by a very unsuitable Pen, yet I hope the truth of what is said will make some com∣pensation for want of the niceness and elegancy of the com∣posure. And as to the truth and credibility of what is here avow'd, I hope the solemn protestation which I have ad∣ventur'd to make in the body of the Sermon, will even yet justifie it, though we live in an Age wherein the great my∣stery of Jesuitism hath appear'd in that effroncy, as to harden the minds of Criminals to palliate their Treasons under such solemn Oaths at the last periods of Death it self, that it may for the future almost desecrate all due veneration to that great Sanctuary of Truth, and render it even useless amongst men.
Be it as it will, I knew the subject uncapable of flattery, and therefore gave my self the larger scope of commendati∣on, because I knew my self still within the limits of what he deserv'd. For certainly he was such an one whose bulky ver∣tue bore no proportion to his little stature, but it had quickly
invaded and overswell'd all the parts of it, as Statius speaks of little Tydeus.
at. 1. l. eb.
— Totos infusa per artus
Major in exiguo regnabat corpore virtus.
One thing more, I think my self bound to account for; and that is, that whereas I say in my Sermon, that for some years before the close of his days, he engag'd in the best thoughts and in the best practices of life; I would thereby deliver him from the diminishing imputation of a death-bed repentance. It was not the dread and terror of that which Nature so easily shrinks at, that govern'd him in this change of life, but the just sense and reasonings in his own mind, im∣prov'd and cultivated by the Grace of God, that had deter∣min'd him in a well-temper'd resolution of future devotion toward God and usefulness toward Men.
He oftentimes told me, that he had not naturally that dread and horror for Death, that seem'd in the tempers and constitutions of some Men: even then, when (as he exprest himself) God knows, he had all the reasons imaginable, to have trembled every joynt at the fears of a surprize, he had no more perplexing apprehensions of Death, than of that fly, which in the instant of his speaking, was moving upon his hand. In his last sickness, as there was nothing unusual that for a long time gave himself or his friends any concernment for the issue of it so when any threatning symptoms did grow upon him, he seem'd to be under no fright at them; so that neither before, nor in his sickness was it fear, but choice that made him what he was.
I confess, there was a very remarkable Feaver two or
three years before his death, that had given us nearer ap∣prehensions of losing him, than this last had done till the ve∣ry close of it; and this did indeed fasten in him the reso∣lutions he had antecedently taken, of being more useful and exemplary in his Generation, if God should spare him; which we all visibly experienc'd in that remainder of time wherein we afterward enjoyed him. He made it evident that his sick-bed goodness was not as the Morning dew which past away upon the warmth and vigour of his health again, but remain'd & exerted it self still in more fruit, to the last minute, wherein he was capable of acting like himself. I cannot omit one very considerable passage he told me of, and which he had made a very thoughtful observation of himself; and that was, that he had taken notice, how for a long time after he had begun to bethink himself, he gave himself a task of consulting the Holy Scri∣ptures every day, especially some portion in the Psalms, which he always had a peculiar veneration and esteem for, as believing there was something therein that might well suit every circumstance and condition of life, which a man, dependant upon Providence, could suppose himself in in this World; and for which reasons he did with so much eager∣ness consult & embrace that useful and learned Paraphrase which a Reverend Dignitary in our Church hath lately put forth;
Dr. Pa∣trick D.P. besides those most Religious and valuable Medita∣tions of the late Earl of Clarendons, which he had by him in Manuscript. And yet, he told me, he observ'd, that in the daily road of absolving this task wherein he had oblig'd himself, he found so little more than ordinary as to the in∣ward
concern or emotions of his mind, that he could not but think that all this performance was but what we charge the Romanists for resting in, the meer opus operatum, in Religion, wherein he could not be satisfied; and therefore made it his importunate request in his private retirements to God, that he might in consulting his Oracles, find some other relish and savour upon his spirit some other transports of mind, which, he thought, without the blemish of any un∣reasonable Enthusiasm, he might expect as the signature and stamp of Divinity in what he read. This, he often prayed for, and this, as he himself believ'd he found some good effects of, so might his observing friends easily per∣ceive, if they took notice but of his outward deportments in any action where the Publick Prayers, or the Holy Scri∣ptures had their share.
But I shall give you no further trouble in enlarging up∣on any other heads wherein I might find sufficient matter, that would be pleasing to my self, and useful to others. And, as I dare not reflect upon the conducts of Providence, who hath thought fit to snatch such an one from us that had de∣voted himself so much to his service and our advantage, so I earnestly pray for you his Relatives and mine own par∣ticular, that we may so remember his example as to follow it, where he follow'd Christ's, that when we depart we may be with Christ, as we hope and believe he is.

WANDSWORTH, Decemb. 24. 1680.
