


YOU know, Most Illustrious Prince, how often I have been and am dayly prest by great Numbers of Emi∣nent Persons, to proceed in the Pan∣tagruelian Fables; they tell me that

many languishing, sick and discon∣solate Persons perusing them, have deceiv'd their grief, pass'd their time merrily, and been inspir'd with new Joy and Comfort. I common∣ly answer, that I aim'd not at Glory and Applause, when I diverted my self with writing; but only design'd to give by my Pen, to the absent who labour under Affliction, that little help which at all times I will∣ingly strive to give to the Present that stand in need of my Art, and Service. Sometimes I at large relate to them, how Hippocrates in several places, and particularly in Lib. 6. Epidem. describing the Institution of the Physician his disciple, and also Soranus of Ephesus, Orbasius, Galen, Hali, Abbas, and other Au∣thors, have descended to particulars in the prescription of his Motions, Deportment, Looks, Counte∣nance, Gracefulness, Civility, Clean∣liness of face, Cloaths, Beard, Hair▪ Hands, Mouth, even his very Nails▪ As if he were to play the Part of a Lover, in some Comedy, or en∣ter

the Lists to Fight some Enemy. And indeed the practice of Physic is properly enough compar'd by Hippocrates to a Fight, and also to a Farce acted between three Persons, the Patient, the Physician, and the Disease. Which Passage has sometimes put me in mind of Ju∣lia's saying to Augustus her Father. One day she came before him in a very gorgeous loose lascivious Dress: which very much displeas'd him, though he did not much discover his discontent. The next day, she put on another, and in a modest Garb, such as the chast Roman La∣dies wore, came into his presence. The kind Father could not then forbear expressing the pleasure which he took to see her, so much alter'd, and said to her: Oh! how much more this Garb becomes, and is commendable in the Daughter of Augustus. But she, having her excuse ready, answer∣ed: This day, Sir, I drest my self to please my Father's Eye; yesterday to gratify that of my Husband. Thus, disguis'd in looks and garb, nay e∣ven,

as formerly was the Fashion, with a rich and pleasant Gown with four sleeves which was called Philonium, according to Petrus Alexan∣drinus in 6. Epidem. a Physician might answer to such as might find the Metamorphosis indecent: Thus have I accoutred my self, not that I am Proud of appearing in such a Dress; but for the sake of my Patient, whom alone I wholly design to please, and no ways offend or dissatisfie. There is also a Passage in our Father Hip∣pocrates, in the Book I have nam'd, which causes Some to sweat, dispute and labour; not indeed to know whether the Physician's frowning, discontented, and morose Look ren∣der the Patient sad, and his joyful, serene and pleasing Countenance rejoyce him, for experience teaches us that this is most certain; But whe∣ther such Sensations of grief, or pleasure, are produc'd by the ap∣prehension of the Patient, observing his motions and qualities in his Physician, and drawing from thence coniectures of the end, and cata∣strophe

of his disease, as, by his pleasing Look, joyful and desire∣able Events, and by his sorrowful and unpleasing Air, sad and dismal Consequences; or whether those Sensations be produced by a transfu∣sion of the serene or gloomy, aerial or terrestrial, joyful or melancholic Spirits of the Physician, into the Person of the Patient, as it is the Opinion of Plato, Averroes and others.
Above all things the best Authors have given particular directions to Physicians about the Words, Dis∣course, and Converse, which they ought to have with their Patients, every one aiming at one point, that is, to rejoyce them without offending God, and in no ways whatsoever to vex or displease them. Which causes Herophilus much to blame that Physician who being ask'd by a Patient of his, Shall I dye? impudently made him this Answer:

Patroclus dy'd, whom all allow,
By much, a better Man than you.
Another who had a mind to know the state of his distemper, asking him after our merry Patelin's way: Well, Doctor, do's not my Water tell you I shall dye? He foolishly answer'd, No; if Latona the Mother of those lovely Twins, Phoebus and Diana, begot thee. Galen. lib. 4. Com∣ment. 6. Epidem. blames much also Quintus his Tutor, who, a cer∣tain noble Man of Rome, his Pati∣ent saying to him, You have been at break-fast, my Master, your breath smells of Wine; answered arrogantly, yours smells of Fever, which is the better smell of the two? Wine or a putrid Fever? But the Calumny of certain Cannibals Misanthropes, perpetual Eaves-droppers, has been so foul and excessive, that it had con∣quered my patience; and I had re∣solv'd not to write one jot more. For the least of their Detractions

were, that my Books are all stuffed with various Heresies, of which ne∣vertheless they could not show one single Instance; much indeed of Co∣mical and facetious fooleries, neither offending God nor the King: (And truly I own they are the Subject, and only Thme of these Books.) But of heresy, not a Word, unless they interpreted wrong and against all use of reason, and common Lan∣guage, what, I had rather suffer a thousand deaths, if it were possible, than have thought; as who should make Bread to be stone, a fish to be a Serpent, & an Egg to be a Scorpion. This, my Lord, emboldned me once to tell you, as I was complaining of it in your presence, that if I did not e∣steem my self a better Christian, than they show themselves towards me, and if my life, writings, words, nay thoughts betray'd to me one single spark of heresy, or I should in a detestable manner fall into the Snares of the Spirit of Detraction,  that by their means raises such Crimes against me; I would then

like the Phoenix gather dry Wood, kindle a fire, and burn my self in the midst of it. You were then pleas'd to say to me, That King Francis of Eternal memory, had been made sensible of those false accusations: And that having caused my Books, (e, I say, because Se∣veral false, and infamous have been wickedly layd to me,) to be care∣fully, and distinctly read to him by the most learned, and faithful Ana∣gnost in this Kingdom, he had not sound any Passage suspitious; and that he abhorr'd a certain envious, ignorant, hypocritical Informer, who grounded a mortal heresy on an N put instead of an M by the carelesness of the Printers.
As much was done by his Son, our most gracious, virtuous, and blessed Sovereign, Henry, whom Hea∣ven long preserve; so that he gran∣ted you his Royal privilege, and particular protection, for me against my slandering adversaries.
You kindly condescended since, to confirm me these happy News at Paris, and also lately when you visited my Lord Cardinal du Bellay, who for the benefit of his health, after a lingring distemper, was retired to St. Maur that place (or rather Paradise) of salubrity, se∣renity, conveniency, and all desirea∣ble Country-Pleasures.
Thus, my Lord, under so glorious a Patronage, I am emboldened once more to draw my pen, undaunted now and secure; with hopes that you will still prove to me against the power of Detraction, a second Galli Hercules in Learning, Prudence, and Eloquence, and Alexicacos in virtue, power and authority; you, of whom I may truly say what the wise Monarch Solomon saith of Mo∣ses that great Prophet, and Captain of Israel; Ecclesiast. 45. A Man fearing and loving God, who found favour in the sight of all flesh, whose memorial is blessed. God made him like to the

glorious Saints, and magnified him so, that his enemies stood in fear of him; and for him made Wonders: made him glorious in the sight of Kings, gave him a Commandment for his People, and by him shew'd his light; he sanctified him in his faithfulness, and meekness, and chose him out of all Men. By him he made us to hear his Voice, and caused by him the Law of life and knowledge to be given.
Accordingly if I shall be so hap∣py as to hear any one commend those merry Composures, they shall be adjur'd by me to be oblig'd, and pay their thanks to you a∣lone, as also to offer their prayers to Heaven for the continuance and encrease of your Greatness; and to attribute no more to me, than my humble and ready obedience to your Commands: For by your most honourable Incouragement, you at once have inspir'd me with Spirit, and with Invention; and without you my heart had fail'd me, and

the fountain-head of my Animal Spi∣rits had been dry. May the Lord keep you in his blessed Mercy.
My Lord,

Paris this
28 of January. MDLII.
