



Learned Sir,
I Here present thee with an
ancient famous Wit of
France, which yet is not
much exalted above the
Meridian of thine. But in
comparison of whom, all those Dotards
of old; Zoroastres of the Bactrians, and
Orpheus of the Thracians, and Pythago∣ras
of the Samians, and Numa of the
Romans, and Democritus of the Abderites,
and Agrippa of the Germans, and Mer∣line
of the VVelch, and Nostradamus of
the French, and Roger Bacon, Bungey,
Lamb, and I know not how many more

of the English; were but heavy and dull
Impostors, He is such a pleasant Astro∣loger.
And thou resemblest him in this,
that although thou art not altogether
so good a Droll, yet every man when
he reads thee, has a kind of tentation to
laughter. And yet thou for thy part see∣mest
so grave and serious that thou wilt
easily pardon the Translator of this,
having thy selfe so usefully rendred
his jest into good earnest: and I know
not perfectly whether he were thy
Originall, or but an imperfect Type, or
faint representation of thee, a greater
Prophet to come. Thou hast all along
his Style, Figures, and Policy, and all
but the profession of Drollery. Thou
knowest as well how to wrap thy de∣ceits
in a cloud of generalities, that they
may not lye open to discovery or repre∣hension.
Do but look upon thy Ephe∣merides,
and thou canst tell us very
gravely that some body or other shal dy
next month, and as plainly forseest the
fall of some great man in August, as we
mortalls the dropping of a Pomwater

in Autumn. In fine, thy Prophecies are
as sure as Death: for Those, as This, are
in themselves certaine, but the Time,
Place, Manner, and Persons, and such
petty circumstances, altogether uncer∣tain.
Thou canst, like him, Prophesie
of things past or present: but it will be
thy wisdome to be more sparing in
future Contingencies which depend
on the will of Man; and though Hea∣ven
look upon us with a thousand
Eyes, yet it is thought not to be able to
peepe into mens private Clossets, and
lesse into the Cabinet of their Hearts;
or to discover the little Thefts of a
silver Spoon or Tankard, but such as
thou imploiest thy Nimble Mercuries
to steal. 'Tis true, There may be an un∣happy
guesse at these events, but 'tis a
Casting winter or summer, Crosse or
Pile, on which side to be mistaken; a
meere Handy Dandy, Even or Odd,
which is the right. 'Tis to venture thy
discretion at Passage, or, Most in three
throwes, in hope thou mayest have the
good luck to speak truth. Our noble

SchollerLord Ve∣rul. m. tells thee a mea∣sur'd
verity, when he gives
the reason these bold pre∣dictions
find so much Credit among
us. It is because we observe when they
hit, and not when they misse; and their
Faults like those of Physitians are hid
under ground, when their Cures live a∣bove
it. The Candles vowed to the
shrine of the Saint that preserved the
Passengers from a storm, are to be seen
in their Chappells, but they who were
wrackt in the sea had no such Monu∣ments.
Nor is the same truth more un∣handsomly
exprest by the wi∣sest
Historian our Nation
hath brought forth,Sir Walter Rawleigh. That
Prognostications of this kind are as
seed scattered in the vast Field of
Time; 'tis extreme ill hap, if none of
them take. Sure I am, Thine are thick
sown, how thin soever they come up. If
it were not so, what need our Princes
allow such excessive Pensions to main∣taine
honorable Spyes, and receive ad∣vices
from abroad, when thou an uni∣versall

Agent, who lyest lieger for the
sphears, and art confederate with Hea∣ven,
canst more cheaply preserve intelli∣gence
above: when every Beam of the
Sun is a letter, and each Mote in it a
Character for thee to uncypher and
read over all the dispatches of Fate.
And hence I believe arises the angry
contest between thee, and the Ignorant
sawcy Divines, who pretend to under∣stand
a Heaven above Thine. They take
a bare word, which some hold to be
but a weak security, and believe upon
Parole: but thou wilt have Gods hand
and deed sealed, and delivered to thy
Faith in a legible and shining Text.
There are that take thee to be not only
a discoverer, but a cause of those Effects
thou fortellest. As the young Nostra∣damus
set the City of Pouslin on fire
which he Prophesied should be burnt.
And Cardan that bespake the time of
his owne death, would dy a volunteer
at that time to keep his word. Yet some
Malicious persons suspect thee to deal
not so much in Galileus his Tubes, as

thy Magicall looking glasse (thy Specu∣lum
Trinitatis upon Earth) wherein to
take the height of a match between
two starrs when they shall meet in Cot∣tu,
and enter into the signe of Scorpio.
Others take thee to be a right Courtier
of Heaven that ever keepest in with the
Lord Ascendant. If Saturn be deposed,
quit him for a leaden melancholy
Planet, and turn thee to Jupiter in his
stead. Truly it is not unbecomming,
that he who studies the measure of
Time, should serve it. As for the Coun∣try;
it contends for thee as the seven
Cities for thy fellow Poet Homer. Essex
pretends to thee by reason the Sun, thy
Prince, rises from thence. And Surrey,
because though it be barren and dry (as
thy language) yet it is mistresse of a
clear Ayre, such as that of Assyria
where thy Brethren the Chaldeans first
practis'd. And in Middlesex, though
most of the Native Gentlemen have
somewhat of the incivility and rude∣nesse
of Clownes, and the eminent
Clownes somewhat of the riches and

pride of the Gentlemen; yet both are
content and humble themselves, and
purchase thee at the dear expence of
a Teston. Onely they complain thou art
too negligent of the serious affaires of
thy lovers, and would read thee often∣er
then they carry their Bible to
Church, If thou wouldst quit this busy
trade of Policy, which they think not
so proper, & deal a little more in their
beloved Husbandry. They look upon e∣very
page of the Month to find, Cloudy
Dark, somewhat Cold, Thunder-like,
Inclining to rain, or, what like an Oracle
never fails, Variable wether. They ex∣pect
to heare from thee under what
Signe it is safest to cut their Cocks or
their Pigs, when to plough or sow,
when to plant or graft Trees or inocu∣late
their Vines, with the likeliest hope
of fruit. They itch to be instructed when
are the Quarterly or Monthly Tearms;
what is the wide difference betwixt
St. Lucies might, and St. Barnabyes,
and the effects of a showry St. Swethins,
or a shiny Candlemas. When a deare

year is a comming, for Sordido to hoard
up his Corn. And the Epicure longs
to know from thee when Oysters are
fullest and fattest; and the very minute
and second, when Venson or Lobsters
goe out of season. If thou didst but inter∣taine
them with these usefull discourses
they sweare to do nothing without
thee. Not to eat or drink without thy
licence. Not to goe to stoole unlesse
Mercury be Retrograde. Nor to a Con∣venticle
but by star light. Nor to Court
without enquiry, if Jupiter be stirring.
The goodwif would not sow her Leeks
or Onyons but under an Egyptian con∣stellation:
Nor keep a milch Cow with∣out
thy Heavenly Bull. Nor expect her
butter to come, unlesse by thy charming.
Their Petitions seem to me very rea∣sonable:
to which they add, It would
doe well if thou leave not out the Effi∣gies
of the Man that is stabd through
all the twelve Signes, but place it in the
room of thy Picture, and such whol∣some
advices in rhyme, as, Flee Bathes
and Venery, Drink wine but sparingly,

and the like, These were atcheive∣ments
fit for thy Learned adventures.
These things they understand, and (I
am afraid) thy self does No more. But
they are perswaded, that to cast the
Nativity-water of a Nation, and pre∣scribe
the Phlebotomy of War, or purg∣ing
of a Parlament, City, or Army is but
to be a Celestial Quack, a fortune-teller
at large, and a State-Mountebanck.
To conclude, I should forget the Na∣ture
of an Almanack, did I not a little
fringe it over with verses: And there∣fore
I presume herewithall to send you
an ancient Prophesy made in Henry the
8 his time, by a Poet Laureat John Skel∣ton;
who, though he were as merry a
Madcap as the Doctor, and his verses
appeare like that play at Crambo; and
that he run a poor rhyme out of breath
till it pant and expire, or hurry it on
with such a strong gale, til it touch
upon the Coast of Nonsense; yet per∣haps
between his fits of talking idly,
he hath some lucid Intervalls of
shrewd and poinant expressions. Read

him here as a Prediction of our Rablais
in Type, but in Truth of thee, to whom
all the world subscribes, as I do my
selfe,

