



Right Honorable,
IT is truly resolved by Learned men, Aquin. part. 1. qu. 1. art. 4. & Scholastici in Prolog. Sentent. That Theology is not a bare Speculative Science, which ultimately terminateth and stoppeth in the understanding, but that it is a Doctrine ordered and directed unto Practice, pre∣scribing not onely the John 17. 3. Ephes. 4. 13. knowledge of Spiritual Truth, but the Marth. 7. 21. Jam. 1. 22. John 13. 17. doing and loving of Spiritual Good. The Apostle calleth it the Tit. 1. 1. Eph. 4. 20, 21. acknowledgment of the Truth which is after Godliness; The Learning of Christ, and of the Truth as it is in Jesus. As light and heat, lustre, motion, and influence, are united in the Sun, the one working with and by the other; so Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are joyned with fulness of

Grace and Holiness, in the Sun of Righte∣ousness, whose Wings have healing in them. The Doctrine of Religion is like the Ezek. 1. 8, 13, 16, 18. Prophets Vision of Cherubims, where he saw Wheels full of Eyes; the one for Vision, the other for Motion; and Hands under Wings; these to soar in contemplation, those to be imployed in Action; and Lamps, and Burning Coals of Fire; the one for light, the other for heat. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 19. c. 25. De Nupt. & Concupisc. l. 1. c. 3. Contr. 2. ep. Pelag. l. 3. cap. 5. Contr. Julian. Pelag. lib. 4. cap. 3. As an Heathens and Hereticks Moral actions do not benefit him without Faith in Christ; so a Christians Aug. Tom. 4. lib. de Fide & oper. cap. 14. ad Simplician. quaest. 2. speculative knowledge, and meer Doctrinal Faith will not save him without good works, and the fruits of new obedience. Aug. de Trin. l. 15. c. 18. Qualis est illa confessio quae sic Deo cre∣dit, ut pro ni∣hilo ejus ducat imperium? aut quomodo ex ani∣mo ac verè di∣cimus, Domi∣ne, Domine, si ejus quem Do∣minum confite∣mur, praecepta contemnimus?—Inter Christianum & Gentilem non fides tantùm debet, fed etiam vita distin∣guere, Hier. Epist. ad Gelantiam de ratione Piè vivendi. Fides esse sine charitate potest, prodesse non potest Though therefore we dare not ascribe unto good works, any meritorious dignity, or proper causality, whereby they pro∣cure or produce Salvation for us, yet such a Heb. 12. 14. & 10. 36. Vide Davenant. de Justitia Actuali, cap. 30. 31. necessity of them we ever acknow∣ledge, as that without walking in the

way of holiness, we shall not arrive at the Kingdom of Glory; without doing the will of God, we can never expect to re∣ceive the promises. And as it is a dange∣rous temptation of Satan on the one hand, to perswade men to deifie their own good works, by putting confidence in them; so it is no less dangerous on the other hand by meer notional, aiery and Platonical speculations to eat out all care of good works, and those moral duties of Piety, Temperance, righteousness, and Cha∣rity, in which the life and proper vertue Gal. 5. 6. 1 Thes. 1. 3. 1 Tim. 1. 5. Tit. 3. 8. of true saving faith doth exert it self.
These considerations moved me, when I was invited to Preach before you at that solemn time when many proper objects of good works use to be presented to your eyes, to single out that argument to treat upon. And that so much the rather, be∣cause we live in times wherein there is a concurrence of many of those symp∣tomes and distempers, upon which our Saviour hath concluded, That the love of Matth. 24. 6, 12. many should wax cold: Wars, and rumors

of wars, Nation against Nation, Kingdom against Kingdom; many offended, many hating one another, many false Teachers, many seduced people, and, above all, an abundance of iniquity. And indeed, it may be justly feared, that where there are so many divisions, prejudices, animo∣sities, differences both of judgment and interest, to say nothing of the luxury, de∣licacy, vanity and excess in private ex∣pences, there cannot but consequently be a very great obstruction in the current of good works.
My hearty desire and prayer is, That as this Sermon received favorable audi∣ence from you, and is now by your own direction exposed to a more general view, so some signal blessing may follow the publication thereof, that thereby the hearts of many rich men may be inlarged to honor the Lord with their substance, and to let their Merchandise, and their Prov. 3. 9. Treasures have inscribed upon them, Holiness to the Lord. Isai. 23. 18.

