



Dearly Beloved,
THIS Sermon was
Preached before you
in order to the Peace
and Vnity of the
Church of God
amongst you: and I presume in or∣der
to the same good end I was by
You pressed to the publishing of it.
Which motion I have the more rea∣dily
entertained, that the Argu∣ments
unto so necessary a duty,



which I found prevalent with you
then, might he always at your hand,
to revive in you the same affections.
And truly those many men in all
parts of this Nation, who, upon what∣soever
plausible and specious preten∣ces,
have given entertainment un∣to
novel opinions, (never before
these loose times heard of in the
Church of God) and thereupon do
forsake the Assemblies, and di∣sturbe
the peace of an Orthodox
and Reformed Church, little consider
the advantage they give the Common
Adversary: who no doubt rejoyceth
to see us break one another with our
own hands, whom they with theirs
hither to have not been able to harm;
As Vespasian is observed by Jose∣phus
to have done in the siege of Je∣rusalem,

not choosing to storme
the Jewes by any hostile assault,
while they were destroying one a∣nother
by their Intestine confusi∣ons.
Certainly what ever prejudi∣ces
weak and credulous men may
have their eyes dazled withall, Di∣visions
and Contentions in the Church
have alwayes fleshly lusts at the bot∣tome
of them, as the Apostle assureth
us, 1 Cor. 3. 3. Nor are they on∣ly
fruits of sinne in men, but evi∣dences
of wrath in God, and sad
symptomes of his further displeasure.
When Manasse is against Ephraim,Isai 9. 21.
and Ephraim against Manasse,
and both against Judah, it is a sign
that Gods anger is not turned away,
but that his hand is stretched out still.
Shismes in a Church being like Leaks



in a ship, or breaches in a Sea bank,
which threaten speedy and extremest
danger. And therefore all who wish
well to Sion should listen unto Heal∣ing
and Vniting Counsels, not suffer∣ing
in so important a businesse, as the
Peace and prosperity of the Church,
any secular designes, single, or divi∣ded
Interests, carnal animosities, or
perverse disputes, to embitter their
spirits or alienate their affections
from other their brethren, heirs of
the same common salvation: or to
draw them away from the Communi∣on
of that Church, from whose breasts
they have often sucked the sincere milk
of the word, and in whose fellowship
they may still undoubtedly partake
of all the means of Salvation. The
Lord grant that all of us in all places



of the Land, both Pastors and Peo∣ple
may be unanimously zealous for
the Peace of the Church. That
Ministers by sound and wholesome
doctrine, which cannot be disproved
by holy, humble, prudent, and peace∣able
Lives, and by unwearied dili∣gence
and fidelity in their Callings,
may stop the mouthes, and winne up∣on
the affections of their Gain-say∣ers:
and that the People may not
lean on their own wisdome, nor be
carryed away blind-fold with uncha∣ritable
prejudices, or with every
winde of doctrine, but may yeild
themselves to the guidance of their
faithfull Pastors, and be swift to
hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath;
for Contention is usually the mother
of disobedience.Jam. 1. 19. Rom. 2. 18. Now the Lord of



Peace himself give you peace always
by all means; the Lord be with you
all.

