



SIR,
IT were a Solaecism of the first magnitude to
entertain you with any thing like a Nar∣rative
of the Superennial Fast, under all the
Havooks and depraedations whereof the
Derby-shire Damosell hath hitherto been
sustained, though emaciated thereby into the
ghastliness of a Skeleton, to the great astonishment of the
Vulgus. Your correspondencies are so faithful, and your
Circumstances so advantageous, as wholly to supersede the
necessity of my engaging in, and the possibility of my grati∣fying
you, by such a Province. However, indulge me,
while bemoaning my self, the liberty to tell you, that con∣cerning
the Phaenomena's attending this prodigeous Ab∣stinence,
my own thoughts have been so miserably ravel'd,
and my scanty intellectuals so much overmatcht thereby,

that I could not with any Complacency look into those, nor
with any delight consult these. A just reverence to Re∣formed
Theologues, asserting a total Cessation of Mira∣cles,
forbad me to immure my self in any such supernatu∣ral
Asylum: and a praejudicate opinion of humane bodies
in this Animal State, allowed me not to Eurefuge my flu∣ctuating
mind in Physical Causes clubbing together, by an
Anomalous Cpulation, to engender so great an Heteroclite.
While thus lost in the Chaos of confused apprehensions, and
smarting under the Hirricano of my own tumultuary
thoughts, I hurry away to a very Worthy and Compassionate
Friend, who with a little deliberation runs through the
Diagnosticks of my Malady, pitieth my case, and after
some sharp Conflicts, with his own Modesty, affords the Re∣lief
of a Philosophical Elixir (for so I call the ensuing
Discourse) wholly transferring the right, which he had in
the happy results of his own contemplations, upon me.
Now (Sir!) what by much importunity I extorted from
him, for my own private satisfaction, I make bold to
tender the world a view of, under the Countenance and
Protection of your great Name, which is not only able to
secure it from the Critical Pharaphrases of an Envious Age,
but also to command it the Iustice of an unpraejudicate
perusal with such as know your worth. To my own grief,
I have found it much an Anodyne; or as a pleasant Lul∣labie
to my whimpering fancy; the issue of all hath been
rest: not knowing, but it may minister the like seasonable
relief to others, who have not Wit and Philosophy enough
to start any greater Objections, than my self; I judged it
worthy to travail the World. The confidence wherein I
seek to entitle you to the Patrociny of it, is no less than an
assurance of your benign Nature, singular Ingenuity, and
obliging goodness, which have begotten and pupil'd in me,
that perswasion, ever since I had the happiness and honour

to know you. Besides your clearer Intellectuals, and your
vast acquaintance with Natures Recondite Mysteries, made
it wholly incongruous to adopt any other the object of this
Dedication. I do still remember with the deepest resent∣ments
of a grateful heart, the happy distinction betwixt
parts Spermatique and parts Haematique, wherewith in pity
you relieved me, when anxiously enquiring, upon a Religi∣ous
account, after the principuum individuationis in hu∣mane
bodies: a Notion (as to me it seems) more able to
rescue the Grand Article of our Creed concerning the Re∣surrection
of the same individual Body from under suspi∣cion,
and the many gross▪ absurdities, that some Phyloso∣phasters,
and half-witted Atheists, would ain clogg it
with, than any offerture of Humane Reason, that I ever yet
had the happiness to meet with! Here (methinks I could
break forth into an , and congratulate my great,
though late felicity, that the ) as
Origen, in one sense or other calls it) the Principle main∣taining
a Numerical Identity in Humane Bodies, through
the whole series of Vicissitudes, Changes, and Sanctorian
Transmutations; betwixt the Vterine Formation, and the
Vltimate Reunition of soul and body, should, after many a
tedious search, and frustraneous disquisition, at last be
suggested by an hand able, in the maintenance of it, to
grapple with any Contradictor. In this you have satisfied not
only my reason, but my curiosity too; and therefore (Sir,)
so great is my opinion of your skill (absit omnis adu∣lationis
suspicio!) that whatever Dogma steps abroad
with your name written upon it, I could almost surrender
up my self as a perfect Captive to it (were I not a Man,
and which is more, a Protestant) upon an implicit faith!
But I have, I know not well how, digressed, and stept asid
into things heterogeneous to the purport of this Dedica∣tory
Address. I therefore return to my ingenious friends

Discourse, upon which, were my judgement in these matters
worth any thing, I could afford to be liberal in the bestow∣ance
of my Encomium's. But as 'tis shrouded under your
Patronage, so 'tis submitted to your Censure: (this I am
bold to do, knowing the Author, so much an Admirer of
you, that he cannot reluctate) whether more worthy your
pity or your approbation, none can better judge, than your
discerning and deserving self. Therefore such as it is, I
leave it to your Mercy; and beg leave to tell you, that I
should presently fall out with my self, did I not, upon
a faithful Scrutiny, find my self in the number of those
that really love and honour you.
Farewell.
