



Honourable Senators:
HAving had for a long time strong ap∣prehensions out of the word of God, of an approching storme upon the Nati∣ons of Europe, for the ruining espe∣cially of Antichrst's Kingdome; I thought it not unmeet for the times & Auditors (having your honorable call to the Worke) to treat in your presence upon such a subject. The Kingdoms & states of Europe are grown old, & a man would think, were come even to their years, & full ripenesse in all kind of sinfulnes & prophanenesse, but chiefly in ido∣latry & persecution in the Ecclesiastical, & in tyranny and oppression in the Civill state, and that under and against a great deale of light and meanes that either they had or might have had. And there is a mervailous concurrence and agreement, both in the generall Comminations of the word against sinnes so aggravated (besides the examples) and in the particular Prophecies and Praedictions of the last times, all of them pitching upon this, as that period of time wherein the Lord will visit. The Lord is certainly driving on a great Worke both of mercy and justice; of
mercy towards his owne (though by a way of severe corre∣ction) in their Humiliation, Purgation, Probation, Re∣formation, Redemption from bondage, and at last, in the Restauration and great enlargement of the Church: Of justice, against his incurable enemies of all sorts and sizes, in their perdition. We must not be moved that the Worke is so long in finishing among us, being haply not much more then begun. There is assuredly a great deale for a pub∣lique calamity, still to doe (alas too much) in every Coun∣try, City, Towne, Parish, Family, Person; many both per∣sons and things are yet (as it is to be feared) among the Litigants on both sides, that are to be removed and subdu∣ed. Besides, the Lord useth to deale with men as men, the great power of the wicked cannot by humane meanes (which God is pleased to use) be suddenly and easily breken.
Neither can the godly,
sa. 48.10. whom the Lord will not refine as silver, purging out all their drosse at once, be suddenly ham∣mered unto a sufficient humiliation, reformation, &c. But this divine agent chooseth to worke upon them according to their receptivity. Neither let any be scandalized at some interruptions and rebates, as I may say, in the Lords proceedings, and at some successes now and then granted to his Churches adversaries; you shall find the like in all the great acts of God that be of the same nature: But all things are carried on by the steady hand of the Almighty, though through many oppositions, repulses, contingencies, &c. a∣mong men, to their designed end and appointed period. Not to speake of this, that had not the enemies some encou∣ragements, as the Lords worke would hardly, by them, be perfected and finished upon his owne people, so neither would they be hardned to their owne destruction: If Pharaoh had never been released of the first plagues, he would scarce
have perished in the Sea at last: I hope it will neither be unprofitable nor unacceptable, as a Watch-man, to put your honours, and by you, others in mind of these things. I doe not deny, but in the course of humane affaires, there will be treaties among men, for the composing of those differen∣ces that God casts in, to be the occasion and meanes of ex∣ecuting his decrees: Yea, there must (and for some rea∣sons peradventure there ought to) be such: But I know I speake to men too wise to beleeve that God's quarrels can be taken up by humane treaties; but they will without faile attaine the issue by God himselfe before prefixed, and by his Word threatned and promised.
Neither doe I doubt but that the Church shall obtaine her desired peace and rest in the end, when God's Worke is finished, though no such meanes were used at all, and give law to all her enemies; till which time I looke for no solid and durable quiet to be by the people of God enjoyed; yea, I am confident upon the faithfull word of God, that the Saints shall then enjoy things, which would be but by a few even of themselves now desired, and by the adverse party never yeelded. The Temple of Salomon was built in a peaceable, the latter Temple in a troublesome time; but now though there be great noyses of Axes, Hammers and tooles of Iron, partly about the preparation for the new building, but chiefely about the pulling downe of the old, (which is the great worke in hand) yet when the appointed time of building is come, the Church may promise unto her self from God, and undoubtedly expest, an absolute cessa∣tion from all these disturbances in Church and Common∣wealth, and a time, (farre above all that ever were) of admi∣rable freedome, serenitie and tranquillitie.
There are some few things: concerning the happy estate
of the Church, in her promised future reformation, which time would not then suffer me to bring in; I have here made bold briefly to adde them, without which the former would have been imperfect. I have purposely pretermitted some things subject to doubt and exception; I humbly pre∣sent all to your judicious view, whom God hath thought worthy to make his Instruments to begin so great a Refor∣mation in these Nations, which will (I feare not) have a good influence by divine blessing, upon others also abroad; hoping stedfastly, that the same God will through his in∣finite mercy in Christ, by your hands in due time, finish the same. Which is the daily desire and prayer of him that is

