



SIR,
IT was my Fortune, as I past St. Paul's Church-Yard, the Third of November last, to meet a Book (then wet from the Press) in∣tituled, The Case of Allegiance due to Sove∣reign Powers, &c. and, as casually returning the same Afternoon, to find (at least the Title-Page) reprinted, as a Second Edition, 1691. And when I saw there was neither Picture nor Rhime before it, that might thus occasion a Second Impression, within the compass of Three Hours, I began to think, there was something more than ordinary in it, and so took it with me: But when I came to examine it, the Name of Dr. Sherlock had so possess'd me, that I began to enquire, whe∣ther there were Two Dr. Sherlocks? And was thus answer'd, That whether there were or not, there was a Gentleman (meaning your self) whose whole Course of Life, Studies, Interest, were so in∣terwoven with the Doctor's, that he would readily
 salve any Thought of mine concerning it, or at least, represent it to him. And this (Sir) is the single Reason why I thus address to you; as will∣ing to be satisfy'd, whether you believe the Do∣ctor's writing this Book was all pure Conscience? Or, whether there were not more of the Loaves, than the Doctrine in it? Because, near the very beginning of his Preface, he speaks of the For∣feiture of all his Preferments, by refusing the Oath, which he had lost for ever, had not the Government been more mild and gentle to him in it: Which seems to me meer Interest; in that, had he taken the Oath, and not retaken his Preferments with it, I must have confess'd it, to have been pure Conscience: And yet, to make it as easie as I can, I think he wanted not some Pre∣cedents in the Case; those (I mean) that swal∣low'd the Covenant in the Rump-Parliament's Time, and a Bishoprick after it, upon the King's Restauration.
The next thing your Friend says, is, That while he refus'd to take the Oaths, he never made it his business to disswade Men from it: When his Opinion was ask'd, he deliver'd his own thoughts, but never sought to make Pro∣selytes; As deeming the taking them to be against his Conscience. But how then did he satisfie the
 Obligation of a Pastor, when he suffer'd his Flock to do that, which in Conscience he thought to be an ill thing, and not fit to do himself? With this further (as to the delivering his Thoughts) whether in the Company of some Di∣vines or others, his Opinion, touching the present Matter, being demanded, and Bishop Overal's Convocation-Book urg'd in defence of it, that he did not answer it, came not up to the Case, or Words to that purpose; because if he did, the Stone which he then refus'd is now become the Head of his Corner; and if he did not, I must do him this Justice, to say, he is shrewdly belyed.
However, whether he did or not, he pray'd for King William and Queen Mary by Name, according to the Apostle's Direction, to pray for all that are in Authority, which they visi∣bly were; with this Caution nevertheless (which I find in his Book,Page 17. though not in the Apostle) That he took care to do it in such terms as not to pray against the dispossessed Prince: And chose rather, highly to offend some, than separate from others. And truly (Sir) du∣ring all this time, your Friend may be said to have been consulting with his Staff: On the one hand, lay Conscience; on the other, Preferments, not without hopes of better; the Staff fell to
 the surer Side, and Conscience wisely acquiesc'd in Providence.
Nor do I think I am much out in it; how far I may be, even himself be Judge, when he says, He did not refuse the Oaths out of any Fond∣ness for the Government of King James, nor Zeal for his Return, which the present Prospect of Affairs gives no Man any reason to wish; because,Page 18. as he says in his Book, his Power is broken, and there is no visible Prospect of his recovering his Throne again: But out of pure Principles of Conscience, to comply with the Obligations of his former Oaths, and that Duty which Subjects owe to their Prince, which he then apprehended irreconcileable with the new Oath. But now that the Doctor's Con∣science is at rest, or if it should wake again, the World is too noisy to have it heard, be pleas'd (Sir) to ask him, why he gives no other Reason of his so long dissatisfaction, than, If Reason were never so plentiful with him (i. e. as cheap as Blackberries) he thinks it not worth the while to gratifie a Curiosity: When yet Mr. Chilling∣worth, upon his going off to the Church of Rome, left the Reasons of his dissatisfaction on his Study Table, and when he came back to the Church of England, answer'd them himself; but never
 (that I heard) took any Preferment after it, that he might not be thought to have done it for Inte∣rest. But alas! alas! the World is alter'd, Sine Cerere & Baccho friget, &c. and therefore, let the Doctor say what he will, That what he has thus written, was for our sakes, for my part, I should have thought it had been for his own; had he not brought in Religion as a Party, in saying, We live in an Age of great Pro∣phaneness and Infidelity, which is ready to take all Occasions to reproach Religion, and expose it as a Cheat and Imposture; and to neglect no opportunity to blacken the Clergy, as Men of no Faith nor Religion themselves, though they make a great noise about it, to serve their own Interests, &c. But pray (Sir) what does your Friend mean by this Anticipation? Has any Man trod on his Corns? Or is he afraid they may, that he crys (oh!) before he is touch'd? That it is a Prophane Age, who doubts it? But can he shew me the Age that was not so? All of them had a kind of rotten Cough, more or less; and if we may believe Boccaline, were born with it. — Mores, Caeciliane, tui, has been an old Disease; yet if every Man would but mend one, I think the Cure might be easily effected: as also (perhaps) that other of Infidelity; if while
 Men stand damning one another with as much Ʋncharity as Ignorance, they would but soberly sit down, and agree the Credenda. And being so, what wonder if Religion has been so often expos'd to Reproach; especially, when it fares with us,Jer. 5.31. as with the Jews of Old, The Prophets had prophesy'd a lye (before) the People lov'd to have it so. And truly, we come near after a time, when Religion was made the common stale to every thing: The Rebellion of 1642 was founded in that Name; and O. Cromwell was seeking God at St. James's, while his Journey∣men were murdering their Sovereign at Whitehall. And since it has been foretold us, Offences will come, how ought every Man to have a Care that they come not by him? More especially, that they come not from the Clergy, in that it blackens too much, without any additional Scandal: Or other∣wise, I shall hold those lying Prophets among the Jews, and those others of our late Times excusable. And what have we to do with them (if yet any such are to be had now) that put on Religion as a Cloak, not a Garment; and for their Faith be∣lieve in God, but dare not trust in him: Believe God can spread a Table in the Wilderness, but for fear he should not, timely provide for them∣selves: Some, I must confess, would call it In∣terest,
 whereas others, and those the wiser in their Generation, incline to that of the Apostle, He that provides not for his own, has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel.
But still (Sir) your Friend seems uneasie to himself, as doubting, whether what he had of∣fer'd in Justification now may serve turn, unless he give a good Reason, why he did not comply be∣fore: and yet salves it so loosely and shufflingly, in saying, No Man is forbidden to grow wiser; nor that he is asham'd to own, that he is still a Learner; and hopes he shall be so as long as he lives; that even your self would hardly be∣lieve he truly meant what he said: Young, brisk Men may improve by Study and Conversation, but a hopeful grey Beard, or dry Brain, I never yet heard of; with this only, that a better prospect of Affairs, may make them the apter to unlearn all again.
In a word (Sir) I have laid before you my Thoughts, of your Friend's Preface, saving, that I have wholly omitted Bishop Overal's Convoca∣tion-Book; because I have spoken to it, Page 3, 4. and in the Answer to the Doctor's Vindication, Page 45. have further enlarged on it, to which I referr you: With this further, That you'll please to take notice, that my intent in answering this Vindica∣tion
 was not to mix in the Dispute, to which the Doctor replies, but to the end, that where your Friend had brought new Matter I might examine it, and where he had not, that I might direct my Reader to the Page where I had before answer'd it; and for his new Matter, answer it in its proper place, which I have at least endeavour'd; and am,
SIR,

