



Madam,
IT was at your desire that these Sermons were preached, and it is through your continued commnding importuni∣ty that they appear in publick: our backwardnesse hereunto is very well known unto you; which yet proceed∣ed not from any want of respect either to your self, or your deceased Husband (whose Memory we do, and ever shall honour) but from the sense of our own weaknesse and unworthinesse, and an unwilling∣nesse to renew your grief, fearing lest every review of these Sermons, might prove as a fresh tenting of that wound, which the loss of so near and dear a re∣lation hath made in your heart. But our respects both to your deceased Husband, and to your self, from both whom we have received so many ingaging fa∣vours, as also your own most earnest desire that these Sermons might be printed, have silenced all our Ob∣jections, and prevailed with us to the publishing of them, which we now humbly dedicate unto you, knowing none that have a greater right unto them than your self, by reason of your most neer relation, and dear affection, unto him at whose Funer they were preached.
Madam, We are very sensible both of your and our
great loss. The Lord teach and help both you and us, to find and make up that in God, which we have lost in the Creature. The present duty which this dispensation of Providence calls for, is the eying of God in it, a submission unto, and due improvement of it, that you may hear the Rod, and him that appoints it.
And if any thing in these plain Sermons may fur∣ther you, or any other in the like condition, to the performance of this duty (which through Gods bles∣sing we hope they may) we shall rejoyce and be thankful unto God.
The former acquaints you with Mans Vanity in his best Estate, which lesson God hath been many wayes, and for a long time teaching of you; First, by taking away diverse of your dear Children from you in their tender years, and now your more dear Husband in his best Estate, according to the sense of the Psal∣mist. Sure God would by these Providences knock off your Hands and take off your Heart from the Creature. Endeavour to make this use of them, to get a more weaned Heart from the world, and all those Creature enjoyments God hath yet left you It is true indeed you have cause to say with Job, Have pity upon me, have pity upon me O ye my Friends, for the Hand of the Lord hath touched me. Yet withall, you have still cause to acknowledge, that in the midst of Wrath, God hath remembred Mercy: in a peacea∣ble setling your worldly affairs, to content and sa∣tisfaction, and yet more, in his hitherto sparing and continuing unto you the life of your now onely sur∣viving Daughter Mrs. Winnifred Pierrepont, a living Branch of your deceased Husband Our Prayer is, and shall be, that God would season her young and ten∣der
Heart with Grace, and that he would lengthen her life, that she may live to be an instrument of his glory, and a comfort unto you and her relations. And our Humble Advice to you, in order hereunto is, That you would take heed lest you set your Heart too much upon her; you cannot love her too well, but you may love her too much: and strong affecti∣ons towards Creatures, do usually make way for strong afflictions. See therefore that you place not too much of happinesse in her, or any other Creature, but make God your portion, and while you use Creatures of which God hath vouchsafed you plen∣ty, be sure you enjoy God: and labour after an E∣state that is better than Mans best Estate, whether na∣tural, Civil, or Moral.
The latter Sermon, presents you with the gain and advantage of Ʋprightnesse, and Sincerity of Heart, and may serve as a Cordial to Gods People under the greatest present presures of trouble and affliction, which they are exercised with, affuring them of a calm Evening after a stormy Day, and that though they have sorrow here, yet they shall find joy and rest at last, in their Fathers House and Saviours Bo∣some. We hope God hath given you this Ʋpright∣nesse of Heart, and pray, that he would give you that peace and comfort which he hath promised to it. Labour more and more to abound in this Grace: See that Ʋprightnesse animate all your performances, Professions, and Practices: Let Ʋprightnesse be your way, and Peace shall be your end. Which that it may be, is the humble and earnest prayer of
Madam

