



REverend and beloved Bretheren.
Ever since the preaching of this
plain Sermon, I have been impor∣tuned
Quotidiano convicio (if
I may use the Orators expression) to make it
publick.Quintilion. I have at last suffered my self to
be overcome by the perswasions of my friends.
My chief end therein hath been, That I might
provoke my younger brethren to make it the
main design of their Ministry to render the
Lord Jesus, His divine Person, His sacred
Offices, His heavenly Doctrine, His blessed
Example, His spiritual Graces, the fellow∣ship
of his sufferings, the power of his re∣surrection,Phil. 3. 8, 10.
the excellency of his know∣ledge,Eph. 3. 8, 18, 19
the unsearchable riches of his love,
& al the mysteries of his Kingdom, amiable in

the eyes of their hearers, As it was foretold
of him,Hag. 2. 7. That he should be the desire of all
Nations,Cant. 5. 10, 16. the chiefest of ten thousand, and
altogether lovely. That in preaching the
Law, they may lead men to Christ for mercy
to pardon the Transgressions, and for Grace
to obey the commands of it. That in preach∣ing
the Gospel, they may direct men unto
Christ for Faith, to believe the promises of
the Covenant, for he is the Author of our
Faith:Heb. 12. 2. Col. 1. 27. For Hope, to wait for the fulfilling
of them, for he is unto us the Hope of
Glory; and for Love, to in flame that purity
and holinesse which they are intended to kindle
in us, for the Love of Christ constraineth
us.2 Cor. 5. 14. That by the awe and dread of the Name
of Christ,2 Cor. 5. 20. in whose stead they speak,1 Pet. 5. 4. and un∣to
whom,Heb. 13. 17. as the chief Shepherd of the
sheep, they must give an account, they may
be deterred from all those ways of passion, o∣stentation
and vanity, whereby men are some∣times
transported to preach themselves ra∣ther
then Christ,Jer. 23. 16, 22, 26. and the conceptions of their
own heart rather then his counsel,1 Sam. 2. 17. and thereby
provoke the people to abhor the offering of

the Lord. I have taken the liberty of dedi∣cating
it unto you, that I might thereby te∣stifie
the Love and Honour I owe your per∣sons,
the value I set upon your learned and
pious Labours, and the real thanks which I
return unto you, for the great Love which
you have expressed towards my person, and
assistance which you have afforded me in
mine attendance on the service of that Dio∣cess.
And I hope it will not be grievous
unto you, or offensive unto any, if after the
Example of the Antient Bishops in the
primitive and purer ages of the Church, who
were wont to sit with their Clergy and pre∣side
in an Ecclesiastical Senate,Ignat. I shall in
matters of weight and difficulty intreat the
advice and assistance of you who are Pres∣byteri
urbis, in order to the more safe,Origen. judi∣cious,Consessus Cleri. Cyprian.
regular,Senatus Eccle∣siae. Hieron. vid. Cyprian: passim. Epist. 6. 18, 19, 24, 28, 31, 32, 33, 35, 40, 46, 58, 66, 71, 72. and inoffensive determining
of them. And so I commend you to the
Grace of God, and remain

