



Honoured Sir,
NO sooner could I make my thoughts to com∣ply
with the motion of publishing this Sermon,
(which I presume for its seasonableness unto
the present juncture of affairs, more than
from any intrinsick worth therein, some that heard it
were pleased favourably to estimate) but it presently
became the matter of a deliberation with my self,
what could discourage me from hoping but that your
worthy Name might prove auspicious unto it, by lend∣ing
it something of a credit to pass out into the
world? I foresaw nothing that could check my pleasing
aims herein, but might arise either from the subject
treated of in this Discourse; or from the person whose
it was, and doth now present it unto your candid ac∣ceptance;
or from the defectiveness of the management
and handling of it.
As to the first of these, I did the more easily perswade
my self, that it could not offend you to see and read
in this Sermon the deformities of a false Religion in
any degree exposed, who have your self zealously
espoused, and are so good a friend unto the true and
best Religion in the world. A Religion never suffi∣ciently

to be praised and commended for the certainty
of its Rule, which are those Books of Canonical Scrip∣ture,
of whose authority there was never any doubt in
the Church: for the compactedness of her Fundamen∣tals,
determined and summed up in the Apostles Creed,
explained in those others which are called the Nicene
and Athanasian: for the simplicity of her Sacraments,
and all her Administrations managed, in a language,
and performed with that decent plainness as may be un∣derstood
by all that are concerned in them: for the
gravity and soundness of her Ordination and Mini∣stry;
for the peaceableness of her Tenets, in obedience
to the Magistrate; for her conformity to the Aposto∣lick
and Primitive pattern in all things, so far as
the looseness of this Age will bear: for the undoubted
assurance of finding Salvation by its Rules and Pre∣cepts,
if we continue in them and do them. These and
the like are the lineaments of our and your Religion,
which cannot be displeasing unto you to assert, and there∣fore
neither to oppugn the contrary.
But neither, in the second place, could I suppose any
disrespect unto the person, submitting those Papers un∣to
your candor, that should be able to create unto you
any ill resentment of the Sermon it self. In that what
never had been, I could easily hope, must have a grea∣ter
occasion than this to beget it. For indeed it is a
pleasure to me to let the world to know, that under Him
who is the giver of every good and perfect gift,Jam. 1. 17.
next unto the memory of my exeellent and worthy
Patron deceased, I owe most unto your care and pro∣vidence,
for the comfort and bene esse of my being and
Ministry in the place where I am: whereby you have
buoyed me up above the necessity of depending upon the
precarious benevolence of a people; which I wish no

good or honest Minister were ever put to trust to. A
good part of my Books deservedly bear your honoured
name upon them for their Donor: The first and the
most seasonable News-years gift I could possibly have
received for the encouragement and assistance of my first
studies in this your own Dwelling-parish. You never yet
denied me any request (which notwithstanding have
been very many) that in consistency with your Honour
and Power I durst move unto you: nor ever spared to
take any pains (which yet have been very great) where∣of
the success in prospect hath promised fairly on my be∣half.
So sure hath been my happy interest in your ever
valued respects, that I never found it hitherto checked
with the least change of countenance or carriage. So
noble and generous, that whereas anothers kindnesses
would have necessitated a man to the study of an An∣swerable
Gratification; you have always taken my Re∣lation
to you as your Minister for so sufficient a Super∣sedeas
to such designs, that I have never apprehended
any adventure more hazardous of yours, than only to at∣tempt
it. I cannot really admit any diminutive account
of your goodness to my self, otherwise than by consider∣ing
you in that larger sphere which God hath placed
you in, as a , a common good to your Coun∣try;
of which for me to say any thing, would be altoge∣ther
unnecessary, forasmuch as there are every day so
many mouths open to acknowledg it. There being there∣fore
no room for the scruple of a personal prejudice: It
remains in the third place, that only the defectiveness
and blemishes of my speaking unto this subject, can ren∣der
it unworthy of your acceptance: and as to this, I
confess the charge; and relye upon your known and ex∣perienced
candor to excuse and lay your finger on the
naevi of this Discourse. Indeed it is a small and a slight

thing in it self, to have your Name prefixt unto; but
yet it is not unusual for Maps in single sheets to carry
their Dedication on their forehead. And as for the fail∣ances
in the manner of handling it; forasmuch as it is
a time for every one of us to shew his zeal for his Reli∣gion,
the fear of smaller miscarriages that are frequent∣ly
incident to zealous actings, will no more dispense
with their total neglect, than it can warrantably prescind
or supercede any other Moral or Religious duty, in that
we cannot acquit our selves therein with an absolute per∣fection.
Hoping therefore that upon the removal of those
bars first supposed, my way of access unto your favoura∣ble
reception of these few Pages is plain and open, I
shall in gratitude for (what I presume of) your pleasing
countenance reflecting on them, and all other signal
pledges of your kindness, think my self now and ever
obliged to pray, That the father of mercies would still
make good the multiplied effects of his infinite love and
goodness, for your temporal and eternal welfare. That
the generation rising may by an hundred-fold recom∣pence
unto the hopeful branches of your Family, all the
good that your self have been the instrument of unto the
generation shining; and that he who is now your hum∣ble
Orator at the Throne of Grace, may never want the
opportunity or power of approving himself to the last day
of his life.
St. Thomas
Novemb. 13.
168.

