



Right Honorable,
WHen I was com∣manded by the Council of State to Preach before you on the day of the Parliaments Assembling, I could not but reflect on the woful and never-enough to be lamented con∣fusions, under which these Na∣tions

were ready to sink and perish, till the Lord was pleased, as it were , to raise up an Honorable Instrument, by his Wisdom and Valor to put a stop to the progress, and to open a way, that you by your Counsel and Authority, might put a period to the Being of them. In order whereunto, I thought it my duty, as a Minister of the Gospel of Peace, and a Servant to our Great Lord, whose work it was to heal and recover, Luke 4. 18. Humbly to set before you the Au∣thor and the Object; and on the Monday following, before the Right Honorable House of Peers, the means and method

of Gods healing a Sick Nation: And thereupon to be seech you, so to imitate the example of Christ, who is the Lord that healeth us, so to promote the fear of his Name, and the great works of Humilia∣tion, Supplication, and Re∣formation amongst us, as that you might comfortably plead his pro∣mise, to hear, forgive, and heal the Land: For the Lord will be with you while you are with him; and if you seek him, he will be found of you.
And for this work of setting up the fear of God, and real conversion unto him, though god∣liness have as many enemies, as there be Devils in Hell, or wick∣ed

men in the World; yet pro∣faneness is in it self so shameful, and holiness so amiable, that en∣deavors in this most weighty work, will, I am confident, meet with no prevalent opposition or ob∣struction among you. All sober men of every perswasion, how so∣ever otherwise divided, acknow∣ledging the necessity, and pro∣fessing their desires, that the Name of the Lord may in pu∣rity of Doctrine, and in holi∣ness of life, be magnified amongst us.
You have made an happy en∣trance unto this healing work, (for certainly the great suffer∣ings of our Princes, have had a

strong causality upon our distracti∣ons, it can never be well with the Body, while it is ill with the Head,) and you have hereby blasted the projects and attempts of any, whose ambition might ani∣mate them, to awaken old, or to kindle new flames amongst us.
If together with this noble act of Justice and Loyaltie, you pro∣ceed to secure the Interest of Jesus Christ, by establishing the True Reformed Religion, an Orthodox, learned and painful Ministry, pure Worship, and the Power of godliness, sup∣pressing and putting to shame all profane practises, whereby the wrath of the Lord may be again

kindled against us, you shall there∣by greatly blast the desires of li∣centious and evil men; and comfort the hearts, and give e∣vidence of the answer of God to the prayers of good men. Which that you may be enabled and as∣sisted to do by the power of Divine grace, is the most earnest prayer of
May 5. 1660.

