



Right Honourable,
WHen I was by you called to
bear a part in that season∣able
and necessary service of
your late solemn Humiliti∣on,
I considered the sad condition where∣unto
these Nations were reduced, the ma∣ny
and great provocations which we have
been guilty of, the miserable commoti∣ons
and earthquakes, which have not

onely shaken, but even dissolved our
foundations, and made them all out of
course. I seriously looked back on the
dark and gloomy providences of God
amongst us, the untimely death of Princes,
the dimidiating and dissolving of Par∣liaments,
the frequent expirations and
vicissitudes of Governments, the horrid
Apostasie, Atheisme, Scepticisme, Indif∣ferency,
Prodigies of phrenetick and per∣nicious
Opinions, whereby multitudes
have played the wantons with as glori∣ous
a light of Orthodox Religion, as any
Nation under heaven enjoyed; the de∣faming
of Ministry, decrying of Ordinan∣ces,
incroaching of many Romish doctrines
under a disguize, and other like distem∣pers,
whereby we are become an hissing
and astonishment to the Nations round a∣bout
us. In a word, It seemed unto me,
That the Scene of the ten Tribes was
translated into these Nations, and that we
were making hast to be a Jezreel, a Lo-Ruhamah,

and a Lo-Ammi, as they once
did.
And therefore, though my habi∣tual
disposition usually lead me to Ar∣guments,
which have more of mild∣nesse
and gentlenesse in them, as remem∣bring
the counsel of the Apostle, to in∣struct
in meeknesse those that oppose
themselves: yet I thought it a duty,
little lesse then absolutely necessary, in
such a day of trouble and rebuke, to
set the Trumpet unto my mouth, and
to represent unto you, the doleful con∣dition
of a Deserted people, and with∣all
the sad misgiving feares (whereunto
the Symptomes of these sick and sin∣full
Nations did lead me) least
the Lord were now departing from
such a People, who after an hun∣dred
years possession of the Gospel, did
still so wantonly abuse it, and walk
so unworthy of it.
Yet if any man shall say unto me,

that it shall not be so, that the Lord
will still own us, and continue his pre∣sence
with us: I shall answer as
once the Prophet Jeremy did, A∣men,
The Lord do so, the Lord for∣bid
that I should desire the wofull
Day, or with Jonah be displeased
with the patience and goodness of
God. Farre may this Sermon be from
a Prophecy or prediction, let it be one∣ly
an Instruction, and a warning un∣to
us. But certainly the maturity of
our sinnes, and the face of our distem∣pers
do so farre threaten us, as that
we ought thereby to be awakened to
cry mightily unto God, and to hold him
fast, least he be weary of repenting,
and after so many despised mercies,
take at last the plumb line into his
hand, and refuse againe to pass by us
any more.
If hereunto this weak service of
mine may be any way useful either to

City or Countrey, to Magistrates,
Ministers, or people, I shall have abun∣dant
cause to blesse the Lord, to whose
gracious presence and protection, in
these dangerous times, I desire in
my daily prayers to commend these
three Nations, and this great City,
and so to be

From my Study,
Decemb. 10. 1659.
