



Right Honourable;
YOu two are so joyned, as
it were in one, that it may be
said of you, which was said
of Jonathan and David,1 Sam. 18. 1. 3. & 20. 42. (two
mighty warriours) that their hearts were
so knit, that they loved each other as their own
soules; they had such sweet experience of
each others faithfulnesse, that it was not
in the power of Saul (though a King) to
break it,Prov. 12. 26. or cut it asunder; and although
many have attempted to doe the like to
you, yet their labour hath been fruitlesse;
it hath bin a joy to many to see the effects
of love so freely flow forth from each to
other interchangeably, which is amiable,
sweet, and lovely. Moreover, God hath
raised you up, and set you in high places,

where opportunities flow of doing good;
and which is more, God hath given you
hearts to improve these opportunities to
his glory, and the good of his people.
You have also had many and great expe∣riences
of his protection, presence, & bles∣sing,
even to admiration; it is the Lord
alone, who hath wrought all your works
for you: surely you may well stand asto∣nished
at his dealings with you; all you
can doe, is too little for him who hath
done so much for you; you know the sor∣rows,
sufferings, and sighings of the peo∣ple
of God in this Kingdome, have been
many and great, by reason of the Prelates
Lording it over them in matters of Reli∣gion;
and their sorrows and sufferings are
like to be greater, if the plots and snares
laid against them take place, therefore
now is the time for the righteous in au∣thoritie
to shew themselves for the peo∣ple
of God; and such as sleepe and slum∣ber
had need quickly to be awaked, that
they might rowse up themselves, & shake
off that feare and faintnesse which posses∣seth
their hearts, & arme themselves with
resolution & courage, to hazard all, even

life it selfe, upon a possibility of doing the
least good,Prov. 29. 2. (for to do good we live) we re∣joyce
that God hath chosen you, (with
many others) whom God hath kept wak∣ing
for such a time as this. Next under God
our eies are upon the house of Commons of
England, to deliver us from temporall sla∣very,
to free us from the oppression of men
in matters of Religion; we trust they will
effect this work fully,2 Epis. Joh. 8. Job 29 (and God shall give
them a full reward) as good Job, who was a
father to the poore, and the cause he knew not
he searched out, and brake the jawes of the
wicked, and plucked the spoile out of his teeth.
It is a great honour unto you,1 Sam. 16. 18. that you
have done valiantly, & so have been spe∣ciall
instruments to save this Kingdome
from destruction, & that God hath made
you and your Armies so victorious; but it
is a greater honour unto you, that you are
of the number of those that love the truth
and people of God, and endeavour to re∣scue
them from the hands of cruell and
unreasonable men: the people of God are
in the love of God,Joh 2 and (which is more)
they are one with God, therefore God
takes the good done to them as done to

himselfe,Prov. 10. 30. abide by them, and you shall be
in safety; hold together, for they that seek
their lives, seek yo also: And as you
have pleaded their cause, (with many o∣ther
Worthies with you) so still goe on
& prosper,Judg. 6. 12. the Lord is with you, you va∣liant
men, the Saints love you, they pray
& praise God for you; England fareth the
better for you, childrē unborn shall praise
you, & blesse God for you, & the memori∣al
of your names shal be for ever precious.
Most noble Worthies,Luk. 1. 3. I may seeme to
passe the bounds of modesty, so to presse
into your presence, but such is your hu∣mility
and love, that you can passe by any
defect in that kinde, and accept of that
wch is presented in love. And seeing God
doth not despise the day of small things,Zach. 4. 10.
I trust you will not; the great respect you
have shewed to the truth, and people of
God, hath imboldened me to present you
with the best I have, in love, out of a deep
respect unto you; the perusall and accep∣tance
of which, I submit to your wis∣domes,
and humbly take my leave, and
remaine

