



MY BRETHREN,
THough my Prayer unto
God is, that what I have
written, may tend to the
establishing of those, who
have already been obe∣dient;
yet unto you I
do chiefly recommend this following dis∣course:
and my Reason is, Because it doth
more principally concern you, it being a
discovery of part of the minde of Christ;
yea, part of the foundation of his service,

whereunto the greatest Number of you
have not yet been obedient.
And now, my Brethren, you that by
Baptisme have declared your selves to be
followers of the Lord Iesus Christ; I do
Begg and intreat of you, to Examine your
principles, and see whether or no, you
have obeyed Christ, according to the Com∣mission
he gave to his Disciples, Mat.
28. 20. Wherein you are injoyned the
Observation of all things he commanded
for your obedience, according to his Teach∣ing;
being forty dayes with his Apostles
and Disciples, (after his Resurrection)
in which time he gave Commandments
unto his Apostles, whom he had chosen,
and was speaking unto them of the things
pertaining to the Kingdome of God, Acts
1. 2, 3. vers. I beseech you consider,
have you obeyed the form of Doctrine,
Rom. 6. 18. which you shall finde laid
down, in Heb. 6. 1, 2. See, I pray you,
whether the beginning-Word of Christ is
that you have received; whether you stand

upon that foundation, the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, upon which the
first Churches were built, Ephes. 2. 20.
Heb. 6. 1.
Consider, God in these last dayes hath
spoken unto us by his Son, Heb. 1. 2. the
Lord Iesus Christ is our great Doctor, the
Prophet whom Moses spake of, Acts 3.
21. therefore we must learn of him, we
must hear him in all things; Therefore
know, it is your duty to be followers of
God, according to your Profession in
Baptisme, and to Act in no way, but what
Christ hath appointed for you; Even that
way, whose foundation is upon the lips of
Christ, which he also hath appointed a
foundation for us to build upon.
Wherefore examine if you have laid
your foundation with this Corner-stone,
with Repentance from dead works, faith
towards God, the Doctrine of Baptismes,
and laying on of hands, the Resurrection of
the dead, and eternal Iudgement: Whether
these be the principles of your Religion,

Heb. 6. 1, 2. Consider wherein you are
defective in these principles: are you not
in Repentance? I wish I could not charge
you herein; yet I must tell you, the Hire
of the Harlot is found amongst you, the
burden of which your poor Brethren have
long mourned under, and suffered for. I
know it is not the practise of all of you;
yet those that do it, were never to this day
disowned by you? O! that you would
therefore try your selves: have you turned
your selves from the vain worships of the
men of this World, and from such who
teach for Doctrines mens traditions? are
you according to your Profession of Christ
in Baptism, dead to the rudiments of this
World? Col. 2. 20. Why know, it is your
duty, not only to cleanse your selves from
Temporal, but Spiritual delfiements,
2 Cor. 7. 1. and as you are not to act
any thing contrary to the Law of righ∣teousness
in your Conversation, so to do no∣thing
in the worship of God, but by rule:
for that which hath proceeded from our

Lord Iesus Christ, is the rule for Saints to
walk by. Know this, that all the misery
and sin in the World came in at this
door, viz. by hearkning to Reason, the
wisdome of the flesh, against that which
God hath spoken: it is mans deformity,
to walk according to his own invention,
and at last, (as experience doth teach,)
will prove his own destruction. Surely
God will not indure to be prescribed by his
Creatures; no, it hath been wickedness in
those that have done it, and God hath
found it out; but he takes pleasure in them
that fear him, and teaches them in his
wayes, Psa. 25. 12. but when men change
his Laws and Ordinances, (although it
proceeds from no wicked intent) yet it
provokes him to Iudgment, as it did in
Uzza, 1 Chro. 15. therefore learn to know
the voyce of Christ; for his Sheep hear it,
and they follow him.
It hath been the work of Satan and his
Instruments, such who first did forsake
the right way, whom God gave up unto

strong delusions to believe lyes, because
they received not the truth in the love
thereof, to corrupt the Word of God, and
to change his Laws, and to set up their
posts by the posts of God, or rather in
their stead: and who knows not, that
knows Christ, that now all his endeavours
are to make voyd those truths, and the
right way of the Lord; either in whole or
in part? if he cannot keep people wholly
in blindness, he will labour to insnare
them through pretended wayes of light,
which is indeed darkness. O! how doth
he now perswade the poor soul, that either
the wayes of God are not now to be practi∣sed,
or else the practise of them is but an
indifferent thing. O! let's beware of this
deceit: for he that saith I know him, and
keepeth not his commandments, is a lyer,
and the truth is not in him, 1 John 2. 4.
therefore I desire you to examine your
selves, and see wherein you are short of
obeying the voice of Christ; being careful
of receiving any thing, but what is re∣corded

the Word of the Lord; and be also
as careful of rejecting any thing that is
his will.
And wherein he speaks unto you, as you
are Baptized believers, know, it is your
duty to be obedient, to be followers of him,
to set shoulders to his work; for unto that
this day you are called, that the founda∣tion
in Sion may again be laid, the Walls
of Jerusalem may be again repaired, and
then they that be of thee, shall build the
old waste places, Isai. 58. 11.
Let not the wisdome of man beguile
you, (whereby he labours,) when any
truth of God is discovered, to pervert it,
or to turn you aside from following of it:
know, this is but one of Satans old plots,
and deceitful workings; and marvel not
that he works in good men in our dayes;
for this is certain, that if persons dissent
from truth, so far they serve for his de∣sign,
which is alwayes against the truth,
which is the Law of God, that which God
hath commanded: thus he wrought in the

Prophet of the Lord, who told a lye in the
Name of the Lord, unto which the young
Prophet yeilded; contrary to what God had
Commanded him, 1 King. 13. 18 and
was destroyed of a Lyon: know, he many
times makes use of good men to carry on
his design; therefore though you may
judge they are good men, that speak a∣gainst
a truth of the Lord; let not that
turn you aside, knowing it is your duty to
be a follower of him, in what he hath
spoken, that doth relate to the worship of
God, or your duty in your conversation;
which doth concern you, as you are belie∣vers,
and would be partakers of the pro∣mises,
especially those things that are prin∣ciples
of your faith and Religion; yea,
principles of the worship and service of
that God, whom we profess to sear; yea,
and to obey.
And take heed of those who teach you,
only to believe that, unto which you ought
to manifest your obedience to the great
God. Such persons, who call that which

Christ taught, and whereunto believers
were obedient, a Doctrine, but not a pra∣ctise,
such words are corrupt: but let us
know this, that so far as Christ hath
taught us, we ought to be obedient; and
therefore let your obedience be manifest to
all men; For the Lord is at hand to give
recompence unto you: and let not the op∣position
which truth meets withal, be a
stumbling-block unto you. You may see
how easily confusion and errour take
place upon the hearts of men, this day.
O, let truth have place upon your Souls!
O, it grieves my Soul to see, how easily
that which hath but a colour or shew of
truth from the Scriptures, takes place upon
the hearts of men, and many Professors
this day; and yet that which is real truth,
hath little entertainment in the World.
What's the Reason? was not this alwayes;
it's too low, it's too mean, it's too plain? it is
indeed without the wisdome of man; and
therefore finds little entertainment a∣mongst
men. Alas, saith the Wiseman,

what's a little water? this is a poor thing:
others have as low an esteem of laying on
of hands; besides, it's a riddle unto them:
thus God makes foolishness the wisdome
of this World.
But now some do say, Did we see these
Ordinances to continue, we should wil∣lingly
obey.
I Answer, Do you think the Scribes
and Pharisees would not have made as
large a Profession as this, when they re∣jected
the Counsel of God against them∣selves,
being not Baptized? Luke 7. 30.
or do you not think, that those who are
short of any truth, if they profess any
thing, but will as readily make this Ob∣jection
as your selves? yet will this excuse
them? or would the Iews ignorance of the
Lord of life, excuse their Crucifying the
Lord of Glory? 1 Cor. 2. 8. surely no.
Therefore know, it's your duty to seek
after truth, and to yeild obedience to it:
Christ requires it of you; therefore come in
unto him, and be willing to take upon you

his yoak, and despised wayes; and be sure,
you shall be no losers by it.
Now the Lord help you, you that have
put on Christ by Baptisme, to read what I
have written in this book without preju∣dice,
and with a heart lifted up to God
for wisdome, to direct to give you to see
truth from errour. And that this truth,
which I do principally mind and drive at,
(to wit) laying on of hands upon believers
Baptized, as such, may have the Spirit of
God, making of it forth unto your Souls,
in the Reading and Consideration there∣of;
that so you may be followers of God
therein, is the Prayer of him, who is wil∣ling
to serve you for truths sake:

