


SIR,
The great work of a Christian in the world, is to preferr Hea∣ven to Barth, the law of the Lord to the law of sin, Gospell concernments to all earthly interests, when the one cometh in competition wi▪ or opposition to the other. The first fall of man, as the schoo termeth it, was Aversio a Deo, and conversio ad creaturam. A turning from God to the creature. Then sin obtained prece∣dencie to Grace, folly to Wisdom, lust to the law of God. Our health and safety cometh in, by recoverie and cure, our victo∣rie by a reserve: therefore God sent his Son into the world, with the Gospel remedy, to turn us from ungodliness, and worldly lusts, Titus 2. 12. to wean us from the inordinate love of the substance, and shaddowes of the world. 1. Iohn 2. 15. to espouse our love to himself, that we may be presented as a

chaste Virgin to Christ, 2 Cor 11. 2. For this we pray, we preach, we lbour, we make use of Ordinances, and goe about every duty. This is the scope and course of a Christian, and what∣ever, hindreth this design is not to be approved by him. Wood, hay, stuble, is not a Gospel cure. Pure Religion and unde∣filed, can only better the heart, mortifie corruption, subdue the body of death, subject the whole man to the soveraignety of Iesus Christ, mend the world, and make men live holily, righteously and soberly. When this salve was rightly applyed in the primitive Church. O how wonderfully did the Lord bless the cure, and proved the medicine to be good by great successe. How were men bound to their duty, by the awe and love of GOD on their hearts: that the very Heathens and Iewes eto amused and forced to give testimony to the doct∣rine, that it was of GOD. But when men afterwards did be∣ginne to mixe the wine with water, and handle the word of GOD deceitfully: They then became lovers of pleasure more then lovers of GOD▪ then fell they in dotage with the pompe and pride of the world. Which disease did break forth noto∣riously first at Rome, thence it spread and infected many Churches (Ʋrbs rea stagitiies, urbs lei causa putanda es. Ʋrbs fera, Tibrinae cui famulantur aquae.) As heathen Rome usurped dominion, so Rome now being animated by the Pope, and his Complices taking advantage by the division of Princes, and encreasing her wealth by their wrack, like some who live near the Sea, as if there had been no law of Christ, to deny our selves take up our cross and follow him, turned the Gospel-sim∣citi into state-policy, and the Ppoe degenerating from the hristian carriage of primitive fathers, sought secular great∣ness chiefly, put on a triple Crown, followed the pompe of the world. And all this is done under the name of Christ, pretence of Religion, and in ordine ad spiritualia, which maketh the sin more sinful, and their way irreconcilable with the dogatick saith of a Christian who believeth the Scrip∣ture. The Church of Rome was once famous for Gospel profession. Her saith was spoken of through all the world in Tertullians time who lived in the second centurie, Rome hath this character from him, lib de praescript. adversus Haeretico,

Felix Rm, cui totam doctrinam, Apostoli cum sanguine suo pro∣fuderunt, legem & Prophetas cum Evangelicis & Apostolicis literis miscet, & inde potat fidem eam, aqua signat, Spiritu Sancta vestil, Eucharistia pascit, martyrio exhortatur, & adversus hauc in∣stitutionem nominem recipit. Happie Rome to whom the Apostles poured forth their doctrine with their blood, who mixeth Law and Gospel together, and drinketh in saith that way, ta∣keth on the Baptismal seal thus, cloatheth her self with the graces of the Holy Ghost, feedeth by the Sacrament of the Supper, confirmeth the doctrine by martyrdome, and receiv∣eth none but on thse termes. Quantum mutatur! O how great an alteration is there? Rome is not like that which is was once. For then they were made martyrs for the faith, now they make martyrs for the same faith, then they had pure or∣dirances, now they pollute them all with superstition and humane inventions. Bernard lib. 4. de consid. ad Eugen. Invisi Terrae & Coelo impii in Deum, temtrarii in sancta, seditiosi ad seiu∣vicem, simplicissimi dissimulatores, malignissimi proditores quos no∣minem amantes nemo amat. &c. The pimitive Fathers studied modelty, humility, and Gospel carriage. Cornelius to Cyprian in his Epistles, breatheth forth much self-denyal. Cyprian tha holy Martyr at the Council of Carthage, saith, neque euim quisquoē nostrum, se Episcopum Episcoporum constituit i. e. None of us maketh himself an universal Bishop. And divine Augustin writing to Hierompist. 97. uttereth, himself thus, in multis re∣bs Augustinus Hieronymo minor est, this was Gospel like. But now the Pope is the Prince of pride, naming himself infallible, consequently incorrigible, & by the same reason impeccable, amomis peccans in eo quod peccat errat. Every man erreth in as much as he sinneth, saith the school. If our hope were in this life only, and no retribution hereafter; or if the Alcoran were our rule, this deportment being full of carnal wisdom, proclaimeth them witty politicianes. But seeing the conta is sure by the undoubted word of GOD, this their way is so¦ly, and it is admirable how understanding men appro their sayings. This their way hath wronged Christianity highly, and many sad effects have followed upon this pompous alte∣ration of the Primitive frame. First, It hath turned many I∣talians

who live near the Court of Rome, voide of all true Re∣ligion, and dyed them with Atheisme. So that as it is report∣ed of them in Print, they will call proverbially their Idiots Christians, and when they would name a fool, they say he is a Christian, as if Christianitie were a fable, and high follie. A discerning person who travelled through Italie many years ago, told me, that he heard some of them publicklie blaspheme Iesus Christ, by words which should not be repeated, and yet go unpunished. This is the fruit of their state way. For now it is far more like to the state of Rome, no the old Church of Rome. Secondly, It exposeth Christian Religion to reproach, and stumbleth many. The Iews are hindred to come in by their superstitious worship. The Eastern Church which is the most an∣cient, agreeing almost with us in all doctrinals, (as their Con∣fession of Faith emitted by Cyrill the Patriarch of Constantinople testifieth,) is much offended at their Church dividing way. We are vexed with their plots, blots, underminding courses. They sowe cockle amongst our wheat, and tares in our field, while men sleepe. Of all men on Earth in any visible incor∣poration pretending to Christianity, they have made the great∣est breach in the Catholick Church, and taken the tittle to them∣selves contrar to all reason. The Paganes perceiving our breaches are hardened in their blind way When their were not so great breaches in the Christian Church, Chrysostom on the Galatians, bringeth in the Gentile speaking thus, Vellent fieri Christianus, sed nescio cui adhaream, multae sunt inter vos pugnae, seditiones, & tumultus; nescio quod dogma eligam, quod prae∣seram, singuli enim dicunt, ego verum dico i. e. I would be a Chri∣stian but know not to whom I shal adhere, there be such differences amongst you, I know not what to choose, what to preferre, every one saith he hath the truth on his side. For this we are derided by Iews and Gentiles, and the Church of Christ is divided. This ob∣tion may be soon solved, by these who adhere to the Scrip∣re, sensed by sound antiquitie: But to them who are with∣out, it maketh a great muster, and is a mountaine in the way, which none have towred up more then the Romanists, by craft and might they have stated a faction, and fixed a Schism in the universal church. Is it not high arrogance, that a town in Italy,

and a pettie Prince there should make a monopolie, and ob∣trude their ware, pro arbitratu & imperio sub poena anathema∣tis, upon all the Christians in the world, what have we to do with an Italian Prince, and who gave him right over us? Albeit these rents made in the church by secular interests, be matter of mourning, yet there be a providence in it, and this is per∣mitted by the wisdom of GOD, that these who are approven may be made manifest. 1. Cor. 11. 19. Ʋt sides habendo tentatio∣nem, habeat probationem, as saith Tertull. contra Haeres. cap. 1. Divina veritas calida oppositione agitatur, ut adversus illos ad∣versarios desendi possit, considerari diligentius, intelligi clarius, praedcari constantius, & ab adversariorum motis quaestionibus di∣scendi existat occasio. Divine truth is cunningly opposed, that it may be defended more vigorously, considered more attentively, un∣derstood more clearly, preached more instantly, and that from the questions of adversaries, we may have the more occasion of learning truth. Saith Aug. de civit DEI. lib. 16. cap. 2. It is noted by Historians, that in the tenth Centurie, called the unhappie Age, there were no Heresies started not opposed, they were then a∣sleep, and cared neither for truth nor errour. Setiousness about these matters was at that time suspended. Yet it was infelix se∣culum, & it had been better for some that the tares had appear∣ed, and then trysted with speedie opposition. Albeit evil be not good, yet sometimes, bonum est malum esse, as Aug: telleth us in his Enchiridion, it is good that evil be, qui bonus est non sine∣ret malū esse, nisi omnipotens etiam de malo faceret bene. He would not suffer evil to be, if he being Omnipotent, could not bring good out of it. VVe are not therefore to cast away our confi∣dence, nor become despondent, albeit Poperie encreaseth, & Papists way hold. The only wise Lord knoweth why it is so, & how to order this broken condition for good. VVhen they like the old Pagans at Rome [who fathered Portenta Gnosticorum & aliorum Haereticorum, the absurdities of Gnostickes, and other Hereticks upon the orthodoxe Christians, as Church Historie telleth us,) blot our doctrine & worship with all the reproaches which malice can devise: who can tel but the holie providence of GOD may bring us out amongst the pots, with our feathers like yellow gold. And he who worketh manie of his workes by

mean instruments, may put such to it, that his strength may be perfected in weakness. I have contrar to my designe, engaged into this debate, and do acknowledge that I am a weak sinful man, my inclination is averse from janglings, and I have had more satisfaction in going about the work of my Calling, in practicals of Religion, nor ever I had in penning or publish∣ing this debate. But what could I do? Adversaries invaded the flock, pursued me within the ports, when my back was at the wall, and I had no purpose for warre, stealed the sheep out of my bosome, and averred considentlie that they were sed with rot-grasse in stead of wholsome food. Should I not in this exigence defend with such weapons as the Lord would afford? It may he said that the adversarie is stronge at home and abroad, but the Lord on high is more mighty then the noise of many waters. So farre as I am concerned, I rather would choose to fall in the field, nor turne my back, or by sinful si∣lence suffer the truth to be over-laid and stifled. To some this may seem a light matter, and needless worke, yet, if all be well understood it will not be found such. The found of a testimo∣nie for the truth in the case of subversion, is an ominous du∣ie, if it were for no other end but this, to leave a vvitness, & not to be involved in the shout. Eveti Minister of the Gospel is bound within his station, to promove Gospel intorests, to which Popery is highlie prejudicial: to convince, convert, confute gain-sayers, to confirme the weak, and undeceive the simple, I am much mistaken if this be superflous worke. see∣ing it is one of the ends of our Calling. It is to be rsited indeed, that by debates for our just possession, past prescriptiō, we should be diverted from more comfortable and edifying worke; seeing ordinarlie this way is so unsuccesful that few adversaries once engageing use to yeeld, and will rather act their partes to defend one errour with another, ne videantur rrasse, nor with divine Aug: make a retractation. VVhich e∣videnceth much pride, and unmortified self-love, but very smal respect to the Gospel. Yet cura officii i ours, and our e∣venus belongeth to the Lord, who will make a good account of all his affaires, & cause the fot of adversaries slidalin due . Now Sir, seeing I resolved upon these considerations

to publish this Vindication, following the custō, I have shelte∣red i under the Patroiny of your Name, so much valued for Re¦ligiō & Vertue. When Hierō writeth to Dardanus▪ he calleth him Christianorum nobilissime, nobilium Christianissime. I will not make use of that compellation to you, I know ye love not so well words to proclaim you good, as those which may make you better. It may be said without any assentation, that ye are a serious lover, and diligent practiser of those Gospel verities which have been from the beginning. And it will appear by proof, as Tertullian speaketh, antiquum nihil aliter suit quam su∣mus. This maketh me consident, that ye will entertain this Tractat for the truth. To speak of your descent and ancient extract, it belongeth to Historians and Heraulds, not to me. Ye if any doubt of that, let them read Hector Boetius historie concerning the reign of Alexander the third, anno. Chr. 1208. fol. 300. And again about the reign of King Robert Bruce, anno Chri. 1320. fol 317. in both which, famous mention is made of your Relatives, Beside the Rudera of that old Castle in Mur∣ray called yet by your Name, proclaimeth this much, fuimus Trees. Neither shall I insist upon the constancie and frequencie of your fervent devotion these seventie years and upward. And how ye preveen the morning watches in the coldest sea∣son, this commendeth the grace of GOD in you. Your Ante∣lucna is such, well backed with the practise of righteousness, holiness, peaceableness, meekness, temperance, patience, zeal, and aboundance of spiritual fortitude, if any will deny this, they either know you not, or love you not. I intend not by this to fire your corruption, that were not friendly breath, but to further your faith, and that others may learn of you to be religious indeed. Go on worthie Sir, in your Christian exercise, well may ye flourish in old age, well may ye finish your course with joy, O that all descended of you, may learn to follow your steps, in holiness, and righteousness, this will be the mercy of your familie, which is daily desired by

