



THE Corruption of Our Stage, most
Noble Senators, is so very Palpable
and Notorious, that the Authors
themselves who Live by it, and have
lately writ in Defence of it, are forc'd to ac∣knowledge
it wants a Reformation.Pref. to Beauty in Distress. Defence of Dramatick Poetry. Usefulness of the Stage, &c.
But when they come to Particulars, every one
stand upon his own Defence, and refuses to ac∣knowledge,
that the Plays of his Writing con∣tain
any thing Culpable or Blameworthy.
All of them write in Defence of the Stage,
and some of them plead, the Usefulness and
Absolute Necessity of it, at the Expence of
the Honour and Credit of the Nation, whom
they Charge as the most Splenetick and Rebel∣lious
People in EuropeMr. Dennis in his Use∣fulness of the Stage.; and that they stand
in need of the Drama, as a Sovereign Preser∣vative
against the Mischievous Effects of that
Distemper.
At Your Feet therefore, most Noble Senators,
the following Sheets are humbly laid, as con∣taining,
(amongst other things) a Vindication
of the Brave and Generous People whom
You Represent, from that Foul Slander: and
Charging the Guilt upon the True Criminals,

who endeavour'd to tear Our Constitution in
pieces, by setting Our Kings and Parliaments
at Variance, and endeavouring to have Liberty
and Property swallowed up by Prerogative, to
which wicked Design, the Stage hath not a
little Contributed.
The Bleeding Morals of this Gallant Nation,
are past the Cure of all Quack-pretenders; It
is His Majesty and Your Honours alone, who
are capable of applying the Sovereign Remedy,
by obliging Magistrates and Ministers to per∣form
their Duty, or enabling them to do it by
New Laws, if those we have already be not
sufficient. Our Gracious Sovereign hath not
only rescued us from Popery and Tyranny, but
out of his Fatherly Care, to prevent our future
Danger, hath again and again recommended it
to His People to take Effectual Methods for the
Suppressing of Prophaneness and Immorality,
which the Enemies of our Religion and Liberty
made use of, as the most successful Engines to
Ruine both.
The Author of this Treatise has endeavour'd
to prove, That the Corruption of the Stage
is in a great measure owing to the Method
of Educating our Youth in Schools; from
whence the Infection spreads into the Univer∣sities
and Pulpits: And having been Encou∣raged
by the late Reigns and part of the Clergy,
hath at last prov'd so fatal to the Manners of
 ople, that the Stage is become a general
, and hath been complained of as such,
 by Puritans and those who oppos'd King

Charles I. as the Advocates of the Theatre do
falsly pretend, but by Antient and Modern
Church of England Divines, and hath been
sometimes Restrained, and at other times en∣tirely
Banished, by the States of England in
Parliament Assembled.
Whether the Merits of the present Stage, be
such as may deserve a more favourable Censure at
Your Hands, is Submitted (as is fit it should) to
Your Great Wisdom.
In the following Treatise, there's the Opinion
of the Jewish and Christian Church, of the
Greatest of the Heathen Philosophers and
Poets, of the Heathen, Greek and Roman
State, of the first Christian Emperours, &c.
and of Our English State, against the Theatre
fairly exhibited: But seeing the Defenders of
the Play-house argue the Usefulness of it to
the English Nation in general, and to the pre∣sent
Govenment in particular, it is reasonable
the Appeal should be to Our Honourable Re∣presentatives,
and that the Arguments pro and
con should be laid before them, not doubting (if
they think fit at all to take it into Consideration)
but they will give a True and Righteous Judg∣ment
in the Matter.
It is not in England alone, where the Law∣fulness
or Unlawfulness of the Stage, and the
Immorality and Profaneness of it, is the present
Subject of Controversie. But in France
and Italy, nay at Rome it self, where as well as
at Paris, the Stage has of late, as all the
Publick Intelligences inform us, receiv'd a Check,

tho' the Prefar to the Play call'd, Beauty
in Distress, says, the French Stage is so Re∣form'd
as not to fall under the Censure of the An∣tient
Fathers. The Honour of our Nation and
Religion would therefore seem to require, that
our Theatres should come under Examination,
as well as theirs; but the Time whe, and the
Method how, must be left to the Wisdom of the
King and Parliament to determine.
In the mean time it were to be wished that our
English Ladies and Gentlewomen, whose En∣couragement
and Presence is the most powerful
Argument (after all) for the Defence of the
Stage (and by whose absenting themselves it must
fall in Course without Law or Statute) would be
pleased to consider, That the wise Roman Se∣nate
approv'd the Divorce which Sempronius
Sophus gave to his Wife for no other Reason,
but that she resorted to the Cirques and Play∣houses
without his Consent; the very sight of
which might make her an Adultress, and cause
her to defile his BedValer. Max. l. 6. c. 3. § 12.. And the Christian
Emperor Justinian made the following Consti∣tution,
That a Man might lawfully put away
his Wife, if she resort to Cirques, to Play∣houses
or Stage-Plays without his Privity and
Consent, because her Chastity might thereby be
endangeredIustin. Cod. l. 5. Tit. 17. De Repud. & Novella. 22. & 117..
If Our Stage then be so much Corrupted as its
Advocates themselves are forc'd to confess, its
influence upon the Morals of the Audience
must needs be dangerous, and therefore its
hop'd our English Senators will be as careful of

the Chastity of the English Ladies, as the An∣tient
Roman Senators were of theirs, and that
our English Women, whose Beauty is every
where admir'd, will readily Consent to any thing
that may preserve their Modesty too from
being so much as Questioned.
