



SIR,
AS soon as Your Majesty was pleas'd to ad¦mit me into the Management of Your Af∣fairs, I resolv'd to use my utmost Endea∣vours to facilitate Your great Designs, as useful to this State, as glorious to your Person.
God having bless'd my Intentions, insomuch that the Virtue and Happiness of Your Majesty have astonish'd the present, and will be admir'd in fu∣ture Ages, I thought my self obliged to write the History of your glorious Successes, both to hinder many Circumstances, worthy to live for ever in the Memory of Man, from being bury'd in Oblivion, thro' the Ignorance of those who cannot know them like me; and to the end that the time past might serve as a Rule for the future. Therefore I forth∣with apply'd my self to it, being perswaded that I could never begin that too soon, which was only to end with my Life.
I did not only carefully collect the matter of such a Work, but moreover, I reduc'd part of it into Order, and put the Transactions of some Years in the Form I design'd to publish them.

I own, that tho' there is more Pleasure in fur∣nishing the Matter of History, than in putting it in∣to Form, yet I found a great deal of Satisfaction in relating what had been perform'd with great Labour.
While I began to relish the Delights of that Performance, the Illnesses and continual Inconveniences which attend the weakness of my Constitution, join'd to the Weight of Affairs, forc'd me to lay it aside, because it requir'd too much time.
Yet tho' I cannot possibly perform, upon this Sub∣ject, what I so passionately desir'd, for the Glory of your Person, and for the Welfare of your State, I think my self oblig'd in Conscience at least to leave your Majesty some Memoirs of those things I think most necessary for the Government of this Kingdom.
Two Reasons oblige me to undertake this Work. The first is, The Fear and Desire I have of end∣ing my Days before the Expiration of yours.
The Second is, The Faithful Passion I have for your Majesty's Interest; which makes me not only desirous to see you attended with all sorts of Pro∣sperities during my Life, but also makes me earnest∣ly wish to see a Prospect of the Continuation of the same, when the Inevitable Tribute we are all oblig'd to pay Nature, shall hinder me from being a Witness of them.
This Piece will appear under the Title of my Political Testament; because it is made to serve after my Death, for the Polity and Conduct of your Kingdom, if your Majesty thinks it worthy of it: Because it will contain my last Desires in
relation thereunto; and that in leaving it to you; I bequeath to your Majesty the best Legacy I have to dispose of, whenever God will be pleas'd to call me out of this Life.
It shall be conceiv'd in the most concise and clearest Method I am capable of, as well to fol∣low my own Genius, and my usual way of wri∣ting, as to comply with your Majesty's Humour, who ever lov'd, that Men should come to the Point in few Words, being as much pleas'd to hear the Substance of things, as apprehensive of the long Discourses most Men use to explain them.
If my Spirit, which will appear in these Me∣moirs, can after my Death contribute any thing towards the Regulation of this great State, in the Management of which your Majesty has been pleas'd to give me a greater Share than I deserve, I will think my self infinitely happy.
To that end, judging with Reason, that the Success God has hitherto been pleas'd to grant the Resolutions your Majesty has taken with your most Faithful Creatures, is a powerful Motive to invite you to follow the Advices I will give you for the future: I will begin this Work with an Abstract of the great Actions you have perform'd with so much Glory, which may justly be stil'd, The Solid Foundation of the future Felicity of your Kingdom.
This Relation will be made with so much Sin∣cerity, according to the Judgment of those who are faithful Witnesses of the History of your Time, that it will induce every body to believe, that the
Counsels I give your Majesty, have no other Motives, but the Interest of your State, and the Advantage of your Person. I am, and will re∣main Eternally,
SIR,

