



Right Honorable,
IT being my hap some years since to find in the Stationers shop at Amsterdam, your Lordships Elegant Treatise of Baptisme, and being upon Enquiry, informed tou∣ching the quality of the Author; I wondred what Gentleman it was, that having a stock of Honor & Repute in the world, had with∣al so much Christian Courage, as to venture it in that kind. For I judged (and I suppose rightly) that for a Gentleman of name and note, at that time to dare to vindicate the true Christian Baptisme, contemning the clamorous censures of the weake Multitude of Pretenders to Religion and Learning, was an Act of more true and high Courage than to storm a Town. And I humbly conceive, Experience has evidenced the Truth hereof, since hundreds (not to say thousands) that have adventured their Lives to gain Honor and Riches in the Field, have in their hearts found it too hard an Adventure (however otherwise convinc't in their understandings) to own and acknowledg the true Christian Baptisme, and sub∣ject themselves to the scorned practice thereof, with the evident hazard of much of their acquired Honor, and of their future Repute, and the advacement depending there upon.
That this action, nevertheless, of yours (my Lord) has not been attended, with al that Ignominy and Prejudice, which was only to be expected from Men; is the singular pro∣vidence of God, giving Courage and Ingenuity, to many o∣thers of note, soon after (much animated doubtless by so noble and generous a Leader as your Lordship) to acknow∣ledg and submit to the Divine verity, and beautiful, and most

lovely Rationality of that solemn Institution of our Mr. Christ▪ and his eminent blessing that part of the soldiery, Characterised thereby. Much affected therefore with your Lordships Christian Vertue in this kind, and desirous to commend the same to Posterity; It has not been since that time in my power to do it more effectually, than by prefix∣ing your truly honorable Name in the Front of this excellent Anatomical Treatise, and best Foundation of the Art of Hea∣ling, commonly though corruptly called Physick. The fitness of which Dedication, I shal with your Honors gentle Patience, thus demonstrate
Seeing this book is nothing (for the most part) but a Decla∣ration and Exposition of the stupendiously admirable wis∣dom of the Eternal our Maker, shining forth in the most cu∣rious Fabrick of Mans body; to confirm and seal the beleefe of the Resurrection whereof (which is the very Foundation of1 Cor. 13. 15, 16. 17. 18. 30. 31. 32. Christianity) baptisme seems (by the Scripture) to have been cheifly ordained, by our great Mr. Christ; that as we had one solemn Ceremony to represent his sufferings and death, we might not want another to set forth and solemnize his burial and Resurrection (without which his own death and his Disciples Faith had been in vain) and to take possession in and by a Figure of our own Resurrection to come (For, weColo. 2. 12. are, saith Paul, Buryed with Christ, in our Baptisme, and therein also risen with him; That is, in a figure, being through a solemn Ceremonious possession of our future Resurrection from the grave, instated into eternal life.) This being so (my Lord) to whom should this excellent Description of the body of Man in general, with al its parts, and their Respective Diseases, be dedicated, rather than to him that has vindicated to the Christian world, that excellent pledge of the Resurrection thereof; to wit, the Baptisme of Christ rightly solemnized: whereby al true beleevers are mightily assured, that though this curiously built House of our Earthly Tabernacle, be so∣wen in the dust, yet it shal not there abide for ever, as the beasts that perish. Accept therefore (Generous Sir) from your most humble servant, this Testimony of your Christian

Courage and sincerity, and suffer this excelleut Treatise to shelter it self under your honorable Patronage. And though this testimony of your vertue so publickly given, may (I fear) afford some disgust to your Modesty, yet I beseech your Lordship to let it pass, for the glory of our great Mr. Christ, and the Edification of Christendom. And I have much rea∣son to hope, it may be a Monument of your honorable Me∣mory, when probably the royal and Magnificent combes at Westminster, shal pledge the Fate of them in Pauls, and be overwhelmed with Dust and Ruins. Such is the desire and Hopes (my Lord) of him that craves leave to subscribe him∣self,

From my House neer Cripple-Gate in London. December, 22. 1656.
