




Right Honourable,
OF all people in the world, that's the on∣ly Ps. 144. 15. happy people whose God is the LORD; the Lord being that, suprem Mat. 19. 16, 17. good,

in whom alone are concentred all beatificall Gen. 17. 1 Mat. 5. 48. Perfections. No people can enjoy the Lord as their God, but by Cove∣nant in Christ Iesus, that only Joh 14. 6. way unto the Father. Co∣venant-Interest in Christ cannot actually be pleaded by any person, but only such a are actually seized of a graci∣ous Jer. 31. 3. 4. Covenant-State; th Grace of the Covenant i us, being the surest Pledg of Gods entring into the Co venant of Grace with us. S that to be in a Graciou State is true happinesse: B to know our selves to be

such a State, is true happinesse double upon us.
Hereupon, that I might lend some help to true belie∣vers, for reading and discern∣ing their own spirituall Evi∣dences of their State of Grace, I have been perswa∣ded to publish this bundle of Beleevers Evidences for Eternall Life in the ensuing Treatise. Whereunto I have been the more inclinable, that my lines might be of use,
1. To 1 Thos. 5. 14 support the weak, and comfort the feeble∣minded, who Ps. 22. 1. and P. 77. and Ps. 88. walk heavily and disconsolately in the paths

of grace, through want of As∣surance; That they hereby comming in some measure 1 Cor. 2. 12. to know the things that are freely given to them of God, may Heb. 12. 12. lift up the hands that hang downe, and the feeble knees, and Ps. 119. 32. run with enlarged hearts the way of Gods Commandements.
2. To confute really the Enthusiasticall fancies, the ignorant Anti-Scripturall opinions of some, who cry up (I know not what) imagi∣nary Raptures, Revelati∣ons, and other Dreames of their own, as the only Chara∣cters

of Election and Justifi∣cation: decrying, as carnall, all discoveries of beleevers spirituall estates by markes and Signes of Sanctificati∣on. For this In ipsa e∣pistola sa∣tis dulci omnibus, quibus sa∣num est palatum cordis, ubi sapiat pa∣nis Dei, & satis me∣morabili in sancta Ecclesia Dei, maxi∣me chari∣tas com∣mendatur. Aug. Prae∣fat. in 1. Epist. Ioan. sweet Epistle of John the Joh. 13. 23. and 19. 26. and 20. 2. and 21. 7, 20. beloved Dis∣ciple is full of such markes; as in this book is evident. Christ hath taught us to judge of Mat. 7. 16, 17, 18. the tree by the fruits. And Reason directs us to discover the Cause by the effect.
3. To divert the distem∣pered minds of men a little (if it be possible) from jejune, empty, 1 Tim. 6. 5. perverse disputes, 1 Tim. 1. 6. vain janglings, brain-sick

notions and speculations, (the calamity of these crazy times,) to exercise themselves upon that wholesome necessary practicall businesse of 2 Pet. 1. 10. ma∣king their calling and E∣lection sure. We have laid out farre too much Isa. 55. 2 for that which is not bread, for that which satisfieth not.
4. And finally, to rouze up my selfe, and all sorts of Christians in this King∣dom, in these slippery days, (wherein both Lives, Liber∣ties, Health, Friends, Wealth, Pleasures, Honours, Crowns, Scepters, and all sublunaries

are in such extremity of ex∣traordinary uncertainties,) to 1 Tim. 6. 12, 19. lay hold and make sure of eternall life; that in the midst of all terrestriall Concussions and Revolutions, we may have a celestiall unshaken foundation of true spirituall Peace and Consolation.
Your Honours noble re∣spects, and undeserved fa∣vours heretofore manifested unto me, have commanded me to Dedicate and Present unto you this small Testimo∣niall of my unfeigned grati∣tude. And wherein can I be more truly serviceable to your

Honours, then in such sin∣cere endeavours to promote your Assurance of eternall salvation? Now the 1 Pet. 5. 10. God of all Grace, fill your hearts with all the Gal. 5. 22, 23. fruits of his Spi∣rit, Col. 2. 2. unto all riches of the full assurance of understand∣ding, and Heb. 10. 22. faith, and Heb. 6. 11, 18, 19. hope in this life: And at last crown you both, with ineffable glory in the life to come, in the full enjoyment of himselfe, who is the Heaven of heaven, and Glory of glory. So prayeth
Augustines, London. Octob. 9. 1648.

