



Men, Brethren and Fathers, entirely beloved in the Lord.
THe substance of these practical Directions for worthy receiving of 1 or. 11.20. the Lords Supper, I have re∣presented to your eares in preaching; That before I administred unto you this heavenly 1 cor. 10.16. Communion, I might (according to my duty) instruct you in right Communicating: Now I offer them to your eyes in Printing; And, by both Preaching and Printing, to your Hearts; that they

may be unto you as a con∣tinual Sermon before e∣very Sacrament.
When first I treated of this Subject, I had no thoughts of printing it in any other Book, than in your breasts. (O that your hearts and lives were li∣ving Books, wherein the whole Heb. 6.1. Doctrine of Christ were printed in Capitall Letters, that he that runs might read: Then should ou be 2 Cor. 3.2,  The Epistle of Christ▪ written not with nk, but with the Spi∣rit

of the living God) Yet since that, I have been induced to make these familiar Directi∣ons more publique, up∣on these Considerati∣ons;
1. That I might gra∣tifie your pious request in publique to me, That these Instructions might be printed, which you apprehend might be of such frequent use and advantage to you and yours, before, in, and after every Lords Sup∣per.
2. That I might help on your Edification and Consolation, and happi∣ly others also, in refe∣rence to that sweet fel∣lowship which Christ affords his Members with Himself and his Death, in this Ordi∣nance. For hereby your understandings may be farther cleared, your me∣mories confirmed, your Hearts & affections rais∣ed upwards, your Graces acted unto higher per∣fections, & your Sacra∣mental Duties regulated

so as to seek the Lord herein, in a right Order. And I perswade my self that those things which were so acceptable to you in my Sermons; will be the more profitable to you in my Book. If your souls prosper, my heart shall rejoyce. I shall count it my Crown and glory, to promote your Grace and Glory. It will be my Heaven here, to help you forward to∣wards Heaven hereaf∣ter. And in order here∣unto, I hope I shall wil∣lingly

preach; print, and bestow my pains in pub∣lique or private amongst you, that I may more and more endeare you and es∣pouse you unto Iesus Christ; For I trust I may truly say with the A∣postle, Phi. 1.8. to 12. God is my re∣cord, how greatly▪ I long after you all, in the bowels of Iesus Christ. And this I pray that your love may a∣bound yet more and more in knowledge and in all sense.
That ye may approve things that are excel∣lent, that ye may be sin∣cere and without of∣fence till the day of Christ: Being filled with the fruits of righ∣teousness, which are by Iesus Christ unto the glory and prayse of God.
3. That I may preach unto you, not onely whilest I am with you, but even after the Lord shall have taken me from you.
As Heb. 11.4 Abel by his faith (he being dead) yet speaketh: So these lines may live, when I shall be dead; and they may speak to you, when I shall be si∣lent in the Grave. I am here but Ps. 39.12. a Pilgrim, and my abode with you can be but momentany at the lon∣gest, for Jam. 4.24 our life is but a vanishing vapour, Ps. 102. ii our dayes a declining sha∣dow, our Ps. 39.5. years as no∣thing, Heb. 13.14. we have here no continuing City, but seek one to come: There∣fore by this publicati∣on,
2 Pet. 1.15. I will endeavour that you and yours may be able after my decease to have these things al∣wayes in remembrance. Thus Moses & the Pro∣Phets, Christ and his A∣postles, preach unto us & the whole Church of Christ still (though they are all in Heaven,) by their Doc∣trines & writings left be∣hinde them.
4. That I may testifie this way my true love and affection to you in the Lord Iesus: And to let you know, 2 Cor. 7.3 that ye are in

mine heart to live and die with you. For you have not only loved & de∣servedly honoured my Re∣verent, learned, and pious Predecessor, now sleeping in the Lord, thereby shew∣ing your selves very emi∣nently exemplary to all the Congregations round about you: but you have also de∣clared your singular re∣spect & affection unto me, the unworthiest Labourer in the Lords Vineyard, e∣ver since my first entrance amongst you, both in your ready accepting of my

Ministery, diligent at∣tending upon the Ordi∣nances, willing compliance with such pious proposals as I have laid before you, and in other demonstrati∣ons of your kinde disposi∣tions towards me to this day. And therefore I have cause to be 1 Thes. 2.8. the more af∣fectionately desirous of you, and I am willing to impart unto you not the Gospel of God onely, but also mine own Soul, because ye are dear unto me.
The Lord maintain and increase the Spirit of love still betwixt us, whilest we have a day or an houre to live together.
Upon these Motives es∣pecially I have been incli∣ned to commit thee ensu∣ing Meditations to the Presse: And I dedicate them unto you especially, most earnestly beseeching the Lord, that they may be abundantly useful and beneficiall both to you and others. 2 Thes. 2.16, 17. Now our Lord Iesus Christ himself, and God even our Father,

which hath loved us, & hath given us everlast∣ing consolation, & good hope through grace, comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work. And fill you with all grace, that may fit you for ever∣lasting glory, So prayeth

From my Study in
Wrington in
Somersetshire
June 12. 1651.
