


Honourable Sirs,
IT is a rare and come∣ly sight to see great∣nesse and goodnesse together: both are concentring and met in you, un∣wearied you have been in your paines, faithfull in your trust, a refuge for the oppressed, not

onely in these times, when m∣ny are assertors of Religio because it should protect the and because it is in fashion: b even then, when it was the gre¦test crime to be godly, it hat been the counsell of others to b still on the strongest side: b their aime being false, they sho wide of the marke. God hat given you a more spiritual judgement, which hath mad you to stand like a Rocke unm¦veable, venturing all, when o¦thers out of timorousnesse hav unworthily betrayed their trus and left a perpetuall blot upo their names.
Your wisdome and fidelity i an honour and a joy to then that chose you, and to the whol Kingdome; which hath grea cause to blesse God for you: i any doe otherwise, yet kno for your comfort, that you

wages in your worke, as the har∣est is in the seed. Whatsoever ou expend for God, in God ou shall find it againe: the ore publick your spirits are, he nearer you come to that cen∣er of all perfection. Selfe n a man is a base and poore end: ea, it is proudly to sit downe n the place of God, to whom lone it is proper to worke for imselfe: even the best of Crea∣ures must acknowledge their ubordination unto him, the ore we doe so, the greater re∣ection of honour and blessing  begets: subordination in some espects may bee between two nely: but sometimes there is  series, or concatenation of hings subjected one to another,  which the Logicians call sub∣ternation: and here there is a oking upward and downe∣ard: and so doe you, to God,

and to inferiours: I should b in gratefull either to deny, o forget it.
You have engaged me, wit often, manifold, choise, unde¦served, unrequitable favours.  have consulted what to returne pauperis est numerare pecus. Th ensuing discourse you have al¦ready had by word of mouth  the acceptance that it foun with you, when it was first del¦vered, hath emboldened me t present it unto you againe wit some enlargements. Solin writes, that the African Ele¦phants are dwarfes to the Ind¦ans; and therefore are loath t bee seen of them; Iul. So∣lin: poly∣histor. cap. 38. quasi parv¦tatis suae conscij: it is myne ow case in relation unto your Ho¦nours. I much revere you Judgements: that which make me ventrous, is your unsuspe¦cted candour and ingenuity

you shall have (as the Oratour speakes) levidense crasso filo: but the preciousnesse of the subject matter will make amends for that: Christ the Lord of life, and the most precious one of the Father. I doubt not but he is such to you also: and perhaps this Treatise, such as it is, will draw out your hearts and affecti∣ons farther. You know not what tentations and trialls God may yet bring you through. Christ the Angel of his presence will be with you: your safety will be in him: infinite is that distance between the favour of God and us, without him. Rest then upon this rocke of ages: goe to this fountaine of strength: he will fortifie you against fears without, and terrours within: and when opposition is at the highest, he will raise your spi∣rits to a sutable height: he will

carry you as on Eagles wings: you shall be above the creature; above your selves: you shall as it were walke in heaven; while you live on earth.
Honourable Sirs, give mee leave to leave with you this monument and witnesse of my thankfulnesse for your many un∣merited favours towards mee. I have abundant reason to think, that your hearts are right for God, and for the Kingdome of Christ: some cannot lay downe themselves enough: if it were not so; whereas they doe some good, they would doe much more. Selfe-deniall makes a fat and fruitfull soule. Blessed be God for your obedience in this behalfe: then we love our selves best, when wee love God more then our selves; the matter of this discourse will much pro∣move it. I know no better Load∣stone

to attract and draw out affections to God ward, then Christ laid open in all the sinews and joynts, in all the veines and arteries of his Fathers love to mankinde. I have done it very jejunely and brokenly: I leave the many defects of it to be made up by your meditation: how so∣ever I have handled it, I am con∣fident, the subject is such, that you will receive it, as I present it, with the right hand.
I have adventured to cast this poore mite into the publique treasury, although I am consci∣ous to my selfe of mine own in∣ability for such a worke. What though a man cannot contend with Lynceus in quick-sighted∣nesse; must he therefore be rec∣koned stark blind? What though he cannot run with the swiftest; must he therefore have his heels tript up? What if he cannot

climb to the highest fastidge and top, must they therefore disturb him, and throw him down from his station? Zech. 4. 10. Wee should not de∣spise the day of small things: inest sua gratia parvis: there is a foot in the body, as well as an eye: and the Apostle speaks of , diversities of gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 4. And divers they be as well in measure, as in kinde. I much rejoyce, I know nothing by my selfe: by the grace of God I am that I am: it is he that hath stir'd me up to the best studies: and I shall be willing to doe good, according to the dispensa∣tions of his grace.
Now the Lord make you so to eye and apprehend the preci∣ousnesse of Christ in his person, in his graces, in his offices, in his members, in his ordinances, in all the operations of his Spirit, that you may be willing to spend

and be spent for him, to adven∣ture all your worldly interest, and to throw downe all your honour at his feet; as the foure , foure living cre∣atures, and not four li∣ving beasts as our trāslation hath it. living creatures, and foure and twenty Elders did their crowns: this is the way to take up all a∣gaine with unspeakable advan∣tage: this is the best traffique and trading in the world: this is the safest adventure, that you can make. Christ will be a rich gaine unto you here, and when you come into that endlesse world, he will set the never-withering crowne upon your heads. So prayeth


