


GENTLEMEN,
IF his Observation be true, That no Man can lose by the World; but what he loseth in Purse, he gains in Experience: You will have no Reason to complain, if sometimes your subterranean Projects miscarry upon your Hand: Since that Loss may easi∣ly be Repaired by your experimental Knowledge, of those occult Regi∣ons of Matter; concerning which, the most profound Philosopher can give no Account, but by way of Hypothesis and Conjecture.
Solomon, that great Master of ex∣perimental Knowledge, tells us that

Wisdom is better than Rubies; and all the things that may be desired are not to be compared to it. And tho' that by Wisdom he may mean that Divine Philosophy which the New Testa∣ment calls Religion; yet certainly there is nothing contributes more towards making one morally or phy∣sically wise, than Experience, as he intimates in the following Verse, where he brings in Wisdom thus speaking: Prov. 8.11. I Wisdom dwell with Prudence, and find out the Knowledge of witty Inventions. I confess that the Theorick Part of Philosophy (be∣ing the first-born,) is more noble; and therefore deservedly sits Regent in the superior Faculties of the Soul: Attended with sublime Notions and Specula∣tions; and sometimes Figments and Chimaera's are also her Maids of Honour.
And altho' the practick or experi∣mental

Part, sits below in humble Garb, attended only with mechanick Arti∣ficers, and manual Operators: Yet she oftentimes Entertains the World with more of Certainty, and Demonstra∣tion than the former.
Gentlemen, I shall not complement you into a good Opinion of these Noi∣ons which I am willing should abide the Test of an impartial Iudgment; only I think it may be convenient to let you know that they are the product of 20 Years Experience and Observation; for so long I have been concerned in the Inspection of under-ground Works of several Kinds.
Besides the Place of my Habitation being under Crosfell, (one of the highest Mountains in England) whose lofty Top gives a large Prospect both of the East and West Seas; I have from thence observed, not only the different Classes of Matter, the Eruption of

Rapid Springs; but also the Rising and Falling as well as the Rarefaction and Condensation of Vapours.
Gentlemen, If the Publication of this short Treatise (which I pre∣sume to present to your Hand, as the most proper Patrons of subterranean Philosophy) put you to the Charge of an easie purchase, you will certain∣ly have it much cheaper than the Au∣thor, who shall always remain,
GENTLEMEN,
Dys, April the 16. (1696.)

