



I Have presumed, tho' I knew at the same time how hainously I trespass'd against you in doing so, to Inscribe your Name to the following Colle∣ction of Letters. As you were no Stranger to that Excellent Person, whose Pieces Composes, by far, the most valuable part of it, so I was satisfied that every thing, from so celebrated a Hand, wou'd be acceptable and welcome to you; and in that Confi∣dence, made bold to give you the Trouble of his Address. My Lord Rochester has left o established a Reputation behind him, that he needs no officious Pen to set out his Worth, especially to you, who were acquainted so per∣ectly well with all his Eminent Qualities, hat made him the Delight and Envy of both Sexes, and the Ornament of our Island. In every thing of his Lordship's writing,

there's something so happily express'd, the Graces are so numerous, yet so unaffected, that I don't wonder why all the Original Touches of so incomparable a Master, have been enquired after, with so Publick and General a Concern. Most of his other Com∣positions, especially those in Verse, have long ago bless'd the Publick, and were received with Vniversal Delight and Admiration, which gives me Encouragement to believe, that his Letters will find the like Reception. Tho' most of them were written upon pri∣vate Occasions, to an Honourable Person who was happy in his Lordship's Acquain∣tance, with no intention to be ever made publick; yet that constant good Sence, which is all along visible in them, the Iustice of the Observations, and the peculiar Beauties of the Style, are Reasons sufficient, why they should no longer be conceal'd in private Hands. And indeed, at this time, when the private Plate of the Nation comes a∣broad to relieve the present Exigences, it seems but just, that since the Dearth of Wit is as great as that of Money, such a Trea∣sure of good Sence and Language shou'd no longer be buried in Oblivion. With thi difference, however, That whereas our Plate before it can circulate in our Markets, mus

receive the Royal Stamp, must be melted down, and take another Form, these Vnva∣luable Remains want no Alterations to re∣commend them; they need only be taken from the Rich Mines where they grew; for their own Intrinsick Value secures them, and his Lordship's Name is sufficient to make them Current.
As for the Letters by other Hands, that make up this Volume, some of them were written by Gentlemen, that are wholly Stran∣gers to me, and others belong to those that are so much better known in the World than myself, that I can say nothing upon this Oc∣casion, but what falls vastly short of their Merit. But I cannot forbear to say some∣thing of Mr. Otway's: They have that In∣imitable Tenderness in them, that I dare op∣pose them to any thing of Antiquity; I am sure few of the present Age can pretend to come up to them. The Passions, in the rai∣sing of which, he had a Felicity peculiar to himself, are represented in such lively Co∣lours, that they cannot fail of affecting the most insensible Hearts, with pleasing Agi∣tations. I cou'd wish we had more Pieces of the same Hand, for I profess an intire Veneration to his Memory, and always look∣ed upon him as the only Person, almost, that

knew the secret Springs and Sources of Na∣ture, and made a true use of them. Love, as it is generally managed by other Hands, is either raving and enthusiastical, or else dull and languishing: In him alone 'tis true Na∣ture, and at the same time inspires us with Compassion and Delight. After this, I will not venture to say any thing of my own Trifles that bring up the Rear. Some of 'em were written long ago, and now huddled in haste; the rest had a little more Care and Labour bestow'd upon them. If they contri∣bute in the least to your Entertainment, which was my only Design in publishing them, I have attain'd my Ends: I have some others by me, which I may, perhaps, publish hereafter, if these meet with any to∣lerable Success.
I need not, and I am sure I cannot make you a better Panegyrick than to acquaint the World, that you were happy in my Lord Rochester's Friendship, that he took plea∣sure in your Conversation, of which even his Enemies must allow him to have been the best Iudge, and that in the Politest Reign we can boast of in England. The Appro∣bation of so impartial a Iudge, who was, in his Time, a Scourge to all Blockheads, by what Names or Titles soever dignisied, or

distinguish'd, is above all the Incense that a much better Hand than mine can presume to offer: Shou'd I put out all the Dedica∣tion Sails, as 'tis the way of most Authors, I cou'd soon erect you into a great Hero, and Deliverer; and tell how often you have triumph'd over inveterate Distempers, and restor'd the Sick to that only Blessing, that makes Life supportable. I cou'd tell how, by your single Merit, you have baled a Faction form'd against you with equal Ma∣lice and Ignorance; I cou'd tell what Marks of Munisicence you have left behind you, in the Place that was honour'd with your Edu∣cation, and how generously ready you are to serve your Friends upon all Occasions. But after all, the highest thing I will pretend to say of you her is, That you were esteem'd, and valu'd, and lov'd by my Lord Rochester. 'Tis true, as there never was any Conspicuous Merit in the World, that had not, like Her∣cules, Monsters to encounter, so you have had your share of them; but, Heaven be prais'd, your Enemies, with all their vain Endea∣vours, have only served to six your Interest, and advance your Reputation: Tho' I know you hear of nothing with more Vneasiness, than of the Favours you do; yet I cannot omit to tell, and indeed I am vain upon it,

that you have condescended so low, as to di∣vert those Hours you cou'd steal from the Publick, with some of my Trifles, that you have been pleased to think favourably of them, and rewarded them. For all which Obligations, I had no other way of expressing my Gratitude but this; which, I am afraid will but inflame the Reckoning, instead of paying any part of the Debt: But this has been the constant Vsage in all Ages of Par∣nassus, and, like Senators that take Bribes, we have Antiquity and Vniversality to plead in our Excuse. But I forget that you are all this while in pain, till the Dedication re∣leases you: Therefore I have nothing but my Wishes to add, That you, who have been so happy a Restorer of Health to others, may ever enjoy it yourself, that your Days may be always pleasant, and your Nights easie, and that you'll be pleas'd to forgive this Presumption in

