



ADAMS sinne was a great one doubtlesse, I thinke the greatest of all; some except the sinne against the holy Ghost. I am sure the whole Creation groaneth under it, and travelleth as in paine for it at this day, especially the little world, mankind: The evils which are up∣on our bodies, soules, goods, names, are hence. Hence diseases on and in the body innumerable, the freeing us from which, and putting it in an equall temper, taketh up the Art and industry of the Physitian; and when he hath done all, there will be a dissolution of that earthly house. Dust thou art, and into dust shalt thou returne againe.
The divine is Gods special ordinance for the soule, & (blessed be God) there is a

compleate remedy in that way for the foule, the saving of the soule, beginning, consummation, and body too in the glori∣ous resurrection, the salvation prepared to be revealed in the last times.
A maine part of salvation is Justificati∣on, just making, by it such as beleeve are holy, unreprovable, unblamable in Gods sight, white as Snow, and whiter, perfected for ever; so are all those that are sanctified God dealeth with them as such, pardoneth all sinnes, freeth from guilt and punishment properly so called, whatsoever is compensatory or fa∣tisfactory, and giveth them eternall life.
Hence peace with God, rejoycing in hope of glory, glorying in tribulations, against Adams sin, the death caused by it, servitude to sinne, freedome from righteousnesse, the power that was, and the reliques, yea and those of omissions, & cōmissions, against the worlds accusations, condemnations, the Devill and conscience. It is God that justifieth, who can condemne, who canlay any thing to their charge? Physitians agree not about the cure of the body, nor Divines about this of the soule. Some differences there are about other

things.  i about that by which, the forme, or what is insteed of it; some give it faith imputed in a proper sense, so the Animad versor I deal with sometimes, some∣times remission of sinnes, both which he calleth righteousnesse, (righteousnesse is confessedly necessary 'to justification.) Papists to faith, hope, and charity; both make Christ the meritorious cause. It is his merit whence faith is imputed and juctifieth, saith one; his merit, that faith, hope, and charity, justifie, so the other.
I deny faith, hope, and charity; yea, faith alone in a proper sense Though I allow faith to be the instrument applying, that by which, I professe my selfe a friend of imputation of the Active and Passive obedi∣ence of Christ; that, as that obedience is the meritorious cause, so the matter, and that imputed, given or applied by God, the for∣mal cause, or that which supplieth the place there of: whilest some have beene busie a∣bout other controversies of our times, and others in an eager persuite of war; I (having a little more leisure then ever before, not used to be idle) have laboured in this con∣troversie

the clearing of it. My first and last thoughts of some to whom I should De∣dicate this, pitched on you both, and I de∣sire you to take it as a pledge of unfeig∣ned love and thankfulnes for many loving kindnesses, for constant friendship. I hope the cause (being the constant tenet of all Protestants against Arminians and Papists) will defend it selfe; It is Iesus Christs cause, he will never leave it. If in your perusall of it, it shall contribute to your establishment, to your peace and comfort in life & death, to your boldnesse in standing before Gods tribunall here and hereafter which was Sc. Pauls defire, and the practise of all that did ever so stand) I shall have mine aime in this mine in tituling it to you both, whom I truly love, which I earnestly desire and pray for, resting ever yours in all services of love to be commanded,

Aprill 3. 1643.
