



Worthy Gentlewoman,
THe labours of many of GODS faithfull ser∣vants (in all ages) have been commen∣ded to the Church of God through the gratious hands
of women. S. Hierom writes to ma∣ny, as to Salvina, to Faria, to Celan∣tia, Marcellina, Asella; most of his workes hee dedicates to Eustochia a noble and honourable Virgin. Which practise of his (in prefer∣ring that Sex) was objected against by some (as appeares in one of his Epistles) but by him defended,Epist. 140. and very justly: For however the ho∣nour of that Sexe was much blemi∣shed through Transgression, yet (with Mary) may the virtuous say, He that is mighty hath magnified us; not onely in vouchsafing that a woman should be his mother, when no mortall man was his Father (as Hugo speaketh) but likewise in en∣dowing them with may excellent Gifts and Graces of his Spirit,Exod. 15.20 & 38.8. Judg. 4.4. 2 Kings 22.14. 2 Sam. 14.4. & 20.14. as Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Zeale,
Boldnesse, Humility, Patience, Chari∣ty,Judg. 13.9, 22, 23. 2 Kings 4.8, 9. Matth. 15.22, 28. Luk. 24▪ 8, 9, 11. Judg. 4.21. Ester. 8▪ 4. Act. 8.3. & 9.2. & 16 13. Luk. 8.3. & 10.39. Curtesie and Constancy in well do∣ing (wherin they have many times excelled) leaving upon a perpetu∣all record, their prais-worthy works for the serious imitation of men: di∣recting withall the Penmen of holy Scripture to write Epistles to them (as S. John to the elect Lady) yea to de∣dicate whole Books to their names (as that of Ruth and Ester) for their everlasting Honour.
Through your gentle hands I commend this poore peece of my studies to the world. It is not ne∣cessary that I should give it an ac∣count why I seeke so farre from home: GOD hath wrought my heart to love those that love him, and distance of place cannot a∣bridge my duty: Withall this I
would the world should know that I am one, amongst those many, who truly honour You for Your virtues: In testimonie whereof I make this Dedication to Your worthy name, which I beseech You to accept of, as an acknowledgement of that debt I owe, and the unfained desire I which the Prayers shall never bee wanting of him, who is

