



Gentlemen,
IT is to you that I owe the largest acknowledgment ima∣ginable; for the kindnesses that you have shewed me, have not only been in themselves very Great, but very Singular. It
was a Noble and a Generous Act, so liberally as you have done, to encourage Mr. Kentish and Me, and it was a Rare and Peculiar Generosity not to with∣draw the Testimonies of your Love and Respect during my Long and Doleful Sickness, which made me for two Years incapable of being any way ser∣viceable to you. It is impossible for me to forget so great a Favor, and equally impossible for me to express the sense I have of it.
At the desire of Mr. Dun∣well, one of your number, I Preached on the following Sub∣ject,
and now at the request of a great many of the same number, it comes into the World: And I was the more willing that it should see the Light, because, as far as in me lies, I would help to Extinguish those Flames, which being encreased by di∣stance and strangeness, have long Troubled and Scorched us. It is in vain, I well know, to think that all Men will have the same Thoughts, or the same Ex∣pressions about matters of Reli∣gion; forasmuch as in their dif∣ferent Souls there are different degrees of Light; but I would
endeavour however to perswade persons of different apprehensions to be kind and civil and genteel to one another, and this is easy to be done, and will be attended with a mighty pleasure.
Our Lecture, as you will bear us Witness, is not a Semi∣nary of Sedition; nothing, we dare appeal to you and our other Hearers, is Preached there, but what is Orthodox and Loyal too; nor do we there take an occasion to vent our own Passions instead of the Truths of God; nor at any time endeavour to make our Hearers have an ill Opinion
of our Brethren the Confor∣mists, for so we love to call them, and we hope they will not refuse to give to us the same Friendly Title. We have among us all abundance of common Work to do against Atheism and Drun∣kenness, and the other Vices of a Corrupt Age, and against the World, the Devil and the Flesh: The necessities of the Souls of Men are so many, that our United Endeavors will be little enough to supply them; and therefore we should Love and Encourage and bear with one another, and so the Good of all sides, I verily
perswade my self, will resolve to do.
In our Discourses our Audi∣tory do not use to find matter ei∣ther of just Scorn or Laugh∣ter, nothing, I hope, that is Ab∣surd or Ridiculous. A late Epi∣tomizer of the Works of the Learned, is so complaisant as to call some Practical Discourses of mine, formerly Published, Cant∣ing Sermons, and thinks those Gentlemen, who in a late Ac∣count of Books, put an Abridg∣ment of those Discourses after some Sermons of Mr. Norris, Acted, as if by such a method
they designed to expose the Dis∣senters. I will allow Mr. Norris to be an Ingenious and neat Wri∣ter, his Thoughts is Clean∣ly, and his Language Fine; but I think it will be no diskindness either to him, or Mr. De la Crose, to desire them not to dip their Pens in Gall, and to for∣bear Satyr when they would spread Truth: A little more good Nature and Civility would do neither of them any great harm. To say this or that is Cant is no Proof, 'tis Reviling without a Reason, and none of the Learn∣ed or Judicious will use so silly
and so Trite a Word. I am afraid this French Writer is of a very little Soul, and thinks no Sense can be spoken but on his own side: Men of more Ʋnder∣standing than he, will allow that the Dissenters know a little what belongs to Sense and good Lan∣guage too. He Ridicules the Lives of Mr. Hieron and Mr. Eliot of New England, those Blessed Divines, as he calls them, but I wish he may sit at their Feet in the other World. I would desire this Abridger of Books not to be so Partial; and if he would have his Writings
to be useful, not to cram them a∣gain with such Stuff, for it is nauseous to all Men of Sense and good Breeding, to see persons of such a Little Soul talk as if they had Monopolized all the Wit and Sense of the World in their own Brains. I have longer in∣sisted upon this, because I hope it may a little Soften some that are of a Morose and Waspish Constitution: I wonder in what Air they have lived that are continually spitting out Ulcerated Language: I wish all the Men of Bitterness an Healthful state of Soul, and then I am sure
they will be calm and gentle, they will cease to be Incendiaries and learn to be Peacemakers, which is a much better Office.
To you, Gentlemen, it is that I do now publickly return my sincere and hearty Thanks for all your Kindnesses to me both in Health and Sickness: At your Service I am, and shall upon all occasions be ready to give you the most chearful Marks of my Respect; may your Trades and Employments thrive better for what you give to my Brother Kentish and to me: What good is done to the
Souls of Men by us (as we hope there is some) will turn al∣so to your Account in that Day: I wish you may continue to be promoters of Peace and Uni∣on among all good Persons of all Perswasions, and that you would labour in your several Sta∣tions to advance a thing so Plea∣sant and so Profitable: May you have always calm Spirits, and quiet Families, and loving People to Deal withal: May you have Comprehensive and large Souls: For many long Years may you Thrive and Pros∣per, and be useful in this World,
and at last be admitted into the World above, which is the blessed place, for it is the World of Love.
So Prays, Gentlemen,

London, Decemb. 12th 1691.
