



Most gracious Soveraign:
THose that are supprest and helpelesse are com∣monly silent, wishing that the common ill in all sort might be with their particular misfortunes: which disposition, as it is uncharitable in all men, so would it be in me more dogge-like then man-like, to bite the stone that strooke me: (to wit) the borrowed authority of my So∣veraigne misinformed, seeing their armes and hunds that flang it, are most of them already rotten. For I

must confesse it ever, that they are debts, and not discontentments, that your Majesty hath laid upon me; the debts and obligation of a friendlesse adversity, farre more payable in all Kinds, then those of the prospe∣rous: All which, nor the least of them, though I cannot discharge, I may yet endeavour it.
And notwithstanding my re∣straint hath retrenched all wayes, as well the wayes of labour and will, as of all other imployments, yet hath it left with me my cogitations, then which I have nothing else to offer on the Altar of my Love.
Of those (most gracious Soveraigne) I have used some part in the follow∣ing dispute, between a Counsellour of Estate, and a Iustice of Peace, the one disswading, the other perswad∣ing the calling of a Parliament. In all which, since the Norman Con∣quest (at the least so many, as Hi∣stories have gathered) I have in

some things in the following Dia¦logue presented your Majesty with the contentions and successes.
Some things there are, and those of the greatest, which because they ought first to be resolved on, I thought fit to range them in the front of the rest, to the end your Majesty may be pleased to examine your own great and Princely heare of their acceptance, or refusall.
The first is, that supposition, that your Majesties Subjects give nothing but with adjuction of their own in∣terest, interlacing in one, and the same act your Majesties reliefe, and their own liberties; not that your Majesties piety was ever suspected, but because the best Princes are ever the least jealous, your Majesty judging others by your self, who have abused your Majesties trust. The fear'd continuance of the like abuse may perswade the provision But this caution, how ever it seem∣eth

at first sight, your Majesty shall perceive by many examples follow∣ing but frivolous. The bonds of Sub∣jects to their Kings should alwayes be wrought out of Iron, the bonds of Kings unto Subjects but with Cobwebs.
This it is (most renowned Sove∣raigne) that this trafficke of assu∣rances hath been often urged, of which, if the Conditions had been easie, our Kings have as easily kept them; if hard and prejudiciall, either to their honours or estates, the Creditours have been paid their debts whith their own presum∣ption.
For all binding of a King by Law upon the advantage of his ne∣cessity, makes the breach it self lawfull in a King, His Charters and all other instruments being no other then the surviuing witnesses of unconstrained will: Princeps non subjicitur nifi sua volun∣tate

libera, mero motu & certa Scientia: Necessary words in all the grants of a King witnessing that the same grants were given freely and knowingly.
The second resolution will rest in your Majesty, leaving the new im∣positions, all Monopolies, and o∣ther grievances of the people to the consideration of the House, Provid∣ed, that your Majesties revenue be not abated, which if your Majesty shall refuse, it is thought that the disputes will last long, and the is∣sues will be doubtfull: And on the contrary if your Majesty vouchsafe it, it may perchance be stiled a yeelding, which seemeth by the sound to brave the Regalty.
But (mose excellent Prince) what other is it to th' eares of the Wise, but as the sound of a trumpet, ha∣ving blasted forth a false Alarme, becomes but common aire? Shall the head yeeld to the feete? certainly it

ought, when they are grieved, for wisdome will rather regard the commodity, then object the disgrace, seeing if the feet lye in fetters, the head cannot be freed, and where the feet feele but their own paines, the head doth not onely suffer by participiation, but withall by consi∣deration of the evill.
Certainly the point of honour well weighed hath nothing in it to even the ballance, for by your Ma∣jesties favour, your Majesty doth not yeeld either to any person, or to any power, but to a dispute onely, in which the Proposition and Minor prove nothing without a conclusion, which no other person or power can make, but a Majesty: yea this in Henry the third his time was called a wisedome incomparable. For, the King raised again, recovery his authority: For, being in that extremity as he was driven with the Queen and his Children, Cum

Abbatibus & Prioribus satis humilibus hospitia quaerere & prandia: For the rest, may it please your Majesty to consider that there can nothing befall your Majesty in matters of af∣faires more unfortunately, then the Commons of Parliament with ill successe: A dishonour so perswa∣sive and adventurous as it will not onely find arguments; but it will take the leading of all enemies that shall offer themselves against your Majesties estate.
Le Tabourin de la paurete ne faict poinct de breuct: of which dangerous disease in Princes, the remedy doth chiefly consist in the love of the people, which how it may be had & held, no man knowes better then your Majesty; how to loose it, all men know, and know that it is lost by nothing more then by the defence of others in wrong doing. The onely motives of mi∣schances

that ever come to Kings of this Land since the Conquest.
It is onely love (most renowned Soveraign) must prepare the way for your Majesties following desires. It is love which obeyes, which suf∣fers, which gives, which stickes at nothing; which Love, as well of your Majesties people, as the love of God to your Majesty, that it may alwayes hold shall be the continuall prayers of your Majesties most humble vassall,

