



Much Respected Sirs,
AS at your Request the following Sermon was preach'd; so to gratify your further Desire, in the poor and mean Dress that you now see it, it ventures into the World. Which Desire of yours, I attribute rather to have proceeded from the willingness that you had to keep up the remembrance of your Friend, and what was memorable in his Example, than from any thing else that could appear to your Judgments as worthy of the publick view. And I hope to that it may be serviceable, tho' not so much, nor so well, as if it had been managed by others of greater skill in Affairs of this nature than I pretend to have. I in∣tend not, as you see, to usher it in with the Titles of the Wor∣shipful, the Honourable, or the Reverend, nor to court the Pro∣tection of the Great; all the ambition of my Discourse is, to bear the Titles of such to whom it was peculiarly address'd, a∣mong whom you are the chief.
I have no other aim in the whole Sermon, nor in the print∣ing of it, than to shew the necessity of a serious remembrance of God in Youth. And 'tis all my desire, that He who i wont to bless sincere, though weak, Endeavours, would
make it successful to such an End. And tho' I expect to meet with ill treatment from the Censorious and the Critical, yet if I may, by complying with your Desires, be in the least helpful to the furtherance of your Holy Faith, or the Good of others, I shall not be much concern'd with all the Aspersions and the Calumnies that may be thrown upon me. These my First-Fruits I humbly offer to my Creator, by the High Priest of the most Noble Order, his own Son, by whom I hope this poor Oblation may meet with a favourable acceptance, and, as it is design'd, be made (through his Blessing) somewhat useful to the Service of the Sanctuary, and to you whom I believe to be the Temples of the Holy Ghost.
Pardon me, if I presume to be your Monitor in this, that as you are engaged in a contemplative studious Course of Life, so you would so well provide for your own Ease and Pleasure, and for your good progress in Learning, as amidst all your Studies, to contemplate God. The frequent Thoughts of Him will be a great relief to your Minds, when they are apt to be weary, and faint, with the multitude of other Thoughts. When you are perplex'd, he can shew you the right way to Satisfaction; he can solve your Doubts, and render those things obvious and plain, which to Men that lean upon their own Ʋnderstandings, will continue to be mysterious and unfathomable. 'Tis the great Father of Lights that can alone chase away that darkness which is the natural grievance and trouble of the Soul. When you dig for Knowledg as for hidden Treasure, he can tell you where the rich Vein lies, that others miss of after a long and tedious search; for without his assistance and direction 'tis never to be found. Those glo∣rious Truths that enlarge and beautify the Soul, are not the Portion of the Careless and Irreligious, but of the Meek, the Humble, and Devout, for such, he that hath his Chair in Hea∣ven, will guide in Judgment, and teach his Way. Forget not
to converse with your God, while you converse with others; nor while you read other Books, slight those that he made. You have the Scriptures, and the Volume of the Creation both to read and study, and these will not be, as Solomon speaks of the rest, a weariness to the Flesh; for every time you look upon them, you will have new degrees of pleasure; only you must so order your Meditations, that one may help the other, and that your Philosophy may minister to Divinity, and your Reason to Faith.
As you enjoy the great Priviledg of a learned ingenuous Education, so God expects more from you than from others. You have more leisure to think of him, than those that are employed in Trades, and servile Offices. And besides, your know very well, that the best way to improve your short a∣bode on Earth, is to be undressing, to leave off by degrees an over-great indulgence to the Body, that so you may, with great willingness and patience, lay it quite aside when your Maker calls you to go strip'd of this Garment, into the Spiri∣tual and Eternal State. You should always be in a prepared posture, that when the Night (or rather the day) of your deliverance comes, you may travel with courage from this House of Bondage, into the joyful and happy Land.
The frequent remembrance of your Creator, will take away from Death its frightful and ghastly shape. Nor will it seem a dismal thing for you to remove to him whom you have often thought upon. To die then, will be only as if you should cross the Narrow Seas with a fair gale, and go and see a Friend with whom you have held a good correspondence; who hath sent you many rich Presents, and with whom you have long wish'd to be. While you are young, please him by a constant opposing of your Sins, and then you will fight your last Battel with ad∣mirable skill, and be crowned with a sure Conquest: for this will be the lot of all those that were engag'd betimes in this Holy War.

There be many erroneous by paths, and you must delibe∣rate and act wisely when you are first setting out, lest you wan∣der in a wrong way, and be forc'd, after you have endur'd much hard labour, to return back again. I question not but you will, by your blameless and holy carriage, let others see that there is a great beauty and lustre in Religion, and by your pra∣ctice present it to their Observation, as a very sweet amiable thing. In this sense you may be Preachers, without being ob∣noxious to Penalties, to Fines or Imprisonment, even the Prea∣chers of Righteousness in a corrupt and wicked Age. This honou∣rable Temper will be useful to your selves and others too; it will yield you store of quiet comfortable Thoughts, that others must never have, that make it late e're they begin their Ma∣ster's Work. This will make you unwearied in all Holy Duties, and constant to your own Vows and Promises, in the days of Evil, such as ours are. And if (as our Sins have given sober and considerate Men too much cause to fear) the thick dark∣ness of Popery should over-spread our Land again, it will be some comfort (if there can be any left in so sad a Case) for you to think that you did not (as others by their brutish Lusts) even desire our Saviour to depart out of our Coasts, that you did not hasten the loss of the Gospel, nor the setting of the Sun.
And if at any time you find your selves indispos'd to the per∣formance of this important necessary Work, call to mind the ex∣ample of this young Gentleman, your late Companion and Fel∣low-Student. Think with what earnestness and fervour he prayed, and do you the same. But I am afraid I shall but encrease the sorrow that you have for so great a Loss, and make your Wounds bleed afresh, while I mention the Name of your dear Friend. It is I know a trouble to you, when you consider that he is dead; who, had he liv'd, might have been a great comfort to the now disconsolate Lady his Mother, and to you an Instance of a more than ordinary Zeal and Piety, and by his
Example a great help to you in your way to Heaven. He might have been a great Blessing to this Nation, that needs the Prayers of many such as he was. But God saw it fit to put a period to his Life. In his early days he arrived to those bounds that were appointed for his abode here: And tho' his Maker and yours thought fit soon to remove him, yet you may conclude that it was even then the most proper and sensonable time for him to die. And I am sure you will not be so disloyal, nor so traiterously enclin'd, as to call the King of the World to your Bar, nor to question the Supream Ruler (that was never guilty of any miscarriage in Government) for what he hath done with his own. It may be he is removed from those Evils that you must live to see; and will you, that loved him so well, envy him the peculiar favour and regard of God? or be vex'd that your Friend is safe, while you are in the danger; or that he is in the Harbour, while you are yet to sail upon the rough stor∣my Waves? It has been observ'd, that Jesus when he knew that Lazarus was dead, was not much concern'd, but when he was to be rais'd, and to come into this miserable World again, then he wept. And indeed considering the Sorrows and Troubles, the Disappointments and Vexations of this short uneasy Life, how uncertain and how frail are its Joys, and how sure its Griefs, we may well think it was not without the highest Rea∣son that the Wise Man said, Eccles. 7.1. The day of Death is better than the day of ones Birth; to the Religious I am sure it is greatly so. The one is as the entring into a noisom Prison, the other as the going out into a stately Palace, and a clear Air. The one is the way to Labour, and the other is the way to Rest. The one a passage to a dark troubled Condition, the other to a perpetual Calmness and Serenity.
If our Holy Friends that were better prepared have gone faster than we, and have bid us farewel, let us remember they are but gone as our Saviour did (upon higher accounts) to
their Father and Ours, and it is not a farewel for ever. They are in the House not made with Hands, and we are in this Ta∣bernacle, yet we shall meet again, tho' not to eat and drink together as we did here, yet to live as Angels do, upon the sweet Emanations of the Deity, and the Joys that follow there∣upon, which is a far more glorious honourable Life. If ma∣ny of our good Friends are in Heaven already, this World should seem to us all, less desirable than it was; and we that are young, should upon this Consideration run with the grea∣ter chearfulness, and long to be there, where none are com∣plaining they died too soon. Let us now be Religious, and then the time will come, when you and I, and all the good People, both young and old, that we have known on Earth, shall meet together in the presence of our Lord, who with the shouts of his attending Angels, and Saints, will congratu∣late our Happiness, and bid us welcome to the secure possessi∣on of that glorious Crown for which we now strive and pray. Then shall we discourse of our Creator, and of all things that are great and comfortable, in a far better manner, and with much more pleasure than we can below. And that we may, when this Life shall end, obtain so great a Blessing, shall be the continued and sincere desire of,
London, Nov. 15. 1682.
Respected SIRS,

