



Right Honourable:
THE graces of Selfe-deniall and Faith, are like those two pillars of Iachin and Boaz,2 Chron. 3.17. erected at the beautifull entrance into the Temple for all men to cast their eyes upon, and that worthily; for most costly and pretious was their matter, and most curious and artificiall was their workemanship. For, as those two Pillars led the way into a glorious Temple, yet made with hands; so doe these two stand in the porch of a better Temple, even that of Grace here, and Glory eternall in the heavens: And as they so stood neare the gate of entrance that no man could enter in, save by them, although themselves never went in but alway staid with∣out; so these graces though they shall leave the soule in Heaven, be∣cause she should not need them, yet they shall not forsake her while she abides in the porch, but shut heaven doore upon her ere they take their leave. Moreover as the contriver and erecter of the former was that famous and cunning Artist, Hyram of Tyre: so,1 King. 7.13. no lesse an artificer then Hyram (nay a greater then Hyram is here) I say, the Spirit of the Lord Iesus is the framer and setter up of these in the Soules of Gods Elect. And these two graces (good Madam) with the discovery thereof, are the chiefe frame of these my ensuing Lectures; in which, both when I preached them, and now I write them, I aime at this marke, to withdraw the soule from the life of it owne hand, to the life of the Lord Iesus,Esay 57.9. and from an
 empty Religion to be acquainted with the mysteries of the Gospell, the only manuduction to true godlinesse. All profession being no∣thing else, save a shadow, and bottomlesse building, which is not grounded and quickned with Selfe-deniall and Faith.
And indeed (Right Honourable) if ever any age of the Church did, then doth this in which we live, in my judgement, re∣quire that the labours of us Ministers, be improved about the urging of these; whether we looke upon the times, or turne our eyes to God himselfe in his administration and government; we shall observe the former excessively overgrowne with an outward and formall Religion; and for the latter, when did the Lord so estrange himself from us, and dwell as it were, in the midst of a thicke cloud: So that, except by the lively practice of these two graces, we do not stir up our selves to take hould of him, how can our lives chuze but be sad and comfortlesse? Surely, if ever, we had now need, to prease upon more familiar acquaintance with God in all his graces, and (as David did) to view his Temple well.
True it is, that the old Iew, had little knowledge of God, save by the name of Iehova, Alsufficient, and a generall aime at the promise of a Messia, the blessed seed to come. Doubtlesse, they lived at poore termes: It was enough for them to cast an eye upon Gods Temple, as Daniel in captivity, and Iona in the Whales belly might do;Dan. 6.10. Jona 2 7. Strange and deep was that mercy which would so far off behold such, as so far off beheld him; but now we, the Church of the New Testament are come nearer to God,Heb. 12.24. we are come to mount Sion, to the heavenly Ierusalem, to the Church of the first born, to Iesus himself the Mediator of the Covenant, and the bloud of sprinkling, which speakes better things then that of Abel. We are come now beyond the Porch and Sanctuary, even to the Holy of Holies, through his flesh, that hath broken downe the vaile of seperation. So that now we are past viewing of the Temple well, for we had need become this Temple our selves;2 Cor. 3.18. Whose corner stone is precious Iesus, and wee precious stones built upon him, and rising up daily to a more lively and well proportioned building.2 Pet. 1.4.5. A little taste of the gift of God, a few good reaches and affections after holinesse are not e∣nough for us, but to be grounded upon these foundations of Selfe-deniall and Faith,2 Pet. 11.1. which promise us an open entrance into that eter∣nall Temple. According therefore to those talents of Wisdome and
 Knowledge which the Lord hath long imparted to us by the blessed lights of his Ministers (who sometimes shined in our Sphere, but now in glory it is expected at our hands, That we comprehend with all Saints that depth and breadth of love which is in Christ,Eph. 3.17 18. that he may dwell in our hearts by faith,Heb. 6.1. & that (forgetting our first ele∣ments) we strive toward perfection so far as in this vaile of misery its possible to reach to. I know your Honour hath long made this your marke; and that leaving things behinde, you have long looked forward to the prize of the high calling of God,Phil 3.13. and to that end have I sent you this Booke, that it may affoord you some succour and di∣rection hereto in your private condition, and sad widowhood. These thirty yeares I have wholly intermitted any converse with your La∣diship (an error scarce pardonable) except your so farre distant dwelling from the place of your first nativity and education, did plead some pardon for me, being one whose age and occasions admit no travell to remote places. Yet have I not wholy been unacquainted with your course and conversation in Gods waies; nay I know through how many combats and fights of affliction God hath brought your Honor into the condition wherin you stand: And besides,Heb. 10.32. I may say of you, as the Lord once said of Iehoshua,Zach. 3, 2. Is not this a brand pluckt out of the fire? Hath not the Lord taken you as a dry branch and planted you in the Courts of his owne house, to grow wel-liking and flourishing in goodnesse? Sometimes the Lord abhorred a female out of that flecke which had a male.Mal. 1.14. But now the males of your flocke are all gone, the Lord hath left you, as a female hope of recovering the honour of a collapsed family. A great honour: for to say the truth, who hath beheld so deep an eclipse of such as have beene neare you, as your eyes have done? ew that J know in our Country, for their estate, had fairer meanes, nor suffered a greater decay. Yet God hath ingrafted your Honour into another stocke, and therein turned the streame of former prosperity upon your selfe a∣gaine, the onely remnant of that family: you have seene upon how weake shoulders the faire necke of all outward welfare stands, of which the Lord may speake with more reason, then that bloudy Em∣perour to his wife [O pulcra cervix, sed cum ego voluero,Nero ex Suet. ab∣scindetur] Oh faire necke, but when I please it shall be cut off: And why doe you survive such as are gone, save to be an instrument of happinesse to your posterity, that from that holy oile of the Spirit
 which runs downe your head, the skirts of your cloathing might bee wetted, and your hopefull off-spring consecrated to God.
The great respect which your Grandfather, Father and Mother of worthy memory shewed to that reverend servant of Christ, my Predecessor; the remembrance also of your first childhood and e∣ducation, being so neare to my dwelling: Your Honors frequent sa∣lutes, and invitations by sundry who have travelled this way that I would visit you: But, above all, that blessed report of your Grace, which (as the Panthars breath to all the beasts of the Forrest) hath made your name sweet and savoury in the Church of God; all these have emboldned me by so good an occasion as this is (ere I leave the world) to soder up my errors, and incivilities, by prefixing your name to this my Dedication.
Plin. Nat. hist. Aelian.There is a creature which the Historians call , one dayes life, dead as soone as bred. Well may many bookes claime this name now a dayes, whose breeding costs longer time then their life amounts to: For why? Each humor fancies what hee likes, some books of Poetry, some of story and delight, which humors while they last, bookes sorting with them are catcht up, but when they are downe, bookes lie by. Novelty takes up, and laies downe as shee pleaseth. Books of practice above all other find least entertainment. From all such, my appeale is to your protection under God. It hath pleased him to exercise my pen in sundry kindes of Treatises, which have not escaped the hands of the better and more solid sort of rea∣ders, and that with some fruit. I have now thought fit to make the like triall in publishing some of those my last Lectures which I prea∣ched at my last farewell to publicke. The perusall whereof, with your loving acceptance of them, I leave to your Christian diligence, and Gods blessing: Not doubting (Right Honourable) but that God having made you a reall patterne of those things which here I write, he will also make you a willing Protector of the Book it selfe: and no small encouragement to many, both to peruse and practise what they reade: if God shall make them as fruitfull in the read∣ing, as they were in the preaching, I shall have double cause of re∣joycing. In which hope I humbly take my leave, remaining,

From my Study We∣thersf. this 16. of May. 1641.
