



My Lord:
HIs EXCELLENCY the Lord Jesus hath sent out his Summons to other Nations also, and the Blade of that Sword (whose handle is held in England) will reach to the very Gates of Rome ore long, but by what Pag. 131. There is a Prediction which sayes, a C. shal sound within the wals of Rome. Instruments we know not, yet for what end we know, Psal. 72. 2. 4. 13. viz. to breake in peeces the oppressor, and to deliver the poore and needy, yea to spoile the weak-hearted, and be more excellent then the (migh∣tiest) mountains of prey, Psal. 76. 4. 5. this shall goe on till all the earth be filled with his glory. Now my Lord, hitherto he hath honoured you in his War, let him also doe so in his Work which the War hath made way for, viz. in throwing down of Tyranny the Oppression, which as you have begun to doe, so this Treatise hath unavoydable reference to your Selfe, to carry on; as our Conquerour upon Christs and the Common-wealths account, and not upon your owne. Therefore are the eyes of thousands upon you, to see what you will doe for their safety and freedome, according to the just Rights and Liberties of the People of this Nation, which they had before the Norman Tyranny and Conquest; for it is far better for us (my Lord) now to hang us, then not to help us against these unsufferable Lawes and Lawyers, which rob us of Justice

and righteousnesse, as it is obvious in the Treatise; whiles not one honest man in England dares justifie them, the mouthes of all are open against them, which like doores without Lock or Key can scarce be shut close againe till there be an alteration. Je∣thro's counsell to Moses (my Lord) concernes you, in Exod. 18, 19. Hearken and I will give thee counsell, and God shall bee with thee, be thou for the People to God-ward, that thou mayst bring their causes to God, &c. we beseech you hearken to the inexorable (yea inexuperable) cryes and calls of the Commu∣nalty for godly Lawes; and for justice upon the usurping proudMirror of Just. p 230. & p. 60. Lawyers, for their lying, perjury, and treachery (which is ac∣cording to the Statute, and good Lawes punishable.) It is without malice to a man of them, and meerly out of Conscience to ingage against sin, and enemies to Christ and this Common-wealth, that I must make such a Character of them as I doe; it may be I speake spiritfully (yet not spightfully) though oppression makes a wise man mad, (sayes Salomon) Eccles. 7. 7. and indeed if it be madnesse to ingage against Sinne, I will be so, for Si na∣tura negat, facit indignatio versum; but here's no need of Passion, seeing Piety preaches, yea the light of Nature presses these lines against that sinfull Society, yea the  calls for it. The Aegyptian Hieroglyphick for Legislative Po∣wer was oculus in sceptro, but ours had need to be oculus in ense, the eye in the conquering Sword of the people; I meane, first☞ a full eye to looke , backward and forward, with an open Prospect into the Peoples Liberties and advantages for their safety and freedome; and then an able quick eye to deliver the People from oppressors, and to defend them in their owne ights. And indeed (my Lord) we would have no Law, Nisi lex oculata, but that Law which sees how, and what, and to whom to administer in aequilibrio, in justice, whilst many of our Lawes are the lawes of this Common-wealth: for as Plutarch sayes, Turpe praeceptum non est lex, sed in quitas. The Chineses would perswade us, that they only see with two eyes, and other Nations but with one. O that we could convince our Neighbour Nations now by our Lawes and Government, that we see with both eyes, for our selves and friends too (if need be!) wherefore let us fall to their , let us worke, and

watch for Christs Monarchy, which is now upon the borders! and be sure to keep in the Kings (Christs) Road, for that is sa∣fest. Israels Omen of going on against his enemies was, 1 Chron. 14. 15. the voyce in the top of the trees; and this is ours also, viz. the voyce of God as in Primitive times, and in the top-ages of the Church; for his Spirit is mighty, and growes great every day: and when the enemy shall be like a Floud, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against them, Isa. 59. 19. and why? see Isa. 31. 3. the Lord Gods greatest worke in these dayes is Spirit∣worke, and none will be found fit to be imployed in it, but such as are spirited for it, by the Holy Spirit; for then our Warres wil be holy Warres, our Lawes holy Lawes, our Parliaments holy Parliaments, &c. and not before. Wherefore my Lord, for Christs sake minde, and finde out what your worke is! you have not done all yet, for now you have won us, you must wall us with the good and wholsome Lawes and Liberties of the People, as we were before the Norman invasion, or rather as Israel of old, Deut. 6. 1. or else Gog will arise, who sayes in his presumption, I will goe to the Land of unwalled Villages, I will goe to them that are at rest. It is dangerous indeed (now) to sit still, seeing the Wheele full of eyes is in his swiftest motions, and may (without heed) run upon us and ruine us. The Devils designe is to make the most able and eminent Instruments uselesse by idlenesse, when the grea∣test worke is to doe, as one sayes of the Crab, that seeing theRobinson, o Gen. 49. Oyster gape, he throwes in a little stone which hinders it from shutting againe; so am I (and hundreds beside) suspicious, least Sathan should deale with them that now sit still, and gape about (as if they had nothing to do) by throwing them some temptations or other, to stay them here behinde, in purchases, preserments, or pleasures, and make them loose their work and opportunity. O it is sad! if it be so; for the best Birds, dum morantur in nidis, doe moult and loose feathers. But (my Lord) hark! the Trumpet sounds! and Christ is coming in great glory! arise, and to your worke!—It is not notions of Philosophy, nor Principles of Po∣licy which will give us to see this; for in Philosophy what is so dark as light? and the Sun which one would thinke most evi∣dent to be seen, is hardest to be looked on; and so is this glorious approach of Christ, and his Fifth Monarchy. But Eagles see bet∣ter

then Owles. The Lord Jehovah (then) make you Eagle∣eyed, and Eagle-winged in this worke which you have to doe for Christ, and this Common-weale. Cicero expected extraordi∣nary knowledge and practise from his Son, because of his con∣versing and living with Cratippus; no lesse doe wise men looke for from you (my Lord) for that you are so conversant with the Occurrences of these times and seasons, and that so eminently too, and live (as we hope) so much with Christ, and for Christ: yet we know a man may have good cards, but loose the game by playing ill. But (my Lord) I leave you to that Spirit which gave Daniel skill, Dan. 9. 22. and Ioshua courage; the same wisdome that tels us, He that understands is of an excellent spirit; tels us also, That the Prince who wants understanding, (i. e.) in the things of God, according to the season of his government) is also a great oppressor. Wherefore my Lord, I beseech you, contemne not the Clock that tels you how the time passes; a meane Herauld may goe on great errands, and on this errand he is contented to be mean & contemptible, who is sent to you, and prays unfainedly for you, that you may never be set aside, but be of singular use (yet) in this Generation, and then, and not till then, rest from all your labours, as David did. Acts 13. 36. The Sword of the Lord and of Gideon together, gets the loud suffrage of your suffering,
From my Study the 8th. Month, 20th. day, Tho. Apostles.

