



MADAM,
YOUR LADYSHIP has a very just claim to this DEDICATION; and under your Patronage this BOOK can with good assu∣rance venture abroad: You, more than any other, have enquired of me concerning the following Trea∣tise, and more frequently urged me to Print it. You were pleased to Honour me, during my long Affliction, with your kind Visits; and though I was greatly afflicted, and in degrees beyond what are
very common to Men, yet you did not a little revive me by your Compassionate and Gentle words, and by the Charitable hopes that you had of my deliverance, though you have often heard me say, That I should never be delivered. I thought that I should never have any more ease in my pained Body, nor ever any more hope or quiet in my troubled Soul: But that God who is Omnipotent, and who heard your Prayers, and the Prayers of many others in my behalf, hath wrought a double Salvation for me. He who is the Lord of Nature, has healed my Body; and He who is the Father of Mercies, and the God of all Grace, has given rest to my weary Soul. None have any Cause to presume, when they consider what miseries I felt for a long time, and how I was overwhelmed with the deepest sorrows, for many doleful
Months together; neither have any cause to despair, they cannot be more low, more near to Death and Hell than I thought my self to be, and yet I live, and am not without some refreshing hope of God's accep∣tance, and can say with the Prophet, Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy: And with him is plenteous redemption.
Your LADYSHIP has never, indeed, been afflicted with that Di∣stemper and those Anxieties of Soul whereof I treat in the following Book, and I heartily pray you ne∣ver may: For MELANCHOLLY is the worst of all Distempers; and those sinking and guilty Fears which it brings along with it, are inexpres∣sibly dreadful. But I know that you have been in manifold Afflictions, and you have had several very great Losses: You lost some years ago a Father, who was, indeed, in all re∣spects,
for his Holiness, his Even-temper, and his Publick and Chari∣table Spirit, worthy to be loved; and I am sure you greatly loved him, as he you, to the very last. You lost a Mother, whom all that knew her, greatly valued for the skill and experience that she had in matters of Religion, and especially for her admirable acquaintance with the Holy Scriptures; and tho in the lat∣ter part of her Life, she saw not the Light of this World, yet her Soul was recreated with a Light Spiritual and Divine; and the loss of her sight was abundantly recompenced to her, by the clearer views which she had of God, and of a Life to come. And not to mention other Losses, you have lost several Children, in whom there was all the sweetness of youth, all that good temper, and those blooming appearances of hopefulness which could make such
little Plants desirable; but you have born even so great a Loss with a submissive and a Christian Pa∣tience, as knowing that you have not so much cause to mourn for those that are gone, as to rejoyce in those that are left; and who are a very great Comfort to you; and may they long be so.
As I have had for some time here∣tofore the Honour to sojourn in your Family, I always observed in you that Meekness and Good Tem∣per, that Affability and Condescen∣tion to your Inferiors, which made your Conversation very exempla∣ry, and made it easie and pleasant for any persons to be in your House. If all the Ladies and Women in the World that are called Good, were of a Temper so happy as your La∣dyship's, What a quiet and peace∣able World should we then have! The mutual Love in which Sir
THOMAS and You live, renders, indeed, the Married state very ex∣cellent and Honourable.
I thought, when I came to de∣scribe my inward Troubles, I should have described them much more largely; but I durst not re∣view them too particularly, lest the very thoughts of them, should a∣gain, in some measure, overwhelm me: And, indeed, Inward Terrors, are things that may be sadly felt; but they cannot be fully express'd. To have the sense of Tormenting, Racking Pain, the immediate prospected of Death, and together with this, an appre∣hension of God's Displeasure, and the fear of being cast out of his Glorious Presence for ever, this was a part of my Case; And who can describe that Anguish and Tribula∣tion, which such apprehensions cause in a desolate and a mourning Soul! I have in the following Trea∣tise
said as much as will, I suppose, be believed by those who have ne∣ver been in such a woful state; and if I had said more, it might perhaps sink some poor souls, who are al∣ready low enough; and if I cannot help them, which I design, yet I will be sure, as far as in me lies, not to make them worse.
MADAM, I Could say a great many excellent things of your LA∣DYS , and which, in the opini∣on o all that have the happiness to be acquainted with you, would be no flattery; but I know your Vir∣tues are Illustrious, and evident e∣nough of themselves, without my endeavouring to place them in a more open Light. Excuse, I entreat your, the boldness of this DEDICA∣TION, in which, to speak sincerely, I have a great deal of selfishness; for I question not, but by the means of your Name, this BOOK will be
more publick, and so be more ser∣viceable to people under long and sore afflictions, whereof this misera∣ble World is very full. I wish you a continuance of the Blessings of Hea∣ven, with those of this Earth, which you have in great abundance; And that the Candle of the Lord may con∣stantly shine on your Taberna, on Sir Thomas, your Self, and all your Chil∣dren; and I desire you to be assured, That there is none, that mo hear∣tily! prays for your present and Eter∣nal welfare, than
London, Sept. 8. 1691.
Honoured MADAM, 
