



Right Worshipfull:
IT pleasing GOD in a gracious dispensation of mercy to lay his hand of visitation upon me, so as I have been disenabled to that publike function of the Ministery, to which I am set apart: I boldly adventured on this more publick course, willing to give some testimony of my desire to do my GOD the best service I was able, though with the hazard of mine own repute, being never such as I fear to be a lo∣ser. May it please my good GOD to accept of these my weak endevours, whose glory, and his Churches good be ever my ayme: and may you daigne them a gracious pa∣tronage, for the unweighed censures of the many, I passe not much. Mine own sicknesse first pitched me on this sub∣ject, and while I considered your body so enfeebled through infirmities, and your many years, the two most certain fore-runners of approching death: it emboldned mee to tender this Dedication; hoping you would willingly en∣tertain such a wish, and make it yours. The ship that draws water but at one leak may be repayred, but when it breaks
in on all sides, it threatens speedy wrack: when the cra∣zed, aged body is become
 Lucian. a living sepulchre, it portends the grave is neer. We are at best but of
. Plut. ad Apoll. a days continu∣ance: and you by the blessing of GOD have lived to the evening of age, to the Sun-set of mans life, it is now high time to think on sleep, and making your bed in the dust. I am confident, diviner thoughts have long since deaded your affections unto the world. Length of days,
. Pind. Olym. Od. 1. the cleèrest witnesses of wisdom have given you experience of the Wisemans conclusion, Vanity of vanities: and you who in your yonger years have had a care to live well, now make it your chiefe to dye so. It is not the thought of your end will draw it neerer, nor the meditation of death will one minute shorten your life: if so who might not feare a publick odium, that should move you to such a thought? For You,
Deus amorem viri quem dili∣git in animos hominum dig∣nanter resudit, Malm. de reb. gest. Aug. lib. 4. who by the goodnesse of GOD have lived so generally beloved, cannot dye but much lamented, though there be neyther solemne Funerall to rayse the pomp, nor mourning women,
Horat. de art. Poet. ut quae conductae plorent in funere: Your endeared friends, the poor whose wants have been by You relieved, and widows will make lamentation. In that desires cannot prolong your days on earth, here shall be my Amen. When the set period of your life is come, may you lye down in comfort, rest in peace, arise to glory, be happy to eternity. So prays

