



SIR,
I was willing to take this Opportunity of an Address, that I might make my grateful Acknowledgments for the obliging Favours I have received from you. While you were in a private Capacity you were assistant to your Friends and Relatives, and have not forgot them, since you were in a public Concern, wherein you have been so ser∣viceable to the Kingdom, that if I have not been mis-informed, you have been e∣steemed, and honoured by several Prin∣ces,
and in a particular manner by our gracious King and Queen: And possi∣bly few Persons have served the Pub∣lic so long with so little Advantage to their own private Interest as you have done; which demonstrates the Great∣ness of your Spirit, and a generous Contempt of the World. I have had the Happiness of an intimate Conversa∣tion with you, and been oft with Satis∣faction entertain'd by you with Excel∣lent Discourses, That I can without a flattering Complement, say, I have thought you a great Master of Reason. And when you have been in an hurry of Affairs, and under the fatigue of busi∣ness upon others Account more than your own, you have appeared so calm and serene, that there hath no Wrinkle been seen in your Brow, nor Passion in your Breast, to ruffle and discompose you. You have not had the least Emo∣tion of Mind, but have been as sedate,
and tranquill (like the pure Aether) as those that have had no Concern of their own, or others upon them. And this last Character makes you as Great a Master of Empire, as the most victo∣rious Conqueror, if we may believe one of the most excellent Poets.
Latiùs regnes avidum domando Spiritum,
Horat. Carm. Lib. 2. Ode 2. quam si Libyam remotis Gadibus jungas, & uterque Poenus Serviat Uni.
Which the wisest of Monarchs properly translates, when he saith,
Prov. xvi. 32. He that is slow to Anger, is better than the Mighty; and he that ruleth his Spirit, than he that taketh a City. But besides the Obligation of Gratitude, I have another Reason why I presume on this Dedication, because you have a pier∣cing Judgment, and can well judge of a rational Consequence from Holy Scri∣pture,
or a true Deduction from Rea∣son; and seeing I have from these two Topicks undertaken a Defence of one of the main Doctrines of the Church of England (whose Principles I have heard you heartily espouse, and rationally maintain) I submit it to your Censure, which tho' it may deserve, yet I dread not; because your natural Goodness will, I doubt not, mix so much Candour therewith, that it will instruct, rather than affright; and I had much rather have a Censure with a Reason, than an Approbation without it, because the one may make a Man wise, when the other may be a Temptation to Pride. But I will not trouble you long, because the Minutes of Public Persons are not to be disturbed. Nor shall I need, be∣cause I am not so well able (as others to whom I reserv that Province) to give a true Character of your Worth: Nor am I willing if I were able, because I
have known you long endued with such a stock of the Vertues of Humility and Modesty, you had rather do well than hear of it; and are much better pleased in the Reflections of your Mind, than with the Eulogies of the best Men. And I am very confident you never did a Ser∣vice for the Public, or a Kindness for a Friend, but it was as great a Satis∣faction to your self, as it was to them who received the Benefit, and reap'd the Advantage. Great Spirits that are endued with strength of Reason, and have obtained a Conquest over unruly Passions, are Persons fit for the Me∣nage of Public Employments: And that you have a large proportion of these Qualifications, is not only my Judgment, (which possibly may not be valuable) but the Observation of those that have known how faithfully you have trans∣acted a Trust for the Publick: And therefore by giving this Account, I
cannot in the least be suspected guilty of Flattery. Men that are qualified for public Service may be said in a true sense to answer the Ends, promote the Conduct, and carry on the Designs of a wise Providence in his Administra∣tion of, and Government over, the World. And such Persons who by their Pru∣dence (with the Man after Gods own heart) serve their Generation,
Acts xiii. 22, 36. shall inhabit more Glorious Mansions in the Regions of Bliss above, shall receive greater Compensations in the Apartments of Glory. I will con∣clude with the same Option the Poet puts up for his great Mecaenas, Cae∣sar Augustus.
Serus in Coelum redeas,
Horat. Carm. Lib. 1. Ode 2. diuque Laetus intersis Populo.

Which St. Paul may English, when he saith,
Phil. 1.23.24. Though he had a de∣sire to depart, and to be with Christ; yet nevertheless to abide in the Flesh, i. e. to continue longer in the World, was more needful for the Public.
And he that shall reflect upon your indefatigable Pains for the Ser∣vice of others may without Osten∣tation believe that what St. Paul said as a Minister of the Church, you may say as a Minister of the State; That you will gladly spend,
2 Cor. xii. 15. and be spent for the Publick.
SIR,
That after many years expended in the Publick Service for the Good of the Kingdom, you may leave behind you the Honourable Name of a Pa∣triot
of your Country; And that the ,
Phil. III. 14. the Prize, the Crown of Glory that hangs at the end of your Race may be more Luminous, and Bright, have a greater Refulgency and Splendor, is, and shall be the sincere Prayer of,
Greatly Honoured Sir,

