



Worthy Sir,
I Have here presumed to pre∣sent
you with a strange and
bloody Tragedy of Here∣ticks
and Enthusiasts, writ∣ten
in Latine by a most ele∣gant
pen, by one who hath concealed
his name, as I conceive out of this rea∣son,
that, living near the times and places
of this representation, it might have pro∣ved
dangerous to him to have published
it. Here you have Religion brought up∣on
the stage in very strange disguises, nay
they make her act parts the most contrary
to her nature, imbruing her white and
innocent hands in blood, and Massacres.
But as she hath met with Wolves to de∣stroy
and tear in pieces, so hath she also
met with Shepheards to heal and protect,
and among those the most laborious

Authour of  ANZEBEIA hath not bin
the least considerable. His severe and
most indefatigable labours in most parts
of Learning, are consummated in this
piece of Religion, wherein like an expe∣rienced
Anatomist, he hath left no vein
un-cut up. To fall into excessive com∣mendations
of him, were to commit a
moral absurdity, by praising one whom
the general Trumpet of Fame hath
blaz'd abroad for so great an advancer of
Vertue and Learning; But to trouble
you with them, were yet to be so much
the more importunate, whose conversa∣tion
with him was so great, that whatso∣ever
I may say of him, I shall not ac∣quaint
you with so much as your self
know. Nor did the influence of your
Patronage raise and animate only him,
but there are so many other monuments
of your great encouragements to learn∣ing,
that it will be thought modesty in
me not to mention all. But your excessive
Benefactorship to the Library of S. Iohns
Colledge at Cambridge (whereof I have
sometimes had the honour to be an
unworthy member) I cannot passe over,
as a thing, which will stand upon the file
of memory, as long as learning shall find
professors or children. And that which

increases the glory of your munificence,
is, that that Library may hoast that it is
furnished with the works of its owne
sonnes, which, being the greatest act of
retribution and gratitude that may be,
must be accordingly acknowledged by
all that shall come after. But that which
hath the most engaged and satisfied
the English world, is, that your endea∣vours
have displayed themselves in their
clearest light, in that one thing that is ne∣cessary,
that is to say, Religion, not only by
being a constant assertor of her purity here
in England, but in that, after more then
Ulyssean Travels throughout most parts
of Europe, you have returned to your
former enjoyments of that chast Penelo∣pe,
when others either out of weaknesse
or surprise, are ensnared and besotted
with the Tenets of other Countries,
whereby they are both ingrateful and in∣jurious
to their own, by preferring the
prudence and policy of another before
hers. Religion certainly, if well impro∣ved,
is the Talent, that felicifies the im∣prover,
if not, condemnes him. It is
that universal Patrimony, which entitles
us to be the sonnes of God, and by which
we are adopted into the assured hope of
eternal happinesse. It is the Loadstone

wherewith when our soules are once
touched, they are directed to the right
pole of the eternally beatifical vision;
and without which, we must infallibly
expect to split against the rocks and
shelves of perdition. It is the consumma∣tion
of heavens indulgence to Mankind,
that which doth familiarize us, and
makes good our Interest in the great be∣ing
and cause of all things. It is the per∣fection
of nature, since that whatsoever
we know of the divinity by her comes
only by the assistance and mediation of
our sences, but the other furnishes us with
a more evident assurance, (and that, in
things, which can be neither seen, heard,
nor conceived,) by the more particular
providence of Grace and Faith, whereby
he is pleased to bow down the heavens, and
descend unto a familiar conversation
with our very spirits.
But that which ought further to en∣dear
all men to Religion, is, that she on∣ly
next to God may pretend Ubiquity, as
being a thing written in such indelible
characters in the hearts of all men, that
even the most barbarous nations, and
the greatest strangers to civility and po∣licy
have acknowledged some divine
worship, though their pravity or want

of instruction, may have blinded them
from the true, but yet that eclipse of
the true God hath not been total, inso∣much,
as they have still retained a sense
and veneration of Religion, so that to the
best of their imaginations, they have
created something like God to them∣selves.
To make this yet more evident,
we are to note, that most people, though
they had not so clear apprehensions of
the immortality of the soul, as we have;
yet were they not only perswaded of the
impossibility of its annihilation, but
have also acknowledged rewards and
punishments to be expected after this
life.
To ascend yet a little higher; the di∣vinity
and preheminence of Religion is
demonstrated, in that it exerciseth that
Empire and Soveraignty over the mind
of man, that no blandishments of the
flesh, no temptations, no torments have
been able to dispossesse it. It hath tri∣umph'd
in the midst of its persecutions,
and by her sufferings hath conquered her
persecutors. Her pleasing Ravishments
can stifle for a time all sence of humani∣ty,
elude flames, and racks, and so arm the
delicacy and tendernesse of virgin-puri∣ty,
as to overcome the hardiest Tyrants.

It is she that raises our soules to a holy
boldnesse and intimacy in our addresses
to heaven, being indeed rapt into the
heavens of divine contemplation, by
her extasies and illuminations. It was
her inspiring communication, that ele∣vated
your pious soul, when you descri∣bed
the divine perfections of the incom∣parable
THEOPHILA. These
things can she do and greater, when
there is but one grain of true Faith; but
when she is defiled and adulterated with
humane ceremonies and inventions, she
is deformed, and looses all her grace and
beauty. And among these hath she met
with two most importunate pretenders,
Atheisme and Superstition; the one strips
her stark naked, the other meretriciously
prostitutes her in the disguises of humane
Inventions. And that she hath been thus
evill entreated, in all places and times,
this book gives but too great testimony,
whether you look on the  or this
small appendix, treating for the most, of
what happened in High and Low Ger∣many.
I would not draw any excuse for
our own gyrations of Religion here,
from their madnesse; but rather condem
them as things that would have out-vy'd
the extravagance of the former. But to

draw any argument against Religion
from either were impious; for if we did,
we must in consequence, deny all, both
particular and universal providence of Al∣mighty
God; we must deny the Scriptures,
the heavenly Legacy of eternal salvation;
we must deny Heaven, Hell, Eternity, nay
take away the Cement of all humane soci∣ety,
and expect to see the order and beauty
of the universe hurried into darknesse and
confusion, since it ought not to out-last
man, for whom it was created. Nay▪
but let us rather professe humanity, and
make this use of the failings and extrava∣gance
of others in matters of Religion;
To humble our selves to a relyance on
that immense Being, who hath thought
fit to plant Religion in the heart of man,
to direct him in his voyage to eternal
happinesse, wherein that every man
might take the right way, is the earnest
prayer of
Worthy SIR,

