



Right Honourable,
SHould I have least hope of merit from your Honour by this my Dedica∣tion, Having never had the happiness to appear in your Honours presence, I should render my self both weak and presumptuous; but my comfort is, I write to a Person of Honour, Learning and Parts, who
is of that Magnanimity, that he will not despise the smallest gift or the meaness of the Giver, or the first for the unworthiness of the last; Artaxerxes King of Persia disdained not the water a poor man, as he saw him pass by, brought from a River in his hand and gave him, but received it with a smiling countenance, not measuring the grace of the Gift according to the value of the Pre∣sent, but according to the good Will and intent of the Giver, accounting it no less an act of Magnanimity and Kingly bounty to take small Presents in good part, then to give greater. And truly, though this my mite may seem small, proceeding from so mean a hand as my own: Yet let me say thus much of this Sci∣ence, which is the chief of these we call Liberal, together with ASTRONOMY, PHYSICKS, and NATVRAL PHILOSOPHY which make up all but one intire Science, and of themselves are but parts thereof,And not only Aristotle, but also all other Ancient and Authentick Writers, as doth more appear in the first Book of this Volume. as witnesseth Aristotle Lib. 2. Cap. 2. Phis. as also further in his Metaphis. 6. and 12. and 1. Pol. Cap. 7. and in his 2. De Coelo, Text 17. and Lib. De Pro∣prietat. element. & lib. de Mundo, cap. 9. and in his 4. De Generatione Animimalium Cap. 10. using in all his Writings indifferently the Name of ASTROLOGER and ASTRONOMER, and ASTROLOGER and PHILOSOPHER for one and the same; for the Contemplaters of Nature in and by this Sci∣ence, are of all Philosophers the chiefest; and this Antiquity maketh plain unto us, as testifieth the most Ancientest Historiographers, who Record that the Priests and Kings amongst the EGYPTIANS, the CHALDEANS among the BABYLONIANS, the GYMNOSOPHYSTS among the INDIANS, the MAGICIANS among the PERSIANS, the chief PHILOSOPHERS of GREECE and ITALY, and the DRUIDES of FRANCE were all ASTROLOGERS; and esteemed by these Nations as the wisest men. And there∣fore
fore I say, as it is a part of the chiefest of the Liberal Sciences, so hath it been still in high esteem amongst the Nobler and Graver sort of People, and the more refined Souls in all Ages, especially amongst the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Assyrians, Lacedemonians, Sydonians, Indians, Persians, Greeks and Arabians; for amongst the Egyptians, it was not Lawfull for any man to take the Function of Priest-hood on him, except he were an ASTROLOGER; neither could any be chosen King, except he were of the Colledge of the Priests: And Rodiginus reporteth, that for the prevention of Treason, the Nativities of all Infants born therein was brought to the King to be judged on; and Dion recordeth the same to be practised by the Emperour Tyberius; and in the Pro∣phesie of Daniel, we may see that the Monarchs of Ba∣bylon attempted nothing of importance without first as∣king Councel of the Caldeans; And the Kings of Lace∣demonia suffered none to sit in their Councels, but who were Astrologers; And amongst the Persians none was admitted to the Crown, but who were excellently skil∣led in ASTROLOGY.
Wherefore (my LORD) since this is an ART that hath ever been esteemed amongst the Nobler, Wiser, Greater, Ingeniouser and the most refined Spi∣rits of the World from Age to Age, and chiefly Stu∣died, Maintained, and Upheld by them, I humbly presumed to Dedicate this Introductory Part unto your Honour, since all these Properties are Natu∣rally Inherent in your Noble Self; for tue Nobi∣lity is the fittest Patron for such Noble SCIENCES, neither are they fit to be offered to any but who are really such, it surpassing the reach of the or∣dinary capacity of the World; so that (my LORD) my hope is, that if not for the Wel-wishes and Honour the Presenter thereof beareth to your Lord∣ship, nor the Antiquity and Excellency of the
Thing presented; yet your Honour will accept thereof out of the Munificence of your own In∣nate Magnanimity, it being sufficient honour for me to acknowledge my self
MY LORD, 
