



Worthy Sir,
I Have here presumed to pre∣sent you with a strange and bloody Tragedy of Here∣ticks and Enthusiasts, writ∣ten in Latine by a most ele∣gant pen, by one who hath concealed his name, as I conceive out of this rea∣son, that, living near the times and pla∣ces of this representation, it might have proved dangerous to him to have publi∣shed it. Here you have Religion brought upon the stage in very strange disguises, nay they make her act parts the most cō∣trary to her nature, imbruing her white & innocent hands in blood, & Massacres. But as she hath met with Wolves to de∣stroy and tear in pieces, so hath she also met with Shepheards to heal and protect, and among those the most laborious

Author of  ANEBEIA hath not bin the least considerable. His severe and most indefatigable labours in most parts of Learning, are consummated in this piece of Religion, wherein like an expe∣rienced Anatomist, he hath left no vein un-cut up. To fall into excessive com∣mendations of him, were to commit a moral absurdity, by praising one whom the general Trumpet of Fame hath blaz'd abroad for so great an advancer of Virtue and Learning; But to trouble you with them, were yet to be so much the more importunate, whose conversa∣tion with him was so great, that whatso∣ever I may say of him, I shall not ac∣quaint you with so much as your self know. Nor did the influence of your Patronage raise and animate onely him, but there are so many other monuments of your great encouragements to learn∣ing, that it will be thought modesty in me not to mention all. But your excessive Benefactorship to the Library of S. Johns Colledge at Cambridge (whereof I have sometimes had the honour to be an unworthy member) I cannot passe over, as a thing, which will stand upon the file of memory, as long as learning shall find professors or Children. And that which

increases the glory of your munisicence, is, that that Library may boast that it is furnished with the works of its owne sonnes, which, being the greatest act of retribution and gratitude that may be, must be accordingly acknowledged by all that shall come after. But that which hath the most engaged and satisfied the English world, is, that your endea∣vours have displayed themselves in their clearest light, in that one thing that is ne∣cessary, that is to say, Religion, not only by being a constant assertor of her purity here in England, but in that, after more then Ulyssean Travels throughout most parts of Europe, you have returned to your former enjoyments of that chast Penelo∣pe, when others either out of weaknesse or surprise, are ensnared and besotted with the Tenets of other Countries, whereby they are both ingrateful and in∣jurious to their own, by preferring the prudence and policy of another before hers. Religion certainly, if well impro∣ved, is the Talent, that felicifies the im∣prover, if not, coademnes him. It is that universal Patrimony, which entitles us to be the sonnes of God, and by which we are adopted into the assured hope of eternall hapinesse. It is the Loadctone

wherewith when our souls are once touched, they are directed to the right pole of the eternally beatificall vision; and without which, wee must infallibly expect to split against the rocks and shelves of perdition. It is the consumma∣tion of heavens indulgence to Mankind, that which doth familiarize us, and makes good our Interest in the great be∣ing and cause of all things. It is the per∣fection of nature, since that whatsoever wee know of the divinity by her comes onely by the assistance and mediation of our sences, but the other furnishes us with a more evident assurance, (and that, in things, which can bee neither seen, heard nor conceived), by the more particular providence of Grace and Faith, whereby hee is pleased to how down the heavens, and descend unto a familiar conversati∣on with our very spirits.
But that which ought further to en∣dear all men to Religion, is, that she on∣ly next to God may pretend Ubiquity, as being a thing written in such indelible characters in the hearts of all men, that even the most barbarous nations, and the greatest strangers to civility and po∣licy have acknowledged some divine worship, though their pravity or want

of instruction, may have blinded them from the true, but yet that eclipse of the true God hath not been total, inso∣much, as they have still retained a sense and veneration of Religion, so that to the best of their imaginations, they have created something like God to them∣selves. To make this yet more evident, we are to note, that most people, though they had not so clear apprehensions of the immortality of the soul, as we have; yet were they not only perswaded of the impossibility of its annihilation, but have also acknowledged rewards and punishments to be expected after this life.
To ascend yet a little higher; the di∣vinity and preheminence of Religion is demonstrated, in that it exerciseth that Empire and Soveraignty over the mind of man, that no blandishments of the flesh, no temptations, no torments have been able to dispossesse it. It hath tri∣umph'd in the midst of its persecutions; and by her sufferings hath conquered her persecutors. Her pleasing Ravishments can stifle for a time all sence of humani∣ty, elude flames, and racks, and so arm the delicacie and tenderness of virgin puri∣ty, as to overcome the hardiest Tyrants.

It is she that raises our soules to a holy boldnesse and intimacy in our addresses to heaven, being indeed rapt into the heavens of divine contemplation, by her extasies and illuminations. It was her inspiring communication, that ele∣vated your pious soul, when you descri∣bed the divine perfections of the incom∣parable THEOPHILA. These things can she do and greater, when there is but one grain of true Faith; but when she is defiled and adulterated with humane ceremonies and inventions, she is deformed, and looses all her grace and beauty. And among these hath she met with two most importunate pretenders, Atheisme and Superstition; the one strips her stark naked, the other meritriciously prostitutes her in the disguises of humane Inventions. And that she hath been thus evill entreated, in all places and times, this book gives but too great testimony, whether you look on the  or this small appendix, treating for the most, of what happened in High and Low Ger∣many. I would not draw any excuse for our own gyrations of Religion here, from their madnesse; but rather condemn them as things that would have out-vy'd the extravagance of the former. But to

draw any argument against Religion from either were impious; for if we did, we must in consequence, deny all, both particular and universal providence of Al∣mighty God; we must deny the Scriptures, the heavenly Legacy of eternal salvation; wee must deny Heaven, Hell, Eternity, nay take away the Cement of all humane soci∣ety, and expect to see the order and beauty of the universe hurried into darkness and confusion, since it ought not to out-last man, for whom it was created. Nay; but let us rather professe humanity, and make this use of the failings and extrava∣gance of others in matters of Religion; To humble our selves to a relyance on that immense Being, who hath thought fit to plant Religion in the heart of man, to direct him in his voyage to eternall happinesse, wherein that every man might take the right way, is the earnest prayer of
Worthy SIR,

