




May it please your Majesty,
SƲch are the froward perverse Hu∣mours and Spirits of most Men with whom we Convers and live in these apo∣statizeing
times, and last dayes describ∣ed by theAnd in 2 Pet. 2.10, 12, 13. Apostles 2 Tim. 3.4, 5. That truth it self may not be spoken without passing under the severest cen∣sures their Depraved Phansies and Ima∣ginations can suggest unto them. Yet, having that within me which is a con∣tinuall Feast, And which is sufficiently able to Arm and Defend me from the sharpest Arrow their malicious Tongues can shoot and sputter against me, I shall not forbear to testifie my joy, and congra∣tulate your Majesty's most miraculous Restauration by this my Dedication; not∣withstanding thereby I shall only discover a will to desire, having no skill to deserve the least Countenance from your Majesty. And having no better a Praesent at pre∣sant, nor other way to manifest that Loy∣alty which hath for many years kept me under a Cloud, I thought better bestow a mite, thē nothing at all: not that I presume I can add in the least to your Majesty's Vertues, or merit by all that I can, do or
have done or said, I am sufficently sensi∣ble that when I have done and suffered to the utmost, it is but my Duty, and if your Majesty shall so far Condescend as to take the smallest Cognisance thereof, I must ever brag and boast of superlative favour and greatest honour that so mean a shrub and unworthy a subject as my self can possibly be capable of. And for such as weigh me in the false Ballance of their own Judgements to think other thē my words Declare; or take me to swim down the stream of Flattery and Time-servingnesse with the major part of the World (which my Soul ever abhorred) that for secular ends and their own ad∣vantage, turn as the Weather-Cook upon a Steeple; wrong themselves more then me, who to my familiar acquaintance was ever known to be firm and true, to that of Prov. 24.21. Manger all the Temptati∣ons which years of Calamities could force upon me; Witnesse my last Dedi∣cations to my Quadripartite, Intituled,
Astrologie Restored, Published Anno 1653. At which time every one did what seemed good in his own eyes, there being no King in England; Though at that same time there arose such a thing as the Phrantick people and the giddy part of the world esteemed equivolent to Sacred Majesty, verifying that Parable of Jo∣tham, Judg. 9. verse 14. and 15. espe∣cally (whereby your poor subjects have been so scratch't and claw'd, that your Majesty can hardly know them, they are so strangely metamorphosed) Nobility layed aside, and he that ran might read, Prov. 28.2. in the very frame of our Government: And that in Psalm 12.8. was found true in all our streets. But blessed be the wise Disposer of all things that hath given us some hopes of a bles∣sing upon our Land, since we may boast of the next words, Eccles. 10.17. more then any people in Christiandome, no King for so many hundred of years in Europe, (nay, I think I may safely say,
in the whole world) is lineally Descended from Nobles, nay Kings, As ours. Let us therfore remember that truth, 1 Sam. 15.23. And to follow the Command of the HOLY-GHOST, Eccle. 10.20. That Job's Reprehension, Job 34.18. may ne∣ver rise up against us more. For since there is no Power but of GOD, Rom. 13.12, 3. v. 5. & 1 Pet. 2.13. And therefore we are injoyned to be obedient; much more is our ingagement thereunto when there is so apparent an Hand of Divine Providence, Justice, Goodness, most singularly and miraculously shown in the Restauration and establishing of your Majesty over us, even in a time when there was, in all Human Probability, no hopes; that so we might see the Finger of the LORD, and that it was he only that could redeem us out of the Egyptian Bondage and Slavery we groaned under; And by suchFor in humaine Reason, Fleetwood, who was Generall, and Com∣manded all the Forces, should have im∣ployed them for his Brother Rich. P. Establish∣ment (his ends be∣ing bound up also in his) then for the pulling of him down. Which was the uie of both. un∣likely means; By the strugling and striving of a few Ambitious Spirits, that were blinded therewith, so that they
knew not where their own safety lay, was this happy birth occasioned; And, which is most of all, without the least Bloodshed. This isPsal. 118 23. Matth. 21.42. marvellous in ourAnd not to be pa∣ralel'd in any story Sacred or prophane. Which miraculous providēce me thinks, should silence & quiet the Tongues and Spirits of all Rebbells. eyes, and should be for a perpetuall joy unto us! And, Certainly, GOD doth never worke any extraordinary worke, but to some extraordinary end, which we have as much reason to expect, as any people under heaven, if our sins and wantonnesse under so great mercies pre∣vent not. For, we see and know, that since the rising of so glorious a Sun as your Majesty in our Hemisphere, all the mists of Disorder, Confusion, Discord and Trouble which over spread us, And those dark and horrid fears of perpetuall Warr, Dissention, Desolation and De∣struction, as Mists and Foggs upon the Soules and Spirits of good Men, are wholly Dissipated and Dispersed; So that we hope to have Peace and Righteousness upon their true and Right Basis to all Generations setled. And, as we doubt
but it will be your Princely care in these more weighty matters; So we can no less then daily expect a Rectification of other abuses, And a perfect Cure of other e∣vills which are Epidemically Reigning among us. As, to trouble your Majesty but with the mention ofAll∣though we might mind your Ma∣jesty of an Infinite many more. Yet we shall only hint at one, which makes divers of your Majesty's suffering Subjects & Servāts, sick at the very Heart. That they must be still equally sufferers now ūder your Majesty's Just Power and Government, as formerly under Oppressours; Because Mammon the God of the World is not their friend so much as such who have been your Majesties Enemies. And therefore their interest in friends (as friends go now) is as slen∣der. And, allthough, I, for my own part, can plead no merit, Loyalty being my Duty; Yet, if your Majesty would be pleas∣ed to take notice of such who have been wholly ruined by the fall of your Majesty's Father of Glorious Memory, (as I have beē for one) to whom my Father was not only a Servant, both in the Bed-Chamber and Privy-Chamber, but also to your Maje∣sty's Royall Grandfather all his Reign in England, And like∣wise TO YOƲR MAJESTY WHILST PRINCE, that we be kept from Ruine, it will be the Highest peice of Kingly bounty imaginable: one, And that is, the more then ordinary abuse of THAT MOST NOBLE ART OF PHISICK, by Illiterates, Quackes, Mountebancks, and Em∣pericks, that have been, are, and will be, if not prevented, the Ruine of more of your Majesty's Loyall and Faithfull Subjects, then either the Sword or Plague. The Imployment is Weighty, Difficult,
and of greater Importance then most of the world are capable either to apprehend or believe. As our Learned Father of Physicians HIPPOCRATES most excellently shewes in Aphorism Sect. 1. Aphoris. 1. Where he sayes, . & therefore, as he also very well observes, Lib. De Lege, He that will be a Phi∣sician, Horum omnium Compotem esse debere. . Or, as in Lib. De Decent. Habitu, it is exprest in short, Medico futuro necessaria sunt , & ; Natura, Doctrina, seu Scientia Do∣ctrina Comparata, & usus, seu ex∣ercitatio. For, such indeed are wor∣thily called Phisicians, that are both learned and skilfull, and none else. But, that which must give life unto all (ac∣cording to Hippocrates) is, A Naturall Inclination, Ingenuity, Wit, Phansie, and
Aptness to Learn, sufficient Reason, Judg∣ment, Memory, Ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius, Every one thus endued, is not fit to make a Scholler, neither are all Schollers sit to be Phisicians. What is sayed of all Disciplines.
Tu nihil invita dices faciesve Minerva,
Is likewise verified in Phisick, in a Phisician chiefly. And that withall, he have a sharp apprehension to discover what will be the event of this, or that, and by the Signes, to discern even hidden De∣stempers before there be the least appear∣ance of them; As also to know the Cau∣ses, Indications and Method to be fol∣lowed in the Cure.
In all which, that a Phisician may be the more compleat, It is most requisite he be well Learned in these Seven Particu∣lars.
1. LANGUAGE or Knowledge of the Tongues, especially Latine and Greek, that he may the better understād the vast Labours and Volumes of our
Among which, the chiefest are, Hippo∣crates, The∣ophrastus, Dioscori∣des, Galen, Areta∣us, Rufus Ephesius, Paulus Aeginetus, Oribafius, Aetius, Tralianus, Philaretus, Theophi∣lus, Nicolas Mirepsus, Actuarius, Archengenus, Appollonius, &c. which wrot in Greeke. Antients, andDonatus Antonius ab Altomari, Alexander Massarias, Amatus Luitanus, Aurelius Cornelius Celsus, Guilielmus Rondeletius, Ber∣nardus Gordonius, Victorinus Trincavellus, Nicholas Piso, Carolus Piso, Hieronimus Mercurilis, Petrus Forestus, Joannes Crato, Jo∣annes Baptista Montanus, Felix Platerus, Hercules de Saxonia, Jo∣annes Fernelius, Leonhartus Fuchsius, Duncanus Liddelius, Joannes Riolanus, Matheus De Gradibus, Vidus Vidius, Valescus De Taranta Benedictus Victorinus Foventinus, Nicholas Florentinus, Julius Alexandrius, Valesius, Christophorus A vega, Thomas A vega, Ludovicus Mercatus, Guallerus Bruel, Zacutus Lucitanus, Joannes Heiurnius, Daniel Sennertus, Paracelsus, Van Helmont, Lazarus, Riverius, Capivaccius, Stockerus, Weirus, &c. Neotericks, and, if they hadRhasis, Mesues, Alsaharavus (or Albucasses▪ as some call him) Avicenna, Averroes, Avenzoar, Serapio, Haly Abbas, Haly Rhodaham, Rabbi Moyses, &c. Hebrew & Arabick it were not amiss, since many old Writer also, wrote in those Tongues; And, Translati∣ons, many times, vastly vary from the o∣riginall Copies, whereby many mistakes and much mischief is occasioned.
2. PHILOSOPHY, That so, he may know the subject on which he is to work, mans Body; with all its parts, the Elements, Humours, Spirits, the uses and temperament of every part, the Ani∣mall faculties and functions, That diseas∣es
may the better be discovered, with their severall Causes, And Signes both Diagnosticks and Prognosticks, And the right Method of Cure, which is the end of Phisicke; To know how to order, rectifie and praescribe, according to the present Condition, Constitution, and Temper of the Patient, what may prevent further e∣vills, Conserve health where it is, and re∣store it where it is lost,
So that without Philosophy a man can never be a good Phisician; Quod enim optimus Medicus, idem est & Philosophus, Galen proves in a peculi∣ar Book by it self. For, ubi desinit Phy∣sicus, incipit Medicus. As Aristotle well observes.
3. LOGICKE is Requisite for a Phisician (Logismus est actus rei in Hominem) And is, indeed, the first in order of all Arts: for, the , in the thing, must needs be before  in it.  enim est actus rei ab Ho¦mine, in Hominem. Without which Discipline, he can never be able to give a perfect Definition of any Disease, or
Symptome of a Disease, much lesse a rea∣son why it is so.
4. ASTRONOMY, for, the knowledge of the Ascensions, Culmi∣nations, and settings of the Stars, with their Right, and oblique Ascensions, Severall Positions and Declinations, is, also, of great and eminent use. And for the knowledge of the several Quarters of the year, and such like; But, especially, (as SENNER TUS thinks who is the PRINCE OF OUR NEO∣TERICK PHISICIANS) As it is an help, furtherance, and introducti∣on to ASTROLOGY
The 5th. and most necessary Discipline of all the rest. Not as it is commonly pra∣ctised (and indeed, abused) by broaken Mechanicks, and Illiterate Novices (And hath beē of late years, when every one did what seemed best in his own eyes) bring∣ing shame and contempt upon that Noble and worthy Art, which, because (as the Learned know) it is of excellent use in Phisicke, they under that Colour, De∣ceive men of their monyes, and foo
them out of their lives, There being more Empericall Impostors praetending to Astrology, that are very Ideots, Cheats, Illiterate, and of the vulgar sort; Then of any other kind whatsoever, (which abuse, it could be wished, your Majesty would likewise Amend, and re∣strian this their Licentiousnesse, which on every Post and Piller through all the streetes of this City of LONDON, (wherein notwithstanding there is a COLLEDGE OF ABLE AND LEARNED PHYSI∣CIANS) they publish not only to the seducing, but ruinating of many of your Majesties poore Subjects.
I say, it is not this I allow, or speak for, in this place; but the Pure Astrology of the Antients, without which, Hippo∣crates and Galen accompted a Phisi∣an a foole; Advising men not to trust themselves or their lives in such mens hands. And without which, Avicenna accompted them Butchers, rather then Physicians; Homicidas Medicos A∣strologiae Ignaros. And Thurnes∣serus,
Paracelsus, with others, will ad∣mit of no Phisician without it; Medi∣cus sine Coeli peritia nihil est. Many Phisicians, I know, are of the Contrary Opinion; But, as, the one is too nice, the other is too remiss. To mediate, there∣fore, between both, I shall, in short, give your Majesty, what may justly be sayed for it; In these two propositions. 1. Who∣soever is ignorant of the Causes of the Al∣terations of the temperatures of mens bodies, by which Diseases are occasioned, must needs be ignorant in the Cure, and of that which much conduces and helps thereunto. But mens Bodies alter in their tēperatures with the seasons, which change according to the Motions and Places of the severall Constellations and Coelestiall bodies, whence follow many In∣firmities and Diseases. Ergo, whosoever is ignorant of Astrology, that is, that do not know the Influencies of the stars, which cause Diseases, and alter our Temperatures, are ignorant of the Cure. And therefore that Astrology is neces∣sary to be known by all such as practice Physicke, will not be denyed.

For so Hippocrates stifly maintaines, in Lib. De Aëre, Aqua & Locis; And therefore concludes (in many parts of his workes) that Man who is ignorant in the Natures and Virtues of the Coele∣stiall Bodies, is blind and in the Darke. Referring all Alterations in our Bodies and Diseases, to the Starrs and mutati∣ons of the Moon. So doth Galen throughout all his workes, especially in Lib. 3. De D bus Decretoriis, Cap. 2▪ 3, 4, & 5. &c. Secondly, whatsoever discovereth unto us the state and Csis of an acute disease, And is the only true and exact way to the knowledge thereof, is fit to be studied & known by all Phy∣sicians. But Astrology, and it only, by the Knowledge of the Motions, Na∣ture, Positions, and influencies of the Moon, discovers unto us the true Crisis in all sharp and violent Diseases (as is aboundantly shewed by Galen in his Bookes, De Diebus Decretoriis, & De Crisibus, Avicenna, Lib. 4. Fen. 2.
Tract. 2. Cap. 2. Joannes Fernelius, Lib. 2. De Abditis Rerum Causis, Cap. 10. Daniel Sennertus, Pract. Med. Lib. 3. Part. 3. Cap. 12. Et in Methodo Discendi Medecinam, & in Institutionibus, &c. Andothers) Ergo, Astrology and the Nature, Motions, In∣fluencies, &c. of the Sun, Moon, and Starrs, are requisite to be studied and known by all Physicians. And, as Acute Diseases follow the Moon; So do Chronick, the Course of the Sun; As common experience evineeth us: And it i dly seen that Quartain Agues be∣gin with the Autumnal quinoctial, and end in the Vernal. Wherefore, Avicenna Ascribeth Health to the fortunate Starrs, And sickness to the unfortunate; In Contie. Part . Text 104. Nay, Para∣celsus, De Podgra, Ascribes more to Starrs, then Humours, stfly affirming the Constellation alone, may be a cause of Deseaes, without the mediation of any Humours at all; Instancing in Luna∣ticks,
which Distemper, As Reason, and common Experience evinceth, followeth the Course of the Moon. As I have noted in my Astrology Restored, Lib. 1. Cap. 4. And in divers places of myA Book yet in ma∣nuscript, and not condemn∣ed to be prest. Mel Medicorum.
Neither is it my Opinion only, that strology should be well studied and own by all that practice physick, to Instruct them in the Nature of Diseases, their Causes, finding out their true Crisis (which can no otherwise, with Certainty, e Discovered) And other most necessary beings, conducible to the persecting of the Cure; But also, over and above those Authours before mentioned, it is the Advice of Joannes Crato, Joannes Picinus, Joannes Hosurtus, Antoni∣us Mizaldus, Joannes Bodinus, Ber∣ardus Gordonius, Magninus, and infinite others, that they be all Astrolo∣gers.
Wherefore, since I have written more agrely hereof in a Treatife called
A small Tract not yet Pub∣lished. Flagellum Empericorum, I shall, of this Point, add no more, at present: But proceed to the sixth thing requisite for a Physician, which is CHYMISTRY with the KNOWLEDGE OF METALLS, STONES, &c. To know how to distinguish between the true Stones, Metalls, &c. from what are adulterate and false; And, when need Re∣quires to joyn Chymical with Ga∣enical medicines in their proper places, times, and with parties and Bodies con∣venient. For, a little Chymistry may serve the best and greatest Physician. I know Paracelsus, Crollius, Hartman∣nus, Querceranus, Severinus, Leo Savius, Ravelascus, Van Helmon & his Expositors, with all the Brethren of the Rosy Cross, And other Sectarists in Physick, stifly maintain it is the on∣ly thing a Physician is to busie his hea about, that none can be perfect, nor  Cure effected without it, that it is all in all, &c. But Joannes Crato, Thomas
Erastus, Joannes Fernelius, Daniel Sennertus, and others of the more Rationall and Methodicall Physi∣cians, are of the contrary opinion. And, although Paracelsus, ostentati∣ously, boasts himself a Monarch in Phy∣sick, triumphing over Hippocrates and Galen, as Infants, affirming he did thereby, more famous cures, then all the Galenists in Europe besides; Yet Era∣stus accompts him but an Impostor, an Emperick, an Heretick, affirming him to do the same in Physick, which Luthe did in Divinity: That he was a drunkē Rogue, a base Fellow, a Magician, ha∣ving the Devil for his Master, Devills for his familiar Companions, And what  did, was by the help of the Devil. In a word, as none will or can deny Chymi∣stry to be of great use in the practice of physick rightly prepared, and fitly apply∣ed; So must they likewise, that are Ra∣onall, confess, that the rejecting of l other medicines, Admiring the Lrge
Encomiums of their Aurum Potabile's Elixers of Life, Quintessence's, Pa∣nacea's, and universal medicines, and the like, using these only, without any Judgement, Art, Method, As Women do Receipts, because they hear they are good for such a Disease, is a madness; rendring such Practitioners rather Quacks, and Empericks, then Rationall Physi∣cians.
Lastly, a Physician SHOULD KNOW THE VEGETA∣BLES AND PLANTS that are to be used, at least the chiefest and most effectuall, And their virtues, &c.
And thus (may it please your Majesty) if such as dare to adventure the Practic of Physick be not endued; And are unabl to give an accompt, workeman like o their Actions, where the lives of you Majesties poor Subjects lye at stake; The are to be accompted rather Cheats, an Murtherers, And ought to be proceede
against according to Law. Such there∣fore, may, by this Treatise, do more hurt, then good. Will your Majesty therefore be graciously pleased to cause such whol∣some Statutes as are provided in that Case already, to be put in execution; And where they are defective, they may be sup∣plyed and amended as to your Grave Wisdom shall be thought fit. That so every one may abide in the Calling wherein he is called; The Divine not Intrenching on the Physicians, nor the Lay man on either, nor the Chyrur∣gion on the Apothecarie's, nor the Apothecary on the Chyrurgion's, nei∣ther both or either, on the Doctors; As they too frequently take the liberty and boldnesse, now, to do, even in this City of London, in the face of the Colledge of Physicians to their great shame: That so every thing may be done decently and in order. That the GOD of order, ay blesse us, and Confsion be wholly anished from among us. Which is the
Hearty Prayer of him who casts these his unworthy Labours at your Majesty's feet, And is, As ever,
From my aboad in London Die ♀is. 26. Oclo∣bris, 1660.

