



IT is the custome of most, to impose a patronage of their errours upon some eminent person. But it shall be my ambition in this my Dedication, to manifest my observancie. Others make their choice of potent men, thereby to shun the darts of envy. It shall be my glory to be thought worthy of inviden∣cy; whose ignorance is not so great but well

knowes that ever some will bite in secret; and scourge these errors of my youth with private reproches. But such malignant tongues I will counterpoise with the wind▪ and set as lightly by as they are vaine. And al∣though I am confidently perswaded that the covert of your wings, be sufficiently able to shelter my faults, yet had I rather to expresse my duty toward you in these naked infirmi∣ties, whose goodnesse truly knowes Ausis lite∣rarum igno∣scere Vege∣tius in Pro∣log. how to parden the bold adventures of learning. I present you therefore with Athens, whose deplorable raggednesse my papers well re∣semble: which may challenge this excuse, that they assimulate themselves to the Trea∣tise in them contained. Which of all men, I my selfe am conscious most unfitly to have handled. That City once the Cic. Epist. nurse of rea∣son; Patercul in fine Lib. 1. which flourisht in eloquence, & brave atchievements more then all Greece, could not, unlesse in her miserable ruines, have without her disgrace been spoken of by me▪ That Athens Whence the learned Fathers of the Church suckt rare literature, Basil his

eloquence, Nazianzen his strength, & others their flowing Oratory. That Athens which who had no seen is by Apud Di∣caearchum . Lypsius accoun∣ted a block. Accept, Honoured Sir, these Re∣liques of that famous University, though by me offered, as Devotion paid to Antiquity, by you well esteemed of, though among most of these our daies accounted durt; whose labour it is to seek new fashions, and like nought but what may be accounted no∣velty. Resembling the brute, of which Cice∣ro. Ad id solum quod adest, quod{que} praesens est se accommodat, paulum admodum sentiens praeteri∣tum, &c. never caring for what is past. But you weigh well the excellency of talking with those Champions of Learning, hun∣dreds of years since gathered to their former dust: By whose pensills wee see drawne the lively Images of deceased Monarchs, the formes of goverment, and very lives of states. Out of which patternes, if you please to deeme the least part of this to have been ta∣ken, it shall heap to my joy that the follovv∣ing Tract will not seeme a spurious and de∣generate

of spring. Upon presumption of which I feare not, as the Eagles doe their young, to expose my brood to the rayes of the open Sunne. Thus with continuall wishes for addition to your happinesse, I take leave, 
From my Study in Merton Colledge June 9. 1637.

