



NO—'tis in vain—attempt not to persuade!
They were not, cou'd not be by Woman made:
Each Thought so strong, so finish'd every Line,
All o'r we see so rich a Genius shine;
O more then Man, we Cry, O Workmanship Divine!
Courtly the Stile as Wallers, clear, and neat,
Not Cowley's Sence more Beautiful, or great:
Numerous the verse, as Drydens flowing strain;
Smooth as the Thames, yet Copious as the Main.


But when the Author Royal Mary mourns,
Or in soft Fires for gay Orestes burns
Agen, our sexes Pride is undeceiv'd:
A Soul so Soft in Man yet never liv'd.
In vain, alas in vain our Fate we shun;
We Read, and Sigh, and Love, and are undon:
Circaean charms, and Female Arts we prove,
Transported all to some New World of Love.
"Now our Ears tingle, and each thick-drawn- Breath
"Comes hard, as in the Agonys of Death:
"Back to the panting Heart the purple Rivers flow,
"Our Swimming Eyes, to see, our Feet unlearn to goe:
"In every trembling Nerve a short-liv'd Palsy reigns,
"Strange Feavers boyl our Blood, yet shudder thro' our Veins,
Tyrannous Charmer hold our Sence, our Souls restore!
Monopolize not Love, nor make the World adore!


Can Heavenly minds be angry! can she frown?
What Thunders has one eager Thought pull'd down?
Diana thus by the bold Hunter found,
Instead of Darts, shot angry Blushes round.
O Goddess Spare—all white as Cyprias Dove
Is thy untarnisht Soul, and Loves as Angels Love;
Honour and Virtue each wild-wish repel,
And doubly sink 'em to their Native Hell.
Saints may by thee their holiest Thoughts refine,
And Vestal-Virgin's dress their Souls by thine,
Sure none but you such Passion, cou'd, restrain;
None ever Lov'd like you, and Lov'd in vain.
What Age can equal, what Historian find
Such Tenderness, with so much Duty joyn'd?
Sappho and Behn reform'd, in thee revive,
In thee we see the Chast Orinda live.
Thy works express thy Soul we read thee there,
Not thine  Pencil draws more like, or fair.
As Flowers steal unobserv'd from Natures Bed,
And silent sweets around profusely shed,
So you in Secret shades unknown unseen
Commence at once a Muse, and Heroine.
Yet you're in vain unknown, in vain wou'd shrow'd
That Sun, which shines too bright t' endure a cloud.



Prepare then for that Fame which you despise!
But when you're seen still hide, O hide your Eyes!
Love Vertue, and adorn't still let us see
Such Wit and Beauty joyn'd with Piety.
Let Heaven and Heaven's Vicegerent always share
Your noblest Thoughts, and your most Dutious care.
WILLIAM's a Name, you're Fated to Record;
No Pen but yours can match the Heroes Sword.
If yon ASSOCIATE too, you'll guard Him (more


Then all the Loyal Myriads gon before.
Let harden'd Traitors know what 'tis to' abuse
The Patience of a King and of a Muse.
Let 'em no more a Monarch's Justice dare,
Draw off his side, at once, and END THE WAR!
These just, tho' poor Acknowledgments I send,
From distant Shades, to Heav'ns and Cesars Friend:
Those but debase, who weakly strive to raise,
You'll ne're grow vain with—'s humble praise.

