



Right Honourable,
PEace being the chief Jewel of the Treasure of Temporal Happiness, as common Disturbers ought to be stigmatiz'd with some Signal Dis∣grace and Satyr, so ought the Promoters thereof to be extoll'd with all Encominums and Applause imaginable. Hence it was that those, who among
the Ancient Romans, had done great Things against a Foreign Enemy, for their Country's Good, were on their Return to Rome, convoy'd to the Ca∣pitol with all Solemnity, and with great Enter∣tainment, received all the Honour Rome could bestow: Which being deny'd to Julius Caesar, bred the Civil War 'twixt him and Pompey. Neither was any Attempt among them reputed too hard and desperate, when the Publick Interest lay at Stake. Thus Mutius Scaevola, that reso∣lute Roman, having design'd to kill Porsenna King of Hetruria, in his Tent, mistaking one of his Lords for him, burnt his Right Hand that had committed the Mistake, in the Fire, in the King's Presence, with these Words, En quam vile sit Corpus iis qui magnam Gloriam ap∣petunt! The King being amazed at his undaun∣ted Courage, dismiss'd him without Harm, and strait made Peace with the Romans. Epami∣nondas, that Noble Theban, who overcame the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, by his Conduct and Courage, made Little Contemptible Thebes the Mistress of all Greece. And having, at last, received his Mortal Wound in the Battel at Man∣tinea,
betwixt the Thebans and Lacedaemonians, in the great Joy of his Victory, his Blood and Soul issued out of the same Wound together; whilst it was said of him at his Death, That he left only Two Daughters to continue his Name to Posterity, viz. the Victories of Leuctra and Mantinea.
Worthy Sir, I repute it neither Arrogance nor Flattery to compare the Heroes of past Ages with the Ornaments of the Present, and say, that tho' you should leave no other Memorial to perpetuate your Name, but your late Signal Victory obtained over the Disturber of Christendom, at Sea, it were a sufficient Monument, to immortalize your Memory, more than the Two Daughters of Epaminondas. Thus since, for your Countries Interest, you have, with so good Success against the Common Enemy, appear'd on the World's Stage, every one who reap the Fruits of your Care, Conduct, and Courage, ought to pay Tri∣bute to your Praise, tho' the whole Nation be not able to pay the Interest of your VVarlike De∣serts. I, among the rest, throw in my Mite, to strew the way to your indebted Capitol, pre∣suming that you, who have been Victorious over
Monsieur at Sea, do not fear to second a Quarrel against him on Land, Thus, relying on your in∣nate Goodness, Candor, and Clemency, begging your Acceptance, and Pardon for my Boldness, I hearti∣ly acknowledge my self

