



THE World may know, that this Treatise,
however little in bulk, and as little in
it's own eyes, yet presumes not to walk
abroad, after so long confinement, with∣out
the perusal and approbation of several very
Learned and Judicious Men, as skilfull in the
Controversies of Church-Government as most
of their Age. If any demand why a posthumous
piece shall need to be anonymous too? Its answer∣ed,
that though the worthy and much lamented Au∣thor
hath been a Dead Man ever since 1662. Yet
there may be Reasons which concern the living why it
should be so. If another ask, why the lists are enter∣ed
so late, after 20 years silence? Ans. Better late
than never. And as Diogenes said of Dineing, A
Rich Man when he will, and a poor Man when he
may; so say I of Printing. The Hebrew servant
who refused his liberty in that year of Jubilee, when
he might have had it, was to be a slave for ever. But
the greatest Question is yet behind, and it is about the
seasonableness of this Work. Wherefore, if any shall
say with Paul to the Priest, withdraw thine hand:
this is not a time to plead for a Jus Divinum of
Church-Government, when the Church it self, is
like to be swallowed up of Popery; even the Holy

City trod under foot of the Gentiles; and our Com∣mon
Enemy be glad to see Protestant against Pro∣testant
(that they may divide the spoil) and so great
a Champion of the Protestant Cause assailed. To
this several things must be said: 1. As some may
write for their way, when they will, (as I have said)
why should others neglect the year of Release, which
falls out but once in an Age? 2. But if you would
know why we venture on offending Episcopacy, by
asserting the principles of Presbytery, when Pope∣ry
so pretends to be the Ascendant. Truly, there's
but little reason to stick at this; Partly because the
Reformed Churches generally look on Prelacy as a
limb of Popery; and partly to the grief of our hearts
we see many of those men fallen in so kindly
with that interest, that it causeth great thoughts in
heart: I mean, not so much by the Popish doctrines
that many of them vent, as by a more general pallia∣ting
of the late hellish, popish plot, to murther our
King, and introduce the Romish Religion into these
Nations. There being no person more ingrateful to
some of them than Dr. Oates, the first and great Dis∣coverer
of the Plot; no discourse more unsavoury to
them than the discovery it self, and no Parliament so
dreaded by them as one likeliest to prosecute the dis∣covery
of the Plot, and punish the Papists. And let
the World judg whether we have cause to be tender
in offending such Protestants in this Controversie,
who had rather the Plot should be stifled and the
Papists go unpunished, than poor dissenting Pro∣testants
should have any favour shewed them. Now
the good Lord forgive these men, and turn their
hearts from hating of their Brethren to love the

Truth. 4. As for Dr. Stillingfleet (whom this
Author deals with about Church-Government) I
am far from placing him, Dr. Tillotson, and seve∣ral
of his Worthy Brethren in that Category, They
have done so worthily in our Israel; especially, him∣self
hath writ so learnedly against the Papists, that
he deserves well of all good Protestants. But yet,
seeing the learned Dr. seems to have repented of
his writing against the Jus divinum of Episcopa∣cy
(having since his Irenicum, much applauded
and congratulated the happy restitution of the
Church of England to its wonted lustre and Gran∣deur
(far enough from his formerly desired Redu∣ction
to Primitive Presbyteries:) I know not but
he may find as good Reason here, for his repenting
to write against the Jus Divinum of Presbyterie.
For the end of his Epistle to the Irenicum, about
this matter, may be recanted, but never reconciled to
the beginning of his Epistle to Arch-Bishop Laud's
Defence against Fisher. What pity so grave and
great a Man should thus expose himself by a Con∣test
too palpable between principle and preferment.
Now though this hath the last word, and carries it
with the World; yet the Elder Brother will be ac∣counted
the honester with the wise, because born of
the Free-woman, while the after-seed was conceived
and brought forth in Bondage. 5. It may be judged
a fit season of asserting the Kingly Power of Christ
in setling the Government of his own House, when
Men so liberally give away the Lord's Prerogative;
Not a coal of the Altar, almost, which they are
not willing to carry to the Eagles nest. Pray God
they fire it not. Our Pulpits now so ring with a

Catholick Jus Civile, that there is scarce any Jus
Divinum left, but of Tythes, which I hope they will
hold to the last, being good Church-men. Those pro∣digal
Sons of the Church, are like to prove the pro∣fusest
spenders of her Patrimony, that ever she
brought forth: and, which is worst of all, they are
like to promote a DIVORCE from her Husband,
by cutting her off from Subjection unto, and Com∣munication
with the true Head. A fair Charter
hath Christ sealed to his Church with his own blood,
giving her Officers, Ordinances, and free Courts
within her self; all which unfaithful Children, with
profane Esau often sell for morsels of meat, and
by base compoundings alienate the Churches Good's
from her self (the greatest of Sacrileges) and put
them into the hands of strange Children, to the un∣speakable
detriment of Religion, and disgrace of
Christianity.
Now could Men let Christ alone, to govern his
own House in his own Way, by his own Officers and
Ordinances; how happy were we! Who can better
reprove the Atheism of the World in setting up
Mans Post by Christ's, than Dr. Stillingfleet hath
done in his other works, while he sayeth that To
say a Man may be of any Religion, according to the
Laws of Men, is to take it for granted, that there
is no such thing as Religion in the World. And
again, That no Men do so dangerously undermine
the foundations of Civil Government, as those
who magnifie it to the contempt of Religion.
Fear, i. e. Religion, and particularly Worship and
the Ordinances of Christs House must not be taught
more by the Precepts of Men, than by the Truths

of God. Nor may Polititians and Court-parasites
dare to form a Religion in the flexible mould of
State. A municipal Religion would many fain
promote, following Reasons of State more than
Rules of Conscience, like the Heathens, who first
built Cities, and then instituted a Religion fit for
the Inhabitants. The Roman Empire flourished
while Virtue was nourished, to shew, says Austin,
how happy they should be, who should have Religion
superadded. And indeed they had no better Subjects
than Christians: for none can give unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, upon any valuable or holding
account, who make no Conscience of giving unto God
the things that are God's. Now this innocent and
learned Book can hardly offend any, that are not
Adiaphorists on Erastians: pleading in Thesi the
faithfulness of Christ in setling a form of Church-Government
in his Fathers House, which he is set
over: and the Hypothesis of Presbyterie, or a pa∣rity
of Governours, is not so much asserted positive∣ly
(further than the Dr's Concessions give ground
to build on) as arguments are answered, being
brought against its divine Right. So that the design
is meerly to set it as right as it was before the Dr.
imployed his Ordinance against Presbyterie and E∣piscopacy
as to divine Right, with equal force. And
how the learned, and unprejudiced, (if it fall in∣to
such hands) shall find this Defence managed,
Judicium sit penes lectorem. Sed frustra ferit
aures Orator, si Cor non reserat Creator, says
great Calvin like himself. If Men could come with
a prepared mind to read Books, i. e. with some sense
of their own blindness at best, looking to God for

more light, supposing that clear Scripture and strong
Reason may be brought against some things they hold,
there were some hope of getting Good, and Truth's
taking place. How may the Most High, after all
the Antichristian encroachments on the Scepter
of his Son, bring back the hearts of this People to him∣self,
making them yield to the internal Government
of his Spirit, and the true, Apostolick, and ancient
external Government of his House: that the glory
of the Latter House may be greater than the glory
of the former, even a spiritual Glory of the power∣ful
presence of the Lord may appear among us; and
the pleasure of the Lord may prosper by his own Or∣dinances
in the hands of his own appointed Servants
as the beauty of his House, and the blessing of his
Chosen. Amen. Even so Lord Jesus, let thy King∣dom
come!
Feb. 20. 1679/80.
