



Gentlemen, and Brethren,
I Have a Necessity, and assume the Liberty to salute you both under One Title, and in One Epistle, as∣suring my self, that I shall find no less measure of Candour and Love, than of Censure and Judgment from you both. I cannot fear but the English Nation, how∣ever debauch'd the Age may be, affords a glorious Host of right Spirited Men, who keep their Ancient station of true Honour and Piety, and are alwayes ready with Courage and Cheer to defend the Rights of both, against that vile Scum of the boyling times, men who seek gain from Infamy, from Infamy inherent in themselves, and from spots of infamy which they itch to rub upon others, especially on such whose integrity is vital, and has an active Influence, and renders every base thing Odious.

I willingly take my refuge to you, that the world may know, how much I abhor the baseness of a false Spirit. This I must do, not for my private right only, but for the right of my Name, whereof I am chief in England (and I think it no whit degraded by my Ministry, or by any Sufferings for it) which was never stain'd with the least spot of Disloyalty or Dishonour, and shall never be spoted by any Degeneracy of mine. It has been signaliz'd with most Royal marks of Honour, witness the Right hand in my Scutcheon with this Motto, Hac dextra Vindex Prin∣cipis & Patriae, for which I have the Broad Seal of England. In Our late Soveraign's Warrs, My Father spent a considerable Estate in raising forces for the Royal Aid, and the Remainder was so engaged, that I now suf∣fer a total loss of it; yet I repent not, but readily spend my self in his Majesty's Service, in which I am most unwor∣thily mis-represented by some. I hazarded my life in three sharp engagements in Ship with the Earl of Ossory, who honour'd me with his favour ever after, and Letters, and Title of his Chaplain, and by his Lordships commendation I was placed in a very beneficial portion of the Church in the Island of Barbadoes, where I labour'd in the Indian Fires four years, planted Conformity, silenced the Qua∣kers, after many publick Combats, and bodily dangers, reduced hundreds to the Church, and return'd not till forced for want of health, resigning freely a living of three hundred per annum. For all which, I have the Testi∣mony of Sir Jonathan Atkins his Majesty's most Wor∣thy Governour there, and his ever most Loyal and ap∣proved Martialist, whose Chaplain I went.
Since my return, finding two Enemies of Church and State, Popery and Dissention, I have most heartily and laboriously oppos'd both, and that, as I am perswaded,
with the most proper means: and if any man, of whatso∣ever side, can inform me better, I shall instantly embrace his instruction. I could never perswade my self, that rail∣ing against Mr. Calvin, or against Geneva, or blowing out anger and Passion, and sounding forth persecution a∣gainst Dissenters, was or can ever be a proper means to do any good. On the Contrary, I have found by certain Tri∣al and by many Experiments of ten years time, that Apo∣stolical Moderation, and Peaceable Perswasion with those Arguments of peace which the Gospel most abundantly affords, is an effectual way to reduce the most to Ʋnity. And having followed this way more strictly above two years in Thistleworth Parish, I found no small number of Dis∣senting and Dis-satisfied Souls won to a hearty and fre∣quent Communion, even at the Table of Love.
But this very thing, that many Fanaticks (as they spake) followed me, became as a Crime, and some busie Sycophants turn'd Informers, at Court and Cathedral, that I led a Faction, and made the Church a Meeting-House; and they carried on this Calumny so close and clandestinely that I could not suspect it, till I found my self supplanted, and scarce then could I beat out the busi∣ness.
I therefore now declare to the Whole Church, that I never used any unlawful means or perswasion, nor the least Disloyal motive, to make a Congregation, or to gain the favour of any person, much less of a party. I Conform'd entirely to the Church of England in all things, especially in the Doctrine of the 39 Articles. I used no means to gain applause of any, but Christian Moderation, as be∣comes a Preacher of the Gospel. And I dare confer above 200 Sermons which I Preach'd in Isleworth Church, for as Practical and Seasonable and Loyal Discourses, as
any other man has Preach'd, or as the times required. The only Sermons which are objected against me are this present and three more already printed: and I was con∣strain'd to print this of St. Paul's Voyage, for some had spred in City and Country most false and scandalous Bre∣viates, which were not taken from my mouth, as themselves confess, but were made in Company afterwards from weak Memories and Ʋnsound Heads, and with what ingredi∣ent of Prejudice and Malice, I leave to God and others to Judge. I therefore desire to be excus'd, as Printing it altogether upon constraint, to avoid or avert, or at least to allay a greater evil of Mis-reputation.
I also intreat, that my design in Preaching that Sermon may be understood, which appears from the final drift of it, which was to move the People to most earnest Prayer, that God would Ʋnite Our King and his Parliament, contrary to the manifest endeavours of the Papists. For I alwayes esteem'd it the most dangerous and chief part of the Popish Plot to disturb the close Ʋnion and sweet A∣greement of the King and his Parliament, without which neither Our Church, nor our State can Flourish or Prosper. And without doubt this is One of his Majesty's greatest Griefs, as his most gracious Declaration does intimate, that he was constrain'd to make so many Dissolutions and so short Sessions. As for the Reasons or Political Causes of these, I alwayes thought them above the Sphere of a pri∣vate Man. But, as our Enemies rejoyce in these things, I think we ought all to mourn, and to beg of God with publick and private Prayers and most unanimous Suppli∣cations, that he will please in due season to unite and strengthen the States of the Realm.
As to my other three Sermons, of Mirmah, Maromah, and Maroum, the matter of them being wholly new
(though the assertion Ancient and Orthodox) I judg'd it necessary to print them to prevent the strange Accounts which many gave of them. The Assertion is this, That the Popish Principles and Practices maketh Witnesses of the late Plot most Credible, that the Evidence of things has been so great that we ought to believe the Matter of Fact, if not with a Divine Faith, at least with all the Assurance of a Humane and Moral Faith: That the Pope is the Antichrist, that very Apocalyp∣tical Beast, the Number of whose Name is 666. That the next thing to be fulfilled, in the Apocalyptical Order of the seven Vials, is the fiery destruction of Rome, that the time is very near; and in most proba∣ble account to be fulfilled in this Generation or Cen∣tury.
These things, as to the Assertion, are agreeable to all Reform'd Divines of Note; especially the Ancient Di∣vines and Bishops of England, and of King James his time. Yet I wonder to hear some Murmur, as if now Di∣vines were better inform'd of the Pope, and cannot think him a Beast or the Antichrist: if any Divine be so per∣swaded, My Sermons are the more necessary for his sake. As for the matter in which I handle and prove these asser∣tions, which is the Name of Maroum, and that singular Prophecy of Isaiah, chap. 24.21. I think that matter was never touched before to the same purpose, and I think the Name of Antichrist, to which that Number belongs, was never discover'd before, though thousands of brains have been busie in search of it; and I think the discovery I made, is the Divine truth, and that Wisdom of God, which St. John commends to every man that hath under∣standing, Rev. 13.18. which ought not to be kept hid.

Wherefore I again commend those Discourses to the Whole Church of God, as being of great Consequence and of comfortable Ʋse, especially in these times. And I do this again, with the more earnest heart, because I have found of a Truth, that the discovery is sound and effectual and triumphs over all contradiction and dispute. Nei∣ther let any man despise it for my Person, for God did wonderfully call me from mine infancy to this profession, the first of my Family that was of it: and I have spent a∣bove thirty years in the Study of Languages and Sciences, but chiefly of the holy Scriptures which I have known from a Child, and to which as the chief means I ascribe (next to the Grace of Jesus Christ) my Faith and Knowledge of Salvation.
In fine, I desire the Favour and Civility of all ingenu∣ous men, not to suffer the abuses of idle and empty Talkers, much less the injuries of busie, pragmatical Sycophants, to lessen that Just Reputation of Godly Sincerity and Loyal∣ty, which (as all my Name before me) I pursue and hope to possess by due and proper means, as being with cor∣dial Affection and unshaken Constancy,

Thistleworth, Nov. 14, Anno Christi 1681.
