


SIR,
IT was forbidden by the Attick Law, to the Orators of that Commonwealth, to make use of any long Praeludium and Praeface, thereby to insinuate and wind themselves in a sly and secret stealth, into the Ears and Hearts of their Judges; and to re∣pose more strength and stress upon the force of their Rheto∣rick, then upon the weight and worth of the Cause and Ar∣gument. And yet that Lawyer was of another judgement, who accounted it not a Soloecisme only, but aNefas videri in foro causas dicenti∣bus, nulla prae∣satione facta, Judici rem exponunt. Caius Crime, for publick pleaders to jump and leap into their matter, and not to walk towards it in a slow and sure pace; by a just Narrative, and Expository Praeface, touching the several grounds and reasons of their undertaking. If then any question be moved and made about those renued and re∣iterated Addresses to your self, rather then to some of ano∣ther Orb, Stars of a far greater magnitude, who by their propitious Aspect, and benigne Influence, were more like to afford light and life to these dead labours; This may be al∣ledged
and advertized in the general, That divers of that rank and number (for I speak not of all, nor of the greater part) are none of the firmest and fastest Friends of our Tribe and Order; whereof many, very many have had late and lamentable experience in these tumultuary and calamitous times; and may fitly and feelingly take up that sad com∣plaint of Gregory Nazianzen, concerning great Saint Basil.Gregor. Naz, Basilio Epist. 31. . This hath been the onely benefit and advantage they have made of their Friendship, not to trust friends hereafter. Add hereunto, that Applications and Dedications of this nature, should hold some sutable conformity and cor∣respondence with the Genius and Disposition of the parties; lest otherwise they seem to patronage and priviledge that with their Names, which they disown and deny in their prin∣ciples or practice. And it was sage advice, of that great Master of Morality in this case and kind; Not to dishonour or disoblige Friends, by incongruous, orƲtique cavebimus, ne inunera super∣vacua mitta∣mus: ut foemi∣nae aut sine ar∣ina venatoria, aut Rustico li∣bros, aut studi∣is ac literis de∣dito, retia. Seneca de Be∣nef. l. 1. c. 11. superfluous pre∣sents. In all which respects I know none so fit and proper to interest and entitle to these ensuing Sermons, as your self. None, in whose proved and approved Friendship, select and solid Judgement, unswaied and unbiassed Integrity, I may more securely and safely confide.
The poor Widow in the Gospel threw in her two Mites into the Treasury, which make a Farthing. And where∣as other rich and wealthy persons poured out of their abundance, she devoutly dropt out of her pure poverty; , even all her living, Mark 12.42, 43. I have herein personated this poor Widow, and cast in a second Mite into the Churches Treasury; the common Gazo∣phylacium of the Press: and so far presumed, as to make you the Receiver of Both. Be pleased to afford them as fa∣vourable acceptance, (though every way as unworthy of you, as in themselves) as they are freely tendered by the Hand of

