



WHo knoweth (most Noble and potent Lord) how glorious it is, and how praise-worthy, when the mighty, and these who are Psal. 47. 9. cal∣led The shields of the Earth, and the Cedars of Lebanon cast their shadow over the City of God? Airie wits and broken spirits chase fame, but fame and glory shall chase him, who is (as the spirit of God speaketh)  a Sonne of courage, and one who hath done Sam. 23. v. 20.  many acts for the Lord. The followers of Christ are the sonnes of Nobles Omnis san∣guis concolor. Franc. Petrarch. All blood is of one colour, holinesse maketh the difference. Fortuna vitrea est, tum cum splendet, fran∣gitur. Things we rest on here be made of cristall glasse, while they glister, they are broken. Plures tegit fortuna, quam Psal. 84. 11. tutor facit. The world may cover men, it cannot make them secure. But the Lord is a Sun and a shield. What hath Jesus Christ on Earth, which he loveth, as he doth his Church? What a created peece is the true Church? Revel. 12. 1. A wo∣man clothed with the Sunne, and the Moone under

her feet, and upon her head a Crowne of twelve Starres. Her very servants are the 2 Cor. 8, 23. glory of Christ. Yet is this poore woman in Brittaine, crying, travelling in birth, pained while shee be delivered, because of the Ido∣latry of the Land, and our defection and apostacy practi∣sed, countenanced, tolerated in both Kingdomes. Many graves, many Widowes, and the Land turned into a field of blood are the just fruits of many Altars, of Masse-idolls, of Bread worship, of many inventions of men, let then: have a name and flourish in the House of the Lord, and let them be written with the living in Jerusalem who contribute help for the desired birth of the manchild. Prelacy and Popery wither, as in a Land of drought, ex∣cept they be planted beside Rivers of blood; but the Lord shall build his own Jerusalem.
Your honour may justly challenge this little expression of my obliged respects to your Lordship. I acknowledge it is little, though it may have some use. Etiam capillus u∣nus habet umbram suam; one haire casteth its owne shadow. Jmpotency to pay debt layeth not upon any the note of unthankfulnesse, except it be impotency of good will. If I be not a debter for will, I am nothing. And this I owe, and this Church and Nation may divide the sum with me; for which, wishing to your Lordship all riches of Grace, I stand obliged.

