


SIR,
YOur Person I know not, but I can with great facility discern your Spirit, and the Frame and Temper of your Mind, by your two Books; for it's discovered (almost) in every Para∣graph thereof. I have endeavoured to shun following your Example, Quoad potest, with respect to the Nature of the thing, and (instead of Railing) to give you Scripture, Reason and Argument, for what I have said. But whe∣ther after all (as to your self) I have not lost my la∣bour, you are best able to resolve. For my own part, I have little hopes of such, who set themselves to oppose and contradict the Truths of God in such a way as you have done. However, I have (according to my power) endeavoured your Conviction; being exhorted by the Apostle, 2 Tim. 2.25. In Meekness to instruct those that op∣pose themselves, if God peradventure will give them Repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth. But, Dear Sir, remem∣ber, that (in the Judgment of the Apostle) it's but a peradventure; be not therefore high minded, but fear: For, (as our Lord said to Paul) It's hard for thee to kick against the Pricks; to spurn against the Authority of Jesus Christ in his Word.
Sir, One Eminent Instance of your Wilfull Opposition to Truth, and the Conviction of your own Conscience, is, that you tell us about Aenon in John 3.23. And John also was baptizing in Aenon, near to Salim, because there was much water there; and they came and were baptized.

Now, Sir, You tell us it could not be supposed to be done by dipping, nay, almost impossible it should, because of the extream scarcity of Water, that there was not Water to dip such multitudes in. That at Aenon, where John was baptizing, there was not much water.  is but Oculus an Eye, a very little Fountain, now here you speak directly contrary to the very Letter of the Text: For the Holy Ghost saith, There was much water: And you say, There was not much water. Which must we be∣lieve? This is a bold and daring Assertion.
Now Mr. H. Collins, in his Answer to your first Book, sufficiently confutes this Assertion of yours; not only from Scripture, but by the Authority of Learned Men, (who also were for Infant-sprinkling) as the Learned Lightfoot, Dr. Hammond, Erasmus, and that profound Cri∣tick, Mr. Poole, who all testifie there was Pools of Water, many Waters, gushing Streams of Water, and that the Word so signifies both in the Greek and Syrian Langua∣ges. Now if you had confessed your Error in your Se∣cond Book, you had heard nothing from me about it.
But in your second Book you persist in your opposi∣tion hereunto, for you say in page 33. Mr. Collins saith, I have contradicted the Scripture, in saying there was not much Water there: Which you are pleased to say is no contradiction; for notwithstanding the Scripture saith other∣wise, yet you say, what I have said is true. And you bring the Evidence of the Learned Piscator (after all this) to contradict your self: The words are these, , videntur significare plures rivos, &c. That the words sig∣nifie many Rivers, &c. If there was many Rivers, (as your Author saith) no Man can doubt but there was much water, and that it was a fit place to dip multitudes in. And why you brought this Testimony, unless to confute your self, I know not. The next Testimony you bring is Hierom, Aquae multae erant illic, there was much water there. But because that would have directly contradicted your self, you say, which Holybuse Englishes many Wa∣ters. And you say the Town had its Name from some Fountains of Water springing there. And you further say, That Aenon come; from the Hebrew Word,  Gnajin, a Fountain. A Man would have thought all this had beeh a full Confutation of your self, and you had been hereby , self-condemned.

But after all this, you still oppose the Truth as well as your self, by saying it signifies an Eye, a little Foun∣tain, sending forth but little water, in conformity to the Eye: There really was but little water, a Man might stop it with the Foot. What, can a Man stop many Rivers with his Foot? I hope you will blush at the reading of such silly Contradictions as these.
But yet (you say) there was much, that is, many Wa∣ters; here Conscience began to check you, and forced another Confession from you, but immediately by your Ex∣plication you contradict it again: For, you say, there was several little Holes, like Eves, gushing out Water. But in the next Words (you say) there was much water. Well, but how do you make that out? As a Bucket-full is compared with a Spoon-full. I was afraid those many Rivers would have dwindled to nothing.
But you confess, there was a Bucket full of water to fill those many Rivers, and to supply their constant course of flowing; and so (you say) comparatively there was much, and yet really but a little water. If this be not to write against the Light of your own Understanding, and to struggle with the Convictions of your own Conscience, I know not what is. We may see by this, what shift some Men will make to support an Error, when once they have espoused it. The Greek words in that Text are, , which Arias Montanus renders, Quia aquae multae erant illic, Because there was much water there; as our Translators have also done: And the Learned Leigh, in his Critioa Sacra, saith, , multus, much; and in approved Authors, as Thucyd, Homer, and others, it's used for things that are great, large, excelling, eminent, &c. Teste Budaeo. With the seventy Interpreters, there is nothing more usual than to render it thus; as Gen. 15.1. Exceed∣ing great, Psalm 36.6. A great deep; 1 Kings 4.29. Exceed∣ing much. And it's so taken Luke 16.10. where it's twice rendred much.
And seeing you have mentioned the Hebrew, give me leave also to set down the two Hebrew words that answer to it, viz. , Majim rabbim: Majim signifies Wa∣ters, Fontes & Flumina, Fountains and Rivers; Rab. sig∣nifies in the singular much, great, chief; and as Leigh saith, Multus magnus apponitur parvo & pauco; it signifies much and great, opposed to little and few: But here it's used
in the plural Number, which encreases its signification: See Robertson's Hebrew Dictionary, and Leigh's Critica sacra: And as for the other word , Gnajin, an Eye, a Foun∣tain, as it's rendred a Fountain in many other places of the Old Testament, so particularly in Gen. 16.7. it's twice so rendred in that one verse; And the Angel of the Lord found her by a Fountain of Water in the Wilderness, by the Fountain in the way to Shur: But if in this and many other places where the same Word occurs, we should understand it an Eye, instead of a Fountain, what strange work should we make in interpreting Scripture? such that would not become one who esteems himself a Master of Reason, and a Teacher in Israel.
But, Sir, I perceive your speaking of the Name of the Town, which was not at all to the purpose, was to lead us from the Truth of the thing, which was the Matter in Question; viz. That there was much Water, as the Ho∣ly Spirit saith.
Before I pass this place, the last Words in John 3.23. are in Greek, , and were dipped. The Hebrew , vaitabelu, and were dipped. For as Baptizo signi∣fies to dip, or plunge into the Water, and implieth the washing of their whole Bodies, even so the Hebrew Root Tabal (from whence is used this Word in the Text in the passive form vaitabelu) signifies, He dipped. The same that is used in 2 Kings 5.14. Then went he down, and dipped himself seven times in Jordan, according to the saying of the Man of God. From hence you may observe, That when this word is rendred to wash, it signifies no other washing than what is performed by dipping and plunging the whole body under the Water: For in ver. 10. it's said by the Prophet, Go and wash in Jordan seven times, and in ver. 14. according to that Command, He dipped himself in Jordan seven times.
And to let you see what Trifling you have been guilty of in both those Tracts, about the Meaning of this place, Had it been Sprinkling intended, it must have been from Rantizo in the Greek, to sprinkle; or from , Nazab in the Hebrew, he sprinkled; but neither of these are used in this place, but instead thereof its , Tabal, he dip∣ped, from whence it's derived, which are as different both as to Letters and Signification, as any two Words can well be; for that Sprinkling is not Dipping, Rantizing is not Baptizing.

Besides, It's plain, from the reason given by the Holy Spirit in the Text, why John baptized in this place, i. e. because there was much water. But if he had not plunged them into the water, and overwhelmed them with it, (as the word signifies) but only sprinkled their Faces with a few drops thereof, this Reason had been without Foun∣dation: For, as Cornelius a Lapide observes, A very little water would have served to have sprinkled thousands: But their manner of baptizing being to dip the whole Body under water, therefore much water was necessary thereunto, without which the Act of baptizing could not be performed. And as Erasmus saith upon the place, Aenon (in the Syrian Tongue) signifies gushing streams of Wa∣ter, by reason whereof there was plenty of Water to bap∣tize the People withall. And our Learned Critick, Mr. Matt. Poole, saith thus upon the place, It is from this ap∣parent, that both Christ and John baptized by dipping the Body in Water, else they need not have sought places, where there had been great plenty of Waters.
I shall say no more to it, for this is more than suffi∣cient to satisfie any rational Man about the meaning of this place: And, Sir, If you will not acknowledge such a wilfull Error as this, I shall despair of curing your infi∣delity.
2ly. I desire you to observe, that the great stress you lay upon the word , Gnolam, Gen. 17. to prove that Covenant of Circumcision to be the Covenant of Grace, is because (you say) that word signifies eternal. Now if you your self did not doubt the truth of your own Assertion, what makes you say in your second Book, pag 17. The Covenant of Grace is immutable and eternal, there∣fore Gnolam doth here signifie a perpetual Eternity. Sir, this is according to the common Proverb, To run round like a Horse in a Mill: For, First, You prove (as you say) the Covenant of Circumcision, Gen. 17. to be eternal, because Gnolam signifies eternal; and then you prove Gnolam to be eternal, because the Covenant is eternal. I pray Sir, shew us the Medium if you can: And 'till you do, it's nothing to your purpose; and yet the main pillar of your Discourse is founded upon this doubtful Interpre∣tation of the Word Gnolam.
But, Sir, Suppose (as Mr. Collins hath already told you) that this word is not limited to a perpetual Eternity, but
oftentimes signifies a much shorter space of Time, then all you have said from Gen. 17. is insignificant.
That it is so to be understood, I will give you the Opinion of divers Learned Men upon it, both Jews and Christians.
Leigh in his Critica sacra, saith, , Gnolam, Hebraeis, Non semper aternum est, ut neque Graecis , sed saepe secu∣lum, atque etiam temporis spatium seculo brevius significat. This word Gnolam with the Hebrews doth not always signifie Eternity, as neither doth Aion with the Greeks, but it often signifies an Age, as also a shorter space of time than an Age.
The Learned observe two things that are diligently to be noted in the use of this word.

1. That when it is affirmed of God, or other eternal things, then it designs an absolute Perpetuity and Eter∣nity.
2. That when it is affirmed of things mutable in their own Nature, it designs only a periodical, or circumscri∣bed Perpetuity, according to the quality of the Sub∣ject.

Of this latter signification we have divers Examples in the Holy Scripture, as Deut. 15.17. speaking there of the degenerate Slave, it's said, Then thou shalt take an Awl, and thrust through his Ear unto the Door, and he shall be thy Servant for ever; which can intend no longer than during his Life: And it's used in the same sence, 1 Sam. 27.12. where Achish King of Gath saith of David, Therefore he shall be my servant for ever: As also in 1 Sam. 1.22. Han∣nah tells her Husband, that Samuel should go to Shiloh, and there abide for ever; which is explained in ver. 28. to be as long as he liveth: And in Exod. 12.14. speaking of the Passover, Ye shall keep it a feast by an Ordinance for ever: And yet your self must acknowledge, this Ever hath been at an end above 1600 years agoe; the Passover be∣ing abolished by the Death of Christ, and in Exod. 31.16. the Sabbath is said to be a perpetual Covenant, and yet you do no think your self obliged to keep the Jewish Sabbath.
Now from hence we may fairly infer, That as those things before-mentioned are not to be observed, because they are abolished by the coming of Christ, so neither is the Covenant of Circumcision, Gen: 17. because the word
Gnolam, everlasting, is added to the other as well as to that, and signifies no more than the time of the Jewish Oeconomy, which was to continue but 'till the time of Re∣formation: They being temporary, and mutable, and sub∣jected to the will of the Law-giver, 'till the Seed should come to whom the Promise was made, and then all that shadowy dispensation was done away.
Besides, Had you been a Master of the Hebrew Tongue, you might have known, that this in Gen. 17. cannot sig∣nifie a perpetual Eternity, because the Characteristical Note thereof is there wanting. I will deliver my sence thereof in the Words of that Learned Rabbi, Rabbi Moses ben Maimon, who saith, , Gnolam non necessario significat aeternitatem, nisi ei conjungatur , vel , idque vel post illud ut Gnolam vagned, vel ante gnad gnolam. Mor. Ne∣bochim, Part. 2. Cap. 28. Gnolam doth not necessarily signi∣fie eternal, except gnad or gned be joyned with it, and that either after it, as gnolam vagned, or before it, as gnad gnolam. And he instances in Psalm 10.16. the Hebrew is, , Jehovab melech gnolam vagned, The Lord is King for ever and ever. Thus you may see, Sir, Those skilled in the Hebrew, know when it signifies Eternal, and when not; altho' you are ignorant of it: And because this is not added to it in Gen. 17. it doth not prove it to signifie so, and therefore not the New-Cove∣nant, because that is eternal and immutable. And thus (you see) the main pillar upon which you build your Anti-christian Practice of Baby-Rantism, is fallen, like Dagon before the Ark of God. I pray consider it, take advice, change your Mind, and practice it no longer; for it hath no Scripture Authority for its Foundation.
But, Sir, I cannot close this Epistle, without making some further Observations.
1. Upon that Argument of yours, Part 1. page 44. which you have urged again in Part 2. page 26. viz.
That all Christ's Disciples ought to be baptized is not dark, Mat. 28.19. Infants are Disciples, therefore 'tis plain they ought to be baptized.
Sir, If I should deny the Minor, neither you, nor all the World are able to prove it. For Infants are not ca∣pable to be made Disciples by the Ministry of Men, which is there intended in that Commission.
But you tell us, the Command is ,
which you render (as if you did not understand it) in this Tautologizing English, Go, disciple me all Nations, teaching them.
Now, because I would (if possible) explain this to your Understanding, I shall first give you the Opinion of the Learned upon this place, and then argue upon it.
The Learned Leigh, upon Mat. 28.19. saith, , Matheteusate, Go, and teach all Nations; or, Word for word from the Greek, Go make them Disciples, as it is expounded John 4.1. Discipulate (liceat mihi sic loqui gratia docendi) sive, Facite mihi Discipulos. Vide Bullinger. Significat et docere, ut Mat. 28.19. & simul etiam discipu∣lum esse, ut Mat. 27.57. from hence you may see that it is not a bare speaking to them that is intended, but such a teaching of them by which they learned, and were made Disciples of Christ by the Apostle's Ministry. And as the word  is rendred by our Translators Disciple, and in the plural, Disciples, where it occurrs in the New Te∣stament in all other places (so far as I have found) and particularly five times in this very Chapter, as I have shewed in my Epistle to the Inhabitants of Ashford, &c. concerning Baptism, why they have rendred it only Teach here in ver. 19. the Reader may easily guess. For you cannot but know, it signifies, as a Learned Critick hath it, Omnes eos qui doctrinam Christi sectabantur, Mat. 5.1. and as the Learned Grotius saith, Ita etiam usurpatur, Mat. 12.49. Luk. 6.13. Act. 11.26. multisque alijs in locis. It is taken for a Learner, or Scholar, who submitteth him∣self to another to be taught; which can no way agree with little sucking Infants, so soon as they are born.
It is distinguished from , in ver. 20. Teaching them: For as it's another word, so it hath a different respect and signification: Matheteusate in Mat. 28.19. im∣porting that the Apostles should teach and instruct the Gentiles, who were Strangers and Aliens in the Faith and Doctrine of the Gospel, that they might believe it, and become Disciples of Christ: But , ver. 20. Teaching them, vero docere significat eos, qui jam discipuli redditi sunt, & Magisterio nostro jam addicti. By which it's plain, that you have no reason to imagine that Infants can possibly be here intended (qua talis) because the first word intends such as were to be made Disciples by their Ministry; and the latter respects their being instructed in
all those other Duties, this new Master of theirs, the Lord Jesus required of them, after they were first made Disciples and believed, and were baptized, that they might be made perfect and compleat in all the will of God.
How false therefore and incougruous is that rendring of the Words, Matheteusate panta ta ethne, Discipulize all Nations, as you have done, to say, Go, disciple me all Na∣tions, teaching them, when the plain meaning is, That they were first by their Ministry to be made Disciples of Christ, and then to be baptized; as it follows in the Text. And not as you say, That when the Parents being taught, believe, they are discipled, and their Infants with them. For if that be the meaning of the Word Matheteusate, that such who are so taught as to believe, are discipled, their Infants not being capable to be so taught by the Mini∣stry of the Apostles, as to believe, they cannot be Dis∣ciples (in your own Understanding) from any meaning can be put upon these Words by you recited, Mat. 28.19.
But further, here is an express Command to baptize some Persons. That they were Believers we affirm, because it's said in that Parallel Text, Mark 16.15, 16. He that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved.
That any Infants can be intended by it, you must deny; because (you say) there is no express Command to baptize them. For, in Part 1. page 41. you put this Objection, But we have no express Command in the New Testament to baptize Infants. Your Answer is, I have shewn there needed none. And in page 37. you bring in this Objecti∣on, If it be God's will Infants should be baptized, why is there no Command for it, as there was for their Cir∣cumcision. Your answer is, There was no need of any particular mentioning of them. And further say, It had been absurd to have given a New Command for Children, and your saying that the general Command includes Children, and yet never tells us what it is, or where to be found, is a covering too narrow for you to escape this conse∣quence. For if there be an express Command in Mat. 28.19. given by Christ to his Apostles, to baptize fome Persons or other, and there be no express Command (by your own Confession) in the New Testament to baptize Infants, then Infants are not at all intended in this great Commission. And I pray Sir, tell me how it is then an
Ordinance of God, if it be no where commanded by him in his Word? For baptism is a part of instituted Wor∣ship: And you ought to shew the Institution, or else for∣bear practising it any more.
I will now shew you what Grounds we have from Scrip∣ture for baptizing penitent Believers, that are adult Per∣sons, able to give an account of their Faith. And be∣cause Mr. Richard Baxter is an Author you so much esteem, I shall give you his Arguments from Scripture for proof thereof in his Book, called The second Disputation of Right to Sacraments, p. 149, 150. in these words upon this very Text, Mat. 28.19, 20. This is not like some occasional mention of Baptism, but it is the very Commission it self of Christ to his Disciples, for Preaching and Baptizing, and purposely expresseth their several works, in their several Places and Orders.
Their first Task is to make Disciples, which are by Mark called Believers.
The Second Work is to baptize them, whereto is annex'd the promise of their Salvation.
The Third Work is to teach them all other things, which are after to be learned in the School of Christ.
To contemn this Order, is to contemn all Rules of Order, for where can we expect to find it if not here? I profess my Conscience is fully satisfied from this Text, that it is one sort of Faith, even saving, that must go before Baptism, the profession whereof the Minister must expect. Of which see what is to this purpose be∣fore cited by Calvin and Piscator, which Words are men∣tioned by him, p. 85. and are as follows, Calvin upon Mat. 3.6. saith, Therefore that Men may rightly offer themselves to Baptism, Confession of Sins is required, othewise the whole Action would be nothing else but Sport. And Piscator upon Mark 1.4. saith, It is called the Baptism of Repentance for Remission of Sins, because John preached the Remission of Sins to the Penitent Believers.
Mr. Baxter further saith, p. 149. If there can be no Example given in Scripture of any one, that was bap∣tized without the profession of a saving Faith, nor any Precept for so doing, then must we not baptize any with∣out it: But the Antecedent is true, therefore so is the Consequence.

To prove this Assertion, he produces the several Ex∣amples in Scripture, which (he saith) might afford us so many several Arguments, but I shall put them together. viz.
First, John, as I have shewed you, required the proses∣sion of true Repentance, and that his Baptism was for the Remission of Sin.
Secondly, When Christ layeth down the Apostolical Commission, the Nature and Order of the Apostles work is first to make them Disciples, and then to baptize them.
That it was saving Faith that was required of the Jews, and professed by them (Acts 2.38.) is plain in the Text.
The Samaritans believed, and had great Joy, and were baptized into the Name of Jesus Christ, Acts 8.12. whereby it appeareth, that the Understanding and Will were both changed. And they had the profession of sa∣ving Faith, yea, even Simon himself, ver. 37.
The Condition upon which the Eunnch must be bapti∣zed was, If he believed with all his Heart, which he professed to do, and that was the Evidence Philip ex∣pected.
Paul was baptized after true Conversion, Acts 9.18. The Holy Ghost fell on the Gentiles before they were baptized, Acts 10.44.
Lydia's Heart was opened before she was baptized, and she was one the Apostles judged faithful to the Lord, and offered to them the evidence of her Faith, Acts 16.30.
The Example also of the Jaylor, is very full to the resolution of the Question in hand: He first asketh, What he shall do to be saved? The Apostle answereth him, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved and thy House: So that it was a saving Faith that is here men∣tioned: He rejoiced and believed with all his House, and was baptized the same hour of the Night, or straightway.
Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue believed on the Lord, with all his House, and many of the Corinthians bear∣ing, believed and were baptized, Acts 18.8.
Philip in Acts 8.37. is determining the Question, and giveth this in as the decision, If thou believest with all thy heart, thou mayest. And to say, that this is but De
bene esse, meaning that it includes not the Negative, other∣wise thou may'st not, is to make Philip to have delu∣ded, and not decided or resolved.
In a word, I know not of one Word in Scripture, that giveth us the least Intimation that ever Man was baptized without the Profession of a saving Faith.
He also affirms positively, That we must not baptize any without the profession of true Repentance, which he thus proves.
Argu. 1. If John Baptist required the profession of true Repentance before he would baptize them, then so must we; but John did so, therefore the Consequence is clear.
The Antecedent I prove (saith he) from mark 1.3, 4. he preached the Baptism of Repentance unto remission of Sins, and doubtless that Repentance which is to re∣mission of Sins is true, special Repentance.
Argu. 2. If Jesus Christ hath by Scripture Precept and Example, directed us to baptize those that profess true Repentance, and no other, then we must baptize them and no other; but the Antecedent is true, so there∣fore is the consequent, which is fully made good from Mat. 4.17. Mark 1.15, 16. Acts 17.30. Luke 24.47. when Christs himself did, and sent forth his Disciples also to preach Repentance, to prepare them for Baptism, which afterwards followed, as Mat. 3.11. Mark 1.8. Luke 3.16. Acts 2.37, 38, 41.
And in page 156. if according to the Institution, the Answer of a good Conscience must be joyned with Bap∣tism, for the attaining of its end, then we must admit of none that profess not the answer of a good Consci∣ence: But the former is certain from the Text, for Baptism is said to save, that is its appointed use, yet not the external washing, but the answer of a good Con∣science doth it; therefore this is of a necessary injunction, and without it Baptism cannot attain its End. But it is to be administred and received only in order to the Attainment of its end, and therefore never in a way by which the End is apparently not attainable.
Paul calleth all the Baptized Church of Corinth, justi∣sied, none that profess not justifying Faith are called ju∣stified; therefore none such should be baptized. I con∣fess (saith he) tis sad, that good Men should be so un∣faithful
to the Truth, which is so preclous, and is not their own, and which they should do nothing against, but all they can for it. Divers other Testimonies might be added, besides these already recited, but these shall suf∣fice at this time,
And Sir, If these do not plainly prove our practice of bap∣tizing Persons upon profession of Faith; and also that In∣fants cannot be the Subjects of Holy Baptism, as not being capable of performing the necessary pre-requisites thereto, I have no Skill in Polemicks.
I proceed therefore to what you say, Part 1. page 44.
Objection. The baptizing Persons before they know, oc∣casions much gross Ignorance. To which you answer,
Christ is the Occasion of the Ruine and Damnation of thousands,
I reply. Dear Sir, Altho' you make bold to abuse the Bap∣tists, and throw very Reproachful Scandals and Calumnies upon them, Methinks you might have spared their Lord and Master, and not have laid the Ruine and Damnation of thou∣sands at his Door, Who came not into the World to condemn the World, but that the World through him might be saved: But I need not wonder at this in you, when divers of your party have charged Christ with being the greatest Sinner in the World, notwithstanding he did no sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth. Sir, These are unsavoury Expressions, unbecoming the Pen of one who would fain be esteemed a Minister of Jesus Christ.
And now, Dear Sir, as a Close, I have some few things to speak to your self by way of Caution and Advice, which I wish may be received by you, as candidly as they are imparted by me.
In all your Discourses about Polemical Divinity, that you would observe these few short Rules, which may be of use to your self and others.
1. Be careful to avoid all invective Calumnies, Wrath, Bitterness and Reviling, against the Party with whom you contend: For that is so far from being a means to con∣vince them, that it rather begets a Prejudice in them against what you shall say.
I know, every Person is naturally a Friend to what he supposeth to be a Truth, and wisheth that others were of his Mind, and it's both lawful and commendable to promote it, in a sober and judicious way: But surely it is an Ex∣cess
to propagate Truth, (a thing divine) by the Methods of Hell; as Anger, Biterness, Fraud, Reviling Reproaches, and throwing out Scandalous and Vile Invectives against your Antagonists. Sir, You have more Reason to believe your Adversaries are in the right, than your self: For, that they have both Precept and Precedent for their Pra∣ctice in the Holy Scripture, but you have neither for your own. What need was there therefore of all those bitter Revilings you have poured out against us? Sir, We could use the Liberty of Lex talionis, (if we were minded to recriminate) in such instances against your Party, that would blacken you with a Witness; of which you could never acquit them by all the Artifices you could use: But we do not think it comports with Charity, to exas∣perate your Enemies against you, and make you vile in their Eyes, notwithstanding you have so unchristianly dealt by us.
2. When any of your Christian Neighbours labour to convince you of some Truth you are yet ignorant of, do not scorn their Advice, nor trample upon the Truth for their sakes, because they are but mean in the Worlds Esteem; but remember that Apollo, altho' he was a Man mighty in the Scriptures, did not disdain that Aquila and Priscila, should expound unto him the way of God more perfectly, Acts 18.26. A Cardinal could once say upon the Words of a Shepherd, Unlearned Men take Heaven by force, whilst we with all our Learning are thrust down to Hell.
3. Let me entreat you to search the Scriptures, and see whether the things I have said be so or no; give your self to Fasting and Prayer, cry mightily to God to give you his Spirit, to open your Understanding, that you may under∣stand the Scriptures.
Lastly, Give me leave to tell you, That it's not likely your People should think you in earnest, when in the Pul∣pit you Press them to Meekness and Charity, when they find so much Railing and Reviling in your Books.
Truly Sir, If Ministers Books of Disputation were as full of Charity, as they require their People to be in their Sermons, our Disputes and Writings would be Excellent Expedients of improving Knowledge, and discovering Truth. And not as now perpetuating Controversies, and of wide∣ning and imbittering them.

No Debates (saith one) have been managed with that bitterness, no Questions debated with that virulence, as the Theological. When will Divlnes be ashamed of sacri∣ficing of their Charity to their Passions; that is, to the sensual and brutal part of our Natures? The Tartars ma∣nage their Wars with less Cruelty than the Clergy: For (saith he) there is neither Measure nor End of our Reproaches and Infamations.
I beseech you Sir, consider these things, and if you are not satisfied about the Controversie depending, if you please to acquaint me with any particular doubt about it, so you do it in the spirit of Meekness, I shall endeavour to give you all reasonable satisfaction. For, in short, the best Expedient (I can think of) to promote Knowledge is, that we argue all our Religious Controversies with that Spirit of Charity and Tenderness, and of deference towards our Opposites, which the Gospel we preach to others more especially obiiges us to: Then may we ex∣pect a Blessing from the Lord, in such Pious and Charl∣table Procedures. I shall add no more, but subscribe my self, as in Duty bound,

