


My Lord,
ALthough I have not had the Happiness to see your Lordship since your very tender years, by reason of your distance in Foreign parts; yet I have heard so much of your great Im∣provements in Knowledge

and Vertue, that I cannot slip this occasion to congra∣tulate your early Fame, and the hopes, or rather Assu∣rance you give of being an extraordinary Person. For that season of Life which so many others pass away in Frolicks, and Riot, and vain Amours; In Raillery, and the wanton Essays of Buf∣fooning & Versifying Wit, (which contemptible child∣ishness the youth of the pre∣sent age seems to value as the highest Perfection) your Lordship wisely, and wor∣thi'y imploys in gaining

those real Acomplishments, which may fit you for Pub∣lick Service, in that high Station in which Provi∣dence hath set you.
My Lord, you are de∣scended from an Ancient Stock of most Noble Pro∣genitors, and are the im∣mediate Son of a Lord and Lady, whose Vertues may inspire all who have the Honour and Happiness to be related to them, with the Noblest Thoughts and Endeavours; and doubt∣less a generous Ambition prompts your Lordship to

appear worthy the Glories of such Ancestors. Nobili∣ty is the mark of the favour of Princes, and when 'tis a∣dorn'd with intellectual and moral Excellencies, it hath then the Signatures of God upon it, and the Personal gives Lustre to the Heredi∣tary Greatness. Secular Ho∣nours extort outward shews of Respect and Homage; while the unsuitable Dispo∣sitions of such as are paint∣ed with misplaced Titles, make them Objects of the real scorn of their pretend∣ed Adorers; But the Noble∣ness

of a wise and Vertuous Spirit commands inward Venerations, and hath a large Empire over the Souls of Men. Knowledge is a Beam of the Coelestial Light, and Vertue a Branch of the Divine Image; Great Ex∣cellencies in themselves, and true Accomplishments of humane Na ure: In both your Lordship hath out∣done your few years and gi∣ven a Pattern to young No∣blemen, how to imploy their Youth Honourably and Be∣commingly, to the Reputa∣tion of their Quality, and

Families; and their own Happiness and Glory.
But, my Lord, there is a Perfection beyond these, or more properly, 'tis the height and perfection of them, and that is Religion: this makes Honourable in both Worlds; and enters those that are truly possest of it, among the Nobility of God. I doubt not but your Lordship hath taken care to season your Active and Considerate Youth with the Study and Practice of this best Accomplishment: such a Dedication of the

first Fruits to our Maker is most just in it self, most ac∣ceptable to Him, and will be most comfortable to the Person that makes the Offer∣ing. Your Lordship is by the Bounty of Providence incircled with all Circum∣stances of Earthly Felici∣ty; Piety and a Religious Life will procure the Di∣vine favour, bless all your Injoyments in this World, and assure infinitely better in another. There dwells our Happiness, and Religi∣on is the way to it. This is the Subject of the little

Book with which I here humbly present your Lord∣ship. If it may contribute any thing to your Service, in these highest Concerns, it will be a mighty Plea∣sure, and Satisfaction to,
My Lord,
Your Lordships Most humble and most obedient Servant,
Jos. Glanvil.
