



May it please your Grace,
GReat and manifold are my obli∣gations unto your Grace, not on∣ly as a Client towards a great Patron of studies, but more especially as an adopted Son of your especiall favours. Ten yeares agoe, onely upon one humble
letter of mine from hence, unto your Grace residing in Dublin, craving most humbly your assistance in my purpose towards the Orient; It pleased your Grace to write unto me (being as then by sight unknown unto you) and most favourably to offer mee a certaine annuall allowance for my voyage, if I had allready left England, or if not, to invite mee to come over to your Grace, and that upon very honou∣rable termes, upon knowledge whereof, that excellently learned, Hugo Grotius (unawares to me) commended mee and afterwards carried me along with him to the Cardinall De Richelieu then the greatest Minister d'Estate de France, who, after some discourses inviting mee to serve him in the Orient, and my modest refusall alledging my obligations to this English Nation, but especially to your Grace, and when upon the second and third reply of his, I did promise to write unto your Grace about it, but hee being unwilling I should do so, did after a most ample, and large commendation of your
Lordship dismisse mee with an honorable donative, in the presence of that re∣nowned Ambassadour, with whose Son, (Anno. 1636 being a Courtier at the Court of the Queene of Sweden,) had acquaintance at Stockholme. Out of respect also unto your Grace, Mr. Pocock. Anno. 1639. at Constantinople became very active on my behalfe with my Lord Ambassador, as also the treasurer his and my host and the consull of Smyrna, Mr. Edward Stringer a most worthy & excellently learned Gentleman for your Lordships sake were never weary of af∣fording mee all the favour they could, at∣testing frequently this humble respect towards your Grace; And after my re∣turne home I received so freely and large∣ly of your Bounty, that I confesse my selfe to have had all along an exceeding rich supply from you; the considerati∣on of all this and that it should be done to a stranger one never seene unto you, onely at the motion of those learned men Doctor Elichman, Lud. De Dieu,
Ioh. Gerhardus Vossius, that such un∣paralled honour I say and bounty should bee done mee, layes an unpara∣lel'd burthen on my shoulders worthily to testify my thankfulnesse for the same; your Grace also prevents mee even in that which alone is left me, whereby to testify my thankfull remembrance of your favours; you honourably make men∣tion of mee, unknowne to mee, in that most learned Epistle to Ger. Ioh. Vossi∣us de Symbolis lately setforth, calling me yours (Noster Ravius) and truly so I am; I esteeme my selfe your Son, and you my gratious Father that provides for mee, nay more then a Father; A Father knowes his Son for whom hee provides, your Grace provided for me as a part of your heart which you never saw. You have still the same gratious care of mee and my lectures, whereof at all times your Grace is pleased to en∣quire the successe. I will not excuse or deplore the state of my creeping and weake studies, Vltra posse nemo ob∣ligatur;
nor speake for the tuition of this small offer; If what it con∣teines bee truth (which I have learn∣ed under your fatherly care) the of∣fer of it is great; if the matter of it be false, and the conceit of a heady braine, the greatest Booke of mine would justly bee loathsome and detest∣able in your sight. Eruditi possunt judicare, rudes discere, scioli neu∣trum. I shall be as glad to be taught better if here I have done amise, as to have written a truth and a beneficiall one, wherein I do not amisse. I con∣fesse I never part from your Grace but I returne more learned then I came, but, which I esteeme above all things, farre more confirmed, and resolved upon the following of your pious, meeke, humble, sincere, unfeigned con∣versation, and because I can never attain the learning and exact judgement of your Grace, I shall endeavour in a higher measure, and nearer proportion to at∣taine your Christian faith, shewed in
that unparallel'd height of humility, wherein your Lordship outstrips all th Archbishops of the World, and to bee truely ready to follow the steps of your Grace in the Lord Iesus, as your,

