



SIR,
ELoquence is so natural to persons of your House, that it is difficult to form any Ideas, but what you have already conceived; or to write any thing upon this glorious Subject, that you have not perfectly considered. All the world knows, that it was this Eloquence, joyned with a great Capacity, with a Pro∣bity yet more great, and with all those Vertues which Quintilian gives for its companions, which hath advanced your Father to the first preferments in the Church, and
who yet attracts the admiration of of this renowned Kingdom. The chiefest glory that you have acqui∣red in pursuing such noble paths, you have obtained from Elo∣quence: It is to her that you owe those great praises, that you have merited in your first sally into the World. For this cause, Sir, the Reflections that I present you be∣long most justly to your self; do you protect them, Sir, and it will render them more acceptable to those who read them: For who can refuse to read, or give their appro∣bation to what appears authorized by a name so auspitious to Elo∣quence as yours is?
How oft, Sir, have I admir'd that solid Spirit, that excellent Judgment, that vast and illumina∣ted understanding, which you have in all things, and in which you are so very much distinguish'd from all those that are considerable, upon
the account of their vertue and great qualities? But as you aspire not to any other reputation, but what flows, mixt with pleasure, from an honourable discharge of your sacred Function, I forbear to make a further discovery of what all the world observes in you, & which all your modesty cannot conceal: Yet how would the Publick accuse me, if out of fear of wounding your modesty, I should neglect to speak of that unexampled moderation which you have witnessed in the flower of your Age, in renoun∣cing all things, to apply your self only to copy, even to the least Tracts, from that admirable Model which you have perpetually before your eyes.
It is there Sir, that you find an inexhaustible fountain of bounty, of Knowledge, and of Piety, which are not to be met elsewhere. How in∣finitely above others are you ren∣dred
capable of all these excel∣lences by a Study such as that is, and by an imitation of such a Father? O what a happiness is it, to have a domestick example, which alone includes all others!
It is not Fortune alone that distri∣butes these advantages; there is re∣quired vertue, which must be as na∣turalized in a Family to merit these favours of Heaven. I have said per∣haps too much for a man that de∣sires not to be known: For it is not enough to conceal my name, but I should also have conceal'd my Zeal, and contented my self that you know who I am, and with what pas∣sion I am, Sir,

