


Brethren,
I Cannot but with all the oppor∣tunities that I can, promote the honour of my dear Master, and the interest of precious Souls. I would by pray∣ers, tears, intreaties, preaching, writing; be doing what I can possible to pluck poor Creatures out of the snares of Satan; and of all sorts of men, poor Seamen have not the least share in my affections: I can I hope though in too low a degree yet speak these words of Paul to you, Brethren my hearts desire and prayer to God for your Souls is, that they may be saved. I know the re∣demption of the Soul is precious, and cea∣seth for ever, and shortly you will be out of the reach of my intreaties, and I expect e're long to put off this Tabernacle; the shortness of my breath, and the weakness of my body, cry aloud to me, What thou
 dost do quickly, for shortly thou must be silent. I am not ignorant of the dangers that you grapple with every moment; methinks when I hear the wind begin to rustle, my heart begins to ake; fain would I do all that I can to secure you from an everlasting wrack. I am not insensible how many temptations you meet with, and how much you are exposed in those hot Climates you trade in, and of what prevalency bad examples may be with some; I know also that the want of quickning Ordinances, and powerful preaching, when you are abroad, doth not a little hazzard the cooling of your affections to Spiritual things. I can't also but observe that a strange hardness, stupidness, and uncon∣cernedness hath possessed most of your tribe. And who can chuse but bewail the condition of men that live within sight of death and eternity every hour, and yet carry it as if there were no other life be∣yond this; or as if their business here were to secure misery and damnation hereafter. Oh what doth sin make men! what sots, mad men, and fools are most? and who worse than some Seamen? who of all men living should be most serious. They which carry their lives in their hands had need carry grace in their hearts.

 Oh what a sad sound it is to hear any of them swearing and cursing, and damning, who one would think should be almost al∣ways praying, or praising of God! when I lay all these things together, and consider how loud God himself hath spoke within these few years to poor Seamen, I could not but strike in with Providence: It may be some may hear, and in this their day un∣derstand the things of their peace before they be hid.
It was not long since the dismall thun∣dring of Cannons did alarum poor sleepy Seamen; it's not long since the groans of the dying spoke aloud to you to get an Ark; it's not long since the wounds of your Brethren opened their mouths and bid you look quickly for the Balm of Gi∣lead; it's not long since the decks of your Ships were slippery with the brains and blood of your friends: and what doth all this teach you, but that your lives and souls are in unspeakable hazzard; and whoso∣ever neglects the minding of Christ and his Soul, it should not be a Seaman. Especia that fa storm t thousands of Souls, September last, which occasioned the Autho preaching several of the ensuing Sermons, specially upon th Text, The Lot fell upon Jonah. And also it occasioned their co¦mitting to publick view, that they may be prepared against succ¦ding stroms and tempests.
I will say nothing of the later storms, and
 dismal tempests, although I believe they are not easily to be parallel'd in some hundreds of years: I pass by the miserable captivity of others; and what storms the tribe of Mariners may still meet with, I will not now say. When I consider what leisure you have to read, when you can∣not hear, and how heart-affecting a warm discourse may be to you when you have time to read and think, and read and see, and hear what is writ, and read and pray too; I can't but commend to your serious perusal this judicious practical and affecti∣onate piece of my reverend Brother.
And now I have an opportunity give me leave to add a word or two more to quick∣en you to seriousness, and let me leave these following lines as a witness of my hearty affections to you, which I beg of you to think of, when I am dead and gone. Again, I beseech you as you love your Souls think of these ensuing Considerations.
1. Consider what a sorry Vessel you have under you, how brittle is that Bark that you are sailing in; a little blast over∣sets it, a leak sinks it, if it strike upon the ground it's soon broken; I mean your bo∣dies are poor frail things, and are soon shaken; you dwell in tabernacles of clay,
 whose foundation is in the dust; and is it not worth the while to think seriously what shall I do to live for ever?
2. Consider what precious Wares this Vessel is laden with. Your Vessel is your Body, the lading your Soul, and what do you think a Soul is worth? as little as most mind it, if you'l believe him that bought them, he saith, That they are worth more than a world; and shall the preciousest commodities be least valued? or was Christ mistaken, and gave too much for them? or are you wiser than Christ? is gold and sil∣ver worth more than a soul? are dying men, or are damned men that have lost their souls, of this mind? Oh Sirs, you can never be too careful about the saving of your Souls.
3. Consider whither you are bound; it's for eternity, either everlasting glory, or everlasting misery. Death will shortly land you in endless happiness or sorrow, and if you would never so fain you cannot then alter your state; you may repent your bargain, but not mend it; prayers, tears, and wishes will e're long be in vain. Oh therefore seeing it is for eternity, do your work to purpose, that it may not need re∣penting of: Man your voyage is great, lay in provisions accordingly.
 4. Consider how few make a saving Voyage; many that think they are getting, when they come to cast up their accounts, find that they were hugely out; men carry great ventures with them, and expect to be made by it, and when all comes to all they are worth less than nothing, and un∣done for ever; no grace, no peace, no Christ, no glory; and is it worth the while to ven∣ture ones life and soul for that which is worth nothing, and will do one no good in another world.
5. Consider what dangers you are in every moment: I need not tell you that you are sailing within a few inches of death; sometimes storms, sometimes sands, some∣times rocks, sometimes pyrates, sometimes a calm, and provisions fail; sometimes the Vessel proves leaky, and men are fain to pump for their lives; you know your dan∣gers better than I, I wish you did also know how to secure your selves: what have you to hold up your hearts in the greatest of difficulties? can you say Christ is my Ark in this storm, his bosom will be my harbour if this should prove a wrack. What dost thou say man? if you can't, I wish you could. Awake oh sleeper, what meanest thou?
6. Consider how good a Voyage some
 make, they go out fraught with tears and groans, and pass through many a storm, devouring seas of difficulties, and some∣times almost lost, so that they scarce know whether they be in the Sea or out; their Masts are spent, their Rigging spoil'd, their Anchors and Cables broke; and yet after all there hath been a calm, their Rigging recruited, and all recovered, and they come home richly laden with grace, peace, glory, and the pearl of great price, and they come top and top-gallant into the harbour of rest, and have an abundant entrance ad∣ministred into the everlasting inheritance: and would not you be one of those? Blessed are the people that are in such a case; yea, blessed are the people whose God is the Lord. Oh what a triumphant welcome will such have to Glory! and would not you be glad to be of this number? but Sir, what shall I do to make such a Voyage? If I should give you advice will you take it? Oh but will you indeed? if you will not, lay down this book and read no farther: But methinks I hear some saying, Oh that we did but know what we shall do to be saved, what we shall do to secure this pearl of great price? Oh a Christ, a pardon and heaven, upon any terms in the world. Well then, if you take this following advice, my soul for yours if you miscarry.

 Direction 1. Venture not out but in a Directi∣ons. sound fight, and good bottom, let your ground-work be well laid, in deep hu∣mility and solid knowledg, labour to know your selves, your corrupt natures; your ab∣solute need of Christ his excellency, se∣cure for yours, and all's well. Labour to see sin the greatest evil in the world, and to loth your selves, and justifie God under a sense of your own unworthiness; beg that you may not be deceived with an hypocri∣tical profession, but that your hearts may be right in Gods statutes; he that's sincere is safe.
2. Have not too many Owners, let God be your owner, and you are safe enough; none of his Vessels miscarry. Yield your selves to the Lord; make over all you have to him, never more your own, than when most his.
3. Let all your tackling be of the best: let your Judgment be well convinced and established, that's your Mast; let your af∣fections be divine, they are your Sails; let your hope cast Anchor upon Christ, and the Scripture-promises; let your Vessel be well ballasted with humility; lay in good provi∣sions, such as are strengthning, wholsome, lasting, get in the whole armour of God, and resist your adversary therewith, and he will fly from you.

 4. Let your lading & fraught be such Com∣modities as will go off well in that other Country. Oh how many that are bound for another world, that are loaded with rags, dung, dross; faith, love, meekness, patience, zeal, heavenly-mindedness; these, are the wares that can never want a good market.
5. Make up your accounts exactly when you go out; & go to the great office, & insure all whatever it cost you; it's that may be done, you may run a sad riskow if you don't; the comfort and peace that you will have in it wil abundantly recompence your pains & charge in this business: How joyfully then ay you look dangers in the face? though the Sea run mountains high, though the waves therof roar, though every billow look as if it brought death with it; yet how comfortably may such a one look, he knows that if the vessel break, and his body be drowned, yet Christ lives, and he shal immediately be cast upon a happy shore, where in amoment all wants shall be supplied, all losses shall be made up in the glorious, perfect, and eter∣nal fruition of God. And he that gets Hea∣ven, Christ, and Glory by his losses, hath no great reason to be afraid of them.
6. Labour to make the best advantage of opportunity; don't lose your markets when the wind presents, hoise sail and away: The opportunities that God gives you at Land
 in his Ordinances must not be slighted; the Lords day is your great market-day, where∣in you may buy the richest peniworths; and when affections are striving, & the spirit of God is moving upon your spirits, & striving with your fouls, and pleading with you, then have a care of loosing such an opportunity; that's a brave gale, and the wind sits fair, & if you be then ready, such a wind may send you amain to your port; or else you may lie be∣calm'd, or windbound, & eat out your com∣forts, and lose more than you are aware of.
7. Take heed of the great rocks, Pre∣sumption and Despair: take heed of the great Pyrat the Devil; take heed of running a ground: the love of the world ruins thou∣sands, and if you strike here it's dangerous, but if you stick here you are broken, Ship-wracked, lost; take heed of all the sins that poor Seamen are too subject to; Swearing, cursing, raging, damning, jeering at godliness neglect of prayer, hardness of heart, atheism; may I not add drunkenness, uncleanness, &c.
8. Look oft to your Compass, the Word of God, and then you can't steer amiss; read and meditate upon the Scriptures, the Bible is an excellent companion.
9. Get a good Convoy, Pilot, Factor, Christ is all; count all as dung and dross in comparison of him: let your eye be still to him, your heart upon him, and know this,
 you can't overvalue him whom never yet any did sufficiently prize; let your hearts be much above, let not sea and land make you forget heaven, think you never make agood port till you are safe in the arms of Christ.
10. Keep an exact Journal, observe what way you make, by this God may have glo∣ry; you may have past experiences to feed your faith, and hope upon for the future. O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men.
11. Let losses make you more diligent to get and secure that which can't be lost.
12. In a word take heed of a sleepy in∣different careless spirit; take heed of ha∣ving a Jonah aboard, of carrying any sin unrepented out with you; and be much earnest and constant in prayer.
But in this and many other things, I re∣fer you to this seasonable and excellent Discourse which is calculated for the tribe of Zebulon chiefly. Again, I say, read and think, and read and practise, read and pray; and this will be the joy of one that dearly loves you, and daily prayeth for you,

March 1. 1672.
