



THE Wise and Supream Governour, and Orderer of all Affairs here be∣low, hath put you into a large ca∣pacity of Serviceableness and Ʋse∣fulness in your present day and Generation, Isa. 26. 1. (as Nationally considered) not only in a way of Commerce and Trade, but in a way of De∣fence and Safe-guard: God hath not onely bulwarkt England with his Salvations, Sal∣vation hath God appointed for walls and Isa. 26. 1. bulwarks; but also with Seas and Sea-Com∣manders: You have many times in your Ca∣pacities stood in the breach to keep out an Enemy that would have flowed in upon us like a flood, if God had not by spiriting of you, lifted up a Standard against him; and what
 message these following Papers have to you, is to call you, and excite you to further mea∣sures of use and service, that such as have been honoured in doing service for their Na∣tion, may be honoured in being useful to pre∣cious and immortal Souls under their Charge and Command; which you may be by the Blessing of God, in holy, exemplary, consci∣entious walking in and out before your Com∣panies: To which end, consider but these few following Motives:
1. Your Command is great; and where God gives much, doth he not require much? Can you say to your Companies as the Centu∣rion did to his Servants, Go, and he goes? and do they not readily obey you? and have you a word of command to do your business, and not one word of command for God, and their own Souls? It was said by a great per∣son once in high command; upon some Com∣plaint; Well, (saith he) if Soldiers, private Soldiers, miscarry, I will make Commanders pay for it. I wish in the issue it prove not so in this case: You should rule for God in your places.
2. Your dangers are great; and will you, can you neglect your duty in time of danger? in a time of danger you will look out if there be fears of an Enemy, of a Rock, of a Sand: Soldiers neglect not their duty when besieged with danger: You at Sea are besieged with
 dangers, yea with deaths; as it was said of Paul, he was in perils often by Sea; there∣fore you had need with all your Companies, attend your duty towards God, towards one anothers Souls; this is the way to come off when beset with dangers. Prayer hath brought many a Vessel off, and Ships company off, when all hope of being saved hath been taken away.
3. Your time looks as if it were short; have not you of all men cause to reckon so? Can you ensure your lives, though you may your Vessels, and your Ventures? hath God told you, you shall not miscarry this Voyage? who can tell what is in the womb of To-morrow? then can any tell what is in the womb of a twelve months, or a twenty months Voyage? Can you promise your selves a return home from an East-Indie, or from a Guiny Voy∣age? If you be secured from storms at Sea, can you secure your selves from the Diseases of the places and countries where you go? Oh then do good in your day, (which is like for any thing you know to be short).
4. Your Reward will be great; your Re∣ward will be great here, and hereafter. Your reward will be great here, Great peace have they which love thy Law: In keeping thy Commandments there is great reward. And when you come to die, either at Land, or Sea, you will be able to say with good Hezekiah,
 Lord, Remember how I have walked be∣fore thee in truth, and with a perfect heart: And hereafter, Oh what a Crown will it be if one Soul be converted under your charge, by your gracious carriage, and going in and out before them!
5. Your advantages and helps are great: you are advantaged with most excellent sea∣sons to do good to their Souls under your charge: Oh when Conscience hath been work∣ing in your companies, in their storms and dangers! what may not a word spoken at such a time do upon their souls! when it may be the sense of their eternal states is fresh upon them, when it may be, Eternity is be∣fore them; when it may be their hearts are tender with the sense of deliverance from some terrible Tempest: Oh what good may your praying, your speaking to them do at such times? Do not you see the Wonders of the Lord in the deep, to affect your hearts? may not you say your eyes affect your hearts?
6. Your Obligations to God are great: Are any persons under Heaven under such Obligations as you are? When you go into the utmost parts of the Sea, doth not Gods hand lead you there? Do not you sail under Gods especial Protection? Is not his Banner over you love, from Voyage to Voyage? Is not he much out of Purse (as I may say) upon you? Hath not he brought you out of the Jawes of
 Hell, and Death, many a time? Hath not he commanded many a storm into a calm for your sakes? Hath not he many a time said to the raging Waves and Seas, Peace and be still? Thus far, and no further? And will you thus requite the Lord, with evil for so much good? Is this your kindness to your friend? such a friend as he hath been in a day of adversity, to know your Souls in your distresses? Why should your Souls shew them∣selves so unkind?
7. Your Promises to God have been great: Oh the Vows that your lips have uttered to God in the day of your distress! what Pro∣testations have come from you, when in sig∣nal and eminent dangers? Are any men in so much debt to God as Seamen? are not pro∣mises debts? when you pay your Vows, do not you pay your Debts? and is not the God of your Salvations, the God to whom the Vows ought to be performed? Oh then go on Sirs in your several capacities, to promote the Hon∣our of that God who is the God of all your Deliverances. And do good to all under your command and charge, as opportunities present to you, that you may have the mercies of all that sail with you to be given unto you, and never come under the judgment of having them that sail with you to come in as witnes∣ses against you in the day of the Lord.

 If any thing in these following Papers may be useful and serviceable to this end, it will cause the Author to say, (It is enough) nay it is all that was in design, in sending out these weak endeavours into your hands. That you, and your Ships-companies, Souls and Bodies, Vessels and Ventures, may be ensured in the great Ensurance-office above, is the prayer of

