



MADAM,
I Have long waited for an opportunity to acknow∣ledge the many and great Obligations I have been under by your Ladiship, and your Family, since Providence put such a Price into my hand as
the mercy of your Acquain∣tance; and this is one reason a∣mong many others why I Dedi∣cate these poor papers to you & yours.2 Joh. 1.5. When I considered how John wrote to the Elect Lady, and her Children walking in the Truth,One observs that St. John who was the be∣loved Disci∣ple avas of a Noble stock, in which re∣gard he was so known of the High Priest that he did not fear the Jews, so as the other Disciples did. Where Nobility is enamelled with grace, it renders it far mere illustrious and splen∣did. I was much encouraged thereunto. Besides upon these accounts I could not but lay hold of the present opportuni∣ties. 1. The Care that I know you have many years conscien∣tiously spent in the Education of those tender Branches, the Lord hath honoured you with. O what glory might have been raised up to God, if in the Fami∣lies of Honour and Quality there had been such diligence in train∣ing up their Posterities, in the fear of that God, whom it is a great
Honour to serve! 2. The great success that crowned your Ladi∣ships endeavours herein, (that the Lord let you see your dear Chil∣dren set upon seeking the Lord betimes,) that so many morning seekers in such a Family (as I must confess I have not elsewhere known) while the dew of Gods blessing upon your Education lay upon these Branches; how did they while young grow up in Holy Affections and Desires after the Wayes and Truths of God! 3. And all this much in a time when the Power of Godli∣ness in many great Families was much discouraged (if not de∣cry'd) though Gospel duties, reading the Word, praying in Families, a strict observation of Sabbaths did grow in to reproach
and contempt in many Houses: yet all that time the Lord helped you to Resolve with an Honour∣able, and holy person of Old, I and my house will serve the Lord.Josh. 24.15.4. The great encouragement that you have given, not only to me the meanest of those Servants of God acquainted with your Family, but that you have given to many more in a dark and gloo∣my day. O how many Families have you and yours refreshed in a day of straits I and is it any dis∣honour to testifie this before this uncharitable world? 5. The Lord honouring you with soli∣dity of judgment, these giddy reeling times; that in dayes and times when erroneous notions and principles, as well as corrupt practices have overspread many
Families, you have been preserv∣ed in the truth, and have taken great care that your Children should, while they were young, be trained up in the truth, as it is in Jesus. If I had no more rea∣sons for my present tender of these poor endeavours to you and yours, are not these enough? But I am afraid you will say here is more than enough said: though not so much as might. I did not know upon serious thoughts how such a design as this might tend to encourage or promote good beginnings and breathings after God in your Family. And though, through the rich mercy and grace of God, you be not a tender young plant in the Courts of God, but grown up in the Grace and Knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ; yet here may be some thing presented to your children that may prove through a blessing from above of use to them, as to their further progress in the good wayes of God. I re∣membred one thing, when I thought of this Dedication, how oftenWhen I had the hap∣piness of being con∣versant with them. some of them did employ me to buy or acquaint them with what Books they should buy proper and useful for them; and who are fitter to Dedicate an useful Book to, than such? (if God will so please to make this poor Treatise.) There are Lambs (your Ladiships know) in the flock of Christ, that need carry∣ing, as well as those that are with young, that need leading; there are Babes in Christs School who have need of milk, as well as
stronger Christians that need stronger meat. If this may be milk, sincere milk that any of Gods new born Babes may grow thereby, yea, any of your Chil∣dren may grow up in grace there∣by, this will be the rejoycing of the Author. Now Madam, that God would cause your House to grow, who hath made a sure Co∣venant with you and yours, and that the dew of Heaven, as well as fatness of the Earth may be the portion of you and yours, is the prayer of

Decem. 9. 1672.
