


Dear Friends,
YOur state and calling is set forth by the Spirit of God, to be the most dangerous of all Means; You mount up to Heaven, and go down again to the depths, and is not this a desperate case? Their soul is melted because of trouble, (can any more Psal. 107. 26, 27. be said in a word, to declare their forlorn and deplorable condition?) They reel to and fro like a drunken man, and are at their wits end. They know not what to do, but then their eyes are up to God: And that when you are plunged into this sad estate, you may have some good Anchor-hold for eter∣nity, is the design of these Papers, sent now into your hands. 1. Love to your Souls studied them; love to your Souls
 preached them, and now love to your Souls, (notwithstanding the many imper∣fections they are clothed withal,) prints them; and indeed they were hastned to the Press, rather by the voice of God than man: Thoughts of presenting them to publick view were taken up, and laid down again some Months, but that dreadful ala∣rum from Heaven, in that fatal storm, both at Sea and Land, when so many Ships and Lives miscarryed; viz. September the 11. and 12, 1671. did occasion the reassuming fresh thoughts, that through the blessing of God, they might be useful to the good of poor Seamen; and so the Author was pre∣vailed with to trust God with them; espe∣cially so few Treatises being in print, for the sakes of poor Seamen, that live con∣stantly lives of death and danger, and their Relations, that lives Lives of sorrow and fear: That you may be serious in the rea∣ding, and practising what now is put into your hand; Let me tell you,
1. Your Souls, your Families, your Estates, your Lives; nay, your All is here concerned: The design of these Papers is the Ensurance of your immortal precious Souls, this is the Jewel if safe, all is safe, if this be lost, all is lost, Ships lost, you may get others; nay, the loss of Relations may be made up, but the loss of a Soul is an
 irreparable loss; as it is unvaluable, so it is irreparable, it can neither be made up, nor sum'd up. O poor Seamen what a pre∣cious commodity do you carry to Sea with you! what an unvaluable Jewel! and yet run the venture, take no care to ensure this, that is infinitely worth more than all you carry to Sea with you besides?
2. Your snares and temptations are grea∣ter than other mens: May it not be said of you, as of them, Fear, the Pit, and the snare are upon you: It is to be hoped you are not all fearless and graceless. Snares of Com∣panies at land, at sea, at home, and abroad; snares of foreign Countries, and snares of your callings: Oh what a wonder it is that poor Seamen that walk upon snares, are no more sensible of them! that they are not like him that dreamed he saw the world full of snares, and heard a voice say, Quis per∣transeat ista?) Who shall pass through these? and afterwards he heard a voice say by way of reply, Humilitas pertransit, Humility shall pass through. So say I, Oh poor Sea∣men, a watchful heart shall pass through all your snares, you have need of as many eyes as the Poets feign Argus to have. Who have so many snares as you have! How true is that of many Seamen that Job hath of the wicked, For he is cast into a net by his own feet, Job 18. 8. and he walketh upon a snare.
 3. Your opportunities and seasons for your Souls are fewer than other mens. Good Books must be your Sermons, and if you will not read when you cannot hear, you live in a daily neglect of your duty to God, and to your own precious souls; Oh how sad would it be, and will it be for you one day, if you sleight and despise the Ministry of Reconciliation, when you are at home! where you may enjoy it as in no place of the world whither you go; and when you are at Sea neglect those advantages, which you may have in reading of the word; Seamens Ordinances are and ought to be Gods Providences; and their Ministry, and Preachers, Seas and Winds, if you sleight the Ministry of your Barnabasses ashore, viz. the Sons of Consolation, you shall meet with the Ministry of Boarnergesses at Sea, a Ministry of Thunder: Doth not God often thunder upon you in storms, Hurri∣canes, and mighty Tempests? doth not the Lord make that word good upon many poor Seamen? Ʋpon the wicked he rains fire, Psa. 11. snares, and brimstone, and an horrible Tempest: This shall be the portion of their cup.
4. Your Accounts are great: No men have greater accounts to give to God than Seamen have; therefore they had need look well to the stating of them; poor Seamen, though you put it off, yet the great Audit∣day
 is coming; the Lord will call you to a reckoning, what though it should be (as you think) long first it is said of the sloth∣ful servant, that after a long time the Master of that servant reckoned with him: God will make you know that long forbearance is no forgiveness. As Solomon says to the young man, so I say to the Seamen, Rejoyce O poor profane Seaman in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; But know thou that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment. 1. O that Seamen would con∣sider that the Lord will call them to an ac∣count for their vows, that their lips have uttered in the day of their distress: The day will come that they shall say, Thy vows are . 56. 12. upon us, O God: Can you answer the que∣stion, when God and Conscience shall ask you, what is become of your vows, of your promises, and protestations? Can you make vows, and break them with the same breach? 2. Oh that Seamen would consider God will call them to an account for the Convictions they have had in their storms and distresses: Oh doth not God and Conscience often board them (as I may say) and come to close fight with them, and tell them, poor sinners, these are your sins, your crying sins, that you must leave and lay aside, if ever you
 expect to find mercy from me, and these are your duties that you must conscientiously take up, as ever you think to have my com∣fortable presence with you. Oh now how ordinary is it for poor Seamen to wear off and loose such Convictions? but though you forget them, God remembers them, and will call you to an account for them. 3. God will call you to an account for your Salvati∣ons and Preservations; are there any men in the world men of so many deliverances and mercies as Seamen are? Oh what deaths and dangers do they pass through every Voyage! how may it be said to many of them, as Jonathan did to David? As I live there is but a step betwixt thee and death: What few steps, inches, are betwixt Seamen and death, nay, and damnation, if they mis∣carry before an interest gotten in the Lord Jesus Christ? and can you think, nay dare you think that God gives you such mercies and preservations to spend them upon your lusts; to gratifie your flesh withal? may not you hear God sometimes saying to you as in that case, Are you delivered to do all these Jer. 1. abominations? Oh will not God say to you, Did not I give thee thy life poor sinner, when many others miscarryed? did not I bring thee off in a most miraculous manner, when others were swallowed up? and what use didst thou make of such a preservation?
 4. God will call Seamen to an account for all their Provocations: Oh poor Souls, you no sooner commit them, but you forget them; Oh but God hath a book of Remem∣brance in which they are all recorded, and out of which you shall be judged; the se∣cret of all hearts in that day shall be mani∣fest; all the hidden things of darkness shall be brought to light, all secret guilt at home or abroad in the foreign parts of the Earth; all your secret sins are set in the light of Gods countenance. 5. God will call Sea∣men to an account, for their Afflictions: Ma∣ny of them they meet with great trials, one while breaches upon their Estates comes upon them, as the breaches of the Sea; one Voyage it may be rich, and the next impo∣verished, or if not so, it may be taken by the Turks, or some cruel Enemies, and then under great slavery and misery, and after all redeemed; Oh will not God call to an account for this. What better were you for your slavery? did it make you sensible of your spiritual captivity? did it bring you out of Soul-bondage? did it occasion you to consider this slavery of your bodies to the Turks, is nothing to the slavery of your souls to sin and Satan? As it is said by God, I sent you into the Land of Chaldea for your good; so will God say, I sent you into Sally, I sent you into Argier, but was it for your
 good? Oh what a pity it is to see bodies of poor Seamen redeemed, and their souls Captives still! to see them Drunkards, Swea∣rers, unclean, and what not, after they have been slaves. Oh what pity it is to hear them talk of their slavery, and see their souls lie still in irons and fetters; Captives to the Prince of darkness, which is worse bon∣dage than that you talk on, when men are sent up into the Country to the King of Fess? 6. God will call Seamen for an ac∣count for their time; they have abundance of time, many of them, and God will ac∣count with them for it, what improve∣ment they made of it, what use they put it to? It is a talent, the improvement of it is accountable.
5. Poor Seamen to move you to read and practise, what you here meet with; consider your day goeth away; your glass runs apace, you are sailing for Eternity; you being under sail for another world, why should not your eyes and hearts be much upon that Country, to which you are bound? Dost thou know whether thou shalt make this Voyage that thou art go∣ing on? Canst thou assure thy self of a safe arrival, or a safe return? Canst thou say as Abraham did, when he went to offer up his Son, I, and the lad will go yonder to wor∣ship, and we will return? Can you promise
 your dear Relations a meeting again in this world, when you part with them? and should not you then be serious in reading, in practising, in improving any thing that concerns the peace of your precious souls?
6. That poor Seamen may read and pra∣ctise: Oh that they would consider how lost time will sting their poor souls another day! have not many of you much time for reading, prayer, heart-examination? though it is true, such are your circumstances some∣times, that your time will not give you leave for such serious employments; yet again at other times, you have abundance of leisure, is not this a great sin among Sea∣men, idly to game their time away, or to talk it away, or sinfully to sport it away? but when you come into a storm at Sea, or upon a death-bed at land, what will your souls say to it then? Oh that I had redee∣med my time! Oh that I had been more di∣ligent to make my calling and election sure! Oh that I had spent more time in reading, prayer, heart-examination, than I have done! and less in sinful pleasures in sinful company, in sinful conference. It was a sad saying of a distressed soul, when go∣ing to die, Ten pounds for an hour: Ten pounds for an hour. Oh poor soul what wouldst thou not give for a day, or two, reprieve from hell and death, if there might be hope of a pardon.
 7. That poor Seamen may read and pra∣ctise, Oh that they would consider, they have as great need for grace, as any men under heaven have. Oh what need have Seamen, and their poor Relations of grace; as in that case is said by the Apostle, You have need of Patience. So I may say in this, Oh poor Seamen, you have need of pati∣ence to bear your storms quietly; and Oh how many that do not possess their Souls in patience, in tempests and storms; but are in as great a storm as the Sea it self, whose hearts are like the troubled Sea, that cast forth nothing but mire and dirt, who belch out their Oaths & Blasphemies against God; and like that King Ahaz, sin more and more in the time of their distress; who are like a Bull, a wild Bull in the net, full of the fury of the Lord. If the winds blow they swear. What need have you of faith for your Souls, for your Bodies, for your Relations? Is not faith a storm-grace, and may not Jesus Christ say to many why are you fearful? Oh you of little faith; nay, why are you so bold and presumptuous, Oh you of no faith!
8. That poor Seamen may read and pra∣ctise: Oh that they would consider, their account will be aggravated by what they meet with here if they practise it not; as Christ said to those Jews, so may I say in
 this case, If I had not comne, and spoken unto you, you had not had sin, but now your sin remains: viz. Your sins had not been so circumstantiated so highly aggravated. Wil't not be said another day, were you not warned of such a danger? of such a sin? charged by the Lord in the Ministry of the Word, to submit and subject your souls to such a duty; and will not all this be matter of evidence against you in the great day? But that your poor Souls may be pull'd as brands out of the burning, and come in this your day to hearken to the voice of the Lord, and not harden your hearts as in the day of Provocation; but know the things that concerns the peace of your precious Soul, before they be hid from your eyes; is the earnest prayer of him who is one that desires nothing more than to be directed to let down the Net at the right side of the Ship, that your poor Souls may be brought into Christ by it.

