


SIR,
'TIS the custom with those that Dedicate any thing, to adorn their Frontispieces with the Panegyrick Praises of their Mecenas. In which thy create Favours, and Illustrate their own Eloquence, unto which I was always averse. But, forasmuch as the great Demonstrations of your Civili∣ties and Benevolence towards my Family, are always in my Memory; my Affections could not but be moved with the Earth, and the Divine Providence at last afforded me an occa∣sion, which I had long sought for in vain, to repay some small acknowledgment of a grateful Mind, by offering unto you the first Fruits of a new Language (the Knowlege of which I attained to in your Neighbourhood) then Dedicate any thing new to you. Nay, 'tis very reasonable that this Treatise should see again the same Country where it began to speak, or rather to stut∣ter.
Yet if there were any need to mention more weighty Reasons and pass by these, how innumerable of them, might be afforded, known both to me and the whole Nation, in the enumerating of which a whole Volum might be defective? But that
which hath been the greatest Motive with me, was the Piety innate to all your Noble Family, and to your Illustrious Lady, excelling all others both in Beauty of Body, and in great Parts of Mind. To which may be added the Candor and Con∣stancy of your Mind, free from all secular blemish; which Vertues you know how prudently to use in the exercise of Ju∣stice, and the distribution of Right to every one, in punishing Vice and Vicious Persons. On which, and on many other things is founded His Majesty's (the most Prudent of Kings) and his Counsel, Judgment, in conferring on you the Magistra∣cy. The unanimous Concord of the whole Country in chusing you to sustain their Parts in the most August English Parlia∣ment, was upheld by this Foundation. On this incorrupted Sincerity, leans the hope of its Patronage, and the Affection of a sincere and faithful Mind, for the Conservation and Promotion of the Present State of Affairs. But many Words become not the Candidate of a Foreign Tongue, especially in so sublime a Matter. Pray, Sir, respect not so much the external Meanness of the Person, as the Gratitude of his inmost Affecti∣on, after the Example of that Prince who disdained not wil∣lingly to accept of cold Water offered to him in the Hand of a Countryman, his Subject; But having perused this Work, be pleased to accept of it as a Pledge of the eternal Deference I owe to you, and disdain not to embrace it in your Patronage. In the mean time that God will grant an Accomplishment of this, and many other Years attended with his most gracious Benedi∣ction to you and all your honour'd Family, and that the effluxi∣on of this Age may be free from all Commotion and fatal Alte∣ration, either of the Earth, or of the Present Affairs of this Kingdom, is the Prayer of
SIR, 
April 9. 1693.
