



Honored Sir,
THe great Design of God in this World, is to exercise man; and the greatest in∣terest of man, is to glorifie God, who hath provided the Touch-stone of his Word to try our hearts by, and the Balance of his works to weigh our Lives in: So much strength as we have in a day of temptation, so strong we are; and since Temptation is for our Probation, we have as much cause to bless God for our support under Try∣als,

as for our deliverance from try∣als: It is true, Satan hath his Sieve, and his aim is to seperate the Wheat from the Chaff; to give life to our sins, by the death of our Graces; but God hath his Fan in his hand, and his design is to seperate the Chaff from the Wheat, to give life to our Graces by the death of our sins.
I must acknowledge, That God hath lately put into your hands a bitter Cup to drink off (in the decease of your Vertuous and Beloved Consort) onely this I presume doth support you, That your eyes are opened to see that it was of your Fathers mingling: This affliction is a sharp Arrow, but it is shot out of a sweet hand; ama∣ra sagitta, ex dulci manu Dei (as

the Father speaks) How excellent a thing is it, when Gods Rod is upon our backs, to have our hands upon our mouthes, and not to mur∣mur? While unbelief commenceth an Action against, and complains of the heavy hand of God to the World, for us to complain rather of our own evil hearts to God? Your experience (Sir, I trust) in Gods School, hath ac∣quainted you with the Equity of his Discipline and Pedagogy. Oh! What an advantage have we over Satan, when we understand the intent, and and possess the fruit of every Cross; when we can see our Lashes to be our Lessons, our Corrections to be our In∣structions, our Crosses to be the Ex∣ecutioners of our Corruptions.
It was an Heavenly Prayer of him that said, Lord, I do not desire that the Burthen should be taken off, but that I might have strong∣er shoulders to bear it: And an Heroick Experience of him that said, If any man would ride post to Heaven, let him get up upon the Cross. The truth is, every affliction is Gods Messenger, and eve∣ry one of his Messengers have their Errand to deliver: The Rod must be heard, or the Word will never be felt: Though all that are corrected are not Gods children, yet all that are Gods children are corrected. Afflictions are favors, and therefore when God threatens that he will shew mercy no more, he threatens that he will af∣flict

no more. Ephraim is joyned to Idols, let him alone. Lord, rather (let every gracious heart say) let thine hand be laid on me, then that I should be cast out of thy hand; rather frown on me, then that thou shouldst turn thy Face from, and not look on me.
But the great Advantage of our tryal, is to come; here the Language of the rod is easie and plain, but the Dialect of that Language is hard and difficult to be known; conformity and self-denyal, are indisputably the mean∣ing of every blow, but we are disposed to misconter Providence in Particu∣lar; what God intends onely for our exercise, we pretend is done out of his anger: And therefore where the Text is obscure, we must be wary in writing

Cōmentaries, we must take heed of turning his Reubarb into Ratsbane, by reading wrath where God never wrote it: There will come a time, when God will interpret his own minde, and sa∣tisfie us, not onely in the Regulari∣ty and justice of his Rods, but in the Reason and suitableness of them; why we are almost burned and consu∣med, while others were but singed; why he drew so much blood from us, more then from others that seemed more exorbitant: God loves not to be sting∣ing, like the Bee, he exhibits honey freely, but he stings upon provocation; his wisdom and our necessity, weigh and prescribe every drop of gall that is put into our Cups, and every lash

of the Rod that is laid on our backs. A Cordial is fitter for this man, a Cor∣rasive fitter for another: Such a Christian will be wakned by the light of a Candle, another stands in need of a Clap of Thunder: How sweet is it to justifie God, when he condemns us? At last day we shall say, The Lord knew our distemper, and he let us blood in the principal Vein; if we had not perished, we had perished: His Sun∣shine melted us, his Hammer brake us. Blessed affliction! that made us see more uglinesse and emptinesse in the Creature, and more excellency in God, that weaned our affections from the world, and occasioned our more seri∣ous thoughts of Eternity.
It may satisfie us, That God

dealeth with his, as the Persians, I take it, do with the offending children of their Princes; they correct their Royal Garments in publick, but let their Persons go free; our Bodies are beaten, and our Souls are bettered: Here we must be polished by Tryals, and hewn by Hammers, and hereafter we shall be laid into Gods Building; Nunc foris per flagella tundi∣mur, ut intus in Templum Do∣mini disponamur, Afflictions are the fruit of his Wisdom, Repentance our fruit of his Afflictions: The Lord grant that all our storms may drive us nigher to our Harbor. I should hum∣bly crave excuse for this freedom, but that I know your Ingenuity, and that your condition requireth support; and

as remembring that words spoken in season, are like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver. I am sorry of so sad an occasion of presenting this, yet so seasonable a subject to you: I request your acceptance of it; the advantage whereof, is the desire of,

From my Sudy in Shoreditch, Decem. 20. 1656.
