



YOu Gentle Ladies that would know
What in Adonis Gardens grow,
Walk forth with me, and I will bring
You to the Beauties of the Spring.
First we will view the Myrtle Grove,
And there salute the Queen of Love,
With Daphne, fair as when alive,
Clos'd in a Verdant Vegetive.
Then to th' Enamel'd-banks wee'l go,
And as the dainty Flowers blo',
We there will pick out all the fair,
To make fresh Chaplets for your hair.
See where the Primroses appear,
With otherRed and blush Prim∣roses. Infants of the year,
Blushing with shame for to be shown
Now the rare Daffodills are blown:
Mark in what Order they do stand,
Bowing their Heads to kiss your Hand,
And then with yellow Jealousie,
Rival'd by richer Beauties, dye.
For see theAuricula ursi Bears-Ears. Auriculaes come forth,
Adorn'd with Dies of much more worth,
And fair Eyes twinckling on each stem,
The Heavenly Bear shines not like them.
But then the rare Anemonies
Appear and challenge all the prize,
In various colours richly drest,
And might be chosen for the best,
Did not now Phoebus call to rise
The Tulips, to delight you Eyes
With glorious Garments rich and new,
Excelling all in Eden grew;
Like the Rich Glutton some are dight
In Tyrian-Purple and fine White;
And in bright Crimson others shine,
Impal'd with White and Graydeline:
The meanest here you can behold,
Is Cloth'd in Scarlet, lac'd with Gold.
But then theAgot Hanmer a rich Tulip. Queen of all delight
Wears Graydeline Scarlet and White:
So interwoven and so plac'd,
That all the other are disgrac'd
When she appears, and doth impart
Her Native Beauties shaming Art.
Once did that famousPater Zgrs, a Jesuite in Antwerp, fa∣mous for pain∣ting Flowers. Jesuite try
To Copy out her Majesty,
But falling short of his desire,
He left his Pencil to admire.
Neer to this Queen on either hand,
As lovely Maids of Honor, stand
TheNames of fine Tulips. Orient Virgin in despair,
AndArch-Duke Imperial. Leopaldus Mistress fair,
Viewing Grand-purpur, in aray
So Rich, may challenge all the day;
And many more, which to express
The manner of their curious dress,
Would Pens and Pencils set at strife;
Yet neither render half the life.
But see they fade and seem to dye,
The Dews to weep their Obsequy,
And all their lustre vanish quite,
That lately were so fair, so bright:
Yet Gentle Ladies do not fear,
They'l spring again another year:
For, though they seem, they are not Dead,
Onely disrob'd to go to Bed,
And there secured from all harms,
Rest in their tender Mothers Arms.


Beauties walk on, why droop yee thus?
Look where the brave Ranunculus
With Scarlet Robes appear in State,
And double Ruffs ingeminate:
Monster, Puvoine, Variegated
From Forein soils hither translated,
Thrive by the Florists skill and care,
In this lean Earth and Northern Air.
And now behold as you pass by
The White, the Purple, and Blush Paeony,
With some fair Lillies that invite,
The double Red, and double White:
Who now their Beauties do disclose,
To entertain the lovely Rose,
The White, and Red, together meet,
To match their mixture by your Cheek;
And now I find my thoughts prove true,
From thence the Rosa-mundi grew.
See how your presence makes to shine,
TheNames of several fiue Roses. Damask and the Crystalline,
Marbled with varied colours spred,
The gallant Belgick, Blush and Red.
That Thornless Bryer there doth twine,
With the sweet double Eglantine,
Brings forth fine Flow'rs that do excell
As well in Beauty, as in Smell;
And in this clear, and sweeter Air,
The Double Yellow looks most fair;
The Damask Province, and the Red,
Do now appear no better spred;
Their folded Buds upon each stem
Expect your Breath to open them,
That so perfum'd they may disclose,
And each appear a Fragrant Rose:
The various Flow'r ofIri Chcido∣nica. Chalcedon,
Bulb'd Iris, and the Martagon,
With all else blown, you may suppose
Are servants to attend the Rose.
But June is past, the Rosie Bowers
Give place unto the Gilliflowers,
Whose comely Forms, and Colours fair;
With odorous Breath, perfuming Air,
And Merry looks, invite your Eyes
To veiw their choice varieties.
How big with Flow'r theirLargest Gil∣liflowers aprest to break the pods. Bellies seem?
Lucina aid them now they Teem;
Help Ladies for to hold the Back,
Lest that their tender Wombs should crack.
So, now 'tis well, doubtless next morn
You'l see a dainty Beauty born,
With so many lovely Graces,
Matching the Tincture of your Faces;
All will conclude, but first admire,
That young Adonis was the Sire,
And Venus must the Mother be
Of those Fair Infants which you see:
For Children of an Unchast Mother
Are seldom like to one another;
And mark them well, you'l find each one
Of different complexion,
Var'ing in Stature, Form, or Air,
And none of them of Vulcan's Hair.
'Tis a sad truth, and their own case,
Most of them are ofSeedlings. Spurious Race;
For the Legitimate are gone,
And there remains scarce any one
Descended from the Nobler kind,
Fortune to such hath long been blind.


Ladies methinks you are not Merry,
Sure this long Walk hath made you Weary,
But if you like this harmless play,
I'le meet you here another day;
When to their Quarters we will go,
Where they themselves shall let you kno',
Which in each kind doth most excell,
With all their Names, and where they dwell:
And then you'l hear them beg, and sue,
That they may come to wait on you.


Ladies before you bid adieu,
Hear what the Author wisheth you.


May all the several Ornaments You wear
Be like these Flow'rs, renewed ev'ry Year:
And You, like them, such splendid Graces win,
You know the Lillies neither Sow nor Spin.
Silent as Flow'rs may You in Virtues grow,
Till rip'ning Time shall make you sit to blow,
Then Flourish long, and Seeding leave behind
A numerous off-spring of your Dainty kind:
And when Fate calls, have nothing to Repent,
But Dye like Flow'rs, Virtuous and Innocent.
Then all your fellow Flow'rs, both Fair and Sweet,
Will come with Tears, to deck your Winding-sheet;
Hang down their pensive Heads so dew'd, and crave
To be transplanted to your perfum'd Grave.


