



THIS Antiphrastical age
perverting terms to con∣trary
meanings, calling
Truth Falshood, Fals∣hood
Truth, Vertue Vice,
and Vice Vertue, &c. not
only minds us of Ephesian Wolves and spe∣kers
of perverse things,Act, 20. 30. but evidently
shews, that the time of which the Apostle
warned, is not instant but extant. The
deaf Adders will not be charmed, or hear∣ing2 Tim. 4. 3, 4
endure sound doctrine (Amara sunt vitiosis ac malè∣viventibus prae∣cepta justitiae, Lactant. l. 1. c.  that's bitter

to the wicked) but after their own lusts
heap up to themselves Teachers (like Jero∣boams
1 Kng. 12. 31Priests of the lowest of the people)
having itching ears.Oecum. in 2 Tim.2 Tim. 4. 3. We have so much ex∣perience
hereof, that we cannot but know
that for the loud-crying sms of this Nation
proceeding from contempt of his Word
and Ministry, the Lord hath smitten many
tongues and ears with a worse thenDeut. 28. 27.Egyp∣tian
plague, a spiritual botch, scab, incura∣ble
itch, madness, blindness and astonishment
of heart, so that theyJoh. 3. 3, 20.hate the light and
learning,. Gr. Nazianz. orat 20. because they would have all like
themselves, that their ignorance might lie
hid in one common darkness, unreproved,
undiscovered; all which like a shril Trum∣pet
from the clouds of heaven, sounding
lowder and lowder, gives the alarm to all
faithful Ministers toAct. 20. 28.take heed to themselves
and to all the stock over which the H. Ghost
hath made them overseers: spiritually fur∣nished,
like those repairers of the Temple,
both forNehem. 4. 17 building and defence, taking to
them the wholeEph. 6. 13. armour of God, that they
may be able to stand. I may safely say, no
one age ever felt such various oppositions

of truth; Satan seeming in former times
but to skirmish, but now to storm theRev. 20. 9.be∣loved
City and Tents of the Saints with all
his Legions of errours drawn up into one
body: of all which none more infest or
hinder our work, then those Moabites and
Ammonites;Deur. 23. 3.who contrary to Gods ordi∣nance,
have intruded into the work of the
Temple, pretending to build with us; say∣ing
with those enemies of Israel,Ezra 4. 2. We seek
your God as ye do. Now the noon-tide Devil
is on the Stage in his last scene, whose part
is (if itMar, 24. 24.were possible) to deceive the very
Elect. To which no ordinary dress can
now fit him or his Ministers; it must be
(and so is) some close semblance of sancti∣mony,
in which the Saints delight; without
which Satan could not easily take them,
with which he often doth; whilstIncauè creduli circumveniuntur ab iis quos bo∣nos putabant. Minuc Fel. Oct.incau∣tiously
credulous, they are deceived by
those whom they esteemed, &c. Strab. l. 16. good. The
hunters of Ostriches used to dress them∣selves
up with their feathers, imitate their
motions, and scatter grains of seeds before
them; so the false2 Cor. 11. 13, 15. Apostles, deceitful wor∣kers,
seduce by transforming themselves

into Apostles of Christ, Ministers of righte∣ousness;
scattering out of their delightful
bags, seeds of dangerous Heresies and
Schisms.
Why I undertook this polemical task,
you know who were present at my first
imbarquing in this controversie; as also
many of my reverend brethren, who af∣terwards
importuned me to the first part
hereof. If any ask, why it comes out so
late to publike view? let the false2 Sam. 16. 3. 2 Sam. 19. 25, &c.Zi∣baes
answer; I can conjecture but not re∣solve;
it is now about two years since it
was much desired, fairly promised, and
accordingly sent to one Press; where the
Vid. Isa. 37. 3children were come to the birth and there
was no strength to bring forth. Why I write
after so many, so much more able to defend
the truth, might possibly put me to the
Oratours quaereQuae sunt igi∣tur meae partes, &c. Cic. orat. pro L. Cornel. Balb. init. What is left for me to do?
but new adversaries arising, giving fresh
assaults, and impudently affronting and
challenging me in my publike charge to
answer them; what could I have answer∣ed
the Lord, if seeing the Wolf coming
into the fold, I had withdrawn or betrayed

the soule of my Auditors; who might pos∣sibly
have thought our cause deserted, for
which none durst plead. All lovers of
truth owe it respective defence: and too
much caution cannot be in things of so
great moment as salvation ofSimiliter fa∣cis, ae si me ro∣ges, cur te due∣bus contuear oculis, & non altero tantum, cum idem uno assequi possim. Cic. denat. deor. l. 3.souls. No
man rationally asketh, What need we two
eyes who can see with one? I am far from
pleading universality for defence, or multi∣tudes
for Patronage of truth: let our ad∣versaries
reckon themselves many, and
think that—Illes
Defendit numerus, junctaeque umbone Phalanges:
They have many Writers; but if the cause
be weighed by Scripture and solid reason,
then as2 King. 6. 16.Elisha said, they are more with us
then with them: yet I heartily wish that
many more would shew themselves on our
part, and neither betray the truth by their
silence, who can seasonably and ably speak
in its defence, nor encourage the adversa∣ries
thereof by such a Laodicea-like luke∣warmness
as shews a dangerous symptome
of neutralitie. For my part I cannot but
be conscious of much disabilitie, yet dare
not but endeavour to defend the. Gr. Nazianz. Orat. 13.truth:

for this, let whoso will condemn or acquit
me; God is all-sufficient. Such as these
endeavours are, I submit to the judgment
of the1 Tim. 3. 15.Church of God, the pillar of truth, and
dedicate them to you who love the truth;
and by Gods assistance:2 Pet. 2. 12, .will not be negli∣gent
to put you alwayes in remembrance of
these things, though you know them, and be
established in the present truth; yea, I think
it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle.
God alone gives theCor. 3. 5, 7. encrease: To him be
Lc. 2. 14glory in the highest, and on earth peace, good
will towards men: to you and yours, con∣stancie
in the truth, and happiness tempo∣ral
and eternal; which is the daily prayer
of
Decemb. 8. 1653.

