



SIR,
I Have (upon assurance of your excellent Candor) presumed to invite you from your more fer∣tile Studies to the Barren Heath, where you will find the Air wholsome, though the Soyl be sterril. Frustra salubris est locus, ubi peritur fame. Frustra fertilis

ubi non licet vivere. The richest Seats are not healthy: Health and Wealth seldom meet in the same Place. The Design of the ensuing Directions is to render the Barren Earth fruitful, and provide for the Profit as well as Pleasure of those whose Lot is fallen into a Heathy Ground. The wise God, who justly Cursed the Earth for Mans sake, hath yet left Means of Redemption by the Sweat of his Brow, and Labour of his Hand. Humane Industry, with the Blessing of God upon it, will faecundate the Earth, which Mans sin made unfruitful. The admirable Production of Art out of Natures dull and unweildy Womb are the Subject of many Discourses; and the new Experiments of every Day allure the Ingenious to renewed Essayes. Amongst the various Tryals of this kind, none is more profitable than this of Im∣proving Barren Ground, and the good Husbandry to turn the parched Desart in∣to

a Fruitful Field, and to render the unfruitful Hills as pleasant Valleys. The Pleasure of this may be more than guessed at,Illi etiam praedivites, qui ab aratro accer∣sebantur, ut consules fierent Voluptatis cau∣sâ sterile atque aestu∣osum Pupiniae solum versabant. when we consider the Prisca Gens, and Greatest Men of the first Age were enamoured with Agri∣culture: When Quintius Cincinnatus, and Marcus Curius, after they Triumphed in the Field, ran hastily to their Farms, and coun∣ted themselves more Happy, and no less Ho∣norable, with the Mattock and Spade in their Hand, as when they had the Sword and Scep∣ter. The many Encomia of Poets, Orators, &c. of the Blessedness of a Rural Life, and pleasant Divertisements of a little well til'd Spot, confirm this.
Now Sir, if you shall please to remit a little while your graver Studies, lay by your Plouden and consult Columella, and shall honor these Directions with your experiment, you

will find sensible Arguments of Profit and Pleasure, strong enough to oblige you to spend a good part of your Vacation on the Plow.
I have been emboldned to prefix your Worthy Name to this Little Book, know∣ing you a Person able to Protect and Vindi∣cate both It and the Author, and one who will Pardon the little Errours that your piercing Eye shall find, and will accept kindly of the Endeavours for Publick Good, of
Hackney, April 14th. 1670.
Sir,

