



My Lords,
THere has been a great Hurly-burly about
the Death of Sir Edmund-Bury
Godfrey, publick Justice has made her
Report to Heaven, that he was murdered by the
Papists; but the Papists scandaliz'd at the
Wickedness of the Action, would fain have made
the World believe that he killed himself. My
Lords, 'tis well known, how far I have contribu∣ted
my Personal pains, before and since that my
Advice to bring this noble Design to pass. But I
think the Devil owes us a shame, we have always
the ill Luck to meet either with Fools or Knaves:
When it comes to the pinch, what we well contrive
is defeated, by the ill management of our Instru∣ments.
The Observator indeed did indifferent
well; for he gave a sparring-blow at Praunce's
Reputation, and back'd our Friend Thompson
i'the very Nick, the very morning before the Trial.
I chuckl'd again when I heard of the Vintner's
Boys; they put me in mind of the St. Omers
Lads. But as for F. and P. and all their Wit∣nesses,

'twas Money meerly thrown away. But
let us not despond my Lords, if one thing fails ano∣ther
will hit, and we shall hit it at last: In the
mean time, 'tis my Advice, that you keep up the
Observator's Spirits and double his Salary. It
will be a thorn i'their sides that swore him at the
Queens Chappel, as long as he lives.
Facit Indignatio Dialogos, my Lords—And
though the Heraclitick Cabal be of little
moment, let it not sink: All helps, as the Wren
said: But above all (since you may have so many
Protestant Booksellers to do it) let the Ld. C's
Vindication of the English Catholicks, his
Memento, and the Ld. Stafford's Memoirs
be reprinted. Those Gentlemen puzzl'd the Peo∣ple
with their if's and their ands, and how is
it possibles, at a strange rate. They had a
brave Design to persuade men out of their Reason
and their Senses; and I am persuaded all that be∣lieve
in the Observator, and Heraclitus, will
believe in Them. I beseech you, my Lords, take
these things into your Considerations; for you
have leisure enough, and believe that she will ne∣ver
forsake you, unless you forsake her, who is▪

