



THIS little Treatise (most Gracious and Dread So∣vereign,) was occasion'd by a Sermon Preach'd the last Ascention-Day, by a Bishop of the Church of England, whose Tal∣lent

was so much commended, that I was no less curious than desirous to hear him: And so I did with atten∣tion. I confess, I am no competent Author to fasten an Opinion of his Lordship on any; yet being not at all pleaed with his Doctrine, I gave my best Friends the faithfullest report I cou'd of the chiefest Points of his Discourse. His Lordship I own, is Oratour enough, and was sufficiently moderate for a great part of his Ser∣mon, till at last he flew to Contro∣versies nothing material to his Text, and much less Consonant to good Do∣ctrine. Then I was resolved to have a sharp Eye after him. Sermon be∣ing done, immediately I Recorded

his chiefest Errours, and endeavour'd at leasure to reduce them to the best and easiest method that was pos∣sible for me.
May it therefore please Your most Sacred Majesty to countenance this little Scroul, in hopes that under Your Gracious Protection it may get the Credit to be worth the Reading. I am most certainly sure it can never be set forth to the Publick advan∣tage of Souls, better than by Dedi∣cating it to a KING, who has done more in one day for God's Glory, and the propagation of the Christian Faith, than most of the Christian Kings have done in the whole course of their

Lives. It is well known that He has truly a Paternal Breast to all His Subjects, and most particularly to them, that profess any Zeal towards the Conversion of Souls, having this Sentence of St. Denis deeply Engra∣ven in His Royal Heart: Divino∣rum Divinissimum est co-operari Deo in salutem animarum. The Di∣vinest of all Divine things is to co∣operate with God for the salvation of Souls.
Now then, (Dread Sir,) I Conse∣crate my self and this little Paper together with all the Faculties of my Soul and Body to Your most Sacred Majesties Spiritual and Temporal

Service, for I never desire to live longer, than I am able to serve Your Self, and Your Royal Family. And shall conclude with this hearty Ad∣dress to Almighty God, that as he has most Miraculously preserv'd Your Royal Person from so many Eminent, Evident, and hidden Dan∣gers both on Sea and Land, Abroad and at Home, and settled Your Majesty in spite of Fate, on the Throne of Your Royal Ancestors, so He may settle Your Majesty and Your Royal Consort on a Throne of Glory in Heaven, after living a full Century on years in all Prosperity on Earth, to the perfect Conversion of all Your Subjects. This with the

blessing of a most Hopeful Prince, who shall perpetuate Your Royal Names to the Worlds end, shall be the constant Wishes, and daily Prayers of,
Dread Sovereign,

