



Honored Sirs, and Citizens of a famous City, &c.
I Call you out to a new Merchandize, many of you have been negotiating in most of the known Cities of the World: but did any of you yet Trade at Nineveh? Let this be your Empory, buy up her Commodities, and set up an Exchange of her Wares: others may call upon you to traffick elsewhere; I direct you to this City. Some of Nineveh's Ashes, Sack-cloth, men with new lips, feet and hands, would be more useful now, than all the precious Rarities the richest Marts can afford: Nineveh is the Place, the way is beaten: you shall never repent of the Journey, 'tis a renowned place: in whose Ruins, you may find Treasure enough to redeem you out of the present hazards, and to prevent future Miserys. Indeed, I lay your Sandals before you, yet be not discouraged, ye shall go but like Merchant-Adventurers; if ye be Industrious ye may drive a very advantagious Trade, and come home laiden with the Riches of the same; linger not, set forth speedily, and make a quick return, and Millions shall bless you: quarrel not who shall go first, but walk peaceably, and God Almighty prosper you: Apply your selves to the right work, and fall to right down Christianity; let him be the best Man which can be most Zealous in this Religious Service. 'Tis hard to build a City, and 'twill be as hard to preserve it: When a City is grown crazy with Sin, they must be Master-Workmen that repair its decays, or keep it from a Down-fall: be ne'er so well prepared, your Task requires almost Angelical puriy and perfection to discharge: Consider what ye are to do; to wring a Spear out of the Almighty's Hand, to turn back an Host of Judgments upon their March: appear in  2. compleat Harness, and quit your selves like men. But by what Citizens shall this  done? By them that are truly Religious, and are sensile of the Sins; and do suppli∣cate for the safety of the City: I Must have such as have the Sins of the City smarting upon their Hearts, and the safety of the City, ecchoing in their Lips. I take no de∣light in hearing Citizens commended for exterior things, such are The conspicuous Persons which are perspicuous in Graces, and the Eys that see them bless them for their Piety, whose chief Mart is in Heaven, and Trade for such Riches as excel all the Treasurs of Aegypt, whose Hearts are knit to the City, and whose Tongues are soli∣citing for it, which weep over the Sins of the City, and would even sacrifice them∣selves in Expiatory Dutys, to prevent Judgments from it: Pardon me, I judg not the City by Furs and Gold-Chains, &c. These have no place, but only the feeling Con∣science
and fervent Soul: the rest I might send to C. M. Coriolanus, who in the greatest necessity never tendred the well-fare of the Inferiors, but lookt only to pro∣vide for his own Greatness and his great Ones: and held the poorer Citizens to sad suf∣ferings, lest being supplyed with what they wanted, they might be enabled to call him and the rest to account for their Injurys. Having taken upon me a dolorous Service, to whom should I apply my self, but to the true Mourners in Jerusalem? yes, there are sins in the City, and these sins do threaten Judgments; All ye which do face the one and fear the other, let me intreat You to sigh and sacrifice with me, that the City being penitent, neither the Peril nor perishing of the City may be dreaded. To obtain this Blessing, I confess, I have (as I can) sanctify'd my self with some solemn Resolutions: I desire you to enter into the same Vow with me, not to desert the City with your Re∣pentance and Devotion, till a discharge be brought out of Heaven, and the City set∣tled in a Condition to be spared. I hear a loud speech, what is not this City able to do? I wish it may be able to examine amd to extricate her self: I cannot but love your City for her Breast, that she proved such a kind Nurse to them which had neither Milk nor Maintenance, when upon the Death of their Mother they were as exposed Children. I thought once to have call'd in all the Nobility and Gentry of the Nation to joyn in this Work: I would have Invited the Reverend of the Clergy to have assisted in this Religious service, I would have drawn in all the Civil and Common Lawyers to plead in Heaven for this City. I would have summoned in all the Physicians to have admi∣nistred a soveraign Potion to this City: I thought to have sent down to all the Citys in this Kingdom to have repaired hither themselves, or send faithful substitutes, their Conversion, to officiate for the City in her greatest peril: for seeing this is the Metropolis, why should not all the Daughters do their Duty to their Mother, and wait upon her with their Prayers, Tears, Humiliation and Mortification? yes, they here vending all their Commoditys, and buying their principall Wares, 'tis convenient should bless her with their Repentance, which hath blessed them with Revenue. But because the most proper Cure is that which is personal, (people being able to prepare their Antidote) therefore ye knowing both the Malady and the Medicine, what need I trouble others? when ye are able (if ye will) to do the work your selves, and to be your own Physicians. And now I have left you in your own Hands (setting Life and Death before you, Oh that I could speak to the City in general, that as ALL Nineveh, so ALL your City would be unanimous to unite their Repentance to keep oft a Judgment. But I see such a Complicated Disease of bad Opinions, and such  Cakexy of evil Life amongst you; some only magnifying the Virtues of the  others going on in an Insensibility of any thing, that it is either Sin or Danger, that▪ dispair to find the generality apprehensive either of Disease or Cure. I remember that Calcedon was called, the Town of the Blind, because they would not suffer an experi∣enced Work-man to build their Houses: and so, such a blind City shall I leave you, if I set on Work half sighted Architects, who can neither see Errors, nor forsee Hazards. Therefore I do set-by all the Humorous and Vitious amongst you, and apply my self only to those that are truly Religious, which have the most Conscience to discover sin, and the most Remorse to reconcile an offended God. It is a singular Work, and there must be singular Agents in it. It is That great City, and it must be that Great or Good
party which must invert the state, and avert the Judgment of the City: Lord, who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the Children of Israel out of Aegypt? Exod. 3.11. So, who am I, that I should summon a whole City to Repentance, and bring such vast numbers out of the bondage of their Corruption and Destruction; Yet God hath given the Motion, and he may by such a Stammering Tongue make his Message effectual, who knows but this Cake of Barly-Bread may overturn the Medianites Tent? That this Lump of dry Figs may heal the Soar? That this Clay and Spittle may open the Eyes of the Blind? Bring forth your Repentance? and what may not such an Hester appearing do to reverse a Decree? God is not so offended with the City, but Repentance can end the distaste. I set before you Nineveh, not half so glo∣rious in being Potent, as being Penitent. Jonah doth denounce a Judgment, God doth pronounce a Pardon; the Prophet must not spare, and yet God doth spare. The Prophet hath Threatned them into Repentance, then God doth not Threaten but Com∣fort, not adjudg and accurse, but accept and acquit: Repentance doth renew the People and revoke the Sentence. The Prophet was very opposite to it, but God doth bring in very apposite Reasons to satisfy his Contradicting spirit. God doth plead for the City, and doth plead against his own Prophet. This is the Dilemma how the Pro∣phecy may stand and the City may stand: The Prophecy is obey'd, and therefore there could be no overthrow, there was Repentance and therefore there could be no Rejection and Revenge; this is the middle way, which God doth make use of to answer the Di∣lemma. God will not approve of his Prophets, if they do not proclaim Judgment. Tho the Prophets must thunder, yet God doth keep the thunder-bolt in his own hand. A sinful people must be warned, a penitent people must not be destroy'd. This is one of the Riddle's of God's Mercy, which Jonah not being able to unfold, God doth expound it: doth God shew Jonah how he could prophesy no less, and yet how he himself could spare no less? Shouldst not thou thus cry? should they not thus reform? should I not thus spare? God had taught Jonah many things, and now he doth reveal to him the Aenigma of his merciful Justice, how Justice and Mercy may meet toge∣ther in the same subject without Violation to either: The Prophet was in great blindness concerning this secret, and the City had like to have paid dearly for his want of under∣standing, but God satisfy'd the Doubt and saved the City. Oh that we could see such a Riddle in your City, and thus explained. Jonah [now] doth cry, but is God believed? the overthrow is proclaimed, but do Men fly from it? the City is warn'd,  is it humbled? 'tis threatned, but shall is be speared? Oh that the Citys willful Im∣ ncy, after millions of Crys, should not be a greater Riddle, how it can be speared,  Gods inclination to Mercy after serious Repentance, is a Riddle, fully expounded before, and half expounded now, that the City may be spared. As intelligent as this City doth seem to be, I wish it could answer one Question, Is it Nineveh? Is there expression; or almost expectation of such humbling? for this end is this Cy sent forth  this time] and Oh that the Prophet might only cry, or so cry, that he might cry up a  ineveh! Be not deaf but open the Ears of others, that ye may not be my Patrons only,  of the City, not of her sins, but of her Repentance. If ye fail in this work, the City  past Remedy. Be as penitent as you can, and diffuse Repentance to others, have ye bur∣ed Consciences? draw others to fell the weight of those guilts which may sink them
into Ruine. The City is in Peril, what is the Preservative? Policy may invent much, but I know none but that of Repentance. To prevent a general Overthrow, shall we ever see a general Conversion? What will Men leave their Seats of Honour, and ap∣ply themselves to Sick-cloath, Ashes, Fasting, mighty Crys, turning from their evil Ways, and from the Violence of their Hands? Oh that we could see such a beautiful City to honour our Nation, and to bless it self. But I fear this is but a City of Desires, and that it is not harder to build up Jerusalem to her first Glory, than to raise up such a City amongst us; every Stone in this City may sooner be altered, and new-laid, ra∣ther than Mens Minds and Consciences. I doubt whether penitent Duties were ever truely intended amongst us, and I am very jealous whether ever or no we shall see them really exprest. Men can rather shoot the Gulf; climb the Alpes, go a pilgrimage over the whole Earth, than repent: All the Difficulties which ye ever met with, are not like this Streight. I confess here doth appear to be much Religion in the City, but what Repentance is there? or if Repentance, is it that of Nineveh? No, here are Sins enough to over∣throw a City, but is there Repentance enough to have it spared? The Earth never saw greater Provocations; but when shall it be said, Heaven never saw greater Propitiation? People are much for Paterns, but not for Imitation (Ʋnless it be of that which is wicked, as Swearing, and Whoring, &c.) wise Men may devise Forms, but where are the vertuous Men that will conform to them? No, as a Beast neighed to Alexander's Horse which was painted, but the Spectators expressed no such Repect to Alexander's Image it self: whereupon Apelles said, That he had painted the Horse better than the Prince. So Bruites will be more affectionate to those things which do resemble their Nature, than we to those things which should direct our Manners. Here is a choise Picture, Nineveh limmed out with Tears and Graces, and a Frame made for it, even this Record in holy Scripture: but when shall we behold the Paralel? Oh Citizens, and Religious, though you have some Skill in Painting, yet can you draw Nineveh to the life, in orient Colours amongst you? No, were it to preserve the City from Fire and Sword, yet will ye readily be thus abased and changed? ye may be, but it will be with a great Difficulty. For the present, what Signs are thereof such Prostration; Consterna∣tion, Renovation? No, they which have committed horrible Sins, may rather have Forms of seeking God to confirm themselves in theis Wickedness, than many here which are liable to eminent Dangers, have any evident Expressions to fall to the Earth, or to look up to Heaven to avert Vengeance. Can these Bones live? O Lord, thou knowest, Ezek. 37.3. There is nothing impossible to God, but this is almost incred  to the present View. For I see that Men have not learned Nineveh's initiating,  less her compleating Graces; they are not yet come to her Trepidations, Percussions, Astonishments, Humi-cubations Macerations, Syncopes of Greif, Paroxisms of Con∣flicts, gravitoned Accents of Prayer: No, people nourish the Flesh, catch at the World, follow Modes, temporize with Changes, and leave Perils to the Venture, and Judg¦ments to the Chance: Happen what will, they have not so much as a wrimpled Brow, or a trembling Breast: A Stork will fly faster from a cold Country, or a Beast from a naked Sword, than these from Plagues and Punishments. When shall we see these two essential parts of Repentance amongst them, The turning from their evil Ways, an from the Violence of their Hands?

1. Their Evil ways do seem to have a Mist upon them, they have not Eyes clear enough to see them, or Hearts tender enough to lament them: though they have strayed far enough from the prescript Rule of Obedience, and never a precept warrant∣ing their lawless Paths, yet they tread on, and consider it not, the Ignis Erraticus hath lead them aside, and lay not to Heart over what Rocks and Precipices they do pass: Oh that there should be such Declinations under the directing Ordinances; or such Foot∣prints amongst instructed Christians! No man saith, what have I done? Many a Man saith, what may I not do? People look upon their Faces, but seldom on their Consciences: This clasped BOOK hath not been opened to view every leaf, nor this deep Well searched to the bottom these many years. Oh! how much Hyprocrisy, Apostacy, Bribery, Flattery, Blood, Blasphemy, Southsaying. Sacriledg have been past over without the least check or fret. If any Sins come under their Discovery, they are the sins of the Age, or the sin which Malignity have doom'd sins, but they have neither Eye, nor Tongues, nor Hearts, to spy out to speak out, or reflect upon their proper sins; though they be as bitter as Gall, as red as Scarlet, as venomous as the poison of Asps, as black as Satan, coming forth with a Steem of the bottomless Pit; yet there is neither Sen∣sibleness nor Conscientiousness of them: they are their proper sins, and as they have gi∣ven them Conception and Birth, so they bestow Education and Maintenance: they may have a street-cry, or pulpit noise (sometimes) but the sound is gon so soon as received; they deny them, conceal them, extenuate them and justify them; yea some are so im∣pudent as to deride them: Fools make a mock of Sin, though it be to dance before a Calf of their own making, to triumph over a captivated Sampson, or to quaff in the Bowls of the Sanctuary, or to present John Baptist's Head in a platter, or to cry Hail to the King of the Jews, when he is leading away to be crucified. These, or the like, are the Expressions which they do make to their Sins, rather than look agast upon them, loath them, bleed under them. How many Sinners have ye yet seen, that though they have done things contrary to the Torch Light of Nature, and Sun-Light of Scripture, the Tenor of their own Oaths, and the Terror of a Catholick Church con∣demning them, that have yet blush'd, sob'd, or rung a hand, or bended a knee for them? No, they have done them, and stand up in the defence of them; after pro∣ductions they do bestow upon them protection. Now if People will not discern their Sins, how will they ever disclaim them? if they will not look upon their evil ways, how will they ever turn form their evil ways? what little likelihood, what small hopes of Conversion and Reformation?
2. Turning from the violence of their hands; is a thing as improbable: For, are there any gentler or juster times to be expected? Will Men pare their Nails, soften their Palms? No, I don't see so much as sense of Jnjury, or a shame of Oppression. Not so much as an Adonibezek's remose for Cruelty, Threescore and ten Kings have I, &c. Nor an Ahab's fright upon a Bloody Fact, to be confounded so, that, &c. People do not so much as question their Estates, which they have gotten by forged Cavillation, or ask forgiveness for their wrongs, or make restitution for their ill gotten goods: much less will desist from their damnifying Courses. Tyranny doth flow in with a high age. The Earth is covered with violence; as it was in the days of Noah, Gen. 6.9 A man would think that Aegypt's iron Furnace, or Babylon's iron Yoak were amngst us. Here is digging of Pits, taking up all with the Angle, swalowing People alive, as the Grave, eating Fruits without Mony, breaking the Arms of the fatherless, afflcting
Gods Heritage, the Rulers being as roaring Lyons (as the Scripture saith) and the Judges as the Wolves of the Evening, devouring with such Fury that they leave not the Bons till the Morrow. Some groping for Bribes with Felix: Some requiring mens right Eyes to condescend to a peace, with Naash: Some pronouncing sentence of death upon a framed Information, with Jezabel's Judges; Some not being ashamed to run greedily after the Error of Balaam for Reward: How many Houses are build with crying Stones, and cemented with bloody Morter? The Times are full of much Fraud and Force, Invention and Circumvention, Domination and Conculcation. Men injoying Preys with as much Satisfaction as Birthrights, and possessing Rifles with as quiet a Conscience as just Earnings. Oh! when will the Whip depart out of this City? when will the wild Beast's teeth fall out of their heads? when will the Hammers leave beating? or the Mill-Stones leave grinding? when will Repentance so reduce this City to Equity, that there need neither Tribunal to rectify Injuries, or Pulpit to touch Conscience for Extortion? People in general will scarce take notice of their Cruelty, much less will they take away the Crime; they will scarce feel their rough hands, much less will they turn from the violence of their hands.
Thus then you see, how the City is in a dangerous deplorablestate, full of stupendious sins, and yet full of stupid Impenitency; a professing City, and yet far from Evange∣lical Purity: How then may the City Walls shake, and every Cittizens Heart be daunt∣ed, expecting some exemplify'd Judgment, for these enormous Transgressions? Will God ever be dared with challenging Trespasses, or mockd with phannatick Formalities? will the noise of the Sermon-Bells, or the sound of the Gospellizing Tongues be able to pacify an incensed God? No, he may seize you in your Streets, where you are defy∣ing him in your full strength; or take you at Church, where you are deluding him (per∣haps) with Temple-Cheats. Who ever resisted the Lord and prospered? God may send the Flood, when thou art in the midst of thy Quaffings and Dalliances? Fire may come from Heaven, when the Sun is shining brightly in thy streets: A great Cry may be heard in the midst of the City at Mid Night, when thou art supposing neither the Slaughter of the First nor First born; the Avenger of Blood may persue Thee, and pluck Thee out of the Cities of Refuge: God may slay thee whilst thou art laying hold on the horns of the Altar. Hath not God destroyed as mighty a people as you? yea, the Amorites were potent, yet when their sins were full, they were emptied out of their Nation. Hath not God ruined as religious places as yours? yes; Go ye now to my place which is in Shiloh, where I set my name first, and see what I did to it, for the Wickedness of my people Israel. Jer. 7.22. Yea, go to Jerusalem, how was that For∣tress of the Earth demolished, yea that City of Oblations made a Sacrifice to the Ju∣stice of a provoked God. Oh therefore be not confident, neither upon your own Prowess nor Profession; for 'tis neither your formidable Chivaldry, nor forml Reli∣gion, which will priviledg you or protect you; but 'tis your Repentance must sheild you, and shelter you. See then what must save you, and what is your only Preser∣vative. There are a great Company among you, famed for Pars, and magnifyed for Piety; to You I write, You I summon, intreating You by all the Worth that Your Names are embelished with; and adjuring You by all the Orthodox Truth, which ye seem to have reserved out of the defection and declension of the Times, that You would
first go a Circuit through your own Consciences, and then that you would walk the streets, and go from one end of the City to the other, and observe the Face and Fate of the City; that you would take notice of the Maladies and Ulcers of the City, and consider what prognosticating Symptons there are of an Emigration and Ex∣animation. Oh feel the weak Pulse of the City, toutch her cold Lips, and behold her grisly Cheeks; look upon the present Dangers and Disasters, apprehend what a Flag of Defiance is hung out upon Eath, and what a Sword is bathed in Heaven. Can such Sins, and the Citys Safety, such Impenitency and the Citys Impunity long stand together? Fear ye not some Plague? Some general Massacre, some Coal blown with the Breath of the Almighty, that may sparkle and kindle and burn you to such Cinders, that not a Wall or Pillar may be left to testify the remembrance of a City? They whose Judgment was not to drink of the Cup, have assuredly drunk it off, and shalt thou altoge∣ther go unpunished? Jer. 49.12. May not the Vial of red Wine be reserved for the Lips of this City? Is there more Sin, and shall there be less Justice? Vengence deferred is not recalled, a forbearing God may double his dismaying and cofounding Stroaks. Oh therefore mark the bad Crasis (i. the Complexion or Mixture of your natural Hu∣mours) and the sad Crisis (i. the time of Conflict between Nature and Diseases) of the City. Help at an Exigent, Repent when there is nothing but Repentance left for an Antidote. Repent truly, lest your Repentance prove a Scandal and a Curse: Re∣pent throughly, lest one unmortifyed sin frustrate the vertue of a Humiliation; repent timely, lest not knowing the time of your Visitation, the Blessings you wish for be hid from your Eyes.
1 Repent for your-selves. For, as the pure minds had need to be warned, so the pure Consciences had need to be cleansed. The best of you, I fear, have not past through the Puddle without some Filth sticking upon your Skins: therefore search out your Spots and leave not a Stain to be an Eye-sore to Heaven. Weep out all your Contaminations, pray away all your Pollutions, purge away all your Defilemens, have an hour in a day, a day in a year for strict and solemn Repentance.
2. Repent to teach others Repentance. When thou art converted, confirm thy Bre∣thren. When ye are quickned yourselves with Repentance unto Life, propagate it (if pos∣sible) unto Multitudes, that it may be said, Behold here am I, and my Children. Let your beleiving in God beget faith in others, your standing up from your Seats, excite others to rise; your empty Bowels, provoke others to fast; your stript Backs, cloath others in Sack-Cloth; your moist Eyes, set others on weeping; your confessing Lips, stir those Tongues in other Men which have bee silent these many years; your making Reparation for Errors, cause others to deface the Memory of foul Facts with oppsite Vertues; your mighty Crys fill the City with Eccho's of Devotion; your turning from your evil Ways, change the Steps of others from Exorbitancy; your purging your hand from Violence, procure Oppression to ake in the Joyns of thers Mens Fingers; Do your Closet-work well, and be exact in your Street-work: Repent, and make a whole City propense to Repentance.
To some I might say, Have ye not heard of Repentance? Do ye not know how to repent? Do ye not understand the Effects of Repentance? Have ye not seen Fruits of Repentance? Can ye not repent? Will ye not repent? When did ye ever repent? When will ye at last repent? Oh that ye were as eminent in Repentance as Nineveh!
Oh that ye could be rid of the Libertines and Hypocrites amongst you, and that there were none but Penitents in the City! Oh that ye stood upon equal Numbers, that ye were but the third, the twentieth, the fiftieth, the hundred part of the City: that, there but a common Hall of you, that ye did but equal the number of the Officers or Watches in the City: that ye were but enough to take the Frowns out of God's Fore∣head, the Menaces out of his Cheeks, to retard his Feet, to bind his Hands, to put Audience in his Ears, Compassion in his Eyes, Reconciliation in his Breast, Pardon in his Lips; to keep his Trumpeters from the Gates of the City, or his Troopers out of the Streets of the City: Oh! Religious Cittizens, try the Compleatness of your Num∣bers, and the Perfection of your Gifts. Be not blind under so many Greivances, deaf under so many Warnings, sleepy under so many Judgments. Beleive not your Po∣liticians, if they tell you your City is in no Danger: Beleive not your Pulpits, if they preach you up to be pure enough against God's examining Justice; beleive not your own Consciences, if they perswade you, that you are prepared sufficiently against all Accidents. Consider how many are wit-foundred with Humours, which stare upon themselves as if Heaven must look upon them with an enamored Eye? how hard is it to get People to confess that there is a guilty Nation, or a sinful City? howsoever that They are the peccant People, or that God should visit a Place for their Impieties: Oh! behold, how many things there are to tempt you to Security, to cauterize you in Sin, and to stupify you to Repentance. And as ever you would seem to have risled your own Hearts, dissected your own Consciences, to have sent the Intelligencer into the City, to have heard the Crys of your Abominations at Gods Judgment-Seat, to have seen the Ar∣mies which are raised in Heaven to assault you: Oh, think upon the City with dismayed Hearts, look upon the City with weeping Eyes, turn aside to bemoan apparent, Perils, and fall upon your Knees to mitigate deserved Vengeance: Oh bring forth all the Wa∣ter in your Heads to extinguish Wrath, kindle all the Fire in your Lips, to put a Heat into congealed Pity: stretch forth all the Manacles in your Hands, to chain such an Ad∣versary. Think, that ye have read Scriptures with reckless Eyes, if ye have not found out Curses against such Sins; that ye have frequented Sanctuaries like fruitless Hear∣ers, if they have not taught you Repentance for such Sins; that ye have searched your Consciences with partiality, if the Sense of such Trespasses do not drive you into Passi∣ons; that ye were terrifyed with your own Exigents, if it doth not perplex you to see a City at such a Dysaster. Make an Experiment of your own Contrition, try how you can humble your-selves, to keep the City from Confusion and Curse; cut of your own Fore-skins, and do your best to circumcise others; rend your own Hearts, and make a Wound in your Brethren's Breasts, till the Blood come: If there be but one Remedy, leave all other Medicinal Applications, and fall to Repentance; or use all other Exer∣cises but as Ingredients, to be infused into that Catholicon. Repent heartily, repent eminently, that Angels may rejoyce over your Conversion, and God himself may look out at his Court-Gate, and say, Behold another Nineveh. Oh think not of the World, think upon Judgment, mind not too much Preferment, mind Attonement; look not upon the Splendor of the City, look upon the Horror of the City; eye not your Guardians, eye your Enemy. Carry the Threatnings of God's Laws in your Ears, and the Perils of the City in your Breasts; let your Hearts ake, and your Lips quiver.
The Lyon hath roared, who will not fear? The Lord God hath spoken, who can but pro∣phesy. So long as People are setled upon their Lees, think that there is some emptying of the Vessel at hand. When you are laid in your Beds, suppose that a punishing God may awaken you; when you are at your Feasts, that Vengeance may bring in the Voi∣der; when you are selling your Wares, that the last Bargains are even making; when you are telling your Thousands, that ye are but pursing up for the new Receiver; when you are looking out at your Doors, that ye are ready to be plucked over your Thresholds; when you are coming from your Sermons, thae the time is at hand when your Temple-Doors shall be lock'd up. Expect every hour when your Bells shall ring awk, when a shreick Trumpet should be blown in the Streets, when nothing should be heard among you but tumult, distraction, wailing and crying, alas, alas! Would you shun this? can you prevent it? then know, that ye must not only remember the City in the Morning, nor mention it at Night, but consider how low ye must stoop, what Abjects ye must turn, what Mediations ye must use, what Castigations ye must endure, what strange Bcks and Bowels, Loathings and Lamentings, Debatings and Debasings, Cleansing of Con∣sciences, and Cleansing of Estates, Transformings and Translatings there must be be∣fore the Breach can be repaired. This is your Work, act like expert Artists, Master-workmen. Religious Citizens, fly from all Pleasures, contemn all Honours, be Strangers for a time to your own Chairs, Cook-rooms, &c. Converse rather with bi∣ting Hunger than sumptuous Banquets, bitter Crys than musical Instuments, till ye have dispatch'd that Service which will secure your Goods, your Blood, your City. Oh! they must be prime Penitents which are to be imployed in this peerless Duty, they must have Nineveh's Plaster, to heal this festering Wound; they must have Nineveh's Solicitor to procure Peace in this Court: They must write out their Repentance in Ni∣neveh's capital Letters to have it legible in Gods Eyes. Oh ye Citizens then, gather to∣gether, and see how many Penitents there are amongst you; or, let the Penitents stand apart, and mark what Qualifications they have. The Penitents are the best Citizens, and the best Penitents are the true Ninevites. If there be a Number amongst you with Nineveh's Art they may have Nineveh's Success, they may bury all Fears in the Ash, heap, and shift oft all Miseries in the Sackcloth; they may fast away all Perils, and pray away all Judgments: God will not turn upon the City with Fury, if they turn from their evil Ways, nor stretch out his avenging Hands, if they turn from the Violence of their Hands. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and forsake his feirce Wrath, that we perish not not? These Penitents may send Word to Heaven, that God may for∣bear smiting, for they have smitten themselves with Repentance: They may convey News to all their Enemies upon Earth, that they may stay at home, for Repentance hath reared up their Walls, higher than the Clouds which n scaling Ladder can reach, and mounted Ordnance for them upon their Towers and Fortresses, which will shoot and Assailants to Death, farther than the Spires of their Steeples can be seen; yea, di∣spatch away Messengers to all Plagues and Judgments, that they are not to come nigh to the City, for Repentance hath gotten a Warrant of Remove to carry them beyond the Seas. Do you thus Repent and you are as safe as Nineveh, God will be your Pleader against all your Adversaries (were it Jonah himself) multiply Reasons for your Preservation; he will draw Pity towards you from the most fliny Hearts, however his
own Brest shall flow with Combassion; ye shall be pretious in Eye. he will forget nothing that may be incentive for sparing, not the Greatness of the City, not the Mul∣titude of the Persons, nor the Plenty of the Cattle: Should I not spare Nineveh that great City, wherein are more than Six-score Thousand Persons, &c. I have shewn you the right way to Safety, walk in it, and you are gone beyond Danger, ye are the the City to be spared.
Thus leaving my Motion to your Consciences, I rest;

