



DREAD SOVERAIGN,
GOD hath given us a Sight, the Sight of your Self. How many aking eyes where there once to see You? how many ra∣vished eyes may there be now to behold You? Every one could not present such a Sight; no, He in Heaven,

Restituit Patriis Androgeona focis,
Hath restored You to your Fathers Throne to be looked upon as a glorious Spectacle.Propert. l. 1. We saw for many years nothing but the horrid faces of strange Rulers, and now we have your Face of true Majesty to bless our eyes with,
—forma tum vertitur oris
Antiquum in Buten,Virg. Ae. neid. 9. —
Oh that we had good eyes in our heads to discern the difference of Objects; what a change is this, that whereas we saw nothing but Usurpers in their Barbarousnesse, Our eyes do now see a King in his Beautie? Your absence was the Bane, Your presence is the Beautie of the Nation. To apply all this Beautie to Your Self, perhaps would be judged flattery, therefore have I endeavoured to shew Your three King∣domes, that there is a derivative Beauty in You, namely that your Majestie is our Beautie. For how is a Nation obscured if it hath not a King in it? and how is it illustred, if it hath a King reigning in Royal Splendour and Impe∣rial dignity? I wish that there be  Iudges of Beautie in the Land, and that there be none which are ready to strike at the face of Beau∣tie. It doth grieve me, that when you have
brought delight to the eyes of Millions, and put peace into all hands, yet that there should be left amongst us some glaring eyes, and me∣nacing hands, The Jesuit to such may resigne his malicious eyes, and mischievous hands. What need those King-vexers and Gad-flyes of Monarchs plot treasons, and kindle dissen∣tions, when we have Incendiaries, and State∣troublers of our own?
Ab pudeat, certe pudeat.Propert l. 2. —
For is it not an infamy that a Reformed Church should agree with the Church of Rome in the Gun-room? that men should cast out Popery at the portal, and take it in at the posterne? Which of these are the better Sub∣ject?
Arcades ambo,Horat.
Both of them can level at Kings. For the ho∣nour of religion then these must ever hereafter lay aside dissentions, and lay down armes a∣gainst Kings, or else there will not onely be the treacherous and fatal Jesuit, but the odious and omirous Protestant. For conscience sake therefore I trust a King shall not need to fear a frighting or a fighting Protestant. For must a face of Majesty smile upon all Designers,
or Beauty espouse it self to every Corrival, or else shall there be weapons drawn to force fa∣vour and affection? this is bad morality, and worse divinity. For where did they learn this? sure I am not in Scripture, for that saith Fear God, and honour the King, and I advertise thee to take heed to the Kings Commandment, and that in respect of the Oath of God. Therefore men must seem to have no reverence to Gods lawes, nor dread of perjury, or else their brains must leave plotting, and their hands leave braining. They may find these grounds of conspiracy in old Achitophel, or new Mariana, but confident I am, that they cannot in the Old Testament, or the new. Except then they would burn their Bibles, and make Humour their Holy writ they must consume to ashes such principles and practises. We have been shamed enough farre and nigh for such paradoxes and strata∣gemes, and cursed be they which do renew the next scandal. The honour of the Church, and the Beauty of the Kingdome are then gone. Have Protestants against Papists sheathed up their swords, and shall Protestants against Pro∣testants unsheath theirs? what against their fellow Professours? what against their natural
King? oh inexorable, oh incorrigible King-haters? Men have been mad, and some distempers we have lately found, but surely this phrenzy will not al∣wayes last. Let them look your Majesty through, and what occasion can they find in you of disgust, distast, or so much as discontent? So far as I can perceive your Majesty doth but seek your Native Right, the established Religion, the fundamental Lawes, the Honour of the Highest, the freedome of the meanest, the welfare of the Nation, the Peace of the Kingdome, and they may see as well as I that your graces are conspicuous, your qualifications e∣minent, your carriage affable, your Government mild, your counsailes prudent, your actions Heroi∣cal, your life spotless, and your conscience sincere, except therefore they would have an Angel to reign over them, where can they have in flesh and blood a more desired man? what heart then can have a rancorous thought against such a King? No, I hope to see all your Enemies blush at their cause∣less anger, and senseless spight; yea to fall down at your Royall Feet, and repent that they have been so inconsiderate, and weep that they have been so unkind. Bear but with their former failings, & par∣don that which is past (as what cannot that Royal Heart of Yours that is the living spring of clemen∣cy
wash out of your remembrance?) and me think your Majesty should have felt the last of animosi∣ties, and triumphs; people will not alwayes kick against the pricks, and run upon the speares spoint of divine lawes, but do that which God hath obli∣ged them to, even honour your Person, acknow∣ledge your Authority, submit to your Edicts, ad∣mire your Perfections, and be knit to you in the adamantine chains of Fidelity and Loyalty, that this wasted Country may once again become a flourishing Nation, and the Kingdom of Triumphs. Thus in all Humility prostrating my Self at your Majesties Royal Feet, and Praying for your long Life, your increase of Princely Honours, your last∣ing Peace, and everlasting Blisse, submissively I take leave, and rest

