


Right Honourable,
AS nothing can be more destructive to any City or Incorpora∣tion, than the having of persons in publick Trust, who mind not the publick Interest of the Society; so it is certainly the greatest Happiness they can enjoy, to be govern'd by those who prefer the public Good to their own private Concern, and their Religion to any State-Interest or Advantage. That the first hath been in part this Cities Fate these several years bygone, is so well known, that he who runs may read it. But since now the Storm begins to Calm, and the antient Liberties and Fundamental Priviledges of this City, begin to receive their wonted lustre, and such Governours set to the Helm of Affairs, as we hope will never Impare the publick Good, or give the World occasion to say, that ever they Forfault their wonted Character of Religion, Loyalty, and Bon accord. And since all good Citizens (now in the entry of your Government) are giving all the Expressions of Joy in their Power upon this Exigent, we judge our selves bound to throw in our Mite, knowing you to be Men, not only well principl'd in the true Protestant Religion, but (as we our selves) are Abhorrers of all Popish Superstitions and Designs. Have therefore resolved to add to the Solemnity of this day of your Election, by carrying his Holiness in Procession through∣out this City in the greatest Splendor, where in end he will meet with a fatal Doom. And lest any ill principl'd or malicious per∣sons should represent us or our Actions as Tumultuary, we have thought fit to give you assurance there is no such Designs, neither intend we to injure the Persons or Goods of any. And to evidence our Ingenuity in this, we send you herewith the manner of the Procession, Indictment, and Sentence of his Holiness, with all its Circumstances and Solemnities; which if ye will countenance with your presence, will be taken very kindly. So wishing Prosperity and Safety to all the Maintainers of the True Protestant Religion, the Preservation of His Sacred Majesty, the Flourishing of our
Noble Patron and Colledge, the happy and peaceable Government of you as Magistrats, and the wonted Unity and Friendship among all the true Citizens of Bon-accord. We are in all Sincerity,
Right Honourable, 
Marishals-Colledge 11 Jan. 1689.
