


Right Honourable!
FAlse Weights and false Measures are an abomination unto the Lord: So Solomon that Oacle of Wisedom, and mirrour of Ju∣stice, Prov. 11. ver. 1. If so as in the Hebrew; a Stone and a Stone, an Ephah and an Ephah, a Hin and a Hin, or a Gallon and a Gal∣lon be an abomination unto the Lord; Surely then they must be abominated by your Honours who are the Lord's people. Unum pondus & una Mensura it per totum Regnum nostrum: So saith Old Magna Charta, and doth not the great Charter for heaven say the same, Deut. 25. ver. 13, 14, 15. Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a small, thou shalt not have in thy house divers measures, a great and a smal, but thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shalt thou have. Worthy Sirs! That the Brewers of London should be gauged by the Gallon con∣teining 272 Cubicall-Inches, which is the Corn-Gallon, and yet be enforced to sell their Ale and Beer by another, viz. the Ale-Gallon containing 288¾ Cubicall-Inches, their loss being thereby in the Excise 7000 l per annum: Surely this must needs he juge'd by all mn a very Horrid oppression (except it be by the Commissioners and farmers of Excise, who have vowed to judge for their own profit, although it be to the ruine of all the good peo∣ple of the Nation) especially when as the Brewers by this pretended over-measure gain nothing, but lose the Principall. But as it must not be thought that our Supream Magi∣strate can do any wrong; or that  revenew is so mean, as to bee augmented by the farmers rapine▪ so it cannot be imagined but that the intention of  the Parliament was always so honourable, that they never meant that the Officers of the Excise should accompt with the Brewers by a measure so contrary to the established pra∣ctice; which were to bring a snare in a moment upon all the Subjects of this Nation  much less can we ever conceive, that ever a Parliament which is the Fountain of Ju∣stice, should so far Patronize injustice, as to confirm such an oppression by a Law, in full assurance therefore that your Honours will grant us relief in this particular, wee crave leave to subscribe our selves your Honours most humble and faithfull servants, . But the farmers Vassalls.

