



Dear Sir,
I Would be loath to be the first that welcomes You into England, with the sad Newes of the breach that God hath (since your departure) made upon your comforts, I mean, in taking to him∣self your dear Wife. I suppose the tidings of that, will reach your eares to your hearts greif before my Papers, for bad newes flyes apace. I send you not these Lines for that end, but for a contrarie, namely, rather to quiet and bare up your disconsolate Spirit under so smarting a Providence: As a meanes to which, I commend to you a serious consideration of her great Gain, to be opposed to your great loss: what great gainers Christs Saints are by Dying, you may, if you please, read in the following Lines.
Sir, I remember one sayes that the work of Navigation, is a very great Work; and requires much Ʋnderstanding and Wisdome, for men to build moveable Houses, and go thorough the great Deep, or dry Land, and every way so fitted as would amuse an ordinary and unskilfull beholder to view. Its a very graet work, Now God that hath brought you lately from doing one great work, hath upon your return provided another for you to do. Which is to submit and resolve your will into his, and if I mistake not to do this aright, will ask you no less Ʋnderstanding and Wisdom, I am sure more Grace and Holiness, then the former; but that God that hath given you understanding for the one, can by his Almighty Power and Goodness, inable you to the other.
You have often seen in the Seas, the resemblance of the misery of mans life, as that ebbeth and floweth, and is seldom quiet, but after a little calm a storm succeeds, why such is the whole life on Land too, nought else but a Sea of Tempests while on this side our great Haven or Port of Glory.
Its the saying of a Learned and good Man; what pitty is it but Souldiers and Marriners should be holy Persons, who are so subject to dangers, and have such experiences of Gods Goodness
and Mercy in their preservation: He that carryes his life in his hand, should alwayes carry grace in his heart, and yet the Author complaines, who worse men then those that behold Gods wonders in the Deep. Seldome good but in a Storm, and when over as bad or worse then ever: of Souldiers it was long since an harsh affirmation, Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur, I wish the most of them did not too much verify it, that there is little Religion or Piety in such as follow Camps; and of Marriners Nautarum vota, a Marriners Vow, hath been long since a Proverb, and yet some very good men amongst both sorts: for Souldiers, we read of Cor∣nelius, of whom tis sayd he was a devout Man, one that feared God with all his House, gave much Almes and prayed to God al∣wayes, and he was a just man, one that feared God, and of good Report, Acts. 10.2.22, and v. 7. of the same Chapter, You read of a devout Souldier that belong'd to that devout Captain.
And for Seamen and Marriners; I question not but God hath a large and precious number among them, of which I hope your self to be one, and that you seriously desire so to be: and truly Sir, if so, as I question it not, here is a tryal for you, to make proof of, and make use of that Faith, that Patience, that Humility and self De∣nyal, yea of that whole stock of divine Grace, wherewith God hath endowed and enriched your Soul.
I have read of Alexander, when he was in a great Perill in India, being to fight with Men and Beasts, huge Elephants; he solaced and cheered himself, saying Tandem par animo meo periculum video, at length I see a danger answerable to my mind, as great Dangers require great Stomaches; so great Tryals will exercise great Graces, I hope you have learned not to despise the chastning of the Lord, nor faint when rebuked of him, as knowing that whom the Lord loveth he chastneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth, Heb. 12.5, 6. I must needs yeild your loss very great, for I think in my heart, no man ever enjoy'd a more tender, kind, loving, and every way endearing, and desirable yoke fellow; For her Piety towards God, her love to your self, and all excellent endowments, you had wives in a Wife, truly Sir, did I not really believe it I would not dare to speak it, I know not how to give fattering Titles, in so doing my Maker might soon take me away,Hugo Card. Job 32.22. I re∣member a Learned writer, upon those words of David, Ps. 39.1. That I sin not with my tongue, I will keep my mouth with a Brid∣dle &c, makes eleven several wayes, wherein a man may be guilty,
and offend in speech; as lying, detracting, swearing, idle speak∣ing, &c. amongst the rest of tongue vices, he reckons up that of flattery, thereby intimating, that Christians ought as well to be care∣ful of this, as of any of the other: and sayes one, Amarae sunt oblo∣quentium linguae, & non semper veratia sunt ora laudantium; the tongues of Detractours are bitter, and the tongues of Flatterers of∣tentimes not true, but that God that ponders hearts as well as words; knowes that I really think all true, that I speak or have spoken of her.
And therefore your loss the grater, but Sir, quarrell not that you enjoyed her no longer, but bless God you enjoyed her so long, and be content that he hath her, who hath more interest in her then your self ever had, to whom she was but lent for a little while,
And now learn by her loss, how slippery the best of earthly comforts are, and therefore to look at, to look after, and make sure of; these comforts that when enjoyed are never to be parted with; look up to that place where she in her better part dwels, where there is life with∣out death, day without night, joyes without sorrowes, holiness with∣out impurity, comforts without crosses, rest without labour, health without sickness, youth without age, beauty without deformity, strength without weakness; where are such good things as Eye ne∣ver saw;1 Cor. 2.9.Ear never heard, or Heart never comprehended; and to compleat all, eternity of all, without change or fear of loss.
When once we are got safe thither, we shall be safe indeed; yea sit down and be quiet, which this troublesome (yet bewitched world) will not afford us: thither I hope you aspire, whither she is but gone before.
I have no more, but to end with my well wishes, beseeching God to bless, guide, and keep you; to fill you with himself, to stay your mind up∣on himself, to enable you to make a wise and holy improvement of this stroake, and to say, what shall I receive good at the hand of the Lord, and not evil.
The Lord continue you a comfort to yours, and make them com∣forts to you, and make your little Daughter the Relict of your de∣ceased Yoke-fellow, the inheritrix of her Mothers Vertues; that all her excellent endowments, may so live and flourish in that little child of hers; that we may say of her gone, as Cicero of his Sulpitius,Nullm monumen∣tum clarius Sulpitius relinquere potuit quam effigi∣em morum suorum, virtutis, constantiae, pictatis, in∣genij fili∣um. he could not have left a better monument, than so lively a Portrai∣ture of his goodness in his Son.
I hope Sir, you will pardon me the giving you this trouble, and let the singular respect I bear to your self, and the honour I owe to the memory of your pious Consort, now with God, plead my excuse I have no more but to assure you of my being and remaining

From my Study in Milton Hamlet,
this 3. Ian. 1672.
