


My Lord,
I Have some Years since met with a Prophecy (and many talk of such things at this Time) which may yield a little Comfort in this Day of our Vi∣sitation. The Original it self I have not seen: but it is taken out of Telesphorus de Tribulat. and thus cited by Dr. John White: Antichristus non poterit sub∣jugare Venetias, nec Parisios, nec Civitatem Regalem Angliae.
The Memorable Baffle that the Venetians gave to Paul the Fifth; the frequent Picqueering of the Sorbon with the same See, may in part Justifie: But the Won∣derful Preservations, both Antient and Modern, of this Kingdom and Metropolis, from the Restless At∣tempts



of many of that Faction, will, I hope, Evince its Probability.
How Instrumental your Lordship hath been towards that Security and Happiness we yet Enjoy, how Inde∣fatigable your Pains, how Undaunted your Courage in the most Critical Conjunctures, is with Gratitude and Applause proclaimed to the World, not only by your own Large and Numerous Flock, but by the Loud Acclamations of the Whole Nation. And though I never was so fortunate as to be an Eye-wit∣ness of those Heroick Vertues which daily Influence Your Charge, rendring You so Amiable to the Church∣es Friends, and at the same time so Formidable to her Enemies: yet that Universal Character which is eve∣ry where given of You, engages me to look on you as no less than a Person in whom Concentre those Requi∣sites, which some Criticks in Morality (how justly I dispute not) have exacted to make up a Compleat Christian. They are these: The Orthodox Faith and Loyalty of a true English Protestant; the Zeal and Good Works of a Roman-Catholick; the Gratious Words and Painful Preaching of a Puritan. And all these Inculcated by your Life, as well as Injunctions on your most Learned and Religious Clergy.
But I must remember my self at the Judges Barr, and not at the Heralds Office; and that this Paper attends You as a Petition, and not as a Panegyrick. Your most Gracious Approbation of my Desires (inti∣mated to you by the Reverend Dean of St. Pauls) Invites

the one; as Your undoubted Worth and Honour Ex∣torts the other.
Vouchsafe then, my Lord, to Accept into the Arms of your Noble Charity what is penn'd purely with a Spirit of Charity. They are such Reflexions as Reclaimed my self, and may, with Gods blessing, con∣tribute to the Reducing of some others, as unwarily mis-led as I was.
To which purpose, I endeavour Brevity and Per∣spicuity: designing this Discourse for the Vulgar, (the Learned have richer Mines to recurr to) and therefore waving that Accurateness of Method and Expression, which Your Lordships Judicious Eye may expect; but neither my Intent, the present Affliction I lye under, the unsettledness of my Affairs, nor Ab∣sence from my Books (all which afford not that Tran∣quillum Scribentis & otia) will admit.
However, when all Athens was Busie and in Mo∣tion, the Cynick for Company would needs rowl a∣bout his Tub. And, if so obscure a Person as my self, intrude into the Crowd of those Many Able Contenders for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, which daily almost appear upon the Stage; I have St. Augustines Advice for my Apology. De Trinit. l. 3. c. 3. In places infected with Heresie, all men should write, that have any faculty therein, though it were the same thing in other words: that all sorts of People, among many Books, might light upon some; and the Ene∣my in all places might find one or other to encounter him.


Besides, I thought this the best Expedient, Pub∣lickly to testifie my Sincere Re-union to that Church in which I received my Baptism and Education; and how faithfully I am, and resolve by Gods Grace to continue,
My Lord,

