



May it please your Highness;
THE Author of the ensuing Work,
originally a Spaniard, was in his
life-time, so highly esteemed for
his Learning, Wisdom, and Experience
in State Affairs, that he made no small
Figure in the greatest Courts of Europe.
Nor has this Off-spring of his Brain met
with less favourable Success. For having

been translated into several Languages, and
in each often printed, it has been received
with great Applause, and ever been honour∣ed
with the Protection of some Illustrious
Young Prince.
But Precedent, Royal Sir, is not my
only Apology for this Presumption; for were
Saavedra now living, he might see his
Theory reduced to Practice by the best of
Kings, in the best of Governments: And
though he has indeed given you excellent
Maxims, supported by many eminent Ex∣amples,
yet are there none so worthy your
Imitation, as those you may continually ob∣serve,
in the Conduct and Bravery of that
most Excellent Prince, your Heroick Vncle;
the whole Series of whose Life as far sur∣passes
Panegyrick, as the Greatness of his
Soul abhors Flattery. And I was the rather
induced to attempt this unpolished Version,
knowing that honest Plain-dealing and un∣biassed
Integrity, the two darling Mistresses
of our Author, could not be unacceptable in
a Nation where they are so generally belov∣ed,
and in a Court where they are beyond

Precedent, more peculiarly cherished and
maintain'd.
Your Royal Highness will here find Dis∣courses,
which I hope will not only be diver∣tive
to your Youth, but profitable even in
your ripest Years; by reviving those Seeds
of Honour and Virtue, which are daily
sown by the pious Care and Example of
Your most Illustrious Parents. You may here
learn, not only the Duty of a Prince, but that
also of an accomplish'd States-Man and
Loyal Subject: And if ever it shall please
God to make You his Vicegerent, You may
from hence (next to the Holy Scriptures)
learn your Duty to him also, by whom
Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice.
In fine: You have here a Compleat Sy∣stem
of Religious Politicks, which may
guide You through all the Labyrinths of
Government in this World, and crown You
with immortality in that to come. But, par∣don
me, Royal Sir, I presume not by this
Address to think, but that the nicest Stroaks
of our Author come far short of Your High∣ness's
blooming Virtue, but as near as Per∣fection

can be copied, this Work has a Right
in Your Royal Highness, it shewing not so
much what You should be, as (if we may
Iudge the ensuing Day by the Glorious Morn)
what You will be, the best of Princes.
But here I beg leave to retire, having
already waded out of my Depth, Your High∣ness's
Praises being a Topick so profound,
that in attempting them, I should only
trouble the Stream without hopes of ever
plumbing the Bottom. The main Motives
to this Dedication, were those two inherent
Passions of Mankind, especially Writers, In∣terest
and Ambition; the first in Regard to
this Work, which has need of no less a Name,
than that of Your Royal Highness to protect
it; the last in respect to my self, having
none greater than to subscribe my self,

