


To the Right Worshipful
Sir ROBERT PEYTON, President, and one of the Stewards elect.
Captain JOHN PERRY.
Lieut. GEORGE CLERK.
Lieut. THOMAS LOW.
Lieut. WILLIAM PEPPER.
Ensign JOHN MERYDALE.
Serjeant RALPH HOLLAND.
Stewards of the Honourable, the Military Company, and to the Stewards elect.
Sir RICHARD COMBES.
JAMES LONG. Esq.
CHARLES HUMPHREVILE. Esq.
CHRIST OPHER VANE. Esq.
JOHN AYLOFFE. Esq. and to Captain JOHN HOOKER, Treasurer.
Worthy Gentlemen,
EVer since I consented to your desires, to Print this rude Discourse, I have been hardly put to it, to make an Apology for it; at first I resolved to go the way of all Authors, and indite my Pa∣trons, for committing a rape upon my modesty, and drag∣ging this poor offering, like an unwilling Sacrifice to the Altar; but upon second thoughts, I could not but disap∣prove such a kind address, as too disingenious, and un∣mannerly; for to avouch your importunities for the pub∣lication

of so mean a discourse, I might reasonably think, would be to libel your Judgments, and to make the world believe, I designed Revenge, rather than Obedience; and therfore, in conclusion, I rather resolved to take all the blame upon my self, hoping that in the great crowd of silly things that come abroad into the world, this little trifle may pass unobserved; but if it should be so unhappy, as to be taken notice of, I hope the world will not be so unconscionable, as to deny me the priviledge of playing the fool, as well as o∣thers; whatsoever imperfections there may be in the Sermon, the subject of it is so great and excellent, that 'tis no shame for any man to lie prostrate under it, for in∣treating of such high Arguments insufficiency, is both Art, and Rhetorick; If therefore I have not given it a Charact∣er as great as it deserves. I hope this will in some mea∣sure excuse me, that I am a man, and not an Angel, but however I fare in the esteem of others; this comfort I have, that the weaker the Discourse is, the greater Argu∣ment it will be, of the gratitude and obedience of

