




MY LORD,
GOD left not mankind in a confusion like beasts, but hath appointed a Magistracy, by which Policy receives it's order▪ Quod Magistratus sunt (saith Chrysost.) Quod Chryst.  23.  ad   quidem imperant, isti vero pareant: quod non simpliciter at temere cuncta feruntr, nec populi fluctuum instar, huc at que illuc circumaguntur, Divinae sapi∣entiae opus esse dico: and blessed be God that hath given such power to men.
Government is so necessary, that better no Creation, then no Government: better not to be at all, then not to be under Rule. When there was no King in Israel, every man did that which was right in his own eyes: Micah and his Mother, ri∣vate Judg. 17.  and c. 18.  and . 21. 2 persons, made a goodly Image, and had a house of gods,
 Judg. 17. 4, 5. Gibea a City, ravished the Levites Concubine to death, Judg. 19. 25, 26. and the Tribe of Benjamin counte∣nanced their villanie, Chap. 20. 13, &c. The Danites, a Tribe robbed and set up Idolatry, Chap. 18. 17, 18. 30. Ubi Princeps non est (saith Athanasius) ibi prorsus disturbatio nascitur, Athanas. in Orat. ad ver∣sus idola. Where there is no King, there is nothing but overthrow, confu∣sion and trouble.
First, Of all Governments, Monarchy is the best: 1. For Antiquity. 2. For Order. 3. For Peace. 4. For Strength. 5. For Stability. It is the best, because God setled it among his People, and the most perfect, being the last he established among them. See Justin. in Orat. ad gen∣tes: Cyprian. de idol: vanit.
Hieron. in E∣pist. ad Rusti∣cum Mona∣chum.
Thom. in 1. part, 4. 103. Art. 3. & lib. 4. cont. gent. Arist. polit. l. 8. c. 10. Plato in polit.
Plutarch in Opusc. de Mo∣hia.  serm. .  civ. . 5. 29.
Secondly, Kings have their Authority from God, Rom. 13. 1. its given them from above, Joh. 19. 11. He setteth up Kings, Dan. 2. 21. and by him they reign, Prov. 8. 15. They are Gods Anointed, 1 Sam. 12. 3. 5. 2 Sam. 19. 21. Cujus jussu nascun∣tur homines, ejus jussu constituuntur principes; by whose appointment they be born men, by his appointment (and no other) are they made Princes, saith Iren. lib. 5. and that is only by God, Inde illis potestas, unde Spiritus, thence have they their power, whence they have their breath, saith Ter¦tuli, Apol. p. 695.
Thirdly, Kingly Government and Authority, is not founded upon sanctifying Grace, nor is it lost by sin, which was the dan∣gerous error of some Hereticks called Pseudoapostoli, who as Bernard relates, taught Omnem potestatem tam politicam quam Ecclesiasticam, amitti per peccatum mortale, ac proinde illis; qui mortalis culpae reï sunt, non esse obtemperandum: August. saith well; Qui Mario Imperium dedit, ipse Caio Cae∣sari, qui Augusto, ipse & Neroni; qui Vespasiano vel Patri vel Filio suavissims Imperatoribus, ipse & Apostatae Ju∣liano. All Kings are Gods Anointed, not only David, 2 Sam. 19. 21. Solomon, 2 Chro. 6. 42. Josiah, Lam. 4. 20. but wicked Saul, 1 Sam. 12. 5. 13. and Cyrus a Heathen, Isa. 45. 1. want of Religion doth not un-make a King, for then Cyrus had been no King; nor had their been any King of old, but in Judah,
 nor any now, but some Christian Kings, and but few of them both too. Tyranny un-makes them not, else Saul a Tyrant, and persecuting Emperors had been no Kings. Heresie un-makes them not, for then Constantius, Valens, Valentinian the younger, who were Arrians, Anastasius an Eutychian, Heraclius a Monothelite and others had been no Emperors. Excommunica∣tion divests them not of their Authority, for then Saul deserted and excommunicate of God, 1 Sam. 15. 18. had been no King. Yea, Apostasie it self deprives them not of their Crown; Ju∣lian then had been no Emperour: But God acknowledged Cy∣rus and Saul, and other wicked Kings as his Anointed and Kings: And the Primitive Christians acknowledged and obeyed these Hereticall Emperours; yea, and obeyed Julian the Apostate: No Christian ever enterprised or taught, or stirred up the Subjects to De-throne them, be their Religion what it will, and themselves never so wicked, they continue Kings, and by God they Reigne. Good Kings, Per Deum propitium: wicked ones, Per Deum iratum, but still per Deum, by God.
Fourthly, The persons of Kings was still accounted Sacred; their Office and Power Sacred, and they reverenced as Gods Ignat. Ep. 7. ad Smyrn. Tertul. in A∣polloge. c. 30. & 33. 37. Tertulli. ad Scapulam. Anointed, that could not lawfully be touched, 1 Sam. 24. 6. 10. 1 Chron. 16. 22. Neque enim rege quisquam praestantior aut quisquam ei similis in rebus creatis, saith Ignatius: Rex à Deo primus, post Deum secundus, saith Tertul. He is the second from God, and the first after God: count not God, and the King is the first, count God, and he is the second. He is solo Deo minor (saith that same Author) and omibus major dum solo vero Deo minor est: How sacred and highly did holy David esteem the person of King Saul, may appear from 1 Sam. 24. 6, 10, 12, 13. and Chap. 26. 9, 10, 11. and from 2 Sam. 1. 14, 15, 16. of the heroick reverence of primitive Christians to∣wards their Emperors will a little appear from the next Section: Their Writ was stiled, Sacri apices; their Word, Divalis Jussio; their presence, Sacra vestigia; their Warrant, , sacra praeceptio, piissima Jussio, jussum pium and pi∣um decretum; these were the usual stiles of Councels when they spoke of them.

Fifthly, So great was the heroick Loyalty of the holy Fa∣thers, Commanders and Christians in primitive times, that it was Universally accounted unlawfull to resist their Emperours by force of Arms, although persecutors, or hereticall, or apostates; not because they wanted force, as Bellarm. and others would Bellarm. l. 5. de Rom. Pon∣tif. c. 6. & 7. Cyprian. ad Demetrian. Tertul. in Apo∣leget. c. 37. make the world believe. Tertull. and Cyprian are living wit∣nesses to the contrare. Cyprian saith the number of Christians was marvellous great. We do not resist (saith he) although our number be great; if we would be revenged, we could not want force, we are visibly known to you and interested in all your Af∣fairs, Cities, Forts, Decuries,—What war are we not ready and fit for, &c. saith Tertul. It is clear that the far greater part of Julians Army were Christians, as appeared instantly upon his death, by their loud Acclamations to Jovian his Successor; Christiani sumus: yet they having power did not resist, not though the people be prone to resist you, saith Nazian, not when Nazian. Orat. 2. in Julian. Ambros. tom. 3. l. 5. post. epist. 32. the people are present and offer a defence, saith Ambros. when the same Ambros. was sufficiently armed both by power of People and Souldiers, strengthned with the might of Christ, and guarded by Angels, yet would not defend his Church with violence against the furie of the hereticall Emperour, as wit∣nesse August. Epist. 166. Athanasius having sufficient power to stir up the Emperour Constance a true professor against his Athanas. in Apollog. ad Constantium. brother Constantius an Heretick, yet would not, but rather submitted to the violence of persecution. That famous example of that renowned Thebean Legion of 6666. Souldiers, is well known, who having sufficient force to resist, yet suffered them∣selves to be slain for their Christian profession by the Officers of Maximinian the Emperour: multitude of testimonies might be produced from Antiquity to clear this to the full, which the narrow compasse of an Epistle doth forbid. The Apostles did choose rather to suffer evil, then to revenge, although endued with the power of working miracles, Acts 5. 5. 9, 10. Heroicall Martyrs thought their faith glorified in this, that being per∣secuted, yet performed obedience; for conscience sake they did it, in obedience to Gods Command, saith August. and Amobius.
 They thought it more lawfull to be killed, then to kill, by re∣sisting the Emperour, saith Tertul. in Apolog. c. 37. and their August. lib. Expos. quar. Propos. ad num. 74. Arnob. cont. Gentes, lib. 8. reasons were; First, Gods Command binding to obedience, and forbidding resistance, Rom. 12. 19. Rom. 13. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 3. 13. 18. Secondly, The sword is not put into the hands of Sub∣jects, the Prince beareth it, Rom. 13. 4. Thirdly, Princes have their Authority from God, and they accounted it unlawfull to rob and deprive them of what God gave them. Fourthly, Vengeance is threatned against them that resist, Matth. 26. 52. Rom. 13. 2. These who bear the sword against Rulers (saith August.) must perish. Fifthly, Christians should be preachers, August. cont. Faust. l. 2. c. 75 Cyprian. ad Demetr. August. Loc. cit. Arnob. cont. Gent. l. 8. (its Cyprians word) of the supernaturall vertue of Patience, and not of vengeance. Sixthly, By the induring the miseries of this life, they avouched their hope of a life eternall, saith August. Seventhly, That thereby they might make a distin∣ction of Christian obedience from that of Pagans (saith Anob.) that whereas these yeeld obedience, proceeding only from fear of men, the obedience of Christians should appear to be from conscience towards God. Eighthly, They thought their Faith and Profession glorified by Suffering, which would have been stained by resisting. Ninthly, They knew this was an excellent mean to propagate the Christian Faith; They saw that Sanguis Martyrum was semen Ecclesiae, and thereby also men were in∣duced to search out the evil, for not doing whereof they did suffer, and so came to know the vanity of Idols, and to con∣sider the good for which they underwent so many miseries, and so came to know the excellency of Christian truth. If others should not resist, far lesse Ministers who should be Paterns. My tears and Prayers are mine armour (saith Ambros.) for Amb.  cont.  and l. 2.  14. and l.  Epist. ad . Bern. epist. 22 ad Lodovic. Regem. such are the defence of Priests. We beseech, O Emperor, we fight not, though all the world should conspire against me (said Bernard) to move me to practise conspiracy against the Majesty of the King; I would fear God, and not willingly offend the King ordained of God: for I cannot be ignorant of that which is written, &c. Rom. 13. 2.
These Prerogatives wherewith the great King hath privi∣ledged
 Kings his Lieutenants and Deputies on Earth should work the hearts of Subjects to a sense and practice of their se∣verall duties they owe to Gods Vicegerents, and to an abhor∣rency of these following sins. 1. Not to comply with Traytors and Rebels, against Gods Anointed, by being a Champion or Leader of them, as Joab to Adonijah; by being spoks-man for them, as Jeroboam to his Crue, by blowing the Trumpet, animating them, as Sheba to his Crue; by giving them shrewd advice how to manage their matters; as Achitophel to Absolom, by praying for their successe, which was all Abi∣athar could do; by harbouring them as the City Abel did Sheba; by furnishing them with money, or supplies, as the men of Sechem to Abimelech; by speaking or writing in de∣fence of the Rebels, or their deeds; by praising them, calling them the Godly Party, as some called Corah and his Company the people of the Lord, and Holy: by reviling and cursing, which is the base and presumptuous trade of Shimei, of filthy dreamers, and ignorant beasts, by touching the Kings Person, His Regalia, His Crown, Authority and Dignity, by wresting the Militia out of His hand, who bears not the sword in vain, Rom. 13. 4. touch these once, His person will soon fall un∣der contempt, and if they go, His life will not tarry long after.
As these Prerogatives forbid us to meddle with these sins, so they call upon us to these following duties. 1. To take no∣tice and discover Conspiracies hatched and contrived against the Kings Person, or Authority, whether by angry Bigthans and Teresh's, or crafty Achitophels, or fawning Judases. If Mordecai did so to an Idolater and oppressour of Gods people, what should a Subject do to his lawfull and orthodox Prince. 2. To honour the King, by a reverent conceit of Him, and by an outward honourable testimony of the vertues in Him, and the good we receive by Him, 1 Pet. 2. 17. 3. To pray for them, their persons and Government, 1 Tim. 2. 2. 4. To fear them, Prov. 24. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 18. 5. To fight for them, not against them, Joh. 18. 36. 6. To pay them tribute, Rom. 13. 6, 7.
 Matth. 17. 27. Matth. 22. 21. 7. To obey them for consci∣ence sake, 1 Pet. 2. 13. 8. To be thankfull unto God for a good KING, 1 King. 1. 40. 2 King. 11. 12. and Psal. 118. which was Penned to teach the Subject how to entertain with joy and thankfulnesse Davids advancement to the Throne of Israel.
How greatly stand we of these Nations engaged to God for re∣establishing among us the best of Governments, and setling it upon the right shoulders, and restoring to us our King. It was our sins which deprived us of Him, because we feared not the Lord, Hos. 10. 13. and did not thankfully and reverently entertian Him when He was with us, as became dutifull Subjects. The more tyes lyes upon us to blesse the Lord, that notwith∣standing of our unworthinesse, yet he hath restored Him, and set Him upon His Throne with Glory and Honour; and so much the rather, in that His Majesty is no stranger by Birth, but our rightfull King; no stranger by Religion, not a Jeroboam to make the Land sin, but of that same Orthodox Profession with us, and Fidei defensor: Not a Rehoboam, not able to ad∣vise Himself: but a Solomon, a David, wise as an Angel of God to discern between good and evil: not a Zedekiah, but a Josiah fearing the Lord: not a Manasseh, but gentle and mer∣cifull as David; not a covetous Ahab, but willing rather to dispense with part of His own Revenues. God hath not delt so with every Nation, and in this he hath magnified His mercy toward us in giving us such a King, a King Primae intentionis, of special favour. God hath been Schooling us under the rod of Oppressors to know the worth of our King, and teach us better principles how to entertain Him with more sincere, chearfull and constant Loyaltie; and I wish all may learn their Lesson well.
My Lord, To testifie our thankfulnesse in this place with publick Narrations, Confessions and Praises for so great and rich a mercy. It was resolved upon by the Masters and Mem∣bers of the Kings Colledge here, and Me, to set apart a
 solemn day for that gratfull imployment which was solemnly gone about by all here, and many others both Ministers and Professors from several places of this Countrey, and among others the Magistrates and many Inhabitants of the Honourable and Loyal City of Aberdeen. And in this we had the prece∣dencie before many of this Nation, that we celebrate here the fourteenth day of June, whereas others followed after upon the ninteenth day.
This Sermon was a part of the work of that day, which when ended, I laid it by, not intending to have sent it abroad to publick view: But the Masters of His Majesties Colledge by their often and earnest entreaties fo far prevailed with me, as to send it to the Presse: Ʋpon which when I had resolved, then immediately some magnetick vertue from your Lorddship, drew my thoughts towards you, and sweet∣ly, yet powerfully, engaged me to transmit it under your Lordships Protection. The Sermon it self is plain, in which is nothing but the words of truth and sobriety; I speak most in the words of God; for in preaching, Gods Word should have the preheminence, and therefore I purposely forbear to garnish it with Testimonies of humane Writers.
My Lord, When mean men speaks to the King, they do it by the means of some Courtiour, and when Scho∣lers speaketh to the Kingdom, they do it under the Protecti∣on of some worthy Patern. I have made bold to transfer this Sermon to the Nation under your Lordships Name and Protection: Reasons moving me were these; First, The subject of the Sermon is concerning the King; and who should more own and countenance it, then your Lordship, beloved of the King and advanced by Him to the highest place in this Kingdom. Secondly, The eminencie and con∣catenation of Gods Graces, and Heroick resplendent Vertues in you, as they have drawn the eyes and hearts of all good and Loyall Subjects, so mine too towards your Lordship,
 and in this I am happy. Wisdom leadeth men to shelter them∣selves and their Labours under the wings of the most eminent for Piety Learning and Vertue, and such is your Lordship, by the harmonious testimony of truly good men. Thirdly, Your Lordships good affection manifested to honest Loyal Ministers, countenancing and incouraging them, re∣ceiving them when they came, with chearfulnesse; inter∣taining them courteously, and dismissing them with con∣tentment. Fourthly, Your Lordships zeal for His Majesties restauration, testified by your valorous undertaking. When others would not, ye went with a handfull of Loyal Subjects and jeoparded your self in the high places of the Field, and so wisely and valorously acquit your self, that ye became a terrour to the Enemy: But when the Lord was not pleased to carry on his work by that mean, then your Lordship testified your Loyalty by suffering for your Prince. To you it was given, not only to act, but to suffer for Him. Fifthly, Tour Lordships activity and wisdom in advancing the work of His Majesties restauration when God offered the opportunity, by dealing with the Lord General Monck, now Duke of Albemarlie, and others of his Army (as I am cre∣dibly informed.) When open acting would have exasperated enemies, and retarded the Designe, ye acted secretly and successively, for which your praise is through the Churches of God in these Lands, to the perpetuating your Name to future Ages. Sixthly, Your several testimonies of love and respect which your Lordship was pleased to extend to my Re∣verend Brother Master William Scrougie Minister at Rathven, and on singular among others, which your Lordship procured to him from the Kings Majesty. Be pleased therefore most Noble Lord graciously to accept of this my humble addresse, and grant me and this Sermon your favourable Protection, for the dayes are evil.
I have one word more, and so I have done, it is my hearts prayer to God, that he will blesse His Majesties Person and
 Government, and make the Crown to flourish on His head for many years, and on the heads of His Posterity, till there be no more time: That He will blesse His People with Loy∣alty, Ʋnity, and Obedience; The Ministers of the Gospel with zeal for God and the King: The Church of God in this Land, with the continuance both of His precious Truth in Power and Purity, and of the Priviledges and Government thereof: and that He will grant to continue your Lordship long in the high Charge His Majesty hath laid most worthily upon you, to the Honour of the King, the good of the Commonwealth, the comfort of the Church, the Glory of God, and your own comfort in Him, and that He will perfect His Graces in you, and after many prosperous years on earth, will minister an entrance to you into His everlasting Kingdom. And, I humbly beseech your Lordship to conceave of me as I am and shall be

