



As also to

The Right Honourable,

Marqss. of Worcester,
Earl of Shrewsbury,
Earl of Mulgrave,
Earl of Berkley,

The Right Worshipful, and Worshipful,

Sr. Jonathan Raymond,
Sr. Simon Lewis,
Sr. Benjamin Newland,
Capt. Benjamin Harvey,


And to the whole Court of Assistants, Field-Officers, Captains, and Gentlemen, professing and exercising Arms in that Renowned and Honourable Society.
Right Honourable, &c.
THE design of this Discourse is to wipe off one of the lewdest Calumnies that was ever cast upon our holy Religion, viz. That it is apt to render men Cowards, and to unsit them for great and ha∣zardous undertakings. How successfully I have effected it you have

obliged me by this Publication to leave to the judgment of the world; which I assure you I do so much reverence, that had not your Com∣mands, and the many Examples of Obedience before me obliged me to it, I should never have presumed to concern it in the cause, espe∣cially now when it is so continually Harassed with an Epidemical Itch and Licence of scribling; and through the numerous Appeals that are every day made to it, is forced to keep Term without any Vaca∣tion: But since you will needs have it published, I must crave leave to tell you, that you are finely drawn in; for by your approbation you have made it your own, and are become accountable for all the faults of it: So that now you are not only obliged in honour, as you are Souldiers, to shelter it, as it is a helpless thing, that flees to you for Protection, but also in your own defence, as you are Wise men, to vindicate it, as it is a retainer to your good opinion; this you get by obliging men to appear before the world under your Patronage. But I would advise our carping Censurers to have a care what they do; it is a daring act to affront the Iudgment of an Artillery Com∣pany, and however he that doth it may succeed, he will be sure to come off with this scarr upon his reputation, that he hath a great deal of Courage indeed, but very little Wit. And now that I have fenced it about as well as I can with your Authority, I humbly submit to your perusal, and remain,
Right Honourable, &c.

