


Honoured Doctor,
I Have lately read a scurrilous pamphlet, in whi
the Author doth endeavour to render your Pill truc lent,
and himself the onely Chymist, and a Pediscque 
Helmont. As to the first, that he may make 
world believe he speaks truth, he pretends knowledge 
each particular concrete that are Ingredients of yo
Pill; but in this he forgot the Adage, Ne sutor ult
crepidam; for I having had the honour to be 
Southampton-house the 13. of June, 1664. when yo
calcin'd your powder for the composing your Pill befor
Kings most excellent Majesty, several Princes, Lords
Knights, and Gentlemen, am able to say he is mistake
in the foundation of the Composition, and hath plaidth
fool in earnest, in writing against that he never under¦stood: but this Adage may be applied in his excuse
Hominem experiri multa paupertas jubet. To te
you my mind, in all that he hath done against you, he hath
imitated the Dog in Plutarch, that spends his time i
barking at the Moon, being enraged more at her ligh
that offends his eyes, than at the black spots she weareth 
but you are above, whilest he is below, making good the
Adage, Canes timidi vehementius latrant. Next,
as to his Chymistry, the Skinner in Walbrook suffic∣ently
experimented it to the damage of 975l. and loss of
his life afterward with grief. He can transmute metalls,
if you will believe him; and yet is a pitiful Fellow, or else
he would not have been so often in prison for his cousen∣age,
insomuch that he is as well known in Newgate, as
most of the common Rascals: Qui mendax, idem fu∣rax.
Lastly, his being the onely man understands and
imitates Helmont. Helmont was a very holy man,

tness his prayers, his visions, and his gifts, and parti∣larly
in pag. the 19. where he says, Concidi in fa∣em
& dixi, Domine ignosce, si favor in proxi∣um
extra limites abripuit, condona, condona
omine indiscretae charitati meae, nam tues radi∣ale
bonum ipsiusmet bonitatis, and so onwards, and
wards the end of the chapter he says, Et quem
ominus Iesus vocaverit ad sapientiam, ille & non
lius venturus est. And can the world be so blind as
o think this Sot is so called, who accouuts it his glory by
he Circean Charms of Liquor to be metamorphosed into
a Spunge, which is fit for little else but to suck in and
spue out, that will drink and vomit, and vomit to drink
again, and so continue the sport, making good the Adage,
Parthi quo plus biberent, eo plus sitiunt? A pret∣ty
Fellow, and likely to be called by the Lord Jesus, and
Raphael to be bestowed on him. It is confest he borrows
Helmonts glorious names, and imposeth them on his
trifles: but a Bristol-stone  no more than a Bristol∣stone,
although a fool says it is a Diamond, and counter∣feit
pearls are but counterfeit, though they may make a
Fidlers daughter look like a German Princess. And
this is the condition of our pageant Helmont, Aut Hel∣mont,
aut Asinus. And thus I leave him till he gives
the next occasion to be flasht, and rest,
Nov. 7. 1664.
Your Friend, 
