



MY LORD,
RENEWED heart is a very Heaven in our little world, and Faith is the onely Sun in that
 Heaven. The sinner ne∣ver comes to be preci∣ous, till he comes to be pious; and the value of that piety still advan∣ceth, according to the quantity of true faith, as the Ring is the more considerable with the Diamond. I cannot conceive of a more compendious way for any Christians full and constant revenues, then this, To get faith, and stil to use it: The summe or product of which would be this, Grace
 and Glory, Heaven and Earth are ours.
Satan well knowes what a serviceable chan∣nell Faith is for all our traffique, either for our ship to lanch out into duties, or for Gods ship to come laden in to us with mercies: & there∣fore there is no Grace which hee batters, and conflicts so with, as with faith: If we wea∣ken or shake foundati∣ons, this hath a spread∣ing influence into the whole building: A
 Christians faith cannot be wronged, but pre∣sently all the spirituall frame becomes sensible of wrong and losse.
In my weak judge∣ment, it were a great prudence to secure that, which being secured, now secures all. No∣thing grows weake, where faith growes strong. My Lord, This poore Treatise which I presume to front with your name, is like Aaron and Hur, who staid up the hands of Moses; So
 doth this Treatise in∣deavour to stay the hand of faith in a weak Beleever, who hath an ample estate on the shore and at land; but those waves of doub∣tings (when he is thrust∣ing in) too often make him to fall back and stagger: Whence fol∣lowes this great unhap∣pinesse, That whereas his faith might have served in many preci∣ous comforts, it is (al∣most a whole life) im∣ployed onely to answer
 fears and doubts. I hum∣bly present the subse∣quent Work to your Lordships personal use, and publique patro∣nage. Be pleased (at your leasure) to peruse it, and regard it as the first cognizance of my thankfulnesse to your Honour, for the Living which you did so freely and lovingly confer up∣on me, wherein I shall desire faithfully to serve your Lord and mine.
Now the Almighty God, and blessed Father,
 abundantly inrich your noble heart with all sa∣ving graces, and conti∣nue you long to be an instrument of much glory to himselfe, com∣fort to his Church, and good to our Common∣wealth.

