



, exer∣cetur ad virtutem in solitudine anima; was the the saying of a Bragman or Indian Philosopher to Alexander the the Great: and how memorable it is, you may perhaps collect from this diversion. For, the imperfect Dis∣course I herewith send to you, my dear Friend, concerning the PASSIONS, is the product of my late ten weeks solitude in the Country. Where being remote from my Library, and wanting conversation with Learned Men; I knew not how more inno∣cently to shorten the winter evenings, than by spending them in revising

some Philosophical papers of my own, wherein among other things, I had formerly, out of the best Au∣thors, made certain Collections con∣cerning the divine art of acquiring constant Tranquillity of Mind, by Wisedom or the right use of Reason. And of this serious Diversion I then made choice, both because I well understood the best part of Human Science to be that which teacheth us how to moderate our Affections to the deceiptfull and transitory things of this life, and so to regulate our Actions, as to reap from them, what∣ever their Events may be, the hap∣py fruit of internal Acquiescence and Satisfaction: and because my accu∣mulated Misfortunes had at that time reduced me to a necessity of consul∣ting that part of Philosophy, about the most effectual Remedies against Discontent.
In this state and resolution then, first I remembred, that Nature hath

made Man subject to no other real Evil, but only pain of the Body; all Grief or pain of the Mind, though many times more sharp and intollera∣ble, being created by our own false Opinion, that we stand in want of things that are in truth without the circle of ourselves, and therefore not absolutely necessary to our wel-be∣ing.
Then I considered, that most com∣monly false Opinions are occasioned, and so exorbitant Desires suggested to us by our Passions; upon which all the Good and Evil incident to us in this life, seem's to depend: as Ioy and Grief are the two points in which all Human actions end. For, though it be undoubtedly true, that the Rea∣sonable Soul hath her intellectual De∣lights and Disquiets apart, such as are proper to her simple and spiritu∣al nature: yet is it no less true, that those other Delights and Disquiets that are common to her with the Bo∣dy,

depend intirely upon the Af∣fections. Which when regular, that is, moderated and directed by reason, are indeed of good use to the Soul, in that they serve to incite her to de∣sire such objects which she well know's to be pleasant and beneficial to her, and to persist in that desire: but when irregular, by representing as realy good, things that are so only in apparence, provoke her to errone∣ous Desires, and in persuit of them, to Actions also repugnant to the dict∣ates of right Reason, and consequent∣ly to peace and tranquility of Mind.
From these Cogitations it was not difficult for me to infer, that the whole art of attaining unto that internal se∣renity after which I was seeking, con∣sisteth principaly in Directing our De∣sires aright, that is, to things which we clearly and distinctly know to be re∣aly Good: and that the only way so to direct our Desires, is to imploy our Understanding or Faculty of Dis∣cerning,

which God hath to that end given us, strictly and attentively to examine and consider the goodness of things recommended to us by our Passions, before we determin our Will to affect and persue them. For, most certain it is, that as our faculty of Discerning, that is our Intellect, cannot naturaly tend to falsity: so neither can our faculty of Assenting, that is our Will, be deceived, when it is determined only upon objects which we clearly and distinctly un∣derstand; and where our Will is not misplaced, there can be no just cause of Perturbation of mind.
Being soon convinced of this no less evident than important verity, in the next place I considered, that if our inordinate Affections be the bitter fountain from whence the greatest part of, if not all our practical Er∣rors, and by consequence most of the Evils we suffer, flow; and if as the diseases of the Body, so likewise

those of the Mind may be more easi∣ly cured, when their nature and cau∣ses are understood: then would it be requisite for me first to inquire as far as I should be able, into the nature, causes, motions, &c. of the Pas∣sions, before I proceeded further in my research after the most powerfull Remedies against their Excesses.
To this inquiry therefore I dili∣gently applied myself, both by rea∣ding and meditation; by Reading, that I might recall into my memory what I had long before transcribed out of the books of such Authors who had written judiciously and laudably of the Passions: by Meditation, that I might examin the weight of what I read, by comparing it with what I daily observed within the theatre of my own breast; every Man living be∣ing naturaly so sensible of the vari∣ous Commotions hapning in various Passions, especialy more violent ones, that some have held, the knowledge

of their nature and causes may be without much of difficulty derived from thence alone, without any help from foreign observations. And while I proceeded in this course, I digested my Collections and private Sentiments into such an order or Me∣thod which seem'd to me most con∣venient, aswell to show their genuin succession, and mutual dependence, as to make the Antecedents support the Consequents, and both to illustrate each other reciprocaly. I put them also into a dress of Language so plain and familiar, as may alone evince, my design was to write of this Argument, neither as an Orator, nor as a Moral Philosopher, but only as a Natural one conversant in Pathology, and that too more for his own private satis∣faction, than the instruction of others. And thus have I succinctly acquainted you with the Occasion, Subject, Scope and Stile of the Treatise that accom∣panieth this Epistle.
But this, Noble Sir is not all where∣of I ought to advertise you, before you come to open the Treatise itself. There remain yet two or three things more, which it imports me to offer to your notice, as Preparatives a∣gainst prejudice.
ONE is, that if in the preliminary part of the Discourse, where it was necessary for me to investigate the Subjectum Primarium of the Passions, I have declared my assent to their opi∣nion, who hold that in every indivi∣dual Man, there are two distinct Souls, coexistent, conjoined, and cooperating; one, only Rational, by which he is made a Reasonable crea∣ture; the other, Sensitive, by vir∣tue whereof he participateth also of Life and Sense: I did so chiefly for these two reasons.
First, it seem'd to me unintelligi∣ble, how an Agent incorporeal, but not infinite, such as the Rational Soul by her excellent faculties and proper

acts appear's to be, can act physica∣ly in and upon a gross and ponderous body, such as ours are, immediately or without the mediation of a third thing; which though corporeal too, may yet be of a substance so refined and subtil, as to approach somwhat neerer to the nature of a pure Spirit, than the body itself doth: and there∣fore for the more probable explica∣tion of the Phenomena of the Passi∣ons which are not raised in the Ratio∣nal Soul, I found myself obliged to admit her to have a Sensitive one conjoyned with her, to receive her immediate suggestions, and to actu∣ate the body according to her sove∣raign will and pleasure; there being less of disparity betwixt the most thin and subtil bodies of Light and Flame (whereof many eminent Phi∣losophers have conceived a Sensitive Soul to consist) and a substance pure∣ly Spiritual, than between a pure spi∣rit and a gross, heavy body, as ours is.
Secondly it seem'd to me no less unconceivable, whence that dismal  or intestin war which every Man too frequently feels within him∣self, and whereof even St. Paul him∣self so sadly complained, when (in Epist. ad Roman. cap. 3.) he cries out, video aliam legem in membris meis repugnantem legi mentis meae; should arise, if not from a Duumvi∣rate as it were of Rulers contending for superiority within us, and incli∣ning us two contrary ways at once. For, to conceive that one and the. same Simple thing, such as the Rea∣sonable Soul is rightly presumed to be, can be repugnant to itself, or at one and the same time be posses∣sed with opposite affections; is mani∣festly absurd. There are indeed, who to evade this absurdity, imagine it possible, that of one and the same Rational, simple Soul, there may be two distinct Faculties or powers opposite each to other, from whose

clashings and contrary inclinations this civil war may proceed. But to ob∣lige us to swallow this palpable con∣tradiction, these Men ought to have reconciled those two repugnant noti∣ons of Simple and Compound; and to have told us, why in the same sim∣ple substance of fire there cannot likewise be two mutualy repugnant faculties, heat and cold. In a Mixed body there may be, I confess, oppo∣site faculties; and therefore the like may be imagined also in the Rational Soul, if she be conceived to be of a mixed or compound nature: but this is against their own supposition, and destructive to the natural immor∣tality of the Soul. What then can remain to cause this dire war daily observed within us, betwixt the al∣lurements of our Sense, on one side, and the grave dictates of our Mind, on the other; but two distinct Agents, the Rational Soul and the Sensitive, co∣existent within us, and hotly conten∣ding

about the conduct of our Will?
But You, Sir, will perhaps tell me, there may another, and that a more probable cause be given of this ho∣stility; and that the searching wit of Monsieur des Cartes hath been so hap∣py to discover what it is, in libr. de Passion. part. 1. art. 47. where he thus reasoneth.
In no other thing (saith he) but in the repugnancy that is between the motions which the Body by its spirits, and those which the Soul by her will, do at the same time endeavour to excite in the Glandula Pinealis in the brain, consist all the Conflicts which Men commonly imagin be∣twixt the inferior part of the Soul, which is named the Sensitive, and the Superior, which is called the Rational, or betwixt the appetites natural and the will. For, in us there is only one Soul, which hath in her no variety of parts: the same that is Sensitive, is also Rational,

and all the appetites thereof are volitions. The Error by which divers persons as it were, that are for the most part mutualy contrary, come to be imposed upon her; hath pro∣ceeded only from hence, that hi∣therto her functions have not been sufficiently distinguished from the functions of the Body; to which alone is to be ascribed all that can be observed in us to be repugnant to our reason. So that here is no other Contrast, but that when the Glandule seated in the middle of the brain, is impell'd on one part by the Soul, and on the other by the Spirits Animal, which are nothing but bodies, as I have before decla∣red: it often happens, that those two impulses or impressions are contra∣ry each to other, and that the strong∣ger hindereth the effect of the wea∣ker. Now there may be distin∣guished two kinds of motions exci∣ted in the Glandule by the spirits:

some represent to the Soul objects that move the Senses, or impressi∣ons found in the brain, and use no force upon the will; others use force, namely those that make the Passions, or the motions of the body that accompany them. And as for the first; though they often hinder the actions of the Soul, or be hindered by them; yet because they are not directly contrary, there is no strife or contention ob∣served in them: but only betwixt the last and the Wills that are re∣pugnant to them; for Example, betwixt the endeavour by which the spirits impell the Glandule to induce upon the Soul a desire of some one thing, and that by which the Soul repells the same Glandule by her will to avoid it. And this chiefly demonstrateth this strife, that since the will hath not power (as hath been already shown) to excite Passions directly, the Soul

is therefore compell'd to use art, and to apply herself to the considera∣tion of various things successively. Whence if it happen that any one of those various things hath the force of changing for a moment the cours of the spirits; it may so fall out, that the next thing that oc∣curs to be considered, may want the like force, and the spirits may resume their former cours, because the precedent disposition in the nerves, in the heart, and in the blood, hath not been changed: whereby it comes to pass, that the Soul almost in the same moment feels herself impell'd to desire and decline the same thing. And this hath given Men occasion of ima∣gining in the Soul two powers mu∣tualy repugnant. But yet there may be conceived a certain Conflict in this, that oftentimes the same cause that exciteth some Passion in the Soul, exciteth also in the Body

some certain motions, whereunto the Soul contributeth nothing at all, and which she stops, or en∣devours to stop, so soon as she observes them: as is manifest from experience, when that which ex∣citeth Fear, causeth also the spi∣rits to flow into the Muscles that serve to move the leggs to flight; and occasioneth the will of exerci∣sing Courage to stop them.
To this Objection therefore I an∣swer (1.) that had this excellent Man, Monsieur des Cartes been but half as conversant in Anatomy, as he seems to have been in Geometry, doubtles he would never have lodged so noble a guest as the Rational Soul, in so incommodious a closet of the brain, as the Glandula Pincalis is; that use whereof hath been demon∣strated to be no other but to receive into its spongy cavities, from two little nerves, a certain serous Excre∣ment, and to exonerate the same a∣gain

into its vein, which nature hath therefore made much larger than the artery that accompanieth it; and which having no Communication with the external organs of the Sen∣ses, cannot with any colour of rea∣son be thought the part of the brain, wherein the Soul exerciseth her prin∣cipal faculties of judging and com∣manding. (2.) This Glandule which he supposeth to be so easily flexible and yielding to contrary impulses, is not loosely suspended, but fixed: so that whoever hath once beheld the solid basis, strong consistence, and firm connexion thereof, will hardly ever be brought to allow it capable of any impulse to either side, though by the greatest Hurricano of spirits imaginable; much less by every light motion of them excited by external objects affecting the senses. (3) Though we should grant this Gland to be both the Throne of the Soul, and most easily flexible every way:

yet hath Des Cartes left it still uncon∣ceivable, how an Immaterial Agent, not infinite, comes to move by im∣puls a solid body, without the me∣diation of a third thing that is less disparil or disproportionate to both. Now these things duely considered, you will (I presume) no longer ima∣gine the Conflicts or Combats that frequently happen within us betwixt the Rational and Sensitive Appetites, to consist only in the repugnancy of the impulses of this little Glandule by the Spirits on one side, to those of the same Glandule by the Soul on the other. Besides, that the Soul hath power to excite Corporeal Passi∣ons directly, that is, without consi∣dering successively various things; is manifest from her soveraignity o∣ver the body, which in all voluntary actions is absolute and uncontrollable; and in the very instance of Fear al∣leadged by our Author, where she determineth her Will to Courage to

oppose the danger suggested, in∣stantly and without running through a long series of various considerati∣ons, for which she then hath not time sufficient. However, evident e∣nough it is, that this conceipt of re∣pugnant impulses of this Gland in the brain, is so far from giving light to the reason of the Conflict here considered, that it rather augmen∣teth the obscurity thereof, by imply∣ing two contrary Appetites or Wills in one and the same Soul, at one and the same time: Whereas the suppo∣sition of two Souls mutually opposing each others Appetites, doth render the same intelligible.
Against this opinion of a Duality of Souls in one Man, some have (I well know) with not a little con∣fidence urged the Sentence of some of the Fathers, yea and of whole Councils condemning all who should assert it; and more particularly Con∣cil. 8. act. 10. Vienn. in Clem. VII. & Lateran. 3. sess. 8.
But this, Sir, is Brutum fulmen, dangerous to none, terrible only to the Unlearned. For, to any under∣standing reader of those decrees, it is clearly manifest, that the edge of them is turned against first the doc∣trin of the Maniches holding two human Souls in every individual Man; one polluted with the stain of vices, and derived from an evil prin∣ciple; the other incontaminate, and proceeding immediately from God, yea more, a particle of the Divine Essence itself; then the Platonics al∣so, and Averrhoists, teaching that the Rational Soul is not man's forma informans, but part of the Anima Mundi or Universal Soul: but not against the asserters of two Souls co∣existent, one simply Reasonable, the other merely Sensitive, in every single person, in that innocent sense I deliver it. And thus have the same Decrees been judiciously interpreted by the religious Philosophers of the

Collegue of Conimbra; who as of all Men they have discoursed most acutely and profoundly of this Argu∣ment; so have they with greatest moderation treated the Defendents of this opinion by me here embra∣ced. For (in 1. de Generat. cap. 4. quaest. 21. art. 2.) though they ex∣presly avow their adherence rather to the common belief of the singula∣rity of the Human Soul, as most consentaneous to the sense of the Church: yet they declare also, that the contrary opinion ought not to be censured as heretical or erroneous.
Why therefore should I fear to espouse it? especially if to the reasons here urged, and others no less con∣siderable alledged by me in the third Section of the Treatise to which this Epistle invites you, be added for confirmation, that so celebrated text of St. Paul (ad Thessal. 1. cap. 5. vers. 23.) , integer vester

Spiritus, & anima, & corpus, &c. Where our most learned Dr. Ham∣mond of pious memory (in his An∣notations on the place) conceives the Apostle to divide the whole Man into three constituent parts, viz. the Body, which comprehendeth the flesh and members; the Vital Soul, which being also Animal or Sensitive, is common likewise to Brutes; and the Spirit, by which is denoted the Reasonable Soul originally created by God, infused into the body, and from thence after death to return to God; and this genuin exposition of his he confirms by agreeing testimonies both of Ethnic Philosophers, and some ancient Fathers.
To these give me leave to super-add (ex abundanti) the concordant suffrages of three eminent Philoso∣phers of our own age; namely the Lord Chancellor Bacon, who (in his 4 Book of the Advancement of Learning, chap. 3.) gravely discour∣sing

of the parts of Knowledge con∣cerning the Mind or Soul of Man, divideth it into that which declares the nature of the Reasonable Soul, which is a thing Divine; and that which treateth of the Unreasonable Soul, which is common to us with Beasts: and then proceeds to affirm at large, that the former hath its origi∣nal from the inspiration or breath of God; the later, from the matrices of the Elements: the immortal Gassen∣dus, de Physiologia Epicuri, cap. de Animae sede, Passionibms Animi, &c. and the now flourishing Dr. Willis, in libr. de Anima Brutorum cap. 7. whose words I forbear to transcribe, out of design to increase your satisfaction, by obliging you to read them at your leisure in the places cited. Now if solid Reasons, Authority Divine, and the judgment of many sublime Wits and profound Philosophers, as∣well Ancient as Modern, be of any weight to recommend this neither he∣retical,

nor improbable opinion to me; certainly I need not blush to incline thereunto. Notwithstan∣ding this, I recount the same tan∣quam in Hypothesi, only as a suppo∣sition convenient to solve the Pheno∣mena of the Passions; not as an arti∣cle of my faith: nor had I so impor∣tunely insisted thus long upon argu∣ments to justify my approbation thereof, in this Letter; had I not, through want of Books, omitted to doe it where I ought, in the III. Sec∣tion of the Discourse itself. ¶
The SECOND advertise∣ment I owe you, Friend, is this, that the greatest part of what is deli∣vered in the same Discourse, concern∣ing the nature, substance, faculties, Knowledge, &c. of a Sensitive Soul, hath been borrowed from that ela∣borate work of our Learned Dr. Willis de Anima Brutorum, lately published. Which I hold my self bound here ingeniously to acknow∣ledge

left otherwise you might justly condemn me as a Plagiary, and that I may invite you also to the pleasure of attentively reading that useful Book. Wherein I found great part of what I had formerly read of that subject in various Au∣thors, so well collected, digested and explained; that I chose from thence to copy an image of the Sen∣sitive Soul of Man, whereupon I was often to reflect my thoughts, while I fate to describe the most re∣markable of the Passions to which it is liable: and this I did the ra∣ther, because at that time I had by me no other Book of the same sub∣ject.
You are not therefore to look up∣on the Description of the nature and affections of a Sensitive Soul there∣in delivered, as a supposition newly excogitated, and unheard of by for∣mer ages. For to Men conversant in the Theories of Physiologists con∣cerning

that Subject, it is well known, that all the Ancients were so far from holding the Soul of a Brute to be o∣ther than Corporeal, that they for the most part taught their Disciples, that the Soul of Man was so too: ex∣cept a few of them, namely Pytha∣goras, Plato, and in some favoura∣ble sense Aristotle (when he defined the Soul by that enigmatical term ) and his Sectators, Aristoxe∣nus and Dicaearchus, when they cal∣led it a Harmony. True it is indeed, they were much divided in their opi∣nions about the Substance or Matter of a Soul; some imagining it to be of Fire, as Heraclitus, Democritus, Hipparchus, and the Stoicks; some conceiving it to be on the contrary, of a Watery nature, as Hippon, and Thales; others fancying it to be com∣posed of Water and Earth, as Xeno∣phanes; others, of Earth and Fire, as Parmenides; others again, of all the four Elements, as Empedocles:

and yet notwithstanding they una∣nimously consented in these points, that this Corporeal Soul is divisible; composed of particles extremely small, subtil and active; diffused through or coextens to the whole body wherein it is contained; pro∣duced at first by generation out of the seed of the parents; perpetualy recruited or regenerated out of the purest and most spirituous part of the nourishment; subject to Con∣traction and Expansion in passions; and finally dissolved or extinguished by death. If you doubt of the truth of what I here say, I know not how more easily to convince you, than by referring you to the incom∣parable Gassendus in Lib. 10. Diogen. Laert. cap. de natura, contexturàque Animae ad mentem Epicuri: where you find the same more amply delivered.
Meanwhile suffer me to recite a pertinent and memorable text of the

Lord Verulam's (of the Advance∣ment of Learning Book 4. Chap. 3.) that now comes into my head.
The Sensible Soul (saith he) must needs be granted to be a Corporeal sub∣stance, attenuated by heat and made invisible. I say, a thin, gen∣tle gale of wind swell'd and blown up from some flamy and and airy nature; indued with the softness of aire to receive impressi∣on, and with the vigour of fire to embrace action; nourished partly by an oyly, partly by a watery substance; spread over the body; residing (in perfect creatures) chiefly in the head; running through the nerves; refreshed and repaired by the spirituous part of the blood of the arteries: as Bernardinus Telesius (de rerum natura lib. 5.) and his Scholar Augustinus Donius have delivered it.
And as for the Bipartition of this Sensitive Soul into two principle

members as it were, or active sour∣ses; vix. the Fiery part, upon which Life depends; and the Lucid, from whence all the faculties Animal are, like so many distinct rayes of light, derived: I will not affirm it to be ve∣ry ancient: but yet methinks, I dis∣cern more than a shadow thereof in some lines of the same most acute Lord Bacon (de vita & morte, ex∣plicatione canonis quartae) which are these.
Spiritus vitalis omnis sibi continua∣tur, per quosdam canales, per quos permeat, nec totaliter intercipitur. Atque hic Spiritus etiam duplex est: alter ramosus tantum, permeans per parvos ductus, & tanquam lineas; alter habet etiam cellam, ut non tan∣tum sibi continuetur, sed etiam con∣gregetur in spatio aliquo cavo, in bene magna quantitate, pro analogia corpo∣ris; atque in illa cella est fons rivu∣lorum, qui inde deducantur. Ea cel∣la praecipue est in ventriculis cerebri,

qui in animalibus magis ignobilioribus angusti sunt; adeo ut videantur spiritus per universum corpus fusi, potius quam cellulati: ut cernere est in Ser∣pentibus, Anguillis, Muscis, quo∣rum singulae portiones abscissae moven∣tur diu: etiam Aves diutius, capiti∣bus avulsis, subsultant; quoniam par∣va habeant capita, & parvas cellas. At animalia nobiliora ventriculos eos habent ampliores; & maximè omni∣um Homo. Alterum discrimen inter spiritus est, quod spiritus Vitalis non∣nullam habeat incensionem, atque sit tanquam aura composita ex flamma, & aere; quemadmodum succi animalium habeant & oleum, & aquam. At illa incensio peculiares praebet motus, & facultates. Etenim & fumus in∣flammabilis, etiam ante flammam con∣ceptam, calidus est, tenuis, mobilis: & tamen alia res est, postquam facta sit flamma: at incensio spirituum vi∣talium, multis partibus lenior est, quàm mollissima flamma ex spiritu vi∣ni,

aut alias; atque insuper mixta est magna ex parte, cum substantia aerea; ut sit & flammeae, & aereae naturae mysterium.
This place of that Prince of Mo∣dern Philosophers, the Lord St. Al∣bans, conjoyned to that other of his immediately precedent, seems to me to contain a pourtraiture of the Sensitive Soul, drawn indeed as in perspective, in colours somwhat faint, and not accurately ground; yet with good judgment, and bold strokes of the pencill, such as give it no obscure resemblance of the original. And if you (Sir) please to compare it with the more ample description of the same Sensitive Soul, lately set forth by Dr. Willis: it will not be difficult to you, to observe, in how many things they agree. ¶
The THIRD and last thing whereof I am here to advertise you, is, that in the description of many of the Passions likewise, I have in∣terwoven

some threds taken from the webbs of those three excellent Men, Gassendus, Des Cartes, and our Mr. Hobbes; who have all writ∣ten most judiciously of that obstruse theme. Nor will I otherwise ex∣cuse myself for being so liberal to you, of what I owe to the bounty of those richer Wits; than by reci∣ting what your beloved Seneca said to his dear Lucilius, in defense of his adopting for his own so many wise and memorable sentences of his, and our Oracle, Epicurus: adhuc de alieno liberalis sum. Quare autem alienum dixi? quicquid benè dictum est ab ullo, meum est. Epist. 16. I will only add, as a reason of my so frank communication of these un∣polished papers to you, who are my Lucilius, what the same Latin Stoic most affectionately pofessed to his, on the like occasion: Ego vero cupio ista omnia in te transfun∣dere, & in hoc gaudeo aliquid disce∣re,

ut doceam. Nec me ulla res de∣lectabit, licet eximia sit & salutaris, quam mihi uni sciturus sim. Si cum hac exceptione detur Sapientia, ut illam inclusam teneam, nec enunciem, reji∣ciam. Epist. 6. ¶
