



IT is not without rea∣son (adored JESUS) that I offer up unto thee this Work, wherein I endevor to teach thy Ser∣vants how to use their Passions: For to boot, that all our thoughts are due unto thee, because thou art the Eternal Thought of the Fa∣ther,

and that whatsoever our Soul produceth, are as so many Images of thine; This belongs to thee by a double Title, and cannot without some sort of Injustice, be Dedica∣ted to any other than thee. Passions, in that state whereunto they are brought by sin, are Monsters which ought to be immolated upon thy Altars; this Sacrifice succeeds those of the Old Testament. As thou delightest in receiving a heart struck through with sorrow, and consumed with love, so dost thou with joy receive such Passions as Grace and Reason do consecrate unto thee; neither dost thou despise the Motions of our soul, when they are enlightned by Faith, and inanimated by Charity; thou art well pleased, that being Priests and Victimes for thy Glory, as thou hast been for our sal∣vation, we find some feelings in our¦selves,

which we may immolate unto thee; that in obedience to thy just Laws, we sacrifice unto thee our love, and our desires; and that courageously suffocating our anger, and our hatred, we appease thy Iu∣stice by the death of a part of our selves.
Thou likewise dost permit, that without shedding the blood of these savage Beasts, we tame them, to make them serviceable to thy de∣signes; and that we employ our hopes and fears to overcome Vice, and acquire Virtue. But assuredly, we cannot undertake this Combat, nor hope for Victory therein, with∣out thy assistance; for passions hold of thy Empire: and since these slaves are become Rebels, they are only to be reduced by thy Grace.
Thou, by thy eternal Birth, art the primitive Reason; and the same

term which we make use of in all Languages, to express thy Personal proprieties, teacheth us, that thou art as well the Reason, as the Word of thy Father: To thee it belong∣eth to regulate all the Passions; and if wise men have any command over theirs, 'tis for that their Reason flows from thine: They are only wise, in that they are reasonable; and they are reasonable only, in that they have the honour to be thy Images: Grace it self, whence the strength and light of thy Saints do derive, flows from thy divine Person: those great ones are not only Gods, but Sons of God, they bear thy Cha∣racter in their Souls; and the Fa∣ther, who looks upon them as thy Brethren, loves them as his Children. This Divine Quality makes them triumph over their Passions; they owe all their victories to thy Alli∣ance;

and if they tame the motions of their souls, 'tis because they have the honour to unite, as thou dost, Reason and Grace in their per∣sonages, and to be by priviledge, that which thou art by Nature.
Thy Actions, since thou hast vouchsafed to become Man, serve us for Instructions; and we find examples in thy life, which we may securely imitate. Before thy tem∣poral Birth, we had no model which was not imperfect: Virtue and Vice were intermingled in all men; and the greatest Saints did no good works, which were not accompani∣ed with some defects. Their Passi∣ons out-ran their Wisdom; the first motions of them were so sudden and so violent, that they could neither foresee them, nor hinder them: When they were once up, and that Reason gathering her forces toge∣ther,

gave them battel; these Rebels joyned Insolence to Fury, and ar∣gued Authority with their Sove∣raign. Thus thy faithfullest Ser∣vants needed forgiveness in the war, which they made against their passions; and it behoved thy good∣ness to give light to illuminate these blind men, Wisdom to conduct these giddy-headed People, and Fortitude to overcome these Rebels. But in thy sacred Person, passions have no defect: These wild Beasts are tamed, these troublesom Seas are always calm, these revolted Subjects are alwayes Obedient, and by a Miracle, as Rare as Illustrious, these Enemies of our Reason, do al∣ways agree with thine: They raised themselves when thou ordainedst them so to do, their first motions were in thy power, they waited thy leave to be troubled: Sorrow seiz∣ed

not on thy Heart, Tears distilled not from thine Eyes; and red-hu'd Anger, or pale Fear appeared not in thy Face, before thy Will, which ruled all their motions, had given them Permission. They were so well instructed in all thy Designes, as they seemed to be indued with Reason; and Reason found such Obedience in the Inferior part of thy Soul, that no Clouds were gathered together there, which she her self had not there formed. In the world Tempests are raised from the lower Elements: Thunder-claps, which make so hideous a noise in the Clouds, take their original from the Valleys or the Rivers; and all those Storms that trouble the clearness of the Ayr, proceed from Vapors of the Sea, or Exhalations of the Earth: In men that are composed of Mud and Dirt, their passions arise from

their bodies; their Revolts proceed from the senses; and all these Tem∣pests which molest their quiet, take their vigour from Flesh and Bloud; but in thy divine soul it fares clean otherwise; thy Passions sprung from thy Reason; it was the Soul that wrought upon the Body; it was the Superior part that inanimated the In∣ferior; and it was the primum Mo∣bile that gave motion to all the o∣ther Spheres, which did depend thereon.
Hence came it that thou didst enjoy a profound peace, that thy Victories were without Combat, or thy Triumphs without Victories: Thou feltest no Disorders in thy Per∣son, all was calm in thy soul, and even when sadness was grown to such a height, as it was able to cause thee to die, it was so submiss to Reason, that to obey her, it agreed

with Ioy its Enemy. Thou wert the most content, and the most afflicted of all men: Thou wert able to cause Envy in the most hap∣py, Compassion in the most misera∣rable, and Astonishment in them both. Love and Hatred were never at odds in thy heart: These two con∣traries bear respect to each other. Thy Reason had such absolute power, over them, that they preserved their opposition, without losing their good Intelligence; and men were astonish∣ed to see, that thy Soul, which was the Theatre, where two so violent motions were formed, should enjoy Peace amidst War. In fine, Fear and Audacity ended their diffe∣rences in thy Person; thou didst suffer these two affections to possess thy Heart without dividing it; whilst thou wert in thine Agony in the Garden, thou gavest confidence

to thine Apostles; and when the thought of death made such havock in thy Soul, thou didst encourage Martyrs to the Combat; thou pre∣parest Crowns for their Victories; and procuring them strength by thy weaknesses, thou ordainest them to be the Champions of thy Church Mi∣litant.
But whatever help they received from thy Grace, their Victories were never like thine; they found more obedience in the World, than in themselves; and have confessed, it cost them less to overcome wild Beasts, than to vanquish their own Passions. Famous Martyrs have been known, who having over∣come Lyons, could not quell their own choler; and have suffered them∣selves to be born away with Im∣patience, after they had endured Tortures: Their Combats were not

always followed with good Suc∣cess; they were oft-times in one and the same day, both Conquered and Conquerors: They gave way to Voluptuousness, after they had triumphed over Grief; and having had courage enough to be Martyrs, they wanted resolution to be conti∣nent. How often have they wisht for Death, that they might be freed from these domestick enemies? and to that end, sighed and made vows? When thy Providence gave them over to their own weakness, they de∣spaired of their Salvation; finding no support save in thy Goodness, they begun all their wrestlings by Prayer, and professed, that to over∣come their Passions, they must be animated by thy Spirit, and assist∣ed by thy Power. Thou art the sole Conqueror, that wert never worsted in this War; thy Affections never

betrayd thy Reason; and thy power hath been as absolute in thy Person, as in thy Kingdom: These Passions of our Soul changed nature in thine; by the use thou madest of them, they became Virtues: Thou con∣ceivedst no love which did not turn it self into Charity; thou didst ex∣cite no Choler that was not just in∣dignation; and thou feltest no pity, but it was transformed into Mercy. All that in our Nature is Humane, was Divine in thine; and the un∣confused Mixture of two Natures, whereof thou art composed, made thy passions to be rather Miracles than Virtues: Thy Anger served as an Officer to thy Fathers Iustice; thy Compassion was the Interpreter of His Mercy; and thy Love an earnest of His Good will. How happy was that distressed man that drew tears from thine eyes? how rich was that

poor one, whose wants thou didst bewail? how puissant was the op∣pressed, whose interests thou main∣tainedst? how innocent was that Offender, whose Conversion was wrought by thy Tears? and how glorious was the infamous Sinner, to whom thou witnessedst thy Love by thy Complaints and Sighs? Heaven had a regard to all the motions of thy Soul; the eternal Father never denied any thing to thy Tears; and his Thunder-bolts never failed to fall upon their heads, on whom thy just Anger called for punishment. Thy Passions were the Organs of thy Divinity; thy Sighs were no less powerful, than thy Words; and without using either Prayers or Vows, the Desires were sufficient to make known thy Will. What Admiration did these Motions of thy Soul cause in the Seraphim? with

what astonishment were those pure Intelligences strucken, when they considered that God taking our nature upon him, took part of her feelings, and no part of her weak∣nesses? That he wept with the wretched, without interessing his happiness? That he was Angry at those that were injured without troubling his Quiet? That with the needy he formed desires without loss of his Abundance? And that with Lovers, he felt the flames of Love, without enduring their Disturban∣ces? What a miracle was it, to see that Anger should be kindled in thy Soul, without trouble thereunto? That Pity should wound thy Heart, without weakning it? That it should be enflamed with Love, yet not consumed? That it should be eaten up with Sorrow, yet not dis∣quieted? What can I do less in

honour of so many Wonders, than to consecrate our Passions unto thee? What less submission can I make to thy adored Power, than loudly to avouch that there is none but thou, who can teach us the use of these Motions? And that it appertains only to thy Wisdom, to change our Anger into Indignation, our Pity into Mercy, and our Love into Charity?
Indeed, it is thou alone who canst rule our passions; thou art he only who workest our good out of our Evil, and of Poysons composest Antidotes. Thou knowest men by their Inclinations; thou seest, with∣out studying them, the motions of their hearts; and making benefit thereof, dost wisely conduct them to thy end. Thou employest Fear, to take off a covetous man from those perishable Riches which possess

him, thou makest a holy use of De∣spair, to withdraw from the World a Courtier; whose youth had been mis-imployed in the service of some Prince; thou makest an admirable use of Disdain, to extinguish there with a lovers flames, who is enslave by a proud beauty; thou employest Choler, to disabuse a Souldier, whom a dissembling General feeds with vain hopes; thou makest excellent use of Grief to cure a sick man, who sought for his Souls happiness in his Bodies health, and lost the remem∣brance of Heaven by being to strongly fastened to the Earth. In fine, thou makest Chains of all our Passions, to unite our Wills to thine thou minglest Grace with Nature; and makest Angels by the same dis∣orders, as they would have been made Devils. Sin is the Theatre of thy Power, as well as Nothing; thou

makest thy greatest Works issue out of two Subjects, whereof the one is Barren, the other Rebellious: Out of Nothing thou drawest Ex∣istence, and out of Sin thou extract∣est Grace; thou findest every thing in its contrary, and by an effectual violence, which can proceed only from an infinite Power, thou com∣pellest Nothing to produce men, and sin to make Saints: But after these two Miracles, which are thy Master∣pieces; we see not any thing more wonderful, than the use which thou art able to make of our Passions, for the changing of our Wills; thou makest that serve thy designes, which did serve thine enemies; thou savest men by those Weaknesses which would have been their undoing; and bestowing on them a little Divine Love, thou turnest all their Passions into Virtues. For, when once

Charity begins to reign in their souls, they fear nothing but sin, they wish for nothing but Grace. Thou art the end of their Desires, as thou art the object of their Love: They change Condition, without changing Nature; though they have Passions, they commit no more Offences; and losing neither Hope, nor Despair; neither Audacity nor Fear; neither Love nor Hatred; they are free from all the mischiefs which accom∣pany these Passions, when they are Faulty.
But certainly, if thy Mercy appear in well husbanding the inclinations of thy Friends, to their salvation; thy Iustice shines forth no less, in making good use of those of thine Enemies, to their Destruction: For they become chains in thy hands, to bind these Malefactors with; thou forgest out of them Irons to punish

these slaves; and thou changest their Desires into Aversions, & their plea∣sures into pain. Thou abandonest e∣very sinner to the passion which pos∣sesses him; thou commandest this do∣mestick fury to revenge thee, & cor∣rect him; thou turnest his sin into his punishment, without imploying either Hell or Devils; thou ordainest every sinner to be his own executioner; and makest him taste as many torments, as he nourisheth passions in his Soul: Thus we see by experience, that the irregular desire of honor, is the punish∣ment of the ambitious; that the sham∣ful love of voluptuousness, is the tor∣ment of the Incontinent; and that the insatiable thirst after riches, is the pe∣nalty of the covetous. Those chastise∣ments which astonish us with their outward appearance, are not the most rigorous: those plagues which sweep away whole Kingdoms, those wars

that unpeople the world, those thun∣ders which grumble over our heads, and those Abysses which gape under our feet, are but the flourishes of thy anger; thou makest thy Children feel those scourges, when thou wilt cor∣rect them; and these disorders of Nature, are oftentimes rather favors from thy Mercy, than chastisements of thy Iustice. But when thou wilt punish the guilty who have long offended thee, & that thou desirest to continue them in their sins; that thou maist sa∣tisfie thy just fury, thou givest them over to their own Lusts: thou com∣mandest their Passions to be their executioners, thou permittest all the inclinations of their souls to be turn∣ed into so many sins; and that de∣lighting in their offence, they no lon∣ger think of appeasing thee, or of their own Conversion.
Since then thou dost so justly em∣ploy

the passions, both of thy friends and enemies, vouchsafe to let me offer up these unto thee; and that to do homage unto thine, I may sacrifice to thee mine: Suffer me to propound thy life for an example to thy faithful ones; that not abusing them with false Virtues, whereof Vain-Glory was the Soul, and honor the reward; I repre∣sent to them, those which thou didst practise, during those happy years, thou wert pleased to converse with men. Give me Grace to explain to them the Morality which is learnt in thy school: And since the passions are the Seeds of Virtues and Vices, favor me so far, that I may so well express their Nature & their Motions, as that I may make all the readers of this my Book, virtuous: dissipate the darkness of my understanding, that in handling this matter, I may penetrat the depths of mens hearts, I may discover the extent of their jurisdiction; & that I

may bring all men to observe, how passions are raised in them, how they rebel against Reason, how they seduce the Vnderstanding, and what sleights they use to enslave the will: After I have known the Malady, teach me the Remedy, that I may cure it; teach me how a passion is to be stifled in its birth; what means I must use to subdue a passion, which finds her strength in her old age; and which, (O the wonder!) is never more vi∣gorous, than when most ancient. Teach me the dexterity we are to use, for conquering those Passions that flatter us with their promises; those which corrupt us with their subtilties; those which daunt us with their threats; and those which en∣chaunt us with their allurements: That being illuminated by thy Light, and assisted by thy Grace, I may by one and the same Work, inspire mens souls with the Love of Virtue, and Hatred of Sin.
