



My most Gracious Lord.
IF any where in the whol World the Wisdom and Almightiness of the most good and great God does appear (most High and most Illu∣strious Prince, my most gracious Lord) in the Contemplation of Natural Things, it does most cleerly shine forth. For who is it that contemplates this admirable Frame of the World, and therein the Sun, Moon, and other Coelestial Bodies, considering their most bright Light, most powerful Faculties, sundry turnings and returnings, and yet for so many Ages so cer∣tain and regular, but that he must needs acknowledg a most wise and Almighty Creator? who that views this vast Region of the Air, and the Clouds therein flying and hanging over our Heads, and the Rains, Snows, Hails, Thunders, and other Meteors? who that weighs and ponders in his mind this Globe of Earth where∣on we tread, hanging by Geometry in the empty Air, and there∣in the high Mountains, steep Hills, low Valleys, plain Fields, and these beset with so many Trees, Shrubs, Herbs, Flowers, and Fruits, affording food to so many sorts of living things which fly in the Air, creep and walk on the surface of the Ground; so ma∣ny Fountains, Brooks, Rivers, and the Seas themselves, and in them a countless crowd of Fishes? and in the Bowels of the Earth so many sorts of Minerals, Mines, and Metals, so many Fires burning for so many Ages together, and the Waters with great violence rushing and rowling through the Bowels of the Earth without destroying the same? Who I say that sees and considers all this without admiring the wisdom and almighty power of
God the Maker? Of whom St. Paul himself in the first to the Romans, thus writes; The invisible things of God are cleerly seen by the Creation of the World, being understood by the things created; namely his Eternal Power and God-head: and Hermes or Mercurius Trismegistus; Man is made to behold the Works of God, and he hath admired them, and known the Creator. But as the works of God in Nature are most wise and wonderful; so to search into and know the same is ex∣ceeding hard, insomuch that even the Prince of Philosophers Aristotle himself did not blush to confess, that the eyes of our Understanding were to the Light of Nature as the eyes of Owls to the Mid-day Sun; and the most acute Julius Caesar Scaliger in Ex∣ercit 307. Sect. 27. complains of the scantiness of our Understan∣ding, and confesses that it is a part of Humane wisdom to be con∣tentedly ignorant of some things; and in Exercit. 297. he inge∣nuously writes of himself (though otherwise a most acute man) I often give my self the charge to look about, remember and con∣sider how weak the eyes of our minds an to search into the deep Mysteries of Nature. Yet since in great and hard matters it is a thing deserving commendation, but to endeavor to do somwhat: Rare and Heroical wits in all Ages have not suffred themselves by the difficulty of Nature to be frighted from the contemplation thereof. With whom though I cannot compare my self; yet I was unwilling to lag behind, but spent a good part of my life in these Contemplations. And though I have found that common saying (Flattery gains Friends, but True speaking breeds Foes) to be true, not only in civil Conversation, but also in Philosophical Disputations; while I have observed that those who meerly re∣cite and transcribe the Inventions of our Ancestors, are not so apt to be slandered and back-bitten; but those who according to the Counsel of Seneca, being perswaded that though our Ancestors have done much, yet that they have not done all, and that there remains yet much work undone, have endeavored to add any thing to their Inventions, have made themselves liable to hatreds and reproaches: yet have I alwaies more valued the Truth than the Friendship or Hatred of any man whosoever. And therefore I have boldly adventured these my Meditations upon certain Heads of Natural Philosophy into the publick, and having writ∣ten them a yeer or two since, now I communicate the same to others.
And I was desirous (most Illustrious Prince, and my gracious Lord) to dedicate them to the most Honored Name of your most Illu∣strious
Highness, not so much because I would follow the fashion of this Age; but because I know, and am certainly acquainted that your most illustrious Highness is so seasoned with good Li∣terature, that you are also able to judg of the Labors of those that profess the same. And therefore I do most earnestly beseech your most illustrious Highness, that you would vouchsafe to receive this Work of mine, such as it is with a favorable Countenance, and by the Splendor of your illustrious Name to dispel such Mists as Malevolent Persons may chance to throw about it. The most good and great God long preserve your Highness in Health and Happiness.

