



My Lords and Gentlemen,
A Man who maketh the Publick Concern his own, and an Au∣thor that Dedicats his Works to any Society of People, the one must resolve to have the Sense of his Duty for a re∣ward: And the other, Men of all Cha∣racters for his Patrons.
But Men that live together in a regu∣lar Society, are very much deceived, when they think it sufficient for their Happiness to scrape together plentiful Estates: without concerning themselves how the publick Business of their Coun∣try is managed. For, how can they be secure, either in their Enjoyment, if the Laws don't protect them? Or, how can they Hope for Good Laws, if they don't concern themselves with that Assembly, which hath the Legisla∣tive power?

 Rome owes not her Greatness to her Founders, who were a parcel of Peo∣ple Born and Nurs'd up in Murders and Plunderings, and trained in all sort of Villanies; but to their Successors, who became Wise, Frugal, Just, and pas∣sionatly studious of Virtue and Glory, till at last, they overtop'd in power all their Neighbours. Nor could any thing have put a stop to their Empire, till privat Men did prefer their own gain to the Interest of the Publick. Then was it, that, in the time of the Empe∣ror Tiberius, all ran headlong into Sla∣very; The Consuls, the Senat, the Gentry: And the Nobler the Person was, the greater hast he made to ruine his Country.
My Lords,
You are Hereditary Members of Par∣liament, so that both your Titles of Honour and your privat Interests oblige your Lordships to be the Pillars and Supporters of your Country: By ma∣naging all it's Concerns, without the least byass, from that true Virtue which
inspired some of your Forefathers to ap∣pear Heroes for this Nation.
And you, Gentlemen, who are Mem∣bers of Parliament, both your Duty to your Countrey, to your Friends, and to your selves, will stare you in the Face, if you do any thing against the Interest of any of them. And you that are not Members of Parliament, how necessary is it, for the Security of your Lives, Liberties and Properties, that good Laws be made, and every thing removed, that may endanger them? Be therefore diligent, in putting the Members of Parliament in mind of their Duty; and let the most sensible of you, who have Families and Estates to care for, endea∣vour to fill the Places of the Represen∣tatives of Parliament, when any are va∣cant, that by your Honesty and Wisdom, every Misfortune may be avoided, that hath threatned this Nation from Mem∣bers, that have neither Fortune nor Re∣putation to preserve.
Whilst the Parliament contains Men of Courage and Publick Spirit, who can neither be bought nor frighted, Matters cannot long proceed amiss: And 'tis
hardly conceivable, what Esteem is payed to Men of steddy Principles, even by their Enemies: their very Words and Actions are admired and followed, so long as they live. Whereas busy In∣triguers after Places and Pensions are contemptible to the very Men, of whom they are the wretched Instruments to en∣slave their Countrey.
Therefore, My Lords and Gentlemen, If these Essays can demonstrat any way the Interest of this Nation, I will have my Design both in Writing and Dedica∣ting of them to you, on whom depen∣deth the greatest part of the Happiness of your Countrey.
My Lords and Gentlemen, 
