



SIR,
WHen this Ʋnfortunate Play implores Your Patronage, it is an Humble Addressor to You, even for that common English Humanity, as the Reception of a persecuted Re∣fugee, hunted out of the World, and now a Shelterer under Your Hospitable Roof. And if Your Good Graces shall vouchsafe it that kind Entertainment, I Beseech You to look upon it as a forlorn Brat, turned out abroad under the Curse of those Sour Grapes, the Faults and Misfortunes of the unhappy Author. And re∣ally, under that Prejudice that lours upon me; I may truly say, could I pretend to never so great an Interest in the Muses, as that I am far from; I Plant but at a North-Wall, rear that Fruitless Nursery, where I am certain to be Chill'd and Blasted: So miserable it is to live, where not one Beam smiles.
And indeed, a Poet, under a hard Name, groans beneath a perfect Turkish Subjection, where Sentence and Execution are so wholly Arbitrary, that the Black Robe, and the Bow∣string are sent him, without Process or Tryal.
But the happier Favourite Quils, (Lord!) What Wonders can they perform! Can Write as the Famous Witherington Fought, upon their very Stumps. For,
The Lucky have whole Days, and those they chuse.
Th' Unlucky have but Hours, and those they lose.
—As a Poetick Oracle tells us.
Poetry is so much the Creature of Favour, that 'tis not the Oar, but the Stamp that sets the value. A Darling Muse shall make Medals of what an Abdicated Scribler shall hardly pass for Counters.
But to leave this Melancholy Theme, the severity of this poor Plays Fortune, and change to a cheerfuller Cause; 'tis now Lodged in the hands of Mercy; for 'tis Dedicated to Worth and Goodness; Titles, so properly Your own; that to a Natural Candour, Sweetness of Tem∣per, prideless Familiarity, and all that Generous

Disposition of Mind, that warms where You Fa∣vour, and charms where You Converse; You have the Additional Acquisitions and Improve∣ments of the most Generous Education too, as no small Superstructure upon so ample a Foun∣dation. You challenge that bountiful Litera∣ture, a Feather not in every Gentlemans Crest, that we may trace Your Rich Fountain up to the Banks of Cham, as nurtur'd and cherish'd no less by the Beams of an Alma Mater, than Your own smiling Genius; Insomuch that so truly accomplisht, You are equally furnisht as well for the Courtier as the Country Gentle∣man.
And, faith, Sir, now I have named an English Gentleman, he that with all the true Quali∣fications of Gentility, lives like Your self, above the World, Attendance and Dependance the Cowlean Curse far from his Door, a plentiful Estate his fair Field Argent, and a Bravery of Spirit to enrich that fair Coat, may be truly said to be more a Prince than he that fills a Throne: whilst free and uncontrould, within his own smal∣ler Province of Command, he Reigns more Ab∣solute, than the prouder Crowned Head in all his Realms and Territories, that larger Canton of the Globe; who besides his Cares and Fatigues

(a pain You feel not) weilds but a shackled Scepter, under a bounded Dominion, and limit∣ed Sovereignty.
But whatever ample Theme Your Merit fur∣nishes me, I dare not be too bold upon that subject: for Panegyricks are only acceptable Guests where there's Pride and Vanity to welcome and receive them. But so extraordinary a Modesty shines in You, that instead of attempting the Pa∣negyrist, I must rather check the Publication of those fair Truths, though never so justly Your due, as knowing that You can easier deserve Encomi∣ums than hear them; under which silencing Com∣mand upon me, I can only conclude with subscri∣bing my self
Sir,

