



My LORD,
HAD I thought that this Piece I here Dedicate to Your Lordship, was not above Your, or any Man's, Patronage, I had shewn less Respects to You in making You so Mean a Present. Were You Monarch of the Universe, TRUTH (which it Defends) could receive no Pro∣tection from Your Grandeur. Her Genius is so Sublime, and Her self so Nobly-born, that, like Him from whom she descends, she is Beneficial to all, and Incapable of receiving Advantage from any. All Extrinsecal Sup∣ports, in stead of Honouring her, Debase her. Her Well-compacted and Indissoluble Fa∣brick is altogether Divine: Contrary to our Material Structures, it is Built from the Top; and, its Foundation laid as high as Heaven it self. The GOD of Truth has imprinted all Natural Truths in Created Beings, as in the Footsteps of his Infinite Wisdom; from whence, by the Vehicles of our Senses,

they are Copy'd and Transcrib'd into our Mind; where, without our Labour, they beget all our Natural Notions; and, as Spe∣culation, and even Experience, assures us, they do also, at the same time, give us some Knowledge of the Things themselves; which steadily and distinctly Reflected on, breed in us that best Natural Perfection of our Understanding, SCIENCE; of which those Notions are, as it were, the Seeds.
Thus was Mankind put into a plain Road-way of gaining Clear Intellectual Light, by the Common Providence of our Good Creatour. To improve in which, and to keep our Thoughts from wandring into Er∣rour, the same Goodness of our Maker en∣dowed us with a Faculty of Reflecting on the Operations of our own Minds; and, on all the Guilded Train of our Spiritual Con∣ceptions, and of the several Natures and Manners of them; by which means those who were addicted to Attentive Reflexion, or Speculation, invented a Way, and setled Artificial Rules, how to manage their No∣tions, Judgments and Discourses. Which Rules laid orderly together, and found by Reason to be Agreeable to the Natures of Things according to the Being they had in the Mind, and, therefore, Solid; did, in time, compose that excellent and most useful Sci∣ence call'd LOGICK.

But, my Lord, the Crooked Byass of Men's Wills perverted their Reason, and made them disregard this Well-grounded and Regular Method, given them so freely by the Author of Nature. The Heathen Philosophers of old, whose God was Vani∣ty, affected to set up several Sects, to pride themselves with the Empty Honour of be∣ing esteemed their Heads. The Christian Schools succeeded; who, at first, discours'd gravely on those Subjects which were of a higher Nature; but, whether the Circum∣stances did not bend their Thoughts that way, or from what other Reason, they set∣tled no Scientifical Method to attain Philo∣sophical Knowledges. Yet, those who fol∣low'd Aristotle's Principles, (as the great Aquinas constantly endeavoured) did gene∣rally discourse even in such Subjects, when they had occasion, very solidly. But, after∣wards, when School-disputes grew to be the only fashionable Learning, the Multitudes of Combatants increas'd, and the Contests were maintain'd by several Great Bodies; each of which thought it Creditable to their Party to set up and follow some Eminent Man of their own. Hence this Nature∣taught Method came to be much neglected; and he was thought to win the Prize who was the subtilest and acutest Disputant, and not he who could most solidly Demonstrate

Truth. Hence, no Exact and Rational Lo∣gick being settled and agreed on, they were apt to take up oftentimes Wrong Principles; and the several Conceptions of our Mind were mistaken to be so many several Things. Demonstration was rather talk'd of for Form's sake, than pursu'd and practis'd; and, the the Use of General Maxims, which should establish our Discourses, was scarce once thought on; without which, Demonstration was Impossible. New Questions in Philo∣sophy, of little or no use, were started; and bandy'd to and fro by Terms and Words not well understood; nor their Sense agreed on, by the Contending Parties. The Heat of Opposition fix'd Men in their own Opi∣nions. Innumerable Quaint and Nice, and sometimes Impertinent, Distinctions were invented, to escape their being Entangled by the Arguments of their Adversary. Eve∣ry man affected to be a Proteus, and took more Care to elude Opposition, than to set∣tle and establish Truth on Immovable Grounds. The true Sense of Aristotle's Doctrine, not being taken from himself or his First Interpreters, but from some Modern Mis∣understanders, was lost; and his Text drawn into several Meanings, to abet Contradicto∣ry Tenets. In a Word, nothing was deci∣sively concled, nor likely to be so, by this way of School-Term-Learning, as things

were manag'd by Unmethodiz'd Disputation.
Thus stood the Affair of Philosophy at the beginning of this present Century; which having been fertile of many Excellent Wits, two of the Chiefest of them, Cartesius in France, and our Ingenious Countryman Mr. Locke, having taken Scandal at these Miscarriages, and an Aversion against that Miracle of Nature, Aristotle, whose Doctrine Schoolmen had ill represented; and being withal Men of Strong Brains, enabling them to carry their Conceptions through, and to make them Coherent; they did, out of their Zeal for Truth, undertake to set up New Systems of Philosophy; tho' Cartesius in some sort, furbish'd up, improv'd, and refin'd up∣on the old Corpuscularian Way of Democritus and Epicurus; which I have fully confuted in the Appendix to my Method; and, I hope, beyond all possibility of Reply. But, these two Gentlemen, being better vers'd in the Mathematicks than in Metaphysicks; and, thence, not apprehending how Corporeal Natures could get into the Mind, or be there; nor, reflecting that a Spiritual Nature, being incomparably Superiour in the Rank of Be∣ings to that of Corporeal Things, must, con∣sequently, have naturally and ncessarily a Power to comprehend, after its manner, (or by way of Knowledge) that Inferiour one; they were forc'd, thro' their want of Higher

Principles, to build all Knowledge, not up∣on the Things themselves in their Knowing Power, but upon Ideas or Similitudes of them; tho' neither of them set themselves to make out or demonstrate how we could possibly have our Notions, or First Notices of the Things by them. Now, these Spiri∣tual Ideas being, most evidently, neither the Things known, nor any Mode or Accident of those Objects; and, consequently, nothing at all of the Thing in any sort, were manifestly convinced not to be the Productions of Crea∣tive Wisdom, in which he had imprinted all Natural Truths, but meer Fancies, coin'd by their Imagination. These Ideas or Fancies then, and only these, they contemplated, and Grounded all Natural Truths, (which could have no Foundation but only in the Things which the First Truth had made) up∣on these Fantastick Resemblances: and, thence, they put all Formal Truths to consist in the Agreement of those Empty Similitudes; till at length (as Fancy let loose to fly at its full Random, and driven forward with a quick Wit, does naturally and genuinly lead) they had introduced a kind of Fanaticism into Philosophy; built, in the main, or in great part, on a pretended Inward Light by means of those Imaginary and Visionary Ideas.
From this Introversion upon these unsolid Aiery Bubbles, and thence their neglecting

the Things themselves, and our Solid Natural Notions, Mr. Locke was brought to Confound Corporeal and Spiritual Natures; and conse∣quently, (these two being the Adequate Ob∣ject of all Philosophy) all Philosophical Knowledge was rendred impossible. And Cartesius left us no means to know whether Man is One Thing made up of Soul and Bo∣dy, or Two Things, tack'd together by virtue of some Accident; which well consisted with their Substantial Distinction. Hence also it came, that GOD was brought in at every Hard Pinch, to act contrary to what the Na∣tures of Things requir'd; without which, they could not lay their Principles, or make their Scheme cohere; that is, they would needs make GOD, as he is the Author and Orderer of Nature, to work either Preterna∣turally or else Supernaturally; which is a plain Contradiction. Nay, Mr. Locke finding no Fancy in his Imaginative Power that suits with our Notion of [Thing,] would perswade the World that no Man living knows what a Thing or Substance is; that is, that none knows what the Word Thing means; which is so Evident to our Natural Thoughts, that it is impossible for the rudest Person in the World to be Ignorant of it. In a Word, their Fan∣cy so inveigled their Reason, that they came to deny Self-evident Truths; and held many other Propositions, which were absolutely Impossible and Contradictory.

Wherefore, seeing Philosophy reduced to this lamentable Condition; and, that Solid Rationality, and all Truth in Natural Objects, were thus in imminent Danger to be over∣run and born down by Imaginary Conceits; and apprehending that GOD's Providence had fitted and enabled me to redress such great Mischiefs; I thought it became me to re-instate Reason in her Soveraignty over Fancy; and, to assert to her the Rightful Dominion Nature had given her over all our Judgments and Discourses. I resolved therefore to dis∣intricate Truth, (which lay too deep for Su∣perficial Fancy to fathom) from all those La∣byrinths of Errour. I observ'd that Philo∣sophy labour'd and languish'd under many Complicated Distempers, (all springing from this way of Ideas) and that they were grown Epidemical; nor could they be cur'd by the Application of Remedies to this or that Par∣ticular Part, or by confuting this or that Particular Errour. Hereupon, having found out the true Cause of all these Maladies of Human Understanding, I saw it was necessary to Stub up by the Roots that Way it self; and, by Clos and Solid Reasons, (the most Deci∣sive Weapons in Tru Armory,) to break in Pieces the brittle Glassy Essences of those Fantastick Apparitions; which, if a Right Way of Reasoning be settled, and under∣stood, will disappear, and vanish out of the

World, as their Elder Sisters, the Fairies, have done in this last Half Century.
I know, my Lord, Reformation made by a Single Man, tho' but in Philosophy, seldom gains Credit to him who attempts it. And, it must be confess'd, that, to pretend to re∣form where there is no Necessity, has an Ill Name; and is justly held to spring from Po∣licy, Interest, Pride, or some such other Si∣nister Motive. But I am very confident, that whoever peruses this Treatise, nay, but even the Preface, will see, that the Occasion of this Undertaking was not only Expedient, but Co∣gent. Nor can any Man justly tax him of Arrogance, or of Usurping a Dictature over other Men's Judgments, tho' he opposes Great Multitudes of Speculaters, who offers his Reasons to convince theirs.
To this Necessity, now laid open, of Re∣forming Philosophy, I shall add another, of a much more weighty Concern; and which may also rectifie some zealons well-meaning Friends; who, judging of Things by their own Short Reach, think that the Advancing Truth in Philosophy is little better than Time and Labour lost; whereas, I, on the Contrary, do really think, that the Supplying what the World most wants, is the Greatest, and most Universal Good I can possibly do. This other Necessity then, of my rectifying our Modern Philosophy, (which will make others see,

how great a Good it is,) is this: Those Truths which are of a higher, and more Sacred Na∣ture, can never be rightly Explicated, nor consequently (such Men not valuing Autho∣rity) be duly recommended to those who Dissent from them, unless True Principles of Philo∣sophy be Settled, and Unsound ones Confuted. For, since no Explication of Faith can be made by Faith it self; all of them must necessarily be made by our Reason, shewing the Confor∣mity they have to our Natural Notions, or to such Knowledges as we had from the Things in Nature; especially, since Dissenters draw their Chief Objections from the Repugnancy of those Points to our Natural Principles. 'Tis a known Truth, that as every Definition must be the Self-same Notion with what is defin'd, so must every right Explication too; it being, in reality, nothing but the Unfolding what was before wrapt up Closer. Whence follows, that, when he who has the ill Luck to have taken up False Principles, comes to explicate the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Resurre∣ction, or any High Point of Reveal'd Faith; his Explication must always be Contrary to True Principles of Nature, and perhaps may have twenty real Contradictions in it; and, so, Common Reason (as was said) telling all Sensible Men, that the Explication must be the same Sense with the Point which it Expli∣cates; the Tenet of Faith will suffer in the

Opinion of Witty Men, by such an Untoward and Senseless Explication; be Ridiculous to Adversaries; and be held perfect Nonsense and Contradiction. Whereas, if the Philosophy, by which those Tenets are Explicated, be True and Solid; then, since both Natural and Reveal'd Truths are Children of the same Fa∣ther, (the GOD and Author of All Truth,) who cannot contradict Himself, and therefore those two Sorts of Truths cannot but agree; it will follow, that the Explication of all Re∣veal'd Points, made according to True Phi∣losophy, must needs appear to Intelligent Men to be most Rational; and most Consonant, and not Contradictory, to True Natural Prin∣ciples: Which will Comfort Faith in those who believe already; Recommend it to all Ingenu∣ous and Indifferent Seekers; help to Convert to Christianity those, whose Reason was for∣merly Dissatisfy'd upon such Sinister Miscon∣ceits; and, Lastly, Confound Adversaries, by putting them past Opposing it by any Princi∣ples of True Philosophy, and leave nothing for them to object against it, but Idle and Ill∣grounded Fancies, whose weak Attempts are easily defeated. Whence, I could heartily wish, that, were True Philosophy in Fashion, all Sects (so the State thought fit) might have Free Liberty to Print the best Reasons they can muster up against Christianity; Resting confident, that (in that Happy State of Science,

or True Learning) nothing in the World could gain to Truth a greater Advantage. Till that Desirable Time comes, all I can do, is, to de∣clare here publickly, that I shall take it for a great Favour, if any Learned Socinian, Deist, or Atheist, would please to send me those Reasons they, or their Leaders, judge of most Weight, why they cannot embrace the Do∣ctrine of the Trinity, or Christianity; which they may do privately, and Unnam'd, to the Stationer who publishes this Treatise; and I do hereby promise them, I will give their Objections their Full Force, and publish an Answer to them: Onely, I will expect, that their Arguments shall be Intrinsecal ones, or drawn from the Opposition such Reveal'd Ar∣ticles, as they mislike, are conceiv'd by them to have to some Principles of Logick, Phy∣sicks, or Metaphysicks, which are either Self∣evident, or which they will undertake to re∣duce to Evidence: These onely being such Objections as becomes a Christian Philoso∣pher to speak to. For, if they be Extrinsecal ones, and built on Histories, or on Groundless Fancies; or, if they consist in Glossing Words, in whose Sense we are not Agreed; it belongs to a Critick, or a Historian, and is not the Proper Employment of a Philosopher.
I would not be thought, by what is said lately, to cast any Reflexions on Cartesius or Mr. Locke, (whom I join here equally, and

indifferently,) as intending any Diskindness to Christianity by their New Methods of Philosophy: It appears both by their Wri∣tings, and by their particular manner of handling their Subjects, that they meant in∣genuously and sincerely to follow what they conceiv'd to be True. Onely I must say of both of them, that, if their Way of Philoso∣phizing, and, therefore, their Philosophy it self, be shewn to be far from True and Solid; then, in case any Chief Christian Tenet should come to be Explicated by their Ways, those Sacred Points themselves must necessarily, for the Reason now given, receive some Taint and Blemish by such Ill-grounded Explications: And the same, for the same Reason, I must say of School-Philosophy too, if it proceeds upon Principles that are not Well-grounded, or Solid.
It remains, my Lord, to give my Reasons why this Common Duty I here perform to the Learned Part of Mankind who are Can∣didates of Science, comes to be particularly address'd to Your Self: Which, in short, are these. I was much in Debt; and it was an Honest Man's Part to endeavour to discharge it. I ow'd much to Your Lordship's Father, of Honourable and Pious Memory, who both encourag'd my first Endeavours, and favour'd me with a particular Friendship and Corre∣spondence to His Dying-Day: And, I make account, such kind Obligements, writ in a

Grateful Heart, ought to be as Lasting, and as Binding, as those Obligations drawn on Paper; and, withal, ought to devolve, by a Hereditary Right, to His Immediate Descen∣dent, Your Self. I ow'd very much to Your Lordship's own Person, for the Kind Respect with which You have been pleas'd to honour me. I ow'd much to all Your Lordship's Nearest and Noblest Relations, both in the Direct, and in all the Collateral Lines. And, lastly, since every Man who writes for Truth, naturally loves to be Understood, I ow'd it to my Self, to present this Treatise particularly to Your Lordship; than whom, I know none of our English Nobility more Acutely Intelli∣gent. It is of such a Nature, by its laying the Foundation of Philosophy from the deep∣est Bottom-Principles, that, to comprehend and penetrate it thorowly, there was requir'd a Judgment both Solid, and Pointed; both which Perfections meet in Your Lordship's Great Genius, in a High Perfection.
The Diligent Printer has overtaken my Lazy Pen, and stays for this hasty Scribble; which forces me, with an Unmannerly Ab∣ruptness, to write my self,
My LORD,

