



SIR,
'TIS so Unusual a Com∣plement,
to make a Per∣son
of your Quality a
Judge in a Philosophical
Controversie, that it will be Ad∣mir'd
at by those who do not know
you▪ and, I fear, scarce Accepted by
your self. Such Studies do so seldom
colour with the Profession of a Gentle∣man,
that He must be much rais'd
above the Common, who can merit
the Esteem of being fit for such an
Umpirage. To be held, not only a
Lover of Learning, but a Discerner
too in that Highest Sort of Know∣ledge,
is such a Starry Embellish∣ment
to a Noble Extraction, and
sets such a Deep Stamp of Honour
upon it, that it gives a Double Tin∣cture
of Excellency to such Illustrious
Persons, and ranks them in the First

File of Heroes. In the Time of Au∣gustus,
when the Roman Learning
was in its Zenith, such Famous Wor∣thies
might have been easily met
with; but they are so Rare now-a-days,
that they seem Uncouth, and
look like Monsters: And such, in∣deed,
they are, in Scaliger's Phrase;
that is, Monsters of Perfection.
Great Men do generally, now, so un∣dervalue
Learning, and 'tis so de∣spicably-Little
in their Eye, as if
they took a View of it at the Wrong
End of the Prospective. The Noble
Sir Kenelm Digby, the Honourable
Mr. Boyle, and some few others,
have rescu'd the Universality of their
Peers from this Imputation: But,
now that they have left us, such
Personages are so very thin-sown,
that, for any thing we see, there are
but Few left, besides your self, who
give us any Prospect of keeping alive
a Succession of Men, endow'd with
that Renowned Character.

Yet, Ignorance and Folly are
such Ignoble Blemishes, that KNOW∣LEDGE,
in Common, does still up∣hold
it self, with the Generality of
Mankind, in a Fair Esteem: But,
this Thing, call'd [PHILOSO∣PHY,]
looks like such a Bug-bear to
most of our Modern Great Ones, that
the very Name and Sound of it
puts them in a Marvellous Fright;
whence, 'tis no wonder Men do not
love, or esteem Amiable, what they
fear, and look upon as Hideous.
Whereas, indeed, the Study of Phi∣losophy
is no more but the Improve∣ment
of our Reason, (by which we
are Men,) in Reading, and (to a
fair Degree) Understanding the
Book of the World; or, in Knowing
those Things, with which, whether
we will or no, we must Converse,
and be Concern'd daily. Certainly,
their Palate is much out of Taste,
who cannot relish a Benefit so Natu∣ral
to our Soul; but think it below

the Station of a Gentleman, to re∣gard
it. I could wish such Men
would please to reflect upon what
kind of Objects their Thoughts and
Affections are employ'd, while they
neglect This. I believe it would
shame their Choice, if they duly
consider'd what Empty Toys they
pursu'd, and preferr'd before this So∣lid
and Substantial Good. PHI∣LOSOPHY,
truly such, and right∣ly
understood, is far from being such a
Frightful Thing as their Imagina∣tion
paints it; being only Plain,
Natural Reason, Polish'd, Better'd
and Elevated by Art and Reflexion:
So that they who check at the Know∣ledge
of Philosophy, ought, with
much better Reason, find fault with
the Teaching Persons of Quality to
Sing, Dance or Play on the Lute:
Unless they think it very Prudent, and
Expedient, to give our Voice, Feet
and Fingers the best Advantages we
can, to perform their Actions artifi∣cially,

and exactly; but, that 'tis
a very Needless Folly to perfect the
Knowing Power of our Soul; and
wondrous Wise, to let it still doze
on sluggishly, in its Home-spun Na∣tive
Rudeness, and lie wholly Uncul∣tivated.
Nay, such Gentlemen would
be much offended their Houses should
not be clean Swept, and Garnish'd;
yet, they are not, in the least, con∣cern'd,
that Cobwebs should hang in
the Windows of their Intellect, and
Dusty Ignorance dim and blear the
Sight of the Noble Inhabitant.
But, where is this Philosophy all
this while? Or, Is there, indeed,
any such Thing in Nature? What∣ever
Glorious Attributes some have
given it, they all Agree in this,
that it is the Knowledge of Truth:
If so, then, as Truth can be but
One, so it should follow, that ei∣ther
can there be more than One i∣losophy
which is the True One
and, that all others are but 

Pretended; and, consequently, in
reality, Fabulous, and Erroneous.
Where, then, shall we certainly find
this One, or only-True Philoso∣phy?
Multitudes of Sects did, of
old, set up to drive the Trade and
Profession of Philosophizing: But,
they all Broke, and shut up Shop,
having but a very few Chance-Cu∣stomers;
except that Great Man,
(whom St. Hierome calls, Ingenii
Humani Finis,) ARISTOTLE.
He, I say, alone, has got Quiet
Possession of the Schools, for a long
time; and, ha now strengthen'd his
Title, by an Immemorial Prescri∣ption:
Nor did any Pretender of
Note put in his Claim against him, till,
in our Days, the admirably-Ingenious
CARTESIUS declared himself
his Competitor. Till then, Aristo∣tle
being drawn into different Senses,
by his Many-minded Commentators
amongst the Modern School-men, those
Men who were of Sharp Wits, and

hated jurare in verba— were in dan∣ger
to turn Scepticks; and began to
think that Truth was either flown to
Heaven in Astraea's Coach; or, (as
some Antients thought,) was in puteo
defossa; or else, if she were above∣ground,
that she was sequester'd in
some Terrestrial Paradise; so that
none could get Knowledge of her Ha∣bitation,
or come at her. In this
juncture, to rescue the Flower of Man∣kind
from falling into perfect Scepti∣cism,
and to encourage them still to
hope for Truth in Philosophy, there
arose, very opportunely, those Great
Men, Thomas Albius, Sir Kenelm
Digby, and Cartesius; who were,
all of them, in a manner Contemporary:
All of them promis'd Science, which
kept up those Men's drooping Spirits
from Despair of Truth. The former
Two of these, in many of their main
Principles, declar'd themselves Ari∣stotelians;
as also did those who fol∣low'd
their Philosophy: Whereas, Car∣tesius

ravell'd all the Schemes hither∣to
woven by others, moulded all the
World in a New Frame; and set up
for his Single Self, without any Co∣partner.
By which you see, Sir, that
your Task, which seem'd at first so
Vast, and Endless, is reduc'd, and
confin'd to this One Enquiry; viz.
to determin (in your own Thoughts
at least, whether you think fit to pro∣nounce
Sentence, or no) which Par∣ty,
viz. these Followers of Aristotle,
or of Cartesius, are True Philoso∣phers.
On which side soever the Lot
falls, it follows of course, that, since
they contradict one another, the Other,
let them Talk and Write as long as
they will, are, in reality, None.
Still you will complain, that even
This is beyond the Extent of your
Narrow Province, and exceeds the
Purlew of your Reading, and Think∣ing
too. But I dare assure you, Sir,
that this present Debate is of that
nature, that it requires no more to

Decide it, than a Fair Stock of Clear
and Penetrative Natural Reason;
in which your Discerning Genius
(besides what Acquisition may have
added to it) is well known to be A∣bounding,
and no way Deficient.
To perform this, there needs no Se∣dulous
and Tedious Turning over
all the Books writ by both Parties,
or Scanning the Force of their Argu∣ments.
Providence would be wanting
to Mankind, were there no other Way
than this left us, to know where Truth
is to be found: Nor would Man's Life
be long enough for such an Endless
Task. I know not what Untoward
Ways Men, who love much Talk,
have fram'd to themselves, and intro∣duced
into the World: But, certain∣ly,
the GOD of Truth, who envies
not to Mankind his Best Natural Per∣fection,
Exact Knowledge, or True
Science, has furnish'd us with a more
Compendious, and more Sure Me∣thod,
if we will but follow it: Which

is, to examin which Party, what
Book, what Discourse has Right
PRINCIPLES; and, which not.
If two Mathematicians follow their
Principles, and yet differ in their
Conclusions, we may be sure the Pre∣tended
Principles of one of them are
no Principles at all: And the same,
for the same reason, holds in all other
Sciences. But, how shall we know who
has True, or Right Principles? Most
easily, by Examining the FIRST
PRINCIPLES either Side pretends
to. For, if the First Principles may be
Fallacious, and, consequently, None;
then the Second Principles, which
depend on the First, can be none nei∣ther;
and, so, they will be unavoid∣ably
convinc'd to have no Kind of
Principles at all. Nor is it possible
for any Man to be Ignorant, whether
the First Principles, or First Truths,
which are to be the RULE of knowing
all other Truths, be truly such;
because These must be Self-evident,

most Firmly Grounded, Unmistaka∣ble,
and necessarily Assented to, by
All Mankind; as is demonstrated in
the Following Treatise; and, indeed,
is Evident by Common Reason. A∣gain,
If either Side would pass upon us
Gratuitous, or Unprov'd Supposi∣sitions,
for Principles; or decline the
Way of Connexion of our Simple Ap∣prehensions,
in which all Truth for∣mally
consists; and, without which, all
Discourses must be necessarily Incohe∣rent:
Lastly, If the RULE of Know∣ing
Truth which One Party assigns, be
such, that even Learned Men may be
Mistaken, and Deceiv'd, while they
think they follow it; in all these Ca∣ses,
I say, 'tis Incontestably Evident,
that that Party are no Philsophers:
nor can know any thing at all, if Na∣ture
be not Kinder to them, than their
own Unprincipl'd Doctrine.
You see, Sir, by this time, that a
Gentleman, endow'd with a far less
Perfection of Understanding than your

self is Master of, may, by these Tests,
determin, who are True Philosophers,
who not: As also, how all Controver∣sies
in Philosophy may be easily Deci∣ded;
how all Occasions of Wrangling
about particular Tenets, may be avoid∣ed;
and, lastly, how the Fiercest Op∣posers,
if they really seek after Truth,
may be Reconcil'd, and Satisfy'd.
'Tis the Business of this following
Paper, to let you into the Certain
Knowledge, what Kind of Propositions
are the First Principles, and the
Rule of Knowing all Truth what∣ever.
The First Step we take into
our Inmost Thoughts, we meet with
and discover these Primary Truths:
whose Self-Evidence is the Earliest
Light that dawns to our Soul, as soon
as over her Power of Knowing awa∣kens
into Action. 'Tis a Subject, tho'
most Necessary, and of the highest In∣fluence,
yet neglected by Writers hi∣therto.
Two or three have, indeed,
spoken of it; but, none I know of, has

handl'd it professedly, and at large.
Tho' it be Dry, and requires Chawing
ere it becomes Nutritive; yet, I dare
presume, it is Solid, and not at all
Windy. Even, Seeds, when first
planted, are Dry; which, yet, hinders
them not from yielding a Large In∣crease
afterwards: The First Princi∣ples
are the Seeds of all Truths;
which, by how much their Roots are
laid Deeper, so much Higher they
Rear and Extend their Branches. The
Present I offer you, is Small; but the
Little it contains, (as far as concerns
this Subject,) is wrought entirely out
of Natural and Reflected Reason,
without being beholding at all to the
Dishonourable Task of Transcribing;
as some Pieces, I could name, are. I
dare undertake, that the Reasons pro∣duc'd
here, are so firmly Grounded,
that they can fear no Opposition but
Drollery, the last Effort of Nonplust
Reason. You will not expect Fine
Language, in a Matter that cannot

bear it. Self-Evidence is so bright∣ly
Luminous, that nothing can make
it more Glossy: Nor is all the Elo∣quence
in the World able to do these
First Truths any Service at all: All
Attempts to burnish or varnish them,
do, instead of doing this, dawb and
hide them; as Painting does a Per∣fect
Beauty. The Sum is; The whole
Controversie, now agitated, is this;
Whether of these two Philosophies a∣bovesaid
is built on more Evident
Principles; or, has a more Self-evi∣dent,
and Unmistakable RULE of
Knowing; And, your Steady, and
Equally-poiz'd Iudgment, is request∣ed
to hold the Scales. What the Tri∣fle
I here send you, wants in Worth,
is, I am sure, abundantly supply'd by
the sincere Respects, which are, at
the same time, presented you by,
Much Honoured SIR,

