



SInce your Ladyship has such great Ad∣vantages of Fortune in those par∣ticular Blessings, Wit and Beauty, the best Companions of Quality; this Trouble is no more than what in Reason ought to be expected: For Dedications are but little better than Prologues and Epilogues; the general Subject of 'em is, to Persecute the Witty and the Fair. Your Ladyships Perfections give me an ample Theme, and your Kindness to this Poem gives me boldness to make use of it. But Virtues in Persons so Nobly descended, are but things Necessitated; your Ladyships▪ Merits

could not be less, since they are derived from such Illustrious Parents. The Loyal Earl of New∣brogh, by his Personal Actions in the Wars, and his constant following the Kings Fate beyond∣Sea, made himself so considerable an Enemy to the Rebellious Party, that they used all their Arts, and laid all the Baits of Interest to have made him their Friend; but their Impious Cause, and their slighted proffers appeard so detestable, that he proved his Valour and Fidelity equally Im∣pregnable. And to summe up his Character, he was a Person that made the Field his Temple, Majesty his Divinity, and his Life and Fortunes, the Sacrifices he offered: Nor were his Heroick Vertues unmatcht in the Famous Lady Aubeny, whose Industrious Loyalty, and more than Fe∣male Courage, renderd her so Conspicuous, that, though Success and Victory were the Rebels constant Slaves, and the spight of Fate had made 'em continually Prosperous, both in their Coun∣cels and their Arms; yet such were her Indefatiga∣ble Services to the Royal Cause, as made her Ad∣mired by the World, and Feared even by the In∣vincible: witness her Imprisonment in the Tower, from whence by a miraculous Escape from her

Confinement, and her threaten'd Martyrdome, as she lived a Champion for Loyalty, she dyed an Exile for it. Nor is your Ladyship less Indebted to Providence for your Education than your Birth, in the Affinity and Patronage of the Lady Stanhope, a Person of so much Worth and Honour, so truly Generous, and so excellently Good. But my design is not that of a Herauld, but a Petiti∣oner. The Faithful Shepherd begs Acceptance, and the better to obtain that Favour, I may with∣out a Crime boast of some Merit in the Present I make, since it borrows its Value from the Esteem'd Guarini; and I have one encouragment more to devote it here, knowing it has formerly been your Ladyships Diversion. If I am Censured by the Admirers of Pastor Fido for being so bold with so received a Poem, I only make this Apology, that Plays are so strictly tyed up to Fashion, that like costly Habits, they are not Beautiful without it. I confess I have taken a great deal of Liberty in the Characters of Sylvano and Corisca, be∣cause they were not kept up in the Author: The first of which, in the Translated Pastor Fido (for I am a Stranger to the Italian) flag'd in the second Act, and was wholly lost in the two last.

And the part of Dorinda was made up new to fit it for the person design'd to Act it: And the two last Acts which have so little of the Authors, have still his design, only that I have represented what was but Narrative in the Original. But what-ever ad∣vantages I may have received from so famed a Story, & so good a Foundation, my greatest is, the occasion it gives me of expressing my self,
MADAM,  
