



My LORD,
THE City in their Unanimous Choice of their Supream Magistrate, have put the Sword and Scales into so tryed a Hand, already so fam'd for the Administration of Justice, that Your Lord∣ship's Advancement to the Praetorian Chair, is no more than the Lawrel to the Conqueror; all the Heroick Bravery, and every Meriting Virtue that won those Bays were all his own before.
Never was this Honour more Deserved, or less Co∣veted than by Your Lordship. The Popular Torrent of an Universal Esteem and Veneration carried their Darling Choice to the Chair. Yes, Sir, it was their common Oblation of Gratitude: They owed it, and they paid it You. In which Honourable Dignity they Crown'd Your Virtues, not Your Ambition. And to compleat that truly Excellent, that Prideless Character, so wholly Your own; all the private Satis∣faction Your Lordship shall receive from that Illustrious Administration, will be Your Glory of Serving the City, not that of Commanding it.

And indeed that which has attracted Your Lordship so general a Love and Respect, is, that Moderation that has always governed through the whole Conduct of Your Life. Your Lordship, with a true Judgment, and right Reason, has ever esteemed Opinion and Faith to lie only before a Higher Tribunal, and consequently to be only Answerable there. Under the Guidance therefore of that Golden Mean, not Byast or Warpt by Favour or Prejudice, an Assent with You never heighten'd Your Smiles, nor a Dissent from You ever lessen'd 'em. No, the Difference of Persuasion that has so often disturb'd whole Families, and even shaken States, never concerned Your Lordship. No, my Lord, Humanity and Common Right have ever been adjudged by Your Lordship the only Arbitrators in Humane Society. And therefore with a Justice without Severity, and a Mercy without Fondness or Partiality, Your Lordship has ever held the Ballance upright and even to all Mankind. 'Tis with this In∣nate and Unchangeable Principle the Chair finds You, and the World shall leave You. This Due all Tongues have ever paid You, and my Pen only writes after 'em, being,
My LORD, 

