



Gentlemen,
WRITERS set out in Print, as Adventurers to Sea: The happy Discovery of some extraordinary Fortunate Coast the first Voy∣age, is an Invitation to attempt a Plantation there the next. Such was the Temptation of a New-found GOLDEN WORLD: whil'st the Sails of a CORTEZ, were only swell'd by the Pro∣sperity of a COLUMBƲS. The same Success, and the same Attraction is my Loadstar, whil'st the Honour of Dedicating my First Piece, my Narrative, to the Worthy Sir THOMAS TAYLOR, has brought me, like a Bolder Inmate amongst you, resolved to plant my self, and my whole Labours in no other Soyl.
I confess indeed my own infinite Unworthiness makes my Intrusion wholly inexcu∣sable. However that Innate Goodness that ever attends the LOYAL and the BRAVE, is no little Encouragement; when I consider, that whatever my past Faults have been, yet Clemency and Forgiveness, as being the brightest Emanations of GLO∣RY from that inexhaustible Fountain of Mercy, the Best of KINGS, are ever the na∣tural Borrow'd Beams to that Loyalty that shines from him. A more particular Portion of which enlightning Brightness, is so justly your own, that a never shaken Loyalty, and an unsullyed Fidelity are the very Claim even of your BIRTH RIGHTS. For what∣ever weaker and less fortified Hearts the Growth and Progress of Faction may have sub∣dued; YOU challenge that Native Brittish Honour, so much of the Heroe, derived down from Ages to you; that the Vindication of MONARCHY and the oppos∣ing and repelling all Republick Arts and Machinations against the ROYAL-CAUSE, with the same Souls and Resolution that your Renowned Ancestors with∣stood the Norman Arms, is but asserting your own Hereditary Glory of KENT, that is, of being INVINCIBLE.
The Assurance of which Generous Virtues born and bred with you, that Illustrious Ge∣nius that runs in your very Veins, gives me hopes, not only of obtaining your Pardon for this Presumption, but likewise your Patronage and Protection from the Slanders of my Enemies, who endeavour to intercept all Favourable Thoughts of me, and my Writ∣ings, by alleadging that I have written so virulently and maliciously, that I ought never to be trusted for a Convert.
The first part of their Accusation, my own guilty part, 'tis true, I own, and submit to all the Load that Justice, Reproach and Shame can lay upon me. But alas! am I the onely Libeller never to be Converted, or never to be believed so; when some of my own Faulty Predecessours, the present Honour both of the PRESS and PULPIT, under as blackning Circumstances, have sometimes in their Lives play'd the very Panegyrists upon a Cromwel. And though indeed, a Submission to the Government of a Rebel might come under Self-Preservation, yet publick Encomiums upon him are these Super-errogating Works of Affection and Applause both to the Traytor and the Regicide, which no little Pe∣nitence could wash off. Yet whil'st not only the present Generous Arms of a Pardoning COURT, and the kindest Embraces of an Endearing CHURCH are those Royal Credentials of THEIR Plenary Conversion: with what Eyes must the World look on Me, either to find that unmalleable Impenitency in My Temper, or that Hardness of Belief in their Own.
'Tis probable, I confess that this following Discourse may give Distast to some of our late Members of Parliament, written to convince the World that the Church of England, and the Protestant Strength of this Kingdom stand upon a ROCK Immove∣able; whereas on the contrary, the False Prognosticks of our lae State-Wizards have Seated them on Bogs and Quicksands, just tumbling and sinking.
However, for my Justification I have this to say; We live in a Kingdom where, Thanks to GOD, and our yet safe MONARCHICAL Constitution, we are in that Temperate Region, that (unless now and then of late in the too sultry DOG-DAYS of Black-rod, and Messenger Time) we are only Govern'd by LAW. And when I find no Statute, nor one Letter of that LAW to make my Denyal of our Popish Dangers Criminal, I think I may safely with Honesty and Justice in the open Face of Day aver, that we are no more bound to believe any such Popish Dangers near us because this TRUE PROTESTANT Sham-Patriot, or that PLOT-COMMITTEE has pronounced them Oraculous; than we ought to stand up for the ALCORAN, because this Mufti and that Mussullnam will dye for't. POPE∣RY in England being that Goblin that is not seen by ALL Eyes: and it being highly unreasonable, because three Parts of the Kingdom have been troubled with the JAUNDIES and seen all things yellow, that therefore every Man with SOUND HEALTH and BRAINS should do so too.
For my part, I am of Opinion, that no Man with three Grains in his Skull is any more obliged to believe OTES his Discovery, because so Voted, the PRESER∣VATION of the Kingdom, than the Lending the King Money, as Voted likewise, had been the BETRAYING of it. Nor can I possibly fancy a Bill of ƲNION, be∣cause so adjudged (that is, the Incorporating of all sorts of SCHISMES down from the Presbyter to the Muggletonian into the Body of the CHURCH, were the way to preserve Us from POPERY, any more than the letting of Pickpockets, Shoplifts, and Ruffians INTO the House, were the keeping of FELONS and BURGLA∣RERS Out of it.
I confess I pay as great a Respect to every Resolve in Parliament that carries REA∣SON, HONOUR, and LOYALTY along with it, as every good Subject ought to pay. But I profess, if I should find,
Resolved by this HOUSE, that his Majesties Life has been twice in Imminent Danger from a certain Screwd Gun, most terribly charged, once with all Bullets and no Powder, and a second time with all Pow∣der and no Bullets; and therefore be it likewise Resolved, as the only Expedient for the SAFETY of his Majesties Person and the Protestant Religion from the Danger of such bloody Popish Assassinates, that an ADDRESS be made to his Majesty, that all the MEN-WORTHY Papists in Masquerade be removed from all Offices of Trust, and the True Protestant WORTHY-MEN be placed in their Room; and that a Bill be likewise brought in for the Lodging the Militia for forty two days in Con∣fiding Hands for the King and Kingdom's DEFENCE.
Now I say, if I should read this a thousand times over with an Imprimatur WI. WILLIAMS in Letters of Gold, confirmed too by the Infallibility even of Nemine Contradicente it self, hang me if I should find out either that Wondrous Danger to his Majesty in the first Resolve, or that secure Preservation of him in the Last.
If ten thousand Resolves of Parliament should declare Coleman's Papers a Confirmation of OTES and BEDLOES Popish Plot for the Murder of the King, or raising Armies for cutting the PROTESTANT Throats. I should be sorry to think that any thing within the Pale of Rationality should believe it, when there is not one Syl∣lable throughout those Papers that bear the least Tendency that way; and the whole Plot of that false Intriguer was more a Design of French-Jesuit MONEY Catching, than French Religion, or French Government Building.
And if Bedloe himself should rise from the Grave, and in a Conference betwixt Prance and him, should swear as boldly by STYX and ACHERON, as former∣ly they had done by the four EVANGELISTS, that Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey was murder'd with a Pillow and Long Cravate at FIVE in the Afternoon in the Up∣per Court of Somerset-House, by Walsh, Lephaire, the Lord Bellasis's two Gentlemen, and Mr. Atkins, Mr. Pepy's Clerk: and murdered likewise the same Evening at NINE at night, with a twisted Handkerchief, at the Stables in Somerset-House Outward Court, by the Hands of Green, Gerald, Hill, Berry, and Prance: and if a hundred Successive PARLIAMENTS upon the Receipt of such a Testimony, should Resolve that a Disbelief of either of the two Relations, and a Dispute of the VERACITY of the two Witnesses, were a Downright Countenancing of POPERY and a Weakning the PROTESTANT INTEREST, with all the rest of the dreadful Senate-House Anathema's at the Tayl on't: Maugre all those Parliamentary Fulminations, I should be loth to see three honest Men in three thou∣sand, either convinced by the Oaths of the One, or terrifyed out of their Senses by the Menaces of the other.
And when I read upon RECORD our Swearing Master OTES one day upon Oath affirming, that he had no other Person to accuse of the Popish Conspira∣cy than those he had already Impeach't, and yet the next day, bringing the ve∣ry Queen her self into the PLOT against his Majesties Life: after so damnable a Perjury from so impudent a Reprobate Varlet, Lord have Mercy upon the STRONG FAITH of Three Kingdoms, that could hang a Rat upon an Affidavit other Credentials to support it, than bare OATHS from such a Wretch; without one concurring Circumstance, one scrap of Treasonable Papers, Consults, Commissi∣ons, &c. of so many hundred of them all Sworn to, and all trusted in the Discoverers Hands; or the least Breath of a Confession from any one dying Malefactour. Nay, and more than all this, a Discovery too, that with such palpable Contradictions, In∣congruities, and Impossibilities throughout it, is such a meer ROPE OF SAND, that not all the Craft of MAN or DEVIL can ever make HANG TO∣GETHER.
Take all this Discovery (a Prodigy which nothing but this one only Greater Prodigy the CREDITING of it can exceed) with some few more of its De∣pendencies along with it, such as that precious HOƲSE OF COMMONS Vote, of revenging the King's Untimely Death upon the Papists; with the subse∣quent Use of that Vote, Viz. when the most Zealous TRUE PROTESTANT Members, the fiercest Promoters of that very Vote, were actually Themselves en∣gaged in his MURDER, and resolved to turn their own SHAM into ORACLE, by doing the Feat with their own Fanatical Hands, and then Lodging the BASTARD at the Popish Doors: Take the whole PLOT I say, and this Fabrick built upon it together, and 'tis a Million to a Mite but the Foun∣dation will at last appear as HELLISH as the Superstructure: and when the Popish Plot, thus made a Property for the Fanatical Conspirators, shall be duly and througly examined; he that will but give himself the trouble but of Looking or Thinking, will have but too much Reason to suspect the Tool as Infernal as the Hands that used it.
And to give our great Witness even the fairest Interpretation of his Discovery; I know no unlikelihood why the Regicide and Massacres of Whitebread, Fenwick, Ireland, and the rest of them should not be of the the same piece with Mr. Elliots MAHU∣METANISME and CIRCUMCISION. For perish me, if I can find the least Glimpse of Reason why he that could be so cursed a Limb of Lucifer in his Evidence at Drs. Commons, should have so much Immaculate Divinity in his Testimony at the Old-Bayley, whil'st the same Breath that smelt so rank of Sulphur one day, should be so Heavenly Perfumed another.
'Tis true, there's a sort of People will call this Discourse an ARRAIGNING the Justice of the Nation; when indeed they are wholly mistaken in the Matter. For the Justice of the Nation is safe whil'st it acts by LAW: and there∣fore while the Witnesses SWORE and the Jurors BELIEVED, not Pickering himself fell otherwise than by the Sentence of Justice.
'Tis true indeed as to the English Latitude of BELIEVING in some Cases, Extraordinary Examples may be given. 'Twas but enough to cry Halloo! Popery! and the whole Populace of the Kingdom, as Natural BLOOD-HOUNDS at that Game, would certainly take the False Scent so readily, that there needed no more than Look there she goes; and the Seven-headed, Ten-horned Babylonish Beast, with all her Bloody-Pilgrims, Black-Bills, Screw'd-Guns, Teuxbury Mustard-Balls, &c. were all as DISTINCTLY VISIBLE as the French Army Land∣ed at the Isle of Purbeck was to two or three whole Counties round it. And if the Sense, Reason, and Intellects of whole Countries together could be so grossly Imposed upon as in that Purbeck IMPOSTURE; I know neither Law nor Gospel why it should be a Sin to averr a poor Jury of twelve may possibly once in their Lives be mistaken. Nay, or that the Opticks Within a House of COM∣MONS may as possibly be no more Accurate than those Without it, it being not the first time that REPRESENTATIVES have been as Blear-Eyed as their ELECTORS.
And considering the first Fanatick CONSPIRACY of ever infamous Me∣mory, made its Approaches and Attacques, and indeed gain'd its whole Triumph by a previous SHAM Popish One, as the only necessary Pipe to set the Fools of three Kingdoms a dancing after it; I know no Reason why our later CONSPIRATORS under the same Necessity, should be less Industrious than their Predecessours; and therefore think it not at all an Impossibility that the Headpiece and Interest of a Shaftsbury should be able to pick up upon occasion, a Brace of VAGABONDS from the Jayls and Alms-Baskets of three Kingdoms to swear a few PRIESTS into a Halter; when the same Phanatick Faction the last Age had a whole Set of MERCINARY ROGƲES at their High COƲRT OF JUSTICE ready for True Protestant Evidences against the ve∣ry Life of MAJESTY it self.
But to leave the POPISH PLOT to the Hell that engendred it, the Villains that Midwiv'd it, the Rebels that Nurs'd it, and above all, the TAP that Suckled it: that no man may think I design any Reflection upon the Constituti∣on of PARLIAMENTS, (for though Corruptio optimi est pessima, and there∣fore nothing more detestable than Depravity and Faction in that Great COUN∣CIL of the KING and KINGDOM) to show that no Man can have a higher VENERATION of the Nation's REPRESENTATIVES when TRULY Venerable, I hope to see the Day, when those Great State Pilots shall make JUSTICE and LOYALTY the only Stars they Steer by, whil'st TRUTH, the Child of TIME shall have the Honour of Their Hads to bring it into the World; and when all our late Popish Trash, that long unwinnow∣ed Chaff, shall be sifted away; and the Security of our Religion, and the Peace of Men's Minds shall be cleared from all such Dross and Rubbish: the Disquisition of Truth, being that indispensible Duty of the Nation in Parliament Assembled, that without a Cordial and Impartial Inspection and Suppression of all Factions FRAUDS, and all our FORGED Dangers; all the National UNGROUNDED JEALOUSIES, and the Violent and Fatal Effects of them lye at their OWN Door.
And therefore it ought to be the Prayers of all good Men for such a next Meeting of that Illustrious ASSEMBLY, who under a true Sense of their DUTY, both as Patriots, Subjects, and Englishmen, shall so effectually provide for the Kingdom's

Safety as to hang out their Best Lights and Fairest Sea-Marks to warn a poor delud∣ed People to avoid that old Treacherous Rock, the False Fear of POPERY and SLAVERY, on which so lately▪ we so fatally split before. And persuant to this Work, I hope to see them so Zealous for Truth, and the Unvizoring of all Impostures, that they shall not only unravel the Negromancy of our SHAFTSBURIAN-PROTESTANTS, and plainly discover that only the Old Republick Rump began to Flyeblow again, and all our Fears and Dangers from ROME and PO∣PERY were but the Corrupted Insects,, the Popular Maggots bred in that Carrion; but likewise Retrive the sullyed Reputation of a Derided Kingdom, by amending the Headlong ENGLISH Credulity, and using even some unhappy RECORDS Themselves, with almost as little Mercy as a NOBLE PEERS SPEECH, or a Fitzharris his Libel, as being indeed the more Unfortunate, though possibly, less wilful Incendiary of the Two. And lastly, shall do that Justice to the Memory even of the Top Evidence Otes himself, as to Eternize his Due Glory of being Judas his SUCCESSOR, only with this Difference: Judas of the two was the more Inno∣cent Imp of Hell. For he ingenuously took the thirty pieces of Silver as a barefaced Traytor, approach't and seized like one; and neither acted nor pretended to any other than the visible Villain he was. But this profligate Miscreant with Guilt of a yet deep∣er dye, to the blackest of Forgerys and most diabolical of Murders added the fairest and most painted HYPOCRISY, being the Disturber and Enflamer of a whole Di∣stracted Kingdom, under the most specious Mask of the Protectour and Saviour of it. Nay, and is yet the more hardened Desperado of the two: as his Face is more Bra∣zen'd, and his Heart more Steel'd; and that he has not all this while those Horrours of Conscience enough about him to make him fly to the same Medicinal Halter of his Predecessour.
However as the Fanatick Overfondling and too much Hugging of the late Beastly Po∣pish Discovery gave the Government an occasion to suspect the True Father of the Dow-dye, whil'st the greatest Outcrys of Popish Dangers being bawl'd LOUDEST, and almost ONLY from the Geneva Throats, warn'd us to look for the Old Serpent lurk∣ing under these New-Leaves. And as accordingly never was a more accursed Legion of threatning Devils rais'd than from that filthy abominable piece of Enchantment; insomuch that the whole Genius of the Nation was almost all turn'd Demoniack: so no common Oblation of Thanks for a National Deliverance, are due to Heaven, and Heaven's Darling Vicegerent, the BEST OF KINGS whose Wisdom and Princely Resoluti∣on alone stept Boldly and Timely forth to play the Mighty EXORCIST. Which to his never dying Glory he has performed with that wondrous Success, that succeed∣ing Ages shall justly Record him in Chronicle, of all our Crown'd Heads the greatest Founder of the CHURCH OF ENGLAND, and even of MONARCHY it self, whil'st the strongest Pillar of the First, and Cement of the Last has been the pe∣culiar Work of his OWN HAND, Viz. By so great a Suppression of the dangerous Growth of FANATICISM, and this ever memorable Defeat of the Machinations of those most Restless and most Formidable Enemies, not only of the MITER, but of the CROWN.
Yet nevertheless as the Popish Bugbears are not quite vanisht, & the dying Confession of the late Traytor Holloway lays the greatest Ferment of the late damnable Conspiracy on the yet too spreading Panick Fear of POPERY still coming in; and indeed Sidney and the rest, nay Russel himself in his highest Affectation of dying Innocence still con∣curs in that Point, that their whole Uneasiness and Turbulency, with the intended Stirs, Anglicè Insurrections, were only levell'd against that Danger: whil'st in reality the Storm now seems to be a little clear'd up with them from the Valadoly'd and St. Jago Quarter, the Pilgrim and Black-bill Region; and the lowring Popish Clouds are now only engendring nearer home, the Wild-House and White-Horse Consults and Caballings being by the Insolent Faction removed, and most audaciously lodged in WHITE-HALL it self; considering, I say, how Villany and Delusion still retain their POYSON, and so many weaker Constitutions of Fear and Ignorance have not

yet thrown off the INFECTION, this following Subject cannot come unseasonable.
Besides, not only my Service to my Country, but likewise my own Vindication de∣mands it of me. For since the petulant Whiggs are angry with so open a Deserter: amongst their many Snarlings against me, there's none so common with them as
Hang him Rascal he turn'd only with the Tide, and in spight of all his Recantations, his Popish Character has that Sense and Truth in it, that not He nor any Man will ever be able to Answer: and in spight of his Teeth will stand a perpetual Record against the Baseness of so vile a Turncoat.
As this is the general Clamour against me, 'tis high time publickly to clear my self from that Calumny, and by engaging my Pen in a GOOD Cause, lay open the naked Impotence of a BAD One, by unravelling the false Positions throughout that feeble Pamphlet. And though indeed much better Pens than my own have long since chastiz∣ed that Licentious Libel, yet 'tis absolutely necessary my own Handy-work should give it this last Stroke.
And, Gentlemen, the better to recommend it to your Patronage, I shall not spare my self a tittle, but lash my own Faults as heartily as any other severest hand would do it for me. Which Integrity in this Treatise makes it the more presume to throw it self at your Feet, and the Author more confidently aspire to subscribe himself,
GENTLEMEN,

