



SIR,
YOUR promised Acceptance has lent me Con∣fidence to make you this Present, yet what∣ever Pretensions your own Goodness has giv∣en me for this Presumption, or the Present it self might otherwise obtain, the unhallow∣ed hand that offers it, is enough to make it undeserve the Glory it claims. However I lay hold of your generous Condescension, and fixe your Name before this Peice, not onely as a Patron; but a Precedent to all Loyal Gentlemen to forgive my past faults as you have done.
'Tis with this Design I shelter my selfe under the Protection of a Person of such Eminent Worth, and so high in the List of Honour: For no man has a Soul more intirely devo∣ted, and a Loyalty more firme to his Prince; and to heighten the Blessing, no man a Courage more daring to signalize that Loyalty, when ever his Prince shall call for't. But, Sir, as your Country may be proud of you in either Capacity, may it never want you in the last. May our Caesar Reign like a se∣cond Augustus; have his Janus Temple ever shut, and his Peace for ever Florishing. And that he may not onely have the con∣stant Prayers, and hearty Endeavours of all good Subjects to give him it: I hope he has some Prognosticks even from Hea∣ven it self to assure it him. For certainly that Noon-day Star that shined at his Nativity, and that Miracle that shined more bright, his Bloodless Restoration, both from the Immediate Finger of God, are undoubted Forerunners of some more then common Glories attending him; Those Divine Propheticks that he neither can be what the Malice of his Enemies would Cha∣racter him, nor shall be what their Trechery would make him.
But, Sir, before I aspire to the Favour of so Honourable a Friend as your self, I ought first to shake off that Load that holds me down even below your meanest Thoughts. And truly Sir, as I want no little refining to purge my Dross away, so I am resolved to be so candid in my Confession, that in Testi∣mony of a perfect Abjuration of my past Ills, Ile give both Your self and the World as plain a Picture of my faults and follies as my severest Enemies can or would paint them for me.
About ten years since I writ a Play call'd, The Empress of Morocco, and some time after I carryed it to His Majesties Theatre, where in the height of Mr. Harts Health and Excellence, I flat∣ter'd my self with assurance of wonderful success from the per∣formance of then so able a Company: but upon former Trea∣ties with His Highnesses Servants, they made a complaint to their Royal Master, & got the Play commanded back again to their own Play-House, where tho' His Royal Highness, upon conde∣scending to hear his Servants in so humble a Cause, upon the Circumstances against me, did nothing but the highest Peice of Justice, yet Self-justification and my defeated Vanity begat that malignant resentment, that manet alta mente repostum, and engende∣red that unhappy Gall, that above Seven Years could not re∣move; and the License of the Press, and the Eruption of the late accursed Plot, furnisht me with an Opportunity, under the umbrage of a popular Champion, to wreak my own private Spight and Revenge. This I declare was the true Cause that misled me into so much Spleen and Venome, of which I hear∣tily repent and am ashamed, and humbly implore Pardon at the Feet of that Royal Prince for all those accumulated wrongs I have done both against his Honour and Vertue: and from the bottom of my Soul I wish, as I have been the greatest (I mean in my little capacity) so I may be the last of his Enemies.
And truly my Faults, how criminal soever, are likewise so Universal, that I stand not alone under this convicting Accusa∣tion. For too many, alas, and those of the greatest Men in England have my sins too to answer for. For where the true Preservation of the Protestant Religion makes One Patriot (as they call themselves) Uneasiness, Disgust, or a Court-Grudg makes Twenty; whilst Reformation is the least buysiness of those that most pretend to it. How many Persons of the highest Qua∣lity in the Kingdom (if they would be but half so ingenuous as
I am) could tell you that tho' Religion and Property are the pretended Quarrel against the great Pilots above, their real Greivance is that their own Hands are not at the Rudder, and the State Helme is only Steerd awry, because some happier some envied Court Darling sits at it before them. Thus as poor Abel Dyed for being a greater Favourite to God then his Brother, the same Discontent that made Cain a Murderer, makes a great Man a Patriot.
But now, tho' this plain Confession, how disadvantageous soever to my self, might have been curtil'd into a something more Excusable Errour, by laying the whole blame on that more pardonable Folly of being mistaken or seduced, yet I declare I had rather trebble my blushes, than fly to so mean a refuge as a Lye for any part of an Apology. And therefore I must own, though with the greater shame, I was so far from any Advice or Encouragement for the writing my first Libel, The Character of a Popish Successor, that I had finisht it before ever I let it see Light: But then indeed I Coveted the Approbation of my Honourable Aldersgate-street Patron, and entrusted a Friend to shew it him, who truly made but little Correction, onely he exprest his Dislike of one or two passages in it, and for A∣mendment, Bid the Author speak more favourably of Rebellion.
But now since the Malevolent spirit of Revenge was the fatal Lust I gratified, and that foul Tempter the Plot rose up to lend both Means and Opportunitie, I am resolved, like a true pe∣nitent Debauch, to renounce both the Whore and the Bawd; and as I abhor the Sorcery of the First, so loath the Lewdness of the Last: Lewdness indeed! for to all the loose Desires, and prostitute Imaginations that Faction ever whored after Our late Plot has been the unhappy Pandar.
What was it but the Plot that furnisht the world with so much counterfeit Zeal, and Gilded Hypocrisy, making the greatest of Athiests, the greatest Stickler for Religion? What brought the most rigid Fanaticks to the Church of Englands Communion and Sacrament to Capacitate them for an Office of Trust; and wi∣dend the Throats of the greatest true Protestant City Dons even to the Gorging of Perjury, but the Plot. What makes the Me∣tropolis independent of the Crown, and the lopping the Pre∣rogative, and borrowing the Militia to fight against Black Bills the Principal Expedient for the safety of the King and the Na∣tion
but the Plot? — What has set up so many City Posts and Chains, to keep out Spanish Pilgrims, and Popish Guards, but the Plot? — And riddle me riddle what made the whole Body of the Antipopish Dissenters in their Highest Enmity and Dudgeon against Plots, and Rome, desire to be united, and incorpora∣ted with the Popish Church of England, but the Plot? — What is it arraighns the Laws, Libells Courts, and Blackens Kings; supplies the poyson'd Gall to all Republick Pens, prefers a Raree-Show before a Te Deum, and sets a Milton above an Evan∣gelist, but the Plot? The Plot writ the Association: and 'twas Plots Popish Plots too that install'd the Covenant, Plots that pul'd down the Church to set up the Kirk, rays'd an Arbitrary Com∣mon Wealth to pull down an Arbitrary Legal Monarchy, and cut off the Kings Head to make him Glorious? — What is it that Plots cannot or have not don though never so Romantick or Impossible? Have they not made a whole Protestant Church all Popish, and the Episcopal Clergy Tooth and Nayle con∣spiring for their own Destruction? Yes, and the Mildest and Best of Kings, after so moderate an Administration of Govern∣ment, a Raign of above Twenty quiet Halcyon years together, a Raign, where Law and Justice were never stretch unless in∣to Mercy and Indulgence, a Raign, where too easy Forgiveness, and receiving his pardon'd Enemies the warm ungrateful Snakes too near into the Bosom of Majesty, and too high into his Trust and Honours, has been the onely fault in the Throne; This very Godlike Tempred King after so long a Harmony of Go∣vernment in so calm a Sphear of Glory, by the all-aspersing Li∣bel of a Plot, shall nevertheless all of a suddain throw his long golden Reins away, and to bring in that unweildy Leviathan Arbitrary Power involve his Gray Haires in inextricable Broyl and Tumult, loose all the peaceful Rest of Age, and all to turn a Tyrant, a Jehu, a Phaeton even in the last Race of his Life. Nay and to make the Hideous Fantom a little more Gi∣gantick, this very Prince (if Noyse and Plots may be beleiv'd) shall be pensioning and confederating with France, though against himself, to the betraying of his Crown and Empire.
But Popery and Arbitrary Power are to be brought in; and though by Head and Shoulders, though by the most Ridicu∣lous Means, as wide from Sense and Truth as North from South, 'tis all alike. 'Tis but insinuating into the Brainless
heads of the People that the King himself (as I told you) is leaguing with France to bring in the Pope: and though the French King has his Sword in the very Bowels of Flanders, against the Faithfullest Son of Rome the King of Spain; though he can scarce keep his profane hands even from Italy, the Seat of the Roman God himself; though he has pyrated the very best Flower in the Popes Garden the Regalias of his Em∣pire, and shaken the very Papal Supremacy, even to the pul∣ling down of that dreadful Curse of Excommunication, had the Pope but Courage to pronounce it; nay though he has pro∣moted the Protestant Rebellion in Hungary, and brought the very Turk into Christendom, possibly not many years journey from the very Gates of Rome; yet all this while this very King of France shall be the Popes right Hand, his Spear, his Shield, his every thing, and is setting up the Romish Interest with all the Industry and Vigour in the World: And to compleat this Mountainous Monster of a Conspiracy, the King and Court of England (for Plots and Popery make all things go down) shall be as deep in it as He. And though, God knows, there is not so much as the least Signe Appearance or shadow of any thing of this, and the Infusers of all this poyson into the unreasoning Multitude are conscious 'tis all rank Forgery, no matter for that: They know whom they have to deal with, the Headlong Mobile of England, a People of that strange Con∣stitution, that they fear nothing that they See, but all things that they Hear. And those very men that in Visible dangers shall face the Mouths of Cannons, yet at the Apprehension of Castles in the Ayre, Popery and Arbitrary Power, from the Imaginary Thunderbolts from that quarter shall start like Hinds. 'Tis but winding that Horne, and they fall as flat before the sound as the Walls of Jericho; and nothing but breathing the Spirit of Rebellion into them, can rowze them out of the fright on't. And who at last are the Great First Movers in all these National Enflamings? — Truly those very Men that bawld lowdest for the Preservation of His Majesties Person, against Plots and Popish Swords, are the Numerical Persons that Scandalize His Majesty with Popishly affected, to the withdrawing the hearts of his Subjects, which are his greatest and strongest Guard against all Plots or Swords whatsoever. And whilst this Zeal for the King and the Government Esta∣blisht,
brings these mighty leading Nimrods into the Chace, 'tis much to be feared the Cry of running down Popery, is more to call the Hunters together then the Game intended.
Thus since the Plot is made the Tool for all this Mischief, and furnishes all the Fuel for Dissentions and Discords the great Incendiaries of the World; I am resolved to bid adieu to it: and to leave it as I found it, draw the true Picture of that Wonderworking Prodigy that has so long and so highly (to asto∣nishment be it spoken) put three Kingdoms into a Distracti∣on.
And now, Sir Thomas, having shaken hands with that troublesom Companion Whiggism; my Conversion, as the Divines say of Christianity, makes me happy, if but in the very Ease of Mind it gives me, and the Slavery it rids me of; A Whigg being that Owlight sort of Animal that, unless in a Coach and six, it never looks abroad without being hooted at. And I thank my Starrs I shall now be no longer confined but to two perches in a Cage, like the Salamanca Doctor, just to hop to Amsterdam Coffee-House and then home again; But once more venture to walk by Daylight, and from this time forward look Sense and Quality in the Face, and instead of Shades and Coverts returne to Conversation and the World again; And that I may no wayes forfeit those good Graces that, Sir, from your self and all other Persons of Honour and Loyalty I shall ever am∣bitiously Covet, and study to preserue: I shall fully and in∣tirely abjure all Turbulence and Malignity whatever; and to avoyd the Crime and Fate of Saphira retain no one part of my un∣repented sins about me, that might make my whole Atone∣ment Sacrifice unacceptable; but persevere with that Integrity and Honesty that may render me so much the more worthy to subscribe my self,
Sir,

