


Gentlemen,
WHEN I address to You as Merchant-Taylors, that very Name alone, without my particular Survey of the collected Body of so Honourable a Company, is enough to take up no little part both of my Speculati∣on and Veneration. For do we visit the utmost Reach and Extents of Land and Sea: make the very boundless Ocean a Tributary to the narrower Thames, and bring home the Wealth of the Universe to our own Doors? Who but the Merchant is that commission'd Purveyour, and travelling Treasurer! What's the whole Mass and Wealth of Ransact Nature, but his rich Hoard! The very Jemms of Crowns and Robes of Kings, Their Ermyn, and their Purple, their Pearls, and their Rubies, are all but his Richer Cargo. Do the glittering Pal∣laces of Monarchs in all their Lustre and Magnificence so dazle our weak Eyes? Their Splendor is no more than the Oar refined from the Merchants Mint; and their Embroydery but his Drapery; being all first the Riches of His Wooden Walls, before they are the Ornaments of their Marble Roofs.
What is the Merchant but the Surrounder and Circler of the spacious Globe, that draws the only Lines of Communication betwixt the Con∣versing and Commercing Regions of the Earth. Were it not for the Mer∣chant, we had lived altogether in an unsociable World: Our very next Neighbourhood had been a downright Terra-Incognita to us; whilst pent up in their own narrower untraffiking Precincts, whole Kingdoms

and Nations had been little less than a larger sort of Cloysters and Cells. Then the product of our own Glebe only must have furnisht both our Kitchin and our Wardrobe. Nay our very Monarchs themselves must have been contented to have taken up with a homlier mettald Crown, possibly such another as the Isle of Mann's Diadem; and their very Coronation Mantle, (though no Disparagement to our own native Growth, the Fleece of the Sheep that buys the Jewels of the Crown) instead of the richer Orient Embroydery, the Silkworms softer Spinstry, and the Ermins whiter Down, must at highest have reacht but to Wooll and Lambskins. Thus the Pavilion Royal is but justly a part of the Merchant-Taylors Scutcheon: For whilst the Imperial Hero marches to the Field, and sweats in Arms all Day; he sleeps at Night under Your Umbrage, whilst not only his Tent of War, but his Canopy of Peace is all Your own.
Thus the Great Columbus in his Discovery of a new World, only open'd a new Door to the Merchants Glory; whilst after their long Ad∣dresses and Visits to their European, Asian, and African three old Mi∣stresses; they had found out a new fair American Sister to pay their new Court and Devoirs to; and to plume themselves in the Wealth of the rich Dowr She brought them.
We may justly rank the whole Industry of mankind under these two Classes, That of the Husbandman, and this of the Merchant. And indeed there's so far an Allyance and proportion betwixt both their Toyls and Labours, that 'tis all but the Work of the Plough: His that turns up the Glebe of the Earth, and Yours Your Keele that ploughs the Main. And as the Fruits of Bountiful Nature are his Harvest; So the Riches of it are Yours: Only with this Difference between You, That the Husbandman is but the Subminister or Underfactor of the Merchant. The sweat of His Brow gets the Bread: But Your Gold pays that sweat; and indeed drives both Plough and Ploughman
Amongst the several Pageants of the Day, all suited to the Lustre and Renown of Your Honourable Foundation, the Fair Minerva in both her Capacities, viz. the Goddess of Arts and Arms, is but the true Em∣blem and Portrait of Your Glory. For Arts are all so intirely Your own, that You resemble the Ocean, on which You Trade. For as into that all the Lesser Rivers flow: So the Toyls and Industry of the whole Land, from the Spinstry of the Cottage, to the Loom of the Burgh, and the Woof

of the City, all Center in the Merchant. And as the Wealth and Im∣provements of Peace are so justly Yours, no less are the Prowess and Strength of Arms Your own too. For as the Nerves and Sinews of Trade are the Life and Soul of War; 'Tis only as the Merchant leads the Battle moves.
And now Gentlemen, having brought You thus far in Your fair Chace of Honour, here Ile leave You, and heartily wish, so may You all una∣nimously lead, and make the Battle so successfully move; That England may live to see her long Effeminacy shook off: and have yet a Race of the Third Edward and Fifth Henry Boys, as may still carry Terror to the too powerful neighbouring Lillies, and raise up the Heads of her own Royal Lyons.

