



May it please your Grace,
THat so worthless a Present to so Emi∣nent
a Person, is a piece of Arro∣gance,
I am as Conscious as I am
that your Grace has Goodness to
Pardon it; for if sins of Presump∣tion
could not be forgiven, the punishment of
Offences would put a restraint on Virtue, and

make Mercy one of the noblest Ornaments of
Greatness a Stranger to it; and at that rate
a Patron would be as confined as a Iudge, who
at the same time he is a Kings Representative,
and presides over Iustice, is a Slave to it; whilst
his Sentence is but the voyce of Law, & his Fa∣vour
or Cruelty, not voluntary, but prescribed.
Your Patronage is not so bounded, your Favours
are unlimited, and your Grace can execute a
more peculiar Kingly power; You can give Par∣dons,
and by your Smiles create Merit where
you do not find it. But above that Title of a
favourer of Poetry, which single Attribute were
enough to make the Muses your Votaries; the
World is sensible of your Conspicuous Eminence
in more adorable Qualities. In a Duke of
Newcastle Wit has found a Pillar, Valour a
Pattern, Loyalty a Standart, and England a
Patriot: In which rank of Heroes so placed
and so adorned, your Grace has the advantage
over both the ancient Worthyes, and those of
the present Age. For when Homer or Virgil
Character'd Greatness, with them the Walls of
Cityes were built by the Hands of Gods, their

Heroes descended from Deities, and their Di∣vinities
personally Interested in National Quar∣rels;
whilst the almost fabulous Gallantry they
painted, was set off by False Lights, and so their
Presidents of Glory were but things of Noyse,
and works of Art. But your Grace lives in an
Age where History and Poetry are the Repre∣sentations
of Nature; and he that describes
your Worth, draws your true Self; and Story
must render you Illustrious by Glories that are
your Own: And when Fame (which will pre∣serve
your Memory longer then Marble can
your Ashes) shall speak of a Newcastle; its Au∣thority
will be undisputable, as its Subject is
unimitable. Nor can this Age (should it joyn
the Noblest Blood, and the most forward Cou∣rage
in one Person,) raise your Equal. For
Loyalty now under a Flourishing King, is but
like Ripe Fruits in Summer: The kindness of
the Season, & the Blessing of the warm Sun take
off their Rarity, and lessen their Price. But you,
my Lord, are the truest and noblest Miracle of
Honour, whose Arms, whose Policy, and whose
Fortunes were Vigorously engaged, and as Glo∣riously

signaliz'd under a great, but drooping
Cause; whose Fidelity was ripend by the In∣fluence
of a declining Sun. Thus the faithful
Newcastle laid a foundation for Immortality;
and to compleat so fair a Structure, Fate con∣spired
with his just and sacred Ambition. For
when Rebellion durst strike at Majesty, and
the Quarrel of a threatned King had made
Newcastle an Assertour of his Countreys Free∣dom,
Victory waited on his Arms, and added
Gems to his Coronet, when it deserted a Crown;
wherever he led in Person, Conquest attended
him, and his Royal Cause had never sunk, had
Newcastle admitted of Rivals; had all its
Champions been as great Favourites of Fortune
as He. But Providence, as it had more parti∣cularly
obliged your Grace with extraordinary
Parts and Ornaments of Nature, so it adjusted
the Laurels which it gave you, to the Merit of
the Brow that wore them. Nor did your Ho∣nours
spring only from the Trophies of the Field,
the Harvest of War: Your Glory began its
Ascension, before it had those steps Conquest and
Triumph to mount upon. His late Majesty of

ever blessed Memory out of the Deserving No∣bility
of England, singled out your Grace for
the Care of a Nations Hopes, the Tuition of a
Prince of Wales: So visible were your Sacred
principles of Honour, that they were thought fit
to be precepts for an Heir to a Crown, and by
that pow'rful inspirer Education, to be imprint∣ed
in the Bosom of a growing Majesty. In which
high Trust, your Grace reacht that height which
Seneca could not arrive to. He, though in his
Learning and Integrity he resembled You, met
not your Success in the stubborn Nero. Provi∣dence
has justly lengthen'd out your happy Life,
to see the prosperous Raign of a Great, a Pious,
and Gracious Monarch in your Royal Charge.
Thus whilst your Matchless Gallantry has ren∣dred
your Character so great in the Records of
Fame, and your Worth an Object for a
Kingdoms Veneration; in the vast numbers
of those whom the Admiration of your Vir∣tues
has made your Creatures, I, in pre∣senting
you an ill Play, have made the
meanest Offering to your Grace; yet I

humbly beg you would not condemn an Effect
that has a Cause so powerful. Every one cannot be
deserving in Crowds; & not to have your Admi∣rers
numerous, is as impossible, as 'tis for your
Grace to bid your Fame spread thus far, and no
farther; whilst That knows no bounds, They
must be Infinite; which is the only justification
of

