



CErtainly, of all Mankind, nothing is so vain as the Scriblers of this Age; for no sooner are they blest with any extraordinary Favour, but they must tell the whole World of it. The Honour of that Friend∣ship You have been Generously pleased to give me, and the Delight of a Conversation so Compleatly Ingenious, affords me no little Occasion for the same Natural Vanity. This is that makes us Publish our Plays, as formerly the Romans Built the Porticoes to their Houses; they always fixt their Lares o're their Threshold.—But at the same time that I boast of the Honour I have received, I ought to blush at the Present I make You, when I treat you with a Play so worthless, and so Unfortunate. Nay, to sum up all its Misfortunes, it does not only owe so little to the Composers Hand; but breath'd too in a Season, when Poetry even with its softest and most Curious Aires, to the Ears of this untunable Age, sounds but harsh and unpleasant: nay, and what's yet worst of all, perform'd by the feeble Fragment of a Company.—'Tis true, the Theatre Royal was once all Harmony; where the Heroick Mu∣ses sung so sweetly, and with Voices so perfectly Musical, as few or no Ears could escape Enchantment. But when this hapless Play came forth, its sweetest Pipes were stopt; and like a shatter'd Organ, it had only left what could do little more than squeak and jar. But, Oh, that their Oracle should be quite silent! Ah, that their Gold∣en Head would speak agen, and bring once more the scatter'd Quire around him! Then Tragedy might re-assume its Majesty, and Passion plead with such aa Emphasis, till the charm'd Spectatour should almost wish to be that Real suffering Hero he admires, and share his very Fate, to move but half his Pity. For my part, wee

I a Poet, nay, a Fletcher, or a Shakespear, I would quit my whole Title to Immortality, so that one Actor might never Die. This I may modestly say of him, (nor is it my own particular Opinion, but the Sense of all Mankind) that the best Tragedies on the English Stage have receiv'd that Lustre from Mr. Hart's Performance, that he has lfft such an Impression behind him, that no less than the Interval of an Age can make them appear agen with half their Ma∣jesty, from any second Hand. And when he leaves the Stage, the Reign of Tragedy Expires; for then it must dwindle from a Mo∣narchy to a Common-wealth. And were it in my Nature to be Envious or Malicious against any Man that writes, it should be a∣gainst their Good Fortune, who writ in the Indian Emperors first Days: And having named that admirable Play, methinks it has made its Appearance since, so far short of its Primitive Excellence, that I fancy it has been sometimes almost as unmercifully used, as their tortured Montezuma by the Barbarous Spaniards. But, Alas, the very best of Plays now find but a cold Reception, in com∣parison of the kinder Entertainment they met, at the King's first Returne. For Players and Plays came then upon the Stage like Co∣lumbus into America, they brought New Faces, and almost a New Language into our World; and what betwixt Novelty and Surprize they won Spectators Hearts so easily (whilst a little Wit in Plays went so far) that like Him they could Traffick even with Beads and Baubles: But Time & Conversation has made the Critical Au∣diences like the Wiser Indians; and he that would please 'em now, must purchase their Applause with Solid and Elaborate Sense, and bring more than Glass to barter for their Gold.—But this Discourse looks so like extenuating my Faults, that 'tis high time to give it or'e: Yet if by any Arguments I can purchase your charitable Opinion I have gaind a Judge to my side; and indeed I have no mean Creder∣tials to confirm me in that Assurance: For, besides the Charm of our ordinary Conversation, you have more particularly favour'd

me with the Perusal of a Poem of your own; without Flattery, not outdone by a Coopers Hill: And what adds to the Merit of it▪ you writ it so Young, that a Judgment so Ripe, at an Age so early▪ is not a little Miraculous. But, Sir, you have all the Reason in the World to be both Poetical and Ingenious, having both Nature and Fortune your Friends; and certainly, there's nothing goes so far to∣wards the compleating a Man of Wit, as Prosperity and Patrimo∣nies. For to say truth, Wit is never truly well scituate, but where a good Estate lies round it. This made the Antient Poets fancy that their very Muses could never be Happy, nor cheerfully Harmonious, till they gave 'em a Pernassus for their Inheritance, whilst their Mounts & Fountains, Groves & Grottoes were all their own. With these Advantages your Fancy soars; nay, it has one Happiness above all this, it needs not look abroad for a Subject: For whilst you de∣rive your Descent in a long unbroken Line, from the Old Active Brit∣tish Princes, within the Circuit of your Ancestries Fame, like him that hunts and hawks in his own Ground, you have an ample Field for Po∣etry even within your Self; and borrow-from your Birth a Theme, of which your own Native untaught Bards, could but rudely sing.
But your Hereditary Glory has no occasion to look so far back into the Records of Time: Even the last Age is so full of your Fa∣thers, and your whole Families Active, and no less suffering Loyalty; Loyalty that e'n embalms their Dust, and makes their Memories fra∣grant: That if ever an English Monarch should have a Cause to dispute, a Prerogative to maintain, or an Injury to revenge, (but Heaven forbid, that the Glorious Son of the Unhappy Charles, should ever have his Father's Necessity to use 'em) I could wish him no bolder, nor no Faithfuller Champions, than the Heir of your Families Honour, Courage, and Allegiance. But, Sir, my Business is not to be your Herald nor Historian; but to tell you how much I am▪
SIR,

