



My LORD,
AS there's a large Distinction betwixt the Honour of the Magistracy, and that of the Magistrate; the First being that which he finds in his High Seat, and the Last that which he brings himself thither with him: So there's nothing more happy then when the Perfections of the One aggrandi the Glory of the Other.
The fair Hopes your Lordship gives us on this Occasion are not a little conspicuous, when your whole Conduct of Life has appear'd so singularly eminent, in that Serenity of Temper, being of so pacifick a Dis∣position in all your Converse with Mankind; that were the general Genius of Humane Race but moulded like your own; I might say, with a great deal of Truth, Enmity and Discord had been Names unknown to the World; and that warmest Smile of Heaven, the Bles∣sing of Peace, had been an Universal and Everlasting Inheritance.
In your Lordship's Advancement to the Pretorian Dignity, I cannot tell what Pride there may be in the
Robe, I am sure there will be none in the Wearer. Nor can the CHAIR raise you so high, but your own Innate Goodness and Humanity will still sit up∣permost.
How far these Signal Virtues, accompanied by your Lordship's no less eminent Prudence, may qualify you for the Magistrate, were a needless Description.
But in all our Assurance of your Lordship's steering Hand at this Honourable Helm; as Commendable as that Important Part, the Execution of Right and Equi∣ty may be; yet 'tis not All the World expects. The Governing Head of this Glorious City, in no other Capacity than her Supreme Administrator of Justice, does not fully answer that Figure and Character he bears. For, to say Truth, the Precepts or Decrees of his Mi∣nisterial Authority, are not so much the Edicts of Guildhall, as of St. Stephen's Chappel: With the Law on one Side, and the Obligation of his Oath on th other, in that part of his Greatness, viz. his Post of Trust and Power, he may be said, in some measure, on∣ly to Obey when he Commands. That Judiciary Ad∣ministration therefore, as being no more than the Per∣formance of his Duty (not to derogate from the Glory of Magistracy) is not his highest Desert.
No, my Lord, as the City of London is that Metro∣polis, that bears her Head so high, without a Vanity, above any of her European Rivals; so her Eyes look up with no common Expectation from her command∣ing Magistrate. 'Tis his publick Acts of Munificence and Hospitality; in short, the keeping up the Grandeur of the CHAIR, and thereby rendring himself the more Worthy of that Exalted Station, those being his
own free and voluntary Grace and Goodness, that must compleat the shining Merit of a Mayoralty. 'Tis the Generous Accession to Dignity is always the Noblest. That's the only Glorious Ambition of a Magistrate, when he aspires to a Post of Honour more to do Good in it, than to reap Good from it. 'Tis on these Foundations only that the Glory of a Year may sup∣port the Reputation of a whole Life, and transmit a Lasting Fragrance to the very Memory of a truly Ho∣nourable Magistrate.
Now, my Lord, not doubting but your Lordship makes your Entry with these Generous Resolutions, 'tis to that True Pretorian Greatness, that I make you this hearty Congratulation, from,
My LORD,

