



My LORD,
I Ought to implore Pardon for daring to throw my self at Your GRACES Feet, did not the Occasion warrant the Ambition, and the Glory of the Subject consecrate the Poëm I pre∣sent You. Thus whilst I have en∣deavoured to pourtraict the Illu∣strious Earl of OSSORY, how faintly soever I have perform'd it, yet I have this Security on my side, that this Worthless Mirrour will receive that Lustre from the Bright Image that fills it, that methinks with that Name for my Authority, I make my Ad∣dress to the Great Duke of ORMOND, as the An∣cient Romans made their Entrance to the Temple of Honour, which was through that of Vertue. But in the Commemoration of his transcendant Perfe∣ctions, I am got so far into so ample a Field, that 'tis impossible for me to take a Prospect of his splendid Gallantries, without surveying their sacred Source, Your GRACES Elder Glories.
'Twas in our late Civil Wars, an Age which I may call the Libertines Carnival; when Treason and Re∣bellion play'd the Frantick Revellers: 'twas then

the famous Duke of ORMOND laid his first Foundation for Immortality, resolved to drein at once his Veins and Fortunes, in a Cause Divinely Glorious. But in vain your GRACES infinite ex∣hausted Treasures; with your own personal Com∣mand in Arms, bent their whole force to oppose that Torrent, which Providence had ordain'd should meet to stop. Heaven had decreed the State-Hydra should be Invincible, and even an Herculean Labour in∣effectual.
'Twas then, 'twas then, that England's Royal Mar∣tyr fell, and by a Stroke so universally deplor'd, that all the Business of such surviving Loyalty as the Duke of ORMOND's, was either to Revenge his Murder'd Master, or set in Bloud, and make a Ruby in his Crown of Martyrdome. But as the first was predestin'd to be Impossible, so Heav'n would not permit the last, but gave Your GRACE this Recompence for all your Indefatigable Endea∣vours in the Loyal Cause, that you survived to see the Restoration of our blessed Soveraign; and by a Turn so Miraculous, that what was an Age in de∣stroying, was recover'd in a Day; whilst Heaven appeased our troubled World with as much Ease as it spoke the Creating Word that form'd it: And Rebellion that had so long misled our Sun, like Pha∣eton, was by the Thunderer dasht from its Seat, whilst our Returning CHARLES stept in, and in a Mo∣ment reassum'd his Light and Throne. This hap∣pie day Your GRACE justly lived to see, and acted so great a Part in the Universal Triumph, that after Your Honourable Exile, and the long Sequestrati∣on of so prodigious an Estate, You attended his Majesties Coronation with Your Shatter'd For∣tunes, like ragged Ensignes, at once both Ruinous and Glorious too.

Nor must Your GRACE'S unwearied Services to Your King and Country finish here: for after the unexampled Honour of four several Commissions for the Government of the hard-neckt Stubborn Ireland, Your GRACE has render'd Your self rather the Founder than the Viceroy of a Kingdom, whilst by Your unfadom'd Depths, and incomparable Conduct, You have made that a Jewel in a Crown, which was formerly a Rent-Charge to the English Diadem; and disclosed the profitable Royal Mine without the least Murmur of the People, or even the shadow of an Oppression; whilst holding out Your Powerful Scepter in this bold Enterprise, like the old Mosaick Rod, You have stemm'd all Oppositi∣ons, and past through that Great but hazardous Office on safe and solid Ground, where all Your in∣tervening Competitors have been overwhelm'd or lost.
Thus whilst my elevated Thoughts have often rais'd me to the Contemplation of the Glorious Duke of ORMOND, and the no less Glorious Earl of OSSORY, two such Worthies in one Age, and in one Family, I cannot but think their Noble and Heroick Mindes could not have a less Original than the Transmigrated Spirits of a Philip and an Alexan∣der: That restless and daring Courage shone in the Son, and that solid Prudence and Judgment in the Father; that one had a Soul fit to Conquer a World, and the other to Govern it.
But now, my Lord, with how great and how just an Adoration soever I have offered this pious Duty to the Immortal Memory of the Valiant and Loyal OSSORY, never was so unhappie an Altar rais'd, or so unwilling an Oblation paid. For had the u∣nited tenderest Wishes of all Mankinde prevail'd, England had still enjoy'd her Champion, and ORMOND

his OSSORY. This Pious Theme should then have been the work of later Historians, and enricht the Chronicles of Remoter Ages. Then how nume∣rous had his great Atchievements been, and how much more Voluminous had his Recorded Glories swell'd, had Providence thought fit to have leng∣then'd out his Life to the Performance of those Wonders which the World so justly expected from so promising a Greatness. But now, alas, consider∣ing his Early Setting, his too untimely Fate, he that writes his shining Character, as dazling as it is, yet comes so short of what Nature, by his daily rising Growth, design'd it; that we register his Memorials but as the Famous Sibyl publisht her Prophecies; when of her Nine sacred Folio's she left but Three. Her malicious hand that committed the other Six to the Fire, was less spightful to the World than that Fatal Destiny that brought an OSSORY to his Grave. His Race of Honour was so shortned, that his Miracles come forth no less curtaliz'd than her Oracles.
And now, my Lord, if so weak a Pen as mine, has so unworthily presumed on so sublime a Treatise, I beg Your Grace would be pleased to impute it to an Impulse that was wholly Irresistible. His Match∣less Vertues were such, that, in spight of Nature it self, have made an Enthusiast. And if the Inspira∣tion is too humble for the Divinity it celebrates, let my Zeal expiate for my Boldness; and my Vene∣ration for that Great Man, make some part of an Atonement for,
My Lord,

