



MY LORD,
IN Your Lordship's Accession to the CHAIR, advanced by so many Eminent Merits to that High Post, there needs but a very little Spirit of Prophecy to foretel with what true Glory Your Lordship will execute that Honourable Trust. To say, Your Lordship will answer the Expectation of the World, speaks too little: There's something more than Expectation, an Universal Assurance and Confi∣dence of Your Lordship's Performance.
And whilst the Worshipful Company of GOLD∣SMITHS, have, after a three Years Cessation, reviv'd the Customary Splendor of the City on this Solemn Occasion, I dare not say, 'tis wholly their own Natural Grandeur and Magnificence, so much as their Gratitude that furnishes the Entertainment. Your Lordship makes so considerable a Lustre, and gives that Ornament to their Society; that this Publick Triumph, on Your Inauguration-Day, is not so much a Present they make You, as a Debt they pay You.

Of all Your Lordship's numerous Virtues, the truly Noble Train that attend You thither, Your Unshaken Constancy to Your Native Altars seems to carry the Leading Glory. Your Lordship's truly Christian Undivided Knees, pay that greater and more entire Adoration to an Eternal Throne, than to make at one time a Cain's, and, at another, an Abel's Sacrifice. Your Lordship would start at so poor a Prevarication with Omnipotence, as to bring a Sheaf of Stubhle to Your Morning Oblation, and a Lamb to Your Even∣ing one.
Nor are Your Lordship's Moral Perfections less Conspicuous: You ascend to this Metropolitan Dig∣nity, wholly untainted with the too common Avarice of Greatness. No, my Lord, You come not thither to Gather, but Shower the Gold; whilst warm'd and ani∣mated by Your own innate. Principles both of Charity and Hospitality, those two Illustrious Ornaments of Ma∣gistracy, Your Lordship has resolved to recal from their late Banishment: And indeed those truly radiant Virtues could never appear on the Praetorian Chair with nobler Lustre than now; considering they will so immediately break forth in that full Glory there, after so total an Eclipse before. 'Tis thus Your Lordship designs in Your Administration of Your Mayoralty to waken and revive the late drooping and languishing Honour of the City: And indeed to give a new Resurrection to the Grandeur of the Chair; which I may honestly say has some time lain buried. 'Tis thus, my Lord, the Shades behind You will illustrate Your own Glories before You; Or, to speak in the Goldsmiths Dialect, Those Foils will set off Your Diamond.

But what has yet more nobly signaliz'd Your Lord∣ship; In the late Suppression of the Defaced and Adul∣terated Coin, at the time when all the Private and Pub∣lick Banks of England, and indeed the whole Currency of Exchequers and Treasury's stood almost intirely stopt; at that time when 'twas no forfeited Credit even for the proudest Court or City Heads to play the Insolvents; 'twas then Your Lordship's Particular, I might say, Only Pride, that when all the other Golden Veins of the Nation were stagnated, Yours alone kept their whole open Circulation: You answered all Bills with the same prompt and entire Satisfaction, perhaps to the Wonder, at least to the Envy of the World. And tho' the then general Examples all round Ye, might have excused You from that Stretch of Payment; yet Your Lordship so valued Your Reputation, as to do Justice even to a Supererrogation.
And here methinks Your Lordship's very Coat of Arms, the long Hereditary Escutcheon of Your Family, by a kind of Prophetical Herauldry seems to blazon the very Virtues of Your Lordship that bears them; when Your Lordship's Argent Eagles truly soard, whilst your Neighbours flagg'd and droop'd.
But in enumerating Your Lordship's singular Worth and Deserts, I am enter'd into too large a Field, and therefore shall modestly retire, with subscribing my Self,
My LORD, 
