



SIR.
THE Character and Figure You bear in the World, has so markt You out for Sufferings of this Kind, that I beseech you to take it as a Persecution You were born to. 'Tis enough You attract all Eyes, and fix an Universal Veneration, and have so far got the start of the rest of the generous Persuers of Your own fair Chace of Honour, that (tho without a Title) I may truly say this of You, that You carry the Renown and Grandeur of an English Gentleman, to that uncommon Height, that Nobility itself should it set out with You, would be thrown out of the Race and lag behind You. Nor has Your Port and Bravery more dazled, than your Justice and Goodness indear'd, and the Sweetness of your Temper and Conversation charm'd; insomuch, that, betwixt such various Objects of our equal Admiration, you have even reconciled at once the▪ Envy and the Love of Man∣kind. You are so much Master of a truly noble Genius, that you have all the Glory of a Second Timon, without the Follies and Vanities of the First. And indeed You challenge those United Graces of Gallantry, that like Heaven's fairest Union, Light and Heat, warm where they shine.
But Providence pours not such Golden Showres at ran∣dom; so vast the Difference betwixt the Gifts and the Re∣wards
of Heaven; and 'tis possibly Your own peculiar fair∣est Glory to deserve first, and then possess. For above all You have that noblest Foundation of Honour, Virtue; a Flower not always so ripe in so young a Garden; that serious and solid Mass of Morals and Principle, that Your Afflu∣ence of Worldly Blessings have not smiled more kindly round You, than that has enricht you within; insomuch that You have, at least, this Advantage of the Great com∣plaining Alexander,
All see my Spots, but few my Brightness take.
that on the contrary you give the World a sufficient View of the last▪ without any Allay or Cloud from the first.
But after Your Pardon first beg'd for this Boldness. I ought to tell the World, that I make not this Address under the Name of a Dedication: Some worthier Product, and fairer Volume may cover that Honour. No, Sir, this poor Trifle is only thrown into Your Hands en passant; and the only encouragement for this Presumption is, that I consider that he that presents but a Rose bud may express as much Zeal, as he that offers a Garland, which is the best Apology for,
SIR, 
