



SIR,
THE Feast being made under your own Roof, I cannot choose so proper a Patron for this Entertainment, as your Self. This Performance, I confess, wants an Universal Prote∣ction: For if Industry, Labour, and Expence, can deserve a Smile, it stands high for a Favourite. So Great an Undertaking, I am sure has never been on an English Stage; and I am not Traveller sufficient to make Foreign Comparisons.
And here I think my self obliged to do the Pencil this Publick Right, to tell the World, That never was such a Pile of Painting rais'd upon so Generous a Foundation; especially under all the Hardships of so backward a Season of the Year (our Misfortune, not Fault.) However, the Undertaker very well knows, he is in the Hands of Honour; and no

ways doubts of a suitable Encouragement, from so much Worth and Justice.
As for my own part, I stand so highly Indebted for Favours received of You, that I only wish the Present I make You, were much more deserving your Acceptance, to be the worthier Oblation of my Gratitude.
As to the Entertainment it self, I hope I shall not be vain to say, That the Model of the Scenes of this Play, are something of an Original: I am sure I have removed a long Heap of Rubbish, and thrown away all our old French Lumber, our Clouds of Clouts, and set the Theatrical Paintings at a much fairer Light. And therefore am an humble Suppli∣ant to the Generous Audience, for some Grains of Mercy.
For as I dare confidently averr, the Prospect of this Stage will put all the old Rags out of Coun∣tenance: So I hope the Town will graciously please to pardon the undeserving Scribbler, for some small Merit in the Projector. Otherwise it would be a little too hard to give me that Fate with my Play, as Middleton had with his Pipes, viz. By intro∣ducing that Project, as may Enrich my Successors; and at the same time Starve my Self.
However, my Doom be what it will, yet still I shall carry this Pride along with me, That I have endeavour'd to Please, in spreading so Gay a Table.
And if this Essay, on the other side, does find Success, it will bring me a double Pleasure; not on∣ly in the Gratification of my own Interest, but like∣wise in the Satisfaction I shall receive, that this pub∣lick Acknowledgment of your Goodness, will be so much a more lasting Record of those grateful Tenders, are here made you by,
SIR,

