



SIR,
A Fair Name in the Frontispiece of a Book, is by long Custom reckoned as Essential a part of it, as a Portico is of a Temple. And yet as Panegyricks are their common Furniture, Dedication is the nicest part of Writing.
For though the Honest Poet, like the Faithful Painter, draws not beyond the Life, 'tis still but a sort of Labour lost. For as Modesty is the Finishing Stroke to the Compleat Gentleman, That Patron that is the most worthy of Praise, is the least fond of it.
And if we stretch into that nauseous Extream of Flattery, the Panegyrick is turn'd into a Libel, by exposing what we pretend to praise.
'Tis true, the Pretence of Dedications, is the borrowed Protection a piece of Scrib∣ble receives from the Noble Patron, under whose Ʋmbrage 'tis usher'd into the World. When, alas, a great Patron is no more a Protection to a dull Book, than a Cesar's Face to a leaden Shilling. Wit and Sense stand only upon their own Legs, and go no farther than their own intrinsick Merit carries them. The World, at least the Judi∣cious part of it, is not to be so cheated. There's no passing off that false Coin for which every Man of Sense has both a Scales and a Touch-stone. Wit runs the Fate of Belteshazzar: The [Mene Tekel] is certainly written over our Heads, if we are once weigh'd and found too Light.
But supposing some favour'd Author, che∣rish'd by the Smiles of a Noble or Generous Patron, takes this occasion (for that's the fairest Dedicatory pretext) of avowing his Gratitude to the whole World for such sig∣nal Obligations; yet this publick Acknow∣ledgment of past Favours, looks very suspi∣ciously like a Design of drawing on of new

ones too: So that to sum up the Cause, the Brotherhood of the Quill, if they would fair∣ly unmask, should plainly tell the World, that there's a private Gratification goes along with the publick Acknowledgment. For Men make Dedications as Votaries make Thanks∣givings: The bent Knee is not wholly for Blessings receiv'd; but for some little Continuation too of the kind descending Smiles.
And, 'Faith, now I am playing the Tell-troth, and making thus bold with the Poe∣tick Fraternity; this common Fault amongst them may well be excused: For to Apologize for the Muses in their own Native Dia∣lect, I need but quote a Stanza in Gon∣dibert.
O hireless Science; and of all alone
The Liberal! Meanly the rest each State
With Pension treats: But this depends of none;
Whose Worth they reverently for∣bear to rate.
If Poor Poetry is put to such hard Shifts (for maugre our Gondibert's fair Flourish, that's the plain English) to be so wholly un∣provided for, that the Muses have neither Lands nor Livings annex'd to their Foun∣dation, but are wholly supported by Goodness and Favour; whilst all other Studies, whe∣ther in the Long or Black Robe, have their Preferments, as warm Gowns, soft Furs, fat Glebes, and fruitful Crops, and what not: And Poetry, as much as 'tis charg'd with Fiction, yet, like Truth, goes almost naked: Ʋnder these Melancholly Circumstances it may well be permitted some Grains of Allowance, as an Ʋnhappy Dependant upon Courtesie.
But whilst I am thus plain in correcting Faults abroad, I ought to look at home, as having a much weaker Plea for my own Dedication, when being so altogether a Stranger to you, I dare be guilty of this Pre∣sumption. This indeed I ought to have con∣sider'd: But when I find the Ingenious every day making their Court to you, and the more eminent Priests of Apollo, the more suc∣cessful and no less deservingly so, all assi∣duous

Suitors to your Favour; so many fair Examples are that Warrant for my Am∣bition, that I lay hold of any Occasion, tho at a farther distance, of making one of the Train.
You have that Air of Sweetness and obliging Temper, a Conversation so grate∣ful, as renders you the Favourite even of Both Sexes.
But if I proceed to sum up your fair Character, I shall transgress the Laws I have laid down, and offend that Mo∣desty, as has an Ear too tender for that Subject. Not to enlarge therefore upon your other Merits, 'tis sufficient, You are so great a Cherisher of the Muses and the Stage, that that single Virtue alone has encourag'd me to the Confidence of this Address.
All I have truly to blush at, is the slen∣derness of the Present, this inconsiderable Trifle I offer you. However, as the Crow presented to Cesar, be pleased to give it the same favourable Acceptance, as indeed

(like that poor Crow) saluting you with the same [Hayle] only with more Zeal, and tend'ring you the humble Obedience of
SIR,

