



Heroick Sir,
THE present affairs of this Kingdom, are, so providentially managed, by God; so prudentially, by You; and so happily—opportunely, for the building up, the Ruins; and re∣pairing of the Breaches, both in Church, and State: that, the Factionist, malignes; the Temporist, ad∣mires; and Royallist, congratulates; so hopeful a beginning.
Let it not then displease (my Lord) if now, one of those poor grateful Royallists; hath (in this spring of hope) so cheerful a boldness, as to beg the favour of your Excellency, to Patronize this Peece.
This Peece (I confess) is Theatrical, New, and

Strange; Strange, but yet Pertinent; New, but yet Serious; and Theatrical, but yet Sacred.
Nor am I in This, either singular, or affected; while Apollinarius and Nazianzen (two antient Fathers of the Primitive Church) are known to be exemplary in this very way.
The truth is, I am now upon the well-tun'd Put (with my Palm, and my Psalm) to chant an Hosan∣na for the Kings Reception.
I am now upon the joyful Stage, to play the devout Comaedian; and by a new Triumphal, to court the affections, of the most Disloyall.
Upon the Stage I am, that (as by a true reflection, to shew the radiancy of my divine zeal) so, I might (by congruous Divinity) render Corah (notwith∣standing his holy Plea) Rebellious: and Treason (notwithstanding Garnet's Straw, and Becket's Canonization) in the Abstract, hateful, both to God, and man.
Religion and Allegience, are the wings of the soul, to mount her unto Heaven: and the present Masque, is, but to preserve the Beauty, of so fair an Allegati∣on; and to attest before the world, my utter abhor∣rency of the least Confederation, against the Higher Powers.
Oh Sir! may the Higher Powers be, as safe, as

sacred: and may That SaCRed Person, into whose hands, God, by his Grace; Nature, by Descent; and the Law, by Right; have successively given the Globe and the Scepter: may, He,—ah may He be, as happy, as He is Good; and as Good, as He is Great: the Best of Men, crowned with the Best of Blessings.
Sir—your Excellency is now, the Renowned Instrument, of wonderful Transactions: In the name of God, go on, and prosper.
Certainly (my Lord) if your auspicious self, shall (with this hopefully-happy Parliament) go on, to Act for God; and the good of his distressed People:
By Enthroning, The most Illustrious Prince, And Our Lawful King, Charles the Second:

For the Setling, of the State:
For the Reforming, of the Church:
For the Establishing, of the Lawes:
And the Maintaining, our Reiigion;
That most true, Protestant Religion,
Of the Church of England:

I am confident,—You shall as surely Prosper, in having,

The Holy Spirit of God, to be Your Guid:
The holy Angels of God, to be Your Guard:
Here, to be Famous; and Hereafter, to be Glo∣rious; as there is a God, in Heaven.


