



Sir,
THIS Play, which I here recommend to your Protection, either through the Calamity of the Time, which made People not care for Diversions, or through the Anger of a great many, who thought themselves concerned in the Satyr, or through the want of taste in others, met not with that Success from the generality of the Audience, which I hop'd for, and you thought, and still think, it deserved; and I have the Judgment of Men of the best Sense, besides the best of the Poets, on my side in this Point.
But no Success what-ever, could have made me alter my Opinion of this Comedy, which had the benefit of your Correction and Alteration, and the honour of your Approbation: And I heartily wish, you had given your self the trouble, to have review'd all my Plays, as they came incorrectly and in hast from my hands; 'twould have been more to my advantage, than the as∣sistance of Scipio and Laelius was to Terence; and I should have thought it at least as much to my Honour, since by the effects, I find I cannot but esteem you to be as much above both of them in Wit, as either of them was above you in Place in the State.
I shall not, according to the Custom of Dedications, make a Declaion upon your Wit, the common Theam of all that have any, at least of such as know you, who will acknowledge, they have heard more of it drop carelesly from your Mouth, than they have ever seen from the labouring Pen of any other. And my greatest satisfaction is, that I have the Honour of his Friendship, and my Comedies have had his Approbation, whom I have heard speak more Wit at a Supper, than all my Adversaries, with their Heads joyn'd together, can write in a year. Nor are your Writings unequal to any Man's of this Age, (not to speak of abundance of excellent Copies of Verses) you have in the Mulberry-Garden shown the true Wit, Humour, and Satyr of a Comedy; and in Antony and Cleopatra, the true Spirit of a Tragedy, the only one (except two of Johnson's, and one of Shakespear's) wherein

Romans are made to speak and do like Romans: there are to be found the true Characters of Antony and Cleopatra, as they were; whereas a French Author would have made the Aegyptian and the Roman both become French  his Pen. And even our English Authors are too much given to make  History (in their Plays) Romantick and impossible; but in this Play, the Romans are true Romans, and their Style is such: and I dare affirm, that there is not in any Play of this Age so much of the Spirit of the Classick Authors, as in your Antony and Cleopatra. This Opinion I have, unbi∣ass'd by my Friendship, and the Obligations which I owe to you, often decla∣red, and shall always persist in.
After all this, since my Comedies are approved and commended by you, and Men of your sort, the rest of the Audience must forgive me, if I am much more exlted by the praise of such as you, than I can ever be humbled by their censure.
Satyr will be always unpleasant to those that desrve it. It was not my design in this Play to please a Bawd of Quality, a vain Selfish, a sensless, noisie Prig, a methodical Blockhead, having only a form of Wisdom, or a Coxcomb that's run stark mad after Wit, which uses him very unkindly, and will never be won by him; nor did I think to please the Wid∣dows in the Name. The three first of these Characters are wholly new, not so much as touch'd upon before, and the following ones are new in the greatest part. And till I see more variety of new Humour, than I have produced in my Comedies, and more naturally drawn, I shall not despair of bearing up near my Contemporaries of the first rate, who write Comedy, and of always surmounting the little Poetasters of the fourth rate, who condemn me; such as hold, that Wit signifies nothing in a Comedy; but the putting out of Can∣dles, kicking down of Tables, falling over Joynt-stools, impossible accidents, and unnatural mistakes, (which they most absurdly call Plot) are the poor things they rely upon: But'tis the Opinion of the best Poets, that the Story of a Play ought to be carried on, by working up of Scenes naturally: by design, not accidents. I have endeavour'd to do so in this Play, and I doubt not, but the Scene in the second Act, wherein La. Busy would perswade Isabella to be kept, will live, when the Stuff of such Scriblers (more fit for Drolls than Plays) shall be consumed in Grocery-ware, Tobacco, Band-boxes, and Hat∣cases, and be rased out of the memory of Men.
I should not say so much in my own behalf, if I had not met with palpable injustice from some, se design is to set up Quacks, and put down true Pro∣fessors; nor can I find any Reason, why a Man that is to live by his Wit, should not vindicate that, when 'tis traduced, as well as he, who is to live by his Reputation, may assert his Honesty, when 'tis aspersed especially since neither of 'em are qalities of a Man's own making. But I must ask your pardon,

for troubling you so long with my Resentments, when I should be boasting of the many Favours you have done me, and giving you my thanks for 'em; yet I know you look for no returns where you oblige; however I am too proud of your Kindness to conceal it, and therefore shall take all opportunities I can publickly to declare my self,
Sir,  London, Feb. 16. 167.
