



MY LORD,
I Who have been so long and so continually oblig'd by your Lordship, have ever fresh Occasions of ac∣knowledging your Favour and Bounty to me, and cannot be silent of the late great Honour you have done me, in making me the King's Servant; but must publish my Gratitude for that, and all the rest of the great Obligations I have receiv'd. Your Lordship not only makes use of your own Power, but of that which the King has entrusted you with, to do good to Man∣kind, which you ever delighted in. And as I am apt to believe, that no Man had ever a great Office con∣ferr'd upon him with more Favour from his Prince, so I am well assured no Man ever receiv'd one with a more general liking of the People than your Lordship. Nothing but the Service of so Great and Gracious a

King, who so miraculously redeem'd us, and since makes all our Interests his own, could recompence you for the happy Retirement you might enjoy, and wherein you so much delight.
This Play, my Lord, I humbly submit to your Lordships Iudgment. I can write nothing worthy of your Acceptance; but I hope your Lordship will give some Indulgence to this, since it was Written during eight Months painful Sickness, wherein all the several Days in which I was able to Write any part of a Scene, amounted not to one Month, except some few which were employ'd in indispensable Business. This is indeed no Excuse in any one who does not Write for Necessities of Life.
The Play has met with a Kind Reception from all for ought I hear, but some of the late Loyal Poets, above whose Censure I esteem my self; and from some who are still so fond of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-resistance, that they think it a Profana∣tion to bring the very words into a Comedy.
These are so weak to mistake that for a Point of Divinity, which is indeed a Point of Law; and some of the most vigorous Maintainers of that Doctrine, have seen their Errour, and not only left off professing it, but have wisely and justly Contradicted it in their Pra∣ctice,

b assisting towards our late wonderful Delive∣rance. And sure there is no need of any great measure of understanding to find out, that, when the Compact on which Government is founded is broken, and those very Laws destroy'd, which were made to secure the People in their Estates, Liberty and Religion, the Law of Na∣ture must take place, which not only permits, but ob∣liges Mankind to Self-defence.
I never could Recant in the worst of Times, when my Ruine was design'd, and my Life was sought, and for rear Ten years I was kept from the exercise of that Profession which had afforded me a competent Subsistence, and surely I shall not now do it, when there is a Liberty of speaking Common Sence, which tho' not long since forbidden, is now grown Current.
I humbly beg your Lordship's Pardon for the trou∣ble of this Epistle, who am,

