


May it please your Grace,
THe Favours have been so many and so great, which your Grace's un∣wearied Bounty has conferred upon me, that I cannot omit this opor∣tunity of telling the World, how much I have been obliged, and by whom. My Gratitude will not suffer me to smother the favōurs in silence; nor the Pride they have rais'd me to, let me conceal, the Name of so Excellent a Patron. The honour of being favoured by the great Newcastle, is equal with any real Merit, I am sure infinitely above mine. Yet the encouragement I receive from your Grace, is the certain way to make

the World believe I have some desert, or to create in me the most favourable thoughts of my self. My Name may thus, when otherwise it would perish, live in after Ages, under the protection of your Grace's, which, is famous abroad, and will be Eterniz'd in this Nation, for your Wit beyond all Poets; Judgment and Prudence, before all Statesmen; Courage and Conduct, above all Generals; Constancy and Loyalty, beyond all Subjects; Virtue and Temperance, above all Philosophers; for skill in Weapons, and Horsemanship, and all other Arts befitting your Quality, excelling all Noblemen: And lastly, for those eminent Services in defence of your King and Countrey, with an Interest and Power much exceed∣ing all, and with Loyalty equalling any Nobleman. And indeed, the first was so great, that it might justly have made the greatest Prince afraid of it, had it not been so strongly secured by the latter.
All these Heroick Qualities I admired, and worshipped at a distance, before I had the Honour to wait upon your Grace at your House. For so vast was your Bounty to me, as to find me out in my obscurity, and oblige me several years, before you saw me at Welbeck; where (when I arrived) I found a Respect so extremely above the mean∣ness of my Condition, that I still received it with blushes; having had nothing to recommend me, (but the Birth and Education, without the Fortune of a Gentleman) besides some Writings of mine, which your Grace was pleased to like. Then was soon added to my former Worship and Ad∣miration,

 , and infinite Gratitude, and a Pride of being  by one, in whom I observ'd a Ma∣jesty equl with greatest Princes, yet Aability exceeding ordinary Gentlemen. A Greatness, that none e'r ap∣proached without Awe, or parted from without Satisfa∣ction.
Then (by the great honour I had to be daily admitted into your, Grace's publick and private Conversation) I observed that admirable Experience and Judgment surmounting all the Old, and that vigorousness of Wit, and Smartness of Expression, exceeding all the Young, I ever knew; and not onely in sharp and apt Replies, the most excellent way of pursuing a Discourse; but (which is much more difficult) by giving easie and unforced oca∣sions, the most admirable way of begining one; and all this adapted to men of all Circumstances and Conditions. Your Grace being able to discourse with every man in his own way, which, as it shows you to be a most accurate Ob∣server of all mens tempers, so it shows your Excellency in all their Arts. But when I had the favour daily to be admitted to your Grace's more retired Conversation, when I alone enjoyed the honour, I must declare, I never spent my hours with that pleasure, or improvement; nor shall I ever enough acknowledge that, and the rest of the Ho∣nours done me by your Grace, as much above my Condition as my Merit.
And now, my Lord, after all this, imagine not I intend this small Present of a Play (though favoured here by those I most wish it should be) as any return; for all the Ser∣vices of my life cannot make a sufficient one. I onely lay hold on this occasion, to publish to the World your great Fa∣vours, and the grateful Acknowledgments of,
My most Noble Lord, 
