



My Lord,
I Have ever been ready to own all Obligations re∣ceiv'd
from any Man; but being favour'd by so
great and good a Man as your Lordship, I think it
so much to my honour, that I cannot but be proud
of it, which makes me take the first occasion to publish my
Gratitude, and boast of your Patronage. Nor have I any
other end in making bold with your Lordships Name be∣fore
this Trifle. I would not be so unreasonable to desire
your Lordship to defend the weakness of my Writings: I
have been by long sickness made very unfit for that Task.
A man ought not to hope to Please the world very much,
who is not at ease, and somewhat pleas'd himself: Tho I
have no reason to complain of the reception of this Play.
For my own, but much more for my Countrys sake,
I rejoyce that there is a TALBOT still left to sustain
the Honour of that Illustrious Family; so able, so sincere,
and so disinterested a Minister; so real a Lover and Ho∣nourer
of his King, equally faithful in his Services to him,
and true to the Interest of his Country. (Nor can any
one be faithful to the first, who is not true to the latter);
for in effect they are but one; and they can never be odi∣ous
enough who endeavour to divide it.
We still have a Talbot who is a firm Friend to the Eng∣lish,
and a just Enemy to the French; and I doubt not, my
Lord, but you will live by your Counsels and Actions to
become as terrible to them as any of your brave Ancestors
have been. I dare not be too forward in your just Com∣mendations,
Praise being not the end that a man who is
truly great ever aims at; nor does an ingenuous Man delight
in it: To such the conscience of doing well is the only satis∣faction.
But one thing out of the abundance of my heart
I cannot restrain my self from observing in your Lordship.
The most important business of this world, the Educati∣on
of Youth (which ought to be put into the hands of the
ablest, wisest, most learn'd and vertuous men, who have no
other interest but the bettering of mens minds; and because
of the great trouble of the Office, it ought to have great
Rewards and Dignities affix'd to it by the publick) is for
want of those encouragements put upon such mean, weak,
or corrupt persons, that it is the greatest task of a mans life
to break loose from his Education, and shake off the pre∣judices
he contracted by it; which none but a great Genius
ever does▪ The rest, tho of the highest rank, swallow eve∣ry

thing unchew'd, and take every thing unexamind from
their first Dry-Nurses in Petticoats to their last in Square-Caps:
Women begin with them, and young Priests end
with 'em, who are sure to bring 'em up to the interest of the
Clergy, tho it be never so much against that of the Laity.
Your Lordship, by strength of Understanding, and indu∣strious
Enquiry, early perform'd this great Task, and freed
your self from those Principles instill'd into you in your
Youth; which would have made you incapable of being
a good Subject and a great Patriot in your riper age; and
have since became so eminent in both characters, that eve∣ry
man that heartily loves the constitution of our English
Government, has a profound Respect and Veneration for
your Lordship.
Nor will your share of Honour deserve to be less in Hi∣story
than that of the bravest of your Ancestors▪ since none
could ever more freely adventure Life, Estate and Honour
for their Countreys Freedom than your Lordship did. And
it appears to me to be much a greater Glory to be highly
instrumental in the Redemption of ones own, than in the
Conquest of another. And I beseech your Lordship pardon
this interruption of your business or diversion, from him
who is, without any mixture of fawning, most sincerely,
My Lord,
 May 5. 1690▪
