



Madam,
VVHat was lately composed at your Commands, is now in your name Exposed to the World; with this consi∣derable Advantage, that where my Reasons flagg, or are deficient, the most attractive Motive of your Example will undoubtedly prevail.
For if Divine Plato dogmatiz'd right, Vertue in her self hath such powerful Charmes, that should she but assume a visible shape, all would immediately become her Inamourato's. And therefore I question not, but it will have great Influence on the Reader, when he shall understand of a Young Lady, whose first Demand at the Entrance on her Estate, was, how she might Regulate it according to the severest Principles of Conscience.
The Pious Weeper of Israel in his Lamentations, chap. 3.27. acquaints us that it is good for a Man to bear the Yoak from his Youth, Quia levavit se super se, He hath lifted himself a∣bove himself. Madam, by this Early and Heroick Resoluti∣on, you have not only exceeded and anticipated the General Ex∣pectation of those who knew you, but gain'd a most compleat Victory over your self, which in the Estimate of a Wise Man, is more than Alexander did in Conquering the World. You have new taught Man-kinde that forgotten Lesson of King Solomon; To honour God with our Substance, Prov. 3.9. and that our
Real Interest, and Lawful Usury, is, faenerari Domino, mise∣rendo pauperis, By pittying the Poor, to Lend to the Lord, chap. 19.17.
Qui dedit Velle, donet & Perficere. May indulgent Hea∣ven, who hath begun a Good Work in your Soul, perfect it, and daily water that Blooming Goodness his own Right Hand hath planted; till laden with the fruit of Good Works, you wax Ripe for Heaven, to be transplanted to the Paradise of God.
I shall close this Address by way, both of Encouragement, and Congratulation, in the Words of King Laemuel's Mother's advice, Prov. 31.29.30. Multae Filiae, &c. Many Daughters have gathered Riches together; but thou hast surpassed them all: Comliness is Deceitful, and Beauty is Vain; the Woman that feareth our Lord, shall be praised, which is sufficient to wipe off the suspicion of flattery in
Madam,  
August the 3d. 1673.
