



May it please your Grace,
SO long as your Grace pèrsists in Obliging, I must go on in Acknowledging; nor can I let any opportunity pass of telling the World how much I am favored by you; or any occasion slip of assuring your Grace, that all the actions of my life shall be dedicated to your service; who by your Noble Patronage, your Generosity and Kindness, and your continual Bounty, have made me wholly your Creature: nor can I forbear to de∣clare, that I am more obliged to your Grace, than to all Mankind. And my misfortune is, I can make no other return, but a declaration of my grateful Resentments.
When I shew'd your Grace some part of this Comedy, at Welbeck, being all that I had then written of it, you were pleased to express your great liking of it, which was a sufficient encouragment for me to pro∣ceed in it: And when I had finish'd it, to lay it humbly at your feet; what ever I write, I will submit to your Grace, who are the greatest Ma∣ster of Wit, the most exact Observer of Mankind, and the most accurate Judge of Humour, that ever I knew. And were I not assured of the Great∣ness of your favour, I should be afraid of the excellency of your judgment.
I have endeavoured in this Play at Humor, Wit, and Satyr, which are the three things (however I may have fallen short in my attempt) which your Grace has often told me, are the life of a Comedy. Four of the Humors are entirely new; and (without vanity) I may say. I n'r pro∣duc'd a Comedy that had not some natural Humour in it not represented before, nor I hope ever shall. Nor do I count those Humours which a great many do, that is to say, such as consist in using one or two By-words; or in having a fantastick, extravagant Dress, as many pretended Humours have; nor in the affctation of some French words, which several Plays  shown us. I say nothing of impossible, unnatural Farce Fools, which some intend for Comical who think it the easiest thing in the world to write a Comedy, and yet will sooner grow rich upon their ill Plys  write a good one: Nor is downright silly folly a Humour, as some take it to be for 'tis a  natural Imperfection; and they might as  call it a humour of Blindness in a blind man, or Lmeness in a lame one: Or as a celebrated French  has the humour of one

who speaks very fat, and of another who speaks very slow: But Natural imperfections are not fit Subjects for Comedy, since they are not to be laugh'd at, but pitied. But the Artificial folly of those, who are not Cox∣combs by Nature, but with great Art and Industry make themselves so, is a proper object of Comedy, as I have discoursed at large in the Preface to the Humorists, written five years since: Those slight circumstantial things mentioned before are not enough to make a good Comical Hu∣mour: which ought to be such an affectation, as misguides men in Know∣ledge, Art, or Science, or that causes defection in Manners, and Morali∣ty, or perverts their minds in the main Actions of their lives. And this kind of Humour I think I have not improperly described in the Epi∣logue to the Humorist.
But your Grace understands Humour too wll not to know this, and much more than I can say of it. All I have now to do, is, humbly to De∣dicate this lay to your Grac, which has succeeded beyond my expecta∣tion, and the Humours of which have been approved by Men of the best Sense and Learning. Nor do I hear of any profest Enemies to the Play, but some Women and some Men of Feminine understandings, who like slight Plays onely, that represent a little tattle sort of Conversation like their own; but true Humour is not liked or understood by them, and therefore even my attempt towards it is condemned by them. But the same people, to my great comfort, damn all Mr. Johnson's Plays, who was  the best Drammatick Poet that ever was, or, I be∣lieve, ever will be; and I had rather be Author of one Scene in his best Comedies, than of any Play this Age has produced. That there are a great many faults in the conduct of this Play, I am not ignorant. But I (ha∣ving no Pension but from the Theatre, which is either unwilling, or una∣ble, to reward a Man sufficiently, for so much pains as correct Comedies require) cannot allot my whole time to the writing of Plays, but am for∣ced to mind some other business of Advantage. (Had I as much Money, and as much time for it) I might perhaps write as Correct a Comedy as any of my Contemporaries. But I hope your Grace will accept of this with all its imperfections; which since the Royal Family have recei∣ved favorably, I have all my aim, if it be approved by your Grace, who are next to them, in the greatest esteem and observance of,
 London, June 26. 1676.
