



RIght Honourable, I humbly crave leave to enshrowde these ensuing Notes under your Excellencies pa∣tronage, and though there be (as the Philosopher speakes) megiste di∣astasis, which might have deterred me;Eight Ews, yet three things among others moved me to this boldnesse, First, that kind and thankful acceptance of my poore paines, and that most Noble respect which your Excel∣ency was pleased to afford to mee at Rippon; when it was (not my desert, but) my duty and solace towaite on your Excel∣lency, withE. of Belford E. of Hartford (now Mar∣ques) Earl of Essx. Ea. of Salisbyr, E. of Wiebe. E. of Be ssiolle, E of Helamd, E. of Barlishire: 8. Lords the L Wharton. L Paget L. Mandevile, (now Earl of Man∣chester,) L. Brooke. L. Pawlet. L Howard. L Savil L. Dunsmore, Commissioners for England. And for Scotland. 8. Viz. Earl of Dumfermling. L. Lowdon. Sir Willian Dowglasse. Sir Partrck Hephurne Mr. Satith. M. Wetherburne. M. Henderson. M. John∣ston (since Knighted,) fifteene other most noble Earles and Lords, at that great and successefull Treaty, betwixt the two King∣domes
of England and Scotland, beginning in October, 1640.  how much (though especially, yet not onely I, but) all the King∣dome, and the children yet unborne of both these sister Nation have cause to blesse God for you, and you all for God, though we already perceive in some large measure yet hitherto but  And what an unspeakable losse, the whole Land (and m∣selfe in particular) had, by the death of that most Noble, and worthy Patriot, the Right Honourable, the old Earle of Bedford and what a want these present times have of him, your Excel∣lency among others fully knowes, and I feele.
Secondly, these Notes were preached before our Joshua of the North, the Right Honourable Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, and his Army, (of whose fidelity to his Countrey, courage for God and his Cause, cordiall and reciprocall affection of his Countrey to him, and his to them, I need not tell the world, much lesse this Kingdome. And therefore may with somewhat more boldnesse returne to your Excellency, as their Spring and Head. Thirdly, something in these Notes treats of the honour and duty of Soul∣diers; your Excellency is (and hath of long been) knowne to be a man of War, 2 Chron. 8.9. Now these lines may serve (like King Philips Monitor) sometimes to recall to your mind, first, a Soul diers place, its lawfulnesse, antiquity and honour, &c. secondly, the quality of the persons, Souldiers should be holy, God calls his Souldiers as well sanctified ones as mighty, Isa. 13.3. Thirdly, of their duty, first, to take God with them, they may not fotger the God of the Arke when they goe to battell, they had better leave behinde them the Arke of God, 1 Sam. 4.3. 2 San 15.25. Saul (as ill as he was) would not goe out against the Philistins till he had prayed and sacrified,Psal. 76.2, 3 at Gods Ta∣bernacle were the Arrowes, Sword, Bow, and Shield, breken, and batted wone. 1 Sam. 13.12. Though Jehshapha had almost 1200000. valiant warring men, 2 Chron. 17.14.—19. (though but in about two Tribes, whereof the whole twelve were not by the fourth part so big as England) an Army (one would thinke) enough to have over-run a world, yet puts all his confi∣dence in God by prayer, and sayes still, without him they had no strength, 2 Chron. 20.12. Elishas prayers,* slay as many as the sword of Hazael and Jehu. 1 King. 19.15, 16, 17. Salomon had
40000. stalls of horses for his Chariots, 1400. Charits, 12000. horsemen, 1 Kings 10.26. & 4.26. yet found no safety ot to runne to God, 1 Kings 8.33, 34 Prov. 18.10. David had (in a Kingdome) as I said much lesse then ours, they had but 12 Tribes, we 52 shires) fifteen hundred threescore and ten thousand men that drew sword (and yet two Tribes were left unnumbred) 1 Chron. 21.5, 6. him∣self as gallant a man as drew sword, 1 Samuel 18.7. he had thir∣ty seven speciall choice Worthies, 2 Sam. 23.35. whereof one slew 300. men, another slew 800. men, another slew a Lyon, and two Lyon-like men of Moah, and an Egyptian Cyant: another defended a field of barley, another a field of Lentiles against an Army, (and many such like) 2 Sam. 23. yet makes God his onely Rock, Psal. 18.2. and rests on him alone by praver for conquest.By Dr. Smoaking Flax, Ep Psal. 56.9. be pleased to remember what was said to Generalt Vere [Souldiers that carry their lives in their bands, had need above others to, carry grace in their hearts.]
Secondly, to leave their sins behind them, Deut. 23.9, 14. Cary no wedge or Babylonish garment, Josh. 7. may I not say as the E∣gyptians to their King, let your sins go, else you know not, that England is destroyed, that we be all but dead men, Exod 10.7. and 12.33. Be pleased to call to mind that sweet and experimental Speech of your Excellencies most renowned Father, [Dr. B in his S∣sat Pa Crsis,  1.16  the  day of or Earler de Sometimes in the Field encountring the Enemy, the weight of my sins lying heavy up∣on my conscience quell my spirits, and lnake me the most timerous and fear∣full man that may be; whereas finding my peace with God in a morning, maketh me as bold as a Lyon.]
Thirdly, to goe by a right rule, from a right Principle, and aime at a right end, not the desolating, but recovery of a sick and sinfull Kingdome, the sealing of a happy and holy peace; not a∣ny way at his sacred Majesties least hut,To bee friend to King is a old sinde Sarbal Neb. .1. Jewes,  19.12. ye they but bour to be first in br∣ing the K back, 2. S 19.41, & (Oh God forbid, 1 Sam. 24.5. & 26.9.) I am verily perswaded that no man doth more de∣sire his Majesties safety, honour and happinesse, then your selfe, (according to your Allegeance and late Protestation,) and that you would not have one haire of his head to perish: else could you never have so many wrastling crying prayers, as I think never any Generall or Army to this day ever had, of those whose per∣sons are pretious, 2 Cor. 8 23. whose teares have lowd tongues,
Psal. 6.8. whose Prayers are most pleasant to God, Cant. 2.14. and have (as I may say) a wrastling, Hos. 12.4. prevailing, Psal. 50.15. nay, a commanding power with God, Isa. 45.11. Wee have heard much fame of the Heathen Generals, Achilles, Hector, Hanniball, Sci∣pin, Seanderbag, &c. but what (alas) did these regard God, his Church, his Cause, or God them? But we are confident of other ends and principles in your Excellency, and hope that God will use your Excellency as a blessed instrument for setling such a roall Peace, and bringing in such happy times as our Kings Majesty, & all the Land, yea, the child yet unborne, will see cause to blesse God for you, and acknowledge Gods goodnesse and mercy to England by you. Wee have had mercies hitherto a long time on free cost; if we pay now a little dearer then formerly, we hope for so much better dayes; the fulfilling of the Prophesie, Isa. 30.26. the fall of Babylon, the advancing of Gods Church, clearing of his truth, the engrafting of the broken branch into the true Olive; how have the people of God been scorned and nicknamed a long time, for Waldenses, Hussites, Lollards, Lutherans, Hugenots, Precisians, Puritans, (or all in one) Round-heads; (As a Parliament man said well, the word Puritan in the mouth of an Arminian, signifies an Orthodox Divine; in the mouth of a Drunkard, signifies a sober man, in the mouth of a Papist, signifies a Protestant,) &c. And true it is, Gods Church may have Winter and Summer, seed time and harvest, Gen. 8.22. and we hope ere long to sing with the Spouse (through Gods mercy to his Majesty, the high Court of Parlia∣ment, your Excellency, and these Kingdomes,) The Winter is past, the Raine is over and gone, 2.11,  the Flowers appeare on the earth, the time of finging of Birds is come. That those that sowed in teares shall reape in joy, Psal. 126.5, 6. When God will restore his out-casts, Jer. 30.16, 17. and that as the high and Honourable Assembly spoke of that wonderfull successe at Leeds, that God had heard prayers, so still he will, till his Temple bee finished, his servants cleared who have long suffered. My very Honourable Lord! such have been your tryed valour, fidelity to your Countrey, your kind respect to Gods Ministers, love to Gods Servants, undaunted courage for Gods cause, &c. that were I not in awe of your Excellencies
humility, (more then of your Army) I might enlarge any one of hese beyond and Epistle; but I well know, that your Excellency he more you deserve, the lesse you desire praise. I will onely doe that which more suits with my desire, and profession, humbly trave pardon for this boldnesse, and leave, that these notes may passe under your Excellencies patronage and protection;Job 32.22. and shall not cease to bend my knees to the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, for my Soveraigne, his great Counsell, your Excellencies prosperous successe in Gods way, encrease of grace here, and eter∣nall felicity hereafter; such are the uncessant requests, of the poorText. earthen vessell, who is
My Lord, 
March 4. 1642.
