



My LORD,
WHEN I designed the publication of the en∣suing Treatise, it was my reso∣lution to present it to your Ho∣nour, as once I notified to you, which I have now presumed to
 put in execution, though then I had not your express licence to prefix your Honour's name, yet by some expressions of re∣spect, I conceived you would not be offended if I did. Upon this presumptive allowance as I was encouraged, so upon o∣ther obligations I was engaged to doe it. I have received high respects from your Lordship upon several occasions and in∣stances, which I ought, when∣ever an opportunity was offe∣red, to acknowledge with all due veneration, neither could I pitch on a more fitter than this, how mean and little so∣ever it is. The old Rule was, He who could make no better payment, should readily con∣fess the debt; Reddit, qui liben∣ter debet, holds still good with
 noble and generous Spirits. But this is onely a debt of gratitude and common hone∣sty, and an argument of good nature to honour those who have deserved honour: but an higher obligation from a more divine principle is due from an inferiour Priest to his Diocesan. That Order, Let nothing be done, , without the permission or consent of the Bishop (I wish it were better observed) is so strongly bin∣ding, that, I think, every Cu∣rate (without offence, I hope, to the greatest Rectors or Vi∣cars) is to apply himself in all doubts and emergent cases of difficulty to his Diocesan for resolution; and all his Clergy should in all publick Underta∣kings have either his express,
 or reasonably presumed con∣sent, especially if they be such as this Treatise makes a shew of, viz. The asserting the ex∣cellency of our Reformed Church for its strength and beauty, surpassing all others both for soundness of Doctrine, purity and comeliness of Wor∣ship and Apostolicalness of Go∣vernment. A Church for this reason, the more excellent, be∣cause most opposed; for as the hardest things are the most ex∣cellent, so the most excellent are most aimed and shot at. One sort perfectly hateth, be∣cause they fear her, as long as she holds up her head, they must lowr, fret and storm, and never perfect their projects; yet they most malign and vi∣lifie her, who by all humane
 and divine Laws should live in obedience to her. No Church hath had more furious assaults made on her, but her enemies were still repulsed: a Church of that firmness, that the Gates of Hell, even when Satan was let loose, could not prevail a∣gainst her. This is her com∣fort, all the Reformed Chur∣ches of any good figure give her the right hand of Fellow∣ship, and of preeminence too. The very attempt then to de∣fend this Church is both He∣roical and Christian, how weak soever the Undertaker be, he may have and hath a good heart, though his hands be feeble. It is true, Non eget au∣xilio tali, nec defensoribus istis; yet if a Puny manage a Cause under dispute with good suc∣cess
 against an old experienced famous Lawyer pleading on the other side, he himself gains a little esteem, but its great re∣putation to the Cause; That Cause was good which so mean a man could defend. This is my case, who am sufficiently sensible of mine own weak∣ness, but very hearty to de∣fend that Church whereof I have been a Priest for full for∣ty eight years, ordained by one of your Lordship's Prede∣cessours; for this I have suffe∣red, and do yet suffer in some sort; (sufferers may have leave to speak) this I will defend, when I can doe no otherwise, by Pen, while I am able, yet always and no otherwise but permissu Superiorum, upon which account I tender this address,
 begging your Ghostly Bene∣diction, and that you will still repute me as,
Right Honourable and Right Reverend Father,

