



RIGHT HONORABLE,
VEry ancient Historians call this our Nation Pri∣mogenitam Ecclesiarum, the first begotten of all the Churches, and tell us that though Christ was preached in some other Nations before this, yet that this was the first wherein the Christian Faith was pub∣liquely entertained by Prince and State, Omnium Provinci∣arum prima Britannia publicitus Christi nomen recepit: and they add, that Lucius King of Britain was the first Christi∣an King in the world, and did, in the year after Christ, 169. send two learned men, Elvanus and Medvinus, to Eleutherius (then Bishop of Rome) to receive further instruction in the Christian Faith, and for the better Government of this Land; Eleutherius returned Answer by two learned men, Faganus and Others call them Fugatius and Dimanus. Damianus, in these words; You require of us the Ro∣man Laws and the Emperors to be sent over to you, the Ro∣man Laws and the Emperors we may ever reprove, but the Law of God we cannot; you have received by Gods Mercy in the Realm of Britain the Law and Faith of Christ; you have with you within the Realm both the parts of the Scrip∣tures, the Old and New Testament: Out of the same by Gods grace, with the counsel of your Realm, take you a Law,
 and by that Law, through Gods sufferance, rule you your Kingdom of Britain; for a King hath his name of ruling, and not of having a Realm: you shall be a King while you rule well, but if you do otherwise, the name of a King shall not remain with you, and you shall lose it, which God for∣bid, &c. And though the Gospel was preached here before then, yet not till then were the Temples of Idolatry, the twen∣ty eight Flamines, and three Arch-Flamines removed, and a marvellous great change made throughout Lucius his Domi∣nions, Romanorum inaccessa loca, Christo fuere subdita: After, when Gregory sent Augustin the Monk hither, (who brought over some Truth and much Superstition) in the Saxons reign here, anno 596. he found the wife of Ethelbert King of Kent (viz. Queen Berta) and her Chaplain Bishop Luidhard and many others, zealous Christians, especially in Wales, yet some light broke out then, and much more in the reign of a childe (King Edward 6.) and more by a woman (Queen Elizab.) that God alone might have all the glory: and surely God is carrying on the same work still, in purging and reforming of his Church, shaking Nations, that Christ may the more come in: And I verily beleeve that no ten Hagg. 2. 7. years since Lucius his time can speak of so great wonders (if not miracles) wrought for England, and wherein the Lord hath more appeared for the good of his People here, then since Your Honor hath sate in the Chair of that Honorable Assem∣bly of Englands Parliament. God grant that our murmur∣ing (which never makes any thing better, but provokes a fa∣ther, and brings more rods and lashes on the childe, and which God calls Rebellion, Numb. 16. 41, 46. with c. 17. 10.) do not either quite overturn us, or at least protract eleven days journey into fourty years travel, as the Israelites murmuring did, Numb. 14. 26, 30. and cause that many of us shall fall in the Wilderness, and never see the good Land: Far be from me such thoughts, such praise Adulator & Laudator have both the same letters., or rather flattery, as to think or say, that the Grand Assembly (whereof You have so long, and with such indefatigable pains, been the faithful Speaker) hath had no faults and errors (though I desire ra∣ther
 to weep over them to God, then blaze them to men) re∣membering often that story of Gilbert Foliot, Bishop of Lon∣don, in H: 2. raign, Anno Christi 1161. who saith of him∣self, that when he first entered into the Monastery, he zeal∣ously cryed out against the sluggishness of his Governors; af∣terward, being chosen Governor, he inveighed against his su∣periors; being chosen Prior, he cryed out against the Abbots; afterwards, being chosen Abbot, he excused them, and deep∣ly charged the Bishops; but being chosen Bishop, I began (saith he) to see how much easier it is to finde faults, then (when it is our own case) to mend them. I cannot say of your Honorable Senate, what that learned and holy Who was, as Nazian, said of Basil, . Beza (who lived 86. years) said of himself, that his Head never once aked; but truly I think a bad Stomack may make a good Head to ake, and our sins and murmurings may much fur∣ther that which we so much complain against: Israel sinned, and God left David to number the People, 2 Sam. 34. 1. and I verily beleeve that our good and wise God (that can bring light out of darkness, good out of evil, and extract medicines out of poysons, 2 Cor. 4. 6.) hath sometimes brought much good to this Land, even out of Your Errors and our Ene∣mies; and hath many times (a Mercy that Luther much noted, and often blessed God for) not taken advantage of your and our failings to our destruction, but hereby made us more zealous, wary, and active afterwards. O the wisdom and mercy of our gracious God! Of all the Saints in Scrip∣ture, I finde no one that vented more impatience then Job, as Cap. 3. cursing, (though not God, as Satan promised, Job 1. 11. & 2. 5. yet cursing,) Job 6. 8, 9. & 7. 14, 15. & 10. 18, 19. Yet the Holy Ghost, Jam. 5. 11. highly com∣mends Jobs patience, and lays it down for a pattern, never naming one word of his impatience. Abraham shewed much unbelief, twice thereby denying his wife, yet is chronicled for the Father of the Rom. 4. 11, 18, 19, 20. faithful, and one strong in Faith. Jeho∣shaphat joyned friendship with Ahab, 2 Chron. 18. 3. went with him to battel against Ramoth Gilead, Vers. 27, 28. and after that he had been reproved for it by Jehu, 2 Chron. 19. 2.
 yet he again makes friendship with Ahaziah, 2 Chron. 20. 25. and marries his son to Ahabs daughter, 2 Chro. 21. 6. and yet the Lord saith of him, 1 King. 22. 43. that he turned not aside from doing that which was right in the eyes of the Lord. How should this melting patience cause you to bless and act for this gracious God, and to chronicle his mercies to posterity! How often have I wished, that Your Honor, who have had, during almost these ten years, so perfect information of all the wonders of our God to and for his People in this Nation, had Psal. 107. 43. kept a perfect Diary thereof! or if You have so done, that You would communicate the same to the world, which would be one of the rarest pieces of humane stories. How wonder∣ful and various have been the goings of our God in this Na∣tion, these ten years, and still are, like His dealing with His People of the Jews, after their return from Babylon! Zech. 14. 6, 7. It was for a long time neither day nor night, clear nor dark, (a man could not guess what a day it would be by the eye of sense, but presently after a Sun-shine, a Cloud;) and all this to shake off such as live by sense, and not by Faith, and serve themselves of God and the Publique (as Jehu and Judas did;) and to let the Saints see, that things are carry∣ed on not by might, nor by power, but by the Lord of hoasts his own Spirit, Zech. 4. 6. nevertheless in the evening time it shall be light. And I am (in the midst of a cloudy day) the more encouraged, when I consider, 1. That the work is in the hand of a good and wise Master-builder, who ever the instruments be; In all these turnings there is a Spirit in the Wheels, and the Wheels are full of eyes, Ezek. 1. Secondly, God sees and aims further then the best Agents and Instru∣ments that are used in the work: The Apostles did not see, in the work themselves were imployed in, so far as Christ meant, but he lets them see more and more by steps and degrees what he would have done, Mark 4. 28. So Ezek. 47. 3, 4. and God hath led us along with a Cloud and Fire, and owned us in the Mount, and midst of straits. Thirdly, The light of the Truth (I mean, not Satans delusions, and mens phan∣sies, but true Light) much spreads in America, New-England,
 in Wales, in the North, &c. Poor Creatures flock like Doves to the windows, and the Kingdom of Heaven suffers vio∣lence: And if it be said, so do Profaneness and Heresies spread; I answer, it was always so in times of Reformation, till things could be setled, Satan more struggles; and when God is giving physick, the disease more breaks forth, Hos. 7. 1. When did cursed Doctrines and Practices more break forth in the Old Testament, then in Malachi's time, when the Jews were returned from Babylon to reform Church and State in Canaan? Mal. 3. 14, 15. See Israel through the Wilder∣ness. Fourthly, Compare former times impartially with these, we shall finde, thirteen, fourteen, or twenty years ago, traps of several kindes layd for consciencious Ministers and Christians; men durst not meet together to seek Gods face, humble their Souls; Sermons on Lords days in the afternoon, weekly Exercises, &c. restrained, the very face of piety discountenanced, and they that wrought wickedness, and most zealous against Puritans, were exalted: dumb dogs, non-residents, sports on Lords day, &c. favoured: But how are godly men and godliness countenanced in good measure? what happy alteration in our Ʋniversities for advance of piety, (though still more is to be wished?) And though too many Errors in some Members of our Armies, yet see heretofore every Town generally sent such out to be Souldiers, who were of the basest sort for drunkenness and villany, that knew no∣thing; compare our Army now with those here formerly, and then judge without prejudice. Fifthly, Though mens ims were but little and strait at first, as Luther said, that when he first began, he meant no more, but to withstand Popish Occasione dinatios indulgentiarum pretio numerato Lutherus initio fuit permotus ad hoc quod suscepit Refor∣mationis opus, &c. Pardons and selling of Indulgences; yet neither would God nor his Enemies let him alone, till he resolved with Moses not to leave a hoof, neither root nor branch of Popery: So God and our Enemies heighten Your spirits. Sixthly, We hear what God is still working, in bringing in many poor Natives in America, (whether they be the Posteri∣ty of the Jewish ten Tribes, as Peter Martyr of old, and Mr Thorow∣good. o∣thers of late give very probable conjectures, and if so, Mr
 Brightman and others may well be owned for Prophets, who above fourty years ago foretold the Calling of the Jews to be∣gin about the year 1650. or whether they be Gentiles) to embrace the Gospel with tears, prayers, marvelous zeal and Reformation: And how have we seen the finger of God all a∣long, restraining the rage of men, letting the Enemy vent onely so much fury as might conduce to Gods praise! Psal. 76. 10. He that stills the noise of the Seas, stills the tumules of the People, Psal. 65. 7. The great God swaddles the mighty raging Ocean like a little Infant, (yea, more easily then any Midwise can do the least childe) in swadling bands, Job 38. 9. and the Original word  of , Fraenum Capistrum. used Mark 4. 39. for Christs still∣ing the winds and Sea, signifies his putting a bridle in the mouth of the winds and Sea, whereby he turns them about (when most blustering and raging) more easily then any man can do the nimblest horse: He gathers the winds in his fist, Pro. 30. 4. nods  men to death, Psal. 80. 16. with a blast, Job 4. 9. And how may all these experiments stir You up to trust God for the future, and be sincerely active for God against Your own and the Nations sins and distempers! as Henricus Au∣ceps when he fought against the Hungarians made this Vow to God, that if the Lord would give him a victory over his E∣nemies, he would purge his Country from Commonly so called, else buying livings was not Simons sin, Act. 8. 18, to 20. though usually called Simony. Simony, which then much raigned therein. And I beseech you return the praise and glory of all not to Your selves, or Armies, but to the free mercy and goodness of God alone. Pope Hadrian having built K. W. Ru∣fus when two Monks came to him to buy an Abbots place, each outvying o∣ther in great sums of money for it, the K. asked a third Monk that stood by, what he would give, who answered, never a peny, for that its against my Conscience (said he) to give any thing; then said the King, of all the three thou best deservest it, and so bestowed it upon him. a sumptuous Colledg at Lovain, caused this inscription to be engraven upon it, Utrecht (where he was born) planted me, Lovain (where he had his education) watered me, and Caesar (who promoted him to the Popedom) gave the increase, under which a witty Passenger subscribed, Hic Deus nihil fecit, Here God did nothing. Nay, much rather say as Dan: Cra∣merus, Nil scio, nil possum, nil sum quoque quod tamen esse, seire & posse aliquid dicor id omne Dei est.

 Or as holy Cruciger, Omnia praetereunt praeter amare Deum.
And now, Honorable Sir, give me leave to acquaint you with the Reasons which moved me to presume to present this plain Discourse to Your Honor.
1. To give a poor, yet humble and hearty acknowledgment to the world, of the many favors and great undeserved respect which I have received freely from you, and the kinde offers which you long since made to me, upon your first taking notice of me, as far above my deserts as desires, the embracing whereof my other Obligations would not permit. And se∣condly, That seeing the love of this Common-wealth is deeply rooted in your heart, (deeper then the loss of Callice in Queen Maries, or the love of his Country in A. Fulvius Non Catilinae te genui sed pa∣triae, said Au∣lus Fulvius, when he slew his own son with his own hands for Treason a∣gainst the Common∣wealth.) which pub∣lique frame of spirit is a thing most highly commendable, though it be not true which Tully saith, Omnes qui patriam conserverunt, adjuverunt, auxerunt, certum est esse in Coelo,) and that God hath called Your Honor to a very high place and work, (for such work, and so long a time, as you have no president before you) let me hear (I beseech you) take occa∣sion to become a humble Petitioner to your Honor, and by You to the Common-wealths Representative, in a few parti∣ticulars: It hath been my lot for some time to be constantly at York Assizes, (not as having any suit at all, but in attend∣ance to some worthy friends,) where my heart even bled with∣in me, to see such rashness and carelessness in swearing, too many offering to swear that (but that the Judges were more careful and honest) which after some discourse they were con∣vinced to be untrue. Oh that there could be found some other way then swearing of every man at the Assizes, whether to punish false witnesses by pecuniary or corporal mulct (as the new-converted Natives of America do punish the sin of ly∣ing, for the first lye 5 s. for the second 10 s. for the third 20 s.) or what other way shall seem to Your Wisdoms most convenient; which perhaps would more restrain such careless and conscienceless persons from unjust witness-bearing, then any their Oaths; so might the Land be much freed from the
 burthen of Oaths under which it groans, Jerem. 23. 10. and from that flying roll, Zech. 5. 23. It is observable that the word in the Hebrew, which the Scripture useth for swear∣ing, is always used in the passive  juratus fuit. voyce, to note (say some) that a man should not swear but when an Oath is layd upon him, and he driven to it: the word also hath the signification of seven  and , as having reference, say some, to the seven Spirits of God before the Throne, before whom we swear, and therefore should swear in truth, righteousness, and judgment, Jerem. 4. 2. Rev. 1. 4. & 5. 6. and not rashly, Eccles. 5. 2. How scrupulous and tender was good Eliezer, and how clear would he be ere he would swear? Gen. 34. 4, 5, 6. Such a mans word is worth more then many mens Oaths. When Lewis the French King was taken Prisoner by the Turks, and af∣ter they agreed upon Articles, for confirming whereof the Sultan offered to swear, that if he broke any of the Articles, he would renounce his Mahomet, requiring K. Lewis to swear likewise, that if he broke any of his Articles, he would deny his Christ to be God; which Oath Lewis detesting, and offering rather to dye then to take it, the Sultan wondering at his tenderness and constancy, took his word without any Oath at all, and so published the League: I complain not a∣gainst swearing as unlawful in it self, nor yet against the manner used therein, in touching or kissing the book, (though that godly sufferer William Thorp, and some other eminent Worthies in England, did mightily oppose this, and suffered much for their Opinion herein above 240 years ago, in the reign of our King Henry 4.) onely I could wish, if it were pos∣sible, this common and rash swearing and for, wearing might be prevented.
2. I beseech you further what in you lies, the suppressing of cursed Heresies and Fandamental Errors, which are no small See the E∣pistle of the Walachtian Churches sent to the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, Quomodo omne geaus Haeresium in ultum permitti possit in illa Civitate quae tam expresso juramento sese devinxit ad omnia Scis∣mata cyenda. blemish to our endevored Reformation: It's more then three years ago since a forreign Pen wrote to our disgrace in a Book
 published at Dantzick, Anglia his quatuor annis facta est col∣luvies & lerna omnia Errorum & Sectarum, nulla a condito orbe Provincia, tam parvo spatio tot monstrosas Haereses pro∣tulit, atque haec; Epise porum tempora intra sexaginta annos non nisi quatuor sectas protulerunt, & eas plerunque in obscu∣ro latentes, &c. I pray you help us really to confute his testi∣mony: I know when the Jews returned from Babylon to re∣form the Church and State, they set up first the Altar, then the Temple, then the walls of the City, (as if we would say, first Worship, then Doctrine, then Discipline,) but yet up the walls did go also at last: The Lord help you and us against this dangerous flood of the Dragon, which so hurts both broa∣chers and receivers. Austin saith of Arrius the Heretick, that his pains are increased in Hell, as oft as any one, through his Heresie, is seduced from the Faith; and we finde it true, that the itch of Error, if not prevented, oft-times breaks forth into the scab of Atheism. We have publiquely hum∣bled our selves in this Nation more then once for our Here∣sies; I beseech you act what you justly may against them: We hear what Laws our Brethren in New-England have made Mr Thorow-good. about three years ago against Anabaptists and others (not for their Conscience, which they may keep to themselves, but) for infecting and seducing others. And we read M. Weld rise, growth, &c. that a∣bout thirteen years ago, anno 1637. they convented at New-Town in New-England some of the principal Ring-leaders, and not onely publiquely admonished and excommunicated, but al∣so imprisoned, and after banished them. Luther fore-told above one hundred years ago, that the Familistical Er∣rors, which he then in their bud opposed, would hereafter rise up, with more subtilty and danger, in the days of more light of the Gospel, and sure now Satan is busie in sowing Tares.
3. I beseech you encourage and further (as, blessed be God, you have begun a glorious work that way) a godly orthodox painful Ministry in England, Ireland, Wales, &c. that God, that hath always payd so well for nursing his children, and counted that done to him which is done to them, will not for∣get Matth. 25. Acts 9. Mat. 10. 40, 41 42. Zech. 2. 8, any pains and care for his faithful Ministers, and propa∣gating his Gospel, advancing piety and learning with all due
 and needful encouragements thereto: Satan every way op∣poseth them, and Gods work by them: Elijah was called the Troubler of Israel, 1 King. 18. 17. Amos charged for con∣spiracy, Amos 7. 10. Paul counted a . pestilent fellow, (a very post) a mover of Sedition, and Ring-leader of a Sect, Acts 24. 5. and Christ himself a Teacher of New Doctrines, Mark 1. 27. as well as Paul, Acts 17. 9. Jeremy was layd by the heels for a Traytor to the State, Luther called a trum¦pet of rebelli∣on, and Beza a seedsman of sedition. Uni∣cum crimen eo∣rum qui crimi∣ne vacabant, as Lipsius out of Tacitus. Therefore they stand in more need of your further encouragement; so shall you be not titulary, but real defenders of the Faith. The Pope sent over to James the fourth King of Scotland a Sword with this Title, Protector of the Faith: and presently after another Sword to our King Henry the eighth with this Title, Defender of the Faith; but the meaning was, to protect the Popish Faith, and not Christs pure Gospel; and accordingly both those Kings afterwards caused several godly men to be burned for the Truth in their Dominions, and great ignorance followed, men wholly studying Popish fancies, and neglecting Gods Word, so as George Creichton Bishop of Dunkel confess∣ed that he had lived Bishop many years, yet never knew any thing of the Old and New Testament.
4. I beseech you, while you sit in that Honorable Senate, forget not poor Prisoners in the Gaol, but let there be in every County some provision made for their Souls, so that they may not be made in their Prisons ten times more the children of Hell, then before, and most unfit to dye, when most unable to live. How much good did that learned and holy Mr Perkins that way in his time! One Malefactor (amongst others) crying out upon the Ladder to Mr Perkins, that he feared Non metuo mo∣ri, sed damnari. not Death, but a worse thing, was even melted into tears at Mr Perkins his Prayer, and dyed joyfully. What a blessed work would this be, to provide some able man (and means for him) to preach to, and catechise these poor Souls, that so they may not be in bondage to Satan, but Christs free men, that when the Justice of the Law will not suffer them to live, the Mercy in the Gospel may fit them for death. A reuerend Minister of this Nation (now with God) said that one shilling a quarter of every parish (one with another) in the County of Somerset (which is no burthen to any man) would encour∣age
 some godly man to this work; so might we perhaps, through Gods mercy, see more penitent theeves.
5. Contribute (I beseech you) your best skill and help for the joynting of godly and faithful men, who agree in the same Fun∣damentals of Doctrine, and truth of practice towards God and the State, and shall agree in the same Heaven at night: Tragediae Lutheranae mihi ipsi etiam calculo sunt molestiores, (said Erasmus;) The Differences among godly men more troubled Erasmus then the stone: It's a thousand pities to see what strangeness in Opinion, Affection, and Conversation a few years of peace have bred in too many, who agreed, mour∣ned, and wept together in times of Trouble, (like sheep run of a heap in a storm, but spread up and down the mountain in a Sun-shine.) How do the Philistins hereupon triumph, publish it in Gath, and raise up their hopes! And I fear there are some cursed spirits that do purposely heighten our Divisions, to ruine us both. I have often sadly thought of that passage of Oecolampadius to the Lutherans, when the fire of conten∣tion grew hot 'twixt the Zuinglians and them (as they were called,) and the subtil Jesuites and Papists joyned themselves with the Lutherans in the Sacramentary quarrel, and stroked them on the head (eos laudabant, & in pretio habebant, &c.) purposely to make the breach wider and irreconcileable, to ruine both; Error condonari potest (saith Oecolamp.) dis∣cordiam neque si sanguinem fundamus expiabimus: and as our Divisions bring scandal, so danger (as Machiavils rule was) by being divided in minutula frustula. Cambden observes that the low Countries suspecting the friendship of the English (anno 1587.) stamped money with two Earthen Pitchers swimming on the Sea, with this Motto, Si collidimur, fran∣gimur; If we dash one against another, we are both broken. I wish that England and Holland, England and Scotland, Eng∣land and England, would timely consider this, whom to cement and glue firmly, was worth the study and labour of another Constantine the great, nay, of an English Parliament; but lieth onely in the Power of the Almighty. In the Raign of Henry the eight (anno 1536.) fourty thousand Yorkshire men rose up in Arms, to uphold the Popes authority, their
 old Traditions, Latine Service, (though alass whether it was cursing or praying they knew not,) their Beads, Crosses, and other Church-ornaments (as they called them,) which they thought Cromwel would then have pulled down: This Rising they called the Holy Pilgrimage, on their Colours they had the five wounds of Christ, with the letters JESUS in the midst: The King sent down a great Army against them, both Armies drew neer to one another, the place, day, and hour of battel was set, but that night, before the battel should be, fell a small rain, which so raised a little brook that was betwixt the Armies, that neither Army could come at the other all the next day, the neighboring Inhabitants having never seen that brook swell neer that height, (which the day before a man might have gone over dry-shod,) though they had often seen far greater rain: both Armies looked at it as Gods mi∣raculous hand, forbidding their fighting, and so treated, a∣greed, and departed quietly: How happily was the effusion of blood prevented? Alass, how do we see sincere godly men rea∣dy (through different apprehensions and remnant of corrupti∣on) like Abraham and Lot, Paul and Barnabas, to fall out! In Queen Maries days of persecution, some godly men (after Martyrs) thought that they might not with a safe consci∣ence fly away, though they had fair warning and opportunity, as Latimer, Taylor, Badford, &c. but were bound to tarry and witness the truth of God: Others (though very godly) thought they might not with a good Conscience stay, but should be wilfully accssary to their own death, as Fox, Juel, Knox, &c. and when those godly men that fled did re∣turn, some approved Church Government by Bishops, others could not: some conformed to the Ceremonies established, o∣thers durst not; yet many of both Opinions agreed in Grace and Glory: Yea, even Bishop Andrews could say in his E∣pistle to P. Moulin concerning those Churches that had not Bi∣shops, nor owned that Government, Ferreus sit qui salutem eis neget, nos non mus ill ferrei: and yet alas in matters of smal∣ler moment Sudum partium is magna pars studiorum: You may (through Gods blessing) much conduce to a happy union, however God will reward you  and not :
 What a journey took Polycarp (anno Christi 157.) to recon∣cile that frivolous brabble 'twixt Romans and Asians about keeping Easter? Where strife and contention is, there is con∣fusion and every evil work, Jam. 3. 16. But where godly a∣mity and unity amongst brethren, there the Lord commands his blessing, and life for evermore, Psal. 133. Let me call to minde one remarkable victory to this purpose; About ninety years ago, when Mary Queen of Scots (Widow to James the fifth King of Scotland, and Grandmother to King James of Great Britain) would have forcibly established Popery in Scotland, and had secretly received divers French into Leith for that end, and garrisoned that place with them, she was op∣posed by the Protestants in Scotland, who being too weak, prevailed with Queen Elizabeth to ayd them; she sent over the Duke of Norfolk with an Army to assist the Scots, the English with the Scottish Protestants layd siege to Leith, from whence the French and the Queens Popish party of Scots sal∣lied out, and slew divers both English and Scotch, and layd their dead bodies naked upon the top of their Works in the hot moneth of June (anno 1560.) against the Sun: The Queen of Scots looked out of her window upon the Dead Bodies, and said, Yonder is the goodliest Tapestry that ever my eyes be∣held, I would the whole fields hereabouts were strawed with the same stuff: After which words she shortly fell sick and dyed; and the Popish party besieged in Leith were forced to yeeld and depart; Scotland was quieted, and the Truth of Religion hereby there established: but ere our Army return∣ed home, it was desired that there might be a solemn Day of Thanksgiving to God kept at Giles's Church in Edinburgh in July, 1560. where one prayer was then solemnly put up to Heaven, and recorded in Scotland, in perpetuam ei memo∣riam; part whereof was in these words: O Lord whereas thou hast made our Confederates of England instruments to set us at this liberty, and to whom in thy Name we have promised mutual faith again, let us never fall into that un∣kindness O Lord, that either we declare our selves unthank∣ful to them, or Profaners of thy holy Name, but confound O Lord the counsels of those that go about to break that
 most godly League contracted in thy name, and retain thou us so firmly together by thy holy Spirit, that Satan never have any power to set us again at variance or discord. I add no more, but fiat, Amen and Amen, &c.
6. As I heartily beg of God for you and us, that never any iniquity may be established by a Law, so would I beg that our Laws may be so framed according to Gods holy Word (suit∣able wherto something is begun I leave it to Your Honors to judg whe∣ther one Post in a weeke which needs not travel on the Lords day at all (when no Case of necessity, or extraordinary,) was not better, then two, who travel every Lords day, all the day con¦stantly. for Lords-Day, and against Adultery, Incest, Swearing, &c.) as might cause our Lawyers and others more to read and study the Scriptures, therein to know more fully and clearly the Law of our Land, as Eleuthe∣rius long since wrote to K. Lucius: but herein I submit (as is meet) to Your and the honorable Senates grave and wise Judgments, humbly craving your pardon for this tediousness and bold Dedication. I shall not fail, right honorable Sir, to bow my knees unto the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for you, and the Heads of our Tribes, that our onely wise and good God would give you a true sight of, and repent∣ance for what is amiss, (for I know you are far from Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry. Bishop Overton his minde, who accused a faithful Minister Mr Hugh Clark Vicar of Woolston in Warwickshire. within his Diocess of Treason, and committed him to Warwick Gaol for praying before his Sermon for Queen Elizabeth, That God would forgive her her sins. You are not such strangers to your own hearts and actions, as Cardinal Bellarmine, who could not finde any sin to confess, save one or two in his youth.) I shall lap you round about in my poor prayers, that God would more and more discover unto you his minde and work, make you all spiritual Princes to Jesus Christ, guide, bless, and carry you through in Gods work, and for the Publique, in such a manner, as you may not onely do his work, but have a share and comfort in it. I add no more but Doctor Hollands Farewel, which he used when he took his leave of the Fellows of Exeter Colledg in Oxford, where he was Principal, Com∣mendo te dilectioni Dei, & odio Papatus omnisque superstiti∣onis, and humbly and heartily subscribe my self


