


Dread Sovereigns,
ALthough the greatest Princes, with their dependant Governments and Interests, are exposed to change, yet Truth is not: This stands on such a firm Basis, that, that which was once Truth, whether in Rome, Geneva or England, is still so, and will be so for ever. And therefore, how propitious and indulgent soever, the publick Revolution of Affairs may prove to the corrupt Lusts and Interests of Men seditiously minded, the Truth will always be their Adver∣sary, and bid defiance to them: and such is the mighty and irresistible force thereof, that it will even∣tually conquer and triumph over all their Sophistical reasonings, and enthrone it self in their Judg∣ments and Consciences, for Conversion or Confusion. That Catholick Doctrine, which is asserted and contended for in these Papers, hath been, is, and will be for a Crown of rejoycing to the Church of England, whose Religion being constituted of a stedfast Allegiance to her Princes, as well as a con∣stant Devotion to her God, it cannot be disclaimed and renounced without a plain Apostacy from her Communion, which is matter of abhorrence to all good Christians: and yet such is the boldness, I had almost said, Impudence of some bigotted, pirking Fanaticks, that for many Months together, they have attempted with great diligence to ridicule and expose it to scorn and contempt: and one of them having mounted and settled himself in the Seat of the Scornful, made it part of his Morning Exercise, to insinuate amongst other sediticus Things, That the Preaching thereof, is one of those national Sins we are to repent of, in expectation of national Mercies, because a Doctrine designed to enslave the Na∣tion; Slavery with them, being an equivalent to a restraint from the Liberty of an armed Resistance of their Prince, when they shall judge it necessary, and themselves well prepared for it. Indeed, another of them for part of his Morning Exercise, assumes the Confidence, to publish to the World, That they are misrepresented, when reported as Enemies to Monarchy, because they have given assurance by Oath of their Allegiance to it; but if the one be fit to be an Interpreter to the other (as no doubt but he is, they being of the same Confederacy, and bound up in the same bundle together) their Allegiance is only during pleasure, which they will term, so long as your Majesties Behaviours and Administrations are such as they should be, that is, such as they shall well like and approve of: The naked Truth is this, their Friendship and Fidelity to your Majesties Persons and Go∣verments is only founded on what they apprehend to be beneficence to their private Opinions, and consequent Affections and Interests; for the Proof of which their Deportments under the late Ad∣ministrations of publick Affairs, is an evidence even to a Demonstration; their factious Designs and Practices being the sole Standards and Measures of what they repute good and evil, all publick Ad∣ministrations are Objects of their election or reprobation, agreeably to that subserviency or contrariety they bear to them: So that, if you serve them, they will serve you: but if you oppose and suppress them, they will oppose and suppress you, if they can. Wherefore, if your Majesties will be secured from their rebellious Insurrections against your Government, you must let them do always that which is right in their own eyes, and never displease them. Abrogate the Act of Ʋniformity and the Tests, Renounce Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical, and extirpate Prelacy as well as Popery (the continuation of all which with them are national Sins) raise up and set on foot the solemn League and Covenant,  and bring the Episcopal Clergy to such a Temper, that they may pass for
Men tollerable in the Church, and if no body anger them, they will be very quiet. But Your Majesties must remember, that they are Abhorrors of the Doctrine of Non-Resistance as well as of the Act of Ʋniformity, the Sacramental Test, Episcopacy, Liturgy and Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Causes; and therefore must keep your selves in the posture of Gladiators; for if the publick Administrations chance to be oppressive in their Apprehensions and Judgments to their natural, civil or spiritual Rights and Priviledges, with which they are more richly stored than their Neighbours, they will be your Subjects no longer than they are strong enough to be your Masters, and the Deposition of your Majesties in order to the Exaltation of their own Discipline, which they will call the Scepter of Jesus Christ, shall be reputed a Mercy as considerable as a Fifth of November's Deliverance. It can be no matter of wonder to your Majesties, that those Men, who will still have this lain down for a Principle, That in all the Disputes between Power and Liberty, Power must be proved, but Liberty proves it self; the one being founded only on positive Law, and the other up∣on the Law of Nature; that they caution your Subjects against examining the Matter of Regal Power by the Scriptures; for if we are resolved to stick to them as the Rules of our belief and practice in this case, we shall find the Power of Kings founded on another Bottom and Constitution, than that these Men have invented and commended to the World; for the Scriptures do assure us, That not only those who reigned over God's own peculiar People did Reign immediately from and by him. Acts 7.35. Numb. 27.16, 18. Judg. 2.16. 1 Sam. 10.1. Prov. 8.15. but also that all other Kings are as truly and certainly of his Ordination and Constitution as they were, and owe their Authority and Kingdoms immediately to him, and not to their Subjects, Jer. 27.5, 6, 7. Isa. 45.1, 2, 3, 4. Dan. 2.21. and 5.26, 28. Rom. 13.1. and therefore are called the Ministers of God, Rom. 13.4. but never the Ministers of the People; and God himeself hath called them Gods, Psal. 82.6. to ascertain us, that their Persons are Sacred to him, and their Authority of his immediate Delegation, and not derived from any voluntary Paction or positive Con∣stitution, made and ratified betwixt them and their Subjects, which is forfeitable and revocable ac∣cording to the express or tacite Tenor of the Fundamental Contract, as these Men sometimes phrase it. And as the first Dominion and Government of Divine Ordination was Monarchical, so we have no reason to think, that it was God's intention, that, that Species or Form of Government should be altered, and another introduced, because we have no instance of any other Government, either of his immediate Ordination or Approbation; and so far as I am instructed in divine Revelations, we have no Rule for the Establishing of any other Form of Government, nor direct precept to submit to any other as of his prescribing: and when Men prefer their own Inventions before divine Institutions, they bring forth as Aaron did, a Calf instead of a God: The Church of England having deter∣mined, That, the most high and sacred Order of Kings is of divine Right, being the Or∣dinance of God him elf, founded in the prime Laws of Nature, and clearly established by express Texts both of the Old and New Testaments, those pretended Sons of the Church need good foreheads, who presume to affirm them to be their Peoples Creatures, and to owe their Au∣thority and Power solely to them, and ought to exercise no more than they have by their Concession. I hope God hath such Grace and Mercy in store for this Church and Kingdom, that he will raise up Men of greater Abilities, and better Opportunities than can be pretended unto by my self, to defend the crowned Heads thereof from such Assailants: but if these ensuing Discourses in any measure prove a Countermine to their designments, and contribute any degree of assistance towards the Security of the Publick Government, I shall ascribe all the Honour thereof unto God, and Your Majesties will have no reason to discountenance the Honest, though Weak, Endeavours of

