



My ever Honoured Lord,
IT is one of the Happinesses of us pretenders to learning, that we are commonly the subjects of great Mens favors. But in this we are not so singular as we are in
ther, that sometimes we are thought to pay our Debts to them by growing in New ones; Of which this my present Dedication may be some instance to your Lordship. For I must ever own with all humble and thankfull Resent∣ments, that what Dignity and Place I have in the Church of England I received from your Noble Bounty, and hold under your sole Pa∣tronage. And now I further take confi∣dence, considering your Lordships great abi∣lity in Learning and Judgement, for that purpose to invoke your Lordship, as a most proper Arbiter, Judge and Patrone of the Discourses that I have now committed to the Presse. And, in truth, I could do no other∣wise. For seeing the Receiving this Counte∣nance and Favor is by the kind interpretation of the World a fashionable Way of Thank∣fullnesse, I, who have so much Reason to make use of all meanes of Gratitude, should be high∣ly Culpable, if I should not gratify my self by
laying hold of this, which is most expedient also for me in my present Occasion, and much for the Reputation and Ornament of what I publish.
And, my Lord, as your Protection is very necessary for me, so I conceive it now very ho∣norable for your Lordship, in that great and eminent Office which you bear in Gods Church. For what can bee more suitable for a Bishop, than to countenance the defence of those Truths, which are the fundamentall Basis of all Reli∣on and Vertue.
What I present now extends but to the Ti∣tle de Finibus: Which, if we handle Divi∣nity in the Analytique Way (the VVay that expedites our learning and accommodates it to practice) is first in Order. But your Lord∣ship hath seen my whole Method, and if they shall bee judged usefull may command my Endeavors upon the other Titles also. And though here (as in the holy Waters descri∣bed
Ezech. XLVII.) the further we go, the deeper we shall wade into the Body of Divini∣ty, yet I think we may avoid all those depths, that are unfathomable or Dangerous, if we contain our selves within the Compasse of what is Practicall. In the mean time I could not forbear to contribute my Mite towards the fixing in the first Place of these Initiall Rudi∣ments, that are naturally first in Order, now first openly call'd in Question and allwaies, as I before intimated, of prime influence to ground us in Morality and Religion.
It is the Observation of Plato in his tenth Book de Legibus, that whosoever beleiveth that there is a God, and a Providence and that God will not be corrupted to Parti∣ality or Injustice by any Complement in VVorship , He will neither willingly do an Ungodly Act, nor speak an unruly Word: I need not to your Lordship expatiate in commending
the judgement of that Philosopher who deter∣mineth it necessary for the well Government of a Common weal,. apud Poit. x. de leg. ad Finē. that it be thus ruled in the fundamental Laws of it. That in case A∣theisme of any kind should appear in any Man, every one should bee obliged to oppose it as a publick Pest, and to defend Religion, and to delate to the Magistrate such, who by dis∣settling the common Principles, which affirme a Providence, would corrupt the manners of the Ʋnlearned: and that then the Magistrates should punish all Atheists so delated most severely, as being persons of very pernicious influence to the state. For it is not only to the contempy of the Soveraigne Deity, but to the Ruin of any Temporall Kingdome, that Atheists, or at least that Professors of A∣theisme, and teachers of profanesse, should be sufferd to go Ʋnpunished. These Heclorings against Heaven being justly reckon'd among those things that are , the ve∣ry
Banes of Empire and Government, as taking away that which is the great and com∣mon Awe of Men of all degrees, the Reve∣rence I mean of that supreme and Dernier Re∣sort in the highest and unavoidable judgement of the great Creator. It is much to be wish't and pray'd for, that we, as we all worship the same same God, so we might once be so Happy as to agree in the same worship of Him. Such an Ʋnion would certainly render us more dear to Him and more considerable to Men. But if some Difference in Worship, for the dark∣nesse of Mens Ʋnderstandings and the hard∣nesse and untowardnesse of their Hearts, must be tolerated; yet methinks we should have so much Zeal for Religion, and Loyalty to the supreme Creator and Governor of the World, as to discommon those from all our Societies, who lay foundations to eradicate all manner of worship, who laugh at all the Reverentiall Hopes and Fears in Religion and behave them∣selves
as , Men who desire to live in the VVorld that God hath made; and yet despise to worship Him that made it.
That God would pardon our past provocations and continue to bresse us, and his immediate Vi∣cegerent our King, and make Him glorious in the Extirpation of Atheisme and Profanesse and in the punishment of those who have been or shall be hereafter Ministers of Evill, in scatter∣ing the poisonous seeds of Irreligion and Wick∣ednesse among us: And that He would give your Lordships the Bishops, and all other inferior Magistrates, Honor in your contributing seve∣rally to this great and necessary Effect, is, and by his Grace, ever shall be, the Prayer of
My most honoured Lord,

