


SIR,
I Will not so far Rail at my own Practice, as to Exclaim against Epistles of this Nature, to People of the First Qua∣lity, from Persons below 'em: However, I think, 'tis much more Reasonable, to Express our Gratitude to a pri∣vate Friend in the best manner we can; than Court one, to be so, who values neither the Man, nor his Dedication, farther, than it Flatters his Vanity. The Author is not allways Guiltless of this Weakness; To shew that he is Acquainted with a Man of Note and Dignity, he shall Confess Favours he ne∣ver Receiv'd; and, more often Petition for 'em, than he shall ever Succeed. 'Tis Pity, indeed, Men of Generous Education and Sentiments, shou'd be Expos'd to such Mean Things, as to have an Occasion to Complain, that there are in England (the Noblest Nation of Europe) a People, Wearing all the Marks of Grandeur and Magnificence, whose Souls wou'd, much better, Agree with the Good Husbandry of Amsterdam and Geneva. A People, Pro∣fessing a Value for the Muses, and such as Belong to 'em; while, in the Little Care they take, to Incourage their Studies, we Dis∣cover their Concern for the Sisters and their Sons Consists in nothing more, than Promoting their Interest, and Humouring their own Conceit of Inspiration. Praise is ever Wellcome when it Costs Nothing: and if a Good Word, or a Fair Promise, will Engage a VVriter to Speak Well of one that wants it, the Bar∣gain is Cheap enough, when it can be so easily Purchas'd. Tho' a Little VVarmer Assistance, wou'd, sometimes be necessary: Yet this is the Entertainment we have Generally found. And since the Patrons are of such Miserable Dispositions, I see no reason why we shou'd not Prefer the Friends we Converse with, and who are fond of Serving us, before such as Treat us, like their Domesticks, in every thing but Promoting us.
Experience tells me, there are many, whose Names are not so often repeated, nor their Liveries so much seen, who Deserve as well to be Remembred, as those who Affect to be Popular, only by having it in their Power to do Good, tho' it is never in their Natures. A Free, Easie Conversation, a Pleasant Temper, and a Readiness to Oblige a Friend, in Every Thing that a Man is able; are Qualities, which will Eternally Render such a one Happy Himself, and all those Happy who know him.
That you Possess these, every body, of your Acquaintance, must Confess; tho' no Man has had more Temptation than you to Ac∣cuse his Stars, and consequently to be allwayes out of Humour, and Help to make your Friends as uneasie as Himself; as I have known some Persons, with whom the VVorld, being with Justice disgusted, endeavour to make those they Converse with, as wretch∣ed as themselves, in their perpetual Spleen and Vexation. The Persecution of a Father is sufficient to give a Man an Ill Opinion of Mankind in General; but, as yours is no more your Re∣lation, than the Law of Nations has made him, you have Learn't to Treat him with the same Indifference his Ill Practices have ac∣quir'd from the rest of the VVorld: A Man must have a great deal of Good Nature, that can stand out against the Injustice and Oppression of those, who, in Duty, are bound to Protect him. But there are some Men, so Awkard in their VVicked Actions, that they make themselves Ridiculous, when they aim at being Dreadful; and, like the Person you deal with, provoke Pity rather than Terror. Folly being generally its own punishment: and those that aim at Ruining another, seldom fail of destroy∣ing themselves. I would not say so much of this in so open a place, but that I believe there are many Labouring under the same Inconvenience, who have not heart to Disingage themselves so well as you, from the Troubles of a Marryd Life and a Fami∣ly; and, to appear as Gay, in the midst of Disappointments, as if you were the Master of your Vows and Fortune. I beg you to accept this Present, as a
Hearty Return for the many Civilities I have Receiv'd from you: and, since 'tis much more Shakespears than Mine, to make it a part of your Diversion, in the Long Re∣tirement of a Vacation.
I am, Sir,

