


I Read of a rich sil∣ver Globe presen∣ted by Ferdinand to Solyman the Magnificent of admirable Work∣manship, expres∣sing, besides the passing of each hour, the motions of the Sun, changes of the Moon, &c. and giving a resemblance of the whole frame of the Celestial Orbs, made with much Art by the direction of the most famous Astronomers then in the world.
I have nothing of that Art and Ra∣rity

to present you with, but a plain Theological (not Astrologi∣cal) Sun-Dyal, representing not the lower Heavens and their Motion, but the Empyrean and its Rest; and the Essence, Attributes, Properties, Ef∣fects, Motion, Influence of the High∣er Sun, the Sun of Righteousnesse.
The Subject handled I cannot wish greater or better, there is none before it; the manner of handling I could wish much better, especially for the dignity of the person of whom it treats, as also of your selves, or whoever may per∣use it. But as with him where there is a willing mind, there is acceptance of what little we have; so I doubt not but you will hold it your Honor, in all things to be like minded to Jesus Christ.
To many of you I am bound in ma∣ny bonds of Gratitude, to all in duty; therefore I could not judge any among those whom I am bound to love and ho∣nour so fit to have this Discourse inscri∣bed and presented to, as your selves, who are to me above all others whatso∣ever, nearest in spiritual relations and

 in Christian and cordial affecti∣▪ To others I owe much, to you my selfe. Having then dedicated my self, first to him of whom it treats, (woe I am, and whom I serve) your Saviour, my Lord; who can be thought s ft to bee joyned with him as your selves, whose things next to his I desire most to take care of? The Ministers duty is to divide himselfe between the Lord and his Church (not the Lord and the world,) for so did Christ di∣vide his love between his Father and his Church; to him he gave himself to ex∣presse the highest love of pure obedience; for the Church he gave himself, to ex∣presse the strongest love of benevolence.
You have had the sum of this Dis∣course preached among you, and di∣vers of you have it written in your Note Books, and repeated in your Families. But I would desire rather you might have the Doctrinal part of all Sermons written in your Consciences, and the Use ever repeated in your Conversations.
Now that you may, as you have heard of Jesus Christ be taught by him, and as you have received him walk in him, at∣taining

to all the riches of the ful Assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the whole Mystery of Christ, in whom are hid all treasures of wisdom and know∣ledg; and that your conversations may be as becomes the Gospel, that you may be ever found among such as fear his Name, that you may wait for this Sun of Righteousnesse to rise upon your souls, to heal all your infirmities, to cloath you with his Righteousness, that coming be∣hind in no gift, duty diligence, comfort, experience and growth, you may by him bee presented perfect and without spot before God; which as it will be your (that I may not say mine) Joy, Glory, Crown of rejoycing in the day of the Lord Jesus; so it is the prayer of

