



RIGHT HONOURABLE,
WHen Men are once firmly per∣swaded of the certainty of ano∣ther World, and do verily be∣lieve the Doctrine of Eternal Life revealed in the Holy Scriptures of God; there is all reason in the World (methinks) to conclude, that the first Enquiry should be, How they themselves shall become partakers of it? For who can be imagin'd to be sincere in his belief of so Glorious and Blissful a State, that takes no thoughts how he shall ob∣tain it, or not so many thoughts as what he shall eat and drink and put on; that sits down contented, having given himself that cold answer which was once given to the Mother of Zebedees Children, It shall be given to them for whom it is prepared? Therefore to justifie the sincerity of their belief, most Men do fancy to themselves something or other that will entitle them to this happiness; though not so much perhaps because they account it so blessed
 a thing to obtain, as dangerous and shame∣ful to miss of it.
Amongst the many particulars that men do imagine will give them a claim to E∣verlasting Life, The Love of God is one of the greatest, and as much pretended to as any. It is so Universal a Plea, that I scarce think there is any Man who calls him∣self a Christian, but he will make it. Not to love God sounds so ill, that it makes the Ears of the most Profligate Christian to Tingle, when it is charg'd upon him. But notwithstanding all these pretences to the Love of God, it is most Evident that a great part of the pretenders are indeed strangers to it; inasmuch as they may be convicted of the Love of the World, which is incon∣sistant with it. To find out and cast out therefore the Love of the World must needs be the most important Enquiry and Endea∣vour of Man, of every man in the World.
Your Lordship will easily believe me, if I tell you that although Men be never so great and high in the World, if the World be great and high in their Hearts, the Love of God is not in them▪ Although Men have never so much of this worlds Good, if at the same time they be unmerciful and un∣charitable, the Love of God dwells not in them. This is expresly the Apostle James his Doctrine.

But to speak a little the closer, though a man be instructed in all Wisdome, and furnisht with all Variety of Arts and Sci∣ences, that he can name all things as pro∣perly as Adam, or discourse of their Na∣tures as learnedly as Solomon; if yet the Love of the World be Predominant in him, he is but a vain pretender to the King∣dom of Heaven, a great stranger to the Life of Angels. Though a Man know and believe all the wonderful Doctrines deli∣ver'd in the Holy Book, if this Faith do not operate to the purifying of the Heart from the Love of the World, he is at pre∣sent as far from having a true title to the Kingdom of Heaven, as they of whom the Apostle gives this Character, That they Believe and Tremble. In a word, though a Man be a Member of the Purest and most Reformed Church, be never so Orthodox in his Judgment, never so con∣stant and specious in External Acts of Wor∣ship, never so even and blameless in his Conversation, never so exact in Works of Righteousness, and abundant in Works of Charity and Mercy, if yet in his heart he prefer the World before God, he will be interpreted a Lover of the World, and consequently an Enemy of the Father.

I do verily believe, my Lord, that I do here present you with a Treatise written about the most Important Enquiry in the World. They are Morning Meditations, stollen from the ordinary Employment of my Life; which I do present to the World, meerly to advance the Love and Honour of God amongst Men, and do Dedicate to your Lordship, in a grateful acknowledg∣ment of your kind Respects to me; and in Testimony of the Honour that I bear to your Lordships good Design of promoting Piety, and establishing Peace in this Nation. I beseech your Lordship favourably to ac∣cept the Oblation, and I heartily pray God, that as his Providence hath made you  (very Illustrious amongst the English Fa∣milies) so by his Grace you may ever ap∣prove your self Tam re quam nomine  Oh how Blessed and Honourable a thing will it be found to be, sooner or later, to be a Sncere and Ardent Lover of God! To his good Grace and Guidance I heartily recommend your Lordship, and rest,
(My Lord)

