



SIR,
I Have undertaken to re∣commendNon est gloriosares gratum esse nisi tutum est ingra∣tum fuisse. Seneca d Benefi. Moral Vertue, which I should very little understand, if I did not believe Ingenuity and Gratitude to be a considerable part of it. A Vertue which is rather more
 then less excellent, because the contrary Vice is not  punishable by Humane 
What are the favours to a grateful acknowledgment of which you have obliged me; I could take a Wurd in elling the world, but that I would not bring you under a suspition of Symbolizing with those, who gave Alms for the Trumpets sake. YetMath. 6. thus much I think my self bound to say: If there be any thing in these papers doth my Reader god, when he hath given thanks to God, for this help (among o∣thers) o a vertuous and good life; let him be i thankful to Sil Thomas Darcy, for those endou∣ragements of my first and earliest
 Studies, without which it may be I had never been in capacity of doing this service.
Besides this Retribution which I was in Justice to make, if I would be Modish, I should go on to take notice of your other Vertues. For Books are more commonly without Epistles De∣dicatory, then those Epistles without an Elogy of the persons to whom they are made. In∣deed Sir, you deserve it, and the Argument I prosecute would fairly lead me to it: But I con∣sider, if I should say little, I should detract from your worth: For as he who with all serious∣ness and pretended Faithfulness reproves another for some petty
 escapes and inadvertencies of life, would have it believed that there are no greater faults to come under Censure: (a note whereby Plutarch distinguishesDe adula∣toris & a∣mici dis∣crimine. a Flatterer from a Friend.) So will he who slightly and sparing∣ly commends, give occasion to suspect, that there is nothing else worthy of commendation. But if on the other side, I should be as large, as Applications of this nature use to be, and as your Me∣rit justly Challengeth; They who are strangers to your Person, would not believe but I were a Flatterer: A Vice so abhorrent to my Nature, (unless I flatter my self) that I think I have sometimes been too Morose, and
 have been wanting to give Te∣stimony of the Value I have had for many persons, upon no other account, but because I would not be thought to Flatter. To avoid which suspition, I now say the less; yet I do not doubt, but my thoughts of you, and all other Lovers of Vertue, are as Ho∣nourable as theirs who comple∣ment and brag more.
Such there are in the world, bafely Mercenary Parasites, who have Mens persons in admiration but for their own advantage; who under pretence of Honouring Vertue, do it a great deal of dis∣service; for while they commend Men as if they were Vertuous, and that at all adventures; they
 encourage many to be still Viti∣ous: And yet there is some good comes out of this evil; for when they who do not deserve it are flattered and spoken well of, it is a great Argument that Vertue is very Excellent and Praise-worthy where indeed it is: for why should a Picture be drawn hand∣somer then the Face, but because Beauty is a desirable thing? This is some advantage, in as much as it is a conviction to the world, that, that Vertue which is so much commended, ought to be more practised: Else it is as true here as any where—Laudatur & Alget.
Sir, If you please to give this Book a Palronage when you are
 at leisure to read it, I hope you will find the Argument, as not un∣worthy of a Christian, so neither of a Gentleman. However there may be some Gallants of the Times, (as there have always been) who think it below them, and dishonourable to them, to be tyed up to the same Rules of Ver∣tue with Ordinary Men: yet Ver∣tueGenero∣sum Hone∣stum. Persius. of old hath been counted so Generous and Noble a thing, that it hath not only made Men Gen∣tlemen, but Gods too in the ac∣count of the Heathens. So CiceroDe Natur Deorum. Lib. 2. gives this Reason why Hercules, and Aesculapius, and others were reputed Gods; because while they lived they were excellent and useful Men. And even still
 throughout the world, the de∣sign and intent of conferring Titles of Honour, is this, to re∣ward and encourage Vertue. Go on Sir, by your Vertuous Exam∣ple to let the world know, that you believe Vertue to be Excel∣lent and Honourable. Go on to2 Phil. shine as a light in this World, that hereafter you may shine as a Star in Glory: Which is the hearty Prayer of,
March 6th 166 6 / 7. SIR,

