



Right Honourable and Right Worshipful,
THe Doctrine of Providence has divers Adversaries: Not only such as Athe∣istically disbelieve it, but such also as perversly infer from it; so

 
 do they who from present Success ar∣gue to the Merits of their Cause, and justifie their Villanies in the Name of God.
If to grate upon former times were a pleasing Argument, or such as might serve any good End, I could have made this a part of my Discourse: But hav∣ing contented my self to give an hint, that the Providence of God is no Justi∣fication of wicked Enterprizes, I chose these Words for another purpose.
Instead of disputing a Controversie (of which these Times are full) I thought it as seasonable to put men in mind of a Truth, which we all ac∣knowledg, but it has not a sufficient In∣fluence upon our Lives. If it be too hard to call them Adversaries to this Doctrine, yet it must be owned that they disparage Providence, that they have low and dishonourable thoughts of
 God's governing the World, who can∣not infer from his Wisdom and Goodness and Power, that it is safe and happy to trust in him.
That which is said to this End in the following Sermon, was by your Lord∣ship and the Aldermen then present, re∣ceived with such candor and good ac∣ceptance, that you have thought fit to command it to be made Publick. To which I consent more as a Testimony of my Obedience, than an Instance of my Choice. I have not so great an O∣pinion of it, as to think, it deserves bet∣ter than many others which are not Printed.
Yet I know it was preach'd with an honest Design, And I know there is need that men should be awaken'd to a sense of their dependence on God; And if any honest man finds himself brought to a better temper of mind by reading
 this Sermon; If it give occasion to any man, to resolve by the Grace of God to live better, that he may not make God his Enemy; and if it shall then encou∣rage him to trust in God whatever be∣fals him; I will thank God, who put these thoughts into my mind, and I will thank your Lordship and your Brethren, for being Instruments thus to reform a∣ny wan's life, or to satisfie his mind.

Colchester,
July 8th. 1680.
