



SIR.
IT is the happiness of this Age, to equal, if not to exceed all others in true Philosophy, that is to say, in the knowledge of men and things. One reason of which knowledge. I shall only insist

on at present, and that lyes in the general Communication of Books by Translating them from all Ages and all Coun∣tries into all Noterique Mo∣ther Tongues. But, if there be a more than ordinary Exten∣sion of this advantage, We, un∣doubtedly, meet with it in our own Nation: Where not only the best discourses, penn'd by the most Eminent Men of the States round about us, are taught to speak English, but the Primogenial Wits of Athens and Rome do not miss of such hands, as are in no wise une∣qual to the mighty task of Interpreting them, but seem Commissionated by Nature to handle and revive their

Ashes, and perhaps bestow upon them a greater fame and lustre, than they had, when they first appeared in the World.
This, I say, not to set a va∣lue or reputation on our own Countrey, by the disparage∣ment of Greece or Italy, the first nurseries of Art and Wit, but only to shew, that I am not as yet fully persuaded of the Divinity of those Antient He∣roes, and that he who adores 'em, must be at the same time blinded with that Cloud of Incense, which he offers up to them. Great Geniusses, most indubitably, they had, and did rarely well in those days,

wherein they had not fail'd of Admiration) if they had done less: But, by no means, can I think it tolerable, that because they were accounted the chief∣est Men in their own Age, they should indefinitely be look'd upon as such in all succeeding times. I will readily grant that those Authors of Anti∣quity in their composures of Wit, and particularly in those that appertain to the Theatre, had a richer Vein, than we have, for the Description of Nature, and of humane Passi∣ons, and, in brief, of what∣eer bears a respect to wording and expression, But, since in things of this nature there are other matters to be observed,

and a due Decorum, Contri∣vance, Oeconomy and Metho∣dical Distribution of the several Portions is to be carefully minded, (which I may call the Mechanical compounding Parts, and which will require no small number of Rules and Precepts that can never be found out but by a long train of Experi∣ence and Reflection) it must follow, that the last Ages will have the advantage in these concerns, for as much as they have enjoy'd all the labour and thinking and mistakes of the former.
Of all the considerations, that belong to Men of Letters, this seems to me the most weigh∣ty

and Important: For, if, on the one side, a contemptuous treatment and irreverential behaviour towards our Fore∣fathers be an ill quality in a Scholar, on th' other, a neg∣lect and disestimation of the Moderns is still of as bad a consequence, by reason of the just indignation, which Men of the clearest Heads in this Age cannot but conceive, when having the most accomplisht na∣tural Endowments, and the greatest solidity of judgment, yet they shall chuse rather to lye idle and bury their Talents in obscurity, than venture to come into the light, where they will have open injustice done them: Which Horace complains

he met withal, when the least works of Antiquity were pre∣ferr'd before the acutest and most exact Complexures under the Reign of Augustus
This remark, Sir, I hope, is sufficient both to excuse the labour I have bestow'd on this piece, and likewise to make some Apology for my prefixing your name to it: For, as it is a thing of more than ordinary sa∣gacity and delicacy of sense, and might claim a much more accurate Pen than mine, to put it into an English dress, and as here will be quarrelling work for the most ambitious and for∣ward Spirits in the Empire of Wit, wherein no Man ought

to plead the merit of Nobility and all-commanding Grandeur, but that only of good-sense to Rise, so, I think it a felicity worthy to be commemorated both by my-self and this Book, that I have chosen a Man of that excellence and height of Soul, to whom I might justly assgn the protection of the high∣est and most incomparable pre∣sent, which, (universally speak∣ing) ever the Muses made to Mankind, since the Trium∣phant Ages of Conquests and Politeness. I was never so vain as to flatter my self, that I could write any thing, which would bear your Eye: But, having taken in the loftiest Ide∣as of these Papers in the Ori∣ginal,

I fancy'd, I might safely venture an other Man's thoughts in your presence; Es∣pecially, when they were of so nice a stamp and so ponderous a character: Tho, perhaps, in this Translation they do not resemble the Elements of the Aristotelian Hypothesis, which are the more weighty, when re∣mov'd out of their Native Sta∣tion.
Wherefore, to your Candour, Sir, not Judgment, I mst appeal in this my Perfor∣mance: And I do not care, with what disrepute to my self, provided I can get your single Approbation, which is more to me than the Applause

of a whole Theatre. The truth is, unless we take this way, the Criticks are too hard for us: They make Parties, and damn e'ry thing without Wit or Conscience: Which, no doubt, is the readiest way of thriving and building a Man's Greatness in this World; For, if Alexander had snorted and boggled at invading other Men's Kingdoms, he had never wept for the scarcity of Worlds. Yet, let men say what they will, there is such a thing as Good sense, in the General Notion▪ whereof eve∣ry one does agree as much as in the Idea of a Triangle. I have frequently met with it in the Pit among the Wo∣men,

who have judged with that undebauch'd upright∣ness and Integrity, that I could hardly find any Imper∣fection, left by traduction in their Souls: Their minds en∣joy'd their Native Purity, were unsophisticated and free from all the Illusions of Pre∣judice, Friendship, or Inte∣rest: and to such minds as these must I recommend the Speculation of these uncom∣pounded Essences of Poe∣try, with Reference to the Stage.
For, this Enchyridion containing no superficial, but the fundamental Notions, and (as it were) the Meta∣physicks

of the Theatre, will require a Mind abstract∣ed from all Prepossessions, that can retire into it-self to Meditate, and there whirle about like so many Atomes, the Eternl Paradigms of things, those spectres and Ghosts of Entity, with which Plato was so much inamour'd, as to relate them into the num∣ber of his causes. So that un∣less the Brain be thoroughly de∣fecated, these thoughts will be neither well-understood nor relish'd: They are not of a cut for every ordinary Perception, nor the staring ghesses of the incogitant Rabble. For, as I have heard our Church-men, say, that the Antient Fathers

suppos'd, that the sufferings which our Saviour underwent in his Body, were more affli∣ctive to him, than the same wou'd have been to an other person, by reason of his excel∣lency and quickness of the sense of Feeling; so likewise these sublime Ratiocinations will be reach'd in proportion to the height of the capacity, that stretches it self at them. They are not deliver'd with Orna∣ment and Polishing; they are firm and solid, like Metals of the strongest, most enduring and noblest substance, which are fil'd with the greatest diffi∣culty: They are not set off with any pimping dress or for∣reign blandishments, but the

Author seems to have that of Martial in his Eye.
Quicquid amas, cupias non placuisse nimis.
Tho' certainly truth never appears more beauteous and killing, than when we have the good Fortune to see her as stark-naked, as ever her Maker made her, or Men keep plain-dealing still so in this World. Octavius took great care to express his mind with the greatest plainness imaginable, and was us'd to reprehend Marc-Antony for writing such things as Men did rather wonder at, than understand. To speak the truth, when we write on a ra∣tional

Subject, it is a hard matter to be witty, without spoiling the Connexion and order of Deductions: For Wit being nothing but the fer∣ment of the Soul, such Excocti∣ons must necessarily offuscate the brightness of Reason, we must deal with it, as we do with dangerous Physick, weighing it by Grains and Scruples and nice Proportions. And, in the management of such Argu∣ments, it is as carefully and prudentially to be disperst, as motion in the Universe; what it gains in one part it looses it another, so that in the whole it remains always alike and the same.
This Objection, I foresaw, would presently be rais'd against these Essayes; and therefore, I have taken leave of you, Sir, here to answer it at first once for all. There are many others, that I know, will be started, which I cannot better obviate and make a reply to, as well as to those, which the Author himself brings against the En∣glish Stage, than by prefixing here a Preliminary discourse concerning the distinct Tracts of this Book which I must sub∣mit all along to your Lime and Correction: For, since Cri∣ticks now adays, are grown more assuming than Jove him∣self, and the sacred Lawrel it self is not over-safe from their

Thunder-bolts, the humbler Shrubs of the plain (as Cow∣ley calls them) had best take all possible care to shelter them∣selves the best they can.
This I shall endeavour to perform in Emulation of my present Author, with all the natural easiness imaginable: I will go no further than my own present thoughts which hazard rather than Study brings into my mind: I will fancy my self in your Compa∣ny, sliding from one hint to another, in a grateful variety of Sentiments: I will only ex∣amine the plain nature of things, and not the adventiti∣ous Appendixes of industrious

Cogitation: If I must be some∣times forc'd to an Ostentation of Learning, when I come to want a Quotation, I will get up to reach down my Author: I will speak nothing in a passio∣nate and Dogmatical Huff, nor will I follow in Poetry the great Duellists in Religion, who, tho Chaplains to the Prince of Peace, are evermore terma∣gantly mad, and with the most sanguinary zeal hacking and hewing one another.
All the World knows, how necessary to our selves is the observation of other Mens minds and manners. The Stage has been so often call'd the Looking-glass of Mankind,

that I am as much asham'd to repeat it, as to obtrude a Pro∣verb upon Company for a new notion, or to averr with an hundred and fifty Oaths, that two and two make four. It is almost an Eternal verity, and had not Cicero told me, that for the preservation of health, a Man ought to study and be thoroughly acquainted with the State of his own Body, yet I shou'd have believ'd, that it is very requisite towards a good Regulation of our Lives, to take a Prospect of the love∣liness of Vertue, the odious∣ness of Vice, and to see those little extravagancies of Men's Tempers, which are stil'd hu∣mours, publickly ridicul'd.
The two first of these are the proper business and subject matter of Tragedy and Tragi∣comedy: For I shall use this lat∣ter Term, since it's not only authoriz'd by Plautus, but also by the Modern Practice: Tho I may possibly elsewhere and at some other time take occasion to shew, there is no such thing in Nature. In Tra∣gedy every thing is employ'd to move and stir up the Passions of the Spectators by the dread∣ful Adventures which it repre∣sents, and then it's work is to appease and settle their Souls in their former calm and tran∣quillity; whilst the great He∣roes of Antiquity are rais'd from their Graves, taking up

their Tenements of Clay again, to converse with us. This, questi∣onless, is a great advantage, that for half a Crown we can come into their Company, and hear them be their own Histori∣ans, and talk such fine things a∣bout Love and Honour, without being affrighted at their Spec∣tres. And, this is one of the chief Preheminences of a City above a Countrey Life, that we can enjoy such illustrious and edifying Dialogues. We see vir∣tue in it's exalted State, that , L. 7. C. 1. which Aristotle (who poyson'd his Pupil and Benefactour, men∣tions in his Ethicks, whereby he denotes, that it is not so much situated above our Attain∣ments,

as above our obligati∣ons to attain it, but that when we have acquir'd it into our reach, it will, most infallibly, lift us above the ordinary Pre∣dicament of humane Nature, and we shall all become Tran∣scendentals. So that, these great Heroes must be truly great, and endued with all manner of Perfections, and all the Moral Vertues: And their Vices must be either very carefully manag∣ed or quite conceal'd: Alexan∣der must have a great deal of deference and veneration paid him, and he must not be expos'd to laughter, tho he should pre∣tend himself to be the By-blow of a God,Inter Epistolas Mandi Procerum. rather than that of honest

King Philip, which his nown Mother resents most bitterly in a very pathetick Letter to the ungracious Universal Mo∣narch. However, so many A∣batements are not to be made, as that Tragedy should swerve from History: It may improve it, but in such a mea∣sure, that the discrimination of the real Persons may remain. Tragedy is to glorify them in this Resurrection, but yet they are still to continue the same Individual Men. It wou'd be extreamly ridiculous to draw Tully and Catiline, Caesar and Cato, Antony and Brutus with the same lines and the same features, tho they liv'd in the very same Age together, and

the same Common-Wealth.
P. 1.And my Author says, that the French excel in works of the Stage, and he may say so with all my Heart, if he will give it me under his hand, that he speaks this in general, or in complement to his own Coun∣trey: For, upon no account can I concede it, if he affirms it with an Allusion to Ours. In which sense and acceptation, we may very well understand him, when he boldly Challenges all the Countries in the Uni∣verse to dispute with France the advantage of Tragedy, and im∣mediately subjoins, that he will allow but four or five English Tragedies to be compleat, and

these neither, unless they were Guelt, and had a great many re∣straints and alterations made in them. What these four or five are, Sir, I am sorry he hath not nominated, so that we might have impartially examin'd both their Beauties and Imperfecti∣ons, and compard them with as many of the best French pie∣ces. Otherwise we cannot lay hold of him, he speaks at vol∣ley and universally; and there is no course to be taken in de∣fence of the English Theatre, but one, which I judge to be very odious, and that is a general comparison betwixt that and the French.
With this Province, Sir, I

am not much taken, by reason it is my Opinion, wherein I have your concurrence, that 'tis a putid way of Wit to draw Com∣parisons in National Concerns, and to make artful and black∣ening Observations on whole Communities: It almost looks as gross as a similitude in a dying Man's Mouth. I will, therefore, modestly, in our Ho∣nour only specify one or two things, wherein our Tragedies do as far exceed the French both for Profit and Diversion (if we may allow any at all in this case) as the Monument sur∣passes Pancradge-Steeple, both for strength, and height, and Beauty, and, I will leave it to any Rational-man to conjecture at the rest.
The French Tragedy bears much resemblance to an Epique Poem, picking out, generally, one or two principal Personages of great Renown in Story, and laying out all its gifts on some certain notable passage and e∣vent of their Lives. Therefore it will suffer no more men to come upon the Stage, than what are purely necessary to the adorn∣ment and furtherance of that one main-action. And then, the whole intrigue is carry'd on in Rhythme, with tedious Harangues, Dialoguewise; where∣in the Actors do as devoutly pay their respects to Honour, as if it was a piece of Re∣ligious Worship (as indeed Tragedy, heretofore, bore a

part in the Heathen Liturgy) and have the most immortal occasions upon Earth to speak fine things, according to Mr. Bayes's Phrase in the Rehear∣sal.
Contrarily, we introduce a manifold and thickening di∣versity of Actions into the leading designment; whereas the French are so very super∣stitious in observing the Sta∣gyrites Rules of purging Pride and Ambition by shewing, that no State can secure Mankind from the Lapses and Reverses of Fortune, that one wou'd guess by their Tragedies, that they had no other vice than Ambition, nor other Men than

Heroes, as we guess at the Diseases of a Countrey by their Remedies. But on th' other hand we aim at curing not only our soaring Sparkes, Our Nahashes, Our Absoloms; but all such Fools as suffer themselves to be mad their Instruments as Our Ziphs by shewing the fa∣tality that attends all those that are engag'd in such im∣pious undertakings. Thus we flow more free and unconfin'd, mixing with the great Plot many little circumstances, by the help of our Episodes. Whereby these considerable ad∣vantages fall on our side, that our scenes are not so nauseous,

nor have so many Ambages, as our Neighbours, but the Audience's Mind, meets the more frequently with different Mutations and Prospects; that our Stage has more Persons upon it, which takes off the fatigue of still viewing the same-object, and adds a pickanter vivacity to whatever is spoken. In the last place, we, for the most part, do not use Rhythme; but blank-verse, whereby the Poets minds is left more to it self, and has a fairer and more natural-field, wherein to ex∣patiate, without the necessity of cursing Arabique Customs or Moorish Innovations, which forc∣ed a man to spoil a good thought

by tagging it with Ting-tong.
Had our Author duely weigh'd these things, he wou'd not, perhaps, have so hardily pronounc'd against the English Buskin, as he has done, espe∣cially by way of comparison, when he could not but remem∣ber, what that honest-fellow of a Critick Rapin long ago con∣fest of his own Countreymen, that none of them had writ a good Tragedy, nor were ever like to write one. I know by intimation under hand he may oppose against what I have thought fit to say in our behalf, that this variety of Under∣plots does bring an heap of confused-events:P. 9. But this lies

wholly at the Poets discre∣tion; he is to answer this Objection, I believe, before he can get his Play acted. They may be confused, as in a Chaos, rudis indiges-taque moles, while they lye in the Poet's Mind, they may be then like the first matter, without form: But it is the Poet's work; and, perhaps, one of the greatest Arts of human Wit to unconfound them, to find fit-digressions, and right Ligaments to tye one thing to another, least instead of representing a true State of natural Society, he plunges himself into Hobbs's State of War.
I might here, indeed, Sir,

particularize in many of our Modern English Tragedies, en∣dued with all the proportions of place, time and such ex∣ternal Regularities, which would prove the most forcible Argument against my Author: But since upon this whole mat∣ter, he hath chosen to deli∣ver himself, and to sport in Ge∣nerals, I have follow'd him but in such a way, that all men of judgement, who have stu∣died the English Stage, will think him out of the way, when he judges thus of it. I must a∣vow, Sir, I have here missd an heavenly opportunity of gain∣ing the Amity of some of our Top-Poets: But you know, Sir, what a fierce Nation they are,

(as Boileau calls them) and it is, perchance, as dangerous to praise as to discommend any one of them: And, therefore, I will still put both themselves and their Fortunes upon God and their Countrey.
There is one thing more, which upon this Topick impinges on us,P. 9. that we are wonderfully pleas'd with the sight of barba∣rous Murthers, that our Stage is an Acheldama, that there we read Eternal Paraphrases upon the third Chapter of Job, and that the more Blood is spilt, the more delight does the audi∣ence receive. I will not here al∣ledge the Roman Theatre, where∣in were as many Knoxes and Car∣gyls,

as in the cirque of the Gladiators: I will only deduce a Replication from the nature of our Stage it self. Our scenes are much fuller than the French, in which I have already glo∣ry'd; and consequently, the Dependents of great Men al∣ways partake of their Fates. Now, how can this be thought a piece of Inhumanity (as my Author thinks it) which is dayly seen to be Acted in Princes Courts, and upon the true Theatre of the World? Our shores (we thank God) are not inhospitable, as they were when Horace said,
Visam Britannos hospitibus feros.
And the French, I am certain, will allow, that the English can readily borrow a great ma∣ny people, to help fill up these By-plots.
I now pass to Comedy, where∣in my Author seems not to take the same measures, as he did in Tragedy,P. 39. that every thing ought to be referr'd to one prin∣cipal event, However, he de∣clares not his own Opinion in this point, but with many al∣lowances. He will only have it a contest depending on the Ge∣nius of the two Nations. He very fairly and justly allows Ben. Johnson to be an Excellent Comic Poet,P. 44. in de∣picting the several humours

and manners of men.P. 35 Yet he thinks, our humours are carried on too far, which pro∣ceeds from our too much thinking on the same thing,P. 35. and our too long plodding in the same beaten Tract of Re-action. I had rather at any time, Sir, defend than accuse, but by no means can I omit in this place, what every body knows, in what a Lewd condition the French Comedy is at this day; that (as my Author confesses) it is mostly filtch'd from the Spaniards, and that it is generally (with a few exceptions) degenerated into Farce, Puppet-shews, Buf∣foonry, and Apish-tricks: Whereas the English sally into new Invention, and keep it up

to the same sublimity and splen∣dour, as it held, when Loeli∣us and the Masters of Rome, who had crown'd Heads for their Subjects, writ Comedies to divert the People.
I will not affirm, that we Religiously observe all the Laws, which Kings and Par∣liaments of Parnassus have En∣acted, and tho a Man will hardly miss of Horace's Art of Poetry in the Title-page, that by consequence all the Rules of that Lycurgus are observed in the ensuing Comedy. Tis enough the Prologue does still either Court or Huff the audience to surprize it's good-Opinion: Love goes still on at the old rate,

he is still reputed the most an∣tient of the Gods,  (as Plu∣tarch says) all things are made and Providentially dispos'd by him.
Totamque infusa per artus Mens agitat molem—
So that tho the Sparks had a perpetual, but a very uneasy Celibacy, till the last Act, yet then from the objective they pass to the formal happiness. And tho (as my Author remarks) the English may surpass the natu∣ral Ideas of things, by letting our thoughts dwell too long upon one Object, and rarifying it in∣to vast dimensions, yet if it

were otherwise, I am perswad∣ed, there cou'd be nothing heard for yawning, all wou'd be cold and chill and beyond the eight Degree. And this reason is to be assign'd, for the continued thickness of the Wit, which sometimes is pil'd up so moun∣tainously thick that it is impossible to think any man can be suppos'd to speak or answer so, extemperaneously, but upon Study and Premedi∣tation.
But, to consider this thing a little more closely and Philoso∣phically, matters do, perhaps, stand in a much better condition as they are, than if they were intirely conform'd to the pre∣cepts of Aristotle and Horace.

Indeed, if none but the great Ma∣sters of Poetry, who have a thorough insight into these two Law-givers, came into the The∣atre, our Adversaries would say something, but our English Actors nothing at all, unless this, Unus est nobis pro Po∣pulo, I mean our Lawreat. I have, oftentimes, apply'd my self in some difficult cases to some particular Men, who pretend to have made this Art their Stu∣dy: But I have found, they either have not told me their minds sincerely, or else have made ill use of their Pains, seeing, afterwards, I have re∣ceiv'd more satisfaction from Persons of ordinary good-sense than these speculative Curiosi.

For it is, indisputably, true, that as to the Art of the Stage, no∣thing is more easy, than for a Man to be deceiv'd in his con∣ceptions, when he will needs peep into it's delicacy and fineness, and little Whimseyes: Nothing is more easy than to give a wrong Explanation of Aristotles or Horace's Rules, which are wont to breed as great a disorder and hub-bub in an unapt Brain, as they yield illumination and benefit to a mind, fram'd by nature for these sorts of notices.
We are to consider that Co∣medy is appointed to please not only the Sir Courtly Nice's in Wit, but all true Souls, whom

Terence calls the People; and we have his Affidavit, who was no Oates, that then it at∣taineth it's end, when it pleases them. When a Man, Sir of unblundering sense, that does not lay claim to one Iota of Greek or Latin, that never read (God bless him) either Aristo∣tle or Horace, and that never yet aspir'd to write a Billet∣doux so much as in his own dear Mother Tongue; when this Man shall tell you, that such a Co∣medy pleases him, that he sat easy and attentive all the while without ogling the Boxes, and tho gifted with the Spirit of Ruffling, he bauk'd the Mas∣ques of his Douceurs, that he comprehended the Plot very

well, that he view'd it's tur∣moils with some disturbance, that afterwards he saw 'em un∣ravell'd with some emotions of joy, that he came from the Play-House in some hast, or, perhaps, stumbled in the way, while he was preparing his memory for his Friends, I should believe the Comedy good, and the testi∣mony of this one man shou'd be of more comfortable importance and judicious weight with me, than all the petty-reasons of an half-skill'd Play-crafts-man. And I will not go far to prove, if not to demonstrate this as certain as any Problem in Eu∣clid, at least in an equal, and not in a comparative sense. For, the difference which lyes be∣twixt

a Man of skill, and a Man of no skill, upon this pos∣tulatum that there be an equal division of good-sense between them, can never make them to have a different relish of the Comedy. They will be equal∣ly pleas'd or displeas'd at the same Play, with this discri∣mination only, that the Man of skill can tell, why he is pleas'd, or why he is displeas'd, and the Man of just-sense can∣not, as having never made it his business to dive into the Art of Poetry.
But, to leave it in suspence, whether all the Aristotelian and Horation Precepts are nice∣ly requisite in the composition

of a Comedy, and not to return back and enquire here, whe∣ther the same dispute may be warped also to Tragedy, we can make no manner of questi∣on, but that Opera's or pieces of Machine are not subject to their Jurisdiction, but are whol∣ly out of the pale of those two great Men's Territories, since they are of a later date, and owe their original to Florence in Lorenzo de Medici's time or to the Venetians, who (as Mr. Dryden thinks, might gather them up from the wrecks of the Grecian and Roman Theaters,Postscript to Albi∣ and Albaius. which were adorn'd with Scenes, Musick, Dances, and Ma∣chines, especially the Atheni∣an:

Which polite Common∣wealth, tho it was very frugal in every thing else, according to Mr. Rhymer's observation, yet did tax and assess them∣selves, and did expend more out of their publick Exchequer upon the representation of these publick Plays, than all their Wars cost them, tho sometimes both Sea and Land were co∣ver'd with barbarous Foes, by whom they were invaded.
Aristotle, whom all men a∣gree, to have treated of the Stage the first and the best of any Writer, saith, that two things therein are parti∣cularly to be observ'd, which are verisimility and marvel∣lousness,

with this difference, that in Comedy nothing but what retains on verisimilitude is to be admitted, whereas Tragedy doth not refuse the marvellous,Preface Ibid. or as Mr. Dryden calls it, the sur∣prizing conduct. However in this case, great moderation the Philosopher will have used, so that if a Man be forc'd to intermingle things supernatu∣ral and so usher in the Gods, it must only be on some pinch of necessity: And this is the sense of that Law and Ordi∣nance of the old Peripatetique Gentleman, which Judge Hales himself cannot interpret more uprightly. From whence we may deduce this Corollary,

that Dramatick Poetry is to be thus essentially divided: Comedy ought to have every thing likely and probable, i. e. only natural and ordinary E∣vents; Opera's which are a species, that stand in oppo∣sition to the former, must ac∣cept only of extraordinary and super-natural Adventures: But Tragedy, like the Aristotelian vertue, is to lye snudging be∣twixt them both, being com∣pounded of marvellousness and possibility. So that hence we see, the vices and imper∣fections of a Comedy, are the vertues and beauties of an Opera. Nothing is more wicked in a Comedy than the slipping and alteration of the

Scene: But nought is so rich and excellent in an Opera as the breaking of all the unities of time, place and action, I mean as the leaps, not only from one place of the Earth, to an other, but from Earth to the Empyrean Heav'n, and from Heav'n to Hell: While the simple Inhabitants of the Lunar Planet little think what work we make with them in Dorset-Garden. In a Comedy, nothing is so unmercifully in∣supportable, as to ungigg or explicate the Intrigue by a Miracle, or by the kind arrival of some : where∣as in an Opera nothing is so charmingly ravishing, as these sorts of Miracles and these Ap∣paritions

of Divinities, when Men have some ground and reason to introduce them.
From this wide distinction betwixt the nature of Comedy and Opera, it may be deter∣min'd, that either my Author did not understand the right notion of Operas,P. 42. when he terms them, ev'n beyond a litte∣ral sense, Comedies in Mu∣sique,P. 45. or else he means that abused Constitution of them, which he himself derides, when they are compell'd in Musick to negotiate the inferiour and common affairs of civil Life. In this▪ Observation he cer∣tainly shakes hands with truth, and I am sure, you, Sir, will

take his side: For I, partly, be∣lieve, that should a Man dril∣lingly sing and warble out an errand to his Lacquais, the Fellow might, perhaps, go, but I fancy, he would make more hast to Court than to the place appointed him in his message, that he might be the first to make Friends for his Master's Estate.
I will not here examine my Author's judgment in sing∣ing, nor the Preference he gives the French to the Italian Operas, such an attempt being extraneous to my un∣dertaking: But since he damns the very essential con∣stitution of this Theatrical En∣tertainment,

notwithstanding the incivility, I think my self engag'd to see him contra∣dicted. And I hope, Sir, that I shall obtain your pardon both for the tediousness and the unpolish'd neglect of this dis∣course, especially in this part of it, wherein I have so few helps, seeing I do at once plead the cause of Friend∣ship, and, perhaps, of good-sense: For, this portion of the Stage's diversion being but a Novice in our Theatre, and having just receiv'd the Royal Approbation and en∣couragement, as it would be unmannerly to let any thing slip the Press, that so much as indirectly strikes at the

design, so it wou'd be as severe too, and to the de∣triment of the Actors, who have been at immense char∣ges in carrying it on, and some of whom of Eminent judgment and sense I am proud to call my Friends.
All the reasons, therefore, which I can find my Author goes upon, in subverting root and branch, the constitu∣tive Principles and founda∣tion of Opera's are two. The first is more general. That it is impossible for the mind of Man to be sincerely pleas'd, when it has so lit∣tle to do,P. 42. and that tho, perhaps, it may be at first

surpriz'd into some delight, yet, afterwards, it presently sinks into it self, and be∣comes tir'd and drooping. The other is, that he never saw an Opera,p. 44. but what to him appear'd foolish and contemp∣tible, either in the disposi∣tion of the subject, or in the composure of the Verses.
In reply to these reasons: This principle is acknow∣ledg'd as a Basis and Ground∣work in all Arts and Sci∣ences, that those who first invented them, and gave 'em all the perfections requisite to their Frame, Nature and Constitution, ought to be the Supream Dictators in

whose steps, all the follow∣ing Disciples are to tread: Otherwise, they tread awry. So that, as the Italians did first pitch upon and accomplish in all it's numbers this En∣tertainment of Operas, who∣ever undertakes to compose an Opera, must wholly square his measures to their design. This my Critick ought to have consider'd, before he had gone, and committed High-Treason against one of the most establish'd and most fa∣mous Laws among Men of Wit, by not having the fear of Authority before his Eyes, and by contriving some new Atheistical Regulations, ac∣cording to which he would

alter the setled Government.
But (it seems) he has rea∣son so to do: No Man of sense can be taken with things, which have no sense in 'em: The mind does not find matter enough in 'em, to employ it self about no∣thing but noise and fine shews: And the Ludgate-audience, provided they be neither Deaf nor Blind were by Predestination devised to be charm'd with these super-aerial practices: Mighty Scenes and Fustian adorn'd with ex∣travagant Decorations never fail, but operate as certainly as a Devil, a Fool, and a Frier: And what is the effect

of all this, but to be praised by such a Riff-raff is to be condemned.
It was said of the Empe∣rour Trajan when he boasted of his Parthian Trophee be∣fore the Gods, that he was , and that he regarded a sound of words more than real mat∣ter it self: But whether this is liable to be apply'd to Ope∣ras, I will leave it to the decision of all judicious men, from the consideration both of what has been already urg'd upon this Topick, and what I shall further add in confutation of the second ar∣gument. In the interim, I will

here put the case, that there is nothing to be heard, felt, or understood but a non-sen∣sical sound: Yet, if this sound be truly Harmonical, whe∣ther vocal or Instrumental, or both, men will certainly prefer it sometimes before the greatest. Embellishments of Wit. Musick, therefore, as well as all other polite Arts has been embrac'd and che∣rish'd by all the most glori∣ous Nations in the Universe, and has receiv'd it's augmen∣tation proportionable to the augmentations of Empire. I have already particulariz'd in two immortal and com∣manding Nations, especially the Romans, who not only

us'd it in their Theaters, but in Religious matters on the greatest of all days, when their Carmina soecularia were sung with so much pomp and ostentation, that they were styled , The Hebrews themselves (not to speak of the glittering and incessant use of it in their Temple) did in Solomons time, when that Dominion was elevated to it's highest Akme, and ev'n a note above Ela, had' publique times of joy adorn'd with the magni∣ficence of musical perfor∣mances. And, as Mr. Dryden has remarqu'd that the first OperasPef. to Alb. ad Alba. seem'd to be design'd

by the Italians for the Cele∣bration of Princes Marriages, or days of Universal rejoicing, whereof he gives us an instance in Guarini's Pastor fido; So the Song of Songs, (as our Learned Church-men long ago express'd it) 

is a kind of Divine Pastoral, or Marri∣age Play, consisting of di∣vers Acts and Scenes: Or a sacred Dialogue (by way of Opera) with many in∣terlocutory passages. First the Bride comes in, and saith, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his Mouth: Then the Bridegroom, I have com∣par'd thee, O my Love, to a Troop of Horses, &c. After which he withdraws

himself, and sits at his re∣past, leaving the Bride with her Companions, as it were alone upon the Stage, who thus speak to her, We will make thee Borders of Gold and Studds of Silver, &c.
But to come nearer home, and to give a tast of our own times, Balets have ever been in vogue in France, Spain has it's Bull-feasts, the Moores their Zambra's, the Ger∣mans their Wirschafts, being pieces compos'd of Mascarads, Balets, and Songs, the Court of Savoy it's Sapates, and none of these Entertainments but has Musick for an essential Ingredient.
Can we, then, think that Actions, tho long, of Dra∣matique Musick to be un∣grateful, and sure to put the audience to the most hideous Agonies of yawning? Can we suppose the most delicate Peo∣ple, that ever yet liv'd upon Earth to be Sots and heavy Ideots? Can we imagine them to be weary of an happiness of their own contrivance, and to be as great Fools as the Apostate Angls, who were cloy'd with their fliity, and left thir own Habitations? Toward a pleary satisfaction and compleat aquiescence of mind, it is necessary, that all the powers of our Souls, be adequately fill'd with Plea∣sure,

and be rapt up into an Eternal Enjoyment. There must be no interfering Acci∣dent, to break it off. The trance must be ineffable, and what signifies it, so it be a Trance, whether it be agree∣able to the Catholick▪ mea∣sures of sense or reason? I confess, Mr. Cowley says, that Wit should not be lay'd too thick, but discreetly ma∣nag'd and scatter'd up and down: But for my share, I do not think this notion is extensive to the divertise∣ments of the Eye or Ear: And I fancy a Lady much more richly dress'd in a Gown all laid o'er with Jewels, than with here and there one, nice∣ly scituated.
The Thomists will have the fruition of the Divinity to consist solely in an Act of the Understanding, which they call Vision: But the Sco∣tests in an Act of the Will, which is Love: And the Tho∣mists seem to have the better of the argument, because see∣ing the operation in which our perfectest happiness is found∣ed, must he the perfectest ope∣ration, and seeing that of the intellectual is more perfect than that of the sensitive part, it is apparent, that the ope∣ration of this fruition must lye in the Intellectual Part only. But tho I question not but that both in th' upshot may be brought to an accommoda∣tion,

according to the Max∣imes of the new Philoso∣phy, which holds all sensa∣tions not to be realities ei∣ther in the senses or the ob∣jects of them, but to subsist solely in the perception. I say, I do not care, whether the Pleasure springs from ei∣ther part, provided I have the Pleasure: Tho, perhaps, all that results from Harmony, arises from the Concord, it bears to our Souls, which some have opin'd to be Har∣mony.
I know, sometimes, our sense of seeing is affected to that degree with the Harmony or Beauty of Colours, and

our hearing with that of sounds, that some have prov'd too frail for the enjoyment, and have become maddish with the superlative Plea∣sure. And to this cause may be ascrib'd the extravagant joys of the Italian Theatre, where the Composers of the Musick of the Opera, en∣deavor to end the Scenes of the principal Actors, with such Airs as not only draw the applauses of the whole Theatre, when Benissimo is heard from a thousand Mouths at once, but have sometimes transported some Gentlemen besides themselves and their Wits by the charming voices of their Young Women, so

that they have cry'd out, while they lean over from their Galleries, Ah Cara! mi Butto, mi Butto, as if they were about to precipitate them∣selves down in the extasies, into which they were rapt by these divine voices.
This, I think Sir, enough to offer in contradiction to the first reason of my Cri∣tick: The second does with∣out any exception or dis∣pensation condemn every par∣ticular Opera, he ever yet saw, both as to the dispo∣sal of the main subject, and the composition of the ver∣ses; I will not here ob∣ject to him Lovigis Operas,

wherein he franckly avows,P. 5. himself hath found inimi∣table things, nor any of the Illustrious Atchievements in this kind of the Italian Masters: I will only bring our Alb. and Albanius in∣to his consideration, which not only for the amussitated ma∣nagement of the subject-mat∣ter, and the ingenious con∣trivance of the versification, but for the great and God-like Argument, for the He∣roique design of it's Instru∣ction, for the admirable and sumptuous performance in the sweetness of the Musick, in the Harmonique Movements and Postures, in the richness of the Habits, and the Beau∣ty

of the Machines and Decorations, we may op∣pose in competition with any thing, that ever Paris or Venice it self did yet see. Notwithstanding the ge∣neral design is but as yet in a State of Probation.
The Argument is both according to and beyond the Poets own Heart, both litterally true and super-na∣turally Historical. The mi∣raculous Restauration and Deliverances of the two Roy∣al Brothers, with the Apo∣theosis of our late Immortal and cherish'd Monarch. The Instruction easie and fresh in our Memories, Treason

defeated by the Almighty, and his Vice-gerents preserv'd. We are not constrain'd like our Neighbour Nations, to feign Poetical Tales: We have dai∣ly new-subjects for Operas set before our Eyes, and we see ours acted first on the true Theatre of the World.
The conduct sublime, yet no great chasms in it, but such as rather seem to heighten than stint the minds of the audience. The Verses pure, fluent and fill'd with a Coelestial and Blissful Cadence, nothing in our Lan∣guage, yet extant, comparable to it. And we can find but one and twenty Apostrophe's (I mean of distinct Woods) through the

whole Series of the verse.
This was a way of writing, first observ'd and introduc'd by Mr. Waller: And without this, the contrivance of Operas could never stand. And as there is a sweetness in the middle, so is there at the end of the verse, which is chiefly caus'd by the Dissyllable and Trissyllable Rhymes, lately much us'd in our Songs, and borrow'd originally from the Italians. or, it is ge∣nerally of the Constitutive na∣ture of all Italian verses, of what numer of Syllables soever they be, to have the Accnt upon the Pnultima. There ae some, in∣deed, which they call Sdruccioli or slippery verses, that lay it

upon the Ante-penultima, their final Cadence running swift: Whereof we have many exam∣ples in this English Opera, as being naturally Competible to it's Constitution, as may be provd by this instance.
The Italians, as they have preserv'd many things of the La∣tine through their whole Tongue, so have they retain'd a sort of verses, nam'd Sciolti, without Rhyme: Wherein that excellent Traduction of Virgil's Aeneis is written by Hannibal Caro, from whom, I am of opi∣nion, Sir, that that great man of your name, whose enlarged Genius, you inherit, separated from the unhappy and fatal ma∣lignities,

which belong'd to that Age, took his design. The body of the work consists of Heroique verses of eleven Syllables, but he sometimes mixes the Sdruccioli of twelve, and then principally, when he makes the Gods to speak as in the Sybill's Answer in the Sixth Book.
Verrano i Teucri al regno di Lavinio,
Di ciò t' affido. Ma benstoito desser vi
Si penteranno. Guerre, guerre horri bili
Sor gere ne veggio, & pien di sangue il Tevere.
As to the performance, I will not inquire whether our English voices are so fine and fit for things of this nature: I will ra∣ther suspend my judgment with my Author, remembring, that things cannot at first receive

their ultimate perfection, qui non est hodiè, cras magis ap∣tus erit; and that there is a strife among Musicians as well as Men of all other Professions:
.
I will not strain in com∣mending the vision of the Ho∣nours of the Garter, in which we see the Glories of our Au∣gust Prince with all the lesser Deities about him.
Divisum Imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.
Neither will I mention the Peacock which had the Samii

seen (who stamp'd it's Pour∣traiture upon their Coins, because Juno, to whom it was dedicated, was by them ado∣red) they would not only have Worshipped her but the Bird too, and, perhaps, more the Birds very Pourtraict. She, indeed, is appointed by the Poets to con∣vert the Eyes of Argus in the Peacock's Train: But here the Spectator does wish for his Eyes to look upon the Bird it self, as being as rare a sight, as when it was first transported from the Barbarians into Greece, at which time Aelian tells us, that among the Atheni∣ans it was not to be seen with∣out Money.
I will not enlarge, Sir, upon these Occurrences, because they have already betray'd me into a great deal of Pedantry, tho I have made it my scope all a∣long to keep at as great a dis∣tance as I could from the A∣nonimous Translator, who some days ago put forth these Stage Essays. I will say nothing in derogation of his Traducti∣on, nor build my own Repu∣tation upon the ruins of ano∣ther Mans; But I do not doubt, that if he had ponder'd more, he wou'd have more throughly un∣derstood his Author, and a lit∣tle more pains wou'd have bet∣ter spoke his Acquaintance with honest Will. Lilly.
And now, Sir, I think I have been sufficiently guilty of the Vice the Greeks call'd , as to have try'd to what a degree you stand possess'd of the great vertues of perseverance and long-suffering, so as that it's high time to make an end, least I be goar'd with questo non sa la storia intiera, perche non gli fu insignata la fine. Where∣fore I shall leave all I had to say about Epicurus, to my An∣notations: It being an infinite work to dispute concerning sum∣mum bonum, of which So∣crates affirms in his Ecclesiasti∣cal History, there were three hundred several Opinions. This is all I have to add, that

Epicurus had a Garden, and in that Garden stood a Tree of Knowledge: But in the Bark of it was writ, by some Lycur∣gus or other, a Noli me tan∣gere.
I am, Sir,

