



Good People,
THE Cure of your Souls being by  Divine Providence incumbent upon Me, very unfit to undergoe so great a Cha especially considering the Liberty which  men do now assume in the way of Religion In the discharge of my Duty, though  not say I have been so prudent and digent as the high and holy nature of my Fun requires; yet you know I have not omitte frequently to put you in mind [which is on principal part of my Office] of the who Will of God, in the carefull observanc whereof the Health of your Souls consisteth
The Contents of God's revealed Will, be∣ing delivered and disporsed through th whole Body of Holy Scriptures, are collec∣ted and summed up into general Heads by the Church of Christ in her Catechism: th which, though by a strange Fanatick humou it be slighted, and even derided, yet con∣tains
all things both of Faith and Fact ne∣cessary to Salvation, being rightly, clearly nd fully understood.
Did you therefore rightly understand, nd seriously consider, wherein your Soul's Health and Edification chiefly consists, you ould be better pleased with the frequency f Catechizing, and be more versed in those ssentials of Religion, then in the hearing  many Sermons, which are of less concern∣ have not spared my Pains in Preaching, or my Purse in the maintenance of others  assist me herein. But by long experience it is evident, that Sermons [what through he Variety, severall Modes and Methods on he one hand, and what through the great abuse thereof on the other,] have not that nfluence upon the minds of men as becometh ound Doctrine, but have too much sway with men of itching ears, who heap to hemselves Teachers after their own usts; who, upon Pretence of going on to erfection, goe off the Foundation, wax ain in their imaginations, and their foo∣sh hearts are darkned, whilst they conceit hemselves enlightned.
And therefore for your more ready, ea∣sy,
and constant instruction, I have com∣mitted to writing, and made publick, the Summary of Christian Doctrine in the Church-Catechism paraphrased.
And because Doctrine without Practice is but a Body of Religion without a Soul to quicken it; I have here added a Summary of Christian Practice, in the insuing Rules of Self-examination, which will equally discover unto you your Sins and Miscarria∣ges past, and serve for a Guide to direct you in the future ordering of all the Actions of your lives in the ways of Godliness.
In both which Summaries I have endea∣voured to be both brief and plain, delivering onely what I conceive generally necessary to Salvation, and expressing the same in the most easy way to be understood: as knowing that multitude of words, various, acute, and quaint affected expressions, especially in the Essentials of Religion, though they may more please, do not so much profit, nay, they do really rather distract then instruct the minds of most. For it is not the rat∣tling of the Leaves, but the Fruits of the Tree of knowledge that feed the Soul to life eternall.

The Praiers prescribed upon any the in∣suing considerations are not by way of one long continued Oration without inter∣mission; but divided into severall shorter Praiers: and this because,
1. The heat of holy Zeal is hereby better maintained, and kept flaming in the Soul, whilst the ending of one Praier and begin∣ning another adds new fervour to the Soul's Devotion.
2. Long Praiers do tire the spirits, clog the memory, distract the mind, and damp that celestiall fervour which is the life of all holy and acceptable Praiers.
3. Such are all those Praiers which are truly the Praiers of God's Holy Spirit, and stand upon record in Holy Writ: they are all divided and cut short into so many dis∣tinct Verses, as into so many several shorter Praiers.
4. Thus Christ has commanded us to pray, Matt. 6.7, 8, 9. And according to this patern the Praiers of Christ's Church, even for the length thereof, are generally fra∣med.
My primary intention in the insuing Dis∣course was chiefly, to direct you for the
worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion of the Body and Bloud of Christ, where∣unto a through Self-examination is abso∣lutely necessary.
And being desired to inlarge my Medita∣tions upon that Blessed Sacrament, I have therefore now divided the former Edition into Two Parts: the First, of Self-exami∣nation; and the Second, of the Holy Communion.
Wherein I must necessarily tell you, that since the Danger of unworthy Receiving is equivalent with the Benefit of the worthy; it therefore concerns every one of you, that hath any sense and sincere care of his Soul's health, as strictly to examine himself be∣fore he eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup, as he believes he shall be exami∣ned before the great Tribunal of Heaven; and accordingly to purge and purify his Soul by Confession, Contrition, and all the sa∣cred Acts and Offices of true Repentance; the practice whereof is in the following Leaves delivered.
Of the other Two Parts of the Practical Christian, mentioned in the general Title-page, you will have a farther account in the Preface thereunto.

I shall not farther enlarge this Epistle, more then to pray, that God may be pleased to assist you by his Divine grace carefully to observe such useful Instructions as be herein given you: not vainly jangling, and talking of Religion; but, according to the Covenant you have made with your God, to keep his holy Will and Command∣ments, and to walk in the same all the days of your life; remembring who it is that has said it, If thou wilt enter into life, keep the Commandments, Matt. 19.17. And that you may observe the one as the way to the other, is and shall be the constant Praier of

