



My Lord,
WIsdome is attain'd by an exact disquisition after Truth: which seem'd once so difficult an attempt, that in Greece (the then knowing part of the World) seven only were accounted to deserve the name of Wise. Such commendable researches gain'd 'em that prae-eminence; and this made them prescribe to the rest of Man∣kind. They declar'd Truth (like precious Oar) bury'd in a Pit, not to be got thence, but by a long deduction of Reason; nor this Reason per∣fected without Study and Learning. Now Learning is only the culti∣vating of Parts and Wit, 'till we arrive at a thorough improvement of thoughts upon things and Men.
My Lord, all this being consider'd, who can lay a juster claim to this Iewel, than your Lordship? Whose mind, being animated by generous spirits, always addresses it self unto noble ends? Your inward sight (sharper than that of Eagles) can gaze upon the splendeur where Truth'sits thron'd, and discern all the finesses of Policy and Prudence. Ablessing not to be attain'd without a sagacity able to pierce into the deepest resorts of Nature, and to extricate hidden forms from the Wombs of their Causes. But these Perfections (like th' Elixir of the Phylosophers) are impossible, or very difficult to be obtain'd, without such a prosperous success as your Lordships, that has run through the round of all Sciences, with a perspica∣city even to admiration. You, my Lord, (like the Eye of the World) have not only visited, but inlighten'd each Orb in the Heaven of Learning.

And those who hence forward shall pretend to knowledge must owe it to your Influence. Wherever you past, you left such tracks of light, as may direct the inquisitive World into the most private recesses of knowledge.
Besides, 'tis as wonderful how your Lordship could arrive to this height, to these miraculous improvements! How could you break through those intangling blandishments of Fortune? Those cumbersome imployments of Honour and State? Those tediousnesses of Address, that wait on and add to the tumults of Grandeur? For Greatmen (as th' incomparable Verulam observes) have little freedome either in their times, their acti∣ons, or themselves. Insomuch, as prae-eminence would afford no Aitraits, nor any pretences authorize the thirstings after Greatness, unless a pow∣er to do good. By such revelations of your merits and vertue, you have added lustre to your Coronet, and ennobled even Nobility it self. Vulgar Fame applauds Majesty in such choices and that common∣stream runs here into the Fountain of Honour.
If our Age had been unfortunate in wanting you, as that of the Ro∣mans had been happy in injoying you, Cicero might have spar'd his ex∣pectation (as he smartly worded it to Caesar) Quae miremur habemus, quae laudemus expectamus. In our late Deluge of Ignorance and Rebellion, you stood up like one of Seth's Pillars, and preserv'd Letters and Loyalty to this happy Age. You were tost indeed, but not discom∣pos'd with the humrous successes of Fortune. You steer'd your Reso∣lutions, and kept a steady soul amidst those storms that shipwrackt three Kingdomes. In that fatal 41th. when those false Representatives of our Liberties (like Robbers) pretended to direct us into the right way, and then intrapt us into streights, to cut our Purses and our Throats: when by a horrid Conspiracy (like that of Corah) they rebell'd both against Moses and Aaron; when (like the ingrateful Hebrews) they wanten'd after impure Loves, and worshipt false Gods of their own making; Then you, my Lord, indeavour'd with all your might to rescue us from inhumanity and rapine, and divert Iudgments from the People, like Cicero in the Conspiracy of Catiline; (and with equal Eloquence) you labour'd to save both Capitol and Common-wealth from ruin. In testimony whereof, those two incomparable Speeches of your Lordships, to the House of Peers, in Defence of the Hierarchy, will be recorded in the Temple of Fame, till Time shall be no more.
Nor is this all, for tho these great Truths must eternize your Name, and advantage the next Age with glorious examples; yet to come nearer

home, my Lord, the present time is as much oblig'd. Your Hospitality and way of living is such, as may instruct those of your Lordships rank to restore and uphold their ancient int'rest and grandeur, too much and too long neglected. Here is Plenty without Luxury and Intemperance, Greatness without Noise and Disorder: Entertainments are here be stow∣ed both upon Mind and Body, and 'tis doubtful to which our Repasts are most oblig'd.
But I'm fall'n upon a Panegyrick, where I intended a Dedicati∣on; and in both alike presumptuous; yet it may be the more excusable in that I have sacrific'd to Duty and Truth, in acknowledging your Lordships favours and my great obligations, and in yielding a Testimo∣ny to the merits of so eminent a Person. And after my Reader is con∣firm'd of all these great qualities, and hears how your Lordships pleas'd to countenance this Tragaedy; I need not fear his acceptation. You, my Lord, alone are a sufficient Theater, and your single praise more to be valu'd than the loudest Plaudite. I humbly beg, that your Lordship will vouchsafe to pardon all its falours, and accept of that devotion, where∣with I offer it, which will be an infinite honour to,
My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and most Devoted Servant.
August 30th. 1678.

