



MUch is spoken which should not be thought, and written which should not be spoken, and printed which should not be written. Such may this discourse be, or such accounted: I am contented. Yet I go on with an ingenuous boldnesse, in this small bundle of Common-places, (as we call our morning Exercises) to re∣present,
next unto God, unto you my thankfulnesse, for my education in that House, whereof you are the Worthy Governours. If I thus discharge this debt, the adventure of my credit will be lesse dangerous, the losse more easie; since we are not bound so to a perfection of learning as we are bound to a perfection of Duty. The Stork is said to leave one of her young ones where she hatcheth, as it were out of some instinct of gratitude: and I, to return an acknowledgement of my breeding, present you with this little offspring of my mind, penned indeed ra∣ther then plumed.
They are next unto the first Com∣mon-places which I ever made. Since, much time, and years have run, wherein I might have added much, varied some∣what, polished all: but I desire to serve them up in their first and naturall dresse,
and not to deceive you with my first Common-places last made.
The Poet calleth his books his children; This of mine is but a daughter; slight, slender, impertinent, unprofitable. Yet the raritie of the subject comforteth the Authour, that what cannot satisfie, be∣cause not so usefull, may please because so unusuall. Few such texts there are; this, to my knowledge, not touched before.
In the way of the discourse Hagar wait∣eth diligently upon Sarah, Humane learning carrieth the candle to Divinity: now the candle may be set down, and the servant may go out.
Be pleased to signifie the height of your Greatnesse in a condescent of ac∣ceptance. The Presse hath delivered it into this legible fashion in respect to your Qualitie: But I mean not that the world shall see it, either because I would save
my modesty, or serve you more peculiar∣ly. Do it the justice of favour, to think of it better then it deserveth; and me the honour, to vouchsafe me to be

