


MADAM,
HAD my abilities to perform, been equal to my propension to undertake your commands, these Papers had pre∣sented you with somthing more worthy the memory of that half of your self which is in Heaven, and less unfit for the perusal of the other with which we are still honoured upon Earth. But the greatest ambition, as well as the most proper disposal of them as they are, was to have heen buried in the same dark Vault with their subject. Yet seeing you would not be prevailed with to lay aside your authority over me, nor be denied a sight of that, which your circumstances would not permit you to hear. I committed this Dis∣course into your hands, in confidence you would have confined it to your Closet; where I could
have rested secure of a pardon for all its fai∣lures, upon your own native goodness; but could never have admitted the least thought of suffering it to be more publick, had it not been for your irresistible commands, and invin∣cible resolutions to have it so, notwithstand∣ing the greatest and justest importunities of my self and friends to the contrary; so that your Ladyship must be accountable to the world for the many imperfections it labours under.
The Pictures of our absent friends though they express no more then their outward and visible features are very desireable and de∣lightful monuments; but the Character of their minds, and their inward and invisible beauties are far more excellent and valuable.
Fine spirits like elegant faces are difficult to be drawn to an exactness, even by the greatest Masters. And this worthy person hath been equally unhappy both under the Pencil and the Pen. How little I have suc∣ceeded, and how short this rude draught falls of the Original: your first reading (I doubt) will testify with trouble if not with tears: and now when 'tis too late, force you to take up my first wish that this Province had been
allotted to a more skilful hand, that might have done him more right, and given you more satisfaction. Better parts might not only have set a greater lustre on so noble a Theme, but have reflected an honour upon themselves, and together with his consecrated their own names to Eternity; while my humble Talent only sues for an excuse, and may not unreasonably expect it too; if either extremity of Passion through this surprizing blow; or distraction of thought, from a like intervenient Occasion and Office I was called to at the same time, which throws the mind into confusion, and darkness, may pass for indispositions to such composures. But what ever Entertainment this discourse may meet with from its deficiencies of form, and po∣verty of art, in this nice and censorions age, yet the richness of the matter, and the excel∣lence of the argument are sufficient (I know) to recommend it to a place among your choic∣est Cimelia.
But as the greatness of his worth, in∣hances the estimate of your loss; so the dis∣playing of that, doth but open and revive your sense of this: which I finding it more
reasonable to appease then aggravate, and observing how much you resemble the famous Lady Paulina in S. Jerom not only in the eminence of her Vertues, but in the tender∣ness of her passions; shall rather recommend to you those few familier considerations in the close hereof directed to the stopping of the stream of nature; or allaying the bit∣terness of your grief, if not the turning it into the sweeter passion of Joy. To the making all which advices of reason, and succours of faith there offered, effectual to that purpose, 'tis requisite that you bring a∣long with you, a serious attention, and a greatness of Spirit: The former of which you have in your power, the latter in your nature. For the awakening of which, I know nothing more prevalent then to mind you of the original Stock, from whence you Sprung; and of those personal qualifications, and that elevated Genius, wherewith you are blessed. Your paternal family hath fur∣nished out persons of that eminence both for parts and virtues, as have adorned the high∣est stations in Church and State. A delibe∣rate reflection whereupon will hardly suffer
you to stoop to so weak a passion, or entertain so mean a thought, as must sink you below the dignity of your Line, or to be dejected with any thing, save what is degenerous, or inglorious. Your own excellent endowments which have sufficiently appeared on other occasions; as the serenity of your understand∣ing, the soundness of your Judgment and constancy of mind, if duly touched and ex∣cited with these meditations can hardly fail of raising the desired effects. But though envy it self cannot but give place to a re∣verence for the dead; yet it will not so pa∣tiently brook the commendations of the living. And though his modesty who is gone cannot be wounded by his Just Character, yet yours is so tender, that it would be oppressed with your own. So that I know not how to do right to the rest of your Vertues, without offering an injury to this. I shall therefore indeavour to supply the omission of your de∣served praises, and the weakness of my other performances, with the sincerity and ferven∣cy of my prayers, to him who can wipe all tears from your Eyes, and make the bones that he hath broken to rejoyce,
for your support and improvement under this severe Visitation; that what you have lost in temporal comforts, may be abundantly re∣payed you in Spiritual, in this life; and with eternal glory in the next: which shall be the constant Intercession of
Most Honoured Madam

Octob. 3. 1687.
