


I Cannot but give this Honourable Assembly some short Account of the Tyrannous Insults and Barbarous Threats of Our Enemies, (the French) in Particular against these Two Houses of Parliament, at the beginning of the War.
IT being my Misfortune to be Disabled and Taken at Sea, in the Year 1689. I was carried to Brest under very hard usage, and nothing could I hear, but of having my Self and Men sent to the Gallies, and that they did not question but in a Twelve Months time, to have all the Parliament of England there, to Row their King in a Galley, using the most Reproachful Names to this August Assembly, that their Malice and Madness could think of; and so far they proceeded in their Barbarity and Con∣fidence of Victory, that they took upwards of Seven Hundred Eng∣lish Prisoners, (part of them my Ship's Company) Hand-cuff'd them two and two together, fastning Sixty Couple in a Rope, in that manner, driving them from Brest and other Places, to Thou∣lon in Provence, being several Hundred Miles, Beating, Whip∣ping, and so hardly using them, that several of them died under their hands: And when they came to Thoulon, hearing of the Success of Their Majesties Arms in Ireland, they changed their Resolution of putting them into the Galleys, but travelled them back again to Rochfort, under such miserable, harsh and severe usage, with Hunger, Cold, Travelling, and Beating, &c. That
 many of them Died by the way, who were then knock'd out of the Irons, and left often in the Fields without Burial; And when any of them broke Prison, (which their Misery forc'd them to, desiring rather to dye than live so) their Guard when they took them, would Chain them to a wall without shelter from the Wea∣ther, and there let them lie Languishing for several days toge∣ther, as particularly John Hutchin's, Yeoman of my Powder-Room, who lay Chained to a Wall Thirty Nine dayes with a Chain of Eight Foot long, and many others: And for my own part, they took Me out of the Hospital at Brest, before half Cur'd of my Wounds, and would have carry'd me on Horse-back, though the Chirurgion declar'd it would cer∣tainly Kill me; at length the Chirurgions prevail'd to have me carried in a Litter, with Lieutenant Walker, one of my Lieutenants, who was likewise Wounded; They Carry'd us thus Eight Days in Company with three Deserters, whose Noses were slit an Inch up, their Cheeks burnt with a Flower-de-luce, their Hair cut off, and their Ears cut, with their Legs tied under the Horses Belly, and their Hands chain∣ed, yet they were better mounted than those in Company with me, to whom they would neither allow Stick nor Spur; Their Names were Lieutenant William Clutterbuck, (one of my Lieute∣nants) Mr. Rowley the Vice Admiral of Brandenburgh, and one Mr. Carbonnell, an English Merchant of French Pa∣rents, who was first taken up under pretence of being a Spy, and still detained in Prison, and now pretend Debt upon him. We were guarded with the Povost Marine, and four Arches, giv∣ing out by the way, That I was an English Lord they had ta∣ken, so that all the Country People came flocking to see me. When we came to Nantz, they clapt us up in the Castle, where there were two Hugonots and a Priest, one Monsieur La Noa, that had been a Prisoner Two and Twenty Years, Seven Years in a Dungeon (where he never had any Light but while he Eat) Sixteen Years before brought to Tryal, and then because too old to go to the Gallies, they Condemn'd him to perpetual Im∣prisonment, and all for writing a Book Reflecting on the Arch∣bishop of Paris; and though they could not prove it upon him,
 yet they used him so severely, it being the Barbarous Principle of the Cruel French King, rather to punish twenty Innocent Persons, than let one, they think Guilty, Escape: They would not allow us any Provision though we sent to the Governor, unless we would give half a Crown a Day each; then we desired the Al∣lowance only of Bread and Water, telling them we had no Mony, but for all that they would not allow us any without paying for it, and Six-pence a Day found us Four Bread, which we were for∣ced to give or starve; thus we liv'd on Bread and Water Fif∣teen Days, and then the other Three consented to pay for other Victuals; but because I found such living did me good for my Wounds, I continued it Five and Twenty Days, with the help of two Pound of Cheese which I had, unknown to my Guard; but if we had had no Mony we must have starved for Want. When I came to eat Meat, my Wounds growing worse, I was or∣dered to take Physick, and being advised by the Protestants to take care I were not Poisoned therewith, when my Physick was brought, I called the rest of my Company, and desired them to bear Witness, That if I were Poisoned, it were in Drinking King William's Health, and thereupon I drank the same, which being told the Governor by the said Mr. Rowley, and notice sent to Paris, An Order came to take me from the rest of my Company, and put me into a Dungeon; but the Governor being a Man of more Conscience than the rest, because there was no Dungeon but what was so wet would soon have kill'd me, He put me in a Tower (the Walls twenty Foot thick) Archt above and below, and the Windows made up, save only a little Light twelve Foot high, where I lay a lone very disconsolately, three or four Months, when Mr. Skelton coming thither, got me liberty to walk in the Castle, which being known at Paris, an Order came to send me to Angiers, and then I had Ten-pence a Day paid me for all the time I was at Nantz, which was the only Mony I received of the French all the while I was in France.
At Angiers I lay Close Prisoner in the Castle fifteen Months more, under a most Cruel and Tyrannical Governor, Monsteur
 Doteshon (formerly one of Cardinal Mazarine's Guard) who would receive the Sacrament every Week, and yet as soon as he came out of the Chappel, and sometimes even within it, would beat or abuse the Prisoners, or do some wicked thing or other, on any the least occasion.
There were in Prison fourteen The Dutchess de la Force, three Years in Prison. Mr. de Crosnier, five Years. Mr. de la Brifardiere two Years. Mr. de Malle, three Years for Re∣ligion. Mademoiselle Robert. Mademoiselle Voison Me. Katharine le Roy. Me. Manon Soignart. Me. du Plessis. Me. Paulain. Me. Bellefuille. Me. Carnay, Aged 100 Years. Me de la Porte, Aged 80 Years. In Prison 12 years on suspicion of Poysoning, but can have no Tryal or Hearing. Persons, some for Religion, and the rest on other Pretences; among whom were People of very good Quality, whose Names are in the Margin; they have some of them been in Prison ten or twelve Years, some more, some less, and some of them Eighty and an Hundred years of Age, who are never permitted to Write or receive any Letters from their Friends, and particu∣larly the Dutchess de la Force, tho her Husband the Duke (by his great Age and Hardship in the Bastile) was forced to turn his Religion, yet they will not suffer him to Write to his Dutchess, nor her to Write to him.
This Governor by his own contrivance to Punish the Priso∣ners, had a Door made to the outside of each Prison Window, which upon every slight occasion, he would cause to be Locked up, that the Prisoners had no manner of Light sometimes for six or seven Months together; so that the neerest comparison I can make of a Prison in France, is to that of a man buried Alive for such a time, being equally debarr'd of all earthly Comfort, by any fort of Intercourse or otherwise.
While I was at Angiers, there was a Protestant Marquess Condemned to the Gallies for breaking out of Prison; he was Chained to a Turk, that had hardly Rags to cover him; in this Manner he was carried to the Galleys, and then made to Strip, and Row with the rest of the Slaves.

 The Taxes upon the People are so Prodigious, that a po Shoemaker at Angiers (one Mathurine Gainer) that had a Wife and three Children, and paid but Twenty Shillings a Year Rent, was rated a Noble; and tho he offered to part with all he bad for five Shillings, yet they sent Soldiers to Quarter upon him till he paid; (which is their usual method of raising Taxes) who taking away what he had, the poor Man by Charity, got enough to pay the Tax; but yet for saying he would write to the King about it, he was clap'd into a Dangeon in the same Castle where I was, and there kept three Weeks, and then upon the Supplication of his Wife, he was permitted to work in the Passage to the Dungeon, to keep his Children from Starving: And according to the Ability of the Persons, they send Sol∣diers to Rifle and Tyrannize over them till they pay their Taxes, and when I came away, they were going to lay a Tax upon Saboes, or Wooden Shoes, besides four Pence upon a Hat tho it cost but half a Crown, and Taxes upon Christnings and Funerals.
☞ There was likewise a Prisoner at Angiers, one Mr. God∣dard an English Gentleman, who being in the Academy before the War, was at the beginning of the War, taken up as a Spy, tho then but Fifteen Years of Age, and kept so closely, that they would neither let me see him when he was Sick, nor he see me when I was Sick, only when I was coming away, with much ado, I got to see him, where he lay in the Common-Goal in a sad Condition, and now I hear, he is removed to the Bastile, and no Exchange will be allowed for him, tho there was a Prisoner sent hence by mutual Agreement, for him, two Tears since, who was kept there and yet he not delivered; and thus we see what little regard the French have to their Word, in performing either Articles or Treaties.
At my coming away, I went to visit the English Prisoners at Dinan in Brittany, where they lay in a most miserable con∣dition; two lay Dead at the Door, and had so lain four and twenty Hours; the Place Stunk so I was not able to go in;
 and with their hard Ʋsage, Seven hundred have been Buried out of that Prison since this War; which computed with those Dead at Rochfort and other Places, we cannot reckon to have lost less than Two thousand good Seamen, by the ill Treatment they have had in France: And notwithstanding the General Exchange agreed on, they continue their wonted Barbarity to our Seamen as much as ever: And yet to the Honor of the English Sailers, I never found (notwithstanding all their ill Ʋsage by Hanger, Beating and otherwise) that any of them went into that Kings Service, tho much Sollicited to it by the Duke of Berwick and Sir William Jennings, and that Mr. Fitz James, who is Stiled Grand Prior of England and Ire∣land, went to Sea the two last years, yet there was not Fifty English Seamen in their whole Fleet; which may serve to con∣fute a popular Mistake among us, that the French have abun∣dance of our Seamen in their Service: Indeed, there are three Privateers belonging to King James, that were set out of Ire∣land when he was there, that are Manned with English and Irish.
And as they at first gave out I was an English Lord, so I found afterwards their Demands were accordingly for my Re∣lease, for they first refused thirty Seamen in Exchange for me, then they refused two Captains (Pecarr and Busheen) after∣wards they demanded Captain St. Maria and four Scotch Captains that lay Condemned in Newgate, and when that was consented to, then they demanded Lieutenant General Ha∣milton for me, and would not be content to take the Earl of Clancarty, or any of the other Prisoners in the Tower; and now after all, this Value put upon me by my Enemies, I should be very glad to be thought Serviceable at Home, as I desire to be, and hope I may in this.
They took on Board me, one John Denny a French Prote∣stant, who was Settled and Married in England; him they Condemned to be Hang'd at Raines, but afterwards gave him his Life to Serve them Ten Years. Now since there is a gene∣ral
 Exchange, and that we Release all the English and Irish of their Party that we Take, I think it my Duty in like man∣ner to plead for his being Demanded, and sent for back, that he may return to his Family. There was likewise taken and Condemned with him at Raines, one Fountaine, who was Chy∣rurigon of the Lively; but he got his Pardon, and is since come to England.
And here it may not be amiss to let these Honourable Houses know, what care the French King took to keep an account of what Expence he was at upon the account of Ireland; for that he had a Commissary on purpose to take and keep an Account of all the Charges he was at in all things relating thereto; and it may be easily imagined why he did so: One time it happened that the Governor of Angiers sent for me, and in Discourse told me what it had cost the King his Master on the account of Ireland, which amounted to a great many Millions of Livres, which I put down for a Memorandum, but lost the Paper, and the Sum I have forgot; but the Governor told me, When King James got England again, he would pay the French King all the Expences he had been at on his Account, or give him Ireland for it. And another time a French Gentleman being permitted by the Governor to Discourse me, and I not fearing to speak, as knowing I could not well be used worse than I was, told him, They were all Slaves to their King, but could not see it, like a Dog that never complains for want of a Hat, because he never wore one. He said, If they were Slaves, yet their Comfort was, they should e'er long have us to be their Slaves. Another time the Governor sent for me to tell me Plymouth was Surrendred to them, and that it was done by the Deputy-Governor, upon which I Smiled at the Conceit; he being extraordinarily desirous to know the rea∣son why I would not believe it, I told him, That Governors here were not so Arbitrary as they in France; and that be∣sides, a True Englishman had as much an Antipathy to a Frenchman, as a Mastiff Dog had to a Bull; upon which he very angrily remanded me to Prison.

 Salt is there Ninepence per Pound, which all People must take at that rate, and what quantity they are allotted; and must not dispose of any to a Neighbour or Friend; and poor People that are not able to Buy, will watch an opportunity when any Salt Fish is laid a Freshening, to get the Water to make Pottage, but the Goblees, which are Officers appointed to look after the Revenue of Salt, will throw it down the Kennel to prevent the Poor having that small Advantge.
If any Person be found Stealing the Custom of Salt, though never so small, they must pay an Hundred Crowns for the first Offence, or go to the Gallies; but if they do it a Second time, nothing can prevent their being sent to the Gallies; and thus the French King breeds Slaves of his own, without buying Turks, Moors, or Negroes; for by the help of these, and the Protestants that break Prison, he finds almost sufficient for that use.
The manner of his Dragooning his Protestant Subjects is this, When any one would not comply with the Priests in mat∣ters of Religion, Dragoons were sent to Quarter upon them, according to their Rank or Degree; which Dragoons would not be content with Free Quarters; but the Oppressed Host was forced, for Quietness, to give them a Pistole, or two Crowns a Day, in that manner wasting their Estates till all was gone; then the Poor Men would endeavour to make their Escape out of such Misery: But the Dragoons having a strict Eye over them, would certainly keep them while any thing was left, and then carry them to Prison.
The French King to decoy those poor People, at first assured them by his Officers, that if they would comply, they should re∣ceive the Sacrament in both kinds, which prevail'd with many to turn; but then according to his wanted Broken Word, denied them the Cup, and allowed them only the Wafer; and abundance are now in Prison that have so been for several Years past on
 that Account, who fail not constantly to Pray for the Success of Their Majesties Arms.
And if this be their usage to their own People, What may those of our Nation expect, if ever they should be so wretchedly Ʋnhappy (which God prevent) to fall under their Power, which makes me admire that some People here should so lose there Senses, as to Applaud or Entertain the least Thoughts of a French Government, which I could never imagine, till my Return to England; and therefore must impute it to the most Stupid sort of Ignorance and Malice, and that they have no∣thing to lose after they have parted with their Brains, and that Love for their Country, Religion and Posterity, which is natural to every true Englishman. I am,
My Lords and Gentlemen,

