



SIR,
HAving received, with your Letter, the learned Book you sent with it, I hasten to pay you my thanks for both; and in answer to the former, have done to the latter what you de∣sir'd. You (I doubt not) will commend me for complying so soon with so great a Stranger; But I have need of saying something to excuse my Easiness to my self. And the All I have to say, is entirely this: That notwithstanding you are a Gentleman I never yet saw, nor till your Letter came to me, had ever heard of; yet Dr. Sherman was a person, whom having never seen, I had heard of often. I often heard he had been one, who suffer'd many things and well, for his King and Countrey; one in whom Learning and Religion had for many years met, and had equal shares. To which I add, that he was one of those Cambridge-men, of whom
 (before I was admitted into that University) I should for many years together have had a very great Envy,, &c. Diod. Sic. lib. 1. . Thucyd. l 5. but for my Reverence, and my Love, which were extremely much greater. For methinks I stand affected towards Oxford and Cambridge as Thucydides did to Athens and Poloponnesus, whereof the first was an un∣kind Mother, and the second a loving Nurse. Thence was he fitted (more than others) for an Impartial Historian of the Warr between both, because his Gratitude to the one, was as prevalent with him, as his natural Affection unto the other.
Growing thus kind to Dr. Sherman, and somewhat yet the kinder to him (at least the apter to express it this way) because he is not here in Being to thank me for it, I read as much of his Discourses in Confutation of Fa∣ther Johnson, as would consist with my greater, though less acceptable, Employments. Perhaps I read what I could read with as much eager∣ness and delight since I saw it printed, as the most excellent Bishop Hall by a written Copy. And I am heartily glad to see that extant in 63. which such an exemplary Prelate so much commended to the publick in 54. He hath commended it indeed to so good a purpose, and the work it self will so deservedly com∣mend it self to All Readers, (All I an who have the skill to compare and grasp it, as well as
 the patience to read it through,) that should I say, how much I think it to be an acute and a solid piece, I should consider my self too much, and the Book too little.
Nothing pleaseth me more than the Con∣dition of the Subject, on which the Challenge of the Jesuite drew forth his Answer. For the point of Infallibility must needs be one of the two Pillars, (whereof the Pope's pretended Headship or Universal Pastorship is the other,) wherewith the Trumperies superstructed must stand or fall. That as twas skilfully contriv'd by Father Johnson, to spend his strength in secu∣ring that saving Error, [The Church of Rome can∣not err,] as giving excellent security to whatso∣ever other Errors his Church can own; and under which, as an Asylum, the grossest Follies they can get by do live in safety; so 'twas as happily re∣solv'd by Dr. Sherman (upon so good an Oc∣casion given) to shew the Feeblenesse and de∣fects even of that which does hold up the Papal Grandeur; and cannot choose but be acknow∣ledg'd even by men of both sides, to be their first or their second most Helpfull Engine.
This does bring into my mind, what I was told some years agoe by Mr. Patrick Carew (when newly come out of Italy, where∣in from his childhood he had been bred,) That having first been convinc'd by the little Treatise, which had been penn'd on that point
 by his brother Falkland, That his belov Roman Church was not unerrable; He could not hinder his own Discovery, how very grievously she had err'd. Nor by consequence could he hinder his own Conversion from a Church still pretending to a priviledge of not being able to be deceiv'd, as soon as he found 'twas even That, that had most deceiv'd him. And truely, had I been bless'd but with a little of that leisure which some enjoy, where∣by to have written some Reply to Serenus Cress, who pretending to confute, has escap'd my Sermon, and only fought like a Parthian, by certain dexterous Tergiversations, though un∣like a Parthian in point of mischief; neither denying, nor disproving, but still evading my Ci∣tations, and taking very great care to obscure his own; as well by making both the Greek and the Latin Fathers to hold their peace in Greek and Latin, and only speak in such English as He affords them, as by concealing both the Pages and the Editions of his Authors, for fear a Protestant should have leisure and patience too, whereby to bring them to a strict and a speedy Trial: I say, had I time to Refute his Book, which untill the other day I had not time enough to Read, (nor then quite through,) I should not inlarge on any point with greater contentment to my Self, or greater hope of con∣vincing both Him and His, than That on
 which he hopes most to guard his obstinacy by.
For (that I may touch on that Subject which the Reverend Dr. Sherman hath largely hand∣led, so as to add to his Thoughts what I find uppermost in mine own,) when the Romanists contend for the Church of Rome's being Infallible, they mean by the Roman, the whole Church Catholick; and by the whole Church Catholick, theyFather Johason, p. 350. mean as many as own the Pope for their Soveraign Pastor. This is call'd (by a plainer phrase,)Father Cressy, p. 95. The present Visible Church, to which (for all the General Councils) the last Recourse is to be had. But why rather to the present than to the Primitive Church? or why to the present Church Visible, rather than to the four first General Councils? Even because (saithIbid. Mr. Cressy) Universal Experience doth demon∣strate it impossible, that any Writing can end a Debate between multitudes of persons interessed, and therefore not impartial or indifferent. Thus still there is something, not only fallible, but false, whereby a Romanist is to judge where to find Infallibility; (for wheresoever That is, the last Recourse is to be made;) Because an Ex∣perience as universal as that whereof Mr. Cressy speaks, doth also demonstrate it as impossible, That any present Church Visible (much less that His) should put an end to a Debate between multitudes of persons, whose Interest and Byasse
 is multifariously divided as well as They. Men must equally agree (which they never will) first what is to be meant by the present Visible Church; and after That, that she is Infallible; before she can possibly put an end to all their Dissen∣sions in their Debates.
But what does he mean by the present Church Visible? Does he mean all the Churches that do submit unto the Pope as their Soveraign Pastor, either IN or OUT of a General. Council? If the first, he must mean either a written or speaking Council. If the former, Then he should not have distinguish'd it from the pre∣sent Church Visible, as here he does. Then there needed no more then One, but That (by all means) must be a standing General Council, from the beginning of the Church till the Day of Judgement. And then the Church was never able to make her Members the better for her Infallibility, or to prove she had such a privilege, by being able to put an End to a Debate between Multitudes of different Interest and Judgement in several Nations, either before the Nicaene Council, which was the first that was Gene∣ral; or since the Council held at Trent, which they avow to be the last. But if he means only a speaking Council, then he confesses that at present there is no such present Visible Church, as can Infallibly put an end to the Debate above mention'd; even because there is no such Gene∣ral
 Council. Which being so; where is the boasted Infallibility? How shall we find or comprehend it? or how is any Creature the wiser for it? And if he means (what was said in the second Branch of my first Dilemma,) All the Churches that own the Pope as their So∣veraign Pastor, not in, but OUT of a General Council, Then the Pope in his Conclave, or College of Cardinals, (which, by the way, is a Conventicle, though not a Council, not Conci∣lium, but Conciliabulum,) must be the sole, proper speaking Judge, who can end such a Debate as before we spake of; so that in Him, as in her Head the present Visible Church does entirely lodge; at least in respect of her Infallible Judgement; which none but the Pope (out of a Council) can have or utter. But thus the Romanists Absurdities will be more shamefull than before. For the Pope may be an Here∣tick, if not an Heathen. Pope Marcellinus was the first, and Pope Liberius the second. And there is no better arguing than to the Apti∣tude from the Act. Nay, in some of the 30 Schisms whichOnuphr. in Chro. p. 50. Onuphrius reckons up in the Church of Rome, (before the word Pro∣testant was ever heard of,) when two or three Popes did sit at once, 'twas even impossible to determine, which Pope was the true, and which the false. The Councils ofConcil. Constantiense praecipuè congregatum extinguendi schismatis Causâ, quis esset verus Pontifex, vix agnosce∣bat. v. Hist. Concil. à Paulo V. Edit. To. 4. p. 127. Constance andStatim illud in Con∣troversiam venit, Num Synodus Pisana in Il∣los potuerit animad∣vertere, cùm eorum alteruter verus esset Pontifex, sed uter is esset non constaret. ibid. p. Seqq. Pisa (whereof the former, by the way,
 was a General Council, in the Catalogue set forth by Pope Paulus Quintus,) were utterly at a Losse in their Debates of this matter. From whence it follows unavoidably, that Mr. Cressy must not dare to avow this last no∣tion of The present Visible Church; as well be∣cause it is not That, to which he dares say the last Recourse is to be had, as because she can too easily declare her sense in another way, than as she was ever represented by her Pastors out of all Nations, that is to say, by a General Council, which yet the present visible Church can never do, saith Mr. Cressy, chap. 9. p. 95. But when I say, he must not dare to avow this last notion of the present visible Church, to which he gives the last Recourse, and to which he ascribes Infallibility: I mean, he must not for the future, not but that for the present he dares to do it; Because he tells us expresly, p. 97. (and as dogmatically too, as without al proof,) That the present Superiours living and speaking must conclude all Controversies, their Interpretation of Scripture and Fathers, their Testimony of Tradition, must more then put to silence all contradiction of particular persons, or Churches; it must also subdue their mindes to an Assent, and this under the penalty of an Anathema, or cutting off from the body of Christ.
This is said by Mr. Cressy concerning the living and speaking Judges of his Church, Judges
 for the time being in every Age. Quite for∣getting what he had said not long before, (p. 95.) That Reason, Inspiration, and Examples of Pri∣mitive Fathers, must joyntly make up the only Guide, which He affirms to be Infallible. For, unless they all concurr (as he had said before that, p. 93.) together with the present visible Governours (to whom he there gives a judging determining power) That which we take to be Reason, and Inspiration, and the sense of the Primitive Church, may deceive and misguide us. Now besides that this saying destroyes the for∣mer, where no less was ascrib'd to the present visible Superiours living and speaking, than here is attributed to all four Requisites in conjunction; we know that Reason may be deceiv'd, Inspi∣ration be counterfeit by some unclean spirit, (which fallible Reason must be the Judge of) primitive Fathers subject to Error, and present Superiours much more than Primitive: And, many fallible Guides can never make up one Infallible, any more than many Planets can make one Sun, or many Acts of finite knowledge one true omniscience. For as Mr. Cressy does confess, that Infallibility and Omniscience, are incommuni∣cable Attributes of God Himself, (p. 98.) so he imply's a contradiction, when he saith they are communicable to any creature, such as is his present visible Church. And another Contra∣diction as bad, or worse, when he saith that
 a man, although of much Ignorance, may in a sort be Omniscient within his sphere, (p. 99.) which is as if he should have said, That a man may be able to have a knowledge of all things, because he may so know them All, as to be Ignorant of some. But then, with the help of that , the meanest man is as omniscient, as is his Roman Catholick Church; because (within his determinate sphere) he must needs have a knowledge of All he knows; and of more than she knows the Roman Church hath no knowledge. So again when he would shew how a creature may be Infallible, though he had said that God Himself is incommuni∣cably such, (p. 98.) he has no better a , than an implicit explication of an Affirmative by a Negative. The immutable God can preserve mutable creatures from actual mutation; [ibid.] thereby implying, that the Immutable cannot communicate his incommunicable Attribute of Im∣mutability to any creature, even because he can∣not possibly perfect a creature into Himself. But from actual mutation he can preserve any Creature, as well an Ignorant single man, as a whole Church Catholick. Thus by endeavou∣ring to uphold, Mr. Cressy does throughly de∣stroy his Doctrine: All he saith coming to this, That however God only is undeceivable, yet he is able to preserve his deceivable crea∣tures from being actually deceiv'd. Sed quid
 hoc ad Iphicli Boves? The Question is not, Whether God can preserve a Church from be∣ing actually in error, (for so he can, and often does, particular Members of his Church,) But whether de facto he hath granted an Inerra∣bility, or an Impossibility of erring, unto that which they call the Roman Catholick Church. Not whether the Church can be actually false in her opinions, but whether or no she is Infallible, or exempted by God from the passive power of giving false Judgement in points of Faith. Will Mr. Cressy so confound an Adjective in Bilis, with a participle derived from the passive preterperfect Tense, as either to argue à non actu ad non potentiam, or else to pass over from the one unto the other? Will he argue that Adam before his fall was Impec∣cable, because he yet was preserved from actual sin? or, that the Church was Infallible in the Apostles own Times, because she was not erro∣neous untill she was? He cannot sure be so destitute either of Logick or Grammar skill. I think it rather his skill to dissemble both; as finding no other way to dispute a whole Chapter for such a Doctrine, unless he either begg's or forsakes the Question.
But now to give him more Advantage than he is mindfull to give himself, when he al∣lows so great a privilege to the present Gover∣nours of the Church in every Age, whom he
 will have to be the living and speaking Judges, to whom (without contradiction) all particular Churches as well as persons,Ubi supra. p. 97. must meekly yield up their Assent; Let us allow it to be his mean∣ing, not that These are undeceivable, but that God doth still preserve them from being actually deceiv'd. Was not Pope Hildebrand himself the supreme speaking Judge, when yet theImperial. Statut. apud Goldast. Tom. 1. p. 74. Coun∣cil at Wormes did set him out as a Brand of Hell?Conc. Constantien. A. D. 1414. Seff. 11. Edit. Bin. To. 7. 1036. Notoriè criminosus de homicidio, veneficio, pertinx Haereticus, Simoniacus, con∣tra Articulum de Resurrectione mortu∣orum dogmatizavit. — Et paulò superius, — cum Uxore fratris sui & cum sanctis mo∣niatibus Incestum commisit p. 1035. Was not John the 23. the supreme speak∣ing Judge of Mr Cressy's then present visible Church, when yet he openly deny'd the Immor∣tality of the soul, and for That (with other crimes) was condemn'd by the Council then held at Constance? Were not John the 22. and Anastasius the 2. the supreme speaking Judges in their several Times, who yet were both stigma∣tiz'd for the Crime of Heresie? Let Mr Cressy now speak like an honest man, Were such superiours as these, then living and speaking, to conclude all controversies, to Interpret Scripture and the Fathers, to put to silence all particular Churches, to subdue mens mindes to an Assent, and this under the penalty of their being cut off from the body of Christ? Let him read his own dictates, p. 97. It will but little mend the matter, to say, The Pope is but one, and that He spake of All Superiours: Because, besides that they may All have their Byasses and Errors as well as He, in case they are all consulted
 with, (as they never are) 'Tis very evident that the Pope (like the Sun among the Starres) is more than All in all Cases. The greatest part of those Councils which they are pleas'd to call General, have been indeed little better than the meer properties of their Popes: which that I may not seem to say as one that loves to speak sharply, but rather as compell'd by their own Accompts of them, I shall here give an Instance in one or two.
In the last Lateran Council under Julius the 2.A brief Accompt of the last Lateran Council. and Leo the 10. The Holy Scriptures (at the first Session) are humbly laid down at his Holinesses Feet; And, an Oath being admi∣nistred, are formally toucht by the Officials. The Pope (in that Session) is call'd The Prince of all the world; and (in the next) The Priest and King to be adored by all the People, as being most like to God Himself. Accordingly (in the 3d) The Kingdom of France by Pope Julius is subjected to an Interdict, and the Mart held at Lyons transferr'd to Geneva. The pragmatick Sanction is rescinded in the fourth, for the im∣proving of the Trade of Ecclesiastical Hucksters, the buying and selling of Church-preferments. The Pope is asserted as Gods Lieutenant upon Earth, though not of equal merits. (A very signal Condescension! and to be kept in everlasting Remembrance! God is meekly acknowledg'd to be superiour to the Pope.) In the fifth Session, Julius
 dies,Ne sleveris Fiia Sion (ut Ep scous Md usiensis affatur Papam, qia Ecce vet Leo de Tribu Juda, Radix David. cce Tibi suscitavit Deus Salvatorem &c. Te, Leo Batissime, Salvatorem expecta∣mus, Te Liberatorem vnturum speravi∣mus. Concil. Lateran. ult. Sess. 6. Bin. To. 9 p. 74. (another great Condescension!) And Leo his Successor is saluted, as no less than the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Root of David, the Saviour and Deliverer that was to come. (A pret∣ty clinch, but a blasphemous complement, and unworthy a Bishop's mouth.) In the eighth and ninth Sessions, This Lion Roars; first against them that shall violate his Decrees in the pre∣sent Council, to whom he threatens such a Sen∣tence of Excommunication, as none but Himself could absolve them from. Next against the Em∣perour, Kings, and Princes, whom he chargeth not to hinder such as were coming to the Coun∣cil under the penalty of incurring God's Displea∣sure and his own In the last of those two Sessions,Divinae Maj statis tuae conspectus, vuti∣lanti cujus fulgore imbecilles oculi mei caligant, &c. Et paulo post, In Te uno legitimo Christi & Dei Vicario, pophe∣ticum illud debuerit usus impleri, Ado∣rabunt cum omnes Reges Terrae, omnes Gentes servient ci. Ibid. Sess. 9. p. 114, 116. Antonius Puccius tells Leo, how his Eyes are darkned by the rutilant Brightness of his Divine Majesty.—in him alone as the Vicar of God and of Christ, That saying of the Prophet ought again to have its completion, All the Kings of the Earth shall come and worship, All the Nations under Heaven shall do him service. In a word, through∣out the whole Council, nothing is carried by counsel or consultation of Assessors, (for Assistants I cannot call them,) nothing by suffrages or votes from them that make it wear, the name of a General Council; But, the supreme present Judge (to use the phrase of Mr. Cressy) as an Infallible Dictator, ordained All. This is con∣stantly the Preface to each Decree in That
 Council, Leo Episcopus, servus servorum Dei, ad perpetuam rei memoriam, approbante Concilio, &c.
So again in their last and best beloved Gene∣ral Council,Of the Council at Trent. All the Fathers do but prepare convenient matter for Decrees, whereunto the Pope's Fiat does give the life. Their two and twenty years contrivances do end at last inHumiliter petimus nomine dicti Concilii oecumenici Tridemini, ut Sanctitas vestra dignetur confirmare omnia & singula, &c. Edit. Bin. Tom. 9. p. 442. meek Petition, That his Holiness will vouchsafe to con∣firm what they had done; that is, to inform the lifeless matters they had prepared; which could not have the nature and force of Articles or De∣crees, until the Pope had breathed on them the Breath of Life. So a little before That,Si in his recipien∣dis aliqua Difficult as ariatur, aut aliqua in∣ciderit quae Declara∣tionem aut Finitionem postulent, — con∣fidit sancta Synodu Pon ificem curaturum —&c. viderit expedire—&c. Si necessarium judi∣caverit, &c. Si ei visum fuerit, &c. Ibid. p. 434. The General Council doth humbly hope, That if any Difficulty arise in the receiving of the Canons, or if any things Doubtful shall require a Definition, or Declaration, His Holiness will provide for the Necessities of the Provinces, for the Glory of God, and the Tranquillity of the Church, either by calling a General Council, if He shall judge it to be needful, or by commit∣ting the Business to such as He shall think fit to do it, or by what way soever He shall judge more commodious. All, upon the matter, both is, and must be, as He pleaseth; and when the Council is dissolv'd, He is himself Tantamount to a General Council. Indeed much more. For the Council did but propose, But HeApostolicâ Auctori∣tate declaramus & definimus p. 444. declares and define's by Apostolical Authority. HeFidem sine ullâ Du∣bitatione haberi man∣damus at{que} decerni∣mus p. 443. com∣mand's
 and decree's by somewhat more than A∣postolical, That Faith without any Doubting be had by all to his Creed; and all under the pe∣nalty of being cut off from the Body of Christ; notwithstanding some part of his Creed is.Vide Concil. Tri∣dent. Edit. Bin. ex∣cus. Genev. A. D. 1612. Tom. 9. Sess. 4. p. 354. This, That Apocryphal writings and meer Traditions concerning Faith as well as Manners are by all to be receiv'd with as much Reverence and affection, as things proceeding from God the Holy Ghost, or from the mouth of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Now if a Council (as the Lateran) does only Read a Decree in Fieri, And a Pope (as the Tenth Leo) by saying Placet, does make it one in Facto esse; If a Council cannot be currant, un∣less it be called by the Pope, and by the Pope praesided in; yea if nothing done in it, can pass for currant, until the Pope hath approved of it, or until he hath made it become Authentick by an Act of his Will, or by a word of his Mouth; Mr. Cressy and Father Johnson who do so ear∣nestly contend for a subcoelestial Infallibility, can∣not chuse but believe (if at all they believe as well as plead it) That its real Inhaerence is in the Pope, and only said to be in the Council, be∣cause it does more become the Error, and set it off to the People with better Grace. The Reason of what I say, is very cogent in it self; and that it may be so to others, I thus endeavour to make it plain. They say that Councils are not good or currant, unless approved of by the Pope. Nor
 does he give his Approbation until the Council is at an end. His Approbation is after; and not before it. From whence 'tis natural to In∣ferr, That he approve's not of the Council, be∣cause Infallibly good, and therefore currant; (it would not then need his Approbation:) But the Council is good and currant, because He approve's it. And why should That be said, unless because He is Infallible with them that say it? Thus (I say) it is to Them, not Thus in it self. For then there would follow this other Absurdity, That if The Council hath err'd, it is because the Pope hath not approv'd it. For let him but approve, and It hath not err'd, be∣cause it hath every thing required to its Infallibi∣lity. If not, let them speak; for I argue only ad homines, and (out of very great charity) try to make them asham'd with their own Devices.
Now (to speak a gross Truth,) The Ap∣probation of a Council, when a Council hath done with its Consultations, cannot possibly have the virtue to effect that such a Council shall not have err'd. For if it hath erred, it is erroneous, though He approve's it. If not, it is orthodox, though He reject's it. The Emperours who call'd the first and truest General Councils, did either not care for, or not expect his Approbation. Yet Those were the Councils, either not erring at all, or at least the least erring of any other.

But let us yield Mr. Cressy yet more Ad∣vantage, and suppose him only to mean, what once he saith, (for he saith so many things, that he seem's to have many, and those contradictory, meanings,)Ch. 9. p. 95. Sect. 7. A Church represented by her Pastors out of All Nations, which Pastors out of All Nations make aConcilia Generalia dicuntur ea, quibus interesse possunt & debent Episcopi toti∣us Orbis, (nisi le∣gitimè impediantur) & quibus nemo rectè praesidet nisi Summus Pontifex, aut alius ejus nomine. Inde enim dicuntur Oecumenica, id est, Orbis Totius Terrae Concilia. Bel∣larm. Controv. Tom. 1. l. 1. de Concil. c. 4. p. 1096. General Council; And that This only is the Church, to which he ascribes Infallibility. To which I answer, by two De∣grees. First, by observing that he takes for granted what is false. For there was never such a Council, as to which All Nations did send their Pastors, and by consequence The Church was never so Represented; and by consequence never Infallible, if She can only be Infallible when so Represented, to wit, by the Pastors of All Nations that have Christian Churches in them. For, the first four General Councils were not such in that sense; And only were called Oecumenical, not for Bellarmine's Reason, but because they consisted of all the Pastors who were sent from Those Nations which made up all the Roman Empire,. Concil. Chalced. Act. 1. Bin. To. 3. p. 50. whose Emperours by a figure were call'd the Masters of the world. Be∣yond the limits of the Empire, None of those, or after-Councils, did ever reach. None went thi∣ther out of Persia, India, the Inmost Arabia, and Aethiopia, wherein the Churches were never sub∣ject to the Roman Empire; Nor yet out of Britain, France, and Spain, when being parted
 from the Empire, They became the Peculiar of other Princes. And as the Empire grew scanty, so the Councils in proportion did grow less General. Whose Greatness is to be measur'd not by the number of the Bishops, but by the multi∣tude of the Churches, and by the Greatness of the Regions from which they come. But since the Bishops of Rome, with other Rights of the Ro∣man Empire, have invaded This also, of calling and praesiding in General Councils, they have been only call'd General, for being a Confluence of Pastors out of all the Papal Empire. And therefore, according to Mr Cressy, They could not possibly be Infallible, because not such, as to which All Nations did send their Pastors.
Next I answer by observing, that the learned'st Romanists cannot agree about the Nature or Number of General Councils. For, first as to the Nature, The General Councils of the Ro∣manists areQuaedam sunt ab Apostolicâ sede app o∣bata, at{que} ab Ecclsiâ universâ recepta, quaedam omnio re∣probata quaedam par∣tim reprobata partim approbata, quaedam nec approbata, nec repro∣bata. Bellarm. ubi supra. p. 1097. thus divided by themselves! Some (say they) are approved by the Sea Apostolical and received by the Catholick Church. 2 Some are absolutely reprobated. 3 Some are repro∣bated in part, and in part approved. 4 Some are neither reprobated, nor approved, Now since each of these sorts is said by Romanists to be General, and General Councils in the general are also said by the same to be Infallible; What do they but say in effect and substance, The Church represented in General Councils is either
 absolutely Infallible, as in the first species of Ge∣ral Councils) or altogether fallible, (as in the second;) or partly Infallible, and partly fallible, (as in the third); or neither fallible, nor infallible, (as in the fourth.) If General Councils cannot err, Why do they reprobate, or doubt any of them? If they have sufficient reason both to re∣probate some, and to doubt of others, Why do they callp. 1105, 1107, 1109. Et inde con∣stat, locutum esse Bel∣larminum ex senten∣tiâ suâ, quia sic clau∣dit Partitionem. Quod membrum postremum in Conciliis particu∣laribus potissimum lo∣cum habet. p. 1097. Ergo membra priora in Generalibus, ut & postremum aliqua∣tenùs, etiamsi non po∣tissia ùm. General Councils? or, if General Councils can be doubted of at all, and that by Them, by what Infallible Token shall they know, either that the Councils are truly General and Genuine; or at least, that being such, they are Infallible? Of Bellarmine's 18 General Councils, which are his first and best species, he proves the Approvedness and validity by the Pope's praesiding in, or ap∣proving of them. His General proof is but this, [They are approved of by the Pope, and receiv'd by Papists.] And what is this but to beg the Question? The first 8 Councils he proves to be such, by theDist. 16. Can. sancta octo. apud Gratian. p. 60, 61. Decree of the Pope. The Nine that follow he proves to be approved, Because the Pope praesided in them. And the last was confirm'd by Plus Quartus. So that a Council's  is derived from the Pope, and depend's upon his Pleasure. But now of those 18. there is a very great difference. For the first four only were received and rever'd by Gregory the Great, as were the fourGratian. Decret. par. 1. Dist. 5. Hac spectat Epist. Vigilii Papae ad Euychium, apud Concil. Edit. Bin. To. 8. p. 593. Gospels of Jesus Christ. Which Reverence would have been due to the other
 fourteen, had they been of as great Authority; as they needs must have been, had all been ae∣qually Infallible, in their opinion who own them All. And yet the later Councils had been more valid than the former, if tis notAs{que} Romani Pon∣tificis Authoritate Sy∣nodum aliquibus con∣gregare non licet. Ibid. Dist. 17. lawful to call a Council, without the Authority of the Pope, as Marcellus his Decretal affirm's it is not. Secondly for the number of their approved Ge∣neral Councils, I see not how it can be agreed. For besides that theConcil. Florent. Sess. 5, & 6. Greeks receive no more than the first seven, TheMagdeburg. Cent. 8. c. 9. & Cent. 9. c. 9. Lutherans but six, The Eutychians in Africa no more than three, The Nestorians in the East no more than two, and the Polonian Trinitarians no more than one, (which Difference is acknowledged by Bellarmine Himself,): I say, besides This, I wonder when Bellarmine will be ever agreed with Pope Paul the fifth. The former rejecting the Council at Constance from the number of the Approved, which yet theV. Concil. Gen. a Paulo V. Edit. Tom. 4. Later does ad∣mit of with equal Reverence. It was repro∣bated indeed by a worse than it self, to wit the Council at Florence next following after; But for decreeing that a Council was above the Pope, for which it ought to have been approv'd. And abating those things which consist not with the Haughtiness (but the just Dignity) of the Popes, It is as generally received as any other. Yet we need no better Argument to prove such a Council above a Pope, and the gross fallibility
 of both together, than an Historical Accompt of That one Council, as we find it set down by Pope Paul the fifth. The Third at Constanti∣nople, which is commonly reckoned the sixth General Council, was by the 14th at Toledo, Can. 7. esteemed the Fifth. Implying the former under Vigilius, not to have been one of the General Councils, which yet with other Coun∣cils does pass for such without Question. And so much for the number of general Coun∣cils.
Last of all, let Mr. Cressy be allow'd to mean at the most Advantage, That his General Councils are said to be Infallible, not because they cannot, but do not err; for so he most im∣properly, but yet most kindly help's out him∣self,Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 8. Sozomen. l. 1. c. 23. Niceph. l. 8. c. 19. chap. 9. p. 98. But does he not think it was an Error in the first Council of Nice, (as in the third of Constantinople) to assent to Paphnutius his  and patronizing the marriage of Priests, as both Socrates, and Sozomen, & the RomanDist. 32. Can. Nicen. V. Concil. Constan∣tin. III. Can. 13. Concil. Elib. can. 36. Decree do alike affirm? At least the Council of Eliberis (which was contemporary with That) Mr. Cressy will say was in an Error, for declaring it unlawful, to paint in the windows or walls of Churches,Concil. Nicen. 2. Act 4. Concil. Constant. quartum decrevit cundem I∣maginum cultum E∣dit. Bin. Tom. 7. p. 1046. what is the object of Adoration. And so much the ra∣ther will he believe it to be an Error, because the second Nicene general Council, decreed that I∣mages are to be worship't, and denounced an Ana∣thema
 to all that doubt the Truth of it. Does he not think it was an Error in the Council of Chalcedon,Concil. Chalced. Act. 15. Can 28. Qui Canon genuinus est, non obstante Bnii subterfugio Pudendo. to Decree unto the Bishop of Con∣stantinople, even in Causes Ecclesiastical, an aequa∣lity of privileges with the Bishop of Rome? Or does he not think it was an Error in theConcil. Constan∣tinop III. Act. 13. Vide Notas in vitam Honor. Edit Bin. Tom. 4 p. 572. sixth General Council, to condemn Pope Honorius as a Monothelite, and to decree that his Name should be razed out of the Church's Diptychs; &c. Concil. Florent. De∣finit. Edit. Bin. To. 8. p. 854. seeing another General Council, since held at Florence, hath defined the Pope to be the High-Priest over all the world, the Successor of St. Peter, Christ's Lieutenant, The Head of the Church, The Father and Teacher of all Christians, and one to whom in St. Peter our Lord Jesus Christ did deliver a full Power, as well to GOVERN, as to feed the Universal Church? And did accordingly exauctorate the Council at Constance, for seating a Council above a Pope? Or is it not thought by Mr Cressy, that This Flo∣rentine Council was in an Error, in Granting the Roman Church a Power of adding to the Creed, which the General Council of Chalcedon had forbidden to be done under the Penalty of a Curse? as wasibid. Sess. 5. p. 593. observed and urg'd by Pope Vigilius Himself, to Eutychius the Patriarch of Constantinople? Let Mr. Cressy but compare the sixth General Council (whose famous Canons were made in Trullo,) with the Tridentine Ca∣nons, and the General practice of his Church.
 And sure I am, He will acknowledge that the one or the other hath foully err'd. It was de∣creed in the sixth,, &c. Conc. Constant. III. Can. 13. To. 5. p. 326. Edit. Bin. To. 5. p. 326. That married men without scruple should be admitted into the Priesthood, and this without any condition of abstaining thence-forwards from cohabitation, lest men should seem to offer Contumely unto God's holy Institution Yea (which is most to be observ'd) This was a Canon made professedly, &c.—, &c. ibid. p. 325, 326. against the Canon of the Church of Rome, whereunto is confronted the antient Canon, which is there said to be of Apostolical Perfection. Here the Doctrin and Practice of the Church of Rome is condemn'd by a Council, which is owned to be General by the same Church of Rome. The Church of Rome is also condemn'd by the sameIbid. p. 338. General Council (in its 55 Canon,) and command∣ed to conform to the 65 Canon of the Apostles (from which they had scandalously departed) under two great Poenalties therein express't. To all which if I shall add, How the 8th General Council made a peremptory Decree,. Concil. Constant. IV. Act. 9. Can. 3 Edit. Bin. Tom. 7. p. 977. That the Image of Christ is to be worship't as the Gospel of God, That whosoever adore's it not, shall never see his Face at his second coming, (never at least by their Goodwill,) That the Pictures of Angels and all the Saints are in like manner to be adored, And that all who think otherwise are to be Anathematiz'd; I hope Mr. Cressy and Father Johnson are not such Lovers of Idolatry and Contradiction, as not to
 know and to acknowledge the Fallibility of their Church in a general Council. And as, on the one side, Their stedfast Belief That She cannot err, is enough to confirm them in all their Er∣rors; So, to convince them on the other side of that one Error, will make them ready both to see, and renounce the Rest. That it may seem to be a vain, or a needless Thing, for any man to be lavish of Time, or Labour, in a particular Ven∣tilation of other controverted Points, whilst This of Infallibility remain's untouch't, or un∣decided. For if we shew them the Absurdities of Bread and Wine being transmuted into the Body and Blood of Christ; or of being so transmuted into Human Flesh and Blood, as to retain both the Colour, Touch and Tast, and all other Adjuncts of Bread and Wine; or of its so beginning now to be (in the Act of Consecration) the numerical Body of a crucified Jesus, as to have been the ve∣ry same under Pontius Pilate, as well as in the Virgin's Womb; or of its beginning to be as often, and of as many several Ages, as the Priests at their Altars shall please to make it; or of its being the same Body, whether eaten by a Christian, or by a Dog: They will defend themselves with This, That though 'tis absurd and impossible, yet it is necessarily true, because 'tis taught by That Church which cannot deceive or be deceiv'd. Whereas, if once we can convince them that she is able to be deceiv'd, who had taught them to
 believe she is undeceivable, (and that in matters of greatest moment,) They cannot chuse but disapprove and forsake her too, as the greatest Deceiver in all the world.
Thus I have done what you desir'd, if not as amply, or as well, yet at least as my Time (or my want of Time rather) would give me leave. Had I the Tithe of that Leisure I once injoy'd, I might have long ago reply'd to Mr. Cressy's whole Book, which I can hardly now say I have whol∣ly read. Nor indeed do I intend to consider more of it then here I have; partly because I am inform'd that the whole is undertaken by other men; partly, becaule I am prohibited both by mine Enemies and my Friends, (though in several senses, and to several ends); but chiefly, because I am forbidden by less-dispensable Employments. For al∣though I must confess, I think the Task very easie, and such as hath nothing in it of difficult, besides the length, which Mr. Cressy's Misad∣ventures would make unavoidable, upon so many and ample subjects, (so as his strength doth chief∣ly lie in the number and nature of his Infirmities, which nakedly to observe, were to write a Just Volume) yet supposing a Camel already loaded with the maximum quod sic that his back will bear, the Addition of a Feather may serve to break it. Some may think me Insufficient, others In∣dulgent to my Ease, (and I am as careless, as they unkind.) But I have Witnesses to my Comfort,
 both within, and without me, And God above is my Witness too, That I have little or no Time either to read or write Books, but what I rob Na∣ture of, even by stealing it from my Sleep. Which being as needful as the Oyl whereby the Lamp is kept burning, my Light of Life cannot chuse but be very Dim, and by many such Night-works would be extinguish't I know, there are who would teach me, how to live without sleeping, (as Hierocles his Scholar taught his Horse a Thing like it;) But they must pardon mye Refusal to put such a Trick into frequent practice, the very learning of which is enough to kill me. Yet Sir, you see I was resolv'd to watch a Night in His Service, in whom The vigilant D Sherman is faln asleep. And now it would be high Time to bid you heartily Good Night, but that I see it begin's to be Bright Morning. And the same Gallicinium which calls up others to their Labour, does more significantly bid me make haste to rest

M. C. Sept. 7. 1663.
