



Royal SIR!
THose Presents which in themselves are rich and beautiful, cannot lose any thing of their esteem, though tendred by the meanest hand; the Dia∣mond falls not under its true value, when found among the low-prized Pebbles: Nor will (I hope) this Hi∣story (which with all due Reverence I presume to lay at Your Majesties Feet) be thought worthless, although presented to the greatest of Kings, by the least and lowest of his Subjects.
Yet my presumption bears with it a more exten∣tive Modesty, than to possess me with a belief, that what I now bring, can, as far as it is any thing of mine, be worthy the least regards of Majesty. For it's Worth Con∣sists in it self; and being a Genealogical History of a Royal House Indubitably Descended from our English Kings, cannot I hope find a less Gracious Acceptance from our Great Monarch, than it hath formerly done from His most Christian Majesty, in Favour of those who but dispu∣tably have maintained it to be a Branch of the Royal Stem of France; but it may much more engage Your acceptance, when Your Majesty considers, that out of this Re∣nowned
 Stock Your Majesty hath made choice of Your most Excellent Queen.
For from Philippa the daughter of the great Duke of Lancaster, John of Gaunt, descended that numerous issue, which hath since supplyed PORTUGAL for above Three hundred years with a Succession of Heroick and Valiant Kings, and was not discontinued, but by the Power of the Ca∣stillians, under Philip II, III, IV. Kings of Spain, and hath been as miraculously restored in the Person of K. John IV. so that as King John I. much augmented the Glory of that Nation by allying himself with England, another King John hath no less renewed it, not more by redeeming his King∣dom out of the hands of Ambitious Seisers, than in being Father to that Daughter, by whom in the Persons of Your Royal Majesty, and our Gracious Queen KATHERINE; a second and much firmer union is contracted between these two so antiently allied Crowns.
But here, Dread SIR, I do conclude (lest I should too long disturb Your Royal thoughts,) with those Prayers which all good Subjects are bound to make; That as the Portuguesses have acknowledged that Match with England, to be the most happy and fortunate that ever any of their Kings contracted, both for the strength, and glo∣ry of that Kingdom; So that Heaven would likewise give Your Majesty as numerous, and as glorious an issue by this second Match, that Generations to come may have cause to Bless that Day wherein a Monarch of Great Britain did Espouse an Infanta of PORTUGAL. Thus prayes,

