


GEntlemen, the noble expres∣sions of courtesie, which I have received from your hands, beyond all merit, and expectation of mine, have inga∣ged me to be so bold as to prefix your names, in the frontispice of this little Book. And although truth need no Patron, and falsitie deserves none, for an Army cannot defend falsity, when truth of it self is murus aheneus, a brasen Wall. Yet I humbly crave, that you will be pleased to give it pro∣tection. Gentlemen, I assure you upon my credit, that I maintain ne treason against Philosophy, or any heretical opinion against Physick, but the an∣cient
verity which Hippocrates, and Galen have delivered unto us. Therefore in this your protection you may deserve the henour of patronizing those antique worthies whom the universal world, for many centuries of years have had in sublime estimation: And if you expect any of Demosthenes his Rhetorique, or Ciceronian Eloquence, I crave par∣don, and make this apologie for my self, That truth may be apparelled in plaine garments, and need not curio∣sity. Philosophy, and Physick are as ci∣vil matrons, which neglict rich attire, and splendid ornaments. Sophistry is many times in rich vestments. It hath bin observed many years ago, that the greatest Heretiques were the Eloquen∣test men. And garments that are perfumed with must, civet, and am∣ber, many times hreed a suspicion. Non bene olet, qui bene semper olet. And as Scaliger saith, non
in foro versamur, aut Romano co∣mitio, sed in communi Theatro sapientum, sub oculis veritatis cu∣jus supellectilem, atque apparatum non tam nitidum quam opulentum esse decet. . Learning hath a plaine coat without welt or guard as they say. Accept therefore I pray you, these plaine lines drest in a hom∣spun English sute. And if this Tractate cannot deserve your worthy acceptance. Yet may it be as a mo∣nument, and Testimony of my affecti∣on. Thus wishing you both, not only a perpetual health (that you need no Physitian) but also eternal happiness. I subscribe.

