



Honoured Sirs,
EVen Justice it self, without any other rela∣tion, challengeth this Dedication to you; unto whom God had given the Author, and the Author himself devoted his En∣deavours: so that whosoever alienates things of this nature to a private Mecoe∣nas, is justly to be redargued Parasitical, and as a moral Impropriator. You know, the children of the bond∣man are the goods of the parents master,Lev. 25.45, 46. Levit. 25. and however hereby made more common, yet are neverthe∣less your own in particular.
That the Eye therefore may no longer (now) envie the Ear, but both help the Soul; these Sermons are presented to your view; and that without the least sus∣pition of one Sense proving less candid then the other: appearing (here) as not without some disadvantages, (in regard of that same Magisterial presence, and Charming
 Elocution of the Author;) so not without some oddes at other side, for permanencie, and more leasurable in∣stillation of the matter. And 'tis an happiness obliging unto thankfulness, that God vouchsafeth thus to feast his people at both Senses. The lively sound, indeed, is the more piercing, (as SaintViva vox habet nescio quid latentis . In Prologo Galeato. Ierome saith;) but the Letter written, the more during; Litera scripta manet: The one, as it were, like Lightning; the other, like the fire upon the Altar.
According to my Talent, I have endeavoured some good both ways, not so much fearing censure, as desiring the good of others; and that these Papers might speak that permanently, to the eyes of all our Country-men, which found such favour in the ears of your Citizens, and entertainment in so many hearts. Yet all this, but too narrow a confinement for his ample merit, which did so far transcend the Pattern of his Predecessors, that he hath laid a Task invincible upon his SuccessorsAs was said of Chrysostoms successor, Quis, Cui? and after Athanasius, that a storm fol∣lowed a stream. Nazianzen.: Vix dedit, vix dabit aetas parem.
But I know, Love and Sorrow need no Remem∣brancer. 'Twould therefore be superfluous for me (to say no worse on't) if not infandum, renovare dolorem, to eccho to you his incomparable Parts and Arts; whose departure your love still lamenteth; whose pious ex∣cellencies, so many painful yeers imprinted on your Me∣mories; and not there onely, but, I hope, shed, with all their Celestial influences, on your conversations; that as, in these writings, he being dead, (as the Apostle saith) yet speaketh: so, in your Christian practice, the world may see and say, that (albeit deceased) he still liveth.2 Kings 23. 2 Chron. 35. Nor hath he so altogether forsaken us, (though This, like that other good Iosiah, subductus aevo pessimo, taken from the evil to come;) but that (as Nazianzen Naz. Oratione in laudem Basilii. said of Basil) he still doth us good, besteads us still: yet that, not (as they stretch his Rhetorick) by praying for us; but thus, by his instructions, and profitable labours, teaching us. For here, your meditations (though but
 in one short Chapter opened) are carried, as it were, thorowout the Vniverse: sometimes, as in Elijahs cha∣riot, up to heaven, to contemplate the Angels there, and their good offices; the blessed spirits of just men made perfect; I, and most frequently, the God of both of them, and him whom he hath sent, Iesus Christ, our dear Saviour: sometimes alighting unto  lower objects, pointing us to all the several mansions of the Vertues, and powerfully ejecting that same Legion of Epide∣mick vices: sometimes aloft, from the top of the tree of grace, shaking down the fruits of the SpiritGal. 5.: at o∣ther times again, stooping to inferiour capacities, and regulating of domestical relations: sometimes (as a Remembrancer from heaven) advertizing the publike Magistrate; strongly and sweetly moving all, to spiri∣tual prudence, and conscientiousness in their several Functions; chalking out to us (in these last and worst times) the Christian Menagry of all these various events of Divine Providence; with the profitable husband∣ing of both-hand-Temptations, Prosperity, and Affli∣ction: That so (like Musick out of discordant sounds, or wholesom Medicine from distastful severals,Rom. 8.28. all things may terminate unto Gods glory, Mans amendment and felicity. All which (together with a grateful affe∣ction to the Authors memory,Acts 22.3. at the feet of which Ga∣maliel I had the happiness to sit some yeers) conquered me into this Vndertaking; for which (as some of his neer Correlates acknowledge) these divers yeers could not finde out an Gedipus.
What care and travel is bestowed here, (in extricating the Character, rendering the Languages, digesting of the Index, and transcribing the whole business) I men∣tion not; nor need I, unto such as have but seen his Co∣pies: Yet modesty need not blush to say, It was not each ones work; his Manuscripts fulfilling that same Greek Proverb,. As difficult as excellent: his Notes right Golden Oar, (though precious in themselves, yet)
 worth but little, till digged out with art and labour, (as some of your own eyes are pairs of witnesses:) so that, although the matter of them be a divine Collyrium, or eye-salve to the soul; yet, penned in so diminutive a Letter, writ in so strict an Hand, (the wonder of Youth to read, much more of Age to write it) that they appear like Basilisks unto the bodies eyes: And that's the Re∣mora (I suppose) that hath so long detained them, and hitherto deterred his dearest Affectionates from such perusal of them.
But it shall ne'er be said, but that, for such an heaven∣ly Paul, some of his Auditors will dare even pluck out their own eyes also,Gal. 4.15. (in this sense) and give them to him; at least, hazard such a Private Darkness, to hold forth such a Publike Light. 'Tis honour enough, in the Sanctuary of God, (where all cannot be Lamps) to be but of those golden Candlesticks,1 Kings 7.49. Revel. 1.12. 1 Kings 7. Indeed, such metal was ordained for such service; and pity 'tis, any coarser should support our Authors holy Flame: Yet alas, some part of it (we see) hath been obtruded to the world in brazen, as it were, if not wooden sockets; burning but dim and gastly, by reason of their dull reflections:Quem reci∣tas meus est, ô Fidentine, Li∣bellus; sed ma∣le, &c. Mart. Ep. Sed malè dum recitas; But the truth is, while thus mutilously they render him; 'tis even their own dark Lanthorn, rather then his Taper: and therefore I have used here both tongs and snuffers of the Sanctuary, to vindicate its proper lustre. And although some (perhaps) might have effected it more dextrously; yet none could have more faithfully endeavoured, that the Childe might look like the Father, and not like those Mephibosheths that halt abroad under his injur'd name: which, how∣ever tolerably done too, as to such private men and fa∣milies, (the best use of Short-writing;) yet are right Short-hand-Sermons, Sermons far short of that same hand that penn'd them; meer Skeletons, without all lineaments and beauty. Indeed, vulgar Stenography, I mean, illiterate Short-hand, is but the coarse fieve of
 Learning, and the very Executioner of all Ingenuity; which it not onely rifles and disornaments, but com∣monly dismembers, and beheadeth; sucking indeed a∣pace (like Leeches) but the grossest blood. These, no such births blinde with hasteCanis festi∣nans caecos pa∣rit catulos., but delivered from his own Quill: These Sermons are no Hagarens, but children of the free-woman, of the Authors own Mi∣nerva. Your Senses can witness to your Vnderstandings they are his; his totally, without any the least mutila∣tion: (Sermons, like their Author,Attested by his own brother, M. Tim. Shute, to be his Sermons at large; and that he seldom altered a word or phrase. compleat in all their numbers:) And who dares draw a line after such an exquisite Apelles!
And having shewed they are his, I know how little need there is, either to intreat your acceptation, or ad∣vise your use: it is enough to have presented them into your hands, and, thorow them, to the Church of God; which they now finde (here) much like that wounded traveller, Luke 10.Luke 10. and none more like the good Samari∣tan, then he: Oh may his wine and oil (of comfort and instruction) help bathe, and search, and binde her bleed∣ing wounds, (our peace being bundled up in hers, as Ia∣cobs life bound up in Iosephs.Gen. 44.30.)
That God, who (above his other favours) hath given you fixed hearts in looser times, and stayed your feet in so many slippery places, adde an increase of all other heavenly graces, by this unworthy service of my weak endeavours. Mean time, 'tis both my joy and thank∣fulness, to have done (though but thus instrumentally) some little good: (in such things sure, Causa sine qua non, non est causa stolida.) 'Tis at once a comfort and an honour to his poor servant, that the great God of hea∣ven hath vouchsafed any way to use his hand, in the Ieast service of his Church.
These are but some Primitial handfuls, a few sheaves of that goodlyThe whole stock of the Authors Sermons being in the hands of his Reverend brother, Master Tim. Shute of Excoste; whence the Church may expect them, if he live to act his promises, or leave such as may do it Crop, which you may hope one day to reap, if God please to encourage Labourers. I have presented you a fragrant Posie of his Flowers; future
 time may make up the Garland: Facile est inventis ad∣dere. Here I have broke the Ice, whereat Gods Flock may drink, and finde the springs of comfort: I have spi∣ed out this Canaan, and brought you here the first true cluster of the Grapes you long'd for. But there want not Discouragers: so that I shall either proceed or stand, according as the Cloud or Fire admonisheth.
These, in the interim, not onely crave your entertain∣ment, but bring along their Recompence; their Recom∣pence (I say) by seasonable Exhortations to piety and wisdom. Had they come sooner to my hands, they had sooner come to yours: or could civil importunity have purchased more, I should have given an account of him in a larger Volume. Nor yet, having but these, would I be tempted to play the Egyptian midwife with them, seeing the day of small things is not to be despised,Zech. 4.10. Zech. 4. glad of each good opportunity to turn a Grievance into an Ad∣vantage,Psal. 39.2, 3. (having kept silence long, with David, not with∣out pain and grief) by thus improving an enforced Non-term, and over-long Vacation, in such a promulgating the best of Laws.
Now therefore, as the sedulous Author hath industri∣ously composed, and his Amanuensis ingenuously expo∣sed them: so do you henceforth conscientiously impose them on your actions; copie them out with a fair hand in all your dealings, that they may work your riches into a Crown inviolable, and lead you unto Immortality; that they may conduct you (like S. Peters Angel) thorow this tumultuous City of the world,Acts 12.9, &c. nay thorow the Iron gate of death it self, into that City of the new Ierusalem: To which end shall my prayers daily follow you; desi∣ring therein a Retaliation, for
(Sirs)

From my Study in LONDON, Novemb. 10. 1648.
