



MADAM,
THe sad Occasion of the Sermon, and your Relation to Her, whose Dying Request was ful∣filled in my Preaching it, doth style the Dedication yours. Though what I have mention'd of your Excel∣lent Daughter, is less than others would have said on the same Subject, yet having given an Account of her Pre∣paredness and Willingness to Dye, me∣thinks that should be considered as a sufficient Argument to mitigate your Sorrow, and prevent its Excess. 'Tis the Apostles Instruction concerning them who sleep in Jesus, that we ought not to sorrow as do others, who have no hope. Such were the Aegyptians; and 'tis ob∣serv'd
of them, that they mourned long∣er for the death of old Jacob, than his own Son Joseph did. I know the Time of her Death gives an Accent to the Ca∣lamity: That before your Mourning Weeds were laid aside for one of the best of Husbands, who hath a good Report of all Men, and of the Truth it self; you should be forced to continue the same, or put on more, for the Loss of such a Child, in the Prime of her Youth, and Strength, and Beauty: A Loss for which you do not mourn alone, since many others are partners of your Grief; not by sympathy only, as pittying you, but from a due Respect and Affection to her, and their own Concern at her Departure.
But as your Afflictions abound, God can make your Consolations by Christ abound much more: And such Losses as these, (though some of the smartest and most afflictive to humane Nature) may turn to your Spiritual Gain: And even this Rod, like that of Aaron, may blossom, and produce the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness: If in the want of their Company, God himself be more de∣pended
on as your All in all: If their removal out of this World promote your Mortification to it; if their being taken up to Heaven, assist your Prepa∣rations, and excite your Desires to fol∣low: God hath already made good his Covenant Promise, in a very peculiar manner, to those whom he gave, and hath taken from you; and I trust will do so as to those who remain: that they may know and serve the God of their Fathers with a perfect Heart, and see the Felicity of his Chosen; That they may tread in the steps of their departed Relatives, and bear up the Name of God in their respective Stations; to his Glory, and your Comfort, and their Salvation. And if God should not make your House to grow, yet he hath made an Everlasting Covenant with you, well ordered in all things, and sure, 2 Sam. 23.5.
I wish the following Discourse may contribute any thing to your Support: or at least be accepted, as an Expression of my Obedience, in complying with your request thus to make it publick: And as a Testimony of my unfeigned
Respect to the Memory of the Deceased with a serious desire of some benefit to others also, by such a remarkable Instance of an Early Piety, of an Exemplary Life, of a peaceable Death: Which God grant, who alone can bring Good out of Evil; all whose Works are perfect, and whose Wayes are Judgment. I am,
London, Jan. 25. 1681/2.
MADAM, 
