



SIR,
I Have not adventur'd to displeas you by publishing your Name to the World; wherby you will easily apprehend, that I send you this Discourse as to a Friend, for your impartial Opinion of it; rather than to a Patron for Protection: (the stale Complement of Epistles Dedicatory.) I designed it should have been accompanied with several other Discourses, concerning the Evill of Sin, and its Agravations. First, in relation to the B. Trinity; as it dishonours God, dispa∣rageth the Divine Nature, & bespatters every Attribute & Perfection of the Godhead; & consequently strikes at the very being of a God. As it is a Rebellion against his Souve∣raingty; Enmity to his Holiness; a Provocation to his Ju∣stice; a Contempt of his Wisdom; an ungratefull Affront to his infinite Goodness; challenging his Allmighty Power; giveing the Lye to his invariable Truth; slighting his Omniscience; wearying his Patience; &c. as it opposeth his Glory, & contra∣dicts
his holy Will, & the great design of all his Revelations, Institutions, & Providences. Secondly, with respect to us as it thwarts the end of our Creation, perverts our rational Faculties, and the very principles of our Nature: as it blurrs the Image of God upon our Souls; robs us of his Delight & Love; & renders us uncapable of any friendly Convers & Communion with him. As it deforms & defiles the Soul; inslaves us to many foolish & hurtfull Lusts; as it gratifyes the Devil, & brings us under his power; as it infects others with its contagion; dis∣turbs Societies; is the great Make-bate of the world, and the fatal source of all he Mischiefs and Calamities, under which the Creation groans, and Thirdly, In comparison with all other Evills of Affliction and Punishment: wherby sin will appear to be the most pernicious and intolerable Evill: especially as the cause of the Eternal Ruine of Souls. Where I intended to consider the certainty of that Everlasting Destruction threatned in Holy Scripture to the finally Impenitent. A Doctrine which so many would feign persuade themselv's to doubt of. I cannot wonder at it, since Intrest and Inclination are instead of Evidence in other cases as well as this: men are loath to admit any such Premises, whose Conclusion would ingage them to change their cours of Life: it is not therfore strange if after haveing forfeited the Blessed∣ness of Heaven, they endeavor to extinguish the flames of Hell. But being at present diverted from finishing what I began in that kind, I am desired to let this be publisht alone. I have not be∣spoke the Readers candor, as is usual, by representing in a Preface the seasonableness & usefullness of the Argu∣ment
treated of; because both are sufficiently obvi∣ous.
There is hardly any man whose Experience & observation will not oblige him to acknowledg, that Sin doth very often cor∣rect & reprove the sinner in this world. The Evidence is too sadly notorious to be denyed, in the miserable Catastrophe of A∣postats, in the afflictive consequences of great Transgressions, & in the ordinary fruits of Lust & Folly, Lewdness, & Passion, Intemperance & unrighteousness, & a disorderly Life. Neverthe∣less, thro the deceitfullness of Sin, & the subtility of the Temp∣ter, the neglect of Consideration, the powerfull Influence of bad Company, and sometimes the Righteous Judgment of God, (suffering men to harden themselv's in their wickedness) the far greater part will not receive Instruction by this voice of the Rod; but turn the deaf Ear to all the Calls of God; & will not be reclaim'd, by all the methods of his Grace, to bring them to Repentance.
SIR, by the following acount that is given of it, you will be furnisht with abundant matter of Thanksgiving to God: who partly by the early communications of his Grace, and the pious Care of those who had the conduct of your younger years; & partly by the kindness of his Providence, in keeping you at a di∣stance from Temptations; & by your own vigilance & prudent Caution in places & seasons of Danger; hath preserved you from those Vices, which are thus attended with Temporal sufferings. Such an Improvement of this Discours should be made by all those happy Persons, who cannot confirm
this sad Truth by their own Experience, save in very few & the less considerable Instances of it.
The best men may reap this Benefit by perusing it: that the consideration of the mighty Prevalence & Growth of wick∣edness, with the present bitter fruits of it, may promote their being crucifyed to this World, and willingness to quit it, assoon as God shall please: & so dispose them to desire & wait to be translated to a better state; where they shall neither Sin, nor feel the smart of Sin any more for ever; or be greiv'd & sadned by the sins or Sufferings of other men.
In this Life our corrupted Nature is not perfectly healed, but doth ever & anon cast forth Mire & Dirt. Tho we are dyeing dayly unto Sin, & long for the funeral of the old man; t' is not quite Dead; neither will it intirely be so, till our own Dissolution: on which acount the Deceitfullness & desperate Wickedness of the heart discovers it self in an hour of Temptation. So that some of those, who were thought to be Establisht & Confirmed Christians, have dishonor'd the name of God by scandalous Backslideings, discredited their pro∣fession, falsifyed their most solemn vows and obligations, hard∣ned the hearts of some, & weakned the hands of others, and shamefully disparaged the Religion of our B. Saviour. Wher∣upon God testifves his displeasure by inward and sometimes outward Troubles: a terrifyed Conscience writes bitter things against them; or God denies the aids of his Grace, after such a forfeiture; and their minds are darkn'd, their hearts hardned by degrees, & they become careless and remiss in the
Matters of Religion, & continue in their security; till by a severe Providence, or a more than ordinary Grace, they are awaken'd to consider their ways, and remember whence they have fallen, & Repent; & therby recover his lost favor, & God restores the Joy of his Salvation.
But this, Sir, is our Encouragement, & ought to be ar∣gumentative to continued watchfullness, & the utmost endea∣vors to persevere, that if we are faithfull to the Death, (which may be nearer then we are aware) we shall then enter into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, & Sin no more. We shall no more provoke him to Anger, by our Apostacy; or suffer his correcting Rebukes for our Backslideings. We shall no more be exposed to Temptation; or seduced by Satan, to defile our Consciences, to destroy the Peace of our minds, & greive the H. Spirit of God. We shall no more start aside like a broken Bow, & violate our holy promises & Resolutions. Igno∣rance shall no longer darken our minds, or unmortifyed Lust lay lurking in the Heart, or the Body any more betray the soul by unruly passions to the Commission of Folly. And as the blessed Consequent of a sinless state, no sorrow shall ever more be felt, and therfore no complaint ever more he heard. Oh that thes thoughts were more delightfull & more connatural to us! This should be the highest of our Wishes, and the object of our most deliberate & Resolved Choice; to be made more pertakers of the Divine Life; & to glorifye God by a more per∣fect conformity to his holy Image. I most heartily be seech the great Sanctifyer & Lover of souls to effect it more & more on
the my own heart & yours. And tho one Kingdom do not hold us, & I may never see your Face on Earth againe; yet before that glorious Everlasting Kingdom we expect, (when by seeing God, we shall be changed into his likeness,) we may dayly meet at the Throne of Grace; & there I humbly beg you would be my Remembrancer, as I promise to be yours. I most affectionate∣ly kisse your hands, & remaine
SIR, 
