



SIR,
THE Honour which it pleased God to bestow on Your De∣ceased Brother, to be so much a Blessing, and Beloved, while Living, ought to qualifie your Sorrow for his Death; and make you the more softly to lament your Loss there∣in. If the reading of this Sermon do any way renew your Grief, you must thank your self, and those who join'd with you, in desiring to have it published.

'TWAS his Serious Godliness, that made him so valuable, and in some respects, You and I are more obliged than others, to Follow his Faith, or Christian Piety; (in
* 2 Tim. I. 5. Chap. IV. 6. that sense you know the word is sometimes used.) The Integrity of his Heart towards God, joyn'd with a true Zeal for his Glory, qualified him for great Service as a Minister.
WILL you suffer me to mind my Self and You, (who I am perswaded, need it less than I do) that it was his soli∣citous Care and Concern about the Sal∣vation of his own Soul, that made him so Diligent and Successfull for the Souls of others. He had very much Help herein, by the frequent and Attentive Perusal of the close
Warnings and Directions given Mini∣sters in
* Mr. B's. Gildas Selvianus, The Reformed Pastor . Chap. 1. §. 9. Chap. V. §. 5, 6, 7, &c. The Reformed Pastor, To take heed, lest we be Preachers and no Christians, dedicated to the Altar as God's Priests, and not san∣ctified by dedication to Christ as his Disciples, and so worship an un∣known God, and preach an unknown Saviour, an unknown Spirit, an unknown state of Holiness, and Communion with God, and a Glory that is unknown, and like to he un∣known for ever.—If we soundly believe, and are affected with the Truth we study and preach, we shall preach it more heartily. Experience will direct us to the fittest Subjects, and furnish us with Matter, and quicken us to set it home. Whereas
he is like to be but an Heartless Preacher, who is a Stranger to that Christ and Grace, he preacheth of to others. And so if he do not first preach to himself, what he teacheth them; for if our own Hearts be cold, our Preaching will be so: And if we have but an affected Fervency, we cann't expect a Blessing should attend it.
THERE are many Passages in that Book of the like Tendency, which we can hardly read without Fear and Trembling; some of 'em, as I remember, he own'd did most deeply affect his Soul, and I have sometimes thought, they had some good impression on mine. I desire to be more under the Awe and Influence of such Considerations. It may be the Recital of a few more
of 'em, may be of use to some of the Younger Ministers; tho' I know your Character so well, that I do not add them for your sake, but my own, and others. As Face answers to Face in a Glass, so doth the Heart of Man one to another: What was of use to him and me, may reach more.
HOW many have preach'd Christ, and perisht for want of a saving In∣terest in him? Many may be now in Hell, who have told their Hearers of the Torments of Hell, and warn'd them to avoid it. Who have preach'd of the Wrath of God against sinners, and are now feeling of it. O what sadder Case can there be in the World, than for a Man whose Business and Calling it was to proclaim Salvati∣on, and help others to obtain it,
yet after all, himself to be shut out! That we should have so many Books in our Libraries, that tell us the way to Heaven, that we should spend so much time in reading those Books, and studying the Doctrine of Eternal Life, and after all to miss of it! That we should preach so many Ser∣mons of Eternal Salvation, and yet fall short of it: And this because we preached of Christ, but neglected him; of the Spirit, but resisted him; of Faith, but did not heartily believe; of Repentance and Conversion, but continued in a state of Sin; of an Heavenly Heart and Life, but re∣mained Carnal and Earthly our selves. Do we not know, that God is no Respecter of Persons, and that an Holy Calling will never save an Unholy Man? That the Preachers
of the Gospel, must be judged by the Gospel; stand at the same Bar, be sentenc'd on the same Terms, and dealt with as severely as other Men? — It is a fearful thing to be an unsanctified Professor, but much more so to be an Unholy Preacher. When we open our Bibles, should we not tremble, lest we read our own Condemnation? When we pen our Sermons, little do we think we are drawing up Indictments against our own Souls: When we are arguing a∣gainst sin, that we are but aggrava∣ting our own: When we magnifie the Riches of Christ, and his Grace, and declare it to others, we publish our own Iniquity in rejecting him, and our own Misery in being Strangers to him. O Miserable Life! that a Man should study, and preach from
year to year against himself, and spend his dayes in a Course of Self-condemn∣ing. — What aggravated Misery will it be, to perish in the midst of Plenty, to famish with the Bread of Life in our Hands, while we offer it to others, and urge them to receive it, but we our selves will not:
NEXT to His Piety, or as a part of it, his Peaceableness and Charity, in opposition to Bitterness, and Dividing Zeal, and a Narrow Spirit, was very Commendable and Exemplary. He could unite with all Christians in Things Necessary, and was not for making more Fundamen∣tals and Necessaries than Christ hath made; or for other Terms of Church-Communion, than the Terms of our Common Christianity: And therefore
was ready to receive All, whom he believ'd Christ would receive. He was of one Church with All those, whom he hop'd to meet in Heaven. Endeavouring to hold the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, because he acknowledged that there is but One Body, one Spirit, one Lord Jesus Christ, one Hope, one Faith, one Baptism, (and consequently but one Holy Table,) one God and Father of all, from whom, and by whom, and for whom are all Things.
'TIS from this Principle, as esteem∣ing the Piety, Learning, and Useful∣ness of Men of all Perswasions, that I cannot be unaffected at the Death of the Reverend Dr. Horneck, of the Savoy, this Week: His Devotion, Zeal and Diligence in Preaching, Writing,
and otherways endeavouring to do good to the Souls of Men, makes him to be deservedly and generally lamented; tho' I had no particular Acquaintance with him, I reckon my self bound to value and love every Man, who en∣deavours to promote Reformation, and Practical Religion, and spends his Time, as he did, to help to make the World better. I Rejoice in the Gifts, and Graces, and Success of All the Servants of Christ, of what∣ever Name or Denomination. Yea, I will Esteem and Love Them, whe∣ther they will Own and Love me or no.
THIS Charitable Spirit, (let who will call such Moderation Lukewarm∣ness,) with serious Diligence to please God, and do what Service we can in
our Several Places, will be accepted with God, and yield us Comfort, liv∣ing and dying. And will, I doubt not, be better thought of hereafter, when the little Names of Distinction and Matters of Dispute, that now divide Christians and Protestants, shall be forgotten. As to all the Opinions and Censures of Men, while we endeavour to do our Duty, we ought to be firmly perswaded, that every Man's Reputa∣tion and Credit, is as much at the Disposal of God, and under the Con∣duct of his Providence, as his Estate or Health, or Life; and accordingly we ought to trust him.
SIR, By what I already know of you, I do not question your Agree∣ment with me in these things. I hope I shall know you better, by a nearer
and more intimate Acquaintance, if it shall please God to Direct and Guide you, to comply with the Invitation you have (by a unanimous and speedy Choice) to succeeed your Brother. However that may be, I beg of God to sanctifie this Providence to you, to the Congregation, and to all his surviving Friends and Acquaintance: May I have Wisdom, duely to improve it! I am
SIR,
London, Febr. 3d. 1696/7.

