



SIR,
IF you did not know how little time I have to command, I should need an Excuse for not having sooner finisht the Trans∣cription,
and Enlargment of the following Discourse: which was preached at your Desire, on the Death of your Wife, and now on the same Motive is made publick. If it may any way Contribute to allay your Sorrow for your great Loss, or be useful to any Others, especially the Relations and Acquaint∣ance of the Deceased, I shall not Repent it.
The Text recommend∣ed to me is every way suit∣ed
to the Occasion, and to your Design of my instruct∣ing the Living from it, how∣ever defective the Prosecu∣tion, and Performance be. You will not expect (from me, at least you cannot,) that a Subject so often treated on by Others, should be beautified with new noti∣ons. Neither do I fear to have displeased you, by the citation of some Passages, out of the practical Writ∣ings of the Excellent Mr. Baxter. For whose Memory
I know, you have so dear a Value; and by whom, while he Lived, you had the Honour, and Advan∣tage to be esteemed and loved. For my own part, I think my self obliged to take all Occasions, to express my Thankfulness to God for the Ministry and Ac∣quaintance, the Books, and Counsels of that Great and Holy Man: whom I reck∣on to have been a Publick Blessing to the Nation, and the Age: and am confident
that more Impartial Posteri∣ty will acknowledg it. I can∣not doubt but that you, with many thousand Others, do Joyn with me, in Praising God for his long Life. That One so often near the Grave, and so fit for the up∣per better World, and li∣ving in such delightful Fore∣thoughts of Everlasting Rest, should be spared, and con∣tinued among us, for so many years.

 May he, that hath the Residue of the Spirit, fill surviving Ministers, Young∣er and Elder, with greater measures of Holy Light, and Love, to furnish us for our work, and to assist, and suceed us in it. May we all learn to carry it with greater Indifference to this present, Animal Life; and dayly advance in our De∣sires, and Preparations for the Heavenly one. The Re∣moval of any of our Friends, who were made meet for
Heaven, may be many ways improved to this Pur∣pose; for whom, you know, we are not to Sorrow, as others who have no Hope. Doubt∣less your late Sickness, and Indisposition, since the breach God hath made in your Fa∣mily, will be regarded as an additional Call, and help to such Thoughts, and Affecti∣ons, as this Discourse is de∣signed to promote. And if the many Prayers, of those who have reason to Bless God for you, may be
heard, (as in some Instan∣ces they have been,) we may hope your Life and Serviceableness shall be yet prolong'd. In which request to God, I heartily concur, who am,
Sir,  London Febr. 13. 169.
