



THE following Sermon was Preach'd, and is now Pub∣lish'd at your Desire. Your near Relation to the Extraordinary Person Deceas'd, and that which I have the Honour to bear to You, doth manifestly determine my Choice to whom to Address it.
You will not, Sir, expect in this Epistle, that I should give the World an Account of Your Eminent Qualities, after the man∣ner
of Modern Dedications. The Aversion I ought to have for Flattery, and that which You have of any thing that looks like being Flatter'd, besides the Cen∣soriousness of this nice Age, (which will not bear the Praises even of those who very well de∣serve 'em,) make this Point so tender to be touched, that I dare not adventure to draw Your Cha∣racter. However, if Your Chil∣dren and Grand-Children, fol∣lowing the Worthy Examples of their Parents, in great part are, and the Rest like to be, Excellent Examples unto Others; that, Sir,
is a living Panegyrick upon You, which You cannot escape.
Ʋpon the like Reason, I have said so very little of the Deceased. Your positive Prohibition not suffering me, to do her that Ju∣stice which the Audience expect∣ed. I should otherwise have mentioned her Exemplary Piety and Devotion; the great Mode∣ration of Her Principles and Temper; Her Concern at Heart for the Division among Prote∣stants; Her strict Observation of the Lord's Day, in Publick, and Family Worship; Her extraor∣dinary Care to take a frequent Account of the State of her Soul,
and of her Progress towards Per∣fection; Her Love to all Good Men, of whatsoever Denomi∣nation; Her Prudent Admini∣strations at Home, and her dif∣fusive Charity Abroad; (a Cha∣rity not confin'd to a Party, mea∣sur'd only by the Merit and Ne∣cessity of the Objects.) And to her Honour, I should have taken Notice of the Wise and Success∣ful Education of her Children; and the great Regard she had to the regular Behaviour of her Servants; on whom she endea∣vour'd to leave some lasting Im∣pressions of Religion.

In short, I would have de∣clar'd, that she had discharg'd the Duties of every Relation, as a Wife, Mother, Mistress, Friend, Neighbour, &c. in that manner, as perhaps there have been few such Examples of Piety and Prudence, in our Age. In not doing this, I observed Your Orders; which I ought to mention, as a just Excuse for that Defect in my Sermon.
Dear Sir, May all the Bles∣sings of an Holy and Honourable Old Age, which I have named, be long Yours! May it please God, to satisfie You with long
Life, and afterward shew You his Salvation! This is the Hearty Prayer, of
SIR,

London,
Nov. the 3d. 1698.
