



SIR,
WHen after an unpleasing separa∣tion, the Providence of God gave Opportunity of renewing our Converse, in your Habitation; I pro∣mis'd my self an unmix'd satisfaction, during my stay with you: And as none is more oblig'd to rejoyce in all the Good, which you, or yours, are partakers of; so none could be more heartily dispos'd to do it. Indeed the hopes of enjoying your Society sweetned the fatigues of a Voyage, which (after many Years ab∣sence) I lately made unto my own Coun∣trey: In which I was truly delighted to find, that not only your Person and Ministry were acceptable and useful, but
that there was a prospect that God would make your House to grow. But when I was preparing to return, I per∣ceived that God had brought me to mourn with you, under a most afflictive Providence: In which though my Cha∣racter had made me unfit to present Comfort to you; yet few of your Friends had more light to discern the deepness of your Wound, and greatness of your Loss. For the intimate Friendship be∣tween us, and our cohabitation in Hol∣land, gave me opportunity of understand∣ing the worth of Her, whom now you lament. Though this Consideration, as it makes your Tryal greater, renders your Resignation more acceptable to God, and useful to Men.
To part with an ordinary Possession with willingness, is a kin to that Pati∣ence which is exercis'd under merited Punishment, which in the Apostles judg∣ment hath no Glory or Commendati∣on in it: (1 Pet. 1.20.) But 'tis an Heroick Spirit, a resemblance of that Faith which dignifi'd the Father of all who believe, to give up a rare and en∣dearing
Treasure: And if any Conside∣ration hath strength to work this Noble Disposition in our Souls, that which is taken from the Glory of God, and the Redeemer, hath: 'Twas this which led my thoughts unto the Meditations in the fol∣lowing Discourse, which though much be∣low the dignity of the Subject, am willing to make thus publick, that they may be a lasting Monument of the Gratitude and Respect I owe unto your Deceas'd Con∣sort, and with the Divine Blessing may be useful to those who may be call'd unto like Tryals.
Many of your Brethren would have per∣formed this Service with far more ju∣stice unto both the Subjects of the Dis∣course, than one who is in a journeying State: But when your self, and some near Relatives desir'd this last Office, I was not unwilling to comply; especially having the advantage of knowing by how singular a Providence your Marriage-Ʋni∣on was brought about, and how happy it was to you both.
I need not tell you how this sorrowful Event makes the thoughts of my intended
Voyage much more uneasie to me, who must leave so dear a Friend depriv'd of his delightful Half: But an Interest in the whole Deity, (who cannot dye) will abundantly compensate this loss, which to∣gether with your long continuance in Tem∣ple Service, and the desirable success of your Labours, is with utmost earnestness prayed for, by
London, Sept. 1. 1691.
SIR, 
