


HAD Fortune plac'd You on a peace∣full Throne,
Had not Rebellion made Your Vir∣tues known
(As Stormy Nights, and Dark Eclipses, may
Set greater Value on a Fairer Day)
Posterity had onely understood,
That You, like Your Great Ancestours, were Good,
And Iust; that, under You, the Church, and State
Flourish'd, and seem'd above their present Fate.
But then, when Hell, and Earth, had Must'red all
Their Forces, to procure Your Father's Fall;
When Trait'rous Hands had seiz'd upon Your Crown;
When all Our Rights, and Laws, were trampled down;
Temples to Stables turn'd; Our Flamens fly,
Or else, for Victims, on their Altars dy;
All Holy things prophan'd: That You, alone,
(As when the Arrian Heresie was grown
Too strong for Truth, and in one Holy Breast
Religion dwelt, exil'd from all the rest)
Have 'gainst these Cruel Storms a Bulwark stood,
And (like the Great Restorer, when the Flood
O'reran the Vniverse) an Ark prepare,
To which all such, as Good, and Loyal are,
For Safety flie; had ne're been known to Fame,
And still this great Addition to Your Name
Had been conceal'd, and, after Your Decease,
The Good, but Easie, Titles of a Peace,
Had been Your sole Renown: but now we see,
What You in Peace, what You in War can be;
With what an equal Temper You can stand
The Shocks of Fortune, and Your Self command.
So that by You the Old instructed are
To live, the Young the worst of Fate to dare.
Hence all, but such, as are with-held by Charms
Of Wealth, or Rebels, that now fear Your Arms,
Come from all Quarters of the World, in You
Their Present Happiness, their Future, view.
Our Church within Your Walls, alone, can keep
Her Rites, and recollect her scatter'd Sheep.
Within Your Breast the Archives of the Law
Are safely lodg'd, and thence we hope to draw
Those Streams of Iustice, that (as sacred Nile
Swells, and makes fruitful the Aegyptian Soil)
Shall England Happy make, that, now, with War,
As rudely looks, as if hot Sirius Star
On it, in stead of Libya, only shed
Its Flames, and Men, worse then her Monsters, bred.
None then can justly of their Fate complain,
That are Exil'd, unless You there did Reign.
You are our onely Wealth; and whether You
Auster's, or Boreas Frozen Kingdoms view;
Or should You to America repair,
Or t'other Indies bless: whereer'e You are,
All, that are Good, will follow You, and all,
That Place their Home, that Place their Countrey call.
But, Oh! (me thinks) I see, with squallid Locks,
Poor England, rear her Head above the Rocks,
And this great Blessing beg, That She may be
Eas'd of her Chains, and, by Your Conquest, Free.
Go then (Great Prince) go; may propitious Gales
Still wait upon You, and extend Your Sails!
Those, that from Tyrannie their Native Land
Redeem, in Fame's large Temple Greater stand,
Then those, whose Forein Conquests Trophies rear.
Such the Camilli, such the Decii were,
Whose Names, in Story, are more Sacred far,
Then theirs, that, happy in Invasive War,
Brought Western Gold, and Eastern Spices home:
These did Enrich, but those Preserved Rome.
Such (Sacred Prince) be Your Return! May We
Such Your Success, and such Your Triumphs see!
As when the Phoenix, in his Parent-Nest
Reviv'd, in Triumph from the Spicie East
Returns, and Offers, on the Pharian Coast,
Due Sacrifice to his Paternal Ghost;
While all the Birds of Night, and those of Prey,
Into the Deserts fly, to give him way.
But a more Noble, and Obsequious Train
Their King attend, and Aegypt, wanting Rain,
Sees Father Nilus Flow, without Excess,
Or'e all the Land, and give a rich Encrease,
Without their Labour. May You then repair
The Ruins of Your Throne, and, sitting there,
Restore to Vs again an Age of Gold;
While Your Blest Father may, from Heav'n behold,
Himself in You, as Great, as You are Good,
And all due Expiations for his Blood
On Rebels made. While all, that now for Fear,
Or Interest with them Comply, when there
They You behold, shall then, repenting, come,
And justly from Your Mouth attend their Doom.
When France shall tremble, and the Swede shall run,
Fearing Your Arms, yet further from the Sun.
And Victory, attending on Your Hand,
Wheree're Your Ensigns flie, shall take her Stand,
Resolv'd to fix with You, and shall devest
Her self of Wings, to Plume Your radiant Crest.
And then those Wounds, those Ills, which We before
So much lamented have, We will Adore.
