




IT is a manifest impeach (most glorious Prince) both to your Highness's Authority and Candid∣ness; to have your Illustrious name (a name celebrated above the Stars) prefixed to so mean and inconside∣rable a Pamphlet. My presumption had been more excusable, had it been to some weighty Volume, the product of long pains and most ac∣curate politure. But since volumi∣nous Opera's are not for the genius of this present age, who being more taken with succinctness, will not reckon brevity amongst my crimes, but having long since renounced all prolixity, may value this Compen∣dium
as a Homer shrunk up into a Nut-shell. The more delicate Stomacks of these times loath that flesh (as right∣ly they may) that being often hash'd and stew'd, retains neither tast nor vertue in itself, but has lost it in such abundance of swashy broth. And if your Highness be delighted with such a brevity; I humbly presume, that this small Tract (may I use the vanity to say) this small body consisting of its due Members and Arteries will not be exposed as a new born Orphan, altogether desti∣tute of your most noble Patronage.
I have endeavoured to expose to publick view the Pope of Rome, that true Apocalyptick Beast, in his own proper and genuine Colours. I have deservedly linked him with the grand Devil, that sworn Enemy of Mankind, and universal Parent of all Disorder and Confusion: Not in the least doubting, but your High∣ness's deep, and most acute Judg∣ment, will quickly perceive the
reasons of that Conjunction. And if I do not evince (tho briefly) the de∣scription fully and in every part to answer the Frontispiece, I will in∣genuously confess my self to be carried sheer from my Design; or must loudly confess, that the truth of Hi∣story is very questionable.
But to the truth of these Premi∣ses, 'tis an unparallel'd rudeness to doubt of your Highness's Assent, who has been throughly instructed in the verity of the Proposition, as well by those manifold dangers your Prince∣ly Person underwent, as the sad and miserable calamities that befell your Royal Father and his Family, from the Hellish Malice and Tyranny of that cursed Romish Crew; besides what you have added by your long and constant experience of their un∣wearied pursuit after Royal and in∣nocent blood.
So that nothing remains for me now, but to cast these unworthy Pa∣pers at your Highness's feet for Pa∣tronage
and Protection: earnestly praying in the lowest posture of an humble suppliant, that it would please your Highness, according to your wonted Gallantry to give them a kind and curteous receiption. And that it would further please you to beam down on your unworthy Sup∣plaint, the warm blessings of your Princely Favour, as may best suit with your innate and known gene∣rosity, and his Condition.
This if your Highness please to vouchsafe, it will vastly add to those Obligations, whereby I am bound to be for ever Yours, intirely to admire and serve.
Long and happy may you live (most Illustrious Prince) a Comfort to your self, the Church, and State; as it shall be the daily and hearty Prayers of,
Great Sir,



