



May it please Your Lordship, and the Honourable Senate,
I Present you with a mean Oblation, less than the Widows Mite, but with a willing mind. 'Tis all I can afford at present. Farre liabit, qui non habet, thus: Who wants Frankincense, must sacrifice with Bear-meal. I have sometimes offered more to others, who were not so deserving. I still remember how kindly the Council treated me for some Years ago. when I taught the Mathematicks at Edinburgh; and what a singular Obligation they conferred upon me after, when I was employed to search out a well, which by good Providence I lighted upon, which is now a Well-spring of Happiness to the Good-Town. I made several Observations, with a most accurate, and exact Level; but especially one from the highest Ground in the Castle, in the Evening towards the Fountain, by the help of a Light there, on the 29. of May, 1674. which gave infallible assurance to the Magistrates, that the Source was 200. Foot higher than the Weigh-house, and great encouragement to the Council to begin the Work. It is registrate in Scripture, as one of the great Acts of Hezekiah, that he made a Cistern, and a Condut, and brought Water into the City of Jerusalem. This work will be extant among the Annals and Chronicles of the City, of things done from Year to Year, to all Generations, which is the glory also of the succeeding Magistrates. But your wisdom and prudence in governing the City, and composing all Diffe∣rences, and setling all Matters every day so happily, is of far greater moment.
This Transaction explains the Weather-Glass, and Hygroscope, which are in great esteem, even among Kings, and Princes. His Royal Highness put no small value upon that which I presented to Him. Non equidem tali me dignor honore.
I now crave pardon, that I have adventured to prefix your Names to the Frontispice of this mean Pamphlet, between which, and your incomparable Merits, there is no proportion. All I can do, is to pray, that your Lordship and Council may live to be, as you are, the glory and credit of the Place, and that you may slowly, yet surely exchange at last, this Mortality with Immortal Life. This I fervently wish, while I am

Leith,
Ianuary 9. 1683.
