


Alexander Brand, Alexander Simpson, Iohn Morray, and William Montgo∣mery, Baillies; Iames Nicolson Dean of Gild, Edward Marjorebanks The∣saurer; and remanent Members of the Honourable Senate, of the Antient City of Edinburgh.
May it please your Lordship, and the Honourable Senate,
IT is neither Ambition, nor Ignorance of your Worth and Merit, which have inclin'd me, to prefix your Names to the Frontispiece of this mean Pamphlet, but the sure experience I have of your encouraging all vertuous Actions and Learning. What I have now in Equity and Reason presented, I hum∣bly desire the Honourable Senate, may accept favourably. I owe all I have,

and my Self too, to your Devotion and Service. I chuse rather to be doing somewhat Amiss, than doing Nothing. 'Tis the Widows Mite, which I have shelter'd under the Wings of your Pro∣tection. If I should endeavour, but to recapitulat, what Sentiments of your Kindness I have found, both Time, and my Memory would fail me. None can think, that there is any Deserving in me, which can be proportionable to those unvaluable Acts of your Bounty. If there be any, I am confident, it is too too scanty to Oblige. When I was able to do more, none were found more willing. I endeavoured indeed, accor∣ding to my Capacity, to contribute my Assistance for promoving that great and noble Design, which was accomplish'd; for which the Generations to come, shall call you Happy, whom you have En∣riched, with Refreshing-Streams of Cooling-Waters, more Advantagious and Useful to the City, than the Fruit of the Vine. I cannot satisfie all the Obli∣gations to Duty, which ly upon me. The

more I was inclin'd to offer this Trifle, the more I was overcome with Reasons perswading to the contrary. But the uprightness of my Intention, to beau∣tify this trivial Subject, with the Splen∣dor, and Glory of your Names, will excuse the faillings of my Understand∣ing. I cannot remunerat the Kindness of the Honourable Senate, better, than by Hearty Prayer, that the LORD may give you, the Spirit of Wisdom, and Government, to Manage the Weighty Affairs of the City, and His Conduct, not only to Guide each one of you, in his particular Calling, but all of you, to the endless Fruition of Immortal Life. This I fervently wish, while I am

