



ALL the well-affected in the Kingdom cry unto you, as the woman of Samaria did unto the King, Helpe us: or as the Disciples did to Christ; you have bid us come unto you upon the wa∣ters, Save us, for we are sinking; sinking in our estates, our liberties, our Religion, yea in our hearts and courage too. You have many wayes before you for our safety, as the speedy execution of justice on Offendors,
Ier. 5.1. 1 Sam. 21.15.14. (their life may bee our death 1 Kin. 20.4.) the vigorous pro∣secution of the warre; the taking hold of all advantageous opportunities; the wise and active improvement of that Spirit God hath yet left in the People, which never was more high and great then now it will be.Great dangers raise great courage.
But there is no meanes like to Reformati∣on: that's a defence cannot be beaten down. The stones and timber of the Temple were hewed and squared indeed, some time be∣fore they were set up, but if that building be not in your heart, and in your hearts a∣bove all things besides, what ever else you doe will either be without successe, or make us further miserable. Without successe; for except the Lord doe keep the Kingdome, the Watch-men are in vaine; and God will not keepe that which is not a Glory to him: or else make us more miserable; for when men are subdued, God will come and war against us. It's a fearfull thing to fall into the hands of the living God: Our God is a con∣suming fire, Heb. 12.29. and these words are spoken to presse on a Reformation. If a Re∣formation
be not aimed at, Quorsum haec dispendia? why are wee in jeopardy every houre? and are as sheepe accounted to bee slaine? If it bee aimed at, troubles are not troubles, losses are not losses: Those heapes are not ruines which the Builder makes, in plucking downe to make the house up better. Men will never reckon of their taxes, dan∣gers, feares, if they may have Reformation for them. Some evills have so subtilly layd themselves between the stones of the Com∣mon-wealth, gotten such Lawes, obtained such favour amongst men, because they are imployed so much in Civill matters, that no word of God alone can destroy them, with∣out sharpe contentions, unlesse your hands be on them. Every one may reforme himselfe, but you onely can the Nation, of those evills: and unlesse those bee removed, actum est de Religione. The God of Heaven give to all and every of you such a spirit as may make you fearlesse of dangers, faithfull to your trust, true to your professed ends, and succes∣full in this worke which shall be the dayly prayer of him who is

