



My Lord,
I PRESENT Your Lo: with an Oblation, both Lame and Imperfect. 'Tis all which my Ability can af∣ford. I must Sacrifice with Barley-Meal, because I want Frankincense. Farre litabit qui non habet thus.
But what Imperfection is in it, I supply it with the Sincerity of my Respects, who pre∣sents it. 'Tis a Subject, that the Learndest Prince, and greatest Monarch in His time was not ashamed to treate of. I se∣riously implore your Lordships Protection, for, I have to do with many Adversaries of this Visible World, who will not fail to ride tilts at me, with Bul-rushes and Win∣dle-strawes. As for those of Satans Invisible UUorld, in the Name of the LORD, I defy them. I know the acutness of your Lordships Ingine and Profound∣ness of your Knowledge, in all such and o∣ther Matters, that there is no Theme which I am able to treat of, or Thesis which I am able to publish, but your Lordship is able by your Power and Authority to protect it, and by your Reason to defend it.
I am the more encouraged to offer this to your Lordship, A Noble Patrician, be∣cause I have seen Tracts of this Subject con∣secrated to Kings, Dukes, and Princes. I have sure Experience of your Lordships Bounty and Favourable Aspect, which gave Wings to my New Philosophical Experi∣ments, to flie thorow Holland, France,

and Germany, which have made them so acceptable to Strangers.
Neque Phoebo gratior ulla est,
Quam sibi quae Vari praescripsit pagina nomen.
If my Writings had such good Fortune and Success abroad, by the auspicious Con∣duct of your Lordships name upon the Fron∣tispice, what must they have at home, where your Power, Interest, and Relations are so consi∣derable? Where your Ancestors are so famous, having been useful to their Countrey, in Peace and War; others of them imployed in Publick Affairs at home and abroad, and all of them most eminent for their unstained Loyalty to their Prince, and Zeal for his Interest; and that since Malcome the third, six hundred years agoe, to your Lordship, who is the twenti∣eth and fifth, Lineally descended from Dougald the first of the Family.
What a Faithful Achates, and Compa∣nion was Christopher Seton the third, to King Robert the Bruce, in all his troubles? whose love to his King, was like the love of Jonathan to David, for which, and his va∣liant Atcheivements, be bestowed his Sister

Christin upon him in Marriage, and the Flower-de-Luce to his Coat of Arms, one of the chief Ornaments of the Royal Badge.
— Patruo te Principe celsum,
Bellipotens illustrat Avus. —
Was not Alexander Seton, the second Son of Lord William, and Lady Katharin Sinclar, or rather, Saint Katharin, who builded the famous Chappel of Seton, for his excellent Endowments of Body and Mind, made Head of the noble Family of Gordons, by marrying the Heretrix of Huntly; and that three hundred years ago? And was not his Sister Isabel, by the same Mother, bestow∣ed in Marriage upon that most Princely Youth John Stuart of Darnly, from which two, the Royal Race is descended: So that I may say without Flattery, your Family is come off Princes, and reciprocally, Princes are come off your Family.
Quis venerabilior sanguis, quae major origo
Quam regalis erit? —
What was that illustrious Knight Alexan∣der the third, who during the time of John the Balliols Vsurpation, three hundred and

fifty years ago, was made Governour of Berwick, whom the King of England, while he was beseiging the Town, could nei∣ther by Threatnings, nor fair Promises, in∣veigle or perswade to betray his Trust. The Garison labouring under great penurie of Pro∣vision, a Truce was made upon this Conditi∣on, That if Relief came not before such a limited day, the Town should be de∣livered up. The Scottish Army approach∣ing, under the Conduct of the Valiant Dou∣glas, and King Edward fearing that the Town might be releived, sent to the Gover∣nour, certifying him (though the dayes of Truce were not yet expired) that if he did not render it forthwith, both his Sons, the one an Hostage, the other a Prisoner of War, should be crucified immediately before his eyes.
But the magnanimous Father, and incompa∣rable Mother, being driven to this insupe∣rable Dilemma;
Dextrum Scylla latus, laevum impla∣cata Charybdis
Obsidet —
Love to their Dearest Children perswading,

and Love and Respect to their Countrey, and Familie disswading, carrie like two invincible Hero's, and by admirable Resolution, and Constancy, beyond what Roman Histo∣ries can parallel, they prefer their Countrie to their dearest Pledges, Fidelity to Treach∣erie, and Glory to Shame. On which bar∣baritie, the Famous Poet Johannes John∣stonus Aberdonensis, writteth thus in his Book intituled, The SCOTS Hero's,
Huc averte oculos, neu tristia fata tu∣orum,
Respice —
Vincit amor Patriae constansque in pectore virtus,
Omnia pro Patria sustinuisse valens.
This strange Tyrannical, Barbarous, and Monstruous Fact, is suppressed in the Histories of England, and buried in silence, not un∣wiselie, it being capable neither of Defence, nor Excuse.

My Lord,
Neither can I pass over in silence Lord George, the fifth of that Name,
Claros inter habent nomina clara viros.
Your Great Grand-Fathers Father, who being Master of the Royal Oeconomy to the Queen, was sent by Order of Parliament to France, to make up a Match between Fran∣cis the Dolphin, and Mary Queen of Scots. And after, was sent by King James her Son, to Henry the third, for confirming the anci∣ent Alliance, whose third Son Alexander, for his Knowledge and Skill in Juris-Pru∣dence, was manie years a Senator of the Colledge of Justice, and thereafter Presi∣dent to the Senate, and one of the Kings honourable Privy Counsellors, and at last made by King James, Earl of Dum∣fermling, and Lord High Chancellour of SCOTLAND; from whom, by his two Daughters he had two Grand Children, two matchless Hero's, John Duke of Lau∣derdale, and John Earl of Tweeddale, both of them, as was said of Julius Caesar and Ca∣to, Ingenti Uirtute, Men of most emi∣nent Parts and Endowments.
Fortes creantur fortibus, & bonis
Est in Juvencis, est in equis patrum
Virtus: nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant aquilae columbam.
I come at last to your Lordships Father and Grand-Father, who imitating their Noble Ancestors, were notable examples of Love and Piety towards their Soveraign: both of great Humility and Goodness. Your Grand-Father was admirable, even to excess for Liberalitie to his other Children, and Ho∣spitalitie to Freinds and Strangers, more be∣coming a Prince, than a Subject. Your Mo∣ther of the Renowned Gordons, a Paragon of Nature for her matchless Beauty and Good∣ness,
Rara quidem facie; forma pulcherrima Dido.


My Lord,
I have touched a little the Historie of your Familie, but cannot relate all it deserves. It is well done by others, and augmented by the Learned Notes of Sir Alexander Seton of Pitmeden, Knight Baronet, that honour∣able Gentleman, one of the honourable Senators of the Colledge of Justice.
But for what end (my Lord) have I cele∣brated the praises of your Predecessors? Is it because I have nothing to say of Your self? Far be it. Your large Possessions purchased by the

Prudence and Heroick Valour of Your Fore-Fathers, are managed with Frugalitie and Moderation.
Non minor est virtus quam quaerere, parta tueri:
Casus inest illic, hic erit artis opus.
The ancient Honour and Dignitie of Your Fa∣milie is preserved without the least stain or spot of Disloyalty; so that I may trulie say, as is ingraven upon the Frontispice of Your statelie Palace, Decus decori addis avito.

This Treatise is called Satans Invi∣sible UUorld Discovered, but I am ascertain'd, that by Your transcendent Skill, you have discovered an Invisible World, far beyond what any of your Ancestors could do; I mean your subterraneous World, a work for a Prince, and a Subject to Write of, by that great Philosopher Kircher. What Me∣anders and Boutgates are in it, are rather to be admired then beleived. There Daedalus for all his skill would mistake his way? What running of Mines, and Levels? What piercing of Gaes? What cutting of impreg∣nable Rocks, with more difficultie, than

Hannibal cutted the Alpes.
—Qui montes rupit aceto.
What Deep-Pits, and Air-holes are dig∣ged! What diligence to prevent Damps, which kill Men and beasts in a moment! What contriving of Pillars, for supporting houses and Churches, which are undermined! What floods of Water run thorow the Labyrinths, for several miles, by a free Level, as if they were conducted by a Guide! How doth Art and Nature strive together, which of the twain shall advance Your Lordships Interest most! What curious Mechanical Engines has Your Lordship, like another Archimedes, contrived for your Coal-works, and for draining of Coal-sinks! What a molimi∣nous Rampier, hath Your Lordship begun, and near perfected, for a Harbour of deep Water, even at Neip-Tides!
Portus ab accessu ventorum immotus & ingens.
How bountiful has Nature been in forming a choice Coal under ground, within a stone-cast of your New-haven?
Your Experimental Skill in improving your Coal, for making of Salt, is praise worthie. Your defending of the Salt-pans against the imperious Waves of the raging Sea, from the N.E, is singular. Your renting of Rocks, for clearing of Passages into Your Harbours, which none of your Predecessors were able to do, is stupendious.
As the Result of the wise Government of your Affairs, redounds to your self, so does it to the publick. Advantage of the Countrie, and others, so that men may say,
— Te toti genitum se credere genti.
How manie hundreds of Young and Old have their Beeing and Livelie-hood, by their dependence on your Lordships vertuous Acti∣ons about the Coal and Salt, and things be∣longing thereunto, who art your self the greatest Coal and Salt-Master in Scotland, who is a Nobleman, and the greatest Nobleman in Scotland, who is a Coal and Salt-Master; Nay, absolutelie the best for skill in both, of all Men in the Nation. What fruitful Corn-fields, where Ceres hath her chief habitation lye within the Prospect of your dwelling house at Seton▪ Which

perswades me to maintain this Paradox, There is no Subject in Britan has so much Casual and Land-Revenue within a mile of his house, as your Lordship has.
In a word, your Affability in Converse, your Sobriety in Dyet and Apparel, your Friendship and Kindness to Your Freinds, your Candor and Ingenuity, with the pru∣dent management of your Affairs, have in∣deared all Men to You; So that I may say, If your Predecessors were famous of Old for their Feates of War, in the time of War, so is your Lordship famous for your Arts of Peace, in the time of Peace. But, my Lord, I fear I am wearisome, and therefore I shall close as I began, imploring your Patrocination to this small Enchi∣ridion. And as I have been long since Devoted to You in all Dutie and Love, so shall I fervent∣lie pray for Your Preservation and Happiness here and hereafter, while I live, and shall think my self happie to be under the Character of Your Lordships,

