




My Noble Lord,
THe first application I make, is
for pardon, that I have adventu∣red
to prefix your name to the
Frontispice of this Work, which
in it self, cannot be thought
worthy of your Trust and Protection; there be∣ing
no proportion between the greatness of
your Merit, and so mean an Oblation; save what
flows from the Nobleness of the Subjest, and
the sincerity of his respects who presents it.
It is truly a part of Philosophy, that was

never much Cultivated, but of late, ex∣cept
in a more abstract and subtil way, which
did render it less useful; but is now more
improven by sensible Manifestations of the So∣veraign
Mistriss of Arts, NATURE her self.
There are indeed (my Lord) many excellent
Sciences, which do merit the favour of your
Lordships studies, and by which your Noble
Accomplishments might be more improven;
yet I am bold to affirm, you cannot apply your
Noble Mind to any part of Philosophy, where
you will find more Pleasure, with less Pains;
more evidence of Reason, with less Difficulty.
The famous Gregorio Leti, was so much an
admirer of your Vertues, that he sheltered un∣der
your Patrociny, his Vita Di Sisto quinto Pon∣tefece
Romano. And if you were able to pro∣tect
an envyed Italian in Italy, much more may
I expect full security from your Name in
Scotland, where your interest and relations are
so considerable. And if he, who only look'd up∣on
your Vertuous Mind, while it was but blos∣soming,
was so much perswaded to judge none

more fit to Receive, Protect, and Claim his
Labours, much more I, who have seen the ac∣complishment
of your Vertues at home. I
have likewise very much confidence of your
Noble and Candid Disposition to admit this
into your Favour, and assurance of your Af∣fection
and Skill, to Love it, and Understand
it; both which are conspicuous, the first in
your encouragement to all Learning, the other
in your Capacity and Understanding to com∣prehend,
whatever you encourage.
Though (my Lord) I have been much
emboldened to offer this Dedication to your
Lordship, upon the account of your own He∣roick
Vertues, yet I must not pass over in si∣lence,
a most special Motive, which to me shall
be the last, sparing to express all the great
Causes oblieging me so to do, and that is, the
Memory of your VVorthy and nearest Re∣lations,
who are, my Lord your Father, Grand∣father,
and Great-Grand-father, not only me∣morable
for their Vertue and Learning, and
peculiar Endowments, whereby they were

thought worthy to serve their King and Coun∣trey,
in Council, and Honourable Courts of Iustice
for these many years, but for the Dignity, and
Antiquity of their famous Ancestours. How old
your Lordships Name is, Buchanan testifies in
the close of the Second Book of his History, who
writeth thus, Certè Gildus vetus est in Scotia No∣men,
ut vetus Mackgildorum, sive Mackgillorum
gens indicat: è cujus posteris honestae adhuc in Sco∣tia
& Anglia sunt familiae. That is, Surely
Gild is an ancient Name in Scotland, as witness
the old Family of Mackgilds, or Mackgills:
of whose Posterity there are yet in Scotland and
England many Families of good account. And
as an instance of this, the same Author tells
us of the Great Thane of Galloway, Mackgil∣lum
Gallovidiae longè Potentissimum, in the life of
Mackbeth, who by this Vsurper was put to
death for his adherence to his Prince, from
whom your Lordship, and your worthy Pro∣genitors
are Lineally descended, and of whom
Buchanan meant in the foregoing passage, since
our Predecessors flourisht in his time; your

Great-Grand-Father having then been His
Majesties Advocat, his Brother Lord Register.
Having now (my Noble Lord) laid be∣fore
you so many considerable Motives, which
I humbly desire may prevail, I cannot but
make my next Application for Acceptance, and
seriously intreat this Work may be received into
the Tuition of your Favour, and get a full
Protection from the Censorious, and being en∣lightned
with the splendor of your Name, and
receiving the impression of your Authority
upon it, may safely pass thorow the VVorld,
for which singular Favour, I shall fervent∣ly
wish to your Self and Noble Family,
all Prosperity, and Happiness, and shall think
my self very happy under the Character of,
Edinburgh, May 20.
(the day of your Lo.
Birth and Majo∣rity)
1672.
My Noble Lord,

