



THis little Gift, which, being not long since at Paris, I received from a most Eminent Divine of that City, I bequeath, most worthy Sir, to You, as knowing well how success∣fully for many Years you have bent your Studies to this sort of Learning.
The ensuing Treatise was taken out of the Large Critical History of the Old Te∣stament, Written Originally in the La∣tin Tongue; which Original theF. Simmon. Au∣thour was lately thinking to have pub∣lished himself. For the French Editi∣on,
which is common in every bodies Hand, is only a Compendium of the Latin, that has not yet seen the Light; and was indeed design'd for Persons ac∣custom'd to that Language, who as they are more Nice and Curious, so they are soon tir'd with what is long and tedious. Nevertheless I could wish that Work had been communi∣cated entire to us, who are not so scru∣pulous and delicate; for we do not ea∣sily reject those Things that are good; but tho it could not be obtained from that most laborious Author of the Criti∣cal Animadversions: Yet a Parisian Di∣vine, both Doctor and Canon, who had then some thoughts of setting forth a Bible compleatly furnished, bestowed it in pure Friendship upon Us, whatever it be, which he assured me he received from the Author of the Critics, to be in∣serted among the rest of those Additions
designed for the Bible, which he was then intending to publish: For, most wor∣thy Sir, the Study of Critical Animad∣version is not yet grown so cold among the Parisian Divines, but that in our Age, there are yet some most Learned Persons among them, who contemning the Trifles and Idle Subtleties of the Schools, handle that Art with singular Success, as being eminently skilled both in the Greek and Hebrew Languages. In the number of these is He, who wil∣lingly Communicated to me these Cri∣tical Enquiries, into the various for∣tune that has befallen the Bible, through the diversity of Times and Places. Per∣haps most learned Sir, that Parisian Divine may seem to you to have fallen somewhat too severely upon our most Excellent Vossius. But if those Mon∣sters of Opinions, which he lays to the Charge of our most Learned Vossius,
be but attentively considered, you shall not find him to have exceeded the Laws of Moderation and Equity. But I need say no more to recommend to you, so Knowing and Judicious in this kind of Learning, the Reading of this little Treatise: For I remember how highly you valu'd, residing in Paris, the Wit, the Learning and Judgment of the Au∣thor of the Critica Sacra, tho other∣wise little known to you at that time, then by his Writings. And indeed such is the Genius, worthy Sir, with which you came into the World, that what is good you approve, what is right and true you applaud, even in Men who differ from us in their Religion and Forms of VVorship. Therefore if there be any thing too sharply uttered in that same Author, or which may seem not to comply with the General Doctrine of the Protestants, you know
him to be one of those who professes the Faith of the Romish Church. In the mean time accept this little Present, whatever it be, and believe that I am always ready to serve you in greater things.
Oxford, the middle of April. 1683.
