



Dearly Beloved in our Lord,
OUR Blessed God is what he was, and will be what he is, without variableness or shadow of turning, Jesus Christ our Lord and Saviour, is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; God∣liness also is the same in its Nature and Work, in its Excellency and Glory. The Reward which followeth after is the same likewise, no less than an undisturbed rest, and joy unspeakable, a Crown of Life, an exceeding weight of Glory, to∣gether with a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. But alass! alass! there is a won∣derful abatement and decay in the Practi∣cal part of Religion, and an apparent vast difference between the generality of Pro∣fessors at this day, and those who lived in former times. The Sun hath gone ten

degrees backward, we have quarrelled and, fought, disputed, and wrangled the life and power of Godliness almost out of the Nation. There is indeed something of an empty formal Religion abroad, but there is very little or none of the Truth and Power at home. There is so little done for God in the Houses of many who call themselves Christians, that one would take them not for Christians, but Atheists, and conclude them without God in the World, yea, and that altogether; for there is no Praying in their Families, no Reading of the Scriptures, no Singing of Psalms, no Repeating of Sermons, no Catechizing of young ones, who would not take these for Heathens, if they did not call themselves something else?
It was certainly of God, and I hope in Love to this poor, but dear City (the place of my Nativity) that there lately was such a ready and general agreement among the Dissenting Ministers, at the same time in their several Congregations to Preach up Family-Piety, and Worshiping of God.

That very thing afforded to me great mat∣ter of rejoycing, and no small ground of hope that God will not yet break up House, nor deprive us of his Gospel-presence, which is far more desirable, because incompara∣bly more worth than all the World; for if the Ark be lost, other things will go with it; but what ever else remains, we may well write Ichabod upon London, and if there, then upon England, for the Glory is departed from them. But amidst the bad Symptoms that are among us, there are two of a benign and kind aspect, viz. the Magistrates encouraging the suppression of Prophaneness, and the Ministers endea∣vouring the advancement of Godliness; a∣mong the rest of my Brethren I applied my self to the work, looking up to the ever blessed God for assistance, without whom I know my self able to do nothing; but he was not wanting to his poor unworthy Ser∣vant, but graciously pleased to come in, and make his power known.
Before I had waded far and Preached often upon the Subject, I heard many

were much affected, and several of you signified your desire (wherein as you said, you were not alone) that when this Dis∣course was finished it might be published. I am not so foolish as to be ambitious of appearing in Print, that indeed is Vain-Glory. I have also reason to know how difficult a a work it is for him who hath his full load already, to prepare so many Sermons for the Press, and to be in daily expectation of Dunning by the Printer, yet could I not find in my heart to deny you, from and for whom I have so great a dearness of affection. Your desire could not but obtain being arm'd and back'd with powerful Considerations, for it could not but be very pleasant to me to hear that wholsom Truths and Counsels dish'd in by me, though poorly dress'd by so mean a Cook, should as savoury Meat, find so great acceptance, and be so very sweet to your tast; also it delighted me to argue and conclude thus. Surely these my Friends that are so pleased with the Do∣ctrine, are not strangers to the Practice, but they and their Houses do serve the

Lord. And there was a third thing, which like a dead weight carried it, it perfectly conquer'd all my aversness, gain'd my con∣sent, and of unwilling render'd me free; viz. Your confident perswasion that the good this Discourse will do, will abun∣dantly compensate the pains that I must necessarly take about it, not liking the bit∣terness of Passive Obedience, and letting it alone as long as I can, I was hereby brought to be at perfect peace with a Non-Resist∣ance in the present case.
I have now done my Part, and the Prin∣ter his; your desire is accomplished, the Book you see abroad, may your hope and expectation be accomplished too. May these Sermons of mine, so far as they con∣vey the truths of God, be as sweet to all that shall read them, as they were to you in the hearing, though as I must confess, that is too great a wish, a thing scarce to be look'd for; since as a late Worthy Writer observed, there is as much difference be∣tween Sermons Preached, and Sermons Printed, as there is between Milk in the

Breast, and Milk in the Bottle. Yet I am sure of this, that they will be full out as sweet to them that shall read them, as they were to you when you heard them, if the Divine and All-quickning Spirit will gra∣ciously vouchsafe to take them and Preach them to their hearts; and of this also I am no less sure, that they will be found ha∣ving in them a delicious sweetness, by all those upon whom they shall fall with an overcoming power. And that is it, yea, that is it which I do heartily beg, and gladly would obtain for you that are my Charge, viz. That all those Scripture Truths, which being sent of my great and glorious Ma∣ster I bring you, and in which your pre∣cious Souls are most nearly and everlasting∣ly concerned, may come not in word only, but in power; you, like Mettal cast into the Mould, being delivered up to that form of Doctrine which is delivered unto you, in order to your being informed by it, conformed to it, and transform'd by the renewing of the Spirit of your Mind, and so be able to say, this is true in the Scrip∣ture,

and it is so in me; this I hear, and this I feel, this God hath spoken, and this I believe; thus I am commanded, and thus I live, thus I do. This, and that, and the o∣ther the Ministers of Christ tell me is my Duty, and prove it such, and my Consci∣ence bears me witness that it is my delight.
The good Lord hide Pride from every one of you, it is so odious a thing, that it looks well in no body; may you be as knowing, as loving, and as well accom∣plished a People as any in the World. May you have the dew of Heaven, and the fat∣ness of the Earth, may you be richly stor'd with grace, and come behind in no gift, thoroughly furnished for every good work, yea, and fill'd with all the fulness of God; but withall, be very humble, great in value and usefulness, but little in your own eyes, that will not be to your loss, but much to your advantage, for God gives grace to the Humble, and no less to your Honour; Hu∣mility eclipseth and obscures no Mans glo∣ry, but sets a singular lustre and gloss upon it, making it shine with a greater brightness.

Holy and Humble Paul was one of the most Eminent Servants God ever had in the World, and his speaking of himself as being less than the least of all Saints, detracted no∣thing from his real worth, nor did it hinder his being equal with the chief of the Apostles, if we may speak of a chief among them; among whom our Lord appointed a Pa∣rity; at that time there was no such thing as a Pope.
I would not speak one word to swell or puff any of you up, if you study and know your selves as you ought, you will soon find defects, infirmities, corruptions enough to keep the best of you down, yet I cannot but say you are my Joy, and Crown, and as I do every day make mention of you in my Prayers; so I can, and frequently do bless and give thanks to my God upon my remembrance of you, and that upon sundry accounts, which I speak of for your encou∣ragement, and the promoting your farther progress. I have reason to hope it is the true grace of God in which you stand, and as you have a Name to live, so you have

been made partakers of the Life it self; for as you do all make a good and excel∣lent Profession; so I know none of you that stain and contradict it by a scandalous walking. You have been stedfast in shaking and falling Times; some did indeed go off in the Days of sore Persecution, not having on the whole Armour of God, nor being able to indure Hardship as the good Soul∣diers of Jesus, but they were few, so few that we did not miss them, we do not want them; the Lord grant that they may find Mercy of the Lord at the great Day, I shall be glad to meet them in Heaven. You have received and owd me as an Angel or Messenger of God, and the delight you take in my Ministry hath evidenced it self (and still doth) by your constant attendance upon it. In this Sceptick Age you have been Wise to So∣briety; in this Erroneous Age you have been sound in the Faith, neither admiring the pretended new Lights, nor falling in love with those old rotten Errours which some have dig'd out of their Graves: In

this dividing Age you have kept the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace; you are not for taking up a Yoke of Bondage, but for standing fast in that Liberty where∣with Christ hath made you free, yet no Friends to Licenciousness. While you flee to the Gospel for Relief and Comfort, you own the Law for your Rule, you do not divide Christ, but take him just as God hath exalted him, and doth offer him, Prince as well as Saviour; and not only to be an underling to pay your Debts, and bear your Burdens, and die for your Offences, but likewise to be a King upon his Throne Commanding and Ruling you. And as you rely only upon him for Righ∣teousness, so you desire to imitate and fol∣low him in his Holiness, and to shew forth his Vertues, who hath called you out of Darkness into his marvellous Light. Am I mistaken in any of you as to these things, I hope I am not, the Lord grant I may not; I know of no wild Notions, nor loose Opinions among you, may there never be any, but all of you have (as one

said) Heads well-hearted and Hearts well-headed, and so a soundness throughout. May you approve your selves to God and Men, being good Christians, good Sub∣jects, good Citizens, good Husbands and Wives, good Parents and Children, good Masters, Mistresses and Servants, good Friends and Neighbours, filled with the Holy Ghost and Goodness, and all the Fruits of Righteousness; Love God, Fa∣ther, Son, and Spirit with a supreame, in∣tire, and most intense love; think the most vehement flame of your love too cold here: Love the Church of God, study, seek, and pray for her good: Love all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sin∣cerity, though in some things they differ from you, let not that cause any alienati∣on in Affection so long as they hold the Head, count them Brethren, and be dear over them as such; love one another, help one another, quicken, strengthen, com∣fort one another, provoke one another to Love and good Works; rejoice in one a∣nothers Mercies, sympathize with one a∣nothers

Afflictions, bear one anothers Bur∣dens, and so fulfil the Law of Christ.
Most dearly Beloved, my Mouth is open to you, and my Heart enlarged. The great God knows I do as really desire and pray for the Prosperity and Salvation of you all, and of all yours as I do mine own; and in the following Sermons I have commended no other things to you than what I believe and know to be both your Duty and Interest, and would my self be found in the practice of; if we call our selves Christians let us be Christi∣ans, Israelites, and Israelites indeed; what signifies the Name without the thing? Gird up, I beseech you, gird up the Loins of your Minds, make no trifling Objecti∣ons, listen not, yield not to any wicked Temptations, but apply to your Work; act for God in your Places to the utmost; shine bright in your own Sphere, keep your Hearts continually in an holy frame fit for Communion with God in Duty; be not now backward to it, nor hereafter weary of it.
Though you have but a little stock of Knowledge and Parts, fall to Trading and you will increase it. Be not discou∣raged because you cannot do what you would, God accepts of the Will; when the Disciples were offended with a good Woman, Christ's plea for her was, She hath done what she could. The Lord told his Servant, he had been faithful in his little, and thereupon gave him an entrance into his Joy. Your little will find great ac∣ceptance, and be rewarded with great Blessings, so it be your Best. In short, would you stem the Tide of Profaneness which breaks in upon us with fury? Would you save the Life of Practical Re∣ligion which is brought very low, and in a deep Consumption? Would you be in∣strumental for the preserving of a Seed to serve the Lord? Would you be able to give a good account of your selves in the Day when God shall come to Reckon with you? And do you desire the present and future welfare of those precious Souls which are committed to your Care, then

observe the Rules, and follow the Coun∣sels of God which are given in this Book.
And the God of Heaven accept you in the Beloved, grant your Petitions, water the Seed you sow, and bless both you and yours, and make you Blessings to one ano∣ther, and all of you Blessings to the City, and the Nation. I do heartily pray for you; I need your Prayers too, and ear∣nestly beg them; do not deny me, do not forget me, in praying for me you pray for your selves. The gracious Good∣will of him that dwelt in the Bush be up∣on you, let God compass you about with his Favour as with a Shield, and make you Rich in Blessings of the Right Hand, and of the Left: And Oh! that you and I may at last meet in Heaven, and there, toge∣ther with the Saints and Angels, Sing E∣ternal Allelujahs to God and the Lamb; so prays

From my Study,
Mar. 23. 1694.
