



AT your desire this Sermon was preached, and at your re∣peated desire it is now published. God grant that it may be accompanied, where-ever it shall come, with the Di∣vine Spirit and Blessing, that being so backt and in∣uenced, it may accomplish the thing for which it is thus sent abroad, nd prove a singular means of good to precious and immortal Souls. The hand of that God, before whom it becomes the whole Earth to eep silence, hath made a very great breach upon you, by depriving ou of your dear and affectionate Husband, whose Life was very desirable unto those that were his acquaintance, but much more to ou. The good Lord stand himself in the breach, for he alone is ble to make it up, who out of his infinite fulness is able to sweeten ll our comforts, to supply all our wants, and to fill up all vacancies, nd to do far more abundantly than we can ask or think. It is your wisdom not to stand poring upon your Loss, but to endeavour he turning it into gain: for meat may be fetched out of the eater, nd life out of death; that which devours our comforts, may feed ur graces. Every thing shall one way or other befriend that per∣son who is indeed a friend to himself. Your Husband is taken from you, and this is heavy upon you, that you shall see his face no more; yet see carefully to this, that you mourn not as one that hath no hope, rather believing that he is gone to a place of peace, rest and happiness; gird up the loins of your mind, and by a dili∣gent speedy preparation of your self, make all the haste you can after him, so you shall see him in a better place, and better state, and more than that, you shall see your God and Saviour too in all his glory, which shall reflect a glory upon you. It may be our com∣fort to think that it is but a little time which you and I, and the rest of the people of God have to mourn in, and to conflict with Enemies and Troubles in; and if we can through the assistance of grace obtain a Victory over our unruly and imperious lusts, we

 rows. Make we it our care and labour to get sin out of our hearts and the hand of Infinite Love and Goodness will infallibly wip away all tears from our eyes. My hearts desire and prayer t God for you and yours, is, that ye may be saved, and so follo those blessed Souls that are gone before, and have through Fait and Parience enter'd into the possession of those glorious thing which are contained in the Promises, and an intimate Communi with that God who made them, as that you may be comportioner & fellow-sharers with them. Oh that the prevailing Comforter, who our dearest Lord sent to his Church, may take up his abode wit you, and do that part of his Office to you in the midst of all yo disconsolations! May be direct your feet into the way of peac and your hearts into the Love of God, and a patient waiting f the coming of our Lord, and the day of your Redemption. T Lord himself be your Sun and Shield, give you grace and glory with whatever else he sees good. May be teach you to live holiy and to all well-pleasing, and then enable you to die triumphantly To his grace, guidance and blessing I commend you; and as I hope  find you, so I desire to leave you under the healing and refreshing wings of the glorious Sun of Righteousness; My self remaining,
From my Study, Ian. 24. 1690.

