



May it please your Excellency,
THE love of Truth made me forsake what I loved most of worldly things, and occasioned my dear∣est friends to become my bitter
Enemies▪ Tyranny did stop my mouth formerly from speaking Truth, and malice subrogated now doth pursue me even where I expected liberty, being busy, as I am informed, in contriving (if not my destruction) my dis∣credit, that I might not be able to speak against errours, too much prevailing in the world, or not to be credited, when I should do it.
The same of your Excellency's Heroick Endowments, & Chri∣stian Zeal of Truth and Holi∣ness, derived from your illustri∣ous Progenitors, and more im∣mediately from your most hon∣ourable and renowned Father of glorious memory, for sacrifice∣ing his life to Truth and Loyal∣ty,
did encourage me to address my self to your Excellency's Protection in this more than or∣dinary necessity thereof. The most gracious reception your Excellency was pleased to give me, emboldened me to manifest the justification of my departure from the Romish Communion, and adhereing to the purity of Catholick Religion, as it is pro∣fessed by the Church of England, in a Sermon Preached at the Royal Chappel of Christ-Church, in your Honourable Presence. And the singular i∣gnity wherewith your Ex∣cy & your Ilustrious  was pleased to hear, and  prove of my discourse upon  Subject, giveth me confiden
to present to your Excellency, & commend to your protection the same Discourse being ordered to publish it, That being Hon∣oured in the Front with your Excellency's Illustrious Name, it might the better withstand the assaults of envy and malice.
The adversaries of our Do∣ctrine are so active in advancing their Faction, that where they cannot practice Violence, their contrivances do reach to terrify Sincere mindes from professing or speaking what they judgright. I have but too much ground to think it is so with very many in this Country and abroad, It is more want of courage, than of knowledge, that keeps many good men under their yoke, and such as know their ways,
may think it a wonder that any who were among them of note, should dare to oppose them. It will be a singular glory of your Excellency, if under your shel∣ter we may enjoy the freedom of speaking Truth. Peace is the Foundation of Happiness and Lustre in any Government, and the fiercest Enemy of Peace is Dissension in Religion. Of such Dissension, the only remedy by ordinary Providence, is, a free exchange of reasons, according to the Rule of God's Word, and within the Bounds of Christian Modesty. And this Freedom be∣ing all my ambition, I cannot but assure my self of your Ex∣cellencies gracious Protection and Favour, that may enable
me to praise God in this way; That we being delivered out of the hands of our Enemies, Lu: 1.74. might serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness, before him, all the days of our life. Praying continually to God, he may be pleased to bless your Excellen∣cy with all prosperity, and far∣ther your holy intentions for the spiritual and temporal wel∣fare of this Kingdom. I cease to give your Excellency farther trouble, but shall ever remain

