



THere is a time to speak, and a time to keep silence, saith the wise Preacher, in the 3. of Ecclesiastes; the truth wherof, though it be acknowledged by all, yet the fitnesse of the time of both, is greatly mistaken, by many: For there are some that think it a time to speak, when they ought to keepe silence, and others thinke it a time to be silent, when they should speake. It is said in Historie, thatGuevara lib. 4. di. principe cap. 19. Acaticus the Philosopher, while he feasted with his friends, being asked, wherfore he keped silence, when others did speak, he answered, that it was no lesse deficil to know when to speak, than to know how to
speak. The Scripture telleth us that Herod and Pilate wil have Christ to speak, when he thinks it more expedient to keepe silence: and the Disciples will have him to keepe silence, least the Pharisees should be offended, when hee thinks it better to speak freely, that their faults may be reproved. The Greek Retorician admonished his friend well,Duo lo∣quendi tempo∣ra constitue unum de rebus tibi plane cognitis, alte∣rum de ijs quae necessario sunt dicenda, in his enim solis praestat silen tio oratio in alijs verota∣cere satius est quam loqui Isocrates Ad demonicum. That he should appoint to himself two times of speaking, one of things whereof he himself had per∣fect knowledge, and another of things which necessa∣rily should be spoken, for in such things speach is bet∣ter than silence, and in all other things it is better to be silent, than to speake.
One of the Romane writters relateth of a Senatour, Blosius,Quis Blo∣sium scelera∣tum putasset fuisse si tacu∣isset, quis non etsam sapien∣tem, si pro ne∣cessitate tem∣poris loquutus esset. Valerius maximus lib 4 cap. 7. That none would have thought him wic∣ked, if he had holden his peace, and any man would have thought him wise, if he had spoken according to the necessitie of the time.
If then the fittest time to speake be, when the things that are spoken are needfull to be spoken, then it is a fit time to speak when great danger is threatened and grie∣vous trouble apprehended: for by keeping silence great skaith and damage may be sustained, and by season∣able speaking great profite and commoditie, may bee reaped, and tymous remedie provided. This chiefly be∣longeth to faithfull Pastors, who watch for the soules of people, for in the time of threatned persecution they should speake to God by prayer, that his people may be protected, and they should speake to the people by good instruction, and sound direction, that they may know how to carie themselves in the time of danger and affliction, for as king Iehosaphat first fervently prayed to God, and then comfortably incouraged the people when they were threatened with hostill invasion:
So faithfull Pastors must not looke how their speaking may offend, or silence may please the enemies of the Truth, and oppressors of Gods people: But how much their seasonable speaking concerneth the honour of God, and the safetie of his people, for whom they must speake to God, by fervent prayer,Perpende quid dicturus es examina consule interi∣orem veritatē & sic profer ad exteriorem auditorem August in Psal; 4 and to whom they must speake from God by the Oracles of his Word. And therefore (most wise and worthy Councellours) as this is the practice of all the faithful Pastors in this land, to speake to their people of such things as concerne the pre∣sent state, and condition of the land: I thought it was my part not to be deficient in so necessary a duetie, espe∣cially seeing by divine providence, I have occasion to preach in the most eminent Citie, though unworthie to preach in the obscurest Corner of the Kingdome. Be it knowne therefore to your Lo. that the occasion of the preaching of this Sermon, to them that heard it, and the publishing of it, to such as shall read it, wherein I have weakly described the cruell practices of the proud persecutors of Gods people, the occasion whereof I say, was the late troubles that our Nation hath sustained by the violent invasion of our unnaturall Countrey-man, whose pride and ambition hath so farre miscaried him, that he hath troubled the people of God, and his owne Countrey-men, with bloudy cruelty, and horrible op∣pression. It is well known, that once he did take part with the people of God, against their enemies, but now contra∣rie to the oath which he swore in his Covenant, he is com∣bined against Gods people, with their open enemies, and sheweth himselfe unmindefull of the love that he ought to his Countrey,Caedis ad∣bc cumulo patriae per viscera vadit Lucan. lib. 7 through whose bowels he passeth with continuall slaughter. O quantum mututatus ab il∣lo hectore qui fuerat, so powerfull is pride and ambi∣tion,
to make a wonderfull change, and alteration in the hearts of men, from good to evil, and from evil to worse, untill the extremitie thereof be such, as cannot longer be suffered, but by divine justice, must needs bee punished. And truly, the cruell courses of this Cateline, are knowne to the world, but what his end shall be, is best knowne to God: one thing we know from divine Truth, that the cryes of the Elect shall speedily be avenged. And as Augustine saithOppressio pauperis vin∣dictam evo∣cat divinam mortem no∣centis acce∣lerat, aures divinas iugi∣ter inquietat August con∣tra Faustum. The oppressions of the poor calleth for Gods vegeance, it hastneth the death of the oppressor, and continually troubleth the ears of the Lord.
Now I have taken the boldnesse to dedicate this first fruit of my weak labours to your honourable protection for divers reasons, first because there is no Preacher that can have greater or nearer relation to any people then I have to you, being the sonne of a Citizen borne in your Citie, bred up in your Schools of learning, and by divine providence these 20. years imployed in the work of the Ministery amongst you: in how great weaknes is known to God, and my selfe, but with what willingnesse and rea∣dienesse it is known to you (my honourable Patrons and the rest of my worthie Citizens. Secondly because as God of his goodnesse hath made this Citie the chiefest of this Nation, so hath he been pleased to furnish you the present Magistrats, and Councellours with wit, and discretion, vertue, and pietie, which the exigencie of this dangerous time requireth in such as are worthy of your places, and as the tree is known by the fruits, so the eminencie of these gifts showeth foorth it self in you by the singulare care that ye have to see the true Religion flourish in your Citie, to charish learning in all kinds of professions of divine and humane literature:
and in a word your Citiznes ought to be thankfull to God for your singulare diligence, in punishing of vice, and advancing of vertue. Seeing as the Romane Oratour could say,Nec do∣mus nec res∣publica stare potest si in e nec recte fact is praemia extent ulla nec sup∣plicia peccatis. Cicero lib. 3. de natura. de∣orum. No house or common-wealth can long continue, where there is no reward appointed for good workes, or punishment for evil: And one of the Latine Comicks could say,Oppidum si incolae sunt bene morati, pulchre mu∣nitum arb tror Plaus. in pers. That he did thinke a Citie well guarded whose Citizens were indued with good manners.
These then being the reasons of the didication of this first birth of my weake labours which hath come to the view of the world, to your honourable protecti∣on. I humbly implore your favourable acceptance, for which I shall never cease to pray to God for the health of your persons, the prospering of your weightie affairs and the wellfare of your flourishing Citie. And so shall remaine

