



Dear Sister,
THat stroke which the wise God lately gave to  Family, did, and yet doth, as I doubt not, sma on your back, and pain you at the very heart. The wresting of a loving Husband out of the bosom of an affectionate Wife, is not much unlike tearing the flesh from the bones. Where indeed there is unsuitableness and discontent, a galling yoke between persons so nearly related, Cohabitation is more uneasy than Dissolution. They are not like to grieve much for parting, who were a mutual vexation and torment. But I am persuaded there was between you Conjugal Love, Kindness and Delight, and walking together as Heirs of the grace of lise; whereupon separation by Death, cannot but be a sore Affliction to you who are left behind. Yet, a reflection upon such a life, and the blessed consequences of that Death which was the period of it, may very well prove a sovereign Cordial to you, carrying along with it strength and sweetness, support and com∣fort. God hath been graciously pleas'd to carry him through those difficulties which he did encounter in his way, and to employ him in that honourable work of the Ministry which he lov'd and faithfully did, notwithstanding there were many Adversaries, and but very small encouragement he received from the hands of men who will give more to their Houshold servant, than to an Embassador of Christ; and he continued him in the world, and

in his work, to a good old age. When at last he had finished his day and his work together, he entered into peace and rest. And now while he rejoiceth in Fruition, do you rejoice in Hope. Long it will not be, ere he that shall come, will come, and carry us away too to our eternal home; therefore instead of an impo∣tent mourning over our dead Relations and Friends, it is our main wisdom and interest to prepare our selves for Death, that we may be found in a fitness for a better life, in a meetness for the inheritance of the Saints in light. Hearing it was my dear Brother's desire upon his Death-bed, that I would preach the Funeral Sermon, I did most readily apply to the work; and your self afterward desiring that what had been preached might be printed, I complied therein also, notwithstanding mul∣titude of business lying upon my hands; here you have it in the following sheets. The good Lord accompany it with his Spirit and blessing upon you and others that heard, or shall read it, and thereby my desire and design will be accomplished. Your self I commend to the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush. May the Ever-living and Ever-blessed God be your Husband, Comforter and Portion.
DEAR SISTER,
Novemb. 8: 1695.

