


My LORD.
HERE I present to your Excellency a defence of the true primitive and Catholic Apostolic Faith, maintain∣ed and professed in the Church of England, a∣gainst the assaults of Adversaries, so bold s to present the venem they spit against it,
one of them to a most Illustrious person of the Court of England, another to the generality of the people, and a third to your Excellency, representative of our Gracious Soveraign in Ireland. This last in a mockery, like that of Judas betraying our Saviour with a kiss, while he endeavours to bereave your Excellency of the life of your soul, telling you that
I. S. pag. 140. and 304. the Church of England, your Mother, is not the Church of Christ, nor any part of it; that no Saint (which is to say, no just man or true servant of God) was ever of it; that you cannot without Blasphemy, alledg Scripture for your Tenets, with other like most insolent opprobries, He stiles himself your Excellencies most humble and faithful servant. He would have your Excellency burn the defenders of your Church, for offering to deny that we are all confessedly Schismatics.
When our Adversaries are so bold and active, it is much our concern, to watch and stand on our guard. I should prove undeserv∣ing the Gracious protection and favour, I have from your Excellency, enabling me to appear for truth, if in this Exigency I did desert the defence of it. I will therefore, b Gods Holy assistance, betake me to the arms o
his Holy word, to resist the insulting, and detect the fraud of subtil and violent adversaries of the true Catholic Faith, appearing under the veil of defenders of it; and endeavor to shew with unfaigned, plain and solid proofs, that the Faith we profess in the reformed Church of England (in which many other Illustrious na∣tions join with us) is the true primitive Catho∣lic Apostolic faith, which our Savior Jesus, and his sacred Apostles taught and established on earth; that our adversaries, branding us with Heresy and Schism, are themselves the prime cause of all the schisms and confusions, which too long have vexed Christianity; and are guil∣ty of as many Heresies, as Articles coined by them in after ages, which I hope we shall prove to be opposit both to Canonical Scripture, and to the Doctrin and practice of the Primitive Ca∣tholic and Apostolic Church. In which opposi∣tion certainly the true nature of Heresy doth consist; however they to their own advantage, would make men believe, that the Popes plea∣sure and decrees, must be the rule of all, and nothing Heresy, but what is opposit to them.
His pretended Infallibility, Supremacy, Vice-Godship, and such like big sounding Titles, (but emty, as here will appear) have frighted
a great part of men to becom slaves unto him. The invention of Purgatory, indulgences, re∣missions, and other engines of lucre, have in∣creased his means to maintain his usurped power. My work will be to shew with plainess of reasons, suitable to the sincerity of my in∣tention, and apposit to overthrow their sophi∣stry, that the forementioned tenets of the Ro∣mish faction, fewel of all the Combustions of Christendom, are not from above conveied by the Holy Ghost, but conceived in the mints of earthly passions: for the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partia∣lity, and without Hypocrisy. Jam. 3.17. Such is not the wisdom taught by the Roman Court, or Church, (if they will have it so called.) It is not pure, but corrupted with ma∣ny pernicious errors as will appear in this Trea∣tise. It is not peaceable, but contentious; not easy to be intreated, but obstinat against all reasonable overtures of peace, against the con∣tinual and ardent desire of all good Christi∣ans for a Council truly Occumenical and free, wherein the Roman Bishop and faction, as o∣thers, may sit with like freedom and indiffe∣rency
to judg, and to be judged, by the ord of God, and rules of Christian sincerity, as practised in those purer ages of primitive Christianity. Nothing will satisfy them, but a blind obedience, and entire submission to their will. Far are they from being full of Mercy: their thoughts are not of peace, but of death and destruction to all their fellow Chri∣stians, that will not be of their party.
All this I shall endeavor to demonstrate by a close and serious Examen of the particulars conducing to the discovery thereof, with no o∣ther design then the Glory of God, with no prejudice or Passion against the Roman Church, but with a hearty desire of the happi∣ness of it; that setting aside all profane policy, it may return to that primitive purity and lu∣stre it had, when the Faith of it was praised throughout the whole World, Rom. 1.8. and so join heart and hands with other Christians to the Edification, and thereby to to the Conversion of Infidels, and to the en∣crease and splendor of Christianity. This be∣ing my real intention, as well as the hearty wishes of all good men in the reformed Churches; sure I am, that my study, and en∣deavors to this end, will be protected and
countenanced by your Exellency; Whose happi∣ness Eternal, and Temporal, is the hearty and continual Prayer of

