




IT is a disputing age wherein we live, abounds with Controversies; Religion in the Practicals, yea in the Doctrinals and fundamentals of it, is by adversaries loudly alarum'd, and hotly charg'd; even that which in Paul's account was beyond the line of Controversie, is yet at this day brought within the lists. And if the foun∣dations be undermined, it's no wonder that that which is superstructory hath strong Battery made against it. Such is the present condition of the Ordinance and exercise of sing∣ing. Some endeavour the invalidating of its authority, by Arguments framed against it: Others discourage from the practise, by reproches and scorns cast upon it, and upon those helps which have been afforded for the managing of it; making no more account of the composures of holy men of God, famous in their generations, then of loose Poems, and profane Jigs. Let such take heed lest they be found under a malignant influence, and acted by an Antichristian spirit, blaspheming God and his Temple, his holy Institutions, and them that attend them. A Vindication of this blessed Or∣dinance and exercise, hath been made by M. Cotton of
New England, M. Manton, on Jam: the 5th, and of very late days, by M. Ford of Exon; who have all appear'd in a Polemical way, and militated in this behalf: And I do heartily wish there were better improvement made of such Provisions, and that the Saints would not suffer themselves to fall under a suspension from practising Gospel Duties, meerly upon this account, that they are questioned and contradicted; that they would not fall off from them, be∣cause others fall foul upon them. My business at present is, to promote the practise of that which my self and others have so justly pleaded for. I engaged at first to deal with
Solomon's Song, that mysterious Marriage Song; moved thereunto by considering the sutableness of it to Sacramen∣tal Communion. Having performed that task, and com∣municated my papers to some of my Learned Brethren, they perswaded me in like manner to deal with some other Scriptural Songs, and so make them publike. Accordingly I have digested the Songs of Moses, Exod. 15. Deut. 32. The Song of Deborah, Judg. 5. The Song of Hannah, 1 Sam. 2. and the Churches Song, Isa. 26. into a familiar Meeter; and in all, have endeavoured to keep as close as I possibly could, to the letter of the Bible. If what I have done may be in the least to the honour of God, and your ad∣vantage, I have my aym. It is the priviledge that Christ our blessed Redeemer hath purchased for you, and others of his Saints that when his enemies shall weep and howl, you and they shall sing and rejoyce. It shall be my Prayer for you and them, that when others shall lament and mourn for the destruction of Babylon, Rev. 18. you may be counted worthy to stand on Mount Sion, and sing the Song of Mo∣ses, and of the Lamb.

