



SIR,
IT is my happiness, that I can be acquainted a little in her writings with her, with whom God was pleased to give me so short a time of acquaintance in this life. Sir, though I could not deny my worthless labors, as my last piece of service to her; yet, had it not been to tempt out this little piece into the world, I should have denyed this Sermon any further publication then the Pulpit in which it was preached. I need not excuse it to you (Sir▪) who know enough what impar opus humeris con∣stantly lies upon my shoulders, that I had neither time to compose it, not yet since to enlarge or refine it; but have sent you my own Notes, totidem verbis, as the first day written. I shall beg, Sir, That her Notes may be prefixed to the Sermon; I shall be a little covered under so sweet a shadow, and the Readere expectation

will be satisfied, before his eye reacheth my Sermon: But, Sir, (without a Com∣plement, which is but the folly of excuse) the Sermon holds out something of Christ, his name is precious: Reading, Rhetorick, &c. are but the poverty of the Creatures endeavors. In her writing you will be a Spectator to a pitcht battel, sought betwixt her Soul and Death: My Sermon will present you with the Con∣queror, singing Triumph, we sight, but Christ conquers; nay, to speak truth, he both fights, and conquers too. After I had seen her upon her death-bed, so fully triumphing over the King of Terrors, I could not but at her Funeral rejoyce, con∣cerning Death, with crying, O Death, where's thy sting? O Hell, where's thy victory? It hath often pleased my secret thoughts, to remember her, over-looking Death, when the pangs of Death had taken hold of her. Ah Sir! how sweet is it to have an assurance of Christs love? What a nobleness of spirit is there in the true Christian, that can call Death and Hell cowards? It is no marvel to see a profane beastly wretch (whose conscience the Lord hath feared to damnation) dying

quietly; but to see a knowing Christian, of an awakened conscience, to dye tri∣umphingly, and make an holy-day of leaving all Creature-contenents: O this is the mighty Conquest of the Soul, through the great work of him that hath led Captivity captive: Sir, methinks it should comfort you to think how willing she was to part with you, (though be∣fore more dear then her own life to her.) It argued no want of love, to desire Christs company more then yours. Alas! Sir, you never dyed upon the Cross for her. Let it refresh you, Sir, to think how much you were beholden to the Bride∣groom of Glory, that he would trust you with his Bride so long a time: The enjoy∣ment of such a Saint thirty years Sir) is a great piece of Heaven. Is she gone? No Sir; only restored: Where she is, she is in good keeping; and as well-beloved as she loves. You have resigned her, Sir▪ And it was but Justice that the Lord Je∣sus should have his Wife, when he sent such a messenger for her as would not be denyed: Ah! Sir, let us follow, she is gone before; It should seem her Mansion was ready before ours. or (which is

most probable) her Soul was fitter for it then ours: She was first drest, and there∣fore is first gone to take her walk in the Paradise of God. Sir, let us blush, and get ready; how long shall her glory anti∣date ours? But it will be some comfort to think, that though she hath got the start in Heaven before us, yet she will be walking there till we come: It is a rare walk, that wearres not the feet of he Re∣deemed ones: Here we wall upon stones, there we shall have a gardes-walk, and legs that cannot be weary. ut yet let us make haste; there's odds betwixt Earth and Heaven; what ever our enjoy∣ments here be. This Sermon,  rather her own prefixed Meditations, may mind you of her, Sir, who now is before the Throne, and is satisfied with the likeness of him who is the brightness of his Fa∣ther's glory. I beseech you Sir, as it minds you of her, so let it quicken you after her. So shall God have the glory your Soul the comfort; and he the answer of his prayers, who is, Sir,

From my study in Chplyfield house in Nor∣wich, August 26, 1648.
