


RIGHT HONORABLE,
It hath been the avourable Advantage and signall Providence that hath attended Aber∣deen

for many Ages, that it hath had a honorable Character among the Burghs of Scotland, (which I wish may never declyne) the sense whereof made me recollect what I knew or had read concerning it, at least since the fatall Overthrow thereof in the dayes of King Da∣vid Bruce about the year 1330, by the totall burning of it, and the universall slaughter of those that did not escape. And finding that Sir Robert Sibbald, Dr. of Phisick the Kings Geographer, by a warrant from Authority; had emitted an Ad∣vertisement for a true information of the several Shyres, Burghs, Univer∣sities &c, of this Kingdom. I look∣ed on it as a fit Opportunity to communicat what I knew unto

ou, that ye might dispose thereof s ye should see meet. I have there∣ore set down a Survey of Aber∣deen at some length, that all may see nd perceive what a City it is, and ath been; not onely for conside∣able Buildings, but also as to the enown of its Inhabitants. If there e ought judged worthy of Praise r Remark, ye may look upon that s an incitement for imitation, and  quickning motive for your Pos∣erity to endeavour a studious Pro∣ress in the commendable wayes of Vertue; for here may be seen the minent Evidences of that Loyaltie which was conspicuous in your Ancestors: Also, the Princely Rewards and Royall Marks our overaignes did bestow upon your

City and Magistrats. Here also may be seen the assiduous care and diligence our Magistrats have at all occasions evidenced for advanceing Vertue, and what might tend to the Honour and Reputation of the City.
If Rome had matter to glory of her Heroes in severall Generations, Aberdeen hath not wanted occasion to speak well of many of her Rulers in diverse Ages? I love not to be guilty of giving the least appea∣rance of evil, or what may savour of flatterie or ostentation. One thing I aim at, is, that ye may out∣vye all that have gone before you in Vertue, Wisdom, Fidelity, and care of the Wellfare of your Common-Wealth. And in a word,

that I may say as the Wise-man said of the Vertuous Woman, That your own works may praise you in the gates, which is the earnest desire, of
Right Honorable 
