


Worshipful and Beloved,
THe days, into which Providence hath cast us, are evl, because they are days of trouble, dark and cloudy, but especially because in them iniquity abounds, and the lo of many is grown cold. He that considers the mstrous Atheism and Profaneness of the Age, the ghting of Ordinances, Opposition to Truth,  of Ministers, notwithstanding the purity of the first, the clearness of the second, the faith∣flness and idustry of the third, must say, We are fa into the drgs of Time. England may well  Gods goodness to her, in her manifold Deerances, miraculous Preservation, outward Peace and Plenty, and Gospel-enjoyments, (God hath not dealt so with all Nations as with her, nor with her at all times as now) but she hath cause to be ashamed of, and blush at the ingratitude, wanton∣ness, fruitlesness, and bad returns of her children.

Not long since Providence frowned upon us, and see∣med to threaten the laying of our Vineyard waste, by taking away the principle Stake in its Hedge; had the Foxes and wilde Boars then broken in and de∣voured, it had been just: But in rich mercy the Lord hath again made up the gap, and raised up another to stand in the breach. What duty you, and all owe unto him, the following Discourse tells you, which was calculated for no ther Meridian than yours, prepared onely for your Table, intended onely for your Direction and Instruction. The truth is, I judge not my self sufficiently accomplished to walk abroad, if my plain dress will please you my Friends and Neighbors at home, it is as much as I can promise my self; and I can say to Gods glory, and your de∣served commendation, that hitherto you have given very friendly entertainment to my poor labors, ha∣ving learned to rellish plain Truth, and to make muh of the simplicity of the Gospel, though it be not adorned and guarnish't with the gaudy and flan∣ting words of mans wisdom. Indeed your Town is not exempted from the common condition of all great places; there are divisions among you, under which let you and me groan. We have many enemies to the Churches purity, and we have some that are but small friends to the Churches peace; some that would defile her with their sinful mixtures, others that scratch her face, and fetch blood, with their causeless separations; But blessed be God, that you have learned to follow peace and holiness, and to judge, that these two are not inconsistent. As for those who are godly, but differ from you herein (of what perswasion soever they be) I shall pray for

them, long after them, and wish that they were like-minded with you, and shall wait till God shall reveal this unto them.
But since there are Divisions among us, it would be a wonder if I should not meet with some opposi∣tion, or not taste of that bitter cup, which my Re∣verend Fathers and Brethren have ha so large draughts of, nay, which my dearest Lord and Master drank deeper of than any, though he spake as never man spake. I thought the ensuing Sermon had been so harmless and inoffensive, as that it might have past without a censure: It was not my design (neither when I studied, nor when I preach∣ed it) to exasperate the spirits of any, my inten∣tion was to kindle praying affections in all, not to inflame the choler of any one; and I hope, those that peruse it▪ will think it hath a Dove-like in∣nocency, and brings in its mouth an Olive-branch of peace. But he that doth not like the Cook, will finde some fault with the Provision; if the Mini∣ster be not acceptable, his Sermons will be unsavory▪ I will not say, that for this Sermon I have been cal∣led A Sowe of Sedition, but because I there in spake against a lawless Liberty, calling it (as it is) An accursed Toleration, I have sate very heavy upo the spirits of some. But if this is to be vile, I will (God enabling me) be yet more vile. Not that I would call for fire from Heaven upon every one that is of a perswasion different from mine, neither is my charity so strait-laced, as to have a bosom open to none, but those that jump in judge∣ment with me. I know Christ prayed that his peo∣ple might be one, as the Father and he are one; and

that prayer shall be answered, because God heard him always; but I am apt to think that a compleat oneness and perfect harmony will not be the happiness of the way, but of the Countrey. I verily believe there shall be a sweeter close among Christians here, and that there shall be fewer differences than now, if any at all, and happy are they that live to see it; in the mean while I condemn not every one that va∣rieth from me, nor dare I say all are out of the way that do not exactly tread in my steps. Question∣less we must bear one with another, allowance ought to be given in matters controverted und of less mo∣ment. But what then, because flowers of several colours, and different sizes ought to be continued and lookt to, must weeds be suffered in the Garden? Because we may, without breach of charity, differ about Circumstantials, shall there be no hedge set about the Fundamentals? Christians, can you think it is pleasing to God, that the Holy Trinity should be spoken against, your Blessed Savior degraded, your Publique Assemblies forsaken, your Mini∣sters made Antichristian? I beseech you, consult the Word, and your own Consciences, and then tell me whether that would not be an accursed Toleration, which should suffer these and such like things. What would become of Religion if that should be granted? Surely the weeds, if let alone, will in time, choak the Corn. They need not be watered, it is enough for them, if they be let alone: If I desire they may be rooted out, I hope I am no enemy to Church and State, neither to God nor Caesar, and yet for so do∣ing I am maligned, and have been evil spoken of once and again. So that being necessitated to vindi∣cate

my self, and hoping these poor Labors may not be altogether useless, I have been willing (contrary to mine own Genius) to send them forth into the world, the blessing of God go with them. Something I have added, I hope that will not offend, since no thing is diminished; you have one or two passages twice ever, because I thought it a piece of honesty (pub∣lishing my Notes uon such an occasion) to leave out nothing.
As for you, mine honored Friends, I have onely to tell you, that I love you in the Lord, desire your wel∣fare, pray for, and shall rejoyce in the prosperity of your souls. And I do beseech you to walk worthy of the Lord in all well-pleasing. Go on (as you have be∣gun) to own God, his Cause, and Ministers; where∣to you have already attained, walk by the same rule, and minde the same thing. Mark them which cause divisions, and avoid them, keep up an high esteem of publique Ordinances, and be constant in your attend∣ance upon them; contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints. Hold fast that which you have, and let no man take your Crown. Be humble and fruitful, study not to be wise above what is writ∣ten; credit the means you enjoy by your spiritual in∣creases, and exemplary conversations. And that God would bless you with grace, peace and comfort here, and crown you with glory hereafter, is, and shall be the prayer of

From my Study
Ian. 24. 1658.
