


Illustrious Sir,
DIvers Authors have discovered to us the manifold and various Accidents which
attend humane affairs, and the changes in States and Kingdoms: And God him∣self
has been pleased heretofore to instruct us, and with his Own voice, as it were
to foretel us what should happen of this Nature, many Ages before it came to pass.
And as to the first four Great Empires of the World, He has been pleased by Da∣niel
the Prophet to inform us, of their Order, Changes and Successions: The greatest part of
whose excellent Predictions are now (by the event) exposed and made very plain to us, and af∣ford
us a knowledge which is both very sweet and full of Consolation. The same holy Prophet has
also foretold the changes of Religion, and the contests concerning its Doctrines; and the Apostle
St. Paul who followed him, has clearly also discovered before-hand many things of that Nature.
And the accomplishment of these Predictions has been delivered down to us, and explain'd by va∣rious
Writers who have lived in the intermediate Ages. But then that change which has hapned
in our times, is one of the most Illustrious Events which has come to pass.
The Prophet has foretold that the Roman Empire should be the last, and the most powerful, and
that it should be divided; and accordingly it is reduced to the lowest degree of weakness, tho it was
once of an immense Bulk and vast extent, so that now it only subsists within the Confines of Ger∣many;
and its Fortunes have been very various and unsteady, partly by reason of its Intestine
Divisions, and partly on the account of Foraign Combinations against it. Yet after all, God has
at last given us the most Potent Emperor that has reigned in many Ages: For in the Person of this
Prince are united the Succession of many Rich and Powerful Kingdoms and Inheritances, which by
reason of their Situations have afforded him the opportunity of performing great things, by Sea
and Land, above any other of our Princes. And as his Power has very much exceeded all the
Emperors of Germany which have Reigned since Charles the Great: So the things which have
happen'd in his time, and under his Government, have rendred him the most Conspicuous and Me∣morable
of all our Princes.
And amongst these, the Reformation of Religion doth justly challenge the first Place, which
began with his Reign. For this Controversie had not been moved above XIV months, when Maxi∣milian
the Emperor (his Grandfather and immediate Predecessor in the Empire) died: And
when he was chosen by the VII Electors, Luther being at the self same time provoked by his Ad∣versaries,
entred the Lists, and maintain'd a publick Disputation against Eckius at Leipsick;
by which the minds of both the contending Parties were put into a great Commotion. The Reign
therefore of this great Prince is diligently to be considered, and for the better understanding of it,
ought to be compared with those of the former times. For God has ever used to raise up Illustrious
and great Princes, when the Ecclesiastical or Civil State were to be changed: such were Cyrus,
Alexander the Macedonian, C. Julius Caesar, Constantine, Charles the Great, and the
Otho's of Saxony, and now in our times at last, CHARLES the V.
That change I have here in this Story unfolded, is such that no man who does clearly under∣stand
it, can think of it without astonishment, and the utmost degree of Admiration and Wonder.

Its beginning was small and almost contemptible; and one man alone, a while, bore the hatred and
violence of the whole World: And even he too might easily, at first, have been quieted and laid to
sleep, if the condition he so often offered his Adversaries, had been accepted by them. For he
Promised he would hold his Peace, if they would do so too: But when they refused this,
and would force him to recant, and stood stifly in this Resolution that he should do it: And he on
the otherside as stoutly replied, That he could not retract what he had Advanced, till they had shewn
him wherein he had err'd; The debate between them improved and grew greater, and the business
was brought before the Dyet of Germany, by which means it dilated it self to that degree we now
see it in.
But then upon what reasons it was done; What share the Popes of Rome, the Ʋniversities, and
the Kings, Princes, and States of Christendom had in this Affair; How Luther defended his
Cause before the Emperor and the Princes of Germany in the Dyet; How many men of great
Learning joyned themselves with him; How this business was from time to time agitated and de∣bated
in the Dyets; What ways were proposed for an Accommodation; How the Popes solicited
the Emperor and other Christian Princes; How they frequently promised a Reformation and a
General Council; What Persecutions and Slaughters were in several Places were stir'd up against
those who imbraced this Doctrine; What Conspiracies and Leagues were set on foot to the same
end, not only in Germany but in other Countries, as this Religion spread it self; How some for∣sook
it, and others persevered constantly in it; What Tumults, Contentions and Wars were occasi∣oned
by it; These thing, in my judgment are so great, and so full of Variety, that I think it were a
sin to suffer them to perish in silence, and not commit them to writing.
To this I may add, that I think it very reasonable to give an account what the state of the Em∣pire
of Germany has been during the Reign of this Prince, by the space of XXXVI years; what
Wars he has mannaged; What Commotions and Disturbances have happned; And what has been
the fortune of the Neighbour Kingdoms and Provinces in these times: (But then I shall shew here∣after
the method I have followed in this Work.) For as this Princes Dominions are of great
Extent, so he has been attack'd by very Potent Adversaries. The things therefore that have hap∣pen'd
during his Reign, and in our Memory, are strangely great. Some years since, many men
of eminent Learning and Virtue, when these things happen'd to be accidentally mention'd, began to
be earnest with me that I should commit to Writing the Affairs of our times, especially what re∣lated
to Religion; And this they did, not out of an opinion that I was better able to do
it than another, or because there were not abler men to be found for that purpose; but
because they saw me particularly fancy and love these Composures; and thence they con∣cluded
that I being by Nature design'd to this imployment, and by her powerfully excited
to it, might perhaps not altogether lose or mispend my time in the attempt. On the
other side, I who knew what a large Sea of Matter I was to enter into, and that this de∣sign
needed a man of greater Ingenuity and Eloquence than I could pretend to, and
therefore I almost despaired of ever being able to accomplish it; yet being at last over∣come
by the Authority of those who had made this motion to me, I resolved to make a
trial of it: And accordingly beginning with the time when Luther first opposed the Venal Indul∣gences,
and bringing the Relation down to the Disputation appointed by George Duke of Saxony
at Leipsick, I sent what I had Composed, as a kind of Specimen, to those who had solicited me to
undertake it, about ten years since, to Worms; there being then a Dyet of the Empire in that City,
to the end they might read and judge of it. They thereupon became more earnest with me than
before, both by their Letters and Personal applications that I should go on with it: But about that
time Germany was involved in a Calamitous War, which as it gave great hinderances to all the
Learning and Arts of our Country, so it discomposed my design, and for some time forced me to
delay it. For neither was it possible for me to go on as I desired, and besides I met frequently
with stops and interruptions. But then as soon as ever this storm blew over, and especially in the
three last years, I applied all my Study and Labour to this Work; nor would I give my self any
rest till I had arrived at that period of time I intended.
The main and principal scope of my design is to set forth the Affairs of Religion; but then I
thought it needful for Order sake to set down also the Civil Transactions. As to the nature of the
Story every man that reads it will very easily see what it is.
Candor and Truth are the two most becoming Ornaments of an History; and in truth, I have
taken the utmost care that neither of them might be wanting here: To that end I have taken up
nothing upon surmise or light report, but I have studiously collected what I have here written from
the Publick Records and Papers; the Faith of which can justly be call'd in question by no man.
Besides, I had great assistances from James Sturmius, a Person of Noble Birth and great
reputation, who was imploy'd for above XXX years in the Publick and most difficult Affairs of his
Country, which he at all times managed with much commendation; He having been pleased to
admit me (such was his Goodness) into his Acquaintance and Friendship, like a good Governour

very often shew'd me the right and even way, when I was at a loss, and doubtful which way to
turn me, and at other times stuck on the Rocks and Shallows; and after all, read over, at my request,
the greatest part of this Work before his last Sickness, which took him from us in the year 1553,
and with great industry and care admonished me of what he thought was needful.
The Reader will meet frequent mention of Foraign affairs, especially the French and English,
and in these I have pursued the same method, and I have inserted nothing but what I had good
Authority for. And as to the French transactions, I saw many of them in the IX years I lived in
that Kingdom. So that the greatest part of the Persecutions and Burnings, and the Royal Edicts
against the Professors of the Reformed Religion, which I have mention'd; the Disputation under∣taken
by the Divines of Paris against some of their Ministers; the Confession of their Faith
which was Published in Print soon after, and the Court Factions which then were on foot, do all
of them fall within that time also. As to Military actions, and what pass'd in the Wars, I have
not wholly pass'd them over, nor indeed could I, and yet I have not made them any principal part
of my business, because that of Religion was my main design. And therefore when my Reader falls
upon any thing of that Nature, I would have him know before-hand, he is not to expect an exact
and large account: That being contrary to my undertaking, and which may easily be found in other
Authors who have made those things their principal care, tho I have not.
The second Ornament which I mention'd of History, is Candor or Impartiality, which is ever
to be observed to prevent the Writers being drawn from Truth by his affections, which seems the
more difficult, because it is so rarely to be found in Historians. Now tho perhaps I shall not be
able to perswade all my Readers that I have used more than an ordinary diligence, as far as it was
possible for me, as to this: Yet I do with repeated earnestness conjure them not to load me with an un∣just
suspicion before-hand. This whole Work, as I said above, is extracted out of Publick Acts,
Papers, or Records; collected together with great diligence, and a great part of which have been
already Printed, partly in Latin, and partly in the Vulgar Tongues, viz. the German, Italian,
and French. It contains many Orations, Petitions, and Answers; very many Accusations and
their Answers; in all these I nakedly, simply, and with good Faith, recite all things as they were
particularly acted. For here I do not add any thing of my own, nor do I make any Judgment on
them; but willingly and freely leave it to my Reader. I make no Rhetorical Flourishes, nor do I
write any thing out of Favour or Envy to any man. No, I only furnish the Style, and use my
own words, that the tenor of my Language may be equal, and always alike; and digest every
thing, and fix it in its proper place, as it happen'd to be done in order and time.
In the first years Leo the X, and Adrian the VI, Popes of Rome, wrote many things with
great Bitterness against Luther. Now as I take nothing from their Words, so I add nothing to
Luther's Answers; nor do I make their complaints worse than they were, or his Defences and
Replies better. The two Popes that followed these, Clement VII, and Paul III, and especially
the latter, when Luther's Doctrine was spread very much abroad, turning from his person, did
very odiously accuse and reproach some Princes and Free-Cities: Here I go on in the same man∣ner,
and indeed throughout the whole Work. Therefore I beseech my Reader to lay aside all pre∣judice,
and that he would first consider the things proposed, and my Labour, which was very great,
and then bestow his good will and favour on it. For it is certain, that if those motives which in∣duced
me to begin to Write, had not spurr'd me to go on, notwithstanding all the trouble, I had
long since deserted, and left this very difficult undertaking, when I found by experience the varie∣ty
and extent of it. But my mind and strength were very much supported, first, When I considered
that it was for the glory of God, who was thus pleased to discover his Almighty Power, and admi∣rable
Counsel in our times: Next that the common Good and Advantage, which would result from it,
very much wrought upon me. For even here in Germany very few clearly understand in what or∣der
every thing was done; and Foreign Nations know nothing at all of them: but the far greatest
part of men being prepossess'd with prejudices, judged of the greatest part of the things quite other∣wise
than they ought. To all this, I may add, I have had some consideration for Posterity, if yet
these my Writings will bear the Light, and last any long time. Besides it rarely happens
that things of this Nature are by others related with any degree of Truth and Moderation:
And there is a Book (on this Subject) Printed above six years since at Mentz, Written by a
German, and stuffed with Accusations, Slaunders, Trifles and Reproaches: And within the space
of a few years past there were two Volumes published at Florence, the Author of which has very
largely handled, in them, the History of his own Times; but wheresoever he speaks of the Affairs
of Germany, and especially of what concerns Religion, there he will certainly discover the sickness
of his Mind: The greatest part of what he writes, being not well known to him, False and Slan∣derous,
as might very clearly be shewn. Besides, whereas these two Writers have occasion frequently
to mention some Orations, Letters and Prefaces of Books, which have been Published from the Press,
yet even here they presume to Treat all these things not only with great Enmity and Envy, but they
go very far also from the Truth.

These Considerations, I say, prevail'd upon me, so that I thought I was obliged to go on, and
not to suffer the Story of this Revolution to be falsly delivered to this or the succeeding Age. For
what can possibly be more base and insufferable, in this kind of Writing, than to suffer that which
ought to make men wiser, by false relations to be depraved and turn'd to a contary end? The
greatest part of the Historians of our times, by a fault too common in our days, seek to gratifie
and please some one person, but in the mean time this makes them injurious to many more, whom
they thus deceive and cause to err. As to my self I do assure my Reader, without any boasting,
that I am ready, and well disposed, if I have set down anything in this Work which is not exactly
true, to blot it out, and give the World a caution not to believe it too. But then I am very con∣fident
that nothing of vanity can here be charged upon me; because there are many good men who
can testifie what great study and industry I have imployed, for some years now past, to gain an
exact Knowledge of every thing; and besides I trust the Work it self will prove it.
Now tho I Write the History of those things which have happen'd during the Reign of Charles
V. who is yet living, and at the Helm, of our State, and so many other great Actions may per∣haps
follow in his times; yet because those that are past must of necessity be the first, principal and
greatest part of the events of it: Therefore I would not delay this Work any longer, wherein I
have gratified many Learned Men, not only of Germany, but also of other Countries, who desired
to see it. Without doubt there are great Commotions and strange and wonderful changes coming
on; and the S. Scriptures seem clearly and plainly to foretel as much; and the present state of
Affairs intimate the same; so that those who are disposed to Write, are not like to be destitute of Mat∣ter.
But in the interim, as the Publick good inclin'd me to undertake this task; so it has now at
last prevail'd with me to Publish these XXV Books.
