



AS I owe my Allegiance, and have Dedicated my Life to Your Majesty; so I desire with all Humility in my self, and Zeal for Your Hap∣piness, to offer up these Papers unto You.
Many of Your Subjects are capable to present You, with what is more sutable to the Greatness of Your Understanding; but nothing can be laid at Your Feet which more nearly concerns the Preservation of Your Sacred Person, the Safety of Your Crown, and Se∣curity of Your Royal Dignity.
The danger of Conspiracies lies in their being con∣cealed, none ever perished by a detected Plot, but such as have wilfully abandoned themselves to be destroyed. And therefore, while some of your Subjects, to de∣feat the Hellish Machinations of the Papists against your Majesty and People, are contented to expose themselves, not only to secret Assassinations, but to the vow'd Revenge of a disloyal and desperate Party; It is hoped, that you will not at once both desert your Self, and de-relinquish the care of three Kingdoms, as well as Sacrifice those Loyal Souls, to gratifie implacable Enemies. Sir, 'Tis past the Malice and Strength of your Adversaries, either to destroy your Life, or subvert your Government, unless (which God avert) you joyn in the Conspiracy, by some Personal accession. And against dangers that you volun∣tarily expose your self unto, there is no promise that the immense Wisdom, or Almighty Power, should interpose to save you. The Conspirators find it con∣venient to alter the Methods of accomplishing their

Treason; but they remain unchangeable in their Trai∣terous Designs. But Sir, it is in your own Power, not only to Reign in defiance of their violent Attempts, but to render your People happy while you live, and relinquish them safe when you dye. For to all this there is no more required, but your hearkning to the Advice of your Parliament; who as they are best able to Counsel you, so their own interest, and the welfare of those they represent, will always oblige them to it. Might your Popish Adversaries but once divide be∣twixt you and your People, and dispossess you out of the hearts of your Subjects; the next thing will be (having left you none to stand by you) to wrest your Crown from you, and deject you from your Throne. As it is impossible you should miscarry while you and your People agree, so no humane means can prevent the Destruction of these Kingdoms, and the Unhap∣piness of your Royal Self and Family in their Ruines, if through the Clamours of the Popish Party you should be divided from your People as represented in Parliament, and to be withdrawn from hearkning to their Advice.

