



MADAM:
NO Engagements could have been sufficient to have drawn me to appear in Publick in so madly Censorious an Age as ours, did I greatly concern my self at what the World will say: For Wri∣ting is like a running the Gantlope, where a man Exposes himself naked, and every man will be sure to have a lash at his back. The Wit and Ge∣nius of the Age lyes most in finding fault, and some men will do it out of a dislike to the person, and some to the Work, and many, that they may shew their judgement (as they think) and make it appear that they have wit enough to spy a fault. And therefore privacy is certain∣ly the best defence against the petulancy of the Tongue; for he that is not known nor heard of in the World, is in no danger of being di∣sturbed by the Censures of it. Had I therefore valued the Censures of Men, I had chosen rather to have disobliged you, by denying your re∣quest, than thus to expose my self, and run the hazard that here I do. But I hunt not after Applause, (and if I did, I had never sought it by publishing this Sermon.) Nor do I at all concern my self to think what men will say, or how they will judge or condemn this Work. My work must stand or fall according to my great Masters approbation; Why then should I regard what the World sayes of it? since their Applause or Reproach can neither add nor diminish in the acceptance of it with him. I have therefore Obeyed your Commands, and at your Request this Ser∣mon is now made publick; and other Apology than this I shall not go a∣bout to make for my self. I shall not tell the World what a sense I have of your constant Civilities to me, nor plead that the Obligations that your Kindness hath lay'd upon me, made me unable to refuse your Com∣mands (though I must own that these have been the prevailing Induce∣ments with me;) for when I have said what I can, men will think what they please, and I am very well contented they should do so.
Nor shall I go about to frame an Excuse for this Dedication, with∣out first asking your leave; for at whose door should I lay this Sermon now it is made publick, than at yours, to whose Commands it entirely oweth its coming abroad. I will not doubt of its Acceptance with you, for the sake of him who was the occasion of it, a Person who though dead, yet retains that esteem in your heart that cannot be augmented by the fai∣rest Character that can be given of him, and is sufficient to recommend to your Acceptance any thing that hath any relation to him.

Madam, I know too well the greatness of your Sorrow, and know that you are so fully sensible of your Loss, that it would be but Cruelty to you, under the notion of Respect to the Dead, for me to add more weight to your load, and aggravate your loss, in saying what a one he was whom you have lost. The greatness of the Affection you had for him, should make you the more contented in being deprived of him, sence it is so much for his gain. The support that God hath given you under your great affliction, and the plenty of Mercies that are still left you, are great Occasions and Engagements still to be thankful, and should induce you to own this providence, though severe, yet as the Chastise∣ment of a Father, not as the Wound of an Enemy; he that called for this mercy again, could have called for more, and have left you much more desolate than you are. To continue lamenting your Loss, and to stand measuring the length, and bredth, and depth of the Affliction, and to survey it in all its dimensions, is but to look on the back-side of the Book, where nothing is to be learned; and which hinders you from looking in to read the Lesson that God has written out for you by this providence. Your Work is to consider what God designs in this his doing, and to labour to spell out the meaning of these black Characters. The delight of your eyes is taken away with a struak, and your greatest Comfort in this life hath failed you: Trust then to such perishing Joyes no more, sit loose to the World and the blandishments of it, and fix with all your might your thoughts and hopes upon him, who being unchangeable, never fails, nor can fail them that put their Trust in him. Remember him that is gone before, so as to prepare to Follow him; and let the memory of his Piety and Vertues be ever before your Eyes as a fair Copy to Write afte, that since he shall not return to you, you may go to him, and enjoy him once again, never to lose him more. Such as these, and many more, are the proper Improvements of this dispensation; which that you may so improve, as to reap the advantage of Spiritual health from this bitter Potion, is and shall be the subject of his Prayers for you to the Throne of Grace; who is,
MADAM,

From Much Waltham Vicaridge, July, 1675.
