



SIRS,
SInce Books (as well as Authors) want Pa∣trons, under whose protection they may pass free and undisturb'd through the whole series of Censure, nor be carpt at by every pretending Zoylus, and Factious Critick; the a∣spiring Catiline, drest in his
 English Garb, lies at your mercy for his Doom. He was once raging in his Pas∣sions, and immoderate in his Ambition, affecting no less than the Soveraignty of the onely Empire of the World; but that same Civil War which he was the onely Au∣thor of, turn'd at last to his own ruine, like Envy in Ovid became his own Tormenter and Executioner: Or like that foolish Bird that stole a Coal from the Altar, which burnt and consum'd he whole Nest.
Thus we see to what Ru∣ines and Precipices the Igni
 fatuus of his Ambition de∣coy'd him. But 'tis not on∣ly the fate of Catiline, but all, whose shallow brains enter∣tain such extravagant Chi∣maera's, and are pufft up with the empty bubble of haugh∣ty Ambition; and 'tis the rarest thing in nature, if e∣ver they at last compass what they aim at, though to the attaining but the least part of it, they render them∣selves the most contempti∣ble of Mankind. Catiline, who could content himself with no less Power than that of Sylla, yet condescended to be a publick Pander to pro∣cure
 Whores and Horses for the Roman Gentlemen, whose Heads and Purses he made use of, and whose Ru∣ines he caus'd as well as his own.
The first ambitious men in the World, the old Giants, are said to have made an he∣roical attempt of scaling Heaven in spight of the Gods, and they cast Ossa on Olympus, and Pelion upon Ossa, two or three Mountains more they thought would make them absolute Masters of Heaven, as well as Earth, but the Thunder came and spoil'd all, when they were
 come to the third story.
The great Attempt was all in vain;
They reapt their labour for their pain.
Cromwel, the great Giant of our Nation, one of their Off-spring, when from an inconsiderable Captain he made himself Lieutenant-General of a little Army of Titans, which was his first Mountain; afterwards Ge∣neral, which was his second; and then absolute Tyrant of three Kingdoms, which was his third; is really believ'd to have died of Discontent, because he could not attain the name of King, and the
 formality of a Crown: But if he had compass'd that, yet still something else had been necessary to compleat his Felicity; either the Ti∣tle of an Emperour, or a God.
And to this day what are the minds of many men in∣fected with, but the same Disease? what mean else these Plots and Conspiracies (of which Catiline is but the Model)? and these flyings from Justice, but the cursed fruits of Ambition? What makes men of profligate Lives and lost Consciences endeavour the Death and
 Ruine of their own Monarch and the best of Princes? a Prince whom Wonders and an inscrutable Providence have preserv'd, and attended from his Cradle to his Crown; whose Grace has warm'd into life the Vipers that would have stung him, and entertain'd the croaking Vermine into his own Pa∣lace.
We might well now reflect on the Iron Age of Ovid, Filius ante Diem Patrios inquirit in annos: Or the days of Sylla, when the Sword had free sway, and
 acted what it pleased, and was as familiar with Entrails as the Augurs. And may not we as well imagine that Cati∣line or Cethegus is now rais'd from the dead, and like Ma∣homet's Pidgeon inspires men with the horrid principles of Bloud and Rebellion? What puts the Nation into Frights and Jealousies, what ruines Friendship and Commerce among men, and turns the whole course of Nature in∣to Chaos and Confusion, but Ambition and its pernicious Attendants?
Thus have I made so large a digression in an Essay of
 Ambition: all that I have to say is, That Gratitude and a sense of Honour for my Country-men and School-fellows, was the onely cause (in this interval of my busi∣ness) why I were so ambi∣tious to attempt so difficult a Task. The Original in Latin we learnt at School; and I know some will object, that like a School-boy I have handl'd it: but as I co∣vet not their Smiles, so I fear not their Anger, but am much of Martial's humour, that only studied to please and gratifie the Nobility;

Let Poetasters beat their Brains
To please the Vulgar, what's their gains?
But my ambition was onely to please my self, and if pos∣sible, gratifie my Friends; (but especially you, who are my Holy-day Friends, and ought to be distinguish'd from Pretenders): If I have done this, my ambition is at its height; and 'tis but rea∣son I should study not only to requite, but if possible, erect so lasting a Monument, Quod nec Jovis ira, nec ignis should be ever able to demolish
 their Names, who have so largely and generously o∣blig'd me, and I doubt not but will continue it.
I pass by your Vertues and your Pedigree, and hate to be thought guilty of the least of flattery: for as I ac∣knowledge you my Friends, I should be far from being so, should I in the least en∣deavour it. If Vertue be Nobility (as the Satyrist observes) you have a dou∣ble Claim to it: Vertue to a Noble Extraction adds Lu∣stre, carrying a Majesty with it, and claiming a veneration from every one, especially
 when conspicuous in such young Personages. Which that it may still flourish, as it is the Wish of all that love you, so of none more, than,
SIRS,

