



THE intendment of this Preface is not to court the Reader into an high esteem of either these Discourses or their Author, (the Discourses will best speak what they are, and for the Author, his own Works will praise him;) but only to give a clear and plain Ac∣count of what concerns This Edition, and withall to observe Something concerning the Discourses them∣selves and the Author of them, not unnecessary per∣haps for the Reader to be acquainted with.
The Papers now published I received from the Au∣thor's Of this Editi∣on. Executor, Mr. Samuel Cradock (then Fellow of Emmanuel College, now Rector of North-Cadbury in So∣merset-shire,) whose Beneficence to the publick in im∣parting these Treasures I thought worthy to be here in the first place gratefully remembred.
Having taken a more general view of these, and some other, Papers (divers of which were loose and scat∣tered, not being written by the Author in any Book,) my First care was to collect such as were Homogeneal and related to the same Discourse; as also to observe where any new additional Matter was to be inserted; (For the Author, whose Mind was a rich & fruitful soil, a bountiful & ever-bubling Fountain, sometimes would superadde upon further thoughts some other Con∣siderations to what he had formerly delivered in pub∣lick; and this he would doe sometimes after he had gone



off from that Argument, and though Matter of a dif∣ferent nature had come between.) This emploiment I found at first sufficiently perplex'd and toilsome; but through more then once reading over the Manuscripts, I got through those difficulties, and dispatch'd that First trouble. And I am well assured that the severed Parts, and also the additional Considerations, are brought to their due and proper places where the Au∣thor himself would have disposed them, if he had tran∣scribed his Papers.
And now I found that I stood in need of more Hands and Eyes then mine own for the fair transcribing of the Papers (otherwise impossible to be printed) as also for the examining of the material Quotations in this Vo∣lume: and in this Labour I had the assistance of some Friends to whom the memory of the Author was very pretious. As for some short Allusions and Expressi∣ons borrow'd out of ancient Authors, serving rather for Ornament then Support of the Matter in hand, there seem'd to be less need of being sollicitous about all of them: But for the other Testimonies, which are many and weighty, there were but Few (some possibly among such a number of Quotations might escape) that were not examin'd; and I am sure that this labour was not unnecessary and in vain, how wearisome soever it was, especially where the Authors, or the places in the Au∣thors, were not mention'd.
And then for the sake of such Readers whose Edu∣cation had not acquainted them with some of the Lan∣guages wherein many of the Testimonies were represen∣ted, (being otherwise men of good accomplishments, and capable to receive the designed benefit of these Papers) it seemed expedient to render the Latine, but especially the Hebrew and Greek, Quotations into En∣glish;



(except in such places where, the substance and main importance of the Quotations being insinuated in the neighbouring words, a Translation was less needful.) For the Author seldom translated the Hebrew, and more seldom the Greek, but into Latine; as conside∣ring that he delivered these Discourses in the College-Chappel before an Auditory not needing any such Con∣descensions as are requisite in the publishing of these Papers for the benefit of some Readers.
To dispatch this First part of the Preface which concerns the Preparations to this Edition, I shall add only one thing more; That whereas the Papers now published (especially those that contain'd the Six first Discourses) were written in the Author's own Copy without any Distinction or Sections, (uno tenore & con∣tinuâ serie, as the Jews observe of the ancient writing of the Law, , The whole Law was but as one Verse;) it seem'd expedient for the Reader's accomodation to distinguish them into several Discourses or Treatises (the Title-page to each Dis∣course giving a General account of the Matter contain'd therein) and the Discourses themselves into Chapters and Sections (except the Discourses were short, as two or three of them are, which therefore have the Contents set in the Beginning) and before the Chapters to give a Particular account of the Chief matters therein con∣tained; that so the Reader might have a clearer and fuller view (as of the strength and importance, so also) of the Contexture of the whole, and the Coherence of the several Parts of the respective Discourses: which otherwise would not be so easily discerned by every Reader, especially where there are some Excursions and Digressions in any of the Treatises, (things not unusual in the Writings or Discourses of other men, when the



Notion does strongly affect and possess their Minds, and their Phansies are therefore more active and vigorous) and some such Digressions the Reader will meet with here more then once; though even therein he will see that the Author did still respicere titulum, and kept the main designe alwaies in his Eye. Nor does the Author in these Digressions lead the Reader a little out of the way, only to see a Reed shaken with the wind, an ordi∣nary trifle, some slight and inconsiderable Object; but for better purposes; that he might the better present to the perspicacious Reader something which is worthy his Observation: and therefore these  being usually of such importance, need not be se∣verely censured by rigid Methodists, if any such chance to read these Treatises.
This is a plain Account of some Instances of the care and labour preparatory to this Edition; of all which I accounted the Author of these Discourses to be most Of the Author. worthy: For I considered him as a Friend, one whom I knew for many years, not only when he was Fellow of Queen's Col. but when a Student in Emman. Col. where his early Piety and the remembring his Creator in those days of his youth, as also his excellent improve∣ments in the choicest parts of Learning, endear'd him to many, particularly to his careful Tutor, then Fellow of Emman. Col. afterwards Provost of Kings College, Dr. Whichcote; to whom for his Directions and Encourage∣ments of him in his Studies, his seasonable provision for his support and maintenance when he was a young Scho∣lar, as also upon other obliging Considerations, our Au∣thor did ever express a great and singular regard.
But besides I considered him (which was more) as a true Servant and Friend of God: and to such a one, and what relates to such, I thought that I owed no less care



and diligence. The former Title [a Servant of God] is very often in Scripture given to that incomparable per∣son Moses: incomparable for his Act. 7. 22. Philosophical ac∣complishments and knowledg of Nature, as also for his Political Wisdom, and great abilities in the Conduct and managing of affairs; and in speaking excellent sense, strong and clear Reason in any business and Case that was before him; for he was mighty in words and in deeds, Acts 7. (and of both these kinds of Knowledge wherein Moses excell'd, as also in the more recondite and mysterious knowledge of the Egyptians, there are se∣veral Instances and Proofs in the Pentateuch written by him:) incomparable as well for the loveliness of his Disposition and Temper, the inward ornament and beauty of a Num. 12. 3. meek and humble Spirit, as for the ex∣traordinary amiableness of his outward person; and in∣comparable for his unexampled Heb. 11. 24, &c. Self-denial in the midst of the greatest allurements and most tempting advan∣tages of this world. And from all these great Accom∣plishments and Perfections in Moses, it appears how ex∣cellently he was qualified and enabled to answer that Title [The Servant of God] more frequently given to him in Scripture then unto any other.
The other Title [a Friend of God] is given to Abra∣ham, the Father of the Faithful, an eminent Exemplar of Self-resignation and Obedience even in Rom. 4. Heb. 11. Jam. 2. Trials of the greatest difficulty: and it is given to him thrice in Scripture, 2 Chron. 20. 7. Esay 41. 8. James 2. 23. and plainly implied in Genes. 18. 17. Shall I hide from Abra∣ham, &c. but express'd in the Jerusalem Targum there, , and in De Verbis, Resipuit Noe. Philo Jud. . Nor is less in∣sinuated concerning Moses, with whom God is said to have spoken,  Num. 12. 8. mouth to mouth, and  Exod. 33. 11. mouth to mouth, as a man speaketh unto his friend.


And how fitly and properly both these Titles were verified concerning our Author, who was a faith∣ful, hearty and industrious Servant of God, counting it his Duty and Dignity, his Meat and Drink to doe the will of his Master in heaven, and that  and , from his very Soul, and with good will, (the Ephes. 6. 6, 7. characters of a good Servant) and who was dearly affected towards God, and treated by God as a Friend; may appear from that Account of him represented in the Sermon at his Funeral. I might easily fill much Paper, if I should particularly recount those many Ex∣cellencies that shined forth in him: But I would study to be short. I might truly say, That he was not only Rom. 5. 7. , but , both a Righteous and truly Honest man, and also a Good man. He was a Follower and Imitator of God in Purity and Holiness, in Benignity, Goodness and Love, a Love enlarged as God's Love is, whose Goodness overflows and spreads it self to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works. He was a Ephes. 6. Lover of our Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity, a Lover of his Spirit and of his Life, a Lover of his Excellent Laws and Rules of holy life, a serious Practiser of his Sermon in the Mount, that Best Sermon that ever was Mat. ch. 5, 6, 7. preach'd, and yet none more generally neglected by those that call themselves Christians; though the ob∣servance of it be for the true Interest both of mens Souls and of Christian States and Common-wealths; and accordingly (as being the surest way to their true Settlement and Establishment) it is compared to the building upon a Rock, Matth. 7. 24. To be short, He was a Christian not only Act. 26. 29. , but , more then a little, even wholly and altogether such; a Chri∣stian Rom. 2 29. , inwardly and in good earnest: Reli∣gious he was, but without any Vaingloriousness and



Ostentation; not so much a talking or a disputing, as a living, a doing and an obeying Christian; one inward∣ly acquainted with the Simplicity and Power of Godli∣ness, but no admirer of the Pharisaick forms and San∣ctimonious shews (though never so goodly and specious) which cannot and do not affect the adult and strong Christians, though they may and doe those that are un∣skillful and weak. For in this weak and low state of the divided Churches in Christendom weak and slight things (especially if they make a fair shew in the flesh, as the Apostle speaks,) are most esteemed; whereas in the mean time the weightier matters of the Law, the most concerning and Substantial parts of Religion are passed over & disregarded by them, as being grievous to them, & no way for their turns, no way for their corrupt inte∣rests, fleshly ease, and worldly advantages. But God's thoughts are not as their thoughts: The Rom. 2. 29. Circumcision which is of the heart, and in the spirit, is that whose praise is of God, though not of men; and Luk. 16. 15. that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God.
What I shall further observe concerning the Author, is only this,
That he was Eminent as well in those Perfections which have most of Divine worth and excellency in them, and rendred him a truly God-like man; as in those other Perfections and Accomplishments of the Mind, which rendred him a very Rational and Learned man: and withall, in the midst of all these great Ac∣complishments, as Eminent and Exemplary in unaffe∣cted Humility and true Lowliness of Mind. And here∣in he was like to Moses that Servant and Friend of God, who was most meek and lowly in heart (as our Lord is also said to be, Mat. 11. in this, as in all other respects, greater then Moses who was vir mitissimus) above all the



men which were upon the face of the Earth, Num. 12. And thus he excell'd others as much in Humility as he did in Knowledg, in that thing which, though in a lesser degree in others, is apt to puff up and swell them with Pride and Self-conceit. But Moses was humble, though he was a Person of brave parts, ▪ as Jo∣sephus speaks of him, and having had the advantages of a most Acts 7. 21, 22. ingenuous Education was admirably, accom∣plish'd in the choicest parts of Knowledg, and * learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians; whereby some of the Antients understood the Mysterious Hieroglyphical learning, Natural Philosophy, Musick, Physick, and Ma∣thematicks. And for this last (to omit the rest) how ex∣cellent this Humble man, the Author, was therein, did appear to those that heard him read a Mathematick Le∣cture in the Schools for some years, & may appear here∣after to the Reader, if those Lectures can be recovered. To conclude, He was a plain-hearted both Friend and Christian, one in whose Spirit and mouth there was no guile; a profitable Companion; nothing of vanity and trislingness in him, as there was nothing of sowrness & Stoicism. I can very well remember, when I have had pri∣vate converse with him, how pertinently and freely he would speak to any Matter proposed, how weighty, sub∣stantial and clearly expressive of his Sense his private Discourses would be, and both for Matter and Language much-what of the same importance & value with such Exercises as he studied for, and performed in publick.
I have intimated some things concerning the Author; much more might be added: but it needs not, there being (as I before insinuated) already drawn a fair and lively Character of him by a worthy Friend of his in the Sermon preached at his Funeral; for the publishing whereof and annexing it (as now it is) to these Dis∣courses,

he was importun'd by Letters from several hands, and prevail'd with: wherein if some part of the Character should seem to have in it any thing of Hy∣perbolism and Strangeness, it must seem so to such on∣ly who either were unacquainted with him & Strangers to his worth, or else find it an hard thing not to be En∣vious, and a difficulty to be Humble. But those that had a more inward converse with him, knew him to be one of those Hebr. 11. of whom the world was not worthy, one of the Psal. 16. Excellent ones in the Earth; a person truly Ex∣emplary in the temper and constitution of his Spirit, and in the well-ordered course of his life; a life unius quasi coloris, sine actionum dissensione (as I remember Seneca doth express it somewhere in his Epistles) all of one colour, everywhere like it self: and Eminent in those things that are worthy of Praise and Imitation. And certainly a just Representation of those Excellen∣cies that shined in him (as also a faithful Celebration of the like Accomplishments in others) is a doing honour to God who is wonderful in his Saints, (if I may with some apply to this sense that in Psal. 68. ) and it may be also of great use to others, particularly for the awakening & obliging them to an earnest endeavouring after those heights and emi∣nent degrees in Grace and Vertue and every worthy Accomplishment, which by such Examples they see to be possible & attainable through the assistances which the Divine Goodness is ready to afford those Souls which press toward the mark and reach forth to those things that are before. The Lives and Examples of men eminent∣ly Holy and Useful in their generation, such as were , are ever to be valued by us as great Blessings and Favours from Heaven, and to be conside∣red as excellent Helps to the Advancement of Religion



in the World: and therefore there being before us these , (as S. Basil speaks in his first Epist. and a little afterwards in the same Ep.) , such living Pictures, moving and active Statues, fair Ideas and lively Patterns of what is most praise-worthy, lovely and excellent; it should be our serious care that we be not, through an unworthy and lazy Self-neglect, Ingentium Exemplorum parvi imita∣tores, to use Salvian's expression; it should be our ho∣ly ambition to transcribe their Vertues and Excellen∣cies, , to make their noblest and best Accomplishments our own by a constant endeavour after the greatest resemblance of them, and by being followers of them, as they were also of Christ, who is the fair and bright Exemplar of all Purity and Holiness, the highest and most absolute Pattern of whatsoever is Lovely and Excellent and makes most for the accomplishing and perfecting of Hu∣mane Nature.
Having observed Some things concerning This Edition Of the Dis∣courses. and the Author of these Discourses, I proceed now (which was the Last thing intended in this Preface) to observe something concerning the several Discourses and Treatises in this Volume. And indeed some of these Observations I ought not in justice to the Author to pretermit: and all of them may be for the benefit of at least some Readers.
The First Discourse Concerning the true Way or Me∣thod of attaining to Divine Knowledg, and an Encrease therein, was intended by the Author as a necessary In∣troduction to the ensuing Treatises; and therefore is the shorter: yet it contains  (to use Plutarch's Expression) excellent Sense and so∣lid Matter well beaten and compacted and lying close



together in a little room, many very seasonable Obser∣vations for this Age, wherein there is so much of fruit∣less Notionality, so little of the true Christian life and practice.
Shorter yet are the Two next Tracts Of Superstition and Atheism, which were also intended by the Author to prepare the way for some of the following Discour∣ses upon which the Author purposed to enlarge his Thoughts.
Yet as for that Tract Of Superstition, some things that are but briefly intimated by the Author therein, may receive a further Explication from his other Dis∣courses, more especially from the Eighth, viz. Of the Shortness and Vanity of a Pharisaick Righteousness, or Page 347. An Account of the false Grounds upon which men are apt vainly to conceit themselves to be Religious. And in∣deed what the Author writes concerning that more refi∣ned, that more close and subtile Superstition (by which he understands the formal and specious Sanctity and vain Religion of Pharisaick Christians, who yet would seem to be very abhorrent from Superstition, and are apt to call every thing Babylonish and Antichristian that is not of their way) I say what he writes concerning This in both these (or any other) Discourses, he would fre∣quently speak of, and that with Authority and Power. For being possess'd of the inward life and power of true Holiness, he had a very strong and clear sense of what he spake, and therefore a great and just indignati∣on (as against open and gross Irreligion, so also) against that vain-glorious, slight and empty Sanctity of the spiritual Pharisees, who would (as our Saviour speaks of the old Pharisees, Mark 7.) make void and very fairly disannul the Commandments of God, the weightier things of Religion, the indispensable concernments of



Christianity; while in stead of an inward living Righ∣teousness and entire Obedience they would substitute some external Observances and a mere outward, liveless and slight Righteousness, and in the room of the New creature made after God set up some Creature of their own, made after their own image, a Self-framed Righ∣teousness: they being strict in some things which have a shew of Wisdom and Sanctity, things less necessary and more doubtful, and where the H. Scripture hath not placed the Kingdom of God, but in the mean time loose and careless in their plain duty toward God and toward their Neighbour, in things holy and divine, un∣questionably just and good; yet to make some com∣pensation for their being deficient in things strictly and necessarily required, and primarily pleasing to God, and to excuse themselves, they would express a more then ordinary diligence and zeal in some easie and little things, as all the most specious observances of Formal Christians are, and not worthy to be named with those great Instances of the Power of Godliness, such as Hear∣ty and Universal Obedience, Entire Self-resignation, a being crucified to the world, plucking out of the right eye, and cutting off of the right hand, Mortification of the more dear and beloved Sins, and the closer ten∣dencies and inclinations to Sin and Vanity, and the like.
This is a short character of the Pharisaick and con∣ceited Righteousness; and in our Author's plain disco∣vering the thinness and slightness thereof, and free re∣proving of these false Religionists, it appears that the same Nobleness of Mind and Spirit was in him which was also in Christ Jesus, who never express'd himself with so much vehemency and smartness, as when he was to reprove the Pharisees in his days, those Patterns of Matth. 23. Formal Christians in all ages. For there is nothing



more grievous to the sincerely-religious Soul, then Af∣fectation and Canting in Religion, empty (though spe∣cious) shews of Sanctity, great pretendings to Spiritu∣ality and higher degrees of Grace, when to the free∣spirited and discerning Christian it clearly appears that such Boasters are but low and weak things, Heb. 5. unskillful and unexperienced in the word and way of Righteousness, and manifestly short of being plain Moral men; and that they are Sensual, having not the Spirit, nor bringing forth those lovely and well-relish'd fruits of the Spirit, mentioned Gal. 5. 22. but on the contrary the corrupt fruits of the Flesh grow out of their Hearts, and the works of the Flesh there mentioned are manifested in them: So far are they from being crucified (and not a∣live) to the world and the world to them, so far are they from having crucified the Flesh with the affections and lusts, that they do *  and  Rom. 8. Col. 3. , mind and earnestly affect, favour and relish, the things of the Flesh, and of the Earth; aspiring as much after power and greatness, as self-seeking and self-pleasing, as great lovers of themselves, loving the world and the things in the world, making hast to be rich, thirsting still after more of this world, pursuing worldly advantages and interests, with as much craft and policy, as much sollicitude and eager∣ness, with as unsatisfied desires, as those doe whom they call Worldly and Carnal. So of old the Gnosticks call'd all others but themselves Carnal and Animal men; they only were , others were  and  (as Irenaeus l. 1. tells us:) whereas in truth none were more Sensual, more unspiritual, then they who by their un∣evangelical lives were the great spots and blemishes of the Christian profession.
But to let these alone, and to return to the former,



(with whom our Author had to doe in both these Trea∣tises, and in the 2, 3, and 4. chapters of his seventh Treatise) I shall add this word of faithful Admonition; Be not deceived, God is not mocked: God will not be put off with empty pretences and Pharisaick appear∣ances (how glorious and precious soever in the eyes of men.) God will not be flattered with goodly praises, nor satisfied with words and notions, when the Life and Practice is a real contradiction to them. God will not be satisfied with a specious Form of Godliness, when men under this Form are Lovers of themselves, cove∣tous, 2 Tim. 3. proud, high-minded, fierce, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, and are manifestly under the power of these and the like Spiritual (if not also Fleshly) wickednesses. For the Power of sin within can (it seems) easily agree and consist with the Form of Godliness with∣out: but two such contrary Powers as the Power of Godliness and the Power of Sin, two such contrary Kingdoms as the Kingdom of the Spirit and the King∣dom of the Flesh, which is made up of many petty and lesser Principalities of Titus 3. 3. various Lusts and Pleasures, warring sometimes amongst themselves, but alwaies confederate in warring against the Soul; these so contra∣ry Powers and Kingdoms cannot stand together nor be established in one Soul. Be wise now therefore and be ye instructed O ye sanctimonious Pharisees, ye blind leaders of the blind, and know the things that belong unto your peace: for the day of the Lord will come that shall burn as an oven, when all those fine coverings, wherewith men thought to hide their ungodlike dispo∣sitions, shall be torn from them and cast into the Fire; and in this day shall even these weak and beggerly Elements melt with a fervent heat, and for Hypocrites, Gal. 4. all their paint shall then drop off, and their deformity



shall appear: in this day all affected modes of Religion shall be rendred despicable, and all disguises and artifi∣cial dresses (whereby false Christians thought to hide their crookednesses) shall be pluck'd off, and all things shall appear as they are. Verily there is a God that judgeth in the Earth: he will judge of men by other measures and rules then they used here, whereby they deceived themselves and others. God is for Reality and Truth: He desires Truth in the inward parts, his de∣light is in sincere and single minds. It will then appear That he that walks uprightly, walks surely; and That he that doth the will of God, abideth for ever, Prov. 10. 1 John 2.
If what the Author, out of great Charity to the Souls of men, has observed concerning these things were seri∣ously considered and lai'd to heart, Christianity would then recover its reputation, and appear in its own primi∣tive lustre and native loveliness, such as shined forth in the lives of those First and Best Christians, who were Christians in good earnest, , and were distinguished from all other men in excelling and out∣shining them in whatsoever things were true, venerable, just, pure, lovely, and of good report. Then would the true Power of Godliness manifest it self; which signifies infinitely More then a Power to dispute with heat and ve∣hemency about some Opinions, or to discourse volu∣bly about some matters in Religion, and in such Forms of words as are taking with the weak and unskillful: More then a power to pray without a Form of words; (for these and the like may be, and frequently are, done by the formal and unspiritual Christian:) More then a Power to deny themselves in some things that are easie to part with, and do not much cross their inclina∣tions, their self-will, their corrupt designs and inte∣rests,



nor prejudice their dear and more beloved lusts and pleasures, their profitable and advantageous Sins: and More then a power to observe some lesser and easier Commands, or to perform an outward obedience ari∣sing out of slavish Fear, void of inward Life and Love, and a Complacency in the Law of God (of which tem∣per our Author discourses at large.) For concerning such cheap and little strictnesses as these it may be en∣quired, What doe you more then others? Do not even Publicans and Pharisees the same? ; what excellent and extraordinary thing doe you? what hard or difficult thing do you perform, such as may de∣serve to be thought a worthy Instance and real Manife∣station of the Power of Godliness? except such things are to be accounted hard or extraordinary, which are common to the real and to the formal Christian, and are performable by unregenerate and natural men, and are no peculiar Characters of Regeneration. No, these and the like performances by which such Religionists would set off themselves, are but poor and inconside∣rable things, if compared with the mighty acts and no∣ble atchievements of the more excellent (though less ostentatious) Christians, who through Faith in the Goodness and Power of God have been enabled to doe all things through Christ, knowing both how to abound, and how to be abased, &c. Phil. 4. enabled to overcome the World without them, and the Love of the World within them; enabled to overcome themselves, (and for a man to rule his own Spirit is a greater instance of power and valour then to take a City, as Solomon judg∣eth Prov. 16.) enabled to resist the powers of dark∣ness, and to quit themselves like men and good Soul∣diers of Jesus Christ, giving many signal overthrows to those Lusts that war against their Souls, and to the



mightiest and strongest of them, the Sons of Anak: and by engaging in the hardest Services of this Spiritu∣al warfare, wherein the Pharisaick boasters dare not fol∣low them, they shew that there is a Spirit of power in them, and that they can doe more then others. These are some of the Exploits of strong and healthful Chri∣stians; and for the encouraging of them in these Con∣flicts which shall end in glorious Conquests and joyous Triumphs, the Author hath in the Tenth and last Dis∣course suggested what is worthy our Consideration.
But I must not forget that there remains something to be observed concerning some other Treatises: and having been so large in the last Observation (which was not unnecessary, the world abounding, & ever having a∣bounded, with spiritual Pharisees) I shall be shorter in the rest. And now to proceed to the next, which is of Atheism; This Discourse (being but Preparatory to the ensuing Tracts) is short: yet I would mind the Reader, that what is more briefly handled here, may be supplied and further clear'd out of the Fifth Dis∣course, viz. Of the Existence and Nature of God, of which (if the former part seem more Speculative, Sub∣tile and Metaphysical, yet) the Latter and Greater part, containing several Deductions and Inferences from the Consideration of the Divine Nature and Attributes, is less obscure, and more Practical, as it clearly directs us to the best (though not much observed) way of glo∣rifying God, and being made happy and blessed by a Participation and Resemblance of him; & as it plainly directs a man to such Apprehensions of God as are apt and powerful to beget in him the Noblest and dearest Love to God, the sweetest Delight, and the most peace∣ful Confidence in him.
One thing more I would observe to the Reader con∣cerning



the Discourse Of Atheism, and the same I would desire to be observed also concerning the next, that large Treatise Of the Immortality of the Soul, espe∣cially of the former part thereof; and it is shortly this, That the Author in these Treatises pursues his dis∣course with a particular reflexion on the Dogmata and Notions of Epicurus and his followers, especially that great admirer of him, Lucretius, whose Principles are here particularly examined and refuted. These were the men whose Opinions our Author had to combat with; He lived not to see Atheism so closely and craf∣tily insinuated, nor lived he to see Sadduceism and Epi∣curism so boldly owned and industriously propagated, as they have been of late, by some who being heartily desirous That there were no God, no Providence, no Reward nor Punishment after this life, take upon them to deride the Notion of Spirit or Incorporeal Substance, the Existence of Separate Souls, and the Life to come: and by infusing into mens Minds Opinions contrary to these Fundamental Principles of Religion, they have done that which manifestly tends to the This was of old confess'd, and boasted of by Lucretius more then once in his Poems. overthrow of all Religion, the destruction of Morality and Vertuous living, the debauching of Mankind, the consuming and eating out of any good Principle left in the Conscience which doth testifie for God and Goodness, and against Sin and Wickedness, and to the defacing and expun∣ging of the Law written in mens hearts; and so the holy Apostle judges of the Epicurean Notions and dis∣courses, (a taste of which he gives in that passage, 1 Cor. 15. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die, and then ther's an End of all, no other life or state,) and he ex∣presseth his judgment concerning the evil and dange∣rousness of these doctrines and their teachers, partly in a Verse out of Menander,


, Evil commu∣nications corrupt good manners, and in what he subjoins v. 34. besides many other passages in this Chapter in opposition to the doctrine of the Sadducees and Epicu∣reans: and to the same purpose he speaks in 2. Tim. 2. 16, 17, 18. concerning those that denied the Doctrine of the Resurrection or any Future State and the Life to come. The sum and substance of the Apostles judg∣ment concerning these Epicurean principles is plainly this, That these Principles properly and powerfully tend to the corrupting of mens Minds and Lives, to the advancement of Irreligion and Immorality in the world; That they are no benigne Principles to Piety and a Good life. 'Tis true that some of the more wary and considerate modern Epicureans, may express some care to live inoffensively, and to keep out of danger, and to maintain a reputation in the world as to their converse with others, (and herein they mind their worldly inte∣rests and the advantages of this present life, the only life which they have in their eye) they may also express a care in avoiding what is prejudicial to health and a long life in this world: But all this is short of a true and noble Love of Goodness; and if in these men there be any appearance of what is Good and praise-worthy, they would have been really better, if they had been of other Principles, and had believed in their Hearts That there is a Providence, a Future state, and Life to come, and had lived agreeably to the Truths of the Christian Philosophy, which do more ennoble and accomplish and every way better a man, then the Principles of the Epicurean Sect. But to return, We have before observed. That our Author in these Two Treatises pursued his design in opposition to the Master-Notions and chief Principles of Epicurus

and Lucretius of old: I shall only adde this, That if any of this Sect in our daies has done more then revived and repeated those Principles, if any such has superad∣ded any thing of any seeming force and moment to the pretensions of the old Epicureans mention'd in these Tracts, the Reader may find it particularly spoken to and fully answered by One whom our Author highly esteem'd, Mr. Henry More, in his late Treatise Of the Im∣mortality of the Soul, and in another Discourse intituled An Antidote against Atheism, and in the Appendix there∣unto annexed.
I pass on to the Discourse of Prophesie, which, as it cost the Author more pains (I believe) then any of the other, (it containing many considerable Enquiries in an Argument not commonly treated of, and more then vulgar Observations out of ancient Jewish writers,) so did it (together with the former part of the next Dis∣course) require more labour to prepare it for the Press and the benefit of the Reader then any of the other Tracts, by reason of the many Quotations, especially the Hebrew ones, to be examin'd: in the perusing of which there would sometimes occurr a dubious and dark Ex∣pression, and then I thought it safest to confer with our Hebrew Professor, Dr. Cudworth, for whom the Au∣thor had alwaies a great affection and respect.
It's true, This Elaborate Treatise is of a more Spe∣culative nature then any of the rest, yet is it also Use∣full, and contains sundry Observations not only of Light and Knowledg but also of Use and Practice. For, besides that in this Treatise several Passages of Scri∣pture are illustrated out of Jewish Monuments, (which is no small instance of its Usefulness,) there are Two Chapters (to name no more) viz. 4, and 8. (the lon∣gest in this Treatise) which more particularly relate to



Practice, and might be (if well considered) available to the bettering of some mens manners. The matter of the Fourth Chapter treating of the Difference between the true Prophetical Spirit and Enthusiastical impostures is seasonably usefull, and of no small importance. Not to mention any latter Experiments and Proofs how powerful such Enthusiastical impostures have been to disquiet and endanger several parts of Christendom, it appears by good History (and the Event is yet appa∣rent) how strangely that Political Enthusiast, Maho∣met, has befool'd a very great part of the world by his pretensions of being inspir'd and taught by the divine Spirit whispering in his ear, by his Epileptical fits, pretended Visions and Revelations. Thus Mahomet's Dove hath as wonderfully prevailed in the World as of old the Roman Eagles: although yet (which may abate our wondring at this success) this impostu∣rous and pretendedly-inspired Doctrine was not propa∣gated and promoted with a Dove-like Spirit, but with force of Arms; Mahumetanism cut out its way by the Sword, the worst instrument for propagating of Religi∣gion; to say nothing of the advantages it had from its compliance with Flesh and blood and a Sensual life, and from the Ignorance, Rudeness and Barbarism of that people to whom that impure Prophet communicated his Alcoran, a people capable of any doctrine how ab∣surd and irrational soever. Whereas Christianity was at first promoted and made its way in the world by me∣thods more innocent and worthy of the Doctrine of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ that true and great Prophet, of whom the Voice from heaven was, Matthew 17. See also Acts 3. 22. Deut. 18. 15. Hear ye him: after whose revelation of the Counsel and Will of God to man, there is not to be expected any new (and by him unrevealed) Doctrine



as pertaining to Life and Godliness and necessary to Salvation. Neither is the Eighth Chapter, treating of the Dispositions preparatory to Prophesy, without its Usefulness; there being an easie appliableness of what is contain'd therein to such as are pretenders to Prophe∣sying, according to the more general importance of that Word; and it may be both a just Reproof and a sober Advice to those who being full of themselves, swell'd with Self-conceit, and pufft up with an opinion of their own Knowledg and Abilities (which yet is but , Job 15. a windy and vain knowledg, a knowledg falsely so called, 1 Tim. 6.) and being wise and righteous in their own eyes, take upon them to be most talkative & dogmatical, pert and magisterial, Desiring to be Teach∣ers, although they understand neither what they say, nor 1 Tim. 1. whereof they affirm; and therefore Modesty and Spa∣ringness of speech and Swiftness to hear would better become such then Empty Confidence and Talkative∣ness, and a powring out words without knowledge,  for indeed this is the true account of these men and their performances, the weakness and insignificancy of which (notwithstan∣ding the strong voice and loud noise of the speakers) are easily discerned by those who in understanding are men, and have put away childish things.
What I would further intimate concerning this Trea∣tise Of Prophesy, is briefly this, That though it be one of the largest Treatises in this Volume, yet there are some parts and passages in it which I think the Author would have more enlarged and fill'd up, had he not ha∣sten'd to that which according to the method design'd by him he calls The Third Great Principle of Religion. But of this I have given an account in an Page 280. Advertisement at the end of this Treatise, as also of the adjoining next to it.


The Discourse Of the Legal and the Evangelical Righ∣teousness, &c. which Discourse is a much Practical as the former was Speculative. Nor was the composure of that Treatise more painfull to the Author, then the elabora∣ting of this, at least the former half of this, wherein the Author has travers'd—loca nullius ante Trita solo—the more unknown Records and Monuments of Jewish Au∣thors, for the better stating the Jewish Notion of the Righteousness of the Law; the clearing of which in chap. 2, and 3. as also the settling the Difference be∣tween That Righteousness which is of the Law, and That which is of Faith, between the Old and the New Cove∣nant, and the Account of the Nature of Justification and Divine Acceptance, &c. are all of them of no small use and consequence, but together with the Appendix to this Tract (made up of certain brief but comprehen∣sive Observations) they offer to the Reader what is not unworthy of his serious consideration.
Of the Eighth Discourse, shewing the Vanity of a Pharisaick Righteousness or Godliness falsly so call'd, I have spoken before.
The next Discourse, largely treating of the Excellency and Nobleness of True Religion and Holiness, shews the Author's Mind to have been not slightly tinctur'd and wash'd over with Religion, but rather to have been double-dyed, throughly imbued and coloured with that generosum honestum, as the Satyrist not unfitly styles it,—incoctum generoso pectus honesto. But the Au∣thor's Life and Actions spake no less; and indeed there is no language so fully expressive of a man as the language of his Deeds. Those that were throughly acquainted with him, knew well That as there was in him  (as'twas said of Solomon) a largeness and 1 Kings 4. 29. vastness of Heart and Understanding, so there was also



in him  Psal. 51. 12., a free, ingenuous, noble Spirit, most abhorrent of what was sordid and unworthy; and this  (as the Lxx. translate that Hebrew) is the genuine product of Religion in that Soul where it is suffer'd to rule, and (as S. James speaks of Patience) to have her perfect work. The Style in this Tract may seem more rais'd and sublime then in the other, (which might be perhaps from the Nature and quality of the subject matter, apt to heighten expressions;) but yet in this (as in the other Tracts) it is free from the Vanity of Affectation, which a Mind truly ennobled by Religion cannot stoop to, as counting it a Pe∣dantick business, and a certain argument of a Poor∣ness and Weakness of Spirit in the either Writer or Speaker.
But if in this Tract the Style seem more magnificent, yet in the Tenth and Last Discourse (viz. Of a Christi∣an's Conflicts and Conquests) it is most familiar. The Matter of it is very Useful and Practical: for as it more fully and clearly acquaints a Christian with the more dangerous and unseen Methods of Satan's activity, (concerning which the Notions and Conceptions of many men are discovered here to be very short and im∣perfect;) so it also acquaints him with such Principles as are available to beget in him the greatest Courage, Spirit and Resolution against the day of battel, chasing away all lazy faintheartedness and despair of Victory. This for the Matter. The Style is (as I said) most fami∣liar. This Discourse was deliver'd in publick at Hun∣tingdon, where one of Queen's College is every year on March 25. to preach a Sermon against Witchcraft, Diabolical Contracts, &c. I shall onely adde this, That when he preach'd in lesser Country-Auditories (parti∣cularly at Achurch near Oundle in Northamptonshire, the



place of his Nativity) as it was his care to preach upon arguments of most practical concernment, so was it al∣so his Desire and Endeavour to accommodate his Ex∣pressions to ordinary vulgar Capacities; being studi∣ous to be understood, and not to be ignorantly won∣dred at by amuzing the People either with high unne∣cessary Speculations, or with hard Words and vain Ostentations of Scholastick Learning (the low design of some that by such arts would gain a poor respect to themselves, for such (and no better) is all that stupid respect which is not founded upon Knowledg and Judg∣ment:) He was studious, I say, there to speak unto men  Edification, and  what was sig∣nificant and easie to be understood, as the 1 Cor. 4. 3, & 9. Apostle doth phrase it, and to express his Mind in a way suita∣ble to the apprehensions of Popular Auditories. And as for the Discourses now published, they also were de∣livered (being College-Exercises) in a way not less suit∣able to that Auditory: and therefore it may not be thought strange, if sometimes they seem for Matter and Style more remote from vulgar capacities. Yet even in these Discourses what is most Practical, is more easily intelligible by every honest-hearted Christian. And in∣deed, that the whole might be made more familiar and easie, and more accommodate to the use of any such, I thought it would be very expedient (as to cast the Discourses into Chapters, so) before every Chapter to propose to the Readers view the full Scope, Sense and Strength of the principal Matters contained therein: & I could willingly have spared such a labour (the grea∣ter, when busied about the Notions and Conceptions of another, and not our own,) if I had not conceived it to be greatly helpfull and beneficial to some Readers: besides another advantage to them hereby, viz. That



they may the more easily find out and select any such particular Matters in these Discourses, as they shall think most fit or desireable for their perusal.
Thus have I given the Reader some account of what seem'd fit to be observ'd concerning these Ten Discour∣ses, which now present themselves to his free and can∣did Judgment. And now if in the reading of these Tracts enrich'd with Arguments of great variety there should occur any Passage wherein either He or I may , it need not be a matter of wonder; for what Book (besides that Book of Books, the Bible) has not something in it that speaks the Author Man? It would not have displeased our Author in his life-time to have been thought less then Infallible. He was not , he was no fond Self-admirer, nor was he desirous that others should have his person, his opinion and judg∣ment, in admiration: he was far from the humour of Magisterial dictating to others, not ambitious to be cal∣led of men, Rabbi, Rabbi, as were and are the old & the Matthew 23. modern Pharisees; nor of the number of those who are inwardly transported and tickled, when others applaud their judgment and receive their Dictates with the greatest veneration and respect; but very peevish and sowre, disturb'd and out of order, when any shall ex∣press themselves dissatisfied and otherwise minded, or goe about modestly to discover their mistakes. No, he was truly , a lover of Truth, and of Peace and Charity. He loved an ingenuous and sober Free∣dom of Spirit, the generous Berean-like temper and practice (agreeable to the * Apostle's prudent and faithful advice) of proving all things, and holding fast 1 Thess. 5. that which is good. But to return, Its possible that some Passages in these Tracts which seem dubious, may, upon a patient considering of them, if the Reader be unpre∣judic'd



& one of a clear Mind & Heart, gain his assent; and what upon the first reading seems obscure and less grateful, may upon another view, and further thoughts, clear up and be thought worthy of all acceptation. It is not with the fair Representations and Pictures of the Mind as with other Pictures; these of the Mind shew best the nearer they are viewed, and the longer the In∣tellectual Eye dwells upon them.
There is only one thing more which I ought not to forget to mind the Reader of, and it is shortly this, That he would please to remember that the now-pub∣lished Tracts are Posthumous works; and then affording that charity, candour and fair respect which is common∣ly allowed to such works of Worthy men, I nothing doubt but he will judge them too good to have been buried in obscurity; although its likely, if the Author himself had revis'd them in his life-time with an intent to present them to publick view, they would have re∣ceived from his happy hand some further polishing and enlargements. He could have easily obliged the world with other Discourses of as valuable importance, if he had liv'd and been so minded. But it pleas'd the only∣wise God (in whose hand our breath is) to call for him home to the Spirits of just men made perfect, after he had lent him to this unworthy world for about Five and thirty years. A short life his was if we measure it by so many years; but if we consider the great Ends of Life and Being in the world, which he fulfill'd in his gene∣ration, his great Accomplishments qualifying him for eminent Service, and accompanied with as great a Readinesse to approve himself a good and faithful Servant to his gracious Lord and Master in heaven, his life was not to be accounted short, but long; and we may justly say of him what is said by the Author



of the Book of Wisdom concerning Enoch, that great Exemplar of holiness and the shortest-liv'd of the Pa∣triarchs before the flood, (for he lived but 365 years, as many years as there are daies in one year,) Ch. 4. 13. , He being consum∣mated in a short time, fulfilled a long time. For (as the same Author doth well express it in some * preceding verses) Ver. 8, 9. Honourable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that which is measured by number of years: But Wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age.
Thus much for the Papers now published. There are some other pieces of this Author's (both English and Latine) which may make another considerable Vo∣lume, especially if some papers of his (in other hands) can be retriv'd. For my particular, I shall wish and en∣deavour that not the least Fragment of his may be con∣ceal'd, which his Friends shall think worthy of pub∣lishing: and I think all such Fragments being gathered up may fitly be brought together under the Title of Miscellanies. If others who have any of his Papers shall please to communicate them, I doubt not but that there will be found in some of his Friends a readiness to publish them with all due care and faithfulness. Or if they shall think good to doe it themselves and pub∣lish them apart, I would desire and hope that they would bestow that labour and diligence about the pre∣paring them for publick view and use, as may testi∣fie their respect both to the Readers benefit and the ho∣nour of the Author's memory.
And now that this Volume is finished through the good guidance and assistance of God, the Father of lights and the Father of mercies, (whose rich Goodness and Grace in enabling me both to will and to doe, and to



continue patiently in so doing, notwithstanding the many tedious difficulties accompanying such kind of labour, I desire humbly to acknowledge;) now that the seve∣red Papers are brought together in this Collection to their due and proper places, (as it was said of the Bones scattered in the vally, that they came together, bone to his bone, Ezek. 37.) what remains but that the Lord of life, he who giveth to all things life and breath, be with all earnestness and humility implor'd, That he would please to put breath into these (otherwise dry) Bones, that they may live; That besides this Paper-life (which is all that Man can give to these Writings) they may have a living Form and Vital Energy within us; That the Practical Truths contained in these Discourses may not be unto us a Dead letter, but Spirit and Life? That He who teacheth us to profit, would prosper these Papers for the attainment of all those good Ends to which they are designed; That it would please the God of all grace to remove all darkness and prejudice from the Mind and Heart of any Reader, and whatso∣ever would hinder the fair reception of Truth; That the Reader may have an inward, Practical and feeling knowledge of the Doctrine which is according to Godli∣ness, and live a life worthy of that Knowledge; is the Prayer of

Cambridge, December 22. 1659.
[In this Epistle pag. vii. lin. alt. for mouth to mouth, r. face to face.]
