



Right Honble.
DIvine Providence designing a Spe∣cial Kindness to this Metropolis, (for the advancement of Its Welfare) demonstrated it,
by the impatient longing of Her Sons for your Lord∣ships Election to the Preto∣rian Chair; in which, You were lately fixt by the most Unanimous Acclamations, and Solemn Joy of all Inge∣nuous Spirits.
They well knew, how Eminently the God of all Grace had qualified your Person for Government o∣ver this Renowned City.
The Obscure Author (therefore) of this weak
Essay, humbly craves your Pardon for his Presumption in sheltring it under the wing of so Judicious a Pa∣tron. But your Honor's Courteous reception, and Equal Encouragement of All the Lovers of Vertue, begets an hope, That this honest Design to win Souls over to Christ, by so despi∣sed a Method, as a Perswa∣sive to a Weaned Self-de∣nying Frame; may receive Life and Acceptation from
the favourable Cast of your eye upon an Argument so unpleasing to the World's Fondlings and Admirers.
Your Vertuous Dispo∣sition hath set an Eminent Pattern, of that Weaned Frame herein jejunely dis∣coursed of. For your Chri∣stian Humility signalizes your Real Worth; upon which, your political Gran∣dure only waits, as the Or∣namental Shadowing of some rare Beauty, which
needs not any Artificial Commendation.
Your Contempt of the glittering Imbellishments of the World, and resolute Aversation from Its sensual Blandishments & Delights, is sufficiently known and demonstrated.
But I desist from speak∣ing Truth in this kind, be∣cause You have an Humble opinion of your Self; and I would not put Your Mo∣desty as much to the Blush,
as (I fear) my Weaning dis∣course will prove an Appale∣ing Alarm to persons whol∣ly Devoted to the pursuit of Sensual Enjoyments, and the sordid Humor of Affe∣cting to be flattered.
The Author heartily wishes, that the Heavenly Discipline of Christ's Spi∣rit may allure All Men to the love of Evangelical Self-denyal. This would Promote and Secure their Best Everlasting Interest, by
a vigorous pursuit of the Real State of Blessedness; In which, that your Lord∣ships Person may be pre∣served and establisht, is the fervent Prayer of him, who Dutifully remains,

