



THIS, Sir, is so far from the common road of Dedications, that at first sight it will appear neither fit for me to give, nor you to receive.
Shall a Person so publickly employ∣ed in the greatest Attempts, and most victorious Successes, which the World has seen for these many Ages, have leisure for Philosophical Speculations, or divert to a Science proper for ease and pleasure?
Or should one consecrated to the Divine Service, so laboriously search into the Intrigues of Nature, and assist in the advancement of an

Art, which with its Airy Pleasures often captivates the Soul to sensual things, and makes it more devoted to the World, that is to be conquered with another sort of Victory than your Arms can obtain?
All this I have thought on, yet still find so much in this affair, as not only to excuse me, but to make it accepta∣ble to you.
This Mathematical Discourse is in∣deed the Anatomy of MUSICK, where∣in the infinite Wisdom of the great Creator appears: How delightfully and wonderfully is it made! Marvel∣lous are thy works, O Lord, and that my Soul knows right well.
All the best Proportions, are the best Chords of Musick, and strike the Ear with a pleasure agreeable to the dignity of their Numbers. The ef∣fects of this the Sensualist is satisfied with, and desires to seek no further.
But is it not grateful to every Gen∣tleman, who is ennobled with such a

Soul as yours, to know the divine Harmony of the pleasure he enjoys? Is it not the duty and Felicity of a Rational Being, to consider how the whole System of the World is framed in Consort? How Musical Instru∣ments observe their Arithmetical Laws, all the little Meanders of the Ear faithfully conveying the orga∣niz'd sounds, and the Soul of man made to receive the delight, before he himself knows from whence it comes?
How great is this! How mean am I, to set forth such a Divine Sub∣ject!
However charming this still voice may be, yet no body will believe it can be heard amongst Drums and Trumpets: Why should these Pa∣pers hope for acceptance in the Camp?
I must confess I should think them unseasonable, had not you, my Ex∣cellent Friend, told me that your

most Renowned General Lorain does in all the intervals of Action govern his Army like a Colledge, and allow time for the repose of the Mind, as well as for the over-running subdued Countries.
You may then reflect upon the great Creator and Governour of the World, who gave you being, and now preserves you in the most eminent Hazards; these shall help you to contemplate the infinite Wisdom, and shall be of the greatest advantage to you, since Piety is the best support of Courage, and gives a refreshing Ease amidst the Rage of War.
But the design of War is Peace, and your Friends here long for the return of those cool hours, wherein you may not only have leisure for these Theoretical Studies, but ad∣vance true Practical Wisdom; which you have already represented to us in the most advantageous dress, and en∣flamed our desires to have her in∣terest

promoted to greater heights.
I know the glory of the Field is very tempting, but still you retain as great a passion for Learning; this hath ever found a place in the noblest Breasts: The first great Conqueror of this Island is as glorious for his Pen as his Sword, and by his Commenta∣ries perpetuated his Victories.
We have incomparably more of A∣thens here in England, than your Con∣federates the Venetians this year got possession of: That ancient Treasu∣ry was long ago rifled, and its Jewels brought into the Western part of Eu∣rope: this the learned Proprietors were very sensible of.
When Cicero return'd home from Greece by Rhodes, the famous Orator there Apollonius begg'd the favour of a Declamation: All the Company were amazed, and strove with the highest Expressions to acknowledge the Obligation; but Apollonius sate sad and silent: which when he perceived

Cicero took amiss, he said, . I value and admire you, O Cicero; but in the mean time I must pity the fortune of Greece, since those excel∣lent Goods, Learning and Elo∣quence, (which were all that was left) are now by you brought o∣ver to the Romans. Plutarch, in the Life of Cicero.
The Offers made in these Papers, are the Musical Spoils and Relicks of Athens, a long time buried in obscu∣rity; and though some years ago published to the World in their own Language, yet never known to those whose greatest concern it was to be acquainted with them.
And indeed Musick now very much wants such Patrons as you are, whose Reverence to Antiquity and Learn∣ing, may give Preheminence to the Nobler part; which would at once both advance and regulate the Practick Pleasures.
It must be acknowledged that this Divine Science has a great while sunk with the Devotion of Churches, it has been little learned and little regarded by the Religious; so that the Angelical Praises, which we have the honour to communicate in upon Earth, are faintly and unfrequently celebrated: This celestial accomplish∣ment, which God ordained to enli∣ven our dull Affections, is every∣where wanting; that the pleasure is as low as the skill of performing this most grateful part of Worship.
Hence has Musick of late sought its principal Glory in Theatres, and sensual Entertainments, too mean a Service to be reckoned the designe of such an excellent Art: The in∣finite Wisdom created it for better purposes.
And when God shall please to bless the World with greater de∣grees of Love, and a better Adora∣tion of himself, He will raise up Men

and Means thus to promote his Glo∣ry. Which directs me now to seek your Patronage to the Endeavours of,
SIR,

Mepsal, Nov. 1. 1687.
