



I Have been long doubtful to whom the following History ought to be Address'd, but cannot find any one to whose Patronage it might so properly be recommended as Yours, Worthy Sir. And, indeed, the Analogy that is betwixt the Heroe of this Piece, and your self, seems to challenge your Protection. For, were I a Pythagorean, I should swear that our Alexander animated and inform'd your numerical lump of Clay, as sure as ever Pythagoras himself was Homer, or Euphorbus; and that your Face was much more truly Brass, than ever his Thigh was Gold. But let that pass, those Opinions are worn out long since, and nothing will satisfie this incredulous Age but demon∣stration; however, I shall unburthen my Conscience to you and all the World, and let 'em see what reasons I have for my Opini∣on. This Alexander, when a Boy, was Apprentice to a Moun∣tebank, under whom he serv'd as Whachum to his Sidrophel, and us'd to inveigle and divert the amazed silly Rout, with tumbling through a Hoop and Vaulting, and amuse 'em with Tricks of Legerdemain, and Sleight of hand, conveying Money nimbly and dexterously out of the Spectators Purses, Pockets, or Handker∣chiefs, which his Master was to Conjure for, and restore for a Reward: He serv'd him likewise in several other Capacities; as, Jugler, Sub-Conjurer, Astrologer, Ganymede, and Orator, made Speeches, and wrote Panegyricks in praise of his Master's Panacea's, Panchymagogons, Family Pills and Powders, Cephalicks, Antipodugricks, Alexipharmacks, Antiscorbuticks, Hystericks, and what not; He wrote Almanacks, to direct the taking of his Medicines, and made the Stars vouch for their Vertues, and was as well a writ∣ten as breathing Dispensatory of his own Receipts: He Calculated Nativities, Told Fortunes, had admirable Secrets to Soddercrack'd Maidenheads, and incomparable Philtre's for the Consolation of Dispairing Damsels. Besides all this, which his Master shar'd with him, he had one Trade to himself, whose Revenue was his sole
Propriety, which was letting out his Postern (for he was a good smug young Rogue.) All this he did under his Master for an honest livelihood; but his Master dying, and the growth of his Beard, and decay of his Face, beginning to put the Counterpart out of Repute, he sets up and succeeds him in his business, and a Quack he was for some time. But the Novelty of the Cheat being over, Trade began to grow dull, and the Scene must be shifted, so our Doctor packs up all, and away he marches, through several Countries he strowled; but after all, the Profits arising from this course of Life were not sufficient to satisfie his Ambition; so that some new Project must be started: In order to which, he associates to himself a Fellow, whom he had in his Travels scrap'd acquaintance with; he was a kind of Medley, part Author, part Bookseller, one that published and sold his own Works, whom he observ'd to have an excellent knack of Canting and Counter∣felting Religion, and to have cunning enough to Cheat his Neigh∣bours. To this Man he imparts his design of setting up for a Pro∣phet, and invites him into the Partnership of his Stratagem; and together these crafty Complotters set forward for Paphlagonia our Hero's Native Country, which they chose for the Scene of their Actions, because the Inhabitants were a sort of stupid Block∣headed People, of large Faith, and very little Sense, easie and cre∣dulous, Lovers of Novelty, and addicted to Superstition. Here they put in execution their Plot, gave out Oracles for 12 d. a piece, and soon grew into mighty Reputation among these sot∣tish Gulls. What methods they took to bring their design to per∣fection, I need not inform you, who are already sufficiently vers'd in all the measures requisite for such Undertakings.
It is easie to apprehend for what end I give you this Summary of the History of Alexander, whom I take to have been a Type of You: For your Parts have been no less exercis'd than his, Your Education and Profession the same: If he made himself known to Foreign Countries, surely you have not sate idle at home; the Church Yards and Burying-Places are every where ample Witnesses of your Travels. If Statues were rais'd to his Memory, Millions of Gravestones, and Monuments of Marble and Brass will perpetuate your Name. Was he free of his averse Venery? You have been no niggard of your Talent on the other side, infinite numbers have tasted of your Benevolence, as well Sisters as others: You have Cultivated the neglected Soil, and by You the Barren has be∣come Fruitful: You have Sowed where you have not Reaped,
and Strew'd where you have not Gathered. All Climates and Conditions have reap'd the fruit of your Labour. You have been, as it were, the common Father, and have raised up Seed not on∣ly to the Faithful, but even to the Gentiles also, so extensive has your Charity been. Was he beneficial to the World by his skill in Medicines? You have surpass'd him in that too, as far as the Substance does its Shadow: You teach when to cut Corns, and Let Blood: By you old Nurses are instructed to make Carduus-Possets, and Chalybeat-Pancakes: Bawds to cause Abortions, and to propagate the Pox: Strumpets to counterfeit Maidenheads, and provoke Venery. In a word, your Dispensatories are inestimable Jewels in the publick Treasury; there may be learn'd to Cure Scald Heads, the Itch, Corns, Chilblains, and Kib'd Heels, with many Secrets more of equal value. Nor are you inferiour to him in point of Prediction: For your Almanacks, and Treatise of Chiro∣mancy, have made all the World Prophets: You can make the Stars depose whatever you please; and the very Lines of every Man's hand confirm what you say of him: You can tell at first sight, That he that is born to be Hang'd shall never be Drown'd, and, That the Pope of Rome shall not be Lord Mayor next Year. But oh! the unhappy State of Merit! it is very rarely regarded, and truth is seldom credited; this Cassandra experienc'd many Ages ago; and your representative Alexander, for some time labour'd under. But he found means to surmount all the difficulties he met with; and the very same expedient relieves you. Religion was his Asylum, and it is your Refuge; it was his Stalking Horse, and is your De∣coy. Well, Sir, speed you in your Design, 'tis a Pious Project, and may your Success be as much greater than his, as your Enter∣prise is more difficult and hazardous: His Scene was a Country of Sots, and his Auditors a parcel of Fools, ready gather'd and pre∣par'd to his hand: Yours is an intelligent and populous City, and your Cullies must be pick'd and broken to your use, by your own Industry and Cunning. 'Tis true indeed your Instruments and Methods are the same, but there is a vast disparity in the matter to be wrought upon. He answer'd all Questions, so do you: He propos'd Remedies for all sorts of Grievances, so do you: He ad∣vis'd Physick, so do you: He us'd the assistance of a crafty Fellow, so do you. Only he met with no opposition, all believ'd him, so they do not you. However, proceed, let your Courage carry you through all Obstacles, and your Conscience be your Comfort: You know the old saying, Non sit sine periculo, &c. Faint Heart
never won Fain Lady. It is no easie matter to found a new Church, Paul's, you see can't be built in a day. But great will be the Honour when the Feat is done, adding one point to our Faith, is adding to the compass by which we steer to Heaven, our Directi∣ons are the more exact. Go on, regulate the whole Compass, and be your self the needle to point out the way. None but evil-mind∣ed Men can think our Spiritual Navigation sufficiently improv'd: I think he that finds out a shorter cut to Heaven, is a greater Be∣nefactor to Mankind, and deserves more Honour than if he found the North East Passage to the Indies. Who would wait a tedious Passage by a Waggon, who might go by the Penny-Post. Correct the Geography of Religion, and shew us a better Map of the Roads to the next World. Outdo Bunyan, and all the Spiritual Choro∣graphers that have gone before you. Oh how happy you whose Souls have been anointed and tarr'd all over with his Doctrine, and liquor'd like Carriers Boots, to take off the Scabs of Preju∣dice; Whose Scirrhous Consciences have been soften'd by an Emolli∣ent Cataplasme of Argument? Who have taken an Emetick Dose of Repentance, and the Cathartick Pills of Contrition? Who have pati∣ently endur'd a Diaphoretick Dialogue, and whose Concupiscence has been Flux'd and Salivated by the Precipitate of Spiritual Admonition, whose Appetites have been rais'd by a Stomachick Whet of Pious Cu∣riosity, and satisfied with a Meal of Ghostly Comfort? Whose Spi∣rits have been rais'd by the dear Cordial of Zeal, and whose strength supported by the precious Aliment of Faith, and whose Carnal Itches have been kill'd by the Unguent of Mortification, and whose inward Aches have been taken off by the Opiate of Election. To recount here the infinite advantages you, who are his Disciples, have by this Physician Spiritual and Temporal, were too tedious at this time, since what is past must make all the World as well envious as sensible of your Happiness. I shall conclude with a small Request to your great Master. In a word then, Pious Sir, May you never cease to hold forth the Sucking Bottle of the Gospel to the Babes of Grace, and the Crutches of Faith to the Crippled Saint. Satisfie the craving Sister, and assist the impotent Brother; so may your Pre∣dictions of the Weather always hold good, and your, Almanack be fill'd with Saints of your own Cannonizing, which is the Prayer of, Pious Sir,

