



Honoured Sirs,
YOU have been plea∣sed to heap so ma∣ny of your Favours upon me and mine, that I cannot but take this little Occasion to ease my Mind, by Complaining to
the World, that I never yet had the least Opportunity to express my Thankfulness; but however, it is some Satisfaction to me, that I have not ceased to Pray to God for You and your Families, in that Congregation in which you have been pleased to place me.
It was a very remarkable and unexpected Providence, which directed you to make Choice of me for the Morning Lecture, upon the Recommendation of my Two ever honoured Friends, Sir James Smith, and Mr. Thomas Tyther, considering the great In∣terests that had been made for other Ministers, better deserving, and better known in the City, in which I was then a Stranger.
By this I accounted my self the more abundantly obliged to take Care, that I did not Do the work of the Lord negligently: And, that I might have the better Directi∣on in it, you were pleased to Command, That so much of the Pious Will of Mr. John Raney should be shewed to me, as re∣lated to the Performance of my Duty; and I hope it will not be Offensive to you, if I shew some part of it to the World, as fol∣loweth;
— And further, That before the beginning of every such Lecture on the Sabbath Day Morning in St. Michael's Church, the Lecturer, for the time being, do Reverently Read such Good and Godly Prayers al∣lowed by the Church of England, as hath been heretofore usually perfor∣med.
And my desire is, That the said Preacher and Lecturer in and by all his said Lectures and Ser∣mons, do chiefly Aim at the suppres∣sing of Sin, and building up the Kingdom of Grace in the Hearts of the Auditors: And that he shall, up∣on the first Sabbath Day Morning in every Month, being the usual Communion Day, Exhort his Audi∣tory for the reverent and due Re∣ceiving of the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; and give such Godly Instructions and Directions for the same, as shall be most fitting for that Occasion.
When I had heard this part of the Will of the Religious Donor. I resolved, by the Grace of God assisting, that I would observe what he so piously required of me.
That I have made it my Bu∣siness
to suppress Sin, my Au∣ditors can Testify; and that I have observed his pleasure in Ex∣horting to the Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament, may appear to you by this short Treatise; on∣ly with this difference, that I have made it the chief part of my Work every Month (with very few In∣termissions) to Exhort my Audi∣tors not to neglect it; because since the Death of that Worthy Benefactor, the Sin of Neglecting hath abounded more than the Sin of Unworthy Receiving. I have, with a sorrowful Heart observed, That all those Sermons which are designed to direct and prepare the People to Receive the Holy Sacrament, have signified very little, because there are but very
few in this vicious and divided Age that do partake of it.
The good Success which I have had, (Praised be the God of Heaven for it,) and the continued Importunities of some, who had forsaken the Communion of the Church, and others who had for∣saken all Religion, as to the Prac∣tice of it, but are now become very Constant, and I hope very pious Communicants, have pre∣vailed with me to Publish those Arguments which I have been many Years insisting and inlarge∣ing upon: And if they have the same Influence upon the Readers, which they have had upon the Hearers, it will exceedingly re∣joyce me; And you will have the less cause to repent of your
Choice, and be the more willing, that I should still perform that Service, to which I have no o∣ther Title, but the Continuance of your Favour and good Opinion of me: Which that I may deserve, shall be the constant Endeavour of

Cripplegate, June 12th. 1683.
