



Gentlemen,
IT was no small admiration to me, that you were pleased (at your renewed Fe∣stival) to nominate me for the Pulpit; whose incapacity for that service, might have caused a jealousie in your invited Guests, that you had no great skill in chusing a Cook; who shewed so little, in the choice of a Preacher, And I do much more wonder that your Requests (which have the force of a command) should call my Notes out of my Study, where they were laid aside, and by chance not used as waste Paper. The Title Page, I hope, may gratifie your desires, which declares your resolution to a continuance of your Anniversary Feastival: And if any shall look farther; I hope they will account me a Faithful, though unskilful Steward of
the Mysteries of God. I never was (or I hope, ever shall be) one of those Preachers, who study only to gratifie the curiosity of those Hearers, who most highly applaud the Ser∣mons; in which there appears only the frothy wit of a conceited Preacher; and nothing of the word of God. I love not to court a Text, as some fond Lovers do (with Amo∣rous words) their Silly Mistress; or to shew a Curious Art in carving it into little pieces; and Painting every one of them with fine Flourishes; as if instead of dividing the Word of God aright, and giving to every one his portion; I should cut Sacred, Serious Truths, into Toys, for Children and Fools to play withal. It shall never be my practice to help the Devil catch Sinners, by scratch∣ing their itching Ears, till he lay hold on their Immortal Souls. Had I only presented you with Witty Allusions, and Rhetorical Flourishes? it had been to set before you a Dish, finely garnished, and no Meat in it; an ill president at such a time. My business was to commend your Feasting, and to pre∣vent
those extravagancies (of which I con∣fess, I was more afraid, than hurt) which are the usual concomitants of those Festivals. Your special injunction of a very short Ser∣mon (upon information that the Pulpit was but borrowed for a little while, and must that Forenoon be lent to the Hampshire Preacher, upon the like occasion) must excuse my brevity to the Reader; nor am I to be blam'd, for not enlarging it for the Press; considering my urgent occasions into Norfolk, known to some of you; which makes me fear that the Errata of the Printer, added to those of the Author, will scarcely permit the Reader to guess at what I intended; if he doth, let him afford the same Candour, which I seem'd to have from the Auditors; and it shall not much trouble me, that I did hereby express my self,
July 24. 1671.

