



THe many favours and Encouragements I have receiv'd from your Lordship have given me the confidence to lay this tri∣fle at your feet; not in the least esteeming it worthy of your consi∣deration, but rather as a testimony of my gratitude, and humble acknowledgement to your Lordship. I am conscious the Papers which I now offer up to your Honour have nothing of worth in themselves; But your Lordships acceptance of these mean Produ∣ctions will set a value on 'em, since it can give a gloss, and reputa∣tion even to defect it self. We often see that things which are un∣passable in themselves, become currant and Authentick when Beau∣tify'd by some external impress: Thus Mettalls are enobl'd when his Majesties Royal Image is stamp't upon them; and thus a Pea∣sant may wear the Title of Honourable, if he derives it from the King, the only source and Fountain of Honour. All the Miscarri∣ages, and therefore misfortunes of this Play will be amply recom∣penc'd by the Encouragements it has receiv'd from your Lordship; for I am very well assur'd nothing can be unfortunate, when once it comes under your Lordships Protection. I could almost persuade my self that this is not a very bad piece, if but for no other reason then this, that your Lordship will Patronize nothing that is ill. I shall leave it as it is to your decisive judgment, whose single Ap∣probation I shall prefer to the numerous applauses of a noisy Thea∣ter. My Lord, I attribute it to your bravery of mind, and greatness of Soul that so graciously permit the Muses to wait upon you; For he only will shun their Addresses who has done nothing that is Noble, or else is afraid to have his dishonourable Actions Sung by
 them. The Lacedemonians when they were going to Battle were us'd to Sacrifice to the Muses, being conscious that they cou'd ad∣vantageously recommend 'em to Posterity, and cause new life, like that of the Phaenix, to spring out of their very Ashes. Ambition which in other Men is a vice, in you is a Vertue; for you are guilty of no other then that of the Preservation of your Country: and thus you not only purchase to your self a great, but a good Reputation. Our English Courage which has never been inferiour to any Nations in the whole World, seems to become sickly for want of due Exer∣cise, and to languish thro' a long disuse, and disengagement from Arms; It has lain rusting like our Armour hung up against our Walls; but now led on and fir'd by your Lordships Example, it will recover its former vigour, and throw off the filth it has contracted by a lazy and unactive Peace, and shine as bright as ever, both to the Terrour of our Enemies, and the Glory of our Nation. Your Lordship like the Roman Youth in the Campry Martius have ever ta∣ken care by Manly Exercises to improve the Natural Strength of your body, that it might be a fit Active and vigorous Soul; So that this is always prepar'd to execute those great designes to which the other is ever ready to push it on. But tho' your undaunted Courage and Resolution, your unshaken Loyalty, your forward zeal for the service and security of your Country, together with a numerous Train of many other Noble Qualities have endear'd you no less to Their Majesties, then all good People; yet we must not make it a matter of wonder, if the best and bravest Men are sub∣ject to the Malice and designes of Knaves and Cowards; Especially if we should consider that a great part of the World may justly fall under that denomination. A little Observation will let us see that Mankind have made, as it were, a Combination among themselves to be wicked; and indeed they are so very active in the pursuit of vicious Practices, that one would swear they lay under the obli∣gation of an Oath to be Villains. Hence the dayly Murthers, Thefts, Robberies, Cheats, Assassinations, and what not? Hence it was that the Prince of Orange, His Present Majesty's Ancestor was set upon in his own Hall amidst his Servants, and a strong Guard. And sure we cannot forget a Forreign Raviliac; or our own Felton. From one and the same cause it was that those Pro∣fligate Ruffians so lately assaulted your Lordship in the open street, an action full of horrour and detestation: And here we cannot
 but stand and wonder at your Lordships unparalell'd Humanity, when you could be mercifull to them that were barbarously cruell to you, and even give pardon, and life, to those very Men that would have taken away yours. This is such an Heroick flight, such a bold stroke of Christian-Charity, that the best of Men may Copy from so Glorious an Original. And for this, I presume, your Lordship may deservedly boast with the Elder Scipio, that you have left your very Enemies as much cause to love you as your Friends. And indeed your Lordship has a Genius fitted for every brave and generous undertaking; You are equally adorn'd with the Perfe∣ctions of the Camp and Court: You have the Conduct and bra∣very of one, with all the softness and affability of the other. But since your choice has determin'd you for the Defence of our Navy, we need not doubt but that our Victorious Fleet will ride in Try∣umph o're the Ocean, and that your Lordship will return home Crown'd with Victories, and laden with the Spoiles and Trophies of our Enemies; which that you may accomplish shall be the Prayers of
SIR,

