



HONOURABLE,
I Make bold to prefix your names to this plain ensuing Sermon, not that I conceive it worthy of your Pa∣tronage, but because none had sadder hearts than your selves at the occasion of it, nor any Persons on earth greater Interest in, or nearer Relation to that precious Gentle-woman, at whose Funeral it was preached. If my heart deceive me not, it's not desire of vain-glory that makes me willing to publish this Sermon; but rather these mo∣tives: First, a desire that God may have the glory of the Soveraign∣ty of his grace ascribed unto him, who can so deeply implant his fear in the hearts of his people, that they shall never depart from him, and can keep alive those sparks of heavenly fire, which he casts into the bosoms of his Children in the midst of the Sea of worldly encumbrances, or enjoyments. Many waters cannot quench love; a proof whereof was evident in her, she lost not her first love to Christ, and his Truth in these times of Libertinisme and Errour; neither did the Cares, or Profits, or Pleasures, or Honours of the world (whereof she might have her hands full) choke the good seed
of Gods word in her, but still she kept the best room of her heart free for Christ and heavenly things. Many of my reverend breth∣ren have of late years born publick testimony to the Truth of Christ, I take this occasion to give in my testimony to the Truth of his grace maintained and manifested to the last in this blessed Saint. Though Paul tells us, that not many wise, not many mighty, not many rich, not many Noble are chosen and called, yet one such at least was in this little Parish, whiles she continued among us, who gloried more in the Lord, than in riches, or honour, or all worldly enjoyments: and I hope, some yet remain among us, looking to∣wards Christ and heaven, much provoked thereunto, and bettered by her example. Another motive that induced me hereunto was an earnest inclination in my spirit to testifie that honourable respect that I did bear towards her. I am not afraid to tell the world, that she was a Gentle-woman, whom I did as much honour, and as highly esteem as any one living of her sex and quality, in regard of the vertues and graces which I observed shining forth in her carriage, whereby she did very much beautifie and adorn her profession of Religion. I find, Matth. 26.13. that our Saviour takes care that a Memorial of Maries Piety & Beneficence towards him in anoint∣ing his head and feet with precious Oyntment, Joh. 12.3. might be published, and perpetuated in after-ages, and I am much emboldned by that instance of Christ, to take some care that this Maries Me∣morial also, (who delighted to sit at Christs feet and hear his word, and who often anointed his head with the sweet Oyntment of Piety and Devotion, glorifying him as God, and his feet with the Oynt∣ment of Charity and Compassion, relieving his poor Members, and so ministring to Christ of her substance may be published, and trans∣mitted to posterity. In hope also that the Readers hereof may, through the blessing of God, be edified, and provoked to walk in the way to eternal life, and follow after righteousnesse, so as they also may have hope in their death: I have adventured to commit this Sermon to publick view, to give people warning, not to go on in
their sins, lest they be driven away in their wickednesse; nor to content themselves with the righteousness of the Scribes and Phari∣sees, lest they come short of the Kingdom of Heaven; nor to rest in a bare, groundlesse, lazie conjectural Hope, lest their hope make them ashamed: and exhorting them to use all diligence to make their calling and election sure, by making sure their interest in Christ by faith, considering that such as are without Christ are without hope, Ephes. 2.12. whereas such as have Christ framed in them, have learned a rich and glorious mystery; Christ in us being the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. For if (with Paul) we resolve & en∣deavour, that Christ shall be magnified by us, whether by life, or death, he will be unto us both in life and death advantage, Phil. 1.20, 21. And when Christ who is our life shall appear, we shall also appear with him in glory, Col. 3.4.
I shall not trouble you further with any Apology for my bold∣nesse in mentioning your names, and addressing my self to you in the Dedication hereof; assuring you, it is not with any desire, or intent to revive, or encrease your sorrow, or aggravate your grief, who had the greatest share in that great losse which we have of late sustained; but rather to asswage and allay it, by minding you of that great gain and advantage which she hath gotten by death. Our Saviour tells his Disciples when comfortlesse at the thought of his departure from them: If ye loved me, ye would rejoyce, because I go unto the Father, John 14.28. I know you loved her dearly, as a dutifull Childe to you her Parents, and as a tender affectionate faithfull spouse, and true Christian yoke-fellow to you her Hus∣band; let your love to her be now expressed rather in rejoycing, that she is gone to her heavenly Father, & that she is at rest in the bosom of her Spiritual Bridegroom, than in mourning for her departure from  of this Vale of misceries; considering that to be with Christ is far better and in the presence of her heavenly relations she may enjoy fulnesse of blisse and pleasures for ever more.

If the Poet spake truth when he said,
Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris;
That it's a comfort to the afflicted to have companions of their grief; you may take some comfort in considering, you had many, who did sympathize and condole with you at her death; yea, very many of the Children of Sion did mourn and make bitter lamentation, so that this place was a Bochim, Judg. 2.5. yea, as Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddon, where the Inhabitants of Iudah and Ierusalem mourned for the death of Io∣siah, Zach. 12.11. 2 Chron. 35.25. I dare say, there hath not been a Gentle-woman living in this County so few years, whose death hath been more generally bewailed and lamented over all Sussex. But I know, you make use of better considerations and grounds of comfort than this; And that you are throughly appre∣hensive of the Lords hand in this sad stroke, whose will hath been done by him in this event, and quiet submission of our wills to his ought to be yielded by us, the examples of Aaron, Levit. 10.3, 4. of Eli, 1 Sam. 3.18. of David, 2 Sam. 15.26. and of Iob 1.21. are worthy of your observation and imitation herein. The Lord knows how to cause all things to work together for good unto his people; and he is the God of all comforts, who can comfort you in all your tribulations, and fill your hearts with joy and peace in be∣lieving, so that you may abound in hope by the power of the Holy Ghost; that Christ may be in you the hope of glorie; and that his love being shed abroad in your hearts by his spirit given unto you, you also may have hope in your death. Thus prayeth
Glynde,
Octo∣ber 4. 1656.

