



SIR,
WHen by my Transcription of these Papers, I had a more perfect Survey of them, I found them so much inferiour to your earnest desires for, and dear purchase of

them, that I judged nothing, but your profest respect to my per∣son, and a kind habituated Ac∣quaintance, could seduce your Opinion to so undeserved an esti∣mation of them. Sir, when you heard them, your tenderness of my Reputation, before so great an Assembly, sate at Stern to govern your apprehension; and the gay circumstances of your solemnity, allayed the severity of your observation. But now, Sir, they are under your eye, and your mind at leisure and freedom to exercise an impartial judgment upon them, I fear they may sink in your Opinion, like an artificial Beauty at a nearer

inspection. The hearing of a Ser∣mon, is like a standing to view a transient Cavalcade, which if it stood still, and every part of it were offered to a steady obser∣vation, how would the Glory of it be lessened (in a wise mans opinion) to little more, then the Gaiety of some idle Pageantry? But, Sir, why do I prognosticate so much evil to my self, when the Stars of my fate, are in the hands of so great an ingenuity? I will not chuse to suspect, where I have so much cause not to be jealous. For, Sir, I rest in this satisfa∣ction to my self, that if these Pa∣pers will not answer your expe∣ctation, yet my truth in perfor∣ming

my promise, and my duty in obeying your command, will be approvable, and acceptable to you: and that shall be repu∣ted with me, a sufficient compen∣sation for all the inconvenien∣cies I have objected against my self. And, Sir, for the regard you have shewn me, and the ho∣nour you have done me, in your so friendly a choice of me (in the midst of so many excellent persons, that better deserved your favour) to be interested in your so honourable an imploy∣ment, let it be adjudged a per∣petual obligation upon me to perform all possible Service to your Self and Family, that

ever can come in the Capa∣city of
Honoured Sir, 
Mendlesham
Jan. 24. 1673.
