



SIR,
I Will not offend you by Publishing my Ob∣ligations to You, And I hope I shall not offend You by the Dedication of this small Treatise, as I
am sure I should if there were the least expression in it of Disloyalty to the KING, or Disaffection to the Church of England; And yet I must acknow∣ledge that I expose it to Publick view, partly that I may vindicate my self from the guilt of some Aspersions by which others have en∣deavoured to Expose me, as one Schismatically enclined.
In the late times of Usur∣pation, I had no sooner left the Ʋniversity and began to Preach, but there was a
Caveat entred against me in the Book of Cromwells Try∣as of Ministers amongst those who were accounted Episcopal-men, by one (as I had cause to suspect) who afterwards conformed to the Church, and became my unsuccessful competi∣tor since I came to London. I was thereby forced to leave my Native County, and to live a precarious Life for some Years, till His Majesties Return. But I bless God there never was (and I hope never shall be)
any objection against my Conversation.
There are some now who would represent me to the World as a dissem∣bling dissatisfied Conformist, and Consequently both a great Hypocrite, and a ve∣ry great Fool. The grea∣test cause of this report, hath proceeded from my Treat∣ing Dissenters so, that I might gain upon their Af∣fections, as being the best way to bring them to Con∣formity to the Church: and which hath been the good
effect of it, their being my Auditors. It is a sad case that it should be our Duty and our great Concern to bring those to the Com∣munion of the Church who have Separated from it, and yet our great Reproach if they become our Hearers.
But I may well be con∣tented and account it an ho∣nour to be reproached, con∣sidering that it hath been of late the lot of some of the most Eminent Divines in this Age; Men whose Works have not only praised them
in this City, but in both the Universities & through∣out this Nation (and some other Countries) and have been an eminent means to fix sound Principles, not only in great numbers of the Laity, but of the Cler∣gy likewise. Those men who have done the greatest Service to the Church are reproached and scorned by a furious sort of men that pretend most regard to it: But as those Worthys cannot but have great satisfaction from themselves, in that they
have discharged their duties to God in their Ministerial Function; so have I, And the good success which it hath pleased God to give me by bringing many, not on∣ly to the Church, but to both the Sacraments who had from their Cradles de∣spised the Ordinances of the Christian Religion, is a Sa∣tisfaction to me which out∣weighs all the reproaches which heady & inconsidera∣tive men can heap upon me.
I bless God I can with a good conscience declare to
the World, that I ever de∣signed to do good by my Ministry according to my mean Capacity; and to that end I have alwayes set my self against the two great e∣vils of the Age, Division and Debauchery. I have likewise made it my business upon all occasions to commend the Discipline and Methods of the Church of England, as tending more to the promo∣tion of true Holiness, than any of those Devices which have been formed against Her, and which God never prospe∣red;
and I am sure the same will appear to be my design in this Treatise, which I humbly offer to you.
I know no Person, to whom I can with more con∣fidence present it, than to your self. I have taken oc∣casion in it to shew the ne∣cessity of Obedience to Go∣vernment, & That I am sure is well pleasing to you; for I am confident there is not a day passeth, but all that are admitted into your com∣pany may take notice of your affectionate Loyalty to the King.

I have commended a hearty compliance with the Rules and Orders of the Church, than which no∣thing is more acceptable to you, as appears by your great delight in Episcopal Authors, the great esteem which you have for the con∣formable Clergy, and your diligence in Suppressing the Conventicles: and which is the greatest expression of sin∣cerity, your early atten∣dance every day upon the Publick Prayers of the Church.

My chief design in it, is to perswade the People to treat those who have Dissented, with a Spirit of Meekness; & I am sure that is very agreea∣ble to Your Disposition, for it hath been your earnest de∣sire and request to men of stubborn humors, that they would not make themselves obnoxious to the just severi∣ty of the Laws, but live in peaceable obedience to Go∣vernment. That you are of this temper, appear'd likewise by your great displeasure when you heard of com∣plaints
made by the Dissen∣ters, of some Affronts and Incivilities that were offe∣red to them when they came to the Church; which was the only occasion of this dis∣course, for which I am sure I shall not suffer in the esteem of sober and good men.
Sir, I know your Soul ab∣hors Flattery, and so does mine. I would not therefore have mention'd these things, if I did not fear that some ill men should misrepresent you, as they have done
others who are truly Zeal∣lous for the good both of Church and State.
That the God of Heaven may Prolong your dayes, & continue to you the great Opportunities of doing good, both in your Publick and Private Capacity, is and shall be the hearty Prayer of,
Ever Honored Sir,

