



My LORD,
THe Art of Painting was a thing which of old Princes admired, Kings did affect, Emperors and Noble men of almost all Ages did love and make use of. Not to mention Juba Rex Mauritaniae, Perseus King of Macedonia, King Demetrius, Cy∣rus King of Persia, Alexander the Great, Caesar, and others: How was Tiberius the Emperor taken with the Archigallus of Parrhasius, and the statue which Lysippus made? How highly
did Mnason the Tyrant of the Eleatenses prize the pictures of the Thebean battel done by Aristides? How did King Nicome∣des, who proffered an unknown summ of money to the Gnidians, for the Venus which Praxiteles made, admire it? What estimation had Marcus. Agrippa for it, who offered vast summs to the inhabitants of Cyzicus for the two pictures of Ajax and Venus? Besides ma∣ny others too tedious here to be recited, and sufficiently enough known to your Lordship, of which to make any repetition might be ac∣counted presumption, especially to your Ho∣nour, whose Skill in Art is large, and whose Knowledge of Universal Learning is not small, especially in that of History. It is Honour, as Cicero saith, which gives Being, Life and Nourishment to Arts, and where can that be found more than in your Noble Self? Pre∣suming therefore of your Lordships Affection, and that Unparallel'd Vertue, and Heroick Spirit, which not only lodges in your Ho∣nours Breast, but is also Hereditary to your Noble Family, I have made bold to shelter this work under your Lordships Patronage; expecting either to see it live in your Honours Estimation, or perish in your dislike. Now if these Lucubrations of mine, obtain but so much as your Honours least Approbation, I shall think my self Happy; and hope, that with
your Name and Memory, this work may be consecrated to Eternity. May your Lordship daily increase in Honour and Glory, be replenish∣ed with all earthly Blessings, and for ever en∣joy the full fruition of all Happiness both in this World, and that which is to come, is the Prayer of
MY LORD,

