



Gentlemen,
THese Papers are directed to you, in regard your City hath been the chiefest Scene of many of those things, which their design is for the future to prevent. I do not direct them to you as consi∣dered in your Body Politick, but to each man by himself (that may happen to look on them) in his indivi∣dual Capacity. And having said this, I think it proper in the next place to give you some account of the Reasons that chiefly induced me to this undertaking, which you may briefly take, in what follows.
I was for several Years a very unpleasant Spectator of the proceedings of the Church of England, towards those her Dissenters, that could not Worship God with their Liturgy and Ceremonies. Which as I did deeply dislike, so I would fain have excused her, and laid the blame if I could some∣where else, (as themselves it seems now would do.) But I found it impossible to satisfie my reason in that Attempt, while I daily met with, and heard of such inveterate Sermons, against that Rank of Persons, aswere then Preached by the most Capital Men of the Function, and as the Old Cocks crew, so did the young Ones learn, who are not to be exempted from acting their part in the Clamour; divers of them being no sooner allow'd to tread the Stairs of the Pulpit, but with their little Declamations that way, were quickly as loud as the best of their Doctors.
Had the Supreme Civil Magistrate or his Subordinates, dri∣ven on those Prosecutions, while the Clergy had interposed
with their Christian perswasions to the contrary, it would have gone very far towards the lessening the Complaint; but when the Civil Magistrates shall draw back, and the Di∣vine shall Spur forward, I know not who in this case can be the Clergies Advocate.
But I shall say no more of this; only entreat you to look back, and consider how exceeding uneasie all things that re∣lated to your Station (as Citizens) were made to you. Do you not remember what commotions, inquietudes, strange and unfriendly Divisions, were all that time among you, and how one Neighbour was put upon destroying another, and every Man in fear of himself, and jealous of whomsoever he spoke to?
Do you not likewise remember what huge Interruptions many of you met with in your dealings with your Country Shop-keepers, Traders and Manufacturers, even to a great stop of your wonted Traffick? And (as other bad effects these proceedings had upon your City) what a Stand most Men were at, who had let out their Moneys at Interest, or Lodged them with the Gold-Smith-Lankers, or the Chamber of Lon∣don? While divers of them thereupon conceived those Dis∣satisfactions, as caused the calling in so much of those Monies, in so suddain a manner, as to beget that Insolvency, which disappointed the future settlement of many of the Sons and Daughters of your sellow Citizens. A thing perhaps would make your Hearts Bleed, should you see the like Mis-fortunes happen to your own Widows and Children.
But Blessed be God, the State of Affairs are now much al∣tered by his Majesties late Declaration, taking away the oc∣casion of these Distractions, insomuch as there seems to me to be the beginning of a General happy Settlement, while I see Men of different perswasions in Religion, that before stood at a distance each from the other now, amicably to intermix and unite in their Trade, Correspondencies, and Business; yea, and in the publick Government both of the City and
the Kingdom, from whence it is already perceived, that the difference of opinion, in Religion, hinders nothing from an unanimous agreement of all Persons, managing those Trusts in a due Loyalty to the King, and for the general good and peace of the Kingdom, while one party is not set to oppress the other in his Religion.
Nor need any Man to doubt, but such a good beginning would soon grow up to an absolute Perfection, did not some Men (who have little reason more than the Gratifying their own Jealousies) make the opposition. For what Foundation can be better laid for the Flourishing State of any Kingdom, then that assurance His Majesty hath given in the two parti∣culars of his Declaration, which he would have to be Esta∣blished in a more perpetual Law, viz. That the Administra∣tion of his Government shall fully be with such Justice, as every Man shall be preserved in his Temporal property. And in Spiritual concernments as to Worshipping of God, shall have his free Liberty. Which two things being firmly setled; from whence can it be imagined, any pretence should be found for the worst of Spirits, to set on Foot any Disturbances, Plots, or Insurrections? He that now should but so much as offer at any such thing, will presently fall under that general Dis∣gust with all English Men, as they will think him to deserve no less punishment, than to be presently Hung up by the Heels, until he Spew out his Gall and Die.
Who they are that make the opposition I speak of, and by what means they manage it, you will find in the Book it self: I shall only say here, that it is by some of those that heretofore have carried all the Crack for Loyalty; and this is the true cause that hath drawn these Disquisitions and Expostulations from me; that so I may know how they can make what they do of this kind consistent, with their present Loyalty: In order to which you will meet with a necessary question, put to them for that purpose.
The Matters of Fact on which I often touch, and upon
which a great part of my Discourse doth proceed; having been many of them done within the Lines and Limits of your Liberties. I have thought no other Persons sitter to be made Arbitrators in them (as they are here Controverted) than your Selves.
And that there may be no mistakes, or needless Disputati∣ons in the present case, I have plainly laid down my own No∣tions of Loyalty: wherein I have thought the Nature of it more especially to consist, That so if any Person hath a mind to appear against what I have Written, I do first pray him to contradict me in those Notions, and then he will recover me from my first Error: or if he finds he cannot do that, I shall then pray him to shew me my bad Arguings from such good Principles, and that will recover me from my second Error, (if, of any such Error I should be guilty) and this is the Method I intreat any such Person to take, that may so concern himself.
I have been a Man who have always thought, that there was much more in the Duty of Loyalty, than to Write or Preach against Rebellion; or cry up the Doctrine of a meer external Non-resistance, always believing, that Men may be guilty of high Disloyal Acts even to the introducing of a Re∣bellion) while themselves declare they abhor it. This I learn'd from the Writing of King Charles the First,Vide Page 18.30. as you will meet with in its place.
If any think I have written more favourably of the Roman Catholick Religion, than becomes a Protestant, I must reply to him, I have written nothing at all, either for or against one way of Religion or other, but rather Refer (as I said just now) to such matters of Fact, relating to the Three perswasions of the R. Catholicks: The Church of England, and Protestant Dissenters, as were necessary to carry on what I in∣tended, and if in doing so, and in comparing some things or practices of the Church of England, with the Church of Rome. I find that the Church of England hath upon its Prote∣stant
Principles, made Laws for the punishing her Prote∣stant Dissenters (producing as bad Effects, as those of the Church of Rome) and thereupon say that the Prote∣stants Sufferings from the Church of the England, were in their Extent harder upon them, since the last Settlement of their Uniformity, than they can be said to have been under Queen Mary: it doth not follow from hence, that I Write for her Religion, but rather that I am one that desire to Write impartially.
Or if while I see the Church of England Ministers, either in their Printed Books, or Sermons, exposing as they have done of late, some Doctrines or Practices of the other Church, more to a Popular Contempt, than for an Edifying Infor∣mation of the People, as they formerly dealt by the Dissen∣ters, and take occasion from thence to shew them in some particulars, how very many of their own Practices and Doctrines, may be in the same manner exposed. I hope I may not be the worst Protestant for so doing.
If I reverence that Divine Principle, viz. That Consci∣ence in the matter of Gods Worship is not o the forced, I am not to be blamed, until I be otherwise convinced; no, nor if I Write against those who oppose His Majesty in settling the Kingdom (upon that Principle) in a Freedom from those Distractions, which the practices of many upon the contrary Principles, have ever since the Reformation brought upon it. The principle is such as I cannot but va∣lue and love with all my Heart, because I know it to be so agreeable to the Sence of every Mans mind, That no Man, who knows what belongs to the Sincere worshipping of God, dare allow himself to be unwilling in any part of his Life, to live otherwise than under its Benefit, when I am otherwise convinced I may recal much of what I have Written; but until then I am like to go on in the same way I am in.
If my Stile or way of writing be offensive to you, as any
whit too sharp, I must crave your remission of that (if you judge it to be a fault and for my excuse, must say, I unhappily learn'd it from the Church of Englands chiefest Doctors. He that shall Read their Controversal Books and Sermons, as I have done, written against the Roman Catholicks and Pro∣testant Dissenters, will tell you it is next to an impossibility, not to imbibe the Faculty of their way of Writing.
Gentlemen, I have no more to say here, but wish your Citty, all imaginable happiness, and each of your Selves and Families; the Blessings of this World, and that which is to come.
