



My Dearest Wife. &c.
SInce the Lord in his Providence has been pleased to remove me from you, by Death, and all me hme; so that I can no further, nor other ways be serviceable to you I

I must beg your Acceptance and Pe∣rusal of this the last Legacy of your Deceased Friend, who, tho dead, you find speaking. You may now take a Review of me (if so vile a Thing as I was, can be worth your Pains); I have in the following Papers, given you some Passages of my Diary me∣thodised, in which I have endeavour∣ed, as impartially as I can (if my Heart deceive me not) to give you the view of my Dark Side, as well as my Bright. And both for these Rea∣sons: By the former you may take a view of the miserable Corruption of my most wretched Nature. You have there the very Picture and Character of one posting to Hell; the Wiles and Subtilties of an active busy De∣vil; the Snares and Baits of a be∣witching World; and the mischie∣vous Consequences of bad Company. By the latter, you may behold the wonderful Rich and Free Grace of God in Christ to me; to me, I say,

one of the vilest and greatest of Sin∣ners; to me, that had hardened my Heart, after many and many a Re∣proof, and might upon that account have expected sudden Destruction, and that without Remedy: To me, that had not only sinned my self, but had drawn others into Sin too. Here stand and wonder at Free Grace, in snatching such a Brand out of the Fire; and in bringing me from under Satan's Slavery and Dominion, into his own marvellous Kingdom. O that the Lord might have the Glory of the Mercy he has so eminently given me the Comfort of!
Come then, my Dear Friends, a∣wayTo my Friends that arc i Christ. to Christ; and if you have done this, as I hope you have, why then stay with him, abide here, and mend your Pace Heaven-wards; You can never, I am sure, either mend your Master, your Work, or your Wages: Have you set your Faces Heaven∣wards?

O never think of looking back. Are you not far from the Kingdom of Heaven? O yet go further; for it would be dreadfully sad to perish at the very Gates of Glory. You have, it may be, escaped many of the Pollutions of the World, and , and suffered too something for Dear Christ. Well! have a care of loing all, and falling short of the Glory of God, for want of a  Work, and of holding out to the End. You have the Lamps of Profession, but have you the Oyl of Grace? You can ry, Lord, Lord, but do you do the Will of your Hea∣venly Father? Dear Friends, perse∣vere, have a care of Apostary, Luke∣ , or a  Form of Godli∣ness; hold so the end, whatever you may suffer,  ose for your so do∣ing; and be confident Heaven will  amends for all.
And if this  Book should To Carnal Friends.  by any  Relations, such who are yet in the all of , and in the Bonds of Iiqui∣ty; I must earnestly persuade such  come to Christ. Poor  Sinners, away to Christ. Come, you must at last be good; nay, you shall be good, if any thing I can do,  say, may prevail. I may not Do so  to your Immortal Souls,  to suffer you (if I  help i) to persist, and perish in a way of Wickedness; in a way you, (as well as I)  o, Hell and Destruction. It's not (I believe) too late yet for you to ac∣cept of Christ, freely  fully offer∣in the Gospel to the greatest of Sin∣ners; do but sinc   of Si abandon your Wicked Couns and Companions, give up your selves to a , stric and serious Life; and by Faith lay hold of Christ, as of∣fered, and heartily implore Aid and Assistance to this purpose, and your

Work's done. Come, poor Souls, in time, for sake your Sins, and embrace the Ways of Holiness, that Christ may be yours. I have tried both ways my self, and can from my own Ex∣perience assure you, that the Ways of God are abundantly the best Ways, and Heaven's Wages the best Wages. I have found more real Pleasure, and substantial Delight in the Peace of a good Conscience, in well-groun∣ded Hopes that my Sins are pardoned, in serving God, and in expectation of Eternal Life, through Christ, than I ever did, or could take in the Fol∣lies and Vanities of an ill-spent Youth. I confess I was once of your Mind, but can now assure you that I repent nothing more; God has con∣vinced me of my Folly, and I hear∣tily invite you to taste and try with me, how good God is to repenting, retarning Sinners.
And if what I have here (through the Assistance of Divine Grace) offe∣red, may be to God's Honour, and the Advantage of poor Souls; it will be a sufficient requital of his Pains, whose hearty desire it is to meet you all in Heaven,

London, October 10. 1690.
