



Ever-Honoured Mother, and Dear Sister, &c.
THE following Sheets which I found written by my Dear Brother (now in Glory) with his own Hand, being dedicated by himself to you; I do accordingly, with much satisfacti∣on, humbly present then, to you. And tho they are but the rougher Draughts of what was intended by my Brother, (he having begun himself, and made some progress

in the transcribing of them, when it pleased the Lord to call him to himself): Yet in such a Dress I am confident they will be no less ac∣ceptable and welcome to you, coming from that Hand that wrote them, for whose perusal it was that they were especially intended.
The Advice which my Brother has left towards the Close of his Life (Dear Sister) had he lived to perfect what he had begun, I be∣lieve, would have been in every particular suted by himself to you, wherein it now differs from your Circumstances; but my Brother not reaching so far with his own Pen, I thought it better to trans∣cribe it as it was, than in any thing material to alter or vary from the Original.
And that this Book may reach the Hands of all Relations, for whom it was designed; and may be of use to others also, into whose

Hands it may by Providence be cast, (which I am confident is yours, and I hope the desire of all that are interested herein) per∣swaded much in the making of it thus publick. And upon that ac∣count I have omitted in the Poems (with some few of the Letters) what I thought was less of publick Use or Concernment. And to∣wards the Close of all, have taken leave to add some Hymns, &c. which I found written by my Bro∣ther in another Manuscript of his, (I suppose more lately) which I hope may be useful.
The Lord accompany them all with his Blessing, that they may be so, into whose Hands soever they come; that by such Helps, surviving Friends, and all that read them, may be more fit, and ripened faster for that Blessed State, where Friends (united here in Christ) shall meet again, and

join together in the Eternal Praises of our great Creator and Re∣deemer; of which Number that so vile a one may be, (through rich and glorious Grace) he begs your Prayers, who is,
Most Dear and Honoured Mother,

And
Dear Sister, &c.

July 4. 1692.
