



SIR,
I Have so many Obligations upon me, that to bring in a fair Ac∣count of my Debts, is all that lies in the present power of my Honesty: In the first place, I thankfully confess my self indebted to the good nature of the Town in general: then, in the deepest sense of my gratitude, I acknowledge the Indulgence, and Patronage of particular Men of Quality, who were almost industrious, and con∣triving for the Fortune of this Play; to make it Considerable to the World, in its Reputation; and to Me, in the Profit of the Third Day. I think it becomes every Mans Character to be pleased with pleasing others; and I know, that to be pleas'd is full as much as I ought to be, upon the success of any thing, that I can attempt in this kind; my Poetry will never run away with me; but the good fortune of finding so many Honourable Patrons, I must confess, has transported me; and if I am a little vain now, 'tis from their good Opinion of me, and not from what I think of my self. I took the Hint of the

tragical part of this Play, from a Novel of Mrs. Behn's, called The Fair Vow-Breaker; Tou will forgive me for calling it a Hint, when you find I have little more than borrowed the Question, how far such a distress was to be carried, upon the misfortune of a Womans having innocently two Husbands, at the same time. I have given you a little taste of Comedy with it, not from my own Opinion, but the pre∣sent Humour of the Town: I never contend that, because I think every reasonable Man will, and ought to govern in the pleasures he pays for. I had no occasion for the Comedy, but in the three first Acts, which Mrs. Bracegirdle particularly diverted, by the beauty, and gayety of her Action; and though I was fond of coming to the serious part, I should have been very well pleas'd (if it had been possible to have woven her into that Interest) to have had her Company to the end of my Journey. I could not, if I would, conceal what I owe Mrs. Bar∣ry; and I should despair of ever being able to pay her, if I did not imagine that I have been a little accessary to the great Applause, that every body gives her, in saying she out-plays her self; if she does that, I think we may all agree never to expect, or desire any Actor to go beyond that Commendation; I made the Play for her part, and her part has made the Play for me; It was a helpless Infant in the Arms of the Father, but has grown under her Care; I gave it just motion enough to crawl into the World, but by her power, and spirit of playing, she has breath'd a soul into it, that may keep it alive. I hope I have, in some measure, discharged my self to the Publick; but for fear of the worst, Sir, I have brought You for my Security, because I always found You in Nature enclining to be responsible for Your Friends; You have allowed me that Title, and I thank You for it; but I value my self upon Your being as heartily disposed to give it, as I was desirous to receive it. I cannot but remember some Passages, that would become Your Character, and this Dedication of my Friendship to You; but I must be silent; and 'tis the hard part of Your Favours, that You won't allow 'em to be acknowledged. I can never speak enough to my Obligation, and never little enough to Your Modesty; when I would be Grateful, I shall be Troublesom; and I know you too well, to think You will be pleased with what I can publickly say of You. Every Man, who knows You, will think I say very little, and they, who are to know You, will find I have

said nothing. You are rising upon the World, and every Creature is the better for You, that's near You; and as Juvenal says of his Emperor, Sat. 7. Materiamque tibi vestra indulgentia quaerit. I may speak of Your Virtues, and good Qualities, though You wont allow me to be a Witness to the World of the frequent Occasions You have found out to employ 'em. If Generosity with Friendship, Learning with Sound Sense, True Wit, and Humour with good Nature, be Accomplishments to Qualifie a Gentleman for a Patron, I am sure I have lit right on Mr. Hammond. I have reason to think I have made You my Friend; and You shall have reason to be∣lieve that You have secured me to be,
SIR,

