



SIR,
THERE's no Condition can subsist wholly upon itself: And I am bound to depend, as every Man, more or less, is, upon the Favour of the World, to carry him through the trouble∣some Iourney of this Life: Nor do I think it my Misfortune to wait upon a Great Man's rising sometimes, to put him in mind of me. While I can keep my self out of the necessity of flattering Fools, I shall not very much repine at my Condition. I'm sure I'm safe here, because you are safe every where: And when a common Consent encou∣rages an Opinion, I shall hardly be thought in the wrong, to do as other People do.
Sir, when Poetry becomes, a Man's Business, 'twill hardly prove ano∣ther Man's Diversion: Tho' a Play once a Year, looks very like turning into the Profession, I am a little better acquainted with the Town, than to impose my self this way upon 'em; and let it be the defence of my Writing, that I have nothing else to do.
I know Play-Writers, like Men of other Employments, where the Honest Advantages are so small, are suspected in their Dealings, of indirect, underhand Practices, to carry on their Trade. For my part, Sir, I propose nothing more than an opportunity of declaring myself in my turn, that I have grown up by degrees, with the general Under∣standing, and Iudgment of the Town, into a Respect and Honour that every body has for you: This, Sir, is the only way I have of Publishing mine: and Writing has always been allow'd of, when there was no other way left of discovering the Passion.
Some Convenience, and a great deal of Pleasure, first carry'd me into this wanton way of Wickedness, (those old Seducers, Profit, and Plea∣sure) that have brought at last a great many of both Sexes, into the common Entertainment of the Town.
I have had my ends of this Play, and shou'd have been glad if it had answer'd every Bodies: I think it has its Beauties, tho' they did not ap∣pear upon the Stage, and 'tis not the smallest Commendation, to be able to divert you in private.
If I run into the Course of a Dedication, I shall be lost in the Character of Mr. Boyl; for when I have said all I can, I shall fall short of every Man's Opinion; and no body, but your self, will think I can say enough of you: At home, or abroad; in the Camp, or in the Court, Mr. Boyl's Behaviour, and Address, is the Pattern of every Gallant Man's imitati∣on; so much, that, from what I have seen, and heard of you, I must believe that there is no Province of Humanity, but, at one time or other of your Life, you are design'd to Command. Let it satisfie, Sir, your present Ambition, to Conquer in the fairest Field of Victory, to Tri∣umph in the Court, and in spight of the Cabals, and whispers of the Drawing-Room, to be universally allow'd the fine Gentleman: Which as it seems the easiest, has always been thought the hardest Character of a Great Man to maintain.
Sir, since the distance of your Quality, and Fortune, has made it im∣possible to come near you, as a Friend, I hope you will allow me to wait upon you as,
Sir,

