



Dear Francion,
TO whom more fitly could I dedicate your History, than to your self? It would be an Injury unto you, to present it to any other; for, if it be requisite that it must be referred to one of Judge∣ment, who is there that can be found more able to do it than your self, who know all the rules that ought to be observed in well Writing? I shall acknowledge my self more glorious to receive ur approbation, than if I had the praises of all the People. I am a∣fraid nevertheless, if you are pleased to be a severe Judge, that I shall not be altogeth exempted from Blame. I make no doubt, but, if you had been pleased as well t take the pains to commit your own Adventures unto writing, as you were soetimes contented by your own voice to represent them to me, you would every
y have farr surpassed that which I have done; but I desire not to enter into cmparisons with you. It shall suffice me, if you will take notice, that in this Pce I have laboured with as much Zeal and Care as was possible for me. If I hve assumed the boldnesse to touch upon those things, which, peradventure, may sm not to pertain unto you, it is, because that you your self have given me that erty, and because I was unwilling to let pass this occasion to testifie my love nto you, fearing that it would be made use of by some other. It is true, that
or a long time you have resisted my Design, being not thoroughly adved whether the actions of your Youth were to be published; but I con∣siderd with it, that although sometimes you did suffer your self to be lead asid unto egresse and pleasures, yet neverthelesse you oftentimes have made an hnourable Halt, and being alwayes accompanied with the excellent Priniples of Virtue, you have performed many things, which have ser∣ved to punish, and to correct the Vices of others. Moreover, you have alwes observed such a generous Disposition, that it doth dispell all the Blae and Censures that can befall you; and it is well known, that your Mners, and Conversation of Life, is now so full of Gravity and Mesty, that you are to be the more commended for having dis-intang∣led
our self from so many Temptations and Charms, which on every sid did surround you, and that you have now chosen the better way. This beig most certain, it did seem to me that your Reputation could not suf∣fer, if I should make a History of your passed Adventures, seeing I have disguised them in such a manner, adding something
o them of my own, and changing your Name also, that he must be te Master of a most discerning eye, that can discover who you are. L is suffice the People, to delight themselves with the reading of so many
greeable Sub∣jects, and to derive unto themselves that profit from them,
as to learn in what manner they ought to live at this day in the World, without being too curious to search any further. For my self, when you sall take the pains to read it, and perceive what are the Rocks you hae avoyded, I shall be sufficiently satisfyed, if this which I have don shall please none but your self only; It shall be unto me Glory enough to understand that you doe esteem me to be

