




MY LORD,
THE Best part of the Fortune of my last Play (The Innocent Adultery) was, that it gave me an Opportunity of making my self known to Your Grace. You were pleased to coun∣tenance the Advances which I had been a great while directing and aiming at You, and have since encou∣rag'd me into an Industry, which, I hope, will allow me in this Play to own (which is the only way I can) the great Obligations I have to You.

I stand engag'd to Mrs. Behn for the Occasion of a most Passionate Distress in my Last Play; and in a Conscience that I had not made her a sufficient Ac∣knowledgment, I have run further into her Debt for Oroonoko, with a Design to oblige me to be honest; and that every one may find me out for Ingratitude, when I don't say all that's sit for me upon that Subject. She had a great Command of the Stage; and I have often wonder'd that she would bury her Favourite Hero in a Novel, when she might have reviv'd him in the Scene. She thought either that no Actor could represent him; or she could not bear him repre∣sented: And I believe the last, when I remember what I have heard from a Friend of hers, That she always told his Story, more feelingly, than she writ it. Whatever happen'd to him at Surinam, he has mended his Condition in England. He was born here under Your Grace's Influence; and that has carried his For∣tune farther into the World, than all the Poetical Stars that I could have sollicited for his Success. It was Your Opinion, My Lord, that directed me to Mr. Verbruggen; and it was his Care to maintain Your Opinion, that directed the Town to me, the Better Part of it, the People of Quality; whose Favours as I am proud of, I shall always be industri∣ous to preserve.
My Lord, I know the Respect and Reverence which in this Address I ought to appear in before You, who are so intimate with the Ancients, so ge∣neral

a Knower of the several Species of Poetry, and so Just a Judge in the Trials of this kind. You have an Absolute Power to Arraign and Convict, but a prevailing Inclination to Pardon and Save; and from the Humanity of Your Temper, and the true Know∣ledge of the Difficulties of succeeding this way, never aggravate or insist upon Faults
—Quas aut incuria fudit,
Aut humana parùm cavit Natura.—
Hor. Art. Poet.
to our Condemnation, where they are Venial, and not against the Principles of the Art we pretend to. Horace, who found it so, says,
—Gratia Regum
Pieriis tentata modis.
The Favour of Great Men is the Poets Inheritance, and all Ages have allow'd 'em to put in their Claim; I only wish that I had Merit enough to prefer me to Your Grace: That I might deserve in some measure that Patronage which You are pleased to bestow on me: That I were a Horace for such a Mecoenas: That I could describe what I admire; and tell the World what I really think, That as You possess those Infi∣nite Advantages of Nature and Fortune in so Emi∣nent a degree; that as You so far excel in the Perfe∣ctions of Body and Mind, You were design'd and fashion'd a Prince, to be the Honour of the Nation, and the Grace and Ornament of the Court. Sir,

In the Fulness of Happiness and Blessings which You enjoy, I can only bring in my Wishes for the Continuance of 'em; they shall constantly be devo∣ted to you, with all the Services of,
MY LORD,

