



Right Honourable,
WHen I consider how impossible it is for a person of my condition to produce, and consequently how imprudent to attempt, anything in proportion either to the Amplenesse of the Body you represent, or of the Places you bear, I should he kept from venturing so poor a piece, designed to live but an hour, in so lasting a Publication, did not what your Civility calls a Request, your Greatness ren∣der a Command. The truth is, in things not unlawful great Persons cannot be properly said to request, because, all things considered, they must not be denyed. To me it was Honour enough to have your Audience; enjoyment enough to behold your happy Change, and to see the same City, the Metro∣polis of Loyalty and of the Kingdom; to behold the Glory of English Churchs reformed, that
is, delivered from the Reformers; and to find at least the service of the Church repaired, though not the buildings; to see St. Pauls delivered from Beasts here, as well as St. Paul at Ephesus: and to view the Church thronged onely with Troops of Auditors, not of Horse. This I could fully have acquiesced in, and received a large personal reward in my Particular share of the publick Joy: but since you are further pleased, I will not say by your Judgment to approve, but by your Accep∣tance to encourage the raw endeavours of a young Divine; I shall take it for an Opportu∣nity, not as others in their sage Prudence use to do, to quote three or four Texts of Scrip∣ture, & to tell you how you are to rule the City out of a Concordance; no, I bring not Instru∣ctions, but what much better besits both you and my self, your Commendations. For I look upon your City as the great and magnificent stage of Business, and by consequence the best place of Improvement; for from the Shool we go to the university, but from the universi∣ties to London. And therefore as in your City-meetings you must be esteemed the most considerable Body of the Nation; so met in the
Church, I look upon you as an Auditory fit to be waited on, as you are, by both universities. And when I remember how instrumental you have been to recover this universal settlement, and and to retrieve the old Spirit of Loyalty to Kings (as an ancient testimony of which, you bear not the Sword in vain) I seem in a man∣ner deputed from Oxford, not so much as Preacher to supply a course, as Oratour to present her thanks. As for the ensuing Dis∣course, which, (lest I chance to be traduced for a Plagiary by him who has played the thief) I think fit to tell the world by the way, was one of those that by a worthy hand were stoln from me in the Kings Chappal, and are still detain∣ed, and to which now accidentally published by your Honours Order, your Patronage must give both value, and protection. You will find me in it not to have pitcht upon any subject, that mens guilt, and the consequent of guilt, their concernment might render liable to ex∣ception, nor to have rubbed up the memory of what some heretofore in the City did, which more and better now detest, and therefore ex∣piate: but my subject is inoffensive, harmless, & innocent as the state of Innocence it self,
and (I hope) sutable to the present design and Genius of this Nation, which is, or should be, to return to that Innocence, which it lost long since the fall. Briefly, my busines is, by describ∣ing what Man was in his first estate, to up∣braid him with what be is in his present: be∣tween whom Innocent, and Faln (that in a word I may sute the subject to the place of my discourse) there is as great an unlikeness, as be∣tween St. Pauls a Cathedral, and St. Pauls a Stable. But I must not forestall my self, nor transcribe the work into the Dedication. I shall now only desire you to accept the issue of your own requests; the gratification of which I have here consulted so much before my own deputation: while like the poor widdow I endeavour to shew my officiousness by an Of∣fering, though I betray my poverty by the mea∣sure; not so much caring though I appear nei∣ther Preacher nor Scholar, (which terms we have been taught upon good reason to distin∣guish) so I may in this but shew my self

Worcester-house, Nov. 24. 1662.
