



Right Honourable,
WHen I consider how impossible it is for a person of my condition to produce, and consequently how imprudent to attempt, any thing in proportion ei∣ther to the Amplenesse of the Body you represent, or of the Places you bear, I should be kept from venturing so poor a piece, designed to live but an hour, in so lasting a Publication; did not what your Civility calls a Request, your Greatness render a Command. The truth is, in things not unlawful great Persons cannot be properly said to request, because, all things considered, they must not be de∣nyed. To me it was Honour enough to have your Audience; enjoyment enough to behold your hap∣py Change, and to see the same City, the Metro∣polis of Loyalty and of the Kingdom; to behold

the Glory of English Churches reformed, that is, delivered from the Reformers; and to find at least the service of the Church repaired, though not the buildings; to see St. Pauls delivered from Beasts here, as well as St. Paul at Ephe∣sus: and to view the Church thronged onely with Troops of Auditors, not of Horse. This I could fully have acquiesced in, and received a large per∣sonal reward in my Particular share of the pub∣lick Joy: but since you are further pleased, I will not say by your Judgement to approve, but by your Acceptance to encourage the raw endeavours of a young Divine; I shall take it for an Opportuni∣ty, not as others in-their sage Prudence use to do, to quote three or four Texts of Scripture, and to tell you how you are to rule the City out of a Concordance; no; I bring not Instructions, but what much better befits both you and my self, your Commendations. For I look upon your City as the great and magnificent stage of Business, and by consequence the best place of Improvement; for from the School we go to the University, but from the Universities to London. And therefore as in your City-meetings you must be esteemed the most considerable Body of the Nation; so met in the

Church, I look upon you as an Auditory fit to be waited on, as you are, by both Universities. And when I remember how instrumental you have been to recover this universal settlement, and to re∣trieve the old Spirit of Loyalty to Kings (as an ancient testimony of which, you bear not tbe Sword in vain) I seem in a manner deputed from Ox∣ford, not so much as Preacher to supply a course, as Oratour to present her thanks. As for the ensu∣ing Discourse, which, (lest I chance to be traduced ☜ for a Plagiary by him who has played the thief) I think fit to tell the world by the way, was one of those that by a worthy hand were stoln from me in the Kings Chappel, and are still detained; and to which now accidentally published by your Honours Order, your Patronage must give both value, and protection. You will find me in it not to have pitcht upon any subject, that mens guilt, and the conse∣quent of guilt, their concernment might render lyable to exception; nor to have rubbed up the me∣mory of what some heretofore in the City did, which more and better now detest, and therefore expiate: but my subject is inoffensive, harmless, and innocent as the State of Innocence it felf, and (I hope) sutable to the present design and Ge∣nius

of this Nation, which is, or should be, to re∣turn to that Innocence, which it lost long since the Fall. Briefly, my business is, by describing what Man was in his first estate, to upbraid him with what he is in his present: between whom Innocent, and Faln (that in a word I may sute the subject to the place of my discourse) there is as great an un∣likeness, as between St. Pauls a Cathedral, and St. Pauls a Stable. But I must not forestall my self, nor transcribe the Work into the Dedication. I shall now onely desire you to accept the issue of your own requests; the gratification of which I have here consulted so much before my own repu∣tation: while like the poor widow I endeavour to shew my officiousness by an Offering, though I betray my poverty by the measure; not so much caring though I appear neither Preacher nor Scho∣ler, (which terms we have been taught upon good reason to distinguish) so I may in this but shew my self
Your Honours very humble Servant,
Robert South.
Worcester-house,
Nov. 24. 1662.
