



MY LORD,
THough the interposal of my Lord of Canterburies Com∣mand for the Publication of this mean Discourse, may seem so far to determine, as even to take away, my Choice; yet I must own it to the World, that it is solely and entirely my own In∣clination, seconded by my Obligations to your Lordship, that makes this, that was so lately an humble attendant upon your Lord∣ships
Consecration, now ambitious to Con∣secrate it self with your Lordships Name. It was my Honour to have lived in the same Colledge with your Lordship, and now to be∣long to the same Cathedral, where at present you credit the Church as much by your Go∣vernment, as you did the School formerly by your VVit. Your Lordship even then grew up into a constant Superiority above others; and all your After-greatness seems but a Paraphrase upon those Promising beginnings: for whatsoever you are, or shall be, has been but an an easie Prognostick from what you were. It is your Lordships vnhappeness to be cast upon an Age in which the Church is in its VVane, and if you do not those glorious things that our English Prelates did two or three hundred Years since; it is not because your Lordship is at all less than they, but be∣cause the Times are worse. VVitness those magnificent Buildings in Christ-Church in Oxford, begun and carried on by your Lord∣ship; when by your Place you governed, and by your VVisdom encreased the Treasure of that Colledge: and, which must eternally
set your Fame above the reach of Envy and Detraction, these great Structures you at∣tempted at a time when you returned Poor and bare, to a Colledge as bare, after a long Persecution, and before you had laid so much as one Stone in the Repairs of your own Fortunes: By which incomparably high and generous undertaking, you have shewn the VVorld how fit a Person you were to build upon Wolseys foundation: A Prelate, whose Noble designs you Imitate, and whose mind you Equal. Briefly, That Christ-Church stands so high above ground, and that the Church of Westminster lies not flat upon it, is your Lordships Commendation. And therefore your Lordship is not behind∣hand with the Church, paying it as much Credit and Support, as you receive from it; for you owe your Promotion to your Merit, and, I am sure, your Merit to your Self. All men Court you, not so much because a great Person, as a Publick good. For, as a Friend, there is none so hearty, so Nobly warm and active to make good all the Offices of that endearing Relation: As a Patron, none
more able to oblige and reward your Depen∣dants; and, which is the Crowning Orna∣ment of Power, none more willing. And lastly, as a Diocesan, you are like even to out∣do your self in all other Capacities; and, in a word, to exemplifie and realize every VVord of the following Discourse; which is here most humbly and gratefully presented to your Lordship, by

From St. James's, Dec. 3. 1666.
