


THere is that certain Argument of Poverty in Poetry, that its Off∣spring must always be laid at somebodies Door; and indeed, the greatest Master of this Art, will scarce be able to support the Issue of his Brain, upon the narrow Income of a single Reputation.
From the very Start of my Design upon this Play, I had a Design up∣on you, like a rich Godfather, to ease the Parish of a Charge, and the Parent of a Care, in maintaining it.
You know the Original of Sir Antony, and therefore can best judge how the Copy is drawn; tho' it won't be to my Advantage to have 'em too narrowly compar'd; her Wit is indeed inimitable, not to be painted: Yet I must say, there's something in my Draught of her, that carries a Re∣semblance, and makes up a very tolerable Figure: And since I have this occasion of mentioning Mrs. Montford, I am pleased, by way of Thanks, to do her that publick Justice in Print, which some of the best Judges of these Performances, have, in her Praise, already done her, in publick places; That they never saw any part more masterly play'd: And as I made every Line for her, she has mended every Word for me; and by a Gaiety and Air, particular to her Action, turn'd every thing into the Genius of the Character.
You have here Seven hundred Lines more in the Print, than was upon the Stage, which I cut out in the apprehension and dread of a long Play.
The Abbe's Character languishes in the Fifth Act for want of the Scene between him and Sir Antony, which I plainly saw before, but was con∣tented to leave a Gap in the Action, and to lose the advantage of Mr. Lee's Playing (which, tho' his Part, that place only gvve him an occa∣sion to shew) then run the venture of offending the Women; not that there is one indecent Expression in it; but the over-fine Folk might run it into a design I never had in my head: my meaning was, to expose the Vice; and I thought it cou'd not be more contemptibly expos'd, than in the Person of a wanton Old Man, that must make ev'n the most fashiona∣ble Pleasure ridiculous.

I am gratefully sensible of the general good Nature of the Town to me, which you must give me leave to value my self upon, since the Pride pro∣ceeds from an Opinion, that I have deserv'd no otherwise from any Man. But I must make my boast (tho' with the most acknowledging respect) of the Favours for the Fair Sex (I may call 'em Favours, and I may boast of Ladies Favours, when there are so many concern'd) in so visibly pro∣moting my Interest, on those Days chiefly (the Third, and the Sixth) when I had the tenderest relation to the welfare of my Play. I won't from their Encouragement imagine I am the better Poet, but I will for the fu∣ture, endeavour not to give 'em cause of repenting so seasonable a piece of good Nature; and if I can't give 'em a good Comedy, I won't give 'em a very bad one: This has had its Fate, and a very favourable one. And I cannot but have the better esteem of it, for bringing so many of my Well-wishers together.
So far for Prefacing.
Now, Sir, as to my Dedication: I fear my Credit in this place, is as little worth, as in Lumbard-street; you may take up Money upon it, as soon as a Reputation: But the Blessing of the Fortune lies in having as little need of your Friend's Purse in the City, as your Friend's Praise in Coven-Garden: They who know you, will take you upon your own Word; and they who don't, will hardly upon mine. However, this I must say, if there be a quickness in the Dialogue, and Conversation of this Comedy, I owe it in a great measure to my familiarity with you; which in the free∣dom of several Years, has giv'n me a thousand occasions of Envy and Ad∣miration; and at last perswaded me to an Imitation of what I have heard with so much pleasure and pain. I wou'd not flatter a Friend: But I have often thought, and sometimes told you, That were it as much in your in∣clination, as 'tis in your power, to write Comedy, no Man cou'd better succeed in't, because no Man can be more naturally design'd for the Ʋn∣dertaking. I don't pretend to add any thing to the Character of a Man so very well known: If I have a design, behind the pleasing my self, in De∣dicating this Play to you, 'tis to secure the Esteem of being thought your Friend: As I have the Title, I desire to continue the Thing; being very much

