



I Addresse unto you both, these severall Treatises, not onely out of duty and obligations to your selves, but in regard of your publike good affection to maintain the patrimony of the Church in Tithes, which is so fundamental∣ly setled by our Laws, that nothing can be more certain by them. And the times now growing dangerous to the whole state of the Clergy in this particular, your selves having de∣lred your opinions for Tithes, and accordingly been careful to preserve us in our rights, I hope this my service will be acceptable to you: what farther may be done depends upon Gods providence, and the good endeavours of all pious men to afford tr best assistance. Seeing the Parliament hath ho∣nourably declared themselves for Tithes, both by their Ordi∣nance and the repulse given to some Petitioners against them. For mine own part, though I expect censure and opposition from many, yet as an Ancient said, In causa qua Deo placere cupio, homines non formido. I have therefore in this needfull time, at the earnest request of many, adventured the rather to discharge the trust reposed in me by the worthy Knight Sir Hen. Sp. who being imployed in greater works, committed these to my care & trust to be published. His charge

doth neerly concern me, and in conscience I could not longer conceal them from the publique view. They have been long in my custody; and if the favour of your self M. Crew, in a time of danger, besides M. Knightleys publique deserts and defence of me since from scandalous people, had not pre∣vented, they had been utterly lost by the injury of soldiers, to∣gether with other Manuscripts and Monuments of great con∣sequence against the common adversary. Your selves having preserved them and me, I could not doe otherwise then return you the thanks and fruit of your own favours; and whosoever shall think these worthy the publique view, will have the like cause to render you thanks for saving both them and my self, being extreamly injured by some that are styled in our ancient Laws, Villani, Cocseti, Perdingi, viles & in∣opesLl. H. 1. c. 29. personae; by whose troubles I am inforced to omit divers additions materiall to this argument, which the learned Knight committed to me. But lest hereafter they should miscarry by any common danger, or neglect of mine, I could find no better means to prevent the same, then by committing these to the Presse, that they may live & be extant for the com∣mon benefit of Gods cause and Church. The piety, excellent learning and moderation of the Author, in all his expressions, will prevail much with those that are truly wise and sober, and if your protection shall concur to defend both them and my poor studies, I shall hope to give you farther account hereafter in other works of great moment. Thus praying God to guide and blesse you in all your pious endeavours, I subscribe my self,

