



Right Worshipful, and much respected,
THere are three noble acts of the soul towards God, by which Christians do properly begin to live the life of Glory in the Kingdom of  The first is by a firm dependance on
him as the fountain of all their good. The se∣cond, by a chearfull complyance with his will in the product of all his purposes. The third, by breathing out continual Hallelujahs, Songs of praise and honour to his glorious Name, as the head-spring of all their Salvations. By the first (in the day of their straits and darkness) they are lodg'd in the arms of safety. By the second, they do (without reluctancy) set their seal to every piece of Divine pleasure mani∣fested as glorious. By the third, they do so∣lace their enlarged Souls in the bosom of their Deliverer. Waiting upon God by dependance and submission (in the midst of devouring flames) hath been the business of his poor sighing people in this bleeding Nation for these ten years past; but now behold (through his rich grace) they are come forth glad with the white robe of Salvation, having their hearts tuned by the Spirit of the most High, to sing the songs of the Redeemed, by giving glory, and hon
and thanks to him that sitteth on the Throne, who liveth for ever and ever. In which glorious work (the first fruits of Eter∣nity) that you also might have your hearts ele∣vated to bear a part, is my single aym in the ensuing Discourse. You are not all ignorant whose desire brought it to the Pulpit; neither is it less known to some of you whose request led it to the Press. I would not that my dedicating it to you should be interpreted my (unworthy) courting your favour, thereby to procure its Patronage; but my reall and sincere intend∣ing your profit; which if it shall effect, I shall esteem my self to have obtain'd my End. The serious breathings of my heart, are, that that flying shadow, that floating foundation of true rest, that empty Idoll of the blinded world, cal∣led Popularity, might in none of my atchieve∣ments bribe, either my judgement or affections o any thing irregular or unworthy; much less  it should be to me in the place of the li∣ving
God, whilst I intermedle in things Di∣vine; in which we always do come so far short of the true end, as (in our ayms and intenti∣ons we fall beneath the highest glory: I have therefore studied how I might present you with this feeble Birth of the travel of my poor thoughts, rather in the plain dress of naked Truth, then in the gawdy garb of Oratory; humbly intreating you not to entertain it with the embraces of your favour because its mine, nor rashly explode it because its not anothers: But (wisely walking betwixt those two rocks of Credulity and Prejudice) having well weigh∣ed the whole in a sound Judgement, ballance your election by the standard of the Sanctuary. The Zenith of my ambition (if I know any thing of my self) is, the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ in your souls; that among those many thousands that at this day make melody in their hearts to God their Re∣deemer, you might not be found to stand o
for Cyphers. If you esteem your selves to be (what indeed you are) eminent sharers in the Common Deliverance: Why should you not also stand, as figures of great significancy, in the number of those that make returns of Glory? It pleased the Lord in the day of your fears (with the hand of Grace) to write down your City in the book of his remembrance, a∣mong such as by the wing of his power and lo∣ving-kindness, he would save from the teeth of the cruel: from the bottom of my heart do I beg (and, O that I might obtain!) that you would make it the great work of your lives (as your thank-offering unto Heaven) to make your City more God's, Christs, the Gospel's, the Common-wealths; that this may be written over all her Gates in indelible Characters, Lo this is the righteous City which was saved by d. In the glory of this world I may (with∣ lattery) pronounce it inferiour to none:  un-intermitted happiness in that
glory which is Divine to excell all. May that dark and dismall Winter never pass over it, in which it may not spring and flourish with those glorious fruits of Knowledge, Truth, Righ∣teousness and Peace. And if there be any other Gemm which may adde lustre to the Crown of its earthly or Spiritual glory, which my pen (unwilling to transgress its due limits) hath spa∣red to mention: Let me beg your belief that that, and much more, is cordially wisht to it by him, who is

