


Right Honourable,
MAny who call themselves Ministers and Prophets of God ac∣cuse
us of Heresie and Schism before ye. But I hope ye will
take notice they are but men as we are, and of like passions
with us; neither Apostles, nor Prophets of the first Baptism, or
gifts of the Spirit. Yet if the Priests and Elders, or any Oratour, as
Tertullus▪ accuse Paul to Festus or Agrippa, he cannot but aswer
for himselfe.
I have but few words to speak to ye (Noble Citizens) That ye would
in that Spirit which is of God, judge the Doctrines of Men, and
single them from Traditions, Customes, Councels, Synods, Inte∣rests.
Ye are bid to try the spirits whether they be of God▪ or no.
Try whether it be according to God, for some Ministers, and thse
not Apostles, to call others Hereticks who beleeve not as they be∣leeve:
What will become then of the strong and weak Christian,Rom. 15. 1. 1 Iohn 2. 13, 14. of the
children, fathers, and young men?
Trye whether they ought to peah to ye to suppresse all but them∣selves;
since they are not infallible, but may erre; and where is the
Remedy then, if they erre? Who shall judge the Iudges?
Try whether this make for unity of spirit, to allow no more fellow∣ship
nor brotherhood then in forme and practice. And what will
they have ye do if Formes should alter? For States may change: Eng∣land
hath done so.
Try whether this make for the glory of Christians, to persecute or
banish (as they would have ye) all but themselves. May they not as well
tell ye that God hath made England only for men of the Presbytery
or one opinion to live in, and worship in: And where find they that?
Trye whether some by their daily Invectives from Presse and Pul∣pit

against Independents and others, bring not in the Popish De∣signe
in another Forme, to divide the godly party, both Presbyterian
and Independent, and so to ruine all.
Try if all such Doctrine as they commonly preach and write to
ye, resolve not it selfe most into their own interests, profits, place po∣wer:
And what doth the Scripture and Histories tell ye of that?
And now I have done; praying for ye,
That ye may be still a free City, and not disputed by the miscelany
of Logick and Divinity of some, into bondage.
That ye may be still populous, and not your streets growing with
grasse through any unneighbourly Principle of Persecution, which must
needs lose ye many, and much resort from this famous City, under the
name of Hereticks, not letting such live beside them.
That ye may be a peaceable City, and not raised up and dashed by
any breath of men against the other and greater part of your selves, the
Parliament. England hath long enough broken it selfe against its own
walls: let it now be our strength to sit still, and to stand still and see
salvation.
And since the Lord hath let the most of the successe of the Pres∣bytery,
which is so much desired, come thorow the hands of those and
that Army whom they have told ye over often were Hereticks; let
this be but taken notice on by ye, what God hath told ye in the successe
of that Army; and I trust ye will never regard the Messengers by
whose hands the Presbytery in a kind came, by beating them out of
doores. Thus rests he,

