




RIGHT HONORABLE,
IN this following Treatise you will partly finde the contest between the Car∣men of LONDON, &c. and the Woodmongers of the same, &c. I am confident, that you of the Commit∣tee above mentioned, are very sensible of the wil∣lingness, and great care of this (our happy, bles∣sed, and worthy renowned Parliament, in gi∣ving
 such speedy eare to the cries of the poor Car∣men, and how quickly they were pleased to read their Petition when it was first presented; for which the Carmen have a treble duty upon them towards the Parliament: And your care in meet∣ing at the Committee, as soon as the Petition was re∣farred, to examine the matter on both sides, was so much, that the Carmen, their poore Wives and Children, are ever bound to be thankfull, and to honour and serve you for ever. I doubt not but you are sensible of the great oppressions the Carmen lay under, by their being governed by the Woodmongers: And I beleeve your Ho∣nours were well satisfied with the proof of the same.
And I doubt not but you the Lord Major and Aldermen of the Citie of LONDON doe very well know what wrong the Woodmongers have done the Carmen. And no doubt but you would have relieved them to the utmost of your pow∣er, had the Carmen come with their petition. But I advised them, that nothing could perfectly and perpetually relieve them from their oppressions, but to be severed from the Woodmongers com∣pany, and to be incorporate in one Body by them∣selves, by Charter under the great Seale of Eng∣land, which you had no power to grant: and there∣fore they petitioned the Parlirment, in whose pow∣er it is to grant the same. The matter hath been ful∣ly heard, and received many debates: The Wood∣mongers have been heard at large what they could say, and Mr. Recorder was heard what he could
 say on behalf of the Citie, as he can well report to you. Mr. Recorder can report to you what horrible and unjust things were proved against the Wood∣mongers in point of measure of coales, and how the good people of the Citie are cheated, although the Woodmongers in a scandalous paper delivered lately to the members of Parliament, did basely scandalize and calumniate the Committee, saying, they would not heare them vindicate themselves. Truly you may very well beleeve that those who so openly and impudenrly will scandalize a Com∣mittee of Parliament, will very easily abuse the Carmen, who they have made their slanes so long time. But it is well known that the Woodmongers were heard, and heard again, three dayes one after a∣nother, and had nothing to say; but all their desire was to delay time, and to weary out the Carmen, as the Committee very well knows. And now they as much endeavour to retard the Committee from making their Report to the House: And all is, because they would weary out the Carmen, and continue their usurped authority over them, and to get as many Rent-dayes past as they can: to get in the Car-rents, that so they may goe to Law with the Carmen with their owne money, and most they have now to say is by way of predicti∣on, how the Carmen will abuse the Citie, and abuse Merchants, &c. when I know to the con∣trary: For the Carmen have from time to time in their meetings declared against the rudenesse of some of their Apprentices and Journey-men, and are resolved whensoever the Government is put




 into their hands, to remedy any abuse whatsoever, which the Woodmongers never took care to doe.
Now there is nothing wanting but the report to be made, and the Act passed: I beg for Gods sake, and Justice sake, that you the Committee will be pleased to hasten the same; and that you the Lord Major, and Aldermen of London, will be∣come Advocates to the Parliament, on behalfe of the poore Car-men, by declaring your willing∣nesse in petitioning to the Parliament, that they will be pleased speedily to grant the Car-mens de∣sires, before they be utterly ruined by the Wood∣mongers, that there may be no more leading into catpivitie, nor no complaining in your streets.
And he, who is bound in dutie to pray for your health and prosperitie, will ever remaine,

