


Brethren,
I Have fairly set down how far each of you have attain∣ed in the Mystery of Truth; and surely we are all short of the glory which shall be revealed in the Temple or Church of God; and there are such clouds rolling about each opinion, that may darken it, or something of it, So as things are not so cleare as they are commonly taken by each of us; If any man think he knoweth anything, he knoweth nothing yet as he1 Cor. 8. 2. ought to know: So as the common ignorance and infirmity amongst us, may be a rise for a common Ʋnity amongst us: and seeing we all come out of Ba∣bylon (though in several waies) to the glorious Temple or Tabernacle which God hath sent down to be with men, and walk thus diversly thither; yet our severall and distinct goings are but like so many Travellers to the City of London; some travell from the North, some from the South, and from the West, some from the East, yet all thither; though too, there may be some mistaking of the way in each, because of the little light that is abroad. The gathering of the Saints into the Heaven, or Kingdom below, in this day of Revelation, is like the gathering at the last day, which shall be all into one glorious Body, though the gathering shall be from the four winds or ends of the Earth, by the severall Trumpets or Angels.
One thing I have more. Let us seek for the Spirit of wisdom and revelati∣on, to open to us the Mystery of the Scriptures called The Revelation; for in that Book is the Prophecie of the Churches laid up, and the seasons and times for Truth revealed. Let us search and seek out by the Spirit of Iesus, even that Iesus which was in the Vision, and gave it out to Iohn; for there is none found worthy to open the Book with Seals but the Lambe. Surely in the Mystery of Angels, Vials, Sea of glasse with fire, Temple with Smoke, the Angell with the everlasting Gospell, the Angell enlightning the Earth, the Whore in skarlet and pretious pearles, the Cup of abomination, the Beast like a Lamb, the Image of the Beast, the Horus and Kings of the Earth, the marke in the forehead and in the right hand, the buying and selling, the Tabernacle of God with men, the first and second Resurrection, the Ihron of God, the pure Chrystall River of water, the Holy Ierusalem descending from God, &c. In these is much of the glory wrapped up, and from these shall the Truth we contend for, appeare to our further enlightning.
Yet one thing more. We that are thus contenders for Ordinances, for the Temple and the Vessels in it, let us take heed we forget not him who is greater then the Temple; for one greater then the Temple is here It would be spiritually considered, that while we strive for the Vessels and Cups, we spill not the Wine.
And it ought to be so carried by all of us, that▪ because we are so much in opinion, we may not be thought to place Religion there, as I feare too ma∣ny do, making a Christ of the very Ordinance of Christ, and pressing some outward Ordinances of the Gospell so legally; as some hearing such a po∣wer of Salvation put into them, and finding an outward dispensation more easily got then the spirituall, make haste thither only, and then sit down as saved under a meere outward Ordinance. The Lord grant that we may neither undervalue an Ordinance nor the least Institution of Iesus Christ, nor raise it up into a Iesus Christ, and set up the Law above or beside the Law-giver. We must now learne to know Iesus Christ lesse after the flesh, and not to embody salvation in a meer outward dispensation, and so incar∣nate Iesus Christ over again from the glory and spirituality he is in.
Brethren, farewell; For my part, I am fully assured from Scriptures of the Church of Christ here, or Gospell-fellowship of the Saints; and unto thisIf any man wi do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine, Ioh. 7. 17. fellowship with the Father and the Son, I endeavour; and I have one way to reveale Truth to me which I cannot conceale, nor yet cannot practice as I would, and that is this;
To see Truth by living in the power of Truth, and by first obtaning Je∣sus Christ to live in us in the power of his suffering, death, and Resurrecti∣on; for surely Jesus Christ must do all (though more gloriously and spiritu∣ally) over again in his, which he did in himselfe.
If Jesus Christ the Light be in us, the light by which every outward dis∣pensation is seen, will flow in; for where the Sun is, there will be every beame with it.
