



Right Honourable,
THIS slender Sermon, I am fully sensible, is by its Publication, and by its Dedication, made two things, for which it is very unmeet: By its Publication, it becomes a kind of monument for a worthy friend, and faithful servant of Christ, whose name deserves rather to be engraven in a lasting Pillar of marble, than in this perishing Paper, which cannot add so much to him, as it receives from him. By its Dedica∣tion, it is made a tender of my service to your Honour, which should not have been done by so mean an address as this is, but in a way more answerable to your worth and goodness; and therefore I had wholly desisted from this work, had I not been animated thereunto by a double plea.
1. After its preaching, you were pleased to let fall some such expressions, as that you hoped it might ere long come abroad, which words did sway the more with me, in regard I might thereby take an occasion to testifie my thankfulness in the behalf
 of him, to whom you were pleased to shew much kindness whil'st he lived, and now to continue your bounty unto his, in taking upon you the care and education of one of his sons.
2. I was willing, among others, to express my unfeigned re∣joycing, in your hopeful recovery from a long and dangerous sickness, beseeching God to renew and double your former strength, that you may long continue in the land of the living, as an instrument of good, and an example of holiness; that great Personages may see, that it is not only their duty, but their glory, to serve God above others, who hath made them to shine like Suns in the Firmament, when others twinkle like Stars; and now I have no more to say in my own behalf, but that I made some stay of its coming forth for a time, that I might the more chearfully present it to your Honours hands. All that I shall take leave to speak to your self, is, That the pra∣ctice of faithfulness is a most seasonable duty for you to exer∣cise; sickness is the time of making vows, and health the time of paying them; and if what I here offer, may any way tend to the strengthning of your hands in God, I shall rejoyce, and make that my prayer for you, which was the Apostles counsel to the elect Lady. That you may look to your self, that you lose not those things which you have wrought, but that you may receive a full reward. So I remain,
Madam, 
Hackney, Decemb. 4. 1661.
