


May it please your Grace,
THE following Treatise would not be so fami∣liar, as to
presume upon so high a Patronage, were not your Grace so imme∣mediately
interessed, and con∣cerned therein. Neither was it without some serious
Reslexion and Debate, that I could resolve to make this Present to your
Grace: For though Dedications are lately grown so Epidemical, that no
Person of Quality, ei∣ther sooner or later can avoid the
Infection, yet, methought, your Grace was as much above the common
disturbances that attend your Quality, as you are exalted above the common
Level of it. But, my Lord, you are now go∣ing General of an Expedition, in
whose very Name encounter an admirable Policy, and a certain Glory; for the
Service of which was principally intended this en∣suing Description. This
it is which made me conclude I should have done a great Injustice, had I
put this Tract under any other Protection than yours. And in∣deed at whose
Feet can a Sub∣ject of this Nature be so fit∣ly placed as at your Grace's,
You being so experienc'd a Commander, and about to per∣form such vast important Acti∣ons?
My Lord, it would but ar∣gue me of the meanest Imper∣tinence to
pretend here an Ha∣rangue of those Encomiums you deserve: For he who
acquaints the World whose Son you are, has said enough to those who do
not know you: Your Grace being the best Panegyrick upon your self: The Son
of the Great, the Immortal Schomberg, whose stupendious Actions,
and invin∣cible Courage, together with his unspotted Zeal for the most
ra∣tional Religion of the World, at a time when the Thorns of Persecution
forced him from his Estate and Dignities, have ren∣dred him even above the
Tu∣rennee's, the Montecuculli's, and the
Condees, that is to say, the Caesars of our Age.
Go on, my Lord, and prosper; And whilst your glorious Father's
Blood inheres in you, where's the considering Man that questions Victory,
ordares dispute Success.
Methinks, I hear the Men of Gaul declare, amazed upon the
Notice of your Landing, He comes, 'tis Schomberg's Son, why do we
defer to yield?
We read in English History of the prodigious Actions of the
Mighty Talbot, whose very Name at last was of sufficient force
to defeat whole Armies: The Case being parallel to the great Exploits of your
Renown∣ed Father, of whom your Grace is a compleat Resemblance,
how can it be, that we should fear a Victory?
The Present that I make bold to send your Grace, is a
Geo∣graphical Description of France, considered in its several
Pro∣vinces, the most considerable Cities and Sea Ports, their Distances
one from another, their Longi∣tudes and Latitudes, what they are most
remarkable for, toge∣ther with many other observable things, that
necessarily occur in a Treatise of this Nature.
But lest I prove tedious, I will conclude this Epistle with
assuring you, that not only this Book, but the Author of it are both Dedicated to your Grace's Service, (with hearty Prayers for the
Success of your Expe∣dition) by him, who in all ima∣ginable Humility,
subscribes him∣self,

My Lord,  
