



My Lord,
IT was somewhat late before I received your Commands, (for such I ever ac∣count the Desires of my Lawful Su∣periours) which is one reason that this short Discourse hath been so long in com∣ing to your Hands.

And I shall not trouble your Lordship with any other Apology, because it was not framed for, nor fixed to any Solemn Time, or Special Occasion, but with an equal re∣spect to every Day in the Year, or rather to all the Days of our Lives.
Indeed, the Subject thereof is Common, but not therefore to be despised, more then any other Common Good: more then our Common Prayers, Common Salvation, or our Common Faith, which the Apo∣stle elsewhere calls our Precious Faith, (or Honourable, as the Greek imports.) And the more Common things of Publick use and consequence are, they should be so much the more Precious in our Eyes.
'Tis true the Scene is laid in LONDON, yet not so confined thither, but it may reach the remotest parts of the Nation; for this lit∣tle Mapp presents you with a Transient view of the present State, and Morals of all ENG∣LAND.
England! another Canaan, for Beau∣ty, Wealth, Prosperity, Peace, and Plenty  all good things that a Loyal Heart can wish and yet, (I wish I could not truly say) another Canaan too, for Ingratitude, and forget∣ting GOD their Saviour. The happiest Nati∣on
under Heaven at this hour, and only miserable in this, that we do not know how Happy we are. For we may fairly challenge all Europe for a more Gracious KING, a more Glorious CHƲRCH, a more Peaceable STATE, a more Gentle and Easie GOVERN∣MENT, more Just and Wholesome LAWS, and yet we cannot, way, we will not see it. We are unthankful still, and still murmuring, and know not what we would have, unless we would be Angels before the time.
This provoking ill Humour hath of late spread it self throughout the Kingdom; and therefore my Arguments against it are so General, and take in all sorts and degrees of Men, all that would be thought good Chri∣stians, or good Subjects; the very Dissen∣ters themselves are not a little concerned therein, if they please to read them without that false Glass of guilty Prejudice.
However they deal with us for doing our Daty, and speaking the Truth in Love, so long as we have Patronage and Protecti∣on from your Lordships Chair, and that Ho∣nourable Bench, we shall never think our La∣bour lost, or unrewarded.

The time hath been, when Men in Your Lordships High Place, would not endure sound Doctrine, having itching Ears. Thanks be to GOD and his Vicegerent, that time is now past, and the Case so well alter∣ed, that sound Doctrine, and sincere Loyalty will as easily go down, and pass muster in the City, as at Court.
With my hearty Prayers for the long con∣tinuance of GODS Blessing upon Your Lord∣ship, your Loyal Brethren, and the whole Government of this City, I am
My Lord,

