



SIR,
SInce that you are pleased not to be dissatisfied with the long stay of this Sermon, it matters not to give an account to others, to whose hands it may happily come, what the cau∣ses are that have made it to stick so long in the birth. And yet I am willing they should understand thus much: First, that it is a sad work, and that I never preached or printed more unchearfully: Sorrow is a passion that moves slowly, it makes the words slow as well as few,
 and the pace to be creeping, and snaile∣like: there is nothing in it that runs, but teares. Secondly, that it is an imper∣fect work, and unfit for that end to which it seems to be designed; and there∣fore I gladly would that it might have been still hid like Saul behind the stuffe, and not have appeared in publick view. For I know it will be looked upon as a kind of record that beares upon it the name of the Lady HONOR VYNER, whose name should alwaies be written by me, aureis potius literis, quam vili hoc liquore, in Letters of Gold rather then with this vile and cheap Inke, so many were my obligations to her for the constant and reall favours that she was pleased to heap upon me, which must still live, and be acknowliged by me: But the best at present that I can make of this way is, that black is suitable to mour∣ning,
 and that broken notes, sentences, and inconsistencies (with which I feare this little piece abounds) are in sorrow pardonable, if not commendable. And this is all that I shall now say on my own behalf.
To you Sir, who are still a sad mour∣ner under this band and stroke of God, I hope this Sermon may afford such pre∣vailing considerations as may cause you not to sorrow as others that have no hopes, in regard that she is not dead but sleeps, is not lost but found, not taken from the company of the living, but of the lamenting. Though therefore your eyes may drop as a limbeck, yet let them not run as spouts; though sighs may come from you, yet take heed of repi∣nings. It is God that hath done it, and who shall say unto him, What dost thou? I know you do strive against dejections,
 (and I blesse God) that hitherto you have born your crosse as becomes a Christian; continue, I beseech you still in the exercise of Faith and Pa∣tience, that so when you are tried, you may receive the Crown of life that the Lord hath promised to those that love him, James 1. 12. And that you may thus do, and be thus crowned, shall be the pray∣er of him, who thankefully acknowledg∣eth all your love, and rests
SIR,

