



THough the difference between Men and other
living Creatures be very great, yet happly he that
should say that he could shew little less between
Man and Man would not speak more than he
might prove. What proportion doth one bear to
a thousand? and yet it is a common Proverb, One Man is
worth a thousand, when as a thousand are not worth one. This difference
hath dependence upon the different abilities of their Intelle∣ctuals;
which I reduce to the being, or not being a Philoso∣pher;
in regard that Philosophy as being the proper food of
such as live by it, distinguisheth a Man from the common Es∣sence
of the Vulgar in a more or less honourable degree accord∣ing
to the variety of that diet. In this sence he that hath the
highest looks, is of highest quality; and the turning over of
the great Volume of Nature, which is the proper Object of
Philosophy is the way to make one look high: in which Book,
although whatsoever we read, as being the Work of Al∣mighty
God, is therefore most proportionate; yet notwith∣standing
that is more absolute and noble wherein we more
plainly deserne his art and skill. The Constitution of the Vnivers,
among all Physical points that fall within Humane Compre∣hension,
may, in my opinion, be preferred to the Precedency:
for if that in regard of universal extent it excell all others, it
ought as the Rule and Standard of the rest to goe before
them in Nobility. Now if ever any persons might challenge
to be signally distinguished for Intellectuals from other men,

Ptolomey and Copernicus were they that have had the honour to
see farthest into, and discourse most profoundly of the Worlds
Systeme. About the Works of which famous Men these Dia∣lous
being chiefly conversant, I conceived it my duty to De∣dicate
them only to Your Highness. For laying all the weight
upon these two, whom I hold to be the Ablest Wits that
have left us their Works upon these Subjects; to avoid a Sole∣cisme
in Manners, I was obliged to address them to Him, who
with me, is the Greatest of all Men, from whom they can re∣ceive
either Glory or Patrociny. And if these two persons
have so farre illuminated my Understanding as that this my
Book may in a great part be confessed to belong to them, well
may it also be acknowledged to belong to Your Highness, unto
whose Bounteous Magnificence I owe the time and leasure I
had to write it, as also unto Your Powerful Assistance, (never
weary of honouring me) the means that at length I have had
to publish it. May Your Highness therefore be pleased to accept
of it according to Your accustomed Goodness; and if any
thing shall be found therein, that may be subservient towards
the information or satisfaction of those that are Lovers of
Truth; let them acknowledge it to be due to Your Self, who are
so expert in doing good, that Your Happy Dominion cannot
shew the man that is concerned in any of those general Cala∣mities
that disturb the World; so that Praying for Your Prospe∣rity,
and continuance in this Your Pious and Laudable Cu∣stome,
I humbly kiss Your Hands;

