



My Lord,
COmpassion which gives us a more sweet, and ge∣nerous touch, than any other concern that attends our Nature, had at the Funeral-Procession so sensible an effect upon ev'n Me, that I could not for∣bear being guilty of the Paper with which I presume to trouble your Lordship. For what could be a more mo∣ving consideration, then that a Lady, who had all that Youth, Beauty, Virtue, and Power could bestow, should be so suddenly snatch'd from us? A Lady that was serv'd by the Sword, and celebrated by the Pen of my Lord Cutts. Though indeed, if we rightly esteem'd things, we should lament for our own sakes, not Hers; so Poor a thing it is to make an Evil of that, which is certainly the kindest Boon of Nature, our Dissolution. But the Men of Honour are not so ungratefull to their Friend Death, as to look at him in the ghastly dress the World gives him, of Rawbones, Shackles, Chains, Diseases, and Torments; they know that he is so far from bringing such Company, that he relieves us from 'em. So little is there in what Men make such Po∣ther about, and so much is it an Irony to call it brave to expire calmly, and resolution to go to rest. This

is no News to your Lordship, whom Death has so often allur'd with the Glory of Dangers, and with the Beau∣ty of Wounds, I'll not be so Poetical to say, your Muse hover'd about you, and sav'd you inspight of the many you have receiv'd, but am sure, I may say, she'll preserve you, when you can receive no more: For Apollo is a Physician ev'n after Death: As to my Verses, all, methinks, on the Dead Queen ought to be address'd to your Lordship; who, in the Dedication of your own Works, best adorn'd her Living; if Good for your Entertainment, Bad for your Pardon; if, when these are thrown aside, an Eye cast upon 'em introduces the mention of so excellent a Princess, where other∣wise She had not been spoken off, I have my full end; nor do I think I come late on a Subject, which all Good Men will Eternally dwell upon; I am sensible how short I have fall'n of expressing the gracefull con∣cern of some Honourable Personages, whose Names I have presum'd with; I design'd 'em only an oblique Com∣mendation, and nam'd 'em for the very Reason they walk'd at the Funeral, which was not to showe them∣selves, but to do Honour to the Queen. But should it prove any way offensive, I hope to shun their, and your Lordship's Resentment by the concealment of my name, and borrow the unknown Knight's device, in Sir Philip Sidney, of the Fish Sepia, which when catch'd in the Net, casts a black Ink about it, and so makes it's escape. This thought, my Lord, checks the fervent Am∣bition I have long had, of expressing my self, My Lord,

March 19. 1694/5.
