



SIR,
WHen you, and my self, in an exercise of Friendship, and Con∣versation, (which I always have esteemed no small felicity of my life,) have frequently, within a few years last past, entertained our selves, in taking together some view of our present Times; and sometimes again making a retrospect to the Times of our Fore-fathers, in this Kingdom; not forgetting also, that sometimes, by way of prospect, we have made no less
than a kind of Prophets of our selves in guessing at what might hereafter come to pass amongst us, for

.
Eurip.


Him the best Prophet we confess,
That well of future things can guess.

But for what is past, we have made some remarks upon those vicissitudes, and changes, which we, and our Ancestors have seen in this Kingdom. And particularly noting the different state, and posture of the same, we con∣cluded that the alteration, and change must needs have been very great, as to the most important concerns of the Nation, since the Power, and Jurisdi∣ction of the Popes of Rome was here exauctorated. Upon which, as I re∣member, we wished some particular account of the State, and habit of our Body Politick, when the Influences from Rome were praedominant over it: and that, as well in reference to our Head, the King's Majesty, as also to the Members, the People: wherein we desired seriously to know, whether the
Pope's Power was prejudicial to them, or either of them.
In which matter, that I might give some satisfaction to you, and my self also, I set my self to methodize such notes, and instances, as formerly had occurred to me: First, Touching the Property of the People, and how that was invaded by the Romish Practices: And then, touching the Supremacy of the Royal Majesty of the King of England, and how that was Eclipsed by the interposition of the Papal Power: And now I have put these Collections together, you see what they amount unto.
I confess the Subjects are transcen∣dant, and vast; and not to be measu∣red with my line. The trivial Con∣troversies amongst Neighbours, about Meum, and Tuum, frequently puzzle the gravest Judges, but for the Fun∣damental Arcana imperii, he that shall endeavour to poise them, shall sooner discover the weakness of his own Arm, than their weight: I have known the united strenghts of Parliaments put to puffing, and blowing, when they have lifted at them. But, as the
Divines say of the Holy Scriptures, though they contain many Mysteries, and things hard to be understood; yet there is plainly, and clearly deli∣ver'd in them so much as is sufficient to make men good Christians: So, in the Doctrine of the King's Supre∣macy, though we cannot reach its ut∣most import, there is yet so much of it clearly discoverable, as is sufficient to make all Englishmen good Sub∣jects: And as to that, I have entitu∣led my Discourse an Essay only, not pretending to say all that the subject affords; and have travelled no far∣ther therein, than our Laws, Sta∣tutes, Authorities, and Records have lead me: and I hope that thereby I have produced Demonstration suffici∣ent, that our Soveraign is invested with a most just Authority over all his Subjects, and in all Causes with∣in his Dominions: and then seeing that Veritas est index sui, & obliqui, it follows, by all the rules of conse∣quence, that the Pope's Usurpations were most unjust.
For that other concern relating to the People's Property, I took that
task, at first, to have been much the easier of the two; that is, that it would not have been very hard, to have comprehended, and given some reasonable estimate of those summs which heretofore went out of England to the Popes, and Court of Rome. But after a little dealing therein, I strangely found the account to swell beyond all bounds, and soon experi∣enced the difficulty to lye as much in the mutiplicity in this, as in the in∣tireness in the other. This Grievance was, and could be, adequately known only to our Ancestors who felt it, but the smart is not as yet quite worn off of their Posterity; and therefore what is offered in this affair, I have thought fit to stile, a Remembrance, and indeed it ought not to be forgot∣ten.
But now, Sir, I may possibly deli∣ver a sound Paradox; That though it is conceiv'd a very hard thing now to understand, as formerly it was to endure, and once thought more hard to remedy, all the mischiefs which our Fore-fathers suffered from the Pa∣pal Usurpation, and Tyranny; yet
certainly the Cure was at all times not so very difficult to have been ef∣fected: the Antidote was as near as the Poyson; and there never wanted a Panpharmacon, which, if duly ap∣plyed, would at any time have re∣moved those malignant distempers that invaded the Kingdom's constitution: And that was, in a word, the Execu∣tion of the good Laws. It is the Ho∣nour, and Excellency of the Laws of England, that no man can have a wrong, or damage, but the Law, if rightly managed, will do him right. Did the Papal Power usurp, and in∣croach upn the King's Rights? the in∣herent vertue of the Common Law de∣clared all to be illegal, and void. Did the Romish Practices weaken, and im∣poverish the People? the same Law at once arraigned, and damned those No∣velties, and grievances; and hence it was that all the supervenient Statutes ran but as Declaratory of the old Law.
Vid. Coke 5. Rp Caw∣drys Case. The Law indeed may sometimes be laid asleep by connivance or manaled by some contrivance; but it is a true, and good Rule. Dormit aliquando jus, moritur nunquam: and when the
Law is awakened, and let loose, it soon discovers, and breaks all offences, and offendors.
The incomparable Spenser, in his Faery Queen, sets forth one Sir Ar∣thegal, the Patron of Justice, attended with Talus, his Iron man, the Execu∣tioner, whom nothing could withstand: Pardon me if I give you his descripti∣on of this notable Officer. Our re∣nowned Poet relating how the Divine Astraea, loathing to sojourn longer amongst wicked men, retired to Hea∣ven from whence at first she came:
But when she parted hence she left her Groom,
Faery Queen. lib. 5. Canto. 1. Stanz. 12.
An yron man, which did on her at∣tend,
Always to execute her stedfast doom,
And willed him with Arthegall to wend,
And do what ever thing he did intend.
His name was Talus, made of yron mould,
Immoveable, resistless, without end;
Who in his hand, an yron flail did hold,
With which he thresh'd out falshood, and did truth unfold.

This Yron man, when commanded, and set on, could rout seditious multi∣tudes, destroy tyrannick Giants, quell hideous Monsters, and knock down inchanted Castles: Our Heroick Laws do no less, when by their commanded Officers, they dissipate superstitious concourses, truss up the Gigantick Je∣suite, drag out the monstrous Plotters, and batter down that second Babel of Confusion which the sons of the Earth would be rearing in our English plain.
What thoughts these Collections, and Observations will raise in you, or others, I can but guess at: I am sure they have sufficiently discover'd to me the drift of the Papal Policy; That is, to establish, and uphold a Spiritual Dominion in the World: to effect which, it was necessary the Consci∣ences of men should first be inslaved by superstition, and ignorance; and then, by the Usurpation of Temporal Power, and the ingrossing of Tempo∣ral Riches, the work was done; and the Papal interest so carryed all in the middle, and dark Times, when Kings durst not exercise their just authority,
nor the People call that which they had their own: and in this desponden∣cy it was, that the Laws were muffled up. But when, towards the latter Ages, the revolution came of Learn∣ing, and Knowledge, with a reviviscence and improvement of all Arts, and Sci∣ences, and men became tyred with groping so long in the dark, and those great Lights began to dawn in the World, then both Kings, and Peo∣ple rouzed up themselves, and their Spirits revived, the shades vanished, the Birds of darkness flew away, and the Beasts of prey retired to their dens: Every man then, with alacrity, ad∣dressed himself to his proper Office; Princes took their Scepters in their hands, and swayed them again with∣out controul; the People applyed themselves all to their honest callings, and what they got by God's blessing, and their own industry, they injoyed whilest they liv'd, and when they dyed left it to their posterity; which formerly used to be snatch'd away before their faces by the Romish Harpyes.

The consideration of all which, as it clearly manifests the great abuses, poverty, and slavery, which this Na∣tion once, and for a long time suffered under the Pope's yoke; so it cannot but make us reflect on that proporti∣onable mischief which still lyes upon those that have not yet shak'd him off: with this further observation, how an entire subjection unto Popery corrupts, and debases the spirits of men; for nothing is more obvious, than that in Italy, Spain, Flanders, and other Countreys wholly the Popes, as to his spiritual raign, the Inhabitants are ei∣ther the most Atheistical, debauched, and dissolute; or those, who with a blind zeal apply themselves to an ob∣servance of the Rites of that confused, and absurd Religion, presently become fond, and stupid, giving themselves up only to admire their Holy Father the Pope, their Confessors, and Priests, fancying Rome to be the true model of the Heavenly Jerusalem, and the Pope, and his Cardinals ruling therein like Christ, and his Apostles; gazing upon the formality, and gaudi∣ness of their Church, and intangled
with a multitude of ridiculous Cere∣monies, and Observances: all which tends to make them unactive, and unfit for all those generous, and in∣genious courses that bring Honour, and Riches to a People: When, on the contrary, the Reformed part of the World, being manumitted from such slavery, and incumbrances, beat out the Popish every where in Trading, and generally excell them in all Arts, and Sciences. And this may be noted in our selves, when presently after the Reformation, the English grew potent at Sea, sent forth great Colonies and Plantations; maintained traffick, and commerce over the World, and brought home Honour, Plenty, and Riches to the Nation. So the Ne∣therlanders, after they had freed them∣selves from the Romish briers, pre∣sently got good fleeces on their backs, grew rich, and powerful, eclipsing the glory of Venice, that once famous Republick, which hath ever since been in the wane: Amsterdam supplanted Antwerp: Flanders truckled under Holland: and the Hanse Towns ge∣nerally Protestant, outstrip'd all their
Popish Neighbours in wealth, and strength. Whilest the once great, and dreadful Monarchy of Spain is fallen into a Consumption, supported only with a little Indian Gold, which they steal home sometimes. The Austrian Eagle hath molted his Fea∣thers. Portugal losing both in their Plantations abroad, and reputation at home. And in those Countreys where Protestants and Papists are mingled, as in Fance, Germany, Po∣land, &c. the Protestants generally are the Traders, and grow rich, as all Travellers testifie.
For, besides that an addicted zeal to the Romish Religion contracts, and debaseth the spirits of men; their Guides endeavour also, by all possible means, to contain them in a dull, ig∣norant and formal way; knowing Learning, and knowledge to be their common Enemy, as at once discover∣ing, and overthrowing all the super∣structures reared upon their sandy foundation. But then, what Wealth, what Honour, and Riches do their Clergy, and Orders enjoy? How glorious the Popes; How splendid
the Cardinals; How abounding in Riches, and Titles, all their Relati∣ons, Kindred, and Dependants? all suck'd from the People. Whilest to lull, and gratifie the abused multi∣tude, they have infinite devices: they have perpetual provisions for the dull souls, in their Cells: the austere may take their fill of Discipline, and ri∣gour: the impure, and voluptuous, have their conveniences at hand: the lawless, who find themselves too strait lac'd, may be eased by Dispensations: the credulous shall never want Mi∣racles; the fantastical visions; nor the superstitious Ceremonies; with infinite baubles more, to keep the uneasie Babes quiet.
Now when any person comes to claim, or exercise any extraordinary power, or authority, in a place, or shall levy, and take up what mo∣neys he please, he must reasonably expect to have a Quo Warranto sued out against him, to which he must plead his Title to his Priviledge; and that, I must confess, hath been very fairly done by the Papal Attorneys in this cause, on the behalf of their
Holy Client; and they have drawn their Plea from the written Text of the Divine Law, in this manner; God made two great Lights in the firmament;
Gen. 1.16. the greater Light to rule the day, and the lesser Light to rule the night: from which they inferr the infallible Dominion of the Church; for Pope Innocent the Third wrote to the Emperour of Constantinople thus:
Epist. ad Imp. Decret. lib. 1. de major. & Obed. Tit. 33. You ought to know (says he) that God made two great lights in the Fir∣mament of Heaven, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night; both great, but the one greater. To the Firmament of Hea∣ven, that is, the Catholick Church, God made two great Lights, that is, insti∣tuted two Powers, the Papal Authori∣ty, and the Regal Dignity; but that which is to rule by day, that is over spiritual things, is the greater; but that over carnal things the less, that there may be known to be as much difference between Popes, and Kings, as there is to be between the Sun, and Moon. And then comes the Gloss upon the Canon Law, which sayes, Whilest the Earth is seven times bigger
than the Moon; and the Sun Eight times bigger than the Earth: the Papal Power must consequently be fifty seven times bigger than the Regal Dig∣nity.
Again, that great Hebrew Prophet sets forth a most exact Image of the Royal Papacy, in Melchisedeck,
Campanel. de Mon. Hisp. cap. 5. who did prefigure, say they, the Majesty of St. Peter, and his Successours, who had Melchisedeck for their Prototype: and therefore the Pope must needs be invested with a Royal Priesthood, and armed as well with the Civil, as the spiritual Sword; for if it were otherwise, Christ, and so his Vicege∣rent, would be a diminutive Law∣giver, and not as Melchisedeck, who was at once both King, and Priest.
Further, to fortifie this Plea to a Royal Jurssdiction in the World, they alledge that Jacob, and Esau were perfect Types of the Catholicks, and the Hereticks; signifying that the Catholicks should abound in Pow∣er, and Riches; but the Calvinists, and Lutherans should be low, and poor: expressed fully in the Saluta∣tion
of the Angel Gabriel to the Vir∣gin Mary,
Luke 1.33. That our Lord the Pope was to rule over the House of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. That is, in a word, The Pope is to govern the World.
Another Argument to prove this Plea is fetch'd out of the Eighth Psalm,
Psal. 8.5, 6. viz. Thou hast Crowned him with glory, and honour. Thou makest him to have Dominion over the works of thy hands: thou hast put all things under his feet. All Sheep, and Oxen, yea and the beasts of the field. The Fowl of the air,
Anton. Sum. Theol. p. 3. cap. 5. and the Fish of the Sea, &c. By this, they say, is clear∣ly meant St. Peter, and the power given to him, and his Successors in the See of Rome; to whom God hath subjected the Sheep, that is, the Christians; the Oxen, that is, the Jews, and Hereticks; the Beasts of the Field, that is, the Pagans; the Fishes of the Sea, that is, the Souls in Purgatory; and the Fowls of the Hea∣ven, that is, the blessed Spirits and Angels.
So much for Dominion, and Com∣mand; now for Wealth, and Riches;
nothing is more plain, say they, than the Holy Prophet Isaiah, speaking of the Roman Church, The Gentiles shall come to thy light,
Isa. 60. and Kings to the brightness of thy rising: Then shalt thou see and wonder, and rejoice when the riches of the Sea, and all the sub∣stance of the Gentiles shall come unto thee: they shall bring gold and incense. The sons of Strangers shall build up thy Walls, and their Kings shall mini∣ster unto thee. Thy Gates shall be open day and night, that they may bring unto thee the Riches of all Na∣tions, and their Kings shall be brought: For the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish. The sons of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee, and all they that despised thee shall bow down at the soles of thy feet. Thou shalt suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shalt suck the breasts of Kings. For Brass I will bring Gold, and for Iron Silver, and for Wood Brass, and for Stones Iron. A most plain description of the glory, and splendor of the Roman Church: but the dull Hereticks will not under∣stand the meaning: and St. John, they
say, was surprised with a , when he describes the Angel refusing the honour offered to him, but now du∣tifully paid to Christs Vicar.
Then, when Christ told St. Peter, that he would make him a Fisher of men, though possibly the innocent, and meek Apostle, not fully apprehending the full import of that right which thereby was conferred on him, apply∣ed himself to a kind of spiritual Fish∣ing, hunting after some mystical Fishes, to inclose them in the net of some in∣visible Kingdom in the Heavens; and Cardinal Pool interprets the donation thus,
Regin. Pole in Ioc. Thou and thy Successors shall have dominion over all men, ruling over Kings, and commanding, regu∣lating, and casting out Emperours: yet the good Apostle's more illumina∣ted successors, have now hit upon the true import, and meaning, and con∣clude that Christ did not only give them a power to fish for men, but for money also, and for that purpose con∣ferred on them a Right to Fish in all secular Ponds, and Rivers: For, The Kings of the Earth (says Christ to Peter) from whom do they receive
Tribute? not certainly from us, for we are free: But go thou to the Sea, and cast forth a hook, and take up the first Fish that cometh up; that take, and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money, that take. And by this a great fishing right was established in him, and from him derived to his Successors, that is, to fish in all waters; now by Waters the Ho∣ly Scriptures intend People, and Na∣tions, and Tongues, and Languages: And Christ commanded Peter to lanch out into the Deep, and then they inclo∣sed such a multitude of Fishes, that the net brake; and it was very well,
Serm. 2. in Fest. Petri. and pertinently observed by Pope Inno∣cent 3. that the meaning of that ad∣vice, or command, Lanch out into the deep, was this, Go up to Rome, which had a vast dominion over all People, and from whence they might spread their Nets over all the World, to catch all Nations. And so in pursuance of this Right, this Fishing Trade for mo∣ney hath been driven with all possible art, and industry all the World over, to the great profit of the Roman Mer∣chants.

But in process of time so it fell out, that several Kings, and States, looking upon these Romish Fishermen as Tres∣passers, and Intruders; after a due ex∣amination, and consideration had of all the Pleas, and allegations in this matter, and canvassing the Pope's Title to a free Piscary in all Waters, not only upon this Globe, but in the Coelestial, and In∣fernal Waters also; his Title was ad∣judged, and declared to be of no force, or value, and thereupon he was pro∣hibited to fish any more in the Brittish Ocean, the Baltick Sea, the Lake Le∣mane, and in many Rivers of Germany; and he was in great danger of being prohibited fishing also in the Neigh∣bouring Adriatick: so that what prizes he gets now amongst us, it is by stealth, and now and then a few silly Fishes are drawn, and enticed into his Nets.
But in many places still the Trace is freely driven, with great returns, and profit; how formerly it was managed here, the ensuing Pages will make some discovery; as also how it came to be stop'd. But certainly vast Riches are continually brought in by the Factors of Rome, and thereby the Popes, and Car∣dinals
have mightily inriched Sons, Nephews, Relations, and Kindred, and oftentimes raised great Families, as those of Borgia, Aldobrandini, Sfon∣drati, Caraffi, Peretti, and many more. Yet I have lately met with a notable Observation of an intelligent Roman,
Il Nipotismo di Roma. P. 2. lib. 3. fo. 163. who with great reason, and experience informs, That seldom, or never any of those Families prosper, but suddenly decay, and wither; And that if any one please but to run over the actions of all the Popes, and the Histories of their Families, he will find it an infal∣lible truth, that they are all, either ex∣tinct, or reduced unto a very mean in∣considerable condition; as if Heaven would not endure the Patrimony of St. Peter should be made an universal scandal to the World, and be an oc∣casion of eternizing the memory of the Sacriledge they have commit∣ted.
The Observator proceeding to give this further reason, Because, says he, it so pleases God, not to suffer those who have raised themselves unto that greatness out of the Bowels of those in Purgatory, to continue long without
some signal mark of his displeasure: Heaven is offended to see sacred things transformed into profane: Alms into Theft: Churches into Palaces: Altars into Lordships: Holy things into Comedy, and sport: Divine worship into Adoration of Riches, or rather Adoration into Riches.
And as this was, and is one way still, of employing the Churche's Trea∣sure, viz. to raise Families, and in∣rich Nephews, &c. So you see what it comes to at last: And because the Popes are generally chosen old men, their Kindred, and Nephews, as their discretion dictates, make the best use of their time, and with all greeci∣ness ingross all that they can, whilst the old Gentleman is supported with Cordials: neither are they satisfied with what can be finger'd at present, but reversions, and remainders must be secured also; Nay, to above five, or six of Pope Urban's little Cozens at one time there were Benefices, and preferments given, while they were yet rocking in their cradles: And sometimes Benefices have been disposed off to those that were not
yet born,
Id. fo. 91. for in the Articles of Mar∣riage, not long since, of one of the Barberines, with a Lady of the Fa∣mily of Colonna, this was one, That a certain Abby should be given to the First-born Son.
But now, Sir, I cannot but tell you of a certain difficulty, which I have often ruminated upon, being a great incon∣sistence, as I have conceiv'd, in the Roman Church: And that is, That this external Splendor, Glory, and Riches, should by some be urged as an infallible mark of the True Church: To see the Majesty of the Son of God set forth in the exaltation of the Pope his Vicegerent, seated in a glorious Throne; adorned with a Triple Crown, and other suitable ha∣biliments; Emperours holding his stir∣rop, and laying their necks before him to be trod upon; to see him serv∣ed at the Table by Kings; and offer∣ing his Toe to be kiss'd with great reverence, and devotion by persons of the highest quality, to see him assisted by a conclave of glorious Car∣dinals, and with them appearing like the Major, and Aldermen of this
blessed Corporation: All which, they fay, must needs be the Characteristi∣cal marks of the true Vicar of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who, by his Royal Charter, hath invested his Substitute, and his Asso∣ciates, with these Honours. When again, by others in the same Church, and those of great repute amongst them, the true marks, and signs of the Catholick-ship thereof are made to confist in wilful Poverty, in go∣ing bare-foot, and bare-leg'd, in watchings, fasting, and penances, in going attired in Sackcloth, tatter'd and lowsey rags, in shewing sour, and mortified looks, and bloody backs; affirming, that for an eminence in these severities, it was that the glo∣rious St. Francis is now advanced to the vacant Throne of Lucifer, the highest place in Heaven, because he was the poorest wretch on Earth. I now say, to which of those so diffe∣rent Characters, or marks, shall we apply our selves; and from whence, seeing they are not yet agreed amongst themselves, shall we take our mea∣sures to pitch upon the true Church?
whether from Riches, or Poverty; from Honour, or Contempt; from Rule, or Subjection; from a plump, or a macerated looks; from outward gorgeousness, or poorness of spirit? I must confess my self at a stand and shall take a little time to consider of it.
But I will detain you no longer with these speculations: and for these subsequent remarks, which were con∣ceived at your instance, I now put them into your hands; but if you suffer them to fall under the Eyes of any such as shall be startled, or offen∣ded at them, I know not how they will help themselves: It is a hard mat∣ter to answer Demonstrations, and matters of fact, drawn from the most authentick Registers, and Manife∣sto's of time, which hath been my work chiefly to exhibite. And if I should have proceeded to have set forth all that train of vanities, and mischiefs which attend Popery, it would have been infinite, and far exceeded my designed limits: besides, it would be no news to you, who
can far better decipher them than my self. But for this which is already done, I give it wholly to your dispose, as also is

