



My LORD,
THere be two Idols set up among our Brain-sick People, which must be broken down, viz. LIBERTY OF CONSCI∣ENCE and TOLERATION. Under the Name and Colour of the first, ma∣ny set up their misled Perswasion for a Law, and so sin without possibility of any sense of Guilt or Conviction.

Secondly, Under the Name of Gospel meek∣ness, gentleness and peacableness, they cry up TOLERATION and IMPUNITY, and so are without fear to add sin to sin, when in no danger of a subsequent punishment.
These, if suffered and countenanced, will in time overthrow RELIGION and GO∣VERNMENT, which are the pillars and support of Order and Peace, both in Church and Kingdom.
To encounter and remove these two great obstacles of our Happiness, my design hath been in this little Treatise to assert and prove two things; 1. That there must be just Laws esta∣blished in every Society, to limit the Conscience of the Christian and Rational man, and that whosoever transgresseth those Laws is guilty of sin, notwithstanding any plea of Conscience, which can give no license for any man to sin. 2. That Punishments, by Gospel Rules, are necessarily inflicted upon obstinate Offenders, and that Toleration and Impunity are of dangerous consequence to our King, Church, and whole Nation.
The Reasons are many that induced me to dedicate these weak Meditations to Your protection, my good Pious Lord, as that I might lay hold on the first opportunity of manifesting that just Observance Your worth
and dignity, as well as your favour, have chal∣lenged and extracted from me. And, because honoured with the Title of being Your Son, I accounted my self in duty obliged to give you some assurance of the soundness of my Judgment, and stedfastness of my Faith and Conscience, firmly assenting and adhering to the right exercise of the best Religion, and the best Government under Heaven, which must tend not only to my own credit, but Your content and satisfaction. And my Am∣bition is to give Testimony of some resem∣blance to be in me to such a Father, whose zeal and ability to defend the Church and Go∣vernment is eminently known to a great part of the World. And verily, it is but common prudence for my own security to provide such a Patron as You are, to assist me in de∣fending a Noble Argument, which though full of Truth, Loyalty and Necessity, fit to be pub∣lished, yet in probability can no sooner be drawn out but it must expect to meet with much opposition.
Yet this gives me encouragement, that while under your Banners though I expect many Gainsayers, yet I can fear no Confuters. If I should fall it will be honourably, yet I dare promise my self to come off victori∣ously. And under Your conduct I cannot
but assume fresh Courage, if called upon far∣ther, to maintain the Faith of the Gospel, the uniform Worship of God, the Government both in Laws and Penalties justly fixed and execu∣ted against Recusancy, which will certainly ad∣vance the order, peace and welfare of our whole Society.
My prayers and endeavours are intent up∣on these things, and so long as I continue stedfast in those Designs and Attempts, I hope You will not account me unworthy to pro∣fess my self, as the Churches, so

