



Worthy, and well-esteemed friends,
THat generall, and good respect, which the author of this treatise, found amongst you, whil'st he was living, hath well perswaded us,
that the reviving, of any little piece of his, would be very welcome after his death.
The restoring of a dead man to life, 2 King. 13.21. by the touch of the Prophet's bones, was an extraordina∣ry, (and indeed, no lesse then a miraculous) put∣ting forth, of the power of God; and therefore, no sufficient ground, for the common preserving, (much lesse, for the su∣perstitious adoring,) of the bodily reliques, of Saints departed.
Yet we must needs ac∣knowledge,
that great reviving, which many drooping hearts, have found, and felt, by the Spirituall reliques, of Gods faithfull servants, in workes of this nature; as it holds forth, a sweet manifestation of the Grace of God, going a∣long with the endea∣vours of his servants; so, is it no lesse warrant, for the preserving, and pub∣lishing, such Posthumes as these, whereby the au∣thors, being dead,
Heb. 11.4. doe yet speake, and (after a sort) out-live themselves; put∣ting
also a kind of new life, into their dearest friends who (being most deeply affected with their death,) could have found in their hearts, to have said with Thomas, (if the will of the Lord had beene so, Joh. 11.16) let us also goe, that we may dye with him: I say, the resurrecti∣on of their labours [be∣fore hand,] (which did seeme to have been bu∣ried with them,) doth not a little revive their friends, Io. 11.23, 24. and is next in comfort to the resurrecti¦on of their Bodies [at the
last day, 1 Thes. 4.13.14, &c.] or to the assu∣rance of the happy condi∣tion of their Soules, in the meane time.
For this cause, wee were not a little encou∣raged, to bring this child of light, into publike view; being well assu∣red, that all such as lo∣ved the parents, will be very glad to see the face of it; And, if it should happen (which is the sad case of many a poor Or∣phan) to meet with hard usage, from the hands, and tongues of such, as use to shew little kind∣nesse,
either to the living, or to the dead; we make no question but that great Lord Protector, whose service it plead's for, will also plead for it; and (under him) we are bold to commit it to your care, and patronage.
The work it selfe, speaks much of the mind, and spirit of him, that com∣pos'd it; and is like the sweet sent of a perfuming Candle, which continues a great while after the Candle it selfe is put forth, and removed out of the roome. It is a
work fit for these times, wherein the eyes of too mans professors, are so dazled with looking up to their priviledges, they know not how to looke downe to their duties. Heb. 13.2.
The author was (like Moses) a faithfull Ser∣vant in the house of God; and wee are perswaded his maine designe was, to draw Others (also) from the vassalage of Satan, to the service of God; Act. 26.18. in which worke, Phil. 4.1. God hath crown'd his endeavours with so many seales of his ministery, 1 Cor. 9.2. (as well a∣mongst
your-selves, as in other places) that if wee should hold our peace, Luk. 19.40. many stony hearts, (converted into flesh, and made chil∣dren of Abraham,) Mat. 3.9. would speake to the praise of Gods grace, in this usefull instrument.
In the opening, and applying of this Scrip∣ture, hee hath notably discovered, the vanity of those men, who judge it a vaine thing, to serve God. It is most true,
1 Cor. 15.33. that evill words, (much more e∣vill principles in the heart,) doe corrupt good manners.

The activity, or, una∣ctivity of men [outward∣ly,] doth most certainly spring, from internall principles, most deeply rooted, and closely rivet∣ted, in their spirits: a∣mongst the rest, a world of hurt is done, by this one common, and hurtfull principle in the World, [it is in vaine to serve God.]
What makes men, ei∣ther so desperatly A∣ctive, for the worst of Masters, or so shamefully unactive, for the best; but this secret perswasion,
that commeth not of him, Gal. 5.8. that calleth them?
Now, wee know, a dis∣ease, clearly discovered, in the cause, is in the high∣way of cure. The wis∣dome, and spirituall skil, of this heavenly physiti∣an, Pro. 20.27. hath much appeared in this kind; who by the candle of the Lord, hath made so deep search into the privy Chambers of the Soul, and most in∣ward thoughts of men, that, by the cleare dis∣covery, of the guil, and self-deceit of their hearts in the service of God,
they might be through∣ly convinced of the error of their wayes,
1 Cor. 14.25. and so the secrets of their hearts being made manifest, they might fall downe on their faces, and worship God, re∣porting that God is in his Ordinance of a truth.
If the communica∣ting these labours, may (through Gods blessing) conduce to that happy end, (as, wee are assured it was the maine ayme of this faithfull Stevvard, in preaching of them) so we hope, it shall be our utmost end, in the publi∣shing thereof.

For this cause, Eph. 3.14. we de∣sire to bow our knees unto the Father of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ; and to begge of you, that the Authors Plantation, 1 Cor. 3.6. may be wate∣red by your Prayers, and teares also, that God gi∣ving the increase, his name may have the Glory, of all that Service, which is done in obedience to his commands, and his poore servants may enjoy the comfort, of all his preci∣ous promises, Isa. 45.19. who never said to the seed of Iacob, seeke ye me in vaine.
By the grace, and in
the strength of this God, wee are bold to engage our selves,
2 Cor. 8.5.4, 5. first to the Lord, and then unto you by the will of God,

