



Reverend Fathers, and Brethren;
IT is not out of Presum∣ption (the Lord he knoweth) that I make this Address unto you, as if I were worthy to bespeak, much less instruct Such and So many, but from a sincere Love to mens souls, attended with a pro∣found Respect unto you all. 'Tis you, that have the charge to bring this our Husbandman to Heaven: from his care and labour most of your subsistance comes; You are strictly bound by all Laws Divine and Hu∣mane, to help them to live in Hea∣ven,

that help you to live on earth; nay, you are obliged by express 1 Tim. 4. 15.  Scri∣pture to give your selves wholly to this business, and you must certainly give an exact account of your Ste∣wardship, God knows how soon. Now I only undertake to be your Re∣membrancer, and my own Monitor in these two main things: 1. That we would often consider the Great End of our worthy Ministry, which is not, to please men, but Christ Je∣sus the Lord; not to obtain applause from the Vulgar, or respect from Great Men, or to make ample world∣ly provision for our selves, but we are purposely sent from God, to save mens souls from death, and to carry (if it be possible) all our flock with us to Heaven. Let us revive this often upon our souls, especially when we are casting the Net of the Gospel among a Sea of Sinners in our actu∣all

Ministration, wherein we must consider that our Husbandmans soul is as precious to God, as the soul of a greater man, and should the rather be holpen, because he wants often the benefit of Education, Learning and Ingenuity to help himself. O let's think before their Passing-bell do startle us, whether we have done our utmost for the saving of the Man or Woman that is now sailing for eter∣nity. 2. That in our retired throughts we duly weigh, and then put in pra∣ctise the fittest Means to accomplish this great End. 1. In Sermons, what Texts and Subjects are most needful to ground them, to awaken them, to convert them, and to strengthen them; what Method is most useful to clear the will of God to them, and settle it in their memories, what words and affections are most effectual to declare their duty, and

perswade them to it: In short, how we may so paint to the life Grace and Glory, that the people may fall in love with them, and purchase them at any rate; and then so describe Sin and Hell, that they may tremble to think of them, and go from the Ordinances with their hearts penetrated, ama∣zed, melted and changed. That we may not fill our Sermons with sap∣less niceties, impertinent quotations, cholerick reflections, or with that unquiet controversal Divinity (es∣pecially about points less momen∣tous) which hardly ever produce any effect, save Exasperation. And for as much as experience hath taught us, that private and particular d∣vice and Reproof doth catch many, that have slipped through more ge∣neral means; let us labour as far as we are able to take a particular care of each member of those flocks, where

any of us are Overseers; that we may warn every man, and teach every man, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. How many Drunkards, Swearers, Covetous, Trouble some persons are there under our charge, that either know not, or mind not the evil of their way, whom one quarter of an hours seri∣ous Advice might cure, and how well (generally) do men take such Counsels from us, because we are doing the Duties of our Office, and their faithfullest part, to wit, their Consciences are on our side? If it be possible therefore let us spare some time to go among them, to see how our Husbandry prospers, so shall we best be acquainted with their condi∣ons, and soonest gain their affecti∣ons: Alas! if we do not know them, we must shoot our Arrow at adven∣ture; and if they do not love us, they

will hardly heed what we say. And then 2. In our Lives; O that they may be a Commentary on our Ser∣mons, full of Gravity, Humility, Piety, Peace and Love. Let our words and waies savour of the Ser∣mons we preach, that our Lives may convince those whom our Lips can∣not perswade; Alas we see that one irregular practice doth undermine & throw down, that which many Ser∣mons have been building; they will not believe that, which we plainly show, we do not believe our selves. Though this be their mistake to take sanctuary in our sinnes, who must be judged by our Sermons; yet 'tis a distemper that will not easily be cu∣red, and wo will be to them by whom offences come, as well as wo to them that are offended with the Truth. Let us remember Excellent Mr. Her∣berts Advice (whose Tract called,

the Country-Parson, is richly worth our frequent reading) that the Mi∣nister should be a pattern of all good∣ness to all the Men in the Parish, and his Wife to all the Women in the Parish, and his Children and Ser∣vants to all the Children and Ser∣vants in the Parish, and particularly that we be far from Prophaneness, Covetousness, Contention, direct or indirect opposition to serious Piety, or the Professors thereof. And lastly, 3. For our Inward Affections, that we may keep alwaies flaming in our hearts a sincere and Paternal Love to all our Flock, that our counsels, reproofs and Sermons may flow from a real and dear Love to them, and then they can hardly mis∣carry in their effects upon them; that our Real and Visible design may not be to seek theirs but them. That our Behaviour degrade us not from that

Authority, wherewith we are vested; nor Pride keep us from that seasonable con∣descention, that is so necessary among the people. But that we may be wholly taken up with our great work, and make our other circumstances attend and fur∣ther this; that by any means we may save our selves, and them that hear us. And let's not think much of all this work, for we were told it before, and we shall be richly rewarded for every drop of Spirits, yea, for every drop of sweat, yea, for every drop of ink that is spent right∣ly in our Masters Service; and doubly damn'd, if persons of our Knowledge and Imploment, or Others by our Neglect, Ignorance, Non-residence, or Evil Ex∣ample, miscarry verlastingly. In a word, that we may all in earnest advance the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and keep up the Credit of the English Ministry, is the most earnest Desire and Prayer o
 May 10. 1668.
