



MADAM,
THE whole design of this Trea∣tise, and the Authors ambition is, that it may become subservient to the good of souls. And in testi∣mony of that Honour and Ob∣servance, which is deservedly due to your Ladyship from me, I have taken the li∣berty to prefix your name unto it. Nor indeed do I know how to make a better return to all your love and respects, than by presenting and commend∣ing these Evangelical Truths to your most seri∣ous perusal. Truths they are, of the highest im∣portance;
upon the right improvement whereof, lieth the whole stress of a Believers comfort and salvation. If an error be admitted in these things, it may end (unless timely rectified in ut∣ter and remediless ruine. Let them not be therefore despised, because they tender themselves, clad in an homely dress. I am conscious of mine own weak∣nesses and imperfections: But our God is pleased to convey the richest of his Treasures, in earthen vessels; and to make use of the meanest Instru∣ments, that the excellency of the power may appear to be of God, and not of man. The closer view you take of, and the greater intimacy of acquaintance you get with these, and such like Divine Lessons; the more sweet refresh∣ings, and soul-satisfaction will they minister. It is the nature of all Terrestrials, to be fairer in appearance, than reality: and to promise more at a distance, than ever is to be found in them. Like the Apples of Sodom, they seem glorious and beautiful, when beheld afar off; but upon a neerer approach, and handling, they crumble into dust and rottenness. Gospel-doctrines and excellencies have a contrary property; like some wholsom herbs, which the more they are pressed, yield the sweeter juice, and are of greater fra∣grancy. The deeper you draw out of these Wells of salvation, the more Chrystalline, and cor∣dial, will the waters be, and contribute more sa∣native efficacy, to exhilarate and strengthen the
vital parts. Only be sure to keep the passage open, and free from obstructions, that goeth from the head to the heart and conscience; that the in∣fluence of every divine instruction may reach to the quick.
The main objects of a Christians care and stu∣dy, do for the most part, concenter in three things. 1. To make a right choice of the chiefest good, and pitch upon the true principal end of man: which is nothing else, but the glorifying of God in the enjoyment of him. This only can allay the hunger and thirst, and satisfie the perplexities of the soul. For, alas, what are all created beings, and sublunary vanities, to content the infinite desires, of an immortal spirit? These terrene possessions are only proportionate to the body; and can the soul feed upon the bodies portion? 'Tis poor support can be drawn from the abundance of this world, when the spirit is departing, to enter into an endless eternity. 2. To select and determine upon the sure means, in order to the compassing of that end. And this is only the righteousness of Jesus Christ; ap∣plyed and made over to us, by vertue of our union with him; to be sought after in the wayes of Gods institution; and evidenced by the ho∣liness of our conversations. 3. The sincere, spi∣ritual, and vigorous pursuance of such means. And, I hope, your Ladyship will find, in the read∣ing of this Book, what may be of special use, to di∣rect
and quicken, in each of these: But more di∣rectly, in relation to the two latter. It is mat∣ter of sad lamentation and sorrow, to behold how many, that go under the name of Christians, do miserably faulter in these so weighty affairs. The multitude do little else, but labour in the fire, for very vanity: And such as are, some times at leisure, to think of their souls, do for the most part but study to find out the easiest and cheapest course, a little to palliate and skin over those wounds and grievances, which the Apostacy of man hath brought upon them: without endeavour∣ing after a perfect cure. Your Ladyship hath learnt better: Not only to give soul-affairs the preheminence; but likewise to know, how need∣ful it is, to be intent, and industrious, in the bu∣siness of salvation; and of what dangerous con∣sequence, to do that work by halfs. It is not my meaning to trouble you with a large preambula∣tory discourse. Neither is it my way, nor doth your Ladyship expect it, that I should stuff up this Address with your commendations. They who most deserve, least desire to hear their own praises. You know to whose judgment, you stand or fall. My design is, only to incourage your Ladyship to hold on, and to be faithful, in the good wayes of the Lord, wherein you are ingaged. That our gracious God may preserve you, to be a continued comfort to your Relations, and to be further useful in your Place and Station:
That he may mercifully please to grant you divine assistance and counsel upon all occasi∣ons, for the right ordering your affairs, with Christian sincerity and prudence: That his blessing may be upon you, during your abode on the earth, in your Person, Family, and eve∣ry concernment: And that you may have real comfort, in the day of the resignation of your spirit into the hands of God that gave it, is the unfeigned prayer of
23. July, 1668.

