



MY LORD,
IT was my early and great Hap∣piness, that I was then a Mem∣ber of Trinity-College, when You were an Eminent Guide to the Studies of the Youth there. For, tho'
You were not my appointed Tutor; yet it so fell out, that for Two Years together (a Thing perhaps scarce known in the College, but at that Time) the great and daily Burden of the Philosophy-Lecture was laid upon You: And (for which I do to this Day bless the Divine Provi∣dence) those Two Years fell in with that Time, in which my Standing in the House obliged me to attend those Lectures. And, whatever other Influence they had on me; This I can with Truth avow, That from that Time I always carried in my Breast an Honour and Respect for Your Person.
This I therefore tell Your Lord∣ship, because (I believe) You could not have known it without my In∣formation. For, the beneficial In∣fluence of very useful Men diffuses it self farther, than their own Ob∣servation reaches: And some Few
chuse that it should do so. And I am not so much a Stranger to Your Lord∣ship, as not to know, that You have a chief Place among those Few. But then withal, I beg leave to add, That tho' it be a Noble Temper in Your Lordship to overlook Your Good Deeds to others; yet that will not excuse those others, if they should do so too: For, Ingratitude is not the less, but the more Criminal, where there is no Expectation of Requital. For which Reason, I have rather adventured to trespass upon Your Lordships Goodness, than to forfeit all Title to Goodness my self, by offer∣ing to You some of those Fruits, which do very much owe themselves to Your early Watering and Cul∣tivation.
But tho' these Your early Benefits were (I believe) unknown to Your Self; yet I am sure, that some later ones are not: Tho' withal I know,
that You would have them be so to others. You cannot but remember, (I am sure, I cannot) how affectio∣nately You did desire my advanta∣geous Settlement in this City, and how zealously You did prosecute such Your Desire both with Your Inte∣rest and Assiduity, till You made it appear, that You did more than barely desire it. And I own it to the World, that my First Preferment in London I obtained by Your Means.
And these Your Kindnesses You still pursued with a condescending Friendship, by which I was blessed with the Freedom and Benefit of Your Conversation, that is, with an Advantageous Assistance in my Stu∣dies, and with an Advantageous Example of a sincere Piety. The Faults therefore of what I here of∣fer to Your Lordship and the World, I do with Shame take to my self:
For, they might have been pre∣vented, had I carefully followed my Copy.
But there seems to be a Fatality in Humane Frailty; and therefore Imitations always fall short of their Originals. But still I reverence what I cannot transcribe; and so will every Christian, who knows Your Lordship, and loves our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. For, a good Part of the Nation can bear You witness, that You have with an hearty Affection, and with an un∣wearied Diligence, imployed Your self in that Work (of which he is the Master-Builder) that is, of building up Christians in their most Holy Faith, and of edifying them to Sal∣vation. May His Grace make Your Success equal to Your Labours; and may Your Example provoke other His Messengers to an Imita∣tion of Your Practices. His exalt∣ing
You to such a Station, where Your Example is more visible, and its Influence more powerful, adds Faith to such my Wishes; and Your great Candor and Integrity (which are Insinuating and Victorious Vir∣tues) do increase such my Faith. For, I do confess, I have my self felt Your Influence; and because we are apt to judge other Men by our selves, I can the more easily believe, that others may do so too. God grant, that they may do so without my Defects; of which so many Instances as the following Dis∣course may offer to the Severity of Your Judgment, so many fresh Occa∣sions it will also afford for the Exer∣cise of Your Candor: For, what the First may condemn, the Last may pardon; and tho' You do not allow my Performance, yet You may accept my Endeavours. However, I desire You to believe, that what I here offer to Your Lordship is designed
as a Publick Testimony of that great Reverence I have for Your Person, Piety, and Learning; and of those Acknowledgments which are due for Your great and past Favours to,
MY LORD,

