




RIGHT HONORABLE,
IT may seem strange, that in the Thanksgi∣ving on this Day I have
exalted the prai∣ses of the present season above the head of this
Ancient Mercy. If I deceive not my self, I have not done this to the
disadvan∣tage of those old loving kindnesses, nor without
great Examples.
Is not this the beaten way of JESUS CHRIST with his
Church, to make succeeding visits and loves, by be∣ing a
grave to those that have been already, to become a
Re∣surrection to them, giving them a more Excellent Being in this
Relative State and Subordination, than they had in their
absolutenesse? Did John the Baptist encrease his glory by any
thing more, than by that sweet readinesse to de∣crease before JESUS
CHRIST? How do the holy Pen∣men in all their Prophesies,
or Praises, frequently make every present subject, but as a
sight to direct their eye, while their spirits fly to this mark, the
Heavenly glory of CHRIST in this last Appearance, which is
now from the midst of its Thunders, Lightning upon the
Earth.
Right Honourable, I hambly intreat your Patience a little
further, while I present you faithfully with my Sense in the
Comparison which I make between the Papacy, and Rigid
Presbytery. I shall do this in three words, spoken to
three things; Forms, Persons, Principles.
 1. As to Forms. I grant some to
be purer than others. I al∣low the Church-form of
Presbytery, to excell the Papacy, as the fairnesse of the
Moon, doth the darknesse of the Night. I allow it to be in the first
Rank of the purest outward Forms, although not the first of that
Rank. I believe it the duty of every Christian to follow after the best Forms.
Yet is there a more excellent way, which is that of Love. My Brethren,
our Joseph, our Jesus, chargeth us not to fall out on the
way,
1. Cor. 12. 31. though we walk in
different paths. We are Brethren, let no outward Forms divide
us one from another, if they divide us not from CHRIST, if they have
not in their own nature an enmity to the naturall Image of
CHRIST, which is Ci∣vility, Morality; or the Heavenly
Image, which is Spiri∣tuality: Let us receive one another into
the Glory of GOD, 
Rom. 15 7. as CHRIST receiveth
us, though that Cloathing of the out∣ward Form be not of the same
fashion upon all, nor on some so well shap'd, as on others, to the
Proportion of the Body, which is CHRIST The Lord
JESUS hath his Concubines, his Queens, his
Virgins; Saints in Remoter. Forms, Saints 
Can. 6. 8 in Higher Forms,
Saints unmarried to any Form, who keep themselves single for the
immediate embraces of their Love. But CHRISTS Dove in all these is
One, the New Creature in CHRIST, the spirituall birth of the
Spirit, the only One of her Mother, that Hierusalem above, which is
the City compact, that Band of Peace, that Unity of Saints, the Holy
Ghost.
2. As to Persons; Fathers, and Brethren of the
Presbyte∣ry! You together with me, desire after, sit drwn under the sha∣dow
feed upon the sweet fruit of the same Apple-tree, in the 
Can. 2. 2 midst of the trees of the
Forrest, though not of the same Arm and Bough of that
Tree. I would not in any thing offend you, who are in the number of
the excellent Ones, in which is all 
Psa. 16. 3 CHRIST'S Delight on
earth. If I grieve you, what shall  make me glad? There are
of you, who are ready to answer this government of JESUS CHRIST, as
Peter did CHRIST; Thou knowest that I love thee. Feed then the sheep,
feed the Lambs, in those fresh Pastures into which He now leads you.
You who are of another mind, appear to me, like good old Zachary:
Though an Angel from Heaven witnesse, that the things now come to
passe, are the very answers to those pray∣ers 
Luke 1 which your selves put up
many years agone: yet you can∣not believe, because the way is not in
the ordinary track of your Principles and Expectations.
Therefore are you struck dumb for a season, that you cannot make a
good confession of these Appearances of GOD. But when the Child shalbe
born, the Glory perfectly brought forth then your selves shal name it
John, which being interpreted, is Grace; then shall even
your tongues be loosed, to praise this Day-spring from on high,
which hath visited us; then shal you acknowledg that this was the
gate of heaven, though you were not aware of it.
Now the Lord himself bring it to pass that all you, who in your
pst dispensations have been
fathers to these present dis∣coveries, may suddenly turn your hearts to your
children, lest he come, and for your sakes smite the earth, even all flesh with
a curse.
3. As to Principles. The marriage between our
Saviour and the Soul is a marriage of Spirits, a marriage in one
spi∣rit. No union with any form makes this Marriage, or dissolvs
it. That which alone stands in enmity to these Heavenly E∣spousals is union
with a strange spirit. This strange spirit is the Great Whore
Babylon, Mother of fornications. One of her names is Mystery,
because she puts her self into all forms, from the lowest to the highest; from
the most outward to the most inward; from the darksomest among men, to the
lightsomest amongst Angels. This is the great work of a Saint, to
watch, to watch the Spirit of CHRIST, as be 
 makes his removes out of one Appearance into
another; to watch the spirit of Antichrist, as that
also shifts its forms.
Right Honorable, For this I have desired in my
Preach∣ing, in my Prayers, to work with GOD, even for the
opening of the eyes of men to see, that the same spirit which lay in
the polluted Bed of Papacy, may meet them in the perfumed Bed of
Presbytery; that the fornications and sorceries of this Whore are then
greatest, when they are most Mysterious, that she is able by her
sorceries to bewitch those that have attained to a great degree of spirituality
as the Galatians. To this pur∣pose have I in my Sermon represented the
same spirit which dwels in the Papacy, when it enters into the
Purer form of Presbytery, as fuller of mystery, so fuller of
despight, of danger, not to make the form or
persons, but that Principle, that spirit unfit to be cherished by any
Person in any fom. The Highest Godlinesse, and the Highest
Wickeanesses are those, which are most Spirituall. Now, O Christians,
you fight not with Flesh and Blood, but Principalities and Powers,
spirituall wickednesses in Heavenly forms. But this is your comfort,
spirituall wickednesses ascend as high as the Heavens, even into Angelical
forms: but spiritual God∣linesse goes up above all Heavens, together with
CHRIST into the bosome of the Eternall Spirit, from whence it looks down upon
the Angels, and all forms, as ministring to it. In vain is the snare laid
before those Doves, which have these spirituall eyes and
wings. In the number of which, that you may be ever found, is the
Prayer of


