



May it please Your Majesties,
I Presume I may say without Vanity, that as no Man hath more heartily desir'd, so none hath more con∣stantly and unmoveably endeavour'd, in the way which I take to be most direct and certain, to promote the Honour and Prosperity of Your Majesties, than my self. And though to the generality of the Men of this degenerate Age I may seem to have treated you with less Respect than I ought; yet to Your own Royal Judgments, enlarged with a Noble sense of Piety, Virtue and Generosity, I cannot doubt but the following Pages will de∣monstrate the contrary: and that I have treated you with greater Honour, than their narrow Sentiments could imagine. It is true, I had a principal Respect to the Honor of that Transcen∣dent Majesty, to which all Creatures ought always to be ready to sacrifice their little Sparks of Honour, and their Lives and Be∣ings. And to make the poor degenerate Mortals of this Age in some sort sensible of their Stupidity and great Insensibility of the Honour due to that Glorious Majesty, I know not any thing that could have a more direct Tendency and Efficacy, than with great Fidelity to intermix such Freedom as might excite some sense and concern for the Honour due to a much inferiour Majesty, of a Mortal. And from this Principle may be deduc'd an unanswerable Conviction of a double Fault in most of those who shall censure me for it: 1. Of want of due and proportionable Concern for the Honour of that Supreme Majesty upon just and great occasion. 2. Of want of due Concern at the Dishonour done to Your Majesties, not in Words, but in treacherous and unworthy Actions. He
who can acquit himself of the due discharge of his Duty in these respects, may be allow'd to cast the first Stone of Censure at me.
Your Majesties have done your selves no little Honour in resent∣ing what I have done, not as some mean Souls expected, and per∣haps desired; but so as hath confirmed the Honourable Opinion, which I and many others had of your Virtues. And as I much rejoyce to see it, so it is matter of great pity and grief to me to see so much Virtue and so noble Ʋndertakings so encumber'd and pest∣er'd with so much Sordidness, Baseness and Ʋnfaithfulness, as I cannot but observe in some, who should be, were they like their Ancestors, the Honour and Glory of the Nation. But I hope Your Virtues, by the Favour and Blessing of Almighty God, will spedily subdue all that Wickedness and Ʋnfaithfulness to God and to Your selves, which you must first encounter with at home, and then all Your Enemies abroad, and at last obtain an Eternal Victory. Which is the hearty Desire and daily Prayer of,

