



May it please Your Lordships.
THough at first to some it may seem strange and improper to offer a Theological Controversie to the Consideration of Magistrates, and Judges of Civil Causes; yet if the present Constitution of the Church of England, the Nature of the Question, and the special Qualifications of the Persons for the Consideration of such a Question, besides the Common Con∣cern of all States and Persons in Matters of Religion, be well consider'd, nothing can be more reasonable: A Church pro∣fessing, and glorying in the Profession, of a Religion Established by Law; and so intirely subject to the Authority of the State, that it cannot call a Synode, choose a Bishop, Dean or Prebend, make a Canon, or alter any publick Prayers of the Church with∣out it; a Question of Prescription, Ʋsage, and Custom, than which none are more frequently examined, tryed and determined in our Civil Courts; and, by consequence, no Persons more pro∣per to give a Judgment upon such a Question, because none more versed and expert in Cases of that nature than those of the Honourable Profession of the Law. Besides, Your Lord∣ships, and the rest of that Honourable Profession, have another Qualification indispensably requisite to a just and true Judg∣ment,
Indifferency and Freedom from any special Prejudice, more than what is common to the whole Nation, and as much above that as any Persons in it; I mean that of Education; by which, tho' the inconsiderate Vulgar, and People of little Judgment, are very strangely affected and moved, either fondly affecting, or childishly abhorring what hath nothing of real Good or Evil, but what proceeds from an abused or deceived Imagi∣nation; yet Men of Parts, Judgment, and Experience can more easily extricate themselves out of the fetters and manacles of such Impressions and Prejudice upon consideration of sufficient Grounds and Reasons. But the Generality of the English Clergy, and Non-Conformists, are under a double special Pre∣judice and Pre-ingagement: the Authority and Credit of their Party; and their own in particular, having not only imbibed a Special Opinion in the Case, but inconsiderately asserted, and so espoused it also, besides the Prudential Caution of not disoblig∣ing or offending their Auditors: tho' many Protestants in other Parts are of another Opinion, and the most learned here have deserted the old Cause, both in their Disputes in the Ʋniversity, and in their Controversial Writings. And therefore, as every honest Man in any Difference would desire the Judgment of such as are most indifferent, unbyassed, and impartial, so every wise Man will desire that they may be Persons of most Ability, Skill, and expert in such Matters: And in both these respects I know none more proper to judge of this Case than Your Lord∣ships, and the Gentlemen of Your Honourable Profession.
Nor is this all, that You are thus qualified to judge of this matter; but you have also a Concern, a double Concern in it; but, that it may be fairly and truly determined; a Concern which obligeth you to Impartiality, that the Truth may be cleared, and an End put to such Differences; both in regard to the Places you hold, and the Interest you have in the Civil State of the Nation; and in regard of your Personal Interest and particular Concerns both in this Life and hereafter. For Matters of Religion are of no little Importance to the Well-being of States, as well as of
particular Persons; and to the Well-being of particular Persons as well in this Life, as hereafter. And all this in a double respect; in respect to the Providence of God, and in respect of their Natural Efficacy and Tendency. It is very manifest, that almost all the Ʋnhappiness, Troubles and Disturbance which this Nation hath suffered for more than 150 Years last past, have proceeded from unhappy Differences about Matters of Religion: And it would be as evident, if duly considered, that there is as little Likelyhood, if Possibility, of any long Continuance of Peace without some proper Application to so fatal a Root of Mis∣chief amongst us, for the Extirpation or Suppression of it. Nor is this so vain, unreasonable, or impracticable a thing to be thought on or attempted, as most Men are apt to presume upon the Ʋnsuc∣cessfulness of the Attempts which have been made, if better con∣sider'd. It is no unusual thing for Men to learn from the Errors of former Attempts so to correct their Methods and Measures, as to accomplish with ease what others with great Labour were not able to effect. Many things in Practice are like Riddles in Spe∣culation, which, after many have found insoluble by their utmost Study, appear at last, when the Secret is once revealed, very plain and easie to the meanest Capacity. But in such Differences as these there is usually a double Secret; the one Supernatural, managed by invisible Ministers of the Divine Providence; the other Natural and Humane, proceeding from Error of the Ʋn∣derstanding, or Corruption of the Will and Affections in one or both of the Parties: And for the most part there are Faults on both sides, if not from the beginning, at least in the Progress and Continuance of the Difference. For it is no unfrequent thing for such as have a Good Cause at first, to spoil it in the Management.
And such is the Case in these Differences in Religion, which have so long infested this part of the World: Wherein the Super∣natural Secret is the Operation of those Invisible Powers by the Commission or Permission of God, for Correction of what was and is amiss in the several Parties, among whom they arose; the Consi∣deration of which belonging more properly to Divines, I shall say
nothing of it here. But of those Differences, the first and most considerable are those between the Roman Church, and those who pretend a Reformation. And the Natural and Humane Secret in them lies in certain Faults on both sides. The Faults and Scan∣dals of the Papacy and Court of Rome were so gross and notorious, that all good and intelligent People groaned for a Reformation long before Luther was born. But the Faults of them, who pretended to that Work, will appear, when well considered, no less, neither in Number, nor Nature: There is none of them all that is not notoriously guilty of Sacrilege, Schism and Heresie; besides divers Ʋnchri∣stian Practices to promote or maintain their Party. It is even natural to Men to run out of one Extream into the other: and the Evil Spirits, when they are permitted, cease not to instigate the corrupt disposition of Men to the utmost they can. Hence have proceeded those many endless Differences among themselves, who at first differed only from the Church of Rome: And their Faults and Miscarriages are so notorious, that they are many of them confessed, acknowledged, and disclaimed by divers of the most learned of all Parties. The English Reformation, which was not faultless before, was farther corrupted by Cranmer, (who, tho by some magnified as a Martyr, will appear in time to have been so mischievous an Instrument both in Church and State, as makes him very unworthy of any honourable Character or Memory in any part of the Catholick Church, but especially that of England) and settled at last thro the prevalence of a Party of Calvinian Sectaries, with such Abuses and Corruptions in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, as the most learned and eminent of the English Clergy have long desired and indeavoured what they could to rectifie, but have never been able to effect, or scarce dared to attempt it in any great Matters, being abused and bug-beared with popular Outcries and Imputations of Popery, (with which the Peo∣ple of this Nation have been very grossly abused) when-ever they dared to assert or own any thing of the Primitive Genuine Christi∣anity contrary to the Nations of that Faction; who have been pricks in their Eyes, and thorns in their Sides, both to Church and State,
ever since, by the just Judgment of God, for their Politick Com∣pliances with the Corruptions of that pretended Reformation; which are in truth much greater than is believed or suspected by many good People, as I may possibly, by the Grace of God, shew more par∣ticularly in due time.
But for the present, to calm the Minds and stop the Mouths of such as may be offended at what I say, as briefly as may be, I shall only recommend to their Consideration, if they be Dissenters, the Expostulation of a late leading Man amongst them, Mr. Richard Baxter, to the zealous Anti-Papists, which, he saith, is written to try, if it may be, to promote our common Repentance, and to reform the Dominal Distaken Reformation of those, who have sinned by Extreams; which, by the assumed Name of Reformation have wronged God, and the Truth, and Mens Souls, with the greater Advantage and Success. Thus of the Reformation in general in his Book against Foreign Jurisdiction, printed but little before his Death, Part 2. ch. 1. and ch. 7. he sets down together no less than seven summary Heads of False Charges and Wrongs done to the Papists by the Sectarian weak∣headed part of Protestants, as he elsewhere calls them: 1. Some Men, saith he, do ignorantly charge some Errors on the Pa∣pists, which they are not guilty of: 2. or lay the Errors of some few upon the most: 3. Some make Errors, which are but de Nomine, to seem to be de Re: 4. and lesser Errors to seem Great: 5. Some take divers Truths to be Errors: 6. And some are ready to call some lawful Customs of the Papists by the Name of Popery and Antichristian: 7. Some would deny the Papists the common Civilities and Liberties which are their due, &c. And elsewhere he gives us part of a Catalogue of such rash Charges with an &c. to let us know that those are but part: How far Protestants mistake and rashly Charge them in the Doctrines of Predestination, Free-will, Grace, Merits, Justification, Redemption, Perseverance, &c. I, saith he, have freely shewed in my Catholick Theology, and End of Doctrinal Controversies, and Ludovicus le Blank, after Others,
hath excellently opened. Which is a plain Confession that in all those Differences, besides that about Antichrist, (which he does not at all approve) the Fault lies on the side of the Protestants and the Nominal Mistaken Reformation. And herein I know no Conformists, except Calvinian Sectaries, who do not agree with him, and those Others he mentions. And for Conformists, they may there see, without looking further, that there are and have been many amongst us of greatest Reverence and Name, (as he elsewhere expresseth it) who have thought the Differences as unjust and unreasonable on the Protestant side in divers other Par∣ticulars; such as Arch-Bishop Laud, Arch-Bishop Bramhall, Bishop Guning, Bishop Sparrow, Bishop Parker, Dr. Hammond, Dr. Heylyn, Dr. Pierce, Dr. Saywell, Dr. Beveridge, Dr. Sher∣lock, Mr. Thorndike, Mr. Dodwell; all whom he particularly names, and indeavours to answer: To whom might be added, for my purpose, Bishop Andrews, Bishop Cousens, Bishop Taylor, Bishop Forbes, Dr. Field, and divers other eminent learned Men in and since the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, besides divers now living. And a worthy dignified Clergy-Man of the City, in a Book lately printed, hath asserted that the Reformation was, and was to be, but an imperfect Work. By all which it is easie to be perceived, that the Cause of the Reformation is no such clear Cause, or infallible Truth, as is generally believed, by those who are educated in such a Presumption or Persuasion: Which might also justly be suspected from the Differences, which arose presently, and have been continued from the beginning with bitter Conten∣tions between the Principal Actors in that Work, and their seve∣ral Parties to this day; which are things manifest to all People in all Places, where any thing called the Reformation hath pre∣vailed. But there are other Matters very observable in this Case, as several indirect Ends and Motives, which probably might be, and certainly were the Inducements to many of the Be∣ginners and Promoters of it; the Irregular Manner in which it was managed and settled; the subtile Accommodations of the principal parts of the Work to recommend the Preachers, and
gratifie the People, but undermining the Honour of Christ, and the Power of Godliness, and settling the People in Presumption and Security upon a False Foundation; according to the Descri∣ption of the Apostle, Speaking perverse things to draw away Disciples after them; and the Fruits and Effects agreeable thereunto; a plain Indication that it was not of God, but in the Nature of a Judgment, and that they knew not what they did, nor what Spirit they were of: which, tho' certain Truths, and very evident when looked into, yet are not so obvious to common Observation. Nor indeed, was I my self so sensible of much of them till after much Study and Indeavours to promote the Service of God, and Good of my Country, it all seemed to me to be under an Enchantment, so that no Good could be done: Whereupon con∣sidering the Fruits, according to our Saviour's Rule, upon a fair Invitation and Opportunity I resolved upon a Retirement, and a Review of the Reformation, the Root which produced no better Fruits: And coming to it with much Sincerity and Impartiality, I soon perceived all this that I have here said, and more, very clearly; and some things, which relate to the Civil State and present Settlement of this Nation; of which I soon gave an ac∣count to such Persons as I thought most proper, to acquaint His Majesty with it; to discharge my own Conscience, what-ever was farther done in it.
I do not deny but there was need of a Reformation of divers things: but none know better than your Lordships, and the Gen∣tlemen of your Profession, how common a thing it is for Men, who have really a good Cause, to make it ill through Passion, Partiality, unreasonable Demands or Charges, and such ill Management as, if it come to Tryal, it must be found against them; or tho' it be not Good, yet through Partiality or Prejudice to think it Good; and then, when by degrees they have well fixed and rivetted that Opinion, and besides engaged their Reputation in it, to persuade themselves that those things are lawful for the Maintenance of it, which, in truth, are not; and those things useful or necessary, which, in conclusion, will but expose and ruine it: how much Mis∣chief
People thus affected frequently bring upon themselves and others, and endless Vexations, when obstinate in their Opinion, resolute in their Demands, and pertinacious in their Contentions, right or wrong: how undecent and unbecoming, even in Civil Matters, this appears to all wise and good Men, who have Oppor∣tunity to observe the Truth of the Case: On the other side, how much more Prudent it is, as well as Just and Honest, if a Man have the Misfortune to purchase an ill Title, or be unhappily concerned in an ill Cause, to indeavour to make it Good by fair Agreement with Parties concerned, and Tender of what is just and reasonable; and such honest Means as will at least secure his Reputation, if not his Cause also, however much mend the matter. This has been always my Practice, and this I am resolved to do in this Case, of what I have discover'd upon my Review aforesaid: I do utterly disclaim all the Iniquity of the Case that I have already discovered, or can discover, all the Sacrilege, Schism, and Heresie, and other Corruptions of the pretended Reformation in general, and of that of England in particular. And tho' I do not forsake the Corruptions of this Church to espouse those of ano∣ther; yet I think fit to make my own Cause good, and to stand only upon such Terms, as I can comfortably refer to the Goodness and Mercy of God, and as I am satisfied will make it their Faults, not mine, who shall refuse Agreement and Communion with me. What I think prudent in my own Case, if it be so in∣deed, I could wish the whole Nation did see it as well as I: For I believe it a more firm Foundation for a lasting Peace and true Happiness than any other we can build upon. And if I be not mi∣staken in the Matters in Difference, there is scarce any but such, as many principal Men of the one side think ought to be yielded by them, or as all on the other confess may, for just Cause, be granted by them; or may be otherwise accommodated by only fit Expli∣cations and Expressions. To which, since the most considerable on both sides have shewed a very good Disposition, and the Na∣ture and Precepts of the Gospel, and the Peace, and Repose, and Common Good of Mankind, especially in this part of the World,
which may have a great Influence upon the rest, do require it; I believe it would be for the Honour and Interest of which side soever should do it, to make the Proposal, provided it be ve∣ry just and reasonable. Of those Matters, which are thought ought to be yielded, this, which I propose to your Lordships Con∣sideration, concerning the ancient Practice of Prayers for the Dead, is one, and the most proper Instance that can be in all re∣spects. It is indeed a double Instance; for it is a plain Evidence, that one of the principal Suppositions, with which not only Multi∣tudes of People in these last Ages, but ever since the first Ages of Christianity, have been deceived and misted, with very plau∣sible pretence, is notwithstanding false in it self, besides falla∣cious misapplications of what is true: as appears abundantly by Irenaeus, Tertullian, and the Common Practice of the Ancient Christians in their Contests with Hereticks and Schismaticks. And it is in its self one of the greatest Instances of the Power of Prejudice to abuse weak Men out of their apparent Interest, without any other competent ground or reason; of the Weakness of Men to be so abused; and of the Inconsiderateness of those who presume to be positive, and direct others in such Cases, that I know of.
My intention at first was to have published a Vindication of the True English Liturgy, the first Book of Ed. 6. composed by known English Clergy-Men, and afterward corrupted and disor∣dered by Cranmer, and a Faction of Foreigners, and other unknown Calvinian Sectaries in Secret, and so craftily imposed upon the Church and Nation. But when I considered, in these unhappy Differences, how partially Zealous the Generality of Clergy-Men (who have any Zeal at all) are for their own Party, more than for the common Concerns of Religion, or of their Country; and how unconcerned the chief of the Clergy of this Nation are, and have been ever since the State assumed the Supream Power of Ecclesiastical Matters, as if either dispirited, or presuming that the Care also is incumbent only upon them who have assumed the Power; and how little I have found, by Experience, is to be
expected from them; and, on the other side, how necessary not∣withstanding it is for the Peace and Repose of this Nation, that the Occasions of such mischievous Dissentions should be better con∣sidered and removed; I presently perceived I had a fair Oppor∣tunity in this to present a proper instance of a Matter of such Importance to Persons as well qualified to judge, and who were likely to be as sensible of the Importance of it, as any; and there∣upon concluded to present it alone to the Consideration of Your Lord∣ships, and the Gentlemen of Your Honourable Profession; having already, as to the rest, made a considerable Experiment of what I have here said, of the Hopes we may have of a good Success, if they, to whom it doth belong, will but do what is in their Power towards it: For having published a Liturgy, Entituled, The Liturgy of the Ancients represented, as near as well may be, in English Forms, not much different (only a little more compleat) from that Restitution of the True English Liturgy attempted by the Scotch, with the Assistance of the Principal of the English Bishops, Anno 1637. I presented it to some of the principal learned Men first of the English, who much approved it, and wished it restored by Law; then of the Lutherans, who also ap∣proved it, and declared their Satisfaction to communicate in that Form; and, at last, of the Roman Catholicks, who had no Ex∣ceptions to the Matter or Form of it. And, in short, to say the Truth, the Abuse and Corruptions of the Publick Liturgy in these two particulars, Of Prayers for the Dead, and the Christian Sacrifice, to mention nothing more, are so gross and notorious, that they alone are sufficient to make the Church of England inexcu∣sably Guilty of Schism, and justly obnoxious to Excommunication, (which may be the Enchantment it seems to lie under) and unsafe for any pious Person, after notice, to hold Communion with it: so that it seems not only expedient and prudent for the State to consider these Matters, (for otherwise nothing is to be expected from these Bishops) but absolutely necessary: And so I leave it with Your Lordships.

