







HE who at this day shall read the Account which our Annals give of the Spanish Invasion carried on against England, which is so well defended by her natural Situa∣tion, and where vast Numbers of Brave and Mar∣tial People are never wanting, will conclude with himself, that Spain must have made sure to her Interests no small Party among us; from whose readiness to close with her Design, she took confi∣dence to call her Armado Invincible. Without an Encouragement of this nature, 'twould be at all times a vain Attempt to Invade England. But this Motive was not then wanting; for the Queen was Excommunicated, and her Subjects freed from their Allegiance by the Pope, by whom her Dominions were also disposed of to the King of Spain, who was therefore by the Papists (then a considerable part of the Nation) esteem'd as King de Jure, whilst Queen Elizabeth held only a bare Possession.

 But he who (an Age to come) shall read the History of the late Embarkation, in order to a French Invasion, and know that then the Papist was but the Two hundredth Man in the King∣dom, will admire from whence the French should have drawn their Encouragement to make a Con∣quest upon England; the Name of KING WIL∣LIAM will then shine in the History of this Age with a Brightness (at least) equal to any of his Predecessors in the Sovereignty of these Realms; And the Knavish Distinction of De Facto, which was the Foundation-stone of the late designed As∣sassination, Insurrection and Invasion, will be left out of his Title.
Your Lordship knoweth, that those who have refused to Swear Allegiance to His Majesty, are but a small Party, and the Papists are far from being any great one; so that the dead Weight which the French King must rely upon, are that Body of Men who own the King only as a bare Possessor of the Throne: To whom the Oath of Allegiance is (at best) but a meer Formality; very far from obliging them in Conscience to a vigorous Assistance of the King. That they them∣selves (I mean) think no otherwise, always is made evident, when a Non-Swearer meets with one of the same Principle with himself, but yet who hath sworn Allegiance. The first Question is, Whether he hath sworn Allegiance to the
P. of O? 'Tis answer'd, Yes. 'Tis demanded for what reason; And 'tis replied, Because he is now King of England. What Right hath he to the Crown of England? (saith the other, with some warm∣ness.) Truly, None (saith the Swearer,) but yet he is King de Facto. If Your Lordship is pleas'd to summ up these Answers, you will easily see if they amount to any more than this, viz. he hath sworn Allegiance to the P. of O. Because he is possessed of a Kingdom which of Right belongeth to another. I know that the Style of King William is allowed and used by these Men; but I am sure that Your Lordship did not think the Regal Power of this Realm, to which the Laws and Liberties of England are entitled, could be solidly founded on a meer Complement, or rather Reproach.
Nor is Your Lordship ignorant with what wonderful Zeal and Industry this weak Title (if it be any) was carried on. Not in∣deed by the way of Address, but of meer Noise and Effrontery. So that whosoever asserted His Majesty's Right to the Crown, from the Peoples Grant in Parliament, was for so doing marked out as an Enemy to the Church and Monarchy. And thus the King's Dutiful Subjects have been discouraged, because they own'd themselves bound in Conscience to support his Rightful Title, whilst the Right of King James was sacredly pre∣served,
and warmly defended by the De Facto Subjects of King William.
Could the French King have wished for more inviting Advantages to the pretended King's Re∣storation?
When I consider the wonderful and undeserved Deliverance which our good God, by his never failing Mercy, hath lately wrought for us; as I Congratulate the Joy of Christendom, of Europe, and of England, so I cannot omit to Congratulate a Treble Joy which particularly affecteth Your Lordship, arising from the Preservation of the Metropolis, Admiralty and Bank of England, all which are Your Lordship's honourable and near Concerns. And that there may never be wanting Men of Your Lordships Abilities, and true English Integrity to discharge the Trusts of the Nation, is the hearty wish of,
My LORD, 
