



DOctor Williams, Lord Arch-bishop of
York made an accurate Speech in Par∣liament,
to defend the rights of the Bi∣shops:
and the learned Bishop Hall, made
an abstract of his reasons, against which
Doctor Burgesse published an Examination,
wherein there is little material, if once the
principal doubt be cleared, whether Bi∣shops
had anciently Votes in Parliament,
and were Barons, or that which is equal, or
superiour unto Barons, being accounted
Thanes, in the times of the Saxons, before
the Conquest: which I hope is so fully
cleared in this following discourse, as there
will be little question remaining. Though
Parliaments began, as our Histories shew,
long after the Conquest, in this manner
as now they are held, yet they had Assem∣blies
(Gemots) of the Estates and prin∣cipal
nobility, whereof the Bishops and
Clergy were alwayes an eminent party, ac∣cording
to the Laws and Custome of those
times, and equivalent in authority to our

Parliament. They had several Gemots, as
the first was.
Wittena-gemott. idem apud Anglo-saxones
fuit, quod apud nos hodie Parliamentum:
parum{que} a Folkmotto differebat, nisi quod
hoc annuum esset & è certis plerum{que} causis,
illud ex arduis contingentibus, & legum con∣dendarum
gratia, ad arbitrium principis in∣dictum.
In Folckmotto semel quotannis sub initio
Calendarum Maii, (tanquamin anuo Parlia∣mento)
convenere Regni principes, tam Epis∣copi,
quàm Magistratus, liberique homines.
Iurantur laici omnes coram Episcopis in mu∣tuum
faedus, in fidelitatem & in jura Regni
conservanda. Consulitur de communi salute,
de pace, de bello, & de utilitate publica,
promovenda—&c.—
Sciregemott. (si pluries opus non esset) bis
solummodo in anno indicebatur, Aderat pro∣vinciae
Comes, aderat Episcopus, aderant Mag∣nates,
omnes Comitatenses. Episcopus jura
divina enuntiabat & vindicabat; Comes se∣cularia;
alter alteri auxilio: De causis hîc
cognitum est tam criminalibus, quam civilibus:
sed jurisdictiones postea separabat Gulielmus
primus: videtur hoc idem fuisse, quod olim

Turnum dicemus Vicecomitis, (non minus
quam hodie nunc dicitur) bis in anno teneba∣tur,
aderant que omnes unà comitatus magna∣tes,
& Teiti liberi.
Many other Gemots and Meetings they
had, but in all these publick Gemots, the
Clergy were principal members as appears
by the laws of King Edgar. Cap. 5. Gemottis
adsunto locii Episcopus, & Aldermannus (ho
est Comes) doceat{que} alter jus divinum, alter
jus saeculare. Thus the learned Glossary
sheweth, out of whom it was necessary to
shew the several assemblies then in use,
that we need not contend about the French
word Parliament, which came in use about
the time of Hen. 3. But whatsoever their
Assemblies were,Pag. 314.  the Bishops were alwayes
principal members thereof: and though
once in 25. Edward▪ 1. there is mention of a
Parliament at St. Edmunebury, whereby
the Clergy were excluded for denying of
money (which they refused to grant by
reason of a prohibition from Pope Boniface,
in regard of many Levies latel yraised upon
the state Ecclesiastical.) As of later times,
there was a Parliament once held without
Lawyers, in 6. Hen. 4. at Coventry, as both

our Histories do testifie, and also the Kings
Writ directed to the Sheriff,2. part. Caus. in dors. n. 4▪ whereof the
words are:—Noluus autem quod in seu
aliquis alius vicecomes Regni nostri praedicti,
aut Apprenticius, aut alius homo ad legem a∣liqualiter
sit electus. Vnde Parliamentum il∣lud
laicorum dicebatur, & indoctorum, quo
& jugulum Ecclesiae atrocis petebatur, as a∣learned
Author saith.
Yet I hope (notwithstanding the incon∣siderate
zeal of this Examiner;) our Hi∣stories
shall never be blemished, with such a
reproach, as to report the loss or defect
in Parliament, of either learned Clergy
or Lawyers, to direct and assist in what∣soever
matters are proper to their faculties,
and the publick welfare of the Kingdome.
The most Accurate History of the ancient City, and famous
Cathedral of Canterbury; being an exact Description of all
the Rarities in that City, Suburbs, and Cathedral: together
with the Lives of all the Arch bishops of that See, Illustrated
with divers Maps and Rigres, Published by Will. Somner
Author of the late Saxon Dictionary. 4to. And is to be sold
by Richard Thrale, at the Crosse-Keyes at Paul's gate, en∣tring
into Cheape-side.
