



Madam,
SInce the Authority of your Majesty hath appeared so particularly in a most Necessary Appointment of a Publick Fast and Humiliation to be Observed in most Devout and Solemn manner for Supplicating Almighty God for Pardon of our Sins, and Imploring his Blessing, &c. not once, but every Month during the War. It may be pre∣sumed, that what is sincerely endeavoured, that so Necessary and Pious a Command may happily obtain its desired Ef∣fects, cannot fail of a Favourable and Benign Construction with a person of so much Piety and Sense of Religion: though to those Naturals or Animals, in whom the God of this World hath blinded their Minds, it cannot but seem Foolishness and Canting, as must all Truth to those, who are both Ignorant and yet Conceited: and though to such as are Big with the Wisdom of the World (which is Foolishness with God) ome things in it may seem Rude and Presump∣tuous: For true Piety could bear even the Railing of a Shi∣mei in a time of Humiliation; and Christian Wisdom can easily discern and distinguish between Height of Fidelity and Affection in the plain Words of Truth and Soberness, and that Malice and Falsehood, which are always ingredients of Railing and Presumption. Even Civil Prudence, consider∣ing the irreparable Mischiefs, which are daily wrought in the Courts and Councils of Princes by Treacherous Flattery, will not only permit and allow, but favour and encourage Serious Liberty and Freedom of Speech upon just and neces∣sary occasion in persons of unspotted and undoubted Fidelity

and Affection: But Christian Wisdom much more; and especially in Times of Account, which call for Humiliation, Repentance, Reformation, and Judging our Selves; and for Publick Humiliation, and particular Confession of Publick and known Sins and Offences, with their Circumstances of Aggravation, and carefull Search to discover them. Which is the only way to lay a sure Foundation, and to be raised up by the Mighty Hand of God.
Wherefore, Madam, presuming that I write to a person more Illustrious by such Great Virtues, than any fading, earthly Honour or Majesty can make you, besides what I have said in Common to all, I shall out of Fidelity and great Affection humbly represent to your Royal Consideration some few things more particularly relating to your self.
I will not here recount the Great Things which God hath done for the Gradual raising of your Glory, nor tell you that the Eyes of all the World are upon you, and what Great Things they Hope and Expect from you: But this I may say in the Name of God, That his Eyes are upon you; the Eyes of the Lord, (which) run to and fro throughout the whole Earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them, whose Heart is perfect towards Him: (2 Chron. 16. 8.) That to whom much is given of them, much shall be required; and, That if you justly expect from your fellow Creatures, whom You imploy, Fidelity, Zeal, and Activity, proportionable to the Favours You confer, and the Trusts You repose in them; much more are You obliged to perform all these to the So∣veraign Lord of all in the full Improvement of all tose Grea∣ter Talents of Honour, Authority and other Advantages, which he hath conferred upon You, for His Honour and Ser∣vice; and with so much the more Vigor and Resolution, by how much the greater are the Difficulties which occur. The Highest pitch of all is the least Sacrifice that you can offer to Him.
And therefore I will not, I may not tell you, That the Lei∣sure, as well as the Calm of Peace, will be necessary for this: or, That your Resolving on it Inwardly before God, will be accepted

by Him, though you defer the Actual Performance till that Leisure and Calm, which you may never see, nor are ever like to see, while Difficult Duties are declined, neglected or deferred. For this would be to deceive You after the man∣ner of the False Prophets of old? and to expose You and Your Affairs to the Treacheries and Abuses of Dissolute and Depraved men, who be always truer to their Vices than to their Masters. But on the contrary, this I may be bold to affirm, that when by actual Discountenancing and Dis∣gracing of Vice, and Encouraging of Virtue by distinguishing Marks of your Favour; and by a visible beginning of Re∣forming your Court and your People, and particularly that Bo∣dy, which of all others should need it least, it is once understood that you are setled in those Noble Purposes, this will make the Execution of them Easie to you, and detect the Falsity of such dilatory Doctrines: and would have done so sooner if more Faithfull Advice had not been withstood by such as perverted the Right Ways of the Lord, and mis-led those they should have directed therein. For God hath wrought in the midst of us a Mighty Deliverance; and was ready to perfect and stablish that which he hath wrought for us. But it is now apparent that something there is, which doth stop that Course of Bles∣sings that, seems I cannot now say, but once did seem, ready to flow in upon us. And we have now another Count to cast up. We may and ought to recount the Mercies and Favours of God to us: But we have now, also an Account of his Judgments and Frowns to reflect upon: And this should lead us back to enter into another Account, viz. of Our Sins and Provocations. For that Course of Blessings, which for some time was only stopp'd, was afterwards turned to a Course of Crosses and Disappointments, or of a Mixture of Mercy and Judgment, and is now at last turning, it may be feared, to severe Judgment, Confusion, and Destruction, unless very speedily prevented, by strict and impartial Inquiry into the Causes, by truly Noble and Heroick Resolutions thereupon, and by a vigilant and vigorous Execution. For the King himself, if I, and many others, be not mistaken, hath already

suffer'd some Diminution in some Essentials of his Majesty, Honour, and most Prevalent Powers and is in Danger to fall lower, from being a Glorious Instrument of God for Good and Happiness to this and many other Nations, into the de∣plorable and despicable condition of being an occasion of Confusion and Misery: only there seems a door of Hope still open for him, upon one Consideration, if the Opportunity be not neglected; of which more presently: but first I think fit to say something briefly concerning The present State of Things in the World, and what may be expected from it.
In matters of Prudence, none but weak and dull, or de∣praved Souls will expect Mathematical Demonstrations and Sensible Evidences, for all their Actions: God by his Provi∣dence hath purposely so ordered the Course of things, that his Rational Creatures, Mankind, should be often necessita∣ted to a Close Application of their Minds, and a kind of Spiritual Discerning, in the Management of their own Af∣fairs. This Faculty, as may be perceived by Experience, if well disposed, and carefully observed, extends much farther in many-things than men are able easily to demonstrate to others, and yet even in those often discerns very right. But such Indications may sometimes be observed from a con∣currence of various Circumstances as are Sufficient Principles of a Moral Demonstration. My pre-apprehensions of our own Occurrences have hitherto proved true in the Event; and I have now some Indications to help me.
It is very apparent that there have been very few Princes or Great Men in the World for some years, or rather Ages, who have manifested in their Course of Life any great and just apprehension of the Business of Man upon Earth, much less of the Proper Business of Princes, and Persons under their Circumstances; But have generally both by their Example and their Management, been more subservient to the King∣dom of Darkness, than to the Kingdom of Light; And their Courts, Armies, Navies, and all their great Meetings, gene∣rally little other than Seminaries and Nurseries of Pride, Am∣bition, Covetousness, Injustice, Oppression, Luxury, Impiety,

Prophaneness, and all manner of Vice and Wickedness; where Souls in great numbers have been trained up and habituated to all the Diabolical Qualities of that dismal crew: and so deceived and abused have they been by False Prophets and other Instruments of that Kingdom, appearing great in the World in pomp and grandure, magnifick Names and Titles, the superficial Ornaments of Literature and Wisdom of the World, (all directly contrary to the Simplicity of the Gospel) that they have believed it must be so, and cannot be otherwise; we must not expect Armies of Saints; and so have plainly given over all Care of Reformation of those things, as Impracticable, Platonick or Phanatick-Phansies.
It is likewise apparent that the People in all places, even where hath been, or still is the greatest Profession of Religion, (both Laity and Clergy) are most grievously degenerated and corrupted; a great part with the most gross Vices, and scandalous Sins; others of more consideration and sense of Reputation, some with Atheism and Infidelity; others with Formality or Superstition; some with Hypocrisie and Facti∣on; and most of the very best with over-valuation of the things of the World, and with Pride of some Worldly Ad∣vantage, of Birth, of Estate, Favour with Great Men, Wit, Learning, Apparel, Attendance, or some such Hobby-horse or other, over-looking divers necessary Christian Virtues, and even to despise and be ashamed of Christ himself in his Mem∣bers, if appearing in the genuine form of their Master; so that a Genuine Compleat Christian is rare to be found in the World, especially among those who have the greatest share of it: and the Sins both of Princes and of People seem to have over-grown all the Methods of the Divine Providence for their Amendment.
And it is also apparent that such are the Posture and Mo∣tions of Humane Affairs at this time in Europe, as are plain Indications that Almighty God by his Providence is produ∣cing some Great Alteration in this part of the World very suddenly. And what this is like to be is well and carefully to be considered. Nor is it any presumption to do this soberly;

but so far from that, that to discern the Signs of the Times is a plain and necessary Duty; the Neglect or Non-observance whereof is condemned in the Jews in the like case, by our Sa∣viour, and before by the Prophets.
The present Posture of Affairs is a State of War, which is one of God's Judgments, for the Punishment of Princes and Na∣tions, and such as the present Sinfull State both of Prin∣ces and People hath justly deserved, and we may therefore reasonably conclude hath provoked. This War is between two great Parties, the French and Turk on the one side, and the Em∣peror and the Confederates on the other: And most Princes and States are concerned in it. And if we consider the Motions of this War, it was begun by the French King in secret Confe∣deracy with the Turk and the late Kings of England, without any Colour of Justice, merely to gratifie a Proud, Haughty, In∣solent, Luciserian, Domineering Humour, and carried on with barbarous Cruelty, even upon his own Subjects, and Devasta∣tion abroad. But the Divine Providence at last interposed, and put a Hook in his Nostrils, deprived him of the Assistance of both his Confedarates, and turned the Strength of one of them against him; and thereby gave an offer of Mercy, and a fair Opportunity to the Confederates to have been the Instruments of his Judgments against that Wicked Insolent Invader, had they wisely improved that Divine Favour, for the Service of God and the Reformation and Good of the People.
But they have all been insensible of, and unhappily neglec∣ted their Duty; and have likewise in a great measure lost that fair opportunity put into their hands; so that the Favour of the Divine Providence seems in some sort to have forsaken them, and gon over to their Enemies for the Punishment of this and all their former Sins and Miscarriages, and Unprofi∣tableness for his Service. And indeed whether we consider the Provocations of God's Judgments by this Neglect under such Circumstances, or the present State of Affairs (which I can∣not here particularly observe) both present us with too just reasons for some apprehensions, That that cruel and barba∣rous Tyrant may now be made the Terrible Instrument of the

Divine Vengeance, for purging these Countries of that Wick∣edness, which they would not reform; and for casting out such unprofitable Servants; unless it be prevented immediately by some extraordinary and vigorous Means of Reformation.
For, as all the Judgments of God are for Punishment of Sin, and Reformation of Manners; so the Common Sinfull State of all Nations in these parts, and the General Commotions of all, are a plain Indication of some Great Judgment coming up∣on all, who do not prevent it by speedy Repentance, and some notable Reformation. And because the Judgments of God are frequently executed not onely upon Persons, but in a special manner also upon such Things, as have been much abused to his dishonor or disservice, the Great Work, which all these Commotions overruled by the Holy Providence of God tend to, may in all probability be, not onely the Pu∣nishment of the Persons of all degrees, but the putting down or abolishing of all that Rule, Authority and Power in the World, which hath been so abused, unprofitable and disser∣viceable to their Great and proper Master, to make way for that Glorious Kingdom and Blessed Theocracy, which shall never be destroyed. This was begun, and should have been done by the Confederates against that Insolent Tyrant and common Oppressor, had they well considered their Business and subjected their Power to Their Sovereign, and used their Authority in subservience to this Great Work, first by Refor∣mation of themselves and of the People subjected to them. But they not considering, but neglecting this principal Part, the present Posture of things seems to theraten, That they may be first suppressed and the Sins and Wickedness of them∣selves and their People punished, by Him, and Himself at last for all his Insolence and Wickedness by some extraordinary Judgment. Yet possibly there is not any of them all, but if they shall in time open their Eyes, and without any sinister Designs to set up themselves, apply their Power sincerely and by direct and proper Means to promote the Service of GOD in this Great Work, they may be received and well rewarded, both with Honour here, and Happiness hereafter.
Of all the Confederates, none hath been more highly fa∣voured

by an Extraordinary Providence than King William; but in my apprehension, none hath more failed than he, con∣sidering his circumstances, in the Duty incumbent upon him; nor is any in greater danger both in that respect, and in re∣spect of the present State of his Affairs, which I take to be in all respects the Consequence of that. Onely there seems to be yet, as I said, a door of Mercy and Favour open for him, in as much as it is now apparent, that it was not wholly his Fault, but partly his Unhappiness, in that he had no better Guides to direct and admonish him; and if he yet be care∣full and resolute to doe what he ought, though now more difficult, and therefore to be performed with so much the greater Resolution, possibly he may recover in a great mea∣sure his former Prosperous Condition; though I doubt that He may suffer such loss, as may be just matter for a longer Sorrow and Repentance; and that he that hath troubled both Him and us shall bear his Judgment, whoever he be, unless he prevent it by some proper and eminent Works of Repentance.
Many things more I had to have said: but this first Work is of so great Importance, that unless it be instantly and effectually provided for, it will be in vain to think of far∣ther applications. Nay our very Fasting and Humiliation, and all the Prayers in the World, will avail nothing, unless the Troublers of Israel be brought forth, and the Accursed thing be removed. If this were once well resolved upon and concluded, it would not be hard to detect greater Troublers of our Israel, than those who are now in danger of their Lives; and soon to put things into such a posture of Security, as the King need not fear Confusions in his Absence, which other∣wise may be feared.
Yet one thing there is most peculiar to your self that however ought not to be omitted upon this oceasion; and that is the manifest Judgments of God upon your own Royal Family, and upon so near a Relation as a Father; and Judg∣ments both Spiritual, of strong Delusions; and Temporal, of just and deserved Exclusion from the Government of these Nations. The due Consideration whereof will easily disco∣ver

several Obligations upon you. 1. The Consideration of such Unhappiness of so near a Relation (which is matter not onely of particular Humiliation, but of continual Grief and Mourning) requires great Seriousness in all your beha∣viour, and Circumspection lest Prosperity make you forget it, and thereby offend God, and so bring Evil upon your self. 2. The Consideration of the Provoking Causes requires, first, your Humiliation under them, and that you be content and willing, and desirous that they may be plainly and fully de∣tected: first, that you may avoid them, and all partici∣pation in them, lest you be overtaken and involved in the Judgments of God upon them: but, secondly and principal∣ly, for the Glory of God, and manifestation of the Righte∣ousness of his Judgments: for should you offer to hinder this, as it would tend to the Scandal of his Righteous Judg∣ments, so it would certainly provoke him to detect all some other way to your greater Shame and Confusion, and bring the same Judgments upon your self. Secondly, It requires your utmost Care and Circumspection all your life long to avoid them, that you abhor them, come not near them, lest they lay hold on you: for of all they are the most dan∣gerous for You, by reason of the Participation in so great a Store of Guilt, and the Warning given you by such Judge∣ments, and the special Temptations you are like to meet with.
There is an Iniquity in that Family, which might be traced a great way back into Scotland; but King James I, came in∣to England by the Favour of Providence, in a State of Mer∣cy. And therefore we need look no farther back for this purpose. By and under the same Favour have all his Succes∣sors come to the Throne, and your self in particular: but they all forseited it, and that You may not, is this plain Advice written. His great Sins, which have most ensnared his Posterity were, 1. Great Injustice, and a very wicked Design by a Mystery of Iniquity to subvert a Noble Constitu∣tion of Government, which God had intrusted him with, and he had sworn to mainian; and, 2. Abuse and Prophanation of Religion to serve his Unrighteous Design. To give a parti∣cular account of each of these would be too long for this

place. But there are two Effects thereof which have ever since been very pernicious to his Posterity and to the King∣dom, and at the present are the greatest occasions of Trou∣ble and Danger to Your Government, above all other. The one is, False Notions concerning the Constitution of this Go∣vernment, Prerogative, and the Rights of the People, which cost your Grandfather his Head, and your Father his Crown, and at present mislead many worthy and honest Persons, to be your Adversaries, who would otherwise have been your loyal and faithfull Subjects; and would be much more mis∣chievous to you, if you should by that Faction, Flattery, or any Temptation be once possessed with them. They are in their original, a Mystery of Iniquity, a wicked Imposture, and such as the Vengeance of the Righteous God has pursued, and still will, till they be eradicated; and it concerns you much to be very carefull to avoid them, and that the Oc∣casions and Stumbling-stones be removed by some deliberate Acts of King and Parliament, and of a Convocation: for they will otherwise prove a Root of Bitterness to the whole race of the Authour. Your Government is Just and Right∣full, let but the Execution of it be so too, and God's Blessing will be upon it. The other is, the Overspreading of Prophane∣ness and Formality, which all Governours are obliged to use their utmost Care and Endeavours to reform, but You dou∣bly, that you may also discharge your self of the Guilt of your Ancestors; I might say trebly, viz. also out of Gratitude for the special Mercies and Favours you have received. Nay it is your special Business, as much to suppress that, as to cast out Popery, without which you cannot prosper.
That God will bless your Majesty, and that you may be faithfull to him, and to the Trust reposed in You, and may flourish in all Grace and Virtue and Prosperity, is the hearty Prayer of,

