



May it please your Lordship,
IT would be a Confidence very easie to be convicted of too arrogant presumption, should I be so vain as to imagine any thing of mine worthy, either of your Honours hands, or the publick view. But your Lordship having enjoyned me, the mean∣est of my Brethren, to preach before so learned an Auditory upon so solemn an occasion; and my labours finding accep∣tance beyond their worth, some of my Brethren (who have set a value upon them, above what I dare conceive to be in them) earnestly solliciting Copies of me, (that I might both satisfie their importunities, and withal ease my self
of the trouble of Transcribing) I have adventured them to the Press; which being emitted, must now come under the various Censures of the world, wherein I can never hope that they should relish well with every Palate; nor can I expect, (such are the different humours of men) that they should generally find such candid Readers, as in the Pulpit they were blessed with judicious and ingenuous Hearers: And therefore they dare not go abroad, unless sheltred under the wings of some honourable Patron. Par∣don me therefore (my Lord) if I presume to send them forth under the Ʋmbrage of your Reverend Name; Whose many expressions of Grace and Kindness to my unworthy self, have encouraged me to this Address; And who may by right, claim a special interest, both in all my labours, as mine Ordinary, to whom I am bound to be accountable for all my service in the Church; and peculiarly in these, as being performed by your Lordships special command. And if they shall be approved in your Lordships eye (which all, that know you, know to be most clear and piercing) I shall not have cause to suspect the Censures of any that are judicious; and others I shall not need to value. The Sermon (I confess) comes forth somewhat larger then it was preached, but not a jot altered in any material point; those who heard it, and shall now read it, will find it the same, though increased in some expressions and expli∣cations, which were prepared, but the streights of time would not permit to be then spoken. In this and all my la∣bours, my whole aim and design is,Ephes. 4.15. to Follow the Truth in love, and to assert it with sobriety. It will be the rejoycing of my soul to see every one in their stations, the Clergy especially to maintain the honour of their places by an holy, humble, peaceable and blameless conversa∣tion, which is the main thing this Sermon drives at. The
Government and Discipline of the Church of England, must be acknowledged excellent in its Constitution, and for the main and substance of it, exactly agreable to the Primitive Pattern: It would revive me to see every parti∣cular Act and Exercise of it as blameless in all the subor∣dinate Officers hands; Piety and Peace having their full incouragement; and all Sin and Impiety, Schism and Prophaness meeting with their proper Censures; that the Churches Judicatories may be revered of all, and despised of none.
It hath been a sorrow to my soul to see sometimes that high Censure of Excommunication so abused on slight and very trivial occasions, until I considered how an offence small in the beginning, was increased much by a superadded Contumacy, and the Ecclesiastical Court had no other way to vindicate it self from the contempt of such contumacious spirits, or to compel men to obey: And yet hath not this of late proved a sufficient remedy against the frowardness of perverse men, who slight even this, so far, as that by their own voluntary separations they prevent the Churches Censures, that the Church (as it may seem) shall not need to excommunicate them, who are Tit. 3.11. and do excommunicate themselves. It is my great expecta∣tion and hope, that when the right reverend Fathers of the Church, the Bishops of the upper, and the Reverend Clergy of the nether House of Convocation shall again assemble, some such effectual course will be found out to reduce men to, and preserve them in Peace and Order, that by a prudent exercise of Discipline in all parts there∣of the honour of the Churches Judicatories may be preserv∣ed, and yet so high a Censure may not be debased to secular ends, nor on low and light occasions; that even those who have evil will at Sion, may see, and be forced to ac∣knowledge,
that the Churches aim, is the spiritual and eternal Advantage of her Members, and not the worldly advantage of her Officers and Governours, whose eyes look not so low, as to a secular profit to themselves; and whose pious souls are cordially affected to, and only zealous for the real and proper interest of Christianity, viz. Pi∣ety and Peace in the Church.
My Lord, I have only this one thing to beg, that you would not judge me in this, so vain as to presume to teach or direct so venerable Fathers; but only accept of this Address as a faithful expression of mine high observance of your Lordship; to whose judicious and paternal Cen∣sures, I readily submit my self, and all my labours And as the Lord, who is theDan. 7.9. Antient of days, hath already adorned your head with that, which the wisest of meer men did deservedly call,Pro. 16.31. A Crown of Glory, Gray hairs found in the way of Righteousness: So that he would add to your days a Nestors years, that this little Di∣ocess may be still happy under your Lordships prudent and grave inspection: and when the time shall come that you must be gathered to your Fathers, that He will then tran∣slate you from your Throne in the Church on earth to a far more glorious Throne in the highest heavens, is, and shall still be the unfeigned Prayer of
 From my Vicaridge at Tunbridge, Novemb. 10. 1662.
