



My Lord,
IN obedience to Your Lordships Order I now
present to Your hands, not only the Ser∣mon
You lately heard, but those Ad∣ditions,
which the straits of time would
not then permit me to deliver. In all
which, I was so far from intending to stir up the Ma∣gistrates
and Judges to a Persecution of Dissenters,
as some ill men have reported, that my only design was

to prevent any occasion of it, by finding out a certain
foundation for a lasting Union among our selves. Which
is impossible to be attained, till men are convinced of the
Evil and Danger of the present Separation; it being
carried on by such Principles as not only overthrow the
present Constitution of our Church, but any other
whatsoever. For, if it be lawful to separate on a pre∣tence
of greater Purity, where there is an Agreement
in Doctrine, and the substantial Parts of Worship,
as is acknowledged in our Case; then a bare difference of
opinion as to some circumstances of Worship and the best
constitution of Churches will be sufficient ground to break
Communion and to set up new Churches: Which consider∣ing
the great variety of mens fancies about these matters,
is to make an infinite Divisibility in Churches, with∣out
any possible stop to farther Separation. But, if
after themselves are pleased with condescensions to their
own minds, any think it fit that others should be tied up,
notwithstanding their dissatisfaction; the world will judge
it too great partiality in them to think that none ought to
separate but themselves, and that the same Reason
will hold against themselves in the judgement of others; it
thereby appearing, that it is not Uniformity they dislike,
but that they do not prescribe the Terms of it.
But, my Lord, I intend not to argue the Case of Se∣paration
here, (which is at large done in the following
Discourse) but only to shew, how necessary it was in or∣der
to the laying a Foundation for Peace and Unity, to
have this matter throughly discussed. And if once the

People be brought to understand and practise their duty as
to Communion with our Churches, other Difficulties
which obstruct our Union will be more easily removed.
I have endeavoured to pursue my design in a way sui∣table
to the nature of it, without sharp and provoking re∣flections
on the Persons of any; which often set Friends
at distance, but never reconciled or convinced Adversa∣ries.
However, I must expect the Censures of such who
either make our Divisions, or make use of them for their
own ends: but I am contented to be made a sacrifice, if
thereby I might close up the Breaches among us.
God Almighty bless this great City and Your Lord∣ships
care in the Government of it; and grant that in
this our day, we may yet know the things that be∣long
to our Peace, and to the Preservation of the true
Protestant Religion among us.

