



My Lord and Gentlemen,
IT is the great Honour of this City,
since the Protestant Religion was pro∣fessed
in it, that it hath born a much grea∣ter
proportion to the rest of the Nation, in
publick Works of Charity, than in the
largeness of its Buildings, and number of
its Inhabitants. For when, upon the un∣reasonable
clamours of our Adversaries of

the Church of Rome, an account was
thought fit to be taken of such Acts of
Charity as lay more open to the view of the
World, within sixty years from the settle∣ment
of the Reformation by Q. Eliza∣beth,
it was found, that they exceeded all
that had been done in twice that number of
years in the time of Popery; and that there∣in
this City did equal the whole Kingdom
besides.Dr. Wil∣let's Sy∣nops. Pa∣pismi, p. 1219. 1224. And although those who make this
Report, complain of the too great reserved∣ness
of some Companies in making known
their Benefactours; yet upon the diligent
search some persons made, it did appear,
that as to the best parts of publick Chari∣ty
in founding Schools and Hospitals, &c.
more was done within that time, than from
the Conquest to the Reformation.
For, besides the large and constant Cha∣rity
of the City in the Care of their Ho∣spitals;
many particular Citizens did so
great things in several parts of the Nation
upon their own Stocks, that within that

compass of Time, more than forty Hospi∣tals
were built and endowed, and above
twenty Free Schools, and upon a reaso∣nable
computation, near a million of Money
was thought to be bestowed in Works of
Charity, in London and the two Univer∣sities.
This was the true Protestant Charity
of those times; which ran in a clear, free
and undivided Channel, without the mix∣ture
of Superstition, or being diverted from
its proper course to serve private ends and
designs. And this brought Honour to our
Religion; advanced the Reputation of
the City; and promoted the Good of the
whole Nation. And such are great and
wise ends; fit to be considered and carried
on by those to whom God hath given a heart
sutable to the largeness of their Estates;
which they can neither carry into another
World, nor better employ in this than by
doing Good to Mankind with them.
And as there still continued many and

undeniable Instances among true Protestants
of extraordinary designs of Charity by par∣ticular
Members of this City, whom God
had blessed in their Imployments; so I have
reason to hope, that this Age will afford
remarkable Examples of the same kind to
Posterity: That so our Protestant Faith
may be always found fruitfull in good
Works; which will be the best means
both to adorn and preserve it.
To perswade and encourage others to
tread in the steps of those worthy Citizens,
whose Faith and Charity deserve their
imitation, is the chief design of the follow∣ing
Sermon; which out of due Respect to
the Order of your Court, I now present
to your Hands; with my hearty Prayers to
Almighty God for the continuance of his
Blessing on this City and the Government
of it. I am,
My Lord and Gentlemen,
Your most faithfull and obedient Servant,

