



My Lord,
I Have heard that in some fa∣mous Prophetick Pictures pre∣tending to represent the Fate of England, the chief thing ob∣servable (in several of them) was a Mole; a creature blind and

busie, smooth and deceitful, con∣tinually working under Ground, but now and then to be discerned by the disturbance it makes in the Surface of the earth: which is so natural a description of a rest∣less party among us that we need no Iudge of Controversies to interpret the meaning of it. Our Forefa∣thers had sufficient Testimony of their working under Ground; but in our Age they act more visibly, and with that indefatigable industry, that they threaten (without great care to prevent them) the un∣dermining of our Church, and the Ruine of our established Religion. Which since they cannot hope so easily to compass alone, they en∣deavour to draw in to their As∣sistance, all such discontented parties, who are so weak, (if any can be so) to be prevailed on to be instruments to serve

them, in pulling down a Church, which can never fall, but they must be stifled in its Ruins. One would think, it were hardly pos∣sible, for any to run into a snare, which lies so open to their view; or to flatter themselves with the vain hopes of escaping better than the Church they design to de∣stroy. But such is the admirable Wisdom of Divine Providence to or∣der things so above all humane Di∣scretion, that when the Sins of a Nation have provoked God to for∣sake it, he suffers those to con∣curr in the most pernicious Coun∣sels for enslaving Conscience, who pre∣tend to the greatest zeal for the Liberty of it. So that our Church of England in its present conditi∣on, seems to stand as the Church of Corinth did of old, between two unquiet and boisterous Seas; and there are some very busie in

cutting through the Isthmus be∣tween them, to let in both at once upon it, supposing that no strength will be able to withstand the force of so terrible an inundation. It is a consideration that might dishearten those who are enga∣ged in the Defence of our Religion against the common Adversaries, to see that they promise them∣selves as much from the folly of some of their most seeming Ene∣mies, as from the interest and Power of their Friends:2 Cor. 7.5. thus like S. Paul in Macedonia, we are troubled on eve∣ry side, without are fightings, and with∣in are fears. If men did but once understand the things which belong to our Peace, we might yet hope to weather out the storms that threaten us, and to live, as the Church hath frequently done, in a tossing con∣dition, with waves beating on every side. But if through Weak∣ness

or Wilfulness, those things should be hid from our eyes, the prospect of our future condition is much more dreadful and amazing than the present can be.
If it were reasonable to hope, that all men would lay aside pre∣judice and passion, and have greater regard to the Common Good, than to the interests of their seve∣ral parties, they could not but see where our main strength lies, by what our enemies are most con∣cerned to destroy; And that no men of common understanding would make use of disunited Par∣ties to destroy one Great Body, un∣less they were sure to master them, when they had done with them; And therefore the best way for their own security were to unite themselves with the Church of England. That were a Blessing too great for such a People to ex∣pect,

whose sins have made our Breaches so wide, that we have too great reason to fear the com∣mon enemy may enter through them; if there be not some way found out to repair those Breaches, and to build up the places which are broken down.
For my own part, I cannot see, how those who could have joyn∣ed in Communion with the Christian Church, in the time of Theodosius the Great, can justly refuse to do it in ours. For that is the Age of the Church, which our Church of England since the Re∣formation, comes the nearest to; Idolatry being then suppressed by the Imperial Edicts, the Churches settled by Law under the Govern∣ment of Bishops, Publick Liturgies ap∣pointed, Antiquity Reverenced, Schism discountenanced, Learning encouraged, and some few Cere∣monies

used, but without any of those corrupt mixtures which af∣terwards prevailed in the Roman Church. And whatever men of ill minds may suggest to the dispa∣ragement of those times, it is re∣ally an Honour to our Church, to suffer together with that Age, when the Christian Church began to be firmly settled by the Counte∣nance of the Civil Power, and did enjoy its Primitive Purity without the Poverty and Hardships it endu∣red before. And the Bishops of that time were men of that ex∣emplary Piety, of those great Abi∣lities, of that excellent Conduct and Magnanimity, as set them above the contempt or reproach of any but Infidels and Apostates. For then lived the Gregories, the Basils, the Chrysostoms in the Eastern Church; the Ambroses, and Augustins in the Western; and they who can suspect

these to have been Enemies to the Power of Godliness, did never under∣stand what it meant.
It were, no doubt, the most desirable thing in our State and Condition to see the Piety, the Zeal, the Courage, the Wisdom of those holy Bishops revived among us in such an Age which needs the conjunction of all these together. For such is the insolency and number of the open contemners of our Church and Religion, such is the activity of those who oppose it, and the subtilty of those who undermine it, as requires all the Devotion and Abilities of those great Persons to defend it. And I hope that Divine Spirit which inflamed and acted them hath not forsaken that Sacred Order among us: but that it will daily raise up more who shall be able to convince Dissenters, that there may be true

and hearty zeal for Religion among our Prelates; and those of the Church of Rome, that Good Works are most agreeable to the Principles of the Reformation. Nay, even in this Age, as bad as it is, there may be as great Instances produced of real Charity, and of Works of Publick and pious uses, as when men thought to get Souls out of Purgatory, or them∣selves into Heaven by what they did. And if it were possible ex∣actly to compare all Acts of this nature which have been done ever since the Reformation, with what there was done of the same kind for a much longer time immedi∣ately before it, if the Protestant Charity should seem to fall short in outward Pomp and Magnificence, it would be found much more to exceed it, in number, and usefulness.
Which makes me so much the more wonder to hear and see, the

ill effects of the Reformation in this kind, so much insisted on of late, to disprove the Goodness of it. If some Great men had sinister ends in it, when was there any great Action of that nature, wherein some Per∣sons did not aim at their own ad∣vantage by it? Who can excuse all the Courtiers in the time of Con∣stantine, or all the Actions of that Great Emperour himself? Must Christianity therefore be thought the worse, because it did prevail in his time, and very much by his means? And there were some partial Historians in those dayes, that impute the demolishing of Heathen Temples and the suppres∣sing of Idolatry to the Rapine and Sacriledge of the Times. For even those Heathen Temples were richly endowed; and it is not to be sup∣posed, that when such a Tree was shaking, there would be

no scrambling for the Fruit of it.
However, we are not concern∣ed to justifie the Actions or De∣signs of any particular Persons how Great soever: but that which we plead for, is, that the Reformation it self was a just, pious, prudent, and necessary thing; and had both suf∣ficient Authority to warrant it, and sufficient Reason to justifie it.
We read in the Spanish History a remarkable Precedent, which vin∣dicates the proceeding of our Re∣formation in England. The Got∣thick Nation had been infected with Arianism two hundred and thir∣teen years, when by the means of Leander Bishop of Sevil, the King Reccaredus being duly informed in the Orthodox Faith, called a Council at Toledo,Concil. Tolet. 3.  wherein Arianism was renounced by the declaration and subscription of the King himself, be∣ing present in Council; and after∣wards

by the Bishops who joyned with him, and the Great men; which being done, the Council proceeded to make new Canons and Constitutions, which the King confirmed by his Edict, declaring, that if any Bishop, Priest, or Deacon refused to observe them, he was sen∣tenced by the Council to excommuni∣cation; if any of the higher rank of the Laity, the penalty was paying half their estates to the Exchequer, if others, confiscation and banishment. All which is extant in the Records of that Council. The Arian Bishops, as Mariana relates,Marian. de rebus Hisp. l. 5. c. 14, 15. such as Atha∣locus and Sunna with others, ha∣ving the old Queen Goswinda and several of the Nobility to joyn with them, made all the distur∣bance they could, to hinder the Reformation. But, God not only carried it through, but wonder∣fully preserved the Life of the

King, notwithstanding many con∣spiracies against him; after whose death, the Arian faction was very busie, and made several Attempts by Treason and Rebellion to be re∣stored again; and they once thought themselves sure, when they had gotten Wittericus of their party to the Throne, but his short Reign put an end to all their Hopes. I find some of the latter Spanish Historians much troubled to see all done in this Reforma∣tion, by the King, and the Bishops, and Great men, without the least mention of the Popes Authority. Lucas Tudensis therefore saith, that Leander was the Popes Legat, but Mariana confesses,Marian. l. 6. c. 1. that the very Acts of the Council contradict it. He would have it believed, that they sent Legats to the Pope afterwards to have the Council confirmed by him; but, he acknowledgeth, that no∣thing

appears in History to that pur∣pose: and if any such thing had been, it would not have been o∣mitted in the Epistles of Gregory,Greg. Registr. l. 1. ep. 41. who writ to Leander a Letter of congratulation for the conversion of Reccaredus. But then National Churches were supposed to have Power enough to Reform them∣selves, provided, that they pro∣ceeded according to the Decrees of the Four General Councils.
And this is that we maintain in behalf of the Church of England, that it receives all the Creeds which were then received, and hath reformed those Abuses only which have crept into the Church since that Time.
This, My Lord, is the Cause, which by Command of my Superi∣ours, I was first engaged to defend; among whom Your Lordships Pre∣decessour (whose constant Friend∣ship

and Kindness I must never for∣get) was one of the Chief. Since that time, I have had but little respite from these (not so pleasing to me, as sometimes ne∣cessary) Polemical Exercises; and notwithstanding all the Rage and Malice of the Adversaries of our Church against me, I sit down with that contentment, that I have de∣fended a Righteous Cause, and with an honest Mind; and therefore I little regard their bitterest Cen∣sures and Reproaches.
In the midst of such a Croud of Adversaries, it was no unpleasant entertainment to me to see the various methods, with which they have attacked me; some with piteous moans and outcries, others grinning and only shewing their teeth, others ranting and Hector∣ing, others scolding and reviling; but I must needs say, the Adversary

I now answer, hath shewed more art and cunning than all the rest put together; and hath said as much in Defence of their Cause, as Wit and Subtilty could invent (I wish I could speak as freely of his Fair dealing, and Ingenuity.) Him therefore I reserved to be answered by himself, after I had shaken off the lesser and more barking Creatures.
What I have now done, I hum∣bly present to Your Lordships hands; and I am very glad of this opportunity to declare what sa∣tisfaction the Members of Your own Church, and the Clergy of this great City have to see a Person of so Noble Birth, so much Temper and Prudence, so firm an Assertor of the Protestant Religion and Church of England, appointed by his Ma∣jesty to have the Conduct and Go∣vernment of them. That God Al∣mighty

would assist and direct Your Lordship in those things which tend to the Peace and Wel∣fare of this Church, is the hearty Prayer of
My Lord,

May 30. 1676.
