



SIR,
IT is your seriousness in Reli∣gion, together with your intimate Acquaintance with, and respect for, Reverend Mr. Owen Stockton, that occasioneth the pre∣fixing your name to the ensuing Treatise, of which he was the Author. He was one, mighty in the Scriptures, whose Life was much desired, and his Death much lamented. As you de∣lighted
to hear him Preach when he was alive; So I doubt not, but he being dead, you are wil∣ling to hear him yet speaking; especially in a word of Consola∣tion against the troubles of Life, and the fears and terrours of Death.
I hope the Lord hath deliver∣ed your self from the Sting of Death, but yet you may need some help against the fear of it. Take a survey of your Mercy, that you are not under the un∣happiness of Christless Souls, who, through the fear of Death, are all their life time subject to Bondage.
It is said, that the Indians being alarum'd with the Approaches of Death by its Arrestment, so as all
hope of recovery is past, then to behold and hear their throbbing sobs, and deep-fetched sighs, their grief-wrung hands, and tear-bedewed cheeks, their dole∣ful cries, would draw tears from Adamantine Eyes, that be but Spectators of their mournful Obsequies.
Indeed it is unexpressibly sad, to be under a Conviction (as ma∣ny are) of the immortality of a never dying Soul, and yet to be Strangers to the promise of Eter∣nal Life. Such must needs be Mourners without hope.
All the Cordials in the World in this case, will not afford the least drop of refreshment to such disconsolate Souls: nor will a Righteousness of our own be a
sure bottom for Comfort against that last Enemy Death.
But behold, here is a way de∣ciphered, whereby we may not only be helped to leave Riches, Friends, Wife, Children, Hou∣ses, Lands, and depart in peace, but also with exceeding joy. [In∣terest in Christ] will be a means to turn Death the King of Ter∣rors into the King of Comforts; it will make it of a bitter Enemy, a familiar Friend, an Out-let to Affliction, and a Portal to Glory.
How that [Interest] conduceth to the fitting a Soul with Conso∣lation, is discovered here, by this eminent Servant, and Minister of Jesus Christ, Mr. Owen Stockton, in a Funeral Sermon upon the Death of Mrs. Ellen Asty, (the
Relict of that Reverend Mr. Asty, late of Stratford in Suffolk) which afterwards he much enlarged, and so left it under his own hand. It was intended that the said Mr. Stockton should have printed it to∣gether with her Life; but Death arresting him, before he had Ac∣complished that work; Provi∣dence hath cast it upon my hands to draw her Portraiture out of the papers which were in his hands to that end; which I have done ac∣cordingly, and here present it to your self, and to publick view. I must say further, that this is a Branch, or part of a Treatise of his, on the same Text, entituled [the best Interest], which probably will follow speedily. This, and that together, compleat the Subject,
yet either of them might have appeared to the Reader, as a per∣fect and distinct Treatise, had I not hinted thus much.
I shall only add, that my ar∣dent desire is, that the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, may bless you with all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly places in Christ, so prayeth,
September 1. 1681.
Honoured Sir,

