



Noble Lieut. Generall,
SUch great multitudes of men are daily im∣portuning you, with their implorations of Your favour and assistance, that I still judge it more expedient, and lesse trouble∣some, to present mine in writing, to your Honours, to waite (as I desire this description of the Civill Government of Jersey may doe) for your best opportunity of consideration thereof. Truly Sir, now it hath pleased the Lord to bring me safe againe here, from the reduction of that Isle, I have thought it a part of my duty, having been bold to promise it you heretofore; and having found you so cordiall to bring that to passe, so ready, diligent, and compassionate, to help our poore Country-men out of their eight yeares exile, and generally all the people of that place, out of a most Tyrannicall bondage; All which your Noble deeds are well knowne there. For your Heroicall Actions every where, for the Common-wealth, have made your care of Mercy, and Justice, so highly famous, that it begat, in the poore Islanders, strong hopes of your media∣tion
towards the Parliament, for the Patronization of their hitherto (since the Divine Common-wealth of Israel) un∣paralleld Freedome.
Michael Lempriere Esquire, the Bailly of that Jurisdi∣ction, did lately send an Accompt of the said Government, to the Parliament, also particularly the same to the Coun∣sell of State and to my Lord Generall; but while he was intending one for your Honour, the sad newes of the decease, of your Noble, and most Christianly vertuous Lady, did cause him to forbeare; judging it unfit to adde then trou∣ble to your trouble by any importunity. I must acknow∣ledge, the same consideration hath made me so much back∣ward from presenting my selfe before you, since my arrivall; not any forgetfulnesse of the respects I doe owe to your Ho∣nour. It is true, you were at first in the Country; yet now, that I hope, the Lord hath been pleased to begin to stirre up againe, in your heart, the power of that holy Spirit called the Comforter, to moderate your just sorrow, in a measure according to his will; and that the publique good of my Country calleth upon my Conscience, I must infringe some∣what the rules of Civility, and importune you with these Lines, which are abrupt, because my particular Obligati∣ons could not let me be free from sadnesse, when all honest people suffer a losse, whereof you suffer the immediate afflicti∣on. In this Description, which is not different from that sent by the said Bailly, but only in few things, which he, for brevi∣tie sake, omitted, and I have added; it being true, that the true description of a thing must be like the same thing it selfe; you will see a great excellence of Government, in re∣spect of all other Governments practised, since the Common∣wealth of Israel.
First, because the People doth freely use to chuse, and e∣lect all their Officers, except very few, which were some at the Kings, others at the Baillys denomination.
Secondly, Because the Sufferers can procure the execu∣tion of our Lawes against any one that wrongeth them, at ve∣ry small expences, and indeed, ordinarily for nothing; the Guilty being alwayes sentenced to all the Charges, and Dam∣mages he hath caused.

Thirdly, Because the way and meanes to prosecute Justice in that Island is plaine, common, and easie, full of Huma∣nity, Gravity, and Civility, and short, without Circulati∣ons from Pilate to Herodes, and from Herodes to Pilate back againe; All in the naturall Language of the Inhabitants neverthelesse very Majesticall, consequently terrible as much as possible to Evill-doers, and comfortable to the lovers of Righteousnesse; the true use of the sword of Magi∣stracy.
Fourthly, because there is a sufficiency of Officers to doe all Functions requisite for the procuration, propagation, and preservation of the publicke good, not onely in necessaries, but in contingencies also; and that so prudently, that every Parish, being divided into convenient Divisions, hath in each at least an Officer, which over-seeth it, and keepeth the wicked in awe so, that no Vagabond, or idle Fellow, can be lurking any where to commit vices, and not be taken notice of presently, and prevented, or apprehended; the poore and the sicke visited constantly, and taken care of by due distributions from the Treasure of the Parish, and o∣therwise. By this meanes also, all Orders, and Ordinances of the Magistrate, Civill and Military, are ordinarily published, and made knowne to the people with much ease, and without charges to the State, at their very houses; which may be done in few houres all over the Country; although there is used also a generall way of Proclamations at the Market place, in open Market time, and on Sundaies, im∣mediately after Sermon, in their Parochiall Assemblies, so that in three houres all the people useth to be in a Body, un∣der their Armes, for their defence. After notice given so orderly, none can plead cause of ignorance; Collections and Leavies of Men, or other things whatsoever are by this meanes presently done, without charges to the State. A good distribution is necessary, to governe well.
Fifthly, Because the Lawes used in the said Government are very few, but sufficient distinct, cleare, short in Maximes, or Sentences, knowne of the very poore silly Women, most of them very excellent; Those that are not so, may be abroga∣ted
for future time, and better ones made in their roome.
Lastly, No false Bargaines, Sales, or Cheating convey∣ances can be made in that Government.
Pray read it, compare it with all others, and I am confi∣dent, you will esteeme it worthy the consideration of every good Common-wealths-man; and pardon freely,
SIR,  
London,
March, 1. 1651.
