



Most Glorious, and Dread Sovereign,
WHo, or what am I, whom thou hast chosen to plead hy Controversie, and o go, as an Herauld of War, before the Lord of osts? Alas! I am a
Child;Jer. 1.6. and the Work i too great for me. But Lord, if thy poor Strip∣ling must go; provid both the sling and th stone, the Word, and the Spirit; that this uncir∣cumcised Goliah of Si which hath defied the God of the Armies of Israe may fall before it. Out  the Mouthes of Babes a Sucklings,Psal. 8.4. hast thou ordaine strength; Even so, Fathe for so it seemed good in t sight.Match. 11.26. O, let it be accor∣ding to thy Word! Lord thou knowest, Thou ha
put me on hard, yet happy work; Thou hast et me in the place of Dragons; Lions are in my way; they are a stiff-necked (though thy own) People, unto whom thou hast sent me; Will they believe, or hearken o thy Voice! And now,Exod. 4.1. Lord, what wilt thou do or thy poor Servant, that is willing to adventure to the utmost for thee? Thou knowest my In. ufficiency, and where y strength lyeth; O, withdraw not thy hand,
even thy Right Hand, but deliver me out of the great vva∣ters,Psal. 144.7, 8 from the hand of strang children, vvhose mouth speaket vanity, and their right hand  a right hand of falshood; the vvill I sing a nevv song un thee, O God. Be thou  Mouth unto me, and  will be a Mouth for the Prepare my heart, guid my pen, open my under∣standing; settle, sanctifi and enlarge my judge∣ment; inspire my Sou and set every Povver of  in tune; Fill my Quive guide my eye, and pro∣sper
my hand! Lord, I have none to help me, none to protect me, no Mecoenas, but thy blessed Self, to fly for Patronage, and Refuge to; The Work is thine, wilt not thou own it? the Message is thine, wilt not thou bear me out in it? Thou hast sent me; O send thine Angel, thy Spirit, thy Presence with me! I do so∣lemnly choose thee this day, for my all sufficient Portion and Companion, and the Shield of thy Grace, for my defence; Accept
both the person, and the offering of thy Servant; Suffer me to imbovver it under that golden Wing, from whence I desire to pluck my Quill. O let Him defend it, that at first inspir'd it, and who alone can, and will par∣don the many faults of it; and then the Glory of all, which is his pecu∣liar Deodand, shall be humbly presented Him, on the broken Censer of my Heart. Prosper thy Work in my hands; let me not return with my
Net broken and empty; let me go forth weeping, bearing precious seed, so that I may come again rejoicing, bringing my Sheaves with me. The happy success of my la∣bour and travel, is all the wages I look for, in this world; If thy Name may be glorified, thy People awakened and reformed, thy ends accomplished; I have what I aim at. O let me hit that mark, though I break my bow! let thy Pills work, though thou burn the paper they were
wrapt in! Lord! what∣ever become of me, let it go well with thy Name, thy Interest, thy Church in the Earth!
Thou hast sent me, as once thou sentest Jonas to Nineveh; to proclaim the Lords Warr, and to plead with thy People; put words into my mouth, and cause the Inhabi∣tants of the Land to hear. Thou hast stricken us,Jer. 5.3. but we have not grieved, thou hast con∣sumed us, but we have refused to receive correction.Lam. 1.4. The wayes of Sion do mourn;  Her Ad∣versaries
are the chief, her ene∣mies prosper; for the Lord hath afflicted her.  Jerusalem hath grievously sinned, therefore is she removed; all that honoured her, despise her.  Her filthiness is in her skirts, she remembreth not her last end, therefore she came down wonderfully.  All her People sigh, they seek bread, they have given their pleasant things, for meat to relieve the Soul.  Sion spreadeth forth her hands, and there is none to com∣fort her: the Lord hath com∣manded concerning Jacob, that his Adversaries should be round about him: Jerusalem is as a
menstruous woman among them. For these things I vveep,  mine eye, mine eye runneth dovvn vvith vvater.— When shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged?Isa. 27.9. and this be all the fruit, to take avvay sin;Is. 10.12. When will the Lord have performed his vvhole vvork upon mount Zion? Turn again our captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the South. O suf∣fer thy poor children to wrestle with thee! Say not unto us, Let me alone: We cannot, we dare not, we will not let thee thus alone. Our hearts are breaking for thee; we
know not what to do: we can do no less, we can do no more, than cry un∣to thee. O, remember thy Covenant, and what there hath past, and been mutually sworn and seal∣ed to, between thy bles∣sed Self and us, in the day of our Espousals. Were we thine then, and are we not thine still? Hast thou repented of thy Choice? Didst thou not know what we were, and whence we were, and how we would prove? Lord, have we deceived
thee? and is the Relation void, unto which thou hadst adopted us in Christ Jesus? The Lord forbid! O suffer thy poor chil∣dren to hold thee to thy word, which thou canst not, thou wilt not break. Let us call thee Father stil!, vvhatever be either our Offence, or our Af∣fliction.Hic ure, tunde, seca, mo∣dò in ae∣ternum parcas. Bern. Chastise us, so that thou vvilt but love us: let Enemies rise vvith∣out, so that Enemies may fall vvithin. Righteous Father, we complain not of thee, though vve thus
complain to thee. Thou hast nourished,Isa. 1.2. and brought us up, but we have re∣belled against thee. We are reaping our own harvest; and drinking the wine of our own mingling. Time was, that we had the Bridegroom with us, and then we knew not what Weeping meant: We have been visited vvith our day, a day of Peace; but we knew not the things of our Peace, in the day of our Visitation. We heard thy Voice, thy sweet, thy pleasant Voice; but then
vve had other things to do; The Flesh, the World, the Devil, out∣cryed thee; the bonds of Ini∣quity, the chains of the strong man were upon us: But vvhen thou gavest thy parting knocks, and turn dst the Key upon us, our hearts melted like vvax, and our Souls vvere filled vvith the O∣dours of thy sweet-smelling Myrrh. On this Scent, Lord, vve follovv hard after thee; vvhile our enemies,Cant. 5.5, 7. (the VVatchmen that go about the City) pursue.
O, how long! how ong! wilt thou hide thy self in thy displea∣sure? until we acknow∣ledge our offence,Hos. 5.15. and seek thy face? Lord, thou knowest, we freely ac∣knowledge all that thou hast pleased to con∣vince us of; we seek thy face. And now, what doth the Lord require of us? O, VVhy is his chariot so long a coming?Judg. 5.28. why tarry the wheels of his chariots?Psal. 68 13. How long shall thy Beloved lye among
the Pots? and thy chil∣dren cry in vain? O what is the Cloud that covers thee? Surely 'tis no little cloud that can hide so great a Presence; no small offence, that can pro∣voke so patient, so indulgent a Father Thou wilt not, thou canst not be angry, for trifles. Who, where i he, that hath been th Make-bate between us  Come,Jon. 1.7. and let us cast lots that we may know, for whos
cause this evil is come upon s: Be it our Benjamin,  right hand, or a right ye, let it die, and et us be the Lord's Bond-men. This is the business, that is before thy servants: vve are come to cast lots on ur Selves, this day; that we may know, who, and what it is, that hath troubled the Camp. Give a perfect lot, make a convincing Evidence: though it be a Jona∣than,1 Sam. 14.39. he shall surely
dye: be it a pleasant Daughter, an only child, that hath been wont to court us with Tim∣brels and dances,Judg. 11.34, 35. it shall be as the Daughter of Jephthah; For we have opened our Mouth unto the Lord, and vve wall not go back. Lord, Wilt thou make a Covenant this day with thy Ser∣vants, that are un∣feignedly willing to re∣nevv their broken Co∣venant vvith the Lord their God? Shall it once
more be said, that the Lord delighteth in Eng∣land? Wilt thou once more betroth us to thy self for ver? yea,Hos. 2.19. betroth us unto hee, in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving-kind∣ness, and in mercies, and in faithfulness; Prune us, lop us, dig us, dress us, and then try us once more. O, vvhat a Garden? what a Husbandry? what a Workmanship, mayst thou make of us? vvhat a Temple? vvhat a Tower, mayst thou build to


thy great Name, in the midst of us! hovv Fair! how Beautiful mayst thou make us! Dear God! Once more  once more, try vvhat thou canst do vvith, and for, poor England! O  let us once more look from the top of A∣mana,Cant. 4.8. and Shenir, and Her∣mon, from the Lions dens from the Mountains of the Leopards, and stay thy rough vvind,Isa. 27.8. in this the day of the East-wind
And now, that thy
vvrath is gone out, and thy Plague begun among thy peo∣ple;Numb. 16.46, 47, 48. Suffer thy poor ser∣vant to take his Censer; et thy Spirit put on e from the Altar, and hy dear Son, my dear∣st Saviour, put on In∣ense, and so let him be one of those that stand between the dead and the li∣ing; to turn away thy vvrath from Israel. Ac∣cept of his pleading with Thee, and give success to his pleading with Man; That thy
Rod may not leave us in our Ruins, nor in our Sins. Lord, thou hast us now on the wheel, mayest thou not novv fashion us on vvhat mould thou vvilt! Thou hast us in the Furnace, mayest thou not make of us vvhat thou plea∣sest? Thou hast us in the Nets, mayest thou not bind us to what thou wilt? Thou hast found us in our Month, vvilt thou novv take the advantage on us
and bring us to thine ovvn terms? O Lord,Isa. 62.3, 4. Spare Jerusalem! and see it a quiet habitation. Say unto England, Thou shalt be a Crovvn of Glory, in the hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the hand of thy God; thou shalt no more be termed, Forsaken; nei∣ther shall thy Land any more be termed, Desolate; but thou shalt be called Hephzibah, and thy Land Beulah: For the Lord delighteth in thee, and thy Land shall be married. Look down from Heaven,
and behold,Isa. 63.15, 16, 17. from the Habitati∣on of thy Holiness, and of thy Glory: Where is thy zeal, and thy strength; the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy Mer∣cies towards me, are they re∣strained? Doubtless, thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: Thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Re∣deemer, thy name is from ever∣lasting. O Lord, why hast thou made us to err from thy from thy wayes? and hardned our heart from thy fear? Return, for thy Servants sake, the Tribes
of thine Inheritance, for thy Mercies sake for thy great Name's sake, for thy Covenant's sake, for thy Christ's sake, re∣turn, return. Even so Lord! Amen! Amen!
