


THAT Religion hath a super∣lative Excellency, is confessed more than once by the wisest of Kings, Prov. 3. 15. 4. 7, &c. And would Men of the meanest Parts, and slowest Conceptions desist a little from the laborious pursuit of their sinful pleasures, and give their Fa∣culties, some intermission, so much breath from that hot chase, as may qualifie them for a calm, considerate view of things; 'tis certain they would discern, that Vertue has a much more ravishing appearance, in∣finitely
 more delectable and enamou∣ring, than all the Devils Opticks could put upon their most gustful Sensualities. The great Advantages, that come to Mankind by Religion and Vertue, both to Humane Societies and Particular Persons, bespeak the transcendent Excellencies of it.
1. Religion brings great Advan∣tages to Humane Societies, Cities, Countries and Kingdoms. I know some great Ones of the World have been jealous of the Kingdom of Christ, as Herod was troubled when he first heard of his Birth: yet others, who have followed the Dictates of natural Reason only, and been su∣perstitiously over-aw'd by a Deity, have look't upon it as a necessary Ba∣sis to found Government upon, without which it can no more subsist than a Castle in the Air. I will mention two great Advantages that will come to Human Societies by Re∣ligion,
 and wherein their Happiness doth consist, viz. Peace and Plenty. Where these two are enjoy'd a Peo∣ple cannot be miserable, and where either of them is wanting they can∣not be happy.
1. Religion brings the Blessing of Peace along with it; and this is no mean Blessing. Outward Peace is the chiefest of outward Blessings; it gives sweetness and beauty to all o∣ther Blessings. The very Name of Peace is sweet, saith the Philosopher. The Psalmist pronounceth that Peo∣ple happy, who have it. Psal. 144. 15. Happy is the People, that is in such a case. Now this great Blessing is the product of Religion: And this it ef∣fecteth two ways. 1. By removing the Causes of Quarrels and Conten∣tions. 2. By obliging Men to the observance of such Precepts, and in∣fusing into them such Principles, as naturally tend to Peace.
 1. By removing the Causes of Strifes and Contentions; and they are chiefly two: the Curse of God upon them, and their own Lusts within them. 1. The feud and ho∣stility, jars and quarrels among men are part of that Curse, which lies upon Mankind for his Apostacy from God. We read Gen. 3. 17, 18. How the Ground was cursed for Mans sake: Thorns and Thistles shall it bring forth to thee. But a far grea∣ter Curse 'twas, that one Man should become as a Thorn and Briar to fetch blood of another. Assoon as Man fell out with God, there was a Fire kindled at his own door, in his own nature. Now where Religion is cordially embraced, this cause of Quarrels and Contentions, the Curse of God, is removed. 2. Their own Lusts within them. Jam. 4. 1. From whence come wars and fightings among you? Come they
 not hence, even of your lusts, that war in your members? Lust is the Make-bate in a Community: Covetous∣ness, pride, passion, hatred, envy, intemperance, ambition—make Men quarrelsom and contentious. Now Religion mortifies these vile and cor∣rupt affections; Rom. 6. 6. Gal. 5. 24. Religion files off the ruggedness in mens spirits, removes the harshness of their tempers, and extirpates all those passions and vices, which ren∣der men unsociable and troublesom one to another.
2. By obliging Men to the obser∣vance of such Precepts, and infusing into them such Principles, as natu∣rally tend to Peace. 1. By ob∣liging men to the observance of such Precepts, as have a natural tendency to the Peace of Human Societies. This is most clear from that one general Rule propounded by our Saviour (with which Severus the Emperour
 was so taken, that he caus'd it to be written in his Palace, and other publick Places), Mat. 7. 12. What∣soever ye would, that men should do to you, do ye even so to them. When we have to do with others, we must put our selves into their condition, and consider how we should desire to be dealt with in such a Case. Were this Precept of Christ generally ob∣serv'd, all Quarrels and Contentions would presently cease. How gently and tenderly would Superiors behave themselves towards their Inferiors? And with how much respect & obser∣vance would Inferiors carry themselves towards their Superiors? The Rich would not with-hold from the Poor, nor the Poor by his idleness be un∣necessarily burdensom to the Rich. The Lender would not take advan∣tage of the necessity of the Borrower, nor the Borrower ungratefully defraud the Lender. The Seller would not
 deceive or over-reach the Buyer, nor the Buyer under-value the Goods of the Seller.
There are likewise more particu∣lar Precepts, that have a natural ten∣dency to preserve and promote Peace among men; as That we must forgive wrongs, love our Enemies, keep in our places, mind our own business, be con∣tent with our present state &c. 2. By infusing into men such Principles, as naturally incline to Peace; as love, self-denyal, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness,—The Alcoran saith, God created the Angels of light, and De∣vils of the flame. Wicked men, who are like unto, and acted by the Devil, are furious and wrathful, all of a flame: But where Religion is em∣braced, and prevails upon men, ther's light and love, coolness and calmness of temper. Grace smooths and po∣lishes the most knotty piece; it turns the Vulture into a Dove, the Briar in∣to
 a Myrtle-tree, the Lyon-like fierce∣ness into a Lamb-like gentleness. Es. 11. 6—The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid: and the calf, and the young lion and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. The sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice den. They shall not hurt, nor destroy in all my holy mountain.
Here is laid down the strange ef∣fect, that the Gospel should have up∣on those, who by the ministry there∣of shall be subdued unto Christ, and become loyal Subjects of his spiri∣tual Kingdom. O what a metamor∣phosis doth it make! Those who be∣fore were full of rage and fierceness, hereby become gentle and peacea∣ble.
 Religion fills men with a spirit of universal love and good-will. And so much for the first great Advantage, that Religion brings to Human Soci∣eties, the Blessing of Peace.
2. Plenty is likwise the product of Religion; and that both Naturally and Morally: Naturally, as it makes men frugal, and temperate, and di∣ligent in their Callings: Morally, as it brings the Blessing of God upon their enjoyments and undertakings, Levit. 26. 3—If ye walk in my sta∣tutes, and keep my commandments, and do them; Then I will give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield her increase. Again, Deut. 28. 2—All these blessings shall come on thee, and over∣take thee, if thou shalt hearken vnto the voice of the Lord thy God. Blessed thou shalt be in the City, and blessed thou shalt be in the field—And ver. 8. The Lord shall command the blessing upon thee in thy store-houses, and in
 all that thou settest thine hand unto. Thus you see what Advantages come to Human Societies by Religion: it procures the choice Blessings of Peace and Plenty, wherein their Happiness doth consist.
2. Let us in the second place con∣sider how advantagious Religion is to particular Persons; and in reference only to the Good things of this life viz. Honours Pleasures, and Profit: Things which all men carnestly de∣sire, and set the highest value upon. 1. It brings Honour. Observe what honourable Titles are given to good men in Scripture; they are called princes in all Lands, a crown of Glory, a royal Diadem, a chosen Generation, the Excellent of the earth, &c. What Diogenes said of Learning, is appli∣cable to Religion: It makes young men sober, old men happy, poor men rich, and rich men honourable. Vertue is a lasting Pillar, that causeth the righte∣ous
 to be had in everlasting remem∣brance. The disgrace which wicked men cast upon them, is at worst but like the noise of some loud tongue-Gun gone as soon as heard; but the Honour, which God and good men put upon them, is a pillar that en∣dureth to all Eternity; such a monu∣ment, as neither time nor envy can waste or wear out. 2. It brings Plea∣sure. I know Satan would represent Christians under uggly Vizards, and Christianity in the most frightful a∣verting forms, to make men loath both the one and the other: But Religion is far from such a crabbed face, and austere countenance. Joy is one essential part of it. Rom. 14 17. The Kingdom of God consisteth not in meats and drinks, but in Righteousness, and Peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Her ways (saith Solomon speaking of Wisdom) are ways of pleasantness. Prov. 3. 17. The Pleasure which Re∣ligion
 yields, is. 1. Cordial; it doth not only, with Oyl cause the face to shine, but with Wine make the heart glad. The Blessed Virgin's expression is: My spirit rejoiceth in God my Sa∣viour, Luke 1. 47. 2. 'Tis pure and unmixed. Ther's nothing adhering to it to make an abatement, or put a check to it. 3. 'Tis permanent and lasting. Carnal Pleasure is of a short continuance. Job. 20. 5. The trium∣phing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment. And Solomon compares it to the crackling of thorns under a pot, Eccles. 7. 6. Carnal Joy, like a standing pool quickly dries up, and leaves nothing but the mud of discontent: Whereas the Pleasure, that Religion yields, is like a fountain of water, ever running. That is like a candle, which goeth out in a snuff, a stink; This, like the morning-light, shineth brighter and brighter unto the per∣fect
 day. 3. It brings Profit. And what is more earnestly desired, and highly valued by the Sons of men? The Souldier for this will scale the Walls, and leap upon the Pikes; The Merchant for this will plow the Ocean, and dance upon the surging Billows; the Husbandman for this will rise up early, and go to bed late, &c. Now Godliness with Con∣tentment is great Gain, 1 Tim. 6. 6. Wealth and Riches shall be in his House, Psal. 112. 3. Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand Riches and Honour, Prov. 3. 16.
This just (Right Honourable and Worshipful) but imperfect Account, which I have given you of Religion, discovers unto us two Things:
1. That Religion is no unreasona∣ble thing. God hath graciously con∣join'd Mans Duty and his Interest; in serving God he serves himself; in promoting Gods Glory he promotes
 his own Happiness. Though God have the Right of absolute Domi∣nion, and might exact Obedience on his bare Command; yet he's more pleased to shew himself a Benefactor, than a Lord; and therefore de∣scends to treat with men by the more gentle and inviting methods of Promises and Rewards. Nay, indeed the end of his Commands is only to make us capable Subjects, of those e∣ternal Felicities he desires to be∣stow. And this surely is enough, to excite Men to a faithful Improve∣ment of those Talents they have re∣ceiv'd, since 'tis indeed themselves they are trading for. 'Tis true, the Stock is Gods; but all the Increase of it will by his bounty certainly de∣volve on them.
2. That we should in our several places zealously endeavour the Ad∣vancement of Religion. This is a Duty incumbent on all, but more e∣specially
 Persons in Authority; and the Relation (Right Honourable and Worshipful) I stand in to You, ob∣liges me at this time to press it upon you. And your Professions of Love and Zeal for Religion give me no small encouragement, that this Ex∣hortation will be kindly entertain'd. That it may make the deeper Impres∣sion, let me add to the former Consi∣derations, That in advancing Reli∣gion, you will be highly serviceable both to your King and Country.
1. To his Majesty; for Religion lays the strongest obligation upon men to give tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom, and honour to whom honour is due; in a word, to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesars. Prov. 24. 21. My Son fear the Lord and the King. 1. Pet. 2. 17. Fear God, honour the King. Observe the order; first Fear God, and then Honour the King; implying, that men
 must be good Christians, before they can be good Subjects. Our late So∣veraign doth acknowledg that natu∣ral influence, which Religion hath upon the obedience of Subjects; Take his own Words: 'Tis no won∣der (saith he) if men, not fearing God, should not honour their King. They will easily contemn such Sha∣dows of God, who reverence not that supream and adorable Majesty, in com∣parison of whom, all the glory of men and Angels is but obscurity. And therefore he gives it in charge to his Son (our gracious Soveraign) to countenance and promote solid Piety. None are more observant of Laws, than they that are most a Law to themselves.
2. To your Country, yea the whole Kingdom. The Wiseman tells us, That righteousness exalteth a nation: It brings the Blessings of mirth and joy, peace and prosperity, wisdom and
 policy, riches and plenty, success and victory. God promiseth Israel to enrich them with all Blessings, and advance them above all Nations upon their faithful Obedience, Deut. 28. And the Heathen Poet could acknowledg, That so long as Rome stood Religious, so long she continued Victorious and Prosperous.
Did Religion universally prevail and influence the hearts and lives of men, then might we beat our Swords into plough-shares, and our Spears into pruning-books; then every man might sit under his own Vine, eating the fruit thereof, and none should make him afraid; then there would be no leading into Captivity, no complaining in our Streets; no vexatious Suits, no groanings of the oppressed, no private injuries, no publick Seditions. In a word, this would make England a Land of de∣sire, an heritage of glory, even the glo∣ry of all Nations.

 And in order to the advance of Religion, so advantagious to Man∣kind, let me recommend two Things to your special care and observation.
1. The suppression of such Do∣ctrines, as subvert Religion; parti∣cularly those of the Romish Church. How dangerous they are to Govern∣ment, and destructive of Vertue, you cannot be ignorant; and how male∣pert the Promoters and Professors of them are lately grown, is visible to all. I am not for your sheathing the Sword of Justice in their Bowels (such severity becometh Romanists best), yet let them know, you have one, and that you dare draw it in the defence of that Faith you own, which is truly Ancient, Catholick, and Apostolical.
2. The strict Observation of the Christian Sabbath. That this day is of Divine Institution, and grounded on the fourth Commandment, is ex∣presly
 asserted in the Homily of the Time and Place of Prayer, in these words: Whatsoever is found in the Commandment, appertaining to the Law of Nature, as a thing most god∣ly, most just, and needful for the set∣ting forth of Gods Glory, it ought to be retain'd and kept of all good Christian People; and therefore by this Commandment we ought to have a Time, as one Day in the week, wherein one ought to rest, yea from our lawful and needful works. For like-as it appeareth by this Commandment, That no man in the six days ought to be slothful or idle, but diligently to labour in that state, wherein God hath set him: Even so God hath given ex∣press charge to all men, That upon the Sabbath-day, which is now our Sunday, they should cease from all weekly and work-day labour; to the intent, That like-as God himself
 wrought six days, and rested the eventh, and blessed, and sanctified it: Even so Gods obedient People should use the Sunday holily (not in Sports and Plays) and rest from their common and daily business, and also give themselves wholly (not an hour or two) to heavenly Exercises of Gods true Religion and Service. So that God doth not only command the Observation of this Holy-day, but also by his own Ex∣ample doth stir and provoke us to the diligent keeping of the same. If we will be the Children of our Heavenly Father, we must be careful to keep the Christian Sab∣bath-day, which is the Sunday; not on∣ly for that it is Gods express Com∣mandment, but also to declare our selves to be loving Children in fol∣lowing the Example of our graci∣ous Lord and Father. In which words we may observe, 1. That by
 virtue of the fourth Commandment one day in seven is perpetually to be kept holy. 2. That the keeping of the Lords-day is grounded upon, and commanded in the fourth Com∣mandment. This Testimony I have urged to check those, who confi∣dently Preach and Print too (con∣trary to their own Subscriptions), That our Sabbath hath only the Churches Authority to support it, and have no better Name, than Ju∣daick Precisians, for the strict Obser∣vers of it.
But let me further add, and 'tis what I mainly intend, That the de∣vout and conscientious Observation of this Day is the Support of Religion. A great Divine tells us; The Com∣mandment for the Sabbath is put in the close of the First, and in the begin∣ning of the second Table, to denote, That the Observation of both Tables depends much upon the sanctification
 of this Day. And another observes, That Religion is just as the Sabbath is; it decays or grows as the Sabbath is esteemed; it flourisheth in a due veneration of the Sabbath, and it pines and consumes, when the Sabbath is neglected. I never knew any Place or Person eminent for Piety, that was not careful in the sanctification of this Day.
My next request therefore (Right Honourable and Worshipful) is, That you would unanimously and zea∣lously endeavour to promote the strict Observation of our Christian Sabbath: Let not the notorious Pro∣faners of it escape unpunished. I will not further oppress your Patience; only crave your Patronage and favou∣rable acceptance of this Treatise, and a thankful acknowledgment of the great Obligations you have laid up∣on me.

 That God would incline your hearts to contribute your utmost en∣deavours towards the advancement of true Religion and Vertue, and Suc∣ceed you in them, and Reward you for them; That he would Confer on you all the Blessings you want, and preserve and sanctifie those you have, and Crown all with the unconceiva∣ble Glories of another World, is now, and shall be the humble and fervent Prayer of


