



Reverend Brethren,
IN compliance with your Affectio∣nate Importunity, and Obedience to your Acknowledged Autho∣rity, I now humbly offer you, what few others in the World, but your selves could have wrested from me. I confess it hath always been accounted an Ill Omen, when the Victim comes unwillingly to the Al∣tar:
But Conscience can avouch this for me, That I have not come un∣willingly to any Work, wherein I have had a prospect of serving the glorious Ends of my Ministry. 'Twas your Ʋnanimous Vote, that laid the Injunction of this Pulpit-work upon me; to which (though conscious of my own Ʋnfitness) I readily enough yielded. But when, after my utmost Endeavours to prevent it, you so ir∣resistibly desired its Publication, I could not but be troubled. Yet not from any sullen Aversion to the Press, as the Over-modest Humour of some is, that are eminently better quali∣fied to serve the Churches of Christ that way; but from the unprepared∣ness of the Discourse for Publick View, and the little Time or Strength that I have to fit it better.
It being, for the most part, Ser∣mo ad Clerum; and willing to speak a little, as I could, to what my Text
so naturally directed me to, I took the liberty to offer you the bare Skeliton, without those Exegetical or Inculcative Enlargements, which, in a ruder Auditory, might have been more necessary.
Wherefore now (not without your leave) I presume to present it both to You, and to the World, in a se∣cond Edition, with a few, and but a few Additions, and necessary Varia∣tions; whether for the better or the worse, I cannot tell. I did once hope to have buried it in the faithful Ears and Hearts of my then present Auditors, and never have concerned my Pen any further about it. But seeing it is your pleasure to send it further abroad, you have made your selves Sponsors with me, for all the Infirmities and Faults of it; and have given me the Confidence now, to Claim the concurrence of your Prayers; That God will pardon the many De∣fects,
and prosper the good Design of it; to his own Glory, and the Spiritual Good of all those, into whose hands it shall come. And which is the fervent Desire of,

Sidbury, August 15. 1693.
