


Right HONOURABLE, &c.
THe Ensuing Treatise which I am bold to pre∣sent to Your wisedomes view, containes principall politicall reasons grounded upon the Lawes of this Kingdom, for the remov∣ing of the present Hierarchie, and planting of a Governement by Pastors and Elders. The ap∣pellation of Lay Elders hath beene very displea∣sing to many; whereas the Elder intended to be planted, is not lay, but in regard of the service (wherein hee is to bee imployed) Ecclesiasticall. The Author was an elaborate Student in the ci∣vill Law, and a professor of it. He was esteemed
 learned by the best of that profession, as also by Divines and common Lawyers, learned Sir Ed∣ward Cook, late Chiefe Justice of the Kings Bench, Sir Christopher Yelverton, late Judge of the Common Pleas, Sir Henry Finch, late the Kings Serjeant at Law, and others have given testimony of him. The Treatise is an answer to diverse passages in a Book written by D. Whitgift, late Archb. of Can∣terbury, intituled An admonition to the Parliament. The Author (as I doubt not but will appeare to your Wisedomes) hath written with the spirit of meekenesse and humility, submitting all to the judgement of an High Court of Parliament, hee disputes with the Great Bishop in a Scholasticall way, without one syllable of reviling, or bitter language, which he ever detested. Hee discovers the foundation of the Hierarchie to be totally ille∣gall, and to bee abolished by the abolition of the Papall Canon Law, which appeares to be aboli∣shed by the statute of 25. of Henry 8. cap. 9. The truth whereof (being discovered by the Authors means to the said learned Judge Sir Edward Cooke,) hee did most ingenuously acknowledge, and did avow he never understood the statute so well be∣fore, yet affirmed he thought he had read the said statute an hundred times. May it please you in your wisedomes to commend the Treatise to bee viewed by the learned Gent. of the long Robe,
 whose awfull judgments I shall ever honour. Most true it is (I dare averre) there is little written in this Kingdome tending to the removall of the Episcopacie, from Legall and Politicall arguments, but the Author hath the arrowes in his quiver, I say not that others have borrowed light from his Candle. Right Honourable and Right worthy, I shall humbly take further boldnes (humbly pre∣suming upon your Honourable favours) if this poore model find acceptance in your sight, to pre∣sent you with a new impression of an abstract written in time of famous Queene Elizabeth, (a Book well knowne to learned King Iames) by the same Author, whose memory, I am bound by na∣ture to Honour. Give mee leave onely now to make knowne unto you the Title and severall Treatises contained in it. It is intituled, An ab∣stract of certaine Laws, Canons and Constituti∣ons Synodall and Provinciall in force within the Queenes dominions, and for the most part un∣knowne to the subject. It containeth these prin∣cipall Treatises. 1. That a learned Ministery is commanded by Law. 2. That Pluralities are for∣bidden by Law. 3. That it is unlawfull to make a Minister without a title. 4. That it is unlawfull for a Clerk to have civill authority. This abstract was seemingly answered by the rayling stile of a then Doctor Cozens, but by a further incounter,
 and the counterpoyson (yet extant) written by the same Author, he departed the Field with Honour, such was the opinion of many learned, among o∣thers of the foresaid, Reverend Judge, Sir Henry Yelverton. This treatise was never questioned nor quarreld, for ought I ever heard: Yet was the Au∣thor well knowne to many of the Bishops. You may happily in your Wisdomes conceive some things might have beene omitted, as not wholly incident to the time, and some abbreviated in re∣gard of the shortnesse of your time, and of the high affaires now in hand. But may it please you, being about so to doe, I found the light must have bin much Eclipsed, and the truth obscured. I am over bold, most humbly to commend the de∣fence of what he writes, grounded upon the laws of the Kingdome, to your most Honourable prote∣ction. It shall be enough for me to attend among the meanest of your servants, having heretofore had the happinesse to have bin a member (though unworthy) of the Honourable House of Com∣mons.
Presenting your honours and your grave wis∣domes with my heartiest prayers and humblest service, In most humble manner, I intreate your pardon of and for
