



Gentlemen,
YOƲ may believe it is no pleasure to me to complain of the Immorality of a degenerate age: and the vast con∣quests which prevailing vice like a po∣tent Tyrant hath of late years made, I say, not over the Religion, but the very reason of Humane Nature, and the Dependencies thereof. Which as it is not to be mentioned by good men without lamentation, so cannot be dissembled or excused without participation. Prophane swearing, un∣clean whoredom, and beastly Drunkenness, with other too manifest, are not only abounding, but as the Prophet speaketh mighty sins amongst us; strengthned as well by the quality, as the number of the guilty. It is a prodigious mode of estimati∣on for men to value themselves, or be valued by others according to the measure of their intempe∣rate excess. Etiam viri fortis accipit nomen, qui tamen tanto nequior, quanto sub poculo invi∣ctior. They are the mighty who can drink most wine, and the men of strength who can mingle strong Drink, as if they envyed that Royal Hea∣then Name, and were ambitious of the Honour
of his Inscription upon his Tomb, . I have been able to drink abundantly, and to bear it strong∣ly. In the pride of which strength some will have the confidence to glory, even while a paralytick trembling, (no weak evidence of their great at∣chievements in their Bacchanalia) hath disabled their hands to serve their mouth, and monstrous swellings have mishaped their Bodies into such unweldie burdens that some are tempted to ask, Homines hi an utres verius aestimandi? Whi∣ther they be not rather Barrels, than Bodies of men.
Fallen Nature, even in Heathens have retain∣ed some principles of restraint from impudence and excess of vice. The Spartanes thought it an ef∣fectual preservative of their Children from intem∣perate drinking to present to their view their drun∣ken Vassals (for, as drunk as a Beggar hath been the Proverb) that beholding their loathsome vomit, and ridiculous behaviour they might the more abhorr such gratifying of inordinate appe∣tite, which debaseth the honour of a man into the shame of a beast. And the very Turks af∣ter a fit of Drunkenness, will lie day and night crying, and praying to Mahomet for interces∣sion. But the very Remnants of Conscience and shame seem utterly extinct among some Christians of this generation. Surely the days of the Apo∣stles were modest, when they that were drunk, were drunk in the night: but now St. Peter's ar∣gument is too weak to refel the accusation, for
these men may be drunk at the third hour of the day. And some do so declare their sin as Sodom, and hide it not, Drinking and Singing, Roaring and Revelling, Reeling and Staggering in the open Sun, as if they would confute St. Paul, and demonstrate Rioting and Drunken∣ness to be no works of Darkness.
Yea, such credit and power hath Debauchery obtained, that it lifts up it self above controul, and is impatient to be touched, and ready to turn again, and rent the wisest reprover. And who so is resolved to possess his Vessel in sobriety, and Honour, doth tantum non forfit his reputation, and is in danger to be written among the suspected by those whose God is Bacchus, whose Temple the Tavern, whose Altar the Table, whose Priest the Vintner, whose Offering Wine and strong Drink, and whose Heaven is sensual. Who have arrived to that degree of Atheism, as to fortifie their Lusts against their Conscience with the vainest flattery, and self deluding conceit, that their great pretences of loyalty and zeal for King and Church shall sanctifie the grossest viola∣tions of the Laws of Morality, both sacred and civil. Nay, vice will scarce acknowledge it self to violate, but even claims a right, and calls it self by the name of Vertue. According to the Moralist's Character of the worst times. Habebitur ebrietati honor, et plurimum meri cepisse victus erit, saith Seneca. Offering ex∣cess, of Wine is become an Instance of Noble and Generous Entertainment, and a part of an∣swerable
civility to accept it. Guests are scarce made welcome, if not made Drunk. Such an ob∣liging bond is courting, courtesie and complement, such force in great examples, such arguments ap∣plyed of Honour and Loyalty, Such colour, moti∣on, and sparkling in the glass to provoke, that he must be a Nazarite, or a Rechabite that hath the courage to withstand the power of so great tempta∣tion. He that will be sober, is uncivil, and it is an high affront, deserving no less than a stab, to boggle at life and Soul-destroying Healths, or to refuse to be drowned for Company. Thus doth the pride of debauchery magnifie it self, Hectoring virtue out of its due honour, and arrogating an unjust Glory to its own shame.
What the issue of this great evil will be, is the fear of the Good, viz. least for the Vomit and filth whereof all Tables are full, the Land also in just retribution spue out her Inhabitants. That so many Judgments by which Heaven hath con∣tended with a sinful Nation should not only prove it incorrigible, but leave it declining into worse, is no weak indication of a desperate disease. He that hath denovnced Wo to the Drunkards, is faithful to keep and Almighty to execute his word. Whereof he hath in his righteous provi∣dence made many sad and woful Instances. As in too many other places so particularly in your Colchester. He hath not left himself without witness, by a very quick and remarkable judg∣ment upon a young Drunkard, twice dead, dying dead drunk. The Report whereof at least came
not short of your special notice. May I have leave to speak it. God sometimes blest your Town with the happy Ministry of his laborious and faithful Servant, Mr. Owen Stockton, whose due Character is elsewhere read, whose Head, Heart, Tongue, and Pen constantly travelled for the Salvation of precious, yet perishing Souls. At this warning and amazing stroke, as former∣ly at the destroying Pestilence among you, which exercised the labour of his Pen to a considerable Vo ume, which yet never saw the light, His Spi∣rit like St. Paul's was stirred in him, to improve the advantage of so severe a Providence, by joyn∣ing to it the Word of God committed to his trust, hoping that the Sword of the Spirit being there∣with sharpned, might be the more effectual and mighty through God against this fleshly Lust which warreth against the Soul, and hath made more havock of the Sons of men, than ever Saul did of the Saints of God. In which honourable and pi∣ous ingagement with this deadly sin. He convicts it as the common Enemy of the Bodies and Souls of men, declareth open war against it, defieth, and casteth dirt upon the face of its glory, armeth and incourageth the assailing host of Christians to op∣pose it, dischargeth against it the thundering Ca∣non, laden with the vengeance of Almighty ju∣stice, pursueth it to its higher Mountains, raiseth batteries against its strongest holds, discovereth and defeateth all its subtil stratagems, and con∣futeth all its pretences. Having performed his work according to his great ability, and delive∣red
his zealous Soul to a particular Congregation viva voce, he designed with some enlargement for general use to commit it to the Press, But be∣fore he had put to it ultimam manum, God put to his Life ultimam lineam. Which Providence I am not prone to interpret, as a voice from Hea∣ven saying to him, let the Drunkard alone, thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be a reproov∣er. He that is filthy, let him be filthy still, but will rather hope, God so ordered that it should be his dying Pen, that it might be the more affect∣ing.
Such as he left it, worthy of the Press beyond my commendation, is here Published, and hum∣bly presented Gentlemen to your hands. I am aware how much I presume thus to approach you, for which I am concerned to make my Apology. I am not ignorant what Honourable Respects the Reverend Author deservedly had for your Wor∣ships, and what reciprocal Respects obliged him thereunto: which I am bound to believe he would gladly have expressed, and acknowledged by some more publick Testimony. Be pleased then to un∣derstand and accept this as a posthumous offering, which a lesser hand, though not with less Respects, humbly maketh to you as in his Name.
The Relation, affection and compassion which he had towards Colchester, and the Souls there∣in alwayes excited the vehemency of his desires, sharpened the edge of his just actions, directed the aim of his endeavours, and intended the fer∣vour of his Prayers on its behalf, that some happy
fruit of the travail of his Soul, and particularly of this, might there be found. In complyance wherewith, considering the Character you bear in your Town, I have presumed to prefix your worthy Names to this small Volume, which being an Orphan doth more earnestly crave your Patro∣nage, and is ambitious of the favour and influ∣ence of your recommendation to the concerned Reader.
The dreadful providence towards the young man, who was made an open spectacle of God's Righteous Judgment, (the occasion of the follow∣ing sheets) speaking more especially to Colchester, because in it, did naturally prompt me to betake my self to the advantage of some more eminent names among you, through which to revive the memory of so loud a warning, if happily, some at least who have been long instances of Patience, might with the greater intention legere exem∣plum justitiae ne fiant.
I must not forbear to add, that by Royal fa∣vour and trust, you fill honourable seats of Autho∣rity, extended to a large Province in the Civil Go∣vernment. Now such is the pride and froward∣ness, the obstinacy and contradiction of the sin complained of, so strengthned by corruption with∣in, and temptation without, that the best instruct∣ed Ministry cannot prevail against it, but is forc∣ed to confess the weakness of its most powerful ar∣guments and passionate perswasions, and therefore cryeth to you, as the woman in Holy Writ, in another case, help O Magistrate, ye also are the
Ministers of God, into whose hands God hath put the Sword of Justice, not to be born in vain. Your own great examples of Sobriety shall strengthen your hands in exerting your just Authority, to re∣strain the intemperance of licentious appetites. Wherein you are beyond doubt assured, there is no colour of disloyalty to Prince, no Non-confor∣mity to Church, no violation of Oaths, no breach of Trust, none to be offended but the guilty, who ought not to be pleased. God and the King, Law Sacred and Civil, Conscience and Honour call upon you, and warrant you to apply your politick remedies to this Insatiable Dropsie, which if Ʋni∣versally practised by the State-Physitians, would no doubt as effectually cure, as the policy of the antient Gaules maintained the moderation of their dayes, who were wont to fine those who through in∣temperance out grew their girdles.
But here I reform my Pen, least I seem to teach you your Office, while I only implore your aid, and aggravate my presumption, while I labour to ex∣cuse it. As the publication of what the Reverend Author hath so industriously, and with the Evi∣dence and Authority of Holy Scripture, as well as strength of argument so convincingly written, is a Testimony of my full consent with him, in re∣presenting this unmanly and ungodly excess, as matter of just indignation and abhorrence to the reason and ingenuity of men, and Religion of Christians: So this Dedication and Presenting thereof to your hands, desires to be understood as a Testimony of that true Honour and Reverence
for your Persons, Virtues and Offices, (the Dig∣nity whereof can never be lessened by disgracing an inglorious vice,) which he justly hath, who is
Gentlemen,

Barking. Feb. 25. 1681.
