



MADAM,
SInce your Honour made me happily acquainted with most of your Relations, specially with those of your truly-reli∣gious, and well-ordered Family; though I often joyed to see such varietie of rare endowments in one Noble Lady, yet (amongst them all) I could not but with more admiration observe, how as well your many devout discourses, as your

pious Actions (the apparent steps, by which you climb to Heaven) were con∣stantly maintained by many Recesses, and Retirements for private Reading and Meditation; and how your greatest pains, and delight was more freely spent upon the Holy Scriptures. This made me gratefully, and willingly ambitious, to present your Honour with some book, that should endeavour to facilitate some part of your study in the Bible. By which means I might both give a publick Testimonie of my thankfull acknowledg∣ments to your Honour, and some other of my Noble Friends: and withal take an occasion to discharge a part of my Function, by inciting others, to follow such an eminent example; while I give a just approbation of your love to learn∣ed Piety in all kinds, and particularly of your frequent reading of Gods holy word, which is best able to make you wise

unto salvation. To which study there∣fore we have many earnest exhortations, as well in the Old, and New Testament, as in the writings of the most devout, and Reverend Fathers of the Christian Church.
And good reason. For the word of God is the food of our souls. Therefore it should be the very joy of our hearts, and sweeter in our mouths then honie, and the honie-comb. So it was to the heart, and palate of him, that was a man after Gods own heart. Who, in the front of his Divine Songs, and Hymns, sings the blessednesse of Him, that ex∣erciseth himself in it, Day, and Night. As he did, so we have all just cause to admire, and congratulate him, that is feasted every day, with such spiritual food, and, while he is so, cannot but learn the surest way to repose his soul, every night (after such Angelical repast) upon

that pillow that passeth all understanding. I mean that Peace of God, that can ne∣ver be so well purchased, as by often feeding on the Word of God, and concoct∣ing, and converting it into such juice, and blood, and such spirit, and vigor, as may preserve, and cherish us, in all our waies.
Of no lesse use is the studie of the re∣vealed will of God, that we see in his holy word: therefore revealed, that we should often look into it, saith St. James. And I will not conceal the force of St. James his word () that we should prie, and peep, and look narrow∣ly, and carefully into it, that nothing escape our sight. For there we shall find the means of purchasing that, without which it will prove, that we have utter∣ly lost our selves.
If I shall need to say more, I will onely adde this confirmation of what I said, from holy David his calling it a Lan∣thorn

to his feet and Gods word, Ps. 119. Would we have a Light to conduct us into all necessary Truths? We must have it there. Would we have an Oracle to inform us infallibly of what we may trust to, in our greatest hopes, and expecta∣tions? We must have it thence. That Divine Light will never mislead us. And the word of God we may safely rely upon.
Therefore they are wise, that receive it meekly (I speak it in the words of an Apostle) And a good understanding have all they that do thereafter (saith the Royal Prophet.)
I wish your Honour, and all yours, both those parts of Happinesse. Which is no more, in effect, then to wish the conti∣nuance of what you have, and your per∣severance in what you do. So shall you continue a pattern to all those, to whom this book shall come. Which comes as

presented under your name, and so re∣ceived as it were from the hands of your Honour. For whom, and for all that re∣fer to you, and for all the rest of my Noble and Worthy Friends, it is, every day, my hearty prayer, that you, and they may be preserved to everlasting Felicity, by the continual blessing and mercy of Al∣mighty God. So praies
Your Honours most obliged, and humble Servant,

