



SIR,
PRopriety in Enjoyments adds a great Excellency to them, unto us; and the more the better they be in themselves. Jesus Christ is the best of Enjoyments; he is the gift of God; such, as he cannot vouchsafe a greater; an unspeakable gift, and therefore Interest in him is the best Interest. To obtain that, to have God and Christ ours, is to have the great, the princi∣pal blessing of the New Covenant ours: grounded assurance thereof, is not
unfitly called by some, a Heaven upon Earth, and to promote this having two heavens, is the design of this en∣suing Treatise; of which, that La∣borious, and faithful Minister of Je∣sus Christ, Mr. Owen Stockton, is the Author. The first part being directed to your self, entituled [Con∣solation in Life and Death] I should offer an injury and not testifie my due Respects, if I should not pre∣sent this second and principal part also to you, Entituled [The Best Inte∣rest.] I here present it, and doubt not but both will find favourable Ac∣ceptation with you.
If the Lord hath indulged clear Evidences of his Love, and of your own Interest in Christ, yet you will be glad to have this Confirmation there∣of; and that others, even every Be∣liever
may have such a knowledge of it, as to be able groundedly to say, My Beloved is mine and I am his.
You know, how disconsolate many real Christians are, and how mourn∣fully they walk every day, under their unbelieving Doubtings and Question∣ings concerning it; they are afraid to draw up that Conclusion; and hereby they are greatly obstructed in their Duty towards God, (which is not hin∣dred but promoted by a clear sight of propriety in him) Psal. 63.1. O God thou art [my God] what then? early will I seek thee. The most ardent seekings and thirstings after God, issue and spring from a Soul's being able to say [my God.]
Some in this particular, are too like Scepticks (though in other matters they are not) alwayes doubting and
complaining of their own Conditions: ever enquiring, how they may know their own estate, and never determin∣ing, or not duly. Those that sit in such thick darkness, that they can see no light, they are concerned, to trust in the Name of the Lord, Isa. 50.10. i. e. to trust in him, as the Lord God Gracious and Merciful, for∣giving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. Exod. 34.5, 6, 7, when they can draw up no Conclusion that Christ is theirs, and they his, and that their sins are pardoned, yet they are to trust in that Name, that he may be theirs, and that their sins may be par∣doned: thus they may put the great question out of doubt, by seeking more to get interest, than to know it.
Others confidently, yet ungroundedly conclude that Christ is theirs, without
seeking a real interest in him: all which may be helped here.
That this Treatise may be blessed to your self, and to all (under whose eye it may come) for its proper end, shall be the prayer of,
Honoured Sir, 
Nov. 2. 1681.
