



Right Honourable,
TUtelar Angels are a con∣troverted Theme: But protection from your Ho∣nour, hath been an unque∣stionable matter of my experience, which therefore calls for
a grateful acknowledgement. Gods pro∣vidence in the disposal of my nativity, calculated mee for your neighbour, by vicinity of place; and you have owned mee as a favourite, by your benigne af∣fection. For your Noble disposition ad∣mitted mee as a Client, to your signal Favour, and singular Patronage, when the progging attempts of an ambitious Phylargyrist, had well nigh made mee truly distressed. Had the bright rayes of your Lordships Bounty been onely terminated on myself, in that peculiar Patronizing of a cause, as just on one hand, as sneakingly undermining on the other; nothing less than a Publick Reflection of gratitude, when ever oc∣casion offered it self, would have been expected from your devoted Client. But your Goodness (being no waies de∣fective in its native and genuine pro∣perty of communicativeness) hath from its unalterable Centre derived most con∣spicuous lines of pregnant Bounty, to some of my endeared relations also. To
smother these favours then with a flat denial, would be an high impeachment of veracity; and not to acknowledge them on such an occasion, could plead for no distance, from down-right sordid∣ness, and plain ingratitude. This small Treatise on these Considerations, pro∣strates its self at your Honours feet, not with any hopes to equallize your worth, or to merit your Patronage, with so slender an Essay as it is; but with a desire to leave this Testimonial to the world, that your Favours have not been fruitlesly bestowed on an ungrateful or unmindful servant. Yet if your piercing eye be but animated with a Candid Aspect, so as to pass by the faileurs and imperfections of the Author, the Theme it self, and the main design of the Treatise, may without presumption be deemed not unworthy the Patronage of the most Noble person in the world. Of the former I need not doubt, when I reflect on that clear resemblance in your
Honours deportment of the Primitive Nobles, who were stiled  by the Hebrews, and  Candidi, & filii Candidorum, not only for their white garments, but also for the candid∣ness of their minds, and integrity of their manners. The latter I may with more boldness averre, since the Majestick SHECINAH,See the word ex∣plained, c. 4. ss. 14. p. 70 or the Divine Presence in Gospel Worship fills both pages of the ensuing discourse. Who now can think himself too great, or too good to patronize that, which alone hath the soveraign prerogative of conveying real goodness and virtue to those that are so far blessed, as to be partakers of it. So∣crates meeting Zenophon, and per∣ceiving him to be a smart youth, holds up his staff, bids him stand, and asks him where those small wares were sold, that were ordinarily used, to which, when Zenophon gave him a ready answer, hee further asked him where men were made truly good: Alas Sir! said hee,
that I cannot tell: Follow mee then, said Socrates, and thou shalt learn that of mee. Let those that are so great strangers to themselves, as not to be ac∣quainted with their own weakness, ven∣ture upon the presenting to the world a Systeme of Socratical Wisdome. All my ambition is by this slender Essay, to act the part of Socrates his staff, to put those to a stand, that are wise enough to be trading in the small wares of the world, with a neglect of real goodness; and like a Mercurial Statue; to point out the way to the Presence of God, which can make us both good and glori∣ous, holy here, and happy hereafter. To be your Lordships Remembrancer in this, I humbly conceive it to be a peece rather of my bounden duty, than any bold or presumptuous attempt: And that I need be no more, the world sufficiently knows that is already fully acquainted with your constant zeal and forwardness to promote the flourishing of the Publick
Ordinances, where the special Pre∣sence of God is to be enjoyed. But o∣thers, too too many others there are, that want such a staff to correct them for their Errours, as well as to direct them to their duty. Such I mean who have in their Judgements turned Bethel into Beth-haven, the House of God into an house of Iniquity, and then take occasion to desert it prophanely. The House of Prayer they now abomi∣nate, as if it were a Den of Theeves. The established Church-Government is looked upon as an unsupportable yoak of Tyranny, and is accordingly de∣tested. Gospel-Ministers are looked on as the Pursuvants of the Whore of Babylon, fit onely to Trappan souls into Egyptian darkness, and are dealt withall accordingly, set at open defi∣ance. All Ordinances are disdain∣fully slighted as dry Beasts, and Bar∣ren Wildernesses. The two Sacra∣ments are undervalued and disgusted as
mean food, fit onely for those that are dry-nursed at very low and outside dis∣pensations. The Spirit of Life, the Light within, the ever-living Word, the everlasting Gospel, are the choice rarities that will relish onely in the cu∣rious pallates of our Quakers. In the mean while the Church of God lyes destitute and forlorn, as if God had re∣moved the Golden Candlesticks out of his own house, and had set them up in their Parlours: And as if no other Oyl could be used for the Temple-Service, but what drops out of the good womans cruse. I wonder whether the first Gospel-Preacher John Baptist, could have se∣cured his head any better from these, had hee been living among them, than hee did from Herod, who being , The voice of one crying in the Wilderness, would both in his doctrine and practise decry their dumb conventions, and their high kind of pre∣tended devotion in their silent expecta∣tion
of Enthusiastical raptures. It is ve∣ry difficult to determine, which of the two sorts are farthest off from the true manner of edifying; they that read their service in an unintelligible lan∣guage, or they that use no language at all, and yet pretend 'tis for edification. And indeed by this, and many other Syn∣cretisms of theirs with the other, both in practice and doctrine, it may be easily seen whether that fond Generation were ruing amain. I could think at pre∣sent of no better character of these peo∣ple, than the old Roman Letters S. P. Q. R. with venerable Bedes witty in∣terpretation of them: Who coming to Rome, and being asked the meaning of them, hee dissemblingly answered, Stul∣tus populus quaerit Romam. 'Tis true, the forefront of the Portal, that leads to the Papal Cloysters, are, by their being bedeckt with variety of magnifi∣cent Gawderies, highly abominable to this seemingly self-denying, and morti∣fied
Generation of fondlings. And they are so far in love with that ingenious Acrostick, mentioned by a Right Reve∣rend Prelate of our own on the name PAPA, viz. Paparum Ambitio Pe∣perit Antichristum: That now they cry down all stipends of Preachers as the Hire of the Whore of Babylon, and the Legal maintenance by Tithes as an introduction to Antichristianism. Thus have they wheeled about so far from the fore-front, that at length they are tumbling in amain at the back∣door of Popery. And let any dis∣beleeve this that can, who hath once acquainted himself with the Rules and Method laid down by Contzen the Je∣suite, for the reducing England to the Romish Catholick Obedience. To obviate these gross delusions, and to provide an Antidote for this spreading Gangrene, was both the Original and end, of this following Tractate. Which that it may promote the Glory of God, bee serviceable to his Church,
and as a Testimonial of Gratitude, bee acceptable to your Lord ship, is the most importunate desire, and hearty breathing of
My Lord,

Beckingham, Novemb. 8. 1662.
