



Right Honourable and Worshipful,
THe nature of your Order for the publication in Print of this imperfect Piece following, puts your subscribed in minde of a passage from Augustus to the Poet Au∣sonius, Scribere me Augustus jubet & mea carmina poscit, Poenè rogans. Your Order might have been as well a Po∣stulation or Demand, as a Desire; but you seem therein like the most excellent Augustus, who exprest, in a like case, more hu∣manity and condescension, than Power towards his Poet, as you have done unto your small Prophet or Preacher; he shall there∣fore humbly take leave to presume (as the Emperor took the Poet and his Poem into Protection, it being a product of his own fa∣vour and importunity) that your Lordship and Brethren also will do the like unto your Preacher, and his Sermon, unto which your Honors have given this Publick-being. Eadem est causa pro∣ducens & conservans, is a true rule of the great Mistress of Rea∣son, Logick, That which gives Being, conserves it; not but that the work of it self, as the Author humbly conceives, is very much , or self-potestative, , or self-sufficient to warrant its self, in the whole import thereof; it aiming at the preservation of our far more excellent Augustus, and this his Royal City, and your Honorable persons, and his and your dearest interests, Civil, Sacred, and Natural, together with the whole Church and Nation, as it layes open (how weakly soever) those wicked deceits of ungodly Godly men, which have and may again, by the same slights and advantages of delusion, ruine all: but for that there can be no such natural reciprocation of interest, as when a grateful issue in its dependance of existence throws it self upon the principal Cause for patronage and countenance.
Your Preacher hath observ'd the Order of your Honorable
Court punctually in the substance of the whole Discourse, and every part thereof, though not in every word possibly, having not written it in order, form, or method; in which respect, as he was fain to vary expression often in the delivery, so it must be excusable in the Copy, but he is sure nevertheless this draught in Print answers almost adequately the main exemplar in your memory, except, as afor said, and a word or two sometimes of Transition perhaps, or Apology, or the like; with an addition of one false Position, or deceitful Principle of sin more, to com∣pleat the number of seven, that he might give you a perfect number, at least of Particulars, though a number of Imperfecti∣ons; and an Appendix moreover unto the sixth. Which as to him it was not grievous, as St. Paul's language is in another case, Phil. 3.1. so to You and the Reader, he hopes, it shall be both safe and profitable; the Deceit therein mentioned, com∣municating to the advantages of Sin in all the seven, and may be a furtherance to any fallacious imagination or deceitful practise proceeding from the corrupt heart of men, viz. Spiritual senses and meanings of Scripture, contrary unto or divers from the Letter; whereby the Law of God it self therein written, which is only transgrest, is wrested to justifie transgression.
Both which Additionals had been spoken in the Solemn Au∣dience, had not the Preachers civility to your Honorable selves, and pitty to the laborious crowd below, time being spent, preven∣ted him, and therefore he doth not scruple your acceptance there∣of now, it being frequently exemplated in impressions of other Sermons; Hanc veniam petimus{que} damus{que} vicissim: and 'tis but like some after-birth or superfoetation that intellective Nature would be discharge of.
If any man shall scruple peradventure, that some passages of the Discourse were too smart, he may remember that St. Paul was once upon the question, Whether to come with a rod or no, 1 Cor. 4. v. last; and St. Jude adviseth a way of sa∣ving some men by pulling them out of the sire, ver. 23. with terrors or denunciations, or otherwise, as you may conceive, ex∣probations.
And I know not what sons of thunder should serve for in the Church, but to shoot thunderbolts: and 'tis the barking dog, and that sometimes pincheth a little, which drives straying sheep into their fold, and worries the Dogs of the concision, i. e. evil workers of Schisms and Divisions.
Neither is any part of the style so severe and pungent, except against the most monstrous and prodigious abominations and such actors thereof as we have, to the affrightment of our me∣mories, so deeply smarted by; or, such who are still obdurate and impenitent in their disobedience, whom the Indemnity it self favours not, and one passage of the Sermon hath distinctly marked out, making a difference of others according to St. Jude's counsel loco dicto. And of the former sort, either there remain some, or not; if not, Who should complain? if so, Who shall be displeased at the Authority of the Ministry, which is, to rebuke sin before all, that others may fear, 1 Tim. 5.20?
The drift of he whole endevor in short was only this, Where∣as many Deceivers are entred into the World, 2 Joh. 7. and many Delusions and Deceptions with them, to the experimental wo of this Church and Nation, King and People; and the same perilous principles of Deceivings, are by strong observation discovered or much suspected amongst persons still disaffected, so as abundant caution scarce sufficeth against them; but, accor∣ding to the Drammatist in Aulularia, Qui cavet ne decipi∣atur, vix cavet cum etiam cavet, He that takes heed that he be not deceived, scarce takes heed enough when he takes the most; That therefore, by a loyal Subject, and dutiful Son of the Church, the fallacies might be retexed, and the people undeceived, the guilt of their former horrible commissons lying still upon their souls before God without Repentance, and by fresh actings will be more aggravate and accumulate even to the endangering of their salvation which no temporal pardon or oblivion can help them in.
'Tis confest much hath been spoken by many worthy Pens and Prechers, to this purpose before; but interspersly only and occasi∣onally from mixtures of other discourses, not in one method to∣gether
as this, and therefore, you Right Honorable especially have the greatest challenge of this Dedication for your uncessant dili∣gence and pains to your great peril also often, in discovering and suppressing the practises and actors of these pernicious Deceits, as your Epistler hath done them in their Principles, who there∣fore makes bold to conjecture that your Lordship had a Noble and Honorable ambition of enmity against such deceitful wickedness, in taking an advantage even at the expiration of your Govern∣ment to check it for future, by making publick to posterity this draught of Arguments against it; as if you had a mind to com∣bate it by any kind of opposition though ne' re so weak (as doubt∣les this little Pamphlet must needs prove) when you can no longer rebuke it with the sword of your Office which you now lay down.
Ever Honorable, to cease your further trouble by prolixity, as your Lordship is remarkable by your unwearyed vigilance and prospection acted for the safety of our King & Laws, Church and Nation, your humbly oblig'd shall leave you and your Honorable Brethren with this only passage of Miltiades and Themistocles in Plutarch: Miltiades had done excellenly for the good of his City and Common-weath, for which he was rewarded with so many trophies of Honor, as Themistocles afterwards his successor could not sleep or rest perfectly for dreaming, and continual in∣cumbency of his thoughts and phansie, upon the glorious At∣chievements of Miltiades, which at last he matcht with his own. May it so fall out 'twixt your Honorable self and Brethren, both your present and your future successors, that they may never rest without thoughts, and noble emulations of your famous acting for our King and Nation, and at last add another parallel to Plutarchs, in becomming every one of them successively as glo∣rious in the peoples observation as your Noble self. And so may Wisdoms blessing, Prov. 3.16, 17. rest upon you all, Length of dayes be on your right hands, and on your left hands Riches and Honor; your wayes be wayes of Pleasantness, and all your paths be Peace. Which is the prayer of

