



IT has been none of the Devills mean∣est or unluckiest Arts to infuse pre∣judices into mens mindes against Chri∣stian practise, by representing it in the most frightfull and averting formes. He changes shapes with it, and as he transforms himself into an Angell of light, soe he doth this into one of darknesse, and makes it appeare a State of the most dismall sadnesse and hor∣rour. And how much more readie men are to take the Devil at his word, than Christ at his, who professeth his Yoke easie, and his Burthen light; who saith, that the wayes of holynesse are wayes of pleasantnesse, appeares too fully in the strong and generall antipathie those
 have against Vertue, who never so much as tried it, but take up impli∣cit and confused prejudices against it, and retain those as fast, as if they were the products of many yeares costly experiences. And tis too evi∣dent, that these have taken the deep∣est root in the richest Soil: they seem no where more to flourish, than among the Gentry, and persons of Quality. It is the busynesse of their lives to pur∣sue pleasures; and yet when those of the most refined and exquisite sort would run into their embraces, they grow coy, and cannot be courted to receive them.
If one of a narrow fortune and mean extract attempt to convict them of this foule mistake, by the most convincing arguments drawn from his own expe∣rience, they either think it inconsistent with their honour to lend him an eare, or (if they so far degrade themselves as to hear him speake) they presently
 except against his Testimonie, as being an incompetent Judge.
And if we Clergy-men tell them, that a holy life is so far from implying any thing of real trouble or uneasynesse, that its onely an Art of refining and sublimating their pleasures, rendring them more gustfull and exquisite: That the duties of Religion are not Toils but Refreshments, not Yokes but Crowns, such as differ onely in size from those Celestial ones to which they tend: That the pleasures of piety are so ravishing and attractive, that nothing but a per∣fect ignorance of them can be Amulet sufficient against their Charmes; I say, though we tell them all this, and a great deal more; yet they quickly re∣ply, that out of interest and policie we can say no lesse.
The Testimonies of these persons be∣ing rejected, and their endeavours un∣succesfull, I cannot divine what other Medium remaines to worke this Con∣viction, except the testimony of such as
 are in equal degree with themselves, who out of their own experience can tell them, that there are no such plea∣sures on this side heaven, as are to be found in conversing with God, and walking in his wayes. Here they would have no cause to wave their wonted Priviledge of being▪ tryed by their Peers, or to except against their judgment in the Case, who being plac∣ed in equall circumstances with them∣selves, must be supposed to understand their utmost Temptations to vice, from whence alone all the seeming difficul∣ties and uneasinesses of vertue doe arise.
Could I bring the Controversie to this issue, I should think of no other Per∣sons (worthy Sirs) than your selves, who out of your own experiences are able to give such pregnant proof, such clear evidence of the sweetnesse of vertue, and pleasantnesse of piety, as would even force this sorrowfull Con∣fession from them, O how sadly have we
 been gull'd and Cheated by the mortal Enemy of Man-kind.
Soe great and prodigious are your parts, so deep and profound your judgements, so extense and compre∣hensive your knowledge, as would prevent all suspicion of a mistake. And so sweet and pleasant are your tem∣pers, so prudent and innocent your de∣portments, so winning and obliging your conversations as would remove all prejudices, which too often cause great truths to be sleighted, and strong con∣victions to become abortive.
Your works of Charity, acts of piety &c. are a pleasant subject, which I could with singular delight expatiate upon; but I know your modesty will not allow it and that great Opinion, which all men have conceived of you, ren∣ders it needlesse.
When I have begg'd your Pardon for the rudenesse of this Addresse, I shall conclude with this hearty wish.

 That God would blesse you with encrease of grace, length of dayes, and at last with fulnesse of glory; which is, and shall be the fervent Prayer of
Sir▪

