




My good Neighbours,
THere are too many pluckt away with the Errours of these Sediti∣ous and Schismatical Times: How much it hath been my care to keep you upright, and preserve you from Schism, Faction and Separation, you cannot chuse but witness for me. I am now grown old, and ready to go the way of all Flesh; and see∣ing I have received some part of my temporal Maintenance from you, I thought it meet for me, before I go hence, and be no more seen, to be∣stow some spiritual Gift upon you, by which I might, by Gods Blessing upon it, so season your Rom. 1. 11. outward Enjoyments, as you might be further∣ed in your passage to that Countrey, which I trust you seek after. Give me leave to make use Heb. 11. 14. of a part of S. Peters Expression to the Cripple at the Temple Gate (Such as I have, give I unto Acts 3. 6.
 you) a few Printed Leaves of Paper, which are indeed the best Monuments and sutablest Re∣membrances that a Minister can leave behind him to his People; by which, he being dead, may (with Abel) yet speak unto you. If S. Paul was Phil. 3. 1. not ashamed to write the same things again, sure it is no presumption then in me to present that now to your views, which not long since I com∣mitted to your ears. It seemed welcome to you then; I hope you will kindly accept of it now; & not only entertain it as a testimony of my Love, and dear Affection to you, but that which is far better, viz. That you will make that good use of it, for which it was intended; which was, the rectifying of your Joy here while I am with you, and the continuance of your Comfort hereafter, when I am dead, and taken from you. If God shall move your hearts (as I trust he hath begun to do, and will more) to the entertainment of that which is the principal Subject of this Ser∣mon, it will make you shun the Atheistical pro∣phaneness of these Godless times, and bring that upon you, which is only able to make you happy; even that which will make your hearts stable and unblameable in Joyfulness; which is the hearty Prayer of him that is

