



SIR,
ALthough I have often experimented the infallibility of that Adagie (veritas odium parit) yet I cannot account it fit that truth should be concealed, nor clanculary crowded up into a corner: The truth therefore is this, (you know it Sir, and I am willing that others should be made acquainted with it also) that I was very unwilling to undertake to Preach at the Assizes for you: You must needs acknowledge the many arguments I used to excuse my self from it: As First, my age being now past my Ninth and great Climaterical: Secondly, the crasiness of my body, Thirdly, my frequent distempers, both of the vellicating Stone and torturing Gout, all which were not only great im∣pediments to my due preparation for such a service, but might have taken me off and utterly disinabled me to do it at the de∣stined time for it. But none of these (to make use of Terence his phrase) could causam dicere with you: No nor could all these together prevail to pass by me, and perswade you to pitch upon another more fit for that imployment. And now since that is past you have proceeded to another postulate, viz. to request and that not barely, petere, but expetere, the pub∣lication of those my poor and weak indeavours; you continue pressing of me to be in the press again. Give me leave Sir to expostulate with you a little with the Poet:Proper.
Quid mescribendi tam vastum mittis in equor?
Non sunt apta mae grandia vela rati.
I must also tell you further Sir, that I had even almost Protested against Printing in such times as these are, in which
 that ingenious invention is so much abused with contentious and useless, I might add pernicious and seditious Pamphlets. But seeing your importunity will not receive a modest denyal, I have now therefore thus farre yielded to your request, that after a serious scanning of these my rude notes (if they hap∣pen to gain the favour of an Imprimantur) they then should be published to the perusal of others. And then Sir, if after their pass they chance to meet with the whip of some censori∣ous dispositions (of which sort of people the world is now too full) who will perhaps say that these thing are too mean for this ripe and exquisite Age, I for my part shall acknowledge them to be so, and you must bare the blame who have forced them from me: Yet withal let me desire such to consider, that at the building of Solomons Temple, there was room as well for the burden bearers as for other more curious Artificers; and at the making of the Tabernacle, not only the bringers of blew Silk and Purple and Scarlet, Exod. 25. 4, 5. but even the poorest which brought but Goats hair and Rambs Skins were accep∣ted. However it happen, this is my comfort, that they that know my reservedness, will acquit me from popularity and seeking my self abroad, and will not brand me with that bu∣sie humour by which too many in this scribling age, have e∣ven made the times to surfeit with their needless papers. Sir, I have now but two things more to say, The one of which is to you, and the other is for you. That which I have to say to you is this, That if this my Sermon shall afford any good ei∣ther to your self, or to any other truely fearing God, I shall not then repent my giving way to the granting of your de∣sires by my thus imparting it to pulick view. The other thing is a Supplication for you, that the God of goodness would perpetuate your present happiness here in this world, and crown you with everlasting happiness hereafter in the World to come, and this is the hearty prayers of him who is
SIR,

