


Sr.
YOur selfe, I conceiue, as well as others, both may and will, at first sight, wonder more then a little at the title of this Dedicatory, and cen∣sure it, if not presumtuous, at least farr fetch'd, by a stranger, by an English man, by one wholly vn∣knowne, neyther in a capacity to deserue well at your hands, or ob∣lige you by any seruice. All this notwithstanding, I come with confidence to your feet to make my address, and with soe much the greater, as the pre-alledgd cir∣cumstances
 cleare mee of all self-endedness in the case. And why should I not, synce I haue to doe with a Prince who is a cherisher of ingenuity, whose goodness promises an acceptance not onely beyond but euen without meritt. Therfore I come as full of Reli∣gious simplicity as voyd of com∣plements, nor seek admittance but by my syncerity, which aymes at nothing besydes gratitude and an humble acknowledgment. But how come I engag'd as to these? If I am not for my owne sake, at least for my friends: if not in my selfe, at least in my Country: if not explicitly or personally, at least implicitly but yett really.
 With a small trespass on your Highnes patience Ile tell you all.
Euer synce you were pleasd to grace England with your presence, many Princely expressions of your value for our Nation are reported to haue falln from your mouth, as indexes of your affection, euen to a more then tacit preference of the same before others. I dare not at∣tribute this so much to its meritts as your goodnes; but howeuer it were, it is both honorable to it, and obliging to vs: out of the abundance of the hart the tongue speaks. Nor should we easily haue belieu'd reports had we not seen them vnder your hand and seale, and in such tearmes as import
 euen a kind of passion both for the generall, and much more diuers particulars. Its inbred to Princes to Compassionate the afflicted; and with what a deep ressentment were you pleasd to express your selfe to my Lady of G. ouer the Sufferings of Romane Catholi∣ques euen so farr, as to profess so particular a kindnes for all those of that Kingdome, that, say you, I could be Content to spill my blood to assist them, and contribute to theyr selicity in this world, synce theyr invincihle Constancy in Suffering persecution usakes them meritt an eternall Crowne in the next. These are your owne words and hugely significant. The truth is the Cause of Romane Ca∣tholiques
 there is so clearly good, that no Prince of that beliefe can doubt of it, but he must together doubt of his owne fayth. Euery such Prince ownes this truth, but not euery one with such a pro∣testation: the protestation is glo∣rious to you and encouraging to vs. Why may we not then, nay why ought we not Syr, in a due returne of Ciuility take notice of it, by Registring it to the world, that so it may be at least its owne Monument to posterity if we can erect no other.
Sr. this is one part of the Ac∣knowledgment I am to make: the other is yett more Reall; as much as deeds are before words. You
 were pleasd not onely to say much of English Catholiques but also to doe much for them: & this was verifyd by that noble supply of charity wherwith you relieu'd a dis∣tressd Religious Community of that nation ready to sink vnder the burden of its wants. If I could deem it fit to giue scope to my pen, here is a large field and ample subject wherin to dilate. But I dare not pre∣sume to sound the trumpett, con∣trary to Scripture, to your almes deeds; charity louing to speak rather by hynts and intimations then bo∣asting language on such a theme. And therfore Modesty bids me for beare to say much, as well as grati∣tude something, least I may seem
 eyther to flatter, or to begg a new. The Charity indeed was as signall as vnexpected, and as vnexpected from such a hand as if it had dropt downe from heauen, as surely it did; a meer piece of prouidence, and a Master one of that great Mas∣ter of the Family to his Religious Seruants. Sr. I pretend not here to make a panegyrick of your ver∣tues; that requires a more refin'd pen: but yet neyther must wee shutt our eyes against the Shining Sun though it dazle them, but with reuerence decline the sight. Yett I must not omitt to re∣flect how well you plac'd your Charity: among all the little ones of our Lord who neerer or
 dearer to him then his Virgin∣spouses, the noblest part of him∣selfe or his Mysticall body, as S. Cyprian stiles them, and least able to help themselues. Noble also euen as to the world, and this renders theyr case more Compas∣sionate: for what greater object of Commiseration then such no∣bility in a deep or necessitous de∣cay; where shame retards, as much as want presses, from exposing theyr Condition, when euery Common beggar can doe it with∣out blushing, and Consequently not so much to be pitty'd.
And hence, great Prince, arises another part of my Obligation and present engagement; a Com∣mon
 tye of Spirituall interest linking mee and that Communi∣ty so into a Common vnity, that I cannot but deem its good and bad Concerns my owne, and be deeply Concernd in both. Obe∣dience by my present employment for some yeares has entitled mee to a reliefe of theyr Spirituall ne∣cessityes, as Charity and Compas∣sion did your Highnes to theyr temporall. In this Spirituall in∣terest I cannot but be sensible of theyr temporall: and though the former alone be my Concern, yett I cannot but be Concernd for the latter, as the formers necessary support, without which it cannot subsist: A spirituall tye as more
 partaking and neerer Relating to charity, is, or may be, equally if not more forcible to engage one then the temporall: and this is a fur∣ther ground of my present pre∣sumption. The first Address I made as an English-man, and on the score of my Nation; this se∣cond, as a Religious, and for theyr sake whome charity obliges me to wish as well as my selfe; and I know it will be gratefull to them that I acknowledg the fauour.
Hauing thus farr giuen some ac∣count of my Address, I must now apologize for the Present I make and that in more respects then one. The first is its slendernes, for which it may seem to resemble the Wid∣dowes
 Mite in the Treasury of so many rich Dedicatoryes as are and haue bin made to your Highnes. And I doe not mislike the re∣semblance; both because tru∣ly expressing its Worthlesnes, as also because as that, this not withstanding, found a gracious acceptance, so doe I hope through your Princely goodnes will this. That had nothing to Commend it but the Doners in∣tention; if myne be not as good as hart can make it, I can onely say I wish it so. Sr. I pretend not to present you with a piece of curious VVitt, but a piece of home-bred Sanctity: and I hope I mistake not my measures;
 the former as from mee might suffer perchance its exceptions, as sauouring a little of vanity: the se∣cond is but what becomes my pro∣fession, Religious, and thats be∣yond exception. And, I hope, I do not disparage Sanctity by Cal∣ling it home bred; the Sanctity of our Iland hauing bin in former times not onely the staple Com∣modity, as I may say, of the same, but of Christendome; illustra∣ting the Church of God with as many and noble lights in that Kind as perchance any of its neighbouring Kingdomes. I wil∣lingly come vnder the shadow of sanctity, as least lyable to suffer in the esteem of the good; it being
 wellcom to euery one that's good: Synce euen those that are not Saints, yett loue and admyre them and theyr Sanctity. On this Score I confide it will not be vn∣acceptable, especially to your Highnes, so noted a Patron of the Vertuous as well as Virtuosi: I confide also neyther the Saint nor I shall fare the worse for being English. A Religious Present be∣seems a Religious man, nor shall I be taxd on that behalfe; and as I come with a great deale of sim∣plicity, so I beg to be receiu'd with Cordiality, and I cannot fayle I know of my Request. If I aymd at rarityes, they ought to be rare indeed if fitt for Princes
 Cabinetts; but ayming at Sanc∣tity, the more simple it is, the more Commendable, a little of it is deemd pretious and goes farr, nor needs it any ascititious foyles to sett it off. Princes indeed are aboue rarityes, as cloyd with them; and it fares with such, as it fre∣quently doth with Stomacks cloyd with dayntyes; they'l feed more sauourly on a course dish then on the choysest viands. And to this purpose I haue bin inform'd from no meane hand (and I Comfort my selfe not a little in it) that a sleight Religious Present of a pic∣ture or Relique of an English Saint will find a gratious accep∣tance in your benignity; and what
 else is it I here tender then a rough draught of a great Saint?
Not some but many will more then probably wonder at the lan∣guage, nor spare to censure mee for Dedicating an English Trea∣tise to an Italian Prince: and those also I must satisfy, not your High∣nes. To wit, euery one knowes not your aduance, I may say per∣fection, in the knowledg of the English tongue, nor has had the honour and fauour, like mee, to pe∣rvse your letters, in that language, the natiuenes of the phrase, the pro∣perty of the expression, besydes the speaking and vnderstanding part, and all to such a degree as few externs are wont to attaine.
 And what an esteem and affec∣tion for our Nation doth this im∣ply? or what greater argument of both, then the long patience in ouercoming all the difficultyes of such a thorny vndertaking for so inconsiderable a purchase? This affection, this argument, this pa∣tience, bidds me confide, you will Sr. not onely haue patience with myne, but also that it may con∣tribute somthing to your Con∣tent. And ought we not, in such a meane Competency as our Ca∣pacity affords, cherish such an af∣fection in you, at least giue a testi∣mony of our endeauour? vpon such motiues as these, that which might seem a deterrment is to mee
 an encouragement, to wit, its Car∣rying an English face and speech, in a word its being English. It will not rellish worse but better, I hope, to your pallat, especially synce your naturall appetite and inclination lyes so much that way. Why shall not I hope that at spare houres it may proue a pastime to diuert your selfe now and then by reading a Chapter of the same, greater perchance then if it had bin in your natiue language? at least I feare no just exception on this behalfe.
As to the subject of my Pre∣sent, I am sure it is good in it selfe, howeuer I haue menaged it: to wit, a Saint and his life, who was
 such all his life long, euen from his baptisme till his death, neuer for∣feyting, still improuing the first grace and Sanctity, he receiu'd therin. This will appeare out of the Context of the History by Sa∣tisfactory prooffs: as also a fayre Perspectiue of such Christian Ver∣tues as make and modell a Saint, and which well Copy'd out by imitation will make the Prac∣titioner a Saint too. Who though he were a Prelate yet he was a Prince also, as all Episcopall Prelates are, and may serue for a patterne euen to temporall Prin∣ces as well as Ecclesiastick. E∣piscopacy indeed Consummated his Sanctity, but I may say he
 was a Saint before he was a Bish∣op; he adorning the Myter as much as the Myter him: and so noble by descent, that no Prince need think it any dispa∣ragement euen on that score to propose him to his actions for a samplar of imitation. Of this great Saint I haue drawen a Picture on paper in black and white represen∣ting all the lineaments and featu∣res of his vertues and Sanctity that I haue bin able to disco∣uer. For the syncerity, inte∣grity, and truth wherof I can onely say this, that all or the chief∣est parts and proportions are ta∣ken out of the authentique Re∣cords of his Canonization, which
 are not to be question'd. This homely black paper Picture, I pre∣sume, great Prince, vpon the war∣rant aboue mentiond, to present you with all: because it is black it cannot blush at its owne rudenes; and though it be homely; I doubt not the fauour of your acceptance, not for its meritts but your innate goodnes, which rejects nothing thats good, as my intention at least, I am sure, is.
But euen your Princely Good∣nes set a syde, I come not altogea∣ther at random and without clayme, nay I know not who can lay a better. Sr. this great Saint dy'd in your Dominions neer Flo∣rence, and his Sacred Corps were
 enterrd, say the Records in the Abbey Church of S. Seuerus neer old Florence: and how does this Sacred Depositum entitle him to you and you to him? If he deposed his naturall life with you, who can haue better right to his Written life then you? If your Aultars had, and harbourd his Sacred Reliques where can we more propperly Consecrate the Effigies or Votiue Tablet of his Gests and Vertues? If he went from you to heauen and eternall happynes, he cannot but retayne a gratefull memory of the place which Consign'd him ouer to the same: and euen from his Patronage, not onely from your Highnesses, I promise my
 selfe good success in this Dedica∣tory. This Congruity is not farr fetchd, nor forc'd, but giues a kind of intrinsique interest or propperty; and I am willing to make vse of it to the honour of the Saint, at which alone I doe and ought to ayme.
Nor is this glorious Prelate the onely of our Iland which has sanc∣tifyd your Tuscany with a holy death, and enrich'd it with his Re∣liques. Another Saint, and King also about the yeare 741. Richard by name, Father of the Saints Willebald, Wunnebald, and Wal∣burga Virgin, renouncing both Crowne and Kingdome for the loue of Christ and a vertuous life, after a long pilgrimage to holy
 places Settled in fine at Luca and there concluded the whole journey of his life with great opinion of Sanctity; where he also was bury'd in the Church of S. Frigidianus, his Tomb being afterwards illustrated with many miracles, what euer me∣mory may at this present remayne there of him and them. So that, great Sr., you see our fauours from Tuscany are not groundles, wee ha∣uing two such noble Pledges there of intercession: and who more po∣werfull then they, that is, then the Saints, when the Concern relates to the glory of God and aduance of Catholique Religion? And giue me leaue, Sr. to ascribe, and I think not rashly, these your
 present pious inclinations towards our Country and distressd Catho∣liques to this Originall source, the Saints seeming to haue infus'd these noble Sentiments of a fee∣ling ressentment which I menti∣on'd before from your owne pen, and cannot too often reflect vpon. These pious inclinations haue al∣ready produced great, and good effects, of which we are most sen∣sible, and for which we shall hould our selues obliged euer to be most thankfull.
And now I haue sayd all as to the Apologizing part: what re∣maynes to be sayd further is onely this; that your Highnes will daigne to accept what is sayd in
 good part, as also what is humbly offerd by so vndeseruing a hand. If it be the first from an English pen the nouelty will in some sort recommend it, in hopes it may draw more after it, who will sup∣pley for its deficiencyes; and it is somthing to lead the way and break the yce. If others haue, pre∣ceeded, (and I wish they may) it willingly for theyr better meritts beggs admittance, at least for the Saints if for none of its owne. As to him, as humbly as hartily I wish you his Patronage, and that he may be as fertile to you in hea∣uenly blessings, as he was heerto∣fore to his country in supernaturall miracles; and what miracle but im∣ports
 a blessing? And Sr. while you haue this Paper-picture before you, if in the perusall of his vertues you find any thing for your aduance or aduantage in the same, I humbly propose it to your imitation, as I doe to others. The world is wittnes of your endowments in this, but they must be more then very good that cannot be better: nor is it any disparagement to be still improue∣ing in the science of Saints and Chri∣stian perfection, to which each one in his degree and quality, be he who he will, by that Estote perfecti of our B. Lord and Sauiour, is oblig'd. What is there prizable in this lifes intercourse but piety and the ser∣uice of God, no body being more
 then he is in that: and what im∣prints this truth more liuely in vs then the liues and examples of Saints? wee seeing by what was done by them, not onely what is to be done, but what is fesible to and by vs. This is the thing I endea∣uourd to ayme at in this Narratiue, by inserting reflexions to that pur∣pose, and chiefly of the 4. Cardinall vertues. as both propper and com∣mon to all states and conditions. And if your Highnes or any Reader may be benefitted therby to a due discharge of theyr incumbent duty in the same, I haue my desyre, which is no other then glory to God, honour to the Saint, and ad∣uance of soules in vertu and piety.
