



DO you not know that you ought to be fol∣lowers of God, and Christ, and the Saints, Ephes. 5. 1. Matth. 16. 24. Heb. 6. 12. and not the multitude, Exod. 23. 2. not the world, Rom. 12. 2. And dare you yet to set up them to be your patterns, and to follow their



examples, who are not at all esteemed in the Church? I speak it to your shame, Is there not a Holy Christ to be your Pattern, and a Holy Word to be your Rule; but Professors of Religi∣on must needs be as the irreli∣gious of the world, taking ex∣ample from them, who will take no example from Christ? Now therefore there is utterly a fault amongst you, because you con∣form so much to this world, contrary to that express prohibi∣tion, Rom. 12. 2. Be not con∣formed to this world; and be∣cause you have so much fellow∣ship with the unfruitful works of darkness; contrary to that word, Eph. 5. 11. Why are ye



not rather Reprovers of the world, and condemners of it, as Noah was, Heb. 11. 7. By your walking as Christ walked, 1 John 2. 6. and according to Rule? Gal. 6. 16. Why do you not rather suffer your selves to be derided and despised? Know you not that the world you conform to lies in wicked∣ness? 1 John 5. 19. And that the unrighteous world shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? 1 Cor. 6. 9. you know it. And you know also that Eyes are up∣on you, observers you have many, God, Angels, and Men; you had need look well to your wayes: you have a Rule to talk and walk by. 'Tis not for



you to say, we will be as the Heathen, Ezek. 20. 32. we will be as others, contrary to Eph. 4. 17. Which forbids you to walk as others, in the vani∣ty of your minds: Remember the words of Christ to his Dis∣ciples, Luke 22. 26. ye shall not be so: You must walk as Christ walked He has left you an example, 1 Pet. 2. 21. If you shall walk as others, you will by so doing give great occasi∣on to the enemies of God to Blaspheme, 2 Sam. 12. 14. And be stumbling blocks to the world: and if offences come by you unto the world, woe unto you, Matth. 18. 7. Remember Da∣vid, and what God told him,



The child that is born to thee shall surely dye; verily the name of God is blasphemed a∣mong the prophane through you; Rom. 2. 24. You should adorn the doctrine of God our Savi∣our in all things; mark In all things, Tit. 2. 10. and be very tender of the name of God and his doctrine, that it be not blas∣phemed through you, 1 Tim. 6. . If it be, be sure God will be as good as his word, Amos 3. 2. You only have I known, there∣fore I will punish you Christ has somewhat against you al∣ready, because you have left your first love. Remember therefore from whence you are fallen, and repent, and do your



first works, or else I will come unto you quickly, and will remove your candlestick out of its place, except you re∣pent, Rev. 2. 4, 5. Would I could say of you as it follows, vers. 6. with a little alteration, But this you have, that you hate conformity to the world which Christ also hateth. Brethren, be ye followers of Christ, and mark them which walk so, as that ye have Christ for an ensample. For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ: Whose end is destruction, whose God is their back and belly,



whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 17, 18, 19. But let your con∣versation be in Heaven, as was Pauls and the Saints at Phil∣lippi, Phil. 3. 20. Seek you the things which are above, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God. Set your af∣fections on things above, and not on things on the earth; for you profess your selves to be dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is your life, shall appear, then shall you appear with him in Glory. Mortifie therefore your members which are upon the earth; Col. 3. 2, 3, 4, 5. I beseech you by the



mercies of God, the meekness of Christ, and by your appear∣ing before his judgment seat; hear counsel and receive in∣struction, that you may be wise at length, Prov. 19. 20. If you will not hear counsel and receive instruction, read Jer. 6. 8. and consider and tremble. That you may is the prayer of one who wisheth above all things that your souls may prosper, and be adorned as your bodies do and are.
