


Most Gracious and Dread Soveraign,
THat I take the boldness humbly to
present this short discourse to
your Majesties Sacred hand and
piercing eye; it is upon this
one and onely account, that how
mean soever the performance be, the un∣dertaking
was in obedience to the command
of a most Gracious Master, your Majesties
Royal Father of Blessed Memory. The Occa∣sion
this. When the Army had gotten the King
into their own custody out of the hands of
those that had long holden him in durance at
Holdenby: to put a blind upon the world,

they made a shew of much good towards him,
which (as soon after appeared) they never
meant him. Amongst other the pompous
civilities, wherewith (the better to cloak their
hypocrisie) they entertained him; it was
their pleasure to vouchsafe him the attendance
of some of his own Chaplains: which, though
it could merit little (for such a kindness could
not with justice have been denyed to a far
meaner person;) was yet a boon his for∣mer
Goalers thought too big for him. In that
Summer Progress (such as it was) four of us
of his own naming, with the Clerk of his
Closet, were suffered to wait upon him. In
which time of waiting, (which was in August
MDCXLVII.) His Majesty, being then at
Hampton-Court, one day called me to him,
and told me he had a little work for me to do.
Some about him, it seems, had been often dis∣coursing
with him about EPISCOPACY,
as it was claimed and exercised by the Bi∣shops
within this Realm. Which (whether
out of their good-will to him, or their no-good-will
to the Church, I am not able to say,)

they had endeavoured to represent unto him, as
not a little derogatory to the REGAL AU∣THORITY,
as well in the point of Supre∣macy,
as of Prerogative: in the one, by
claiming the function as of Divine Right; in
the other, by exercising the Jurisdiction in
their own names. His Majesty said farther,
that he did not believe the Church-Govern∣ment
by Bishops as it was by Law establish∣ed
in this Realm, to be in either of the afore∣said
respects, or any other way prejudicial to
his Crown; and that he was in his own judge∣ment
fully satisfied concerning the same: yet
signified his pleasure withal, that for the satis∣faction
of others I should take these two
Objections into consideration, and give him
an Answer thereunto in writing. In Obe∣dience
to which his Majesties Royal plea∣sure,
after my return home, I forthwith (ac∣cording
to my bounden duty) addressed my
self to the work; and was drawing up an An∣swer
to both the Objections, as well as I was
able; with a purpose to present the same (as
soon as it should be finished) to his Majesty in

writing, upon the first offered opportunity. But
behold, before I could bring the business ad
umbilicum, and quite finish what was under
my hand, the Scene of affairs was strangely
changed. The King trepann'd into the Isle of
Wight; the mask of Hypocrisie, by long
wearing now grown so thin and useless, that
it was fit for nothing but to be thrown by; no
kind of impiety and villany, but durst appear
bare-faced and in the open Sun; high inso∣lencies
to the contempt of Authority every
where committed; Majesty it self trampled
upon by the vilest of the People; and the
hearts of all loyal honest men sadly oppressed
with griefs and fears. Yet had the men who
steered the Publick as they listed, (that they
might give themselves the more recreation,
amuse the world anew, and grace the black
Tragedy they were acting with the more varie∣ty,)
a mind to play one game more the next
year; to wit, the Treaty at the aforesaid Isle
of Wight. Where, assoon as I understood,
that by his Majestie's nomination, I was to
give my attendance; I looked out the old

Papers which I had laid aside a good while be∣fore;
made up what was then left unfinish∣ed,
and took the Copy with me to the Isle;
thinking that when the Treaty should be en∣ded
(for whilest it lasted his Majesty was taken
up with other thoughts and debates of higher
concern) I might possibly have the opportunity
to give his Majesty an account thereof. What
became of that Treaty, and what after ensu∣ed,
is so well known to the world, that there
is no need, and withal so sad, that it can be
no pleasure, to remember. But thencefor∣ward
were those Papers laid aside once again,
and destined to perpetual silence, had not a
debate lately started, concerning one of the
principal points therein handled, occasioned
some persons of eminent place and esteem in the
Church (and one of them conscious to the
aforesaid command laid upon me by the late
King,) to desire a sight of those Papers.
Which being by their encouragement now made
publick (though having little other to com∣mend
them, either to the world but Truth
and Plainness, or to your Majesty but that

they had their first rise from his command
whose Throne and Vertues you inherit;) I
humbly beseech your Majesty graciously to ac∣cept;
together with the Prayers of

LONDON,
August 10.
MDCLXI.
