



Right Honorable!
THough there be many reasons which might perswade met silence, especially at such a time, in which some men are made Transgressors for a word, nay every word makes them Transgressors; and benè latere, wisely to conceal a mans self, specially in mat∣ters of Religion, is one great part of the wisdom of this Age; Yet by your Command, and in obedience to your Or∣der, I have adventured this Sermon in∣to publike view; which I confess I
 was the more easily induced to, be∣cause it tends to keep up the memorial of that antient mercy, which (I conceive) God would not have forgotten by us: as also because (unto my grief) I hear, that its commonly whispered by many, that it was only plotted by King James, like to that of Gowries Conspiracy, for some Politick end. But who ever shall look into the story, as related by Thuanus, (surely no enemy to the Papists) shall see reason enough to conclude the story most true, and the design on their part real; De libertate conscientia∣rum despera∣ta, &c. The occasion he tells us, was a deep discontent, for not attaining a tolera∣tion of their Religion; Sic a Theo∣logis suis dis∣serebatur, Re∣gem deponere, & regna con∣cedere penes supremum Ecclesiae ju∣dicium esse, &c. that the Popish Di∣vines had several Debates about it, to set the Consciences of the Conspirators free from their obedience and Allegiance: great Consultations were held with forrein Princes, great assistances promised, persons brought from several parts, ma∣ny of them related to the Iesuites, and of that faction, to act in this design; E sodalitio Jesuitico machinatio sanguinolenta, & si fuisset per acta, ipse ex animo & intimis sensibus detestaturus erat. Et tam atrox & immano facis Catholicos suscepisse plus morte sibi dolere.
 as appears in the confession of Garnet, who did acknowledge when he came to die, that the thing was so horrid, that it grie∣ved him more then death it self, that the Catholicks should have a hand therein. And yet will men who cry out against Antichrist, plead so much for him, as to make this a feigned story, and by this means make all our former praises to be mockings of God, and taking his name in vain, and bring the guilt of the blood of all the Conspirators upon this Nation. But whither will ignorance and interest carry men? even to despise the mercies of God, Condemn the practises of the Godly, justify the wicked, and for some petty end, take part with their greatest enemies.
In this Sermon, warning is given un∣to the people of God against Poperie, which may seem to some men altogether needless; a melancholy conceit, and no∣thing else, especially in such a time as this, when we seem to be so zealous in departing from Antichrist, that we are ready to go too far the contrary way; and
 to forsake the things of Christ, under the name of Antichristian. But I have read of a Woolf in Sheeps clothing; and do never look upon Satan as a roaring Lyon, more then when transformed into an Angel, and do never fear Antichrist more, then when he professes to fight under Christs banner. But in the Scri∣pture we have variety of Notes by which Antichrist is described, and by these we shall best judge who are Antichristian in their Spirits, Principles, and Practi∣ces.
First, Antichrist came in with an Apo∣stacy; when men fell away from God, the way of truth and Holyness, which before they professed. , 2. Thes. 2.3.
2. He brought in a Lye in Doctrine and worship, , 2. Thes. 2.11. and that even in fundamentals; Antichrist denying the Father and the Son, 1 John 2.22.
3. Antichrist did impose upon all men under the danger of persecution; Papalem ex∣communica∣tionem nota∣ri. Mede he did make all, small and great, rich and poor, bond and free, to receive his mark, and no man might buy and sell (trade with him in
 things spiritual) that received it not, Revel. 13.16,17.
4. He speaks Blasphemie against the Saints of God, and their worship; he blasphemes the Tabernacle of God, and them that dwell in Heaven, Rev. 13.6. And there hath not been an age since the mysterie of iniquitie began to work, wherein more of these notes were to be found, then in that wherein we live; if therefore the Spi∣rit of Antichrist in these great things prevail so much among us, and yet we cry out even against the things of Christ as Antichristian, it may justly make men fear that this is the decoy, the great deceit being to bring in Antichrist under the colour of opposing him, and being zea∣lous against him.
And though we have cause to fear the effectual working of this deceit in all parts of this Nation, yet who sees not that the great plot is upon this City? by reason of its confluence from, and its in∣fluence upon all parts of the Nation: here they shall be favoured, followed, of what opinion so ever they be: its your
 duty therefore Right Honourable, to look up∣on it with the more watchful eye: take care of these wanderers, wandering Stars the Scripture calls them, that have no fixed places, that have various motions; now they are here, but if you look for them a∣anon they are to be found in some other part of the Heavens: these are the men that raise Stirs, cause Tumults, make Factions, to that end that they may swim in such troubled waters, and seem somebody in a Partie; who if they stood single, would be wholly inconsiderable. These prove slan∣derers also, and whom they can not, dare not oppose, they dare asperse, Jer. 20.10. Report say they, & we will report it; this is but the begin∣ning of evil. Such are to be noted by you, discountenanced, warned; and so much the rather, because all the disturbances that are among us, are because the peo∣ple as Clouds are carryed about with such winds; if we could allay the winds, the Heavens would be clear; We speak much of settlement; the best way to settle men is to remove those that unsettle them; and to establish them, is to dis∣countenance
 those whose business is to beguile unstable Souls, that they may make merchandize of them. And when in this work it shall be told you, that it belongs not to you to meddle with Re∣ligion; your power is only in things Civil, being a Civil Magistrate; Do you consider, the foundation of honesty is laid in Godliness; and all the duties of the se∣cond, are grounded in the obedience of the first Table. That men are to obey you for conscience sake, and conscience respects God only; and if you set their consciences at liberty in the things of God sinfully, you may expect that God shall let their consciences loose from obe∣dience unto you, judicially; for furely they that are to obey you only out of conscience to God, if they make no conscience of obe∣dience to him, it cannot be rationally expected, that they should be conscien∣tious in obedience towards you. The Magistrate is to rule with God; and his great care is to be, that nothing provoke God to depart from his Government; for (what ever men imagine) it is the Lord
 that builds the house, that keeps the City: Ezech. 10.2. and fire taken off the Altar, burns more fiercely, when scattered over the City, then com∣mon fire. Let therefore the great things of Christ, and of his Gospel be your care, and be you very vigilant against all the wiles of Antichrist, for he is a Beast issu∣ing out of the Earth, Rev. 13.11. of a base original, and yet growing up insensibly; Stirpium more. Mede. and his horns are like a Lamb, when he speaks like a Dragon. The more subtilty there is in this Adversary, the greater circumspecti∣on is required in you. So shall you be chosen Instruments in the Lords hand, to keep this people from returning to Ba∣bylon; so shall you eminently serve your Generation, lay down your sword in peace; and the ruine intended, endeavor∣ed upon this City, shall not be in your hands, which is the humble and hearty prayers of him who is

