



SIR,
WEre it the Mode of this Age to conferre Divine worship upon Physicians, or to erect them publick Memorials, more Countries than Eng∣land would be your Idolaters, and be∣sides

what an infinite number of the No∣bility and Gentry would honour you with, our Royal Sovereign would erect a Sta∣tue to you, as the Ancients did to Aescu∣lapius and Higia, PRO SALUTE SUA ET SUORUM. 'Tis in your Happy Practise that we see what per∣fection great Learning and long Expe∣ence can advance a consummate judge∣ment unto: The most unlimited desires whereunto Ambition can transport any of our Faculty, are but to equal Doctor FRASIER. So much we may think of: So much we may wish for: But we must reckon those thoughts amongst our extravagancies, and despair as much of atchieving them, as the greatest impossibi∣lities: I do avow it in despite of Envy, Malice and Ignorance, that the discovery of the Longitude, or North-west passage, is a more feasible design. These are not the customary Complements of a Dedica∣tion:

Whosoever apprehends that I can flatter, understands not me: and He is unacquainted with Your worth, who imagines You can be flattered herein. The judgment of the most intelligent Prince that ever swayed the English Scepter hath put an end to all suspicions of this nature; and His Illustrious Elogy hath rendered all Panegyriques needless unto you. I profess I should condemn my self as intolerably criminal, should I surmise that any Address from me could add to Your Glory: But those who re∣ceive no Accessionals from our Applicati∣ons, and Praises, do notwithstanding permit us thereby to testifie our Respects and Gratitude: And I beseech you to believe that the presumptuous Declarati∣ons of these Truths, is the result of those Sentiments. I esteem it amongst the peculiar Felicities of my Life, to have been favoured by a Person of so transcen∣dent

Merit, and who disposeth not of his Kindness promiscuously: I am rede∣vable unto You for some place in the re∣gards of his Sacred Majesty, and for some Effects of his Royal Bounty: 'Twas the Character You gave of me, which procured me that Employment, in which I was designed HIS MA∣JESTIES PHYSICIAN IN THE ISLAND OF IA∣MAICA. Sickness did there inca∣pacitate me from acknowledging that Heroical Generosity of my Prince with any considerable Service; But I shall alwayes retain a due sense for what He hath done, as well as for what He hath pardoned; and this shall ever be an in∣centive unto me so to qualifie my self, that I may be able to repay Him all that Loyalty to my KING, and obli∣gation to my PATRON can re∣quire.
Amidst these Protestations, give me leave to tell Sir ALEXANDER FRASIER, that I am not now so esloigned from the World, nor so fixed on my retirement, as that it is indifferent un∣to me whether He continue Me a place in His Memory: 'Tis certain You af∣ford no room there to what is vulgar, and trivial: yet I cannot but beg to be in∣dulged in the vanity of this request: and I assure You I bring no common inclina∣tions to serve You, neither would I by ordinary Testimonies express that passi∣on wherewith I am,
SIR,

Warwick Febr. 14. 1670.
