


SIR,
IF these following Sheets had been designed to have gratifi'd a particular Humor, or private Interest, it had behov'd me to have made this Dedication to one, of whose Personal Acquaintance I were more happy in, than I am of yours; but since the rashness of my Fancy has suggested a more pub∣lick
concern, I know none more fit to protect my good Wishes to that Royal Cause, which you have so vigorously asserted than your self: Or if it had been possible for me (as I thank God it is not) to have offer'd an Effort, which by any Conse∣quence might appear prejudicial to our Soveraign Lord the King, and consequently, to the Universal Well-fare of all his Subjects; it had been but Pru∣dence in me, to have conceal'd such an ungodly At∣tempt from you; for what Incouragement cou'd any disorderly Act (if there were no worse in't) expect from a Loyalist of your Size, whom Malice it self cannot feign ev'r to have trode one wry step in the Duty of a Loyal Subject, and Office of a discreet Magistrate?
But why, Sir, should I pretend to be a Stranger to you? Has not the whole Course of your Life, (ev'n when Iniquity skrew'd it self up into the Seat of Lord Paramount) render'd you sufficiently conspi∣cuous? first, to all true Lovers of your three suc∣cessive Royal Masters, and next to the Adverse Party? Did not those set you before their wary Eyes, as a perfect Pattern both of Courage and
Obedience, and these, as the very Butt of their im∣placable Malice? Cou'd I live so long near you, as I have done, and be unacquainted with your great Me∣rits? No Sir, it's impossible, tho this be the first time I've given you the trouble of an Address.
It was in that Critical Juncture, you did manifest the true Sense of your Soul; when your early En∣deavours to crush the Cockatrice in the shell, did but predict the After-acts of your Life to be no more to you, but drawing your own Breath.
Satan, among the rest of his subtile and hectoring Artifices, had the Impudence to tell his ineffable Creator, that JOB serv'd not God for nothing; yet for all this, when he had got him in his power, and devested him of all that was dear to Flesh and Blood, this admirable piece of Piety was still the same. And pray you, Sir, what have all those dreadful Engines prevail'd, which have incessantly batter'd against you from your Cradle? (And I wish the plentiful Ef∣fusion of Youthful Blood, or the unavoidable De∣cays of old Age, cou'd but obtain a Writ of Ease) what have they prevail'd I say? Nothing, but to your Advantage: The more they strip't, you did but
the fairlyer discover a spotless and active Soul, dart∣ing it self thorow, and springing in the exact and liv'ly Lineaments of a well Organiz'd Body; or made you appear like the Winter Sun, which shines brightest, when the Frost is most nipping,
Again, Sir, the Magnanimous St. Paul did freely undergo Imprisonments, was over and over again, whip't by the Jews, beaten with Rods, Shipwrack't, was in Perils of Water, in Perils of Robbers, in Perils of his own Country-men, in Perils among the Heathens, in Perils in the City, in Perils in the Wilderness, in Perils in the Sea, but the worst of all was Perils among false Brethren; and yet this resolute Hero stood unshaken to the very last. If I were but to trace the Comparison upon your account (as far as the Cases run Parallel) it were but superfluous to those that know you, and incredible to such as do not. As long as Vice is Vice, it will stand in Op∣position to Vertue; and while there is good Men to suffer, there will be ill Men to persecute. I dare not say behold the End of these, for who knows but Al∣mighty God, out of the inexhaustible Treasure of his Bounty, may in good time give a better Under∣standing;
but if some of their Beginnings have not been Ominous, it's a Paradox to more than my self; and let such as distrust this, look back on those who have formerly imbarqu't themselves in such rotten, and leaking Vessels and if they cannot discern a palpable Fatality attending the runners of such Risques, I hope they'll give quicker-sighted Persons leave to won∣der at their Blindness.
I will be very thankful to any of your Ene∣mies (of which by the Instigation of the Devil, and his Dearest Daughter the Good old Cause yo've had a gay convenient Number) if any of 'em, I say, can shew me when ever a force-putt-Con∣formist became not (as soon as ev'r he met with a promising Game for't) the most Voracious De∣vourer of that sacred Authority, which he most solemnly swore to defend: But it's Hypocrisy, not Conversion which I disclaim; and what Precaution is herein to be used, falls under the Cognizance of our Superiours.

Sir, It's not the hollow sound of an empty Pa∣negyrick can Eccho to your Character. Original Worth is the firmest Basis of true Virtue: And in order to that, your own Acts can best speak you: It only remains that I beg Pardon for this Freedom, and the Honour to be allow'd to sub∣scribe my self,
Loyal Sir,

