



SIR,
I Doubt not but the fame of the per∣formances
of Mr GREATERICK
may have raised in you a Curiosity
to be better informed about the rea∣lity
thereof. I have given Mr Boyle an hasty ac∣count
thereof in a Letter, which I send now to you,
that you may not be ignorant of it. It may seem
improper to Dedicate that to one which is sent to
another: but whether it be that I am too busy,
or too lazy to Write more: or that I mannage my
friendships with lesse of ceremony and formality
then usuall; I have resolved upon this course: and
I am confident that if I am in an errour you have

goodness enough to passe it by: The suppositions
I go upon depend so much upon the Doctrine of
Fermentation, that I could not but think of you
when I writ it: and who is a more competent judg
of the Subject here debated, then the best of
Philosophers, and Physicians? It may seeme
equitable that I tell you why I call the Gentleman
the Miraculous Conformist: many strange re∣ports
have and do runne of him; but he is reclai∣med
from all that is fanatique; and this gift of
Healing was bestowed on him, since the Restau∣ration
of his Sacred Majesty, and the restitution
of the Doctrine and Discipline of the English
Church: God dealing with him, as the Shep∣heard
in the Parable, who expressed more
kindnesse to the lost sheep, being found; then
to the ninety-nine that had not strayed. I
have admired much in him, that Diseases carrying
so great a resemblance in their Nature, as to be
thought the same, and to reside in the same part,
are stroaked out divers wayes! That he should
be able to tell, that upon his first stroaking the
Patient should be worse, and cured by a second:
as he did in the Lameness of Mr Thomas Porter,

my very worthy and good Friend: He told him,
he could not set his Legge anew; but that he
would Cure his paine therein; yet at first it would
seem worse then before his touch: which proved
true; and yesterday I was with him in Worcester∣shire,
and found him able to walk three miles
without pain. You see how here his touch strength∣ned
a part, that was incurably weakned by being
broken, and ill set: so that the painfulnesse see∣med
inseparable from the misfortune occasioning
it. I submit all my explication of the accident
to you: if you read it over twice, you do more
then ever I had the patience to do: I know many
imperfections will occurre in it, some whereof
were voluntary, knowing that the Learning of the
Person I writ to, needed not to be troubled with
petty Illustrations: Some defects have happened
thorough haste and inadvertency; it being all
written with one impetus of thoughts and penne,
just as I came from Ragly. It is nothing to say,
some have allready approved the Discourse, if
Mr Boyle, and you dissent. I have onely time to
tell you, that, without the noyse of much talk, and

frequent addresses and applications, I shall never
cease to admire you, and to be
Straford upon Avon
Febr: 17. 1665.
Sir,

