




May it please Your Grace,
TO pardon the Presumption of the Obscure Person that dedicates this Book to Your GRACE, for the sake of the Renowned Man it treats of, Viz. One of your Illu∣strious Predecessors, an Archbishop of Canterbury, that hath deserved so eminently of that See, nay,

and of the whole British Church; I may say, that deserved Best of any Archbishop before him, that wore that Mitre. To whose solid Learning, De∣liberation, and indefatigable Pains, both the Kings and People of this Realm owe their Deliverance from the long and cruel Bondage of Rome. For it is true what the Romanists say in Obloquy of this Archbishop, and we Protestants say it to his Eternal Fame, That he was the first of all the Archbishops of Canterbury that made a Defection from the Papal Chair; Thereby vindicating this Crown from a base Dependance upon a Foreign Jurisdiction.In his Three Conversi∣ons. But whereas Parsons saith, That this was the first Change of Religion in any Archbishop of Canterbury from the beginning unto his days; this is not so true; For sundry of Archbishop Cranmer's Predecessors, (to look no further than Two or Three hundred Years backward) were of different Judgments from the Church of Rome in some Points. His immediate Predecessor, War∣bam, approved of the King's Title of Supreme Head of the Church under Christ, in his own Kingdom, against the Doctrine of the Pope's Uni∣versal Authority. And a Century of Years be∣fore him, Archbishop Chichely, tho he were made the Pope's Legate, refused to exercise his Power Legantine, further than he should be authorized

thereunto by the King. And Archbishop Islip, as long before him, disliked of Dissolving those Marriages that were contracted by such as had be∣fore vowed the single Life. For tho he laid a Pu∣nishment upon a Countess of Kent, who being a Widow, and then Professed, afterwards secretly married to a certain Knight, named Abrincourt; yet he divorced them not, but permitted them to live together. And the Judgment of Archbishop Arundel, who lived in K. Richard the Second's Reign, was for the Translation of the Scriptures into the Vulgar Tongue, and for the Laities use thereof. For He, preaching the Funeral Sermon of Queen Anne, the beloved Wife of that King, after she deceased at Sheen, in the Year 1392. commended her, as for her other Vertuous Ac∣complishments, so particularly for her Study of the Holy Scriptures, and of the Sense of them; and for having them in the Vulgar Tongue; as I find by an Ancient MS. Fragment,E Foxij MSS. writ near Three hundred Years ago, formerly belonging to the Church of Worcester, in these Words fol∣lowing;
Also the Bushop of Caunterbury, Thomas of Arundel, that now is, sey a Sermon at Westminster, thereas was ma∣ny an hundred of people, at the buryeng of quene Anne, (of whose Sowle God have mercy.) And in his com∣mendation

of her he seyd, That it was more joy of her, than of any woman, that ever he knew. For notwith∣standing that she was Alien born, [being the Daugh∣ter of the Emperor Charles IV.] she had on English al the iiij gospels, with the Doctors upon hem. And he seyd, that she sent them unto him. And he seyd, that they were good and true, and commended her, in that she was so great a Lady, and also an Alyan, and wolde study so holy, so vertuouse bokes. And he blamed in his Ser∣mon sharply the negligence of the Prelates, and other men, &c.
So that it is not true what Parsons saith, if he mean, That no Archbishops of Canterbury before Cranmer, varied from the Church of Rome in any of her Doctrines. But true it is, tho not so much to their Credits, that none of them, however sen∣sible they were of the Roman Errors and Supersti∣tions, did in good earnest bestir themselves to set this Church free of them, before our abovenamed Archbishop (being the sixty eighth from Augustine the Monk) resolutely and bravely undertook and effected it. Indeed they spent not their Zeal, their Treasure, and their Interest this way so much, as in contending about Superiority and their Prero∣gatives, in exempting their Clergy from the Cog∣nizance of the Temporal Magistrate, in Appli∣cations to, and Courting of the Bishops of Rome,

in Persecuting those they called Hereticks, in Eterni∣zing their own Names, by founding Religious Hou∣ses, and building Stately Palaces, and Shrines, and in exhibiting themselves in great Worldly Pomp and Appearance.
But blessed be God for Archbishop Cranmer; by means of whose Reformation succeeded a Se∣ries of better, tho not so splendid, Archbishops. Who made conscience of minding things more suitable to their high Vocation, and the Spiritual Trust committed to them: Men that regarded lit∣tle or nothing the vain shews of exterior Grandeur and Glory, nor sought Great Things for them∣selves, but with their great Predecessor St. Paul, (on whom lay the Care of all the Churches) spent and wore out themselves in the Restoration of the Kingdom of Christ, so happily begun by the said Archbishop Cranmer in this Island. Such were Parker, Grindal, Whitgift, the Three first Prote∣stant Archbishops next after him; what he planted they watered, and God gave a Blessed Increase to. Whose most excellent Lives and Conducts in the Government of this Church, as well as in their own more private and Domestick Conversa∣tion; their rare Piety, Prudence, Patience, Cou∣rage, and Activity, I can scarcely temper my Pen

from making excursions into. Of which I could fill even Volumes (had I Leisure, Favour, and Countenance) from those Large Collections which I have for divers Years been storing up with great delight, partly out of their own Original Letters, and partly from other MSS. in their times.
But besides these first Archbishops during the Long Reign of Q. Elizabeth, who by their Care and Diligence established and settled that Refor∣mation, of which Archbishop Cranmer laid the first Stones, we are beholden unto the same Arch∣bishop for all the rest of the Worthy and Painful Prelates of that Metropolitical See, who have taken Care of this Excellently Reformed Church, even unto Your GRACE. Whose Deserts to∣wards this Church and the Reformation, have raised you to sit in Archbishop Cranmer's Chair; tho with as much Reluctancy in You, as was in Him. Of Your GRACE'S Endowments to qualify You for this most Eminent Station, I will be wholly silent; knowing how abhorrent Your Generous Nature is from Reading or Hearing Your Own Commendations.
Nor, MY LORD, is this my End in this my Dedication: But this it is, That You would

so far Encourage these my Weak and Imperfect Labours (done out of a Good Intent) as to cast a Favourable Eye upon them, for the sake of Your Glorious Predecessor, the Subject of this Book; and to repute me among the Number,

