



MADAM,
ALbeit I am no friend to Epistles Dedicatory, because they too fre∣quently prove, to use the Cynick's Phrase, but mellifluous snares; yet because common Justice obligeth me to return unto every man his own, I find my self under an essential Obligation to prefix Your Ladyships Name to the ensuing Noble Discourse: and that not merely by reason of the Trust you were pleased to commit unto me for the Publication thereof, but rather, because Divine Providence has made Your Ladyship the Midwife to conduct this Noble Birth into Light, which otherwise must necessarily have layen buried in the womb of Darkness. And, Madam, give me leave to speak it, Your Honour is herein the greater, in that you undertook this service so laborious and difficult, which no other mortal, as I am assured, was in a capacity to perform; You being the only Person, who very opportunely were instructed in that Character wherein the Original Copy was writ. Madam, I am not of those who admire Titles of Honour, further than they are shadows of Virtue; but rather am of the opi∣nion of the morose Philosopher, that Honours without Virtues are but the Masques of Vices; yet Your Ladyship will be assured, that the Honour You have acquired by this generous Ʋndertakement, is far more illustrious than that which Nature has conferred on You. Solomon gives us an excellent Character of an Honourable Lady, Prov. 11.16.Prov. 11.16. A gracious woman retain∣eth honour, and [or,ד vertitur ut, Jun. as] strong men retain riches. With what force do persons, strong in wisdom and power, retain their acquired Riches? And doth not the Gracious woman with an equal force retain her Honour? And what greater Honour can be acquired and retained, than that which is ac∣quired by the service of Christ and his Churches? What more Honourable than for a creature to be immediately employed in the service of his Creator? Doth it not speak a Mind descended from on High, and truely generous, to be inspired with a divine Ambition of being engaged in service for the King of Kings? Is man ever greater, than when greatly serviceable to his Lord? Was it not a great effate of the Moralist, That he who will be truly Free and Noble, must serve Philosophy? What Liberty then and Nobility do they acquire, who serve Theology! What is, Definit. Platon. Nobility, according to the Pla∣tonick Definition, but a Virtue of generous Manners and Services? And who are invested with this Virtue, if not they who are employed for the im∣provement of Divine Knowledge, the most sublime and generous Science? Are not all Honours measured by approach unto the Fountain of Honour? And who approach nigher unto the Fountain of all Honour, than such as are most deeply engaged in the Service of the Supreme King? The common Title
 of Honour given to Courtiers among the Persians, as also the Jews, was, Men of Presence: And who are the Men of Gods presence, but such as are engaged in the service of his Church? And do we not find Memoires in Scripture of many both Hebrew and Christian Women, very Honourable for their service in and for the Church?xod. 38.8. Is it not recorded, Exod. 38.8. as the great Honour of those devout Women, that they assembled by troops at the door of the Ta∣bernacle, and consecrated their Looking-glasses for the making the Laver of Brass? What more valued by some than their Looking-glasse? How much pre∣tious time is spent thereon? Yea, do not some spend more moments in poring on their Looking-glasse, than on their Souls? Yet lo! these Virtuous Wo∣men part with their Looking-glasses, which had been of so great use to them, and now resolve to spend their time to a better account, at the door of the Tabernacle, in Fasting and Prayer, and other parts of Divine Service! And O! what a lustre of Divine Honour remains on them to this very day? Again, there is an Honourable mention made of other virtuous Women, who employed their time and labours in the service of the Church, Exod. 35.25, 26. And all the women that were wise-hearted, did spin with their hands, and brought that which they had spun, both of Blue, and Purple, and Scarlet, and fine Linen, as an Offering to the work of the Tabernacle: Wh greater Honour could have been affixed to these wise-hearted Women? And how far Your Ladyship may claim an interest in this Title of Honour, the World, at least the Church, may judge: Have you not indeed spun with your hand, a fine thread, both of Blue and Purple, and Scarlet, and fine Linen, for the Tabernacle of the New Jerusalem? So likewise in the New Testament, what Honourable mention do we find of virtuous Women eminently useful in the Service of the Church? Is it not an illustrious Title of Honour, that Paul gives Phbe,Rom. 16.2, 3. Rom. 16.2. That she was a succourer of many, and of himself also? The GrecanicNon dixit  Adjutrix, sed magnifico pla∣nè titulo eam exornans, dixit , i. e. Patronam. Grot.  is a Magnific title, and signifies not merely an Assistant, but a Patron, for so the Athenians termed the Defensors of Strangers; and Plutarch renders the Latin Patron, by . What greater Honour may a poor Mortal expect, than to be a Succourer and Patron of the Churches or Ambassadors of Christ? The like Honour also he reflects on Priscilla, the wife of Aquila, v. 3. whom he styles , Helpers or Co-workers in Christ. To be any way Assistant in promoving the Doctrine of the Gospel, or in draw∣ing men to the embracement thereof, what an high piece of Honour is it? These Instances, Madam, I have given Your Ladyship and the World the men∣tion of, to let You see what an Honour it is to be in any way or measure assistant in and for the Church of Christ: and all that I shall subjoin is, That, as Your Ladyships hand has been so happy an Instrument in transcribing so Noble a Work, so my Prayer for you is, that the divine Hand would so far favour you, as to transcribe those great Truths contained therein over and over in more visible Characters on your Soul,2 Cor. 3.3. that so you may be more perfectly the Epistle of Christ, written with the Spirit of Christ; Which will give You a greater Capacity of Service for your Lord, and Me of being, as I ought, really,
MADAM,

Newington,
March 26. 1678.
