



Right Honourable,
'TIS an Observation I have made for now a dozen Years at least (wherein I should yet be very glad to find my self mistaken) that there is no one thing of more pernicious con∣sequence, to the Peace and Tranquillity of this Renowned City, than its disorderly Popular Elections, whether of Magistrates to Rule, or of Ministers to Teach. The latter of these Evils, I dare say, the most considerable Part of the Clergy here do both highly disapprove, and ve∣ry heartily bewail: the which, I hope, will at length meet
with a Rebuke as publick as the Scandal it gives, from some or other Superiour of that Order, whose Gravity and Abilities are most likely to be effectually successful in the reclaiming of it. And 'twas chiefly because I knew my self to be no fit Match for the former, that I did not without some Reluctancy ingage in the Service Your Lordship was pleased to enjoin me upon this peculiar Oc∣casion, which I easily foresaw would most naturally induce an Encounter with it. For of all the Parts of a Preach∣er's Duty, that of Publick Reproof should be dischar∣ged with both Strength and Courage, Skill and Au∣thority; and is (I think) generally the least becoming, but however the most unrelishable from any of us of the Junior Sort.
My Lord, 'Tis our great Disadvantage in occasional Sermons (and especially upon so copious a Subject as fell to my share here) that we have seldom time to press home any single Argument, without defrauding of all others: and so are forc'd rather to pick, than collect Mate∣rials; to say nothing at all upon some Heads, and perhaps not enough upon any. And (among others) that's one considerable Defect of the Instructive Pages of the en∣suing Discourse: which is scarce any thing more than a Cursory Touch upon many such Particulars, as do well de∣serve a more solid Treatment. And though in the few Elenchtical Periods of it, 'twas my reall Design to act the Plain-Dealer; yet I'm sure I have no where wilfully broke in upon that becoming Deference, which I know to be the rightful Due of those Worthy Sages, who were chiefly in Nomination in the late Election. I have there∣fore given them the Title of Candidates, because I know not by what more proper Term either to express my mean∣ing, or to distinguish them from the rest of their Bre∣thren. And though I sometimes call them Competitors
also, yet the indifferent Reader will easily discern I have taken care to charge the blameable Indecencies of the Competition, not upon them, but upon the undisciplin'd and tumultuary Populace.
My Lord, There is no one more sensible, than my self, of the numerous Imperfections of the whole: And if I have any good Opinion of it, 'tis purely owing to the kind Acceptance it unexpectedly found from both Your Lordship and the Honourable Court. And because I know not what should probably invite so publick an Ap∣probation as you have since been pleased to grace it with, unless its Plainness and unaffected Simplicity: I have therefore taken care to make You a Tender of it from the Press, in the very same homely Dress You had it from the Pulpit; save onely that I have added a sin∣gle Passage or two, to prevent the mis-understanding of my meaning in several others.
In fine, (My Lord) Whatever may be the Effect of this mean Performance, I'm sufficiently conscious 'twas sincerely intended for a charitable Effort (without all manner of Reflection upon either Person or Party) to∣wards the so much to be desir'd Composure of our un∣happy Differences. And though the farther Publication of it is an Instance of my Obedience to Your Lordship's Commands, wherein I had much rather have been excu∣sed; yet if the Reader will peruse it with the like Can∣dour it met with from that Venerable Audience where∣in 'twas uttered; it can, I hope, do no harm, and may (by the Blessing of God) do some good.
My Lord, I have nothing more to add, but my most grateful Acknowledgment of Your Lordship's ma∣ny and signal Favours, both before and since Your Ad∣vancement to the Chair of Eminence. And if 'twere not to prove what I believe no one doubts, I could
my self supply as convincing a Testimony of Your sur∣passing Private Munificence, as the Year of Your Mayor∣alty hath many of Your Publick. But I'm sensible they no more need the Encomiums of either Tongue or Pen, than Your Honour doth the Support of the Praetorial Robe. You may now with Satisfaction put off the lat∣ter, but the former will be the indelible Ornament of Your Name and Memory. And 'twere Injustice in this great City, to grudge You a little Ease in one kind, since She hath taken care to burden You in another: or to repine at Your Absence at Guild-Hall, while You sollicite Her Interest in St. Stephen's Chapel.
May You long enjoy the fragrant Odours of Your diffusive Beneficence, in this World; and at length reap the compleat Reward of it, in that which is to come. And may God Almighty bless this Famous Corpora∣tion with a lasting Succession of such Governours, is the hearty Prayer of,
MY LORD,

