





SIR,
THE Regard I have ever born in my Mind towards Men of Emi∣nency, in Times past born and bred among us, (especially when with their Qualities and Places they have been adorned with Learning, Wisdom or Integrity,) led me at my leisure-Hours to make cursory Collections out of my Books and Papers, of their Lives and Actions. And many such men there were in the Last Age, when Learning and

Religion after a long Eclipse, began a∣gain to enlighten our Horizon. Where∣of some, however useful they were in their Times, and made a fair Figure to the World, are now in effect quite forgotten; and tho' the Names of others of that sort are better known, yet but slight and imperfect Characters remain of them. Whenas they were perhaps the great Pillars of the State or Church, and whose Counsils and Assi∣stances the Prince made much use of in the weighty Transactions of his King∣dom. Of these I confess I cannot read or hear, but I am drawn with an Inqui∣sitive Humour to know more of them, as whence they sprang, their Country, their Parentage, their Education, their Tempers and Inclinations, and remarkable Actions, and what Events fell out to them, over and above what is commonly known or vulgarly told of them. And when by searching a little out of the ordina∣ry Way as it were, (I mean in the By∣corners of old rejected Papers or Letters, and other Journals, Records, Registers, &c.) I gain further Notice of these ancient Patriots, there is wont to arise thence a great Complacency to my mind. And the Thoughts that it may be as

delightful to others as to my self, to re∣vive the Memory of such, and repre∣sent as much of them as can be re∣trieved, hath moved me to make publick some of my Collections of this nature. And moreover, I reckon it a Matter of Equity and Gratitude due from Posterity to preserved the Names and Remembran∣ces of all worthy men that have served God, their Prince, or Country by their Learning or other Abilities. And God himself seems to take care of this, when he saith, that the Memory of the Iust shall be Blessed, as their due Re∣ward.
These, Sir, are some of the Reasons, why I have now brought that to pass, which I formerly made you privy to; namely, the Publishing what I could re∣trieve of the Life of your most Lauda∣ble and Accomplished Ancestor Sir THO∣MAS SMITH. He was a Person that lived in very Critical Times, occasioned by Court-Factions, and the frequent Al∣terations of Religion, and the various Dispositions and Interests of the Princes whom he served. So that he could hardly keep himself always upn his Legs: but by his great Wisdom and Moderation, tho' he sometimes fell, he

fell softly, and fell to rise again with more Glory. This may make his Hi∣story the more pleasant and useful: E∣specially being mixed with many Occur∣rences in his Time, wherein he bore a great Part, both in the University, in the Church, and in the Commonwealth. Where such things may be read, which perhaps are not to be met with elsewhere.
Your said Ancestor, Sir, was the best Scholar in his Time, a most admirable Phi∣losopher, Orator, Linguist, and Moralist. And from thence it came to pass, that he was also a very wise Statesman, and a Person withal of most unalterable. Inte∣grity and Justice, (which he made his Po∣liticks to comport with) and lastly, a con stant Embracer of the Reformed Religion, and therein made a Holy and good End. And therefore the English Soil which he so adorned, would be ingrateful, if she should let the Memory of such a man born in her, pass away, and lie for ever in obscurity. But as he was all this to the Publick, so, Sir, let me add, he is, and ever will be, an Ornament to your ancient House and Family, to your ∣den Mount. where the Noble Seat erected by him, will be his lasting Monument, and finally to the County of ESSEX,

where he was Born and Educated, whi∣ther he gladly retired, as often as pub∣lick Business permitted him, and where he quietly resigned his last Breath to God.
This Great man is the Subject of this Book: which therefore deserves to have been writ by an abler Pen. I am con∣scious to my self that I have omitted ma∣ny remarkable Passages of his Life, which, could they have been retrieved, would have shewn him still more resplendent to the World. But it is impossible to recover all. What I have collected to∣gether in these Papers from various and sundry Books, and Original Writings, are sufficient to give a fair, tho' not a full Account of him. And that which I va∣lue my present Undertaking for is, that I have done it impartially: For it is not of the nature of a Rheorical Panegyric, wherein more Care is taken to Praise, than to speak Truth. To which last I have had a very tender Regard; being born out in every thing I have writ by the Authority of indubitable Monu∣ments; that is, either of Smith's own Letters, Books and Papers, or of others his Friends and Contemporaries.
One thing more, Sir, seems requisite to have been done, to render this Work

more perfect, namely, together with this, to have published his Manuscript Exerci∣tations and Discourses, which being the Fruits and Products of his Learned Brain, no question would have been very accep∣table to all such as have a Value for him. Two of these, that is, His Dialogues con∣crning Queen Elizabeth's Mariage, and his Tables of the Valuation of Coins, I have now brought to Light. But alas! what Pity is it, that all the rest of his brave Philosophical, Astronomical, Moral, Poli∣tical and Divine Thoughts, digested by him into divers Tracts, are now tis to be feared, (except his Common-wealth, and his Books of Pronuntiation) utterly lost: together with all his other Papers, except some Letters of State, that lie in the Kings Paper-huse, and those rough Writings, Sir, in your Hands, and a few others else∣where. But where are now his University Exercises, his Learned Readings, his Elo∣quent Orations, exhortatory of Vertue, Mo∣rality and found Knowledge, his Corre∣spondences with the best Wits of his Age, and many Elucubrations upon ingenious Subjs, which his busie Head was always employed in? I am affraid I must say, they are perisht irrecoverably.
So that this poor Book of mine must serve for the chiefest Remains of our States∣man. And, Sir, my Pains therein I hope, will be taken in good Part by you and o∣thers, excusing candidly my Imperfections: As particularly my Style; which perad∣ventue to some may appear more loose and neglected; and not so smooth, nor set off with Words, as might be expected in Books appearing abroad now a days. But my chief Aim is to speak Truth, and to make my self understood of him that reads me. Nor do I care, this being secured, to be too curious in my Expressions. And perhaps my Converse with a Language and the Writings of an Age or two past may render my Periods more rough and unpolished. But this I suppose will hu∣manely be forgiven me.
Nor would I have it disgust you, Sir, that in the Current of the History you are sparingly entertained with some Latin Poetry, or other Allegations out of Au∣thors; so long as they are Historical and directly tend to illustrate the Story, and the Man I am writing of: and not mere∣ly used for Flourish and Onament. This Caution the rather give,English Historic. Li∣brary, Pt. II▪ p. 105. being aware of a Censure of this nature made by one Mr. Nicolson upon a Book lately set forth,

concerning the Life of Archbishop Cran∣ner; blaming the Author for crouding so much his other Learning into the Body of the History, (he means Citations out of the Latin Poets and other Classics) which, as he saith, instead of entertaining his Readers an∣swerable to his good Design, was apt to amuse and distract them. The Rule he drives at for an Historiographer to observe is good. For a Reader cannot but be displeased to have the Subject matter he is reading fre∣quently interrupted by moral Sentences, Observations or Stories out of Authors, or other Digressions. But surely by the Wayhe hath wronged that Writer no man seem∣ing to be more of Mr. Nicolson's Mind than he, and less guilty of that which he lays to his Charge. For I have read the Book, and unless I am much mistaken, there is but one Distich out of Martial, (and scarce∣ly another Quotation to be met with in the whole Volume,) and that was concer∣ning the great Pompey's having no Monu∣ment as that good Archbishop had none. But if peradventure any other Citation be found in that Book, it is directly in pur∣it of the History, and not surely (to speak so much in that Writers behalf) intended as a mere Embellishment. And if this be a Fault, I may in this Piece be guilty of

some such Blemish: which I reckon in Truth none at all.
You may possibly, Sir, here and there in the Book meet with some Passages con∣cerning Sir Thomas, seeming too minute and jejune to be taken notice of, and of little Moment. But herein I entreat you, Sir, to bear with me, as you would do with an Admirer of some Piece of Antiquity, who is want diligently to pick up and preserve even the contemptible Stones and Frag∣ments that he finds in the Ruines of it. But besides, upon a little Circumstance we know many times depend great Matters; and a Hint may open a Door into some material Points of History. And in a word, what one Reader may run over, as not worth regarding, another may perceive de∣light or Profit therein. Which were Con∣siderations that swayed me not to reject or cast aside even the slighter Matters that may be found in this History.
You are, Sir, the properest Person to whom this Book should be Dedicated: Not only in that you have so freely com∣municated to me divers of Sir Thomas's Papers remaining in your Custody; and that you are his next Relation in a Col∣lateral Line, and to you is descended his beloved Manor of Mounthaw, or Mount∣hault,

and that eligant Fabrick of his rearing there; but chiefly, because you do so truly resemble his Vertues, in being so useful a Magistrate, a Gentleman of so sober and regular a Conversation in this loose and debauched Age, and so constant an Adherer to the Religion pro∣fest in the Church of England, which your Predecessor had a great hand in the Reformation of, and in which he so sted∣fastly persevered.
Pardon therefore, Sir, this that I have done, to prefix Sir EDWARD SMITH's Name to Sir Thomas SMITH's Life, and this long Address I have made to you on the same Account: Wishing withal my Heart the Continuance of your Worthy Name and Family, for many suc∣cessive Generations in the hopeful Issue God hath given you, to be a Blessing to Essex, and to the whole English Na∣tion. And so I desist from being fur∣ther importunate, and am, and have great reason always to be,

