



Reverend Fathers and Gentlemen,
THe goodness of the Quarrel I am engaged in makes me fear no Judg∣es; but yet to chuse the most com∣petent: I am secure of the honest and true; but submit the decision to the learned and prudent. All that are sensible of those studies by which the Morality, Religion, and Civil Policy of this Nation hath been carried on happily before these Impertinents & Innovators; and how this Nation is de∣clined and debauched from every thing that is serious and sober now, are con∣vinced of the justice of my complaints, and how necessary it was that some

body should attacque them; but it is for you to determine of the validity of my charge, and of those proofs with which I come to implead them. I am not troubled at the glorious Titles with which these Comical Wits boast them∣selves; Of the Lyons which they bear, they have only this faint resemblance, that they are not so brave as they are painted I have stooped the Talbots (your Supporters) for them, and if they ever hunt well hereafter, this Age knows whom they are obliged unto. The name of Virtuoso signifies as little with me, as it does in Italy, where they will bestow on a Pastry-Cook or Ml∣lener, even with that fair accessional of molto Illostre; But it seems a little too open and palpable to fetch the project of the Society from Italy, and their name too: though Campanella contri∣ved the former, yet would He not have advised them unto the latter; and if

their invention were so barren as not to suggest unto them a fitting denomina∣tion, they might without robbing mea∣ner Artizans, have borrowed one from the Academy of Perugia, or some where else there, and stiled themselves the INSENSATI, &c. It is manifest now that the Antient Learn∣ing (and not only the Natural Philoso∣phy) is the Rubbish they would re∣move;Mr. Glavi pag. 91.
This work they have so dili∣gently pursued, as if they had forgot Their first and chief Employment, carefully to seek, and faithfully to report how things are de facto—This Specimen acquaints you with what integrity they perform their un∣dertakings; and if the Ensamples they exhibite to the world, whilst They are yet probationers for the glory of Natu∣ral Philosophers, if they be so faulty what estimate may we rationally make of those that are laid up in the Treasu∣ry

of their Archives?
Mr. Glanvill tells us,pag. 90. that They have done more than all the Philosophers of the notional way,I shall hereaf∣ter give the word an exa∣men of the rest of the : and I, design to try them by that piece. since Aristotle opened his shop in Greece: which saying (he adds) may perhaps look to some like a bold and fond sen∣tence; but whosoever compares the Repository of this Society, with all the volumes of the Disputers, will finde it neither immodest nor un∣just; and their History hath given us instances sufficient of their Ex∣periments and Observations, and In∣struments to justifie a bolder affir∣mation.
—I am indeed apt to be∣lieve that all the Philosophers of the notional way in Greece, Alexandria, Arabia, Spain, and the rest of Europe, neither have, nor would have attempted anything like to what they have done; and when I reflect upon the lamentable narratives and proposals which their

History, the Transactions and other Books of theirs represent unto us, I think they purpose to grow famous, as the Turks do to gain Paradise, by trea∣suring up all the waste paper they meet with. But I shall not anticipate your censure, nor endeavor to prepos∣sess you against them by the sense of your interest, nor exasperate your pas∣sion any way: Be as unbyassed as it is possible; Be as Loyal and Monarchi∣cal, as any English-man imaginable; Be as great friends as you can to the Protestant Religion, sober vertue, and the real Honor and utility of these Kingdoms; I wish for such Arbitra∣tors; and your Sentence shall never be declined upon those accounts, by

Warwick Octob. 6. 1669.
