


THough after much importunity, I was at length pre∣vailed with to quit my Relation to you; yet 'twas not without great reluctan∣cy and uneasiness to my self. And that was the true
 and only reason, why I took no leave of you; for a solemn Farewell, as it would have been no real Benefit to you, so, I was well assured, that it would have added to my own Affliction.
What the prevalent in∣ducement to my removal was, is, I suppose, well known to your selves. As for others, 'tis suffici∣ent to let them know, that it was not from any unkind∣ness to me on your part, nor out of any low or mer∣cenary
 respects on mine. That I did not consult my own Ease or Profit, or a∣ny other little selfish Inte∣rest, the Parish for which I left you, is an evident ar∣gument. And so far were you from making me wea∣ry of you, by any manner of Disrespect or Ʋnkind∣ness toward me, that the experience I had of your long-continued and unwea∣ried kindness to me, was that, which, above all o∣ther considerations, kept me so long with you, and
 made me always very back∣ward to hearken to any o∣vertures of removing from you.
Do not therefore ima∣gine, that I am forgetful of the Favours I have re∣ceived amongst you. I am indeed highly sensible of them, and shall ever own my self oblig'd to you for them; and in token of my Gratitude, shall not only readily accept, but in∣dustriously seek after oppor∣tunities of serving you; and shall account it a real
 addition to my own, if I may be any way instru∣mental to advance your Good.
And as I heartily wish your Wealth and Prospe∣rity in all other respects, so I shall especially pray for, and (as much as I am able at this distance) endeavour to promote the welfare of your souls; that they may be prosperous and in health, as your Bodies and out∣ward Estates generally are; that ye may grow in Grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18. and in the knowledge of
 our Lord and Saviour Je∣sus Christ.
To which purpose I have Printed the ensuing Discourse, and heartily re∣commend it, not only to your Reading, but to your Practice; beseeching you to accept it, as a small ex∣pression of my great Affecti∣on to you.
1. S. Paul tells us, that 1 Tim. 1. 5. the end of the Com∣mandment (that to which the whole Christi∣an Doctrine tends, and in which all its parts are uni∣ted,
 as lines in a common centre) is Charity. That Rom. 13. 8, 9. he that loveth another, hath fulfill'd the Law. For this, Thou shalt not commit Adultery, Thou shalt not Kill, Thou shalt not Steal, Thou shalt not bear false Wit∣ness, Thou shalt not Covet; and if there be any other Command∣ment, it is briefly com∣prehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self. As all duties
 of Piety are contain'd in the love of God; so love to our Neighbour is productive of the whole duty we owe to him. For as it follows, Love v. 10. worketh no evil to his Neighbour: No evil ei∣ther in Thought, Word or Deed. For this a∣lone, will cleanse our hearts from wishing any evil to him; this will stop our Mouths, from speak∣ing any evil of him; this will hold our Hands, from doing any evil to him.
 Nor will it only restrain us from the working of e∣vil, but it will put us up∣on the doing of all that Good for him, which we would desire he should do for us, were we in his cir∣cumstances, and he in ours; and will make us as truly condole with him in his Misery, and rejoice in his Happiness, as if we our selves were in his condition.
So great a Grace is Cha∣rity, so comprehensive, that it carries all other Graces
 along with it; and in pro∣portion to our increase in this, will be our proficien∣cy in all the rest.
We need not therefore wonder that our blessed Saviour, (whose great design was to render his Disciples exemplary to the rest of mankind, in all vir∣tuous dispositions of mind) hath so much inculcated this Grace upon us, so ve∣hemently press'd it with the most efficacious argu∣ments, and so powerfully recommended it to our pra∣ctice
 by his own unparal∣lel'd example. And not only so, but as if this were that Grace, which above all other, would adorn our Profession, and recommend him and his Religion to the good esteem of the World, he hath made it the peculiar Badge of his Disciples; For by this, Joh. 13. 35. saith he, shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.
And this was indeed the Character by which the
 first Christians were con∣spicuous and distinguish'd from men of all other Re∣ligions: While they were generally hated and perse∣cuted, and look'd upon as the filth and off-scour∣ing of all things, such was their love, not barely one to another, but even to their Persecutors; that the Heathen World stood a∣maz'd at it, and their most obstinate Enemies, were ei∣ther confounded or conver∣ted by it.

 As therefore the be∣loved Disciple, when by age he was disabled to preach, said no more to his Auditors, than Little Children love one ano∣ther, because this is vir∣tually All; for as it pre∣supposes the love of God, so it includes in it our whole Duty to Man, all the several parts of which, are but so many streams which flow from this as their common fountain; so in like manner I earnest∣ly exhort and beseech you,
 that ye be kindly affecti∣oned Rom. 12. 10. one to another with brotherly love, in ho∣nour preferring one a∣nother. That ye love 1 Pet. 1. 22. one another with a pure heart fervently. That by this means ye may be perfect and entire, wan∣ting nothing; but being readily dispos'd to every good work, may stand com∣pleat in the whole will of God.
Nor is this charitable temper of soul, more ad∣vantageous to your Duty,
 than it is to your interest; as it is in its fruits plea∣sant and profitable, and every way beneficial both to your selves and to your Neighbours. For,
2. Let this Grace rule in your hearts, and there will be no Strifes nor Debates, no crossing the Designs, nor under∣mining the Interests one of another; but ye will all conspire as members of one and the same body, to promote each others happiness. For this a∣lone
 will expell and subdue all those mischievous Pas∣sions and inordinate Ap∣petites, that are the great and only disturbers of your Peace, and will possess your souls with all those benign and gracious Dis∣positions, that do beget, and preserve, and increase, and continue it.
What are the great Make-bates and Destroy∣ers of Peace, but Pride, Envy, Covetousness, An∣ger, Wrath, Bitterness, Revenge, and other such
 like malignant ill-natured Affections? All which are banish'd from, and can find no entertainment in that soul in which Cha∣rity reigns. For Cha∣rity 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. envyeth not, vaun∣teth not it self, is not puffed up, doth not behave it self unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil, rejoy∣ceth not in Iniquity, but rejoiceth in the Truth.

 So far is a charitable person from repining at his Neighbours Good, that he heartily rejoiceth at it; and were it in the power of his hand to ef∣fect, as it is of his Heart to wish it, he would leave no man destitute of any good, which he could wish to enjoy himself. And in case he do not meet with that good e∣steem and kind usage he may justly expect from his Neighbours, as he is not troubled and disquieted in
 his own mind, so conse∣quently he cannot be trou∣blesome or vexatious to them; but sits down con∣tented, chusing rather to be accounted nothing, than by endeavouring to make himself something, to di∣sturb their ease and repose. He is indeed possess'd with such a low opinion of his own worth, that he can∣not take it ill, if others think meanly of him too; yea the higher he is ex∣alted by God in any en∣dowments above others,
 the lower he debases him∣self for the good of others. As he doth not behave himself unseemly to any man; so he thinks nothing unbecoming and unworthy of himself, by which he may be really serviceable to the Good of any. And no wonder that he readi∣ly condescends to the mean∣est employments, for the benefit of his Brethren; because he seeketh not his own, but is of such a ge∣nerous temper, that he stu∣dies the Profit of others
 also. And being of such a publick spirit, he is not ea∣sily provok'd to wrath, up∣on the account of any pri∣vate wrong; as he care∣fully endeavours not to give, so he is slow to take Offence; because he is not apt to entertain an ill con∣ceit of others, or to put a bad construction upon their Words and Actions, but will ever interpret that which is doubtful, to the most favourable sense: And when it is so appa∣rent, that his Neighbour
 is to blame, that he can∣not wholly excuse him, yet he will not fail to make allowances for Infirmities, and as far as he can with truth and honesty, will ex∣tenuate those Faults which he cannot absolutely deny: Yea, though he sees that his Neighbour is malici∣ously set against him, and designedly does him all the mischief he can; yet he will not suffer the Peace to be broken on his part; but notwithstanding the utmost Provocations, he is
 meek and humble, and pa∣tient and ready to forgive; All the good he receives from his Neighbour, he owns himself indebted to him for, and is ready, as he has opportunity to repay it; but so far is he from repaying of Evil, that he requites it only with Good.
Such are the peacea∣ble fruits of Charity; so that in proportion to the growth of this among you, will be your Peace and Ʋnity among your selves.
 And, O how good and Psal. 133. 1. pleasant a thing is it, for Brethren to dwell together in Unity!
3. Nor will Charity only maintain Peace a∣mong your selves, but 'twill also keep you from creating any manner of Molestation or Distur∣bance to your Gover∣nours.
Justice teaches you, to render to Caesar the Rom. 13. 7. things that are Caesar's; yea, to render to all men their dues, Tribute
 to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Cu∣stom, Fear to whom Fear, Honour to whom Honour. And Chari∣ty, which is more liberal and open handed, will be so far from not giving them what is their due, that rather than usurp up∣on their Rights, it will chuse to part with its own.
Besides, Charity and Humility are inseparable companions, they mutual∣ly beget and nurse up each
 other; so that by how much the higher you grow in Charity, by so much the lower will you grow in Humility.
Now a humble person is so far from exalting himself above those that are over him, that he readily stoops to those that are under him. He accounts nothing a greater instance of Pride and Arrogance, than to controll those, to whom he is in duty bound to submit; to prescribe Laws to those, from whom
 he ought to receive them; since this is by interpreta∣tion, to set himself above God, whose Authority Magistrates are invested with, and whose Vicege∣rents they are. He leaves it therefore to his Gover∣nours to determine what is fit to be impos'd, and thinks himself only con∣cern'd to obey; and if it sometime happen, that he is not able to discern the reason of a Law, yet he questions not, but there is sufficient reason for it, be∣cause
 his Superiours (as standing upon higher ground) are able to see further than he can. He doth not therefore dispute, much less remonstrate a∣gainst their Injunctions, but humbly bows and sub∣mits to them.
And if he be unhappi∣ly brought to this Exigent, that he cannot do what his Governours command, un∣less he break the Com∣mands of the absolute So∣veraign of Heaven and Earth; he will then raise
 no opposition either against their Persons or Govern∣ment, but meekly suffer what they inflict, as know∣ing that they are the Mi∣nisters of God, and that whosoever resisteth them, riseth up in Rebellion a∣gainst God himself.
If therefore you are un∣der the power of this Grace, you will not need to be taught, to obey Heb. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 2 13, 14. them that have the rule over you; to submit your selves to every hu∣mane Ordinance, whe∣ther
 it be to the King as Supream, or unto Go∣vernours, as to those that are sent by him; because this alone, will so effectual∣ly dispose you to yield obedi∣ence to these Precepts, that you will not be able without offering violence to your selves, to do otherwise.
But I will not be over tedious, and therefore shall remit you to the following Discourse, in which you will find one prime branch of this Divine Grace, (which hath so powerful
 an influence for the produ∣cing of those foremention'd, and many other bless'd effects) recommended to your consideration, Affecti∣on and Practice.
Finally, Brethren, 2 Cor. 13. 11. farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace be with you. I shall ever remain,


