



Honourable Gentlemen,
OƲt of the great Respect I bear to you all of this Society, in regard from my Youth I have lived among you, and am a Burgess of your City, and have been commanded, and a Commander, and have sailed to several Parts of the World out of this Port, I cannot commit these Productions of my Pen to the wide Ocean of fluctuating Opinions, without the assu∣rance of the Protection of some Honourable Patronage, as your selves; without the which I might haply appear misshapen, and mon∣strous to the eye of the World, and uneasily escape submersion; since that as the Year consisting of more foul than fair Days, so the World in truth affords more bitter Blasts and virulent Censures of Detra∣ction, than candid, serene, unprejudiced Judgment. Therefore I must repair to you, as to Seth's Pillar, which in despight of whole Torrents of Opposers, and Cataracts of Zoilus his furious Off∣spring,
 will (media inter praelia) secure these my poor Labours, and perpetuate them as indelible as the Stars, or your deserved Ho∣nours, who of your Function are the Pillars of a Country, sup∣porting all manner of Trade and Commerce in the World, and, like the industrious Bee, bringing Honey to every ones Hive, in adven∣turing your Estates to several Parts of the World, for the Good of many thousands, which live and depend upon your Prosperity. I could, with many others, desire, That this City and Society had in all re∣spects the same Laws, and Customs in all Maritime Affairs, as the Honourable City of London: then would much Loss, Charge, and Damage be prevented, that many times befals your Ships and Goods; a competent Company of Sea-men, for half Pay, would attend on board at the Ships going out, and coming home, until discharged; and that Pay would relieve themselves, their Wives, and Children, and fit them for the Voyage, and be great satisfaction to them for their attendance on your Service: for by the Rules of Charity, The Labourer is worthy of his Hire; and none deserve it more than Sea-men. Then would your Sea-mens Courage be fortified, Honesty incouraged, and deserving Men rewarded, and the Reformers of an ill Custom be had in everlasting memory, for the Good they did in their Generation. I humbly beg pardon for this Digression, and humbly desire that you would take it into consideration. For my part I ever did, and shall to the utmost of my poor abilities endeauour to honour this City, and will adventure my Life to serve this Society in any Parts of the World.
Accept therefore this Off-spring of some spare Hours, improved more with an intent for the Publick Good, than for any Private Benefit.
I shall conclude this my Humble Address with a Temporal and Spiritual wish, viz. That the Encrease of your Treasures may answer your Hazards and Desires, and that your Virtues and Graces may exceed your Treasures in this Life; and in that to come, may your Glories as far transcend both, as Heaven doth Earth: And for this you have not only the earnest Wishes, but the cordial Prayers of,

☽ Bristol, 10 Novemb. 1667.
