



Most Noble Ladies and Gentlewomen.
SOlomon the wisest of men, tells us, there is a time for every purpose. That this is a fit time for my purpose is unquestionable to me, the season calling for doing good; and according as my station is, I would be found improving my talent.
But possibly, my being a stranger, though not to all, yet to the most of you, may cause some admirati∣on of this my Dedication; but before you judge me in this case, I beseech you peruse these ensuing lines that I present you with, and then, if my crime be be∣yond your clemency to pardon, I must submit to your censures; but if not, passing over my presumption and failings, I hope this my first endeavours in this nature will be favoured with your good-will, 
and acceptation; besides, my Ladies and Gentlewo∣men, there is a four-fold consideration which em∣holdned me to offer this my single Quiller unto your protection and acceptation.
1. By reason of the weakness of the Author. Though the matter herein be of weight and concern∣ment, and I doubt not but will be to the service and advantage of many; but my self being of no great name in the world, never endeavouring it, possibly though the book were never so profitable might not be so esteemed: That therefore it may be of more gene∣ral service, and be prized as it deserves, I took the boldness to put your names at the front hereof, know∣ing that those gardens, flowers or Galleries, that you delight to gather and walk in, is enough to oblige and encourage others, and that your generosity, in∣genuity and authority will add a luster to these my mean labours and endeavours; neither let any despise nor undervalue these lines, because of my acknowledg∣ment of my own weakness, considering that he that is wise in his own conceit, there is more hope of a fool than him, and the way to be wise is to become a fool; but let them read before they judg, & I dare warrant, without it be of them who know more, to whom this is not intended, neither my self for writing, nor you Ladies for accepting shall receive any thing, save thanks and respect.
2. In regard of the fitness of your Persons, for in∣deed works of this nature, are not fit to be presented to all persons, though of your own sex, unless there be that
sobriety, and those qualifications that such a work of such a nature doth require. The Proverb is, It is not good to cast Pearl before Swine. There is many a choice Pearl in this little book; and that they might come or be cast before such as know what Pearl is, and the vertues and use thereof, I were am∣bitious to lay it before you, not questioning or doubt∣ing of those choice and enriched endowments as are suitable to such a subject, and thereby will become profitable and advantagious unto you, which brings me to the third thing, and that is
3. To further your knowledge (a things doubtless desired amongst you) that those things which you understand and see not (through the Pride and Ma∣lice of men) you may apprehend and perceive,

1. What you are.
2. What liable unto. And
3. What assistance you have.

1. That you may the better apprehend and per∣ceive what you are; that is, how you stand distinct from man, and that in the one particular in special, the womb, I have shewed you what it is, to what end created, the figure of it, the form of it, the nourish∣ment of it, and the supporters of it, and no more may be expected from me here, not intending anatomical lectures, or endeavouring after that which, as a good man saith, is too wonderful for me.
2. What you are liable unto; for although the womb be a gallant piece curiously wrought by the best of workmen (if I may so say with reverence) yet it is
subject to innumerable company of diseases and ca∣lamities, which I have endeavoured to unfold unto you by dividing it into three parts, giving you the diseases that are incident to either, in the easiest and plainest method I can. And then.
3. That you may perceive what assistance you have; for as I have told you the womb is subject to very many infirmities, so there are very many supplies and remedies, God having provided in his love in that case, as well as laid punishment to shew his ju∣stice in the other; and that which hath most trou∣bled me, is, that many good women have suffered in many distempers, though things by or easie to be had, by reason of their being ignorant of the vertues of them, might have been made and given either by themselves, or some good Gentlewoman their neigh∣bour, and been relieved. Now in this you will find to every disease, a certain receipt or medicine for the same, with directions concerning it, and they none of the meanest; so that you may plainly apprehend that you have a plentiful supply in all cases, though notwithstanding possibly in some cases, and to some persons, the medicines there directed to, may not al∣ways cure; yet in that case I leave you not destitute, having mentioned several secret Arcanums and specifical medicines in my hands in order, by Gods blessing, to cure the most inveterate diseases which probably might have been also communicated, only chymical operation is required in most of them.
4. To further your ability to do. Only to know is
not so commendable nor so sufficient as to do, also in order thereunto I humbly offer you supplies to help you.

1. To compound medicines.
2. To direct medicines.
3. So supply others with medicines.

1. In order to help you in the composition of me∣dicines. I do not only tell you such a Mineral, such a Vegetable, such an Animal, is good for such and such a disease, but I discover unto you how they must be ordered, compounded or mixed, and with what and when, as also the several quantities both of the one and the other, that so the medicine may not be de∣fective, but compleat to all intents and purposes, whereunto a medicine is applyed or administred.
2. In order to help you to a direct medicine. It would be little or no advantage, especially in some particular medicines, for you to understand the ma∣king of such and such a good medicine, if withall you were not able to give directions as to the taking of the same; as what dose must be given, what time it must be given, and how it must vary, at what time, in what disease, or to what person, with the observa∣tions that ought to be both before and after the take∣ing thereof; therefore in this regard also I have not been wanting, but have annexed to the receipts, what ought in order to their taking be observed or taken notice of.
3. In order to supply others with medicines, be∣sides the delight that most Ladies and Gentlewomen have in looking into Physick and medicines. I doubt
not but also charity is as a spur unto many, that so they may not do something to please their senses only, and in some measure serve themselves, but to to help and redress the griefs and maladies of their poor neighbours, which are not able to help them∣selves other ways. Those noble spirits may here be further furnished in order to such a good work, which to provoke unto, if my small mite shall be found con∣cerned, and they receive good thereby, I should be glad and rejoyce.
Thus courteous Ladies and Gentlewomen, I have in a plain stile, without Eloquence or Complement, (that not becoming such a work) Apologized unto you & it is all I shall say in the case at this time; only I beseech you to pardon me in respect to the subject, being necessary & weighty; inrespect to the method, being easie, though plain; in respect of the language, being as sober as the case would allow; in respect of the brevity, being full, though short in some particu∣lars; and to accept of the pains of him, who as now in this case, so at all times, and in all cases, is ready to assist and serve you. In testimony of which, I sub∣scribe my self

