



SIR,
IN pursuance of what I not long since intimated in the close of the Epistle Dedicatory prefixed to my Practical Register, and in hopes of as favourable an acceptance of this tender of my respectfull service, as you then pleased to afford my weak endeavours, am I now encouraged to make this my second
humble adress. Though this be but a yonger brother, in respect of its time of production, yet in reference to its first conception, growth, & parts, I may justly say, it far excels the elder birth, and is much more fit to do your Honour, and the Publique, service, and may be (I conceive) capable of as large, if not of a greater measure of your favour and pro∣tection. I will not be troublesome to you in relating the pains & time I have taken and spent in this Collection and Publication, but shal leave it to your judicious consideration. How great soever they have been I repent me not, but am (in my self) abundant∣ly satisfied, and do think it reward enough, that I have thereby gained this opportuni∣ty to shew my continuing humble respects to your Honour, and my willingness to be some way serviceable to others, whatever I have been to my self (in that Vocation God hath of his goodness been pleased to place me in) and to give an Accompt to the World (a thing which I hold every good Christian is bound to do) of the expence of my time.
It may be objected, that the Press hath been very fertile in this our Age, and hath brought forth many, if not too many births of this nature. I must confess this Truth; but how legitimate most of them are, let the Learned judge: This I am sure of, there is not
a father alive to own many of them, and they speak so plain in the Language of Ashdod,Neh. 13. v. 23. that a knowing man cannot believe they ever sprung from Israelitish Parents, but by their pronouncing of Siboleth insteed of Shiboleth,Jud. 12. v. 5. may easily collect of what ex∣tract they are. What I here present you with, is, (though a Homely, yet) a lawfull Issue, and I dare call it mine own, and that (I believe) I may do with as good a right as any ever might a work of the like nature, ha∣ving had as little (if not less) assistance from others in the bringing it forth, as any that have travelled in this kind before me. I am not so blindly fond, or so opiniastre as to think it free from Errors and Misprisions, I fear there may too many be found in it, and no wonder, for Humanum est errare, labi, de∣cipi; yet this I do knowingly aver, that I have not (herein) ex proposito or willingly injured any, but have been as studious and carefull in the penning of this my Collection to do right to every person concerned, and to make the Truth appear clearly in its native colours, as was possible at a throngued Bar to do. Nor have I been less wanting in my best endeavours, to prevent and correct the Errors of the Press, (though I must ac∣knowledge my pains and care are not herein fully answered) that it might appear in pub∣lick,
though not in so rich a Dress as to be a Companion for the best, yet (at least) be by your favour suffered to pass (as tollerable) amidst the crowd of a multitude of Editions, cloathed in as ill if not in a worse and more unbeseeming habit,
Inner Temple, May the 17th. 1658.
Sir, 
