



SOme ill natured and unthinking Ani∣mals having imbib'd an Opinion that your only Design in publishing your Journey to Paris, was to flatter the French and disparage the English, they made, you know, very undecent Reflections upon that Treatise, represented your Worship as a short sighted, prejudiced Observer, and one that had a greater Esteem and Veneration for Paris than the famous City of London: Which in respect of its healthful and pleasant Situa∣tion, splendid and uniform Buildings, Houses and Shops richly Furnished, wealthy Mer∣chants and Tradesmen, and excellency of its
Government, is Celebrated as a Non-Pareil through the Christian World.
But, Sir, as Ignorance is the Parent of Misunderstanding, so they were unhappily led into this Mistake for want of Brains to comprehend your Method in commending and dispraising. For your Abilities in Hi∣story, like the other parts of your great Learning, lying very deep, and out of the Vulgar Track, it is not discernible to every Pur-blind Eye: Whereas better illuminated Apprehensions easily perceiv'd your Inclina∣tion was to give the Preference for London and English-men; for when you spake of the French City and People, your Elogies were Satyrs, your Panegyricks Lampoons, and you always unluckily brought in something that disparag'd what you seem'd to advance, and clouded all the Glory that was thought you intended them in the publication of your Journey.
'Tis true, you say the French Gentry are ve∣ry Civil and Obliging, and I believe no less, though you are pleased to say, They value themselves upon their Courtship, and in making a Leg and Bow better than the rest of Mankind: Building and Dressing mostly for Figure, and that their principal Diversions are only to see and be seen; and this I think, Sir, your Enemies will allow to be no extraordinary Chara∣cter.

You acquaint us, Sir, That their Houses are richly furnished; for they have generally from five to ten distinct Families under every Roof, that the Inhabitants are wealthy in Pictures, and have the Curiosity and Ingenuity to Ruin themselves in that kind of expensive Furniture: Which would be thought a vanity in others; but this, Doctor, is your peculiar knack in com∣mending their Oeconomy.
The Buildings in Paris, you say, are very fine, built with rough Stone, Plaister'd over, and Colour'd to make them look like Brick; but at longest, will not stand above five and twenty Years, and then they have the pleasure of building new ones, which must needs be a great satisfaction to the Proprietors.
Paris in your Opinion, Sir, is more Popu∣lous than London, but it seems 'tis only in ap∣pearance, because the Palaces and Convents have eat up the Peoples Dwellings, and crowded them so excessively together in the Trading parts of the Town, that they seem more numerous than they are; whereas the Artists and Tradesmen in Lon∣don and Westminster have purchased the No∣blemens Palaces, and converted them into Shops and private Dwellings. The lower Windows in Paris are grated with strong Iron Bars before 'em. But are excelled in that particular also, if you had thought upon't by the two stately Houses over the two West Gates of London. You say also That Paris is a beautiful and convenient
City but the Streets are very narrow, extreamly dirty, and the Passengers on foot no way secured from the hurry and danger of Coaches.
Above all, You say their Gardens are very cu∣rious things, and well they may be so, for you are pleased to add as a Character of their Gal∣lantry, That as soon as a Frenchman gets any thing by Fortune or Inheritance, he will lay it out upon a Picture, or an Ornament for his Garden: Though many Utensils and Conveniencies of Life are wanting to him which are common in En∣gland.
Their Food in general, you say, Is course Bread and Lettice, but that indifferent Aliment is sup∣ply'd with plenty of Sauce, for you tell us they have abundance of Onions, Leeks, Garlick, Sor∣rel, Shallot, Rocombo's and Mushrooms. Their Hackney-Coaches and Chairs are the most nasty and miserable Voiture [Carriage] that can be, and yet are as dear again as in London; but that misfortune you say, is supply'd by a worse, viz. The Vingrette, which is a Coach with two Wheels, dragg'd by a Man, and push'd be∣hind by a Woman or a Boy, and sometimes by both, which you truly say is a wretched business in so magnificent a City.
Their Bishops, say you, make the best Figure in the Town in their Equipages and Liveries, but not in respect of their Learning; for you are pleased to add, That Learning is not so necessary a Qualification there, as with us in England.
Their Churches are numerous, but not big, and very few of them have either Towers or Steeples, though they are the Glory of a Prospect; but at length, Sir, you are pleased to credit the French, and gratifie your Enemies, in saying, They have more manners and Religion than the English; for which, some of your Country-men are resolv'd never to forgive you, though I think they justly ought, for the Characters you bestow on their Monks. Who wear, say you, the Rustick Habits of old Times, without Shirts, or other Linnen Orna∣ments of the present Age. That wantonly Perse∣cute themselves to do violence to Christianity. That feed upon sowre Herbs, Fish, and such kind of Trash, and lie worse, always rough and upon Boards; go bare foot in a cold Country; deny themselves the Comforts of this Life, and wear out their days in a slavish and fruitless Devotion. And this I think may at one for what your Back Friends call an odious Comparison.
Thus far, dear Doctor, I have been your Compurgator, and clear'd you from the su∣spicion of being more a French-man than an English-man, which might have been prejudi∣cial to your Practice: And now am become an humble Suitor to you, that since a Friend that is gone a long Journey has oblig'd me with a Succinct and Pleasant View of some parts of France; and largely Supplies in Words at length, where you mince the Mat∣ter, that you would please to take it into
your Protection, and give it the Honour of being Bound up as a Supplement with your Journey to Paris, and you will much oblige,
SIR,  
