



GENTLEMEN,
FOR Your sakes I have inserted this following Abridgment or Summary of the Laws, and Penalties, and Forfeitures, as are limited and ap∣pointed by several Acts of Parlia∣ment, relating to the Customs and Navigation; and in what Cases both Ships and Goods are forfei∣ted, upon Exporting or Importation of Prohibited Goods; together with the several Statutes where∣upon they are grounded, being duly compared with the Statutes at large, and the Abridgment to 1664.
I have been provoked to annex this Summary of Custom-House Laws, the more out of a Princi∣ple of good will I have to you, and by knowing some of your defects, or want of knowledge in these
 things, by my own in times past, when I was a Com∣mander my self. Through ignorance of these Laws your Goods have been seised and lost, and Ships stopp'd and hindred in their Voyages, to the great loss and damage of the Merchants, and Owners, and Mariners: Whereas if all concerned had but the knowledge of what they should know, they might prevent this loss and damage, and walk safe∣ly, without any detriment to themselves or Goods, by the Officers; whereas otherwise, without this knowledge, your Ignorance is the Officers Advan∣tage, and he will make you pay for it. And as I would advise every man to follow our Saviour's Counsel Matthew 22.21. Render therefore unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things which are God's: as likewise Rom. 13.6, 7. Render therefore to all their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Cu∣stom, Fear to whom Fear, Honour to whom Ho∣nour: So likewise I do advise all Officers to go discreetly on in their Business with all men, and not hinder, lett, or abuse, in word or action, any one with whom they have Business, without just cause; nor those that fall into their Hands; nor to take the just rigour of the Law of England, lest the Ʋniversal God should take the Law of Hea∣ven upon us for our Errors and Failings: but take reasonable Satisfaction. This is my advice to both Merchants and Officers, and all others concerned. I am their Well-wisher, and so remain to be,

Pill, ☽ Septemb. 2. 1667.
