



May it please your Lordship,
FOr so mean a thing as I am to address my self to a Perso∣nage of your Honour and Quality, may cause wonder in others, and abashment in my self: But for some Considerations, which may
 give them satisfaction, and me bold∣ness, and encouragement.
What I now present your Ho∣nour, is a poor Widows mite; such as, being cast into the Treasury of Gods Temple, may contribute something to repair the breaches of collapsed Piety, and such as, I hope, the Lord of Lords will not de∣spise.
Do I call it Mine? (I must cor∣rect my self) it is indeed your Honours, and my tendring it to your acceptance, is but my paying you your own: It is a Legacy left you by my dear deceased Husband, who commanded me on his death-bed in all humble wise to present it to your Honour, and publish it under your Protection: So that although it was left with me, it was left by him for your Honour.

Do I call it a Legacy? (I must again correct, and confess) It is a due Debt: For our poor Family stands most deeply obliged to your Honour, who have been pleased to exercise a generous bounty towards us, and such as is suitable to none but a noble mind.
The Debt is humbly acknowledg∣ed by us, and shall be undoubtedly repaid by the Lord, to whom it was lent: Your Lordship may with comfort read the Specialty in Gods own Word,Prov. 19.17. which is very good secu∣rity. But as for us, alas! what have we to return? except these gleanings of the Fruits of my dear Husbands Labours, even some of those, which were brought forth, when he last laboured in the Lords Vineyard.
I desire for ever to adore the goodness of God towards me, whose
 weak condition seemed to cry like that woman of the wives of the Sons of the Prophets, unto Elisha, say∣ing, Thy Servant my Hushand is dead, and thou knowest, that thy Servant did fear the Lord, &c. 2 Kings 4.1. To which Cry, your Lordships overflowing munificence hath answered very like the Man of God, vers. 7. Go, and sell the Oyl, and pay thy Debt, and live thou, and thy Children, of the rest.
As for the matter of this Di∣scourse, it is not proper for me to reflect thereon. Only I have a good confidence, That, as your Honour hath been pleased to cast a favou∣rable Eye on other of my Husbands Works, professing profit and plea∣sure in the reading of them; So these words of your dying Servant will not be unsuccessful, but have the

