



Worthy Sir,
THis small Treatise (part where∣of was lately preached in your eares at the Funeral of your dear Mother presenteth it self to your eyes, not for your protection (Divine Truths desire none from men, and
 humane errors deserve none from any) but for your direction. It containeth that in it, which is able to make you wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.
You have a double right to the dedication of this book; partly in regard of the occasion of it; partly in regard of the Authors obligation unto you, which is great, for your liberality, but farre greater for your encouraging of, and exemplari∣ness in the truth and life of Christianity.
I did not think my self a little bound to that Providence, which gave you Relation to our Parish; and I suppose not without cause, when the power of godliness hath few such considera∣ble Patrons.There is scarce one of a thou∣sand, cui praesens fae∣ticitas si arrisit, non irrisit. Bern. lib. 2. de con∣solat. Men of your rank, though some∣times (to stop the mouth of conscience, or for their credit) they take up a form and pro∣fession, yet do usually neglect, if not cursedly deride the strictness and power of Religion. They are too often like the Moon farthest from, and in most direct opposition unto the Sun of Righteousn sse, when they are at the full of out∣ward plenty, and receive most light of Divine bounty from him: their carnal hearts, as the Sea, turn the showers of mercies from heaven, and fresh streams from the earth, into the salt waters of corruption. In our natural bodies, the more fat there is, the lesse blood in the veines,
 and by consequence the fewer spirits. Great∣nesse and Goodness are beautiful and happy,Quies hath no plural number; God sel∣dom gi∣veth two Heavens. Tamen ali∣quando Christus voluit Re∣ginam in coelum ve∣bere saith Luther of Elisabeth Queen of Denmark. Luth. in Epist ad Jo Agric. but rare conjunctions. You know who hath said, Not many such are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. And experience teacheth us, that they are like Stars of the first Magnitude thinly scattered in the Firmament of a Country. How much therefore are you engaged to that distinguishing love, which enableth you to look after the things of a better life!
I shall take the liberty (which I know you will give) to speak a few words to you in your twofold capacity.
First as you are a Christian; and herein my counsel will be, that you would more and more ensure your effectual calling. We say, where men intend to live long, they build strong. I am confident all that you are worth, for your endless condition in the other world, dependeth under Christ upon your inward change. And if ever any wyers had need to be firm and strong, then questionlesse they upon which such heavy weights hang, as your eternal unchange∣able estate.
You have a large room in the hearts of many that are holy: But alas Sir, the best mans confi∣dence of me would prove but a bad evidence for heaven: He is not approved whom man com∣mendeth,
 but whom the Lord commend∣eth.
The great affection which you bear to the souls of the people, amongst whom you were born, is worthy of imitation: And so is your care and cost in scattering some practical home-treatises in several families (whereby souls may be converted, and wherein you may have comfort at the day of Christ) for soul-charity is the soul of charity; but the best charity be∣gins at home, though it never ends there; your main business lyeth within your own doors, to make sure that good work within you, which shall be perfected hereafter.
The ordinary security which most men trust to, will not serve when they come in the other life, to lay their claims, and shew their deeds for the inheritance of the Saints in light. Ma∣ny flaws will then be found in their evidences, which now through their wilful blindness they neither see nor fear.Palens aurum me∣lius est qum ful∣gens auri∣chalcum. Bern. He had need to have ar∣mour of proof that would enter the list with his enemy Death, and not be foiled. The heart not ballasted with renewing grace, may hold out in the calm of life, and shallows of time; but when it meets with the storm of death, and launcheth into the Ocean of eternity, it suffer∣eth a desperate and everlasting shipwrack. The
 want of this is the leak which sinketh many a precious vessel (soul I mean) in the gulph of per∣dition.
There is as much difference between a nomi∣nal and a real Christian, as between a liveless picture and a living person. True Christia∣nity, which consisteth in the souls humble un∣fained acceptation of, and hearty resolved de∣dication unto Christ, as Saviour and Soveraign, is a Paradox to most. There are many Christi∣ans (as Salvian complained in his time) with∣out Christ,Christiani sine Chri∣sto. Salv. but they which know experimentally what the sanctification of the holy Ghost mean∣eth, are few indeed. The Moralist in his best dresse of civility, the Formalist in his gaudy attire of ceremonies, and the hypocrite in all his royalty, is not arrayed like one of these. I do not write these things as in the least suspecting your sincerity, but to quicken you to a godly jea∣lousie over your own soul. If the Apostles and Disciples needed such rousing cautions, Take heed least that day come upon you unawares, Luke 21.34. Take heed least any man fail of the grace of God, Heb. 12.15. then much more you and I, who are more drowsie and prone to slumber, do require awaken∣ing considerations.

Secondly, As you are a Magistrate. And that relation calleth upon you to be very exemplary among men, and exceeding active for God▪
Man is a creature which is led more by the eye than the ear, by patterns than precepts. Great men therefore which are copies, after which ma∣ny write, had need to be exact. You are the look∣ing-glasses by which others dresse themselves; the heads of the people, Deut. 1.15. now the whole body will go along with the head.
Qui in excelso a gunt, eorum facta cun∣cti morta∣les nvere Salust. ad Caearem.You are like Beacons upon an hill, visible to all. The Sun may as soon go unseen, as a Ju∣stice unobserved. A small Star may be dar∣kened, and none take notice of it; but if the great Luminaries are eclipsed or obscured, a thousand eyes will be gazing on them. A little spot in silk or scarlet is more looked on, than a great one in russet or sackcloth. A crack in a peb∣ble is nothing so eyed or prejudicial, as a small flaw in a jewel. Corruptio optimi pessima. Satan doth therefore plant his strongest batte∣ries against the Royal Forts of Magistracy and Ministry (whoever are spared, David and Pe∣ter shall be sifted) knowing that he gaineth a double advantage by their miscarriage, exam∣ple and scandal; by which two wings it will soar higher, and flie much farther An ordi∣nary
 Tradesmon may prove bankrupt without much noise; but if an Alderman or Merchant that had a name for a great estate breaks, the the City and Country ring of it. The honor of God and credit of the Gospel are much engaged in the carriage of a Magistrate that is a Pro∣fessor. The many eyes that look upon you, the many feet that follow after you, and the glory of the blessed God which is concerned in you, do all call aloud to you, to have your eyes in your head (as the wise mans phrase is, Eccles. 2.14. to make straight paths for your feet, and to walk nobly, exactly, worthy of the Lord, even unto all well-pleasing.
Besides, your very place is apt to be a snare and temptation, and therefore requireth the greater care and circumspection. Places of honour and power are like strong meats, which being well concocted yeild much good nourish∣ment (bring much glorie to God and good to souls) but they are of verie hard digestion. He must have a strong brain that will bear much wine, and he much grace that will walk humbly and closely with God in an high condition.
Your Office calleth upon you to be zealous for God, as well as a pattern of piety to your neigh∣bors.So Mr. Pemble in loc. Eccl. 7.16. Be not righteous overmuch, is the voice of carnal and corrupt reason, which
 inciteth to an indifferencie in good courses, and politick forbearance of forwardness in pietie. Such is the judgement of carnal policie, that our verie dutie is but overmuch and needless precisenesse. Moderation is commendable in all things but Religion, because therein there can be no excesse. The lukewarm temper is of all others most loathsome to the Divine Nature, Rev, 3.16. You should not think it below you, to be diligent in finding out, and strict in pu∣nishing those that would debase God, by the breach of his Laws, prophanation of his day, and abuse of his Creatures. To serve the Lord is your greatest honour. Jesus Christ humbled himself more for you: or O how low had you been laid long ere this!
You have begun well with your honouredJohn Be∣resford Esquire, one of the Justice of the Peace for the same Li∣berty. Uncle, my loving Friend, to beat up those head-quarters of hell, Ale-houses. I wish you both an happie progress, and their ungodly disorders a speedie conclusion. Foolish pitie to mens sins is the greatest crueltie to their souls: Favour or connivence encourageth them in their rebellions, encourageth them in their re∣bllions, and encreaseth their corruptions, and thereby furthereth their damnation; when the faithful wounds of wholsom severitie (if God have any sanctifying or saving mercie for
 hem) may reform and heal them. You can∣not easily do them a greater injurie, than to let hem alone in their enormities. One of the greatest stroaks that ever Israel felt from he hand of God, was not to be stricken, Isai. .5.
Some Magistrates are like Mountains and Cypresse trees, high and barren; but God hath ron hands for Justices that have leaden heels, and will shortly strike them home for forswear∣ng themselves to spare others. He will be a error to them, and make them terrors to them∣elves, who will not at his command be terrors to vil doers. They are guilty of all the sins which they can and do not hinder. They sin in others, whilst they suffer them to sin: Vitia aliorum si feras, facis tua; And they that are partakers of others sins, if we will believe the God of Truth, shall receive of their plagues, Rev. 18.4. Some shew at this day, that they accept such places to honor not God, but them∣selves; and they shall know one day, that it were better offending all their neighbors, nay all the world, than one God.
I suppose you do not wonder, that the cruel Lion roareth when he is disturbed of his rest, nor that vicious men rage because they may not without some rubs ruine their souls. Our Na∣turalists
 observe truly, that beasts hate fire: And so do men of heastly principles and practices that heavenly fire zeal. The Dogs will bark and flie at the Moon, not alwayes when she shi∣neth, but when by reason of the clouds hurried under by the winds, she seemeth to run faster than ordinary. The wicked world can well e∣nough endure a cursed neutrality, or (as they term it) a prudential policie;Bona gere & mala pati Regi∣um est. but to serve the Lord with fervencie of spirit, is not more acceptable to God, than abominable to them.
If they cannot make you wound your con∣science,Didicit ille maledicere, & ego contemnere said the Philoso∣pher. (according to the subtilty of the Ser∣pent) they will wound your credit; but a god∣ly mans name is like an oyled post, on which such dirt will not stick. Their good word might be a disgrace to you, and give you cause to re∣flect upon your self (as that Heathen did) and say, What evil have I done, that such a grace∣lesse fellow commends me? But their bad word doth no more now, than the treading with dirty feet on figures engraven in brasse, which are thereby rendred more bright and glorious. And hereafter you shall see a resurrectirn of names as well as of bodies, when Christ will make the sinner pay back the stoln reptation f his see∣vants with interest.

David was the song of the drunkards, and the scorn of the gluttons; and the Son of Da∣vid, that pattern of patterns,Luke 2.34. was set for a sign to be spoken against, and endured the contra∣diction of sinners, Hebr. 12.3. I hope you set your watch not by the Parish clock, but by the dial of scripture, which ever goeth true with the Sun of Righteousness.
In a word, your time is little, your work is great; your talents are many, your account will be weighty; your Saviour observeth every mo∣ment how tender you are of his honor, that was so tender of your eternal welfare; how you testifie your thankfulnesse to him, for all the bitter ago∣ny, and ignominy, which he suffered for you. You shall shortly never more have the least op∣portunitie (though you would give a thousand worlds for it) to do any thing in, for Gods glo∣rie, your own or others good. Work therefore the work of him that sent you into the world, while it is the day of your life, for the night of death is hastening on you, wherein you cannot work: Up and be doing, as a Christian, as a Magistrate, and the Lord be with you.
Sir, I have no more to speak to you, but that the Hearer of prayers may hear often from you, that I may take heed to the ministrie which I have received of the Lord, and fulfil it, and to assure
 you, that my prayers at the throne of grace shall be, that you and your religious Consort may continue to dwell together as fellow heirs of the grace of life; and your hopeful Children may be planted with, and grow up in grace, till they shall be transplanted into the true Paradise, the Kingdom of Glorie. This, through the help of heaven, shall be the petition of

Febr. 15. 1658./9.
