



SƲch is the excellency of the Soul of Man, that the very Heathen, whose Souls were almost wholly immerst in grease and sensuality, and serv'd but as Salt, to preserve their Bodies for a time from putrefaction (according to the Opinion of one of the most ingenious
 among them) have acknowledged it a Di∣vine Plant, a drop of the Ocean of Be∣ings, a Ray of a Deity; and the Body but the Case or Cabinet of this Jewel. The dim Rush-light of Nature hath enabled some of them to discern the spirituality, quick, com∣prehensive, self-reflective motions, and im∣mortality of (their specifical forms as they called) their Souls, and thence to conclude their worth and nobleness: But the clear Sun-light of Scripture advantageth unto a fuller discovery of its excellency. It shews us its Original, that it is of Celestial ex∣traction, created immediately by the Father of Spirits, a beam of the Sun of Righteous∣ness, a bubble of the Fountain of Life, of a much higher descent then the House of Clay, and earthly Tabernacle the Body, Gen. 2.7. Heb. 12.9. Zach. 12.1. It acquaints us with its duration, that it runs parallel with the line of eternity, and swallows up Years and Ages, and Generati∣ons, and thousands of thousands, and mil∣lions of millions, as small drops and mi∣nutes, and nothings in the bottomless Ocean, and endlesness of its abode and continu∣ance. When the Body, like the Sacrifice, falleth to the Earth, and is turned into ashes;
 the Soul, like the Flame, aspireth and as∣cendeth to God, Eccles. 12.7. Philip. 1.23. Math. 10.28. Math. 22.31, 32. It manifesteth the Souls capacity, how no Be∣ing is excepted from its consideration, all are within its compass and horizon; It can view every with its intellectual Eye. It is not bounded with corporeal Beings, nor li∣mited with material Objects, nor circum∣scribed with created Essences; but is capa∣ble of apprehending the first Cause, the Being of Beings, the Original of all things. It is able not only to retrospect upon its own mo∣tions, and to survey the several parts, and ranks, and orders, and rarities, and delica∣cies, and excellencies of the Earth, and this sublunary World; but also to ascend to the highest Heavens, and behold the beautiful Face of the blessed God, till it hath lookt it self into the very likeness, and thereby ren∣dred it self fit and meet for his dearest Love, and eternal Embraces.
The excellency of our Souls doth emi∣nently appear in its receptiveness of the Divine Image: (Great Princes do not stamp their Image on mean things, as Brass and Pewter, but on the most excellent me∣tals, as Silver and Gold,) Eph. 4.23, 24.
 Coloss. 3.10. Gen. 1.26. And its capa∣bleness of enjoying immediately the blessed God. To stand before Kings doth both speak and make a person honourable and worthy.Prov. 22.29. Isa. 43.5. God alone is the Fountain of Honour, and the Standard of Excellency; Every Being is his Coin, and he stampeth on it the rate it shall go at. The Holiness and Happiness of the rational Creature consist∣eth in these two: His Holiness, in confor∣mity to God; his Happiness, in commu∣nion with him: And these two have a de∣pendance on each other. They onely who are like him, can enjoy him: If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in dark∣ness, we lie, and the Truth is not in us, 1 John 1.5. Holiness, or the Image of God, is not onely an indispensable conditi∣on, without which no man shall enjoy God, Heb. 12.14. John 3.3. But withall an absolutely necessary disposition, with∣out which no man can enjoy God, Coloss. 1.12. 2 Cor. 5. And as Confor∣mity disposeth for Communion, so Commu∣nion increaseth Conformity; Vision causeth assimulation in Nature, Gen. 31.38, 39. Grace, 2 Cor. 3.18. And glory, 1 John 3.2.

Though the motions of the Ʋnderstand∣ing and Will are in some respect circular, yet the Ʋnderstanding is the first mover, and the leading faculty, and so the know∣ledge of the blessed God is both antecedent to, and productive of this Image. Though the knowledge of Creatures puffeth up, pol∣luteth, and so debaseth and destroyeth the Soul, (sinking it the deeper into Hell; as a Vessel laden with Silver and Gold, and the most precious Commodities, when it mis∣carrieth, sinketh the deeper for its weight and burden,) 1 Cor. 8.1. Luke 12.47, 48. Yet the Knowledge of God is humbling, advancing, purifying and saving, Job 42. 2 Peter 3.18. John 17.3. The incom∣parable excellency of the boundless blessed God, is the Subject of this Treatise which I present to you both, as a Testimony of the Honour and Service I owe to you, and of my desire to be instrumental for your spiri∣tual and eternal good. The Subject is the highest imaginable; and though the manner of handling it be plain and ordinary, and infinitely below and unbecoming the Di∣vine Majesty, (For who can express his noble Acts, or display all his Praise, Psal. 108.2.) yet the matter of it doth deserve,
 and may prevail for your acceptance of it.
If Knowledge be the excellency of a Man, and differenceth him from a Beast; surely then Divine Knowledge, or the Knowledge of God in Christ, is the excellency of a Christian, and differenceth him from other Men. Our awe of, love to, and trust in the Divine Majesty, are founded in the right knowledge of him. Creatures, the more they are known, the less they are esteemed; but the more the blessed God is known, the more he is prized, desired and obeyed, Psal. 73.25. Psal. 76.7. Psal. 90.11. Psal. 9.10. Our hatred of Sin, and contempt of the World, proceed from our acquaintance with God: He onely hath hateful thoughts of Sin, and self-loathing apprehensions because of it; who hath seen the great and glorious, the good and gracious God, whose Authority is con∣temned, whose Law is violated, whose Name is dishonoured, whose Image is defaced, and whose Love is abused by it, Job 42.6. Isa. 6.5. He onely lives above this present evil World, and all the Riches, and Honours, and Pleasures thereof; who can look beyond it, to the infinite God, and those unsearch∣able Riches, and Weights of Glory, and Ri∣vers of Pleasures, that are in and with him.
 That which was rich and glorious, and plea∣sant to a Soul before, hath now no worth, no glory, no pleasure, by reason of that wealth, and glory, and pleasure which doth so infinitely exceed. When the God of Glory appeared to Abraham, he quickly and quietly left his Country and Kindred, and followed God, not knowing whither he went, Gent 12.1, 2. Acts 7.3. If the God of Glory appear to your Souls, you will soon wink upon these withering Vanities, broken Cisterns, and gilded Nothings, and count them all but Dung and Dross, for the excellency of the Knowledge of him in Christ.
You have begun well, go on and persevere in well-doing: I shall give you the same Counsel which the Holy Apostle giveth to those of whom he was perswaded, that they had those things which accompanied Salvation, Heb. 6.9. Take heed least there be in you an evil heart of unbelief, whereby ye should depart away from the living God, Heb. 3.12. Look dili∣gently, least ye should fail of the Grace of God, Heb 12.15. When false Coin is common abroad, we are the more careful what Money we take; when much false
 Grace is up and down amongst us, and so many please themselves with their Pro∣fession, or spiritual Priviledges, or sacred Performances, or siding with this or that Party, & form of Worship, or the respect and repute they have with others: It concerns you to be the more suspicious of your Selves, least you should fail of that Grace of God, which conformeth the Heart to the nature, and the life to the Will and Law of God.

SIR,
YOu are descend∣ed of a worthy, ancient, and religi∣ous Family: Your Grand-Father (as I have heard) was emi∣nent for Holiness: Your Father is noted, and honoured, for one that feareth God above many; you have hereby the more encouragement, ad∣vantage and engage∣ment to exercise your self to godliness. Ta∣merlane
 made it his practice to read often the Heroick Deeds of his Progenitors (not as proud of them, or boasting in them, but) as glorious Pat∣terns, to inflame his Soul with a love of their Vertues. Man is a Creature that is led more by the Eye then the Ear, by Pat∣terns then by Precepts; and no Patterns are more prevalent, then of those whom Nature and Grace oblige us to esteem and affect. These ex∣amples, above all o∣thers, as flaming Bea∣cons on an Hill, call us to a stout defence of Vertue, when it's invaded by its Ene∣mies. Alexander finding one of his
 Name cowardly, charged him to change his Name, or to become valiant. When one of the Sci∣pio's (descended of Scipio Affrican) be∣came dissolute: The Roman Senate or∣der'd him to put off that Ring, which he wore as the Badge of his Noble Family, be∣cause, by his vicious Life, he was a Re∣proach to it. The truth is, a wicked Son of a godly Father (as Uri∣ah) carrieth Letters of his own condem∣nation about him, causing the Patterns and Precepts of his Family to be Auxili∣aries to his own re∣proach and infamy; whilst the light and lustre of his Ancestors
 renders his works of darkness the more gross and palpable. I mention not these things, as suspecting your integrity; but to provoke and quicken you to the greater care and circumspection in your carriage and conversation.


MADAM,
YOur Birth isDaugh∣ter to the Right Ho∣nourable the Lord Paget. Honourable, but such Honour without Holinesse extends not beyond the Meridian of this World; Grace onely is eternal Glo∣ry. That Honour which is woven in the finest Tapestry of earthly Privi∣ledges, will lose colour, and fade away; but the Know∣ledge
 of God is a possession for e∣ver. Nobility by Parents is but No∣bility by Parch∣ment, and that is but skin-deep at most, and will wast with time. Godliness alone is that Nobility which no Age can con∣sume, and which will run paralell with the line of ete∣rnity.
The whole Earth hath not a plea∣santer sight, then Greatness joyn'd with Goodnesse. Greatness it self is venerable, but Goodness joyn'd with it, addeth a new Splendour
 and lustre to it; as a sparkling Diamond set in a Gold-Ring, it attracteth the Eyes, and challengeth a greater reverence and respect from all. Evil Great∣nesse is a swel∣ling Dropsie, a Disease of the Body Politick, as intolerable a bur∣den as the Earth groanes under; but Grace and Ver∣tue are the more excellent and amiable by the greatnesse of the Person in whom they dwell. It will be your Crown and Cre∣dit to prefer God before the World,
 to esteem Holinesse as the onely Beauty, and a Title to the Covenant, as the onely Riches of your immortal Soul.

Ye have both near and dear Relations, whose Hearts will rejoyce in your perseve∣rance and progress in the wayes of God's Commandements: That you may be helps to each other in the best things, provoke one another to love, and to good Works, live long together on Earth, and for ever toge∣ther in Heaven, is the prayer

