



IF you know not the Reasons of my desiring Mr. S. at the hearing of it, to publish this Sermon, I now tell you, they were these.
1. I was affected with it, as suita∣ble to my own Condition; who have little Comfort to live on, but my hopes of being for ever with the Lord, and no Motive so powerful to engage me to my great Duty, and to overcome all Temptations.
2. And that which is so suitable to me, is not unsuitable to you: I am not the only Man that must die, and
 that hath another Life to live.
3. Mr. Sylvester's Style is so con∣cise, and naturally elegant, that nei∣ther I nor you can sufficiently digest his Sermons upon a transient hearing: A full and frequent review may make them more our own: Of-times four or five Names, or Epithets, signify as much as so many distinct Senten∣ces; and his Phrases are not always vulgar: And therefore they are like strong Meat, that must have longer time, than lighter, for digestion.
4. The Subject is such as you must daily live upon, and therefore should be glad of a daily Help for your pra∣ctical Meditations on it. Being for ever with Christ in Glory, is that which you pray for, hope for, labour for, suffer and wait for, deny the Flesh and the World for, and which you must fetch your supporting com∣forts from, or else you must have nei∣ther Hope nor Comfort, which sound awakened Reason can own.
5. As it is a discouragement to Preachers, when the best studied Ser∣mons, are forgotten at the Church-doore; so it is a great mercy to Hear∣ers when they may carry home, and keep, and daily use, such excellent and pow∣erful Helps. If the Devil knew what Printing was like to do against his Kingdom, I wonder that he did no more to hinder the inventing of it: It was because the Father of Lights restrained him. You Printers and Booksellers look well to your selves, for next to Magistrates and Ministers, there are few that Devils have more malignant designs upon than you, ei∣ther to silence your Presses and Shops as to Good, or to open them to Evil. You speak more publickly than Pul∣pits do. To many Thousands you either preach wholsom saving Truth, or vend flagitious and pernicious Evil. If you vend the best Books only for Mony, you have your Reward; yet thousands may have a greater gain;
 as carnal Preachers may perish them∣selves while their Hearers are saved.
Lastly, I would have those Men that have thought our silencing these 28 Years to be the Churches Interest, and have called on their Rulers to strike home, to see what Doctrine it is that we preach, and whether it deserve Ha∣tred and Destruction. If many such Sermons tell them not, they may see it in the larger Writings, of Mr. Ant. Burges, Mr. Richard and Joseph Allen, Dr. Manton, Mr. Charnock, and many more, (to pass by the yet living).

