



THe toilsom labour which I have undertaken to endure for the common Good of all Men in the adorning of Physick, Part wherof such as it is, be∣ing brought forth and publisht as occasion was offerd, I thought fit to De∣dicate, not to one Prince only, but to You
all, as being the High Lords of Earthly things in this part of the Universal Orb, wherin I am born and live, to whom I doubt not but that Your Own, and Your Subjects Prosperity is Your desire and care. Beseech∣ing the Good and Great God with my whole Heart, to inspire You with an ardent desire, and constant will, that Physic should be per∣fected (as yet deficient in many things) by the pains of excellent Physicians, who live under Your Power in many places, it being useful and necessary that our Course should be happily finisht upon Earth.
Hitherto I have endeavoured to do som∣thing, to the measure of my Ability, for the good of the Common-Wealth: But who can expect so great a Work of one Man, and that privat, and therfore destitute of infinit neces∣sary Helps to perform so immens and hard a Matter? But so much me thinks I have profi∣ted in the Art of Physic, by a continu'd pain∣ful Labour almost forty years, that I now dare boldly affirm, the Structure of a more perfect Edifice of Physic may be erected, the Authority and Munificence of Princes being employ'd with many industrious and judicious Physicians, so much the more de∣sirable
and to be wisht, as by how much Princes no less then Subjects do need its help, being afflicted unto Death with so many, so grievous, and those not as yet enough known Diseases, and therfore so often e∣steemd insuperable.
Neither doubt I, but in a short space a rational and certain way of Physic may be found out by the propos'd Method, if not in all, yet in the most Diseases. For which end I here offer publicly my weak Pains, if acceptable, to You, by Divine Authority set over the Government of others, out of sin∣cere love of farther deserving well of the Common-Wealth, seeing that it pleas'd the Clemency and Wisdom of God, of mere Grace, not only to free me beyond my ex∣pectation a year agoe from a most grievous Disease, and in a manner from the Jaws of Death, and to restore not only former strength of Body and Mind to me, but farther to il∣luminat my Mind more, and hence so boun∣tifully to consent to my Wishes, that en∣trance hath been made daily to me more easie, and farther, to the dark and deepest re∣tirements of natural things.

Now, the same God for his unspeakable Mercy and Goodness towards Mankind, di∣rect your Thoughts and Counsels to the eter∣nal Glory of his Holy Name, as also to Your own, and Your Subjects Health both Temporal and Eternal. Amen. Which is my hearty Prayer.
Leiden,April 14. 1671.
