


Honoured and Beloved,
IT is a general observation, that all crea∣tures have propensity and inclination to∣wards those places where they receive their births and beings. Vegetatives which stand in the lowest rank of life, thrive best (because they delight most) in those grounds whence they first grow. Sensitives as they have an higher being, so a
 stronger inclination to those parts where they are born.
The Prince of Philosophers telleth us that Fish usu∣ally stay with pleasure in those Waters in which they are bread,Arist. Hist Animal. l. 4. c. 8 and Beasts in those Woods in which they are brought forth, and that neither of them will remove without force and violence; Nature hath planted in them both this principle of affecting their native places. Hence it comes to pass that even these creatures, have manifested their thank-fulness after their manner. Trees acknowledge that sap which they borrow from the earth in which they stand, in the tribute of leaves which they pay back to the same in Autumn. The Storks are said to leave one of their young in that part of the Earth where they are hatched.Patriam quis∣que amat, non quia pulchram, sed quia suam. Sen. Men as they have a Nobler life, so a greater love to their Native Country. Heathen themselves have been famous for this.
Pericles the Athenian did so affect his Country∣men, that his usual speech was. If none but my self should lead them to the shambles,Plut. in vit. as much as lyeth in me, they shall be immortal. When Cleo∣menes King of Sparta, being greatly distressed, had a promise of help from Ptolemy King of Egypt,Idem. upon condition that his Mother and Son were sent to him as pledges. Cratesiclea (for so was his Mothers Name) as soon as she understood it; said to her Son (who was affraid and ashamed to mention it to her) How is it that thou hast concealed it so long and and hast not told me. Come, come, put me straight into a Ship and send me whither thou wilt, that this body of mine may do some good unto my Country, before crooked Age consume it
 without profit. Themistocles notwithstanding his Countrymen had banished him,Diodor. drunk the blood of a Bull and poisoned himself to keep Artaxerxes (who had sworn not to go against it without him)▪ from invading his Country.Pez. Mel. Hist. Codrus King of Athens,Tul. de Offic. Attilius Regulus General of the Romans andLivie. M. Curtius are renowned in History for sacrificing their lives for their Countries liberty.
The Christian is  a man of like passions, onely he acteth from higher principles, and affecteth for holier purposes. Religion doth not break the string of natural affection, but wind it up to such a pitch, as may make its stroaks more true, and its sound more melodious. Nehemiah was sad and pen∣sive, when the City of his Father was solitary, Nehem. 2.3. The Jews were disconsolate when their native Country lay desolate, Psa. 137, beginning. Paul could wish himself parted from Christ, that his Kindred and Countrymen might be united to Christ, Rom. 9.3. Greg. Nazianzen and Hierom report that the Jews to this day come yearly to the place where Jerusalem the City of their Fathers stood (which was destroyed by Titus and Adrian) and upon the day of the destruction of it, weep over it.
As its natural to love, so not unusual in our Kingdom for rich persons to manifest their love, to their native parishes by large gifts to the poor. But though my respects to you be sincere, yet I may say (in a sense) Silver and Gold have I none, to speak my affecti∣ons by, onely such as I have I give you. A Treatise which may, through the blessing of God, help you to the true Treasure.
Bucholcerus blessed God,Melch. Adam. that he was born in the
 days, and bred under the Dicipline of holy Me∣lancthon. I must Ingenuously acknowledge, that it was a great mercy to me that I was born amongst you, and brought up under as pious, and powerful a Mini∣stry there,Mr. Thomas Wilson. as most in England.
In Testimony of my unfeigned love, I present you with this brief discourse, which was conceived in your Pulpit, and through the importunity of several of you, brought forth to the Press. The occasion of it (as is well known to you) was the Death of your Neigh∣bour and my dear Relation, Master Caleb Swinnock, (who was interred May, 21. 1662) whose Father and Grand-father had three or four times enjoyed the high∣est honour, and exercised the highest Office in your Corporation. I am much of his mind, who saith, That Funeral Encomiasticks of the dead, are often confections of poison to the living; for many whose lives speak nothing for them, will draw the example into consequence, and be thereby led into hope, that they may press an Hackny Fu∣neral Sermon, to carry them to Heaven when they dye; and therefore am always sparing my self, though I condemn not the custome in others, where they do it with prudence, and upon good cause. My Friends holy carriage in his sickness (besides his in∣offensiveness for ought I ever heard in his health) commandeth me to hope that his soul is in Heaven. I had the happiness some time to be brought up with him, in his Fathers Mr. Robert Swinnocks Fami∣ly, whose House (I cannot but speak it to the glory of God) had Holiness to the Lord written upon it. His manner was to pray twice a day by himself, once or twice a day with his Wife, and twice a day with
 his Family, besides singing Psalms, Reading and Ex∣pounding Scriptures, which morning and evening were minded. The Sabbath he dedicated wholly to Gods service, and did not onely himself, but took care that all within his Gate should spend the day in secret, and private duties, and in attendance on publique Ordinances; of their proficiency by the last, he would take an account upon their return from the Assembly. His house indeed was as Tremellius saith of Cramners, Palaestra Pietatis, a Scool of Reli∣gion. I Write this not so much for the Honour of him (of whose industry for the good of the souls com∣mitted to him, I was a frequent eye witness, and whose memory is blessed) but chiefly for your good, that as some of you do already, so others also may be provoked to follow such gracious patterns. I must tell you, that what low thoughts soever any of you now may have of holy persons, and holy practices, yet when you come to look Death in the face, and enter into your unchangeable estates, a little of their grace and godliness will be of more worth in your esteems then the whole World. Though the Saint be markt for a fool in the Worlds Calender at this day, and the prosperous Sinner counted the wisest person; yet when the eyes of sinners bodies are closed, the eyes of their souls will be opened; and then, O then, they will see and say according to that Apocryphal place which will be found Canonical for the matter of it, We Fools counted his life to be madness,Wisdom 5. 4, 5. and his end to be without honour; But now he is numbred among the Children of God, and his lot is among the Saints.
The Subject of this Tractate is partly, The true way to
 dye well; which I am sure is of infinite concern∣ment to your immortal souls, and such a Lesson, that if it be not learned you are lost for ever.Laert. The Cynick cared not what became of his body when dead, and the other Heathen could slight the loss of a Grave,Facilis jactura Sepulchri. a little Earth; but without question it concerns you nearly to take care what becomes of your souls, and you cannot so easily bear the loss of God and Heaven.
Men indeed are generally unwilling to hear of Death, and the Minister who would urge them to it, is as unwelcome as foul weather, which usually comes be∣fore its sent for; whatsoever hath a tendency to Death is killing; the telling them of it sounds as mournfully in their ears as the tolling of a passing Bell; and the making their Wills as frightful to them, as the making their Graves. Hence, when they are riding post in the broad way of sin and the World, and conscience would check and rein them in with the curbs of Death and Judgement, they presently snap them in peices, and stifle its convictions; They dare not look into the book of Conscience, to see how accounts stand between God and themselves, but like Hauks are ever Hooded within doors,Mori timeat qui ad secun∣dam mortem de hac morte transibit. Cypr. de mortal. blind at Home, and never use their eyes but Abroad, to the hurt and censuring of others.
The Egyptian slaves drank Wine freely, and wrapt their heads in Vails, that they might dye without sight or sorrow. I know many drown the thoughts of their future mourning in carnal pleasure and present mirth, but such mirth, like Nabals, will last no longer, then while they are drunk with ignorance and senslesness; for they no sooner come to themselves, to understand the state they are in, but their hearts dye within them. Besides, hereby they put themselves upon a necessity of perishing;
 for, alas how will they do to dye, who consider not before hand of their latter end.
Naturalists tell us of a Cockatrice, that if men see it first, that dyeth, if that seeth a man first, the man dyeth. Its most true of Death, if we see it first by an holy preparation for it, we kill it, it cannot hurt us; but if Death see and seise us first, it kills us eternally. O believe it sirs; Its another manner of thing to dye well, then the sleepy World dreams of. The lustiest of you all must expect that ere long Death will trip up your heels, and give you a fall. Ask your souls whither you are ready for it; Will it not prove your downfal? When Death throweth you, will it not be your eternal overthrow? Its possible ye think, of preparing for Death hereafter, but why not now? Do any of you say, To morrow I will repent? What if God say, Thou Fool this Night thy soul shall be required of thee? Where are you then? Its one of the greatest strata∣gems of the Devil, whereby he hath undermined mil∣lions of souls, by prevailing with them to delay till it was too late. O Consider, Death like Thunder and Lightning blasteth the green corn, and consumeth the strongest buildings, Job 21.23, 24. One dyeth in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet. His breasts are full of Milk, and his bones are moistened with Marrow. The Cock in the Arabick Fable, having overcome another Cock in a Battel, thought now that he had no Enemy,Vide. Locmu. and therefore got to the top of an House, and began to crow and clap his Wings in token of Triumph. When behold on a sudden, a Vulture com∣eth and snatcheth away this braging Champion and Con∣querour. If nature in any of you have mastered one di¦stemper, it gives you not leave to be secure, for an
 outward accident or inward disease will on a sudden Master you.
It is observable in the days of Solomon, when Israel enjoyed the greatest peace, they made strong preparation for War, 1 Kings 4.25, 26. And Israel and Judah dwelt every man under his own Vine, and Fig∣tree. And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of Horses for his Chariots, and twelve thousand Horse∣men.
Iphicrates the Athenian General in times of peace entrencht his Army, ordered his outworks, set his watch, kept his guards, and observed all Martial Discipline, as if he had been in the height and heat of War. And being asked the reason by one of his Fa∣miliars, and what he feared; He answered to be sur∣prised, and least it should so fall out, that he should be constrained to say, I thought not on it. O that we were as wise, who are Listed under the Captain of our Salvation, for that War wherein there is no discharge. Beloved friends, Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour when the Son of man cometh. Mat. 25.13.
The Brachmanni had their Graves before their doors. The Sybarites at Banquets had a Deaths-head delivered from hand to hand by every guest at the Table. The Emperour Ferdinand, had one appointed at certain times to salute him with Vive memor Lethi Ferdi∣nand. O Ferdinand, live as one that is mind∣ful he must dye. Joseph of Arimathea had his Tomb in his Garden. When the blessed Saviour was in his glorious transfiguration in Company with those heavenly Courtiers,Luk. 9.31. they spake to him of his decease; Could you think but one quarter of an hour every day, what a
 searching, trying day, the day of Death will be. Ah how holy would you live? how exactly would you walk? Were death at your doors, at your tables, in your gardens, in your shops, present before your eyes in all your projects and pleasures, how would it deaden your hearts, to these sublunary vanities, and quicken your affections to celestial felicities?
I have read of one that prayed six times a day, and being asked the reason, said no more, but this, I must dye. If any argument in the World will dis∣swade from wickedness and perswade to godliness, and abounding in the work of the Lord, Death will. They who steer the ship aright sit in the hindermost part of it. They who order their conversations aright, dwell in the thoughts of their dissolutions. When our time is short, we must work the harder.
Its reported of the Birds of Norwey,O Laus. Mag. Hist. Septentri∣on. that they flye faster then the Birds of other Countries, not because they have greater nimbleness of wing, but by a natu∣ral instinct, they knowing the day in their Climate to be very short (not above three hours long, say some) make the more hast to their Nests. Your time is little, your accounts will be great, your work must be done now or never. O work the work of him that sent you into the World, while it is day, for the night cometh when no man can work, Joh. 9.4.
I am bound to tell you, that God hath committed many Talents into the hands of several amongst you, ye are higher in place and power, ye have more opportuni∣ties then others to serve the interest and honour of Christ, and therefore God expecteth that you should do more for him then others. Indulge the Drunkenness, and Swear∣ing, and uncleanness, and Sabbath breaking of others, least
 ye should be counted busie-bodies, or precise persons, and you destroy both your own and their souls. There is no such cruelty to mens souls, as clemency to their sins. He loves his friend best, who hates his lusts most. Besides, the wrong your sinful compliance doth to others, whilst ye bear the Sword, as Women wear their Artificial teeth, for shew onely, not for service, ye treasure up wrath on your own heads against the day of death, for as a reverend Divine now with God said truly. No∣thing more sads the heart when one comes to die, then his neglect of those opportunities, which Gods pro∣vidence or his own place, have put into his hand of doing or receiving good. Neither is there a sharper Corrosive, then the reflection upon those days and times, which have passed over him, male, aliud, nihil, agentem.
Its Cronicled of Philip the third, King of Spain, that though he never committed gross sin,Val. Max. all his life time, yet when he came to dye, he screeched out dreadfully, O that I had never raigned, O that I had never been King, for then I should not have now to Answer for my neglect of doing the good I might, and my not hindering the evil I ought in my Government. Sirs, (I beseech you give me leave to be faithful to you) Will it not be a dreadful time with you, when you are tumbling on your dying beds, and neer your eternity, if consci∣ence should flye in your faces for your falseness and un∣faithfulness in your places, and make you cry out; O that I had never been Mayor of Maidstone; O that I had never been Justice; O that I had never been Jurat, for then I should not have now to Answer before the dreadful tribunal of a righteous God, for all the Oaths, Fornications, Prophanation of the Lord
 day, and other evils which I might have hindred, and did not, and for all the good which I might (by my holy pattern, and encouraging others in piety) have done, and would not. Alass ye cannot ima∣gine the dreadfulness of such a mans condition on such a day. Therefore now be Terrors to evil doers, and encouragements to them that do well, if ye would find comfort then; for as in Philosophy; so in Divinity. They who mind not the premises, make but mad, but sad conclusions.
The Naturalists assure us that the Ashes of a Viper ap∣plied to that part of the body which is stung, will draw the venome out of it, (natural attraction as it were cal∣ling home that poison, which injury and violence had misplaced) the serious consideration that you must dye, and be turned into dust and ashes, will be a soveraign medicine against the poison and pollution of sin, it will make you both good men and good Magistrates.
The Latter part of the Treatise containeth the Graci∣ous Persons Glorious Portion. Therein I have endea∣voured so to set forth the vastness of the Saints estate, (though I must confess neither men nor Angels can cast up its total sum) that I might prevail with you to desire the felicity of Gods Children, and the Inheritance of his chosen ones. This is the portion, which is as the Spanish Ambassadour said of his Masters treasure in the Indies, without a bottom. Though the seven streams of Nilus are known, yet the head of it was never found out. Much of the riches and beauty and perfections of the ever blessed God may be read in the book of the creatures; more may be seen in the glass of the Scriptures, but the longest line of humane or Angelical understanding, can never fathom his boundless, bottomless nature and being,
 yet there is so much to be known of him even in his life, as may draw out your hearts to chuse and close with him. The World is ready to wonder what the people of God see or enjoy in him, that they are so fearful of his fury, and so joyfully in his favour; as the ignorant wretch could see nothing in the Picture of Helena, why Nicostratus should admire it so much, but as Nicostratus told him, O friend if thou hadst my eyes, thou wouldst wonder at it as much as I do; so had the World but the Saints eyes, could they see what a Crown of glory, What a Paradice of pleasures, What a Mine of riches, What a loving, able, and faithful friend God is, could they but behold that beauty, and bounty, grace, and peace, love, and life, which are in the infinite God, they would admire him too; yea their eyes would affect their hearts,Qui Venetias non vidit, non credit, & quiae aliquandi ibi non vixit intelligit. that they could not but love him, and delight in him, but Satan with his black hand (like Swallows dung) puts out mens eyes, that they not seeing so great a good, might not desire him.
The Italians have a Proverb, He who hath not seen Venice doth not beleive; and he who hath not lived there some time, doth not understand what a City it is. This is most true of God; he who hath not with Moses seen him that is invisible, doth not beleive; and he who never had fellowship with the Father and Je∣sus Christ his son, cannot understand what a vast al∣sufficient and infinite portion the eternal God is. O friends, did your eyes with Isaiah, see this Lord of Hosts, or with Israels Magistrate beheld but his back parts; or had you with Paul ever been caught up into the third heavens, ye would quickly trample on all the honours and pleasures, and treasures of this lower World, as toys and trifles, and say with David, whom have we in heaven but thee, and
 there is none upon Earth that we desire besides thee.
I have undertaken briefly in the ensuing discourse to shew also the vast difference between the Christians, and the Worldlings portion, by which you may understand, that if any one among you could enjoy the wealth of Craesus, the wisdom and glory of Solomon, the beauty of Absolom, the strength of Sampson, the plea∣sures of Sardanapalus, and to all, the long life of Methu∣selah; yet in the midst of all these, his soul would be as beggerly as the body of Lazarus, and as restless and un∣satisfied as the stormy tempestuous Ocean. No Water, say Naturalists, will quench the Dragons thirst. No creature can fill the vast desires of a capatious, immortal soul. As among all the Beasts of the field there was not a meet Companion for man, Adam was solitary and alone, notwithstanding their numerous society; so amongst all the creatures in the World, there is not a meet portion for the soul, its poor and beggerly without God, in the midst of all its possessions; your heads may be solicitous, and your hearts industrious, to heap up creature-comforts, and when ye have got what the World can give, ye would be but as hungry men in a Room full of Stones or Chips. That which is unsutable to the souls nature, can∣not be satisfying to the spirits desires.
There is a nourishment proper to every Animal. Spiders feed on Flies, Moles on Worms; the Horse on Grass, the Lyon on Flesh; there is also food proper to mans soul, Spiritual Meat, and spiritual Drink; my flesh is Meat indeed, my blood is Drink indeed (all other is bibi & potus tantummodo umbra) this this is that, which when the soul comes once to feed on it, its filled, its satisfied.
Philosophers observe that the matter of the Heavens
 desireth no other form, whereas in all sublunary things it constantly doth, and the reason is, because of the Actuality and Perfection of that heavenly form. While the soul fasteneth on any sublunary thing, as its happiness it desireth more and better, but when it doth once chuse the blessed God, it desireth no more, no better, because of those infinite perfections which are in God. One God answereth all the souls desires and necessities.
Plut. in vit.To keep you no longer out of the body of the book, It is Recorded of Marcus Cato, that after his return from Carthage, when he did at any time deliver his judgement about any business in the Senate, he would conclude his speech with, Methinks Carthage should be destroyed. Sirs will you suffer me to tell you again, and again. Methinks a dying hour is not to be neg∣lected; Methinks a living God is worthy to be embraced. Though there may be some difference among you, about things that are ceremonial and circumstanti∣al, yet ye are I hope generally agreed (I am sure all are, that have the least favour of Religion)Deu. 32.29 Psa. 90.12. That mans greatest wisdom is to prepare for his dying hour.Psa. 73.25. Mat. 22.35. 1 Joh. 2.15. That the heart of Religion consisteth in taking (not the World, but) God for your portion and happiness.1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. That prophaness ought to be avoided in your selves, andRev. 2.2. 2 Chron. 15.16 Psa. 101.7. 1 Tim. 5.22. suppressed accor∣ding to your places and powers in others.1 Tim. 4.8 2 Tim. 3.5. Joh. 4.24. That the power of Godliness ought chiefly to be minded and countenanced,Rom. 8.5, 13. That an holy, spiritual, not a fleshly, sensual life is the way to Heaven,Gen. 18.19 Prov. 22.6 Eph. 6.4. That your Children and Servants ought to be instructed in the knowledge of God and Christ, of their misery and the means of their reco∣very,Josh. 24.15. Psa. 101.2, 6 7. Col. 3.16. Rom. 16.5. Jerem. 10. ult. That your houses should be Churches,
 praying, reading, and singing Families, andExo. 20.8. Isa. 58.13. Act. 20.7. Rev. 1.10. that the Lords day should be conscienciously observed and devoted to the dearest Redeemer by secret, pri∣vate and publique duties. These things are written (as with the beams of the Sun) so clearly in the Scri∣ptures, that if ye deny them, ye deny your selves to be Christians, and profess your selves to be Infidels, I be∣seech you therefore in the name of the blessed Saviour, who redeemed you from your vain conversations with his own most precious blood, and for the sake of your im∣mortal souls, which within a few day, must throw their last cast for eternity, that your practices be answera∣ble to such principles. For, Beleive me, it will be a dreadful thing another day, for your lives to give your consciences the lye at this day.
I have but one request more to you (pardon my freedom, and plainness of speech, for truly my heart is inlarged towards you) be pleased to per∣use the following discourse, with serious consideration of the truth and weight of the particulars therein delive∣red, and with supplication to God, that the Treatise may be serviceable to your eternal salvations. If I write not what is agreeable to the Word of God, reject it, but if I do, submit to it, least ye subvert your own souls. The Father of mercies, and God of all grace, inlighten all your minds in the saving knowledge of himself, and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent, bless this brief discourse to you, infuse grace in every of you, where it is wanting, in∣crease grace where it is, bless you so in civil things, that your Town may be an habitation of justice, and so succeed you in Spirituals, that it may be a mountain of holiness, and enable you all so to
 prepare for death, that it may be to you the gate of life, so to take him for your portion, that he may be your everlasting possession; and so to glorifie him in your Generations, that ye may be meet for, and heirs of the eternal weight of glory, which is the Prayer of

