



THere are two things which I have always judged chiefly requisite in a Pastor, as he standeth rela∣ted to his people. viz. Labour and Love. The former is a work of the Head, the latter of the Heart: faith∣ful labour will speak his love, and sincere love will sweeten his labour. Labour without love is unacceptable to God, as a sweet perfume without fire, it cannot send forth its pleasant,
 fragrant savour: Love without labour is unprofi∣table to men, like Rachel, its beautiful but barren: both together (as soul and body are the essential parts of a man) are the whole of a Minister. Whether to my power I discharged my trust or no, in these partitulars, whilest the Divine providence continued me in your Parish, I must leave to his judgement, whose eyes behold, and whose eye-lid, try the Children of men, nay whe∣ther I did not many times so labour as to preju∣dice my own body, that I might serve and profit others souls: but sure I am, when I left you, I could not better manifest my love to you, then by commending you to him, who will never leave nor forsake his people.
Its the saying of Euripides, That a faithful friend in adversity, is better then a calm Sea to a weather beaten Mariner. Indeed the world is full of false lovers, who use their friends as we do candles, burn them to the snuff, and when all their substance is wasted, trample them under their feet, and light others; but God to his chosen, is as the Ivy clasping about a wall, which will as soon dye as desert it, Extreamity doth but fasten a trusty friend whilst he, as a well wrought Vault is the stronger, by how much more weight he beareth Though many men
 are as ponds, dry in the heat of Summer, when there is most need of them: yet the blessed God dealeth not so with his Saints, but his help is nearest, when their hardships are greatest, When they walk in the valley of the shadow of death, he is with them.
How great a happiness it is to be under the favour and influence of this God, can never be fully known on this side Heaven. The Prince of Orange had a mirror (say some) which per∣fectly represented the beauty of the naturat Sun: But this Sun of Righteousness is ever in a great degree Eclipsed, to us who dwell in this lower World. Here we know but in part. Pompey, who presumed to enter the holiest of all, when he came out was asked what he saw, he answered, that the house was fall of a cloud: Indeed, He maketh darkness his secret place, and yet is plea∣sed to let so much of his glory and goodness be seen in the glass of his word, as may cause us to admire and affect him; and also assure us that he is the chiefest good.
Somwhat of that felicity which floweth from his favour you will find in some measure disco∣vered in the ensuing discourse: which I present to you as a small acknowledgement of my great ingagements to you. Lycurgus the Lacedemonian
 Law-giver, made no Law against ingratitude, as thinking it impossible for any man to degene∣rate so much as to be unthankful, I esteem it my duty to retain the former favours in memory, which I and mine have received from your self, and my Honoured friend your Husband, and I know not better how to testifie my gratitude, then by endeavouring to my power, your ever∣lasting welfare, and that you may come to your graves in a full age; as a shock of corn in its season.
Its a mercy to be full of days, a far greater mercy to be full of grace, but to be full of days and full of grace, is one of the most blessed beautiful sights in this World, I hope you are passed from death to life, because you love the brethren; but your Age calleth upon you to ensure your effectual calling: The truth is death borders upon our births, and our Coffins, hang over our Cradles, but though according to the saying of Epaminondas, we may salute young persons with Good-morrow, or welcome into the World, yet we must salute old persons with Good-night, for they are leaving the world, The nearer it is tonight, the harder we should work, when we know if our work be not done in this day of life, we are undone for ever.
 Natural motions are swiftest at last. The stream of grace must run with greatest speed when its emptying it self into the Ocean of glory. The good Lord enable you to be more and more upright, and abundant in well doing, and so bless your whole Family with his fear and fa∣vour that when Death shall break it up ye may be preferred from his lower house of prayer, to his upper house of praise, where is fulness of joy, and where are pleasures for evermore, Which is the desire of

