


Honoured Couzen,
THe whole World is fitly termed by the Holy Ghost, a Sea of glass.Rev. 4. A Sea for its tempestuousness, all the passengers who sail on it are sure to be driven too and fro with the surging waves, and high winds of sorrows. Man enter∣eth on this stage of the World crying, goeth off groan∣ing,




 and the part which he acteth is chiefly Tragical, his whole life being little else from the Womb to the Tomb, but a chain of crosses, and a circle of sufferings; he is tost like a Tennis Ball from hazard to hazard, till at last he fall to the Earth. A sea of Glass, for its brittle∣ness; Glass is soon broken be it never so much Guilded: The fashion of this World passeth away; all its carnal comforts perish with it. The possessions of it are corrup∣tible; Gold and Silver are liable to that rust which will consume them. The Relations in it are mutable; whilst we are refreshing our selves with those pleasant flowers, and embracing them in our breasts, and stick∣ing them in our bosomes, they wither. The Jews at this day have a custome (saith one) when a Couple are married, to break the glass wherein the Bridegroom and the Bride have drank; thereby to admonish them that though at present they are joyned together, yet ere long they must be parted asunder. The Saints of God themselves are not priviledged from such arrests; nay those vessels which are most richly laden go often deepest in these waters. The howling Wilderness is the direct way to the heavenly Ca∣naan.
The late Providence which removed your loving and beloved Husband (I hope to Heaven) hath taught you the truth of these particulars. The loss of such a relation must needs be a sore affliction. The nearer the union is, the more difficult the separation. Husband and Wife are one flesh, therefore to part them cannot but be painful; but Grace will help you both to submit to that blow which is so grievous to Nature, and to be the better for it.

It was some comfort to me to observe your Christi∣an carriage under so great a cross. The hour of af∣fliction is an hour of temptation. Satan loves to fish when the Waters are troubled; He would bring us to hard thoughts of God, by the hard things we suffer from God; Touch him, and he will curse thee to thy face. In such stormy weather some Vessels are cast away. A corrupt heart in adversity (like Water boyling over the Fire) then most of all disco∣vereth its froth and filth, Isa. 8.21. But though frosty seasons are hurtful to Weeds, yet they are helpful to good Corn. A sanctified person, like a sil∣ver bell, the harder he is smitten, the better he soundeth. Faith is a special Antidote against the poison of the Wicked one. It can read Love in the blackest Characters of Divine dispensation; as by a Rain-bow we see the beautiful image of the Suns light, in the midst of a dark and waterish Cloud. Gods Rod, like Jonathans is dipt in Hony. Our daily bread, and our sharpest rod grow upon the same root. Every beleiver may say in affliction, as Mau∣ritius, when his Wife and Children were slain be¦fore his eyes, Righteous art thou O Lord, and in very faithfulness hast afflicted me.
Dear Couzen,
Since Gods Rod hath a voice as well as his Word, and like Moses his Rod in Egipt, work∣eth wonders in, and for his people; Let me beseech you to hear it, and to know him that hath appointed it. O how highly doth it behove you to labour, that
 as Aarons Rod it may bud and blosome with the fruits of holiness.
Two Lessons principally God would teach you by it.
First, That your affections be taken off from Earthly possessions; Dying Relations, call for dying af∣fections. When Israel doted on Egypt as a pallace, God made it an Iron furnace to wean them from it, and to make them weary of it. The creature is our Idol by nature, we bow down the knees of our souls to it, and Worship it; but infinite Wisdom makes it our grief, that it may not be our God. When Children fare well abroad, they are mindless of home; but when abu∣sed by strangers, they hasten to their Pa∣rents. The World is therefore a Purgatory, that it might not be our Paradice. As soon as Laban frowned on Jacob, he talks of returning to his Fa∣thers House. Every rout the World puts us to, sounds a retreat to our affections, and calls off our heart from the eager pursuit of these wither∣ing vanities. Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not, Prov. 23.5. much less thine heart.
I have read of a young Hermit, who being passionately in love with a young Lady, could not by any Art suppress the fury and violence of that flame, till at last being told that she was dead, and had been buried about fourteeen days, he went secretly to her Vault, and with the skirt of his Manle, wiped the moysture from
 the Carcass, and still at the return of his temp∣tation laid it before him; saying, Behold this is the beauty of the Womad which thou didst so much desire; And the Man at last with that moysture of the Corps put out the Fire.
The godliness of the World, its whole glory and gallantry is but a curious Picture drawn on Ice, which affords no good footing, for whilst we are standing on it, we are sliding from it, and who would lay the stress of his felicity upon so slippery a foundation. No wise man ever put his chiefest goods and riches in such low damp rooms, where they will corrupt and putrifie.
Hipocrates affirmeth that all immoderations are Enemies to the health of the body. Sure I am, they are to the health of the soul. The amity of the World, is emnity against God. All the Water is little enough to run in the right Channel, therefore none should run beside. The time is short, use the World, as net abusing it, 1 Cor. 7.29.
Secondly, That you chuse the good part that shall never be taken from you. Mans heart will be fixt on somewhat as its hope, and happiness. God therefore puts out our Candles, takes away Relations, that we may look up to the Sun and esteem him our chiefest portion. When we are Digging and Delving in the Earth to find out con∣tent, and comfort, he sendeth damps, purpose∣ly to make us call to be drawn upward. Till the Prodigal met with a Famine, he regarded not
 his Father. If the Waters be abated, the Dove is apt to wander and defile her self, but when they cover the face of the earth, and allow her no rest, then she returneth to the Ark.
I hope there is a good work begun in you, which shall be finished at the day of Christ. But every one stande h or falleth to their own Master. Get Scripture on your side, and you are safe for ever. The Romans when they parted from the bones of their Dead friends (for they burnt them,) took their leave in such language, Vale, Vale, Vale, Noste ordine quo natura permiserit sequemur. Farewel, Farewel, Farewel, We shall follow thee in the time, and order, which nature alloweth us. You may say of your Husband, as David of his Child, I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. Pre∣pare therefore for your dying hour.
Labour to be rich in godliness; Grace alone is special bayl against death; It is such wealth, as will be currant in the other World; lay up your trea∣sure in Heaven, where neither Thief nor Moth, neither Men nor Divels, can rob you of it. Take God in Christ for your Heaven, and you are happy in spight of the World, Death and Hell. You know the living comfort of your dying Hus∣band was, that though his flesh and heart failed him, yet God was the strength of his heart and his portion for ever. And it was a memorable speech of His, when some Friends came to him and com∣mended the richness and magnificence of Hampton Court, newly trimmed and adorned for the re∣ception
 of her Majesty; One drop of the blood of Christ, is more worth then all the World. I must tell you, there is no such Cordial in a day of Death, as this Covenant-Relation to the Lord of life.
The Child may walk in that dark entry with∣out fear, if he have but his Father by the hand; Though I walk in the Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear none ill, for thou art with me. Death indeed is strong, it overcometh Principalities and Powers, but as strong as it is, it cannot separate God and the godly person. It may dissolve the natural union betwixt soul and body, but not the mystical union betwixt God and the soul; The Saints dye in the Lord, they sleep in Jesus.
O Couzen, be married to Christ, and you are made for ever. Heaven is the Joynture, and Death one of the Servants or slaves of her that is the Spouse of this Lord. Death is yours, ye are Christs, 1 Cor. 3.21. Other men are Deaths (it hath dominion over them) but Death is yours, your servant to strip off your rags of sin and mi∣sery, and to cloath you with the Robes of joy and glory.
The ensuing Discourse was for the substantial part of it, delivered at the Funeral of your dear∣est Relation on earth. You gave me the Text, and my indisposition of body allowed me then but little time, which caused me now to make some enlargements and additions, but its the same
 body (possibly in a little neater far, from gaudy) dress, which was prepared for the Pulpit. I present it to you, not doubting of its acceptance, for his sake whose death was the occasion of it. The good Lord bless it to you, requite your love to me, and them that fear him, make up the want of streams in the more abundant enjoyment of the foun∣tain, fill you with all the fruits of righteousness, enable you to persevere and encrease in godliness, and so to live with a good conscience, that you may dye with much comfort, and be a follower of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises, so prayeth,

