


SIR,
IT was the businesse of my Sermon to defend Magistrates, and I hope it will be the businesse of Magi∣strates to defend my Sermon: I know full well it shall stand in a worse place then the man in the Zodiack, many daggers will be thrust into every part, and therefore I humbly fly unto your Honour for Patronage and Protection: And if you demand, Quo jure? I having no in∣terest in you, Intimacy with you, Dependance upon
 you, Expectation from you, I must answer upon the best Title, viz. Detur digniori, which you are, both as a publique Magistrate, and as a private Christian. I shall not bring this Sun of Truth to one who hath sore eyes and cannot abide the light, nor present this glasse to a painted or spotted face which will not endure the sight; Your Eagle eyes will bear these bright beams, your Angels face can endure this clear and Crystall glasse which shews the whole proportion of a Magistrate, a capite ad calcem: Here you have his Head, and that is of Gold, (I have said you are Gods) Here you have his feet, and they are of earth, (you shall die like men.) Many Magistrates like and love to hear of their Deity, but not of their Mortality, much lesse of their eternal Misery; But you are well pleased with all, being not proud of your Deity, nor insensible of your Mortality, nor afraid of your eternal Misery: Were all Magistrates qua∣lified with that Mercy and Meeknesse, Humility and Holinesse, Zeal and Severity, they would so mag∣nifie and beautifie that Office, that (as the Heathen said of vertue) Omnes in amorem ejus traheret, the work of Ministers would be both uselesse and needlesse as for pressing Duties to, and praising the Dignities of Magistrates; Antalcidas his Quis un∣quam vituperavit? would be seasonable. I know also I shall not tender this Present to a rugged and rigid Christian, who can like nothing but what comes from one of his own Church, but your sweet temper is known to all; You do not expresse your self distant from them in your affection, who do expresse them∣selves different from you in their opinion; You can
 harbour love to their persons in your heart, though you cannot harbour liking of their opinions in your head; a most excellent pattern for all Magistrates, Ministers, and people fearing God, whose great blot and blemish it is, that if they have difference with people in their opinion, they will have distance from them in their affection; Magistrates will not do them justice, Ministers will rail at, and revile them in their publique Pulpits, and Christians will slander them in their private meetings.
—Pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, & non potuisse, refelli.
My Brethren, these things ought not so to be, Jam. 3. 10. I speak unfeignedly without flattery, had all Magistrates, Ministers, Souldiers, Christi∣ans, that Moderation and Discretion to bear one anothers burthens, and so to fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2. as you have, I am confident that both certainly and suddenly would the Jesuite be defeated, the Prophane silenced, the Neuter con∣vinced, the Doubtfull resolved, the Godly reconci∣led, and all the honest party strengthened, and we should live and love together, as becomes the Pro∣fessors of the Gospel. You see (Sir) by what te∣nure my Sermon holds, both in Capite and in Corde; as you are a good Magistrate, and a gra∣cious Christian, I beseech you do not sue it with a Writ of Ejection, either out of your Protection as a Magistrate, or Affection as a Christian; by grant∣ing
 which request you shall much oblige him, who esteems it his highest honour to be

From my Study in Southfleet, Feb. 7. 1657.
