



THings compared, though con∣trary, or alike in nature, doe illu∣strate one the other: Contrario∣rum & similium eadem est ratio.Iust. Inst. And therefore, to discerne the strengths, counsels, and ends of diuers Kingdomes, the straigh∣test rule is comparison of their actions, gouernment, and foun∣dation: All Monarchies and Republiques which haue an end proposed, whether to emarge, or preserue their Dominion, most effectually worke to their own ends, because such operation is naturall;Polib. Is qui nouit quanam sint vniuscuinsque Rerumpublicarum principia natura∣li, etiam incrementum et florentissimum statum, ac mu∣tationem, & finem potest cognoscere.
A wife and rationall Historian comparing and cen∣suring diuers Common-wealths, why one subsisted, and others decayed; and how the one preuailed vpon
the other; examined the formes and institutions, their designes, and ends, and what was possible to be bulk vpon them. That of Plato he esteemed vncapable of comparison, other then as a Statue to a man, which had excellent art, without life. Athens and Thebes were not vnderlaid to be are any aduersitie: But when they were most like to rise, the temperature of their policy was insufficient to allay the abundance and increase of humours, & the growth was too sudden and heauy for the foundation: when they began to shake, their root had no earth. The Lacedemonian, to sublist of it selfe, to oppose forraine violence, to need nothing ex∣otique, to liue in peace, was in all perfection institu∣ted. Caterùm ad parandum sibi in vicinos dominatum, to extend their Empire, euen their owne foundation was an impediment. A blessed state, if Ambition were banished the world; but defectiue to absolute safetie: For, no defence is secure, that cannot offend. There∣fore, as soone as that State began to affect conquest, and to raise Armies, they found in their constitution, that the Lawes made to keepe them happy, were too narrow to hold others in seruitude:Plato. and their vntried felicitie blinded their iudgement, to ouer-value their owne abilities. Qui vitam instituisset contra naturam, meritò etiam contra naturam fato functus est.Polib.
The Carthagenians and Romans had larger ends, & a broader foundation, like abilities and aptitudes to ef∣fect them, which were Imperium mundi. And though all Common-wealths doe conuenire in aliquo medio, yet they which designe quiet possession of their owne, and vsurpation of the Estates of others, are at both ends vtterly repugnant.

The reasons why the Romans preuailed vpon Car∣thage being alike instituted, are another consideration,Polib. the manner of building, the constancy, vertue, and goodnesse of Instruments are great differences. In these the Romans. excelled: and perhaps in the youth (for euery State hath an Infancy, a mature, and a decrepit age) and consequently soonest arriued at their ends. But that wherein most effectually they pre∣uailed, was in Counsels; in which they had aduan∣tage in the forme of their gouernment: For the peo∣ple in Carthage, in all deliberations, had too much au∣thoritie, which bred delay, and hindered secrecy; whereas in Rome, the Senate and Optimati,Tacit. experien∣ced and wise men, onely resolued. Imus ad bellum, non omnes Nuncios palam audiri;Polib. non omnia consilia cunctis praesentibus tractari, ratio rerum, aut occasionum velocitas patitur. Victoria consilijs, & ratione perfi∣citur.
From these Considerations a Consequence is de∣duced, that when any two great Kingdomes fall into a warre, that which will preuaile, must consider the ends of the other, and the wayes and meanes where∣with they are prosecuted, and to them must apply all industry, and direct opposition. In the ends, as there is great difference, so there is great aduantage by thē: because actiue things, etiamsi agendo repatiantur, weare-out passiue, though of equall strength and hardnesse, as the iron that strikes, in time batters that which suffers. Common-wealths that designe con∣quest, and are alway attentiue to watch occasion, get ground vpon the modest, more by vigilancy then force: and fraud, which is a terrible instrument, doth
euer accompany Ambition. Counsels vanquish Armes, as spirituall things are predominant vpon ma∣teriall, and as fire dissolues the fastest metals: & those Counsels are most preualent, which are vnited in one head, and issue from one fountaine.
Therefore rising and encreasing Empires are dan∣gerous, if they once grow great, and must be resisted in their ends, and in their counsels: single defence is not sufficient: troublesome neighbours must be made passiue, to abate their reputation, which the spirit of action presupposeth.
To apply these premisses, hauing read with pleasure the following Discourse of the Reasons of the Reso∣lution in the Valteline; and being at leasure, eyther to sleep, or wast in mine owne meditations, I thought it would be a good recreation, and not vnacceptable to my loyall Countrimen, to teach it to speake as plaine English, as it doth truth; and finding the whole scope of the Author (an Authour of great worth, and greater works) to be an information to the World, of the dangerous encrease, and ambition of the house of Austria: and, if possible, to read the King of Spaine a lesson, not to bee learned, but vnder a Rodd of Iron, that in time necessity would open the eyes of all Princes, to oppose his secret proiect of Vniuersall Monarchy; I be∣leeued that some profit might be gathered out of this forraine Garden.
I wil suppose that this Theame is sufficiently hand∣led; and that there are few practised in the world, who will deny it. The witnesses are great and euident; In∣dia vniustly vsurped; Sicily surprised by treason; Na∣ples by breach of Contract; Millan held by Intrusion;
Nauarre by excommunication of the lawfull Prince; Portugall oppressed by the Sword;Conlag. and the Pope re∣fused to iudge either competently, or as Arbiter, the pretences of Parma & Braganza, when it was possible in temporall Causes, his spirit might erre in not ado∣ring Spaine: The Valteline possessed vnder the colour of Religion; The Palatinate and the States of Clene seised by auxiliars, and kept for Debts forced vpon the Proprietaries, which they desired not to borrow: Wesell stollen in a truce; and the Rhyne passed ouer vnder the fauour of a Treaty; Embden attempted; Venice conspired; Piemont assaulted; France twice cor∣rupted into Combustion, with holy leagues and open Armes: and England practiced, and inuaded; And to bee able to doe any, or all these, a scelerous peace sought with the Turke, to whom, in truth, Spaine is only a true friend. These are such a Cloud of witnesses, as no modesty will oppugne them.
Which being now manifest to the world, and that it is expected euery wise Prince and State will con∣sider, nune mea res agitur, I also haue presumed to warne diuisos ab orbe Britannos; who being separated from Generall Commerce by the Sea, which is our wall, true Information may bee kept out, as well as Enemes.
To which purpose, without any malignity or wil∣ling offence, I must looke one age back; For in the for∣mer, Alas, the Kings of Castile were good Neighbors, and were content not to bee supplanted by their owne Moores, mingled with their Subiects, both in house and bloud.

England hath been the speciall and most advanta∣gious marke at which this new Monarchy hath aymed, since cupido dominandi outgrew Conscience, and all lawes of Iustice; England, the Queene of the Sea, and Lady of Traffique being conquered, halfe of the whole is done. England hath more hindered this vnnaturall growth, then all Europe; it is then out of question, that the wisedome of Spaine, which neuer erreth in the way of greatnesse, loues and hates no kingdome so much, as England.
When Don Iohn of Austria had wonne the famous battaile of Lepanto,Raphael Pereg. and therein laid to himselfe a foundation of advancement, and had gotten possession of the Citty of Tunis; the Spanish Councell, foreseeing the rising Starre of a new Monarchy, though in their owne Princes bloud, rather resolued to rase, and de∣stroy that Towne; and accordingly gaue order to the Generall. But hee, who had higher thoughts, fortifi∣ed it, and sollicited the Pope Pius quintus, to intercede with the Catholique king, that the Title of that king∣dome might bee conferred vpon him, to erect a fresh opposite to the Ottoman Empire. The king of Spaine, iealous of any Concurrent, vtterly refused this honor to his owne Brother: and suddenly, to exercise his great mind vpon some subiect of his priuat seruice, sent him Gouernour into Flanders, where hee was as like to breake, as rise; The young Prince, whose fahers bloud boiled in his veynes, discontent to bee shut vp in so narrow a Compasse, fell vpon a net. practise, to conquer England, and procured so farre with the same Pope, that he dealt earnestly with the
Catholique King, to consent to that Enterprise, and to contribute Aydes for the Execution, in fauour whereof his Holiness had already granted him Bulls, Breues, Money, and the secret Inuestiture, though this Proiect in the manner was not acceptable to King Phillip, that the Pope should giue that away, without first consulting with him, which hee had embraced in his owne thoughts, yet he yeelded and promised to assist Don Iohn in the Inuasion of England; So much more hee thirsted to depriue a Christian Prince of an antient Inheritance, then to keepe a great Kingdom, opportunely seated to annoy the Turks, from his friends, the Ottomans; I will not Physically conie∣cture what bloud begat this Counsell; but propose it, as a worthy and great Consideration.
The attempt of the Duke of Medina, and the in∣uincible Armado, was a fruit of the same root; But that the sword might not seeme to cut through all Iustice, to corrupt the minds of the ignorant, and to satisfie the doubtfull and scrupulous, a counterfeit booke; vnder a counterfeit name, was published,Dolman. dis∣cussing the seuerall titles of England, and seeming to giue euery one their owne right, it cunningly insinu∣ates, that the reasons of the Infanta Isabella were more pregnant then all the rest, which could not come into question vntill Sixteene Princes successori∣ly raigning, were condemned for Vsurpers, one of whom her father had married and by her taken the title of England. But God fought for vs; Tonante in coelis lehouah, & Excelso edente vocem suam, grande,Psal: 13. & prunae igneae: ita emittens sagittas suas, dispergit, & fulgura iaculans, fundit illos.

When fained Titles were foolishnesse before God and men, and the Chariot wheels of the Enemy were taken off, outward force not prevailing, Religion, and the defence of that, as the last refuge and Sanctuary of Ambition, was taken vp, and a holy pretence aduan∣ced to practise Treason and Rebellion in Ireland. To this end, the Earles of Desmond and Tyron were thrust out, and maintained in defection, against their naturall Prince; and as soone as their actions were worth the avowing, Aids, and Supplies were openly sent from Spaine, and that Kingdome doubly inuaded, by Con∣spiracie, and Armes. But Kinsale is a famous sepulcher of their honor: that Climate perhaps hauing as natu∣rall an Antipathy to Cholerique complexions, and In∣truders, as to noysome and venemous beasts.
I purpose not to enumerate priuate and clandestine minings and machinations: These three notorious examples will proue the general Assertion, That Spaine doth aspire the subiection of Europe by the first ascent of England: yet to shew more clearly the wiles and re∣ligious Counsells, where with this Designe is prosecu∣ted, it will be no vnprofitable digression, to reveale to the world the Negotiations of this Monarchy with the Ottomans, when eyther it hath beene in want, or fere, or preparing for some new Attempt; Catholique waies, which the Lyon hath neuer trode in the Desert, nor the Vulturs eye seene in the wildernesse.
It is one of the Vaine-glories of Spaine, that they hold no correspondence, nor euer made any peace with the great Enemy of Christendome, calumniating and reproaching all other Princes and States, who, for vtilitie of Trade, maintaine a Civill Commerce with
them: But wise men will discerne the fallacy, and dif∣ference betweene those, who, according to the liber∣ty of the lawes of God and Nations, doe onely traf∣fique & communicate the abundancies of their Coun∣tries, with Infidels; and others, who will haue no ex∣change nor intercourse, but vnder the condition of di∣uiding the world, and oppressing, by mutuall consent, of all Princes. And such a Peace and opportunitie the Spaniard hath offered, and sought of the Emperour of Turky: And if this be not sufficient, to returne the ig∣nominie cast vpon others; Let it be weighed vpright∣ly, and it shall appeare, that all the correspondence and trade of all the Princes in amity with the Grand Signior together, doth not bring to him halfe the pro∣fit and securitie, as the dissentions and Intrusions of the House of Austria, wherwith they keepe all Christen∣dome in continuall feare, or warre. Wherby that com∣mon Enemie liues in safety, and at ease, watching ad∣uantages vpon all, indifferently.
About the time that Phillip the second (the holy League to depriue Henry the Fourth of the Crowne of France, failing him) in the Reigne of Mehemet, Grand father of Morat now liuing, a certaine rich Portugall lew, Don Aluaro Mendes, resident in Constantinople, pretending occasion to send another of his Tribe cal∣led Iehuda Serfati, vpon priuate affaires (but practised by the Ministers of Spaine) into that Country; as soon as he arriued at the frontire, by the Kings order he was created an Ambassador from the Grand Signior, and conducted in that qualitie to the Court, and a Counsel held, in what manner to giue him audience; His name was already changed to Don Gabriell di Bona Ventura,
his Instructions drawne by a Iunto for the purpose; and thus hee was shewed abroad, defrayed by the King, and his Message published, that hee was imployed to offer Peace and friendship from the Turkish Emperour.
When this Scene was acted, he was sent backe with true Letters of Don Christofero di Mora, and the Secre∣tary Catagna, to the great Vizier, and for his better securitie, a safe Conduct and Credance was giuen him, signed by the King Yo el Rey.
Passing by Sicily, by Catholique Order, Forty Tur∣kish Slaues were deliuered him, to present at the Port, in earnest of the Spanish and Ottoman amitie; Letters also of credit for good summes were furnished, to en∣able him to spend, & procure answer from the Grand Signior, and fauour of the Vizier, Mufti, and other of the great Officers.
With which Orders and Armes being arriued at Constantinople, he vsed all meanes, with all men, to in∣duce an acceptance of the Peace, vrging and demon∣strating the earnest affection, and desire of the King of Spaine to conclude it.
But this practise being discouered by the Ambassa∣dors resident at the Port, and others not too well affe∣cted to Spaine, the falshood was made appeare: and Don Gabriel by the great Vizier was clapt in prison, as a Counterfeit and Impostor.
In a few moneths this Vizier was displaced, and an∣other aduanced to his Office, and, as it is a common rule with them, to runne a contrary course to their fallen Predecessors, without examining the merits or causes: this Iew was set at libertie, and all his actions and Letters approued, as true and authenticall; And
thereupon Petition made to the Grand Signior to en∣forme the Negotiation; and by the counsell of the new Ministers, it was admitted, and accepted, and an∣swer granted to the King of Spaine, that seeing hee had shewed so much affection to peace, and to enter into a fineere Correspondence with the Port, especially by the charitable liberty of so many Mahemetans freely presented; that the Gates of the Ottoman Empire were alway open to whomsoeuer did seeke their friendship: and that Ambassadors might securely come to treat and conclude it.
With these Letters to the Catholique King, and o∣thers to Don Christofero di More, and the Secretary Ca∣tagna from the Vizier, Don Gabriel was dispeeded with two Messengers of the Port, by the way of Wal∣lachia to the confines of the Empire, purposing to take his iourney through Germany.
But Rodolphus being then in warre with Sultan Me∣hemet, he was stayed, and examined on the Borders; To free himselfe, he fained that he had Letters to the Emperour; whereupon all his papers were seized, and sent to Prague. His Imperiall Maiesty very discontent, and iealous of such Treaties betweene Spaine and Tur∣ky, without his communication, and in such a Con∣iuncture; gaue order, that the lew should be brought to Vienna, and kept in close Prison, vntill he had some advice from Madrid. The Catholique King, finding diu non latêre scelera, to saue the honor of his priuate Designes, denyed the fact, forsooke and protested the poore Don Gabriel, who miserably there ended his life, con assai mala-ventura. It may be collected, that the Spanish ends of this Treaty were such as durst not
abide the light, seeing they might not bee trusted to the nearest friend; and it was iudged great modesty, to be ashamed, and the part of a good Christian, to re∣nounce secret practises with Turkes, by the mediation of Iewes, but of an ill Master, to leaue and aband on his Seruant. Such Vessels in the hands of Princes are for∣med for honor, or dishonor, as their interests counsell them.
In later times, the extraordinary Ambassadors of the Emperour, treating at Constantinople the frontire Affaires, and accidentall Breaches, another ouerture was by them made in the name of the King of Spaine, and the best argument vsed was, that the world knew but two great and Imperiall Families, Austria, and Ot∣toman, who if they were reconciled, might make ano∣ther Diuision of East and West: The rest, it is more hu∣manitie to conceale, then Christianitie to negotiate.
This last yeare a Bolognese was sent from the Vice-King of Naples, in pursuit of the same Designe; and counterfeit Letters printed in Spaine, with a Cata∣logue of impossible presents, pretended from the Grand Signior, to beg peace, and spread abroad, to add reputation to his Armies; as if the world would trem∣ble at a smoake: And though this Engine returned fruitlesse, yet Spaine is not hopelesse. They know the ease and aduantage they should draw, by securitie on this side, to haue all their Gallies at libertie, to shut vp the Straights, to hinder traffique, and to succour Ge∣noua; and their Garrisons of Calabria and Sicily free, to be imployed in their other necessities. And here it cannot be ouer-passed, that while Spaine did negotiate this Peace, doubting not to effect it, the same instru∣ments
were imployed with monies and Letters, to ex∣cite the Cossacques (though in preiudice of the Peace of the King of Poland, allyed to the House of Austria by a double mariage) to inuade the Bospherus, that the Armado of the Grand Signior might necessarily be kept in the blacke-Sea, for defence, whereby the Spaniard, by a fine Art, doth enioy halfe the fruits of the Peace, without obtaining it: These are a modell of the wayes and counsels of the Spanish Monarchy.
If the King of Spaine enuied his Brother the Con∣quest of a Mahometan kingdome; and treat vnder∣hand with the Turks, without respect or knowledge of the Emperour; If he sollicit the seeds of a warre be∣tween Poland and the Grand Signior, vnder the colour of a peace, without care of the vtilitie of that Crowne so neerly to him allyed: It may be concluded, that ambition of vniuersall Monarchy, is onely able to extin∣guish all obligations, both of Religion and blood: Because, Si violandum jus est, imperij gratia violandum est,Eurip. alijs rebus pietatem colas.
If the first step to this sole Empire be the Conquest of England, as the Designes of the Enemy, from whō some lessons are best taught, and their Counsells to their owne ends doe clearly demonstrate, and the re∣solution of diuers Iunto's haue laid for a foundation: It is happy for England to fore-see the blow, and to pro∣uide timely to preuent it: and not be bound to the dis∣aduantage of making a desperate Bett, when the aduer∣sary shall call, and the game irrecouerable.
These Demonstrations admitted for true, the next Consideration will be, by what meanes most effectu∣ally and virtually to worke a iust defence; Wherein if
the Ends, Counsells, and Wayes, whereby Spaine hath in few yeares aduanced, bee obserued, they will reflect a true light vpon the contrary, how they may be humbled.
The end of Spaine is Vniuersall Monarchy, confor∣mable to the Romans in all; but the noble contempt of Treasons: Herein, and in Counsells, they haue ad∣uantage of vs. It must then be concluded to op∣pose this end, wee must resolue the like, and pursue it with the like wayes, and Counsells, (except onely the wayes of Darkenesse) to take from them those ranke parts, which nourish this Concupiscence.
To discouer the right line of this opposition, it may be enquired, what Spaine did aduance in the last warre, in the blessed dayes of the glorious Queene Elizabeth, either vpon England, France, Germany, I∣taly, or Holland, and the totall summe shall be found nothing. Whether they lost in Flanders, or of their owne, is not the question, for the warre was in the end defensiue, and hee is beaten, that assailing con∣quers not; But that the Indies were not able to supply, nor appease the mutinies of his Souldiers, nor to pay the Interests of Geneua, and that they had lost all Re∣putation, and sought peace on all sides precariè, Hoochstrat, the Electo's, their Bills protested, their tra∣uailng Fryars, their owne Ambassages and the World, are irrefutable witnesses.
To account what they haue gotten in these latter yeares of Peace, onely by peace, besides the daring so bold an Act, as to expell many Millions of inborne Enemies, and thereby raising another Indea of trea∣sure for a designed warre, at the spring tyde of their
full Coffers, would, if it lay together, make a compe∣tent estate for a-moderate Prince. Somewhat in this point hath beene touched in a generall enumeration, but particulars do fully instruct. Alarache in Barbarie, to strengthen their South Coasts of Spaine, and to helpe to shut vp the Streights of Gibralterra; Acon, vnder the Imperiall Coulours depriued of the libertie of Conscience, the Reformed Magistrates banished, and the Citie reduced to their Deuotion; The non Plus Vltra of the Rhyne, 40 yeares defended, slipt∣ouer; and thereby Wesell, the Retraict, and Sanctuary of our Religion, made the Spanish Garrison; Gu∣lick, and the Inheritance of the Heyres of Cleue pos∣sessed vnder the title of protection, and kept as a pledge; The Palatinate distributed to their Depen∣dants, but the Ports and Fortresses of Importance held in hostage; And thus Holland surrounded; The Valtoline blockt-vpp; The Crownes of Bohemia and Hungary intailed, and the Nobility spoiled of their pri∣uiledge of free Election; The Euangeliques vniuersal∣ly exiled and oppressed; And all Germany trembling vnder the example: These are the fruits of a Spanish peace. If the slumbring Lyon bite so mortally, what shall hee doe, enraged after his pursued Prey? And if in peace, contrary to the nature of peace, such achieue∣ments are obtained, that the ship of Spaine runne in the night so many leagues, while the Pilot seemes to sleepe; It is euident, in peace and Warre they haue one end of Conquest. Sapiens non semper it vno gradu,Seneca. sed vna via.
From these examples. wee must learne bellum vtiliter inire, & prosequi. I will not presume to vnder∣stand
where the Spanish Empire is most sensible and weake; but exhibit some generall rules, that Riuers are onely to be preuented of their waters, by stop∣ping or diuerting their fountaines. Aegypt depends vpon the courtesie and payes tribute to the King of Ethiopia to giue leaue to Nilus to water it. The body is soonest reduced to a consumption, by destroying the Liuer, the Indies of blood; And then demonstrate these axioms by a fewe Roman and Spanish Parallels, what they did, and what they suffered, and leaue the application to Actine men.
That Princely People had no Indies, but their Vir∣tue; Rome and the Senate was all; while they caried their Armies abroad, they had no returnes but victo∣ries and triumph, and they could loose nothing, ex∣cept men, that sold their liues dearely. But when their Emuli the Carthagenians, discouered by their Inuasi∣on of Sicily, that their ambition had no limits, and considered that while they fought for their owne ground, they could get nothing, but blowes; They resolued to send Haniball to the Gates of Rome: where he reduced that Empire to nothing, but a Col∣ledge of braue old men, prepared to dye in Maiestie. Eighteene yeares this glorious Captaine trode on the spoiles of Italy, and doubtlesse had finished that Do∣minion, and in that day,Hor. in which he turned to Capua had sapped in the Capitoll, Si quemadmodum sciret vincere, sie vti victoria scisset. From whence grew the prouerbe Capuam Hanibali, Cannas fuisse. We must not trust in errors, nor hope this Courtesie of our E∣nemies.
When the young Scipio reuiued the hearts of the
Romans by vndertaking the Prouince of Spaine, where his Father and Vncle, and so many Legions were buried, he found three Armies greater then his owne, to oppose him. Vulgaria emnia consilia, & quo∣rum venire in mentem cuiusuis poterat, omisit.Polib. To fight with all at once was impossible; to beginne with one desperate; the other two were at his back, entire, vincendo, vinceretur. And fortune must not be often tempted; But when he fell vpon the consideration, that new Carthage was the fountaine from whence all the diuisions were supplied, the Port, and harbour of succours, he resolued, omnes vnà aggredi; by taking that City, to dry-vp the streames at the spring head; Thus the Enemies retraict & storehouse became his, tota Regio in vna vrbe superata est, and he changed the face of the whole warrc, by one deliberation, and was victorious without the vncertaine tryall of Bat∣tell, dubium an vtiliori faelicioriue concilio.
Lastly, when there was no other way to retire Ha∣niball out of Italy, this fate of Carthage vndertooke to transport the warre to their own doores: and then, hee that neuer refused to fight, treated, sought peace, and almost confessed that he was vanquished; then he made that pittifull oration, the most inglorious of all his Acts: Si nunc esset integrum, optaturum se fore,Hanib. ad Scip. vt neque Romani quicquam vnquam eorum quae sunt extra Italiam, nec Carthagenienses, eorum, quae extra Affricam concupiscent. To this moderation must Spaine be re∣duced. Haniball knew hee might safelier haue lost all his battells within the Alpes, then one at the gates of Carthage: In them he aduentured nothing, but the superfluity of youthfull blood, which en gaijetè de
coeur, sought their desteny in the field of honour. But now the Common-wealth was at stake, and they plaied their Altars, Liberties, Wiues, and Children, at one game; Haniball, to auoid this desteny attempted Italy, to wast Rome at their owne charges. But Scipio had learned that wisedome of him, which himselfe could not vse, and finished at once a double warre: and the Spaniards imitating the one part, shewes vs the way to take the other; Spaine, while it was a sin∣gle Kingdome threatned no body, and in Spaine litle is to be gotten, where me ate must be supplied, and a victorious Army may starue. Therefore, that not be∣ing the roote, it must bee sought from whence this c∣uills of ambition ariseth: and as in naturall Bodies, there are other parts, besides the head and the heart, which being cut off, or wounded, cause desolution, so it is possible to find a way to weaken that Monster, which cannot bee killed at one blow.
Great preparations at mighty expences giue too great warning, are subiect to many accidents and ha∣zard too much reputation. And if one State know any one Designe that may much annoy the Enemy, it is like the other is not ignorant of their owne weak∣nesses. Wise Gamesters play not all at a Cast, the By, often helpes the Maine. Therfore, both rule & exam∣ple hath taught vs, that Spaine is more easily wasted, then any part of their Christian Dominion conquered, while the streame of money is open, and vndiuerted. But if this long and sure course threaten also a reci∣procall Consumption, yet that warre in Europe will bee most profitable for vs, which shall be made nea∣rest our owne Kingdome, both for the keeping our
forces vnited, and at hand, and for the easinesse of sup∣plies in all Euents; and out of Europe, by a Roiall Ac∣tion, it is not impossible at one stroke, to behead the Indies,
To oppose them in their Counsels we must first ob∣serue what they are,Pierre Mat. Espagne practiquant tousiours sa vieille maxime de se maintenir par la querra de ses voisins.
Sedition, separation, and disunion are the dange∣rous weapons wherewith they prepare to themselues easie Conquests, and these Arts haue their first effica∣cie vnder the pretence of Treaty, then is the Spaniard most to be suspected, because they know how hostibus prodere prima belli tempora,Tacit. and if they can raise any iealousie, or variance, to remoue any one, all are weak∣ned; rebusque turbatis, malum extremum discordia ac∣cessit. The contrary then, which is a firme and con∣stant League, is onely powerfull, and able to arrest them. In the Colleagued warre of the Common∣wealths of Greece against the vnited power of the Spartans, some of the Confederates, who lay next the danger, beginning to wauer, this sentence of their common safetie was giuen,Pelib. vnicam spem superesse vi∣deo omnibus, agnisui longum tempus possidendi, si Epa∣minondae consilio vsi, omnium temporum, omniumque rerum societatem sinceram iner se colant: To hope to diuide indivisihile is lost labour, the Designes of Spaine are one, vnited in the head, in genere generalissimo, the House of Austria, which cannot be distracted. They haue no other maine and important adherent, but the Pope, and his Ecclesiasticall Dependents, and these also make but one, and meet in the Center, concur∣ring
in common and mingled ends. And they greatly erre, who suppose, that it is euer possible to finde a Pope vnpartiall for Spaine, or to fauour any other Prince against them. Let Vrban the Eighth serue for an example, rais'd and fed by France, yet fallen to their enemies, per ragione distato. One fresh and pre∣gnant instance will discouer both this vnitie, and the aduantage of Spanish Counsells. When the Treaty of Madrid for the liberty of the Valteline was not per∣formed, and roundly pressed by the French, some diffi∣culties remaining, to prolong the possession, the Forts of that Vally were, by consent, deliuered to the Pope, tanquam communi Patri in Deposit.
This seemed very equall, but the French were o∣uer-reached; For they hoped vpon the iustice of their Cause, and that a sentence would timely be giuen for them, which was impossible: For the Spaniard was content, that the Deposition should remaine for euer to his vse; and he knew that the Pope, by accepting it, was engagd neuer to surrender to the Grisons, be∣cause the spirituall Father could neuer deliuer his Children (behold another title) to the subiection and will of Heretiques: and if the French should at last vse force, his Holinesse was doubly intangled, both in honor and conscience, to vnite with Spaine, to main∣taine his Depositation. This the French did not fore∣see, and fel vpon a disaduantage to recouer it from the Pope, a matter of dangerous consequence. Who, at last, takes Armes in the Cause, as the World knowes. But when both the Pope and Spaine saw such a gene∣rall storme, and Colleguation, and foresaw, that there was no remedie but to lose it by Armes, which being
victorious, might quarrell with Millan, or finde new obiects of their disdaine, they resolued rather to sur∣render it, and to seeme to yeeld to Iustice. But who must doe it? The Pope by no meanes can consent to deliuer part of his flocke to wolues, so his Ambassage protested in France, therefore, by secret conniuence and agreement, the King of Spaine doth suddenly seale the old Articles, and makes the Transaction before Barbarini shall arriue, to saue the Popes honor: For a temporall Prince may saluâ conscientiâ restore Here∣tiques to their temporall rights, which the Pope, a higher pretender, ouer soule, body and goods, cannot doe. By this cunning they hope to separate the Prin∣ces vnited, the quarrell being, in outward appearance, ended; and by this Intelligence it is euident, that the Spirituall and temporall serue one another, and take turnes, and shift Interests, for mutuall aduantage. But if examples proue not categorically let it be conside∣red, that the spirituall and temporall Monarchies, affe∣cted by Rome and Spaine, haue such mutuall interest and affinitie, and are so woven one within the other, that though natural affection, or other respects of gra∣titude, may for a time retard, & perhaps striue against an open declaration, yet when necessitie exacteth a resolution, the essence and mystery of the Papacie will preuaile: It must forsake father and mother, and cleaue to this double supremacie; for Rome and Spaine must stand and fall together.
To proceed, when the Romans first transported their Legions into Greece, they were called in by diui∣sion, to restore that shew of liberty to a part, which they absolutely tooke from all Greece. Separation and
disunion by them fomented, opened a Port to a Do∣minion, which vnited, was like their Phalanx, not to be broken. And certainly this day, the Spaniards haue more hope to diuide the Princes colleagued, then to vanquish them: To which vse, they haue two dan∣gerous Instruments, Money for the Traitor, and a Pope for the Conscience. It is obserued, that Spaine will buy Treasons dearer, then other Nations doe Faith; Om∣ne scelus externum cum laetitia habetur. And another noteth,Tacit. that with a bit of parchment, the Pope will reduce any Kingdome to him disobedient, to the State of Nauarre, when the true King Iohn Albret, and Queene Katherine were expelled,Pierre Math. l'excommunication du Pape Iules 1. aquant eu plus de forces que les armes de Castille. And they are not ashamed to glory with Philip of Macedon, another oppressor, that the victo∣ries gotten with words, are more sweet then those of the Sword: For euery Souldier can fight, and share the honor, but Arts and deceits of Treaties, are onely proper to the Prince and his Counfell.
I will not enter into a search of the Treaties of Spaine, nor how they are maintained; I will not cen∣sure Equivocation, nor rip vp our owne wounds: onely I may haue leaue to note, that anciently some States were branded, there was prouerbially Fides Punica, and Faedus Locrense; and therefore I admonish all good Townes, which capitulate to haue no Citta∣dell built within their walls, to prouide, that none bee built vpon them.
By what blood, I know not, the Kings of Spaine are become heires vnto Francis Sforza Duke of Milan, of whom, when Lewes the Eleuenth of France, pressed
by the Confederate warre du bien public, wherein his brother, the Earle of Caralois, and the Duke of Bretagny were engaged, desired aydes of money, hee supplied the King with a good Counsell,Comines. to agree to a∣ny conditions, with any of the League, to disband, or to sowe a iealousie among them; preseruing onely his Armes entire, with which, whē they were separated, he might humble them singly, at his pleasure; adding, that Princes lost no reputation, when they attained their ends. The History is vulgar, and the successe of that aduice, was, the flight of the Duke of Berry, the staine of Charles of Burgundy, and the beggery of Bretagny. I am perswaded, the Spaniards haue con∣cocted the Doctrine, and would come to an agree∣ment with any of the Leagues, to disunite them: and the Breach once made is not easily repaired. Per∣haps in this Coniuncture, they would (if honour would suffer it) consent to make a generall peace, vntill Armes were deposed; But here is the present danger, to loose an opportunity, not to bee recoue∣red in many yeares. The Counsell of Spaine doth know at how great expence of time, and charge of Ambassages, these Leagues haue beene composing; which once dissolued, and lulled asleepe in security, would slowly returne to the present perfection. Therefore there is great Caution to be vsed, in giuing eare to the Enchantments of a Spanish Treaty: For some lye nearer punishment, some make easier Con∣ditions, but all singly, shall feele the reuenge of their particular Interests, in the generall offence;Polib. Occasione nim inuitati, eos vlium ineunt, qui per occasionem tem∣porum ipsis nocuer ant. The truce that Amilcar gaue
the Romans,Idem. when the Insubrian and Alpine Nations hung ouer them like a Cloud, Vine patriam retinere sine periculo potuissent, did more aduance their future Empire, then the three Battailes of his sonne Hani∣ball did hinder it, because hee gaue them leaue to grow, and to haue no Enemy but Carthage; There∣fore I haue resolued, there is no safety in any sudden ac∣cord, nor profit in accepting wasted Countries, vntill some ambitious blood bee let out, and the Spanish Re∣alls consumed, and that Nation, and all the World brought to know, that it is possible to resist their greatnesse,Polib. and to abate their pride, and that in them∣selues they are truely humbled. Hoc igitur, si quid a∣liud qui Remp: regunt solicitè obseruandum memine∣rint; vt quos animos efferant qui in gratiam positis ini∣micitiis redeunt, aut nouam amicitiam ineunt, ne igno∣rent quando temporibus cedentes, quando victis animis pacis conditiones amplectantur: vt ab illis quidem, seu temporum suorum Insidiatoribus, semper sibi caueant.
But seeing the end of all iust war is a good and safe peace, qua nihil pulchrius, nihil vtilius, & the meanes thereunto treaty, and the assurance thereof, publique faith; when it shall be necessary to negotiate a recon∣ciliation with Spaine, Let it be accepted for a Rule, and foundation, that the one part is neuer secure what the other would haue, esse dolum, quia credidi hostis, and when all reasons of State are narrowly en∣quired, and outward Counsells waighed with vtil and honestum; yet there is a secret fit to bee reuealed, That the Kings of Spaine haue a Councell of Conscience, which may approue, or annull all that is, or shall bee transacted, and dormant dispensations, which haue
reference to Contingences in ordine ad spiritualia, to continue or dissolve all Conclusions: and this Re∣traict is formed like waxe, to take the Impression of the present aspect and necessity of affaires.
In the last treaty betweene France and Spaine, in which Amiens was surprised, when King Phillip saw the vigorous resolutiō of Henry the fourth to recouer the Townes in Picardy by the sword, and that he had giuen expresse Command to the President de Silerye to consent to no Conuention, so long as one foote of ground vnsurrendered, remained in the possession of the Spaniards, considering, that the bounds of that Prouince were the entrance into Artois,Pierre Math. and that vi∣ctorious Armies extend their pretences with prospe∣rity, especially the Title of Soueraignty inuiting, and iustifying that progresse, he consulted first, his Coun∣cell of State, for the restitution, who, loath to remit any thing of their stiffnesse, interposed the respects of honour, and so it was necessary, not to confesse ina∣bility to keepe them; but the wise King, knowing, to contend might draw the quarrell into the bowells of Flanders, resoluing both to preuent the occasion, and to saue his reputation, called his Councell of Conscience to deliuer their opinion, who concluded, that hee could not by the Lawes of Religion vsurpe, nor dye with quietnesse of soule, if he restored not to euery man his owne: and so those places were piously sur∣rendered, which could not safely be maintained; But Conscience extended no further, then present que∣stion.
When the same Catholique King found it necessa∣ty, for Spanish reason of State, that his own braue and
eldest sonne should dye, Nature, and honour both, contended against the Sentence; but obligations were pretended and found, aboue humanity, as the Act was without humanity. The Councell of Conscience, and to these a Iunto of Diuines were added, to resolue the render Conscience of a Father, whether hee might with safety of Conscience pardon his owne Child of offences not yet fully published and therefore for euer suspected.Idem. These Ephori pronoun∣ced with weeping eies, que le salut deson peuple, luy de∣uoit estre plus cher, que celuy duson filz, and the gea∣test fauour the Prince could obtaine, was to choose his death, that which was preferred and enioyed by Caesar; & facinus intra gloriam fuit.
Before Alua appeared neere Portugall with his Ar∣my, the Duke of Ossuna and Don Christofero di Mora,Cones. were imploied to buy a party for the Catholique King, and they promised mountaines of Gold, to withdraw some of the Lords from Don Antonio. When the kingdome was setled, these did demand their recom∣pence, and pleaded their Contracts in the name, and by vertue of the Kings order: Who remitted them, not to the Counsell of State, for they must iustifie their owne Acts, but to that of Conscience; Who gaue sentence, that if the Crowne belonged to Don Anto∣nio, they could not rightfully conferre it vpon Phillip. If Phillip were the true heire, the Petitioners could not sell their Allegiance to their owne Prince, for mo∣ney, so that both wayes they were iudged Traytors, and their expected reward was changed into a shame∣full pardon. I conclude, Nothing is sure, without the approbation of this Court of Conscience; Nothing
so vnsure, as what Law, or equitie is the rule thereof. Therfore, that Peace onely will be secure with Spaine, which the two Counsells of State, and Conscience shall together resolue, to be profitable, because neces∣sarie.
To reduce this Discourse to a briefe Conclusion, If right iudgement of all States arise from their ends; If their Counsells direct the way to discouer them, and both being discerned to affect Conquest, must be actiuely opposed, lest they preuaile vpon a suffe∣ring modestie; If the ends of Spaine are apparantly Vniversall Monarchy, and all their Counsells, by Ne∣gotiations, infamous, and vnchristian, or by practises of fomenting Treasons, and diuisions among their neighbours, are directed to attaine that end; If the Pope must be alway obsequious for the affinity of their common ends; If there be no securitie of Peace, but in their pouerty: What other resolution can bee proposed, then that a liuely warre must bee transported to that part of the Dominions of Spaine, which being separated and cut off, the ancient mo∣desty, and naturall constitution of that Kingdome may returne, to bee glad to liue in Peace, and cate quietly their owne Figs and Oliues. And because in great diseases, as well blood and ill humours must be diuerted, as the main Cure intended; so it wil be re∣quisite, more for expedition then necessitie of health, to imitate other States in thrift. France in times past, had Scotland, England, Burgundy, and Navarre; Spaine their owne Moores and Barbary; euery king∣dome had a back-friend vpon their Enemies. Such may be found vpon the weakest side of the House
of Austria, Port d'Atras, drawne from their owne Confessions, that though the Palatinate be conque∣red, Hungary & Bohemia will neuer be secure vntill the Hills of Transylvania be made the Bulwarke of their Empire. But this would be too large a Digression.
There remaines onely of my purpose, to preuent a Question; why I haue chosen to dedicate, by this Epistle, the ensuing Translation, to you most worthy Senators of the House of Commons. For this boldnes may be subiect to various misinterpretations. No mā will suspect me of so great arrogance, as that I hope to teach you any thing you doe not know. But seeing your owne wisedome did first foresee the necessity of a warre with Spaine, and your owne zeale to the honour of your King, did counsell to vndertake it, I thought such forraine Meditations as these, concur∣ring with your owne thoughts, might also animate and nourish in you a spirit, and generous Resolution, vigorously to maintaine it. You know how much of the good successe of great Actions depends vpon re∣putation, and they haue aduanced much, who haue gotten opinion. As Astrologers make their iudgments vpon the first minute of time in Natiuities, so doth the world prognosticate of the happy successes of Princes, by the first coniunctures in their King∣domes, and their first actions abroad: Therefore in∣standum famae, nam vt prima cessissent, fore vniuersa. You know,Tacit. Idem. Monies are the sinewes of warre, Neque arma sine stipendijs, neque stipendia sine tributis, haberi queunt. If you now restraine your liberall hand, you expose your Prince to dishonor, and your Country to Consumption. It is Time onely that will macerate
England, when without traffique and exchange, and that especially of Germany, our owne treasure must be exported to pay forraine Armies. Qui citò dat, bis dat,Sene. and it is ill husbandry to doe that sparingly, which cannot be well done but at once and speedily. It will be time to be thrifty in the members and particulars, when the Head and the whole State is safe. And if you deferre vntill a lingring warre hath exhausted you, Remember that which remaines will not suffice, because sera in fundo parsimonia; non enim minimum,Idem. sed & pessinam remanet.

