



SIR.
THis GENEALOGICAL HISTORY, &c. which (encouraged by Your Maje∣sties Gracious Approbation and more Special Favour) I have (with the expence of all that time which in near fifteen years I could spare from the necessary attendance on that Employment which Your Majesty hath been pleased to confer upon me) brought to such a Perfection, as my mean Abilities could give it, (though neither such as the Kingly Subject requires or deserves) I now humbly Present to Your Majesty, to Whom onely of Right it belongs, You being (as it were) the Ocean into which all these Mighty Springs of Royalty have, through the Streams of so many several Generations, discharged themselves, and in Your Veins running the Royal Blood of all those Kings of so many sundry Nations, Who, within the Records of Time, have swayed the Scepter of this Noble Island.
Your Majesty, when You were first Acquainted with
the Design, and whilst there was yet but a Prospect of it, were pleased to say, That it would be a very useful Book. An Encouragement so Royal, That it was able to put life into the meanest Ʋndertaker. And I can∣not but boast it as my greatest Honour to acknowledge that the Remembrance of those Words of Your Majesty, did, through the whole Course of the Work, Animate me to a more diligent Search and stricter Scrutiny of the certainty of Things, in a Matter so Nice and Curious, so No∣ble and Illustrious; That this History, which I wanted the Art to adorn with the Flourishes of Eloquence, might at least appear to the World, though in the less Gorgeous, yet more Glorious Habit of Truth.
Nor do I doubt, but in this Plain and Humble Dress (guarded by Your Majesties Patronage and Approbation) it may prove as Acceptable to all Well-minded Men, and produce its desired Effects, which are, The Preserving the Memory of the Seals, Monuments, and Epitaphs of the Royal Family, from Devouring Time, and the Fate of Accidents, and the Convincing the People of the Reasonableness of their Obedience. For though Kings ought to be Honoured as the lively Images of the Divinity, and Gods Vicegerents upon Earth, yet it must needs be Acknowledged, That when their Title is Strengthened by a Descent from so many Royal Progenitors, made Fa∣mous from Age to Age by their Renowned Actions and He∣roical Virtues, and the Blood of all these Ʋnited in one Person or Family, to make their Right indisputable, Loyalty Redoubles, and Acts more vigorously in the Breasts of those Subjects whom God hath submitted to so Ʋn∣doubted and Lawfull an Authority.
And this is a Consideration which ought, in a more par∣ticular manner, to Oblige all Your Majesties Subjects to a Nearer and Dearer Veneration of You their King than the Subjects of any other Prince in the World; For whe∣ther they derive their Descent from the Britains, Saxons, Danes, Normans, or Scots, (of all which Nations the Inhabitants of this Island are Composed) You are still their Lawfull Sovereign, by a continued Succession of near Twelve hundred Years. You are Flesh of the Flesh,
and Bone of the Bone of every one of us; so that no Native of this Island can say as once the Ten Tribes did to2 Chron. chap. 10. v. 16. Rehoboam, What Portion have we in Da∣vid? And we have no Inheritance in the Son of Jesse: For You are equally alike to all of us, our Portion, and our Inheritance.
But this, Great SIR, is not all: Providence has not only Obliged us to our Duty, by giving us, to Rule over us, the greatest King in Christendom, in Respect of Blood: You are not only of the Most Antient Kingly Descent of any Christian Monarch, being the Eleventh that in a due and direct Succession have worn a Dia∣dem; But You are likewise the Inheritor of the Glori∣rious Endowments of Your Royal Progenitors. Their Virtues are Ʋnited in You as well as their Blood. Not to fetch Examples from Darker Antiquity; In You we daily behold the Courage and Magnanimity of King Ed∣ward III. The Prudence and Policy of King Hen∣ry VII. The Peaceable Inclination of Your Royal Grandfather King James; And the Piety and Clemency of that Blessed Martyr Your Father. * VVhere then should we find a Center to fix our Obedience, but where Heaven has cocentred all these Advantages of Blood and Virtue?
And yet, SIR, there still remains one more Signal Observation, which seems to Cry out like a Voice from Heaven, and Challenge our Duty and Allegeance to Your Royal Line, which is, That when ever, for the Sins of the people, God hath permitted Invaders or Ʋsurpers to Disturb the Peaceable Course of some of Your Ancestors Reigns, yet never did the Intrusion last beyond the Third or Fourth Generation, but, by some means or other unthought of by and undiscernable to Mankind, Providence hath Ordered the Return of the Crown to the Lawful Heir. This in∣deed is Digitus Dei; which has powerfully been shewn up∣on sundry Occasions, but never did the Arm of God more plainly appear than in that Miraculous Preservation and Restauration of Your Majesty to the Throne, when with∣out Dint of Sword, or any open Violence, even the Ma∣lice of Your very Enemies, was, by the Divine Power,
lull'd asleep, and You endeared to us by being made the Restorer of those Breaches both in Church and State, which, by the Pride, Ignorance, and Folly of a violent Party among us, were opened so wide, that they threatned no∣thing less than utter Desolation.
And now surely he must be the most perverse of Man∣kind, that will not yield that to be Right which Heaven and Earth Proclaim to be so, such Monsters deserve not only to be cut off from the People, but razed out of the Memory of Mankind. May Your Majesties Do∣minions never breed more such Vipers, but all Your good Subjects, with an unanimous Heart, join and say with the Prophet David,2 Sam. chap. 7. v. 29. Therefore now let it please thee to bless the House of thy Servant (the King) that it may continue for ever before thee, for thou, O Lord God, hast spoken it, and with thy Blessing let the House of thy Servant be Blessed for ever. Which shall be the daily Prayer of,

