


Noble SIR,
IT is my ambition to put, not my Ser∣mon, but my Service in Print; so much I stand ingaged to your Ho∣nour, that it's not the Dedication of my Sermon, but of my self, that will satisfie you, nor that neither. I know this Criticall, or rather Hyper∣criticall, I had almost said, Hypocriticall age, will censure and slander me for pride and presumption in appearing so publickly, but the Orator hath made my Sen. de Ben. lib. 2. cap. 23. Apology; Furtivè gratias agunt qui in angulo & in
 aurem. They that give private thanks for publick fa∣vours; commit a theft for which they deserve (though not to be burned in the hand) yet to be branded in their name for ingratitude. This hath caused me to proclaim my indearments and indebtments upon the house top. It was my fear once (what was Furnius to Augustus Caesar) Ne morerer ingratus. I have laid hold Erasm. Apoth. lib. 7. therefore on this lock of opportunity, to publish to the world, what ground I had to render such a Testimony of Gratitude. When I designed my self and Ministe∣rial service for Bristol, and to banish my self from mine own native Country, by a perpetual Ostracism. and to say that which was written upon the Tomb-stone of Scipio Africanus, Ingrata patria, ne ossa quidem Val. Max. lib. 5. cap. 3. mea habes: unsought to, unsent to, on my part, you Barracado'd up my way with Southfleet Living: Since which time I have fallen (fato nescio quo iniquo) between the two Mil-stones of this age, Cavaliers and Cavellers, I mean, prophane sinners, and proud Sectaries, who endeavoured to grinde me to powder; you alwaies interposed your self to keep me from the malice of the one, and the malignancy of the other. These storms alaid, perceiving that most mens consci∣ences were so festered with corruptions, that they hate him who rebuketh in the gate, and abhorre him that speaketh uprightly, Amos 5. 10. I resolved to silence my self, because it was an evil time, ver. 13. and to observe that rule, , to hide my self in some dark cloud or corner, and never to have appeared in publick any more; but to have concluded with Lu∣ther's Vadat mundus, sicut vadit, nam vult vadere, sicut vadit. You then sued me with a Latitat, and caused my personal appearance before the Judges, to an∣swer
 se defendendo. Sir, that such a broken pot∣sheard (who did as little desire, as deserve to act any part on such a publick Theater) should be cull'd and call'd out by you, must needs publish, your judgement was very weak, or your affection was very strong. And because there is a Noverint universi upon your judge∣ment, for the solidness of it, I must acknowledge it was the vail of your Love that covered my many defects and deficiencies for such an imploy∣ment. You have been a fast and faithfull friend to me at all turns and times; You are none of those Glow∣worm Amico's (with which this age more abounds, than Nilus with Crocodiles) who promise and pretend much light and heat of love and affection, but being touched and tried, have neither; but only the squalid and noisom matter of Your servant Sir. You stood by me when it was little less than Treason to own a Mi∣nister, who had sincerely begun with the Parliament-Cause, and did seriously endeavour to keep the Parlia∣ment-Covenant. Wherefore having more reason, than ever Aeschines had to Socrates, I Dedicate and Devote my self wholly to your service. This acknowledge∣ment had come out sooner, but that you were so serious and sedulous to do your Country service, that you could not but have returned Antipaters : But now hoping you shall have leave and leasure for soul∣affairs, I present that to you in whole, which you heard but in part. Time was (by the Judges command) not Executor to, but Executioner of my Text, the glass was the fatall Atropos, to cut asunder the life-thred of my Sermon, so that I was Autor operis im∣perfecti, I therefore here lay it forth, in the true method it was composed. I preached it to you then to
 be a Star to guide you in your present place, I present it to you now, to be a fiery Pillar to lead and lighten you in your future pilgrimage. Sir, be pleased to let this Sermon be another Jerom's Trumpet, to sound Judgements▪ Alarum alwaies in your ears; I can assure you it will be of serious consequence to you in your life, and of sweet consolation to you in your death. But not to create further trouble (verbum sapienti) I shall winde up all upon the quill of those words, which were Pauls Prayer for good Onesiphorus, The Lord grant unto you that you may finde mercy of the Lord in that day, 2 Tim. 1. 18. Which is the daily Prayer of

From my Study in Southfleet, Nov. 1. 1657.
