



SIR,
'TIS without any other Knowledge of you, than what Fame has every where suggested to me, that I presume to make you this Ad∣dress. I may be a Stranger to your Person; but to your Name and Me∣rits it's impossible: Your Goodness and Vertue set you before every Man's Eyes; and 'tis no easie matter to publish any thing, and not take notice of you. He that ventures himself in Print, ought to pitch on some proper Patron to defend his Work (for sure the first Dedicator was something of a Prophet, to foresee the Necessity of Criticism,) And where can such Qualifications be so happily found, as in you, where Wit and Judgment contend for Pre-eminence? Wit pleads its
Quickness and Force on all occasi∣ons, and Judgment its Solidity and strong Reasoning. So that these Powerful Considerations, join'd with humble Reflections on your Birth and Quality, would not per∣mit me to think of any other Pa∣tron for the Present State of Persia. Also I was in hopes of serving my Country, by promoting Thoughts of Travel in a Person so well qua∣lified (for nothing like Voyages serves to further those Inclinations) who might return home, stor'd with all the Advantages of foreign Go∣vernments, and so become a glori∣ous Reformer of his own. Most Travellers come back only fraught with Garbs and Fashions, and lea∣ven'd with the ill Customs and Man∣ners of the Places they pass thro': But you, no doubt, Sir, would agree with Lipsius, in his Epistle to Lanonius, where he says, Vaga∣ri, Lustrare, Disquirere, Cogitare, hoc est verè Peregrinari. The Merchant
in his Travels proposes bonum Ʋ∣tile; the dissolute, rich, young, vain Fellow, bonum Jucundum; but your well-bred ingenious Gentle∣man, only bonum Honestum & De∣cus Patriae. What Advantages Tra∣vel brings to all Professions, I am sure you are not ignorant of, and that there is no Artist or Learned Man thoroughly improv'd without it. The French have a Saying, That a Traveller is Homme mêlé, a Man that is acquainted with all Nations, and who knows how to avoid the Pride of Spain, the Poison of Italy, the Treachery of France, and the Drunkenness of Flanders; also is throughly satisfied, that France is a good Country to ride thro', Italy to look upon, Spain to under∣stand, but England to live in. These things, Sir, I am bold to mention, as farther Motives to any Inclina∣tions you may have for Travel, by which the best and most ingenions Man in the World is to be im∣prov'd:
And if hereafter you should chance to reach Persia, you will find it what it is here describ'd (for our Author is of unquestiona∣ble Reputation) a Kingdom one of the most powerful and considerable in all Asia, whether it be for its Government, Force, Riches, Poli∣ticks, or Antiquity; and which last the Persians have an undoubted Title to; the Assyrians, Medians, and Parthians having all begun their Empires there.
The Author of this present Ac∣count, was a Missionary sent into Persia by the King of France, to propagate his Glory and Grandeur, I believe, rather than Religion: For whoever reflects on his daily Practices at home can he believe him well inclin'd so far off? But however, allowing it to be so, he differs very much in his Me∣thod: For there his Missionaries are Mild and Patient (as our Au∣thor has it) when at home they are
Cruel and Severe. 'Tis observable that he makes use of other Persons; for there they are Fawning Black-Coats, but here they are Blust'ring Red. So that to reconcile these Two to be intended for the same End, I know no better way, than by af∣firming, That his Religion is Ambi∣tion, and his God, Power.
The great distance of this King∣dom of Persia (which some might make an Objection against the minding of it) does but recom∣mend its Description the more to all ingenious Men: For who would not be willing to be acquainted with the Laws and Customs of so remote and Polite a People, who at least have something in 'em worthy to be imitated? Imitation being the great Concern of Life, and on which all Humane Knowledge is founded: For if you read and approve, you imitate; if you see and like, you imi∣tate; if you hear and are pleas'd, you imitate; that is, it sinks in∣sensibly
into you, and is always of∣fering to be made use of upon oc∣casion, when Motives of meer Cu∣riosity, without much Attention, are but Shadows and trivial in every thing.
Now as to these Travels being Authentick, I have this to say, That our Author was one of the latest Travellers into those Parts, and perhaps made the longest Resi∣dence there. I know, that others do differ from him in the pro∣per Names of Places and Per∣sons; but I thought it not safe to follow 'em; neither had it been justifiable in a bare Translator.
Thus, Sir, I have done my self an Honour that none have had be∣fore me; and I hope to recom∣mend it the better to your Can∣dour and Goodness, by its being my Maiden Address, and which is no less humbly Offer'd, than sin∣cerely
and honestly Meant, by him that will be glad of all further Occasions of expressing himself,
SIR, 
