



SINCE the Sale of Paintings by Auction is grown so fashionable, I thought the Picture of a French∣man might be no unacceptable Curiosity to some Persons. It is an Original, I assure you, and drawn as near to the Life as a Limner could take the Features of one danc∣ing the Rigadoon; for, the French, like the Sea, are perpetually in Motion.
When the Sword is drawn, 'tis not fit the Pen should lie Idle; the tenderest hand on board a Vessel, must lend its assistance in case of a Leak, and I think it the Duty of every Man to arm against the Common Enemy.
It is not unknown by what Arts the
French have gain'd so great a Reputa∣tion in England; with the Gentlemen they can Insinuate, and Flatter the Ladies better than the thick Skull'd English; for, were there a Court consisting of but one single Person of each Country in the Ʋni∣verse, the French Man would stand the fairest Candidate for the Office of Master of the Ceremonies.
Oh the Vertues of Shrug and Grimace, and the Charms of loud Laughter! Clark, the Posture-master, never knew half so many Distortions of Body, as they do; only the difference is this, his he acquired by Labour, and theirs is Na∣tural to 'em.
An honest blunt Freedom of Speech and Carriage, has by our modern Accepta∣tion, so much of the Clown in it, that Irish breeding has not more; but to be tickled to Death with Complements, is cer∣tainly the finest way of dying that can be.

By these various Arts of Flattery, the French are grown into Esteem: And, I am the rather confirm'd in the Truth of my Opinion, because I heard a Woman of Quality once say, — That an ordinary French Footman had more Breeding and Civility, than an English Gentle∣man.
He who can calmly hear his own Coun∣trymen so vilified, without some Emo∣tion, deserves better to be toss'd in a Blanket, than the Mayor of Scarbrough. For, with Asper, in a Play of Ben Johnson's, it becomes every English Man to say,
Who can behold such Prodigies as these,
And have his Lips seal'd up? Not I. My Soul
Was never ground into such Oily Colours,
To Flatter Vice, and Daub Iniquity.
But with an armed and resolved Hand,
I'll strip the ragged Follies of the Times
Naked, as at their Birth. —

I profess, the Design of this Paper is only to give a right Idea of the French Humour. What is Generous and Noble in them, I honour; but am something mortified, to see Quality doat upon a Dressing, Cringing, Complementing Mon∣fieur; yet I am so Charitable, as to be∣lieve some esteem them as People do Merry Andrews, because they excite Laughter; or, by a Rule of Contraries, love them as Ladies do Shock-Dogs, for their Ʋgliness.
