




IT's written of the Bereans,Acts 17.11. That they were more noble then those in Thessalonica. What! more nobly descended? more nobly educated? of greater antiquity, learning, valour, power, renown, or any other external priviledge, pre∣rogative, or respect? Not so, for if by the Bereans, we understand the Citizens of Berea (which was a city
in Macedonia, not far from Pella, where Alexander the Great was born) they came far short of the Thessalonians in many, if not in all, the forementioned respects. Or, if by them we understand the Jewes which dwelt in Berea,See Beza on the place. and had a Sy∣nagogue there, whereinto Paul en∣tred when he came thither, (as is most consonant and agreeable to the Text) they were in outward re∣spects in the very same condition wherein the Thessalonian Jews were, not more enobled, dignified, pre∣ferred. But herein they were more no∣ble then those in Thessalonica, in that they received the Word with all readi∣ness of minde; and searched the Scri∣ptures daily whether those things were so.Erasmus Paraph. That is (according to one) For they received the Doctrine of the Go∣spel very readily, every day searching the Scriptures diligently, that they might see how those things that they had learned by the Apostles instructi∣on, agreed with the Prophecies and Figures of the Law.Halls Pa∣raph. Or, (according to another) They chearfully received
the Word of our Gospel, and took pains to search the Scriptures, and to com∣pare our Doctrine with the Text of the Prophets to see if we had alledged them aright. Having thus received the Word, thus searched the Scriptures, which the other did not, they were therefore more noble then they; more ingenuous, better affected.
To be well reported of, reputed of, both whilst they are alive, and when they shall be dead, is that which all should, and many do af∣fect.Pro 22.1. For a good name is rather to be chosen then great riches.Eccles. 7.1 And a good name is better then precious ointment. Nor are the Deserving to be depri∣ved of their due commendation; for hereby not onely of Deserving they become more deserving,Virtus laudata crescit. but others also endeavour to follow them: propound them as fit patterns for their imitation.
Paul is not here deprived of his due, nor are the Bereans of theirs; but both commended by the holy Ghost in this sacred History.
Paul, for that having been so often
in danger, and suffered so much al∣ready of the Jews,Acts 9.23. (as at Damascus, when they took counsel to kill him; and to this intent watched the gates day and night:  for the prevention whereof,  the Disciples let him down by the wall in a banket.Acts 13.45. At Antioch, where they spake against those things which were spoken by him, contradict∣ing and blaspheming;  where also they stirred up the devout and honourable women, and the chief men of the City, and raised persecution against him and Barnabas, and expelled him out of their coasts.Act. 14.5 At Iconium, where there was an assault made both of the Gentiles, and also of the Jews, with their rulers, to use them despitefully, and to stone them;  so that for their own preser∣vation, they fled unto Lystra and Derbe.  At Lystra, where they per∣swaded the people, and having stoned Paul, drew him out of the City, suppo∣sing he had been dead.Acts. 16.23. At Philippi, where both he and Silas had many stripes laid upon them; were cast into prison, with a charge given unto the Jaylor to keep them safely. At Thes∣salonica,
where the Iews which belie∣ved not, moved with envy,Acts 17.5. took unto them certain lewd fellows, of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the City on an uproar; and assault∣ed the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to the people.) That ha∣ving, I say, been already in such dan∣gers, and suffered so much, he would again adventure,  by going into the Synagogue of the Iews which was in Berea, and there preaching the Word, and testifying the Gospel of the grace of God; Oh the Faith, Patience, Zeal, Magnanimity, Charity, Confi∣dence, and Constancy of this faith∣ful Servant of Christ! Yea,Tu ne ce∣dematis, sed contra audentior ito. the more his enemies were, the greater his troubles; the more, the greater was his resolution. What saith he him∣self? The holy Ghost witnesseth in eve∣ry city, saying,Acts 20.23, 24. That bonds and afflicti∣ons abids me: But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministery which I have received of the Lord Je∣sus; to testifie the Gospel of the grace
of God.Act. 21.4 And again, The Diseiples having said to him through the Spirit, that he should not go up to Ierusalem. And Agabus foretold, that the Iews at Ierusalem would binde him, and de∣liver him into the hands of the Gen∣tiles; whereupon,  all they that were present besought him not to go up to Ierusalem:  He answered, What mean ye to weep, and to break mine heart? for I am not ready to be bound onely,  but also to dye at Ierusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus.
The Bereans, That they admitted Paul into their Synagogue; permit∣ted him to preach there; did not disturb him whilst he was preching: not onely heard him, but received the Word by him taught, with all readiness of minde, examining and trying the same (as being unto them new, and whereof they had not for∣merly heard, nor were therewith acquainted at all) by the Scriptures of the Old Testament, which they daily and duly searched, for their further, both satisfaction, and con∣firmation. Whereunto may be ad∣ded,
That they were not led away with the Errour of the wicked Jews; did not follow them, though a mul∣titude, in evil; but loved, what they loathed; embraced, what they de∣spised; received, what they rejected, the good Word of God taught by the Apostle Paul.
Were Ministers now such as Paul was, People now such as the Bereans were, how happily might they enjoy each other? How much would Unity and Amity abound? How much Love, Concord, Peace? What mu∣tual endeavours for the good of each other? How would God be glorified? the Church edified? the Gospel flourish? Truth triumph? Errour decrease? Satan lose of his power and interest?
But alas! what Factions and Fra∣ctions, what Jars and Wars, what Divisions, Shismes, Rents, Breaches are among them? How do they per∣secute, prosecute one another? As they differ in judgement, especially about their Meum and Tuum, (the one seeking to get what they con∣ceive
to be their due, the other seek∣ing to retain what they conceive to be none of theirs) so between them there's no small alienation of affe∣ctions. For the Divisions of Reuben,Judg. 5.15 there were once among the people of God, great thoughts (Heb. Impressi∣ons) of heart. Oh that for our pre∣sent Divisions we were thus affected! then would we employ the utmost of our endeavours (especially fer∣vent and constant Prayer unto God) to quench this Fire, make up this Breach, heal this Sore; till then we are Physicians of no value.
In the mean time, as Timothy was a diligent follower of Pauls Doctrine,2 Tim. 3.10. Marg. manner of Life, Purpose, Faith, Long∣suffering, Charity, Patience; so let all such as are, or would be reputed Gods Ministers, herein follow Paul, follow Timothy.2 Tim 2.15. Let them study to shew themselves approved unto God, workmen that need not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. Let them preach the word,2 Tim. 4.2 be instant in season, out of season; reprove, re∣buke, exhort with all long-suffering
and Doctrine. Great is their Dignity,Honos. great also is their Duty.Onus. Hereof the very Names whereby they are set forth in Scripture, may put them in minde, as amongst many others, these few: Ambassadours for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. Builders, 1 Cor. 3.10. Ensamples to the Flock, 1 Pet. 5.5. Fathers begetting men and women through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. Guides, Heb. 13.7, 17. Marg. Inter∣preters, Job 33.23. Labourers toge∣ther with God, 1 Cor. 3.9. Messen∣gers, Isa. 44.26. Overseers, Acts 20.28. Pastours, Jer. 3.15. The Salt of the Earth, Mat. 5.13. Shepherds, Jer. 50.6. Stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. Teachers, Isa. 43.27. Watchmen, Isa. 52.8. and 62.6. Jer. 6.17. and 31.6. Ezek. 3.17. and 33.7. Every of which calleth upon them to be diligent and faithful in the execu∣tion of their ministeriall Function. And for the People, would they but seriously consider what the Apostle Paul required of them with relation unto their Ministers.1 Tim. 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of
double honour, especially they who la∣bour in the Word and Doctrine. And again,Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves: for they which for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you. Without per∣adventure, they would be swift to hear,Jam. 1.19. (to hear the Word of God; the excellency, necessity, and utility whereof, who is able sufficiently to express? ) and to receive with meek∣ness the ingrafted Word,Mar. 16.26. What is mainly to be aimed at in preach∣ing and hearing the Word. 2 Tim. 1.13. which is able to save their souls. This, even this, (the souls salvation, being of more value then the whole world) is that which is mainly to be aimed at, both in preaching and hearing.
To further this, the Preacher is to hold fast the form of sound Words: whereby, both the substance of sound Christian Doctrine, and the form of expressing and delivering it, may be understood. He is to preach,2 Tim. 2.15. 1 Pet. 4.11 but rightly dividing the word of truth. He is to speak, but as the Oracles of God. He must preach the
Gospel,1 Cor 1.17. 1 Cor. 11.9. but not with wisdom of words, or speech. He must utter by the tongue words easie to be under∣stood: how else shall it be known what is spoken? Shall he not speak into the air? Shall he edifie the igno∣rant and unlearned?  Shall he not be unto them a Barbarian? The Apo∣stle Paul did excel in Learning, was a notable Linguist, Logician, Rhe∣torician, what not? yet what saith he of himself? I thank my God,  I speak with tongues more then you all; yet in the Church I had rather speak five words with my understanding,  that by my voice I might teach others al∣so, then ten thousand words in an un∣known tongue. In Preaching regard is to be had unto the Auditory, whe∣ther they be learned, or unlearned; knowing, or ignorant: to use learn∣ing in a learned Auditory is suteable, but plainness is most fit for a plain Auditory.
There are who run before they are sent, and take upon them to be Teachers of others, they themselves standing in need of instruction, both
about the Matter, or what they are to teach; and about the Method, or how they are to teach.
To remedy both, and that that which is daily done (will be done howsoever) here may be well done, to the glory of God, and edification of his people, I have thought good to communicare (what was many years ago bestowed upon me by a dear friend and faithful Minister of Gods word, now with God) A plain Platform for Preaching; whereof if they (whose Learning is but small, and their experience in preaching not very great) shall be pleased to make use, I doubt not, but that through Gods blessing on their en∣deavours, both their Matter and Method of Preaching will prove satisfactory, and give good con∣tent.
There are many who have writ on this Subjest; as Mr. Perkins in his Art of Prophesying. Mr. Bernard in his Faithful Shepherd. Kecker∣man in his Rhetorica Ecclesiastica, Sculterus in his Method of Preaching.
Erasmus in his Ecclesiastes. Jacohus Reneccius in his Clav. Sacrosanctae Theologiae. Solomon Glassius in his Philologia Sacra. Weems in his Chri∣stian Synagogue. Hyperius, Illyricus, with diverse others.
But this Platform being so short and substantial, so plain and easie to be understood, and containing so much in such a small bulk,Magnum in parvo. I con∣ceive to be most fit, especially for the unskilful unexperienced, young Beginner.
For This I humble crave your Ho∣nours Patronage, that under your Names it may appear in publique. And vouchsafe also your Protection unto a poor Orphan The Destructi∣on of in-bred Corruption; or, An An∣tidote against fleshly Lusts; which was some years ago exposed unto publique view, and had Patrons who were then able to defend it; but those being either dead or disabled, it now runneth unto your Honours for shelter.
Both these I present unto your Honours as tokens of my Thank∣fulness
for your continued Favours.
The Almighty God, who is the exceeding great reward of all them that walk uprightly before him, (in whose hand is the length of dayes) bless and prolong your dayes here, to the Advancement of his Glory, the Propagation of the Gospel, and the Comfort, Supportation, and Encouragement of all the Consci∣onable, Faithful, Painful, and Reli∣gious Labourers in the Lords Har∣vest; and after this life, crown you with Glory for ever. So prayeth

