



May it please you,
I Have made bold in venturing into the world to make use of your Worships name, that so I may passe ith the lesse molestation in these oublesome times. It is an age of ouble, and that not alone in the
 world, and amongst men of the world, but such that professe to Christ, and I hope are in Christ. These latter own themselves, and what is theirs as men and fleshly, too much; and what is Christs and spirituall not enough; The con∣tention in the church of Corinth partly arose from mens overmuch affecting singularity, one was of Paul, another of Appollo, another of Cephas, another of Christ. It may be some boasted of their circum∣cision, some of their Baptisme, some of both Baptisme and cir∣cumcision, some it may be gloried that they had medled neither with Baptisme nor circumcision; if not so, yet it is more then conjectu∣rall that some boasted that they were hearers of such a one, and of such a ones Congregation: and from this outside-worke highly extolling their choice and way, slighting and abasing others,
 caus'd strife. The Apostle blames for this contention, and shews that the way of Christ is to take from men, as men, all glorying. It is unbeseeming the eye to hate the foot, because the foot sees not, 'tis enough that it is of the body: so should not Christians that have more excellent gifts, villifie them that have not attained to their perfection, or trouble to see others differing in judgement in some low things from them; for in the body of Christ unity may stand with diversity: there may be di∣versity in respect of forms and yet unity in spirit; for men may en∣joy God in different formes, God may dwell in them that regard a day, and in them that regard it not; God may communicate him∣self to them, and so make them a∣like within glorious; by enjoy∣ing his glorious presence. Formes are to be reverenc'd (knowing of
 some there is use) as they wherein Christians may walke and be use∣full one to another; yet meer be∣ing in forms makes not Saints, nor doth uniformity in formes breed true unity. True unity of members is from those members union with the head. And as souls are in unity with the head; so will they grow into a unity one with a∣nother. 'Tis the new and spiritu∣all birth whereby souls are one with Christ, and like Christ that makes them at on with Christi∣ans, and true Christians look upon all that professe to Christ not as in formes, but as possessing Christ; and as they find Christ living in them do they esteeme them, and account them precious, knowing that a precious Christ makes pre∣cious Christians, and that they will keep their excellency let the times and places be never so bad they are cast into. Right Worship∣full,
 you are young, and yet some bad dayes you have seen, people of all Ages, Sexes, qualities very bad, some ill savour in every place by reason of corruption have you to your annoyance met withall; And God knowes what more you may, whilest here in the body. You know what hath kept you right in these crosse-walkings, and also what hath preserv'd you and enabled you to keep your sweet∣nes, hath not a Christ guided you? hath not a Christ communicated himselfe to you? I have high thoughts of your Noble self, and I am perswaded never a whit a∣bove you, but that you are as high as I take you to be, and that is in Christ; whom you have found all in all unto you, and on whom you rely to carry you through what remaines of sufferings as your part and portion, that at last you may sit down with Christ
 in his Throne even as he is set down with his Father, in his Fa∣thers Throne: and as you are such as he is in this world, so you may be like him in the world to come, participating with your sweet Sa∣viour, and blessed redeemer in his glory to your perfect happines. You have an inside like Christ now, a soul glorious; you shall have an outside like him also, body glo∣rious, body and soul glorious, all glorious. Towards the enjoy∣ing of which so farre as my day∣ly prayers may help, you shall be sure of them, praying to God on your behalfe. And upon this ac∣count I tender my selfe.

