



YOU will bear with me in this Application, allowing every man to speak according to the Light of his own Conscience. For your sakes, Brethren, did I engage in Disputation; for your sakes, in good will, and true compas∣sion to your souls do I also now write. My design in it falls in with your desire; even that you might have an undeceiving perswasion touching the way to Heaven and Glory; that walking therein you may not miss of everlasting Rest when you are departed hence. How you may attain this perswasion, is a matter of very great importance, and well worth a strict inquiry: Do but think with your selves how others might attain it. A Jew, a Turk, a Papist, an Inde∣pendant, a Presbyterian, an Anabaptist; If they should say, our present perswasion is undeceiving, because our hearts assure us therein, or because our Teachers do so instruct us, or be∣cause we have an infallible spirit which will not suffer us to be de∣ceived
in any thing; your Light would tell you they took not a . But if looking up to God for illumination and  earch for, and examine the grounds of their own and others Opinions; and what they see upon good grounds to be truth, that they embrace, whoever rejects it; what they see upon good ground to be error, that they cast aside, whoever countenanceth it; would not your Light tell you, this were a better and a safer course for them? Now be your own Judges; is not that a good and a safe course for you to take, which is so for others? You may not then say, it is impossible I should be deceived touching my pre∣sent Opinion, because my heart perswades me it is right. As a Pa∣pist may not thus argue, so neither may you: For the Heart is deceitful above all things. He that trusts to his own Heart is a Fool. Lean not, saith God, to thine own understanding. Neither may you say, it cannot be that I should be mistaken in this, for such and such have taught it. A Turk, a Socinian may not thus pin his Faith on anothers sleeve; for deceitful workers transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ: therefore neither may you: Our Saviour cautions you; take heed that no Man deceive you: commands you, call no man Master on Earth: and threatens too, Cursed be the man that trusteth in man. Nor may you say, it is impossible I should be out, for I have an infallible spirit that will not suffer me to erre in any thing. As a Presbyterian, an Independant, an Anabaptist may not thus build his considence; so neither may you. It is incumbent on you as well as on them, to try the spirits whether they be of God. Your work then is, looking up for special assistance, to examine the grounds of what you and others hold, to prove all things, that you may hold fast that which is good. And truly a well grounded knowledge, is a very choice mercy. Wisdome and knowledge, saith God, shall be the Stability of thy times and Strength of Salvation. For your furtherance herein, if the Lord shall adde his blessing; I put this small book into your hands: It will present you with the grounds of what your Teachers hold for truth; and what we hold, Read, and Judge which have clearest reason for what they hold, which have Scripture taken in its true sense and meaning. And as Elijah said to Israel, If God be God, follow him; if Baal be God, follow him. So say I to you, If what we teach be well built upon a sure foundation, embrace it. If what yours teach be
rightly drawn from sound Principles, cleave to it for ever. Re∣member it speaks a Generous and a free Spirit, to be able with Candor and Impartiality to read an Adversary. But unless Gods spirit enlightens your mind, you may see truth, and not perceive; it unless he sanctifies your heart, you may perceive it, and not embrace or practise it: You must therefore needs beg for the gracious presence of God with you, if you would bene∣fit your souls by reading. Examine your selves also whether you have a Love of the Truth, a Readiness to acknowledge and close with it, whether it shall appear to be your own opinion, or ours? If you are resolved in heart to cast away our doctrine, though it should never so clearly appear to be the truth of God; to retain what you have received from your Teachers, though it should never so plainly be discovered error; to what good intent can you read? It is not Truth you are for, but a Party. But if you can be willing to take in Truth on which hand soever you find it; then are you capable to aim at and receive profit by Reading. What do you say? How do you find it with you? If our present Opinion shall appear to be Truth, we can hold to it: Thats not so difficult a business. But what if the contrary Opinion proves true? If it should indeed, we hope through Gods grace we should not reject it. Only Truth leads to Heaven: we should otherwise provoke God to give us up to strong delusions to believe a lie that we might be damned. This is like Persons that are in good earnest for Heaven. But it is good for you to consider before hand, that it is no easie thing to part with an Opinion, you have been long wedded to, and it may be commended, and contended for; to be reconciled to an Opinion, at which you have, it may be, for several years taken distast, and opposed; and to expose your self to disgrace, by openly, as it were, proclaiming your own ignorance during that time; and by becoming unconstant to what you have so long professed: to bear the reproach, ill will and malice of your own Party; they will contemptuously call you Apostates, and what not. What do you now say to the matter? Can you still hold your purpose? Now you begin to stagger. The Devil is an utter enemy to Truth; he knows it leads to Hea∣ven. In this case therefore he will be prompting, what ever ha∣zard thou dost run, spare thy self. Concerning the Kings Mes∣senger said the Prophet, See how this Son of a Murderer hath sent
to take away mine Head; look when the Messenger cometh shut the door, and hold him fast at the door. Unless the great God of Hea∣ven and Earth stand by you, thus will you deal with Truth, if our Opinion appear to be it; you will look on't with as much malignity, as on a spiteful enemy that would take away all that ever you have, you would be sure to bar it out of your hearts. But the Lord will enable all his savingly to take in his Truth. Concerning such, the Apostle could say, God hath chosen you to Salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. Seek therefore your help from the Lord. If he shall graciously transform you by the renewing of your mind, in spite of flesh and blood, Earth and Hell, you shall prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. And so shall your perswasion be undeceiving; so shall your hopes be such as maketh not ashamed. The Desire as well as Design of

