



SIR,
AS your Merits (attended with the Reputation and Honour of your Country) by the guidance of the Supreme Providence, advanced you to that present Station, wherein, as some new Beneficent Star arisen in that Hemisphere, you shine with so amiable Lustre, as it powerfully at∣tracts the Gordiall Regards and Love of all Eminent and Good men: So was it no meane Happinesse to my selfe, that (whilst I studiously served you) I found so fit an occasion, wherein to declare my Zeal for Ma∣gistracy, a thing so acceptable to God, and so benefi∣ciall to men: It pleased Heaven so far to favour my
Endeavours this way, that my Discourse gayning up∣on that Honourable Assembly, before whom it was ut∣tered, was by Authority requested (whereas it might have been enjoyned) to the Press: And being thus become more publick and spreading, to whose name could I more justly inscribe it, then to yours? whose Munificence may challenge it as a Testimony of my Gratitude, and whose Superlative Endowments, both of Nature and Grace (set off by so exquisite Education) win it Esteem and Acceptation abroad; Surely, under such a Patronage, it cannot but be safe, and speed the better in other hands and hearts.
Two principall things there are, which render you (above others) not Commendable only, but Exempla∣ry; the one is, that you are , (for Gods pure Glory sake) a1 Joh. 4.19. Lover of God; and the other, that you are (for pure Goodnesse sake) , a Lo∣ver ofTit. 1.8. Good men, and chiefly, of Able and God∣ly Ministers, the2 Tim. 3.17. Men of God: Both these con∣joyned, denominate you, without either Affectation or Ostentation, an IsraeliteJoh. 1.47. indeed. Your other Ver∣tues of Temperance, Sobriety, Mansuetude, Affa∣bility, Hospitality, Sweetnesse of Disposition, Can∣dor, Liberality, Prudence, &c. all which so intor∣telled as they are within each other, and within you, and so indissolubly, as it were, concatenated together, they are as the Gold ofGen. 2.12. Havilah, Good; but your Piety is as the Gold ofPsal. 45.9. Ophir, eximious, andSee Pro. 8.19 Very Good: And were I a Chrysostome, and flowed with all his golden Oratory, wherein Elegantly, or
copiously to embellish your due praises, I could not more graphically expresse you, than under that your so genuine Character, of beingPsal. 116 16. 2 Cor. 1.12. Truly, and withall mostProv. 2.11. Psal. 112.5. Discreetly Religious; And as that Noble Emperour Theodosius, thought it a greater Honor, to be Membrum Ecclesiae, then Caput Imperii, A Member of the True Church, than Monarch of the World; even so you doe; and may more solidly chear your heart in being Pious, than in being Opulent, though God hath opened both his hands, and powred forth hisProv. 8.18. Blessings upon you: And that which farther augments the Value of all, is this, that as the richest Carbuncles shine best in varyed lights, so your untainted Vertues (whilst you keep your felfJam. 1.27. unspotted from the world) in this loose, inconstant and wavering Age, are displayed in the brighter splendor.
How Happy then must your Father (to whose Encouragements, and Liberality I owe many Ac∣knowledgements) bee esteemed in such a Son? be∣ing the staffe and comfort of his old Age: I may well hither apply that Apposite sentence ofProv. 20 7. confer Psal 112.2, 3. Solomon, The just man walketh in his In∣tegrity, and his Children are blessed after him: In him I cannot omit to mention one Grace (among many others resplendent in him) re∣markeable, and that is, his singular1 Tim. 6.16. Eccles. 5.18, 19 Contentati∣on, accompanyed with Temperance unto Admira∣tion.
But, doubting least I have exceeded the mea∣sure
of an Epistle, I now betake my selfe to my most Fervent Devotions, for the accumu∣lation of Heavens Benedictions upon your Selfe, your Vertuous Consort, and your Hopefull Chil∣dren (enclosing also your worthy Parents) promi∣sing you to persevere what I am,
Sir,

