



Sir,
ITs a maxime with the School∣men, (in whose volumes, amidst much superstitious oar, some gold of precious and refined wit, is, by aSchool-men being more witty to raise questions, then judicious to as∣soyl them, are warily to be read, at least by Novices. Dr. Sclater, p. 73. on 2 Thess. c. 1. v. 11. & p. 202. 203. ib. c. 2. v. 15. wary searcher, to be found) That charity is the form of every Theological vertue: Not, that it gives them al their several natures, or distinct indi∣viduations; but for that it forms them al unto ac∣ceptability before God, in whose repute even1 Cor. 13.1. An∣gelical excellencies, without love, are but as a tink∣ling cymbal, or an empty found: It is, indeed, that royal grace, wherein, above other, God him∣self doth, in a sort, reciprocate with his Saints;
If we fear God, he fears not us; if we obey God, he obeyes not us, &c. But if we love God, he sweetly closeth with us in the1 Joh. 4.19. same kinde, and returns it with advantage into our bosomes. A clearJoh. 13.35. proofe of this affection was expected from none more, I fidor. Pelusiota, l. 1. Ep. 356. then from Apostles; wherefore our Saviour, to make experiment, puts Saint Peter, aGal. 2.9. A pillar. chief amongst them, to an interogatory, in the same terms thrice repeated, Joh. 21.15, 16, 17. Simon,Redditur tri∣nae Negationi trina confessio, ne minus amori lin∣gua serviat, quam timori. S. August. tract. 127. in Joban∣nem. Son of Jonas, Lovest thou me? Who like∣wise thrice appealing to Christs Omnisciency, for the truth of his inward love towards him, is required to shew it forth, by feeding of his lambs, and sheep; by that confession, or engagment, as it is were salving the wound of his three-fold de∣nial of him; and causing his tongue (as Augustine observes) to serve him no less to declare his love, then it had done in disclosing his fear: To wave the mention of what heterogeneous glosses the soothing Parasites of the grand3 Epist. Joh. 9. Diotrephes of Rome, (that Antichristian2 Thess. 2.3. man of sin) impose upon this text, making what was meant only as as theDu Moulin. Art. 23. De∣fence of K. Ja. against Caeef∣teu. strengthening of Peters infirmity,Dico, quòd nullu Apostolo∣rum, facts est à Christo Epis∣copus; Petrus depalude, de po∣testat. Apost. Art. 2. (for so many fallings, so manyBeza, Annot. on Matth. 16. v. 19. restorings, saith Beza) to to be a raising of him, with exclusion of all others, unto dignity; that, on this occasion, by the great cheat of a pretended personal (not by any intended trulyJud. v. 3.  primitiveRom. 1.8. doctrinal) succession, they might, with an usurped triple crown, en∣thronize their visible head, and Monarch of the universal Church; and enstate him in a Primacy of Jurisdiction, and supream Domination over all
other Pastors, and souls whatsoever, or where∣soever; (whereby it appears, he is like1 Pet. 5.3. conferr 2 Cor. 1.24. Peter in no∣thing more, then in the denyal of his master,) whereas, as St.Hoc erant uti{que} & caeteri Apo∣stoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti, & honoris, & potestatis —ex∣ordium ab unitate proficiscitur. S. Cyprian, de unitate Ecclesiae, sect. 3. confer Whitaker con∣tra Duraeum, l. 9. s. 7. Juel against Hard∣ing, part. 2. c. 3. Divis. 3. Mr. Edw. Rey∣nolds, on Psa. 110. p. 88. Diete∣ric in Festo St. Pauli: with all the ful Chorus of reformed, Protestant Di∣vines. Cyprian truly, (exceptingMatth. 10.2. sometimes, but notGal. 2.9. 2 Cor. 11.28. alwaies, a priority of or∣der in his nomination before them) the very same what St. Peter was, in point both of honour,Matth. 28.19. commission, andMatth. 18.18. Ioh. 20.21. St primus ante omnes, non primarius, King James, In Apology to all Christian Monarchs, p. 306. 307. &c. power, were all the other Apostles.
To wave, I say, all this, (as being now en∣diting an Epistle, not writing a treatise,) allowing to Peter, and the Apostles, as to the first Repre¦sentatives, their extraordinary Circumstantials, and unimitableThe Personal Priviledges of the Apostles Calling, see in Mr. Perkins, on Jude v. 17. and in Bilson Praef. p. 11. & c. 5. & 10. of the Per∣petual govern. of the Church. Davenant. on Coloss. c. 1. v. 1. & p. 130, 131, 137, 152, 170. ib. Dr. Feld, l. 1. c. 5. l. 3. c. 4. Of the Church; and Dr. Sclater on Psal. 116. p. 48, 104, 142. priviledges, fixed to their per∣sons only: all other * faithfulJer. 3.15. Pastors, law∣fullySee Perkins on Isa. 6.5, 6. Signes of a ministers lawful calling, see in him, on Galat. c. 1. v. 1, & 11. and on Matth. 7. v. 16. it: Pet. Martyr. loc com. class. 4. c. 1. Bullinger, advers. Anabapt. l. 3. c. 4. Non sunt audiendi, nisi vocati, Gerson. part. 3. de vitâ Spirit. Comad. Dieteric. In Festo St. Andreae. Dr. Sclater, on Psal. 116. p. 142, 143. called, andJer. 23.31. Joh. 17.18. Rom. 10.15. Heb. 5.4. sent, for the ordinary sub∣stantials of theirRom. 11.13. 1 Tim. 3.1. office, inMatth. 28.19, 20. Mar. 16.15, 16. Rom. 10.14. Joh. 17.20. Preaching and Baptizing, &c. are enjoyned the like manifestati∣on of the same love, to the1 Pet. 5.4. chief Shepherd, and1 Pet. 2.25. Bishop of souls, by theAct. 20.28. inspection, and1 Pet. 5.2. feeding of his flock, the Church.1 Cor. 4.2. Matth. 25.21. Joh. 14.15.

This well knew the Author of this ensuing Commentary, (my dear, and reverend father) who seeing the way thus lead before him, strove to walk after in the very path, though he reach'd not, happly, the same large steps; and hath given ample expressions, after hisEph. 4.7. 2 Cor. 10.13. measure, of his love, (the chief2 Cor. 5.14. motive of his ministerial undertak∣ings) to Christ, by his triple feeding both of his lambs, and sheep; to wit. 1. By word. 2. By life. 3. By writing. For so did this great Apostle, with the rest: To those Churches which they planted, Preaching, Tàm vivâ (quod aiunt) voce, quàm per Epistolas, posteà, asTertullian de Praescript. advers. Haeret. c. 21. Tertullian speaketh; as well by their Epistles, absent, as by their lively voyces, present: They delivered precepts both of doctrine, and manners, , as Chrysostome saith, both without writ∣ing, and with it; the which is also insinuated by St. Paul, 2 Thess. 2.15. where he exhorts his Thessalonians to stand fast, and hold the traditions (to wit of doctrine) which they had been taught, by word, or their Epistle. And, indeed, in its de∣gree, a man may , asClemens Alexandr. l. 1. Strom. See Eccles. 12.10. Cle∣mens Aexandrinus phraseth it; Preach, as, by his tongue; so, by his pen. David compared his tongue to thePsal. 45.1. pen of a ready writer, that what he spake might, as1 Tim. 4.1. . a written letter,litera scripta manet. last; and as the Spirit is said to (speak) expresly; so is the Scripture, that is the [written] word, to Jam. 4.5. (say): A writer is a silent, as a speaker is a vocal Orator. Either sanctified, winneth glory to the Lord, and much advantage to the Church of Christ, faxit.Rom. 6.17. So Dr. Fulk expounds it, against the Rhemists, num. 17. on 2 Thess. 2. Chrysost. Hom. 4. in 1 Thess. 2.

Now, it may be thought not well beseeming me, or, at all, my Herauldry to blazon the coat of my fathers graces, the crest whereof is glory: Per∣haps, it might be [lawful] for me, (who knew him both in word, in life, in writings, better, then another did, or could;) but, as the Doctor of the Gentiles, said of his own rapture, and visions; 2 Cor. 12.1., , It is not [expedient] doubtless, for me to glory; though, after Solomons expression, such a Father may be myProv. 17.6. glory: Let his own works praise him in the Gates: he was a fair Copy for me to write after; and, as its written of righteous Abel, He being dead, yetHeb. 11.4. speaketh; and what saith he? Surely, me-thinks, as the ghostly Fa∣ther of Timothy, to him, 2 Tim. 3.10, 14. Thou hast fully known my doctrin, manner of life, &c. Continue thou in the things which thou hast learned, and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them; now, my own desires, and endea∣vours are, that, as I resemble him (they say) inSic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat. Vir∣gil. Aen. 3. de Astyanact Hectoris flio. visage, as a son by natural birth; so, I may do likewise, in religious imitation; adding only (as in all dutiful acknowledgments) of him what Nazi∣anzene wrote, as an Epitaph, on his Basil.
.
His doctrine was thunder, and his life lighte∣ning; the one to startle sinners rock't asleep in se∣curity; the other, toMatth. 5.16. shine before good eyes, and to dazle others, who shun'd illumination. He was in his native disposition, as Moses, abound∣ing in mansuetude, andNum. 12.3. meekness; yet, in the cause of Christ,Act. 7.22. mighty in words, and deeds: SoProv. 31.31. Joh. 8.39. See this book. c. 2. v. 8. p. 78, 79, 80, 81. and, him also, on Psa. 116. p. 174, 175.
that my hope is, theProv. 10. memory of him, as of a just man, both is, and shall be blessed.
And I am the rather induc'd to think so, for that in the perusal of divers Modern writers, I finde him quoted often, as an approved Textuary, and of a sound judgment, in those Scriptures, and Sermons, which he undertook to treat of; some whereof were set forth and revised by himself, in his own life time; some published by me, since his decease.
As concerning this book, which I thought meet to style, [A brief commentary, with notes, on the Prophet Malachy,] the materials of it were meditated, and Preached, some years before his death; (of whom, what concerneth mine own private estate, I say no more, but as Philip sayd of Hipparchus being gone, Sibi maturè, mihi citô, he dyed in a good time for himself, but for me, too-soon:) but, as the Hebrewes are wont to express that in theIn prophetis praeteritum pro futuro poni crebrò solet. Joh. Drusius. Lect. in Obad. v. 7. praeter-tense, which was to be accomplished in the future, thereby denoting the certainty of what they foretell; so what was uttered by him, as in Exposition of this Prophecie, for divers yeares past, was as an apt mould for these very times: He was no Prophet, or Pro∣phets son, much less a favourer of boldContra En∣thusiastas lege Bulling. l. 2. c. 1. adv. Anabapt. & Dieteric. In feriâ 3a. Penecost. En∣thusiasmes, or a pretender to extraodinary2 Cor. 12.1. reve∣lations, under a constitution ofSee Dr. Scla∣ter, on Psal. 116. v. 13. p. 127, 128. ordinary meansZanch. de Divinatione. per Insomn. p. 163. by God. Yet certainly, as Aristotle (the Pa∣triarch of Philosophers) writes of some, that they have , as it were forespeak∣ing, and (after Zanchy's expression) praesagient,See 1 Tim. 4.13.
conjecturing natures, peculiari viConrad. Die∣tericus Domini∣câ post Circum∣cis. Domini: num. 4. ) futu∣ros eventus praesagientes, as Conradus Dietericus hath it; so surely, (finding withal, in experience, thePsal. 25.14. Prov. 3.32. secret of the Lord to be with him) God gave him aProv. 22.3. foreseeing eye, and by a prudent, yea Political observation of Gods exemplary dea∣lings with other Nations, and Churches (sinning, or reforming,) seemed to discover, how the pulse of this land began to beat, and by foregoing symp∣tomes guessed at the approaching disease, that was growing upon this Church, and State; and which, since, in great measure, hath broken out.
For the style, it might, in all likelihood, have been better polished, if he had surviv'd to have drawen his last, and smoothest hand over it; yet, to any who have pleased to be conversant in his other writings, it shall be found alike, that is, as himself was, somewhat after the stature of Za∣cheus,Luk. 19.3. short, curt, and strict, though withal full, and clear: And indeed sententiousness, not loquacity, in serious Theology, is to be preferred.— 
.
His skill was somewhat choyce in searching, and springing the mine of an intricate, obscure scripture, sparing no devotion, or Logick, til he had found out the right veine, where the treasure lay hid. And, in this respect, he hath been heard to say, that he would [warily] adventure to start the hare with any man; which done, a common in∣genuity may finde scope enough to pursue a text.Homer II. .

For the method, it's for the Chapters them∣selves, at large, Analytical; for the Practical ob∣servations thence deduced, synthetical; disposed for the best advantage, both of the memories, and hearts of those plain people that heard him.
The scope is, to discover Gods judgments in the causes; and withal, to hold forth means of prevention, or removal, in their due applicati∣on.
Having, on these, and the like considerations, pondered in my secret thoughts the usefullness of this work, I was fully purposed to prepare it for the press, and to let it see the light. Yet, because (amidst so great Atheism abroad, that now, as Jacob did Esau, hath taken the generalIsa. 6.10. infatua∣tion by theGen. 25.26. heel; insomuch, that the2 Tim. 3.5. power of godliness being long since lost, now, the very outward form is hardly to be found;) Foggy, and (wo is me!) too much uncontrolled erroursMundus se∣nescens patitur phantasias; Gerson. in this dotage of the world; arising like thoseRev. 9.3. Locusts out of the bottomless pit, have damp'd the an∣cient zeal, and, as theJon. 4.7. worm in Jonah's gourd, eaten out the very sap, and vigor of allmost all right holiness:
For this cause, a patron must of necessity be sought to perfect this helpless posthume from the injuries of anAct. 2.40. & Philip. 2.15. untoward generation. And, to shelter a [pious] discourse, I quickly knew where to finde one, a very neer neighbour; even your self, (most worthy Sir:) A gentleman, 'twixt whom, and the Authour, there did ever pass, con∣stanly,
so dear and affectionate a reciprocati∣on of most cordial, and religious respects. I can∣not but well hope from so much candor, and gra∣vitie, for a courteous entertainment of a suitor that comes thus [in his name] to Bradfield. And the rather, for that I have been informed of your Noble acknowledgments, that Doctor Sclater's ministry was, under God, one of the [first] means of your calling, at least, of your firmer establishment, in your first, right wayes of truth, and godliness; insomuch, that I begin to think, on a sudden, you might personally be an Auditor of some of these very Sermons, the sum where∣of I now crave the favour to present you with: nor do I question, but that your inward experience of the comforts ofThe work of the Lord was precious in those dayes, as 1 Sam. 3.1. See p. 79. of this book. those dayes, occasioneth, even yet, (whereof I rejoyce) so daily mention, and so honourable a commemoration of his name, at your refections, deambulations, confe∣rences.
How willingly (had I any tolerable skill in the musick of Oratory) could I now strike the sweet strings, and sound the pleasant Notes of your due prayses; the garlands whereof about your Tem∣ples, like the trees of Alcinous, are ever green, and not suffered to flag or wither through any defect of the radical moysture of Divine graces. But herein, me-thinks, I am as in a straite betwixt two; affraid, on the one side, of the Scilla of mine own insufficiencies; your perfections, as if in the very Tropick of Cancer, are advanced to so great an height, that if I should speak of them in
a magnificent style, they wouldDe quo non possum ità mag∣nifice loqui, id virtus quia superettua; Terent. surmount the reach of my expressions: this were an alloy for an abler pen: on the other side, of the Charyb∣dis, ofLaudator qua∣si, adulator. . flattery, especially when as your piety is i cloathed with so greatVir justus quantò perfecti∣or efficitur, tan∣tò in oculis suis minuitur. Peraldus, tom. 2. c. 5. De vir∣tut. & vitiis. humility; that as those who live under the Equinoctial, even at noon-day, have no shadowes at all; so, in the ve∣ry Meridian of your Sanctity, you decline your [own,] that God may have [his] glory: quàm magnum est nolle laudari, & esse laudabilem? Sene-
Yet, sith the self-depressing2 Chro. 12.11. Apostle would ca. have his Converts to minde, , due praise, Phil. 4.8. and asGranatens. tom. 3. conc. de Temp. p. 460. vol. 8. Granado observes, in praising of good men, we, in them, honour the God of such men, when we shew forth the ver∣tues, or praises of him who hath called them: and though an humble man be shye of giving eu∣logies of2 Cor. 10.18. himself; yet, as St. Clement, Eph. 3.8. in his Epistle to the Corinthians (a genuine piece of an∣tiquity lately come to our hands) hath it, , let him permit another to give testimony of him; this kinde of laudation being (saith a reverendDavenant. exposit. in Co∣loss. c. 2. v. 5. p. 170. confer p. 84. of this book. Bishop) but an artificial, or effectual perswasion to persevere in things all∣ready praise-worthy; thereby, withal, to testifie good affection, and to hold out the lamp of their vertuous lives unto others: In this case, (as Au∣stin speaks in the matter of commending the dead) nec laudantem adulatio movet, nec laudatum tentat elatio, neither adulation may justly be imputed to the praiser, nor Elation to the praised.p Ecclus. 43.7. 1 Pet. 5.5. t 1 Pet. 2.9. S. Clemens, Epist. ad Co∣rinth. p. 50. edit. Oxon. 1633.

And, on this Apology, I must acqaint the world, that my Rhetorick would here fail me, before matter, theInopem me copia fecit. copiousness whereof hath brought upon me a penury of language, to embellish it: However, sith my self have seldom departed from you, without some improvement of Holiness by you, I cannot forbear to break my box of prayses, as of so much spikenard, to perfume the Age with the mention of your Vertues; and that, if not in proportion to yourQuod si dig∣na tuâ minim est mea pagina laude, At vo∣luisse sat est— Lucan. in pane∣gyr. ad Calpurn. Pisonem. merit, yet in some mea∣sure to mine own desires.
Loe! from a living root of worthiness, there have sprang forth from you, by an happy vegera∣tion, various branches of very eximious qua∣lifications, being made conspicuous, and to be seen.

1. In Artificial inventions.
2. In Civil moralities.
3. Oeconomical decorum's.
4. In Political administrations. And (as the crown and glory of all these.)
5. In religious devotion.

For the first, so singular in the universality of them, as if the Universal had been but one singular: as to another Bezaleel, a spirit is given you toExod. 31.3.4. devise cunning works, in all manner of workman∣ship; and as some Christian Archimedes, no engine, or instrument, for contrivance, or motion, exceeds your skill: even the most ex∣travagant Element, the water, is taught, to make melody, yea repast, and delight for most of the senses: Yet all this, as being far beneath your




better thoughts, is made the business but of your spare, succisive houres; and regarded only as your recreations.
 For the second, the whole train of Moral Ver∣tues, as those Virgins did on the Kings daughter, deck't in their fairest ornaments, attend you; such are Temperance, Sobriety, Justice, affability, &c.
 For the third, as God hath given youPsal. 127, 128. fruitful vines, so your children stand, like Olive plants, about your table; your quiver is become full of those arrows, which the Lords is pleased to account his own heritage, and his reward: all these, with your houshold, as if by a kinde of sacred  Abraham's religiousness had, indeed, transmigrat∣ed into your breast, you commandGen. 18.19. to keep the way of the Lord; and they all again, by behold∣ing yourColoss. 2.5. orderly, and constant ensample, are, as it were, piously charmed into a zealousJoh. 8.39. As Ulysses of his family, to quip Ajax, neque in his quisquam dam∣natus, & exul. imi∣tation, like those twelve tribes, Act. 26.7. Instant∣ly serving God, day and night: And, which is very remarkable, (as being indeed the very Diamond set in the ring of Gods favours on you) in so fair a Pomegranate, no one grain is found tainted: No one, among so numerous an offspring, debauched. He, I am sure, who survives as your first-bornMr. William Walrond. son, and is, as Jacob said of Reuben, yourGen. 49.2. strength, the honour of his house, and the hopes of his Country, a gentleman of elegant learning, refined parts, and of eminent sanctity, well leades the way to all the rest; so that I may hither apply what that Heroick Poet sang of these golden branchesz Psal. 45.14.
pluck'd off; if the one failed, another sprang up forthwith in the same place. —Virgil. Aen. 6. Uno avulso, non deficit alter. 
Aureus, & simili frondescit virga metallo.
For the fourth; you have been known, for ma∣ny yeers past, to resemble, in your practice,Exod. 18.21. Je∣thro's magistrate, which hath made you long a stay to these parts; and as Horod wasMar. 6.20. afraid of John Baptist, for his holiness, so hath lewdness been, of your justice; as, on the other side, religi∣on found both countenance, and encouragement from you: but, that which my self (and as I be∣lieve, with me, many others) have with some spe∣cialty, noticed, is; that, as you haveEccles. 9.2. feared an oath your self, so to persons whom you have dis∣covered tender, ignorant, or rash, you have for∣born to load them with a publique oath: which cautelousness if some had equally observed, many consciences had, probably, been less guilty of the breach of theExod. 20.7. third Commandment; and the land notJer. 23.10. mourned so long because of unlawful, and (alas! how often?) contradictory swearing.
 The last, which as King Lemuel's daughterProv. 31.29. ex∣celleth all the former, is your religious devotion: he that runs may read this, in your awful, yet se∣reneCujus vultum nec fuscavit maeror, nec levi∣gavit risus, Bern. de S. Martino. countenance, the clear index of a mortifi∣ed soul; God hath poured upon you a choyce spirit ofZech. 12.10. supplications; you are, in the scriptures, anAct. 18.24. Apollos; to the2 Tim. 3.17.2 Pet. 1.21. men of God, faithful ministers, a q Gaius; of such guests your hospitality is seldom unfurnished: A bemoaner, no fomenter of the great divisions of the times, for which, (ah me!) as
of old, for those of Reuben, there are so great thoughts and impressions of heart: an honourer, promoter, and a strict observer of Gods publique ordinances;Psal. 122.1. glad of occasions to frequent theHeb. 10.25. Assemblies; and not only so, [for an example] to beMatth. 5.16. seen; but yourMatth. 6.6. closset is a Temple for Divinity. And now also, as Isaac had hisGen. 24.63. field, so have you your garden of delight, a retreate for holy meditations; that so, as Enoch, in devout soliloquy's, you mightGen. 5.24. walk, and converse with God; having yourPhil. 3.20. conversation in Heaven, even whilest you are onMatth. 6.10. earth; as some Christian Sci∣pio, nunquàm minùs solus, quàm cum solus, being never less alone, then when you are alone: And, as the richest Carbuncles shine best in varied, or duskish lights; so doth your sanctimony, in an age so over-cast with black, and pitchy clouds of all variety of most fowl enormities; as it more com∣mended Noah to be righteous before God, even in that veryGen. 7.1. generation, when sin as a deluge, had over-flown the whole world, and [all] flesh had cor∣rupted his way upon the earth, Gen. 6.12. But, this is so well known to all, that I may seem to do a wrong, in making them onlie as my own private notices.
To conclude; (for I fear my self to have ex∣ceeded the measure of an Epistle:) thus adorned with Gods graces, it shall be your comfort, yea your glory, to abound more and more; and though, (as you once told me your self) you are not for thePhil. 3.9. righteousness of works; yet persist still (I be∣seech you) in the works of righteousness: Put on these; they shall be, not only as white rayment tor Judg. 5.15. b 1 Thess. 4.1. 1 Cor. 15.58. d 1 Pet. 2.12. Jam. 3.13.
Rev 3.18.cloath you; but also , as the [arRom. 13.12. mour] of light, even armour of proofe, to de∣fend, and guard you against the [hurt] of what∣soever evil may assault you; albeit they are not, as Bernard truly, Causa Regnandi, the cause of reigning; notwithstanding you shall finde them to be, via regni, theJam. 2.18. evidences of your Faith, theEph. 1.4. Tit. 2.14. 2 Pet. 1.10. fruites of your Election, and theEph. 2.10. way ordain∣ed of God to walk directly in, to the Kingdom of Heaven: To the full fruition of which kingdom, that you may full of dayes, and in a good old age, accompanyed with a lively faith, and a clear con∣science, be advanced; (desiring withal the favour of your Hereditary respects,) is, and shall be theCol. 4.12. fervent prayer of, Sir,g Estius, ad Rom. 13.12. h 1 Pet. 3.13.  Isa. 26.12.

From my study in Collompton, Sept. 1. 1648.
