


SIR,
I See among other Malefactors, many poor old Women convented before you for working of Miracles, otherwise called Witchcraft; and therefore I thought You also a meet person to whom I might commend my Book. And here I have occasion to speak of your sincere administration of Justice, and of your dexterity, discretion, charge and travel employed in that behalf, whereof I am oculatus testis. How∣beit I had rather refer the Reader to common fame, and their own eyes and ears, to be satisfied; then to send them to a Stationers shop, where many times lyes are vendible, and truth contemptible. For I being of your house, of your name, and of your blood; my foot being under your table, my hand in your dish, or rather in your purse, might be thought to flatter you in that, wherein (I know) I should rather offend you than please you. And what need I curry-favour with my most assured Friend? And if I should only publish those virtues (though they be many) which give me special occasion to exhibit this my travel unto you, I should do as a Painter, that describeth the foot of a notable personage, and leaveth all the best features in his body untouched.
I therefore (at this time) do only desire you to consider of my report, concerning the evidence that is commonly brought before you against them. See first whether the Evidence be not frivolous, and whether the proofs brought against them be not incredible, consisting of guesses, presumptions, and impossibilities contrary to Reason, Scripture, and Nature. See also what persons cemplain upon them, whether they be not of the basest, the unwisest, and most faithless kind of people. Also may it please you to weigh what accusations and crimes they lay to their charge: namely, She was at my house of late: She would have had a pot of Milk, she departed in a chafe because she had it not; she railed, she cursed, she mumbled and whispered; and finally, she said, She would be even with me: and soon after my Child, my Cow, my Sow, or my Pullet dyed, or was strangely taken: Nay (if it please your Worship) I have further proof; I was with a wise Woman, and she told me I had an ill neighbour, and that she would come to my house ere it were long, and so did she; and that she had a mark about her wast, and so had she: and God forgive me, my stomach hath gone against her a great while. Her Mother before her was counted a Witch; she hath been beaten and scratched by the face till blood was drawn upon her, because she hath been suspected, and afterwards some of those persons were said to amend. These are the certainties that I hear in their evidences.
Note also, how easily they may be brought to confess that which they never did, nor lyeth in the power of Man to do: and then see whether I have cause to write as I do. Further, if you shall see that Infidelity, Popery, and many other manifest Heresies be backed and shouldered, and their professors animated and heartened, by yielding to creatures such infinite power, as is wrested out of Gods hand, and at∣tributed to Witches: Finally, if you shall preceive that I have faithfully and truly delivered and set down the condition and state of the Witch, and also of the Witchmonger, and have confuted by Reason and Law, and by the Word of God it self,

all mine abversaries Objections and Arguments; then let me have your countenance against them that maliciously oppose themselves against me.
My greatest adversaries are young ignorance and old custom. For what folly soever tract of time hath fostered, it is so superstitiously pursued of some, as though no Error could be acquainted with custom, But if the Law of Nations would joyn with such custom, to the maintenance of Ignorance, and to the suppressing of Knowledge, the civilest Countrey in the World would soon become barbarous, &c. For as knowledge and time discovereth Errors, so do superstition and ignorance in time breed them. And concerning the opinions of such, as wish that Ignorance should rather be maintained, than Knowledge busily searched for, because thereby offence may grow:John 5. Prov. 15.1. I answer, that we are commanded by Christ himself to search for Knowledge: For, it is the Kings honour (as Solomon saith) to search out a thing.
Aristotle said to Alexander, That a mind well furnished, was more beautiful than a body richly arrayed. What can be more odious to Man, or offensive to God, than Ignorance;Act. 3. Prov. 9. for, through ignorance the Jews did put Christ to death. Which igno∣rance whosoever forsaketh, is promised life everlasting: and therefore among Christians it should be abhorred above all other things. For even as when we wrestle in the dark, we tumble in the mire, &c. so when we see not the Truth, we wallow in Errors. A blind man may seek long in the rushes ere he find a needle; and as soon is a doubt discussed by Ignorance. Finally, truth is no sooner found out in ignorance, then a sweet savor in a dunghill. And if they will allow men knowledge, and give them no leave to use it, men were much better be without it than have it:Matth. 25. Matth. 5. Luk. 8. For it is, as to have a talent, and to hide it under the earth; or, to put a candle under a bushel: or as, to have a ship, and to let her lie alwayes in the dock: which thing how profitable it is, I can say somewhat by experience.
But hereof I need say no more, for every may seeth, that none can be happy who knoweth not what felicity meaneth: For, what availeth it to have riches, and not to have the use thereof? Truly the Heathen herein deserved more com∣mendation than many Christians; for they spared no pain, no cost, nor travel to attain to Knowledge. Pythagoras travelled from Thamus to Aegypt, and after∣wards into Crete and Lacedaemonia: and Plato out of Athens into Italy and Aegypt, and all to find out hidden secrets and knowledge; which when a man hath, he seemeth to be separated from mortality. For pretious stones, and all other creatures of what value soever, are but counterfeits to this jewel; they are mortal, corruptible, and inconstant; this is immortal, pure and certain. Wherefore if I have searched and found out any good thing, that ignorance and time hath smothered, the same I commend unto you: to whom though I owe all that I have, yet am I bold to make others partakers with you in this poor gift.

