



MY LORD,
IT cannot but be known to your Lordship (being so full and rich a Magazine of all Learning, and Elo∣quence) that the two main1 King. 7.21. Pillars, which as Ja∣chin and Boaz in Solo¦mon's Temple, do support a Church and Com¦mon-wealth, areEph. 4.12. Ministery andTi. 3.1. Magi∣stracy; the one upholding Religion, and Divine Worship; the othr, Order, and Civil Justice: Happy is that people which is inPs. 144.15 such a case, where both of these doe not as those twins within RebeccaGen. 25.22 struggle together, but rather as Righteousnesse and Peace sweetly
Psa. 85.10. embrace, and kisse each other: It's very re∣markable in Holy Writ, how the Spirit ofEph. 4.3, 4. Ʋnity (to ingage, no doubt, an harmonious accord between them) hath been pleased to denominate the persons1 Tim. 1.11. intrusted with either1 Tim. 3.1. Office, by one and the same name, styling them , PublickRom. 15.16. 1 Cor. 3.5. & Rom. 13.4. Ministers of God for good; the one acting as Stewards of the1 Cor. 4.1. Mysteries of God; the other as Dispensers of Righteousnesse andAmes 5.24 Judgement unto men; Both by Gods ownRom. 10.15. sending, andRom. 13.1. appoint∣ment: And methinks, the serious meditation of this their so sacred institution, might power∣fully put to1 Pet. 2.15. silnce the murmurings whether of2 Tim. 3 4 heady sons of1 Sā. 10.27. Belial (impatient even of theMatt. 11.30. easiestThe word  Belial is of  non &  jugum, id est absque juge. Hieren. yoke of the Lord Christ) against them, or the repinings of other Christians not well informed, or mistaken about either: Yea, indeed, it might prove a potent argument to1 Thess. 5.13. . esteem, orHeb. 13.17. obey the one, and to beTit. 3.1. subject unto the other, even forRom. 13.5. conscience of God. I can assure your Lordship, that those beams of encouragement (seconded also by that learned and godlyMy Lord Ed. Atkins one of the Justices of the Court of Commō pleas. Judge then in the Westerne Com∣mission with you) darted, and with so chearing a diffusion displayed from your splendor, as from
a bright star of the greater magnitude, upon worthy Ministers, whom you have professed to reverence, even for their1 The. 5.13. work sake, owning them (in your solid, religious, and elegant Charges given upon the publick Bench of Ju∣dicature) under the title of The Lords2 Cor. 5.20. Ambassadors, holding such as are found1 Tim. 1.12. Faithfull, as the Philippians did Epaphrodi∣tus, inPhil. 2.29. reputation; say those beams, by a sweet reflexion, and influence, so warmed the breasts, and revived the drooping spirits of the godly Ministers, that the mention thereof proveth as an amulet, or even as an  against all present misapprehensions, or future disconsolations: It is that which shall welcome your approach whithersoever Providence may direct your Judiciary Circuit, and embalme your Name with Honour, the fragrant odour whereof, shall be resented with a pious, and gladsome Commemoration in following gene∣rations.
How willingly could I now wish my selfe a Chrysostome, or a Nazianzen, some Thu∣cydides, or Cicero, yea the Quintessence of all their Oratory united into one, and that as by some Pythagoricall  transmigrated
into my breast, that so I might but in some measure expresse (it being a skill beyond Apelles himselfe graphically and fully to de∣lineate) your eximious endowments and per∣fections, which render you first a compleat Christian, and so by far the better and more accomplished Magistrate.
Should I mention your Ethicks, or Morall part, if Plato, Aristotle, or the whole Chorus of the most refined Philosophers had lived in your dayes, your practise might have given them exact rules for all their descriptions, or characters of the Vertues; or if we look unto what is any way perfect in them, there needs no better Comment on them than your practise, in Justice, Temperance, Liberality, Mansue∣tude, and that Architectonicall vertue, which mainly steers all (for which also Sergius Paulus a governor is commnded in Scripture)Act. 13.7. Prudence.
In your Theologicall or religious part, as is recorded of Cornelius, , you are aAct. 10.2. Devout man, one that feareth God with all your house, a lover and frequenter of all Gods publick Ordinances, giving much Almes to the people, and praying to God
alway; your retinue also, and attendants qua∣lified after the perfect Canon of Scripture, withPs. 101.6, 7. truth,Tit. 2.10. fidelity, andEphes. 6.5, 6, 7. Col. 3.22, 23. single-heartedTit. 2.9. obedience, and all sobriety.
In your Noble profession, a Promptuary of the laws, a learnedAct. 5.31. Gamaliel had in singular reputation; in the administration of Justice2 Sam. 23.3. upright, andDeut. 1.17. impartiall, and where is a meet Subject capable, full of clemency, bowells, and indulgence: A terror to none but to the evill, givingRom. 13.3. praise and encouragement to every good man and work.
All which considered, How can I but excec∣dingly congratulate unto my self the so unex∣pected Happinesse of your Lordships favour, and countenance! especially when I meditate the occasion thereof to have proceeded from your candid approbation of these my weake endeavours shewn in this and some other Ser∣mons, which you were pleased to desire (where as you might have commanded it) to the Presse: The subject of it was seasonable, I hope, for that occasion, and generally usefull for these times, intended as a Preservative against the growing malady of this corrupt age, Atheisin; Being straitned by the time, and your important
businesse ensuing, this copious Theam, as a Camell passing through a needles eye, was compendiated into a narrow compass: If your Lordship doe look upon it as in it self, it is too mean a present for your acceptation, but if on the affectionate Heart wherewith it is tendred to your Patronage, you may judg it a great one: It's sometimes as Noble to accept small things as to conferre great: such as it is, it pro∣strates it selfe at your feet, beseeching an entertainment, in finding whereof, his De∣votions shall bee enlarged for your blisse, Who is

