



IN-so-much as I know that your Lordship is by nature wholly in∣clined, and in purpose earnestly bent to relieve the poor, and that not onely with hospitality and almes, but by divers other de∣vises and waies tending to their comfort, having (as it were) framed and set your self to the help and maintenance of their estate, as appeareth by your charge and travell in that behalf. Whereas also you have a speciall care for the sup∣porting of their right, and redressing of their wrongs, as neither despising their calamity, nor yet forgetting their complaint, seeking all means for their amendment, and for the reformation of their disorders, even as a very father to the poor. Finally, for that I am a poor member of that Common-wealth where your Lordship is a principall person; I thought this my travell, in the behalf of the poor, the aged, and the simple, might be very fitly com∣mended unto you: for a weak house requireth a strong stay. In which respect I give God thanks, that hath raised up unto me so mighty a friend for

them as your Lordship is, who in our laws have such knowledge, in government such discretion, in these causes such experience, and in the Com∣mon-wealth such authority; and never the lesse vouchsafe to descend to the consideration of these base and inferior matters, which minister more care and trouble, than worldly estimation.
And insomuch as your Lordship knoweth, or ra∣ther excerciseth the office of a Judge, whose part it is to hear with courtesie, and to determine with e∣quity; it cannot but be apparent unto you, that when punishment exceedeth the fault, it is rather to be thought vengeance than correction. In which respect I know you spend more time and tra∣vell in the conversion and reformation, than in the subversion and confusion of offenders, as being well pleased to augment your own private pains, to the end you may diminish their publike smart. For in truth, that Common-wealth remaineth in wofull state, where fetters and halters bear more sway than mercy and due compassion.
Howbeit, it is naturall to unnaturall people, and peculiar unto witchmongers, to pursue the poor, to accuse the simple, and to kill the innocent; supply∣ing in rigor and malice towards others, that which they themselves want in proof and discretion, or the other in offence or occasion. But as a cruel heart and an honest minde do seldome meet and feed to∣gether in a dish; so a discreet & merciful Magistrate, and a happy Common-wealth cannot be separated asunder. How much then are we bound to God, who hath given us a Queen, that of justice is not on∣ly the very perfect image and patern, but also of mercy and clemency (under God) the meer fountain and

body it self? Insomuch as they which hunt most af∣ter bloud in these daies, have least authority to shed it. Moreover, sith I see that in cases where lenity might be noisom, and punishment wholsom to the com∣mon-wealth; there no respect of person can move you, no authority can abash you, no fear, no threats can daunt you in performing the duty of Justice.
In that respect again I find your Lordship a fit person to judge & look upon this present Treatise. Wherein I will bring before you, as it were to the bar, two sorts of most arrogant and wicked people, the first challenging to themselves, the second attri∣buting unto others, that power which only apper∣teineth to God,Apo. 4.11. Rom 8. Acts 5. Apo. 2. Luk. 16. Dan. 2. & 28. & 47.: Psalme 72. & 136. Jeremy 5. Job 5. & 36. Samuel 12. 1 Reg. 8. 2 Reg 3. Isaiah. 5. Zac. 10. & 14. Amos. 4.7. Job 1. Isaith. 42.8. who onely is the Creator of all things, who onely searcheth the heart and reines, who onely knoweth our imaginations and thoughts, who onely openeth all secrets, who onely worketh great wonders, who onely hath power to raise up and cast down; who onely maketh thunder, lightning, rain, tempests, and restraineth them at his pleasure; who onely sendeth life and death, sicknesse and health, wealth and wo; who neither giveth nor lendeth his glory to any creature.
And therfore, that which grieveth me to the bot∣tom of my heart, is that these witchmongers cannot be content to wrest out of Gods hand his almighty power, & keep it themselvs, or leav it with a witch: but that, when by drift of argument they are made to lay down the bucklers, they yield them up to the divil, or at the least pray aide of him, as though the rains of all mens lives and actions were committed into his hand; and that he sat at the stern, to guide & direct the course of the whole world, imputing unto him power & ability enough to do as great things, and as strange miracles as ever Christ did.
But the doctors of this supernatural doctrine say

sometimes, that the witch doth all these things by vertue of her charms; sometimes that a spiritual, sometimes that a corporal devil doth accomplish it; sometimes they say that the devil doth but make the witch beleeve she doth that which he himselfe hath wrought, sometimes that the devil seemeth to do that by compulsion, which he doth most willing∣ly. Finally, the writers hereupon are so eloquent, & full of variety; that somtimes they write that the de∣vil doth all this by Gods permission only; somtimes by his licence, sometimes by his appointment: so as (in effect and truth) not the devil, but the high and mighty King of kings, and Lord of hosts, even God himself, should this way be made obedient and ser∣vile to obey and perform the will & commandment of a malicious old witch, & miraculously to answer her appetite, as well in every trifling vanity, as in most horrible executions; as the revenger of a doting old womans imagined wrongs, to the destruction of many innocent children, and as a supporter of her passions, to the undoing of many a poor soul. And I see not, but a witch may as well inchant, when she will; as a lier may lie when he list: and so should we possesse nothing, but by a witches licence and permission.
And now forsooth it is brought to this point, that all devils, which were wont to be spiritual, may at their pleasure become corporal, and so shew them∣selves familiarly to witches and conjurors, and to none other, and by them only may be made tame, and kept in a box, &c. So as a malicious old woman may command her devil to plague her neighbor: & he is afflicted in manner & form as she desireth. But then cometh another witch, and she biddeth her de∣vil help, and he healeth the same party. So as they

make it a kingdome divided in it self, and therefore I trust it will not long endure, but will shortly be o∣verthrown, according to the words of our Saviour, Omne regnum in se divisum desolabitur, Every king∣dome divided in it self shall be desolate.
And although some say that the devil is the witches instrument, to bring her purposes and practises to passe: yet others say that she is his instrument, to ex∣ecute his pleasure in any thing, and therefore to be executed. But then (methinks) she should be inju∣riously dealt withall, and put to death for anothers offence: for actions are not judged by instrument∣al causes; neither doth the end and purpose of that which is done, depend upon the mean instrument. Finally, if the witch do it not, why should the witch die for it? But they say that witches are perswad∣ed and think, that they do indeed those mischifs; & have a will to perform that which the devil commit∣teth; and that therefore they are worthy to dy. By which reason ev'ry one should be executed, that wi∣sheth evil to his neighbor, &c. But if the will should be punished by man, according to the offence against God, we should be driven by thousands at once to the slauterhouse or butchery.Proverbs 5. For whosoever loath∣eth correction shall die. And who should escape ex∣ecution, if this lothsomnesse (I say) should extend to death by the civil lawes. Also the reward of sin is death. Howbeit, every one that sinneth, is not to be put to death by the Magistrate. But my Lord it shall be proved in my book, and your Lordship shall trie it to be true, as well here at home in your native country, as also abrode in your several circuits, that (besides them that be Veneficae, which are plaine poi∣soners) there will be found among our witches on∣ly two sorts; the one sort being such by imputation, as

so thought of by others (and these are abused, and not abusors) the other by acceptation, as being wil∣ling so to be accounted & these be meer couseners.
Insti. lib. 5. cap. 8. sect. 6. Item upon Deu. c. 18.Calvine treating of these magicians, calleth them couseners, saying, that they use their juggling knacks only to amase or abuse the people; or else for fame: but he might rather have said for gain. Erastus him∣self,Lib. de lamiis, page 5. being a principal writer in the behalf of witches omnipotency, is forced to confes, that these Greek words , are most commoly put for illusion false packing, cousenage, fraud, knavery and de∣ceipt: & is further driven to say, that in ancient time, the learned were not so blockish, as not to see that the promises of magicians and inchanters were false, and nothing else but knavery, cousenage & old wives fa∣bles; & yet defendeth he their flying in the aire, their transferring of corn or gras from one field to another, &c.
But as Erastus disagreeth herein with himself and his friends: so is there no agreement among any of those writers, but only in cruelties, absurdities & im∣possibilies. And these (my Lord) that fall into so mani∣fest contradictions, and into such absurd assevera∣tions, are not of the inferior sort of writers; neither are they all papists, but men of such account, as whose names give more credit to their cause, then their writings. In whose behalfe I am sorry, and partly for reverence suppress their fondest errors & foulest ab∣surdities; dealing specially with them that most con∣tend in cruelty, whose feet are swift to shed blood,Isaiah 59.7. Rom. 3.15. Eccles. 27.5. Prov. 1.16. Jeremy 2.34. Psal. 39.15. Isaiah 33.15. striving (as Iesus the son of Sirach saith) & hasting (as Solomon the son of David saith) to pour out the blood of the In∣nocent; whose heat against these poor wretches cannot be allaied with any other liquor then blood. And therfore I fear that under their wings will be found the blood of the souls of the poor, at that day, when the Lord shall say,

Depart from me ye bloud-thirsty men.
And because I know your Lordship will take no coun∣cel against innocent bloud, but rather suppres them that seek to imbrew their hands therein, I have made choise to open their case to you, & to lay their miserable calami∣ty before your feet: following herein the advise of that learned man Brentius, who saith; Si quis admonuerit Ma∣gistratum, e in miseras illas mulierculas saeviat,In epistola a Jo. Wier. eum ego arbitror divinitus excitatum, that is, If any admonish the Magistrate not to deale too hardly with these miserable wretches, that are called witches, I think him a good in∣strument raised up for this purpose by God himself.
But it will perchance be said by witchmongers; to wit, by such as attribut to witches the power which appertaineth to God only, that I have made choise of your Lordship to be a Patrone to this my book; be∣cause I think you favor mine opinions, and by that means may the more freely publish any error or con∣ceit of mine own, which should rather be warranted by your Lordships authority, then by the word of God, or by sufficient argument. But I protest the contra∣ry, and by these presents I renounce all protection, and despise all friendship that might serve to help towards the suppressing or supplanting of truth: knowing also that your Lordship is far from allowing any injury done unto man; much more an enemy to them that go about to dishonor God, or to embeazel the title of his immortal glory. But because I know you to be perspicuous, and able to see down into the depth and bottome of causes, & are not to be carried away with the vain perswasion or superstition either of man, custome, time or multitude. but moved with the authority of truth only: I crave your countenance herein, even so far forth, & no further, then the law of God, the law of nature, the lawe of this land, & the

rule of reason shall require. Neither do I treat for these poore people any otherwise, but so, as with one hand you may sustaine the good, and with the other suppresse the evill: wherein you shall be thought a father to orphanes, an advocate to wi∣dowes, a guide to the blind, a stay to the lame, a comfort & countenance to the honest, a scourge and terror to the wicked.
Thus farre I have been bold to use your Lordships patience, being offended with my self, that I could not in brevity utter such matter as I have delivered amply: whereby (I confesse) occasion of tediousnesse might be ministred, were it not that your great gra∣vity joined with your singular constancy in reading and judging be means of the contrary. And I wish e∣ven with all my heart, that I could make people conceive the substance of my writing, and not to misconstrue any part of my meaning. Then doubt∣les would I perswade my self, that the company of witchmongers, &c. being once decreased, the num∣ber also of witches, &c. would soon be diminished. But true be the words of the Poet,
Haudquaquam poteris sortirier omnia olus,
Námque aliis divi bello pollere dederunt,
Huic saltandi artem, voce huic cytharáqne canendi:
Rursum alii inservit sagax in pectore magnus
Iupiter ingenium, &c.
And therefore as doubtfull to prevaile by perswading  though I have reason and common sense on my side; I rest upon earnest wishing; namely, to all people an absolute trust in God the creator, and not in creatures, which is to make flesh our arme: that God may have his due honour, which by the undutifulnesse of many is turned into dishonour, and lesse cause of offence and error given by common received evil example. And to your Lordship I wish, as increase of onour, so continuance of good health, and happy daies.

