


HAving found out two such civil Magistrates, as for direction of judgment, and for ordering matters concerning Justice in this Commonwealth (in my poor opinion) are very singular persons, who (I hope) will accept of my good will, and examine my book by their experience, as unto whom the matter therein contained doth greatly appertain: I have now again considered of two other points; namely, Divinity and Philosophy, whereupon the ground-work of my book is laid. Wherein although I know them to be very sufficiently informed, yet doth not the judgment and censure of those causes so properly appertain to them as unto you, whose fame therein hath gotten preeminence above all others that I know of your callings: and in that respect I am bold to joyn you with them, being all good neighbours together in this Common-wealth, and loving friends unto me. I do not present this unto you, be∣cause it is meet for you; but for that you are meet for it (I mean) to judge upon it, to defend it, and if need be to correct it; knowing that you have learned of that grave Councellor Cato, Not to shame or discountenance any body. For if I thought you as ready, as able, to discharge me from mine insufficiency; I should not have been hasty (knowing your learning) to have written unto you: but if I should be abashed to write to you, I should shew my self ignorant of your courtesie.
I know mine own weakness, which if it have been able to maintain this argument, the cause is the stronger. Eloquent words may please the ears, but sufficient matter perswadeth the heart. So as if I exhibit wholesome drink (though it be small) in a terrene dish with a faithful hand, I hope it will be as well accepted, as strong wine offered in a silver bowl with a flattering heart. And surely it is a point of great liberality to receive a small thing thankfully, as to give and distribute great and costly gifts bountifully: for there is more supplyed with courteous answers than with rich rewards. The tyrant Dionysius was not so hated for his tyranny, as for his churlish and strange behaviour. Among the poor Israelites sacrifices, God was satisfied with the tenth part of an Ephah of flour, so as it were fine and good. Christ liked well of the poor widows mite. Lewis of France accepted a Rape-root of clownish Conan. Cyrus vouchsafed to drink a cup of cold water cut of the hand of poor Sinaetes: and so it may please you to accept this simple book at my hands, which I faithfully exhibit unto you, not knowing your opinions to meet with mine: but knowing your learning and judgment to be able as well to correct me where I speak herein unskilfully, as others when they speak hereof maliciously.
Some be such dogs as they will barke at my writings, whether I maintain or refute this argument: as Diogenes snarled both at the Rhodians and at the Lacedaemonians: at the one, because they were brave; at the other, because they were not brave. Homer himself could not avoid reproachful speeches. I am sure that they which never studied to learn any good thing, will study to find faults hereat. I for my part fear not these wars, nor all the adversaries I have; were it not for certain cowards, who (I know) will come behind my back and bite me.
But now to the matter. My question is not (as many fondly suppose) Whether there be Witches, or nay? but, Whether they can do such miraculous works as are imputed unto them? Good Master Dean, is it possible for a man to break his fast with you at Rochester, and to dine that day at Durham with Master Doctor Matthew; or can your enemy maime you, when the Ocean Sea is betwixt you? What real community is betwixt a spirit and a body? May a spiritual body become temporal at his pleasure? Or may a carnal body become invisible? Is it likely that the lives of all Princes, Ma∣gistrates, and Subjects, should depend upon the will, or rather the wish of a poor mali∣cious

doting old fool; and that power exempted from the wise, the rich, the learned, the godly? &c. Finally, is it possible for a man or woman to do any of those miracles expressed in my book, and so constantly reported by great Clerks? If you say, No; then am I sa∣tisfied. If you say, that God absolutely, or by means can accomplish all those, and many more, I go with you. But Witches may well say they can do these things, howbeit they cannot shew how they do them. If I for my part should say I could do those things, my very adversaries would say that I lyed.
O Master Archdeacon, is it not pitty, that that which is said to be done with the Al∣mighty power of the most high God, and by our Saviour his only Son Jesus Christ our Lord, should be referred to a baggage old Womans nod or wish? &c. Good Sir, is it not one manifest kind of Idolatry, for them that labour and are laden to come unto Witches to be refreshed? If Witches could help whom they are said to have made sick, I see no reason, but remedy might as well be required at their hands, as a purse demanded of him that hath stolen it. But truly it is manifold Idolatry, to ask that of a creature, which none can give but the Creator. The Papist hath some colour of Scripture to maintain his Idol of Bread; but no Jesuitical distinction can cover the Witchmongers idolatry in this behalf. Alas, I am sorry and ashamed to see how many die, that being said to be be∣witched, only seek for Magical cures, whom wholesome diet, and good medicines would have recovered. I dare assure you both, that there would be none of these cosening kind of Witches, did not Witchmongers maintain them, follow them, and believe in them and their Oracles; whereby indeed all good learning and honest arts, are over∣thrown: For these that most advance their power, and maintain the skill of these Witches, understand no part thereof; and yet being many times wise in other matters, are made fools by the most fools in the world.
Me thinks these Magical Physitians deal in the Common-wealth, much like as a certain kind of Cynical people do in the Church, whose severe sayings are accompted a∣mong some such Oracles, as may not be doubted of; who in stead of learning and autho∣rity (which they make contemptible) do feed the people with their own devices and imagi∣nations, which they prefer before all other Divinity: and labouring to erect a Church ac∣cording to their own fansies, wherein all order is condemned, and only their Magical words and curious directions advanced, they would utterly overthrow the true Church. And even as these inchanting Paracelsians abuse the people, leading them from the true or∣der of Physick to their Charms: so do these other (I say) disswade from hearkning to lear∣ning and obedience, and whisper in mens ears to teach them their Fryer-like traditions. And of this sect the chief author at this time is one Brown, a fugitive, a meet cover for such a cup: as heretofore the Anabaptists, the Arrians, and the Franciscan Fryers.
Truly not only nature, being the foundation of all perfection; but also Scripture, be∣ing the Mistress and director thereof, and of all Christianity, is beautified with know∣ledge and learning: For as nature without discipline doth naturally incline unto vani∣ties, and as it were suck up errors; so doth the word, or rather the letter of the Scripture without understanding,Rom. 2.27. 2 Cor. 3.6. not only make us devoure errors, but yieldeth us up to death and de∣struction; and therefore Paul saith, he was not a Minister of the letter, but of the spirit.
Thus have I been bold to deliver unto the world, and to you, those simple notes, reasons, and arguments, which I have devised or collected out of other Authors; which I hope shall be hurtful to none, but to my self great comfort, if it may pass with good liking and acceptation. If it fall out otherwise, I should think my pains ill imployed. For truly, in mine opinion, whosoever shall perform any thing, or attain to any knowledge; or who∣soever should travel throughout all the Nations of the world, or (if it were possible) should peep into the heavens, the consolation or admiration thereof were nothing plea∣sant unto him, unless he had liberty to impart his knowledge to his friends. Wherein, be∣cause I have made special choice of you, I hope you will read it, or at the least lay it up in your study with your other Books, among which there is none dedicated to any with more good will. And so long as you have it, it shall be unto you (upon adventure of my life) a certain Amulet, Periapt, Circle, Charm, &c. to defend you from all Inchant∣ments.

