



THis Kingdom, whereof God, your King, and Countrey have made you Keepers, as well as Preservers, cannot but see that nothing is wanting on Your Part. I do here but publish, Crier-like, the Unanimous Sence of all well-affected Protestants all over the World. Worthies, you are now engaged in a way of such Heroick Designs, as Posterity cannot but set the Stamp of Never-dying Honour upon You. Go on, and mani∣fest your Zeal for your Religion, and the Name of Christ, and he will not fail to manifest Love to your Souls. Your Acts are National and Just; Execute Judgment, and defend the Truth: Fear not the cruel Papists, nor all their barbarous Adherents: And let happen what will, say, Malo cum Christo ruere, quam cum Caesare stare; I had rather fall with Christ, then stand with Caesar. God and your King hath called You for such. Your Call is high, your Work is hard, your Difficulties many, yet Faith will carry You through all. You know why you have been born, not for your selves, but for the Benefit of many; Non sibi se, sed multorum uti∣litati esse natum.
You are our Deliverers, not only from Popish Idolatry and Su∣perstitious Foppery, but also from several other heavy insufferable Burthens. Believe it, most Noble and Renowned Worthies, all the Treasure of this World is no way comparable to your Pious and Just Designs. Yet I hold it not onely fit, but necessary, that your Liberties, Laws, and Goods, should still be precious in your sight; but be sure in point of Care, to exalt the Name of Christ (not the Pope) above your Liberties, his Gospel above all Humane Laws and Devices, and your Religion above your Lives and For∣tunes: Otherwise the Son will be angry, as well as the Father; and so great is the wrath of the Lamb, that the greatest of men cannot withstand it, Rev. 6.15, 16.

The Great Councel of Jerusalem, when they sat, exercised most part of their time in Regulating matters of Religion, and in se∣curing of it; such hath been your Endeavours, such hath been your Desires in all your Sitting. It is Ingratitude therefore in any Degrees of Men not to serve You. We acknowledge the Infinite Mercy of God in calling You together at this time, when no less then our Laws, Liberties, and Religion, lies at stake. Your Work, I confess, is Hard, and Great, but yet 'tis Honourable. Whoever would not endeavour to save his Countrey and Religion, is no more worthy to live in it, than the man that seeks the destru∣ction thereof. The Papists have, dare, and will venture our ut∣ter Ruine and Destruction; and shall not we venture as far to save our Selves and Religion? Had men but Publick Spirits they would do it. The very Heathens have so minded the Publick Interest, as that they forgot Themselves: Publius Decius, the Roman Ar∣my being brought low, rush'd into the midst of the Enemies, de∣manding Safety for his Countrey, Death for Himself, and so occa∣sioned an unexpected Victory. There is no reason therefore that your Spirits should faint, or your former Intentions slacken, in fear of the issue. You are on the Right, and on the Rising Side; and in a Work that will Improve it self: In the Work of Pre∣serving our Lives, Liberties, and Religion; in the Work of Uni∣ting all His Majesties Protestant Subjects, though the Endeavours of many are so mighty to oppose, and their Tongues so malignant to disgrace it. But while You are faithful to God, Loyal to your King, and True to your Countrey, resolve to go on in Gods Name; knowing You must pass through Evil Reports, as well as Good Reports. The Lord make all Great Mountains that lie in your way, as Plains before You: Which is and ever shall be the Prayers of

