



SIR;
THis Sermon (solid, I hope, though not polite, or trim enough, perhaps, for this age) as it was by an unexpected providence, in a solemne, and Ho∣nourable Assembly, preached at your instance; now also, upon your motion, together with the entreaties of the primest Auditors, drawne forth into a more generall view: It cannot but claime a double interest in you, both as an emi∣nent Hearer (such as your station rendred you) and as a Patron, such as its owne tenuity cannot but want: It comes to you, not that you (chiefly under so great a surfet of the Presse) need it, but that it needs you: The honour of whose worthy family and Progenitors, it hath still been to be Mecae∣nates Scholarium, and your Castle (like the old Parnas¦sus) as it were an Academy for learning, and learned men: It's written of Abel (righteous by Gods owne testimony of him) that being dead, he yet speaketh, , or,Heb. 11.4. is yet spoken of; his exemplary piety carrying with it a kinde of Vocall Oratory to perswade even the ages to come un∣to imitation, that whilest the lustre of his graces sparkle in the lives of successors, his memory cannot but be perpetuated: And long may whatsoever was eximious in our Ancestors, find still a continuation in your selfe.
But indeed, that being properly a mansSed genus, & proavos, & quae nen feci∣mus ipsi vix ea [nostra] voco—Ovid. owne in vertue, which is personall; your owne merit being (as I question not) copious, may claime a Panegyricke, as ample; to the sound of things commendable your name and actions (like Ʋnisons in Musick) answere, and (out of no long acquaintance) I ob∣serve
your modesty to adorne your endowments; it resembles shadowing in the Art of Limning, which turnes extreamly to the advantage of the Limner, by setting off the excellency of his Pensill: Yet however you delight not to be praised to your self, notwithstanding your pious ingenuity will constantly have eye unto things praise-worthy. It was a goodly sight to behold Gods Tabernacle, and Davids Palace situate together on the same Sion; so is it to see Goodnesse and Greatnesse like those living Creatures, and those wheels (inEzek. 1.19. Ezekiel) to move, and to be lift up together: When all is done, godli∣nesse is the greatest1 Tim. 6.6. gaine, and religious practice the highest1 Sam. 2.30. honour: Whilest this is your aime, your Name shall become as some precious Ointment poured out, your selfe, your vertu∣ous Consort, and all your relations, shall be blessed out of hea∣ven with the exuberancies of Gods both hands, you shall aug∣ment the reputation of your house, and the already purchased estimation of your Countrey: If my weake endeavours in this present Sermon may prove any furtherance this way, I have my desire, as, who am,
SIR, 
