



IN-so-much as I know that your Lordship is by nature wholly inclined, and in purpose earnestly bent, to relieve the Poor; and that not only with Hospitality and Alms, but by divers other devises and wayes tending to their comfort: having (as it were) framed and set your self to the help and maintenance of their Estate, as appeareth by your charge and travel in that behalf. Whereas also you have a special care for the supporting of their right, and redressing of their wrongs, as neither despising their Cala∣mity, nor yet forgetting their Complaint; seeking all means for their amendment, and for the reformation of their disorders, even as a very Father to the Poor. Finally, for that I am a poor member of that Common-wealth, where your Lordship is a principal person; I thought this my travel, in the behalf of the poor, the aged, and the simple, might be very fitly com∣mended unto you; for a weak house requireth a strong stay. In which respect I give God thanks, that hath raised up un∣to me so mighty a friend for them as your Lordship is, who in our Laws have such knowledge, in Government such discre∣tion, in these Causes such experience, and in the Common-wealth such authority; and never the less vouchsafe to descend to the consideration of these base and inferior matters, which minister more care and trouble, than worldly estimation.
And insomuch as your Lordship knoweth, or rather exer∣ciseth the office of a Judge, whose part it is to hear with cour∣tesie, and to determine with equity; it cannot but be apparent unto you, that when punishment exceedeth the fault, it is ra∣ther to be thought vengeance than correction. In which respect I know you spend more time and travel in the conversion and

reformation, than in the subversion and confusion of Offenders, as being well pleased to augment your own private pains, to the end you may diminish their publick smart. For in truth, that Common-wealth remaineth in woful state, where fetters and hal∣tars beat more sway than mercy and due compassion.
Howbeit, it is natural to unnatural people, and peculiar un∣to Witchmongers, to pursue the poor, to accuse the simple, and to kill the innocent; supplying in rigor and malice towards others, that which they themselves want in proof and discretion, or the other in offence or occasion. But as a cruel heart and an honest mind do seldom meet and feed together in a dish; so a discreet and merciful Magistrate, and a happy Common-wealth cannot be separated asunder. How much then are we bound to God who hath given us a Queen, that of Justice is not only the very per∣fect image and patern, but also of Mercy and Clemency (under God) the meer fountain and body it self? Insomuch as they which hunt most after blood in these dayes, have least authority to shed it. Moreover, sith I see that in cases where lenity might be noisome, and punishment wholesome to the Common-wealth, there no respect of person can move you, no authority can abash you, no fear, no threats can daunt you in performing the duty of Justice.
In that respect again, I find your Lordship a fit person to judge and look upon this present Treatise. Wherein I will bring before you, as it were to the bar, two sorts of most arrogant and wicked people; the first, challenging to themselves; the second, attributing unto others, That Power which only appertaineth to God:Apoc. 4.11. Rom. 8 Act. 5. Apoc. 2. Luk. 16. Dan. 2.28, 47 Psal. 72. & 136. Jerem. 5. Job 5. & 36. Sam. 12. 1 King. 8. 2 King. 3. Isai. 5. Zac. 10. & 14. Amos 4 7. Job 1. Isai. 42.8. who only is the Creator of all things, who only searcheth the heart and reins, who only knoweth our imaginations and thoughts, who only openeth all secrets, who only worketh great wonders, who only hath power to raise up and cast down, who only maketh thunder, lightning, rain, tempest, and restraineth them at his pleasure, who only sendeth life and death, sickness and health, wealth and wo; who neither give nor lendeth his glory to any creature.
And therefore, that which grieveth me to the bottom of my heart, is, that these Witchmongers cannot be content to wrest out of Gods hand his Almighty Power, and keep it themselves, or leave it with a Witch: but that, when by drift of argument they are made to lay down the bucklers, they yield them up to the Devil, or at the least pray aide of him, as though the rains of all

mens lives and actions were committed into his hand, and that he sat at the stern, to guide and direct the course of the whole World; imputing unto him power and ability enough to do as great things, and as strange Miracles, as ever Christ did.
But the Doctors of this supernatural doctrine, say some∣times, That the Witch doth all these things by vertue of her Charms; sometimes, that a Spiritual; sometimes, that a Corporal Devil doth accomplish it; sometimes they say, that the Devil doth but make the Witch believe she doth that which he himself hath wrought; sometimes, that the Devil seemeth to do that by compulsion, which he doth most willingly: Finally, the Writers hereupon are so eloquent, and full of variety, that some∣times they write, that the Devil doth all this by God's permissi∣on only; sometimes, by his licence; sometimes, by his appoint∣ment: so as (in effect and truth) not the Devil, but the high and mighty King of Kings, and Lord of hosts, even God himself, should this way be made obedient and servile to obey and per∣form the will and commandement of a malicious old Witch, and miraculously to answer her appetite, as well in every trifling vanity, as in most horrible executions; as the revenger of a do∣ting old womans imagined wrongs, to the destruction of many innocent children, and as a supporter of her passions, to the undo∣ing of many a poor soul. And I see not, but a Witch may as well inchant when she will, as a lyer may lye whey he list; and so should we possess nothing, but by a Witches licence and permission.
And now forsooth it is brought to this point, that all Devils, which were wont to be spiritual, may at their pleasure become corporal, and to shew themselves familiarly to Witches and Con∣jurors, and to none other, and by them only may be made tame, and kept in a box, &c. So as a malicious old Woman may command her Devil to plague her neighbor; and he is afflicted in manner and form as she desireth. But then cometh ano∣ther Witch, and she biddeth her Devil help, and he healeth the same party. So as they make it a kingdome divided in it self, and therefore I trust, it will not long endure, but will shortly be overthrown, according to the words of our Saviour, Omne reg∣num in se divisum desolabitur; Every kingdom divided in it self shall be desolate.
And although some say, that the Devil is the Witches instrument

to bring her purposes and practices to pass: yet others say, that she is his instrument, to execute his pleasure in any thing, and there∣fore to be executed. But then (methinks) she should be inju∣riously dealt withal, and put to death for anothers offence: for actions are not judged by instrumental causes; neither doth the end and purpose of that which is done, depend upon the mean instrument. Finally, if the Witch do it not, why should the Witch die for it? But they say, that Witches are perswaded and think, that they do indeed those mischiefs; and have a will to per∣form that which the Devil committeth, and that therefore they are worthy to die. By which reason every one should be executed, that wisheth evil to his neighbour, &c. But if the will should be punished by man, according to the offence against God, we should be driven by thousands at once to the slaughterhouse or butchery:Prov. 5. For, whosoever loatheth correction shall die. And who should escape execution, if this lothsomness (I say) should extend to death by the Civil Laws! Also, the reward of sin is death: Howbeit, every one that sinneth, is not to be put to death by the Magistrate. But, my Lord, it shall be proved in my book, and your Lordship shall try it to be true, as well here at home, in your native countrey, as also abroade in your several cir∣cuits, that (besides them that be Veneficae, which are plain Poy∣soners) there will be found among our Witches only two sorts; the one sort being such by imputation, as so thought of by others (and these are abused, and not abusers) the other by acceptation, as being willing so to be accounted, and these be meer Coseners.
Insti. lib. 5 cap. 8. sect. 6. Item upon Deut. c. 18Calvin treating of these Magicians, calleth them Coseners, say∣ing That they use their Jugling knacks only to amase or abuse the people, or else for Fame; but he might rather have said for Gain. Erastus himself,Lib. de lamiis, pag. 5. being a principal writer in the behalf of Witches omnipotency, is forced to confess, that these Greek words , are most commonly put for illusion, false-packing, cosenage, fraud, knavery, and deceit: and is further dri∣ven to say, That in ancient time, the learned were not so blockish, as not to see that the promises of Magicians and Inchanters were false, and nothing else but knavery, cosenage, and old wives fables; and yet defendeth he their flying in the air, their transferring of Corn or Grass from one field to another, &c.
But as Erastus disagreeth herein with himself and his friends: so is there no agreement among any of those Writers, but only

in cruelties, absurdities, and impossibilites. And these (my Lord) that fall into so manifest contradictions, and into such absurd asseverations, are not of the inferiour sort of Writers; neither are they all Papists, but men of such ac∣count, as whose names give more credit to their cause, then their writings. In whose behalf I am sorry, and partly for reverence suppress their fondest errors and foulest absurdities; dealing spe∣cially with them that most contend in cruelty,Isa. 59.7. Rom. 3.15. Eccles. 27.5. Prov. 1.16. Jerem. 2.34. Psal. 30.15. Isa. 33.15. whose feet are swift to shed blood; Striving, (as Jesus the son of Sirach saith) and hasting (as Solomon the son of David saith) to pour out the blood of the Innocent: whose heat against these poor wretches cannot be allayed with any other liquor then blood; and there∣fore I fear that under their wings will be found the blood of the souls of the poor, at that day, when the Lord shall say, Depart from me ye blood-thirsty men.
And because I know your Lordship will take no counsel a∣gainst innocent blood, but rather suppress them that seek to im∣brew their hands therein, I have made choice to open their case to you, and to lay their miserable calamity before your feet; fol∣lowing herein the advice of that learned man Brentius,In Epistola ad John Wier. who saith, Si quis admonuerit Magistratum, ne in miseras illas mulier∣culas saeviat, eum ego arbitror divinitus excitatum; that is, If any admonish the Magistrate not to deal too hardly with these miserable wretches, that are called Witches, I think him a good instrument raised up for this purpose by God himself.
But it will perchance be said by Witchmongers; to wit, by such as attribute to Witches the power which appertaineth to God only, That I have made choice of your Lordship to be a Pa∣tron to this my Book, because I think you favour mine opinions, and by that means may the more freely publish any error or conceit of mine own, which should rather be warranted by your Lordships authority, then by the Word of God, or by sufficient argument. But I protest the contrary, and by these presents I renounce all protection, and despise all friendship that might serve to help to∣wards the suppressing or supplanting of Truth: knowing also that your Lordship is far from allowing any injury done unto Man; much more an enemy to them that go about to disho∣nour God, or to embeazel the title of his immortal glory. But because I know you to be perspicuous and able to see down in∣to the depth and bottome of Causes, and are not to be carryed

away with the vain perswasion or superstition either of Man, Custom, Time or Multltude, but moved with the authority of Truth only: I crave your countenance herein, even so far forth, and no further, then the law of God, the law of Nature, the law of this Land, and the rule of Reason shall require. Neither do I treat for these poor people any otherwise, but so, as with one hand you may sustain the good, and with the other suppress the evil: wherein you shall be thought a Father to Orphans, an Advocate to Widows, a Guide to the Blind, a Stay to the Lame, a Comfort and Countenance to the honest, a Scourge and Terror to the Wicked.
Thus far I have been bold to use your Lordships patience, be∣ing offended with my self, that I could not in brevity utter such matter as I have delivered amply; whereby (I confess) occa∣sion of tediousness might be ministred, were it not that your great gravity joyned with your singular constancy in reading and judging be means of the contrary. And I wish even with all my heart, that I could make people conceive the substance of my writing, and not misconster any part of my mean∣ing. Then doubtless would I perswade my self, that the company of Witchmongers, &c. being once decreased, the number also of Witches, &c. would soon be diminished. But true be the words of the Poet,
Haudquaquam poteris sortirier omnia solus;
Námque aliis divi bello pollere dederunt,
Huic saltandi artem, voce huic cytharáque canendi:
Rursum alii inseruit sagax in pectore magnus
Jupiter ingenium, &c.
And therefore as doubtful to prevail by perswading, though I have reason and common sense on my side; I rest upon earnest wishing, namely, To all people an absolute trust in God the Creator, and not in Creatures, which is to make flesh our arme; that God may have his due honour, which by the undutifulness of many is turned into dishonour, and less cause of offence and error given by common received evil example. And to your Lordship, I wish, as increase of Honour, so continuance of good health and happy dayes.

