




Worthy GENTLEMEN,
TIs not truly any ambition, that I have to be known in the world, (who have too much cause to wish my self out of it) that occasioneth the publication of this Discourse: I pretty well know the for∣tune of those that dare appear in publike: but it was
your kind acceptance of this Sermon, when it was preached, and your earnest desire since, that I would let it come abroad; and here you see your Commands are obeyed; and so let it take its fortune, it cannot suffer much having so many valiant Champions to de∣fend it.
The principal Subject that is commended to your practice, is the Noble Principle of Loyalty, and Fide∣lity, that's our duty to the great Captain of our Sal∣vation, whose Souldiers we are, and have taken our Oaths in our Swadling-clothes to be true, and faithful to him unto our lives end.
Treachery, and Falshood, as well as Cowardize, is the highest Crime, that can be laid to a Souldiers charge.
To betray his Trust, and run from his Colours, and take part with his Generals Enemies, is not to be ex∣piated but by the death of the Traytor.
Therefore, Noble Souldiers, Consider how many great things Christ your Captain, and General hath commit∣ted to your charge.
He hath trusted you with an immortal Soul, which can never die with the Reprobate, nor perish with the vertuous parts of mortal men, but must have a Being, ei∣ther in Eternal Bliss, or woe. Oh! do not betray this pre∣cious Jewel into the hands of her deadly enemies. Ab∣stain from those fleshly lusts that fight against her, and deliver her out of the hands of those that gape for her
destruction. Be saithful unto her in preserving her in the Love of God, and in obedience to his will; that when God shall call for her, you may deliver her up pure, and spotless into his merciful hands: And say with thy Great Captain, Father, into thine hands I commit my Spirit.
He hath entrusted you with his Word, which is the best weapon in the world to defend you from your Ghost∣ly Enemies. Do not let it lie and rust by you, as Swords, Halberts, Armor doth in Gentlemens Halls: But buc∣kle it about you, and handle it lustily. When you are tempted to Infidelity, to Drunkenness, to Whoredom, or the like, draw out thy weapon, and fight against them, it is written, Rev. 21.8. That the fearful, and unbelieving, the abominable, drunkards, murtherers, whoremongers, lyars shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone. Hide his Word therefore in thine heart always, that thou may'st never sin against God.
He hath intrusted you with his truth, and with a pure Religion. Oh! do not betray either of them; fight for Truth against Error. And stand for thy Religion to the death. Live as thou professest to believe. No∣thing will uphold dying, sinking Religion, like a holy and a heavenly conversation. Practice is the best Syl∣logism, and Argument we can use to prevail with o∣thers; for he that lives a debauch'd, wicked life is an Apostate from the truth, and a Traytor to his Reli∣gion; 'tis not a pin matter what side a wicked man takes, for he will bring a curse where e'r he comes. Let
your light then so shine before men, that they may see your good works, that the world may know that you are Loyal Subjects indeed, true Noble Royallists, not by your damning, and sinking, not by your who∣ring, and drinking, but by your temperance, chastity, soberness, and devotion; do not betray so good a Cause, and so holy a Religion, by your vicious lives and conversations. He is the faithfullest Subject to his King, and the truest friend to his Religion, and the greatest lover of his Countrey that lives soberly, righ∣teously, and Godly in this present world, Be not He∣ctor'd neither out of the holy Principles of the Refor∣med Profession; some have changed sides, on purpose to live more losely, thinking that's the surest Ha∣ven to put into, where they may sin, and yet be safe. Be not fool'd out of it neither for a song, for deli∣cate Musick, or ravishing Voices, for fine shews, and pretty nacks; but stick fast to the gravity and sin∣cerity of the Catholick Church of England, which is a most safe way unto salvation, and where you will sure∣ly find rest unto your Souls.
And this Fidelity will cause the great Rewarder to look upon you, and to bless you, your pay shall be cer∣tain, part in hand, and the rest in reversion; in being Faithful, and keeping his Commandments, there will he, and is great Reward; Vertue is a reward to its self, and Godliness hath the promise of this life.
And that which remains to be received, shall be sure∣ly paid you, he hath promised it, who is the Amen, the faithful and true witness, who is Yea, and Amen, God
blessed for evermore; To whose Gracious Protection I commit you, and am
Worthy Sirs,

From my House on Clerkenwel-Green, Aug. 17. 1671.
