



Noble Sir,
AFTER much agitation of thoughts, where (in these dismembred times) this poore piece of my worthlesse en∣deavours might best find shelter; at length it was directed, as Noah's Dove unto the Arke, to seeke your Patronage; as in whose breast so ma∣ny lines of piety, drawne from a large circumference meet as in the proper Center; as who have, by a sacred kinde of Chymistry, extracted the best spirits, and quintessence of the choicest vertues; which vertues, like some rich Carbun∣cles that shine best in varied lights, are by so much more glorious and full of lustre, by how much the predominant and most enchanting vices of this vile age can no way damp or sully them: nor doth it, indeed, a little glad me, to see that early sanctity, which dyed you (to my known expe∣rience) in grayne, in the woull of your youth, now you have been woven in the loomes of Time into more yeeres, still to keep its colour: Besides this, it is your excellence (nor can it be consisted) that though some other Courtiers have some∣time been knowne, like some fair coloured silkes, by too much
ayring to have lost their glosse; yet your retiring Holinesse (which is the Diamond set in the Ring of your merited commendations) hath preserved you still, asSic tibi cum fluctus subter∣labere sicanos, Doris amara suam non inter∣misceat undam: Vargil. Eclog. 10. Alpheus gliding silently under the brackish Doris, untainted and unst yned by the worst of times: and (which I cannot but add) your rare: kill in Arts, and various literature, is that which doth enamell and embellish all the rest: so that whilest the tottering of the times hath rocked many asleep in secure vanity, the very mention of your name, like a box of spikenard broken, hath filled us with a sweet perfume, and the savour thereof drawne me, thus farre, to shrowd this naked issue of my thoughts under the wings of your favour; some few cast feathers whereof may so ympe and fledge it, that it shall adventure with more alacrit, to fly abroad.
Daigne then, Honored Sir, (being a knowne Patron of goodnes) to bestow a looke upon this importunate suitor, and to spread your protection over it, and him; who, asRuffinus, in Symbol. Apost. inter opera Cy∣priant, initio. Ruffinus apologized for the edition of his Comment on the Apostles Creed, cannot (chiefly in so great insufficiency) but know, Non esse absque periculo, multorum ju∣diciis ingenium tenue & exile committere; how full of jeopardy it is, in so slender a schallop, to adventure on the deepes of so many greater judgements; or, as S.S Hierom. in proaem. ad Obad. Hierome said unto Pammachius, of some things written in the beat of his youth; Infans sum nec dum scribere nosco; nunc ut nihil aliud profecerim, saltem Socra. icum illud ha∣beo, Scio, quod nescio. But sith I was willing to let you ee, on this occasion, how much I value your Patronage, Let it be your Noblenesse to stoup to the entertainment of this bearty Testimoniall of my respects; and wihall, to cast some few strictures of favour upon him, the thirst of whose ambition could not be quenched, till be had declared him∣selfe to be,

Febr: 7. 1641.
