


UNlearned Azo, Store of Books hath bought,
Because a Learned Schollar he'l be thought,
counsel'd him that had of Books such store;
To buy Pypes, Flutes, the Viol and Bandore,
And then his Musick, and his Learning share,
Being both alike, with either might compare,
He did both beat his brain, and try his wit,

In hopes thereby to please the Multitude;
As soon may ride a Horse without a Bit,
Above the Moon or Suns high altitude;
Then neither flattery, nor the hope of Pelf,
Hath made me writ, but for to please my self:
Thoug Sin and Hell work mortals to betray,
Yet 'gainst thy Malice, God still arms thy way;
Thou canst be have amongst those Banks and Briers,
As well as he who to Cedars-top aspires,
Or to the lowest Cherub, or Branch of Broom,
That hath its breeding srom Earths stumbling womb.
And now I talk of Broom, of Shrubs and Cedars,
Me thinks a World of Trees, are now my Leaders,
To prosecute this travel made with pain,
And make Comparison betwixt Trees and Men;
The Cedars, and the High-clouds kissing Pines,
Foecunds, Olives, and tke crooked Vines,
The Elm, the Esk, the Oak, the mastie Beech,
The Pear, the Apple, and the rough gound Peach;
And many more, for it would tedious be,
To name each fruitful and unfruitsul Tree.
For to proceed, and shew how Men and Trees,
In Birth, and Breed, in Life and Death agrees.
In their beginning they have both one Birth,
Both have their natural being from the Earth;
Those that scape Fortune, and the extreams of Love,
Unto their longest home by Death are drove,
Where Cesars, Kesars, subjects objects most,
Be all alike consum'd to dirt and dust:
Death eudeth all our cares, or cares increase,
It sends us unto lasting pain, or bless;
Where Honor is with Noble Vertue mixt;

It like a Rock stands permanent and fix't.
The snares of Envy, or her traps of hate,
Could never, nor shall ever hurt that state.
Like Adamant it beats back the battery,
Of spightful Malice, and deceiving flattery.
For it with pride can never be infected,
But humbly is supernally protected;
A Supporter, or Prop I wish Robert be,
As Rowlin call'd Robert was to Normandy.
Robert call'd Iohn-Fernyear was in Scotland,
So was Robert Bruce his revenging powerful hand.
I wish thee Health, Wealth and Renown,
Without any expectation of a Crown:
This Dedication which to your hands takes Scop,
Concerns a Shepherd from Will Scot of Langup,
Who  a Prudent, Wise and civil Gentleman;
As many that lives in this part of the Land.
Who sprung from a worthy Stock of late,
Who was named Iohn Scot of Langup,
Who was the Son, I very well knew,
Of Iohn Scot of Headshaw;
And Iohn Scot, we all do ken,
Was Son to George Scot of Sinton.
And George Scot, called How-coat,
VVas Son of Sintons youngest VVat;
And young VVat was VValters Son,
That was Laird of Sinton, whence Hardin sprung,
And Walter he was George Son,
And George he was the Son of Iohn,
For Walter and William was two-Brether,
His Name was George that was their Father;
My memory is Lord keeper of my Treasure,

And great understanding gives true Iustice measure,
To good, to bad, to just and to unjust,
Invention and Remembrance waits the leasure,
Of memory and understanding most,
Hath wisdom sor her fellow and her guide;
Else Princes, Peers, and Commons stray aside:
For William Scot in our south part of Greeces,
I wish may ne're want such as Iasons Golden Fleeces.

