


SIr, my weak Collections out hath took,
The Sum and Pith of sundry Chronicle-books;
For Pardon and Protection I intreat,
The Volumn's little, but my presumption's great.


Sir, since all memorandums of fore-past Ages,
Sayings, and Sentences of Antient Sages,
The Glory of Apollos radiant chine,
The Supporter of the sacred Sisters nyne,
The Attullus that all Historians do bear,
Throughout the World, here and every where;
Who ever went behind you, I would ken,
Whose worth throughout the spacious Nation ring.
Since Rennal-burn your Worships Kins-man near,
He hath those Sheep which Golden-Fleeces wear,
And it may be, it is such Beast and Fleece,
Which Iason brought from Cholcos into Greece,
Iohn Scot the Squire of Newburgh-hall,
Alias of Rennal-burn as men him call.
To the first Iohn Scot of Rennal-burn late,
He was the Son, and Heir to his Estate,
Who was the Son of that Sir Iohn Scot of worth,
The Prince of Poets, and Knight of New-burgh,
Chancer Glovet, and Sir Thomas Moir,
And Sir Philip Sidney, who the Lawral wear:

They never had a more Poetical Vein,
Than New-burgh's Iohn, that was Mr. Arthurs Son.
And Mr. Arthur was a learned Man,
Son to Simon Scot of New burgh than.
This Simon Scot's call'd Simon with the Spear,
Tutor of Thirlston was, both for Peace and Wear,
That Simon Scot, a bold and resolute Man,
He was Son to Iohn Scot of Thirlston;
Iohn Scot of Thirlston,
My Guid-sir let me knaw.
He was Son to Dayid Scot of Howpaslaw,
That David Scot he did excell,
Mongst all Hunters he bore the Bell;
He did abound for wit and skill;
All his Associats did wear a Tod-tail;
Which they esteem most by their engadges,
More than French gallants do of their Plumages.
David of Howpaslaw, he was the Son
Of the first Sir Walter, e're was of that Roum,
He was a man of Credit and Renown,
He Married Elliot Daughter to the Laird of Lariston,
David of Howpaslay, Sir Walters Son;
He married with Scot, a Daughter of Robertoun,
His Son Iohn Scot of Thirlston, a man of worth,
He married Scot, the Daughter of the Laird of Allenhaugh.
Iohns Son, Robert, was Warden in his time,
The fight of Roberts-hill he did gain,
He for his King, and Countrey, did maintain the Truth;
He married Scot, Daughter to the Laird of Buckcleugh,
The first Sir Robert Scot of Thirlston was his Son,
He married Margaret, daughter to the Laird of Cranston,
Sir Robert Scot his Son, for whose death I mourn,

He married Lyon, daughter to the Master of Kinghorn.
His death was sad to all his near Relations,
A worthy man was he,
And died without Succession:
Then Patrick Scot, his Father-Brother Son,
Took on the designation of Thirlston,
A very worthy Courteous man was he,
He married Murray daughter to the Laird of Black-barony,
His Son Sir Francis Scot, Knight-barronet of Thirlston,
Is now married to Ker, daughter to William Earl of Louthian.
Of his Genealogy I said enough,
His Original it is of Buckcleugh;
Yet were it no more but so I dare be bold,
To think this Land doth many Iasons hold;
Who never yet did pass a dangerous wave,
Yet may with ease its Golden Fleeces have.
My little Book whoso doth intertain,
It's dedicat to none but Gentlemen;
Sometimes to Old, sometimes to Young,
Sometimes to the Father, sometimes to the Son,
Sometimes to the great, sometimes to the small,
So my Book it keeps no rule at all.

