



SIR,
HAving now, (by the space of full three weeks of years, and more) though not without various inter∣ruptions, had a strong dispute with my thoughts, whether under so prevailing a deluge of no less Dog∣maticall, then practicall Athiesme, (that hath una∣wares engulfed this latter age) I might safely ad∣venture from my private closet, as Noah did the
Gen. 8.8. Dove from the windows of his Arke, to let this Posthume volume (more ponderous perchance in matter, then numerous in pages) fly abroad to make a discovery of some asswaging of the waters:
At length, I got the conquest over my dubious re∣solutions, as not utterly despairing, but that, as with some gladsome embleme, it may return with an olive branch of good tidings, and acceptation in the Church of God: And surely, I knew not well, on what firmer ground to bottome those hopes of mine, then on this, if it might but first set footing on that tree, which groweth upon your Mount; find access and allowance at your Polti∣more, a place by far more fertile in celestiall graces, then ever Mount Olivet abounded in
Ecclus. 50.10. fruitfull trees, or branches.
And indeed, from whence, or whom, could I have found a more approved Patron of a scholasti∣call discourse, (such as this is) then so Honoured a Worthy as your self; whose awfull power can pro∣tect it, and whose scientificall wisdome can aright judg of it: I apprehend it not totally improbable, that the Author of this Book might be sometime known to you by face, at least upon report, or by his writings; but if not by the last, you may then possibly by this one single grape, guesse at the ful∣ler vintage of his other labours; the maturity of which in the proper season, hath yielded (absit ver∣bo invidia,) the wholesome liquor of soul-saving doctrine to Gods people: As to this particular Exposition, I shall not speake
Autorem commendet opus. encomiastically a word, onely, if the great expectation before-hand, as some foyl to a diamond, abate not of the value; surely then, in that grand controversie of justifica∣tion by faith, as also of the , and authority of the holy Scriptures; that Papall Idoll of works,
and traditions so much adored by Bellarmine, (a learned Cardinall indeed, but a very sophisticall and prevaricating Champion) as Dagon of the Philistims before the Arke of God, falls
1 Sam. 5.3. flat to the ground, dishivered into dust and ashes: And as a meete preparatory thereto, the Text it self is so artificially analysed, the scope as if discovered by a sun beame, cleared, the terms distinctly elucidated, and then the Doctrinall observations so genuinely deduced thence, as if this single Commentary were the only key to unlock the more deep, and abstruse mysteries of the great Apostle, whose writings are in many things so
2 Pet. 3.16. hard to be understood.
Give leave then, I beseech you, to adorne the frontispiece hereof with the mention of your name, by the authority whereof it cannot but pass into the hands, and as I hope also the hearts of the most judicious.
For if after that Apophthegme of Solomon,
Prov. 27.8. oynt∣ment, and perfume rejoyce the heart, then certes the savour of your
Cant. 1.3. name, as a good oynt∣ment powred forth, more refresheth the age you live in, then the costly
Joh. 12.13. spikenard of that penitent in the Gospell, did the house filled with the odour thereof; yea, it being so eximiously beautified, and adorned with
Psal. 112.6. righteousness, it seems moun∣ted on the wings of honour, and carried into your country with renown, as if it had borrowed the
Psal. 68.13. wings of King Davids Dove, in the Psalme, co∣vered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold, embellished with the richest, fairest, and most lasting metalls, as assuring posterity of
an
Psal. 112.6. everlasting remembrance: And indeed, it were injurious to doubt it; for as
Albertus no∣vicamp. in sco∣po Biblico, pag. 124, ex Cic. 2. offic. Albartus and Novicam∣pianus acquaints us, Est compendiaria via ad gloriam, ut qualis quisque haberi velit, talis sit; Integrity be∣ing the most compendious way to glory, your Christian, and holy practise enstates you in it: having always followed, as
Franc. Guicciard. Histor. Flor. lib. 1 p. 32. vol. 8. Guicciardine reports of Aloisius the Father of Charles the Eight of France, magis res ipsas, quam rerum vmbras, more things themselves, then the shadows of things; more the
2 Tim. 3.5. power of godliness, then the form alone, without it; and that too, in an irreprehensible sincerity (as
Ignat. Epist. ad Trallian. Ignatius a contemporary with the Apostle, com∣mends the Tralliani) , not to make use of, for ostension, or oftentation; but to enjoy as a stable, and an
1 Pet. 1.4. immarcessible possessi∣on; your hearts and your hands, your affections and your actions, being sweetly suited to divine lawes (to use the expression of the same
Ignat. Epist. ad Philadelph. Ancient, to his Philadelphians) , as strings fit∣ted to a well-tuned harp, melodiously warbling harmonious accords: insomuch, that I may say, though not [to] you (whom were I a Chrysostome, or a Thucydides, of a golden mouth, or of a silver lip, to represent even in a most magnificent style, the most virtuous extractions, I should but shew a mir∣rour of what you [are] already, as not scarcely needing to use instructions to what you [should] be better) yet [of] you, I may in this paper monu∣ment, tell posterity in the same language, that
Seneca sua sor. 6. Se∣neca sometimes spake of that sage Cato, that he was, and so are you, solus maximum vivendi Exemplum,
as it were alone (within your station) the greatest patterne, and example for men to live by: And that, whether in your Naturalls, or in your Morals, or in your Theologicalls; in relation to all which, your defecated and refined soul, doth bene habitare, dwellaright, and is well lodged in a goodly recep∣tacle; The portall shewes what guests are in the parlour, the case declares the Jewell.
But, it was not my purpose on this occasion, (as being too-conscious to my self of my own weak∣ness, for so high an attempt) to compose a Panegy∣rick; only, among the many of your observers, af∣ter my measure, as I [could,] though not after my wishes, as I [
—Superest animosa [vo∣luntas] Ipsa∣que nescio quid mens excellen∣cius audet. Lu∣can. in Pane∣gyr.ad Cal. purn. Piso∣nem. would] do; I was willing to let you know; however there may be more elegant Ora∣tours, yet there is not, nor can be a more cordiall honourer of your Person, or Issue.
To dilate on those your severall endowments severally, it would require for each a distinct vo∣lume; and it would be harder to finde a measure, or an end of speaking of them, then a beginning; sith, what
M. T. Cic. orat pro lege Mamlia. Cicero said of Cneius Pompeius, is much more verified in your worship: In vno Cn. Pompeio [summa] esseomnia, in one single Pompeius his vir∣tuous excellencies were all in the Superlative; so that what in some others may be good, or pious dispersedly, or but in some one speciall, as a Pelican in the wilderness [
Psal. 102.6, 7. alone] loe, in your person are collected
1 Cor. 1.5, 7. all together; each virtue by a sacred concatenation linked, and, as it were, intortelled one within the other, in an indissoluble chain, and laid up in your heart, as in a magazine of Gods fa∣vours
on you: That as S.
Vade in Cam∣paniam, et disce Pauli∣num. Austin, when he would recommend a conversation, to be followed by any Christian his friend, he wished him to go into Cam∣pania; and learn of Paulinus: so may I say, goe to Poltimore, and there he shall see, for descent and pe∣digree, through many generations, an ancient Family, supported in the Honour, and reputati∣on of Religion, and hospitality, in a present and hopefull succession: There a Father, , the most discreetly indulgent, and provident in the Nation, Reverend for Age, but more venerable for all manner of religious devotion;
Mat. 6.6. secret in his closet,
Zech. 12.12, 13. private in his family, and (in a consci∣ence of Gods Holy Ordinances) publique in the
Heb. 10.25. Psal. 116.14. assembly; and (as if some bloud of those noble Bereans ran along his veines) a most diligent, and assiduous
Act. 17.11. Ioh. 5.39. searcher of the holy Scriptures; as St. Luke records of him, whose name was Iustus, he was one that worshiped God, whose house
Act. 18.7. joyned hard to the Synagogue; so that if devotion were else-where lost, it might thence be repaired: There a master so bountifull, so munificent, that that house hath yielded a servant even very lately, of a bout an hundred years old, and still hath some at this day, of above twenty years standing, and attendance: There a , a lover and
Rom. 16.23. enter∣tainer of Gods faithfull
1 Tim. 5.17. 2 Tim. 4.2. teaching Ministers, (chie∣fly his own) upon all good occasions; in whose countenance and speech, evermore dwell such plentifull comforts to the men of that function, that as 'tis storied of Titus the Emperour, hardly any depart sad, but with encouragement, such, as
adds fatness to the bones; yea, even a
Mr. Francis Bampfield. son of his own loynes: (as Isaiah the Prophet is said to be de∣scended of
Rabbi Solo∣mon, apud Lyram, & Hicrom. pro∣leg. in Isai. noble blood) of exquisite parts, is now a
Mat. 9.38. & 20.1. , Tit. 1.8. labourer in Gods Vineyard, under that calling: There a , a true Lover and Honourer of Learning, and of learned good men; and (as a burning and shining
B. K. lampe of our Church eft∣soones complained) in this unprofitable generati∣on of ours, wherein men wonder at Schollars,
Iuvenal. ut pueri Iunonis avem, and Schollars wonder more at men of that temper; or rather indeed, hang up their
Psal. 1 37.2. harpes upon the willowes, lamenting the crosse
See Isai. 6, 10. 2 Cor. 4.4. infatuation of the stupid times; yet lear∣ning never departeth discontented from your face; that as you have been long a stay, and a pillar to your Country, in the place of Authority, and Magistracy; so, as
Iustin. Mar∣tyr. Dialog. cum Try∣phon. Iudaeo, p. 172. col. 40. Iustin Martyr wrote of Plato, and Pythagoras, in regard of Philosophy, , they were as the very wall, columne, and prop of the times; in like manner are you (being Learned your self) unto men of that quality: And, (that I may select a more choyce Tulip or two, in this so well-furnish∣ed a garden of spirituall flowers) there may we finde for softness, and
2 King. 22.19 tenderness of heart a Iosiah; for
1 Pet. 3.8. courteous affability, and alacrious
Num 12.3. meekness, another Moses rediv'd, of whom
Eccles. 45.1, 4. Siracides wri∣teth, that he was beloved of God and men.
Again there, (in a reciprocation of duty) we may see, as in a piece of Arras displayed, the seve∣rall pictures of the Parents, in a corresponding po∣sterity, in whom their graces are diffused, in as
great variety as the faces: And though it be a maxime among the
Pure perso∣nalia non pro∣pagantur. Schoolmen, that purely per∣sonall excellencies, are not traduced by prop ga∣tion; yet now I see, that may descend by imitation:
— Horat. Flac. carm. lib. 4. od. 4. nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant Aquilae columbam.
What should genuinely descend frow an Eagle, but an Eagle like it self? For loe, there may we see the
St. John Bampfield Baronet. Son, (a most accomplished gentleman) moulded at it were, into the like forme of piety, by a zealous patrization; the most awfull obser∣vant Son, of a religious Father in the Nation; whose virtuous
2. Epist. Iohn. 1.4. Lady (the devout Phoenix of the West) with her
Eph. 6.4. well-educated Children walking in the truth, becomes the
1 Cor. 11.7. glory of her husband, and an ornament of her Sexe: nor stayeth this here, but the same sanctity is spread abroad into all, and every the branches of the same Stock.
But, methinks, yet among all those graces, that as precious stones
Rev. 21.19. garnish your building, the ri∣chest Chrysolite, or Amethist, is your constant
2 Pet. 3.18. proficiency, and
Gal. 6.9. unwearied
Mat. 10.22. perseverance in all; not suffering your devotion as Hezekiah's Sun, to go back in its
Isai. 38.8. degrees; no not in these stagge ring, loose, and exulcerated times. It is your hon∣our, yea it shall be your glory, that you derive your light as those twelve stars, (a type of the twelve Apostles, Rev. 12.1.) from the Fountain of light the
Mal. 4.2. Sun of righteousness, the Lord Jesus Christ, in whose
Psal. 36.9. light alone it is, that you can see the true and solid light; nor is your motion in Chri∣stianity, like that of the Planets in their Epicycles
now ascending, then descending; sometimes sta∣tionary, anon retrograde; neither doth your devo∣tion, like the river
Maginus Geograph. Jordan gliding in a sweat, and limpid streame, empty it self into the dead sea of
Heb. 3.12. Apostacy; but rather, as the shining of the
Cant. 6.10. mor∣ning, which shineth
Prov. 4.18. more and more unto the per∣fect day, it goeth from
Psal. 84.7. strength to strength; yea, and that even now, when your
Eccles. 12.5. Almond tree doth flourish, your
Canities qua∣si flos amygda∣li, veneranda quidem, sed mortis nuncia. Anton. Cor∣ranus. ad loc. white haires discover the win∣ter, and snowy time of your Age, yet still you bring forth
Psal. 92.14, Rev. 2.19. & Gerard. Moringus. fruit in old age; your i last works, like those of the Angell in Thyatira, being more (if it may be) then the first;
. Some say the metaphor is taken from the silk worm which when it is about to spin the finest thread, is wont to fast 2. or 3. dayes to∣gether and so stretcheth it self out at the fullest length. stretching your self out, as it were, and with your utmost endeavours, pressing towards the mark of perfection, Phil. 3.13, 14. All which I mention with a kinde of tripudiant joy, and exultation of spirit, belonging so skilfull a Pilot; after the many storms of trialls, and tempta∣tions in a tempestuous world, to give occasion to Israelites indeed, to praise him in the
Laudari po∣test gubern ator in portu. Haven: and your sun
Vt Phaebi lumen dulcius esse solet jane jam cadentis. now about to set (though long may it be, before it set) to reflect upon us, at least with so sweet a light, and so delectable an influence.
Goe on, Noble Sir, thus to
Tit. 2.10. adorn the Gos¦pell, and as a starr of the greater magnitude, to
Phil. 2.15 beautifie the Firmament of the Church; by your perseverance (the
Rev. 2.10. crowning grace) your precious soul (by far more shining and refulgent, then the most orient Rubies) shall be fastened to the
Mat. 7.24. & 1 Cor. 10.4. rock of your salvation, the Lord Christ Jesus; and your memoriall after you shall be blessed.
Prov. 10.7. Eccles. 45.1.

Nothing remains, but that I crave and impetrate pardon for this rude prolixity, and presumption on your patience: It shall no way diminish, rather agrandize your greatness, that you condescend to an acceptation of this mean present; hereby, you shall arise in eminence, because by such a dignati∣on, you become greater then your self, in over∣comming your self, and likest the greatest, who took in as good part (when it came from a good
Non de pa∣trimonio, sed de [animo] opus ejus exa∣minans, &c. considerans non quantum, sed [ex] quanto dedisset. S. Cy∣prian. de ope∣re, & cleemos Sect. 14. heart) the widdows
Mar. 12.42, 43. Rom. 1.9. mite, as the richest offe∣ring: May the God of Heaven (whom you serve with your spirit) and that from your
2 Tim. 1.3. Forefathers, with pure conscience fill you, and with you all yours, with
Rom. 15.13. all joy, and peace of conscience in this life; and compass you all with a diademe of blisse, and immortall glory, in the life to come; This is, and shall be the fervent prayer of, Sir,

From my study in Collompton, April 3. 1650.
