


HAving found out two such civil Magistrates, as for direction of judgement, and for ordering mat∣ters concerning justice in this common-wealth (in my poore opinion) are very singular persons, who (I hope) will accept of my good will, and exa∣mine my book by their experience, as unto whom the matter therein contained doth greatly appertaine: I have now again considered of two other points: namely, Divinity and Philo∣sophy, whereupon the ground-work of my book is laid. Where∣in although I know them to be very sufficiently informed, yet doth not the judgement and censure of those causes so properly apper∣tain to them as unto you, whose fame therein hath gotten preemi∣nence above all others that I know of your callings: and in that re∣spect I am bold to joyne you with them, being all good neighbours together in this common-wealth, and loving friends unto me. I do not present this unto you, because it is meet for you; but for that you are meet for it (I mean) to judge upon it, to defend it, and if need be to correct it; knowing that you have learned of that grave councellor Cato, not to shame or discountenance any body. For if I thought you as ready, as able, to discharge me from mine inuf∣ficiencie: I should not have been hasty (knowing your learning) to have written unto you: but if I should be abashed to write to you, I should shew my selfe ignorant of your courtesie.
I know mine own weaknesse, which if it have been able to maintain this argument, the cause is the stronger. Eloquent words may please the eares, but sufficient matter perswadeth the heart. So as, if I exhibit wholsome drink (though it be small (in a treene dish with a faithful hand, I hope it will be as well accepted, as strong wine affered in a silver bowle with a flattering heart. And surely it is a point of as great liberality to receive a small thing thankful∣ly,

as to give and distribute great and costly gifts bountifully for there is more supplied with courteous answers than with rich rewards. The tyrant Dionysius was not so hated for his tyranny, as for his churlish and strange behaviour. Among the poore Isra∣elites sacrifices, God was satisfied with the tenth part of an Epha of flower, so as it were fine and good. Christ liked well of the poor widowes mite. Lewis of France accepted a rape-root of clown∣ish Conan. Cyrus vouchsafed to drink a cup of cold water out of the hand of poor Sinaetes: and so it may please you to accept this simple book at my hands, which I faithfully exhibit unto you,  knowing your opinions to meet with mine: but knowing your learni and judgement to be able as well to correct me where I speake her  unskilfully, as others when they speake hereof maliciously.
Some be such dogs as they will barke at my writings, whether I maintaine or refute this argument: as Diogenes snarled both at the Rhocins and at the Lacedaemonians: at the one, becaus they were brave; at the other, because they were not brave. Homer himselfe could not avoid reprochfull speeches. I am sure that they which never studied to learne any good thing, will study t find faults hereat. I for my part feare not these wars, nor all the adversaries I have; were it not for certain cowards, who (I know) will come behind my back and bite me.
But now to the matter. My question is not (as many fondly sup∣pose) whether there be witches or nay: but whether they can do such miraculous works as are imputed unto them? Go Master Deane, is it possible for a man to break his fást with you  Rochester, and to dine that day at Durham with Master Doct Matthew; or can your enemie maime you, when the Ocean  is betwixt you? What reall community is betwixt a spirit and  body? May a spiritual body became temporal at his pleasure? Or may a carnall bodie become invisible? is It likely that the lives of all Princes, Magistrates, and Subjects, should depend upon th will, or rather upon the wish of a poor malicious doting old foole and that power exempted from the wise, the rich, the learned, th godly, &c? Finally, is impossible for a man or woman to do  of those miracles expressed in my book, and so constantly reported b great clarkes? If you say, no; then am I satisfied. If you sa that God absolutely, or by meanes can accomplish all those, an many more, I go with you. But witches may well say they can 

these things, howbeit they cannot shew how thy do them. If I for my part should say I could do those things, my very adversaries would say that I lyed.
O Master Arch-deacon, is it not pitty, that that which is said to be done with the almighty power of the most high God, and by our Saviour his onely sonne Iesus Christ our Lord, should be refer∣red to a baggage old womans nod or wish, &c? Good Sir, is it not one manifest kind of Idolatry, for them that labour and are laden to come unto witches to be refrshed? If witches could helpe whom they are said to ha made sick, I see no reason, but remedy might as well be required at their hands, as a purse demanded of him that hath stolne it. But truly it is manifold idolatry, to aske that of a creature, which none can give but the Creator. The papist hath some colour of scripture to maintaine his idol of bread, but no Je∣suitical distinction can cover the witchmongers idolatry in this be∣halfe. Alas, I am sorry and ashamed to see how many die, that be∣ing said to be bewitched, onely seek for magical cures, whom wholesome diet and good medicines would have recovered. I dare assure you both, that there would be none of these cosening kind of witches, did not witchmongers maintaine them, follow them, and beleeve in them and their oracles: whereby indeed all good learning and honest arts are overthrowne. For these that most advance their power, and maintaine the skill of these witches, understand no part thereof: and yet being many times wise in other matters, are made fooles by the most fooles in the world.
Me thinks these magicall physicians deale in the common∣wealth, much like as a certaine kind of Cynicall people do in the churc, whose severe sayings are accompted among some such oracles, as may not be doubted of; who in stead of learning and authority (which they make contemptible) do feed the people with their own devises and imaginations, which they preferre before all other di∣vinity: and labouring to erect a church according to their own fan∣sies, wherein all order is condemned, and onely their magical words and curious directions advanced, they would utterly overthrow the true Church. And even as these inchanting Paracelsians abuse the people, leading them from the true order of physick to their charms: so do these other (I say) disswade from hearkening to learning and obedience, and whisper in mens eares to teach them their frier-like traditions. And of this sect the chiefe author at this time is

one Browne, a fugitive, a meet cover for such a cup: as here∣tofore the Anabaptists, the Arrians, and the Franciscane friers.
Truly not onely nature, being the foundation of all perfecti∣on; but also scripture, being the mistresse and director thereof, and of all christianity, is beautified with knowledge and learning. For as nature without discipline doth naturally inclin unto vanities, and as it were suck, up errors: so doth the word, or rather the letter of the scripture without understanding,Rom. 2.27▪ 2. Cor. 3.6. not one∣ly make us devoure errors, but yeeldeth us up to death & destru∣ction: and therefore Paul saith he was not  minister of the letter, but of the spirit.
Thus have I been bold to deliver unto the world, and to you, those simple notes, reasons, and arguments, which I have devised or col∣lected out of other authors; which I hope shall be hurtful to none, bt my selfe great comfort, if it may passe with good liking and accep∣tation. If it fall out otherwise, I should think my paines ill im∣ployed. For truly, in mine opinion, whosoever shall performe any thing, or attaine to any knowledge; or whosoever should tra∣vel throughout all the nations of the world, or (if it were possible) should peepe into the heavens, the consolation or ad∣miration thereof were nothing pleasant unto him, unlesse he had li∣berty to impart his knowledge to his friends. Wherein becaus I have made special choise of you, I hope you will read it, or at the least lay it up in your study with your other bookes, among which there is none dedicated to any with more good will. And so long as you have it, it shall be unto you (upon adventure of my life) a certain amulet, periapt, circle, charme, &c. to defend you from all inchantments.

