



THE Immortal God, Supreme Gover∣nour of Kings, and Ruler of the World, hath by his Providence or∣der'd it, as auspicious to the Catholic Faith, That in these times, wherein other Christian Princes are restoring the Kingdoms of Hun∣gary and Greece to the Church, Your Majesty should ascend the British Throne, and invite
the renown'd English Nation, to embrace the true Religion by your Royal Example. It is by the conduct of Divine, not Human, Wis∣dom that Kings reign,Prov 8.15. and Law-givers decree Ju∣stice. Which being spoken of all Princes in this World, cannot but be understood of Your Ma∣jesty, who governing the British World in Jus∣tice, reign so happily, that You seem to have ravish'd the hearts of all your Subjects with Love, and the Eyes of all Strangers with Admiration. It is a Maxim of the Ancients, and the Oracle of Wisdom it self, that the Love of the People is the Princes chief Safe∣guard. Which made Pliny the second say, in his Panegyric to Trajan, that the Kings Palace is no where better secured, than where Love keeps the Court of Guard. And Themistius, the fam'd Graecian Orator, hath given this ex∣cellent Admonition, that it is far better to allure Subjects by Love and Favour, than to awe them with Fear and Terror. By Love
Mens minds are united and made to agree in one: and by Agreement Empires cement, as by Discord they fall asunder. Which Your Majesty very well understanding, presently quell'd the dissention, that in the beginning of your Reign, threatned destruction to all Britain: and, when you had cut off the Prin∣cipal Conspirators, Victorious and Triumphant, You either intirely pacify'd or wholly restrain'd the minds of the rest by Sweetness and Love. Being excellently well read in the tempers of Men You knew, that he is in vain arm'd with dread who is not fenc'd with love and affection. Having therefore freed your Subjects from terror and fear, You won their hearts by your serene Countenance and affable Conversation; who the more freely acknowledg they owe the Public Safety to Your Majesty, the more other Nations look upon it with admiration. O thrice happy Prince, who whilst you embrace your People with Kindness gain Veneration at
home, Renown abroad, and are purchasing with God a blessed Eternity. I will not speak here of that Frankness with which you receive all, of that Clemency, which makes you easie to be intreated, of that Liberality wherewith you relieve the Needy and Misera∣ble, of the indefatigable Industry wherewith you manage the Affairs of your Kingdom, of that firm Constancy which enables You to undertake the most difficult Enterprises. For these and many other gracious Endowments, wherewith the Great God of Heaven, hath richly adorn'd your Royal Mind, might here be highly extoll'd: But, since they would be too copious a Subject for a short Epistle, I shall only intreat this Favour, that not being mindful of Your Majesty, but my meaness you would so far condescend, as favourably to re∣ceive this small Treatise concerning Ecclesiasti∣cal Hierarchy, which I have put forth in An∣swer to an English Author, and to protect it
with the Patronage of Your Great Name. Nor can any one induce Your Majesty to believe, That I seek to shelter Novelty under the Pro∣tection of Your Royal Name: for in this small Book I do not undertake to defend an Error lately invented, but a truth anciently receiv'd. I treat concerning the Roman Patriarchate, which the Catholic Kings Your Predecessors ac∣knowledg'd for the space of Thirteen hundred years; and which, even since the Schism, Your Grand-father King James of Illustrious Memory hath, not obscurely, asserted. For in the Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, which he sent to Rudolphus the Emperor, to the Christian Monarchs, and to both the Catholic and Protestant Princes,Jacobus Aug∣liae Rex, in apo∣logia pro ju∣ramento fide∣litatis.
Scio, inquit, Patriarchas in Ecclesia pri∣mitiva exti∣tisse, & insti∣tutionem illam ordinis, & dis∣criminis causa amplexor: sed & inter illos de Principatu magna conten∣tione certatum est: quod si in eo quaestio ad∣huc verteretur, meo libens suf∣fragio primum locum Episco∣po Romano de∣ferrem: Ego Occidentalis Rex Occiden∣tali Patritar∣chae adhaere∣rem. I know, saith that Prince, That there were Patriarchs in the Primi∣tive Church, and I embrace that Institution for Order and Distinction Sake: there was also great Contention amongst them, who should be Chief: but if that were still the question,
I would freely give my suffrage, that the Bi∣shop of Rome should have the first place: I being a Western King would adhere to the Western Patriarch. That which King James the First, a Prince of the same name with Your Majesty here asserts, I explain more clear∣ly in this Dissertation; and prove from the Testimonies of the Antients, and the Decrees of Synods, that the Authority of the Roman Patriarchate extends it self over all the West. So that I may use almost the same words which Honorius did (when he exhorted the Emperor Theodosius to preserve the Priviledges long before granted to the Roman See) that the Roman Church may not lose under a Catholic Prince what she ought not to have lost under other KIngs who fell into Schism.Honorius E∣pistad Theod. Suffer therefore, Most Gracious Prince, that this small Treatise may come forth under your Protecti∣on; in which the only thing, I earnestly contend for, is that the Roman Church which is the
special Head of all the Western Churches, and the Principal Head of all the Churches in the World, may not be disturbed, because from thence the Rights of admonishing others issue forth all over the West, as well as over the whole World. Written from Rome by

