



Honourable and much honoured,
HAving no other way to te∣stifie my gratitude of mind for those experiences of Your Noble favours; excuse, I
 beseech You, my boldness in pre∣suming to prefix Your Names be∣fore these Exercitations of mine▪ which I humbly offer up unto You, as a publick testimony of my devoted Service, and deep obligations for Your remarques of kindness towards me, and my nearest Relation; to whom, No∣ble Sir, You have lately been a Munisicent Patron of undesiled hands. May the blessings of the upper and nether springs everJudg. . 15. rest upon Your Honours, and that hopeful young Sprout YourRuth. 4. 11. Son; and be famous in Your generations, and do worthily therein: being exemplary to others in Piety, Encouragers of Virtue; and not being asham∣ed of Christ and His GospelMark 8. 38
 in this adulterous generation: As knowing that Religion is Your business, and Christianity professed and maintained, doth truly ennoble: which will ap∣pearActs 17. 11. more evident, when God shall stain the pride of all glo∣ry, and bring into contemptIsai. 23. 9. all the honourable of the earth, which have not honoured Him. Those that honour God, He will1 Sam. 2. 30. honour; and they are Honou∣rable,Isai. 43. 4. and they shall be ho∣noured.Psal. 15. 4.
Hezekiah his religious and upright walking in the courseIsai. 3. 3. of his life, was his greatest comfort, when (as he thought) he was on his death-bed.
It becometh all to seek the good of their Countrey; much
 more those who are in high and honourable places: whose countenance is as a Command, and whose example is, as a Rule for inferiors to walk by. Honos est onus: Honour is a bur∣den, and carries a burden with it.
They that are in eminency, have many eyes upon them. Their greatness cannot hinder the vulgar from speaking of them. They are as Beacons on a hill; and as watch-towers by the Sea-side, to direct others in their course, lest they split against rocks: for the vulgar are led much by ex∣ample.
I confess this little book is compiled after a simple and
 plain manner. I have not in∣sisted in an exact Logical, or just Methodical way, but as my Meditations did lead me; waving high strains, Rhetorical Phrases, and Philosophical Ex∣pressions, endeavouring in plain∣ness to condescend to the mea∣nest capacity: Not striving (as many do) to be admired and not understood; but to be un∣derstood and to edifie. I fear to1 Cor. 14. 9. be tedious.
My Prayers are, that withPsal. 91. 16. & 128. 6. long life God will satisfie You, and grant You to see Your Childrens Children, and Peace upon this our Israel. That after you have served Your own generation, by the WillAct. 13. 36. of God, fall on sleep, be
 layed to Your Fathers, and see Corruption; He may shew You His Salvation; giving You an inheritance incorrup∣tible and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in Hea∣ven1 Pet. 1. 4. for You. I remain

