



SIR,
I Could have easily sate down contented with the good Reception this Performance found upon the place; nor am I ignorant how impolitick it is to push on too far upon the Flatteries of an happy beginning; but as your Commands alone drew me from my private Sta∣tion, so they have prevaled with me to be yet more Publick. If any thing prove worthy of blame in this Attempt, you must be pleased to be in a great measure answerable for it, with those other Gentlemen who would not be denied, and indeed whose Kindnesses have merited this and a greater Obedience.
I confess it is something uneasie to think of being exposed to the Cen∣sures of Men, which are not commonly so fair as they should be. But let them be what they will, I ought to gratifie you at some hazard; and for once will try the Ingenuity of the World, in hope that what is here said may benefit some part of it.
Not being conversant in Modern Writings, perhaps I have said no∣thing here but what some others have said better before me. If any know where, they have my leave to repair thither, and my Prayers for a Blessing upon their Applications. I would not willingly be accessary to any man's loss of time and disappointment. But I hope they will allow me a Province among those of lesser Reading and Attainments. And I assure you, Sir, there are those in the World to whom the things here spoken are new, and some of them such as pretend to converse and talk of Books, and from whom one might expect other things. Writing would be at a stand, were every one bound to produce something per∣fectly new, the Actions of the World being little else but a series of Repetitions.

I never had the Vanity to think of pleasing all Men; on the contrary, I certainly reckon upon it that I shall displease some. Perhaps too the fault will be on their side, which I pray God to forgive them. If any shall desire to triumph in my Infirmities, I shall prevent them in the ho∣nour of the Discovery, being alway ready to make a large confession of them. But if an honest Intention may make amends, let them know that I am a great lover of Mankind, and when I please them least, I desire to do them good. God grant this Performance may attain that end, and I have mine.
That those who are skilled in Criticks may not think themselves neg∣lected, I will excuse one thing to them. Perhaps some things may seem to be brought into this Discourse impertinently. It may be necessary there∣fore to tell them, That my Text was not only those few words of the Prophet prefixt to the Sermon, but the temper of the World as it fell un∣der my Observation. And if they think I ought not to have accommo∣dated my thoughts to it, it may be sufficient to tell them, that I am of another mind, and if in an Error, not past all hopes of being made sensible of it.
Sir, I beg your Pardon if I have done you any dishonour in this De∣dication, and shall take this Occasion publickly to acknowledge my Obli∣gation to your self and Relations, to whom I owe the Opportunities which I have of serving the Church of God. That you may continue immove∣able in the love which I know you have to our established Church, and your largeness of Soul towards all good Christians; That you may still become your Honourable Station, and find returns of all in this and ano∣ther World, is the hearty Prayer of,
SIR,

