



Precious and therefore Beloved,
WHat hath the holy one done for you! what hath Gospel grace wrought in you? who are these that flie as a cloud and as doves to their winows:
Isa. 60.8. Happy day when the eternal spirit broke open your doors, and led you through the pangs of the new birth into the favour of God by Christ. Blessed season when the Almighty displayed his bright beams of e∣vangelical light, forming Christ in your souls by the same way that the blessed virgin con∣ceived, viz. by the ear; alluring you out of Bbylonish abominations, worldlly pollutions, and unscriptural mazes to follow the Lamb in all his pretious appointments.

 Look (my beloved) from the top of the mountain (to which grace hath advanced you,) and behold the woful world still wal∣lowing in wickedness and weltring in blood under the wrath of a jealous God,
1 Cor. 6.11. in a hope∣less, graceless, christless condition.
And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are ju∣stified; no more strangers and forreiners but fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the houshould of God, founded upon your Rock of Ages whose mysterious habitation and temple ye are. Now what shall we return to the Lord for these invaluable benefits?
I hope there is not a soul of you that dare slight such unsearchable riches of grace, I trust you are truly enlightned & purely prin∣cipled, which with the sence of your former weight of sin (the intolerable burthen of an awakened conscience) will cause you for e∣ver to delight in Christs shadow, and sit with soul-satisfaction under the spread wings of the eternal Saviour; that soul hath onely a name to live that loves not such a Lord.
Amongst all the blessings bestowed upon man, God made for him a holy sabbath, and this of old was the honour of Gods Israel, and shall be again the glory of such as stand in the antient path enquiring for the good old way. Now since Jehovah hath graciously
revealed Sabbath lght amongst you, and laid you under many endearments, let each soul (that is indeed a Saint) take up with the Psalmist, Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee, for truly you have need of rest a∣midst all your reproaches for the Law of your God, and to strengthen you for new trials, especially if you and I (who have hitherto en∣joyed our pretious liberty) should experience what we hear; namely that the present pow∣ers make no conscience of Oaths or Acts; if this should prove so indeed, what can be ex∣pected to Sabbath-keepers but new prelatical persecution?
There is a solumn Oath taken before God and men to protect such as professe faith in God by Jesus Christ though differing from the doctrine or discipline of the nation which is seconded by the present Par∣lament who have enacted,
Inster for Gover. Artic. 36, 37. That such as pro∣fesse faith in God, Father, Son, and Spi∣rit, and own the scriptures,
Parl. Petit. & advic. 1657. pag. 13. shall not be compelled by penalties, nor restrained from their profession, though differing from the publick Doctrine, and disci∣pline, but shall be protected in the peac∣able exercise of their religion.
But notwithstanding these great engage∣ments, there would be little prohability of
peace should their principles be as some are perswaded.
Wherefore flie with speed to your experi∣enced City of resuge and improve your in∣terest in heaven for the suppression of Jero∣boams sin,
1 Ring. 32.33. who did not onely advance the device of his own heart in the time of wor∣ship, but imposed it on the people, and so made Israel to sin.
Strive with your prayers against the re∣maining corruptions, rising oppressions, ap∣pearing persecutions: a manifold enor∣mities of a revolting nation: God hath emi∣nently punished the princes and the Kings children and (threatens) all such as are clothed in strange Apparrel:
Zeph. 1.8. and yet how this abomination abounds amongst us! yea tis feared that as Jehu pulled down one Baal and advanced two golden Calves,
In Hebr. Lord. so the suppression of one proud Prelate may be attended with the promotion of many persecuting Presbyters, and then farwell our precious Gospel priviledges if ever our liberty should be at their allowance; They have already put forth their sting by under∣hand attempts to obstruct this great truth of Gods sabbath.
Their contentious Lecture at Colchester, termed your Gospel Baptism, an infant damning doctrine and the minsters thereof
the Devils Factors stirring up Rulers a∣gainst us, which prebably may prove their strongest arguments in opposing the Sabbath. As for such (either Presbyterian or any other opinion) who are of a Gospel frame of Spi∣rit free from Ishmaelitish persecuting prin∣ciples, I do not in the least reflect upon them, but highly prize all the lovely appearances of Christ in them: knowing that such (though our elder Brethren) dare not murmure at our fathers love, who hath enlightened our minds: with the revived glory of his Royal Sabbath but will like noble Bereans weigh this serious (and I hope sober) work in the balance of the sanctuary.
If such as would have a precept of this high import smothered or concealed, under a bed of security or Bushel of plenty were throughly a wakened by the whisperings of Christ; they would readily proclaim this glorious truth upon the house top. If this lively oracle of Gods seventh day Sabbath be not clearly Instituted by the Father, Ratified by the Son, Approved by the spirit, and ob∣served by the Saints, Let it be confuted and rejected; but if this Royal Law be thus established, how dreadful must be the con∣tinued weekly pollution of it after Christs call to repentance and reformation? God hath long winked at the dayes of our ignorance
but he will not long bear with wilfulness. As for you the beloved spouse of Christ (Elders, Deacons and Brethren) I do bless the Al∣mighty for you; I can never sufficiently ad∣mire that unexpected passage of providence that made plain my path unto you; and tru∣ly since God hath so eminently crowned my weak (but willing) endeavours among you, we cannot without ingratitude for get the many fatherly favours and constant encou∣ragements of that worthy instrument who first invited me to serve you.
The good Lord strengthen us by the choice graces of his precious spirit that we may never forfeit our interest in this honoured Patriot, or in the least blemish our most holy profession. Your gracious submission to gospel truth hath filled my soul with joy, and I am sure God hath enriched your hearts with gifts and grace since your souls were set towards his Sabbath. Tis very much for yoar sakes (who have earnestly desired it) that I have thus far engaged; wherefore with endeared bowels of love I present it to you, the good Spirit engrave it in your hearts that you may honour it in your lives, till the Lord of the Sabbath crown all your services and suffer∣ings with everlasting rest. Dear Brethren cease not to pour out your souls on the be half of,

