



Much Honored Sir,
HAVING considered the great diligence of men formerly, and what per∣fection they would arrive unto in knowledge, be¦fore they undertook the Ministry: and withall the earnestness of some in these times, that decry learning and pretend wholy to a Spirit: and having also had
some thoughts to betake my selfe to the study of Divinity, I stood amazed what I should doe. And truly, at first (through my ignorance I confess) I knew not whe∣ther those Persons might not be in the right: Sure I was, they tooke the easiest and shortest way to (if I may so phrase it) Preaching. But deliberating with my self, I resolved to study the Question, and to be convinced in the point. Hav∣ing examined the Arguments on both sides, my reason presently condemned the haters of humane learning, as irrational, brutish and irreligious persons; that took their rise either from their ignorance, for Scientia non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem: or from malice, and a de∣sire to have religion, Iulian like, betray∣ed, or lastly from avarice, and a Sacrile∣gious mind to devour the revenues, that Benefactors have bestowed upon the Schooles of learning. Now being fully sa∣tisfied, They were guilty of some of these, or of all: and digesting my thoughts in∣to some order, I compil'd this small Trea∣tise,
the which I resolved to expose to the veiw of one, that made good my Thesis in all its respects, and that is, Reve∣rend Sir your self; who have been pleas∣ed formerly to honour me with the writ∣ing out of some of your most learned Ser∣mons. The which could I imitate in the stile, and transcribe in my conversation: the one would bespeak me eminent for knowledge, the other for holyness: from the former I might promise my selfrepute here, and from the latter, happiness here∣after.
Indeed, all that I pretend hereby, is to acquit my self with due gratitude to you for your many favours: and let me further tell you, the subject I handle made me reflect on the eminency of your learn∣ing. And be it spoken to the Honour of your person, and the Ʋniversity wherein you live: My Lord Bishop then of Lin∣colne, Docter Williams (whilst you honored his family with your learning and Piety) gave this honorable character of you, that you were the best read in the
Fathers of any he ever knew.
I wish heartily, I had as much elo∣quence to express the excellency of your knowledge in all manner of learning, as I doe hereby tender respect and zeal to your service. But I must comply with your Modesty, that thinkes every one too luxuriant in your praises, and no body spa∣ring enough. I shall say no more, but humbly beg your pardon for this boldness, and to retaine me under the title of,
h. Church Oxon July 14. 1659
Most worthy Sir, 
