



May it please your Grace.
THE inconsiderat censures of half wit∣ted Critiks have canonized the custom of dedicating books to great persons; at least they have so extenuated the crime, that I despair not to obtain your Graces Pardon for my presump∣tion of prefixing your name to this Treatise, without your consent or knowledge. But if the general custom be not a lawful excuse for my ambitious solicitation of your Graces patronage, I must transfer the fault from my self the Author, and lay it on the Ar∣gument of my book, which is so proper for a person of your Graces high birth, profound judgment, and publick



trust, thus without violence to the work; it could hardly be offerd to any other: The Argument, My Lord, of this Book, is Liberty of Conscience, which is the most rea∣sonable o all liberties; it is the spiritual birthright of our souls, and the only human prerogative that cannot be forc't or forfeited. Though our selves be slaves, our thoughts are free, and so much our own, that none but the sear∣cher of hearts can know them. God himself doth not vse violence: against our opinns; when he commands us o change them, he doth not compell us by rigor and penal∣ties, but convinceth us by reason and miracles.
My Lord, Princes are called Gods in the Scripture, and therfore ought to imitat divin pertions. How much your Grace doth excell in this perfection of being avers from compelling mens Consciences, is so notorious, that any man may without flattery (the common vice of Epistles Dedicatory) publish and print your vertues. In this one of patronizing Liberty of Conscience, are so ma∣ny comprehended, that did I vndertake to enumerat▪ and explain them, this short Epistle must have bin a vast volum: Its an eminent part of Religion to propagat and persuade it by reason: Its Charity, to consider and com∣mierat other mens capacitys, how capricious soever  prudence to proportion the laws to tender Consciences. On the contrary, the zeal of persecution, is but a Cloa of ambition for men of one persuasion to exclude all other

from places of profit, trust, and honor, wherof the Zea∣lots would never be thought worthy, if such (as the penal laws exclude) did conform to the Church of England. And when any one doth becom a conformist, none is more sorry for his Conversion then they that pretended to design and effect it by persecution; because the num∣ber of Proselits doth diminish the profit, and destroy the projects they had of begging Recusants fines and forfei∣tures. Your Genious and generosity, My Lord, are so much above these base, and destructive ways, that you are be∣com the refuge of all persons afflicted for their Conscience. To be popular vpon this score, and to be the patron of so numerous and conscientious a party, as it is the effect of your Wisdom and vertue, so it is a just cause for your Prudent Prince to confide in your Ministery, and to coun∣tenance your popularity.
I do acknowledge, My Lord, that in som districts of the Church of Rome, men are punished for their Con∣science or contumacy, by a Court of Iustice, called the Inquisition. How worthy the Inquisition is of imitation, I leave to the Judgment of others: But this I do maintain in my book, that our penal and Sanguinary statuts are much more severe and vnreasonable then the Canon law, wherupon the Inquisitors Sentences are grounded. 1. Be∣cause the Canons against Innovators of Religion, are al∣most as ancient as Constantin the first Christian Emperor.



2. They seemed so conscientious and convenient to all his Catholick Successors, and other Soveraigns, that they have incorporated into the laws of their Dominions, the Ca∣nons, wherby the Inquisitors are directed to punish here∣sies, or pretended reformations of Religion; and therfore the first Protestant Reformers in England durst not pu∣blish their doctrin vntill these statuts against heretiks had bin repeald by Act of Parliament 1. Edu. 6.3. the Inqui∣sitors pretend not to act by human commission against mens opinions; they proceed as spiritual Pastors, and the Apostles Successors, and therfore endeavor to re∣duce the obstinat Nonconformists by producing thou∣sands of learned and lawful witnesses to proue, that the Roman faith is built vpon the very same Apostolical re∣velations reasons and miracles, wherby the primitive Church and the Catholick world had bin converted from Paganism to Christianity. But our English penal and San∣guinary statuts punish men for adhering to the ancient and authentick Religion of Christendom, and for not embra∣cing a new interpretation of Scripture, for which there is no credible testimony, or proof, that it is the Aposto∣lical; neither is there as much as a pretence of any miracles to confirm Protestancy, or that monstrous Shee-suprema∣cy, which was imposed vpon men, only to make An Bullens daughter Queen of England, and to exclude the right heirs and now reigning family from the Crown.

Notwithstanding this great disparity, My Lord, between the severity of the Inquisition, and of our penal statuts, J wish both equally excluded from this Monarchy; and that no compulsion be used against Conscience, but that every one be left to choos his own Religion, according to his capacity; it being likely that none will have a greater care of saving any mans soul, then himself, who is more con∣cerned therin, then any other, whether Prince, Parlia∣ment, or Pastor. That God may inspire into every soul that one faith without which none is saved, ought to be the only common prayer imposed vpon us; for that by this vniformity of prayer every man is left to his own In∣quisition, which is much more agreable to our genious then that of Spain; and more likely to make us agree a∣mongst our selves, then any penal or Sanguinary statuts; all which I humbly submit to your Graces Iudgment, beg∣ging your Pardon for this trouble, and your protection for this Treatise.

