


YOVR grace will be sur∣prised to see Far PE∣TER WALSH (the great Remonstrator and Re∣former of our Irish Loyalty) charged with treasonable principles copied out of the tedious History he printed of his own speeches and contests. But if this charge be made out against him, doubtless your grace will neither protect, nor pitty a Friar (though seuerely disciplin'd) for imposing vpon Christians (vnder the notion of Allegiance) Tenents in∣consistent with loyalty, or Monarchical gouern∣ment.
That your Grace forgaue him his former faults (in particular that great one of printing
and preaching against the peace of 46. and the royal authority, wherwith you were then in∣uested) is an argument of your Christianity, and a performance of one article of that peace; That you afterwards made vse of him (for reasons of state) notwithstanding the experience you had of his treasons, sheweth your wisdom, but is no proof of his honesty. As it would be great pre∣sumption in me to examin why a minister of state did employ such a Friar so I hope it is no want of respect to your Grace to let you and the world see, that his late principles are as treasona¦ble as his practises; and seing its very ordi∣nary in statesmen to punish the crimes of ma∣lefactors, when they are no more vsefull, I may rationaly conclude your Grace will not commend or reward Peter Walsh for publishing a book stufft with errors, no less dangerous to the state, then damnable to the soul.
My Lord, Peter Walsh his conduct and er∣rors haue rendred him so ridiculous and odious, that he can not be any more vsefull to your Grace or to the gouernment. And though he still en∣deauors by nonsensical Pamphlets to make him∣self be thought a fit instrument to promote the Protestant Reformation, inculcating (among other absurdities) that the Roman Catholik Church of these last 600. yeares hath erred no∣toriously in the doctrin of loyalty due to tempo∣ral Soueraigns, and that all the Bishops therof
haue bin either Traytors to their Soueraigns, or periur'd to the Pope by taking the vsual oath (hitherto neuer excepted against) at their Con∣secration, yet your Grace will be conuinc't (if you please to read this short Treatise) that this Friar's rash assertion is not only groundless, but iniurious euen to Protestants, and in particular to your Grace, whose Illustrious family hath giuen to the Catholik Church loyal and holy Pre∣lats, as well as great Commanders of Armies, and Gouernors of Kingdoms to the english Monarchy. And though Ireland had the mis∣fortune of a meeting of Bishops at Iamestown, from whom the distraction of the times drew a Declaration and Excommunication, not approued of by the Supreme Pastor, or any other Catholik Bishops, and as good as condemn'd euen by themselues in the subsequent Assembly of Lo∣ghreagh 7. Dec. 1650. Yet certain it is, and partly known to your Grace, that Doctor Enos his libel against your Grace and the peace of 46. together with Peter Walsh his printed ap∣probation of the said libel, and the Nuncius his Excommunication, (writ and fix'd with Peter walsh his own hand vpon the gates of your Castle of Kilkenny) did greater mischief, and obstructed more your noble design of preseruing (by a sea∣sonable peace in the yeare 46.) the late King and his Kingdom of Ireland from ruin, then the Bishops Declaration, and Excommunication
dated at Iamestown could do; this being issued an. 1650. after the King had bin murthered, Ireland lost, and past hopes of recouery, though Peter Walsh (to remoue the blame from himself) layes it altogether on those Prelats, and writes an absurd History of his own vain endeauors to reuiue a murderd King, to keep vnited a di∣uided Nation, and to preserue a destroyd Kingdom.
This book my Lord is dedicated to your Grace in hopes you will be pleased to peruse it and therby see the most blameable of the Irish Roman Catholike Clergy was not so guylty of rebellion and the ruine of their country as Peter Walsh, nor his principles so sound as at first sight they seemd to be. I am with all reality and respect.

