



SIR,
YOV may well wonder to be surprized with a Let∣ter
from me, which is first exposed unto publick
view, together with a Sermon out of date. The
acceptance whereof from your Candour, I had no reason to
doubt howsoever: but rather how it may be entertained a∣broad;
since there were no end of printing, if every Ser∣mon
that hath been preached in an honourable Audience,
were to be divulged. Nor yet did I intend to have done
this, having kept it above a twelvemonth by me, with∣out
such a thought till now. If my Reader will vouchsafe
to know the reasons of it, it was preached at your request,
as some part of a Sundayes entertainment, belonging to the
Reverend Judges, who were treated otherwise by you, with
great Magnificence. If it pleased in the heaing (being but
dense of matter) why may it not be more profitable in the
reading, and never out of season? we have heretofore been ta∣ken
up in comparing spiritual things with spiritual, but
since through a surquedry of new models (which did not
answer expectation) men have come to take offence at Re∣ligion

it self, in whatsoever dresse she doth appear: so that
we have been reduced to compare even natural things with
spiritual; and by this discourse (I trust) it will appear,
that the later hath infinitely the more advantages. What
others have written lately to the like effect ought not to with∣hold
me: for the better cause requireth  evidence;
and number it self is not despised in the case: besides that
a new form is like cloathing of the first matter with a new
existence. Which is all the apology that I need to make
unto the publick, more then others that have gone before;
especially confessing, that private reasons joined with it,
did over-poise me.
Such as these: you were lately my Mecoenas, and your
brave house, and Family my Municipium, wherein I did
enjoy much liberty, and priviledge. You were also a part
of my late charge, which I was forced to leave more abrupt∣ly
then I intended, and so, there remaineth to me now no
other way of preaching to you, besides this. So that I
send it as a kind of token to you first, and by you to the rest,
to make up some part of my Apology; and to return to
you with such a foot as I had left, to set forward (being en∣closed
with the Seas) such an one as is shod with the wings of
Mercury, of which we use to make our pens. In fine, it
is almost the only way, that men of our condition have to
testifie their gratitude unto Persons of your Quality (to
coin somewhat that may bear the superscription of your
names) which lies the more upon me, since your respects
have so often followed me hither: which seldome happens
when interest, and Relation cease. Let this therefore pass
by your hand, and it will adde more to the great cumble of
favours, wherein you have still taken pleasure to oblige,
Sir,

Brightston in the Isle
of Wight Sept.
24. 1677.
