


SIR,
FROM the Popular Clamours,
that have been raised and car∣ried
on against the Old Monks
ever since the Reformation, it is easie
to foresee, what cold reception a Book
of this nature must meet with. The
reflections of the witty, and the cen∣sures
of the prejudiced, are the best en∣tertainment
it must expect, and the
Author is too mean to afford it the
least protection. In this melancholy
condition, it flies to Your Patro∣nage;
when nothing but such a Great

Name can defend it against the ill usage
of ignorance and malice. For the World
must needs be convinced, that the
Knowledge of Monastical affairs is nei∣ther
barbarous nor insipid, when it is
countenanced by One, in whom are to
be found Politeness, Exactness, and all
other Accomplishments becoming a
Noble Birth and Academical Edu∣cation.
You well know, Monasteries were
in those dark Ages the only Pre∣servers
of Learning, and maintain∣ers
of Hospitality; Orders and Sta∣tutes
for the relief of the poor were
never known till after their Dissolu∣tion.
Their Founders were men of
the greatest Honour and Virtue in
their respective Ages; and it cannot
but be some satisfaction to the remain∣ing
branches of the Nobility and Gen∣try,
to survey the Pious Monuments
of their Ancestor's Greatness, best ex∣pressed
in these splendid Acts of their
Liberality and Devotion. Among many
other reasons assign'd for the founding

these Religious Houses, it was usual
to erect them after their returns from
foreign Wars, both as an acknowledge∣ment
of Praise and Gratitude to their
Maker for their Success and Safety,
and also out of Charity (according to
the Religion of those times) to the
Souls of their slain Friends. It was to
the Conquest of France, that Noble
College, wherein You preside, ows it's
Birth; which never had a Governour,
fom whom that Society and the whole
University could expect more, than
from You, who fill that Place with
all those Qualities, which exactly an∣swer
the very mind, Idea, and desire
of the great CHICHLEY.
It cannot be denied, but that our
Historians and Lawyers must have
constant recourse to their Annals; and
whatever some modern Authors may
in Essays pretend against their Learn∣ing,
most certain it is that the more ju∣dicious
draw their best arguments from
them. And those that neglect such Re∣cords,
find great reason sooner or later

to repent their ignorance, especially
when their Faults come to be disco∣vered
and exposed. Those Great
Men of the latter Age were of ano∣ther
opinion. Arch-bishop Parker, Sir
Henry Savil and Mr. Camden, thought
they did the Publick good service,
when they brought to light those valu∣able
writings of Asserius, William of
Malmsbury, Tho. Walsingham, Ingul∣phus,
and other Monks. Mr. Selden
and Sir Roger Twisden thought they
could not join their Studies more to
the honour of England, than in re∣trieving
from oblivion those excel∣lent
Pieces of Simeon Dunelmensis, Joh.
Brompton, Stubbs, Thorn, &c. which
will ever remain a noble Monument
of their Pains, and Affection to their
Native Country. And the great design
of that excellent Bishop to publish from
our Theater all the Latin Writers of
the English History, met with uni∣versal
Applause: a Work, the Learn∣ed
World may hope, waits for Your
Care to see carried on and finished.

I shall rather choose to trespass a∣gainst
the Custom of such Addresses,
than make the least approaches to of∣fend
You with those Characters of re∣spect,
which Your Virtues exact from
all that have the Honour and Happi∣ness
to be known to You. So that I
shall only crave leave to acquaint You,
that I presumed to Dedicate this
Treatise to You, out of an innocent
ambition to publish, how freely You
have been pleas'd to encourage this
sort of Learning, in which the Author,
because of his natural inclination to
History and Antiquities, has been
thought by the partial kindness of his
Friends in some measure fit to serve
his Country. 'Tis this grateful remem∣brance
of Your late generous kindness
to a Person altogether unknown to
You, and without which he must have
left this beloved Place and his Studies,
that obliges him to offer these his
First-Fruits of Duty and Gratitude,
and will also give You a right to com∣mand
all his future Labours.

That therefore Your Health and
Vigor may be such as to compleat the
hopes and expectation of all good
Men, in seeing You a Glory to Your
Function, Age, and Country; and that
You may by your Learning, Prudence
and Conduct, be a support and credit
to the Church and Universities, is, as
a Publick Wish, so in a more parti∣cular
manner the sincere Prayers of
Reverend Sir,

