



SIR,
AS you will find the following Scenes drawn from the Stores of that great Master Ben, I hope you will think the Contrivance no ill Imitation: That they had no better Success on the Stage, was for this Reason: The principal Part (on which the Diversion depended) was, by Accident, disappointed of Mr. Nokes's Performance, for whom it was design'd, and only proper; which caus'd a Retrenchment of whole Scenes in the Action, that are in this Copy inserted. As it here lies

together, if the Plot be not too regular for Farce, and ought not rather to have been call'd Comedy, I dare trust the Reader for the rest. Notwithstanding all the Disadvantages in its Appearance on the Stage, you were plea∣sed, Sir, to discover some Beauties through the Cloud. However, I am not so much concern'd for a Work of this Nature, as to impose the Protection of it upon you. My Ambition in this Address, is, to owne my good fortune in your Acquaintance, and Advantages from thence, as to Nobler Spe∣cies of Poetry. I speak not with relation to any Essays of my own, but for improvement of my Skill in the best Latin Poets. When Ben Johnson was inform'd, that a certain Per∣son had done him Injury, he cry'd out with Indignation, I made the Ingrateful Man under∣stand Horace. Obligations of this kind, in∣deed, are unvaluable. I presume (Sir) I could before pretend to a Grammarians, or Commentators knowledge; but this was un∣derstanding like a Dutchman:


From whom, the Author's more obscure become,
The Fogs of Holland cloud the Wit of Rome;
While these the Vehicle of Words essay,
The subtle Spirit flies unseen away.

They understood the Words, but you the Poet. Your Judgment does not terminate in what is express'd, but takes in the whole Scope of Fancy, and feels the flame of the Poet, while he labour'd with Inspiration. In short (Sir) you make their very Spirit visi∣ble; and with piercing sight discover those Beauties, which their Art threw off to such distance, that they were not discern'd by Vul∣gar Eyes. The World must allow me to pay this Acknowledgment: It is what I heard own'd (while a Stranger to you) by a E. of Roscommon. first-rate Judge, as well as Poet; he that was at once the Horace and Mecaenas of our Age. know, Sir, you will pardon me, if on menti∣on of that Noble Person, I stain this Paper with a Tear.


Multis ille bonis flebilis Occidit,
Nulli flebilior quam Tibi-------

Of many Obligations that endear his Me∣mory to me, the Opportunity of your Ac∣quaintance was not the least; while I have heard you discant together on your beloved Authours, Time seem'd to me to be revolv'd, and I thought my self in the Court of Augu∣stus. I think the Nation is duly grateful for what he has transplanted from their Language, though sparing of those Favours. We like∣wise know, Sir, that you have not fate down with the bare knowledge of those ancient Ro∣man Treasures, without giving some parts of them the English Stamp. And to hoard them in Secresy, is injury to your Coun∣try. It was always thought the Perfection of an Honourable person, to be an Accom∣plisht Courtier, Souldier, and Scholar. All which Capacities are (Sir) without Comple∣ment, ascrib'd to You. Nor may we omit, that Justice, Courtesie, and Condescention, which (in relation to Inferiours) compleat

the Character of a Gentleman. As a just Respect on these Worthy Accounts is ren∣dred to you by all Persons, it is by none more sincerely paid, than by,
SIR,

