



I Presume to present to your Honors a Continuation of the full Review of a Dis∣pute of which the first part was pre∣sented to his Highness more than a year ago. To which Writing I take my self many ways obliged, not one∣ly because of my own engagements, but also, and that chiefly, by reason of the important concernment that the truth be preserved. I am sensible that the increase of Books is thought a grievance by many, and that none

are more unwelcome, than such as are about Controversies, specially when they tend to unsettle men in what they have received, and in no point more than in this. Few have abilitie to discern in Disputes which part pre∣ponderates: Few are willing to be∣stow pains in such unpleasant studies: Few can digest a truth which expo∣seth to reproach and loss. These and other considerations had kept me from this adventure, if my allegiance to Christ had not bound me to vin∣dicate his truth, and charity to men tied me to endeavour their undecei∣ving. Wisdom must be justified by her children: nor can he give a good account to Christ at his appearing, who shall, out of undue respects, leave to spoil the truth with which he is intrusted. Polemick Writing are

to few delightfull, yet necessary; it being unlikely that practice of piey should flourish when Doctrines of Faith and Worship are corrupted. They that decline studying and meddling with Controversies, if they be not sluggish, yet are likely unwary, not heeding that thereby the wall is unrepaired, which should keep out Seducers from perverting the Churches. Peace is indeed very desirable, but Truth is put first, Zech. 8. 19. Were men better temper'd than commonly they are, dissenters might ventilate things in question with less offence; I mention it with rejoycing, as a sign of Gods presence with us, in hope that the same Spirit of unanimity will diffuse it self among our Christian brethren throughout the Nation. That Dissenters and Contenders in writing, and otherwise, in this and other points, for their several judgments, have acted hitherto in the business of approving publick Preachers with much harmony of minde, and agreement of votes; Surely the work of Christ would be much advanced by a firm consociation in order to the work of Christ so far as we agree, though there should re∣main, as no doubt there will, diversities of

opinions in things disputable. Nor do I de∣spair that Disputes will be mannaged with more sweetness of spirit, candour, and tender∣ness towards dissenters than formerly they have been.
In this hope my intention is (with Gods assistence) to prosecute the Dispute begun, a part whereof I now tender to your Honours, being desirous that my self, and the cause I mannage should stand right in your eys, who are the eys of the Common-wealth. For whom I beg light from Heaven toguide you in your way, and help from him, who hath been hitherto your strength, and who will be with you, while you be with him, and remain,
London, June 1. 1654.

