



Right Honourable,
THe infallible mouth of the Arch Doctor of all truth hath told us, that eve∣ry Scribe which is taught unto the kingdome of hea∣ven, is like unto a housholder, which bringeth forth out of his Treasure things both new and old. Mat. 13.52.

 Answerable hereunto, there hath beene in former ages of the Church and are also now in these latter times, many able and Orthodox Divines, whose hearty desire for the good of o∣thers, have stirred them up to write for the advancement of true Religion, and the benefit of the Church of Christ, that through Gods blessing upon their writings, they might win many soules unto God: whereby being dead them∣selves, they might still speake to those that are alive; that so their holy DO∣CTRINE might be transmitted, and propagated unto posterity after them.
Of which number my selfe being one, (although the meanest of all the rest) labouring in the same Vineyard, have thought it necessary to gather one handfull of Grapes, and carry them to the Presse, thereby to increase the water of life, wherewith to refresh the Church of Christ when she is either sick, or sorrowfull.
The which as the poor widdowes Mite will adde somewhat to the Chur∣ches
treasury; according to that Talent. which the Lord hath lent me.
And in this Age, there was never greater cause for Spirituall Physitians, to provide restoring comfortable Cor∣dialls, for sick, cast downe, and deje∣cted soules, then in these present deplo∣rable and calamitous dayes.
Naturall experiment tacitly tels us, that the sad expression of woefull cala∣mity, can never be welcome to a truly Christian, and sympathizing heart.
This Ioab the Generall of King Da∣vids hoast knew right well, and there∣fore he would not suffer Ahimaaz whom he loved, to carry tydings to King David of Absaloms death. 2 Sam. 18.20.
The Sword of the late, domestick, unnaturall, and intestine Wars, hath eaten up many thousands of our En∣glish Nation, yea, hath swiftly snatched them away, even as the Oxe licketh up the grasse: so great have Rubens di∣visions beene in our Land.
My self also having borne a great
share thereof, almost as bitter as death it self: For divers of us of the Tribe of Levi, were imprisoned in one roome in the Metropolis of this Kingdome, in which Prison they all ended their dayes: And about one month after all their deaths, my selfe onely (and that by way of exchange) escaped alive; like one of Jobs messengers, to declare somewhat VIVA VOCE, concerning those that are in their graves.
And as an Aggravation to my Af∣fliction, I have beene a long time (and still remaine) under Sequestration, be∣ing deprived both of Living and Goods, whereby my selfe and family are (at this present) destitute of the means of subsistence.
So that, the premises maturely and seriously considered, I thought it there∣fore my duty both unto God my hea∣venly Father, and also to the Church of England my Spirituall Mother, in this her present and sad condition, to ex∣presse to the world her wofull calami∣ty,
together with a Remedy for the same.
For which cause I doe here humbly present unto your Honours this ensuing Treatise, the which may not unfitly be termed A REMEDY FOR THE WARS. Which through Gods bles∣sing upon the holy Endeavours, and Religious Practises, of those persons unto whom it shall come, there may be a present surceasing of these bloudy, unnaturall, and intestine English Wars, and both Church and Common-wealth, even speedily and happily enjoy their pristine condition.
Many thousands of us English Na∣tives (since these troubles arose a∣mongst us) have deeply suffered, and still doe, by a stupendious kind of di∣spersion in Opinion and Practice; and yet how few there are who in lowlinesse of Spirit, and humblenesse of heart truly repenting them of all their wickedness, smite their breasts, saying, What have I done? Jer. 8.6.
And yet I hope the deep apprehen∣sion
of these present Distractions a∣mongst us, doth exercise, and that not unworthily, the heads of many that are of great Wisdome and Policy, to thinke how this distracted Church and Common-wealth may againe be re-uni∣ted.
If ever we would have a wel-ground∣ed, firme, and permanent Peace in this our Kingdome, then must we sincerely performe these three particular Duties.
1. Aversion from Sin.
2. Conversion to God.
3. Humble, hearty and constant Prayer unto God, to inable us by the power of his grace and blessed Spirit, for the speedy and constant performance of both.
At the request and importunity of some who are more able (both in gifts of Nature and Learning) then my self, who having had a sight of this Booke (privately in my Study) before it was fully finished, I was prevailed with to present it to the publike view; and at their instance being resolved so to doe,
I called to mind your Noble Lordship, (as in duty I am obliged) who so wil∣lingly, freely and speedily condescen∣ded to my Enlargement by the way of Exchange when I was in Prison; hum∣bly craving the peaceable Passage of this my Booke under the shelter of your Honourable Patronage, and Pro∣tection; being well assured, that your Honourable Name, and Noble Aspect, casting an approbatious and indulgent eye upon it, have such attractive power in them; as that by vertue thereof, they will set such a splendid luster up∣on this my weake Worke, that thereby as by the efficacy of a Load-stone, the eyes and hearts of many thousands will be drawne unto it: whereby also it may take the deeper impression in their hearts, for the reformation of their lives, and the conversion of their soules unto God, through Jesus Christ: the which (through Gods blessing upon it) may greatly conduce to the glory of the God of Peace, and the benefit and comfort of many poore disquieted soules.

 I humbly intreat your Noble Lord∣ships charitable, and candid censure, for my Super-audacity in this nature; For through the fervent zeale which I have for the glory of God, and hearty desire for the salvation of his childrens souls, wishing also both the present per∣manent Peace, and the speedy continuing Comfort, of his distressed Militant Church, in this our disquieted, perplex∣ed, and distracted Kingdome:
I have (in imitation of Saint Paul to his Romans) somewhat boldly after a sort, written for the benefit of the English Natives, as one that putteth them in re∣membrance, through the grace that is gi∣ven me of God. Rom. 15.15.
I doe ingenuously and submissively confesse my great and over-boldnesse to Dedicate this weake worke unto your Honour: yet I humbly beseech your Honour both to pardon this my boldnesse, and to accept the minde of the Offerer; accept also the Booke offered, if not for the Authour of the Booke, yet for the Authour of the Text,
and those necessary things contained therein, being pertinent to these present times.
And thus fearing to hinder the course of your Honours more serious cogitations, in all humility I take my leave: heartily desiring Almighty God, that when the last Period of your mor∣tall life shall present it self; you may looke Death in the face without Dread; the Grave without Feare; the Lord Je∣sus with Comfort; and Jehovah bles∣sed for ever, with everlasting joy.

