



HAving presented the two former Parts of this Review to His Highness, and His Council; I take boldness to tender this to your Honours, as those who are intrusted with the affairs of these Nations (in which are many Churches of Christ, whose safety, and welfare doth much depend under Christ on your wisedome, and uprightness) that it may serve to justifie your Honours in allowing those who agree with me in the oint herein discussed liberty, employment, and maintai∣nance alike with dissenters. Wherein your equity and wisedome is very con∣spicuous and laudable, notwithstanding the clamours and practises of those our opposites, who would have the ship of this Commonwealth so ordered, that the power of it should all incline to one side to the endangering of the whole. 'Tis true the asserting of this truth hath heretofore been unhappily managed, partly by reason of the conjunction of some errours very dangerous in the As∣sertors of this truth, and partly by reason of the violence of spirit in them and their opposites, which have occasioned hard Lawes against them, and great hatred towards them. Nor do I know any likelihood but that still not onely about this, but also about any other point in difference, when one party seeks to oppress the other there will be much unquietness, unless Governours be∣come moderatours between them. In the Declaration of the Lords and Com∣mons assembled in Parliament, Ordered to be printed 4. Martii 1647. I read these words. The name of Anabaptism hath indeed contracted much o∣dium, by reason of the extravagant opinions and practises of some of that name in Germany, tending to the disturbance of the Government and peace of all States: which opinions and practices we abhor and detest. But for

their opinion against the Baptism of Infants, it is onely a difference about a circumstance of time in the administration of an Ordinance, wherein in for∣mer ages as well as this, learned men have differed both in opinion and pra∣ctice: And though wee could wish that all men could satisfie them∣selves, and joyn with us in our judgment and practise in this point: yet herein wee held it fit that men should bee convinced by the Word of God with gentleness and reason, and not beaten out of it by force and vio∣lence: And yet May 2. 1648. there was an Ordinance which made it pu∣nishable with imprisonment, to affirm that the Baptism of Infants is unlaw∣full, or that Infants Baptism is void, and that such persons are to be bapti∣zed again. Notwithstanding which, it is to be acknowledged with all thank∣fulness to His Higness and your Honours, that we enjoy our Peace and Li∣berty as Dissenters do; which they who value not, forget the goodness of God, and make forfeiture of their own good. For those who so do, I plead not, but for that Truth and Practise which is delivered and appointed by Christ, which should be encouraged not suppressed by Governours. For this I am moved to appear out of Conscience of my duty to Christ, commiseration of them who have been condemned and injured for avouching my position, and my engagement by solemn Covenant enjoyned by Parliament, to endeavour Re∣formation in Doctrine and Worship according to Gods Word; And do humbly present it to your Honours, craving that if any Lawes do remain in force a∣gainst it they may be repealed; And that while we walk according to the rule of Christ, Liberty, Peace, Encouragement may be granted to us as to others who have joyned in the Common Cause, which will be a motive to us the more affectionately to pray for your Honours prosperous and happy pro∣ceedings in repairing the Breaches, and building up this Commonwealth whereto you are advanced, and for which I am

