



THE True God is styled, The Excellency of Jacob, Amos 8.7. The Glory and Praise of his Peo∣ple,
Isa. 60.19. Deut. 10.21. Though Pharaoh King of Egypt boasted thus, I am the Son of the Wise, the Son of Ancient Kings, Isaiah 19.11. Yet David Glories in this, Lord, I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, the Son of thy Handmaid, Psal. 116.16. This is your Honour, That you are descended of Parents that owned Christ's Gospel, espoused his Interest, and countenanced God's pure Worship in Dark, Difficult, and Dangerous Times: I Rejoyce that you tread in their steps, and endeavour to promote God's Kingdom in your Family, and among your Neighbours. As this hath been the Glory of your Predecessors, so I desire it may de∣scend to, and be inherited by your Children, that the Entail of God's Covenant may never be cut off from your Posterity. The World counts it Honourable when Estates continue, and Lands descend from one Generation to another. But this is most valuable,
when Piety, and God's pure Worship descends from Father to Son. It is said, Deut. 33.4. Moses commanded us a Law, even the Inheritance of the Congregation of Jacob. As God hath commanded, and Commended his Law as an Inheritance to the whole Church, so every Particular Member of it should by his Choice accept the Word of God as his Inheritance, as the Psalmist saith he did, Psal. 119.111. Thy Testimonies have I taken as my Heritage for ever, for they are the rejoycing of my Heart. Chil∣dren will be sure to claim their Fa∣ther's Lands, but it is much more de∣sirable to claim their Father's God, as Moses did; Exod. 15.2. He is my Father's God, and I will exalt him. How Excellent is it, when they Inhe∣rit their Parents Graces? Ʋnfeigned Faith dwelt in his Grandmother Lois, then in his Mother Eunice, and then in Timothy himself. This is to be an
Ancient Family, and truly Noble. As in the Temple of Old there were Treasurers over the Dedicated Things, 1 Chron. 20.26. So in the Spiri∣tual Temple, the Church of Christ, God hath constituted Christian Parents as the Treasurers over the Dedicated Things. Children of Believers are Dedicated to God in Baptism, and Parents should Carefully, and Faith∣fully watch over these Holy Dedicated Things, that they may not be alienated from God by cold Neutrality, or open Profaneness and Degeneracy.
The ensuing Discourse Treats on two Noble Subjects, The Preaching of the Son of God, and The Prison of God, which will be the certain Portion and Punishment of those that reject the Word of the Son of God. I am sen∣sible of manifold Weaknesses, Defects, and Imperfections in my self, that
might deter me from exposing my self to the Censures of a Cavilling Conten∣tious Age; but because my Life declines apace, my Days do post away, my Sun will quickly set, I am willing to pu∣blish something that may contribute to the Informing the Ignorant, and awaken the Secure. Christ's Preaching may be a Load-stone to draw perishing Sinners to him; and the Prison of God may Alarm, and Rouze up drousie Souls, and be a Spur to Quicken them to fly for Refuge, to lay hold of the Hope set before them. I bow my Knee to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Lights, and the God of all Grace, that he would Grant unto you the Spi∣rit of Wisdom and Revelation, and thereby Seal Instruction to your Souls; that being built upon your most Holy Faith, you may grow up into Christ in all things, and at last obtain an Inheritance among all them that are
sanctified by Faith in Christ. These are the unfeigned Desires of

Milcot,
May 11. 1694.
