

never acted immodestly, or broke the peace of the Church about it; but have used all private ways to obtain a Remedy.
You know that Ten years since, I presented some of you with a few Queries, in hopes they might have put some upon new Studies, and thereby have begotten a better Understanding: And I have some ground to think they were not with∣out effect; because I find the Spirits of some men more moderate than formerly.
But that not answering my designed end, to remove the Stumbling Block out of the way of the Churches Peace, hath put me upon this pre∣sent undertaking; by which I hope to prevail upon you, either to renounce an Errour, taken up in the heat of Zeal, or appear to give us such demonstration of its Truth and Certainty, as may tend to our Satisfaction.
My Brethren, I do not in this take upon me to be your Dictator, but with all Submission to be your Remembrancer, to present those things to your view, which by a precipitate and mis-in∣formed Judgment, and the want of due Examinati∣on have been obscured.
I know in this case, things have been taken upon trust, and men have not so warily consi∣dered them as the cause requireth; and some
mens duty especially doth oblige them unto. What I have said about the sixth of Genesis, is sufficient to evince, that there is not any certain or safe Conclusion to be educed from thence, to prove B's position. And what I have said touch∣ing my own Notion upon the Text, is left to every one to think as he pleaseth. It's no Article of any man's Creed that I know of, but my own Opinion, which I must retain, till I see cause from more cogent Arguments to alter the same. And what I have said concerning the Doctrine of Ba∣laam, though I never heard any thing less or more from any man about it, either by Word or Writing; yet I have since been informed, that the Learned Doctor Hammond carries it the same way.
I have endeavoured all I can to shew my self impartial, and have stated the Controversie tru∣ly, without abusing my Antagonist, or wronging his sense; endeavouring to the utmost to bring the Truth to the light, both in the former and later parts hereof. And for those Considerations I have put you upon, I have not done it presumptuously, but with all seriousness, hoping you will be per∣swaded calmly to consider the whole, and then I doubt not but my Endeavours will have their de∣sired Effect.

As for the Advice I have given to the Ʋnmar∣ried, I have done it in all sincerity, hoping it may be a means to preserve some from wounding themselves; and I hope you will also be ready to advise and counsel the Brethren for the best.
My Brethren, bear with the roughness of the Style; you know from whom it is, and therefore need not think it strange; and if you object, I might have had Assistance that could have presen∣ted it in a more refined and polish'd Dress: Know, I have declined it for two Reasons.
First, Because I see men so backward to assist in things of this kind.
Secondly, That whatsoever is blame-worthy, ei∣ther in the Matter, Manner, or Time of its Publi∣cation, &c. shall rest upon my own Head, none else being concerned therein.
My Brethren, I leave these things with you, and beg your most serious and Christian Consideration thereof, craving once more your Excuse, and the Blessing of God upon these, and all other my weak Endeavours: Remaining,

