



My Lord,
YOur Lordship's favour for Learning in General, has encourag'd me to begg your Patronage of the follow∣ing Sheets, which contain a remarkable piece of Ro∣man History, though form'd into Play. I have yet ano∣ther Plea for Pardon, since I impose not on your Lordship's Protection a work meerly of my own Compiling; having in this Adventure Launcht out in Shakespear's Bottom. Much of what is offered here, is Fruit that grew in the Richness of his Soil; and what ever the Superstructure prove, it was my good fortune to build upon a Rock. Upon a clofe view of this Story, there appear'd in some Passages, no small Resemblance with the busie Faction of

our own time. And I confess, I chose rather to set the Paral∣lel nearer to Sight, than to throw it off at further Distance. Yet there are none that can apply any Part (as Satyr) on themselves, whose Designs and Practises are not of the same Cast. What offence to any good Subject in Stygmatizing on the Stage, those Troublers of the State, that out of private Interest or Mallice, Seduce the Multitude to Ingratitude, against Persons that are not only plac't in Rightful Power above them; but also the Heroes and Defenders of their Country.
Where is the harm of leting the People see what Miseries Common Wealths have been involv'd in, by a blind Compliance with their popular Misleaders: Nor may it be altogether amiss, to give these Projecters themselves, examples how wretched their de∣pendence is on the uncertain Crowd. Faction is a Monster that of∣ten makes the slaughter 'twas designed for; and as often turns its fury on those that hatcht it. The Moral therefore of these Scenes being to Recommend Submission and Adherence to Establisht Lawful Power, which in a word, is Loyalty; They have so far a na∣tural Claim to your Lordship's Acceptance: This Virtue seeming In∣heritance in Your Lordship, and deriv'd from your Ancestours with Your Blood. We cannot cast an Eye on the sufferings of His late Majesty, but we find in broad Letters, the Allegiance and Servi∣ces of Your Lordship's most honourable Grand-Father, who stopt at no Expence of Blood or Fortunes on His behalf; nor was Pro∣vidence wanting to Crown his Singular worth with a Signal Glory.

When Civil Discord thro' the Realm had Reign'd,
And English Swords with English Blood were Stain'd,
When out of Zeal Religion was expell'd,
And Men for Conscience 'gainst their Prince Rebell'd,

The Best of Princes—When the Pow'r Divine,
(On Purposes too deep for Reason's Line)
Gave Rebell-Arms Success, and seem'd to bring
Distress at once upon our Saint and King.
Not Jesse's Son seem'd better form'd to Reign,
Nor were his Worthies of a Nobler Strein!
But what Relief can bravest Valour lend,
When Heroes, not with Foes, but Fate Contend?
The Age's Crimes for no less Curse did Call,
And 'tis Decreed the Royal Cause must Fall!
Of Conquest thus by Destiny Bereft,
Our blasted War has yet one Garland Left.
Alone the Foes united Strength to Fight,
And Strike the last Fam'd Blow for Royal Right.
This Honour to the Noble Worcester Fell,
Who, alwayes Brave, Himself did now Excel,
His Friends, his Troops, his Ragland Castle (the Ma quess of Worcester's Seat the last Garrison held out for the KING. House, his Cittadel!
Here, tho' reduc'd to last Extreams He Lies,
His cheerful Cannon still the Foe Defies;
The more Distres't, the more his Virtue Shines,
His Courage Rising as his Strength Declines:
Oft from Unequal Force he Guards his Walls,
Oft in fierce Sallyes on the Leaguer Falls.
Thus while Expir'd the other Members Lye,
Worc'ster Stirs Last the Heart of Loyalty.

Pardon my Lord this Start, for the Subject is scarce to be thought on without Transport. Nor has the same Fidelity to the Crown been wanting to compleat the Character of the present Mar∣quess of Worcester; whose Eminent Virtues have rendred him an Ornament both of our Court and Age. What Expectations then the World conceives of Your Lordship is easily imagin'd, and what Instances of Noblest Qualifications Your Lordship has already given, the World needs no Information: Besides the Goodness of Your

Lordship's Temper, and the Justice of your Principles; your Acquain∣tance with Books, and Judgment in Affairs, so far transcend Your Years, as would secure me from Flattery, though I should Launch into a Panegyrick. But I come to beg Protection, not to give Praise; My greatest Ambition being to Subscribe my Self,
Your Lordships most Obedient humble Servant, N. Tate.
