






A Spiritual Lethargy is the reigning Dis∣ease of this Age: The Design of these Discourses is, to Alarm the Secure, to Awaken the Sleeping World. Tho' Christ hath been a great while Invisible, yet he will Appear to the Confusion and Terror of his Adversaries. Tho' he hath long kept Silence, yet he will roar out of Zion. Tho' his Sword hath slept, yet it will awake; do Execution on, and be Bathed in the Blood of Impenitent Sinners. The Sins of Men, and the punishing Hand of Christ, will find out all his Enemies, Numb. 32.23. Psal. 21.8. He that came at first to sase Men from their Sins, yet being slighted, and rejected, will come a second time to destroy Men for their Iniquities. They that have not prized a Day of Salvation, shall Experience, and feel a Day of Vengeance and Destruction. How woful will the Estate of Sin∣ners be, when their own Accusing Consciences shall be as a fiery Oven, Psal. 21.9. within, and the Vengeance of God be as a Furnace of Fire
without; and Sinners shall be Supported (though but Tares and Chaff) to be Eternal Fuel to this Fire. It will be sweet to have a Well of Spiri∣tual Water springing up within, John 4.14. but it will be dreadful to have a Well of Fire to be burning in his Soul. Alvarez de Semedo, in his History of China, speaks of such Wells of Fire, kindled from Sulphurous Matter, that burn and flame continually. The corruption of the Soul al∣lowed will breed that Worm that never dies. I shall Rejoyce if the said Discourses do stir up Sin∣ners to escape the Corruption that is in the World through Lust, and to flee from the Wrath to come. I have a due Respect to you, for appearing for Nonconformists in your Station, that they might not be over-pressed with Burdens. I shall be glad, if what I have written, may contribute to the Ad∣vancement of your Salvation, and stir you up to prepare to meet the Lord of Glory, and to stand be∣fore the Judge of the whole World, whose Eye, Book, and Balance, will be dreadful to hardened Sinners at last. But that Christ may appear as a Redeemer, to perfect your Liberty, and as a Bride∣groom to marry your Soul, is the earnest desire of,

