



THAT I interrupt your Retire∣ment with such a trifling Pre∣sent (for even your Retirement is Busie) wou'd need an Appo∣logy with a Friend of more Ce∣remony and less good Humour. Your Judgment will set a value on Poetry from any Hand, and your Kindness dispense with the imperfect Essays of a Friend. The general hard Censure of Poetry, and its Pro∣fessors, has sometimes been the Subject of our Discourse, where amongst other Reflections, we have with some surprize, observ'd that none hold this Art in less esteem than your gravest Pretenders to Learning; but tax it on such an Account, as they, of all Men, should least insist upon. Its Insignificancy to the World, What can be easier than to recriminate in this Case? Will not impartial Censure prefer the Author of Chevee-Chase to the nicest Distinguisher in Metaphy∣sicks? What difference (as to publick benefit, between idle Speculations and the slightest Madri∣galls, excepting that the former is a more Credi∣table Impertinence, and the Folly made Reve∣rend with a Gown and Title,
In the mean time 'tis forgotten what Aristotle

himself (even against his own Profession) has declared in behalf of the Muses? That Poetry (Tra∣gedy in particular) is more effectual to instruct Man∣kind than Philosophy. And ev'n Tully is Poetical in pleading for this Faculty: Haec Studia Adole∣scentiam alant, Senectutem oblectant, Secundas Res ornant, Adversis per sugium ac solatium praebent; de∣lectant domi, non impediunt Foris: pernoctunt nobis∣cum, perigrinantur, rusticantur. And a little after, Caeterarum rerum Studia, & Doctrinâ & Praeceptis, & Arte constare, Poetam Naturâ ipsà valere, mentis Viribus excitari, & quasi Divinoquodam Spiritu asflari.
'Tis an Error as groundless as Vulgar, to think that there goes no more to the furnishing a Poet, than a Wind-mill in the Head, a Stream of Tattle, and convenient Confidence; whereas no Exercise of the Soul requires a more compos'd Thought, more sparingness of Words, more Modesty and Caution in the Undertaker. To make an ac∣complisht Poet, Nature, in the first place must do her best; she must give him the Facul∣ties of Soul in Perfection, a Copious Invention, a Comprehensive Memory, a Nimble Wit to re∣pair to this Store-house for Materials on all oc∣casions, a Strict Discerning Judgment to censure this Choice, to give it just Expression, and in short, to square and finish what was wrought off in the Heat of Fancy. Nor is even this e∣nough to constitute a Poet. Nature will not do his Business, he must have the Addition of Arts and Learning, be familiar with the Sciences, acquainted with the Intrigues of Courts, the

Customs and Constitutions of Nations, vers'd in their Languages, and read in the Histories of all Ages. His Knowledge must reach to the Policies of State, and descend even to Mecha∣chanism; have insight into the meanest Myste∣ries and Trades, because 'tis uncertain whi∣ther his Subject will lead him; and he is to speak properly on all Occasions: nor are these Accomplishments above Humane Capacity, for they are every where conspicuous in the Iliad and the AEneid.
I am apt to think, that Expression of your be∣loved Horace, the Potestas quidlibet Audendi, which he allows to Poets and Painters, was ra∣ther a Proverb of his time than a Notion of his own; for he immediately lays this restraint upon't,
Sed non ut placidis coeant immitia, non ut
Serpentes Avibus geminentur, Tigribus Agni.
There are some Beauties common to Poems of all sorts, and there are besides select Graces peculiar to every Species of Poesie; and these so distinct among themselves, that 'tis a question whether there ever was an Universal Poet. Ma∣ny believe there can be no such, the various Temperament and Passion of the Poems (which must be as different in the mind of the Writer) be∣ing inconsistent. Virgil may be urg'd on this Occasi∣on, there being nothing softer than his Ecclogues, his Tytirus, his Alexis, his Gallus; nothing loftier than his AEneid: yet even in these Pastorals you

will find the Heroick turn of his Verse, and the Air of a Muse, too Majestick to be diguis'd a∣mongst the Nymphs of the Plain.
— Illa Pharetram
Fert humero, gradiensque Deas Supereminet Omnes.
The greatest Labour of the Muses is by some thought a Task of Ease, whereas there is no Poem of the lowest Degree, that is perfect in kind, but must have such a Symetry in the whole, and so many Proprieties beside, which the Au∣thor must have regard to; the Lucidus, Ordo, Series & Junctura, and the Felix Operis Summa, exacted by Horace, that the Undertaker will find even a good Eligy or Epigram, a Work of weight. What more difficult than to steer amongst such Shelves, where the avoiding an Error is a ready way to commit one.
In vitium ducit Culpae fuga.
This great Poet and Critique will have even the Debentia dici, sometimes omitted, to secure the justness of the Poem; and yet he will tell ye that
Non satis est Pulchra esse Poemata, dulcia sunto.
Where by Pulchra I suppose he means Ex∣act, and by Dulcia, Diverting and Aery. As in good Painting, where the Colours must be neither Dead nor Gawdy.
For distinction of Characters he has given us Rule and Examples in the same Verses, and drawn in little, what can never be more fully exprest in large.

Intererit Multum, Davusne loquatur, an Eros
Maturusne senex, an adhuc florente juventa
Fervidus, an Matrona potens, an sedula Nutrix.
Where every single Epithite distinguishes the Person and makes it a Character.
You have sometimes ask'd my Opinion to what sort of Poetry I would give the Prehemi∣nence? And will possibly expect some account at this time. I suppose the Question can be only betwixt the Epic and Tragedy. The end that is pursu'd by both, I conceive to be the same (for the later Designs the Instruction even of Princes, as well as the former; (and no Monarch was ever too great to be represented on the Stage) but I will not take upon me to deter∣mine which is most effectual for that end. If you will have my imperfect thoughts, I con∣ceive 'em too nearly related to make different Species; and find our learned Laureat content to have one of his Praef. to the Conqu. of Granada. Sprightliest Tra∣gedies, call'd an Epic Poem.
I cannot forget the strong desire I have heard you express to see the Common Places of our Shakespear, compar'd with the most famous of the Ancients. This indeed were a Task worthy the greatest Critique. Our Learned Hales was wont to assert, That since the time of Orpheus and the Oldest Poets, no Common Place has been touch'd upon, where our Au∣thor has not perform'd as well. Our Laureat has

thrown in his Testimony, and declar'd, Essay on Dram. Poe. That Shakespear was a Man that of all Men had the largest and most comprehen∣sive Soul.
What I have already asserted concerning the necessity of Learning to make a compleat Poet, may seem inconsistent with my Reverence for our Shakespear.
— Cujus amor semper mihi crescit in Horas.
I confess I cou'd never yet get a true account of his Learning, and am apt to think it more than Common Report allows him. I am sure he never touches on a Roman Story, but the Persons, the Passages, the Manners, the Circumstances, the Ce∣remonies, all are Roman. And what Relishes yet of a more exact Knowledge, you do not only see a Roman in his Heroe, but the particular Genius of the Man, without the least mistake of his Cha∣racter, given him by their best Historians. You find his Anthony in all the Defects and Excellencies of his Mind, a Souldier, a Reveller, Amorous, some∣times Rash, sometimes Considerate, with all theva∣rious Emotions of his Mind. His Brutus agen has all the Constancy, Gravity, Morality, Generosity, Imaginable, without the least Mixture of pri∣vate Interest or Irregular Passion. He is true to him, even in the imitation of his Oratory, the famous Speech which he makes him deliver, being exactly agreeable to his manner of expressing him∣self; of which we have this account, Facultas ejus

erat Militaris & Bellicis accommodata Tumultubus.
But however it far'd with our Author for Book-Learning, 'tis evident that no man was better studied in Men and Things, the most useful Knowledge for a Dramatic Writer. He was a most diligent Spie upon Nature, trac'd her through her darkest Recesses, pictur'd her in her just Proporti∣on and Colours; in which Variety 'tis impossible that all shou'd be equally pleasant, 'tis sufficient that all be proper.
Of his absolute Command of the Passions, and Mastery in distinguishing of Characters, you have a perfect Account in that most excellent Criticism before, Troylus and Cressida: If any Man be a lover of Shakespear and covet his Picture, there you have him drawn to the Life; but for the Eternal Plen∣ty of his Wit on the same Theam, I will only de∣tain you with a few instances of his Reflections on the Person, and Cruel Practices of Richard the Third. First of all Henry the Sixth bespeaks him in these words:
The Owl shriekt at thy Birth, an evil sign,
Dogs howl'd and hideous Tempests shook down Trees,
The Raven rookt her on the Chymneys Topp,
And chatt'ring Pies in dismal Discords sung;
Thy Mother felt more than a Mothers Pain,
And yet brought forth less than a Mothers hope;
An indigested Lump, &c.
Richard afterwards makes as bold with himself, where this is part of his Soliloque.

Cheated of Fevture by dissembling Nature,
Deform'd, unfinish'd, sent before my time
Into this breathing World, scarce half made up,
And that so lamely and unfashionable,
That Dogs bark at me as I halt by them.
I that in this weak piping time of Peace,
Have no delight to pass away the time,
Unless to view my Shadow in the Sun,
And descant on my own Deformity.
Queen Margaret cannot hear him mention'd without a new stream of Satyr.
A Hell-hound that doth Hunt us all to Death,
That Dog that had his Teeth before his Eyes,
To worry Lambs and lap their gentle Blood, &c.
And never meets him but she presents him with his Picture;
Hells black Intelligencer,
Their Factour to buy Souls and send 'em thither.
And again,
Thon elfish markt abortive Monster,
Thou that wast seal'd in thy Nativity,
The Slave of Nature and the Son of Hell.
Thou slander of thy heavy Mothers Womb.
With very many other Taunts to the same purpose.
It cannot be deny'd but he is often insipid where he is careless, many Things he wrote in hurry; but for his more elaborate Scenes, what Cicero spoke of the Writings of Archias, will hold good. Quae verò accuratè Cogitatéque scripsisset, ad veterum Scriptorrm Laudem pervenerunt.
