


Most High and Mighty Prince,
IT hath been the Wisdom of the most Couragious, Powerful, and Happy Kings, to make use of Oracles and Prophecies, to the advancement of their most glorious Designs. These some∣times afforded them good Directions, and always gave their Fol∣lowers considerable Encouragements. The Examples of all Histories, Sacred and Prophane, and of our Adversaries, commend this Practice to our Imitation, wherein we are incouraged by many great Advantages which we have over them. The sacred Oracles are all for us, that our Divines have demonstrated beyond all Contradicti∣on. Esdras, whom some have recommended as Canonical; Savana∣rola, whom our Authors extol to the degree of Martyrdom, and the Roman wise Historian and learned Philosophers, advance to the emi∣nence of a Saint and Prophet; Tycho Brahe, Grebner, Baudensis, and other reputed Astrologers, with whom our Modern Foreign, as well as Domestick Visions and Prophecies consent, do all with one Voice promise admirable Success to that Northern Prince who Heads the Protestant League, and Protects their Liberties. That Star from Ca∣siopaea's glorious Chair, which gave light to all the World, A. C. 1572, to observe the then new-born English Reformation; those from the Swans Neck and Serpentarius Foot, which illustrated the Access of your Royal Grand-Father to the British Monarchy, whereof that in Cygnus, An. 1600, ushered it, and that in Ophiuchus, An. 1604, attend∣ed it; All three together give full and undeniable Testimony that this Honour is reserved to your Crown and Family. And that most reful∣gent appearance of the most serene and beauteous Light of Heaven which exhilerated your Subjects at your happy Birth, as it poin∣ted out your Person to them, so it gave utterance to their Joys in hope∣ful Predictions, made all your People Prophets, and turned their Pray∣ers into Blessings and Prophecies. Nor may your Imperial Name, your Royal Emblems, Impresa's, Mottoes, or Coyns, be here for∣gotten, wherein whilst you own Christ for your Guide and Hope, and his Cross for your Standard, your Kingdom must needs be the King∣dom of God, and his Christ. Your George is St. Michael, as your An∣gel-Gold
well interprets it; and the Dragon, whom he combats and treads under his Horse's Feet, is the Head of that Kingdom, which opposes Yours, and seeks by the Serpentine snares of his Tail, more than the open force of his Teeth, to overthrow your Horse and his Ri∣der. It is the Finger of God, which in that wonderful Agate, which I have described at the foot of this Book, hath distinguished his King∣dom, and the Princes of our Faith, from the Papacy, and the rest of the World; and thereby taught us to know who are with him, and who against him. Had you no other just Call, or cause to gird on your Sword, and go out as another Joshua, Captain of the Lord's Hosts, against his Enemies, the publick Voice of your People, who are the People of God, sounding so long and loud in your Ears, the Cries and Groans of the Oppressed through all Europe, applying and appeal∣ing to your Throne, as under God, the only hopeful Protector of their Crowns, Dignities, Lives and Liberties, bring you an undenia∣ble Commission, if I may not say a Command from Heaven. Here, if ever, vox Populi, is vox Dei. The Voice of many Nations, compared to the Roaring of many Waters, is the Voice of God, God in them; the Voice of Christendom is the Voice of Christ, Christ in them. Go on then, for He who went out before Joshua and Israel, his, and their Captain-General, is gone out before You, as before him, and be∣fore your People and Kingdom.
They who have begun to shake and fall, shall fall, and be removed before Yours and your Successors, as they have fallen before the Swords of your Predecessors.
That I have to this purpose at large in this Book, endeavoured to proclaim your Title, plead your Cause; gird on your Arms, encou∣rage your Souldiers and Confederate's Hearts, open your Subjects Purses, in so sacred an Expedition from Prophetick Stars, Prodigies, and no less than prodigious Dreams and Visions. As I am assured, it cannot but be grateful to all your Loyal People, who would most gladly enlarge your Kingdom at the expence of their Blood and Trea∣sure; prolong your Life, if it were possible, with a prodigal Effusion of their own, and give their whole Stock thereof, reserving no Mo∣ments unto themselves, to perpetuate your Reign, in the Breath of whose Nostrils they draw what Life they now retain of Peace, Joy, Trade, Liberty of Conscience above all Nations round about them: So, I hope, this small Contribution, collected out of my slender Stock, will not be unacceptable, thus seasonably presented to your Roy∣al Hands,

