



My Lord,
EVery awakened humble Soul should with the Publican, cry earnestly, God be merciful to me a sinner. Without a par∣don God's Armoury cannot be shut, or his Treasury opened. God cannot take us for his Inheritance, Exod. 34 9. Times of re∣freshment cannot come to us from the presence of the Lord, if our sins are not blotted out, Acts 3.19. If our Consciences are not pur∣ged from dead works with the clean water of Christ's Blood, we cannot now walk in peace, go out of the world with comfort, enter into the heavenly Sanctuary with confidence. How therefore should pardoning mercy endear God to us, ond engage us to God? We are natu∣rally without strength to help our selves, and are also ungodly and so provoke God to with∣hold and deny his help to us. We had rob∣bed God, and an Arrest should have followed,
and an Execution have taken hold of us. It is God's Right and Royal Prerogative, That his Will should be our Supream Law, and his Glory our last End; but how have we debased God to exalt our selves? how have we as it were spoiled him of his Soveraign∣ity, and justled him out of his Throne to esta∣blish our wicked wills, and obtain an absolute, unlimited and an independent liberty. But Jesus Christ died to make satisfaction for the wrong Man had done God, Psal. 69.4. Then restored I that which I took not away. The first Adam affected to be as God in Know∣ledge and Independency; the second Adam was condemned for saying he was the Son of God, Mat. 27.64, 65, 66. and making him∣self equal with God, John 5.18. John 10.36. So Christ paid the Debt he did not con∣tract, and pacified the Wrath be did not pro∣voke. And how much should pardoning mercy engage our hearts to God? The best of men are but reconciled Enemies, released Prison∣ers, pardoned Malefactors. What mercy is it that he who seeth our sins with indignation, should yet himself cover them in mercy, Jer. 13. last. Psal. 85.2. That the God that wrote down sin, Isa. 65.6. should himself blot it out, Isa. 43.25. Sin is a terrible writing it self, and it draws after it another more dread∣ful writing, Job 13.25. Thou writest bitter
things against me, and makest me to possess the sins of my Youth. The Sentence of Death did use to be written, and then read to Cri∣minals. Sin recorded will procure a written Sentence of Condemnation. Punishment is the Eccho of sin. In this sense Sanctius takes the Hebrew word, Isa. 59.12. Our sins an∣swer to us. How bad will it be to possess the sins of Youth? The word rendred Youth, Job 29.4. , signifies also Reproach. It is too often that Youth is perverted so that it is a Reproach to God and to us too. How necessary therefore is a Pardon to cross God's Book, cancel our Bond, and reverse the Sentence of Death? God that wounds us with the threat∣nings of his Law, heals us by the stripes of Christ. He received Wounds that God might be Just in justifying them that believe in Je∣sus, Rom. 3.25, 26. How gracious is God that at once removes from us the Incentives of Wrath, and presents to us the Fuel of Love, Luke 7.47, 48. How precious should Justifi∣cation be to us, that hath a sweet retrospect to Election, and as accompanied with, a com∣fortable prospect of Glory; Whom God prede∣stinated and called, them he justified. Thus we may with admiration look back; And whom God justifies, them he glorifies, Rom. 8.30. And so we may with Joy look forward: Par∣don springs from everlasting Love; flows to,
and issues in eternal Life. What Thankfulness therefore doth it call for? If he justifies, we are no more to fear Crimes past, so they are no more to go on in sin for time to come. Hath not Christ born sufferings enough on the Cross, that men will load him with new Affrints and Provocations? Those do not think Christ's Sufferings to be bitter and heavy, that can make light of, and take delight in sin. The Heart is to be Christ's habitation, Eph. 3.17. and not the receptacle of any sweet and secret Lust. We that daily need mercy, should not daily provoke anger. As the work of Creation is attended with providence, which is a conti∣nual Creation, so the new pardon we need, and God bestows, is a continual Justification; as the Creation would sink without a day by pro∣vidence to uphold it, so Justification would cease without a daily pardon to continue it. There may be a Pardon before a Trial, to pre∣vent Condemnation, as well as a pardon after Sentence to hinder Execution. That the Blood of Christ, which meritoriously purged sin on the Cross, Heb. 1.3. may be applied to you, and sprinkled on you, to purge your conscience from dead works to serve the Living God, is the unfeigned and servent desire of,

Hilcot, July 1. 1696.
