



My Lord,
IT is one of the wonderful Riddles, and deep Mysteries of Providence, That the Church, that hath the least of Sin, should yet endure the most of Sufferings; That the Metal that is best refined, should be most often cast into the Furnace; and, That they that are most white in their Souls with the Beauty of Holiness, should be so black'd in their Outward Man and State by the scorching Sun of Perse∣cution. How hard is it for those that live by Sense, to believe, That they shall wear glittering Crowns, and sit on glorious Thrones for ever, that now are crushed as Worms under the Feet of Sinners, and are
bruised as Grapes in the Wine-press of the Worlds Rage and Fury? But as the First∣born of God's New Family veiled his Ma∣jesty, emptied himself, and hid his Glory, Phil. 2.6. His visage was marred more than any man, and his form than the sons of men, Isa. 52.14. so his younger Brethren are arraied in dark Parables of Shame, Reproach, and Sufferings. The blessed Life of Saints is now hidden, and a base and course Covering is spread over all their intrinsick Glory; they are (as it were) disguised and incognitol in the World, 1 John 3.1. Pignorius observes, Quicquid Taetrum, Saevum, Horribile in Christianos olim excogitatum, & ex∣ercitum est, illud omne (ut ego Censeo) a servis ad illos transivit, De Servis, p. 9. That is, Whatsoever Grievous, Horri∣ble, and Cruel Torments were of old practised against the Christians in the Primitive Times, were just the same that cruel Masters used to inflict on their bought Slaves. O what a dark Veil was cast over the Adopted Sons of God, when they were treated just as imperious and tyrannical Masters used to handle their poor and vile Slaves! Those that the World
hath not been worthy of, have been driven Into Wildernesses, as if they were not worthy to converse with, and live among Men: The precious Sons of Zion, com∣parable to fine Gold, have been reputed as the vile potsheards of the earth, Lam. 4.2. and the heirs of Glory been accounted but as Sheep for the Slaugh∣ter, Psal. 44.22. Peter Martyr, in Rom. 8.36. thus glosses the Words; That they are not preserved as some Sheep, for their Wooll and Lambs; but are like other Sheep, fed and fatted, that their Bodies may be for Meat. Scultetus thus understands the Words, in Psal. 44.22. That the Wicked of the World do make no more to kill the Saints of God, than a Butcher doth to kill Sheep. The Bodies of the Saints have been laid as the mire of the Streets, and their Blood poured out as Water on the Ground, and Wicked Men have been permitted to do to some of them even as they would. Read Isa. 51. last. Psal. 79.3. Matth. 17.12.
My Lord, This being the State of the Church of God (for the most part) in the World, how necessary is it that every Chri∣stian should be armed with Faith and Pati∣ence,
that the Truths of God should be deeply rooted in our Souls, that they may serve as an Helmet to guard our Heads in a great Fight of Afflictions, and as an Anchor to establish our Hearts in a grievous Storm of Persecutions? These following Considerations may somewhat conduce to this great End.
1. Christians should consider, That Je∣sus Christ was not of this World, neither is his Kingdom of this World, John 18.36. and he represents and commends his Disciples to his Father as conformed to him in this, John 17.14, 16. They are not of the World, even as I am not of the World. Christ did but Taberna∣cle (John 1.14. ) in our frail Flesh, and passed through the World as a Pilgrim and Stranger: And all the Gospel-Worship of Christians is set out by keeping the Feast of Tabernacles, Zech. 14.16. And what doth this Expression import? Surely this, among other things, may be hinted to us by this Text, That as we are most gratefully to acknowledge this great Mercy of the Son of God's Tabernacling in our Flesh; so, that it ought to have this Effect upon us, to make us to sojourn in the
World as Pilgrims and Strangers, in expe∣ctation of a glorious Life, and Inheritance in Heaven. We should account, that this Natural Life is not our Life, but that our Life is hid with God in Christ, Col. 3.3. That this Earth is not our Country, and that Worldly Enjoyments are not our Portion and Treasure. Christ hath cruci∣fied our Old Man, and abolished the Natu∣ral Life by his Death, Rom. 6.6. Christ hath put an end to the old State Week, and World; and by Rising again the First Day of the Week, he hath begun a new Week and World. The Eternal Day doth dawn, Immortality is brought to light, Everlasting Life is begun and exemplified in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ: And he is ascended to Heaven, to chuse the In∣heritance of, and prepare a place for all the Family and Houshold of Faith, Psal. 47.3. To this Jesus we are called to go forth; on this Magnetick and Glorious Object are we to fix our Eyes and Hearts. If the Wise Men acknowledged him as King when he lay in a contemptible Cradle, and the Thief addressed to him as such when he hung on an ignominious Cross, shall not we much more confess and adore him now,
crowned with Honour and Glory, and sitting on the Right hand of the Ma∣jesty on High? Shall we dote on a World that is a sink of Sin, and a Scene of Va∣nity? Shall be we fond of the vile and base Life of the First, dislike and disparage the glorious Life of the Second Adam? Shall we be charmed by, or chained to poor beg∣garly Objects below, and despise the glori∣ous Portion and rich Inheritance of Christ above? Shall a short Life, clogged with Sin, clouded with Sorrows, tered with continual Temptations and Warfare, be preferred before a Life of Immortality, en∣nobled with glorious Holiness, perfect Peace, and triumphant Joy.
2. Christians should consider what this World is, and the Men of it are; That they are called out from the World, it self is devoted to the Fire, this Earth must be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3.10. And shall we feed on that which must be reduced to Ashes? Shall we lay up our Treasure and Portion where the Flames will devour and consume all? And what are the unregene∣rate Men of this World, but Spiritual Car∣cases, dead in Sins and Trespasses? Strabo, in his Geography, lib. 17. tells us of a
City in Egypt, calle , The Ci∣ty of Dead Men, because of the multi∣tude of Dead Bodies that were Embalmed there: And he speaks of the City of Cau∣nus, lib. 13. That the Inhabitants were so pale, that Stratonicus said of them, , That Dead Men walked about. And is it not so here? Men that are dead in Sin, walk about, and perform onely the Acts of the Natural Life. The World is said to lye in Wickedness, 1 John 5.19. as dead Lazarus is said to lye in the Grave, John 11.41. . The Verb is used in the first place, and the Participle of the same Verb in the other. This corrupt World is set out by the Dead Sea, Ezek. 47.10. in which no Fish did live: Engedi and Ene∣glaim, there mentioned, were Places that did lye, one at the beginning, the other at the end of the Dead Sea, where Sodom and Gomorra stood of old; and on the Banks of it Spiritual Fishermen are said to stand to draw Men out of this Dead Sea, into Communion with Christ the Prince of Life. The Cities of the blind Gentiles are said to be desolate, Isa. 54.3. because there were none in them that did live the Life of God:
And the Psalmist speaks of Wicked Men as dead Carcases, when he saith, The Pit is digged for them, Psal. 94.13. And shall we not come forth from such a World to Jesus Christ? As God said of besieged Jerusalem of old, Jer. 38.2. That he that staid in the City should die by the Famine or Pestilence; but he that did go forth and yield to the King of Ba∣bylon, should live: So those that stay in this City of the World, must be condemned and perish, 1 Cor. 11.32. but those that go forth, and submit to Jesus Christ, shall be saved, and live for ever, Heb. 5.9.
3. We should consider what Jesus Christ endured for us, Heb. 12.3. How great a Person was he? What provoking Contradi∣ctions did he suffer, and that from base Worms, and for vile Sinners? He sancti∣fied himself for our sakes, to be a Priest and Sacrifice, John 17.19. He was whol∣ly for us; he was born, died; rose again, ascended to Heaven, intercedes there, and will come again, for the good of his People, Isa. 9.6. Rom. 4. last. Heb. 6. last. Heb. 7.25. John 14.2, 3. This precious Foun∣dation was laid low in the Earth, for us to build on; this Noble Grain of Corn was
sowed in the Dust, that we might spring up from him to Everlasting Life: This excellent Bunch of Grapes was cast into the Wine-press of the Wrath of God, that we might drink new Wine with him in the Kingdom of his Father: This generous Stock was wounded and cut, that we as Grafts might be joyned to him, and live in him for ever. Do we believe? Or can we think on these things, and yet stick at any Service, or recoil from any Sufferings for the sake of Jesus Christ?
4. Let us consider how Honourable the Sufferings of Saints for Christ are, Gal. 6.17. I bear about in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus; the print of the Stripes and Wounds he had suffered for Christ's sake. Saints may much more glory in these, than Soldiers do in the Scars of their Wounds. Was it not more Honourable for some of the clean Creatures preserved in the Ark, afterwards to be offered in Sa∣crifice to God by Noah, than for the un∣clean Creatures to survive them, or, for other Creatures to perish in the Deluge? Gen. 8.20. Sufferings for Christ are part of our conformity to him in bearing the Cross, and Testimonies of our Adoption,
that being chosen out of the World, and called into the Kingdom of Christ, there∣fore Earthly Men hate and abhor us, John 15.19. The Sufferings of Saints are short, their Evil things are measured by days, Psal. 94.12, 13. but their Good and Hap∣piness is commensurate to Eternity, 2 Cor. 4.17. They drink of a Cup of Afflictions, but it is a Cup like Christ's in this, that it passes away by our drinking of it, Matth. 26.4. Wicked Men shall drink of the Cup of Wrath, and yet it shall always abide at their Lips; but Saints shall drink of Christs Cup of Sufferings, and the Cup shall pass away, their Tears shall be dried up, their Warfare shall be finished; sor∣row and sighing shall fly away; Weeping shall endure but for a Night, Joy shall come in the Morning, Psal. 30.5. After the smoaking Furnace of Bondage and Sufferings, shall come the burning Lamp of Deliverance and Liberty, Gen. 15.16.
6. God sees and will reward the Suffer∣ings of his Saints, Rom. 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17. Though God doth set forth some of his People as men appointed to death, 1 Cor. 4.9. yet he hath not appointed them to Wrath, but to obtain Salvation by Jesus
Christ, 1 Thess. 5.9. The Plowers indeed make long Furrows on them, but God sowes them with the Promise of Everlasting Life; while Men think to destroy their Gold of Grace, God is refining them from their Dross of Corruption; while Enemies would blow away the good Wheat that is in them, God is winnowing them from their Chaff. As Xerxes stood on the Shore, and beheld the Sea-fight of his Men with the Greci∣ans, and when any of his Captains fought valiantly, he had his Scribes by him, to write down his Name, and the Name of his City and Ship, that he might reward him: (See Herod. Hist. 1.8.) So Christ is on the calm Shore of a blessed Eternity, he beholds all the Courage and Conflicts of his Ser∣vants, he registers all in his Book, and takes it on account, in order to an eternal Reward.
7. Consider the Benefit that hath accru∣ed to the Church, and the Advantage that hath redounded to the Kingdom of Christ, by suffering Saints. When Saints have suf∣fered Death for Christ, their Carcases have enriched and fatted the Ridges of Zion's Field, their Blood hath watered the Fur∣rows of Immanuel's Land, and made it more fruitful: When these Grains of Corn
have fallen to the Earth, and died, many more have sprung up in their room. Peter Martyr, in Rom. 8.36. excellently ob∣serves, That the Gospel hath been pro∣pagated in the World by Miracles and Torments; by Works done above the Power of Nature, and by cruel Suffer∣ings, patiently and joyfully endured, beyond the strain or strength of Flesh and Blood. These were wonderful Atte∣stations to, and Confirmations of the Truth of the Christian Religion.
8. Let us consider, That Christ's Inte∣rest shall at last be prevalent, victorious, and triumphant. Crafty Worldlings desire to be of the strongest side; The Decree of Hea∣ven, Psal. 2.7. and the Zeal of the Lord of Hosts, is for the Establishing of the Kingdom of Christ, Isa. 9.7. The Na∣tions indeed have their time, and are angry with Christ and his People; but the time of his Wrath will also come, Rev. 11.18. when he will tread them under his Feet, pu∣nish and destroy them for ever, Psal. 110.1. Psal. 21.8, 9. Luke 19.27. God the Fa∣ther hath promised to make all Christ's Foes to be his Foot-stooll: Though Jacob be but a Worm, yet shall he thresh the
Mountains, Isa. 41.14, 15. And though Zion be as a Tabernacle, weak and con∣temptible in the Eye of the World, yet its Stakes shall not be removed, nor its Cords broken. Christ must reign, till he hath sub∣dued all his Enemies: And though to serve Christ's Kingdom, seems to be as the Pot∣ter's Vessel, and his Enemies seem to have the Rod of Iron to dash it to pieces; yet Faith hath another View and Prospect of Things, it beholds all the adverse Powers of the World but as a frail Potter's Vessel, and Christ as having the Rod of Iron, and an Almighty Arm to use it, for the dashing of them to pieces.
This Treatise, My Lord, that I humbly present to Your Honour, is not unseasona∣ble. If we look abroad into the World, we may perceive, that God hath made many Shilohs among the Protestant Churches, Jer. 7.12. and he sends us to those Shilohs, to behold their Ruines and Desolations. We yet stand on the Shore, and behold the Ship∣wracks of others; but if he that Parks in the wild Ocean, and treads its mountainous Waves into a smooth Plain, doth not pre∣vent, we may quickly feel and taste the same Fruits of Antichristian Rage & Fury.

My Lord, I have Dedicated this small Piece to Your Honour, as a Token of my Re∣spects, and as a Testimony of my Gratitude to You, for Your Favour and Kindness ex∣pressed towards me, who am one of the mean∣est of the Servants of Christ. As the Sa∣crifices of the Law did not discharge the Debt of Sinners, but were , Col. 2.14. a Hand-writing, or Bond, by which they confessed themselves obnoxious to God their Great Creditor; so I presume not to pay my Debt by offering Your Honour this small Treatise, but to recognise my Ob∣ligations, and to confess my Engagements to Your Lordship. That the Wing of Provi∣dence may overshadow Your outward, and that the Well of Life may refresh Your in∣ward Man; That You may be established in the sound Belief and exemplary Practice of Gospel-Truths, and so feel the Power and taste the sweetness of them, for Your Eternal Comfort and Happiness, it is the earnest Desire, and it shall be the servent Prayer of,
Febr. 7. 1681.

