



SIR,
I Have at last receiv'd the Relation of the Voyage, made by Capt. Montau∣band, commonly call'd Montauban, and I have sent it you printed. You will ad∣mire without all Doubt, as well as I, how by the means of his singular Prudence and Courage, he extricated himself from those weighty Pressures, under which any other Person in his Circumstances, would have unavoidably perish'd: You may also call to Mind in reading the beginning of this Narrative, that you had a sight of some of his Seamen at Bordeaux, A. D. 1694. from whence he set out the next Year to undertake the Voyage, of which he here gives us a particular Account.
He gave chace to divers Ships that he met during his Course, and engag'd at Cape Verd, with a Frigat of 34 Pieces of Ordnance. At St. John's Cape he came up with an English Vessel of 20 Guns, and took her after a small Engagement. Afterwards he took a Caper of Branden∣burg,
and steer'd his Course to Angola. At last he discover'd the English Guard-Ship, arm'd with 54 Pieces of Cannon near the Coast, and fought her during five or six Hours, till they both came to board∣ing with great Fury. But when he was just ready to master her, the English Cap∣tain set fire to his whole store of Powder, and both the Ships were blown up into the Air, with a most dreadful Noise and Havock.
You may have the satisfaction to take a view of so terrible a Shipwreck in this Narrative, as it were on the Sea shoar, and to observe how Capt. Montauban makes his Escape with Fifteen or Sixteen of his Men. He suffer'd Hunger above Three Days, and at last arriv'd at Cape de Lopez, where he went to visit the King of the Country: He has given us a De∣scription of the Court and Kingdom of that Prince; treating at the same time of his Religion, and forming a Project for the establishing of the Roman-Catholick in those Parts. He stood Godfather to the King's Grand-son, by his Son Prince Thomas, and embark'd in a Portu∣guese Vessel, to return to Europe. An English Man of his Acquaintance took him on board his Ship, and convey'd him to
Barbadoes, where he was confin'd in a Chamber by the Order of M. Russel, Go∣vernour of the English Island. After∣wards he was set at Liberty, and tran∣sported to Martinica, where he was pre∣sent at the Death of M. de Blenac, Ge∣neral of the French Islands. From thence he pass'd over into France, and continu'd very doubtful thether he should try his Fortune again by Sea or not.
All these Particulars (Sir) are related in so plain and natural a Style, that you may clearly discern the Integrity and Gene∣rosity of the Author. Indeed it must be acknowledg'd that Sailers and other Per∣sons, taken up with the Management of Maritime Affairs, ate nothing near so po∣lite, as those that have Employments on the Land, by reason that they do not keep so much Company, and have not an oppor∣tunity of conversing so frequently with the more refin'd Wits of the Age; but to make amends for this Defect, they are ge∣nerally a great deal more sincere. There∣fore you need not fear, lest a Sea-Captain should impose on your Credulity: Besides, I have often heard him making a Narra∣tion of the same Voyage, yet never could perceive him to vary in the least Circum∣stance; insomuch, that the Candour and
free Air, with which he was wont to relate the bravest Actions that were perform'd in the Engagements, would soon persuade his Hearers to believe, that what he said was certainly true. Neither did he write this Narrative thro' Ostentation, since he him∣self sufficiently declares in the beginning of it, that he did it only to give an Account of his Expeditions to a Minister of State. Lastly, if you still doubt of the Fight, in which the Sieur de Montauban suffer'd Shipwreck, you cannot but remember that you have read it in the Gazettes of the Month of September or October, of the present Year.
I am, SIR,

