



YOU were lately so signally Instrumental in Reform∣ing the Manners of the City of London in your late Mayoralty, that I have thought it proper to de∣dicate to you this small Treatise concerning Christ's pur∣ging and cleansing his Kingdom from all scandalous Persons and Workers of Iniquity. It is a great Reproach to Christianity that so many pretend to it, that enervate in Principles, contradict and subvert its great Designs. How uncomely is it to be Clay Members, under a Golden Head; for carnal Creatures to claim Relation to a spiri∣tual and heavenly King? God promises to lay all Sion's Borders with pleasant Stones, Isa. 54.12. Sanctius in his Commentary conceives, the Holy Ghost alludes to those Stones that did divide and distinguish one Man's Land from another, in a common Field: And so this great Truth it taught by this Promise, That the Church and its true and genuine Children should be distinguished from the rest of the world, not by ordinary and common things, but by pleasant and precious Stones. It is the precious and sa∣ving Knowledge of God in Christ, precious Faith in him, a precious Divine Nature received from him, that puts a
difference between the Church and the World. Notin and Speculative Knowledge, a cold and barren Profeses, a Form of Godliness, a Name to live, a Lamp of Pre∣sion, are low and mean things to distinguish between t Church and the World. The Lord Jesus Christ will ∣ly appear, and sit on the Throne of his Glory: it  then brand Persons with eternal Infamy and Ignominy,  be disowned as no Members, to be disclaimed as no S∣jects of Jesus Christ, to be plucked up as Tares; to be  away as dross, cast away as bad Fish, and winnowed any as Chaff, to be found such as have lied to Jesus Chri and have woefully cheated and deceived their own S It concerns us therefore to look well to it, that we experi∣ence the Fellowship of Christ's Sufferings, and know  power of his Resurrection, Phil. 3.10. These are  i∣portant and most necessary things, to have our Lusts killed, and our Souls quickned;
Rom. 6.5, 6. Col. 3.1. Rom. 6.13. 1 Pet. 2.24. to have our Old Man nailed to the Cross of Christ, the the Body of Sin may be destroy'd, that a may no more serve Sin, and to be pld in the likeness of Christ's Resurrection, so that we rise with him, yield our selve to God as those that are alive from the dead, live  Righteousness, and seek the things that are above; s Christ will recognize us as his Members, and acknowledge us as his Subjects, and we shall not be turned out of the House of God, but stay and abide in it for ever, and when others burn with the Tares in the Furnace, we seal shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of our Father. If this small Treatise may contribute any thing to your spiri∣tual Good, and eternal Salvation, it will be very great∣ful and acceptable to
June 1th. 1695.

