



My Lord,
VVHen I consider'd that the design of my Authors in this Poem, was to shew transcendent Ver∣tue, Piety and Constancy successful; I was

directed by Duty, as well as Inclination, to present it to your Lordship's Protection. The same pious Affections and Habits of Mind, were no less your Lordship's choice than Education. Nor is our Armusia more hap∣py than your Lordship in a beauteous and royal Recompence, whose Perfections are but faintly shadowed in the Character of Quisara: No single merit obtain'd your Lordship so great a Blessing, but those universal Endowments and eminent Qualifi∣cations of Mind, by which you have charm'd the Affections of all good Men, and which will adorn your Lordship's Name as long as Learning, Piety and Loyalty, shall preserve a Reputation in the World. Amongst the present Ornaments of our Court, whose Accomplishments have ren∣dred

them happy Objects of their Prince's Favour, your Lordship is allow'd to have no inferiour Claim. For as in the natural Body, our Animal Spirits are Supply'd by our most refin'd and vital Blood, such noble and ancient Families, as your Lord∣ship's, are the proper Supplements to a declining Nobility. Many are your Advantages, both of Birth and For∣tune. But not contented with descended Glories, your Lordship has imbellished those Honours with no less noble and acquir'd Endowments. To you, my Lord, our Foreign Ministers may resort, to inform themselves of the Manners and Languages of their own Courts. Your Lordship with the Experience and Pru∣dence of Ulysses has seen both Men

and Countries, from which you have inrich'd your self with all that was good, and left all their Vices and Vanities be∣hind. But these, my Lord, your excel∣lent Qualifications are fitter to adorn our Annals, than a private Dedication. All my present Ambition is to beg your Lord∣ship's favourable Censure on this follow∣ing Essay. It had been Presumptuous in me without some Obligation (which I could not well de cline) to attempt an Alteration in any Composure of Beau∣mont and Fletcher. Those Defects in Manners, that were too palpable through the Work, must be imputed to the Age in which they Wrote; but still there are so many and transcending Beauties in all their Writings, that I iudg'd it saf∣est

to Rob their Treasure for a Tribute to your Lordship. The Metal is still the same, but whether it has gain'd or lost by the new Stamp, must be submit∣ted to your Lordship, by him, that is on∣ly Ambitious to be allow'd

