



MY Honour'd Lord, Since, by some Un∣happynesses (which have made Long Furrowes upon your Back, though they could not,
Psal. 129.3. upon your Face, and, by your unmatcht patience, have left That, as they found it, and have not writh'd, nor Afflicted One
wrinckle more upon your con∣stant Brow) I cannot, as the Du∣ty of my Place obliges me, Preach to your Ear, give me leave to do it to your Ey, and to be your Chaplain from the Press, when you cannot Hear (unless by others) that I am so from the Pulpit: I may remember your Lordship, that the ONE GOD, of whom I treat, though He binds Himself to None, does usually observe this Method, in repairing worldly Adversities with spirituall Advantages; and, as it is His Generall design, to better That man, by any Cross, which He layes upon His shoul∣ders, and to bring him neerer to the Favour of That Christ, who bore the Cross for Him, by the similitude of sufferings; so, in your Lordship's Case, he does, not only Prescribe, but Confect
too; tells you what is best, and prepares those Ingredients for you, in removing you from him who has less of skill, in the Cure of Souls, to him who has more of it; and who would not bless God the more, for such a Medicinall, and Healing Tribu∣lation? As All eyes see your Pa∣tience,
Luke 21.19. Dionys. A∣reopag. in which you Possesse your Soul, though, not very much be∣sides, so I beseech That God, who is , and sees All things, that the things which have Happen'd unto you,
Philip. 1.12. v. 13. Ibid. may fall out to the furtherance of the Gospell in you; that, as your Bonds are Ma∣nifest in All the Palace (and were they not manifest, I would not have nam'd them) so they may be Bonds in Christ, that, even This also may turn to your salva∣tion, through your, and our Prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of
JESUS CHRIST.
V. 1.
These my god Lord, and ma∣ny more Inconveniencies and, Incumbrances of life and for∣tunes, with which you struggle, or, to speak more properly, which struggle with you, have made me believe that such a de∣dication as This, (upon which your life is Comment, and your Fortunes Notes) would be not an unacceptable piece of service, in recalling to your Lordships Con∣sideration, That, which all the Circumstances of all your Af∣faires, do daily Mind you of, that there is but One Heaven, That Above,
Job 22.14. but One God, He that Walks in the Circuit thereof.
When you Tasted, and Try'd All the Happinesses of the Earth together, you were, even Then, too wise, to make a God of Any, or of All of These; in that you
Had Them, and They Had not you; in that they Serv'd you, and you Rul'd them; and an Gbedi∣ent God, a Bounden and Chain'd Deity, a Divinity under Lock & Key, You was never so much Persian to allow of; much less,
Q. Cur∣tius l. 4. scribit de Persis, quod Deos, quo Certius reti∣nerent, cate∣nis vincie∣bant. when Fortune has, now, turn'd one half of her wheel, will you make the Clay Feet, the Iron legs, the Brazen Belly, and Thighes of That prosperity a God, whose Breast, and Arms of Silver, and Head of Fine Gold,
Dan. 2.32.33. you could not indure to worship; Let Men, that wrangle at wealth, and for wealth, the Clent, and the Law∣yer, Creep, and Crouch to such Images as These, and think if they will, that they are well a∣wake the while, whilst That they Dote upon, is but an Image, and not the Architype, a Beam, and not the Sun, least of all,
Mal. 4.2. That of
Righteousness, and they them∣selves, when they expect to grasp it, do but Dream; but let my Good Lord look higher, and Pity the Childings at the Barre; Let Him not be Froward with them that are Froward, but buy love with love; with so cheap a Fee, let Him Purchase the One and Onely God, who, though He be but One, and Onely, Is, and has All things, and will sell them All at the Price of Love;
Prov. 8.17. I love them that love Me; (would they have Estates,
V. 18. and Titles?) Riches and Honour are with Me, (would they have Unmolested Estates, and Unforfeited Titles?) yea Durable Riches, and Righteous∣ness; what ever the violence of Time, or Man, takes away, Is neither Wealth, nor yours; That which Lasts, is Wealth, and That, which Is You, is
Yours; the Philosopher said well—Omnia Mea Mecum,
Bias. but your Christian Lordship sayes better, Omnia mea Ego; your self is, only, and all, your Own; nor can you stand in Need of Any thing from Any Other, but from Christ; may He Clothe you, with His Robe of Righte∣ousness, and no matter though there be never a Pocket in it; with That Robe, you will have Peace with God, and Without That Pocket, Peace with Men too; That you may be bles∣sed Both these wayes; and be so like your IESUS,
Luke 2, ult. as to In∣crease in Favour with GOD and Man, whilst you are on Earth, at least, inseparably, and with∣out any Altercation, in Favour with Him, who is God and Man in Heaven, and, yet, in Both those Natures, is but One Per∣son,
and, in That One Person, is the same God, with the other Two, Three Persons, and One God, is the Prayer of

