



May it please Your Grace,
I Cannot forget your Grace's Kindness and Bounty to me in a Troublesome time of Per∣secution from Man, and a Dark-day of Visi∣tation from God; when, by a Disease, I was brought near the brink of the Grave. In Gra∣titude, I offer your Grace a Discourse of that Everlasting Righteousness which we have in Christ, and of that Eternal Salvation we enjoy by him. Some may be wrapt up in the Skirt of Providence, as the Hair in the Skirt of Ezekiel's Garment, Ezek. 5.3, 4. for a few years, yet, at last, be brought forth, and be cast into the Eternal Fire of God's Wrath, 2 Thes. 8, 9. It will be sad to have a Re∣prieve for time, and then to feel a dreadful Execution for Eternity; but through the Righteousness of Christ, God may not only, as a Patient Creditor, forbear us for years; but, as a Righteous Judge, justify and discharge us for ever. Diogenes Laertius, in vita
Socratis, tells us, That Apollodorus brought Socrates a Rich Garment to put on, and Die in. I here Present to your Grace the Glori∣ous Garment of Christ's Righteousness, both to Live on, and to Die in. Our blind An∣cestours, at a dear rate, purchased a Monk's Habit to be Buryed in: but I here tender to your Grace the Beautiful Habit of our Great High-Priest, to Adorn and Secure your Soul for Time and Eternity. The builders of Spi∣ritual Babel are strangely confounded in their Language; they deny the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, yet promise their Benefactors that they will Communicate to them the Merits of their Order. Sir Edwyn Sands, in his Religion of the West, Relates, That he heard a Capuchin Preach, and that in his Sermon (as a high act of Charity) he said, That he would divest himself of all his Merits, and put them on the Congre∣gation that heard him; but he himself would stand before God, as the greatest Sinner of them all. But what a high strain of Pride is this, to deny the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and yet allow the Imputation of their own Merits to others, as if Sackcloth could Adorn, but not the Son of Righteousness. Tucquet, in his Spanish History, informs us, That Philip the Second, King of Spain, was (when Sick)
directed to take a Crucifix in one hand, and a Candle Consecrated to the Virgin Mary, that is worshipped at Monserat, in the other hand, and in this posture to meet Death, the King of Terrors. But is it not infinitely better, that the Lively Picture of Christ Crucified, as drawn in the Gospel, should be before the eyes of our Minds? and the Son of Righteousness be grasped and held fast in the Hand of Faith, that Death may be disarmed of its Sting, and divested of its Terror. The Doctrine of Justification as∣serted in this Treatise, is opposed by many. Socinians deny the Death of Christ to be the Price of our Redemption: Others seem to over-look the Active Obedience of Christ, as it were not the matter of our Righteousness. The Apostle saith, That Christ was made under the Law to Redeem us, Gal. 4.4, 5. This expression, made under the Law, is not to be Restrained to Christ's being made un∣der the Curse of the Law, the Phrase is o∣therwise taken in the same Chapter, Gal. 4.21. You that desire to be under the Law. Surely the Jews did not desire to be un∣der the Curse of the Law, but under the Com∣mands of the Law, as a Covenant. We are poor and weak, as well as guilty Creatures: we need not only that Christ, by enduring the Curse on the Cross, should reverse the Sen∣tence
of Death, but also, that he should obey the Law, and so take it off from us, as a Covenant of Life. If the Sentence of death should be abrogated for the time past, and the Law stand in force, as a Covenant of Life for the time to come, our State would be hope∣less and desperate. Some account Faith to be too small and mean a thing for us to be Justified by; as Naaman thought Washing in the Waters of Jordan to be too slight a Meanes to cure him of his Leprosy, 2 Kings 5.11, 12. and therefore, by Faith, they un∣derstand all Obedience to the Gospel, that flowes from it; as when the Jews lost the Spiritual meaning of the Sacrifices, as they did Typifie Christ, Isa. 53.10. they thought the Offering of a Beast to be a cheap Sacri∣fice, therefore they would arise higher, and Of∣fer the First-Fruit of their Body for the Sin of their Soul, Micah 6.7. So when some consider not, or over-look the Office of Faith, as it is an Instrument to receive Christ and his Righteousness for Justification; they debase Faith as a mean thing, and Introduce all New Obedience as the condition of Justi∣fication. This is to make a Gospel Justifica∣tion like a Legal Justification, wherein Men's own obedience was the Matter of their Righ∣teousness, and the condition of their Justifi∣cation. The Wrath of God is Revealed
from Heaven against us for our Ʋngodli∣ness, and Ʋnrighteousness, Rom. 1.18. And how might our hearts sink, if the Righteous∣ness of God were not Revealed in the Gospel for our Comfort and Sup∣port?
Cartwright. Some distinguish be∣tween the Righteousness of the Law, and  Rom. 8.4. Phil. 3.9. The Righteousness of the Law is in some Measure fulfilled in Saints, as they have Graces, and do Actions, in some measure, conformable to the Law: but yet the Scripture denies, and disavows Christians having the Righteousness that is of the Law, that is, such a perfect and compleat Righteousness as the Law requires for Justi∣fication. But it is the Righteousness of God that we must fly to, and take hold of for Ju∣stification. It is this Righteousness that gives us ground to conclude, that God will turn again and have compassion on us, Micah 7.19. and that he will not return to destroy us, Hos. 11.9. God will not execute the Fierceness of his Anger, but express the Heat, and Height of his Love, in adopting us into his Family, setting us at the Table to Feast, and placing us in the Throne to Reign with Christ, Luke 22.29, 30. Rev. 3.21. We cannot break through an Host of sins, and get to the Fountain of Life, or venture into
the Presence of God, that is a Consuming Fire, if we are not Armed with this Righte∣ousness. That your Grace may continually come into this Righteousness, as your For∣tress and Castle; Live on it as your most precious Food and generous Cordial, and, at last, be found in it, as your Glorious Gar∣ment, is the sincere desire, and shall be the earnest Prayer of
June 11th, 1696.

