



HORACE Epist. X. Lib. I.
Vrbis Amatorem Fuscum Salvere juemus
Ruris amatores, &c.


HEalth to my Friend, who loves the Town so well;
Health from his Friend, who loves his Countrey Cell;
In all but this, we twin like Brother Doves,
What one dislikes, the other disapproves;
And Covent Garden Cooing but divides our Loves.
Thou keep'st the Billing Nest; I range the Fields,
And taste what uncorrupted Nature yeilds;
Riot in Flowers, and wanton in the Woods,
Bask on the Mossy Banks, and skim along the Floods.
In short, I Live, and Reign, and Joy to be,
From all thy much-mistaken Blessings free;
And, as the Slave the Flamens surfeits fled,
Nauseate the Honey-Cakes, and feast on Bread;
If happiness of Life be worth our care,
(And he who Builds, should nicely chuse his Air);
Tell me the Place that with the Country vies,
In easy Blessings, and in Native Joys;
Where chearful Hearths deceive the Cold so well,
Or gentle Gales the raging Beams repel;
When both the Lyon and the Dog conspire,
With furious Rays to set the day on fire;
Where then, ah where! but here, can Sleep maintain
(That slave in Courts) her soft Imperial Reign?
Is Parian Marble press'd beneath thy feet,
More beautiful than Flowers, or half so sweet?
Or Water roaring through the bursting Lead,
So pure as gliding in its easy Bed?
Who Builds in Cities, yet the Fields approves,
And hedges in with Pillars awkward Groves
Strives for the Countrey-View that farthest runs,
And tweers aloof at Beauties which he shuns.
In driving Nature out, our force is vain,
Still the recoiling Goddess comes again;
And creeps in silent Triumph to deride
The weak attempts of Luxury and Pride.
An ignorant and uncomparing Fop,
Is cheated less in any Mercer's Shop,
Than he who cannot with a wary Eye
Distinguish Happiness from Vanity.
Who prosperous Chance too eagerly embrace,
Feel double Pangs in her averted face.
You once must leave whatever you admire;
Ah wisely now, and willingly retire;
Forsake the gawdy Tinsel of the Great,
The Peacefl Cottage beckens a Retreat:
Where tr Content so tru a Greatness brings,
As slights thir aourites, and pities Kings.


The Stag and ors in common Pasture fed,
Till jrs enu'd, and Heels oppos'd to Head;
But Horns are lucky things and Plsrey sled,
Foaming for spight (and Passion is a Wit,)
He sought to Man, and kindly took the Bit:
But when he fully had reveng'd his Cause,
The Spurs still gaul'd his Sides, the Curb his Jaws.
Just so the Man who has his Freedom sold,
(The nobler Riches) to insulting Gold,
His Back beneath a jaunting Rider lays,
Hackney'd and Spurr'd through all his slavish days.
Whose Fortune is not fitted to his will,
Too Great or Little, is uneasy still.
Our Shooes and Fortune surely are alli'd,
We limp in strait, and stumble in the Wide.
Wisely now take what Chance and Fate afford,
Nor wish for more; I know thou wilt not Hoard:
And when I labour for the sordid Gains,
Or heap the Trash, upbraid me for my Pains.
It Serves or Rules, where ever Gold you find;
But still the Varlet is a Slave by Kind.
Receive these from thy Friend —
Who laughs in Kent from Cares and Business free,
And wanting nothing in the World but Thee.

