



THE Sermon that I preach'd at the Funeral of my Worthy Friend, and your near Neighbour, Mr. Richard Moor, late of Hungerford, I here present to you, with some small Enlargements. I did not think of publishing it, but the importunity of some hath prevailed with me to tran∣scribe and print it. The Subject insisted on, is weighty; it treats of putting off our Earthly Tabernacles. It is that which must certainly be, and it can be done but once; It is appointed for all men once to die, Heb. 9.27. and it is said, The Master of the House will once Rise, and
shut the Door of his House, Luke 13.25. He will rise to shut it against the sloth∣ful and Negligent, against the impenitent and unbelieving. And when he is once Risen, and hath shut the door, he will ne∣ver rise again to open it. Those that are once excluded are excluded, and undone for ever. The Errors committed in this Life cannot be redressed or mended, by li∣ving again; and Christ will never revoke his Sentence that he hath pronounced a∣gainst those that have trifled away their day of Life, and sinned away their day of Grace; it is your Duty and Interest to think of and prepare for the putting off your Earthly Tabernacle. If a man be warned out of one House in this World, he will consider how to furnish, and provide himself with another. Our Souls must dislodge out of these Cottages of Clay, and Tabernacles of Flesh; and shall we not think of another habitation? How will God dispose of us, where will he six us for Eternity? Then we begin to be wise, when we number our days, and think of, and prepare for our Removal into an Everla∣sting State;
Heb. 6.19. then we establish our hearts, when we cast An∣chor
within the Vail; then we provide never-failing Springs of Consolation, when we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen, 2 Cor. 4.18.
How unreasonable is it for an immor∣tal Soul to mind only its Tabernacle-state in this World, and to put all its Comforts and Happiness upon an inch, a moment of time, and on days of an hands breadth? Would it not be Folly and Madness for a man to be careful how he should live for one day, and be careless of all his other days? And is it not worse to be solicitous for the one short day of Time, and to be regardless of the innumerable days of E∣ternity? O why should we be so dim, so short sighted, as to discern only the Objects of Sense, and things near to us, and not to behold things that are afar off; the Feast that is to be enjoyed, the Treasure that is to be possessed, the Country that is to be in∣herited after death. Solomon speaks of it as bad for persons to be born into the world, and have nothing; to be Heirs of Poverty and Beggery, Eccles. 5.14. He begetteth a Son, and there is nothing in his hand: But it is much worse to be born into Eter∣nity,
and to have nothing; to have inte∣rest in no Friend, Title to no Inheritance, Claim to no suitable, and satisfying Good, to live on for Eternity; for nothing to re∣main but the sin of men, and the wrath of God, 1. John last, 3. John last. By the Fall of the First Adam we were all capti∣vated to seen things, and fell under the power of the Life of Sense. It is the migh∣ty, and rich Grace of God that must raise us from this low and base life of Sense, to an higher and Nobler life of Faith; con∣verse with, and dwell on invisible and eter∣nal things in our thoughts and affections, tho we have all sinned, and so come short of the Glory of God, Rom. 3.23. Yet it is possible we may be justified by Faith, have peace with God, and rejoyce in the hope of the Glory of God. The Son of God hath proclaimed a Spiritual Jubilee, Isa. 61.2. that not only our lost liberty may be retrie∣ved, but also our alienated Inheritance may be recovered. The Lord fix your Eye and center your Heart on invisible and eternal things that when you shall be a Steward out of Office, you may be an Heir in possession. These are the unfeigned desires of,

