



IT is near Thirty years ago that I was first Ac∣quainted with some of you, and Conversant among you, Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, I am now drawing towards the Confines of Time, and the Borders of Eternity: I was therefore willing to Dedicate this Discourse of Christ's Testament to you, as a Grateful Acknowledgment of your Kindness to me, and as a Token and Pledge of that Real Love that I bare towards you. The Testament of Christ is the most Noble, and Sweet Subject that your Minds can be Con∣versant about, and your Affections feed on that which was contrived from Eternity, may well be Matter of Contemplation in time, and of Admiration to Eternity. This Testament was drawn in the Mind, and Counsel of God before the Foundations of the World, and hath been since Written in the Blood, and established by the Death of the Son of God: In it there are the most pre∣cious, and inestimable Legacies Bequeathed. God gives
himself as a Father and Portion, Jesus Christ gives himself as a Husband, and the Spirit is given as a San∣ctifier and Comforter; and Christians are caused to in∣herit the Church, and Heaven, that once were desolate Heritages, as to them, though the Testator be alive a∣gain, yet this doth not lessen our Portion, or worst our Estate, Isa. 4.8. as the Death of Christ doth Purchase, so the Life of Christ is powerful to conveigh, and bestow his Legacies. Christ hath passed through the most hard and difficult part of his Work, Rom. 5.10. he died to reconcile us, that he may live, and save us; and may sit in Heaven and Enrich us, and perfect whatever con∣cerns our Happiness. Consider these following parti∣culars, in Relation to the Testament of Christ.
1. The Wisdom of God shines in this, that such a way should be found out to set God's House in Order, and to dispose of the most Rich, and Great Estate; all ways of Communicating Good to the Creature seemed to be shut up, and obstructed by the Guilt of Sin. God's Treasury was Locked, his Fountain Sealed, his giving Hand Bound: but Christ died for the Redemption of Transgressions, Heb. 9.15. to buy off those sins that would separate between God and us, that would hinder good things from us, and sink us down into the Bottom∣less Pit, and shut us up in the Eternal Prison. The Conveyance therefore of a Rich Estate, to Guilty, Beg∣gerly, Bankrupt Creatures, through the Death, and Te∣stament of Christ, is the bare contrivance of Infinite Wisdom. In the Lord's Supper, the Seal of Christ's Testament, his Blood is set forth, as Purchasing us to be a peculiar People, Acts 20.10.41.15. and his Flesh is set forth as Bread, to strengthen and enable us to perform our Duty towards our Saviour. By Re∣demption, we are obliged to be First-Fruits to God and
the Lamb, Rev. 14.4. and, by Regeneration, we are fitted to be First-Fruits, James 1.18. that is, to con∣secrate and devote our selves to God and Christ, and to live to them.
2. Consider the Admirable Righteousness of God that appears in this Testament that Jesus Christ purcha∣sed, what he Bequeathed: he is a Priest of good things, Heb. 9.1. that is, he Merited, he procured them by his Death. Good things do not come to us, as a Gift from Christ Living, but as a Legacy from Christ Dy∣ing. It is now just with God to forgive the sins of Believers, John 1.9. It might have been just with God to punish and destroy; but now, through the Death of Christ, it is just for God to Forgive. Grace may now Reign, through Righteousness, to Eternal Life, Rom. 5. last. And they that receive an Abundance of Grace, and of the Gift of Righteousness, shall Reign in Life, Rom. 5.17. Jesus Christ doth not, as other Testators by Death, leave the Inheritance empty, but Purchases a Right for us, to enter upon the Inheritance, and to possess and enjoy it.
3. Consider the wonderful Grace of God, and Christ, that is manifested in this Testament.
1. That Christ should Constitute us as his Heires, then he might have Executed us as Malefactors.
2. That when the Threatnings were in force for our Death, that Jesus should die to put the Promises in force for our Life; that he should cease to live for a time, that we might live eternally.
3. That he should make a Testament to enrich us with Spiritual and Eternal Blessings, when we had, by sin, forfeited our Lives, and deserved to be stript of all Temporal Comforts and Enjoyments.

4. That Jesus Christ should become poor to enrich us, 2 Cor. 8.9. He became poor, that we by his Po∣verty might be made Rich. Jesus Christ had no House to put his Head in, he lived on what others Mi∣nistred to him, Matth. 8.20. Luke 8.3. He was robbed of his good Name, and censured as a Blasphemer of God, and Condemned as an Ʋsurper, and Enemy to Caesar; they stript him of his Garments, and did not cease afflicting him, till every drop of Strength was gone out of his Body, and every spark of Life was quench∣ed, and he became a weak cold Carcase. Christ was thus emptied to fill us, and stooped so low to lift us up to Glory.
5. What the Law of God requires, as a Duty, by Christ it is Bequeathed as a Legacy, and bestowed as a pure Gift: What is required of the Heirs of Promise is purchased for them, by the Blood of the Testator, and wrought in them by the Spirit of Promise. They are changed from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. last. The Holy Ghost doth ex∣cite, actuate, and draw forth Grace: This North and South Wind, blowing on Christ's Garden, doth cause the Spices of it flow forth, Cant. 4. last. If Duties were required to be performed by our Free-will, and Natural Strength, the New Covenant would not differ from the Covenant of Works. The First Promise was a most Free and preventing Promise, and, in it, undertakes to break the League and Amity that was between the Wo∣man and the Serpent, and to kindle Enmity between them and their Seed, Gen. 3.15. And this Free Pro∣mise was to be apprehended by Faith only: God doth not say, Do, and your Soules shall live; but hear, that is, Believe, and your Soules shall live, Isa. 55.3. The Promise doth not run thus, I will be your God, if
you will be my People: but, I will be their God, and they shall be my People, Joel 31.33. Christ takes it upon himself, to fetch back, and bring home straying Sheep, and, to cause them (Isa. 29.19. though deaf, and dead, John 5.25.) to hear his voice, John 10.16. We cannot sincerely enter into Covenant with God, till God, in a great measure, hath executed his Covenant in us; whence Miracles of Grace is to be wrought on us, that Gifts of Grace might be received by us; Till we have new hearts and spirits given to us, we shall but flat∣ter God, and lie to him in all our seeming Service, Psal. 79.36, 37. Hos. last. It is bad to lie to God in all our Confessions of Sin, and Petitions for Grace, and Mercy. We must not therefore stay in the Exacting Letter of the Law, but have Recourse to the Living Te∣stament of Christ. The Law saith, be Holy, Deut. 20.7. But it is Christ that Sanctifies, Heb. 2.11. and as an everlasting Father, doth propagate and de∣rive a new Divine Nature to us, Isa. 9.6. 2 Pet. 1.4. We are bid to Love God, but it is Christ that Circum∣cises the Heart, 2 Col. 11. To Love God, he cuts off the Ʋnclean and Filthy Foreskin of Sinful Self-love, and Baptizes with his Spirit as with Fire. Deut. 30.6. to inflame our hearts with Love towards, and zeal for God, Matth. 3.11. We are charged to acquaint our selves with God, Job 22.21. but the Promise must help us here. All Zions Children shall be Taught of God, and shall all know me, from the greatest to the least, Isa. 54.13. Jer. 31.39. He that hath heard, and learned of the Father, comes to Christ, John 6.44, 45. We are enjoyn'd to keep God's Precepts diligently, Psal. 119.4. but God hath promised to Write his Laws in our hearts, Jer. 31.33. We ought to live to, and walk with God, yet it is by virtue of
his Spirit put into us, and causing of us to walk in his Statutes, and to keep his Commandments, Ezek. 36.27. All the Earth is called on to Fear God, Psal. 33.8. but, that we may do it, God must put his Fear into our hearts, Jer. 32.40. We ought to Repent, but it will ne∣ver be, except God doth take away the heart of Stone, and give a heart of Flesh, Mark 1.15. Ezek. 36.26. Faith it self is comprised in, and given by Christ's Testament to know God and Christ, containes Faith in it, Jer. 31.34.17. John 3. By his Knowledge, that is, by Believing on him, Christ Justifies many, Isa. 53. Chap. 11.
4. Consider the Excellent, and Glorious Power, that executes this Testament, 2 Cor. 4.7. Ephes. 1.19. God saith he will be our God, and we shall be his Peo∣ple, Jer. 3.33. God cannot be our God, if Idols are not cast out; if Enemies are not dethroned, if Rivals, and Competitors, are not put from their nearness to, and intimacy with the Heart; and this the mighty Power, the glorious arm of God only can effect: And we can never be Gods People, if our blindness be not cured, our enmity conquered, if our Minds be not re∣newed, and our Wills inclined to choose God for our chief good and only portion: Christ knocks, and it is he that must open the door, Rev. 3.20. Acts 16.14. It is he that calls, Isa, 55.5. And must enable us to Eccho to his call, to say we are the Lords, Isa. 48.5. and that he is our God, Zech. 13. last.
5. Consider the consolation that may be drawn from this Testament, that we are so safe, that there is no condemnation to us, Rom. 8.1. because Gods sword hath awaked against Christ, Zech. 13.7. Our debt was exacted of him, our Curse was executed on him, and that spiritual things are made so sure to us by Christs death that is past, and by his Testament that
is confirmed and made irrevocable; that there can be no detracting from its free Promises, or adding barder and heavier terms to it, Gal. 3.15. There is no disanull∣ing, or adding to it: God promises to pour Waters on him that is thirsty, and floods on the dry ground, Isa. 44.3, 4. The Heavenly Husbandman will improve and inrich dry and barren ground. If the overflowing of Nilus makes Egypt fruitful, therefore we read of the Harvest of the Kiezr, Isa. 23.3.4. that Harvest that is caused by the River; much more can the Spirit, as the River of God, make us fruitful.
3. I would exhort you to make sure your own concern, in an Interest in this Testament of Jesus Christ; be is risen from the dead to woo and espouse Souls to himself, Rom. 7.4. If you be joined to the suerty of the Testament, and be Married to the Testator, all the Riches of this Testament shall be yours. God with Christ gives all things, Rom. 8.32. Eccho to Christs call, and open at his knock; let in the Heir of all things, and he will bring in his Righteousness, his Riches, his fullness with him: Christ will come in and order our Thoughts, our Wills, Affections, and subdue all to him∣self, Isa. 9.7. Psal. 47.3. Christ will execute justice, and Judgment, Jer. 23.5. he will execute justice: He will do God right, in raising up fallen, bringing back straying alienate sinners to God, Isa. 49.56. And he will execute judgment in destroying Satan, and his works, Heb. 2.15. 1 John 3.8. Though there were many Creatures in the Earth, yet Adam was counted to be alone till a VVoman was made for him to set his love on: So though you have abundance of Creature enjoyments, yet count your selves to be alone till you Know, Love and Marry Jesus Christ.
3. Express your gratitude, and thankfulness to God
and Christ for this Testament, Paul saith, Brethren we are debters, Rom. 8.12. Never were any such great debters, as believers are to God and Christ; you were Reconciled when Enemies, justified when Ʋngodly, Rom. 5.2. Rom. 4.4. Righteousness hath looked down from Heaven, Psal. 55.11. And Bread hath been rained down from Heaven, when it should have sprung up and grown out of the Earth: How wonder∣ful is it that Enmity should be slain, Isa. 61.1. Isa. 49.9. Isa. 49.24. Ephes. 2.16. and yet Enemies be spared and reconciled? That Sin should be con∣demned, Rom. 8.3. yet Sinners be pardoned, Col. 2.13. That Christ came to destroy Satans work only, John 1.38. but to heal, revive and set at liberty those that were the workmanship of God; he releases Prisoners, and delivers those that were lawful Captives, Heb. 2.18. Rom. 8.2. They are turned from the power of Satan to God, and made free from the Law of sin and death, Rom. 8.2. Children of wrath might have been made Vessels of wrath; have been filled up with Gods fury, and have been dashed to pieces by that Rod of Iron that is in Christs hand. In the Law, if a Husband was Arrested for debt, his VVife and Children might be sold to pay the debt, Matth. 15.25. and to free the Husband and Father: But what Grace is this, that Christ who is the Everlasting Father and Husband of the Church, should be sold to pay our debts? As Eve was hid in Adam, and by a Divine Power, Isa. 9.6. 2. Cor. 11.2. brought forth out of him, so the Church was hid in Christ, formed and drawn out of Christ, cast into the deep sleep of death, Ezek. 47.11. John 19.34. O rejoyce in Christs Testament, glory in his Riches, Triumph in his Salvation, that when sin reigns over most unto death, grace should reign over you thro' the Righteousness of Christ unto Eternal life.
