


Right Honourable,
SAlveto, quantumque Cupis, quantumque Mereris. Your Lord∣ship may, perhaps, wonder, to see Me in Print; and you may, above the rest of Honourable Personages (to some of whom, I am onely known de Facie; to others, de
Nomine; to Most, not so much, as that there is such a Creature, in Rerum Naturâ; and to your Peculiar Lordship Intimately, quem nôsti, tanquam Te, Such hath been the Humility and Graciousness of your Lordship's Stooping Affection) have store of Reasons for it; your Lord∣ship hath known me, à Teneris, to be very far from Publick, or from Private-Great-Commerce; and, had not your Lordship con∣descended to take notice of me, when I was Nothing, that by your taking Notice of me, I might be Something, your Lord∣ship knows, I had still been only a Contemptible part of that Ob∣scure Croud, out of which your Extracting Influences have ex∣hal'd me, though not to a Solid Consistency, yet, to Hover a∣bove it, whenever your eminent Lordship is the Center of my
Meditations, and to Relapse into it, whenever I leave off to think of your Lordship: besides this infirmness of my own Solitary, and Un-conversing Disposition, your Lordship does know, how Un-furnish'd I am, in the Upper Story of the Man, of that, which some have well call'd, in relation to Better Heads,
Agapetus. an Ambulatory Library; and, your Lordship May know, by the Fate of these times, the Ineluctabile Fatum, and, as to Me, not the One, onely, but the
Fati Series,
Jo. Se∣cund. & iniqua Tyrannis Fortunae—the Upper Story of the House too, is, in part, Dis∣spoyl'd of, and, in part, not In∣habited by, a Stationary Li∣brary; and how Such a Man should either Write at all, or Presume to affix your Exactly-Learned, and Critical Name, your Lordship may go on to
Wonder, till I have taken off Both these Astonishments from your Collective Self, qui Unus mihi instar Theatries, and from my Common Reader (every of which may, in a Throng, as the Author Himself does, pass, One by one, for a Single Man, and are not, our Several Selves, what your Lordship is, an Entire Sum) by telling Them, and Re∣membring You (who have so much of the Good Caesar in you, to forget nothing but your own Condescensions, and the Benefits you have done) that, had I no other Books, but That One Vo∣lume of Letters, which I have receiv'd from your Hand, These alone are enough to Create a Genius in Him, who was, before, as very a Fungus, and Stipes, and Truncus, and Lignum, as my self: Nor is This to Boast ought in Me, besides that I have been
so much Favour'd, and Taught, by the Familiar skill of Your Lordship's Pen.
Upon This Stock it is that I dare to write; and must suspect Him to be more Read in Books, than in Men, who though with as Good Authority, as Great Distast, He throws Me and my Name away, does not Judiciously take them up again, when He Sees, that Your Rayes have En∣lightned me, and Your Name Supports me: If He Considers This, He will be favourable to me for your Lordship's sake, nay, for His very Own, lest Himself might Incurr That Un∣learned Name, by which He calls me, in that He is Wholly Ignorant of your Lordship, that is, of the Totum, quod est, in re literariâ; for, You do not only Instill, and Encourage Lear∣ning, but you Possess it All;
As St. Austin said true of Hie∣rome in a Letter to Cyril, Quae Hieronymus Nescivit, nullus hominum unquam Scivit; So, no doubt, He had said as true, had He told Cyril, or Any else, Had He, and They, known nothing at all of what Hierome knew, they had indeed known nothing at all; let not the Reader Censure too fast, and I will quit His Kind∣ness, and spare the Application; and I have learnt from that Hierome (who thought it some Addition to His Fame, that He had
G. Na∣zianze∣num & Didimum, in Scriptu∣ris sanctis Catechi∣stas habui. L. 2. Ep. 4. Nazianzen and Didimus for his Teachers) to acknow∣ledge This the best Stake in my Reputation, that my Ears, and Eyes, drank Instructions out of your Mouth and Pen.
We have, yet, (and we bless God for it) in, and of, England, a Nobility, not onely made so, by Both those Bloods, that in their
Veins, and the other Wealthy Purple they were Cradled In, and Born To, but made more Noble yet, by the Mothers side, the Present Universities, and by their Other Nurses, Sage, and Learned Authors. But, O! may not After Ages, when Them∣selves have no Profound, Greek, All-Languag'd, and All-Matter'd PERPOINT; no Suddenly-Oratorious SEYMOUR, who, at an Instant, can Hear, and Re∣ply to, the Premeditations of a Whole University; no Scholasti∣cally-Learned SCUDAMORE, who knows More of Good Di∣stinction, than others do of Bad Division; no Devoutly-Learned HATTON, who can Write better Piety, than Others can Semble; no Humanely and Na∣turally-Learned TRACY, who can teach Morality to the Pro∣fessour, and Prescribe to the Do∣ctors
themselves, nay to Him of the Chair too; no NEW∣PORT, who is, in Himself, All of These, and Loves, and Countenances, in Others, the very Buds and Sproutings of Any of these; may they not, then, misdoubt, that, even we also, had them not? they may, but that we well hope, the Stems, and Derivatives of some of These, will be their Able, and Living Confutations. Your Lordship has, why I write.
And why upon this Sub∣ject, to Prove That God to Be, who is, not onely All, that is Every-where, but, Principia∣tively, and Fundamentally, All, that is Any-where; not onely in Simplici Entitate, but, in complexione Propositionis, as your Lordships, and My, Ari∣stotle hath, long fince, distin∣guisht, and, in re omni Cognosci∣bili;
Besides the Particular rea∣son (as the first Motive and Ground of this Design, with which the Entrance of this Book will acquaint your Lordship) the Loud Noyse abroad, that there is No God, besides that, which is Diffus'd (and As it is Diffus'd) amongst the People, as well as no Power in the State, but, Ori∣ginally in the People (which O∣pinion, how dangerous and dis∣loyal it is even to Any Autho∣rity, in Any State, if the People have but a Will to Disobey, I leave to the Prudent Wisdome of those Several Authorities, to consider) no Power in the Church, even to Ordain Mini∣sters, but Fundamentally in the People (which Opinion, if not how Destructive it is to all true Christianity, yet how Promoting it is, to the Sowing of Tares, in Christ's Field, if the Some
People have a Will to Ordain a Schismatick-Minister, and the Other People an Heretick-Priest, I leave to the Holy Wis∣dome of my Brethren in the Same Calling, to Consider) and this, so loud a Noyse, that it reach'd even to my Remote, and knockt at my Un-inquiring Cell; this unwelcome Noyse, which did first put me in Mind of what Heraclitus said,
Aristotel. l. 1. de Part. Ani∣mal. c. 5. that, In Casulis etiam sunt Dii, and made me so far from disbelieving a God, because I have but a thin Cottage over my Head, and That Ruinated, and, in part, Fallen, that I am rather willing to Cry out,
Stantia non Poterant Tecta Pro∣bare Deum,
Martial. And to Worship my God the more for his Chastizing of Me; and, then made, me Weep with Heraclitus, when I heard that
Others were Full, and deny'd God,
Prov. 30.9. and said, Who is the Lord? and then made me Mourn again, that That Observation of Pe∣trarch should be true, in this Un∣thankfull age,
De Remed. Utr. Fort. Epist. Prae. fat. in quam nos Deus Reservavit. Qui Damna, Pau∣periem, Exilium, Carcerem, Sup∣plicium, Mortem, &, Pejores Morte, Graves Morbos, aequo ani∣mo tulerunt, Multos vidi; qui Divitias, Honores, Potentiam, Nullum; It, at length, wrought this Perswasion in me, that, as for the sakes of some of my Countrymen, it is Wretchedly-Seasonable, not onely to Cate∣chize Practically, (as He,
H.H. D.D. who does all things Incomparably, hath Incomparably done) nor onely Doctrinally, (as Many) but to prelude That, without which They could not Teach, nor We Know, and Do as We Ought; and to Compell the
Belief and Profession of a God into the Most Doubtfull Man, by the Clear, and Deliberate, Dis-passionate, Un-interested, and Most Impartial Testimony of His Own Self and Soul: So, the Mean, Inconsiderable, if not Despicable Condition of the Author, in respect of this Worlds affluencies, might adde some Weight to the Witness-bearing unto the truth of GOD, in that, shall I say, I own Him not the Less? Nay, in that I Reverence Him the more, for the Counsel, and Benefit of His very Rod.
My Lord, may I not say, of the GOD and Author of them, as a Late Learned Author hath said of the Difficulty of Scri∣ptures,
J. G. in His Ep. to the L.B. of S. that, if, while some o∣thers, Preach, and Preach, and Preach, and Travel a Sabbath-daies, and a Week-daies Jour∣ney
too, to do it, some one do, as well as he Can, towards the making good of this Ground∣work, I think He may be let alone at least?
Ovid. Virgil. and have Veniam pro Laude; Neither—Spolia ampla reportans, nor, Spoliatus Ipse? And may I not wish, that my Brethren, not onely in the Pro∣fession of Christianity, but in the Ministerial Function too, would all of them do what some of my Fathers, and Brethren do, spend their Wits, and Cares, and Pains, upon Establishing the True Fundamentals, and Raising the True Superstructions, and Edifications out of them, and upon them? that they would Itinerate and Sermon Pertinently and Advantagiously, not onely to the State (though to the State also) but, Principally, to the Church, the Kingdome of Christ? that they would be Apostles (if
they are Apostles) that they would be Ministers, not of Men, neither by Man, but by Jesus Christ? Gal. 1.1. not, but that the Outward Calling, the Mis∣sion from Man, is requir'd also; for, This St. Paul Himself, (call'd not by Man, but by Jesus of Nazareth, Whom He Persecu∣ted, Act. 22.8.) was, Instantly, sent, by the Lord Himself, unto Man, Go into Damascus, and There it shall be Told thee of All things which are Appointed for Thee to Do, ver. 10. that they would remember That Aposto∣lical Precept, Be ye not the Ser∣vants of Men? 1 Cor. 7.23. not, but that they are to serve Men also, but, not, in Opposition To Christ, even when they pretend a Compliance With Christ, He that is Called, being free, is Christs Servant, v. 22. and not a Gra∣tuitous Servant neither, He is
Bought with a Price, v. 23. He must Serve Man, but Under Christ, and Christ Himself More; He must not Serve the Pay of Man (Non Tu, Pomponi,
Martial. Canae Diserta Tua est) and ne∣glect the Purchase, and Price of Christ; His Blood, and his Sup∣per, is That Purchase, and Price; These are to be Receiv'd and Distributed by the Ministerial Man; I, and that Often too; not onely, Do ye this, but, Do it often, 1 Cor. 11.25. This is One of the Temptations that our Sa∣yiour has bade them Pray,
Luk. 22.40. that they enter not into, that the Wealth of this World may not be overvalu'd above the Word, and Sacraments of Christ; not onely, not Above the Word (for some do Press that, in Season; I, and, in very deed, Out of Sea∣son too) but, not above the Sacra∣ments also; for, the Counsel is
given, in That very Chapter, in which the Supper is Instituted; and I am not able to apprehend, how the Words of Man, though Upon the Word of God, can nourish Faith half so well, as Those very words of God Him∣self,
Ver. 19. This is My Body which is Given for You. This for What I do.
And for the Manner How, I think I have good reason for That also, both in the Dialecti∣cal and Pathetical part of it; The Example of Saint Paul is my Warrant, and His Success my Hope, in that, as He Spake con∣cerning the Kingdome of God, so I write concerning God Him∣self,
Act. 19.8. Disputing and Perswading. I know, Man is altogether Cor∣rupt, in Head and in Heart, and therefore I use both waies to en∣lighten Him, not onely with a Common Coal, but with a
Torch too, and that of the best-Wrought, and best-Scented Ware I have; I know, Some Men are more Corrupt in Heart, than in Head, and that, having Eyes, they Will not perceive, therefore I use the latter way to Convert them by a Pia Fraus,
2 Cor. 12.16. and to Catch them with a Holy Craft, and a Gospel-Guile.
In the Disputing part, I make use of those Sincere Antients who were never stain'd with That Modern Imputation,
Jo. Sec. Utili∣tas Certabat Honesto; who lov'd Truth more than Expediency, and Counted Truth it self the Best Expedient; who never Swerv'd from Universal Truth in all those three Branches of Vincen∣tius Lyrinensis's Universality, in Time, Place, and Men, that Truth which was Antiently Be∣liev'd from the very Beginning of Time, and Every where, and
by Joynt Consent, and not an Al∣manack, or Ephemerides-Truth, of such a Climate, which, over the Sea, is False; nor a Politick Truth,
Omnia pro Tempore; Nihil pro Veritate. Optatus, lib. 1. of such a Time, which Was Yesterday, and Will be to Morrow, False; nor a Rich Truth, of such a Party, which to Day is False, to a Poorer Man; of Those Antients, who, though at their Births, and in their Bodies, they were of Se∣veral Distant, and Denomina∣ting Countries, yet, in their Minds, and Writings, were , and Taught, not Rome, nor Athens, but the World.
Among These, I make choyce of those Arguments, which, in all the Judgement I have, are, Severally, Concluding; and therefore I may, the rather, hope, by All of them, from the most Prejudicate Understan∣ding, what I Promise to my Self,
by Any of them, from a Sober Mind, that He would first be∣lieve, not onely, what the Se∣cretary of the Holy Ghost, the Author to the Hebrews,
Cap. 11. ver. 3. Cap. 3.8. Primus est Deorum Cultus Deos Credere. Sence. Ep. 95. but what the Secretary of Nature, Epi∣ctetus too, would have him, first believe, that God Is; , (and, at length, that He is, not onely, as the One, a Re∣warder of them that diligently seek him, but, as the Other, a Revenger too, against them that seek Him not)  (else the  will not be :) If One will not Convince this kind of Gainsayer, I would even Shame that Stub∣born, Stomachosum Hominem, with whom I have to deal, into a Confession of truth by a Cloud (but a very Bright one) of Witnesses.

And, though these Argu∣ments, and More, are Obvious to the Carefull-Learned, out of Several Authors, yet, because this Sin of Atheism is a Popular Sin, the Sin of those Ignorant, though Conceited Heads, who Do know as Little of Latine and Greek, as they Would know of God; and because these Argu∣ments have not, till now, seen any English Light, I deem'd it a piece of Charity to some of my Erring Countrymen, to set such a Lamp as This, before their Eyes, whereby they may know Him,
Jam. 11.17. who is the Father of Lights.
And, to take off from your Lordship, and Any Other Lear∣nedly-True Man, the Tedious∣ness, and Nausea of a Crambe, (for, such it is, and but B is Cocta, whatever I serve up to your Lordship, out of the Writings,
though of the Ablest Men) I hope I shall not so much Glut Your, and Their Appetite, with my Borrow'd Dishes, as Sharpen them, with a Mess or two of my own Providing; Arguments, which (if I mistake not, out of that Partiality, which is Com∣mon to Mankind) are of Preg∣nant behoof, for those who have made us believe they are about Christning some part of Turky; and by which, I would gladly pay Use, if not to Posterity, to the Present Age, for what I have taken up upon Score from the former; and, yet, not so Cre∣dulously upon Score, but that I have Try'd their Metal, with my Own Touch-Stone.
For the Perswasive part, though Perhaps I do not (what Your Great Lordship does,
Grotius. Tanti qui Nominis Imples Men∣suram) perform my Underta∣kings,
and have not One Word of Rhetorick in all the Book, be∣sides That of Your Name before it (and yet, had I been so Happy to have known Your Lordship as much in these daies of Thun∣der and Astonishment, Cùm Ca∣va Fauce Globos Aera Tonante Vomuere, as I did in the former Halcion-daies of Peace and Plenty, (Those themselves be∣ing the very Embleme, as well as the Of-spring, of Perswasion, and almost-All Rhetorick, ha∣ving of Late taken its flight with Those) I could not choose but have Learnt to Perswade, much better, by Your Lordship, who are, as absolutely, Lord of That, as You are of Your Own Lands; nay, as You are, even of Me, for whom You shall never need to Compound; Sooner than That, I my self may be Rich enough to Buy back my Own Twentieth
Part, though, Hitherto, I know not What it is in me, that does Offend a Powerfull Committee, Asperat & Magnos in Mea Damna Deos, and makes Them keep me Contentedly-Low, as free from danger of Another Stroke, as from Un-Envyable, and yet Oppos'd Preferment, when I could not fore-appre∣hend any Reason of my Mis∣carriage, and have, Since, onely therefore learnt to Judge it fit, and Equitable, because the Wis∣dome of the Court deny'd me; to whose Displeasure I submit, and, more than That, would Crave their Pardon too, were my Obnoxiousness as Manifest as my Plea; whatever, else, was my Guilt, I am sure it was not my being Rich,
Luk. 1.53. that Caus'd me to be sent Empty away: But, This Long Parenthesis, is Long Di∣gression; and yet, Perhaps, it
may not Altogether be so, if They will be Perswaded by it to a future Tenderness: but, to Return) yet, that I ought to Attempt some Rhetorical In∣sinuations (how much soever I do Excidere Ausis) so long as a Man has a Heart, and Will, and Affections, as well as a Head, and Judgement, and Under∣standing; As St. Paul was my Copy in the Whole manner of Prosecution, whose Practice it Was,
Act. 18.28. not onely Mightily to Con∣vince, but, Elegantly to Allure too; So He is more Peculiarly my Pattern, in this Oratorious branch of my method, and with a Peculiar Appositeness to the very Matter I treat of; witness that , that Short and Sweet, Mining and Prevalent, Yielding and Conquering inter∣course betwixt Him and King Agrippa, (not to be match'd
by Cicero and Demosthenes, though Another Caussine should Compare Both Them to Paul, as One hath done Him to Him) King Agrippa,
Act. 26. v. 27, 28, 29. Believest thou the Prophets? I know that thou Be∣lievest; Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou PERSWA∣DEST me to be a Christian; And Paul said, I would to God, not onely Thou, but also All that Hear me this day, were both Al∣most, and Altogether such as I am, EXCEPT THESE BONDS; a little before, He saies, , I am Perswaded;
Ver. 26. He might have Chang'd the Voyce, and said, I am Perswading, for He was, even Then, and by these very Arts, wooing King Agrippa to believe that Christ was the God; and He, that Denies Christ to be the God, as well as He that De∣nies Any God at all, is an Atheist too, in Saint Paul's Account,
Without Christ,
Ephes. 2.12. and without God in the World; They are Synoni∣ma; He puts God and Christ together, and Separates Him from Both of them, that is an Alien to Either of them.
Nay, my good Lord, not onely St.
Mendo. Vim & Potesta∣tem Dicen∣di, à Spiri∣tu accipere. Lucian. in Philopat. Paul, but Your, and His Lord too, who, as He is God, hath given to your Lord∣ship the full Streams, and Cha∣nels of Both, and to Me, a Scan∣ter Rivulet, and some few Drops of Either, Pour'd from out Your Cistern which Himself hath fill'd (in that I, who was Sometimes sent a Moderator, and after I had observ'd Your Nervous Inferences, went back a Disciple,
Is. 50.4. Taught to Argue, from Your Mouth, as well as to Write, from Your Hand) that Lord of Ours, who, as he is God,
A Diis, & Prudentes, & Fortes, & LO∣QUEN∣TES, Nas∣cuntur. Pindarus. does give the Tongue of the Learned, and, as He was
Man, did Practice Both these kinds of Learning; witness not onely His Name, , which Signifies (though more, even Verbum, and Grammar also, yet, as to this present purpose) Ratio & Oratio, Logick and Rhetorick too, but His Disputing with the Doctors, Luk. 2.46. and His Rhetorizing with the Multitudes in his Sermon upon the Mount;
Mat. 5. What could more inflame their Love of those Patiences and Virtues in the Midst (Vertue's Own, and Proper Seat) than a Blessedness at large in the Head of Every of them, and a Peculiar Blessedness in the Close? a Por∣tion in the Entry of the Verse, and a Certainty, What, and how very Much the Sum shall be, in the Period of it? Each Verse (which I may call a Purse, or a Coffer rather, a Whole Shire, or a Wholler Heaven rather) of
those eight Beatitudes, is a more Compleat Form, and Exact Un∣imitable Idea, how to work up∣on, and regulate the Passions of Man, than all the Numerously-Erroneous Dictates, which the Heathen hath prescrib'd in His Volume, de Rhetoricâ, and the Jesuite in His, de Eloquentiâ.
And yet, though All this, and the Entire frame of the Scri∣ptures of God, abounding with Both of these, do entitle Me to a Shallow and Unequal imitati∣on, yet, since, not Both These already nam'd, nor all the Flori∣legia and Spicilegia besides, will furnish us with Sufficient, either Precepts or Instances, of a Gracefull Well-speaking, and an Un failing Perswasiveness, He will be too blame that exacts me to any other Statera than that of Pro re nata facundia; and He will Wound me beyond re∣medy,
that measures my Dear Lord's River by my Stillicidi∣um; 'tis true, I acknowledge your Lordship (though This it self is not your Master-piece) to be the Skilfull'st Master I know of this Commanding fa∣culty; and Where would I Love to Learn, but where I might Learn Most? Not, Enviously, to Commit your Lordship with the Living, Bishop, or Priest, or Esquire, Hall, or Donne, or How∣ell, but, Componens Manibus{que}
Aeneid. l. 8. Manus, atque Oribus Ora, to Compare your Pen and Speech (in reference to whom Virgil wrote that Verse) with the De∣ceast, with Tully,
Horar. Quem penes ar∣bitrium est, & Jus, & Norma Loquendi, who Himself was a Cortex to all the rest; and with Self stil'd Putean, who said of Himself, that He had learnt sine Cortice nare, that he was, Nullius
addictus Jurare in Verba Magi∣stri;
Morat. with Erasmus, who is well∣nigh an aemulous Competitor with Tully's self in point of Clean Phrase, and Classique Tongue; with Pliny, who reverenc'd his Trajan; and with Languet, who Lov'd and Honour'd our Sidney, in some degree near to the Love, and Honour, and Reverence I bear to my Lord; and yet all these, in all their Epistles, come as Short of yours, as their Va∣luations of those whom they would most Extoll, come Short of my Esteems of You; who, amongst the rest of your Skills, have this great Conquering Art, Artem Celare; and, as Pliny said of Isaeus,
L. 2. Ep. 3. Dicis semper extempore, sed tanquam Diu Scri∣pseris; Multa Lectio in Subitis, Multa Scriptio Elucet; but then, and for all this, He, who so Odiously imployes Himself, as
to Mete your Lordship's Bushell by my Thimble, notwithstanding I have already told Him, that the Shreds onely are Mine, and the Garment Yours, I have no other way left to redeem my Lord's Fame (whom, all I write, is, as I may, to Honour) from such a disproportion'd Scandal, than to take my leave of this Busy-Body-Objector, by tel∣ling Him, that, Quintilian's self (though He could not Choose but Love those Rules which His very Self had made) Prescribes like One Orator, and Declaims like Another; How much more may I deflect, (though I Out-Love my Lord, more than He did His Self) not onely from the over-reaching Perfection, but from the Mediocrity too, (if any thing be so, in His Stile (as it Lawfully may be in Another Man's, and in an Un∣bound,
Un-feeted discourse; for, That Inhibition, Non Ho∣mines, non Dii, non Concessere Columnae,
Horat. may only be implead∣ed against Indifferent Poets) and even That Indifferency would be My Perfection) which Shines in His very Suddennesses, espe∣cially when I have so long, and so longly-sad a time, Truanted from my Best of Masters? Cum Magnis Nominibus, etiam Errare, Honestum est: But now, at Length,
I beseech you give me leave to Come Home to you (for, wherever I am, I am onely Tan∣quam at Home, when I think, and Speak, and Write of You, and onely Then, Really at Home, when I See and Wait on You) and to tell your Lordship, as, Why I Print, and Why This, so Why, Under Your Wing.
There is, and will be Reason
enough for it, so long as I am ca∣pable to Understand What Rea∣son is, and what the Gratitude and Demeanour of an Oblig'd Servant Ought to be to a Mer∣cifull, and even-Friendly Lord, in such a stiff Age in which those two Heats, of Anger and Pow∣der, have made the Love of Many to wax Cold.
To Speak of Your Goodness to me, when it was in Fashion to Be Good, and to Do Good, This Would, Mores Saeculi Ce∣lebrare, and not Tuos; but my Acknowledgements must be as Singular, as your Lordship's Affections Are; It might have Satisfied all my Un-meriting Desires, that your Lordship was, Long Since, Unica nata Meis Requies uberrima Curis; but, in that your Lordship does, still, Beneficia Beneficiis Cumulare, and, in your very Actions, speak
that piece of Poetry, Aloud, and Unfeignedly, to my Worst Condition, Et, Nuper, Mea Cu∣ra, & Nunc, Mea Cura, this it is, that extorts from me a Pub∣lication, not so much of my Book, as of my Gratitude; 'tis all that I am able to return to so much Excess, and Wonder of your Bounty, that Goldsmiths Hall, and I, should upon one and the same Day Rifle your Bags; that the Thousands paid in There, could not hinder you, from Raining down a Voluntary Shower of Gold upon Me also; that You should, After, send Reliefs, and Visits too, to so Mean a Person, Enough to make me Suspect I had injur'd my Fortune (and not Fortune, me) in setting too Light by Her, when the very Ill she did me, had so much of Advancement in it, as that it made me fit (in your
Eyes, as Lowly as my own For∣tune) to be Consider'd by your Lordship; I Laid them Both Together, the Reliefs, by your Self, and the Visits, in your Name, by your Chief of Ser∣vants, and Concluded out of those Premises, had I been Less, I could not have Receiv'd more than the One, had I been Grea∣ter, You could not have Done more than the Other, no Other∣wise, then, as your Lordship was, After, pleas'd to Do, to send your Encouraging Letters also, Seal'd with your Own Arms; What could you have done More, had I been the very Signet upon your Arm? and what can I do Less, than Testifie to the World, how Much I Owe Your Lordship, and, though You did these Good things, Se∣cretly, Declare, what You did, before all the Israel we have left,
and before the Sun? I am sure, it does not break the Command of our God Christ, if, when the Alms-Giver did not let his Left Hand know what His Right Hand Did,
Mat. 6. the Receiver Sounds the Trumpet.
You, my Good Learned Lord, who know All things, (quantum Humana Natura, & Aetas Tua Capere & Portare pos∣sunt) know, (and yet this is no Ill Tidings I bring, and there∣fore not liable to That, Nos Co∣gimur Omnia Scire) that He, who is Already Noble, is made much more Noble yet, the Less He makes of Himself, whereas He, that is not Noble at all, does make it Impossible for Him, that He should be so, by taking upon Him that He is So: I have Ex∣periment enough that your Lordship is not Sowr'd into One of those, who, instead of Ac∣cepting,
upon such Presentations as these, are ready to cry out, Quis Mihi? Quid Tecum? Pro∣ximus Ipse Mihi. Let them Star∣tle at a Dedication, who have not Worth enough to Challenge it, or have not Paid enough be∣fore-hand for it; Both Waies, Your Lordship is a Free-man of England; and therefore, that I may Stop Your Lordship's Mes∣sage to your Steward, give me leave to tell your Lordship, that This is not a Petition, but an Acquittance;
Non Posco, neque Gratiam, nec Aera,
Nec Rubri Spolium Maris, nec Aurum;
Sed Charus magis Ipse sis, vel Aere,
Vel Rubri Spelio Maris, vel Auri.

After all these Confessions, and Acknowledgements, if your Lordship asks me, Why I Prin∣ted a Former Book, and made not You the Patron of it, and Me? I shall easily obtain your Lordship's Pardon (for You are Vir Priscae Humanitatis) if I, first, tell you, that I chose no Patron to it, but the Thousand Readers; and next, that I, there∣fore, Own'd not You, because I dis-own'd my Self; and yet, Whereas That Book Was so speedily sold off, for want of the Author's Name to Spoyl the Bargain, I thought it a piece of Prudence, when I Hazard the going off of this Impression, by the Unworthiness of My Name, to do my Self and my Stationer Right, to make it Sell into Other Mens Hands, by your Lordships passing good Name, and not to lye upon Our Hands, by Mine.

Let me take my leave of your Lordship, with this Protestation, that I shall study never to forget the Constancy of your Good Will towards Me in these Un∣steady times, Sive Prememus Hu∣mum, sive Prememur Humo, and shall be Alwaies ready to Press into the Ears of this deaf, fro∣ward Age, how much I am (but that Infinitudes cannot be Rec∣kon'd up)

