



SIRS,
IF there were no Judges to determine Controversies, Disputes would be endless. Dr. Witty having said all he can, in answer to my Obje∣ctions against Scarbrough Spaw, He makes his ultimate and highest ap∣peal to the Right Honourable Lords, to whom he Dedicates his Book, saying, What fitter Judges of this Controversie, can be found out, than their Lordships. And in the conclu∣sion of his Preface, he seems to re∣fer the difference betwixt him and
me, to the major Vote of the Right Honourable, and Right Worshipful.
Thus he prefers Alexander for a more Competent Judge of A Philo∣sophical question before Aristotle; as if Titles of Honour were infal∣lible Amulets and Charms against mistakes; and that none of those were to be imposed upon, by the common Tricks and Juggles of one, who, with confidence, would perswade them.
1. That the Water (notwith∣standing the great proportion of Sand and Clay in it) will leave none of this in our Bodies, because he has let them see (Pag. 42.) That it will pass, when newly taken out of the Fountain, through the filter, leaving nothing behind: or,
2. That the Water cannot possibly occasion Obstructions, because it moves to stool, (p. 108.)
3. That it cannot breed Stones in
the Kidneys, because it provokes to Ʋrine, (p. 37.)
4. That it must be good to prevent and cure the Gout, because it purgeth, (p. 109.)
5. That it is a most innocent Wa∣ter, and good for all, because some who are strong in their distributive faculty, have quitted themselves from the Sandy faeces, without taking harm.
So confident he is in the strength of these reasonings, that he con∣cludes (p. 126) Nor do I think that there is a more innocent Water in the world of this kind, in the very par∣ticulars he hath charged it withal. Self-opinion is a thing so natural to all men, that it may be found in those that say, they know not what, and that do like him, Magno conatu nugas agere; but his ipse dixit, can neither satisfie you, nor silence me.
Seeing therefore you have avow∣ed
to examine all opinions in Na∣tural Philosophy, by the test of Experiment (a foundation for truth that will never fail) and that I de∣sire to be tryed thereby, I make mine appeal to you; were it a mat∣ter of small concernment, not worth your cognizance, I should not be so rude, as to beg, that sentence may be pronounced by you; according to the merit of the Cause, so let your judgments be. I have evi∣denced the Quiddity of petrifying waters, agreeable to Kirchers defi∣nition, by experimenting the drop∣ing Well at Knaisbrough, which Dr. Witty says, is the most famous petrifying water, by far, of any that this Kingdom doth afford, (p. 54.) Of that Water, before it came to the Rock, I distilled a quart, and there was half a dram of pure Ni∣trous Salt remaining. The Cattle he says drinks of it, neither is there any
Symboles of a petrifying property in it. 'Tis very true, for it has been tryed by several; but as soon as it runs into the Rock, and comes di∣stilling forth on the other side, then it petrifies, because the Nitrous Water has now dissolved stone, which it had not done before; I distilled a quart of this Water also, and it gave, as I said, a dram want∣ing Ten Grains, of Stone Powder and Nitre.
Here let it be observed, that the surest way to discover whether a Water be petrifying or no, is to distil, or boil it in a double Vessel, to see what Sediment remains, or is cast down to the bottom; if it be Sand (which is stone powder) that Water is certainly petrifying. As for trying it by putting moss or sticks in the Water, to see if it will lay a crust of stone upon them, va∣leat argumentum affirmativè; but it
is a fallacious Experiment, negative, to deny it to be a petrifying Wa∣ter, in case it do not incrustate.
Because there are other circum∣stances requisite, besides a petri∣fying property in the Water, to perform this incrustation, the main requisite (I judge) is, that the Experiment be made, whilst the Water flows immediately out of the Rock, and is in its act of Corrosion. I dare affirm, that all the tryals had by things petrifyed, were thus ob∣tained; whereas if the same things were left in the Currant of these petrifying Waters, after the act of Corrosion were fully compleated (I suppose a mile or two distant from the Rock) from whence the Water took its petrifying proper∣ty) they would not then be Cru∣sted over.
'Tis more than probable, that this is the case of Scarbrough Wa∣ter,
wherefore it doth not lay a Crust of stone upon the things put in it, notwithstanding it be a pe∣trifying Water. For it runs out of the South, and in a direct line Southward, a mile or two distant beyond the great Mountains, there is an Hydrophilacia, a stately Lake abounding with Fish; here is the Spring-head of Scarbrough Spaw, it passing forthwith through the Roots of those Stony Hills, first, Dissolves the stone, and hath per∣formed fully the act of Corrosion on it, before it come to the Cliff. This being done, it then Corrodes Allom∣stone and in this second act of Corro∣sion, the Spaw appears at the bot∣tom of the Cliff, after the Corrosion is compleated; which happens in a day or two; it settles to the bottom the Glebe of Allom. See for this, what I say to (p. 102.) the Tenth Proposition. A second requisite for
incrustation is, that the Saline water, which has newly dissolved stone, do penetrate through the pores of what is laid in it, that thereby it may leave a crust of Stone upon it; that this is necessary also, ap∣pears by this. The more porous any thing is, that is put into all pe∣trifying waters the sooner, and more perfectly is it incrustated. There is a Water, a mile distant from the dropping Well, that will petrifie neither Leaf nor Stick, or other thing, save Moss only; and that is grown so hard upon the Sur∣face of that Water, that one may go over it, as on a Bridge.
The cause, sine qua non, of all petrifying Waters is, that the Saline Water passeth through the Stone, whilst it is in Embryone, and therefore dissolves it. If it were not so then, all Saline Waters (which must be supposed to pass
through stone, before it appear above ground) would be petrify∣ing, but we know the contrary; for the Sulphurous Salt Well at Knais∣brough, and the Allom Well at Malton, has not a grain of stone powder in them.
'Tis a memorable thing, which the Lord Thomas Fairfax told to me; he cut away an high Rock near his house, at Denton, above the ground; and a good way with∣in the Earth,
'twas very hard, but the nearer they came to the root of the Stone (his Lordships own ex∣pression) the softer the Rock was, even till at last it was nothing but Sand, that had not contracted the firmness of a Stone. Removing the heap of Sand, they came at last to Water and Clay, the mother of all that great Rock.
That Stone which is subject to Corruption, may also be generated.
I need not waste time to prove be∣fore you, 'tis visibly to be observ∣ed, that Stone has its seed, by look∣ing upon the Rock of the Dropping Well, where the Water runs out of the same Chinks, where it has done from the beginning, and will do to the worlds end. Notwithstand∣ing the Water (as Dr. Witty has de∣scribed it) running into the River Nidd (a little way distant from it) has Corroded so much Stone, that it has made a Rock that stretches some yards into the River; which shews, that the Nitrous Water would have consumed the Rock, which it continually Corrodes, un∣less Nature do supply it by a con∣tinued act of Generation.
Not to give you any further trouble, I say, all Spaws have their name, and natural property from the Minerals, or Metals they have dissolved. As we call Knaisbrough
Spaw a Vitrioline water, because it has dissolved Iron; so may I pro∣perly call Scarbrough Spaw a petri∣fying water, because it has dissolved Stone.
If there be any doubt remaining unresolved, touching the petrify∣ing property of Scarbrough Spaw; I beg but to know it from you, (that I may have no more to do with this man of words) and I shall be ready to give you that satisfa∣ction, which reason will prompt me to.
I shall only add a word of Apo∣logy for my freedom, with Doctor Witty, the only provocation that I gave him, to all that uncivil lan∣guage which he used towards me, was my opposing his opinion (which how fairly and candidly, the Book it self can witness for me. But finding him in his return, shew∣ing his strength, rather in reviling,
than disputing; I was necessitated (contrary to my Genius) to use such a way as might make him a lit∣tle sensible of himself; and yet in this I have not abounded too far, because (for the most part) what might seem harsh, are but his own reflections, laid at his own dore, as the proper Father of them; and if there be any thing further, I am sure it may be abundantly justi∣fied by his expressions towards me.

