



Much honoured and dearly beloved in the Lord:
I No sooner bethought me of this Dedication, then there came likewise into my mind that Apostolical Distinction of true Christians into Fathers, Young men, and Little children, 1 John 2.12, 13. All these (ta∣ken conjunctim) Saint John had by a most kind com∣pellation, called Little children, ver. 1. My little chil∣dren, saith he, these things write I unto you (as in an Epistle Dedicatory) that ye sin not; sc. sinningly, as chap. 3.6. and mortally, as chap. 5.16. But if any man do sin, (as alas we can do no less) we have an Advocate with the Father (appearing for us, as a Lawyer appear∣eth for his Client, Heb. 9.24.) even Jesus Christ the just one,Vorstius. (the Judges own Son) and he is the propitiation (that is, the Propitiatour, by a Meta∣lepsis) for our sins. Learn this in general, saith the holy Apostle,. Tit. 1.9. and hold it fast, as with both hands; for it is of the very foundation.
As for particulars, I have yet somewhat more to say to you (divisim) severally and asunder. And first, for you, Little children, or Babes in Christ, who have had your spiritual Conception, Gal. 4.19. Birth, 1 Pet. 1.23. and are now in your child-hood, 1 Cor. 3.12. Heb. 5.13. as well appeareth, 1. Because your sins are forgiven you for his names sake, ver. 12. for an assurance whereof, God hath given you the Sacrament of Baptism; to signifie, as by sign; to ascertain you, as by seal; to convey to you, as by instrument, Christ Jesus with all his benefits. 2. Because

ye have known the Father, in some degree at least, whilest he hath in∣wardly sealed you up by his Spirit, set his mark upon you, and sent you word, as it were, how well he loveth you. Now then, the lesson that I have to lay before you, Little Ones, is only this, That it is the last hour; and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there are many An∣tichrists abroad, ver. 18. look well to your selves therefore that ye be not beguiled (as little ones are apt to be) that ye fall not from your own stedfastness, but (for a Preservative) grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: to him be glory both now and for ever, Amen. 2 Pet. 3.18.
Next, for you, Fathers; you that are old Disciples (as Mnason is called, Acts 21.16.) you that are already gray-headed, and experien∣ced Christians, Saints of the first magnitude, Ephes. 4.13. such as the Psalmist celebrateth, Psalm 92.14. I grant that ye have known him that is from the beginning, ver. 13. and I say it again, (for your singular com∣mendation and encouragement) Ye have known him that is from the be∣ginning, ver. 14. even that Antient of daies, whose head and hair are white like wool, as white as snow, Rev. 1.14. You know him I say, with a knowledge, not only Apprehensive and Disciplinary, but also Affective and Directive of your whole life. Nevertheless, I must friendly forewarn you of this one thing,Old Melan∣cthon was much delight∣ed with that saying of Achilles in Philostratus, . (though ye know it already) Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world, ver. 15. 'Tis strange you should (and yet 'tis often seen you do) dote over impotently on these things here below; even then when you have one foot in the grave, and should have the other foot in heaven, whether ye are hasting. The higher the Sun, the shorter, surely, should be the shade. The nearer to the Sea, the sooner should come in the tide. And as in a Piramide, the higher you go, the lesser compass you find: So ought it to be with you, Re∣verend Fathers, upon whose heads God hath set a silver crown of hoary hairs already; and will shortly set upon them an immarcessible crown of glory.
Lastly, for you, Young men, that are not only past the spoon, but come to a well-grown age in Christ, I have to praise you for this, and again I praise you, that ye have in a good measure overcome that wicked One, the Troubler, ver. 13, 14. because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, ver. 14 But yet, as strong as ye are, and the glory of young men (Heb. of choice young men) is their strength, Prov. 20.29. well improved by you, because made use of against the devil; yet let me caution you also, as well as Elder Saints, to beware of the world; a subtile, a sly enemy, and very insinuative into the best breasts: Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world, is your lesson too, ver. 15. Divorce the flesh from the world, and then your Adversary the Devil can do you no hurt.
Hitherto (worthy Sirs) you have heard the beloved Disciple (only glossed, and paraphrased a little) and a better you cannot hear: for he was à secretis to the wonderful Counsellour, and leaned on his bosom. Shall I now take the humble boldness, (Gentlemen) after so great an Apostle, to bespeak you severally in like sort; only with a little in∣version of the Apostles order?
And, first, for you, Sir▪ (the Grand-sire, the Antientest and most honourable of this thrice-worthy Ternio) besides your singular sagacity, and prudence, both civil and sacred, (the holy Apostles character of a Father) these four Notes of an old man in Christ are all fairly pensil'd out and exemplified in your religious and righteous life, and practice (absit verbo invidia) as in any mans I know alive, at this day.
1. Such an one is exceeding humble; as Abraham was, Gen. 18.27. I am but dust and ashes: as Jacob was, Gen. 32.10. I am less then the least of thy loving kindnesses, Lord: as David was, Psalm 22.6. I am a worm and no man: as Nehemiah was, when he prayed for pardon of his Re∣formations, chap. 13, 22. As Paul was with his Minimissimus sum (so Estius rendereth him, Ephes. 3.8.) as Ignatius was, with his Tantillitas nostra our utmost meanness: as Austin was, with his Non sum dignus, quem tu diligas, I am utterly unworthy of thy least love: as blessed Bradford was with his Miserrimus peccator Ioh. Bradford: as Mr Dod and Mr. Cleaver (your, and my old and good acquaintance) were; with whom, we well remember, it was usual, Agur like, to vilifie, yea to nullifie themselves to the utmost. And this comes, 1. From increase of light. 2. From much and long experience of their unavoidable fail∣ings and infirmities.
2. He is very heavenly minded; as having by the constant practice of mortification comfortably subdued his corruptions, seen through the vanity and vexation of outward things, set one foot upon the battle∣ments of heaven, had here much sweet intercourse and communion with God, gotten a full gripe of Christ, laid fast hold upon eternal life; for the full fruition whereof, he therefore dearly and daily longs and labours. Hence also it comes to pass, that this good old Saint, this earthly Angel, is so heavenly in his Spirit, fruitful in good speeches, innocent in his life, abundant in deeds of Piety and Charity, still doing something that may further his reckoning, and add weight to his crown, which he ever eyeth, and even reacheth after. The former instances might be here called over again; all whose humility was not more low, then their aims were lofty.
3. This good old disciple of Christ is very able to bear, and forbear: like as a man at maturity, can bear with little childrens follies, and not set his wt to theirs, as we use to phrase it. Thus Abraham bore with Lots rudeness: Moses with the peoples petulancies, and insolencies: Paul, with the buffoneries, and indignities put upon him by the Corinthi∣ans and Galathians: Ye have not injured me at all, saith he, Gal. 4.12. Your disrespects and affronts reach me not: I am far above them, I am out of your gun-shot So Fulgentius, an Ancient of the Church, being abused by one who was far his inferiour,Maluit tolera∣re, quàm de∣plorare. put it off with Plura ad∣huc pro Christo toleranda, This is a small Trial: I must frame to bear more yet for Christ As an old Porter that had been beaten to the Cross, he went singing under his burthen; holding it no small grace,Elegantissimum Oxymoron. Casaub. to be disgraced for the name of Jesus, as it is said of those Disciples of our Saviour, Acts 5.41. who soon after his Ascension, were, all

upon the suddain, of Babes, become Grandees in Grace.
4. Lastly, he is much affected with the state of others: Good Abra∣ham could not rest in his bed that night, for thinking of poor Sodom, Gen. 19.27. as Luther observeth. But especially he is affected with the well-fare, or ill-fare of the Churches; as being himself of a publick, that is, of a noble spirit; and as a living member of Christs mystical Body, he feels twinges, whensoever others are hurt in the least. See this in Daniel, Nehemiah, EZra, but especially in Paul, upon whom lay the care and cumber of all the Churches:. 2 Cor. 11.28. it came upon him as an armed man, and gave him no rest or respite. Cyprians Cum singulis pectus meum copulo, is well known. And of Calvin it is recorded in his life, by Beza, that he was no otherwise affected toward the Churches, though far remote, then if he had born them on his own shoulders. This is a sure Note of a Father. Indeed Babes and young men are so cumbred with their own corruptions, have so much work of their own to do within doors, that they have little leisure, or list, to look abroad: Neither are they there∣fore so much affected with other mens conditions.
To speak, a little, of those two also, in their order. And first of the young man in Christ: Where let it be, I beseech you, no trouble or offence of heart, (singultus cordis, some render it, 1 Sam. 25.31.) to You (Noble Colonel, together with yourJungat epi∣stola quos junxit con∣jugium: immò charta non non dividat, quos Christi nectit amor. Hier. praefat. in Proverb. elect or choice Lady) to be set among the second sort of good Christians: though I must needs say, for your very eximious and exemplary Piety and Prudence, you may well claim place in the upper form of this lower world. But you know who it was that said long since,Cicero. Honestum est ei, qui in primis non potest, in secundis tertiisve consistere: And to have a door-keepers place in Gods house, David held no small preferment, Psalm 84.10. But to go on with our business: A young man in Christ may be thus Characte∣rized.
1. He is strong in grace; but withall, he hath some one (or more) strong corruption (suppose Passion, evil Concupiscence, Worldliness, or the like) that holds him play, and puts him shrewdly to't: so that sometimes he could almost find in his heart to sin: My feet were almost gone, my steps had well-nigh slipt, Psalm 73.2. But afterwards, he better bethinks himself, forbears and forgoes it, as a man would do a Serpent in his way, or poison in his meats. He maketh strong resistance, and re∣neweth his well-knit resolutions against sin. A mighty combat and coil there is other whiles: as it useth to be in a thunder-clap, caused by a hot dry vapour, wrapt up in a cold moist cloud, which ends in a great rumble and dreadful crack. Patient Job, and devout David for instance: the one abhorring himself for his impatient out bursts: the other be-beast∣ing himself, for his precipitancy, his rash resolves, one time, when sick of the Fret, Psalm 73.22.
2. Next, the weapons of this young mans warfare are not carnal, (such as natural reason, shame of the world, fear of Hell, &c. have put into his hand) but spiritual, mighty through God to the pulling down of Satans strongest holds, the digging down of his deepest trenches, 2 Cor. 10.5. He fights against the enemies of his soul, with Gods own Arm,

and with Gods own Armour: he is strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: and taking the sword of his Spirit (mingling with faith in his heart the Precepts, Menaces and Promises) he layes about him lustily, and prevails accordingly, driving the field of that old Man-slayer.
3. He is much affected with his success. If he get the better in any measure; so that he doth not so much, and oft break out, as he was wont: if his corruption be any whit abated, his strength increased a little, he is marvellous glad and thankfull. Was not David so when dis∣armed by the discretion of Abigail,1 Sam. 25. and detained from shedding in∣nocent blood? As on the other side, if wounded and worsted at any time, he is all amort, sorely, disquieted, restless as on a rack; like a man thrust thorough the body, he bleeds and sinks, till with Peter, he run to Christ the right Chirurgeon in this case, (with tears in his eyes, bitter complaints in his mouth, and utmost self-abhorrency in his heart) and is cured, set right again.
4. Lastly, He proves at length more then a Conqueror, through Christ that loveth him; and whose work it is, to send forth judgement unto victory, Mat. 12.20. Gr. thrust it forth with violence,. the Devil and the world in vain opposing the work of true grace (called judgement in that Text) which shall surely be perfected: Because ye have overcome that wicked one, saith Saint Iohn, 1 Epist. 2.14 Yea ye over-overcome,. saith Saint Paul, Rom. 8.37. because ye do gather strength by opposition, (as that Giant that fought with Hercules, is fabled to do, by his fal∣ling to the earth) ye conquer, even by being conquered:Antus. you do daily get ground, and out-grow your corruptions, which are already laid a bleeding and a dying at your feet: And God shall bruise Satan un∣der your feet shortly, Rom. 16.20. So that the broken horns of that old red Dragon shall be the Trumpets of your triumph, and the Cor∣nets of your joy.
Lo, Sir, this is that Miles Christianus, that Pancratiastes Evangelicus: which whilest You (a Colonel once in the best of Armies, and yet still so, by your well-becoming Praenomen) shall strive to personate, and go on to express, you shall War a good warfare, holding faith and a good conscience: which some having put away (Gr. expeld,. as Amnon did Tamar, as Colledges do rakehells, without all hope of re-entry) concerning faith have made shipwrack, 1 Tim. 1.18, 19. When as you, Noble Sir, conti∣nue constant in, and to the Truth which is according to godliness, Tit. 1.1. and a hearty hater of all heresies, and heterodoxies whatsoever. For the which your faithfulness, and firmness in adhering to Gods holy cause, and promoting his Kingdom, your Reward is sure with him, though not all presently paid you. A Christian Souldier may have a very great arreer: Paul speaks as if all his Pay were then to take up, when all his warfare was accomplished, 2 Tim. 4.7, 8.
Lastly, for You (Sweet Sir, Mr. Thomas Stephens the younger, for whom my hearts desire and prayer to God is and shall be, that of Davids servants for young Solomon, 1 Kings 1.47. or that of Hector in Homer, for his Son Astyanax,
—.)
May it be your great care now betimes, I beseech you, to know the God of your Fathers, and to serve him with a perfect heart, and a wil∣ling mind,Lactant. 1 Chron. 28.9. Deum cognoscere, & colere, est totum hominis. If you be yet no more then a Babe in Christ, One of his little children, for Innocency and Ignoscency, it shall suffice: till such time at least, as you come unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ, Eph. 4.13. till you grow up to more maturity, and increase with the increase of God, Colos. 2.19 Only it behooveth You, Sir, as such a Babe, to see 1. That Christ be formed in you of a truth; that You be indeed a partaker of the divine Nature, and of the Life of God; that You have some of every grace, though but a little:
—inest sua gratia parvis.
2. That you be very sensible of your weakness, and discontented∣ly contented with it: Like as a child is oft troubled that he is not able to run, lift, labour as men do; and he will be doing as he can at mens actions.
3. As Babes are very hungry; never well, but when the teat or spoon is in the mouth, or vitail in the hand: so should You, Sir, hunger and thirst after grace, and the means of grace; as a new-born babe desire earnestly the sincere milk of Gods word, that you may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. Grow, I say, not in Notion but Motion; not in light so much as in heat, in gifts as in graces. There are that have the spiritual rickets, grow big in the head, but decay in the vitals. Be you none such.
4. Lastly, As Children are naturally apt to imitate their Parents; whe∣ther in good, as Jehosaphat did his Father David: or in evil, as Isaac did his Father Abraham: so let it be Your great endeavour, to tread in the holy footsteps (as of Your Mother Lois, and of Your Grandmo∣ther Eunice,2 Tim. 1.5. both of them famous in the Church: so especially) of Your Renowned Grandfather and Father: in whose imparallel examples You have a very Globe of precepts; and by passing into the likeness of which surpassing patterns, You shall become of a young Saint, an old Angel: of a young Well-wisher to the Publick, a worthy and Well-accomplisht Patriot; able and apt to serve God and Your Coun∣trey in places of noblest Note, and highest Employment, as Your Pro∣genitors have done in their Generations. And hereunto if either my poor prayers,Mr. J. T. Stu∣dent of Christ-Church, Oxon. as a Suitor at the Throne of grace, or my Sons utmost en∣deavours, as a Tutor made choice of by Your best friends, for Your ingenuous Education, may contribute any thing, I dare assure You of both.
To draw to an end of this Prefatory discourse, which begins to swell beyond the bounds of an Epistle; You may very well say, Sir, as So∣lomon once did, Prov. 4 3, 4, 5. I was my Fathers Son, tender, and dearly beloved in the sight of my Mother. He taught me also, and said unto

me, Let thine heart retain my words: keep my commandments and live. Get wisdom, ge understanding, forget it not, &c. Your religious Mother also hath not been behind, I dare say, to lesson her Lemuel, with What my Son! and what the Son of my Womb! and what the Son of my Vows▪ Prov. 31.2. You may please to peruse what I have written upon those two Texts, and the rest, now presented and put into Your hands, in both parts of this third Volume upon the holy Bible. Wherein, if any thing occurr that may be of use, either to Your much ho∣noured Parents, or to Your well-beloved self for Their and Your In∣crease and Furtherance in Knowledge and Holiness, I shall take it for a sufficient Operae precium: and yet hope too, that for the gift (how mean soever) bestowed upon me (how unworthy soever) for the be∣hoof of many others, thanks may be given to God by many on my behalf, 2 Cor. 1.11.
Now the very God of peace multiply grace, mercy and peace upon you all, from the greatest to the least, and upon his whole Israel. This is the unfeigned, and shall be the constant desire of Him who is, and will be,
Noble Gentlemen, 
Welford
this 24. of October, 1659.
