



HONOURED SIR,
BEsides the much help, I confesse, (and not now the first timeSee my Notes on the New Test passim.) to have had from your learned Lucubrations already extant, those many real Courtesies lately done me (a meer stranger) in mine eldest sonne, (whom you have freely beneficed, and fairely encouraged,) call hard upon me for a grateful acknowledgement. And forasmuch (as like another Nicias,) you are known to be , Yea,Stobaeus Serm. 117. (as that renowned Richard de Bury) Extatico quodam librorum amore potentèr abreptus, so that you may well say,Hifuit episc. Dunelmenfis. An. Dom 1333. as that Emperour once did of himself, Quidam equis, hi avibus, nonulli feris dele∣ctantur, Ego vero inde usque à pueritiá librorum cupiditate arsi.Julian ep. ad Ecdicium. I cannot bethink me of a fitter Patron then your worthy self, nor yet of a better Present then this of a Book; beseeching you to own it and honour it with your kinde acceptance, as a token of my true respects, and a testimony of my cordial thank∣fulnesse. I need not here, for an Apologie, tell you Sir, what Seneca saith, There's no Book so bad, but some Commodity may be gotten by it. Let it be (for me) a praise proper to Hippocra∣tes, that in his Aphorismes, there is . Let Scaliger say of Virgil, (and Lipsius as much of Tacitus) Ecujus ore nil tenierè excidit. Aristotles Rhetorick, saith one, is suffi∣cient
to make both a Scholar and an honest man. His Politicks Tully calleth Aureum flumen or ationis, for the purity of the stile, and preciousnesse of the matter. Averroes admireth and ex∣tolleth him above measure, in whatsoever he hath written. And yet others, no lesse judicious, deem that his deep Theo∣remes of Philosophy, as they make men learned, so seldom bet∣ter, and oftentimes worse, meer Atheists. Sure it is, that com∣pared with the holy Scriptures, they are but straminea candela, a rush-candle, that yieldeth but a small light, and is quickly out. To the Law therefore, and to the Testimony, saith that Evangeli∣cal Prophet, (that is, to the Old Testament and the New, as some sense it) If any speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them: As if any, either by speaking or writing bring the least light to these sacred Oracles, (Quae & latent & lucent) They are not to be defrauded of their due commendati∣on. This you have done (worthy Sir) in all your Theological Treatises (which are auro contra non cari) Your elaborate An∣notations on the New Testament especially. On the Old Testa∣ment also we hope to see you shortly; and are so far from cen∣suring you for thrusting your Sickle into our Harvest, that we all highly accept and applaud your learned Labours; heartily wishing you length of days, and help from Heaven, for the com∣pleating of so good a work.Bern. Deus praecepit nobis, ut discamus non argutias Platonis, nec versutias Aristotelis, sed doctrinam Filii Dei. Hereunto therefore we do humbly crave and call for your utmost furtherance, which shall be nothing at all to your hinderance at the last: for beside the reward of eternal life, as∣sured you by Christ our ,Bodin Theat. Nat. p. 9. Scientiarum ea vis est ac na∣tura, ut quo plus doceas, ac alteri de tuo largiare, eò ditior ac doctior fias; there is no losse in laying out your talent. Your much desired Commentaries, now in the Presse, (as is reported) and which you are yet further preparing for the publike, will be most welcom to the world; and I wish they may take as well as did Aretius his Examen Theologicum, printed twelve times in three yeares. As for these, or any other of mine, let them veil, and strike sale to yours, whereever they meet them, and let me be ever reckoned, among many others,
Welford, Sept. 8. 1656.
SIR, 
