



Reverend Sir,
NOw, by a sweet provi∣dence, is that happinesse put into my hands, that I have long wished and waited for, viz a fit op∣portunity of telling the world, how highly I honour You, and how deeply I stand ingaged unto You. A most a∣ble and absolute Divine (in another
sense then Erasmus tearmed some in his time) I ever took You for,Abselutae e∣ruditionis & pietatis viris. Sic scripsit Theolog Parisiensb. Voluit autem, alienis ab om∣ni eruditione & pietate, in∣terprete Me∣lancthone. since I first came acquainted with You. And how little mistaken I am therein, let Your many elaborate lucubrations say for me; those accurate Annotations upon the Pentateuch especially: of which precious piece, and the thrice∣worthy Authour, I am eftsoons ready to say,Buchol. as one did once of Erasmus and his Adagies — quis nôsset Erasmum, Chilias aeternum si latuisset opus?
Or as another did of Calvins Institu∣tions, Praeter Apostolicas,. Dugardi mei ingeniosissi∣mum inven∣tum. M. Ley was at that time the first Pre∣sident of Si∣on-Colledge. Joseph. Scali. epist. ad Eliam Vinet. post Christi tempora, chartas Huic peperere libro secula nulla parem. Sure I am, and not a little sensible, that he that here come's after You, shall but actum agere, he shall but facem Soli (Soli, inquam, in Sion) accendere, he shall but in nobilissimo theatro seipsum traducere. Well he may pick up Praeterita with Drusius,
or spicilegium post messem with Capellus, he shall hardly ever get so near You,Val. Max. as the Latine Orator did the Greek, De∣mosthenes Ciceroni praeripuit, ne primus esset Orator, Cicero Demostheni, ne solus.Cant. 6.12. But whither (or ere I wist) hath the just ad∣miration of Your singular worth trans∣ported me? My design was not to praise You (for that were, as an Ancient said of Athanasius, to praise vertue it self) but to professe my deep indebtednesse unto You, for Your many fatherly favours and reall courtesies done me since mine adoption Quibus effecisti, ut viverē & mo∣rerer ingratus, as he said to Augustus,Sen. de benef. l. 2. c. 12. this being the only wrong that ever You did me, that I must live and die un∣thankfull. These brief Notes passeable (I say not praisable) only for their bre∣vity, do humbly beg Your perusall, and (sitanti sint) Your Patronage: and sure∣ly may they but obtain Your much-desired
countenance and comprobati∣on, I shall soon say with the Oratour, , I fear not any mans cen∣sure. Whatever else is wanting in them, a will, I am sure, is not wanting, of lay∣ing forth my small talent to the honour of my Master, and the good of my fel∣low-servants; those of mine own parti∣cular charge especially, to whom most of these things have been delivered, and of whom I can truly say, as Reverend M. Stock did of his people in Breadstreet London,Mr Gatak, Abrahams decease. That he had rather win one of them, then twenty others. Now that I may be fit and able to fulfill the Mini∣stery that I have received in the Lord,Col. 3.17.  Tim. 4.16. so as to save my self and them that hear me, let Your fatherly benediction, and instant intercession to the Father of all the father∣hood in heaven and earth,Ephes. 3.15.  Parentela. be never want∣ing to

Welford this 16. of Nov. 1647.
