



RIGHT HONOURABLE,
MY first adven∣ture into the World, I pre∣sumed to pre∣sent, some three yeares since, to your most Noble
and Vertuous Consort, for a Consolatory. This next, being my first fruits, at Your Lordships Weston, I knew not to whom more fitly to addresse, than to your Honourable selfe; who may lay as good claime to the Man, as to the Mannour. The One yeelds You an annuall in∣crease, a goodly income. And the Other hates to be held either barren, or not busie in the Lords Vine∣yeard; whether You have so freely and fairely sent im, and set him awork. King Salomon had a Vine∣yard
at Baal-hamon; He let it out to keepers: Every of them, for the fruits thereof, was to bring a thousand sil∣verlings. Salomon had his thousand, and those that kept the fruit thereof two hun∣dred, Cant. 8.11, 12. I spare to expound, or apply so plaine a Text to your Lordship, who can soone see (without my shew∣ing) Your Noble-selfe in Salomon, and unworthy Me Your meanest keeper. To come in with Your thou∣sand, and yet reserve to my selfe two hundred, I cannot. But if your Lord∣ship
be (as I doubt not) of Davids mind.Psal. 119.72. The Law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and silver; my rent is ready; and I here tender it in a Treatise of Gods Word, and God the Word. All my feare is, lest the Divini∣ty of the Scriptures (here∣in asserted and applyed) should sustaine some de∣triment from the utter in∣sufficiency of him that handleth it. But what meane I, or what need I to feare?Psal. 52.1. The goodnesse of God endureth yet still. He once accepted a hand∣full
of meale for a Sa∣crifice, and a gripe of goates-haire for an O∣blation. And for men,Si desint vires tamen est lau∣danda voluntas, Hac ego con∣tentos auguror esse deos. The wise Jeweller cares not though the Ring be not so bright, so the Di∣amond, that is set therein, have a right sparkle. As for the Many,, Plutarch. and especial∣ly the Malevolent, they know my mind already, in a former advertise∣ment. If that satisfie not, I have no more to say to them:Nihil ad nos at∣tiner, quid ho∣munculi sentiant. Lact. Marke 14.31. Satis est Equi∣tem mihi plau∣dere, Hor. but have learned from our Saviours parle with Peter, not (childish∣ly) to strive for the last
word. May I but enjoy your Lordships approbati∣on, and encouragment, I shall, of such, crave no fa∣vour, seeke no farther, say no more, than shut up with that Apostolike per∣close, The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ be with your spi∣rit. Amen.
Stratford upon Avon, this 25 of January, 1641.

