


FOr me to speake of the Nobility and Worth of your Ancestors, and the Noble Family (most Honoured Sir) would be but as an Eclipse of the Sun by the Moon, which is the Pla∣net that moves in the lowest Orbe, but laying a side all such thoughts, the Occasion of the Dedication of this ensuing Treatise to your Honour, is,
First, for that you are signally Elected to be the Speaker of the Honourable the House of Commons, the Representative of the Kingdome, wherein such Lawes are framed and setled, as are conducible to the Weal, Honour, and Safety thereof.
2. Because your Honours Abilities are so pub∣liquely manifest, as that you are likewise singled out to be one of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Councel.
3. And that which doth very much move me hereto is, because your converse hath been much in, and about the Counties of Devon. Summerset, and Wilts. where the Trade of Clothing is very much used, and therefore it may in all reason be deemed, that your Honours knowledge of (and acquain∣tance with) Clothiers and their Imployments is more than ordinary.
Sir the great Ambition I have to manifest my Loyalty to the King, and my zeal to serve the Coun∣trey, puts me upon these endeavours, to discover not only the advantages by our Manufactures, and the disadvantages to the Kingdome by the cessati∣on thereof, but also the great Frauds and Abuses in the Out-Ports by the Custome-Officers, which when reduced and brought into a better Method, by those cheif Officers that are concerned therein, I hope it may prove a good Balsome to heal our wounds, and a Cordial to our drooping spirits.
It is well known that the improvement of our Manufactures in this Nation hath a communicative influence upon thousands of young and old people; yea ma that are now idle and loose people, have been more numerously imploy'd formerly, than now they are, by reason of the decay of Trade, which if it should thus continue, or grow worse, might be a great means to depopulate the Nation, and to draw great burdens upon many Parishes for the

maintenance of their Poor, but if not timely pre∣vented, will cause the Trade to be driven by For∣reigner, and so exceedingly cause an abatement of Rents among us.
Sir, your publique Imployment, your generous and Courteous Deportment, give me confidence to Dedicate these Rude and Unpolisht lines to your view, because I know, you have Ability to judge, and Charity to pardon the Errata's that you may find therein.
When I did first set Pen to Paper about this matter, I found my self in a Labyrinth, and there might have suffered, had not my Education as a Clothier given me a glimmering light to extricate my self. And yet when I had purchased my En∣largement, by my strict enquiery into those Myste∣ries, I had a great dispute with my self, whether I should put my Abortive thoughts into Print or no, but more respecting the common good, than my private Reputation, I resolved rather to make my wishes publique, than to bury them in Oblivion.
Now Sir, it is not only a pleasant study for States∣men to promote the Publike good, but the only way to true and lasting Honour, and Happiness; and that these poor Endeavours of mine may attain that good effect to the King and Countrey, as I re∣ally design; (aiming at no other, I earnestly beg of God to direct you for the Improvement of them, in your publique imployments, which may (like the  Heaven) break open the Springs of Trade ary and thirsty Land, to revive and refresh the

same, and by so doing, Sir, you will not only do eminent service to the King, great kindness to your Countrey, but also oblige all people to pray for your happiness both in this world, and that which is to come, for the which also most earnestly prates,

