


SIR,
I Wou'd not have you surpriz'd with this Address, though I gave you no warning of it. The Buisiness of this Epistle is more Vindication than Complement; and when we are to tell our Grievances 'tis most natural to betake our selves to a Friend. 'Twas thought perhaps that this unfortunate Off∣spring having been stifled on the Stage, shou'd have been buried in Oblivion; and so it might have happened had it drawn its Being from me Alone, but it still retains the immortal Spirit of its first-Father, and will survive in Print, though forbid to tread the Stage. They that have not seen it Acted, by its being silenc't, must suspect me to have Compil'd a Disloyal or Reflecting Play. But how far distant this was from my Design and Conduct in the Story will appear to him that reads with half an Eye. To form any Resemblance between the Times here written of, and the Present, had been unpardonable Presumption in Me. If the Pro∣hibiters conceive any such Notion I am not accountable for That. I fell upon the new-modelling of this Tragedy, (as I had just before done on the History of King Lear) charm'd with the many Beau∣ties I discover'd in it, which I knew wou'd become the Stage; with as little design of Satyr on present Transactions, as Shakespear himself that wrote this Story before this Age began. I am not ig∣norant of the posture of Affairs in King Richard the Second's Reign, how dissolute then the Age, and how corrupt the Court; a Season that beheld Ignorance and Infamy preferr'd to Office and Pow'r, exercis'd in Oppressing, Learning and Merit; but why a History of those Times shou'd be supprest as a Libel upon Ours, is past my

Understanding. 'Tis sure the worst Complement that ever was made to a Prince.

O Rem ridiculam, Cato, & jocasam,
Dignámque Auribus, & tuo Cachinno.
Ride, quicquid amas, Cato, Catullum
Res est Ridicula, &c.

Our Shakespear in this Tragedy, bated none of his Characters an Ace of the Chronicle; he took care to shew 'em no worse Men than They were, but represents them never a jot better. His Duke of York after all his buisy pretended Loyalty, is found false to his Kinsman and Sovereign, and joyn'd with the Conspi∣rators. His King Richard Himself is painted in the worst Co∣lours of History. Dissolute, Unadviseable, devoted to Ease and Luxury. You find old Gaunt speaking of him in this Language

—Then there are found
Lascivious Meeters, to whose Venom sound
The open Ear of Youth do's always Listen.
Where doth the World thrust forth a Vanity,
(So it be New, there's no respect how Vile)
That is not quickly buzz'd into his Ear?
That all too late comes Counsel to be heard.

without the least palliating of his Miscarriages, which I have done in the new Draft, with such words as These.

Your Sycophants bred from your Child-hood with you,
Have such Advantage had to work upon you,
That scarce your Failings can be call'd your Faults.

His Reply in Shakespear to the blunt honest Adviser runs thus.

And Thou a Lunatick Lean-witted-fool, &c.
Now by my Seat's right Royal Majesty,
Wer't Thou not Brother to great Edward's Son.
The Tongue that runs thus roundly in thy Head
Shou'd run thy Head from thy unreverent Shoulders.

On the contrary (though I have made him express some Resent∣ment) yet he is neither enrag'd with the good Advice, nor deaf to it. He answers Thus—

—Gentle Unkle;
Excuse the Sally's of my Youthfull Blood.
We shall not be unmindfull to redress
(However difficult) our States Corruptions,
And purge the Vanities that crowd our Court.

I have every where given him the Language of an Active, Pru¦dent Prince. Preferring the Good of his Subjects to his own pri∣vate Pleasure. On his Irish Expedition, you find him thus be speak his Queen—

Though never vacant Swain in silent Bow'rs
Cou'd boast a Passion so sincere as Mine,
Yet where the Int'rest of the Subject calls
We wave the dearest Transports of our Love,
Flying from Beauties Arms to rugged War, &c.

Nor cou'd it suffice me to make him speak like a King (who as Mr. Rhymer says in his Tragedies of the last Age considered, are always in Poëtry presum'd Heroes) but to Act so too, viz. with Resolution and Justice. Resolute enough our Shakespear (copying the History) has made him, for concerning his seizing old Gaunt's Revennues, he tells the wise Diswaders,

Say what ye will, we seize into our Hands
His Plate, his Goods, his Money and his Lands.

But where was the Justice of this Action? This Passage I confess was so material a Part of the Chronicle (being the very Basis of Bullingbrook's Usurpation) that I cou'd not in this new Model so far transgress Truth as to make no mention of it; yet for the ho∣nour of my Heroe I suppose the foresaid Revennues to be Borrow'd onely for the present Exigence, not Extorted.

Be Heav'n our Judge, we mean him fair,
And shortly will with Interest restore
The Loan our suddain Streights make necessary.

My Design was to engage the pitty of the Audience for him in his Distresses, which I cou'd never have compass'd had I not before shewn him a Wise, Active and Just Prince. Detracting Language (if any where) had been excusable in the Mouths of the Conspi∣rators: part of whose Dialogue runs thus in Shakespear;

North.

Now afore Heav'n 'tis shame such Wrongs are born
In him a Royal Prince and many more
Of noble Blood in this Declining Land:
The King is not Himself, but basely led
By Flatterers, &c.



Ross.

The Commons He has pil'd with grievous Taxes
And lost their Hearts, &c.



Will.

And daily new Exactions are devis'd
As Blanks, Benevolences, and I wot not what;
But what o' Gods Name doth become of This?



North.

War hath not wasted it, for warr'd he has not;
But basely yielded upon Comprimize.
That which his Ancestours atchiev'd with Blows
More has He spent in Peace than they in War, &c.


with much more villifying Talk; but I wou'd not allow even Tray∣tors and Conspirators thus to bespatter the Person whom I design'd to place in the Love and Compassion of the Audience. Ev'n this very Scene (as I have manag'd it) though it shew the Confederates to be Villains, yet it flings no Aspersion on my Prince.
Further, to Vindicate ev'n his Magnanimity in Regard of his Resigning the Crown, I have on purpose inserted an intirely new Scene between him and his Queen, wherein his Conduct is sufficiently excus'd by the Malignancy of his Fortune, which argues indeed Extremity of Distress, but Nothing of Weakness.
After this account it will be askt why this Play shou'd be supprest, first in its own Name, and after in Disguise? All that I can answer to this, is, That it was Silenc'd on the Third Day. I confess, I ex∣pected it wou'd have found Protection from whence it receiv'd Pro∣hibition; and so questionless it wou'd, cou'd I have obtain'd my Petition to have it perus'd and dealt with according as the Con∣tents Deserv'd, but a positive Doom of Suppression without Exami∣nation was all that I cou'd procure.
The Arbitrary Courtiers of the Reign here written, scarcely did more Violence to the Subjects of their Time, then I have done to Truth, in disguising their foul Practices. Take ev'n the Richard of Shakespear and History, you will find him Dissolute, Careless, and Unadvisable: peruse my Picture of him and you will say, as Aeneas did of Hector, (though the Figure there was alter'd for the Worse and here for the Better) Quantum mutatus ab illo! And likewise for his chief Ministers of State, I have laid Vertues to their Charge of which they were not Guilty. Every Scene is full of Respect to Majesty and the dignity of Courts, not one alter'd Page but what breaths Loyalty, yet had this Play the hard for∣tune to receive its Prohibition from Court.
For the two days in which it was Acted, the Change of the Scene, Names of Persons, &c▪ was a great Disadvantage: many things were by this means render'd obscure and incoherent that in their native Dress had appear'd not only proper but gracefull. I call'd my Persons Sicilians but might as well have made 'em Inhabitants

of the Isle of Pines, or, World in the Moon, for whom an Au∣dience are like to have small Concern. Yet I took care from the Beginning to adorn my Prince with such heroick Vertues, as after∣wards made his distrest Scenes of force to draw Tears from the Spectators; which, how much more touching they would have been had the Scene been laid at Home, let the Reader judge. The ad∣ditional Comedy I judg'd necessary to help off the heaviness of the Tale, which Design, Sir, you will not only Pardon, but Approve. I have heard you commend this Method in Stage▪writing, though less agreeable to stricktness of Rule; and I find your Choice confirm'd by our Laureat's last Piece, who confesses himself to have broken a Rule for the Pleasure of Variety. Epst. Ded. to the Span. Fryar. The Audience (says he) are grown weary of melan∣cholly Scenes, and I dare prophesie that few Tra∣gedies (except those in Verse) shall succeed in this Age if they are not lightned with a course of Mirth.
And now, Sir, I fear I have transgrest too far on your patience. Distress was always Talkative: be pleas'd to call to Mind your beloved Virgil's Nightingall when rob'd of her young.

Qualis populeâ moerens Philomela sub Umbrâ,
Amissos queritur Foetus, quos durus Arator
Observans, Nido implumes detraxit; at Illa
Flet noctem, ramoque sedens, miserabile Carmen
Integrat, & moestis late loa▪ Questibus implet.

This Simile you know, Sir, is occasion'd by Orpheus his lamenting the Loss of Euridice, which the Mythologists expound the Fruit of his Labours. You find Virgil himself elsewhere condoling his Op∣pression by Arrius. Such are the Complaints of our Spencer defrau∣ded by Cecill. With these, the melancholly Cowley joyns his Note; and, as Mr. Flatman says, 'tis the Language of the whole Tribe.

I heard'em Curse their Stars in ponderous Rhymes,
And in grave Numbers grumble at the Times.

Poetry and Learning, ev'n in Petronius his time, was a barren Province, when Villany of any sort was a thriving Trade.

Qui Pelago credit magno, se foenore tollit,
Qui pugnat & Castra petit praecingitur Auro;
Vilis Adulator picto jacet Ebrius ostro;
Et qui sollicitat Nuptas, ad praemia peccat:
Sola pruinosis horret Facundia pannis.

Or to go a step higher in Antiquity—

Quid est, Catulle, quod moraris emori?
Sellâ in Curuli Struma Nonius sedet,
Quid est, Catulle, quod moraris emori?

Aristotle himself confesses Poetry a better School of Vertue than Philosophy. Our own Sir Philip Sidney's learn'd Defence of it, is Demonstration what rewards are due, and our late incomparable Author of Hudibras, is no less Demonstration what returns are made to the best Masters of it. Not Greece or Rome can boast a Genius like His; yet after all, his Poverty was a greater Satyr on the Age than his Writings.
Once more, Sir, I beg your Pardon for digressing, and dismiss you to the following Poem, in which you will find some Master Touches of our Shakespear, that will Vie with the best Roman Poets, that have so deservedly your Veneration. If it yield you any Diversion I have my Desire, who covet all Opportunities of shewing my self gratefull for your Friendship to me, which I am proud of, and amongst the many whom your ingenious and obliging Temper has devoted to you, there is none that more prizes your Conversation, than

