



My Lord,
WERE there no other motive besides the com∣mon Principles of Gratitude, to induce me to it, this present Dedication of my Ser∣mon to your Lordship, would be but a just discharge of that Obligation which your many distinguishing Favours have made me a Debtor for.
But since the narrow Confines of an Epistle Dedicatory, and the equally-insufficient Capacities of my Pen are utterly unable either to contain or express the grateful Sense of your Lordship's manifold Obligations; I shall therefore assign ano∣ther Reason for flying to the Asylum and Protection of your Great Name and Authority, in this very Censorious and Ʋn∣grateful Age that we now live in.

 My Lord, 'Tis the apparent danger of Calumny and Mis∣representation for speaking my Thoughts so freely (nay, I will be bold to say, so like an Orthodox Churchman, and a True Englishman) on the late Anniversary Occasion, that puts me under a necessity of giving your Lordship this further Trouble.
I need not repeat the Occasion, nor shall I recriminate (as I might fairly and justly do) on those that are now become my declared Enemies and open Revilers for speaking the Truth; for 'tis enough that I have your Lordship's Appro∣bation of my weak, but well meant Performance. 'Tis your Lordship's Judgment alone, and known Integrity, which I value beyond a Thousand of those Jacobite Animadverters, who as I am too too sensible of it, would gladly take advan∣tage of the Freedom and Sincerity of my following Discourse, in order to prejudice that Interest, and to frustrate those Hopes which I might otherwise reasonably pretend to with such as were signally Instrumental in the late blessed Revolution, and are still well affected to the present Establishment of their Most Excellent Majesty's Happy Government over us.
Give me leave, My Lord, to observe, That the Impa∣tience and Sowreness of some men (those especially whose Heats and Violences in the late Reigns were like to have brought us into inextricable Difficulties and Confusions) are at present such, as will not suffer them to be contradicted; tho their own Practices and Compliances have been a Publick Confutation of, and a notorious Contradiction to All that they have either wrote or said on the following Subject. And by these very men am I threatned with a very severe Censure; and no question were it in their power to inflict it (so great is their want of Charity, and so much are their Tempers sowred) I should receive at their hands a more severe Perse∣cution.

 But thanks be to God for the Settlement of that Govern∣ment over us, which at this time is mine and every other honest Mans security against so uncharitable and bigotted a Party.
And what shall I say more in my own Vindication? When the Government it self, and the best Princes that ever sway'd a Scepter together, are not sufficiently priviledg'd a∣gainst the unhandsome and scurrilous Reflections of these Men; 'tis not to be expected that I, who have endeavour'd (and am still ready on any further occasion) to justify the late Revolution, should pass by uncensured or uncondemn'd by 'em.
When the sharp point of that Rigid Doctrine of their own Passive Obedience, was directed to them, they grew Ʋneasy and Seditious, ('tis their own word) as well as other People, and made no scruple to speak evil of Dignities, nay, and to kick against the Pricks; tho, as I am well assured, they are now highly offended at, and very angry with me for giving a more true and agreeable Explanation of that Do∣ctrine.
Those Men could afford to speak well of, and to desire the Prince of Orange above all things, at a time when their own turn was to be serv'd; nay, they could sit quiet, wish∣ing him Success in all his Ʋndertakings, when he Landed upon the Late King, and they could Address him to take the Administration of the Government upon him, tho all this was notoriously contrary to their own so often avow'd Passive Fidelity.
And yet now, (so monstrous is their Ingratitude) as they cannot bear with a fair Vindication of the Deliverance it self, which most of them were either directly or indirectly Accessary to; so likewise they cannot forbear to slight and revile our Glorious Deliverer for preserving their Religion, Lives, and Liberties.

 But may the Justice of our Government exert it self in due time against these ungrateful and self-will'd People. And may it make some Eminent Distinction (as of late it has begun to do in the Promotions that have been made) between its real and pretended Friends, in order to the better Esta∣blishment of things on a right bottom, and to the Settle∣ment of a lasting Peace and Ʋnion amongst us.
May Their Majesties have a long and prosperous Reign over us, notwithstanding all the trifling Exceptions, and Evil Surmises of these Men.
To conclude, May Your Lordship still continue by the wise and just Administration of that Trust which is reposed in You, to be a Terror to all Evil-doers. And may all Your Successors take their Measures from that Exact Pattern which You have prescribed, in seeing Justice strictly and imparti∣ally executed on all Offenders.
My Lord, You have the Just Encomium's of all Honest and Good Men for Your great Zeal and Interity to the Pre∣sent Establishment, and for the Ʋpright and Conscientious Discharge of Your Great Office in this Famous City.
And may the Rewards and Blessings of a Gracious and Bountiful God be still pour'd forth on Your Self and Family for the same.
My LORD, 
