



SIR,
THE honour and esteem which I have born unto your family, ever since I had the happiness to be acquainted with it, together with
the many favours which I have re∣ceived from it, and especially from your Parents of happy memo∣ry; have sufficiently ingaged me, with all readiness, to lay hold up∣on any opportunity, of giving testi∣mony thereof in the best manner that I can. In order whereunto I was not unwilling to answer the call to the performance of that last, though sad office, of waiting on the fune∣ral Solemnities of that worthy Gentleman, your dear father, and my honoured Patron. An account whereof (since you could not be a hearer, that you might have a sight of it) is here presented to your view. It was hard for me to think any thing of mine worthy of such publick notice; and it was no less difficult to withstand the desires of such as (with me) are able to command. Such as it is I here humbly submit it to your in∣genuity and candor; not doubting (although there were little in it
that might merit your accep∣tance) but that any remembrance of such a father to such a son, will nd some favourable entertain∣ment.
And now Sir, (If with your good leave at least upon this occasion I may use the liberty of being your remembrancer) that the Lord in his wise and holy providence hath deprived you of both your parents; It is to give you to learn betimes, to have your dependance on him alone, who is your heavenly father, who ever liveth and careth for you; whose eye you are alwayes under, where ever you go, and whatever you do; if you cleave unto him, he will never leave you,Psa. 17 10 Isa 49 15 nor for∣sake you, When my father and my mo∣ther forsake me, (saith the Psalmist) then the Lord will take me up.
That you have so early (as it were in your first setting forth) met with the cross, it may seem tedious at present, but yet I trust it
will be for your profit hereafter.
Et mage principio grata coronis erit.Martial.
The Lord is a wise Father, That son whom he loves,Pro. 13.24. he chasteneth be∣times. He knows how apt our minds are to be corrupted (espe∣cially in youth) with ease and pro∣sperity.
Luxuriant animi rebus plerun{que} secundis
It is therefore good (saith the Pro∣phet) for a man that he bear the yoak in his youth.Lam. 3.27 Quam utile est ad usum secundorum per adversa venisse.Plin. Pa∣neg. ad Trajan. If the Lord begin to teach you in your youth, I trust when you are old he will not forsake you.
Esteem that (I beseech you) the best breeding, to be bred up in the nur∣ture and admonition of the Lord Account no gain like to the gain of wisdom and godliness, no loss like to the loss of the favour of God and
your time. Titus the Emperor (who for his humanity and moral vertues, was stiled Deliciae humani generis) if any day had passed with∣out doing of some good,Pezel. mel∣lif. hist. part. 2. p. 174. was wont  complain, Amici, diem perdidi, my friends, I have lost a day.
The eyes of all your friends and relations are upon you, hoping to find their loss in their honoured and be∣loved friends, your dearest parents, to be made up in you. And that their expectations may not be frustrated; Now is your time to furnish your self with those abilities, by which you may become serviceable to your God, and your King, an ho∣nour and ornament to your Coun∣try and family, and a rejoycing to all that love you and desire your happiness. Let neither those en∣dowments of nature, nor these prin∣ciples of education and grace which the Lord in a gracious measure hath blessed you withal, be either lost or corrupted. The truth is, you are
in the midst of a world of tempta∣tions and snares, ready to beset you on every side. But alas what is the world with all the pleasures and allurements thereof, but vanity and vexation of spirit, like Creusa's Ghost.
Par levibus ventis, volucri{que} simillima somno.Virgil. Aenid. l. 2.
What is the pleasure of Hawks and hounds, but a mungril plea∣sure? What are gamings at Cards and Dice, but the firebrands of passion, and the consumption of treasure and time? What is there in rioting and drunkenness, in cham∣bering and wantonness, but the impoverishing of the Estate, the distempring and weaking of the body, and without repentance the ruine both of body and soul unto eternity?
Those that are the first with Ab∣ner to call forth the young men thus to arise and play, will be the first
with him to cry out at length,2 Sam. 2.14.26. This will be bitterness in the latter end. He that will not be warned of them in time, will mourn at last, when his flesh and his body are consumed, and say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof,Prov. 5.11 12, 13. and have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that in∣structed me?
Let it not seem tedious or grie∣vous unto you, that for a time your condition requires, that you be subject to Tutors and Gover∣nours. It is but to this end that by learning first how to govern your self, you may be the better qali∣fied to rule and govern others; and the readiest way to know how to command, is first to learn how to obey. If you perswade your self (as I am apt to believe you do) that those your worthy friends and rela∣tions, to whose care and inspection, the Lord by your father hath com∣mitted you, are both faithfull and
wise, and will omit nothing that in conscience towards God, and Love towards you, they judge necessary, nor advise you to any thing inex∣pedient or superfluous; and that their affections towards you are so real and tender, that nothing will be more their grief, then your not profiting, nor rejoycing, then when they shall see (through the blessing of God upon their endeavours) that as you grow in years and in sta∣ture, so (as is said of our Saviour) that you increase in wisdom and favour with God and man. This will incourage you to attend unto them with patience and content, and to observe and practise their councels and prescriptions with di∣ligence and delight. Neither will it less profit you, or prevail with you, if you observe their practice as well as their precepts. It being a great advantage and furtherance to our instruction, when God gives us such for our guides, as will con∣firm
and clear up their rules by their own examples.
Non sic inflectere sensus
Humanos edicta valent quam vita re∣gentis.Claud. de 4. Honori consolatu paneg.
You will find all means little e∣nough, to accomplish you with those vertues and graces which are requisite to your condition, though you meet with precept upon pre∣cept, line upon line; one precept upon another, and one example up∣on another. As it is not a common measure that you should rest in; so should the means by which you endeavour to attain it be more then ordinary.
To abound only in outward things, is rather excess than excel∣lency. If you have only more wealth, and higher titles than others, there∣in doubtless you may exceed many good men, and as many (if not more) bad men, may exceed you. To be rich, and to abound in the
things of the world, is no more then is common to the wise, and to the foolish, to the righteous and to the wicked, to be noble and the base. But to be rich in good works, and to excell in the endow∣ments of the mind, is peculiar unto them that are truly vertuous and noble. Let it therefore be your endeavour to make it appear, that as much as you are advanced be∣yond others in the favours of the world, so much you are above them in the favour of God, and in the vertues and graces of his Spi∣rit.
Let not the bounty of God to∣wards you in the things of this life, be abused to serve either the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, or the pride of life. Lest while you take and use them, rather as a pos∣sessor of that which is your own, then as a Steward and Dispencer of that which is anothers; you should be numbred among the men of the
world, which have their portion in this life.Psalm 17 14 Luke 14.25. Luke 6.2. How sadly will it fare with him, to whom it shall be said, Son remember that in thy life time, thou receivedst thy good things. Wo unto you that are rich, for ye have received your consolation. Yea rather let it be your resolution, whensoever the Lord shall bring them into your hands, to use them as becometh a faithfull and wise Steward, even as the instruments and ornaments of vertue and grace. And then you shall be sure to be blessed when the Lord shall come and find you so doing. In the mean time the sea∣son and opportunity of giving glo∣ry to God, and gaining honour to your self, by doing of good, is but short and uncertain. Nei∣ther is it so much a long life, or a lasting Name, as a good life, and a good name that is de∣sirable. And that not to be attained by a far fetcht pedigree, or by the
Blazon or display of Heralds, but by noble & vertuous actions; even your Orators and Poets being Judges. Non perpetua fama,Plin. ubi Sup. 47. sed bona concupi∣scenda est, ea porro non imaginibus & statuis, sed virtute ac meritis proroga∣tur.Virgil.
Breve & irreparabile tempus
Omnibus est vitae,Aeurid. l. 10 sed famam extendere factis,
Hoc virtutis opus.
A mans whole life is but a day, and youth is but the morning of that day, and how swift are the wings of that morning? how soon will your Sun ascend to its miridian? And assoon decline and hasten towards its setting. Ars longa, vita brevis; there is much work to be done, and but a little time to do it. He that will do his dayes work had need be∣gin in the morning.
Let your best time be spent in do∣ing of your best works. Think not the prime and flower of your youth
too good, to be consecrated to God and his service. It is no way be∣comming a noble and generous spi∣rit, to offer up that which is worst to God, to bestow the best and choicest wine upon the service of sin, and to reserve nothing but the dregs for God. Let not your youth be spent in making works for repentance in age. That is the season which Sa∣tan most especially layes hold on to spread his nets, and to lay his snares, with utmost craft and subtilty, and to press on his temptations with great∣est violence; because therein he finds the greatest success, and still promiseth himself the easiest victory It was young Amnon, whom he pre∣vails with, and draws to lust.2 Sam. 13. beg. v. 28. & ch. 15. And young Absolom whom he wrought to murder and rebellion.Prov. 7.7. It was a young man over whom the harlot prevailed.Mat. 19. And it was a young man that would follow Christ no farther then he could carry his pos∣sessions with him. And hence it is
that the Apostle sees cause to warn young Timothy (though a very good man) to fly youthfull lusts,2 Tim. 2.22. and to mind Titus,Tit. 2.6. to exhort young men to be sober minded. That you may be the better able both to discern and to avoid such dangers: Let the Word of God wherein you have been instructed, dwell in you richly (or plenteously) in all wisdom,Col. 3.16. and that will make you rich in wisdom, even wise unto salvation,2 Tim. 3.15.17, 17. and throughly instructed to every good work.Psalm. 119 9. When the Psalmist puts the question, Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? His answer is, by taking heed thereto according to thy word.
Non erit hoc artis, sed pietatis opus.
Let no day pass without consulting the Oracles of God.Prov. 20.29. The glory of young men is their strength: May it be your glory to be strong in the Lord,Ephes. 6.16. and in the power of his might, and to be strengthned with
might by his Spirit in the inner man. Thus saith the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisedome, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches: But let him that glorieth, glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, &c. This was it that incouraged the Apostle to write unto young men,1 Jo. 2.13, 12. because they were strong, and the word of God abode in them, and they had overcome the wicked one. It was no less an honour then a comfort to good Obediah,1 Kin. 18.2. that he could say, that he feared the Lord from his youth.
How was the Apostle filled with joy, when he called to re∣membrance the unfained faith that was in Timothy,2 Tim. 1.5 which dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois, and in his mother Eunice? And Timothy by his stedfast persevering in the faith, procured this honour unto his pa∣rents, to have their names made as lasting as the Scriptures. A seri∣ous
profession of religion and god∣liness hath been derived upon you through more generations. To mention the honour and dignity, the wealth and greatness of any of your Progenitors: what rich purchases they have made, what stately stru∣ctures they have raised, what Ti∣tles of honour they have atchieved, were but vanity, and apt to occa∣sion evil rather then good. Abra∣ham (who is so much renowned in the book of God for his faith and obedience) is remembred for no other purchase then of a place to bury in;Gen. 22.15 for no other buildings, then of Altars to the Lord; and for no higher Titles then such as might serve to set forth his spiritual rela∣tions: Abraham the father of the faithfull,Chap. 23. Gen. 17.5 Rom. 4.17 Gen. 26.24. 2 Chr. 20.7 Isa. 41.8. the servant and the friend of God. It sufficeth, if with your patience I may mind you, that as God by your Progenitors hath conveighed riches and honour in a large measure unto you: so that
it may be your care to leave them with a blessing to your progeny. That which may add much to your contentment in the enjoying of them, and to your encouragement in the using of them well, amongst many other reasons this may be one, That whatever they are, they are not such, as have been either hasti∣ly gotten, or increased by usury or unjust gain, which would have left them without a blessing.Pro. 20.21. & 28.8. I re∣ceived it from that worthy Knight and your honoured Grandfather, Sr. Samuel Rolle: when he was a∣bout to leave the world, that he ac∣knowledged it (with thankfulness to God) as an especial blessing that neither he, nor his father, nor his Grandfather, (notwithstanding their many and great transactions in the world) had ever borrowed or lent upon usury. And indeed it is no less a blessing to be kept from being tempted with the gain of lending, then to be delivered from the ne∣cessity
of borrowing upon usury. What pity it were that an inheri∣tance so justly acquired and accom∣panied with such a blessing, should ever be misused or mispent.
Let the Justice, Temperance, Sobriety, Meekness, Moderation, to∣gether with those other vertues which were eminent in your Ance∣stors; become yet more eminent in you. Their hatred of vice, and love and practice of vertue, hath rendred their memory gratefull and blessed.Prov. 10.7 The very instruments and occasions of evil were an offence unto them. Amongst other dis∣orders, against which they testified their dislike, gamings at cards and dice, have not been so much as to∣lerated in their families (as I have been credibly informed) for well near, if not for more then a full century of years. The religious order observed by your great grand∣fathers father (Henry Rolle in the government of his family, espe∣cially
in the sanctification of the Lords day, hath been long since made publick to the world. I hope the mentioning of these things, will not be unto others an occasion of envy, nor to you of vain-glory. My only aim is to offer them as incitements to god∣liness and vertue, and as examples worthy of imitation, and chiefly to you, with whom I trust they will not be unapt to prevail. The beginning and continuance of them, was their honour, and the per∣fecting and propagating of them will be yours. It is no less honou∣rable, than easie to add unto that which hath been well begun. And it is a far greater diminution of ho∣nour to posterity to come short of the vertues of their Ancestors, then of their outward estate or splen∣dor in the world. Quanto majorum vita praeclarior, tanto posterum socor∣dia flagitiosior. But I trust (through grace) that there will be no cause to
that those things which have been so happily begun, and so long con∣tinued, and that with such remark∣able testimonies of the favour and blessing of God, shall receive ei∣ther an end or an abatement in you. It was cause of rejoycing to hear, how affectionately you re∣ceived the wise and holy admo∣nitions and counsels of your dying father. I hope they will ever live with you, and you in them. I shall add no more, but that which Da∣vid by inspiration from God, when he was a dying, spake unto Solomon his Son, and which the Lord by him speaks unto every son of a re∣ligious parent, Know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a per∣fect heart, and with a willing mind: for the Lord searcheth all hearts; and understandeth all the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.
That the Lord may be the guide
of your youth, the strength and shield of your life, and in life and death your exceeding great reward, is the hearts desire, and prayers to God of him, who is,
SIR, 
