



Madam,
I Know not how to Own the humble Opinion I have of these Poems at the same time that I present them to your Highness.
Were it possible for me to write what could have any proportion of Merit to your Highness's Favour, I should bring
my Offering with much more Chearful∣ness. Goodness in Princes naturally oc∣casions trouble to Themselves and such as are near to them: His Royal High∣ness had been pleas'd to receive favou∣rably an honest endeavour of my Muse, which was my greatest Encouragement to this Address. But so raging was that Season of Faction; that no Son of Loy∣alty could want Indignation enough to constitute a Poet. That ever the Hearts of Men could conceive such Injustice and Ingratitude towards a Prince that had so highly obliged the Nation, can onely have belief with the Age in which it was transacted.

But Heaven has once more de∣scended in Miracles, to establish the Royal Family; and in them Prospe∣rity to the Nations. The Storm is spent, the Peoples Sight restor'd, Se∣dition for ever disarm'd of Pretences. Bankrupt Prodigals are no longer made Guardians of Property, nor Atheists of Religion.
Whither then should the Muses now betake themselves with the Songs of Peace, but to the fair Branches of the Royal Stem? whose Praises
and Persections can they more justly celebrate than those that so eminently adorn your Highness. To what cause can they more assign our new establish'd Happiness, than to a Reward from Providence for that most illustrious pro∣gress of all Virtues in your Highness, from your very Infancy. And as a fur∣ther Illustration of your being constituted by Heaven for a general Blessing; We triumph in your Nuptials with a most auspicious Prince, who (besides his personal Conduct and Valour) has strengthned our Monarchy with a most powerful Alliance. Your Blooming
Beauties were justly made the Prize of his early Fame.
All Hearts therefore are employ'd in Addresses to Heaven for Your Fe∣licity, and impatient for the Royal Blessing You promise.
If I had a Talent of Panegyrick, I should decline it in addressing to Your Highness, of whom the ablest Wit cannot express so much as the plainest Heart conceives. Your High∣nesses most charming Condescension, the heavenly Sweetness of Your Temper,
Your unaffected and habitual Piety, Your Generosity and Charity are eter∣nally their own Registers, transcend∣ing all Rhetorick, much more what can be exprest by,
Madam, 
