



Grace and Peace be Multiplyed.
I Have taken this opportunity to joyn you together in one Chri∣stian Epistle, as hoping that you are united in one and the same Spirit and bond of Christian af∣fection, (which of all bonds is the strongest and most durable.)
There is (Honourable and Beloved in the Lord) a two-fold knowledge of spirituall things.

1 That which is meerly literall and carnall, and

2 That which is spirituall and experimen∣tall.

Men may know Gospel Mysteries in a car∣nall manner, and be never a whit the better for all their knowledge, nay it will aggravate their condemnation.1 Cor 13.2. 2 Cor. 5.16. Satan himself, and the evill Angels, being spirits (though spi∣rits of darknesse) have more speculative li∣terall knowledge of Divine Mysteries, then all the men in the world besides. And have not many in our dayes abounded in this kind of knowledge? who now manifest themselves to be ungodly men, turning the grace of God into wantonnesse, and denying the Lord Jesus, wandring Stars, clouds without water, carry∣ed about with winds, Trees whose fruit wi∣thereth, twice dead, plucked up by the roots.Ep. Jude 4, 12, 13.
This is that knowledge which puffeth up1 Cor. 8.1. and maketh men high in their own conceits. Ye reigne as Kings without us (saith the A∣postle1 Cor. 4.8, 20. and I would to God ye did reigne [indeed, and that it were not only in conceit] For the Kingdome of God is not in word, but in power.
These times (wherein Satan more then ever transformeth himself into an Angel of light)2 Cor. 11.14. call aloud unto us for more then ordinary watchfullnesse, self-scrutiny, and a continuall exercise of our spirituall Armour, that we may stand in the evill dayEph. 6 13. Strong allurements and temptations from within, and from with∣out, require much faith, holy vigilancy, di∣strust
of our own parts and sufficiencies, and constant dependance upon the grace, power, and wisedome of the Lord Jesus.
To have our hearts suited to a temptation, is one of the greatest miseries, but to have them suited to the work of the Lord (which he calls us to) is an unspeakable blessing
When there is a confluence of Creature en∣joyments (the world putting on a new Vi∣zard, and Satan the God of this world2 Cor. 4.4. re∣presenting the honours and riches thereof in a faire and specious glosseMat. 4.8, 9. that he may thereby the more insensibly delude us) truly it concerns the Lords people (in such a case) seriously to watch, and to look narrowly to their spirits principles and ends, and to keep their Garments pure and close tied about them, least they walk naked, and their naked∣nesse appear.Rev. 16.14.
What these Garments are, you will find in this explication of the Marriage Song, which I recommend to all the Lords people, and par∣ticularly to you; and wherein (I hope) you will meet with some seasonable practicall Truths (from each Verse) which I have con∣tracted in as little room as possibly I could.
Such as are in high places, are in slippery places, especially if they walk in pride, and according to the Principles and Rules of car∣nall wisedome and pollicy, and not according to the simplicity of the word of Christ; and hereof we have had many experiments in this last Age.

 The best Rule of pollicy and prudence, is to prefer the doing of Justice, before all earthly advantages; honesty and simplicity will be found to be the best pollicy; The lesse of man the more of God, who confoundeth things that are by things that are not.1 Cor. 1.27. Doubt∣lesse the Army (and the good people who have adhered thereunto) have cause to say so, Let them not be high minded, let them not de∣spise and insult over their brethren, let them not seek great things for themselves. The holy jealous God will more and more witnesse a∣gainst an ambitious selfish worldly spirit wherever it appeareth.
Certainly there was never any true, reall beauty or excellency in the honours, Titles, riches, pleasures of this world. Man at his best estate is but vanity, and walketh in a vain shew. These outward things take to themselves wings, and fly from us. But now God having in a great measure stained the pride and glory of all flesh, and the day of his appearance ap∣proaching, there is lesse beauty, sweetnesse, reallity in Creature enjoyments then ever. The older the world groweth, the worse it is: doe we not see the earth reeling too and fro like a drunken man, ready to crack and break under the weight and burden of sin and vani∣ty? May we not behold all parties (so far as they judge of things with a naturall eye, and according to humane prudence) even at their wits ends, not knowing what to doe? As for old corrupt formes, customes, con∣stitutions,
what are they but as so many dead carkasses without life and power?
But we expect a new face of things; we look for a resurrection of Churches, for a re∣stauration of righteous and holy administrati∣ons, for a new Heaven and a new Earth, where∣in dwelleth righteousnesse, holinesse, peace and joy.Rev. 21.1. Old things shall passe away, all things shall become New; O that men would learn to be wise, and not goe about to build the things which God will destroy, nor to de∣stroy the things which God will build; to do both, or either, is a great transgression in the sight of the Lord.
You are not ignorant (Honoured and be∣loved in Christ) that there are great thoughts and expectations among the Saints at this ay, concerning the Kingdome of Christ, some  one way, some in another; nor should this e slighted as a meer fancy, a Chymaera, an odd otion; doubtles there are many symptomes of he approaching glory of this Kingdome. God ath severall seasons for revealing his Truths, relating to the severall Offices of Christ, and hose truths which specially concern his King∣dome and Government, will be more and more required into, and cleared up in this last age, specially when God shal rent that vail wch is upon the Jews.2 Cor. 3.15, 16. But alas! methinks at pre∣ent our hearts are not suited to the glory and iritualnes of this Kingdome (I am sure mine  not) and truly it is to be feared, that many
who speak great swelling words, doe lust after a fleshly, and not after a spirituall Kingdome  for though this Kingdome is and shall be more and more outward and visible (the spirit of God breaking forth in the glorious fruits and emanations thereof) yet the rise of it is in∣ward. The Kingdome of God is within, and comes without observation,Luke 17.20. John 18.2. The King, subjects, Lawes, weapons, obedience, admini∣strations and priviledges, relating to this Kingdome, are heavenly and spirituall, not worldly and carnall.
And indeed it is no small delusion, if (upon this consideration, that the Saints shall rule the Kingdomes of the world) any one party whatsoever shall grasp and ingrosse to them∣selves, the great things of this old corrupt pe∣rishing world, and carry on designes sutable to the interest thereof, and that from an old worldly spirit and principle; for though the Kingdome and Dominion, and the greatnesse of the Kingdome under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most highDan. 7.27. yet shall not the Saints rule in a worldly carnall selfish manner, but in a way sutable to the Justice, equity, and spiri∣tuallnesse of the Kingdome of Christ, and to the Government of that new world, or world to come, which is in subjection to Christ, Heb. 2.5. and which is daily expected by the Saints, I must (for my own part) confesse that I am an Expectant, humbly waiting on God for more light and more love, and for a more
pure self-denying, powerfull Ministry, then yet we have attained (the present Ministry even all of us being deeply involved in the guilt and corruptions of the times) I wait for a Ministry attended with the spirit of Elias, that will make crooked things straight, rough things plain; that will exalt the valleys, and bring down every mountain, that all flesh may see the salvation and the glory of God. This is prophecied of as a fore-runner of the exal∣tation of Christs Kingdome, Isa. 2. and when the Lord ariseth to shake terribly the earth, we should (according to the Prophets coun∣sell there) hide our selves in the clefts of the RockCant. 2.14. even the blood and wounds of the Son of God, which is the soules stedfast Ankor and Refuge in an evill and stormy day.Isa. 4.6. Heb. 6.19.
It is my frequent and earnest desire to the Lord, that all his people in these Nations (which have been the stage of many miracu∣lous providences) may be thoroughly hum∣bled. Such as have seen the Lord (with the eye of faith) will cry out with the ProphetIsa. 6.5. Woe is me I am undone, I am a man of un∣clean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips.
Verily there is none of us that have cause to boast; we have all sinned, and come short of the glory of God; there is none that doth good, no not one. The best of us is but a lye and vanity, and we had need pray continually that God would not enter into Judgement with us, for we cannot stand before him.

 It would be (in my poor apprehension a blessed thing if there were among the Lord people, Magistrates, Ministers, Souldiers (eve from the highest to the lowest) such an u∣versall serious self-abasement and humiliati∣on, considering the guilt and evill which ad∣hereth generally to us all, for our worldliness faction, ambition, murmurings, fleshly zeal and passions, self-seekings, dallying with Re∣ligion, variablenesse and unstedfastnesse in the things of God, rash swearing, violation of in∣gagements and Covenants, complyance with corrupt Opinions, doctrines, interests. In  word, for those many evills wherewith eve good men of severall ranks and employment have been intangled and insnared in the ma∣nagement of the late Wars, and publick stupen∣dious Transactions in these Nations. Confi∣dent I am, there is no humble watchfull Chri∣stian (employed at this day either in Civil o Military affaires) but upon serious examina∣tion will be sensible of many sad miscarriage and sinister ends.
This universall repentance (accompanied with faith in Christs blood) might (through Gods grace) produce good effects in this time of our sojourning in the wildernesse. And O that we could at length not only word it with God (who is an all-seeing Spirit) but in good earnest take shame to our selves, and give glory to him, who will ere long abase the pride of all flesh, that himself alone may be exalted.

 Give me leave to conclude with a word of humble advice, (which I trust is from the Lord) Let it be your care (Honoured and beloved in the Lord) in these unsetled times, o keep close (both in Judgement and pra∣ctice) to Blood, Water, and the written Word,  by which three things the Lord comes into, and hath communion with his people.1 John 5.6. To the blood of Jesus for your reconciliation nd justification. To water (whereunto the Spirit of God is compared) for your sancti∣fication, and for cleansing you from all filthi∣nesse of flesh and spirit (by the application of he blood of sprinkling) and to the written ord for your direction. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if men speak not according to his, it is because there is no light in them.Isa. 8.20.
Be not ambitious and desirous of the Ho∣nours of this vain, tottering, inconstant, defi∣ning world; seek not after that which will not satisfie an Immortall soule. Remember the ex∣ample of Moses and Nehemiah, men of choice and excellent spirits; nay of Christ your head and Saviour, who did not please but deny him∣self. Let your moderation be knowne to all men, the Lord is at hand.Phil. 4.5.
New-Sarum, April 22. 1656.

