



My dear Friend,
HAving taken these Notes on a subject of great con∣cern (which may be much more inlarged) I did consider with my self that they might be very seasonable and suitable to your case and condition; for you have been an afflicted soul for a long time, often complaining to God and Man of the darkness of your spirit, and the sad and dismal thoughts wherewith you
have been haunted and exceeding∣ly disquieted, as if no Mans con∣dition were so sad and dark and disconsolate as yours: But yet there is no Temptation (as you may assure your self) which hath seized on you, but other Christians have had experience thereof; and God, who is Faith∣ful, will with the Temptation also make a way to escape, that you may be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13.
Blessed be God, you have a tender and gratious High Priest that undertakes for you; in that he himself hath suffered, being tempted, he is able to succour
them that are tempted, Heb. 2.18. We have not (saith the Apostle) a High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet with∣out Sin; let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mer∣cy, and find Grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.15, 16. He it is that gathers the weak Lambs with his Arm, and car∣ryes them in his Bosom, and gent∣ly leads those that are with Young, Isa. 40.11. He will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoaking Flax, but will send
forth Judgment unto Victory, Math 12.20.
This Merciful and Compassio∣nate Jesus never rejected any that came to him; and will he cast you off if you come to Him with the burthen of your Sins, Sorrows, Temptations, Melancholick dis∣tempers? No, he will not; he hath promised he will not, Joh. 6.37. There's an Emphasis in the Original, two Negatives, He will not in any wise, by any means cast ye out: The doubled Nega∣tives serve to make the Assertion so much the stronger, and to raise our Faith above all doubts and fears.

O then poor Soul, be not dis∣couraged, draw not back from he living God, through an evil heart of unbelief: Give not way to groundless Jealousies and carnal Reasonings; but believe, and you shall see the Glory of God in giving you speedily a gracious Issue out of all your Temptations, and a comfortable deliverance from the sad disconsolate per∣plexing thoughts of your own heart, which indeed is your great∣est Enemy; for the heart is de∣ceitful above all things, and des∣perately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17.9.
Read over these Notes seri∣ously,
and beg of God earnestly to give you Grace to improve the seasonable directions therein mentioned, and to teach you ef∣fectually by his Spirit; for who Teacheth like him? Job 36.22. When he giveth Quietness, who then can cause Trouble? And when he hideth his Face, who then can behold Him? Whether it be done against a Nation, or a∣gainst a Man only, Job 34.29.
If ye think the publishing of these Notes may tend to the Edi∣fication and comfort of some other tempted afflicted souls, who are in the like condition with your self, it is left to your Freedom to
get them published, otherwise you may make a private use of them for your self and near Relations, as God shall direct and enable you; to whose Gracious Protecti∣on I commend you and yours.
