



THO' there be several Remarkable Occurrences Contri∣buting to the Solemnity of this Day, (as the Presence of their Majesties, the Court, &c.) yet the general Joy, and Satisfaction of the City, is no less Worthy of Re∣cord, which is an Universal as their PREPARATIONS are Publick. Nor can it Chuse but add a Rubrick in the Kalender of Your Life, that you were the first Advanced to the Pretorical Chair of this Great Metropolis, after the Year of Redemption, the Happy Day of Deliverance from Pagan and Egyptian Bondage, by Miracles and Wonders. When Ido∣latry, like a Deluge, had Over-spread the Land, and the Church, like the Ark, lay Tottering upon the Billows, then came the Dove with the Olive-Branch of Joy; He Allay'd the Swelling of the Waters, Restoring us to our Liberty, and Religion. When Arbitrary Force, and Lawless Usurpation had Unreasonably Imposed upon us New Lords, and New Laws, contrary to the Practice, and known Customs, of this City. Then did You, in Defence of our Just Rights and Liberties, stand in the Gap, and Bravely Oppos'd the Violence of the Impetu∣ous Torrent. So great a Champion were You, and so zealous an Asserter of these Rights, that You prefer'd our Privi∣leges before your Liberty, and Glorying in Your Chains, while

You were yet a Magistrate, became Twice a Prisoner. Like Daniel, You are taken out of the Lion's Den to be a Ruler o∣ver us. Nor had those Ravenous Beasts any Power over You, altho' their Malice was sufficiently Exasperated against You. Their Jaws were stop'd till the Delivering Monarch Order'd You Enlargement, raising You Higher by Your Fall, and a greater Object of His Favour by Your Sufferings. This Royal Bounty of the Prince could not but beget in us a Grate∣ful Emulation to Prefer You in the City, for whose sake You had Suffer'd such long and severe Persecution. The Chair being Vacant by the Death of Sir John Chapman, with one Consent You are Chosen for the remaining Time, and then with an Unanimous Heart and Voice of the Elective Assem∣blies to continue for the Ensuing Year. My Lord, we men∣tion not this as a Favour done, but as a Debt due to Your Suf∣ferings, and at last should think all this too little, were it in our Power to do more. This must stop the Mouth of Envy, that all Tongues must confess Your own Merits have most justly Advanced You. You have Asserted our Rights, Re∣stor'd our Customs, and Immunities. Every thing runs clear in its proper Channel. That it may never again be Di∣sturb'd by the Violence of Impetuous and Arbitrary Men, is the Prayer of
My LORD,

