



Most Honourable, and most Loyal.
THis Collection of LOYAL POEMS rescu'd from the Flames (when our Illium was al∣most a second time on Fire) present them∣selves an humble Offering at your Feet. It is the Poets Loyalty and Religion, asserting those Rights with their Pens, which you have avouch'd to main∣tain with your Swords; The Defence of which was the first Foundation of this Illustrious Society. A most Noble Institution, and destin'd to as glorious ends, When Factious Caballs began to prevail, and Rebel∣lion under the disguise of Liberty began to invade on
the Prerogative, then was't the Royal Party began to meet with generous Resolution, and stand up as one Man for the Interest of the Crown and Government. When Absolom had Conspir'd with Achitophel against the envy'd Life and Peaceful Reign of Injur'd David, what less could engage in his Defence than the Princes and Chiefs of Israel? This was that Royal Assembly which like you kept the Aspiring Rebells in awe, and the Monarch against all their Conspiracies safe up∣on his Throne. Where then can these Innocent Loyal Truths rather fly for Protection, than to You the most Eminent Patrons of Truth and Loyalty?
I fear it will be counted Arogance in me to devote so mean a Trifle to the whole Body Politick, the least Member of which is worthy of a far Richer Oblation, but our whole Artillery being level'd against the Factions, what Hercules Arm can guard me against the Multitude? Against the Imps of Rebellion, there is no Power to invoke, but the Sons of Loyalty, nor a spell against the Witchcraft of the Murmuring Cabals, but the Musical Charms of the ROYAL CLƲB. That Club so nobly founded, and so amicably carry'd on with unanimity of Heart and Voice for the long Life and Preservation of his Majesty and Loyal Brother in the Lawful Succession against all Opposers.
I dare not venture after the manner of Dedications to enter on Encomium, or Launce out into the boundless praise of so many Illustrious and Eminent Heroes, the meanest of whom is a Theme sufficient for the most Cele∣brated Pen; but being threatned before on the like
occasion (for my Collection of Loyal Songs Dedicated to his R. Highness) I only implore your gracious Pro∣tection, and acceptance, that under that Influence be∣ing guarded from all the Treacherous Assaults of my Enemies, Whigs and Trimmers, I may walk abroad in safety under the Character of

