




STill with our sins, still with our furies crost,
The Royal Barge is on the Billows tost.
We raise the Storm: You must the Jonas be,
That must appease the raging of the Sea.
You, Sir, are both the Heav'ns and Oceans care,
Whose Gods in your protection claim a share;
Who from devouring Deeps, as him before,
Did in your life, our lives and hopes restore.
So the fair Light once banish'd, does return,
When with new Brightness crown'd the Day is Born:
Tho all the time that disapears, we might
Much better say, we vanisht are from Light:
For that still guides the Day when it is here,
And flies but to extend the Day elsewhere.
As you, whom our poor Isle cannot confine,
More than the Sun can in one Country shine,
For the same cause can never Banish't be,
Contain'd in no one Land no more than He.
Ev'n he, Descending from his Shining height
With us, does rise in other Lands as Bright,
And seeming to go down to this Worlds view.
Retires, but is not Banish't to the new.


So you, no less than he, a Star too Great
To rise for ever in one place, or set.
In Sphere too noble, and of make too pure,
For envious Mists for ever to obscure.
If ought e're seem'd to intercept your Light,
The Clouds ne'r darken'd you, but hid our sight.
Like Heav'ns fair Ruler of the Day, as high
Above all Clouds, as they above our Eye.
Nor less than he a Royal Planet seem,
Born to divided Empire too, like Him.
Your Hemispheres in which you shine, have too
Your Brothers antient Empire, and its new:
The Empire of his Race, which gave the Chair
In which our Kings, when Crown'd, now seated are.
Ev'n so long since some promise seem'd to give,
That thence in time we might our Kings derive:
Gives us in you a sure support alone,
Both of the Scottish Chair, and English Throne.
Well did the ROYAL MARTYR e're he fell
To bind SUCCESSION, shew his latest zeal;
When Kissing GLOUC'STER he forbad all Claims
To CHARLES his Scepter and the Sword of JAMES.
Be CHARLES his Scepter ever sacred still,
And be the Sword of JAMES invicible.
May the young KING to mount my Throne prevail,
May th' ADMIRAL in Battel never fail:
Revolted Cities bend to th' PRINCES yoke,
While Fleets and Armies wait upon the DUKE:
His Lot to shine upon the Land, and be
The other still to Thunder on the Sea.
All this and more kind Heaven understood,
Couch't in your speechless Father's voice of Blood.
For Wounds have Mouths which seem to gape and cry
And in the voice of Blood was Prophecy.
Propitious Heav'n the Martyr's Cry has heard,
A King's and Martyr's Cry deserves regard.
Much to his Vows as the Event does show
For their success the Royal Brothers owe.
Our Sov'reign much for his Return must own,
Meeting i'th' Arms of Peace a Bloodless Crown.


Much you, maintaining to the Sea that Right,
He o're the Land had gain'd, without a Fight.
For what alas had it avail'd to boast
His Scepter gain'd, had yet his Flagg been lost?
And what a Maimed Monarch needs must be
An Island King who is not Lord at Sea?
In his Return Heaven no hands did need,
Reserving that, for its peculiar deed.
Its Act entire, as seeming to declare,
None in the Honour of that work shou'd share:
That Kings may know on whom they must depend,
Whose Gifts are Crowns, and whence they do Descend.
And we due Reverence to our Kings may learn,
Restor'd Divinely, as Divinely born.
This Heav'n perform'd, but left it to your Sword
To Guard those Rights to which he was restor'd:
Keeping in store this Honour, as your due,
What it began shou'd finisht be by you.
And teaching us where humane hands there need,
To what a kind of Choice it does proceed:
When suiting Instruments to Ends it draws
The Brightest Sword still in the bravest cause;
Appointing, and then Arming you for Fight,
Who to the Seas Command by Birth had Right:
Led by just Titles to as just a War,
To reap those Honours, in which none cou'd share.
With double Courage arm'd, you then did show
What a Great Leader, and good Cause cou'd do.
What the Kings just Rights cou'd at once require,
Or we from th' hopes of your high Birth desire:
When you the winged Hosts to Battel led,
And in your Flying Chariot 'fore them rid,
Bearing your Brothers Thunder by your side,
And waving high his Flag, with lofty Pride,
Thus high th' Ensign of his wrong'd Pow'r to show,
While that his Vengeance loudly? speaks below.
Soon as the Sov'raign of the Seas did rore
Prostrate they fell, who cou'd not bow before.
They knew his Voice, and to his Flagg submit,
His Thunder own, and him that carry'd it.


Tall Ships that with their Flaggs erect did ride,
Hide in the Seas the Trophies of their pride.
Low as the Deep their humble Top-sails bend,
And Wide as that their Ruins do extend:
Such was the Fight as did the World convince,
None but you were Born for the Crowns defence.
And tho' it were not your high Charge by Birth,
Your Merit to that place had call'd you forth;
While you at once deservedly Unite
The greatest Merit, and the Highest Right.
What vast unbounded hopes may we conceive
Who under such a pair of Brothers live?
Happy! beneath this fair Conjunction born,
Cou'd we submit to th' Throne which they adorn.
Where each so worthy is, Great CHARLES to Reign,
And YORK to Triumph o're the Conquer'd Main:
A better KING than He no Land e're knew,
No Seas a braver ADMIRAL than you.

