



LUdovicus Vives re∣ports of the Storke, Ciconiae hic mos est, ut
unum e pullis relinquat ei domui, qua est nidu∣lata: The Storke useth to leave one of her young ones to the house where she builds her nest: Sym∣bol. 86. A pattern of thankefulness for kindness received. And Symbol. 81. Accipe oculatus; Re∣ceive kindnesses with thine eye. Though the giver should not much eye them, lest he should seem to upbraide the receiver,
yet should the receiver of∣ten view them, that he may be mindeful of the giver: yet most receivers are blind in this kind. Nihil citius senescit, quam gra∣tia. Nothing grows old sooner then a good turn. Other crimes (saith an Historian) may be hid with many colours; in∣gratitude not with any. It was so hateful to the Egyptians, that they used to make Eunuchs of un∣grateful
persons, that no posterity of thers might remain. Barnab. Rich. descript. of Ireland, Chap. 6. The Earth wee tread on upbraids them,

Inquit amicus ager Do∣mino; sere, plurima reddam:
Si bene mi facias, memini tibi reddere grates.



The friendly field the Lord bespeaks,
Sow, I will render store:
If good you do me, thanks I will
Remember to restore.
Aulus Septimius Severus.


Bethinking my selfe how to rid me of this crime of ingratitude, and finding nothing worthy of your Noble favour to me and mine, in assisting us meer stangers to you in procuring the payment of our publick stipends: I remember what Thales (called by Julian, Sapientum facile prin∣ceps, one granted gene∣rally to be the principal of the wise men, Paneg. 2. in Eusebiam Imp.) an∣swered
to one that asked him, How great a re∣ward he should give him for what he had learn∣ned of him? If thou wilt (saith be) con∣fesse, that thou hast learned of me, thou hast paid me. I hope to finde the same courteous minde in you, that con∣fession shall be accepted for satisfaction. I pre∣sent you with Gods glory in Mans happiness. The
Lord make you a great instrument of his glory, and the good of his Church, in all your pub∣lick imployments, and in the end, remember you with the favour that he bears unto his people, and visit you with his salvation; that you may see the good of his chosen, that you may rejoyce in the gladness of his Nation, that you may glory with
his inheritance, Psalme 106.4, 5. So prayeth he that is

