



SAlvian one of the ho∣liest of the ancient Writers, tels us, Liber est quispiam beneficio∣rum foenore non grava∣tus: coguntur autem omnes ipsa conscientia
sua ad repensationem vi∣cissitudinis, postquam esse coeperint debitores. Contra Avarit. lib. 4. Every man is free, that is not bound to pay in∣terest for benefits recei∣ved: but all are compel∣led even by their own conscience to requite be∣nefits with the like, after they once become deb∣tours. But like for like I cannot give: What shall I then, what can I lesse
do, then give a cordiall and verball acknowledgement, where I cannot render a reall recompence? I am encouraged by that of He∣liodorus, Gratitudo viro sapienti pulcherrimum munus; multosque novi, qui hoc donum, tan∣quam thesaurum, in ani∣mo reposuerunt. Lib. Aethiopic. altero. Thank∣fulnesse is a most beauti∣full gift to a wise man; and I have known many,
who have laid up this present in mind, as a treasure. True it is, the greatest praise for favours received by men is due to God, in whose hands are the hearts of men. Yet though the fountain be most to be eyed, the rivers are not to be slighted. Davids care spurs me on to grati∣tude, who acknowledges Jonathans love in his kindnesse to his posterity, 2 Sam. 9.3, 7. I should be
very ungratefull then, if I should not acknowledge your kindnesse not only to me and mine, but also to many other godly Mini∣sters in encouraging of us, and them in the work of the Ministry. Our con∣cord in Canterbury in driving on the work of the Gospell, though we differ about Government, and our stout consent to main∣tain purity of Doctrine, as it may be exemplary
to other places, so it is throughly known to you. And I must acknowledge in the name of my fellow Labourers, that while you were employed in the Ho∣nourable house of Parlia∣ment, you were the main instrument of setling and paying our means. I may say with Ennodius, Lib. 1. Epist. 7. Quamvis non in me ad florem venerit matura facundia, et pres∣sus onere gratiae solvendi
eserar facultate; com∣nitto tamen cymbam heam placido mari; quia arum ab ingratitudine iffert muta gratitudo. Although I have not at∣ained to the height of loquence, and am over∣ressed with your kind∣esse, so that I want ower to requite; yet I ave adventured to put ny slender boat into the alme sea; considering, hat a dumbe gratitude
differs little from ingra∣titude. I set before yo Gods Choice, and sha pray to God to give yo grace to use diligence to make your calling and election sure.
And so desiring you t accept kindly of th small token of love an thankefulnesse, I com∣mend you to God, an to the word of his grace which is able to buil you up, and to give yo
an inheritance among all hem which are sanctify∣yed, Act. 20.32. So pray∣th he that is

