



Honoured and Beloved Brethren,
I Have thought meet to make this Dedication also to you, be∣cause ye were not only eye and ear Witnesses of what past in the Disputation; but were privy to all the Circumstances with which it was attended, and were the sole Cause of my being engaged in it. How it was managed you best know, and therefore are proper Judges of the matters of fact related in this Narrative. For my own part, I have took much Pains, and used great Care and Consideration in the Review of those Papers you sent me from those that wrote down the Dispute, that I might do no Wrong to either Party.
And herein I have had all the Helps I could obtain both from our Brother Williams, who was engaged with me in the Dispu∣tation; from whom I received (by the hands of Mr. Sharp, our

Moderator) an Account of those Arguments he offered, and what else he could remember, taken from his own mouth: besides the account I have had by Letters from divers other Persons that were present. All which I have diligently compared, and have also endeavoured (so far as those Accounts and my own Memory would furnish me therewith) not only to give a true Narrative of what was spoken, but also to give our Antagonists Words their due weight as well as our own.
And if there be any thing omitted therein, they must blame themselves, or their own Scribe, and not us. For Mr. William Leddell went to Mr. Smith their Writer, and carried our Copy with him, and desired him to compare it with his: He answer∣ed, that his was very imperfect, it being the first time he was in a Dispute, and he could not take it, but some things were left out; and said, that it was not as yet wholly written over. Mr. Leddell waited upon him a second time, but could not obtain a sight of it to compare them together, although he was satisfied it was then finished. Now whether he did this of himself, or by Advice from them, is best known to himself. However, it leaves us without blame.
I know it is not proper for me (who was principally concerned in it) to say much concerning the Dispute it self: for being made Publick, it's left to every one that reads it to judge for himself. Nevertheless, it may not be amiss to make some few Remarks upon it; because it may fall into some hands who may not well understand the Grounds of the Controversie.
1. It is agreed on both sides, That Mr. Chandler's Sermons were the occasion of that Offence taken by you, and of the Dis∣pute it self; as appears by the Preliminaries signed by Mr. Tho∣mas Bowes and Mr. William Leddell on our part, and also by Mr. Chandler and Mr. Williams on the part of the Presby∣terians: as you may see in p. 3, 4.
2. The Objections being made against what Mr. Chandler preach'd, it had been his proper Work to have vindicated the Truth of his Doctrine against those Objections, by the Authority of Holy Scripture. But instead thereof, he puts us upon it to prove the contrary. But as the learned Dr. Smith did well ob∣serve, He that asserts must prove. And their own Modera∣tor did declare, that Mr. Chandler had in his Preaching assert∣ed, that Infants are the Subjects of Baptism, but told us we were not to call on him for that then.

3. I would make this farther Remark upon it, That the Rea∣son why he took this method was, because he was unable to prove what he had asserted: for in one of his Sermons he thus speaks; But that I may proceed with the greater clearness, I shall do these things; first, prove from Scripture the Warrantableness of Infant-Baptism, &c. And to make his Assertion good, he cites the Commission, Matth. 28. 19. for the Baptizing the In∣fants of believing Parents. And argues upon it, that Disciples were to be Baptized; and (saith he) we have a plain Text that such Infants are Disciples, see Acts 15. 10. And when our Saviour saith, Go make Disciples, baptizing them, it must be understood of such Infants. Now as to his Pretence from Acts 15. 10. we did sufficiently enervate that. And as for the Commission, Mr. Leigh doth confess (as well as Mr. Chandler) that it is a Command, and that the Command is express'd, pag. 27. And farther saith, in pag. 28. We must all confess that Jesus Christ gave Commission to Baptize Belie∣vers when at the Age of maturity; but afterwards the Chil∣dren of those Believers. Yet when Mr. Chandler begins to answer my first Argument, he affirms, That Christ hath no where expresly commanded Infants to be Baptized. See p. 6. And if so, then Infants cannot be intended, either in that Com∣mission, or any other place where there is a Command in Holy Scripture for Baptism. So that he needs no other Confutation than his own Confession, in the presence, as is supposed, of about 2000 Witnesses.
4. As for their Consequences which they were so desirous to have a Grant from me that I would allow them to make use of; it's very observable, that if they can do any thing that way, it's yet to be done; for they did not offer them to us in the Disputa∣tion, but have reserved them in their own Breasts, as the Pope doth his unwritten Traditions. And how they should think the People should be convinced of the truth of their Practice, when they tell them there is no express Command in Scripture for it, and pretend only they have some Consequences to prove it by, and yet refuse to tell what these Consequences are, it is beyond my Imagination. I can assure them, those that can take up a Sa∣tisfaction in such empty Pretences, are sufficiently prepared to be Priest-ridden, with a witness.
5. When they should have proved (if they had known how) that Infants are capable to be made Disciples by the Ministry of Men, according to Christ's Commission; they tell us (instead

thereof) That Children are accounted so when they first enter the School, and call a School-master for their Voucher. When the very naming of it confutes themselves, because they are so far from being made Scholars by Teaching, that they know not one Letter of the Book, by their own Confession.
6. I cannot but observe how strenuously they opposed them∣selves against our way of Baptizing by Dipping; and rejected the Authority of their own Authors, and divers of the greatest Pro∣testant Writers since the Reformation, who have asserted our Practice therein to be agreeable to the Etymology of the Word , and the Practice of John the Baptist, Christ and his Apostles; and yet themselves can (when it is to serve a Turn) practise it the same way, by plunging the Person over Head and Ears in Water. An Instance whereof, as I received it (well attested) from several hands (and the Persons own Confession) take as followeth.
To back that Instance of Mr. Williams's about the Virgin Mary and our Saviour in answer to Mr. Leigh's Demand, namely, to give him an Instance of one Person that was born of a Believer, and was Baptized when he came to grown years, see pag. 34, 35. We can give you an Account of one whose Pa∣rent was a Believer when he was born, and Baptized when adult, by Mr. Earl the Presbyterian Minister at Gosport, by Dipping, being about 40 years of Age. And this was done by the Advice of several of their Ministers, particularly Mr. Chandler and Mr. Williams. His Name is Joseph Fox; he is a near Neighbour of ours. And they did it either by the Commission, or, without regard to it, I know not which; that they best know.
And by another hand I have this Account.
We have also thought fit to acquaint you with the Person, and his Name, who was Baptized by the Presbyterians at Gosport; which is as followeth: It was Mr. Joseph Fox, living in Gos∣port; who being (by our Brother Duke) desired to answer him one thing, which was, Whether, when he was Bap∣tized by Mr. Earl, it was done by Dipping the whole Body under Water? And he said, it was; and that in the Presence of four Presbyterian Minister Thi was acknowledged by him to our Brother Duke on the  of  166-9. And we do desire you (if you think  in some part of the Dispute, that the World may  acquainted with that Proceed∣ing of theirs.

Now by this Action of theirs, if they believe it to be according to the Commission, then they justify our Practice; if they do it for any by-end, without believing it to be according to God's Word, then (as Mr. Calvin saith) the whole Action is but a Sport.
Now, that Mr. Chandler can have no other Thoughts of it, doth evidently appear from his own Words: for in his Sermon preachd at Portsmouth Nov. 10. 1698. he saith, It is not like∣ly that that God that will have mercy and not sacrifice, would institute an Ordinance so prejudicial to the Bodies of Men: and that it's very unlikely that Dipping, which when∣ever it is mentioned, is used as a Token of God's Vengeance, should in this Sacrament be used as a Token of his Mercy. Where you read of Dipping, you find it mentioned in a way of Wrath and Vengeance. Thus the old World was Dip'd and Drowned for their Sins: God's Vengeance followed them, and they sunk as Lead in the mighty Waters. Thus the Egyptians were Dip'd and Drowned in the Red Sea. Thus the Lord Jesus Christ shall come down from Heaven, to render Vengeance on his Adversaries; cloathed with Gar∣ments Dip'd in blood, Rev. 19. 13. [Here Mr. Chandler hath rendred that word Dip'd to inveigh and ridicule our Practice of Dipping, although he could object against it when I gave it for an Instance.] But he goes on, saying, You find still Dipping represents in Scripture God's Vengeance and Displeasure. And so I say it is very unlikely, that what was always used as a Token of his Displeasure, should in the New Testament be used as a Token of Mercy. So that it is not necessary that Dipping be used in Baptism.
To which I give this for Answer.
1. If it be so as he saith, then it was altogether unnecessary that Mr. Erle (by his Consent) should dip Mr. Fox's whole Body under the Water.
2. That it was not done in Mercy to him, thus to Baptize him; but in Vengeance, and as a Token of God's Displeasure.
3. That the Baptism practised by John the Dipper, and that of Christ and his Apostles, was not an Ordinance instituted of God in a way of Mercy, but appointed for the People in a way of Wrath and Vengeance: for I have given him a cloud of Witnes∣ses, that they did administer it by Dipping the whole Body un∣der the Water.
4. By this he doth condemn and ridicule all those learned Prote∣stants I have mentioned; with many others that might be named.

And the Divines of the Church of England (as well as we) who appoint Dipping as the best way of Baptizing (and Sprin∣kling only in case of Weakness) and was used by them formerly as their frequent Practice; and is asserted by some of their greatest Divines, to be the old and best way of Baptizing: and is to this day the constant Practice of the Greek Church.
I am also well assured from some other hands, that, upon the 25th of Febr. last, a few days after the Dispute, Mr. Leigh said in the Presence of divers Persons, That to satisfy a Scrupu∣lous Conscience he would administer Baptism by Dipping. Whereupon Mr. Williams askt him if he would do it to answer a Scrupulous Conscience without God's Word? And he answered No. And I have reason to conclude that Mr. Leigh may believe that Dipping is the right way of Baptizing, whatever he might say in the time of the Dispute; because he did say to divers persons, That if it had been in a private Conference, where there had been but a few Persons of a side, he should have made seve∣ral Concessions, which he was not willing to make in so great an Assembly. And therefore I will not charge those extravagant Expressions of Mr. Chandler's upon him; i. e. That Dipping was always used as a Token of Displeasure. And surely Mr. Chandler had mightily forgot himself when he said so: for Naa∣man the Syrian was commanded to Dip himself, not in a way of Vengeance and Wrath, but in a way of Mercy: and he found it to be so; for he was perfectly cured of his Leprosie thereby. I would advise Mr. Chandler to read over Rom. 2. 1, 2, 3. and consider how sharply the Apostle reproves such that condemn o∣thers, and yet do the same things themselves; and saith, Thou art inexcusable, O Man, whosoever thou art, that judgest; for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thy self; for thou that judgest, doest the same things.
How can he, or any of them, condemn our Practice, when themselves can do it to satisfie a Scrupulous Conscience, or, &c. And especially Mr. Leigh, who confesses it to be according to the Word of God? And Mr. Erle hath done it by their Consent.
I shall now give you an Account from another hand written from Gosport, in which (after he hath signified his respects to me, &c.) he thus saith;

Although they look on your Argu∣ments to be of little weight, yet we think them to be of too great weight for them to answer with all their Cunning. I hope those that were unprejudic'd will receive some Light, though they endeavoured (as much as in them lay) to dar∣ken

Counsel with their mutinous Carriage. But Truth will be Truth still in spight of all its Opposites; and will shine, though they would cloud it. This was written after that vain boasting Advertisement of the Presbyterians in the Post-man, which was very pleasing to their Party at London, and made so great a Noise all over the Nation, as if they had gotten some great Victory; although in truth it was nothing so: as will evi∣dently appear by this Narrative. But my Friend proceeds, say∣ing, I hope this Account I have herewith sent you, will come safe to your hands; wherein you may see some of their Cu∣riosity, whereby they say they have confounded your Sophi∣stry. Four things I observed in their Proceedings, which (to me) condemned their Cause.
I. The want of so much as one bare Instance in Scrip∣ture to confirm their Practice of Infant Baptism.
II. When they required an Instance of a Believers Child Baptized when adult; and promised when produced they would give us the Cause: which Instance was given, and yet they persisted in it as before.
III. Their appealing to the People to give their Assent that they were satisfied with Mr Leighs Argument from Matth. 19. 4. Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, by holding up their hands: and it was observed there were but few that did hold up their hands in comparison of so great a Multitude; sup∣posed by some not to be one in fifty, and by others, a much fewer number: so that they were far from having the Opi∣nion of the People on their side by way of Approbation, whatever they may say of themselves; which was not a little Mortification to them.
IV. When they could not obtain it by Right, they would have it be theirs by might. And this was evidenced by their repeated Clamours; which was not (when duly considered) to their Honour.
Besides, There have been two Concessions made since the Dispute by themselves, which were these:

1. That there was Credit gained to our Cause by this Dispute.
2. That there was Truth and Christianity in it.

For my part, I am satisfied in what was said, and so are our Friends, &c.
Sir, This is but some; and considering the Procedure was so clamorons, it may be said to be some of the Spoils won

in Battel, where Innocence and Rancour encountred.
I should be glad to hear of your Welfare, and desire an Interest in your Prayers as oft as you go to the Throne of Grace.
 Gosport, March 11. 1698-9.

I will give you an Abstract of another Letter, from a worthy Person in those Parts, directed to me, who was an eye and ear Witness of what past. In which (after Christian Salutations) he saith,

I hope these Lines will find you in Health, after your tedi∣ous and uncomfortable Journey, which I hope may bring some Glory to God, notwithstanding the great Rage that the, &c. was in. Indeed they had no other shift to save their Reputation, but by casting out a Flood, acting the part of the Serpents hiss amongst the worst. I do under∣stand, several were convinced by their Rudeness; and they are since Baptized.
I think it may be convenient to take away the Cloud from the Common People by exposing what was delivered in the Dispute (to publick view) and by adding that which they would not then hear; I mean that which relates to the man∣ner of Administration. You may consider of it. 'Tis pity they should glory in their shame, deceiving the World.
Dear Friend, I thank you for all your Labour of Love. Your Preaching and Behaviour was to me very acceptable, and to all our Friends, &c.
Gosport, March 6. 1698-9.

By these Testimonies you may see, that the Presbyterians had no Cause to publish what they did to the World, except it were to keep up their declining Reputation.
After the Dispute was ended, and I was returned to my Lodg∣ing, Mr. Williams told me he would go to his Namesake's house to talk with the Presbyterian Ministers that were there. I de∣sired him to remember my Love to them, and let them know, that I could dispute with Men and yet love them notwithstanding: but desired him to tell Mr. Robinson, their Moderator, that I took it very unkindly at his hands, that he should transgress so much as he had done against the Rules of Dispute, and be so abusive as he was, so as to give the Lye (for he said in the midst of the Dispute, with a loud Voice, That is a Lye, and yet could not make any thing out about it;) and for his Misrepre∣sentation of what I had said, particularly upon that Argument about the Beasts of the Field not being capable, &c.

And when Mr. Williams came to see me before I left Ports∣mouth, he told me that he had delivered my Message to them: and that Mr. Williams the Presbyterian Minister did acknow∣ledge that Mr. Robinson had exceeded his Bounds: and that he did abuse me in his misrepresenting of me to the People upon that Argument.
I answer'd, It was well he had acknowledg'd it now; but it had been better if he had done it before the People.
Mr. Williams the Baptist Minister was pleased to commu∣nicate this Account to me by Mr. Sharp our Moderator.
Feb. 23. 1698-9. Mr. Leigh and himself being together at Mr. Williams's House in Portsmouth, there came in Mr. Erle, Mr. Bowler, and Mr. Farrel, three Presbyterian Ministers; and there was two other Baptists present at the same time. Mr. Farrel, in the Presence of the forementioned Ministers, saluted Mr. John Williams, the Disputant, after this manner.
Mr. Williams, I must tell you, and that not as my own Sen∣timents only, but as the Sentiments of every one of our Brethren, that what Credit was gained to your Cause, was gained by you.
Mr. Leigh asked Mr. Williams, whether we did infer from those words. That the Ministers had granted out of their own mouths that we had gained the Cause?
His Reply was, No, all that we infer from it was this; That it was an implicit Concession, that there was Credit gained to our Cause.
Mr. Leigh said, How much Credit did we infer was grant∣ed by them to our Cause?
Mr. Williams said, We do not know the quantity of it.
Mr. Leigh replied, Truly it was but a little Credit that was granted out of our own mouths that was gained to your Cause.
To which Mr. Williams answered, That if there was a little Credit granted out of their own mouths, then there was Credit gain'd to our Cause, granted by themselves; which was no far∣ther denied by Mr. Leigh.
But what was spoken by Mr. John Williams in the Dispute, was abundantly shorter than what Dr. Russel did then speak. Thus far as to Mr. Williams's Account.
Notwithstanding all this, whilst they were making these Con∣cessions at Portsmouth, they let fly an Advertisement after Dr. Russel to London, which was Printed and Published before he got home: for, as Mr. Williams said, they knew who had hurt them. Here follows a true Copy thereof.





Portsmouth, Feb. 23. Yesterday the Dispute between the Pres∣byterians and Anabaptists, was held in the Presbyterian Meeting∣house. It began at Ten of the Clock in the Morning, and con∣tinued till Six in the Afternoon, without any Intermission.
The Theme of the Dispute was the Subjects of Baptism, and the Manner how Baptism is to be performed. Russel and Williams were the Opponents for the Anabaptists, and Mr. Chandler and Mr. Leigh Defendants for the Presbyterians. Mr. Sharp Modera∣tor for the former, and Mr. Robinson for the latter.
Mr. Russel opposed Infant-Baptism, with all the Subtilty and Sophistry of the Schools; and was answered with good Reason and Learning. Upon the whole, it was the Opinion of all the Judicious Auditory, the Presbyterians sufficiently defended their Doctrine, and also worsted their Adversaries, when they came to assume the place of Opponents.



We being silent, and not using the same Methods as they did, to squirt out foolish Advertisements in common News-Papers, these Men grew confident; and upon the 1st of April following, in the Flying-Post, they publish a long Story, full of Ʋntruths, and filly squint-ey'd Reflections, not becoming their Learning or Profession: and all to support a sinking Interest. But it appear∣ed so manifestly partial, that there seemed to be little or no cre∣dit given to it, except by some few of their own Party.
For although they were so civil to give themselves the Title of Master, they grutched to speak so honourably of their Opponents. And in the second Paper they say, one Mr. William (by some called Dr.) Russel of London, &c.
All that I shall say to it is this; As I am a Minister of Christ and of the Churches, I can (through the Grace of God) bear all the Indignity and Contempt they can put upon me; if I, by so doing, can but do good to Souls, and bring the least Tribute of Honour to my Lord and Master thereby. I thank God that he enabled me to count the Cost before I was ordained to the Work of the Ministry; and therefore, if Reproaches, yea Bonds and Af∣flictions, abide me, it is no more than I looked for.
But what Reason these Men have to refuse to give me the civil Title of Doctor, I know not, neither do I care. But this I know, that many years since, I was not only admitted as Ma∣ster of Arts, but took my Degree of Batchelor in Physick, and

was after that Created a Doctor in Physick of the famous Ʋniversity of Cambridge, and also admitted by universal Con∣sent to be a Member of the Senate there: and that not as some have suggested, as if it had been only ex gratia. Yet these Men, even whilst I was in Portsmouth (as well as since) have repor∣ted among the People there, that I was Russel the Mountebank, a Man that hath been dead several years. They thought (per∣haps) by such Artifices to lessen the Peoples Opinion of me. But by making me little, they make themselves the less, in that such Giants (as they would have the People believe them to be) should not be able to conquer such a Pigmy as they have represented me in the Eyes of the Vulgar.
They have also reported, That I am a Hackney Disputant, and that I refused to come down to Portsmouth under thirty Guinea's; but that at last I was prevail'd upon to take Twenty. I did not trouble my self whilst I was at Portsmouth to confute them in it, because our Friends there knew how to do it them∣selves; for they knew the Report to be altogether groundless and false. But seeing I have this opportunity, I think sit hereby to tell the World, That I did not so much as demand one farthing of them for my Journey, neither before nor after. For all that are throughly acquainted with me know, that I do neither Preach for Hire, nor Divine for Money, as some of them do: but as I have freely received, so I desire freely to give; believing that ought to be left to the free Benevolence of the People.
But that I may do Right to our Friends at Portsmouth and Gosport, I do acknowledge that of their own free good Will (without asking) they did pay my Coach hire and bear my Char∣ges; which, as they thought it was the least they could do, so I can truly say, it was the most I ever expected
I shall close this Epistle, with giving the World an Account of the Occasion of this Publication.
There were two things that moved our Friends thereto.
1. Their Noise and Clamour they made in the Time of the Dispute; which bindred the People from hearing what was said, especially when they were pinch'd upon an Argument.
For which Reason, it was thought convenient to publish it, that what they could not be permitted quietly to Hear, they may have the benefit to Read without Interruption; and so have leisure to consider it.
But 2dly, The principal Cause thereof, was those Advertise∣ments they sent all over the Nation, to misrepresent the Dis∣pute,

and blind the eyes of the Ʋnthinking about it.
Whereas this Publication will set the matter in a true Light, and let all Men see that they had neither Scripture, nor any good Consequences deduced from thence, to prove their Practice, either with respect to the Subjects or Manner. And therefore when the People shall see that they have neither Command nor Example for their Practice, I hope it will be a means to convince them of the Ʋnlawfulness thereof; and that they will not dare for time to come to practise a humane Tradition in the room of an Ordinance of Jesus Christ: remembring what our Lord said of the Jews of old, In vain they do worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men, Matth. 15. 9. And in Mark 7. 8. For laying aside the Commandment of God, ye hold the Tradition of men. And then hear what Paul saith, Coloss. 2. 20, 21, 22. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the world; why; as though living in the world, are ye subject to Ordinances (Touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are to perish with the using) after the Commandments and Doctrines of men?
Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his Will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. So prays,

