



May it please Your Grace,
IT is not any Confidence that I have Dexterously per∣formed
this charge, that gives me the boldness to
present it to Your Grace. I have done it, as well as

 For I took not this task upon my self, but was
entreated to it by them, who have power to Command
me. But yet it is very necessary that it should be addressed
to Your Grace, who are, as Sozomen said of Theodosius,
Certaminum Magister, & orationum Judex constitutus,
You are appointed the great Master of our arguings, and
are most fit to be the Judge of our Discourses, especially
when they do relate and pretend to publick Influence and
Advantages to the Church. We all are Witnesses of Your Zeal
to promote true Religion; and every day find You to be a
Great Patron to this very poor Church, which groans un∣der
the Calamities and permanent effects of a War acted by
Intervals for above 400. years; such which the Interme∣dial
Sun-shines of Peace could but very weakly repair: our
Churches are still demolished, much of the Revenues irre∣coverably
swallowed by Sacriledge, and digested by an una∣voidable
impunity; Religion infinitely divided, and parted
into formidable Sects, the People extreamly ignorant, and
wilful by inheritance; superstitiously irreligious, and unca∣pable
of reproof, and amidst these, and very many more
inconveniences, it was greatly necessary that God should send
us such a KING, and he send us such a Viceroy, who wedds
the Interests of Religion, and joynes them to his heart.
For we do not look upon your Grace, only as a favourer of
the Churches Temporal interest, though even for that, the
Souls of the relieved Clergy do daily bless you; neither are
You our Patron only as the Cretans were to Homer, or the
Alenadae to Simonides, Philip to Theopompus, or Seve∣rus
to Oppianus; but as Constantine and Theodosius
were to Christians; that is, desirous that true Religion
should be promoted, that the interest of Souls should be ad∣vanced;
that Truth should flourish, and wise Principles


In order to which excellent purposes it is hoped, that the
reduction of the Holy Rite of Confirmation into use and
Holy practice may contribute some very great moments.
For besides that the great usefulness of this Ministry will
greatly endear the Episcopal order, to which (that I may
use S. Hierom's words) if there be not attributed a
more than common Power and Authority, there will
be as many Schisms as Priests; it will also be a means of
endearing the Persons of the Prelates to their Flocks,
when the People shall be convinced, that there is, or may
be, if they please, a perpetual entercourse of Blessings and
Love between them, when God by their Holy hands refuses
not to give to the People, the earnest of an eternal inhe∣ritance;
when by them, he blesses, and that the grace of
our Lord Jesus, and the Love of God, and the Commu∣nication
of his Spirit, is conveyed to all Persons capable
of the grace, by the Conduct, and on the hands and
prayers of their Bishops.
And indeed not only very many single Persons, but even
the whole Church of Ireland hath need of Confirmation.
We have most of us contended for false Religions and un-Christian
propositions; and now that by Gods mercy, and
the prosperity and piety of his Sacred Majesty the Church
is broken from her cloud, and many are reduc'd to the
true Religion, and righteous worship of God; we cannot
but call to mind, how the Holy Fathers of the Primitive
Church, often have declar'd themselves in Councils, and
by a perpetual Discipline, that such Persons, who are re∣turn'd
from Sects and Heresies into the Bosom of the
Church, should not be rebaptiz'd; but that the Bishops
should impose hands on them in Confirmation. It is true,

that this was design'd to supply the defect of those Schis∣matical
Conventicles, who did not use this Holy rite; For
this Rite of Confirmation hath had the fate to be oppos'd
only by the Schismatical and Puritan Parties of old;
the Novatians or Cathari, and the Donatists; and of
late by the Jesuits, and new Cathari, the Puritans, and
Presbyterians; the same evil spirit of contradictions keep∣ing
its course in the same channel, and descending regu∣larly
amongst Men of the same principles. But therefore
in the restitution of a Man or company of Men, or a
Church, the Holy Primitives, in the Council of C. P. La∣odicea,
and Orange, thought that to confirm such persons
was the most agreeable Discipline; not only because such
persons did not in their little and dark assemblies use this
rite, but because they alwayes greatly wanted it: For it
is a sure Rule in our Religion, and is of an eternal truth,
that they, who keep not the Unity of the Church, have
not the Spirit of God; and therefore it is most fit
should receive the ministery of the spirit, when they return
to the bosom of the Church, that so indeed they may keep
the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. And
therefore Asterius Bishop of Amasia compares Confirmati∣on
to the ring, with which the Father of the Prodigal
adorn'd his returning Son; Datur nempe prodigo post
stolam, & annulus, nempe Symbolum intelligibilis sig∣naculi
spiritus, And as the Spirit of God, the Holy Dove
extended his mighty wings over the Creation, and hatch'd
the new-born World, from its seminal powers, to Light
and Operation, and Life, and Motion, so in the Regenera∣tion
of the souls of Men, he gives a new being, and heat
and life, Procedure and Perfection, Wisdom and Strength,
and because, that this was ministred by the Bishops hands
in Confirmation, was so firmly believ'd by all the Primi∣tive

Church, therefore it became a Law, and an Vniversal
practice in all those ages, in which Men desir'd to be sav'd
by all means. The Latin Church, and the Greek alwayes
did use it, and the Blessings of it, which they believ'd con∣sequent
to it, they expressed in a holy prayer, which in the
Greek Euchologion they have very anciently and
constantly used.. Thou O Lord, the most
compassionate and Great King of all, graci∣ously
impart to this Person the seal of the gift
of thy Holy, Almighty, and adorable spirit.
For as an Ancient Greek said truly and wisely.
. The Father is reconcil'd, and the Son is the
Reconciler; but to them who are by Ba∣ptism
and Repentance made friends of God, the Holy
Spirit is collated as a gift. They well knew what they received
in this ministration, and therefore wisely laid hold of it and
would not let it go.
This was anciently ministred by Apostles, and ever after
by the Bishops, and Religiously receiv'd by Kings, and greatest
Princes; and I have read that St. Sylvester confirm'd Con∣stantine
the Emperour, and when they made their chil∣dren
servants of the Holy Jesus, and Souldiers under his
banner, and bonds-men of his Institution, then they sent
them to the Bishop to be confirm'd, who did it sometimes
by such Ceremonies, that the solemnity of the ministry
might with greatest Religion addict them to the service of
their Great Lord. We read in Adrovaldus, that Charles
Martel,De miraculis. St. Benedict. l 1. c. 1. 14. entring into a League with Bishop Luitprandus,
sent his Son Pipin to him, ut more Christianorum fide∣lium,
capillum ejus primus attonderet, ac Pater illi
Spiritualis existeret, that he might after the manner of
Christians, first cut his hair (in token of service to Christ)
and [in confirming him] he should be his spiritual Father.

And something like this we find concerning William Earl
of Warren and Surrey, who when he had Dedicated the
Church of St. Pancratius, and the Priorie of Lewes;
receiv'd Confirmation, and gave seizure per capillos capi∣tis
mei (sayes he in the Charter) & fratris mei Radulphi
de Warrena, quas abscidit cum cultello de capitibus no∣stris
Henricus Episcopus Wintoniensis; by the hairs of my
head and of my Brothers, which Henry Bishop of Win∣chester
cut off before the Altar; meaning (according to
the Ancient custome) in confirmation; when they by that
solemnity addicted themselves to the free servitude of the
Lord Jesus. The ceremony is obsolete and chang'd, but
the mystery can never; and indeed that is one of the ad∣vantages
in which we can rejoyce concerning the ministra∣tion
of this Rite in the Church of England and Ireland;
that whereas it was sometimes clouded, sometimes hindred,
and sometimes hurt, by the appendage of needless, and use∣less
ceremonies; it is now reduc'd to the Primitive and
first simplicity amongst us; and the excrescencies us'd in
the Church of Rome are wholly par'd away; and by holy
Prayers and the Apostolical Ceremonie of imposition of
the Bishops hands it is worthily and zealously administred.
The Latins us'd to send Chrism to the Greeks, when they had
usurped some jurisdiction over them, and the Popes Chap∣lains
went with a quantity of it to C. P. where the Russi∣ans
usually met them for it; for that was then the ceremo∣ny
of this ministration; But when the Latins demanded
fourscore pounds of Gold besides other gifts, they went a∣way,
and chang'd their custom rather than pay an unlawful
and ungodly Tribute. Non quaerimus vestra sed vos;
we require nothing but leave to impart Gods blessings with
pure Intentions, and a spiritual ministery. And as the
Bishops of our Churches receive nothing from the People,

for the Ministration of this Rite, so they desire nothing
but Love, and just Obedience in spiritual, and Ecclesiasti∣cal
duties; and we offer our Flocks spiritual things with∣out
mixture of Temporal advantages from them; we mi∣nister
the rituals of the Gospel, without the inventions of
Men, Riligion without superstition, and only desire to be
believ'd in such things which we prove from Scripture ex∣pounded
by the Catholick practice of the Church of God.
Concerning the Subject of this Discourse, the Rite of
Confirmation; It were easie to recount many great and
glorious expressions which we find in the Sermons of the
Holy Fathers of the Primitive Ages; so certain it is, that
in this thing we ought to be zealous, as being desirous to
perswade our People to give us leave to do them great good:
But the following Pages will do it, I hope, competently: only
we shall remark; that when they had gotten a custom ancient∣ly,
that in cases of necessity, they did permit Deacons and
Lay-men sometimes to baptize, yet they never did confide in
it much; but with much caution and curiosity commanded
that such Persons should, when that necessity was over, be
carried to the Bishop to be confirm'd, so to supply all prece∣dent
defects relating to the past imperfect ministry, and fu∣ture
necessity and danger, as appears in the Council of Eli∣beris.
And the Ancients had so great estimate and vene∣ration
to this Holy rite, that as in Heraldry, they distinguish
the same thing by several names, when they relate to
Persons of greater Eminency, and they blazon the Armes of
the Gentry by Metals, of the Nobtlity by pretious stones, but
of Kings and Princes by Planets, so when they would signi∣fie
the Vnction which was us'd in confirmation, they gave it
a special word, and of more distinction & remark, and there∣fore
the oyl us'd in baptism, they call'd . but that of con∣firmation
was , and they who spake properly kept

this difference of words, untill by incaution, and ignorant
carelessness the names fell into confusion, and the thing into
disuse and dis-respect. But it is no small addition to the
Honour of this ministration, that some wise and good men,
have piously believed, that when baptiz'd Christians are con∣firm'd,
and solemnly bless'd by the Bishop, that then it is
that a special Angel Guardian is appointed to keep their
souls from the assaults of the spirits of darkness. Concern∣ing
which, though I shall not interpose mine own opinion, yet
this I say, that the Prety of that supposition is not disagreea∣ble
to the intention of this Rite; for since by this, the Holy
Spirit of God (the Father of Spirits) is given, it is not
unreasonably thought by them, that the other good Spirits
of God, the Angels who are ministring spirits, sent forth
to minister to the good of them that shall be Heirs of
Salvation, should pay their kind offices in subordination to
their Prince and fountain; that the first in every kind,
might be the measure of all the rest; But there are greater
and stranger things than this that God does for the souls of
his Servants, and for the honour of the ministeries which
himself hath appointed.
We shall only add that this was ancient, and long before
Popery entred into the World, and that this rite hath been
more abus'd by Popery, than by any thing: and to this Day
the Bigots of the Roman Church are the greatest Enemies to
it; and from them the Presbyterians; but besides that the
Church of England and Ireland does religiously retain it,
and hath appointed a solemn officer, for the Ministery, the
Lutheran and Bohemian Churches do observe it carefully,
and it is recommended and establish'd in the harmony of the
Protestant Confessions.
And now, may it please Your Grace to give me leave to im∣plore
Your Aid and Countenance for the propagating this so

religious, and useful a Ministery, which, as it is a peculiar
of the Bishops office, is also a great enlarger of Gods gifts
to the People; it is a great instrument of Vnion of hearts,
and will prove an effective deletory to Schism; and an
endearment to the other parts of Religion: it is the con∣summation
of Baptism, and a preparation to the Lords
Supper; it is the vertue from on high, and the solemnity
of our spiritual adoption. But there will be no need to use
many arguments to enflame Your zeal in this affair, when
Your Grace shall find, that to promote it will be a great
service to God; that this alone will conclude Your Grace, who
are so ready, by Laws, and Executions, by word, and by
example, to promote the Religion of Christ, as it is taught
in these Churches. I am not confident enough to desire
Your Grace, for the reading this Discourse, to lay aside
any one hour of Your greater Employments, which consume
so much of Your Dayes and Nights. But I say, that the
Subject is greatly Worthy of Consideration. Nihil enim
inter manus habui, cui majorem sollicitudinem praesta∣re
deberem; and for the book it self, I can only say
what Secundus did, to the wise Lupercus, Quoties ad
fastidium legentium, deliciasque respicio, intelligo no∣bis
commendationem ex ipsâ mediocritate libri pe∣tendam,
I can Commend it because it is little, and so,
not very troublesome; and if it could have been writen
according to the worthiness of the thing Treated in
it, it would deserve so great a Patronage; but be∣cause
it is not, it will therefore greatly need it, but it
can hope for it on no other account, but because it is
laid at the feet of a Princely Person, who is Great and
Good; and one who not only is bound by Duty, but
by choice hath Obliged Himself to do advantages to
any Worthy instrument of Religion. But I have de∣tain'd

Your Grace so long in my address, that Your
Pardon will be all the Favour, which ought to be hop'd
for by

