



MY LORD,
NOTHING but a great experience of Your Lord∣ships Candor could warrant the laying what concern∣ment I have in these Papers at Your Lordships feet. Not but that the subject is in it self Great and Vene∣mble, and a considerable part of it built upon that Authority that needs no Patronage to defend it: But to prefix Your Lordships Name to a subject so thinly and meanly manag'd, may perhaps deserve a bigger Apologie than I can make. I have only brought some few scattered handfuls of Primitive Story, contenting my self to Glean, where I could not Reap. And I am well assur'd, that Your Lord∣ships wisdom and love to Truth would neither allow me to make my Materials, nor to trade in Legends and Fabulous reports. And yet alas! how little solid Foundation is left to Build upon in these matters? So fatally mischievous was the carelessness of those who ought to have been the Guardians of Books and Learning in their several Ages, in suffering the Records of the Ancient Church to pe∣rish. Vnfaithful Trustees, to look no better after such Divine and inestimable Treasures committed to them. Not to mention those infinite Devastations that in all Ages have been made by Wars and Flames, which certainly have prov'd the most severe and merciless Plagues and Enemies to Books.
By such unhappy accidents as these we have been robb'd of the Treasures of the wiser and better Ages of the World, and especially the Records of the first times of Christianity, whereof scarce any footsteps do remain. So that in this Enquiry I have been forc'd to traverse remote and desert paths, ways that afford little fruit to the weary Passenger: but the consideration, that it was Primitive and Apostolical, sweetned my journey, and rendred it pleasant and delightful. Our inbred thirst after knowledge naturally obliges us to pursue the notices of former times, which are recommended to us with this peculiar advantage, that the Stream must needs be purer and clearer, the nearer it comes to the Fountain; for the AncientsIn . 16. Tom. 2. (as Plato speaks) were , better than we, and dwelt nearer to the Gods. And though'tis true the  of those times is very obscure and dark, and truth oft co∣vered over with heaps of idle and improbable Traditions; yet may it be worth our labour to seek for a few Jewels, though under a whole  heap of Rubbish. Is not the Gleaning of the Ancients (say the  Jews) better than the Vintage of later times? The very frag∣ments of Antiquity are Venerable, and at once instruct our minds, and gratifie our curiosity. Besides, I was somewhat the more incli∣nable to retire again into these studies, that I might get as far as I could from the crowd and the noise of a quarrelsome and contentious Age.
MY LORD,
We live in times, wherein Religion is almost wholly disputed into talk and clamour, men wrangle eternally about useless and insignifi∣cant Notions, and which have no tendency to make a man either wiser or better. And in these quarrels the Laws of Charity are violated, and men persecute one another with hard names and cha∣racters of reproach, and after all consecrate their fierceness with the honourable title of Zeal for Truth. And what is yet a much sorer evil, the Peace and Order of an excellent Church, incomparably the best that ever was since the first Ages of the Gospel, is broken down, her holy Offices derided, her solemn Assemblies deserted, her Laws and Constitutions slighted, the Guides and Ministers of Religion de∣spised, and reduc'd to their Primitive Character, The Scum and Off-scouring of the World. How much these evils have contri∣buted to the  and Impiety of the present Age, I shall not take upon me to determine. Sure I am, the thing it self is too sadly vi∣sible, men are not content to be modest and retired Atheists, and

with the Fool to say only in their hearts, there is no God; but  appears with an open forehead, and disputes its place in eve∣ry company, and without any regard to the Voice of Nature, the Dictates of Conscience, and the common sence of Mankind, men peremptorily determine against a Supreme Being, account it a plea∣sant divertisement to Droll upon Religion, and a piece of Wit to plead for Atheism. To avoid the  and troublesome importunity of such uncomfortable Reflections, I find no better way, than to retire into those Primitive and better times, those first and purest Ages of the Gospel, when men really were, what they pretended to be, when a solid Piety and Devotion, a strict Temperance and Sobriety, a Ca∣tholick and unbounded Charity, an exemplary Honesty and Integrity, a great reverence for every thing that was Divine and Sacred, ren∣dred Christianity Venerable to the World, and led not only the Rude and the Barbarous, but the Learned and Politer part of Mankind in triumph after it.
But, My Lord, I must remember that the Minutes of great Men are Sacred, and not to be invaded by every tedious imperti∣nent address. I have done, when I have begg'd leave to acquaint Your Lordship, that had it not been more through other mens fault than my own, these Papers had many Months since waited upon You in the number of those Publick Congratulations, which gave You joy of that great Place, which You worthily sustain in the Church. Which that You may long and prosperously enjoy, happily adorn, and successfully discharge to the honour of God, the benefit of the Church, and the endearing Your Lordships Memory to Posterity, is the hearty Prayer of,
My Lord, 
