



MY Obedience to the Commands of the Right Honou∣rable
the Lord Justices, and the most Reverend and
Learned Primate, and to the desires of my Reverend
Brethren, put it past my inquiry, whether I ought
to publish this following Sermon. I will not therefore excuse it,
and say it might have advantages in the Delivery, which it
would want in the Reading; and the ear would be kind to the Pie∣ty
of it, which was apparent in the design, when the eye would be
severe in its censure of those arguments, which as they could not
be longer in that measure of time, so would have appeared more
firm, if they could have had liberty to have been pursued to their
utmost issue: But Reason lies in a little room, and Obedience in
less; and although what I have here said, may not stop the mouths
of Men resolved to keep up a Faction, yet I have said enough to
the sober and pious, to them who love Order, and hearken to the
voice of the Spouse of Christ, to the Loving and to the Obedient:
And for those that are not so, I have no argument fit to be used,
but Prayer, and readiness to give them a Reason when they shall
modestly demand it. In the mean time I shall only desire them to
make use of those Truths which the more Learned of their party
have by the evidence of fact been forced to confess. Rivet affirms
that it descended ex veteris aevi reliquiis, that Presbyters should
be assistants or conjoyned to the Bishops (who is by this confessed to
be the principal) in the imposition of hands for Ordination. Walo
Messalinus acknowledges it to be rem antiquissimam, a most an∣cient
thing that these two Orders, (viz.) of Bishops and Presby∣ters,
should be distinct, even in the middle, or in the beginning of
the next age after Christ. Dd. Blondel places it to be 35
years after the death of S. John. Now then Episcopacy
is confessed to be of about 1600 years continuance: and if before
this they can shew any Ordination by meer Presbyters, by any but
an Apostle, or an Apostolical man; and if there were not visibly a
distinction of Powers and Persons relatively in the Ecclesiastical
Government; or if they can give a rational account why they who

are forced to confess the Honour and distinct Order of Episcopacy
for about 16 Ages, should in the dark interval of 35 years (in which
they can pretend to no Monument or Record to the contrary) yet make
unlearned scruples of things they cannot colourably prove; if (I
say) they can reasonably account for these things, I for my part
will be ready to confess that they are not guilty of the greatest, the
most unreasonable and inexcusable schism in the world; but else
they have no colour to palliate the unlearned crime: for will not
all wise men in the world conclude, that the Church of God which
was then Holy, not in title only and design, but practically and
materially; and persecuted, and not immerged in secular tempta∣tions,
could not all in one instant joyn together to alter that Form
of Church Government, which Christ and his Apostles had so re∣cently
established, and without a Divine Warrant destroy a Di∣vine
Institution, not only to the confusion of the Hierarchy, but to
the ruine of their own Souls? It were strange that so great a
change should be, and no good man oppose it: In toto orbe decre∣tum est;
so S. Hierom: All the world consented in the advance∣ment
of the Episcopal Order: And therefore if we had no more to
say for it, yet in prudence and piety we cannot say they would in∣novate
in so great a matter.
But I shall enter no further upon this enquiry; only I remem∣ber
that it is not very many months since the Bigots of the Popish
party cryed out against us vehemently, and enquired, Where is your
Church of England, since you have no Vnity? for your Ecclesia∣stick
head of Vnity, your Bishops, are gone: And if we should be
desirous to verifie their Argument, so as indeed to destroy Episco∣pacy,
we should too much advantage Popery, and do the most impru∣dent
and most impious thing in the world. But blessed be God who
hath restored that Government, for which our late King of glori∣ous
memory gave his blood: And that (methinks) should very
much weigh with all the Kings true hearted Subjects, who should
make it Religion not to rob that glorious Prince of the greatest ho∣nour
of such a Martyrdom. For my part, I think it fit to rest in
these words of another Martyr, S. Cyprian, Si quis cum Episcopo
non sit, in Ecclesia non esse:EP. 69. He that is not with the Bishop is
not in the Church: that is, he that goes away from him, and wil∣lingly
separates, departs from Gods Church; and whether he can
then be with God, is a very material consideration, and fit to be
thought on by all that think Heaven a more eligible good than the
interests of a Faction, and the importune desire of rule can coun∣tervail.
However, I have in the following Papers spoken a few things,

which I hope may be fit to perswade them that are not infinitely
prejudiced: and although two or three good Arguments are as good as
two or three hundred, yet my purpose here was to prove the dignity
and necessity of the Office and Order Episcopal, only that it might be
as an Oeconomy to convey notice, and remembrances of the great
duty incumbent upon all them that undertake this great charge. The
Dignity and the Duty take one another by the hand, and are born
together: only every Sheep of the Flock must take care to make the
Bishops Duty as easie as it can, by Humility and Love, by Prayer
and by Obedience. It is at the best very difficult, but they who op∣pose
themselves to Government, make it harder and uncomforta∣ble:
But take heed, if they Bishop hath cause to complain to God
of thee for thy perversness and uncharitable walking, thou wilt be
the loser; and for us we can only say in the words of the Prophet,
We will weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of
my people:Jerem. 9. 1. But our comfort is in God: for we can do nothing
without him, but in him we can do all things: And therefore
we will pray, Domine, dabis pacem nobis, omnia enim opera
nostra operatus es in nobis: God hath wrought all our works
within us;Esa. 26. 12. and therefore he will give us peace, and give us his
Spirit.
Finally, Brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord
may have free course,2 Thes. 3: 1. and be glorified even as it is with you;
and that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked
men, for all men have not Faith.
