



My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Ought not to dispute Your Commands for the printing my Ser∣mon
of Obedience, left my Sermon should be protestatio
contra factum: here I Know my Example would be the best
Vse to this Doctrine, and I am sure to find no inconve∣niency
so great as that of Disobedience; neither can I be confi∣dent
that I am wise in any thing but when I obey; for then I have
the Wisdom of my Superior for my warrant, or my excuse. I
remember the saying of Aurelius the Emperor, Aequius est me tot
& talium amicorum consilium, quam tot tales meam unius vo∣luntatem
sequi. I could easily have pretended excuses; but that
day I had taught others the contrary, and I would not shed that
Chalice which my own hands had newly filled with Waters issuing
from the Fountains of Salvation.
My eyes are almost grown old with seeing the horrid mischiefs
which came from Rebellion and Disobedience; and I would wil∣lingly
now be blessed with observation of Peace and Righteousness,
Plenty and Religion, which do already, and I hope shall for ever,
attend upon Obedience to the best KING and the best CHVRCH
in the World. I see no objection against my hopes, but that which
ought least of all in this case to be pretended: Men pretend Con∣science
against Obedience; expresly against S. Paul's Doctrine,
teaching us to obey for conscience sake; but to disobey for Con∣science
in a thing indifferent, is never to be found in the Books of
our Religion.
It is very hard when the Prince is forc'd to say to his rebellious
Subject, as God did to his stubborn People, Quid faciam tibi?
I have tried all the ways I can to bring thee home, and what shall
I now do unto thee? The Subject should rather say, Quid me vis
facere? What will thou have me to do? This Question is the
best end of Disputations. Corrumpitur atque dissolvitur Im∣perantis
officium, si quis ad id quod facere jussus est, non ob∣sequio

debito, sed consilio non considerato respondeat, said
one in A. Gellius: When a Subject is commanded to obey, and he
disputes, and says, Nay, but the other is better; he is like a
Servant that gives his Master necessary Counsel, when he requires
of him a necessary Obedience: Utilius parere edicto quam effer∣re
consilium; he had better obey than give counsel, by how much
it is better to be profitable than to be witty, to be full of goodness
rather than full of talk and Argument.
But all this is acknowledged true in strong men, but not in the
weak; in vigorous, but not in tender Consciences; for Obedience
is strong Meat, and will not down with weak stomacks: As if in
the World any thing were easier than to obey; for we see that the
food of Children is Milk and Laws; the Breast-milk of their Nur∣ses
and the Commands of their Parents is all that Food and Go∣vernment
by which they are kept from harm and hunger, and con∣ducted
to life and wisdom. And therefore they that are weak Bre∣thren,
of all things in the World have the least reason to pretend an
excuse for Disobedience; for nothing can secure them but the
wisdom of the Laws; for they are like Children in minority, they
cannot be trusted to their own conduct, and therefore must live at
the publick charge, and the wisdom of their Superiors is their
guide and their security. And this was wisely advised by S. Paul,
Him that is weak in the Faith receive, but not to doubtful di∣sputations;
that's not the way for him; Children must not di∣spute
with their Fathers and their Masters: If old men will di∣spute,
let them look to it; that's meat for the strong indeed, though
it be not very nutritive: but the Laws and the Counsels, the Ex∣hortations
and the Doctrines of our Spiritual Rulers, are the mea∣sures
by which God hath appointed Babes in Christ to become Men,
and the weak to become strong; and they that are not to be recei∣ved
to doubtful disputations, are to be received with the arms of
Love, into the embraces of a certain and regular Obedience.
But it would be considered, That Tenderness of Conscience is
an equivocal term, and does not always signifie in a good sense:
For a Child is of tender flesh; but he whose foot is out of joint, or
hath a bile in his arm, or hath strained a sinew, is much more ten∣der.
The tenderness of age is that weakness that is in the igno∣rant
and the new beginners: the tenderness of a bile, that is sore∣ness
indeed rather than tenderness, is of the diseased, the abused,
and the mis-perswaded. The first indeed are to be tenderly dealt
with, and have usages accordingly; but that is the same I have al∣ready
told; you must teach them, you must command them, you
must guide them, you must chuse for them, you must be their Guar∣dians,

and they must comport themselves accordingly. But for
that tenderness of Conscience which is the disease and soreness
of Conscience, it must be cured by Anodynes and soft usages,
unless they prove ineffective, and that the Launcet be necessary.
But there are amongst us such tender Stomacks that cannot endure
Milk, but can very well digest Iron; Consciences so tender, that
a Ceremony is greatly offensive, but Rebellion is not; a Surplice
drives them away as a bird affrighted with a man of clouts, but
their Consciences can suffer them to despise Government, and speak
evil of Dignities, and curse all that are not of their Opinion, and
disturb the Peace of Kingdoms, and commit Sacrilegs, and account
Schism the character of Saints. The true Tenderness of Consci∣ence
is, 1. That which is impatient of a Sin. 2. It will not en∣dure
any thing that looks like it; And 3. It will not give offence.
Now since all Sin is Disobedience, 1. It will be rarely contingent
that a man in a Christian Commonwealth shall be tied to disobey, to
avoid Sin; and certain it is, if such a case could happen, yet
2. nothing of our present Question is so like a Sin, as when we re∣fuse
to obey the Laws: To stand in a clean Vestment is not so ill
a sight as to see men stand in separation; and to kneel at the
Communion is not so like Idolatry as Rebellion is to Witchcraft.
And then 3. For the matter of giving offences, what scandal is
greater than that which scandalizes the Laws? and who is so
carefully to be observed, lest he be offended, as the KING? And
if that which offends the weak brother is to be avoided, much more
that which offends the strong: for this is certainly really criminal;
but for the other, it is much odds but it is mistaken: And when
the case is so put, between the obedient and the disobedient, which
shall be offended, and one will, I suppose there is no question but
the Laws will take more care of Subjects than of Rebels, and not
weaken them in their Duty, in compliance with those that hate the
Laws, and will not endure the Government.
And after all this, in the conduct of Government what remedy
can there be to those that call themselves Tender Consciences? I shall
not need to say that every man can easily pretend it; for we have
seen the vilest part of mankind, men that have done things so hor∣rid,
worse than which the Sun never saw, yet pretend tender Con∣sciences
against Ecclesiastical Laws: But I will suppose that they are
really such, that they in the simplicity of their hearts follow Abso∣lom,
and in weakness hide their heads in little Conventicles and
places of separation for a trifle; what would they have done for
themselves?
If You make a Law of Order, and in the sanction put a Clause

of favour for tender Consciences, do not you invite every Subject
to Disobedience by impunity, and teach him how to make his own
excuse? Is not such a Law, a Law without an obligation? May
not every man chuse whether he will obey or no? and if he pre∣tends
to disobey out of Conscience, is not he that disobeys equally
innocent with the obedient; altogether as just, as not having done
any thing without leave; and yet much more Religious and Con∣scientious?
Quicunque vult is but an ill preface to a Law; and
it is a strange obligation that makes no difference between him that
obeys and him that refuses to obey.
But what course must be taken with Tender Consciences? Shall
the Execution of the Law be suspended as to all such persons?
That will be all one with the former: For if the Execution be
commanded to be suspended, the obligation of the Law by
command is taken away, and then it were better there were no Law
made. And indeed that is the pretension, that is the secret of the
business; they suppose the best way to prevent Disobedience is to
take away all Laws. It is a short way indeed; there shall then
be no Disobedience; but at the same time there shall be no Go∣vernment:
but the Remedy is worse than the Disease; and to take
away all Wine and Strong Drink to prevent drunkenness, would
not be half so great a folly.
I cannot therefore tell what to advise in this particular, but
that every Spiritual Guide should consider who are tender Con∣sciences,
and who are weak Brethren, and use all the ways of Pie∣ty
and Prudence to instruct and to inform them, that they may in∣crease
in Knowledg and Spiritual Vnderstanding. But they that
will be always learning, and never come to the knowledge of the
Truth; they that will be Children of a hundred years old, and
never come to years of Discretion, they are very unfit to guide
others, and to be Curates of Souls: but they are most unfit to reprove
the Laws, and speak against the Wisdom of a Nation, when it is
confessed that they are so weak that they understand not the fun∣damental
Liberty which Christ hath purchas'd for them, but are
servants to a Scruple, and affrighted at a Circumstance, and in
bondage under an Indifferent Thing, and so much Idolaters of
their Sect or Opinion, as to prefer it before all their own nobler
Interests, and the Charity of their Brother, and the Peace of a
whole Church and Nation.
To You, my Lords and Gentlemen, I hope I may say as Marcus
Curius said to a stubborn young man, Non opus Vos habere ci∣ve
qui parere nesciret; the Kingdom hath no need of those that
know not how to obey. But as for them who have weak and ten∣der

Consciences, they are in the state of Childhood and minority;
but then you know that a Child is never happy by having his own
humour; if you chuse for him, and make him to use it, he hath
but one thing to do; but if you put him to please himself, he is
troubled with every thing, and satisfied with nothing. We find
that all Christian Churches kept this Rule; They kept themselves
and others close to the Rule of Faith, and peaceably suffered one
another to differ in Ceremonies, but suffered no difference amongst
their own; they gave Liberty to other Churches, and gave
Laws, and no Liberty, to their own Subjects: And at this day
the Churches of Geneva, France, Switzerland, Germany, Low-Countries, tye all their people to their own Laws, but tye up no
mans Conscience; if he be not perswaded as they are, let him
charitably dissent, and leave that Government, and adhere to his
own Communion: If you be not of their mind, they will be served
by them that are; they will not trouble your Conscience, and you
shall not disturb their Government. But when men think they
cannot enjoy their Conscience unless you give them good Livings,
and if you prefer them not you afflict their Consciences, they do but too
evidently declare, that it is not their Consciences but their Profits
they would have secured. Now to these I have only this to say,
That their Conscience is to be enjoyed by the Measures of Gods
Word, but the Rule for their Estates is the Laws of the Kingdom;
and I shew you yet a more excellent way; Obedience is the best
security for both, because this is the best conservatory of Charity
and Truth and Peace. Si vis brevi perfectus esse, esto obediens
etiam in minimis, was the saying of a Saint; and the World
uses to look for Miracles from them whom they shall esteem Saints:
but I had rather see a man truly humble and obedient, than to see
him raise a man from the dead, said old Pachomius.
But to conclude: If weak Brethren shall still plead for Tole∣ration
and Compliance, I hope my Lords the Bishops will consider
where it can do good, and do no harm; where they are permitted,
and where themselves are bound up by the Laws; and in all
things where it is safe and holy, to labour to bring them ease and to
give them remedy: but to think of removing the Disease by feed∣ing
the Humor, I confess it is a strange Cure to our present Di∣stempers.
He that took clay and spittle to open the blind eyes,
can make any thing be collyrium; but he alone can do it. But
whether any humane Power can bring good from so unlikely an In∣strument,
if any man desires yet to be better informed, I desire
him, besides the calling to mind the late sad effects of Schism, to
remember that no Church in Christendom ever did it. It is neither

the way of Peace nor Government, nor yet a proper Remedy for the
cure of a weak Conscience.
I shall therefore pray to God, That these men who separate in
simplicity may by Gods mercy be brought to understand their own
Liberty, and that they may not for ever be Babes and Neophytes,
and wax old in trifles, and for ever stay at the entrances and out∣sides
of Religion; but that they would pass in interiora domûs,
and seek after Peace and Righteousness, Holiness and Justice,
the Love of God and Evangelical Perfections; and then they
will understand how ill-advised they are who think Religion con∣sists
in Zeal against Ceremonies, and speaking evil of the Laws.
My Lords and Gentlemen, what I said in pursuance of publick
Peace and private Duty, and some little incidences to both, I now
humbly present to You, more to shew my own Obedience than to
remind you of your Duty, which hitherto You have so well
observed in Your amicable and sweet concord of Councels and
Affections, during this present Session. I owe many Thanks to
You, who heard me patiently, willingly, and kindly; I endeavour∣ed
to please God, and I find I did not displease You: but he is the
best hearer of a Sermon who first loves the Doctrine, and then pra∣ctises
it; and that You have hitherto done, very piously and very
prosperously. I pray God continue to direct Your Counsels so that
You in all things may please him, and in all things be blessed by
him, that all Generations may call You blessed Instruments of a
lasting Peace, the Restorers of the old Paths, the Patrons of the
Church, Friends of Religion, and Subjects fitted for Your Prince;
who is Just up to the greatest Example, and Merciful beyond all Ex∣amples;
a Prince who hath been Nourished, and Preserved, and
Restored, and Blessed by Miracles; a Prince whose Virtues and
Fortunes are equally the greatest.
