




IT was for your Direction, as well as for the Advantage and Benefit of Children, that this small Treatise was at first in∣ended to be wrote and publish'd: 'Tis to you therefore that it is address'd, hoping that it may be found serviceable to you in the Exe∣cution of your Duty in many Respects. For,
First, It will constantly remind you of the Necessity and Obligation you lye under, in reference to the particular Management and Education of either your own or others Chil∣dren you have taken the Charge of. Nature puts upon you a Necessity of taking Care of the One, and your own voluntary Act obliges you to the Other.
Secondly, It will furnish you with Dire∣ctions, that shall be much easier to you, and more advantageous to the Children you are to instruct. I need not undertake to shew the Inconveniencies of the common Method of

Education. The ill Success that generally at∣tends it, sufficiently detects it to be guilty of some grand Mistakes and Errors: It is not able to answer the end it proposes. For after abundance of useless Pains, Turmoil, and Endeavours, Whipping, Exercising and In∣structing, when a Child arrives at the years of Maturity and Discretion, (as they call it) he is not one Jot mere Vertuous, and scarce∣ly (if at all) more Learned than he was when he first set out.
I have seen in Holland, and other parts of the World, Children entred upon Businest, and very capable also of managing it, at those Years, it may be, ours here in England are learning to Spell and Pronounce.
Is it not a scandalous thing, to see a great Boy; of Fifteen or Sixteen Years old, trudg∣ing to School, with a great Bundle of Books under his Arm, to learn to decline a Noun and Conjugate Verb, and yet after all, re∣mains uncertain, whether the Genders of Nouns be Three or Seven? But by this time he is it seems a hopeful Youth, and his Master thinks fit that he be sent to the Uni∣versity. Now there's no help for it, he must be a Schollar: And yet perhaps, when he comes to commence Batchelour of Arts, shall

hardly be capable of determining whether the Conclusion be part of a Syllogism.
This indeed is the Craft of your common School Masters, to keep Children (like Spi∣rits in a Circle) a long time under the Terror of their Iurisdiction and Discipline, in order only to promote their own Profit and Interest. A mischievous way this, and ought to be ta∣ken Nooice by the Government. Why shu'd the Publick for so many Years be deprived of the Service of so many hopeful Boys, who are ter a great deal to be entred upon Action, and intrusted with the management of Business, than to be compelled to sit in Torment eight Hours in a Day under the grum and unplea∣sing Aspect of an harsh vnd ill-natured Pe∣dagogue.
We hope a great-deal of this may be pre∣vented by the Rules and Methods we here propose: For what we here offer to your Consideration, is neither so difficult, nor so chargeable: There is little but what is in the Power, even of the Poorest, to compass and accomplish, at least so far as concerns the ma∣king their Children Vertuous, and teaching them to write and read, which will mighti∣ly qualifie, and enable them to get an honest Livelyhood in the World. By these, and

such like Methods, Fathers and Mothers may in a Twelve-months time teach their Children more of true and useful Learning at home in their Houses, than they learn at the common Schools in five Years. Decem annos trivit legendo Cicerone, To go ten Years to School to learn to construe a Latin Author, and yet perhaps after all, not understand him to purpose. A very fine Accomplishment, when in half the time he might have been taught to speak very readily three several Languages.
I shall no longer forestall your Desires of Reading and Practicing these easie and na∣tural Rules that I have laid down. I had I declare no bye nor private Respect in the Printing of them, but was wholly influenced by my Zeal to the Service of the Publick, that if it were possible I might contribute somewhat towards the Ease, Convenience and Welfare of Mankind; which effect, if in any mea∣sure these Papers shall obtain, I have all that I can desire.
