



PRECIOUS and dearly belo∣ved Brethren, I know it would seem
 very strange to you, if this following Treatise should come to your hands without my pub∣lick owning of it, as in∣deed well it might, con∣sidering my neer relati∣on to the Author; it is no small joy to my heart that the Lord is pleased in these our daies any way by any means to put his People in mind of that which they are so prone to
 forget, namely the va∣rious workings of God in their poor hearts, which you will find in this small Treatise in these three generall heads, viz. before, in, and since Conversion; we find the Lord in Scripture often calling upon his People to re∣member their uncon∣verted state, Isaiah 51. 1. Look unto the Rock whence ye are hewen, and
 to the holy of the Pit whence ye are digged; And the Lord know∣ing our great inclinati∣on to forget it, he is pleased to mind us of it, as in Eph. 5. 8. 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11. Tit. 3. 3. Eph. 2. 1, 2, 3. &c. The right remembrance of our unconverted state will be a means to engage our hearts to be much in the thoughts of, and highly to prise, that un∣speakable
 love and grace of our God through Iesus in quick∣ning us who were dead in trespasses and sins, in translating us from the Kingdome of darkness into the Kingdome of his dear Son; the seri∣ous pondering of these things in our hearts will sweetly force us to break forth into admiration with the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 3. 1, 2. Behold what
 manner of love the Fa∣ther hath bestowed upon us, that we should be call'd the sons of God, &c. but when we forget the two former, we lose our communion with God in a great measure, and cannot prise and im∣prove the kind dealings of our God with us, since Conversion, neither walk holily and obedi∣ently before the Lord in all his holy appoint∣ments
 as we ought, but leave an open door for Satan to deceive us with his manifold ten∣tations, by which we suffer much harm.
My hearts desire and prayer to the Lord is, that he would give all his people more care and diligence in watching their own hearts and waies, for the increase of their spi∣ritual strength and
 growth in grace, lest they being led away for a time, with the error of the wicked, fall from their own stedfastness, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18. as many have done to their greatest grief and loss. Belo∣ved Brethren, you have here the labours of one of the weakest sex, which I trust will occasion you the more to give glory to God, in that his
 strength appears in weakness; were it not for the relation, I should have much room to speak of the Author, and this Her work, but I shall on∣ly say, Let Her works praise Her; only I have this that I cannot but say, it was not Her desire to publish it, Her reasons She hath ex∣pressed. Secondly, So far as one can speak
 for another, I can say for my Wife, in this vvork she hath had lit∣tle help from men or things, but I believe much from the Lord; and as the Lord hath ovvned and much assi∣sted her in these her great labors, I trust the same povver vvill ac∣company each precious heart, into vvhose hand it may come, to make it very profitable to
 them. At my first sight of it, which was when it was neer fini∣shed, though I believe I was the first that saw it, next Her self, I was so surprized, knowing nothing of it before, that I knew not what to say of it; but up∣on consideration, and reviewing of it, I was very much pressed in spirit to publish it, and the more, in that the
 oftner I read it, the more I was ingaged to it: I can say through mercy it hath been use∣full and profitable to me; I hope it will be so to many more. It is no small mercy, nor low attainment, to be indeed an expe∣rienced Christian; it is easier to have fine words than a trea∣sure in the heart: but seeing the kings daugh∣ter
 is all glorious with∣in, and that our treasure there doth in∣crease by the blessing of the Lord upon our diligent using that means ordained for that end; this I trust will be a faithfull remem∣brancer and helper of us in this great work, in which I hope the Lord will have much glory, and his people comfort, which hath
 been, is, and I trust e∣ver shall be, the ear∣nest desire of

