


My Lord,
WHEN I delivered this mean discourse in so solemn an Audience, where the King's Ministers of Justice, with others of the long Robe met the worthy Magi∣strates of this Great City, to begin the Term at the Church, with imploring the Blessing of God upon that excellent Go∣vernment which you and they joyntly sup∣port; I was much encourag'd to see so
 many Noble Persons, and so numerous an Assembly practising so Religiously be∣forehand the Doctrine I came to Preach, joyning in the Publick Supplications and Common-Prayers. Your devout Appearance and hearty Concurrence in the Divine Service, gave me some Idaea of those times a gallant Loyal Citizen describes in a Speech of his (which for it's Eloquence might have flow'd from the Mouth of any Roman or Grecian Orator, and for it's Piety might have become the Tongue of the gravest Di∣vine—There have been Times (says See Alder∣man Garro∣way's lately reprinted speech spo∣ken at a Common-Hall in the Year 1642. he) that he that should speak against the Book of Common-Prayer in this City, should not have been put to the patience of a Legal Tryal. We were wont to look upon it as the greatest Treasure and Jewel of our Religion; and he that should have told us he wish∣ed well to our Religion, and yet would take away the Book of Common-Pray∣er,
 would never have gotten Credit. I have been (says he) in all the parts of Christendom, and have conversed with Christians in Turky. Why, in all the Reformed Churches there is not any thing of more Reve∣rence than the English Liturgy, not our Royal Exchange, or the Name of Q. Elizabeth, so famous. In Geneva it self I have heard it extolled to the Skies. I have been three Months toge∣ther by Sea, not a Day without hear∣ing it read twice. The honest Mariners then despised all the World, but the King and the Common-Prayer-Book; he that should have been suspected to wish ill to either of them, would have made an ill Voyage.
But though so goodly a Congregation as yours, whose Devotions I had the Ho∣nour to serve that Day, was one of the best sights I had ever seen, yet I live in hopes of seeing a better one Day; I mean
 the same Honourable Assembly transla∣ted from your Lordship's Chappel to our Church of St. Paul's, which begins to lift up its head and to beg for its self from every Charitable Hand, especially from those within the Walls of the City its Fellow-sufferer.
Now I should forget my self and the Duty to which I Exhorted others, if I should not give this proof of my obedience to You that are in Authority, and I do it the more cheerfully to You that imploy your Authority, so well and wisely, as Fearing God, Honouring the King, and not medling with them that are given to change. I should not be true to my Text, if I should not submit my self, and this plain Sermon to be dispos'd of, as you have been pleas'd to Order.
My Lord, 
