



My Lords and Gentlemen;
I Ought not to dispute your commands for the printing my Sermon of Obedience; lest my Sermon should be protestatio contra factum: here I know my Example would be the best Use to this Doctrine, and I am sure to find no inconveniency so great as that of Disobedience; nei∣ther can I be confident that I am wise in any thing but when I obey; for then I have the wisdome of my Supe∣riour for my warrant, or my excuse. I remember the saying of Aurelius the Emperor, Aequius est me tot & talium amicorum consilium, quam tot tales meam unius voluntatem sequi. I could easily have pretended excuses, but that day I had taught others the contrary; and I would not shed that Chalice which

my own hands had newly filled with waters issuing from the fountains of Salvation.
My eyes are almost grown old with seeing the horrid mischiefs which came from Rebellion and Disobedience; and I would willingly now be blessed with observation of Peace and Righteousness, Plenty and Religion▪ which do already, and I hope shall for ever, attend upon Obe∣dience to the best KING and the best CHURCH in the world. I see no objection against my hopes, but that which ought least of all in this case to be pretended. Men pretend Conscience against Obedience; expressly against Saint Paul's Doctrine, teaching us to obey for conscience sake; but to disobey for Conscience in a thing indifferent, is never to be found in the books of our Religion.
It is very hard when the Prince is forc'd to say to his rebellious Subject, as God did to his stubborn people, Quid faciam tibi? I have tried all the waies I can to bring thee home, and what shall I now doe unto thee? The Subject should rather say, Quid me vis facere? What wilt thou have me to doe? This Question is the best end of disputations. Corrumpitur atque dissol∣vitur Imperantis officium, si quis ad id quod facere jussus est, non obsequio debito, sed con∣silio non considerato respondeat, said one in A. Gellius. When a Subject is commanded to obey, and

he disputes, and saies, Nay, but the other is better, he is like a servant that gives his Master necessary counsel, when he requires of him a necessary obedience. Utilius parére edicto quam efferre consilium, he had bet∣ter obey then give counsel: by how much it is better to be profitable then to be witty, to be full of goodness ra∣ther then full of talk and argument.
But all this is acknowledged true in strong men, but not in the weak; in vigorous, but not in tender Consci∣ences: for Obedience is strong meat, and will not down with weak stomacks. As if in the world any thing were easier then to obey: for we see that the food of Children is milk and lawes; the breast-milk of their Nur∣ses and the commands of their Parents is all that food and Government by which they are kept from harm and hunger, and conducted to life and wisdome. And there∣fore they that are weak brethren, of all things in the world have the least reason to pretend an excuse for disobedience, for nothing can secure them but the wis∣dome of the Laws: for they are like Children in mino∣rity; they cannot be trusted to their own conduct, and therefore must live at the publick charge, and the wis∣dome of their Superiors is their guide and their secu∣rity. And this was wisely advised by S. Paul, Him that is weak in the faith receive, but not to doubtfull disputations: that's not the way for him; Children

must not dispute with their Fathers and their Masters. If old men will dispute, let them look to it; that's meat for the strong indeed, though it be not very nutritive: but the Laws and the Counsels, the Exhortations and the Doctrines of our Spiritual Rulers, are the measures by which God hath appointed Babes in Christ to become Men, and the weak to become strong; and they that are not to be received to doubtful disputations, are to be received with the arms of love into the imbraces of a certain and regular Obedience.
But it would be considered, that Tenderness of Conscience is an equivocal terme, and does not alwaies signifie in a good sense. For a Child is of a tender flesh; but he whose foot is out of joint, or hath a bile in his arme, or hath strained a sinew, is much more tender. The tenderness of age is that weakness that is in the ignorant and new beginners: the tenderness of a bile, that is soreness indeed rather then tenderness, is of the diseased, the abused, and the mis-perswaded. The first indeed are to be tenderly dealt with, and have usages accordingly: but that is the same I have already told; you must teach them, you must command them, you must guide them, you must chuse for them, you must be their guardians, and they must comport themselves accordingly. But for that tenderness of Conscience which is the disease and soreness of Conscience, it

must be cured by anodynes and soft usages, unless they prove ineffective, and that the Launcet be necessary. But there are amongst us such tender stomacks, that can∣not endure Milk, but can very well digest Iron; Consci∣ences so tender, that a Ceremony is greatly offensive, but Rebellion is not; a Surplice drives them away as a bird affrighted with a man of clouts, but their Consciences can suffer them to despise Government, and speak evil of Dignities, and curse all that are not of their Opinion, and disturb the peace of Kingdomes, and commit Sa∣crilege, and account Schisme the character of Saints. The true Tenderness of Conscience is 1. that which is impatient of a sin; 2ly, it will not endure any thing that looks like it; and 3ly, it will not give offence. Now since all Sin is Disobedience, 1. it will be rarely con∣tingent that a man in a Christian Common-wealth shall be tied to disobey, to avoid sin: and certain it is, if such a case could happen, yet 2ly, nothing of our present que∣stions is so like a sin, as when we refuse to obey the Laws; to stand in a clean Vestment is not so ill a sight as to see men stand in separation, and to kneel at the Communion is not so like Idolatry as Rebellion is to Witchcraft: and then 3ly, for the matter of giving offences, what scandal is greater then that which scandalizes the Laws? and who is so carefully to be ob∣served, lest he be offended, as the KING? And if that

which offends the weak brother is to be avoided, much more that which offends the strong; for this is certainly really criminal, but for the other it is much oddes but it is mistaken. And when the case is so put, between the obedient and the disobedient, which shall be offended, and one will, I suppose there is no question but the Laws will take more care of Subjects then of Rebels, and not weaken them in their duty in compliance with those that hate the Laws, and will not endure the Government.
And after all this, in the conduct of Government what remedy can there be to those that call themselves Tender Consciences? I shall not need say that every man can easily pretend it; for we have seen the vilest part of mankind, men that have done things so horrid, worse then which the Sun never saw, yet pretend tender Consciences against Ecclesiastical Laws: but I will sup∣pose that they are really such, that they in the simplicity of their hearts follow Absolom, and in weakness hide their heads in little Conventicles and places of separation for a trifle; what would they have done for themselves?
If you make a Law of Order, and in the sanction put a clause of favour for tender Consciences, do not you invite every Subject to Disobedience by impunity, and teach him how to make his own excuse? is not such a Law, a Law without an obligation? may not every man chuse whether he will obey or no? and if he pretends to

disobey out of Conscience, is not he that disobeyes equally innocent with the obedient; altogether as just, as not having done any thing without leave, and yet much more Religious and conscientious? Quicunque vult is but an ill preface to a Law; and it is a strange obligation that makes no difference between him that obeyes and him that refuses to obey.
But what course must be taken with tender Consci∣ences? Shall the execution of the Law be suspended as to all such persons? that will be all one with the former: for if the execution be commanded to be suspended, then the obligation of the Law by command is taken away, and then it were better there were no Law made. And indeed that is the pretension, that is the secret of the business; they suppose the best way to prevent Disobe∣dience is to take away all Laws. It is a short way in∣deed; there shall then be no Disobedience, but at the same time there shall be no Government: but the Re∣medy is worse then the Disease; and to take away all Wine and strong drink to prevent Drunkenness would not be half so great a folly.
I cannot therefore tell what to advise in this parti∣cular, but that every Spiritual guide should consider who are tender Consciences and who are weak brethren, and use all the waies of piety and prudence to instruct and to inform them, that they may increase in knowledge

and spiritual understanding. But they that will be alwaies learning and never come to the knowledge of the truth, they that will be children of a hundred years old and never come to years of discretion, they are very unfit to guide others, and to be Curates of Souls: but they are most unfit to reprove the Laws, and speak against the wisdome of a Nation, when it is confessed that they are so weak, that they understand not the fun∣damental Liberty which Christ hath purchased for them, but are servants to a scruple, and affrighted at a cir∣cumstance, and in bondage under an indifferent thing, an so much Idolaters of their Sect or Opinion as to pre∣fer it before all their own nobler interests, and the Cha∣rity of their brother, and the Peace of a whole Church and Nation.
To you, my Lords and Gentlemen, I hope I may say as Marcus Curius said to a stubborn young man, Non opus Vos habere cive qui parére nesciret; the Kingdome hath no need of those that know not how to obey. But as for them who have weak and tender Consciences, they are in the state of Childhood and mino∣rity: but then you know that a Child is never happy by having his own humor: if you chuse for him, and make him to use it, he hath but one thing to doe; but if you put him to please himself, he is troubled with every thing, and satisfied with nothing. We find that all Christian

Churches kept this Rule. They kept themselves and others close to the rule of Faith, and peaceably suffered one another to differ in Ceremonies, but suffered no difference amongst their own: they gave Liberty to other Churches, and gave Laws, and no Liberty, to their own Subjects. And at this day the Chur∣ches of Geneva, France, Switzerland, Germany, Low Countries, tye all their people to their own Laws, but tye up no mans Conscience; if he be not per∣swaded as they are, let him charitably dissent, and leave that Government, and adhere to his own Communion. If you be not of their mind, they will be served by them that are: they will not trouble your Conscience, and you shall not disturb their Government. But when men think they cannot enjoy their Conscience unless you give them good Livings, and if you prefer them not, you afflict their Consciences, they do but too evidently de∣clare that it is not their Consciences but their Profits they would have secured. Now to these I have only this to say, That their Conscience is to be enjoyed by the mea∣sures of God's Word, but the Rule for their Estates is the Laws of the Kingdome: and I shew you yet a more excellent way; Obedience is the best security for both; because this is the best conservatory of Charity and Truth and Peace. Si vis brevi perfectus esse, esto obediens etiam in minimis, was the saying of

a Saint; and the world uses to look for Miracles from them whom they shall esteem Saints: but I had rather see a man truly humble and obedient, then to see him raise a man from the dead, said old Pachomius.
But to conclude: if weak brethren shall still plead for Toleration and Compliance, I hope my Lords the Bi∣shops will consider where it can doe good and doe no harm, where they are permitted, and where them∣selves are bound up by the Laws, and in all things where it is safe and holy to labour to bring them ease and to give them remedy: but to think of removing the Dis∣ease by feeding the Humor, I confess it is a strange cure to our present Distempers. He that took clay and spittle to open the blind eyes can make any thing be col∣lyrium; but he alone can doe it. But whether any humane power can bring good from so unlikely an instru∣ment, if any man desires yet to be better informed, I de∣sire him, besides the calling to mind the late sad effects of Schime, to remember that no Church in Christendome ever did it. It is neither the way of Peace nor Govern∣ment, nor yet a proper remedy for the cure of a weak Conscience.
I shall therefore pray to God that these men who separate in simplicity may by God's mercy be brought to understand their own Liberty, and that they may not for ever be babes and Neophytes, and wax old in tri∣fles;

and for ever stay at entrances and outsides of Re∣ligion; but that they would pass in interiora domûs, and seek after Peace and Righteousness, Holiness and Justice, the love of God and Evangelical perfecti∣ons; and then they will understand how ill-advised they are who think Religion consists in zeal against Ceremo∣nies and speaking evil of the Laws.
My Lords and Gentlemen, what I said in pursuance of publick Peace and private Duty, and some little inci∣dences to both, I now humbly present to you, more to shew my own Obedience then to re-mind you of your Duty, which hitherto you have so well observed in your amicable and sweet concord of counsels and affections, during this present Session. I owe many thanks to you who heard me patiently, willingly and kindly; I endea∣voured to please God, and I find I did not displease you: but he is the best hearer of a Sermon who first loves the Doctrine, and then practises it; and that you have hitherto done, very piously and very prosperously. I pray God continue to direct your Counsels so that you in all things may please him, and in all things be blessed by him, that all generations may call you blessed Instruments of a lasting Peace, the restorers of the old paths, the Patrons of the Church, friends of Reli∣gion, and Subjects fitted for your Prince, who is Just up to the greatest example, and Merciful beyond all

examples, a Prince who hath been nourished, and pre∣served, and restored, and blessed by Miracles; a Prince whose Vertues and Fortunes are equally the greatest.
