



Great Sir,
THE circles of the Divine Providence turn
themselves upon the affairs of the world
so, that every spondel of the wheels may
mark out those Vertues which we are then
to exercise; and every new event in the Oe∣conomy
of God is God's finger to point out to us by what in∣stances
he will be served. We have been sorely smitten and
for a long time; for (that I may use the words of the Pro∣phet)
Alas, for that day was great, so that none
was like it, it was even the time of Jacob's
trouble; and then, Faith and Patience, and all the pas∣sive
Graces of Religion were in their own season. But since
God hath left off to smite us with an iron rod, and hath once
more said unto these Nations,Jer. 30. 7, 8. They shall serve the

Lord their God, and David their King whom
I have raised up unto them; Now our duty stands
on the Sunny side; it is our work to rejoice in God and in
God's Anointed, and to be glad, and worthily to accept
of our Prosperity is all our business: for so good a God we
serve, that he hath made it our Duty to be happy, and we can∣not
please him unless we be infinitely pleased our selves. It
was impossible to live without our King; but as Slaves live,
that is, such who are civilly dead, and persons condemn'd to
metalls: we lived to the lusts and insolency of others, but not at
all to our selves, to our own Civil or Religious comforts. But
now our joys are mere and unmixt; for that we may doe our
duty and have our reward at once, God hath sent your Ma∣jesty
amongst us, that we may feel the pleasures of Obedi∣ence,
and reap the fruits of that Government which God
loves and uses, which He hath constituted and adorned,
which He hath restored to us by a conjugation of miracles, by
the work of his hand and the light of his countenance, by
changing the hearts of Men, and scattering the people that
delight in War, by infatuating their Counsels and break∣ing
their Cords asunder; that is, which He himself hath
wrought amongst us by himself alone, and therefore will bless
and will never interrupt: only we must be carefull never to
provoke him any more by our Vnthankfulness and infidel
Apostasie.
But now, Great Sir, be pleas'd to give me leave in the
throngs of those that rejoice to see the goodness of God to
his servant Job, in imitation of them who presented him
with, everyman, an ear-ring of Gold, and a piece of Sil∣ver,
or a Lambe *, to bring also my Offering, the significa∣tion
of my joy. For though it be but two Books which

like the Widows two mites make up but a contempti∣ble
Summe; yet because it is all I have, your Majesty may
be pleased to accept: and so much the rather, because
it is also an expression of that part of the duty of my Cal∣ling
which hath fallen to my share. For your Majesty,
like the King in the Gospel, hath been in a far Country,
and some of your Citizens sent after you,Luke 19. 14. and said, No∣lumus
hunc regnare; but God hath caused you to re∣turn
and reign: and if your Majesty should by that ex∣ample
call us to render an account of our Talents, I can
only say, that amongst those many Excellent persons who have
greatly improv'd theirs, I was willing to negotiate and to
labour. What fruit will from hence accrue to Souls is
wholly in the hands of God: but this semination and cul∣ture
was much wanting in the Reformed Churches. For
though in all things else the Goodness of God hath made us
to abound, and our Cup to run over; yet our labours have
been hitherto unimploied in the description of the Rules of
Conscience and Casuistical Theology. In which be∣cause
I have now made some attempt, if the production be
not unworthy, I am sure it is not improper to lay it at the
feet of your Majesty. For your Majesty being by God
appointed Custos utriusque Tabulae, since like Mo∣ses
you are from God descended to us with the two Tables
of the Law in your hand, and that you will best govern by the
arguments and compulsory of Conscience, and this alone is
the greatest firmament of Obedience; whatsoever can be
the measure of Conscience est res Fisci, is part of your
own propriety, and enters into your Exchequer.
Be pleased therefore, Gracious Sir, to accept this in∣stance
of my duty to God, to your Majesty, and to your

Great Charge, the Church of England. There are in it
many things intended for the service, but nothing to disserve
any of these great interests. Those Cases that concern the
Power and Offices of Ecclesiastical Superiors and Su∣preme,
were (though in another manner) long since done
by the incomparable Mr Hooker,Lib. 7, 8. Of Eccle. Polity. Lib. 8. de rep. Eccles. and the learned Arch∣bishop
of Spalato: but their labours were unhappily lost,
and never saw the light. And though I cannot attain to
the strength of these Champions of David and Guardians
of the Temple; yet since their portion of work is fallen
into my hand, I have heartily endeavoured to supply that
loss; though with no other event, but as charitable pas∣sengers
by their little, but well-meaning, alms repair the
breaches of his fortune who was greatly undone by War
or Fire. But therefore I humbly beg your Majesties par∣don
in all things where my weaknesses make me to despair of
your more Gracious acceptance: and here I am therefore to
be confident, because your Mercy is, as your Majesty, this
day in her exaltation, and is felt by all your Subjects; and
therefore humbly to be hoped for by
Great Sir,

