



Most Gracious and dread Soveraign,
THat I should pre∣sume to lay this little Treatise at your Royal Feet, and to implore your Maje∣sties most gracious Patronage of it, is not out of any vain Ostentation of leaping from the distances of my mean Station to approach Maje∣sty; But rather to do that right to

my Subject, as to shelter it against malicious Censurers, under your Royal and powerful protection. Those that Persecuted him while liv∣ing, and at last took away his Life, at once bereaving your Majesty of a faithful Subject, and the Nation of a useful Member, will I question not, endeavour (as they have often at∣tempted) to bear down the true Va∣lue of his Merits by unjust Slanders: but he was too well known to be Scan∣daliz'd by such men, who are as well known (as they were his, so) to be Enemies to your Sacred Majesty, your Kingdoms, and the true Protestant Religion. It was for his firm adhe∣rence to all these that he fell an Inno∣cent Sacrifice to their Revenge and Malice. He faithfully served your Majesty and Countrey, while he had

Life to spend in such Services. 'Tis fit the World should know what he was. He dyed for his Zeal in such Services, for his Loyalty to your Majesty, and Constancy to the Prote∣stant Religion. To whom then should the Protection of his Memory upon such accounts be better (though with a humble respect to your greatness) dedicated, than to our Gracious King and Defender of the Faith?
Honorantes me honorabo, is the Royal Promise of the King of Kings to his Worshippers. Sir Ed∣mondbury Godfrey was one that dutifully Honoured and Served your Majesty: And your Maje∣jesty, according to your Native Cle∣mency and Goodness, and (after the pattern of him whose Vice∣gerent

you are) was pleased in compensation of his Duty, to con∣fer many Honours upon him. You Honoured him with the Digni∣ty of Knighthood, with admitting him into the Commission of the Peace, and that great Character your Majesty was pleased to give him of his Abilities for that Ser∣vice. He was honoured with the freedom of access to your Royal Presence, and being imployed for your Majesty in some great Ser∣vices. After his Death, your Ma∣jesty was pleased so far to Ho∣nour him by your gracious Sym∣pathy with your People in his loss, as to extend your Justice by your Royal Proclamation for the Discovering of his Murtherers, and then to grant a special Commissi∣on

of Oyer and Terminer for their Tryal, and to bring them to condign Punishment.
Unto all these Honours that living and Dead your Majesty has graciously been pleased to extend to him; May it please your Sa∣cred Majesty to grant one more in his behalf, in graciously conde∣scending to Vouchsafe your Royal Patronage to these Memoires of your late faithful, Loyal and Protestant Subject; and of your Princely goodness, as well to par∣don the presumption of the Author, as the defects of his undertaking.
May the divine goodness that hath hitherto (to the unspeakable Joy of your Subjects) preserved your Sacred Person and your Govern∣ment against all the Plots and

Contrivances of your Enemies, con∣tinue to defend you, and increase such Loyalty in the hearts of your Sub∣jects, as this man dyed for.
That the Crown may long flou∣rish on your Royal Head, and that you may be bless'd with a long, happy and peaceable Reign over these Kingdoms, is the hearty Prayer of,
Great SIR,

