



Worthy Sir,
THE Rabbins to maintaine Tradition, usually distin∣guish Gods Holy Law, into the Law written; Torah she baccathubh and Torah she begnah Peh; and their Talmud or Doctrinall, is no other then an elucidation or exposition on Gods Law written, saith Elias Levila in Tisbi:
And to take  or Traditioe, as we use the word in the Church, pro quavis Iustitutione quae ecclesiâ traditur, it may as justly referre to Propheticall and Apostolicall Truths, and by consequence, not to be Abrogated: 2 Thes 2. 15, 1 Cor. 2. 15. 3, 4 As to those things whose circumstances make them mutable and whose observations is therefore free, and not of absolute necessity as Act. 15. 28 29. 1 Cor. 11. 2.
Of this Sermon, you had first an unwritten Tradition or (as the Iews say) the Law spoken, The errors which may be found in it, are with tolerable mo∣desty better to be answered, in that it was given me (as they say their Tradi∣tion) in the Night, for I thinke, there is no man that shall attempt and act matters of high and usefull consequence from houres stollen from his pillow, but may now and then be taken napping▪
But such as it was, being given me to deliver, it was more then Reaso∣nable I should deliver to them, for whom it was Given; yea to do that, was Causa sine quâ non; besides Gods providence and spirituall permission; Your Patience an particular Admission, There was law to command me, the law of necessity, and necessity of preaching, against which I know no law, and I must aknowledge, I had a conscionable Motion to it at that time.
It appertaines to all, lawfully called and duly authorized, to preach Gods word, And though I am yet (by Gods will) Fortunes Dwarf,  (Religiously be it spoken) and so, not commended to any proper Pastorall cure; Yet in Saint Pauls first chapter to the Romanes verse 14. I can read my Duty; To which the Syrian gives a word of such Important obligement; as may supply others (aswell as those of necessary invitation) with a paraphra∣sticall Commentary upon this subject: mehhaicbh euoleakrz, I am indebted to the pulpit, or in Duty to the office of a Preacher.
From this Ground I spake, and spake my Conscience God bearing me
 witnes; and from Gods Bearing me witnes, I writ; and Here you have the Law written.
I must note unto you Sir, that I do not with reall Freedome expose my self to the presse, much lesse, to the Torturing Rack of the worlds harsh Censure; learning it self stands in White sheets and I think no publick penance is volun∣tary; Mine is not such, yet if it suffer such, and look not too pale, the matter is lesse; White is a Symboll of Innocency and Purity, and these is some comfort∣able mitigation, to be perswaded; It doth penance.
The Sinfull Censurers of the Times, are as Locusts in Aegypt; I speak not double when I say Arbeh is nor strained from Rabah, Multitudes from Numbers; Some for Paul, some for Apollos, some for Lephas; From the in∣crease of these Numbers, are drawn many Heads, which some call Divisions: These like wormes, live upon the Government, and eat out the very Hart of the Tree, or as Flies in summer, putrify the sweetest sustenance.
Sir, These send me to you; for the Declension of an age from primitive vertue, could not suffer me to come forth without Protection; an hundred to one, These are many: you may please in this matter to be all one to me: That one is that I wish for my singular esteem of you, makes me account these Plu∣ralists nullius numen, nothing.
To be short; Your Love, next unto Gods Hand, lead me to the Temple, at that Time, and your Approbatory Testimony, compells me to prize my poor Fortunes dexterity, that hath fitted a Dedication correspondent to my desires Direction, at this Time.
The Almighty God of heaven and earth, whose property in Divine Nature is to be mercifull above offences, quicken you by his Spirit, to an heavenly Emulacia to study the Principles and Desires of his Truth, and (as farr as con∣cernes you) the Churches safety; inclose you in the volume of his Book; and Gather you into the Bosome of his Son, in whom is only True Blisse, and of whom.
By Faith and Holines (in this life) you shall be assured at the Resurrection of the Just; when God by his Spirit or soft and still voice, in a lesse minute then any man dies here, shall unite the Spirits and Bodyes of all: When and Where God is All in All.
And though his Church on Earth (as at this time never so militant) be sad round about, and his Children under Clouds and pillars of fire; yet Sursum Corda lift up your hart, and eyes unto the Hils, those mountaines of Delive∣rance above; Take every day two or three Turnes up and down Iacobs ladder, by humble Meditations and Faithfull Ejaculations, Trusting unto your Re∣deemer with Godly perseverance; And let the Troubles, be what can be, for
 Condition and Duration▪ so long as there is Elijah an holy and devout soule; God will be in the Cave.
It is my security in this Busines to have thought upon your Candour; when you have kindly accepted this, you free me not of all; for in Gratitude I owe you service, and in Duty prayer,

From my Study December 19. 1642.
