


SIR,
'TIS the common Fate of Learned Men, that they are more than ordinarily expos'd to the importunity of such as are in want of their assistance; and tho' it be Presumption in their Petitioners, 'tis in them however a generous Condescention, that they encline to gratifie the Requests of their needy Supplicants.
I am ready to acknowledge my self little short of the same Arrogance, in that I am become troublesome so soon as honour'd with your ac∣quaintance.
The Great and Eminent seem indeed to be placed in a sublimer Sphere, not so much that they might pity the Ignorant as to protect the Indigent.

 Being conscious of my own insufficiency to withstand the Test of Critical Censure, it was reasonable I should endeavour to find a Patron that might (in some measure) secure me from the Obloquy of my Adversaries.
When I had consider'd upon whose friendship I might most happily rely, it was the effect of my Ambition to single out Your Self, for one of the greatest and most learned amongst others, whom I had thought on: to make which choice (Sir) I was the rather encourag'd, since you had so lately oblig'd me with a very kind ac∣ceptance of some loose Papers I had by me, which upon your communicating were by the Royal Society esteem'd not unworthy, to be prin∣ted with their Philosophical Transactions. Af∣ter the experience of so much Civility on a first or second conference, I had the less reason to dispute your Goodness upon the occasion I have had of a farther correspondence.
The ensuing Discourse, which I am endea∣vouring to shelter under the Umbrage of your Favour, was compiled about four years since, in which time it was mostly in the custody of some particular Friends, who were not a little earnest with me for its publication; tho' on other accounts I might have rely'd upon their Judgments, yet with this I could not so readily comply, because as I had never appear'd in Print, I was the less capable to imagine the Difficulties and Disadvantages I had to encoun∣ter: I did already foresee some, which put me
 upon thinking, and was afraid to meet with others that should (when past recovery) be at∣tended with Repentance.
'Tis true, I valued not the Resentments of malicious and deceitful Men, since I doubted not but the more honest and judicious would espouse my Cause: But when I reflected on the extream Nicety of the Town, many wherein are fonder to expose what they call Wit, by their Comments upon an Author's Language, prying for Errata's, and searching out his Lapses, rather than regarding the Usefuness of the Sub∣ject, or heeding whether it answers the End for which 'twas enterpriz'd. Of these men I had reason to be fearful, especially perceiving that more learn'd Discourses were frequently attend∣ed with an apologetick Entrance that might ob∣viate their Censure.
Amongst other worthy Authors, I could do no less than take notice of the almost too great Modesty of the late incomparable Mr. Boyle, who when he had written never so elabo∣rately upon what he undertook, is not∣withstanding excusing himself, as if guilty of some Blemish or Imperfection. It should seem by this his singular Humility he was as worthy of, as he could be willing to procure a general Esteem and Admiration: And yet, according to the conclusion of a Panegyrick on the Curious De Graaf,

Quis Jove, major erat, magno quis major Homero,
Ille tamen Momum: Zoilon Alter habet.
However, if so great and famous Men have every where thought it Prudence to arm them∣selves against the Zoilists of the Age, what abun∣dant cause had I to remain silent, and keep out of their reach?
A farther motive to induce me for some time to retard the impression, was, That as I hop'd there would not be wanting those, who would judge aright of my Undertaking, so I as little question'd to find others ready enough to think me more desirous to be reputed an Author, than by being so to serve the Publick Interest.
These (Sir) were the more material Impe∣diments to my Consent, till on the other hand I bethought my self how serviceable such a Dis∣covery as this might be at a time that seem'd extraordinarily to require it; and finding those who were perhaps better capacitated wholly negligent therein, I was the rather prevail'd with to lend my mean assistance towards the redressing so universally-prejudicial an Aggrie∣vance; so that in whatever I have expos'd my own Weakness, I shall think my self enough fortunate if the same be imputed to my Zeal for the General Good, by using my utmost di∣ligence to suppress all base Pretenders to our most Noble Art, and vindicating the same from their Ignominy and Reproach.

 I have no reason to doubt but your self, at some times, in the variety of your Practice, have remark'd how easily many reputable Peo∣ple have been impos'd on by a Pretence to Phy∣sick, and how fatally deluded with a Promise of Recovery; from whence, if I mistake not, there will be little room for a Surmise, whether a Dis∣course of this tendency may be advantageous. However I may happen to be aspers'd, or what∣ever may be thought of the Discourse it self, I fear not to be discommended for my choice of so fit a Person, by the benefit of whose counte∣nance both may be defended from the too rigid Censure of those who will still be condemning all but their own Offspring, if it be but to show the Parts which a more refined Education hath conferr'd upon them above the rest of Man∣kind.
I have here a fair opportunity (since I can say little for my self) to make a modish Ha∣rangue upon your Accomplishments; but rather than trespass on your Modesty, I shall omit to say any thing of that nature.
I am, I must confess, very much of opinion with the Noble Mackenzy, (in an Epistle to Esquire Boyle) with respect to Dedications, and do believe an Author much more concern'd to procure for his Patron him who hath conspicu∣ously render'd himself truly worthy, than one so made by Flattery or Adulation.

 Were I minded to speak to so large a Theme as your Merit would afford, I might say much, I'm certain, before the greatest of your Oppo∣nents would accuse me as a Sycophant. To pre∣vent Reflection, I shall only take the liberty to give the World my Wish, That we had been longer happy in your access to, or possession of our Anatomical Chair. And, that your indefa∣tigable Industry therein may be imitated by your Successors, is the Desire of
SIR,

