



Much Honoured in Christ,
I Humbly here present you with the first-born of my Meditations, which were ever yet published to the eye of the World. I durst never till now, adventure any thing out abroad; and therefore this first piece cannot but go from me, with a kind of Virgin blush. I never yet judged any of my weak labours worthy of a curious eye to look upon: Sen∣sible I am, that my parts are as low as my person; and therefore hitherto it hath been mine only ambi∣tion,
to do good among mine own people in mine own sphere. But truly, the love, and respects in my Ministerial work, which I alwayes met with from your dear yoke-fellow, now with Christ, while he sojourned with us here below in this val∣ley of tears, forces me to this thankfull retaliation, and makes me willing that the World should know how much I was indebted to him. As I have lost a very loving Neighbour; so have you a most dear and, tender Husband. But it is not my desire, or design to renew or aggravate your sor∣row under this sad stroke, but rather contrarily, to present you with something (that through the strength of Christ) might lighten your burden. I know you are like Hannah, a Woman of a trou∣bled Spirit, at all times, but much more now, that you have more than ordinary to do and suf∣fer; and your adversary is most busy, now he finds you at the weakest: And therefore, the good Lord forbid, that by this Sermon I should add to your Affliction, in which already your cup runneth over: I only beg of you, that you would seriously read, and remember this Sermon, but strive to forget the sad occasion of it. Oh do not with Rachel refuse to be com∣forted;
Confident I am you are dear to Chist though too too cruel to your self; and that your Spirit is clean, though very cloudy; and that you are a child of light though you so often sit in darkness. The dead never complain as you do (I fear too much) and darkness could never re∣veal so much darkness as you dayly mourn under. Black thoughts which we continually resist, and pray against, are but the smoak of the bottomless Pitt; they flow from Satans envy against us, not our enmity against God. We must with thank∣fulness take comfort in the grace of Christ in us, as well as allways be poring on our own wants and weaknesses: Our Father expects we should walk thankfully, as well as humbly, and that we should melt under his goodness, as well as our own unworthiness. Our dear Saviour a little be∣fore his death, begins his last Sermon to his Dis∣ciples, John 14.1. with this, not only Counsel, but Command, Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me: intimating, that we may be guilty of Gospel-disobedience and unbelief, by being too much troubled, as well as by being too much defective herein. Our infinite∣ly gracious God hath made large and strong pro∣vision
in his Word, as well for the consolation of his servants here, as for their salvation hereaf∣ter: he hath given us not only his Word, but his Oath, That by too immutable things, in which it is impossible for God to lye, we might have a., strong consolation, Heb. 6.18. even a formi∣dable, giant-like consolation as the word signifyeth; and indeed strong food calls for strong labour; as we should be strong in the Lord in point of duty, so in point of comfort, seeing he hath given us such strong encouragement, even the highest security in the World, his own Word, and Oath to feed upon. Oh when shall I see you come up to a full assurance of faith; unto which all believers should give all diligence: I know you dare not allow your self in any one sin willingly; do not do it in this, in Fathering a spiritual untruth upon your self, that you are an Hypocrite. How an∣gry was God with Jobs friends for this untrue, and uncharitable censure concerning him? nothing but a sacrifice from Job himself for them would appease him: and it is worth the minding, the nature of Gods enditement against them, Job 42.7. Ye have not spoken of Me, the thing that is right, why, their Doctrine was true, though not
Application; the Premises they laid down were sound, though the Conclusion were rotten, con∣cerning Jobs rottenness. Now God interprets this as false doctrine, as speaking an untruth con∣cerning himself, Paul, while Saul; persecuted Christ the head, in the members; so do we when we persecute our own graces (the best part of Christ in us) and father spiritual untruths upon our selves, to gratify the Father of lies. Stephens prayer immediately after the Text, for his enemies, shall be mine, though in a different sense for you; The Lord lay not this sin to your charge, that you even stone to death your own graces, not giving God the glory of them; but sin against him, by sinning against your own grace and peace. I now leave this weak piece with you, and leave you in the arms of Jesus Christ, who loves you, and hath dyed for you; And in him remain,

From my study in Totteridge the 4th. day of October 1658.
