


Dear Sir,
IN Obedience to your Command, I have committed to Pa∣per some Notions I had conceived of the Bankers busi∣ness, and the calamitous dependants thereon. I remem∣ber you thought me (though concern'd enough) pretty warm in this Argument last time I discourst it with you; and truly if hard usages will make a wise man mad, the Effect it hath upon a Fool (as I am) may well want a name. I have I praise-God weather'd out all those dreadful storms which fell some years since upon the Loyal par y, (as you know) though with the Ship∣wrack of my peron and Estate, and this (if I may speak it without Osten∣tation) I did with constancy and joy, for though I could see then nothing but Tempests and Hurricanes without me,Plin. in Pany∣er. ad Traja∣num imperat. psypolit. Lib. 4. Cap 11. Raleighs Pre∣rog. of Parlia∣ment in finc. yet my mind was alwayes refresht with sereneties and calmness, triumphing that I was thought worthy at any rate, to suffer for so glorious a cause. After his Majesties Happy Restau∣ration, though neglected and despised, as many of far greater merit than my self likewise were, we did all however possess our souls with patience (though wise men tell us that it was never accounted the best policy to dismiss  deservers in point of Recompence with the satisfaction only of their Con∣sciences, and the rewards f the next world). And now when we and our miserable Families had thought to have protracted (at least) a contempti∣ble life with those poor remainders, and broken pieces of our Fortunes, be∣hold in one moment those also are ravisht from some of us by our friends. By what name shall I express this treatment? shall I call it a violation of the Widdowes Mite? or a breaking into the Alms-basket? no these reach it not, all nature cannot furnish me with a similitude.
Sir mistake me not, I would not be thought here to lay so great a calami∣ty at the door of my dread Soveraign (a Prince in his own free nature, and unforc't inclination not to be paralleld for all Royal Graces) no Sir, the Law teaches me to conceive more Honourably of the King's Justice (by which his Throne is Establisht) and te me that whatsoever wrong is done to the Subject, is effected by misinformations of his Majesty,Pro. 16.12. and pernicious Coun∣sells.

Nihil aliud potest Rex in tearis (saith Bracton) cum sit Dei minister & vicarius nisi id solum quod de jure potest.Bracton lib. cap. 9. The King can do nothing seeing he is God's Vicegerent, but that which he may lawfully do. Rex hoc so∣lum non potest facere,Cook d. 11. Rep. 72. a Magdalen col case. quod non potest injuste agere (say the Judges in another Case) This one thing only the King cannot do, that he cannot do injustice (which yet is so far from impotency or imperfection, that it is a Character also of the Divinity). And therefore Markham Chief Justice of England told King Edward the 4th. that he could not Arrest any man for a misdemeanour (as a Subject mought) because if the King did wrong,1 Hen. 7.4 b pet Hussey ch. Justice d'An gliter. the party could not have his Action against him; we receive Life and Vigour from the influences of Heaven, but Distempers proceed from the Vapours of the Earth, which vapours yet can convey no infection into those Calestial bodies: Even so sometimes the countenance of Princes may concur in the Execution of illegal advices, without sharing in the Obliquity and injustice of them.
The Poets have a witty Fable of Tiresias, the great Southsayer, that he foretold future events by the flying of birds, not that he did see the birds (for he was blind) but (say they) he had alwaies his Daughter Manto near at hand, who inform'd him of the manner of their flights, and according to her advertisements, the Father evermore divined: The Mythology or Moral of this Fable is oftentimes applicable to the best and most virtuous Princes, they hear with other mens Ears, they see sometimes thorough the spestacles of other mens eyes, and according to the colour of the glass, so is the object re∣presented to them; black or red, or perhaps white, whereas the true tincture of the thing may be clearly otherwise; and yet all this while the fault is not in the eye, but in the deceptive glass. If a false Light-house be erected near a dangerous Rock in the Sea, and in a dark and tempestuous night the Ship is steered that way, as to a safe Port, and thereupon suffereth wrack, no body can with any reason impte this misfortune to the error or incogitan∣cy of the Pilot, or governour of the Vessel, but rather to the malice and fal∣sity of this wicked invention.Seneca de Be∣n ficio lib 3. cap. 30. Ʋpon this ground it is that Seneca (a wise man, Tutor to an Emperor, and one that well understood what he wroe) breaks forth into that passionate interrogation, Quid omnia possidentibus deest? ille qui verum dicat. What thing only do they want which possess all things? Even (answers he) a person that will give them honest Advertise∣ments. And therefore the Lord Chancellour Bacon (among many other his excellent Counsels to the late Duke of Buckingham) urgeth this follow∣ing document to him with a warmer zeal then ordinary.Cabala of Let∣ters fol. 41. In respect of the King your Master (saith he) you must be very wary that you give him true information, and if the matter concern him in his government, that you do not flatter him; if you do, you are as great a Traytor to him, in the Court of Heaven, as he that drawes his Sword against him.

This grievance of our hath been represented to his Majesty under the pretence and umbrages of Royal Prerogative (which in truth he is ob∣liged to maintain) and of publique Emolument and advantage (which cer∣tainly are the most glorious Objects of Royal prudence). With these and the like Blandishments Sir this Chrystal Fountain of Justice hath been poyson'd and contaminated. This is the Coloquintida with which so unspeakable a sweetness hath been imbittered, these are the Paintings with which so de∣formed an Advice hath been sophisticated. But let me tell you Sir, if in the sequel of this discourse I shall not clearly wipe off all these Varnishes and false colours, and effectively prove this advice to be as mischievous to his Sacred Majesty as his people, I shall think I have very meanly acquitted my self in this business.
I hope I shall not be thought to reflect herein, upon any person whatsoever, any farther then his own Conscience may scourge him in this particular. And I know there be many great and illustrious Hero's near his Majesty, (to whose service I could willingly sacrifice an hundred lives had I them) that do abominate so pernicious a Councel. 'Tis not for me rashly to touch heads irradicated with the Beams of Royal favour: For my part I meddle not with the person, but with the Advice abstracted, Amo hominem, odi vi∣tia, is a good Rule
And I praise God and the King, we live not now in an Age wherein it is more hazardous to discover, an evil action, than to commit it, or wherein the justly accused shall take Revenge of the just Accuser.
Neither would I be understood here to erect my self into an Advocate for the Trade and mistery of Banking, A God's name where the Ʋsuries of those people are by the King found outragious and illegal, let them be regu∣lated and reduced to just moderations. All that I contend for is, that the Bankers (whose concernments are now apparently become ours) may by O∣pening the Exchequer be enabled to satisfy their just debts to their Credi∣tors, that so the good and bad, the nocent and innocent may not thus be over∣whelmed together in one and the same common Ruine.
Sir, let us not flatter our selves, posterity will assuredly discourse our Actions, with the same freedome that we do those of our Ancestors.Annalium lib. 4. Irriden∣da est eorum socordia (saith Tacitus) qui presenti potentia credunt ex∣tingui posse sequentis aevi memoriam. The improvidence of those persons (saith he) is ridiculous, who think by present power to extinguish the memo∣ry of future Ages. No this cannot be, the voluminous Histories of all Na∣tions which we dayly read and handle, prove this project altogether idle and impracticable. Certainly there abides in mankind an immortal principle, a Ray of the Divinity which natrually inclineth us to a desire of Glory, and to have our names guilded to all Ages in the eternal Records of Fare.
Now Sir because you shall see with what Candor and fairness I will pro∣secute
secute this Argument, I shall deduce my following Observations from the wisest Historians and Statesmen, from the greatest and most glorious Prin∣ces that the world hath at any time afforded, from justictaries of the most profound Learning, and chastest integrity, nay from bodies of the wisest men of this and other nations in conjunction, from Parliaments and their Determinations remaining with us upon Record,Bacons Essay of Councel. Alphonso King of Cortile: Lipsis Epistola ad porit. Ad Nicoclem. and (because I would take off all imaginable objection o the credit of my Authors) I shall produce only such which have long since departed this lise, which for that reason (as a wise King was used to say) were the most faithful Councellors. Such as these (as Isocrates tells) cannot be daunted with fear, or blinded with affection, or corrupted with preferments.
These have indeed the character of true Councellors,Castllanus de Officio Regis Lio. 1. cap. 55. which is, Ut non modo ne quid fa si dicere audeant, sed etiam ne quid veri non audeant, that they will neither dare to tell a falsity, or conceal a truth.
That would rather (as Seneca tells Nero) Veris offendere quam placere adulando.De elemntia Lib. 2. cap. 2. Offend by telling Truth, then please by destructive adulations and flattery. And lastly, such which Demetreus Phalereus advised King Ptolomy to converse with often;Stobeus ser∣mone 46. because quoth he, ibi quae amici monere non audeant Reges, ea sacile omnia possint reperire. There Kings may dis∣cover those matters themselves, which possibly their best friends sometimes dare not advise them to.
Sir, I fear I have trespast too far upon your patience by way of Letter already, I shall therefore for your farther satisfaction in all these particu∣lars refer you to the ensuing discourse, deteining you here no longer then while I subscribe my self,
Dear Sir, 
