



SIR,
I Have often heard you professe a deep dislike of the unnaturall vanity of the English Nation, in preferring strangers in all callings above such of their own Country men, as farre sur∣passed them. And of this unjust partiality, no profession hath tasted in a greater measure, than that of Divinity; for of our Ministers, such whom God hath best fitted with parts and Learning for the discussing of controver∣sies, have been so undervalued in comparison of some Forraine Divines, whose Learning was little better than syste∣maticall; as that they languished in their private studies, and had dyed in obscurity, unlesse the fame of their great abilities had been eccho'd over unto us by the generall applause of all Christendome. Nay this sometimes hath not awakened us unto a due estimation of them. Dr Ames was looked upon abroad, as one that amongst Protestant writers had few, either superiors, or equalls, for subtilty in Logick, and Schola∣sticall Divinity; and yet he dyed an exile from his Native Soyle, so that his Tombe might have had that inscription upon it, which Scipio by his will appoynted to be on his; Ingrata Patria ne ossa mea quidem habes, Unthankfull Country, thou hast not so much as my Bones. Of how great reputation this our Author was beyond the Seas, I had rather you should heare from the able and judicious Rivet, than by mee, who am censured by some (who I am sure much overvalue their own judge∣ments) to have too high and admiring thoughts of him. Rivet (in his Epistle prefixed unto a late Book of D. Twisses a∣gainst Arminius and Corvinus &c.) will assure you that De auctore, ejus Methodo, Scholasti∣câ disputandi formâ, acumine & accura∣tione, judicium lectoribus relinquo; qui∣bus praeiverunt Doctissimi ex toto orbe Christiano viri, etiam ex iis qui in con∣traria sunt parte, fatentes, nihil acurati∣us, nihil exactius & plenius in hoc argu∣mento hactenus proditum fuisse. The most Learned men in the whole Christian World, even those who are of the adverse party, doe con∣fesse that there was nothing yet extant more accurate, exact, and full, touching the Arminian Controversies, than what was written by D. Twisse. Hoc saltem omnibus piis placere de∣bet, quod us{que} & ubi{que} in bonam causam fuerit intentus; camque, si quisquam alj∣us, ab absurdis objectis, & adversario∣rum calumniis, ita vindicavit, ut ex illi∣us labore habeant non docti tantum, sed etiam minus exercitati, quo se possine extricare laqueis adversantium. ibid. As also That he (if any one) hath so cleared and vindicated the Ortho∣doxe cause from objected absurdities, and the calum∣nies of adversaries, as that out of his labours, not only the Learned, but also those who are least versed in con∣troversies, may find enough whereby to disentangle themselves from the snares of Opposites. Indeed there is none almost that hath Written against Arminianisme since the Pub∣lishing of any thing of Dr Twisses on that Subject, but have made very honourable mention of him, and have acknowledged him to be the mightiest man in these Controversies, that this Age hath afforded.

And yet this Worthy and able Combatant for the Truth and Cause of God, was here at home designed unto Ruine, as I have found in a Manu∣script under his owne Hand. This I grant was by the Canterburian Faction, but withall I could tell strange Stories of the neglects that were heaped upon him by some, who were (I believe) Zealous (I am sure forward) Sticklers for a Reformation. These Men (me think) should blush at the ingenuous Testimony, which Bishop Hall (though dissenting from him about Church Goverment) gave of his eminent worth in a Letter of his to Mr W. S. by way of Approbation of a small piece of Dr Twisses Entituled, The doubting Conscience Resolved &c. The Doctor ever decli∣ned conference by word of Mouth, as out of modesty, so because he thought the more deliberate way of the Pen, to be quieter, and fitter too, for the bolting out of the Truth: And hereupon he spake not much in the late Assembly of Divines at Westminster. This, some (who talked their shares) interpreted as an Argument of the former weak∣nesse, or at least present decay of his intellectualls. But as Cicero de Senectute. Sophocles, when his Sonnes brought him into question for Dotage, is reported to have recited a Tragedy of Oedipus Coloneus, which he had last written, and had in his Hands, and to have demanded whether that seemed the Verse of a Dotard, or no. So our Doctor could have stop'd the Mouths of these bold censurers by Publishing very Masculine and Vi∣gorous pieces that he Penned in even his most declining Age. I may wish but I doe not expect, to Live so long, as to see any thing Published touching this Argument more convincing the adversary, than this Elaborate and Weighty Discourse; and yet some, who are Perk'd up into places, unto which their parts and gifts bare no proportion, have very lately bespattered it as lame, imperfect, and I know not what. But the best of it is, this their detracting from it, is not likely to be any disadvan∣tage to it; for it was so farre from working that mischievous effect, which it seemes they intended, as that it begat in those who heard it, and unto whom it was afterwards reported, only an admiration, and a serious in∣dignation at the immodest impudence of such raw young men, who are no better skill'd in Polemicall Divinity, then the mock Heylins Geography & Torshells Hypocrite. Councel of the Great Duke of Muscovie are in State affaires, which is made up of the gravest and seem liest men of all Musco, and the adjoyning Citties, richly ap∣parrelled out of the Wardrope; which to sorrainers, not knowing this fraude, appeare so many Princes, and Noble men; but indeed are meane and unquali∣fied persons, and of no more ability, than so many pictures in a faire∣wrought hanging, that serve only to cover a Wall. But I appeale from the rash and unrighteous censures of these presumptuous Novices, unto your more knowing and candid judgement, who as you highly reverenced this our Author whilest living, so have you ever since his death borne a zeale unto his memory, and therefore I am assured that this Book of his will find with you, not only a favourable, but also a gratefull acceptation; and the same confidence I have concerning all rationall, Learned, and Orthodoxe men, unto whose reading I commend it, and that unto the blessing of the Almighty; and so I rest,

