



SIR,
THE great Variety of weighty and important Affairs, in which your Lordship is engaged; one would think, did so entirely engross your Time, that you could not have a Minute left to bestow on the Muses. Your unwearied and succesful Application to

the Business of the State, in the nicest Conjunctions, that perhaps England ever saw; as well as your in∣expressible Labours in distributing Justice, in your High Station; have been attended with Ʋniversal Applause; and have convinced all the World, how much the Ho∣nour of his Majesty's Government, and the Happiness of his People, depend on the Capacity and Integrity of his Ministers. You have not suffered, even necessary Re∣freshments to interrupt your Constant Cares for the Pub∣lick. To serve your Country, you have defranded your self both of Meat, and Rest; which, my Lord, is the only Act of Injustice, that was ever charged upon you. Your immoderate Labours make daily Encroachments upon your Health; or at least 'tis the fear of every good Man, that they should. And yet your Lordship, notwithstanding all Disswasions, perseveres inflexible; as if, animated by the Noble Spirit of an Old Roman, you were resolved to Sacrifice your Life, for the Good of your Country.
And yet, my Lord, amidst such a multiplicity of the greatest Affairs, to which you pay a constant Atten∣dance; you have not only found Time, to apply your Thoughts to all kinds of Literature, so as to become a great Master in all; But you have likewise extended your Care to the Interests of Learning, and to the En∣couraging of those, who study the Advancement of it. Among many other Instances, your Lordship has lately condescended, to Preside over the Royal Society;

that was instituted, for the Improvement of Natural Experimental Philosophy; and you have taken care, to Express your great Zeal and Readiness, to contribute every thing in your Power, to Protect their Interests, and Promote their Reputation. And under your Lord∣ship's enlivening Influence, there is all the Reason in the World to expect, that Learning will again flourish there, as well as among other Orders of Men.
This, my Lord, has so embolden'd me, humbly to pre∣sent this Performance to your Lordship. For since so Great a Patron of Letters is risen in the midst of us; we think we have a sort of Right to his Countenance and Protection. I wish the Present I presume to make you, was more worthy of your Lordship: All that I can say to recommend it, is, that the Subject is Novel, and that Care has been taken to give it a just Description; which, I may say, without vanity, never yet appeared in Publick.
'Tis a true Remark, which we cannot make without Admiration; That from Minerals, to Plants; from Plants, to Animals; and from Animals, to Men; the Transition is so gradual, that there appears a very great Simili∣tude, as well between the meanest Plant, and some Mi∣nerals; as between the lowest Rank of Men, and the highest kind of Animals. The Animal of which I have given the Anatomy, coming nearest to Mankind; seems the Nexus of the Animal and Rational, as your Lord∣ship and those of your High Rank and Order for Know∣ledge

and Wisdom, approaching nearest to that kind of Beings which is next above us; Connect the Visible, and Invisible World.
If this Performance shall Promote the Design of the Society, of which I have the Honour to be a Member, and which your Lordship is pleased to Preside over; by im∣proving the Natural History of Animals, and affording the Reader any Delightful and Ʋseful Instructions; I shall look on my Time and Pains, well rewarded. I am
My Lord, 
