



SIR,
I AM ingag'd in the de∣fence
of a Great Truth,
and J would willingly
finde a shrowd to cover
my selfe from danger, and
calumny; and although
the cause both is & ought
to be defended by Kings, yet my person must



not goe thither to Sanctuary, unlesse it be to pay
my devotion, and I have now no other left for
my defence, I am robd of that which once did
blesse me, and indeed still does, (but in another
manner) and I hope will doe more; but those
distillations of coelestiall dewes are conveyed in
Channels not pervious to an eye of sense, and
now adayes we seldome look with other, be
the object never so beauteous or alluring. You
may then think, Sir, I am forc'd upon You; may
that beg my pardon and excuse, but I should do
an injury to Your Noblenesse, if I should onely
make You a refuge for my need, (pardon this
truth) you are also of the fairest choice, not only
for Your love of Learning, (for although that
be eminent in You, yet it is not Your eminence)
but for Your duty to H. Church, for Your loyal∣tie
to His sacred Majestie. These did prompt me
with the greatest confidence to hope for Your
faire incouragement, and assistance in my plea∣dings
for Episcopacy, in which cause Religion,
and Majesty, the King, and the Church are 

agoe, and registred in the Law to make it au∣thentick,
Laici sunt infensi Clericis. Now the
Clergy pray, but fight not, and therefore if not
specially protected by the King contra Ecclesiam
Malignantium, they are made obnoxious to all
the contumelies, and injuries, which an envious
multitude will inflict upon them. It was ob∣serv'd
enough in King Edgars time,In Chartâ Edgar. Regi A. D. 485. apud Hen. Spelman. Quamvis de∣creta
Pontificum, & verba Sacerdotum in convulis
ligaminibus velut fundamenta montium fixa sunt,
tamen plerum{que} tempestatibus, & turbinibus sae∣cularium
rerum Religio S. Matris Ecclesiae maculis
reproborum dissipatur, acrumpitur. Idcirco Decre∣vimus
Nos &c. There was a sad example of it in
K. Iohn's time. For when he threw the Clergy
from his Protection, it is incredible what inju∣ries,
what affronts, what robberies, yea what
murders were committed upon the Bishops,
and Priests of H. Church, whom neither the Sa∣crednesse
of their persons, nor the Lawes of
God, nor the terrors of Conscience, nor feares of
Hell, nor Church-censures, nor the Lawes of
Hospitality could protect from Scorne 

neer a tye as the necessity of their own preserva∣tion
in the midst of so apparent danger, it will
tye the Bishops hearts, and hands to the King
faster then all the tyes of Lay-Allegiance, (all the
Politicall tyes I mean,) all that are not precisely
religious, and obligations in the Court of Con∣science.
2. But the interest of the Bishops is con∣junct
with the prosperity of the King, besides
the interest of their own securitie; by the obli∣gation
of secular advantages. For they who
have their livelyhood from the King, and are in
expectance of their fortune from him are more
likely to pay a tribute of exacter duty, then o∣thers,
whose fortunes are not in such immedi∣ate
dependancy on His Majesty. Aeneas Sylvius
once gave a merry reason why Clerks advan∣ced
the Pope above a Councell, viz. because the
Pope gave spirituall promotions, but the Coun∣cels
gave none. It is but the Common expecta∣tion
of gratitude, that a Patron Paramount shall
be more assisted by his Beneficiaries in cases of
necessity, then by those, who receive nothing
from him but the common influences of Go∣verment.


3. But the Bishops duty to the King derives
it selfe from a higher fountaine. For it is one of
the maine excellencies in Christianity, that it
advances the State, and well being of Monar∣chies,
and Bodies Politique. Now then the Fa∣thers
of Religion the Reverend Bishops, whose
peculiar office it is to promote the interests of
Christianity, are by the nature and essentiall re∣quisites
of their office bound to promote the
Honour and Dignity of Kings, whom Christia∣nity
would have so much honour'd, as to esta∣blish
the just subordination of people to their
Prince, upon better principles then ever, no lesse
then their precise duty to God, and the hopes of
a blissefull immortality. Here then is utile, hone∣stum,
and necessarium, to tye Bishops in duty
to Kings; and a threefold Cord is not easily bro∣ken.
In pursuance of these obligations Episcopacy
payes three returnes of tribute to Monarchy.
1. The first is the Duty of their people. For
they being by God himselfe set over soules,
judges of the most secret recesses of our Consci∣ences,
and the venerable Priests under them,



have more power to keep men in their duteous
subordination to the Prince, then there is in any
secular power, by how much more forcible the
impressions of the Conscience are, then all the
externall violence in the world. And this power
they have fairely put into act, for there was ne∣ver
any Protestant Bishop yet in Rebellion, un∣lesse
he turn'd recreant to his Order, and it is the
honour of the Church of England, that all her
Children, and obedient people are full of indig∣nation
against Rebells, be they of any interest, or
party whatsoever. For here (& for it we thanke
God and good Princes) Episcopacy hath been
preserv'd in faire priviledges and honour, and
God hath blest and honour'd Episcopacy with
the conjunction of a loyall people. As if because
in the law of Nature the Kingdome and Priest∣hood
were joyned in one person, it were natu∣rall,
and consonant to the first justice, that Kings
should defend the rights of the Church, and the
Church advance the honour of Kings. And
when I consider that the first Bishop that was ex∣auctorated
was a Prince too, Prince, and Bishop
of Geneva, me thinks it was an ill Omen, that the



cause of the Prince, and the Bishop should be in
Conjunction ever after.
2. A second returne that Episcopacy makes
to Royalty is that which is the Duty of all Chri∣stians,
the paying tributes, and impositions. And
though all the Kings Leige people doe it, yet the
issues of their duty, and liberality are mightily
disproportionate if we consider their unequall
Number, and Revenues. And if Clergy-subsi∣dies
be estimated according to the smallnesse
of their revenue, and paucity of persons, it will
not be half so short of the number, and weight
of Crownes from Lay Dispensation, as it does
farre exceed in the proportion of the Donative.
3. But the assistance that the Kings of En∣gland
had in their Counsells, and affaires of
greatest difficulty, from the great ability of Bi∣shops,
and other the Ministers of the Church, I
desire to represent in the words of K. Alvred to
Walfsigeus the Bishop, in an Epistle where he de∣plores
the misery of his owne age by compa∣ring
it with the former times, when the Bishops
were learn'd, and exercis'd in publike Counsels.
Faelicia tum tempora fuerunt inter omnes Angliae



populos; Reges Deo, & scriptae ejus voluntati obse∣cundârunt
in suâ pace, & bellicis expeditionibus, at{que}
regimine domestico domi se semper tutati fuerint,
at{que} etiam foris nobilitatem suam dilataverint. The
reason was, as he insinuates before, Sapintes ex∣titerunt
in Anglicâ gente de spirituali gradu &c.
The Bishops were able by their great learning,
and wisdome to give assistance to the Kings af∣faires.
And they have prosper'd in it, for the most
glorious issues of Divine Benison upon this
Kingdome were conveyed to us by Bishops
hands, I meane the Union of the houses of York
& Lancaster, by the Counsells ofIohn Speeds Hist. l. 9. c. 19. n. 23. p. 716. Bishop Morton,
and of England & Scotland by the treaty ofIbid. c. 20. n. 64. p. 747. Bi∣shop
Fox, to which if we adde two other in Ma∣teria
religionis, I meane the conversion of the
Kingdom from Paganisme, by St Augustine Arch∣bishop
of Canterbury; and the reformation, begun
and promoted by Bishops, I think we cannot call
to mind foure blessings equall to these in any
age or Kingdome, in all which God was pleased
by the mediation of Bishops, as he useth to doe,
to blesse the people. And this may not only be
expected in reason, but in good Divinity, for a∣mongst



the gifts of the spirit, which God hath
given to his Church, are reckon'd Doctors, Teach∣ers,
and1 Cor. ca▪ 12. v. 28. helps in government. To which may be
added this advantage, that the services of
Church-men are rewardable upon the Chur∣ches
stock; no need to disimprove the Royall
Banks to pay thanks to Bishops.
But, Sir, I grow troublesome. Let this dis∣course
have what ends it can; the use J make of
it, is but to pretend reason for my Boldnesse, and
to entitle You to my Book: for I am confident
you will owne any thing that is but a friends
friend to a cause of Loyalty. I have nothing else
to plead for your acceptance, but the confidence
of your Goodnesse, and that I am a person cape∣able
of your pardon, and of a faire interpretation
of my addresse to you, by being
SIR

