



My Lord,
I Have lived to see Religion painted upon Banners, and thrust out of Churches, and the Temple turned into a Ta∣bernacle, and that Tabernacle made am∣bulatory, and covered with skins of Beasts and torn Curtains, and God to be worshipped not as he is the Father of our Lord Iesus (an afflicted Prince, the King of sufferings) nor, as the God of peace (which two appellatives God newly took upon him in the New Testament, and glories in for ever:) but he is owned now rather as the Lord of Hosts, which title he was pleased to lay aside when the Kingdom of the Gospel was preached by the Prince of peace But when Religion puts on Armor, and God is not acknow∣ledged by his New Testament titles, Re∣ligion may have in it the power of the Sword, but not the power of Godliness;

and we may complain of this to God, and amongst them that are afflicted, but we have no remedy, but what we must expect from the fellowship of Christs sufferings; and the returns of the God of peace. In the mean time, and now that Religion pretends to stranger actions upon new principles; and men are apt to prefer a prosperous errour before an af∣flicted truth; and some will think they are religious enough if their worship∣ings have in them the prevailing ingredi∣ent; and the Ministers of Religion are so scattered that they cannot unite to stop the inundation, and from Chaires or Pulpits, from their Synods or Tribunals, chastise the iniquity of the errour and the ambition of evil Guides, and the infi∣delity of the willingly seduced multitude; and that those few good people who have no other plot in their religion but to serve God and save their soules, do want such assistances of ghostly counsel as may serve their emergent needs, and assist their endeavours in the acquist of vertues, and relieve their dangers when they are tempted to sinne and death, I thought I had reasons enough inviting me to draw into one body those advices

which the severall necessities of many men must use at some time or other, and many of them, daily: that by a collecti∣on of holy precepts they might lesse feel the want of personall and attending Guides, and that the rules for conduct of soules might be committed to a Book which they might alwayes have; since they could not alwayes have a Prophet at their needs, nor be suffered to go up to the house of the Lord to inquire of the appointed Oracles.
I know, my Lord, that there are some interested persons who adde scorn to the afflictions of the Church of ENGLAND, and because she is afflicted by Men, call her forsaken of the Lord, and because her solemn assem∣blies are scattered, think that the Reli∣gion is lost, and the Church divorc'd from God, supposing CHRIST (who was a Man of sorrows) to be angry with his Spouse when she is like him, [for that's the true state of the Er∣rour] and that he who promised his Spirit to assist his servants in their troubles, will, because they are in trou∣ble take away the Comforter from them,

who cannot be a comforter, but while he cures our sadnesses, and relieves our sor∣rowes, and turnes our persecutions into joyes, and Crowns, & Scepters. But con∣cerning the present state of the Church of England, I consider, that because we now want the blessings of external com∣munion in many degrees, and the circum∣stances of a prosperous and unafflicted people, we are to take estimate of our selves with single judgements, and every Man is to give sentence concerning the state of his own soul by the precepts and rules of our Lawgiver, not by the after decrees and usages of the Church; that is, by the essential parts of Religion rather then by the uncertain significations of a∣ny exteriour adherencies: for though it be uncertain, when a Man is the Member of a Church, whether he be a Member of Christ or no, because in the Churches Net there are fishes good and bad; yet we may be sure that if we be Members of Christ, we are of a Church to all purposes of spiritual religion and salvation: and in order to this give me leave to speak this great truth.
That Man does certainly belong to God, who 1 Believes and is baptized into all

the Articles of the Christian faith, and studies to improve his knowledge in the matters of God, so as may best make him to live a holy life. 2 He that in obedience to Christ worships God diligently, fre∣quently, and constantly with natural Re∣ligion, that is, of prayer, praises, and thanksgiving. 3 He that takes all oppor∣tunities to remember Christs death by a frequent Sacrament (as it can be had) or else by inward acts of understanding, will, and memory (which is the spiritual communion) supplies the want of the ex∣ternal rite. 4 He that lives chastly. 5 And is merciful. 6 And despises the World, using it as a Man, but never suffering it to rife a duty. 7 And is just in his dealing, and diligent in his calling. 8 He that is humble in his spirit. 9 And obedient to Government. 10 And content in his for∣tune and imployment. 11 He that does his duty because he loves God. 12 And e∣specially if after all this he be afflicted, & patient, or prepared to suffer affliction for the cause of God. The Man that hath these twelve signes of grace & predesti∣nation does as certainly belong to God, & is his Son, as surely as he is his creature.
And if my brethren in persecution, and

in the bands of the Lord Iesus can truly shew these markes, they shall not need be troubled that others can shew a pro∣sperous outside, great revenues, pub∣lick assemblies, uninterrupted successi∣ons of Bishops, prevailing Armies, or any arme of flesh, or lesse certain circumstance. These are the markes of the Lord Jesus, and the characters of a Christian: This is a good Religion: and these things Gods grace hath put into our powers, and Gods Lawes have made to be our duty, and the nature of Men, and the needs of Common-wealths have made to be necessary: the other ac∣cidents & pomps of a Church are things without our power, and are not in our choice; they are good to be used when they may be had, and they help to illu∣strate or advantage it: but if any of them constitute a Church in the being of a society and a Government, yet they are not of its constitution as it is Christi∣an, and hopes to be saved.
And now the case is so with us that we are reduced to that Religion which no Man can forbid; which we can keep in the midst of a persecution; by which the Martyrs in the dayes of our Fa∣thers

went to Heaven; that by which we can be servants of God, and re∣ceive the Spirit of Christ, and make use of his comforts, and live in his love, and in charity with all men; and they that do so cannot perish.
My Lord, I have now described some general lines and features of that Reli∣gion which I have more particularly set down in the following pages: in which I have neither served nor dis∣served the interest of any party of Chri∣stians as they are divided by unchari∣table names from the rest of their bre∣thren; and no Man will have reason to be angry with me for refusing to min∣gle in his unnecessary or vitious quar∣rels: especially while I study to doe him good by conducting him in the nar∣row way to Heaven, without intri∣cating him in the Labyrinths and wilde turnings of Questions, and uncertaine talkings. I have told what Men ought to do; and by what means they may be assisted; and in most cases I have also told them why; and yet with as much quicknesse as I could thinke ne∣cessary to establish a Rule, and not to ingage in Homily or Discourse. In the

use of which Rules (although they are plain, useful, and fitted for the best, and for the worst understandings, and for the needs of all men, yet) I shall desire the Reader to proceed with the following advices.
1. They that will with profit make use of the proper instruments of vertue, must so live, as if they were alwayes un∣der the Physicians hand. For the Coun∣sels of Religion are not to be applyed to the distempers of the soul, as men use to take Hellebore; but they must dwell together with the Spirit of a man, and be twisted about his understanding for ever: They must be used like nourish∣ment; that is, by a daily care and medi∣tation; not like a single medicine, and upon the actual pressure of a present ne∣cessity. For counsels and wise discourses applyed to an actual distemper, at the best are but like strong smels to an Epileptick person, sometimes they may raise him, but they never cure him. The following rules if they be made familiar to our na∣tures, and the thoughts of every day, may make Vertue and Religion become easy and habitual: but when the temptation is present, and hath already seized upon

some portions of our consent, we are not so apt to be counsel'd, and we finde no gust or relish in the Precept: the les∣sons are the same, but the instrument is unstrung, or out of tune.
2. In using the instruments of vertue we must be curious to distinguish instru∣ments from duties; and prudent advices from necessary injunctions; and if by a∣ny other means the duty can be secured, let there be no scruples stirred concern∣ing any other helps; onely, if they can in that case strengthen and secure the duty, or help towards perseverance, let let them serve in that station in which they can be placed. For there are some persons in whom the Spirit of God hath breathed so bright a flame of love, that they do all their acts of vertue by perfect choice, and without objection; and their zeal is warmer then that it will be allayed by temptation: and to such per∣sons mortification by Philosophical in∣struments, as fasting, sackcloth, and other rudenesses to the body is wholly useless: It is alwayes a more uncertain means to acquire any vertue, or secure any duty; & if love hath filled all the corners of our soul, it alone is able to do all the work of God.
3. Be not nice in stating the obligati∣ons of Religion; but where the duty is necessary, and the means very reasonable in it self, dispute not too busily whether in all Circumstances it can fit thy particu∣lar; but super totam materiam, upon the whole, make use of it. For it is a good signe of a great Religion, and no impru∣dence when we have sufficiently consi∣dered the substance of affairs, then to be easy, humble, obedient, apt and credu∣lous in the circumstances which are ap∣pointed to us in particular by our spiritu∣al Guides, or in general, by all wise men in cases not unlike. He that gives Almes, does best, not alwayes to consider the minutes and strict measures of his ability, but to give freely, incuriously and abun∣dantly. A man must not weigh grains in the accounts of his repentance; but for a great sinne have a great sorrow, and a great severity; and in this take the ordinary advices; though it may be, a lesse rigour might not be insuffi∣cient: , or Arithmeticall measures, especially of our own pro∣portioning, are but arguments of want of Love, and of forwardnesse in Re∣ligion;

or else are instruments of scru∣ple, and then become dangerous. Use the rule heartily and enough, and there will be no harme in thy errour, if a∣ny should happen.
4. If thou intendest heartily to serve God, and avoid sinne in any one instance, refuse not the har∣dest and most severe advice that is prescribed in order to it, though possibly it be a stranger to thee; for whatsoever it be, custome will make it easy.
5. When many instruments for the obtaining any vertue or restraining any vice are propounded, observe which of them fits thy person, or the circum∣stances of thy need, and use it rather then the other: that by this means thou may'st be engaged to watch and use spiritual arts and observation about thy soul. Concerning the managing of which as the interest is greater, so the necessities are more, and the cases more intricate, and the accidents and dangers greater and more importunate; and there is greater skill required then in the securing an estate, or restoring health to an infirme

body. I wish all men in the world did heartily believe so much of this as is true; it would very much help to do the work of God.
Thus (My Lord) I have made bold by your hand to reach out this little scroll of cautions to all those who by seeing your honour'd name set before my Book, shall by the fairnes of such a Frontispiece be invited to look into it. I must confess it cannot but look like a designe in me, to borrow your name and beg your Pa∣tronage to my book, that if there be no other worth in it, yet at least it may have the splendour and warmth of a burning glasse, which borrowing a flame from the Eye of Heaven, shines and burns by the rayes of the Sun its patron. I will not quit my self from the suspicion: for I cannot pretend it to be a present either of it self fit to be offered to such a Perso∣nage, or any part of a just return, (but I humbly desire you would own it for an acknowledgement) of those great en∣dearments, and noblest usages you have past upon me: But so, men in their Re∣ligion, give a piece of Gum, or the fat of a cheap Lamb in Sacrifice to him that gives them all that they have or need:

and unlesse He who was pleased to im∣ploy your Lordship as a great Minister of his Providence in making a Promise of his good to me, the meanest of his servants [that he would never leave me nor forsake me] shall enable me by greater services of Religion to pay my great Debt to your Honour, I must still in∣crease my score; since I shall now spend as much in my needs of pardon for this boldnesse, as in the reception of those favours by which I stand accountable to your Lordship in all the bands of service and gratitude; though I am in the deep∣est sense of duty and affection

