



My Lord,
I Have lived to see Religion painted upon Banners, and thrust out of Churches, and the Temple turned into a Tabernacle, and that Ta∣bernacle made ambulatory, and covered with skins of Beasts and torn Curtains, and God to be worshipped not as he is the Father of our Lord Jesus (an afflicted Prince, the King of sufferings) nor, as the God of peace (which two appellatives God newly took upon him in the New Testament, and glories in for ever:) but he is owned now rather as the Lord of

Hosts, which title he was pleased to lay aside when the Kingdome of the Gospel was preached by the Prince of peace. But when Religion puts on Armor, and God is not acknowledged by his New Testament titles, Religion may have in it the power of the Sword, but not the power of Godliness; and we may com∣plain of this to God, and amongst them that are afflicted, but we have no reme∣dy, but what we must expect from the fellowship of hrists sufferings, and the returns of the God of peace. In the mean time, and now that Religion pre∣tends to stranger actions upon new prin∣ciples; and men are apt to preferre a prosperous errour before an afflicted truth; and some will think they are re∣ligious enough if their worshipings have in them the prevailing ingredient; and the Ministers of Religion are so scatter∣ed that they cannot unite to stop the inundation, and from Chairs or Pulpis, from their Synods or Tribunals, chastise the iniquity of the errour and the am∣bition of evil Guides, and the infidelity of the willingly seduced multitude; and that those few good people who have no other plot in their religion but to serve God and save their souls, doe want such assistances of ghostly counsel

as may serve their emergent needs▪ and assist their endeavours in the acquist of virtues, and relieve their dangers when they are tempted to sinne and death. I thought I had reasons enough inviting me to draw into one body those advices which the severall necessities of many men must use at some time or other, and many of them daily: that by a collecti∣on of holy precepts they might lesse feel the want of personall and attending Guides and that the Rules for conduct of souls might be committed to a Book which they might alwaies have; since they could not alwaies have a Prophet at their needs, nor be suffered to go up to the house of the Lord to inquire of the appointed Oracles.
I know, my Lord, that there are some interested persons who adde scorn to the afflictions of the Church of England, and because she is afflicted by Men, call her forsaken of the Lord; and because her solemn Assemblies are scattered, think that the Religion is lost, and the Church divorc'd from God; supposing Christ (who was a Man of sorrows) to be angry with his Spouse when she is like him, [for that's the true state of the Errour] and that he who promised his Spirit to assist his servants in their trou∣bles,

will, because they are in trouble, take away the Comforter from them, who cannot be a comforter, but while he cures our sadnesses, and relieves our sorrows, and turns our persecutions into joyes, and Crowns, and Scepters. But concerning the present state of the Church of England, I consider, that be∣cause we now want the blessings of ex∣ternal communion in many degrees, and the circumstances of a prosperous & un∣afflicted people, we are to take estimate of our selves with single judgments, & every man is to give sentence concern∣ing the state of his own soul by the pre∣cepts and rules of our Law-giver, not by the after-decrees and usages of the Church; that is, by the essential parts of Religion rather then by the uncertain significations of any exteriour adheren∣cies: for though it be uncertain, when a Man is the Member of a Church, whe∣ther he be a Member to Christ or no, because in the Churches Net there are fishes good and bad; yet we may be sure that if we be members of Christ, we are of a Church of all purposes of spiritual religion and salvation, and in order to this give me leave to speak this great truth.
That Man does certainly belong to

God, who, 1 Believes and is baptized in∣to all the Articles of the Christian faith, and studies to improve his knowledge in the matters of God, so as may best make him to live a holy life2 He▪ that in obedience to Christ worships God diligently, frequently, and constantly with naturall Religion, that is, of pray∣er, praises, and thanksgiving. 3 He that takes all opportunities to remember Christs death by a frequent Sacrament (as it can be had) or else by inward acts of understanding, will, and memory (which is the spiritual communion) supplies the want of the external rite. 4 He that lives chastly.5 And is merciful. 6 And despises the World, using it as a Man, but never suffering it to rifle a duty. 7 And is just in his dealing, and diligent in his calling. 8 He that is humble in his spirit. 9 And obedient to Government. 10 And content in his fortune and im∣ployment. 11 He that does his duty be∣cause he loves God. 12 And especially if after all this he be afflicted, and patient, or prepared to suffer affliction for the cause of God. The Man that have these twelve signes of grace and predestina∣tion, does as certainly belong to God, and is his Son, as surely as he is his creature.
And if my brethren in persecution, and in the bands of the Lord Jesus, can truly shew these marks, they shall not need be troubled that others can shew a prosperous outside, great revenues, publick assemblie, uninterrupted suc∣cessions of Bishops, prevailing Armies, or any arm of flesh, or lesse certain cir∣cumstance. These are the marks of the Lord Jesus, and the characters of a Chri∣stian: This is a good Religion: and these things Gods grace hath put into our powers, and Gods Laws have made to be our duty, and the nature of Men, and the needs of Common-wealths have made to be necessary: the other accidents and pomps of a Church are things without our power, and are not in our choice; they are good to be u∣sed when they may be had, and they help to illustrate or advantage it: but if any of them constitute a Church in the being of a society and a Government, yet they are not of its constitution as it is Christian, and hopes to be saved.
And now the case is so with us that we are reduced to that Religion which no man can forbid; which we can keep in the midst of a persecution; by which the Martyrs in the daies of our Fathers went to Heaven; that by which we can

be servants of God, and receive the Spi∣rit of Christ, and make use of his com∣forts, and live in his love and in charity with all men; and they that doe so cannot perish.
My Lord, I have now described some general lines and features of that Reli∣gion which I have more particularly set down in the following pages: in which I have neither served nor desserved the interest of any party of Christians as they are divided by uncharitable names from the rest of their brethren and no man will have reason to be angry with me for refusing to mingle in his unne∣cessary or vitious quarrels: especially while I study to doe him good by con∣ducting him in the narrow way to Hea∣ven, without intricating him in the La∣byrinths and wilde turnings of Questi∣ons, and uncertain talkings. I have told what men ought to doe; and by what means they may be assisted; and in most cases I have also told them why; and yet with as much quickness as I could think necessary to establish a Rule, and not to ingage in Homily or Discourse. In the use of which Rules (although they are plain▪ useful, and fitted for the best and worst understandings, and for the needs of all men, yet) I shall desire

the Reader to proceed with the follow∣ing advises.
1. They that will with profit make use of the proper instruments of virtue, must so live, as if they were alwaies un∣der the Physicians hand. For the Coun∣sels of Religion are not to be applied to the distempers of the soul, as men use to take Hellebore; but they must dwell together with the Spirit of a man, and be twisted about his understanding for ever: They must be used like nourish∣ment; that is, by a daily care and medi∣tation; not like a single medicine, and upon the actual pressure of a present ne∣cessity: For counsels and wise discourses applied to an actuall distemper, at the best are but like strong smels to an E∣pileptick person, sometimes they may raise him, but they never cure him. The following rules if they be made familiar to our natures, and the thoughts of e∣very day, may make Virtue and Reli∣gion become easie and habitual: but when the temptation is present, and hath already seised upon some portions of our consent, we are not so apt to be counsell'd, and we finde no gust or relish in the Precept: the Lessons are the same, but the Instrument is unstrung, or out of tune.
2. In using the instruments of virtue we must be curious to distinguish in∣struments from duties; and prudent ad∣vices from necessary injunctions; and if by any other means the duty can be se∣cured, let there be no scruples stirred concerning any other helps; onely, if they can in that case strengthen and se∣cure the duty, or helpe towards perse∣verance, let them serve in that station in which they can be placed. For there are some persons in whom the Spirit of God hath breathed so bright a flame of love, that they doe all their acts of virtue by perfect choice, and without objection; and their zeal is warmer then that it will be allayed by temptation: and to such persons mortification by Philoso∣phical instruments, as fasting, sackcloth, and other rudenesses to the body is wholly uselesse; It is alwaies a more uncertain means to acquire any virtue, or secure any duty; and if love hath fil∣led all the corners of our soul, it alone is able to doe all the work of God.
3. Be not nice in stating the obliga∣tions of Religion; but where the duty is necessary and the means very reason∣able in it self, dispute not too busily whether in all Circumstances it can fit thy particular; but super totam mate∣riam,

upon the whole, make use of it. For it is a good signe of a great Religi∣on, and no imprudence, when we have sufficiently considered the substance of affairs, then to be easie, humble, obedi∣ent, apt and credulous in the circum∣stances which are appointed to us in particular by our spiritual Guides, or in general, by all wise men in cases not unlike. He that gives Alms, does best, not alwaies to consider the minutes and strict measures of his ability, but to give freely, incuriously and abundantly. A man must not weigh grains in the ac∣counts of his repentance; but for a great sin have a great sorrow, and a great se∣verity▪ and in this take the ordinary advices; though it may be, a lesse ri∣gour might not be insufficient: , or Arithmetical measures, espe∣cially of our own proportioning, are but arguments of want of Love, and of for∣wardness in Religion; or else are in∣struments of scruple, and then become dangerous. Use the rule heartily and enough, and there will be no harm in thy errour, if any should happen.
4. If thou intendest heartily to serve God, and avoid sin in any one instance, refuse not the hardest and most severe advice that is prescribed in order to it,

though possibly it be a stranger to thee; for whatsoever it be, custome will make it easie.
5. When many instruments for the obtaining any virtue or restraining any vice are propounded, observe which of them fits thy person, or the circumstan∣ces of thy need, and use it rather then the other; that by this means thou may'st be engaged to watch and use spi∣ritual arts and observation about thy soule. Concerning the managing of which as the interest is greater, so the necessities are more, and the cases more intricate, and the accidents and dangers greater and more importunate; and there is greater skill required then in the securing an estate, or restoring health to an infirm body. I wish all men in the world did heartily beleive so much of this as is true; it would very much help to doe the work of God.
Thus My Lord) I have made bold by your hand to reach out this little scroll of cautions to all those who by seeing your honour'd name set before my Book, shall by the faireness of such a Frontispice be invited to look into it. I must confesse it cannot but look like a design in me, to borrow your name and beg your Patronage to my book, that if there be no other worth in it, yet at least

it may have the splendor and warmth of a burning-glasse, wth borrowing a flame from the Eye of Heaven, shines & burns by the rayes of the Sun its patron▪ I will not quit my self from the suspicion: for I cannot pretend it to be a present either of it self fit to be offer'd to such a perso∣nage, or any part of a just return, (but I humbly desire you would own it for an acknowledgment) of those great endear∣ments, and noblest usages you have past upon me: But so, men in their Religion, give a piece of Gum or the fat of a cheap Lamb in Sacrifice to him that gives them all that they have or need: and unless He who was pleased to imploy your Lord∣ship as a great Minister of his Provi∣dence in making a Promise of his good to me, the meanest of his servants [that he would never leave me nor forsake me] shall enable me by greater services of Re∣ligion to pay my great Debt to your Ho∣nour, I must still increase my score, since I shall now spend as much in my needs of pardon for this boldness as in the re∣ception of those favours by wch I stand accountable to your Lordship in all the bands of service and gratitude; though I am in the deepest sense of duty and af∣fection
My most Honoured Lord, 

