



My Lord,
REst in the Flesh is not ordinary with Gods People, (whose Rest remaineth,
 Heb. 4.9.) but rather trou∣ble on every side; without fightings,2 Cor. 7.5. within Fears, with manifold perills by strangers and Heathen, by Friends and Country-men;2 Cor. 11.26. what through the wick∣ednesse of the wicked, what through the Re∣mainder of the Root of bitternesse in, and among, themselves.
Where Satan's seat is, (as to persecution) Sin∣ners Eat up Saints: where the Gospell runnes (as to Liberty of profession) Saints are too prone to eat up each other. The for∣mer
 is the Hurt of our Brethren abroad, where the sword bereaveth;Lam. 1.20. and Papists, being high, per∣secute poor Professors; The later is our own Hurt at home, where there is as death; for God hath lifted his Peoples Horn on high, but alas! they have pushed at one another.
In respect of the for∣mer, each Party of Pro∣fessors amongst us are troubled, and ready to say (as David) The men, that have done it,2 Sam. 12▪5. deserve to dye; but I fear in Respect
 of the later, some Na∣than may come and tell one and other of Us,verse 7. you, and you are the Men. Now both are the Subject of this discourse, and are, and shall bee, to mee, for a Lamenta∣tion.
Enemies alas! know not; nay, friends consider not, How tender in them∣selves,Joh. 21.15. and tendered by their Saviour,Isa. 40.11. are the Lambs of the Lamb, the little ones of Christ: who will not endure that One of them perish,Matth. 18.14. no nor that one of them bee offended,verse 6. no
 nor so much as that one of them bee despised: who,verse 10. if hee hear an Ishmael but scoffe,Gen. 21.9. writes down perse∣cution, Gal. 4.29. And if hee see a Paul and a Barnabas but contend, hee cals it a Paroxysm, Act. 15.39. And how can it chuse but bee painfull to the Head, when there is a pa∣roxysme in the Body?
But if Contention bee a Paroxysme, it is high time to Endeavour a cure, ie. (for our own, yea for Christs sake) to ensue peace with each other, if it may bee to the lenghtning
 out of our tranquillity; for certainly the Lord, o∣therwise, will speedily Judge between Cattle and Cattle, because of our thrusting with side and shoulder, and pushing all the Diseased with horns, till wee have scattered them a∣broad, Ezek. 34.21.22.
Toward which endea∣vour though I (being least among the thou∣sands of Judah) am least able to contribute: Let these two mites be accep∣ted, though others, of Ability, might cast in much more abundantly.
For though mine un∣skilfulnesse,
 and the ordi∣narie Lot of the friendly Interposer among violent Contenders (Moses him∣self not exempted there∣from) might deter mee from offering my poor thoughts towards the Cure of so Epidemicall a Distemper;Exod. 2.13. yet remem∣bring the Dumb Child, in the storie, that could not but speak, when they went about to kill his Fa∣ther; or rather the words of the Psalmist, That out of the mouth of Babes and sucklings God hath ordain∣ed strength,Psa. 8.2. for the stilling
 of the ENEMIE, and the AVENGER; I am bold (though but a Child that cannot speak, yet) as I am able, to cry out to Per∣secutors abroad, O kill not the Saints! and to Saints at home, O kill not one another! being hope∣full that the Treatise will prove it self to be Truth; and TRUTH is of Age, let it speak for it self.
For peruseall whereof if your Highnesse bee pleased but to allow any few vacant Minutes, I humbly hope that my
 boldnesse in troubling your hands therewith, shall bee pardonable un∣to mee; since the Lord, to whom the Glory belongs, hath put it into your Highnesses Heart to ex∣presse so naturall a care for the state of the Brethren abroad, that are Persecu∣ted; and so solicitous a desire to redintegrate the Brethren at home, that are Divided. And hath put moreover so singular advantages into your Highnesses Hand of be∣coming a further Resto∣rer of wast places to dwel
 in to the former, and Repairer of the Breaches among the later.
Your renowned indea∣vors in the one, the world knows, are not wanting; mine humble prayer to God is that the difficultie of the thing, or Moroso∣tie of any Persons may never bee a Remora to the later; Surely a Lyon in the way of any dutie in∣cumbent on your High∣nesse (before whom God hath stopped the mouths of so many) would bee lesse plea for you, than for ordinary Persons.

What though the Di∣visions of our Reuben bee dangerous? the Wound great, or at least contused and greatly rancoured? Is there no Balm in Gilead?Jer. 8.22. is there no Physitian there? why then may not the health of the Daughter of our people bee recovered?Isa. 53.5 10. Is not the blood of a wounded and bruised Christ effe∣ctuall to stanch the blee∣ding,Col. 1.2 1 Joh. 1.7. and cleanse the fe∣string sore of Sion? Even the Blaspheming Beast can boast of his deadly wound that was healed, Rev. 13.3. Therefore let not Si∣on
 say,as Jer. 15.18. my wound is incu∣rable.
Oh! how great a dis∣paragement would it re∣flect upon Christ, to ac∣count the Distance be∣twixt dissenting Saints to bee like the unpassable Gulf betwixt Abraham and Dives, either for greatnesse or for fixedness?Luk. 16.26. as if the Destroyer were a better artist in the heal∣ing of the hurts of his Party, than the Saviour who hath also promised to his Party;Jer. 32.39. that they shall have one heart, and one way: And shall serve
 him with one shoulder:Zeph. 3.9. Zac. 14 9. And that he will bee One, and his name one.
If any say wee will stay then, till hee come and perform what him∣self hath spoken; 'tis a known principle, that hee that hath made Promises, makes the means of their accomplishment: Who though hee be ever faith∣full to his Covenant, yet is not therefore bound to gratify our unfaith∣fullnesse to our duty. If any reply; however, 'tis enough for us to pray for the Peace of Jerusalem;
 But endeavourlesse Pray∣ers weigh as light in Gods ballance, as Prayer∣lesse endeavours.
Now since the God of all Peace and blessings hath blessed the conside∣rers of the poor,Psal. 41.1. Mat. 5.5, 7, 9. and with them the meek, and the Peace-makers; My Pray∣er is that all his people in generall, and your Highnesse in speciall, may bee ever found giv∣ing all heed to this pure Religion, and Undefiled: till the Lord shall give strength to his (poor,Jam. 1.26, 27. Psa. 29.11. weak) people (abroad) and blesse
 his people (at home) with Peace: So Prayes

