



Beloved Brethren,
HOW displeasing is it to him, who walk∣eth in the midst of the golden Can∣dlesticks, Rev. 2.1. to see his Churches, either corrupted, or divided, to find his Body ei∣ther defiled, or torn. Christ is the Head, and we are the Members of his Body, and as the Purity of the Head, calls for the greatest Purity in the Bo∣dy, so the Oneness of the Body, requires the strict∣est Ʋnion among the Members; 1 Cor. 10.17. For we being many are one Bread, and one Body, for we are all Partakers of that one Bread. Such cannot be Members of the Body who do not hold the Head: Col. 2.19. From which all the Body by Joynts and Bands, having Nou∣rishment ministred and knit together increa∣seth with the increase of God. And such cease to be Members who make a Schism in the Body, it behoveth the Churches of Christ, therefore to take great heed to avoid both these Evils.

The desire of Ʋnity with all that call upon the Name of the Lord in Truth, put me on the seri∣ous Consideration (among other Things) whether Persons who believe, or disbelieve the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, ought to have Communion together as Members of the same Body, and here you have the result of my Thoughts, with the Rea∣sons, wherefore I believe they ought not.
I have no personal Prejudice against any, it is only the Glory of God, the Honour of Jesus Christ, and the Purity of the Churches that hath engaged me in this Work, and I cannot conceive how any who believeth Jesus Christ to be God of the same Es∣sence with his Father, can account the denial of his Deity a small Thing: Is it a small Thing to take Christ from his Throne, his Crown from his Head, and his Royal Sceptre out of his Hand? To deny him that Nature without which you be∣lieve he could not be a Saviour; nor the Object of Faith and Trust which gave all the value to his Sufferings, that made the Offering up of his Hu∣mane Nature, Eph. 5.2. An Offering and a Sacrifice to God, of a sweet smelling Savour: Whereby his Justice was satisfied, and his Law an∣swered; if he thought it no robbery to be equal with God, what robbery will he account it in such who make him no more than a Man. And is it a sign of Love to Christ, to hold the most intimate Com∣munion
with such who having stript Him of His Royal Ornaments, put a Crown of Thorns on his Head, a gorgeous Robe on his Body, a Reed in his Hand, and then Salute him with Hail King of the Jews: For what is it less to give him all the Titles and Characters of God, and yet deny Him his Nature. It is no Argument to say they do it ignorantly, for so did the Jews when they crucified Christ, 1 Cor. 2.8. For if they had known, they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory. And therefore, though we are to Pity and Pray for them, yet we are not to embrance and re∣ceive them into our Communion.
On the other Hand, there is nothing more de∣sirable in the Churches of Christ than Peace and Ʋnity, it is a Blessing to be prayed for and labou∣red after Night and Day, Psalm 133.1. How good and how pleasant, is it for Brethren to dwell together in Unity. For sweetness, v. 2. It is like the precious Oyntment upon the Head, that ran down upon the Beard, even Aarons Beard, that went down to the Skirts of his Garments. For Profit, v 3. It is as the Dew of Hermon, and as the Dew that descen∣ded on the Mountains of Zion; and there the Lord commands his Blessing, even Life for ever∣more.
There he will be graciously present, there he will
dwell, and there he will dispense the choisest of his Favours: But this Unity that is so good, and so pleasant is among Brethren among such who believe in, exalt, and glorifie, the same God the Father, the same Lord Jesus Christ, and the same Holy Spirit.
Peace and Truth must be joyned together: For that is not the Peace of God, which is purchased with the loss of Truth, we are obliged to take as much Care that we have Ʋnion only with the faith∣ful: As to preserve among them the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, Eph. 4.3. I hope I can truly say, I write only for Truth, and shall be so far from being displeased at the disproof of my Ar∣guments, as thankfully to acknowledge my mistake, and be one of the first as shall give them, I now write against, the right Hand of Fellowship: But in the mean Time, for the Reasons herein mention∣ed, I must intreat they who believe their Saviour is God by Nature, to be concerned for his Glory, to be consistent with their own Principles, and not have Communion with such that profess the contrary, and use all due means to recover such who are seduced, by the sleight of Men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive, Eph. 4.4, 5, 6. Let the Exhortation of our Lord be diligent∣ly hearkned to. Have Salt in your selves, and Peace one with another, Mark 9.50. And of
the Apostle, Endeavouring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace; for you are one Body, and have one Spirit, and are called in one Hope of your Calling; you have one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all, Eph. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. The great design of Satan is to divide you, which he endeavours to ef∣fect by sowing Seeds of Discord about lesser Mat∣ters, and stirring up such who cause Divisions and Offences contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, Rom. 16.17. who are to be mark't, there is no∣thing can weaken our Hands more than Discord, nor strengthen them more than Ʋnity; hereby is the Fa∣ther gloryfied, the Son honoured, the Gospel spread, and the Churches Edified.
There are many Things about which the dear Children of God do differ in their Judgments, and will do whilst they are on this side the Grave, for we know but in part, they have not the same degrees of Light; and therefore are not of the same mind in all Things; but their differences are only about such Things which they may believe, or disbelieve and yet hold the Head, they agree in the great and necessa∣ry Doctrines of Salvation, in the Foundation Prin∣ciples of the Christian Religion, and Things of les∣ser moment I humbly conceive should make no dif∣ference among the Churches of Christ, nor cause them
to withdraw their Affections, or Communion from each other; for saith the Apostle (respecting these things) Phil. 3.15, 16. If any be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you, nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same Thing. The strong must bear the Infirmities of the weak, the Consciences of none are to be imposed upon, either to Practice what they do not, or to omit what they do believe to be their Duty, and where their differences are about such Things which are not essential, there ought to be Christian Charity and tenderness towards one another, in Order to this Ʋnity; therefore the A∣postle exhorts to lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in Love, Eph. 4.2. But this Christian Charity must not be abused, and the Line stretched to reach those who profess such Principles, which root up the Foundati∣ons thereof. But whilst we are separating from these let us unite together in intire Affection, and close Communion among our selves not suffering the lesser Points, about which we may have different Appre∣hensions to break the bond of our Ʋnion, that so we may as one Man set our Hearts, our Hands, and Shoulders, to the Work of God amongst us, which is the earnest Desire and Prayer of

