



THE Grand concern of Christianity, and the danger the Protestant Religion is ap∣prehended to be in, by all its Professors, may call for our serious Considerations, how imprudently we expose our selves to our Ene∣mies by our causeless Divisions; and how justly God (provoked by the Separations and Contentions a∣mong our selves) may permit a Wolf to devour us scattered Sheep, of which Mischief I would gladly hope your selves grow more sensible than for∣merly some of that Party (and they of no small note) having declared by Word, Writing,
Gran∣tham's Friendly Epistle to the Bish. of the Church of England. Gal. 5.15 Rom. 16.17. and in Print their inclinations to a Compliance with our Church. An Union much to be desired, and by these Pages sincerely endeavoured for the sole ends of Gods Glory, and the good of the Souls whose unhappi∣ness or Folly I know not which most to lament.
Your unhappiness in separating from that Church, the Purity of whose Doctrine your selves do not de∣ny, unless chiefly in that one Article about Infant Baptism; and that hath not been thought cause enough to separate from us, by several, who with your selves opposed Infant Baptism, but wrote a∣gainst you for your Separation from our Church on
that account,
2 Tim. 3. thereby hindring your selves from the Advantages of a joynt Communion, and exposing your selves to those Judgments Sacred Writ denoun∣ceth against such as cause Divisions.
Nor yet your Folly (if you please to excuse the word) appear less upon an impartial enquiry what occasion, your dividing about Infant Baptism. It seems to be either about the Subject to be Baptized, or the Mode of Baptizing; for the Essence or Form of Baptism I may affirm is Practised by us more consonantly to the Commission of our Saviour given to his Apostles, In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Mat. 28.19. than by you, who give a Liberty (in your Printed Articles) to Baptize In the Name of Christ alone: The Error of which I have endeavoured to manifest.
And as for the Subject of Baptism, the great mi∣stake between us about it, seems to arise from your not considering of, and distinguishing between the state of Christs Church when gathering (in Christs and his Apostles days) and of it now gathered. For though the Apostles could not admit as Mem∣bers of Christs Church, either the Jews, who Cru∣cified our Saviour, or the Heathen, who had not heard of Christ, without a preceding Repentance and Profession of Faith by those Adult Persons to whom they Preached: It being necessary they should give a Testimony of their Conversion to Christ, and believe on Christ, before they were Baptized into Christ, or owned as Members of his Church.) Yet upon their Conversion, their Children also were re∣ceived to Baptism, according to the will of God under the Law, the extent of the Covenant of Grace and other Arguments urged in this Tract.
And accordingly our Church (when Heathens or Jews are Converted, or when Parents professing Christianity, bring up their Children unbaptized) doth prescribe an Instructing of them, and a re∣quiring from them a Confession of Faith, before
they be Baptized. But they being Baptized, our Church (for the same Reasons Gods Church of the Jews and Christians ever did) doth receive the Po∣sterity or Seed of such Converts to Church-mem∣bership and Baptism. So that by Christian Mode∣ration ye may see your Error in Separating from a Church Baptizing Believers as well as you pretend to do.
As to the Mode of Baptizing, I not a little ad∣mire Men of such Reason, as some of you are, should so place the whole of Baptism (a it were) in an external Mode and Circumstance of its Ad∣ministration, and that no where expressed in Scrip∣ture. As to cry up your Dipping for the sole way of Baptizing, esteeming ours no Baptism, because not so performed. Nor can I see what cause ye can modestly plead you have to Separate from our Church, which allows of Dipping or Sprinkling, as being both the import of the word Baptize, as will in due time be manifested.
These things considered, be pleased to take no∣tice how uncharitably ye deal with us, in denying us to be Members of Christs Church, or in a visible way of Salvation, so as ye cannot hope we shall be saved, in the way we are in, thereby exposing us in your present thoughts to Satans Kingdom here, and his Infernal Regions hereafter, from which, that the good Lord would deliver you and us, is my hearty Prayer. And I hope your impartial and conside∣rate perusal of what is here offered, will more in∣fluence your Charity towards us, whose Churches Prayers in her last Fast, Decemb. 22. 1680. were for all our Unions here, and Glory hereafter.
And I assure you, nothing is in these Pages writ∣ten with the least design of Controversie, or with the least prejudice against any of your Persons: But seriously to state the Controversie,
Ephes. 4.1. to 7. and propose the Truth, with an earnest desire that we who all own the same God of Peace, to be Members of the same
Christ,
2 Cor. 13.11. Gal. 5.22. Heb. 12.14. 1 Cor. 3.4. the Prince of Peace, to be acted by the same Spirit of Peace, to walk by the same Gospel of Peace, and to enjoy the same Heaven hereafter, where we shall be at Peace together, may, if pos∣sible, be United here, that our Divisions may no longer rent the Church of Christ, to the great hin∣drance of the Conversion of both Jew and Gentile, and the apparent exposing our Church and State to Ruine and Confusion by the Fury of our Adversa∣ries. But that our unanimous Prayers may Depre∣cate apprehended Judgments, and prevail for our continued enjoyment of Gospel Mercies. And may these Pages be in any respect serviceable to these Ends, so God have the Glory, and his Church the Advantage, I have my end, who am

