



Beloved in our Lord,
'TIs commonly and justly esteemed an Instance of the Wisdom and Goodness of God, that the Dispensa∣tion of the Gospel is committed to those who are of the same Make and Frame with the People to whom they Preach. But that which is a Happiness in one respect, is a disadvantage in another, viz. That tho' they are never so Eminent and Ʋseful, they must Dye as well as their Hear∣ers: As it was in the Mount of old, tho' Christ himself re∣main with his Disciples, (and will do so even to the end of the World) yet Moses and Elias, tho' Excellent Prophets, and glorious Creatures, must withdraw, and sometimes va∣nish in a Moment.
Of this you have a sad instance in the surprizing Death of your beloved Pastor, which was the Occasion of the following Sermon, the Design whereof is to quiet your Minds under, and quicken you to improve so awakening a Providence by a diligent Preparation for your own Decease.
I am the rather encouraged to expect, that this, which is the main Scope of it, will be complyed withall, because many of you did immediately and readily in several In∣stances follow the advice which I gave you, (and which you may here find) in the Close thereof.

Your so doing gives me great hopes, that you will de∣mean your selves as you ought, towards a Successor, when he shall he settled among you; as you have done towards him who is removed from you. I have often heard him speak with great pleasure, of the many Testimonies you have given, of a more than ordinary affection to him. Indeed it would have been strange, if it had been otherwise, because he could use the Apostle's endearing Argument with a great many of you,
1 Cor. 4.15. Though you have ten thousand Instructors in Christ, yet you have not many Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel.
But the great Proof and Tryal of you will be, when another who hath not that additional Advantage, shall enter into his Labours, and build upon that Foundation which this Wise Master-Builder hath laid, and so successfully carried on among you.
Give me leave to put you in remembrance, tho' you can∣not but know it already,
Heb. 13.7, 13. that you are not to govern, but to be Ruled, as well as Taught by him; not to Trample on him, but to Submit your selves to him; not lightly to esteem him, but shew him double Honour in Love for his Works sake, and out of respect to him whom he shall Represent. For a Faithful, Ordained Minister, is not the People's Creature,
2 Cor. 5.20. Eph. 4.11. but an Embassadour of Christ; his Gift from Heaven to the Church, and a Great Bles∣sing to those over whom he doth Preside.
That the God of Wisdom and Order would direct you to pitch upon such a One, and Treat him as such, with one Common Consent; and by prospering his Labours a∣mong you, build you up in Faith, Holiness and Comfort to Eternal Life, is and shall be the Earnest Prayer of

