



My truly Honoured Lord,
WHereas Dedications are generally intended to Express the Editors Acknowledgement unto the Patron that he doth Address, yet this must beg your Lordships pardon for Prefixing your name to a Transaction that may seem too Light for the gravity of your Function to be interested in. But besides the Presumption on your Lord∣ships Condescention, the Reasons moving me thereunto were these.
Your Lordship as a Father in the Church, must needs be concerned for the Religion of it; and it is a matter of Religion (altho she, and her Author be the Greatest Sufferers by it) that is here pretended. Now as we teach our Children to know Good Coin by acquainting them with what is Counter∣feit; so there is no better way to Ground weak persons in the full Assurance of Divine Truths, than by Discovering to them the Juggles of Superstitious Bigots: for God having settled All, and Every Article of the Christian Faith, on the Veracity of his own Ʋnerring Word, and the Evidence of Ʋnested Miracles, there can be no Greater Argument of the Hellish Vil∣lany, as well as Crafty Knavery of those that Tack and Super add any thing thereto, thn in Contradistinction to Gods word and works, to have them Build the same, on the Fanaticism of Ʋnwritten Tradition, and the Sophistry
of Lying Wonders. For, My Lord, what Opinion must any sober Person  of that Church, who ndeavours to Prove the Truth, and Con∣firm her Members in the Belief of the Fundamentals that she coin'd at Constance and at Trent from the Testimony of the Father of Lyes, and one whom in her Exorcisms she labours what she can, to perswade the Assembly, that he is indeed the Devil. This seems to me an Infatuation of that Size, that I cannot apprehend it to be any thing else, but that very Judgment that God hath Threatned to Deliver such Artificers up to. 2 Thes 2.11.
Your Lordship will meet with a deplorable Instance of this in the Follow∣ing Pages, where if you find any thing that shews an Air Lighter than these present Lines, it is because the Subject will endure no other, and Solomon must Apologize for me, who hath made it a Rule, To Answer a Fool ac∣cording to his Folly.
Anothr Inducement to me was the Scene's being Acted in your Lord∣ships aish, and the Great Trust you have been pleas'd to Commit to me there, doth require that I should be Accountable to your Lordship for all Affairs of such a nature as this is, as you are the Rector of the Parish, as well as the Ordinary of the Diocess.
But that which to me is none of the least, is what relates unto the Reader; he is here to meet with such a Medley of opperies, as will be hard to be∣lieve that any who call themselves Christians should be Guilty of; for the Priests have so far over-acted each part of the Play, that the plan Relation of it will appear more like Burlesque, than Narrative. It was necessary therefore that I should Court your Lordships Patronage, that the Reader when he meets with all such passages, may be convinced of the Reay of the, Whilst he must conclude, that I durst not presume to Abuse your Lordships Name, by Prefixing it to what was only my own Invention: and  having plenty of Witnesses (for the Protestants were Frankly invited  the ae-Show, in hopes of a Good Harvest, as the Narrative will inform ) I have been carefull to Assert Nothing, but what I have Ʋndeniable  of, and what hath been twice read over to those that gave me thy  the Operation. Several Passages, where I had not a Plura∣ty of Concurring Ʋoices, I have designedly left out, that the rest might be Ʋnexceple. For instance, When a Person whom they were afraid of loseing, came into the Room; the Demoniack seem'd to Laugh, and the Priest ask'd him why he was so pleasant, to which he replied, he could not but Laugh to think, If that she turned to er Husbands Religion; She must certainly be his; the Rest not ta∣king notice of this passage, I have omitted it. The Priest also amongst on other Quse would needs know, Whether Protestants were not
Damned? Which the Devil (that is the Title, and Language they gave the Demoniack, and therefore I must use it) wishing no doubt but that they all might, avouched that they were; this several will aver, but because the Priest I hear denies it, and thereby intimates as if he had some Charity left for Poor Protestants, I am willing by way of Return to his Civility, to pass it by, with some others.
I know of what moment it is in order to satisfaction in matters of this na∣ture, to direct the Reader personally to the Deponerts themselves, that by some Friend or other he may inquire of it from their Mouths; I therefore once had designd to have affixed to the Relation the names of those that gave me this account, but considering what manner of Spirit the Romish Zealots, their neighbours are of, I siffered my self to be disswaded from it: but if Curiosity on the one hand, or Scepticism on the other, lead any to be Inquisitive after it, the Circumstances of time and Place, when and where the Game was acted, the names of the Parties concerned, together with the Managers of it, will direct him where he may find amplesatisfaction.
As for the order of it, I have methodized it according to the Rules of their Proceedings at Exorcisms; but I do not pretend to be responsible for the place that every passage is ranked in: for in so tedious a Process as this was, it must be above the Capacity of mean Persons to charge their Me∣mory with every Punctilio. It is difficient that there is Truth, as to matter of Fact; it is not at all necessary that there should be the Juncto's of exact order in the relation of it.
What the Papists design was in this Exploit is easily unsolded, we are not Ignorant of there Devices nor the Artificies they make use of to cajose simple well meaning people to their Party. It is not the first time, nor I sear like to be the Last, that they have had to do with the Devil on this score; only according to Circumstances they play a different game, and turn the Tables as obcasion offers. Sometimes they chance to stumble on the opportunity of a natural Disease, and that is their Great Advantage, for Physical operati∣ons are not wanting to be ascribed to a miraculous Energy. But generally the whole business is Intrigue, Collusion, and Combination. I might produce instances of both sorts of these their practices from learned Authors. The Most Reverend his Grace of Canterbury, in his Excellent Discourse of Idolatry, takes notice of the vertues of the Antimonial Cap, and what use they make of it to promote their holy Cheats: The Right Reverend the Bishop of Worcester and others supply us with instances of the Latter kind. But I will confine my self to your Lordships Diocess, because I meet in Our Neighbourhood with fresh Examples of both kinds, which as they are new, so perhaps will not be unacceptable to the Reader. For the first, be pleas'd
to take the account as I had it in a Letter from my Reverend Brother and Weighbour, which is as followeth.

Walton, April 9th. 96.
SIR,
THe Oldness of the Fact whereof you call for a Narrative may excuse my not giving it in all the requisite Particulars. Many of them are slipt out of my memory, and the rather because I was less careful to imprint them there, as not dreaming I should after so long a time, be occa∣sion'd to give an account of them. About twenty years ago, a Son of Mr. Crook's near Lealand, Aged about twelve years, was seized with so un∣wonted a Distemper, that our Country-Gentlemen and Clergy, and some o∣thers that had Skill in Phisick, knew not what to make of it. Some few did conceive it might be a Natural Distemper; the Papists generally de∣clared him to be Possest by an Evil spirit, which too easily catch't the belief of most of his Protestant Neighbours; Some concluded him to be hurt by an Evil Tongue; others thought, because his Step mother was a Papist, that the whole was a Counterfeit, acted to gain advantage to the Roman Interest in those parts; The notorious juggling Tricks in this kind, some Romish Priests had plaid in all the parts in Christendom (whereof the most ingenious per∣sons of that Communion will Complain together with me) gave some wiser heads this suspicion. But the General Opinion, I say, was, that it was a Pos∣ and according! both his hopish and Protestant Friends make some I  to case the Evil spirit out of the Lad. First he was taken into  Mr. Hughson a Popish Priest at Madam Westbey's house  near Lealand, but not with no relief there. Afterwards the (then)  of Crosson (the Boys God-father, as I remember) sent for him to his hous where for se time he shew'd him some ineffectual Tokens of his de∣sire to rid him of the reputed Fiend. All this was reported in many places of our County, and truth supported the Report: but other things were told with the same confidence, for which there was no ground, as that the Boy could tll in his Fits what was adoing in places far distant from him, whereof he could have no information by his Sences, nor by any other ordinary means of
Conveyance; that he could call persons he had never seen before, by their Names &c. However, his case had so puzled the Heads of several Parishes, that they knew not what to say of him, nor what to offer in order to his Help. At last it was resolved (I know not certainly why) to desire me to ride to Croston, and on a set day to take a view of the said Demoniack, where I should be met by several Gentlemen and Clergy-men. A Letter came to that purpose, in obedience to which I went the Evening before the Appointed time and Lodged at the Parsonage of Eccleston, hoping to be time enough at Croston next morning to see the Boy in his 3. Fits; for so many he had every morning, with a competent interval between each of them. But not rising so early as I had intended, One of his Fits was over when I came to Croston, which accident troubled my mind, as it did theirs whom I found expecting me. However, I resolved to make the best of what was to come. I immediately called the Boy to me and askt him how he did! Who answered, I'm very well. I view'd his eye, which was good and lively; and his complexion, which was clear and sweet. I felt his pulse, which had lost but very little of its natural order, Then I fell in talk with the Gentlemen, wishing my service might answer their care, and my Riding so many miles. I confess't to them, I had in my Travels viewed not a few Tables of pretended. Miracles hung up in Popish Churches, and so far Examined some of their Contents, as to find That all is not Gold that Glisters. I added, I hoped not to find it difficult to Judge, whether the Distemper was true or counterfeit: and that I might perhaps distinguish whether it was Natural or Diabolical. But out of this Chat was I call'd with a cry, He is beginning on another Fit. I stept to him, and saw his Eyes (prettily brown, naturally) appear Glassy and much disturbed: his head made a large swim from one shoulder to the other: he curs'd and swore beat the air with his arms; and afterwards let his head fall very Low up∣on his breast, at which time he seem'd to speak with another voice, mistaken by some present for the voice of the Devil. A little after, all his powers, decayed and he was for some time left both without sence and motion. But after a small stay under this Deliquium, he recovered by degrees, and spit a good quantity of fleam amongst those about him. Please to note, that at the first throws and distortions of his body, I caus'd him to be held fast in a chair, and kept my finger over his pulse the whole time of his Fit, and found it decline and also recover in true proportion with the judgement the eye made upon the surface of his body. The third Fit was in all things like the other, in which I attended the workings and way of his body, and watched his pulse, as before. In this indeed (which I did not in the ore∣going Fit) I ask't him a question in order to confute the report sprea
that he knew strangers, and could call them by their names at their first ap∣perance, I ask't him, when he began to speak with a varied (which some thought a Devils voice) Friend Who am I? He answered, Dam thee, Th art Thonson. Ʋpon this I said to the Company, Gentlemen, this is a dull Devil that cannot distinguish the Ʋicar of Walton from the Curate of Rufford. Thus far of the way or manner of his Fits.
Now did the Gentlemen ask my opinion of the Boys case, which I readily gave to this sence. 1. That it was a Real Distemper, and not put on; of which his pulse had given me sufficient assurance. 2. That it was a natural Distemper, which I collected from the gradual declining and Recovery of his pulse, and the no-symptoms of a possession by an Evil Spirit. 3. That the nature of his distemper was Epileptick, which in the closure of the Fit de∣prived him of sence and motion: and I observed that nature in its strugle with the Distemper had wrought down the strong and clammy Fleam into the mouth which had stop't the passage of the spirits and thereby reduced him to a seeming death; upon which he immediately recovered. But notwith∣standing what I had said, several of our company, and particularly Mr. Crook the Boys Father, would still have it a possession. And they put questions to me; which they thought would exact such answers, as must be savourable to their opinion. It was ask't me How he came to curse and swear in his Fits, whose mouth had never offered to frame an oath in his health? It was case to answer, How ready Satan is to blind and confound the Idea's of a sick mans mind, and to inject something of his own which is utterly disagreeable to the sick persons habits. I had seen the like when excellent men had been delirious in Feavers, But yet this amounted not to a possession.
It was ask't me, How he came to speak with another voice? It was easy to answer, He let his head fall low upon his breast, which unnatural posture together with the stricture of his collar, did occasion it. It was askt, Why at his coming out of his Fit he should so keenly spit at all about him? It was case to answer, That as he began the Fit with the swiming of his head several times from one shoulder to another, so he began to sew his Recovery that way, and before he was well come to himself he spit out among them that tough flegmatick humour that was wrought down into his mouth; and so it was an Animal action and no designed one. But notwithstanding these answers given, Old Mr. Crook and some besides him, held to their opinion, That the Boy was a Demoniack. I had then nothing to do but confidently to oppose my Opinion to theirs; and to back this with some Grateful Adventure, I told Mr. Crook I was so sure that his Sons Distemper was a curable Epilepsy, that if he would send him to a Physi∣cian
of my naming, I would oblige my self before all the present worthy com∣pany, to bear half of the Charges he should be at in his compliance with my desires, in case his son should return home uncured. This argument took, and the Father according to my direction brought his son to my Wise and Worthy Friend Dr. Richmond of Leverpool, who healed the Lad and saved my Purse. He began with more general Evacuations, which proving less effectual, he fell to the purgation of his head, and by Gargarisms, Fumi∣gations, Sternutaments and the like, he thinn'd, dislodged and fetched away all that viscous morbifick matter that had caused his sad distemper. After some time his Father and kind Neighbours understanding that the Boy was Restor'd to perfect heath, came into our Parish with Joyfull hearts to fetch him home, and call'd at my house in their Return with thanks for my lucky determination of the matter.
From that time till a few years ago, I never saw young Mr. Crook; when riding near his house towards Preston, he call'd to me, treated me courteously, and gave me thanks for my past care of him. I was glad to see him a proper man, in good health, the Husband of a good, Wife, the Fa∣ther of pretty Children. And I am glad to hear he has the General Character of an ingenious, honest, wel-bred person Pardon his hasty Pen.



AS for what happened in Leigh Parish it is thus (as taken from the Testimony of those that were well acquainted with it, and to whom the Person that was pretendedly possess't did afterwards make a confession of the whole Intreague.)
One Mr. John Urmston of the Higher Hall in West-Liegh a Papist, Married with one Mrs. Southen a Protestant; the Condition of which Marriage was that he should turn Protestant: which accordingly he seem∣ingly did, and continued such to the day of her death, On the day of her Burial he attended her Corps to the Church but pretending sickness, he did not go in, nor did he ever after come at the Church.
His Children that he had by her continued Protestants, and his Daughter Elizabeth Married with one Mr. Ditchfield then a Protestant,; but he being a loose man was (incompliance with his Father-in-Law) prevail'd with to turn Papist. He thereupon endeavoured to turn his Wife, and used all means imaginable but with no success; till he, Mr. Urmston and the Priest had perswaded a Maid-servant one Alice Pennigton (whom they also had perverted to their own Religion) to counterfeit her self Pos∣sessed, by which artifice they succeeded.
This Alice Pennington was taught to dissemble unnatural Fits, and show a thousand silly Actions, sometimes she stared, and froath'd, and made as if she was not sensible of any thing; at other times she would pretend violent Agonies, and cry out of a Witch, which she could see hovering in an Egg shll, or the like, in such or such a place: some times she raved, as if she was Mad, and again at other times she would six her teeth, and saint away, as if she was quite dead. If any Protestant came near she would foam, and spit at them to signifie her detestation of them; and in her most Ragcing Fits the Priest would call for one of Mr. Ditchfield's Sons, Who was then about Nine years of Age (and designed for a Priest as himself told me) and bid him take hold of her hand, which he accordingly did, and tho' others could not hold her, on the Priests ut∣tering a few words, she would be as Calm and Quiet as a Lamb; and when this Feat was play'd they always took care that the mother should be by. The Priests from all parts flock'd to her in so much that there were at least Twenty with her, but the Devil seem'd to fear none so much as one, whom Mr. Ditchfield thinks was Mr. Penket he that was seiz'd for the Popish Plot in King Charles the II time and sent to Lancaster. The Neighbours came frequently to see her, amongst whom was one Mr. William Smith: a Good understanding Protestant, who daily visited
her, and observed that her countenance never, chang'd, when she fell in∣to her Fits, this created in him a suspicion that it was only a Popish Jug∣gle to seduce Mrs. Ditchfield to the Popish party. He also observ'd, that Old Mr. Urmston, whose desire was to turn his Daughter Papist, would never go out of the Room, from the Maid, Whilst any Protestant was there, so that he having a desire to talk with the Maid, could not have an opportunity; finding therefore it would be no better, when Mr. Urmstons back was turn'd (for he walk'd to and fro in the Room) he charg'd her for an Hypocrite, and told her this was only a Trick to turn her Mistress Papist, tohereupon she smil'd, and flung the sheet (for she kept her bed) over her face; which fully confirmed him in his opinion, and obliged him to discover his thoughts to Mrs. Ditchfield, who seemed not willing at all to believe it: but it prov'd too true, for in a little time they gained upon her, and she began to tell Mr. Smith of the virtue of the Holy-Water, and what strange effects it wrought on the Demoniack, of which she could desire that he might be a Witness; so to the Maid they went, and she sprinkled Holy-Water in her face, and the Maid spit at her, Oh (saith she) do you not see what a strange power is in this Holy-Water? Yes (Saith Mr. Smith) and pray will you try it upon me; with some perswasions she was prevail'd with to make the Experiment on him, and she flung Holy-Water on his face, and he spit in her face; and she flung again, and he spit again, what do you mean saith she; O what a Strange power saith he, is there in this Holy-Water; but Dear Mrs. saith he, do you not plainly see that all this is only to delude and abuse you, I am heartily sorry for you; she made him to reply, for they had now prevail'd upon her.
A Day for Exorcism was fixt upon, and Mr. Smith comes that morning to see the Maid, when he entred the house he heard a great noise in the chamber of things hurried to and fro, but he knows not what it meant. He desired to see the Maid, and after some time Mr. Urmston came to him, and told him that she was a sleep. I have often seen her wakeing, saith her and I desire to see how she is, when a sleep. When the Old Gentleman saw he could not divert him, he pretended to go a little before, and he would call for Mr. Smith, this was to get the Priest out of the way, who was in so much haste, that he left his Cant behind hom. Mr. Smith comes up, and finds the Maid, awake, and the Priest's Cane left behind him. What now saith he, hath he over run his staff? What are all these Pictures for (for they had brought a great many into the Room) What must these pu the Devil out of the? at which the Maid smil'd as before, and flung the sh over her face.
But Mr. Urmston could not bear such discourse which created a Quar∣rell betwixt them, and occasion'd Mr. Smith to leave both the Room, and the House.
When he was gone, the Exorcism came on, of which I can give no exact Account, very few being suffered to be present. I cannot there∣fore learn, whether they asked any Questions about Religion as the Prtests with us did; only the Maid amidst her Rambling talk, made use of her own tongue; for one Elizabeth Hilton a Protestant then present, being ask't by the then Vicar of Leigh; whether a spirit spake within the pretended Demoniack, or no? she said, no: for she spake as I do. The name of the Devil was Declared to be Sturdy, and the sign of his departure was to have been a Quarrel taken away with him out of the window, but the Devil would not consent to that; so the Devil and Priest agreed, that the sign should be a Box on the Ear given to the Priest, which at the appointed minute was Executed by the Maids hand.
Ʋpon this Mrs. Ditchfield turn'd Papist, but never after wore the same countenance that she had before; she looked like another woman, as she had got another Religion, and could never well face a Protestant. Her troubles were augmented in that it begun to be whispered that the Maid would confess the Juggle, and how she was hired by her Master and the Priest, to act this Scene. This is thought to shorten Mrs. Ditchfields days, for she was buryed August 15. 1673. as ap∣pears by the Register of Leigh, and this Exorcism happned not much above Two years before. Her Remorse increased, for that the Maid was sent away to New-England, decoy'd, as is suppos'd, by the Priest to Leverpool, and ship'd-off thence. In New-England she Married one Mr. Sworton a Minister there; and whether confessing the Truth there to him, and advis'd by him, or no; I know not: but she return'd again into England, acknowledged the whole Intreague, and that there was nothing in it at all but Trick and Dissimulation.
Mrs. Ditchfield never endeavoured to turn her Children. The Heir is, and (as I am told) always was a Protestant: as for the rest, tho they were constrained to go to Mass to please their Grandfather; yet they are at this day all Protestants, even he, that was designed for a Priest; from whose Testimony joyned with some others herein named, I have compi∣led this Narrative.
These are the little fetches of the Romish Emissaries, which are the great∣est Scandal and Injury to Religion that the Wit of Hell it self can contrive, The Greatest Scandal, for can any one take a more effectual way to
expose it, and its Anthor to the Contempt of Libertines and Aheists, than to be sound Guilty of such a Notorious piece of Priest-Craft a this is.
The Greatest Injury, for how justly may the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles (on which Christianity is founded) be brought into suspicion, when men discover the works of their Disciples, who pretend to the same Power with them, to be nothing else but slight Leger-de∣main.
Thus the Wounds which Religion (like her Master) receives, are in the House of her Friends. But I must contract these Lamentations, lest the Porch should grow too Sumptuous for the Fabrick.
Nothing now remains unless your Lordship desire to know what success this Pious Fraud met with amongst us; and may such Priest-crafts never meet with better; for like to Strong Physick it wrought the contrary way, and the Priests began to find themselves the Loosers: Their own Party, and the Demoniacks nearest Relations could not but take notice of the Dissention amongst the Priests about the Operation, when they found it unsuccessful; and some of them (as I am told) ingeniously confessed that they do not believe that the Person was possest.
I was not, sometime since without some hope of gaining the Demoniack himself, for some of his Friends sent to me, to beg the favour that he might pay me a visit. Whether he was at home then or no; I know not: Yet by the Messengers discourse I conceived that he was. Tho since I under∣stand that his Mother Weeps and Cries, Complains for the want of her, Son, and saith, she knows not where he is. Whether she be sincere in it, or no; I cannot tell; for by some Rumours I have lately heard, I have cause to suspect her. But if the Priests be jealous of his Tongue, no doubt, but they will serve him as they did the Maid in the foregoing Narrative.
Such Scandalous Abuses of Religion as these are, as they create us Sorrow, so deserve our Prayers; and therefore that the God of Truth would in mercy open the eyes of the Blind, that they may all come unto the knowledge of the Truth, is the Earnest Prayer of

