



SIR, not having of mine owne, wherewith I might tell the world of your great and con∣tinuall favours unto me, by such a pubke testimony, I thought good to doe it by publishing this worke of another, whose Person and Do∣ctrine

you well knew and respected. Which I doe the more willingly, because it is sutable to the Con∣tentment here treated of. I am well contented with that mediocri∣ty of gifts and abilities, which God hath bestowed on me. I hold it better in this life, to be faithfull in a little, then ruler over much. No doubt but some are Masters of great parts, and estates, and faith∣full too: rich in this world, and rich in good workes too: high in place and respect among men, and high in the favour of God too. But, both such have their hazzards and temptations, against which they need to be watchfull; and the brother of low degree hath cause (in God and his love) to rejoyce and be contented. And oh how happy were it with godly Christi∣ans, if they had taken forth this les∣son of Contentment! How com∣fortlesse

would their lives then be! How blessedly free from those tor∣turing passions of emulation, envie, murmuring, impatience, and the like, wherewith the spirit is too of∣ten, and too much disquieted! Godlinesse with Contentment is great gaine, saith the Apostle: as if the purchase were small, where Contentment is wanting: And indeed much of the benefit and advantage is taken away, where this lesson of Contentati∣on is not taken forth perfectly. And how unbeseeming is it to an heire of the promises, to be Male∣content for worldly wants, or af∣flictions! How thwarting to the wisedome of God, as if he knew not best to make allowance to his chil∣dren! How terrible to lie discon∣solate in death, or any deadly trou∣ble, moaning as that great Empe∣rour when he lay dying at Yorke;

In my life time I have been all . Sev. things, and now nothing doth me good! I wsh to your Worship all the comforts and mercies of God in Christ, both in life and death; and therunto at this time I com∣mend to your reading this little Treatise of Contentment: resting ever,

