



My Lords,
IT is an Aspersion cast peculiarly on our County, by a Diotre∣phes of the Faction, That the Growth of Popery among us, is for want of an able Ministry to Instruct and Settle the People. A Suggestion, truly Fanatical, (i.e.) it wants both Charity and Truth. The first: for who learnt the Detra∣ctor to blemish the Reputation of Persons, whose Abilities he is altogether unacquainted with. And for the latter, there hath more Converts been gained to the Church, within these last five Years, than the Key for Catholicks hath opened the Heart of. But the Sollicitations which your Honour, we hope, will favou∣rably admit, in behalf of some Convict Recusants, who having Legally joyned our Communion, labour to be discharged from the Exchequer, will be a more ample Confutation of so Infamous a Scandal, than any thing I can expect to Offer.
And for this my present Essay, I foresee it will be construed ra∣ther an incouraging, than weakening of the Papists. For though there would be no such Fatal Stroak unto the Tripple Crown, as our uniting in the Bond of Peace; which is my Prayer as well as Province. Yet, when ever we design to reduce these wandring Sheep unto their Folds, they exclaim, as if we were giving Indul∣gence for Beasts of Prey to Forage. Reputing it the Property of a good Shepherd, to be always in pursuit of Wolves, not considering, that in his absence the ninety nine may go astray, and perish in the Wilderness.
And never more need to project this Ʋnion, than at this Season, when the Sheep have exchang'd with the Wolf, their Cloathing, for his Ravenage, and we are expos'd to as much danger from the Sword of the Lord, in the hand of the Saints, as that of Peter's in his degenerated Successors.
The just Apprehension of these Fears (which by Vertue of my Cure, I take my self obliged as much to obviate, as any other) toge∣ther
with a prospect of that Advantage which their Adherene would afford against the Common Enemy, gave Being to this Dis∣swasive from Contention. Which I intreat the Dissenters, who shall be pleased to read it, to peruse with something more Coolness, than their Brethren Auditors who heard it. For the Calumnies they spread, and the Mischief they designed me for it (as if they meant to let us understand, they were so little Edifyed by our Cor∣reptions, that, If the Righteous should smite them, they would not take it for a Kindness, nor allow of his Reproof to be healing, as an excellent Oyl; but the rather grievous, as what doth break their Head. This constrained me in my own Vindication, as well as for the Benefit of others; who by their supercilious Censures, were pre∣judged in their Opinions about it, and by that means prevented from the hearing of it, to send these Papers on the Itineration, in the Room of their Master. And I humbly beseech your Lordships to favour it with a Protection; for then, though it may chance to feel, it will not fear their Obloquies.
In Duty, no less than Prudence, was I bound to seek a Sanctua∣ry under the Ʋmbrage of your Honour, from whose Influence these our Labours are quickened, and our Industry animated. For we du∣ly value our selves as those happy Instances, by the Countenancing of whom, your Lordships do resolve to convince the World, how falsly and unjustly our Dissenting Brethren Prophesy of the Regress of Popery.
My Lords, this Provident Establishment, of which, your Honours be the Guardians, founded by the late Queen Elizabeth, of happy Memory, is the only Relique of that mature Deliberation, which by our firct Refor∣mers was found the best Expedient to propagate the Gospel. I mean, the Commanding their Majesties Chaplains to Itinerate the Kingdom, and in their respective Divisions, to Preach the Reformation. Which, how successful it was, the Event demonstrated.
Though we confess our selves much their Inferiours for Ability, we are unwilling, to be thought behind them in our Duty. And therefore, in all due Gratitude acknowledge your Lordships Generous Candor on so Cha∣ritable a Settlement, and so good a Work: Whom to Revere as our Patrons, is the Ambition of,
My Lords, 
