



Noble Sir:
IT is a truth able to endure the most fiery times and trials, None but Christ, J. Lam∣bert Mar∣tyr. Epist. ad Romanos. none but Christ. Ignatius expresseth as much, drawing near to his Martyrdome, Let come upon me fire, crosse, meetings of wilde beasts, cut∣tings, tearings, breaking of bones, rendings of members, dissolutions of the whole body, and all torments of the de∣vill, , onely that I may gain Ie∣sus Christ. Thus he intreated the Romans not to intercede for him, and hinder his suffering for the Gospel. And thus the servants of God in these last times, when Romanists have thrust them into flames and other calamities,
Christ is all, and in all, said the Apostle, Col. 3. 11.
Look to the Church: he supplies all defects 1. of his people, heales all their infirmities, puts on all comfortable relations, and procures all

saving benefits; In the golden chain of our salvation, which reacheth from eternity to e∣ternity, we shall observe, that Christ is the owke or closure that tyeth every linke toge∣ther: as in these lines.
He is the foundation of our Election, Ephes. 1. 4. He is the price of our Redemption, 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19. He is the cause efficient of our regeneration, Eph 2. 10. He is the author of our justification, Jer. 33. 16. He is the beginner and perfecter of our sanctification, Heb. 12. 2. John 15. 4, 5. He is the matter of our consolation, spiritual and temporal, c. 16. 37. Rom. 5. 1. He is the sweetner and sanctifier of all our trou∣bles, Rom. 8. 37, &c. He is the assurance and pledge of our resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 20. He is the procurer and producer of our glorification, John 17. 22. Rev. 21. 23. All of them good grounds of comfort, and set forth the happinesse of Gods people. All of them disgrace merit, and the worthi∣nesse of the creatures, Men and Angels. All of them magnifie Gods love and wisdome, call unto thankfulnesse, and would make us con∣tent with little. All invite labour, to make sure of a portion in Christ, without whom all is as nothing. And finally, all command those that are in Christ, to be all unto him, doe all for him, give all, suffer all, speak, live, die, rejoyce

in all through him, and with him expect all in his heavenly kingdome.
Look to the Word, wherein all these things 2. are revealed: Christ is evidently the matter and sum of the Gospel: and the Apostle af∣firmes the like concerning the Law, Christ is the end of the Law for righteousnesse to every one that Rom. 10. 4. believeth. First, by similitude, saith Austin: when a man is come to the end of a way, he can goe no farther: so when a Christian is come to Christ, he hath no farther excellencie to seek or goe unto: in Christ there is enough and enough to reconcile him to God, and bring him to heaven. Secondly, for perfection, saith Cont. Jul. 9. Cyril, when a thing is finished, it is said to come to an end, as namely, in weaving a garment: so Christ hath finished, perfected, and fulfilled the Law: he came not to destroy, but establish it: so that in him we have a perfect righte∣ousnesse to present God withall, even as the Law required, Gal. 2. 16. 21. Thirdly, he is finis intentionis: the Law bids us look to Christ, in whom onely we can live: both the Moral Law, in the holy precepts of it, impossible in this our weaknesse; therefore have recourse to Christ, Rom. 8. 3, 4. together with the curses and threats of it, whereby it is a sharp Schoole∣master

leading to Christ, Gal. 3. 24. As also the Ceremonial Law, all whose shadows figure out Christ and his benefits, Heb. 10. 1. Now is Christ come (saith Tertullian) who is the end of the Law, o∣pening De cibis Jud. c. 5. all the dark matters of it, anciently covered un∣der the mists of Types and Sacraments: An excellent Master, an heavenly Teacher, a setler of truth to the uttermost. Austin calls Moses his Ceremonies, Cont. Faust. prenunciative or foretelling Observations: and saith, We are not now constrained to observe things used in the Advers. Jud. Prophets time, Non quia illa damnata, sed quia in melius mutata sunt; not for any evill in them, but because they are changed for the better.
What they foretold, and how they are chan∣ged for the better, this Treatise in part disco∣vereth, and I purpose not now to discourse. These glorious times of the Gospel shew evi∣dently, how much the truth excelleth the sha∣dow: the vertue common to the antient be∣lievers, as well as unto us: Christ Iesus yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever: but as the mani∣festation Heb. 13. 8 is more clear, so the grace is more plentiful and comfortable. The same Testator made both Testaments, and these differ not really, but accidentally; the Old infolding the New with some darknesse, and the New unfolding the Old with joyous perspicuity.

This glorious dispensation of grace, as it stands by the good pleasure of God, so also by his manifold wisdome, who in severall ap∣proaches of his mercy and goodnesse drawes still nearer to his Church, and yet reserves the greatest for his Kingdome of glory. Even now, in this marvellous light of the Gospel, we have our divine Ceremonies and Sacra∣ments, see him afar off, know but in part, dark∣ly as in a glasse, and receive our best content∣ment by the acts of faith, while the Word and Spirit make us know the things freely given us of God in Christ Jesus. But time shall be, when (to say nothing of the estate of the Church after the ruine of Antichrist, and cal∣ling of the Jewes) we shall in heaven see him whom we believed face to face, clearly, per∣fectly, immediately, without Sacraments or Types, in the fullest vision, nearest union, and absolutest fruition. Never till then shall we comprehend wholly what is the marrow of that text, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. John 14. 6.
To your Worship I commend this Treatise of that illuminate Doctor, excellent sometime in following and opening an Allegory, and now more excellent in enjoying the Truth it self: of whom, while here a Preacher, you

shewed your self a joyfull Hearer, as of other faithfull Pastors at this day, with obedience to the truth, religious care of your family, inte∣grity in your office, love of good men, both in the Ministery and private estate, and all Christian behaviours; as the fame of your sweet savour goes forth in the Church of God, to which I doubt not but this Treatise will be the more welcome, because of your worthy name prefixed. It is an Orphane, & the Widow desires it should be your Ward; who in your love can best tender it, and by your authority defend it sufficiently. The God of heaven in∣crease all heavenly graces and comforts in your noble heart abundantly, and adde unto your dayes, honours and blessings of all sorts, till these shadowes flie away, and the true Day-star arise upon you in glory: the hearty prayer of one, who is, and desires to be reckon∣ed among
Isleworth June 29. 1635.

