


Right Honourable, and Right Worshipful.
IN the printing what I lately ad∣ventured to entertain you with, I have not followed the induce∣ments of my own spirit, which (before I received your Com∣mands) was not under the least Temptation to expose those slender Preparations to the publick view. What I was inabled through Mercy to deliver, was not intended for the
Press, which requires the most close Composure, but the Pulpit, which doth not disallow of a greater freedome; not for the eye, which is more critical, and quick to discern the least Incongru∣ity, but the ear, which is less exact in weigh∣ing and giving its Judgement. My unwilling∣ness to be guilty of an appearance of disregard to your Order, hath carried me out beyond my own private Inclinations to this Action. I am the more chearfull in it, by how much I am assured of the same favour from you in reading the Ensuing Discourse, which you were pleased to vouchsafe in the hearing. As for others, who will give themselves the trouble of per∣using it, I have considered they are but of two sorts, either those which are sensible of their own Infirmities, or those which are not. The first (I presume) will pardon mine: The second (I suppose) will find no just reason to be dis∣pleased, if I take more incouragement in this Attempt from your acceptance, then discourage∣ment from their Censures. Though a sense of the meanness of my performance keepes my hope at a low ebb; yet my desire is earnest, that he which hath chosen the weak things of the world, would exert himself, and so far accept my En∣deavours,
as to use them as shadows to com∣mend the Excellency of his own power.
My intent is not to put any countenance upon vain Contentions, endless Controversies, per∣plexing Disputes, which waste pretious time, disquiet the people of God, drie up the spirit of Religion. Those sparks which issue from such kind of Discussions (considering the Disposi∣tion of the matter on every side to take fire) are more likely to put all into a violent Combusti∣on, then enkindle in any the least flame of sincere love for the interest of the Gospel. The scope I aim at is to animate and provoke to a well tem∣per'd zeal, a holy contending, a vigorous asserting of that faith, which is ingrossed in the Bible by the Spirit of God, sealed with the blood of Christ, delivered to the Saints, witnessed by Thou∣sands of Martyrs. Those Acts of violence it hath sustained in the world, can have no other effect upon all, who love the Lord Iesus, then to engage them so far in its vindication. When the Levites concubine was divided into pieces, and dispersed through the coasts of Israel, all that saw it, thought themselves concerned to take advice, and declare their minds. As strange a spectacle we are dayly exercised with. The faith which Christ hath
espoused as his own, we see dis-memhred and man∣gled, distributed by Piece-meals through several Tribes and Parties, some having only the skin and outside, those matters which are most remote from the heart and life of Religion; others only the bones, the hard and controversal parts; but few in comparison the marrow and spirit. In these Circumstances no less then a Duty is incumbent upon you, and all the Israel of God to unite as one man in asserting of it, which indeed will be a crown to you, a Glory to the Christian profession, an Asto∣nishment to the Adversary, and shall be his prayer, who is

