



My Lord,
THis Treatise I make bold to Present to your Excellency; and I hope the Consi∣deration of the Subject it Treats of, will make Attonement for the Freedom of it. The Republick of Poland is justly Ranked amongst the Greatest Dominions in the World; and the Dispute between Two Great Princes, who both Pretend to the CROWN, draws all the Eyes of Europe on that side: Therefore, I hope, that tho' your Excellency is Perfectly Acquainted with the Laws and Constitutions of all the States in Christendom, yet you will please Favourably to Receive this Book, which, I think, gives an Exact Account of Poland, and of the Pretentions of the Two Illustrious Rivals, who Dispute that Throne.

However, I design not to Prepossess the W in Favour of this Book, by the Prefixing of  Illustrious Name to it; I know I could n make choice of a Better Protector; but I only  tend to give your Excellency a Publick Mark of my Profound Respect.
Neither did I propose to my self to make the Eulogy of the Great Virtues, which are so con∣spicuous in your Excellency, such an Ʋnderta∣king is above Vulgar Pens, and too great to be Treated in the narrow bounds of an Epistle De∣dicatory. Whoever attempts that, must give a Relation of the Sieges of Candia, Athlone, Gal∣way, Limerick and Cazal; Describe the Bloody Batters of Aghrim and Landen; Relate the Important Negotiations committed to your care, speak of the Prudence, Intrepidity, and Bravery you have expressed in the greatest Dangers, and commend, in Terms suitable to the Subject, that admir'd Penetration and Sagacity of your Excel∣lency, which discover'd the Secret Intreagues of a Court, notwithstanding the most refin'd Dissi∣mulation that ever Italy made use of. These great Qualities are so well known, that Envy and Jea∣lousie are forced to be silent, and dare not attack a Merit esteem'd by all the Princes of Europe, and admir'd by all the World.
I am afraid that I should displease your Excel∣lency by proceeding any farther on this Subject, yet I would beg leave to observe, that these great Vertues are hereditary in your Excellency, and not the effect only of an happy Education. My Lord Marquiss of Ruvigny, your Father, was
equally fit for Council and Action. His great Courage and Prudence raised him to the Dignity of Lieutenant General of the Armies of the French King, and would have certainly advanc'd him to that of Mareschal of France, had not his Religion, been an Invincible, tho' Glorious Obstacle to it. Every body own'd he deserv'd that Great Trust, and his Prince thought he had no Subject in his Kingdom so fit to Represent His Person in the Courts of the greatest Kings in Europe.
Your Excellency will pardon me if I cannot for∣bear to carry the Parallel somewhat further, and therefore, my Lord, give me leave to say, That you are like him, Pious and Charitable: You both Ge∣nerously quitted a Great Estate; and a pri∣vate Life, with the Testimony of a good Consci∣ence, had more Charms with you, than all the Dignities and Dazling Splendor of a Court. You are, as he was, Sensible of the Miseries of the Poor: They had always Access to your Person, and were never sent back without Relief: The Widows and Orphans find in your Excellency what they have lost, and the Prayers of so many Relieved People sent up to Heaven, fall down a∣gain upon your Excellency in Showers of Bles∣sings.
But what shall I say of the Vertues of my Lady Marchioness your Mother? It is impossi∣ble to draw her Character, without Exhausting all the Qualifications ascribed by Solomon to his Virtuous Woman.
The Merit of your Excellency is so generally known, that England and Ireland have Ap∣plauded
the Choice His Majesty made of you to be one of the Lord Justices of Ireland; and e∣very body agrees, that the Titles and Employ∣ments Conferr'd upon your Excellency, are not so much the effect of His Majesty's Favour, as the just Reward of your Eminent Virtue and Ser∣vices.
That your Excellency may long enjoy that un∣spotted Fame, will be the Constant Prayers of
My Lord, 
