



My LORD,
SEeing I ow to your Liberality both the leisure and sub∣sistence which I enjoy at Ho∣lywell, I am under the greatest obligation of presenting, to your Honour, the First-fruits of my Studies, since my retirement to that Place. These Studies promoted by the encouragement of your Lord∣ship, were often suggested to me, by the unwelcome conversation of two sorts of People, of which some ap∣pear'd deficient in Faith, and others, in Charity. It is not long, since, by accident, I convers'd with many who were forward enough in venting li∣centious Principles, in the way, but

without the accomplishments, of Mr. Hobbes: neither have I escaped the trouble of meeting with some, who, having heard of the Error, and Re∣cantation, of an unhappy young man, committed, sometime, to my care; began to reproach my self as a favourer of such opinions. As for this rash attempt against my own good name (the prejudice, which, from thence, might be sustained in my Calling, being set apart); I could have been content to have sate down in silence under it; being ready to de∣spise, rather then, deeply, to resent the loudest noise of such impertinent ac∣cusers. For I had learn'd of old, and by this instance was reminded of it, how unequal Judges the vulgar are wont to be; and how very few either can, or do, examine the rea∣son of Things. It sufficeth me, that I continue in the good opinion of your Lordship, and of some other very excellent persons, whose Judge∣ments seem not to be corrupted by ignorance, credulity, or, unjust suspition: and doubtless, that Ho∣nour is to be preferr'd which is ra∣ther tall then broad. In the mean

time, it grieved me to see the Truh lye bleeding at the feet of those who had not spurned at it out of strength of Reason, but out of meer wanton∣ness of humour; and I esteem'd it a piece of Religion to bear such a part as I was able in the vindication of her. In this Cause some have al∣ready engaged, whose Learning is greater then that I should either e∣qual it, or give it such praise as it hath merited: and, certainly, the Pens of many others ought also to be sharp∣ned and employed, against our Au∣thor; that so Religion may the more, triumph over Atheism, and glory both in the strengh and in the num∣ber of her Advocates; and that there may be let, as little soundness in the Reputations, as there is in the Discourses, of such unreasonable men.
How sound those are, of which Mr. Hobbes hath been the great Pa∣tron, I leave to the judgement of all persons, who have not, by any sensual course of life, receiv'd di∣stastful impressions against Religion. He hath affirmed of God that he is a bodily substance, though most re∣fined;

and that he forceth evil up∣on the very wills of men. He hath fram'd a model of Government, pernicious, in its consequence, to all Nations; and injurious to the Right of his present Majesty: for he taught the people, soon after the Martyr∣dom of his Royal Father, that his Title was extinguish'd when his ad∣herents were subdu'd; and that the Parliament had the Right for that very Reason, because it had posses∣sion. He hath subjected the Ca∣non of Scripture to the Civil Powers, and taught them the way of turning the Alcoran into Gospel. He hath said it is lawful, not onely to dis∣semble, but, plainly to renounce our Faith in Christ, in order to the avoi∣dance of persecution. His imagina∣tion hath been infected with so strange an itch after uncertain No∣velties in Doctrine, that he hath affronted Geometry it self, which, so well, deserveth the name of Sci∣ence.
You see, my Lord, that the same Person, who endeavoureth to shake the Foundations of Religion, doth manage a quarrel against the very E∣lements

of Euclid. He hath, long ago, publish'd his Errours in Theo∣logie, in the English Tongue, insi∣nuating himself, by the handsome∣ness of his style, into the mindes of such whose Fancie leadeth their Judgements: and, to say truth of an Enemy, he may, with some Rea∣son, pretend to Mastery, in that Language. Yet for this very hand∣someness in dressing his Opinions, as the matter stands, he is to be re∣proved; because, by that means, the poyson which he hath intermix∣ed with them is, with more readi∣ness and danger, swallowed. Of late he hath set forth his Levia∣than in the Latine Tongue; de∣claring his desire (as is the manner of infected persons) of spreading his Malady throughout the World.
All this being considered, your Lordship will not think it strange, that I use, towards him, in some places, a little warmth in my refuta∣tion: which just Zeal, if he inter∣preteth, Passion and Rayling, he fal∣leth into a like mistake with the poor Norvegian in Balzac, who fled away from a Rose, conceiving it to be

Fire. Wherefore for any bitterness of style, I will not be so injurious to my own innocence as to confess it: but for the Elocution it self, I cannot but acknowledge, before so great a Master of speaking as your Lord∣ship is known to be, that, in many places it is beneath mediocrity: yet even that imperfection serveth the Character of such a person as speak∣eth in an extempora  Dialogue; he being, now and then, at a loss for aptness or fulness of expression. Con∣cerning the Introduction to this Di∣alogue, if it seemeth a little from the purpose of the ensuing Arguments, it is the more natural beginning of an occasional Conference, in which men, otherwise then in the Schools, come not immediately to the matter. And I well remember that Minutius Fe∣lix, in that Dialogue, wherein he defendeth the Christian Faith against the Cavils of the Pagans, beginneth with a story of his walking towards the Sea; of his bathing, with good event, in the salt Waters; and of the little sports which Children used in making the stones dance upon the surface of the waves. That which,

possibly, may offend more, is the frugality of notion, wherewith I may seem to have managed some of these great Arguments; though in relation to the chief business concern∣ing matter as incapable of Thinking, I have not been sparing in my words or conceptions. But your Lordship (I assure my self) knoweth well, that a man can scarce keep at distance e∣nough from the crime of Albutius the Rhetorician, who desired to speak, in every Cause, not all that was fitting, but all that he could say: That a Defender of Religion is not always bound to produce the Arguments which prove the Truth, of which the Church is always supposed in possession; but it sufficeth that he keep off Aggressors: And this (for instance) was the manner of Lctan∣tius. Lastly, that the Book being composed in form of a Dialogue; by the largeness of my Replyes, I should have seemed guilty of the incivility of common Disputants, who endeavour to ingross the talk, and are unwilling to allow, to others, their turns of speaking. For the rest, I might alledge, with truth e∣nough

by way of excuse, the per∣formance of this Labour in the short space of the last Winter-Quarter: but the Apology it self, the great haste in those twelve Artiles, might perhaps seem a crime and a matter of greater guilt then the errour of Ovid, who made the Sun to post through all the twelve Signes of the Zodiack in a single day. The whole, such as it is, is most humbly sub∣mitted to the Candor and Charity of your Lordship, of which, that it is great, I have good assurance, see∣ing your Honour hath pleased to re∣ceive into the number of your depen∣dants,
My Lord, 
Camb. Iune 4. 1670.
