


I Do not remember ever to have refus'd any thing you have de∣sir'd of me, which I take to be a greater Compliment to you, than to my self; since for a Young man to make none but Reasonable De∣sires, is yet more extraordinary, than for an Old man to think them so. That which you made me some time since, and have so often re∣new'd, I have at last resolv'd to comply with, as well as the rest; and if I live, will leave you some Memoirs of what has pass'd in my Publick Imployments, especially those abroad, which reach'd from the Year 1665, to 1678. and run through the most Important Fo∣reign Negotiations of the Crown, with great connexion of Affairs at Home, during this Period, and the

Revolutions it produc'd. The Con∣fidence of the King, my Master, and of His Chief Ministers, as well as that of others abroad, gave me the advantage to discern and ob∣serve the true Springs and Motions of Both, which were often mista∣ken in Court, and in Parliament, and thereby fasten'd many Suspici∣ons, Confidences, Applauses, Re∣proaches, upon Persons, and at times where they were very unde∣served. Twenty years of my Life I pass'd in Publick Thoughts and Business, from the Thirty second, to the Fifty second year of my Age, which I take to be the part of a Man's Life fittest to be dedicated to the Service of His Prince, or State; the rest being usually too much taken up with his Pleasures, or his Ease. The native love of my Country, and its ancient Legal Constitutions, would not suffer me to enter into any Publick Af∣fairs, till the way was open'd for

the King's Happy Restauration in 1660. and in 1680. you know I sent you to acquaint the King with my Resolutions to pass the remain∣ders of my Life like as good a pri∣vate Subject, as any he had; but never more to meddle with any Pu∣blick Imployment. All the rest of my Age before, and since that pe∣riod, I have taken no more notice of what pass'd upon the Publick Scene, than an Old man uses to do of what is acted on a Theatre, where he gets as easie a Seat as he can, entertains himself with what passes upon the Stage, not caring who the Actors are, or what the Plot, nor whether he goes out before the Play be done. Therefore you must expect nothing from me out of the compass of that time, nor any thing of that it self, with much application or care, further than of Truth. You know how lazy I am in my Temper, how uneasie in my Health, how weak my Eyes, and

how much of my time passes in Walking or Riding, and thereby fencing all I can against two cruel Diseases that have for some time pursu'd me· So that I doubt the satisfaction you expect, will be chiefly owing to ill Health, or ill Weather, which yet are not like to fail at my Age, and in our Cli∣mate. For the rest, if you find any thing either Instructing or Diver∣ting in what I shall write upon this Subject, you may attribute it wholly to the Kindness and Esteem I have for you, without which I should not have given my self the trouble of such Recollections: And as I intend them for Your Use, so I desire no Other may be made of them during my Life; when that is ended, neither They nor You will be any more in my care; and whatever I leave of this or any o∣ther kind, will be in your disposal. I am the gladder, and it is but just, that my Publick Imployments

should contribute something to your Entertaiment, since they have done so little to your Fortune; upon which I can make you no ex∣cuses: 'Twas a thing so often in my Power, that it was never in my Thoughts, which were turn'd always upon how much Less I needed, rather than how much More. If yours have the same turn, you will be but too Rich; if the contrary, you will be ever Poor.
