



My most Worthy Friends,
THE Iesuit who occasioned my first ap∣plication to you in this way, has by his Letter, mov'd me to give you this Second trouble: Perhaps it may be the last in this kind; for I do not envy him the Honour of throwing the first, and the second, and the third handful of Dirt. I am unawares ensnared into the most disagreeable Employment of defending and proving: But this I have to offer in just Excuse, That I went in the simplicity of a Christian, as to a Private Discourse, which the Arts of others have

improv'd into a Publick Brawl. I will not so much suspect your Sagacity, as to imagine you do not guess at the reason why my self, and much bet∣ter men, are on this manner treated; why that Reverend Person, the Dean of St. Paul's, is here Mr. Pul∣ton's Remarks, p. 38. call'd, most disingenuous; and elsewhere egregi∣ously slander'd, as one Concl. of Pax Vobis. who has exchanged Christianity for Paganism: Why the Reverend Dean of Canterbury has been in terms revil'd, Reason and Antiquity, p. 45. as a Wri∣ter void of Modesty, Charity, Sincerity, and good Man∣ners: Why the Reverend Mr. Wake A Reply to the Def. of the Expos. of the Church of England. has been just now accused of Calumnies, Unsincerities, willful Mistakes, and Plain Contradictions. You can well understand, that this Work is laid before us for the hindering of better; and that they say this Ill of us, not because we are such, but because we are not theirs.
Mr. Pulton (in his Letter to you) is unwilling to believe that any Romanists spread false stories of me; yet I have spoken with great numbers of you who have heard them, from the mouths of the less generous of them, in publick places. In due time they may call in question that sense too.
He tells you further of Letters sent into the North and West of England, in which He and his Brethren were misreported. If such Papers were sent, I did no more, either by direct, or indirect

Order, occasion the writing of them, than I have subscribed Pope Pius's Creed. This matter had been more probably laid, if he had mention∣ed the other Points of the Compass, and told of Letters sent into those parts of England where I have liv'd. For (I imagine) he does not take NOR∣FOLK for a Northern County.
He speaks (here) of Bitterness and Scurrility, and tells the World elsewhere, he has not gall enough for me Mr. P's Rem. p. 32., tho he seems at present troubled with the over-flowing of it. And yet the provocation was only this great Truth, That his Patient, I. S. grew worse under his hands. I. S. is now under better. I voluntarily own'd what I then thought less decent, and have accounted for it; and I have been, by my Friends, reprov'd for making Apologies in my Epistle Dedicatory, for Warmnes∣ses, which, they say, they cannot find in the Book.
The Iesuit would fix that Indignation which I speak of to you, upon Persons and Orders, when in express words, I make the Objects of it to be Hypocrisie and Injustice. And perceiving in him too great a Degree of those Evils, my resentment, such as it was, was reasonable. And for my Me∣mory, it offer'd me a wholesom Admonition, when I met with a second Gubbard, who attempt∣ed

to take away, I do not say, the Fleeces, but those things which have ever been much dearer to me, the Souls of my Sheep. This he, and his Friend Advice to the Pulpits, p. 26, 27, 28, 29. (who in part repeats him, and then en∣larges) has constru'd, as a Grudge, and a Preju∣dice of thirty years standing, and an impotence in retaining a Childish impression for so many years: But 'tis no more Prejudice and Childishness, than for one, who, in his Youth, has read the History of Naboth's Vineyard, and hates the Encroach∣ment, to think of it a-fresh, when he sees a man invading his own.
For the future, seeing I now know him better than at first I did; and have found him, in∣stead of a serious Schollar, a man of Comi∣cal, and Jocular Humour, See his Rem. p. 36. in misrepresenting and exposing; I shall do Justice upon him, by that which (I hope) is no unbecoming Negli∣gence.
He goes on, but steps into a great Mistake, by saying, I pretend to prove, that Mr. Gub∣bard was a Priest, by his favour with the Com∣mittee. For, besides that I there pretend not to such a Proof, otherwise than the Circum∣stances of the Relation prove it; I have said, That the Committee, who put him in as a Protestant Dissenter, put him out, when they

discover'd him to be a Roman. The Grounds upon which they went, may, in time, be pub∣lished.
But he tells you, he might have preached up Purgatory, (which, by the way, was not the openest Point he preached) without being a Romanist: And in one sense I allow it; for Bellarmine argues for a Purgatory, from the Po∣et Virgil; but it was not certainly that Pur∣gatory out of which men are relieved by Mas∣ses. And such a Purgatory (notwithstanding Mr. P's Suggestion) Mr. Thorndike could not hold; having forbidden his Nieces to marry with any who should go to Mass.
Nor did he, in Mr. Pulton's way, desire an Ora pro Animâ, to be engraved on his Tomb. For he imitated some Christians about the Fourth Age, who wish'd Rest to none but those who, as they thought, already enjoy'd it. And even this Wish of theirs, if it had Charity, it had also (in my O∣pinion) weakness in it.
That which follows concerns the suffering of his Family (in the Evil Times); from the Honour of which I desire not to detract. It seems by his Sto∣ry, that the Spirit of persecution has not confin'd it self to the Established Church, which, so far as I can understand the Temper of it, had rather suf∣fer

injuries than do them. That you may conti¦nue in the safe bosom of this Apostolical Church, is, and shall be my most importunate Address to Al∣mighty God in your behalf, as being,

