



Right Worshipfull:
YOV were pleased of lae, when I ex∣pected it not, to put mee unto that most willing tske, of Preaching this following Sermon; and now besides your expectation, to testifie my re∣spects to you, for your Noblenesse when I had done my Worke, doe I offer it (with the addition of some few particulars then omitted, for feare of being over tedi∣ous) to your eyes, now it hath passed your eares, that so it may sinke further, and not rest, neither returne voyd, but prosper in the thing for which it was intended.
I know that there are a number of things Printed alrea∣dy, more then needes, poore innocent Paper dayly receiving such blurres and staines from the Presse, that make it fitter for the fire then for any thing else But arguments of this kinde shall never bee but usefull, though the iniquity of times should arme thousands with Pen-knives, as Jhoiakim was, when hee cut, and so cancel'd, and then burnt the Roule of Jeremiah the Prophet, because it told him the

truth, which never was, nor ever will bee, for every mans turne.
This I presume may bee for yours, wherein through your many streights, perils, extremities, you may cleerely reade, your escapes, preservations, and deliverances; what you have received from, and what you must returne to God for his manifold multiplyed, renewed mercies, which are to be seene every where, but most of all in the Mount.
I doe not goe about to counsell you as a Merchant, as a Divine, I will, to keepe God alwayes in your eye, ever in your sight, that whatsoever your Adventures are, whither∣soever you send or goe, your way may bee prosperous, for they that reckon without God, must reckon againe; and they tra∣vell too far, that leave God behind them; adventuring them∣selves out of his protection.
One of the Ancients tells us, that there are foure sorts of men, who seeme to take foure severall wayes, that in conclu∣sion meete, and bring them all to happinesse.
Some steale Heaven (as it were) and they are such, as can give an Almes without a Trumpet, and can pray with∣out a Witnesse, who had rather bee good, then seeme so; and these performing unto God much service in secret, are afterward openly rewarded.
There be others againe, which are compelled (as it were) to take Heaven, and they are such as are wearied with, and weaned from the World by afflictions, and having the hap∣pinesse to bee taught, as well as chastened, they turne unto him that smites them, they seeke the Lord, and by see∣king finde him enjoy him.
Some will have Heauen (as it were) whether God will or no, they will have it by force. These carry their Estates, Names, Liberties, Lives, in their hands, and will part with them all, rather then with that. The Kingdome of

Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it: Ibi ra∣pina non est crimen, crimen est non rapere; 'tis not a fault to be violent in the pursuit of Heaven, of salvation; it is a fault, I and a great one too, not to be so.
Lastly, there are some that buy it (as it were) and they are such wise Merchants as the Gospel mentions, that will have that Pearle of great price, whatsoever it cost them. That hidden Treasue, though they pay never so much for the Feld where 'tis layd up. And this is a justifiable covetous∣nesse, which I dare commend unto you, to covet spirituall things, to covet earnestly the best things: To follow peace and holinesse, as having them alwayes in chase: To labour after godlinesse, which brings contentment and gaine, great gaine, the greatest gaine. 'Tis excellent coun∣sell that Solomon gives: Buy the truth, but sell it not, be at any charge for it, but doe not part with it for a World, Non Priamus tanti — because there is nothing in the World that can be put in the Ballance, with it, against it: And when you have tryed all Commodities, yee shall finde Heaven the best bargaine, and worth the having upon any tearmes.
'Tis well observed of Jacob that he got one blessing from his Brother by purchse; a second from his Father by poli∣cy; a third and the chiefest of all from God by contention: If by purchase, or policy, or strife, wee can get this Blessing, the Blessing, wee are happy I shall adde nothing further, but my heartiest wishes for your present and eternall welfare, which shall be some of the Petitions dayly sent up, from him who is, most Worthy Sirs:

