




TO The noble and reverend President and Assistants of the holy Assembly, his honoured Colleagues, DAVID PARIE wisheth health.
THat saying of Solomon is both true and godly, The heart of man disposeth its owne way, but the Lord directeth his paths. Of which, by mine own example, I have experience: for, although hitherto I have neither wanted faire occasions many times, nor my friends exhortations, nor other things which now draw me from mine opinion; yet, I entertained that firm resolution still, never to doe that which now I undertake to doe: From which not onely did the conscience of mine owne infirmity with-hold mee, but also the unhappy condition of Divinity at this day; For they, who professe themselves Divines, are either most bitter enemies to Divinity, and cruell persecu∣tours of the truth: so that, among these, the nimbler one is in railing, the greater Divine they account him; Or, if they will be truly that which they are reported to be, they presently feele those mens madnesse, and find their teeth are fastned in them, to the great griefe and scandall of the Church, to which end it seemes they were made; and so I conceived.
But behold, the Lord directing these things another way: for, what before de∣terred mee, now hindereth mee not; what before could not induce mee, doth now strongly carry me forward. The knowledge of mine infirmity indeed remaines, but then I consider, that there are differences of gifts; and, that every man prophesi∣eth according to the measure of grace and faith given to him from God. Divinity hath got a bad name, as if it were a deceitfull and slanderous doctrine, but this is given to it by bad men; for that holy doctrine is often abused by Satans artifice, and wicked mens malice. Besides, I know, that our Lord hath been, and is yet at this day the signe of contradiction.

By Gods appointment and the Magistrates, I have now some yeares born that of∣fice in this famous Colledge, which, by its owne right, and the examples of prede∣cessours, hath made me at last alter my resolution. Before mee, this place hath been honoured, to the Churches good, and to their owne praise, by Olevianus, Ursinus, Sohnius, Kimedoncius, whom I name, because I honour them; for they were e∣minent men, and some of them were my teachers or masters, and some my reve∣rend colleagues. What? shall I be the first, that must impaire the dignity of so noble a function? Shall I overthrow so commendable, and so excellent an order in our Schoole? Shall I leave to successours a precedent so dishonourable and injurious to our College? Besides that now the Act is at hand, wherein seventeen very learned men in Physick, and in the Lawes, are to receive their ensignes of honour; the many exhortations of my friends, and your most grave and serious reasons (honoured Colleagues) by which not onely have you approved my resolution, but also have so strongly confirmed mee in it, and perswaded mee, that I am drawne to this taske by divine instinct. I beseech our most mercifull God so to direct my pathes in his waies, that they may never goe astray; and that hee would be pleased to make these my endeavours profitable and wholesome, to this Schoole first, and then to the whole Church of God.
I am resolved to set downe out of Gods word, not a full, but a briefe repetition of our Churches doctrine, concerning certaine heads which are at this day chiefly controverted, that I might afford to young Students sufficient matter of disputati∣on; and that likewise the summe of our orthodox doctrine might be, as it were in a briefe Epitome, obvious to the enemies and calumniators of our Churches.
These my endeavours I consecrate to you, honoured Sirs, both because you are the most vigilant preservers of sound doctrine in these Churches, and because you are most courteous favourers of my studies. The Lord Jesus keep you in safety for his Churches good. Amen.
At Heidelberge, in the Colledge of Wisdome, June 1. Anno Domini 1593.

