



My LORD,
I Am sensible that this Mortification of your Triumphs, by so unseasonable an Address, when your Lordship has hardly had time to breathe, after Victory over Rebels, to be engaged in the so formidable Rencounter, as that of a Dedication, may, at first, seem a Crime not to be expiated. But if it be consider'd, that your Lordship has exerted your Loyalty in such a manner, that your Actions bear that Face and Character, as challenge, not only
our present Admiration and Eulogies, but stand as Glorious Examples, as well to all Posterity, as the present Age, and will, un∣doubtedly, prove the greatest Embelishments of the English History, it cannot, in the least, be wond'red that I strike in with the publick Celebrations. Freedoms and Presump∣tions of this nature, are the inevitable Atten∣dants of such like Performances as your Lordships; and since the Advantages, we reap thence, are so great, it seems unreaso∣nable to debar us of our Acclamations. The Generous and Brave must either lye Idle, and not furnish us with such Charming Subjects for Discourse, or they must suffer us to ex∣ult for the Benefits we thence derive, and not hinder us from giving open expressions of our Delight and Satisfaction.
These Considerations have, I hope, where∣withal to plead my Excuse, for the boldness of this Offering, and give some reasonale Varnish to the Ambition of being the fst that has this way taken to blaze the
Insigne recens, ad huc
Indictum ore alio.
Besides, I do not a little pride my self in the Value and Quality of what I Consecrate to your Lordship: This is not like most of
the Books, now commonly publish'd, that resemble those Eggs incapable of Generati∣on, Sunt Ova Zephyria, that produce no∣thing in the Mind, and from whence we cannot derive the least Profit and Instructi∣on; No, My Lord, this is the Master-piece of one of the acutest Pens of this Age, tho' the Author had already, by other his Works obtain'd the name of a finisht Writer, and a perfect Historian.
How well he has merited this Title, your Lordship will find, all along; by his exquisite taste, as to what can please, or displease, tire, or divert; and though he omits nothing ne∣cessary, yet is he Concise or Copious, as is most Consistent with the due beauty of his Work. Nothing of Prejudice appears in him. He is not warp'd nor cainted by Passi∣on, or Interest, or Faction, He blames not, nor Commends, so as to make a Satyr, or an Encomium, He suffers not Fear or Hope at his Elbow, to jog him on to sooth the Moderns, or curry-savour with Posterity. His Impartiality being such, that from his Relations, there's no guessing at his Coun∣try, or his Religion, or his Friends, or his Party. He is far from imitating even those Great Men, that make Speeches for Persons long since dead, which is degenerating Hi∣story into Romance; tho' some will have it,
that tho' it be not Truth, it will serve out turn as well. But this is the Banner of No∣vels and Poetry, and not the Essential of History. Besides, such Decorations and Flourishes, are only capable of dazling and amusing the Mobile; and a Plain, Blunt, Down-right Truth shall, in a solid Mind, ob∣scure all their Lustre. Not but that his Truths have often the Air of Fiction, but the usher∣ing in of such, are the Prerogative of an Ancedoto-grapher. He does not here and there, by starts, make Parade of Wit, but enchases it throughout the whole Piece. Nor does he lye perdue, on all occasions, to be shr∣ging in an Elegancy, but sometimes expresses a mighty Thought in one single word, or hints it without saying it. Yes, my Lord, these  all along speak a nice and general Knowledge of Men and of Things, a Pro∣found, Subtle and Penetrating Wit, capable of unveiling the true Causes of Humane Actions, from their Pretexts and Colours They are a sort of Cabinet, Historical Inqui∣sition, carrying along a Fancy quick and ju∣dicious, conceiving Things aright, and Mid∣wifing them afterwards answerable to the Conceptions. When my Author's subject leads him near a Battel, he has so prepar'd his Rea∣ders, that they themselves seem slusht for En∣gagement, tho' the quality of his Writing
obliges him to wheel 'em off. When he speaks of a Treaty, of the Passions of a Prince, or of a Minister, his Readers imagine them∣selves enter'd into Negotiation, are agitated with the same desires, the same uneasinesses and disquiets. The stile of the Original is neither too negligent, nor too ponder'd, but Plain, Chaste, Perspicuous and Familia, yet without being low and crawling, and throughout accompanied with Dignity, yet rather lofty in Sentiments than Words, tho' speaking all the Delicacy of the most Po∣lite Courtiers. For he is still mindful that he entertains all Nations and Ages, that he has the whole Earth for his Audience, and to Eternity speaks before the whole Congress of Humane kind, where nothing ought to bolt from him, but what bears the Character of Modesty, of Recluseness, of Respect and Good Manners. And he has herein manifested how infinitely he has refin'd upon Procopi∣us his Pattern, who has most nauseously vio∣lated this Rule in more than a thousand Pas∣sages. And take we him only as he is purg'd and retrench'd by Nicolas Alemannus, yet Monsieur Varillas has infinitely the Prefe∣rence over that Antient, without needing to supply the befitting Vacuities he has made, by the Vatican Copy, to applaud the Inve∣ctives that Balthazar Boniface, Trivorius,




le Mothe-le-Vayer, and sundry other Cri∣ticks have utter'd against that Historian. In∣deed the Genius of an Ancedoto-grapher be∣ing the same with that of a Plain-dealer, will not byass him to Employ, and his Labour and his Industry, or innocently or designed∣ly, to abuse future Ages. And herein my present Author has had, as well the good For∣tune, as the Ability and good Will, to do the World Justice; his quality of the French King's Library-keeper advantaging him a∣bove any other, to strife into Modern Anti∣quity. And this he has atchiev'd with that Perfection, that there is not a Person he in∣troduces, but he appears to be acquainted with his every Inclination, and Aversion, and Failure, and weak side. He shews us whence proceed the Complaisances, the In∣sinuations, and all the curious measures that make an Art of winning Hearts, or, at least, of currying Good Will. In fine, my Au∣thor, in this his Performance, has the Gra∣vity of Livy, the Politeness of Salust, the Policy of Tacitus; and had it been the Pro∣vince of an Ancedoto-grapher, could, doubt∣less, have shewn as large a knowledge in Tacticks as Polybias.
But, my Lord, to be more particular, and instance the Union M. Varillas has made of the Talents of Taritus and Salust, in these
his , and thereby his Advantages o∣ver those two Authors, Tacitus, has been ob∣serv'd to convert every thing into Policy, that he suffers Nature and Fortune to have lit∣tle share in Occurrences, and often gives far fetcht Causes for Actions altogether Plain, Common, and Natural. Thus out-going Affairs by too much Depth and Sagacity: that his Pieces are too finisht▪ through over-much Art, and too little Nature; and sometimes too curious and too sinical Specu∣lations interpose fine glittering Ideas, in the room of true Objects, without considering that Nature is never so curb'd, and under the Hatches, but that it still as much Influ∣ences our Actions, as we can regulatns Movements. For Irresolution and Passion prevail equally in the Great, as in the Vul∣gar. And often a little Cabinet-pique, or Bed Chamber Quarrel, occasions a rum∣bling World, and is the soures of the greatest Transactions. Something of the Parties Temper does evermore tinge the most con∣certed Designs. And this my Author has accurately observ'd, in his Relation of the Imprisonment and Exile of Cosme de Medi∣ci, Sir-named the Old, occasion'd through Envy at his Great Power and Riches, ac∣quir'd by his Universal Traffick from Pers into Andalusia, there being nothing finer
ain know of these Gentlemen, what Stm, however Holy, what Dignities and Offices, however August and Sacred, but have been tarnish'd by unworthy Members. Our Saviour himself, tho' he cull'd his Twelve, yet had he a Judas. How often did the Race of David degene∣rate? How often was the High Priest's Office, among the Jews, blemish'd by un∣worthy Officiates? The Richest of Hu∣mane Blood Ebbs and Flows, Stagnates and Corrupts; and since the whole Race of Mankind is subject to these Infirmitions, no wonder that the House of Medici has, in some of its Off-spring, participated of the Frailties incident to the state of Man.
And this, I suppose, is sufficient to urge is behalf of my Author and his Book. And I will only now crave leave of your Lordship, to drop a Word in excuse of my self, his Interpreter. Some will, per∣haps, carp at me, for calling my Tra∣duction a Secret History, whereas the O∣riginal had already made the matter Pub∣lick; but against this, and other Cavils and Objections, that might be rais'd on the same account, I shall not stand to make a Defence, having, for what I have done, the Authority of all Procopius his
Translators. As to my Version, I l∣bour'd under some Difficulties through an imperfect Copy; but when we have the whole compleat, I am in hopes of laying it at your Lorships Feet, rectified from such failures.
I have nothing farther to add, but to beg your Lordships Pardon, for aspiring to the Honour of your Protection to this foreign Production. And as I do not design this for a Panegyrick, but as an Humble Address for your Lordships Patronage, I will not pretend to resine upon the Publick, that is purpetually Celebrating your Lordship for a perfect Model of Honour and Vir∣tue. But though a Relation of their Praises might seem an Attack upon Modesty, yet that of their Blessings must needs be sa∣tisfactory. Yes my Lord, all Loyal Hearts bless you, for having so very conspicuously, and advantageously distinguish'd your self in the Defence of the Sacred Blood of Eng∣land, and the true Interests of the King∣dom. Yet, as if Fame thought us not sufficient for your Eulogies, she has occasion'd your being Courted to ac∣cept of the Best and most Honourable Posts and Employments beyond the Seas. But though other Nations, as well
as our own, speak a most peculiar re∣gard for your Lordships Merit and Gal∣lantry, yet, I am sure, no Man can be with a more profound Respect and Passion, than my self,
My Lord,

