



SIR,
I Had designed this small Treatise (being the first fruits
of my study in Antiquities) for your honoured Father;
but failing of my purpose by reason of his death (which
was untimely to his friends, though not to himself) I
thought I might not (without being highly injurious)
present a thing once devoted to him to any else besides your self, who
as his heir might lay a just claime to it, and also to my most humble ser∣vices;
I promise my self you will vouchsafe it a kind entertainment,
since (I know) both your goodnesse and your interest in the subject,
as lineally descended from the Princes of Northwales (whose rights
are therein maintained) are more then sufficient to oblige you there∣to.
The writing of it was upon this occasion: some Gentlemen of
Southwales being dissatisfied with Caradoc of Lancarvan's History of
Wales, published by Dr. Powel, in regard that therein the Prince of
Northwales is held forth to be Soveraigne over the other two Princes of
Southwales and Powis, as being of the elder house, thought fit (in order
to the compiling of a more exact history) to draw up certain argu∣ments
for the soveraignty of all Wales to be in the Prince of Southwales,
and to send them also into Northwales to see what could be said in an∣swer
to them, before any further use should be made of them. They
were delivered by Sr. Thomas Canon late of Pembrokeshire Kt. to Sr.
John Lloyd of the Inner Temple Kt. and Sergeant at Law, who delive∣red
them to me above 40 years ago, desiring I would take the pains to
peruse and answer them as well as I was able. At his intreaty I under∣took
it, and, as you will find, done somewhat in it, though in a rude
manner, which I hope will be excused in a person, whose only designe
is plainly to set forth the truth, which shews alwaies best in its own
proper colours without the elaborate dresse and varnish of Rhetorick.
But some men possibly may object against this undertaking of mine,

that it was needlesse, and that, if it had been to any end, it was no
discretion to revive and publish an old Contest long since (God be prai∣sed)
happily decided. I confesse we have reason to blesse God for his
mercy to us in our happy establishment under one Monarch; we may
well say we were conquered to our gain, and undone to our advan∣tage,
periissemus nisi periissemus; But yet it must be granted, that it is
no small delight that redounds from the revolving and perusall of old
records: though Troy hath for severall ages layn buried in its ashes,
both its glory and government being quite dissolved, though the Athe∣nian,
Spartan, Theban, and other petit Grecian Estates have long since
had their periods, yet we still take a great deale of satisfaction in rea∣ding
their stories, how they began, grew up, flourished, strove, & decay¦ed.
Besides there may be this good use made of it, viz, that by reflecting
upon our former miseries and divisions while we contended for sove∣raignty,
we may be induced to put the greater value upon our present
happinesse. Thus having given you an account of the worke, and what
I had to say in its defence, I commend it to your protection: and with
my prayers to God for you and your noble family remain, Sir,

Hengwrt May the 9th. 1662.
