



Right Honorable,
TIs our Custome in Eng∣land, on the birth Day of every Year, for the Tenant to lay down his Offer∣ing at the Altar of his Land∣lord; as an Oblation of his gratefull Servitude.
I, your Lordships Tenant, or rather, as the Anagram tells me, Natent, (confessing my self by your Lordships Solar Influence, Renated, and of a Vegetable,

made Vitall) not to abrogate Custom, do here present my Of∣fering, to manifest a strong desire of Gratitude, in the weakness of my Expressions.
Our first Wishes upon this Day, is, for a merry new Year. What better Prologue to Mirth, than a Feast? That my Offering therefore may be the Embleme of my Wishes, I have here pre∣sented your Lordship with an Hermeticall Banquet; wherein are such plenty of Cordialls, that I doubt not but it will make you heartily Merry.
I have caused it to be drest by Spagiricall Cooks; partly to pre∣serve your more Delicate Palate

from the Epidemicall Nausea of Galenicall Potions, with these our Hermeticall and Bezoartick Delicacies. And partly, because I have alwaies observ'd, in the U∣niversalities of your Lordships Studies, a particular Genius much reflecting upon this Art, as the Key of Natures Cabinet.
Expect not much Hony in your Dishes; since like a Bee, shut up in the Winter Hive of my Quarantena, and unable to fly a∣broad and rob other Mens Gar∣dens, was constrained to make use of such as I had collected in the Summer of my Youth: where I fear your Lordship will find more Wax, than Hony. I dance

little after Method, because no Methodist. Neither do I labour to oppress your Stomack with Dogmaticall Gravity.
No, I consider we are at a Feast, and therefore prefer a Jest before an Aphorisme.
How my Mirth will take, I know not, believe me it was meant well: though for want of other Musick I confess it is somewhat extravagant.
I subscribe therefore to your Lordships more mature Judge∣ment; which, like a Celestiall Influence, penetrates even the Center of Inferiour Actions.
If it pass that Magellan, it may boldly, and with a full Sail

plow through the Tempestuous Ocean of the Universe.
'Tis your Lordships appro∣bation then that must pro∣tect our weak Brk. Your Co∣lours only displai'd, bansh all fears of Assaults, and make it .
Under which Banner, I desire to serve but as a Common-Souldier: that so hereafter by some bolder Attempt, I may manifest unto the World, how little I respect superficiall Wounds, in the atchieve∣ment of some better Title, thereby to be judged worthy of so Honourable a calling,

as your Lordship hath gra∣tiously favoured me with, in making me

