



My LORDS,
COuld I have manag'd the Evidence in Proof, of the Murder of this Honourable Lord, with that strength and efficacy they are capable of, nothing would more plainly have appeared to the impartial Reader, than this (to me) great Truth, (viz.) That the Right Honourable Arthur, late Earl of Essex, was most Treacherously and Barbarously Murdered. But such as it is, I do, with all Humility, cast it at your Lordships Feet, to whose great Judgments I shall, with intire resignation, submit.
My Lords, Having long known, and been late∣ly much conversant with Mr. Braddon, I have had often Opportunities of discoursing almost every Witness in this Case examined; and such as I my self have not spoke with, I have from him been in∣formed what such have declared: And though the Account I have here given of what these have re∣lated, which have been examined before your Lord∣ships, be more large and particular than their De∣positions, (because I have had repeated Opportu∣nities of hearing their Relations) yet, if them∣selves say true, nothing in these Papers is contra∣dictory to or inconsistent with what they have de∣posed before your Lordships.
My Lords, In the Account at large I have first stated, the Case, as to the pretended Self-Mur∣der, as it was and is endeavoured to be proved by those immediately attending on my Lord; and then I have divided the Proofs for this Murder into three General Heads, as they have relation to Time: Whether,

First, Before the Day of my Lord's Death.
Secondly, The Day of his Death.
Thirdly, Subsequent to the Day of his Death.

And after every Proof, I have raised all such Objections I could in Conversation ever meet with, or my self could object, which carried the least colour of Argument against such Evidence; and the Solutions, with all humility, are submitted to your Lordships Censures.
In the Abstract, I have observed this Order: First, I have stated the Case, as represented and sworn by those that would prove the Self-Murder; and then detected the Falsity of every Part of those Relations. After which I have briefly con∣sidered the other Proofs in the same Order of Time as the Discourse at large.
My Lords, Several things here mentioned have not as yet been before your Lordships, some of these Relations having not been known to Mr. Braddon before your Lordships Committee was dissolved: But these after-Testimonies, and some other things not here taken notice of, will be brought before your Lordships, as soon as your Lordships shall think fit to move that those De∣positions and Examinations now sealed up, may be taken out of the House by your Lordships, and to those added such other Testimonies as have been taken before several Justices, (since the Report made) or are ready to be taken; and then, that, as well such as are now sealed up, as those others which have been, or shall be deposed, may be reported by your Lordships, in such Method,
as to your Lordships great Wisdom shall seem most meet. After which I doubt not but all your Lordships, and the whole World, will be convin∣ced of that Truth which the Interest of so many have industriously endeavoured to stifle: But there is no Power of Earth, and Hell, when conjoined, can make that Thing never to have been, which was. And therefore if my Lord was treacherously and barbarously murdered, no Interest or Strength what-ever can make him a Self-murderer. Truth may be destroyed in its Credit, but never in its Being; and the Measures that have been taken to discredit the Proof of this Murder, have been sufficiently detected as false, which hath not a little increased the Credibility of that which those Counter-Evidences would have rendered incredible and false.
My Lords, No two Truths in Nature are in∣consistent; for then a Thing would be, and not be, at the same time: wherefore when Men would subvert the belief of a Truth, they do raise some Falshood which stands in opposition to such Truth; but if once this Falshood appears in its true Colour, then doth it give stronger credit to that Truth, which before it was designed to prejudice.
My Lords, every Man's Defence virtually con∣cludes. If my Defence be false, my Charge is true. This Conclusion the Law makes in all Civil Actions, and it's according to the Rea∣son of the Thing: For all Men presume that every Man accused, will make use of the best Arguments (especially in Matters of Fact) he can for his Defence; and if those appear false, he falls under a Self-Condemnation. My Lords, tho this Discourse is printed, it's not published, nor above 200 printed, as is ready to be proved; neither will one of these be communicated to any, if your Lordships shall so order it; for all are kept till Mr. Braddon receives your Lord∣ships Commands as to their disposal. My Lords, I could wish I had not been so large in this Discourse, seeing your Lordships whole time is so ingrossed by the Publick, that I fear the State can scarce allow your Lordships any hours of perusal. My Lords, tho I can't but humbly beseech your Lordships Pardon for this Presump∣tion, yet I could not, without being guilty of the greatest Injustice, any otherwise dedicate this Discourse, seeing what hath been already disco∣vered, is chiefly owing to your Lordships un∣wearied Diligence in those many Committees, in which your Lordships have so often sat in search of a Truth, which the Impenitency of some, and the industrious Interest of others have strongly opposed. But maugre all Oponents, the matter is (as I do humbly conceive) so far detected, as Circumstantial Evidence is (almost) capa∣ble of; and those that will not be convinced of the Truth of a Murder, unless positively attested, demand such Proof for their Conviction as no Law requires. Now that the God of Wisdom, Righteousness and Truth, may direct and prosper your Lordships in this, and all other Ʋnderta∣kings, is the Humble Prayer of,
My Lords, 
