


Most Dear, and Honoured Sir:
'TIs now long since, that I have de∣sir'd your Commands, when I was about leaving England. I must confess, it was rather to testifie my esteem of those uncommon Qualifi∣cations in you, that have gained you the affections of the best men, and laid Charms of respect upon all, than to perswade you, that I had any considerable service in pro∣spect to gratifie you withal. But being loath to return without any signes of having ever been mindful of what I had made a profes∣sion to you of, I sought for some opportu∣nity to continue you in the assurance I had given you of my constant disposedness to do
any thing that I thought might be agreeable to you; and which I look'd upon as an acknow∣ledgment due from all honest men to Per∣sons so eminently virtuous. And there∣fore after I had met with these Religious Ladies, and understood the nature of their grievances, and the use that might be made of their Information; I imagin'd that this might be no unacceptable Present to you, since I found that they were Strangers in England, and scarce suffer'd to look a∣broad in France. For I found them under as great restraint in the Shops of the Stati∣oners of the Sorbonne, as ever they were in their Cloysters, and no leave allow'd them to take the air, but with such as would pay well for their company. They were indeed at first very publickly sold; so that I have seen three several Editions of them, and have at present two of them in mine own hands. But after that the Nunns had gain'd their cause, and the Cordeliers were ca∣shier'd their house; to put a stop to all farther scandal amongst the people, the Copies, that were printed, were order'd to be suppress'd and a watch set upon the Sellers. From this
severe confinement I did very much desire to deliver them, and to bring them into a freer air, where their conversation would be ac∣ceptable, and courted. And I knew so well your kind receptions of all Strangers, of whom you might learn any thing, that I que∣stion'd not but that these would find a well∣come from you. I have reason to think, that you will find them very good company, and afford you variety of entertainment. It may be they will gratifie your cnriosity by making you a spectator of such lives, as are design'd to be withdrawn from the common view, and amongst which possibly you will meet with such new Scenes of Action, as all your con∣verse never before represented to you. The innocent Gallantry of the Nunns and Fry∣ars in some Pages may give you very agree∣able divertisement: And their excesses, and disorders in others, if they raise less grate∣ful Passions in you, yet will furnish you with true, and certain accounts, how the Professi∣on of Monkery is reduced to practice. But whatever eflect you find in your self by it, I hope you will be confident, that my great de∣signe in recommending this new Acquain∣tance
to you, was to assure you, that I am ve∣ry zealously, without any fiction but what you approve of,
Most excellent Bellalmo,

