



SIR,
IF, when you please to locke upon these Collections, you will find them to lead you from the Sun into the shade, from the open Terrace into a private grove, & from the noyse and pompe of this world into a silent and solitary Hermitage: doe not you thinke then, that you have descended (like the dead) in Occidentem & te∣nebras, for in this withdrawing∣roome (though secret and seldome fre∣quented,) shines that happy starre, which will directly lead you to the King of light. You have long since quitted the Publick, & to present you now with some thing of solitude and the contempt of

the world, would looke like a designe to Flatter you, were not my Name, ar∣gument enough for the contrary. Those few that know me, will (I am sure) be my Compurgators; and I my selfe dare assert this, you have no cause to su∣spect it. But what ever the thoughts of men will be, I am already sure of this ad∣vantage, that we live in an age, which hath made this very Proposition (though suspected of Melancholie,) mighty pleasing, and even meane witts begin to like it; the wiser sort alwaies did, for what (I beseech you,) hath this world, that should make a wise man in love with it? I will take the boldnesse to describe it in the same character which Bisselius did the hansome concubine of Mahomet the great:
Puella tota quanta, nil erat aliud
Quàm Illecebra picta, delicatus harpago, &c.
The whole wench (how compleat soe'r) was but
A specious baite; a soft, sly, temp∣ting slut;
A pleasing witch; a living death; a faire,
Thriving disease; a fresh, infecti∣ous aire;
A pretious plague; a furie sweetly drawne;
Wild fire laid up and finely drest in Lawne.
This delicate, admir'd Inhantresse (even to those who enjoy her after their owne lusts, and at their owne rate,) will prove but a very sad bargaine; she is all deception and sorrow. This world and the prince of it are the Canker-Rose in the mouth of the fox; Decipit, arefit, pungit. But those future, supreme fru∣itions which God hath in store for those that love him are neither Phantasmes, nor fallacies; they are all substantiall and certaine, and in the Apostles phrase, , a far more exceeding and eternall weight of glory. Nothing can give that, which it hath not, this transiory, changeable and corrupt world cannot af∣ford

permanent treasures. All it gives, and all it shewes us, is but trash & illu∣sion. The true incorruptible riches dwell above the reach of rust and theeves.
Man himselfe in his outward part, which was taken out of the world, feeles the like passions with the world, he is worn, wased, dissolved and changed, he comes hither, he knowes not how, and goes from hence, he knowes not whither. Nescio quò vado, valete posteri! was the Roman's Epitaph: One generation commeth, and another passeth away. Pro∣perant & decurrunt in abscondi∣tum, they hasten and drive on to their appointed place, untill the great day of accompt. All the severall shapes and gestures we see in this wild Masque of time are but so many disguises which the Spirits that first assumed them, cast off againe when they have acted their parts. Most elegantly did Augurelli∣us sing to Peter Lipomanus upon the death of his sister Clara;
Amaena, Petre, cum vides, &c.
Peter, when thou this pleasant world dost see,
Beleeve, thou seest meere Dreames and vanitie;
Not reall things, but false: and through the Aire
Each where, an empty, slipp'rie Scene, through faire.
The chirping birds, the fresh woods shadie boughes,
The leaves shrill whispers, when the west-wind blowes.
The swift, fierce Greyhounds cour∣sing on the plaines,
The flying hare distrest 'twixt feare and paines;
The bloomy Mayd decking with flowers her head,
The gladsome, easie youth by light love lead;
And whatsoe'r heere with admiring eyes
Thou seem'st to see, 'tis but a fraile disguise
VVorne by eternall things, a passive dresse
Put on by beings that are passive∣les.
All the gay appearances in this life seeme to me but a swift succession of ri∣sing Clouds, which neither abide in any certaine forme, nor continue for any long time; And this is that, which makes the fore travell of the sonnes of men to be nothing else, but a meere chasing of shadowes. All is vanity (said the Royall Philosopher,) and there is no new thing under the Sun.
I present you therefore with a discourse perswading to a contempt & a deser∣tion of these old things which (our Saviour tells us) shall passe away; And with an historicall, faithfull re∣lation of the life and happinesse of a devout, primitive father, who gave all that he had upon earth to the poore, that he might have treasure in heaven.

Some other Additions you will finde, which meeting now in this volume under your name, will in their descent to posterity, carry with them this fai∣rest Testimonie, I loved you. This (Sir) is my maine and my sole designe in this Addresse, without reservati∣on and without flattery, for which re∣spect, and for no other, I beleeve you will accept of what I have done, and looke up∣on my suddaine and small Presents, as upon some forward flowers whose kinde hast hath brought them above ground in cold weather. The incertainty of life, and a peevish, inconstant state of health would not suffer me to stay for grea∣ter performances, or a better season; least loosing this, I should never againe have the opportunity to manifest how much and how sincerely I am
Sir

Newton by Ʋske neare Sketh-Rock.
1653.
