



SEe here (Brethren) we make tender unto you, not of Boccace his Hun∣dred Novelties, but of The hundred and ten Considerations of Valdesso; the great importance whereof I shall declare unto you. Many both Ancient and Modern have written of Christian affairs, and of them some better then others; but who is he next the Apostles of our Lord and the Evangelists, that hath written more substantially and divinely then John Valdesso, would perhaps be hard to find. There be some that have left many great and laborious Books; but amongst them there are also many of little importance, and are not much necessary to a Christian life, being
 fraught with unprofitable questions, and Phi∣losophicall disputations, from whence hath sprung a thousand inconveniences in the Church of Christ. And to give a proof that I say the truth in this matter, I will set down some of those inconveniences, whereby judgement may easily be given of the rest.
First therefore, though they have written huge Books, yet they did not avoid many falsities, follies, and vanities: for as the wise man testi∣fieth, Many words cannot want much vanity.
Next, these great Writers have drawn all the Scriptures to Questions and Disputations, and made as it were an Academy thereof, raising such doubts in every thing, as they have made the Doctrine of the Sonne of God and of his Apostles, and our most certain and infallible hope of eternall life, to become a matter alto∣gether doubtfull. And this which I shall now adde, is not of lesse importance then the other inconveniencies: and that is, that with their am∣ple and infinite volumes, they have withdrawn and estranged men from the studie of the truely holy Scriptures, and from the contemplation of simple verity, and instead of Christs disciples have made them mens scholars: so that we are come to that passe, that more and greater credit is given to those which are termed Doctours (as if so be Christ and his Apostles were not the true and eternall Doctours and Masters of the
 Church) then to the simple doctrine of Christ himself.
This is the benefit and edification that the Church hath reaped from these huge Volumes, which our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ see∣ing, (the safety of his Church being more deare unto him then his own life) he hath stirred and raised up some, and opened their eyes, to the intent that they should by little and little reduce his sheep to the green and healthfull pastures of holy Scripture, and to the pure, clear, and sweet fountains of Gods word. And herein every one hath busied himself according to his talent, that is, the gift which he hath received. But to me it seems, & I hope it will do so likewise to all that have a true relish of Christs Doctrine, that this our Authour in these divine Considerations, and some other writings of his, hath so well consi∣dered and propounded to all our considerations the duties of a Christian man, that there are but a few, yea, very few that can go before him. He hath not indeed writ so huge a Vo∣lume, nor scribled so much paper: No, the Books which he hath written are little and few, but pure, clear, and truly Divine.
Many have written of the virtues, manners, and duties of a wise and good man, as Aristo∣tle, Panetius, and Cicero; and amongst Chri∣stians, Ambrose; and in our age Thomas Ve∣natorius: but none of all these hath intreated
 with such sublimity, nor made such effectuall demonstration, nor discoursed with such sweet∣nesse, nor with such majesty, nor with such au∣thority, nor with such grace, as our Valdesso.
This, this is that which truly deserves to be entituled the book of Christian duties, the book of Christian demonstrations, and of truly di∣vine speculations.
Herein is shewed the Originall, the Cause, the Progresse, and the End of every motion, of every action, of every event that is done under heaven, either by God, or the devil, or by the godly, or by the wicked man; and all this from clear, certain, and unquestionable Principles of holy Scripture, accompanied with so good and proper examples, and similitudes, and compari∣sons, and divisions, & definitions, that unlesse we will be too too obstinate, and out of common sense, we must needs come to agreement touching that which a man ows unto God, to himself, and to his neighbour. And further, what the benefit of Christ is, and to whom it is profitable, what the infirmity, & what the power of Christ is, his abasement and his exaltation, our own mortifi∣cation, and our vivification, election and repro∣bation, and a thousand other such like good and profitable heads are here to be clearly learned, in such manner, as growing practick in this book, you shall come to understand all things necessa∣ry to holy Scripture, better then by the great and many Commentaries of many others.

Now for this great and heavenly treasure we are all debtours to Vergerius, as the instru∣ment of the Divine providence, in causing it to be printed for the view, and injoyment of eve∣ry one. He coming from Italy, and leaving his feigned Bishoprick to come unto a true A∣postleship, whereunto he was called by Christ, brought with him many excellent compositions; doing herein, as men use to do when their hou∣ses are on fire, or their City sacked, and ruined; every one endeavours to escape away with the best and most precious things that he hath: so our Vergerius esteeming nothing more dear then the glory of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, brought away with him those things, which might best serve to the illustration and enlargement thereof. He abandoned therefore the earthly treasures, and brought away with him the heavenly and divine treasures, amongst which this is one of the best, and most rare that can be imagined. And knowing that good and excellent things become so much greater, better, and more praise-worthy, as they be∣come more common; he left unto me these hun∣dred and ten Considerations, that I should cause them to be put in print, which I have, as you see accordingly, performed with as much diligence as I have known, or been able to use.
These Considerations as many well know,
 were first written by the Author in the Spanish language, but afterward by a certain pious and worthy person translated into Italian. Yet have they not been able altogether to quit those forms of speech which are proper to Spain. And besides there are some words, though not many, of the language of the Author. For John Valdesso was by Nation a Spaniard of noble kindred, of an honourable degree, and a resplendent Chevalier of the Emperour, but a much more honourable and resplendent Cheva∣lier of Christ. True it is, he did not much fol∣low the Court, after that Christ had revealed himself unto him, but abode in Italy, spending the greatest part of his life at Naples, where with the sweetnesse of his Doctrine, and sancti∣ty of his life, he gained many Disciples unto Christ; and especially among the gentlemen, and Cavaliers, and some Ladies: he was very eminent, and most praise-worthy in all kind of praise. It seemed that he was appointed by God for a Teacher, and Pastour of noble and illu∣strious personages: Although he was of such benignitie, and charity, that he accounted him∣self debtour of his Talent to every mean and rude person, and became all things to all men, that he might gain all to Christ. And not this alone, but he gave light to some of the most fa∣mous Preachers of Italy, which I very well know, having conversed with them them∣selves.

He never had wife, but lived most continent∣ly, nor did he attend to ought else, asmuch as he could, then unto true Mortification, in which death overtaking him, he became perfectly mortified, so to be perfectly quickned in the resurrection of the just, and to enjoy our Lord Christ. He died in Naples about the yeare 1540. He hath left behind him also certain other good and pious Compositions, which as I hope shall by Vergerius his means be communicated un∣to you.
Go to then, Brethren and Sisters, in the love of God, and in the precious bloud of Christ Jesus, take this Treasure, and think withall, that the benefit lyes not in having, and possessing it, but in the use and fruit that is hence to be gathered. He hath made conside∣ration of these good things not to give nou∣rishment to the imagination onely, but like∣wise to put in execution that which hath been considered and resolved on. It is necessary in∣deed, that we should have the knowledge, but it is necessary likewise to accompany the pra∣ctice therewith, because the commendation of every virtue and art consisteth in the practice, and in the performance of action agreeable to that vertue and art.
And you that waste all your time idly in reading of Boccace his hundred Novelties, and the like, lay them awhile aside, and read these
 Considerations of Valdesso, which are indeed true Novelties. For in them is treated of that great, Divine, and joyfull, new and gladsome tydings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, of the great Pardon for sinnes, of the Reconciliation made with God by the death of the Sonne of God. Here you shall find the true and holy Enamourments of God, and of Christ with mankind. Here you shall find the true Embra∣ces, and the true kisses given by means of the holy Spirit. And last of all, you shall here find where the true delights and pleasures of those souls are, which are enamoured of God and of Christ, and disenamoured of the world.
And if happely the language seem not so spruce and dainty, as that of Boccace, call to mind that which great Paul the Apostle of Christ Jesus hath said, that the kingdome of God stands in the power of the Spirit, and not in excellency of speech. Howbeit to say truth, neither is this manner of speech to be slighted: For I verily find it exceeding pro∣per, and good to expresse that which is in∣tended; and that is the chief virtue of every Writer.
But I will here put an end to my discourse, that I may no longer deprive you of the sacred reading of these Divine Considerations, which you also reading, and that with diligence, and prayers to God for me and all others, shall take
 into due consideration: To the end, that we may come all to be enamoured of Christ, and incorporated in him, as he is incorporated in us; To whom be Honour and Glory ever∣lasting!
From Basil, 1. May 1550.

