


I Was called upon a short warning to attend you in your Publike Fast, I presume that tooke off your expectation, which was some advantage to me; a Learned man whispe∣red to one going up in publike, and said, wee have entertained your Enemie, namely, a great expectation, and this proves prejudiciall. You have by your acceptance of my Labours, and requiring the publi∣cation of these plaine Meditations, gone beyond my expecta∣tion. I obey your command, and offer to the publique view, (under your Patronage) what God on the sudden brought to hand: I was bold in the end of my Sermon, in the last Use, to represent the sad Condition of the people of this Land; give me leave in a word or two to adde somewhat to the same pur∣poss. Wee may looke upon the great Citie of our Land, and all the rest, as Christ did upon Jerusalem;Luk. 19.41. and if wee had the like Spirit, wee should poure out our dolefull expressions even with teares as he did. Divers have shed teares when they have seene sad Spectacles before their eyes. Titus the Roman Generall, wept when he heard of the Calamities of the be∣sieged in Jerusalem; Marcellus wept when he saw the blood of the Syracusans, Scipio Africanus wept over Carthage, but none of these like the teares of Christ, for he mournes for their desolation before it came upon them; he lookes with sorrow upon their sins that did not beleeve in him, and la∣ments their eternall perdition, and these did well become the teares of the Sonne of God: If we had the like Spirit, wee have the like occasion, Jerusalem was destroyed by Divisi∣on, and so were the Romans that conquered it; there were three companies that held out one against another to the very
 last; most of our Cities have more Divisions then three thrice told, they had signes from Heaven to give them war∣ning, Armies of fightng men appeared in the Aire, and a Comet like a flaming Sword over their Citie: Wee have had Armies, and a bloody Sword in the bowells of the King∣dom which have done that indeed, which was represented un∣to them; they had a voice in the Temple, saying, Migremus hinc, Let us remove hence, wee see it done already in a great Measure; the glory is departing from us, not onely to the threshold, but even to the Mountaines: Looke upon the highest,Isa. 23.9. and goe downeward, and you may truely say, the Lord hath stained the pride of all our glory. Jordan (as some af∣firme) was turned out of its course foure yeares before the destruction of Jerusalem. All things are out of course with us,Rev. 11.13. the foundations of the earth are shaken, wee are under the earthquake, and yet few men tremble before the Lord. I am afraid it is a fore-runner of our destruction, and the rather, because that which should unite us is likely to divide us more; You make a rule in matter of Religion and Government, and withall you make so many exceptions which will be as large as the rule, and it is hard to tell whether the greater number will come under the one or other. Were it not better to take into consideration those things wherein all the godly or most agree,Phil. 3 16. (according to that of the Apostle) Whereunto wee have already attained, let us walke by the same rule, and mind the same thing; rather then lay the foundation of a perpetuall division. How this should be done, requires time, and the most serious thoughts of wise man; yet in my poore judgement I thinke it might be done. The Lord direct you that are appointed to be the publike instruments of our good, that some way may be found out to take away the envy of Ephraim,Isa. 11.13. and then I shall not much feare the adversaries of Judah. And this shall be the prayer of him that rests

