


Gentlemen, and Fellow Souldiers.
ALlthough there are discouragements enough to make you negligent in the exercise of Armes, not only to see this Art so little countenanced, but our late Enemies by sitting still, grow rich, and the Royal Sons of Mars, in all their labours not able with one hand to wash the other; yet this one thing, in making our selves capable to do our Gracious King and Country service, should be the chiefest motive to labour after the Theorick part of this Art, by which we shall be the better able to perform the Practick when we shall be called thereunto.

But lest these few Collectives might meet with some objections, why that I should treat of the Horse in the first place, when Antiquity alloweth the pre∣cedency thereof to the Infantry; It was not to raise a dispute amongst the Novists, but I leave such to en∣quire of the precedencies in a Council of War, and who taking place there will resolve them: And it is well known to most of you I was a Commander of Horse my self; and then having finished my weak thoughts as to the Exer∣cise thereof, which being viewed by some Gentlemen of our Country, I was desired by them to set out likewise some few Collections for the young foot Souldier.
It is true there have been many Books printed of this Art in our past ages, and some in our present; and as Solomon saith of making many Books there is no end; yet if it had not been for Books this Art might have been buried in oblivion. And if I should set out at full how all that we practise is not only borrowed from Antiquity, but most of the very words of Com∣mand are kept still in use, it would be too large, and it being not my business, I shall acquiesce with what I intended for my private use, but being (as I have de∣clared) requested hereunto,When London was burnt, 1666. Sept. 3d. &c. and now fear∣ing that most of our books are consumed by fire, I am further perswaded to put these introductives to publick view. Let me perswade, you fellow Souldiers, although you meet with many dis∣couragements and scoffs in your Country, although taxes lie heavy upon you, and your allowances do not answer your moderate expences, nay although not your due for your time spent herein, yet go on; for I
 will boldly tell you that practical knowledge in this Art is the highest step to preferment.
We read among the Romans of Lucullus, and in our latter age of M. Spinola, who through maturi∣ty of judgement and great Learning became Generals as soon as Souldiers: Intimating that it is the Prerogative of Princes to be born leaders of Armies; But others must expect to ascend this Mountain of Honour by many and difficult stepps. Therefore first lay a foundation of honest fame, labouring after the practice of private vertues; Then orderly proceed∣ing to signalize thy selfe by some publique atchieve∣ments (which I doubt not, but every generous spi∣rit will endeavour the ascention thereof) you may be assured that passing once the brunt of it, even to the hazzard of life it self, you'l find delightful pleasures in following the exercises of this Art Mili∣tary.
Who is it that shall think so despicably of a Souldi∣er, or his profession so base, as some have so accounted them? When they that are the sons of Mars and have the true form of Military Discipline, are highly to be esteemed as honourable, and as necessary members in a Kingdome; such as no Kingdome can be without.
It is honourable, because it is compassed about with such reasons as that the contemners thereof by the judicious are much reproved; for that State that is not able to stand it out in Armes against the rage of intestine, and forraign violence, is sure to fall into the hands of the destroyer. How can any particular interest pre∣serve
 it self without it? I will boldly say that the Despisers of the use of Armes, are not only disloyal to their Prince but destructive to themselves. What are the Laws and Civil Orders without defence for the maintenance of them? I may truly terme them like a Ship without a Rudder, which being let at liberty to every gust of Wind will be ruined upon the Rocks of Rebellion: Or like some curious Edifice erected with∣out a roof, which cannot withstand the violence of any storme. Constantine the Great, by the perswasions of some peaceable Subjects cashier'd his antient Legions, by which he overthrew the best of his Military Discipline, and so left an open gap for the barbarous Nations to in∣vade the Empire.
Solomon in the time of Peace provided for War. What Nation dare to meddle with that People who are prepared, and well exercised in this Art of War?
Therefore let every one, Gentlemen and Farmours, Rich and poor, that intend to approve themselves true English men and Loyal Subjects, not only imbrace, honour and cherish Armes, but also exercise (and be exercised) and diligently learn this Military Art: that in case any Rebellion or treachery may arise, they may be fit to defend His MAJESTIES person, with all his rights and Prerogatives: That such as our late intestine ruines may be for ever hereafter pre∣vented: That the Armed servant may no more com∣mand the unarmed Master: Nor the Rebellious ar∣med Subject his unarmed Prince.
Let us not be overwhelmed in security, but when
 any suddain Alarme may sound in our ears, there may be alwayes found such ready and fit both to command and obey. Solomon doth in effect tell us, that it is not the great number of untrained men that are suffici∣ent for defence when he saith, A wise man is ever strong;Pro. 14. yea a man of understanding in∣creaseth in strength; for with Wisdome must War be taken in hand; and where there are many that give Counsel there is victory.
It is impossible for any Kingdome or Domini∣on to live in peace, without the use of the Sword: As Idleness and the neglect of Warlike Discipline hath been the ruine of many States; so the Order of the antient Romans resolved not to lie as slug∣gards, nor to delight in Idle, or wanton pastimes, but at certain times allotted them in a year for the bettering of their experience in Warlike Exercises, they did it with delight and pleasure, so that no la∣bour herein was burdensome to them: and being be∣come by the practice thereof most ready and expert in the same, became at last, as History hath de∣clared, great and mighty Conquerours.
I wish the same of us, that our reputation may not scornfully be laid aside, as if we minded more our Carpets, and the following products thereof, than the Musquett; That through the Exercise of this Military Art, we may become so mighty and Valiant, as that we may be able to withstand a∣ny opposition both Forraign and Domestick.

Thus wishing prosperous successe in all Martial affairs that may be for the good both of King and Countrey; I conclude and subscribe not onely to be a well-wisher to all Military Arts, but in the qua∣lity of

