



Honourable and honoured,
I Hope it will not be impu∣ted to me as a crime, that I did all I could to keep this Sermon from the Presse, not fearing that it would do any hurt; but rather that it might do little, if any good, in this hard, ve∣ry hard-hearted age. But seeing it hath
pleased (I think I may without offence say) God and you, to call it to remem∣brance, some moneths after it was preacht I could not but obey your Order, in giv∣ing you that which you called for, viZ. the Sermon, and not another thing. For indeed, having observed some books frontispic'd with a Sermon Preacht at PAULS, which (as 'tis said of Sir Francis Drake's Ship) had nothing left (not a plank nor rib) but the very name thereof; I durst not (and I hope none will think it a too nice and a needlesse scruple of conscience, that I say) I durst not give you that to read which you did not heare. You have the same things and words, with no more variation then; nor inded so much as, the necessary, very necessary difference, that is to be put between pen and tongue, required.
If it be estimated by the seasonablenesse of it, it will (as it seems you judge) be beautifull; and I hope that it will not be the lesse acceptable, nor the more succesless, for being plaine: for I professe
(to prevent all exceptions to be made against it on that account) that it hath more of heart, then Art, and of af∣fection, then affectation. The time would not give me leave to usher it in with any Preface, nor to close it with any Orato∣rious insinuations; nor is it (I think) fit to do it now, on the grounds fore∣mentioned.
Homely, yet I hope wholsome, as it is, let it go; and the blessing of God go along with it. The lesse man appears in it, the more God may appeare by it. If it may bring some glory to his Name, by engaging any to remember either from whence they should not fall, and so to stand fast; or any to remember from whence they have fallen, and so to re∣turne, I shall be glad, though my Name suffer by it, as I believe in some mens esteemes it will. But not to trouble you a∣ny longer with such things, nor to enlarge this Porch beyond the proportion allow∣able; I shall instead of speaking to you speak to God for you.

I do heartily beseech Almighty God, that that City (over which God hath made you overseers) may never become an harlot, that it may never be said of it, It hath lost its first love, and left its first works. It was full of judgement, righteousnesse did lodge in it, but now murderers. That its Silver may ne∣ver become drosse, nor its wine be mixt with water; that its Princes may never be rebellious, noir companions of thieves; that none of them may love gifts, nor follow after rewards; that, Oh that, it may never be said, they judge not the fatherlesse, nor doth the cause of the widow come before them; Lest the Lord of Hosts, the Mighty One of Israel should say, Ah, I will ease me of mine adver∣saries, and avenge me of mine enemies. The good Lord rather turne his hand, and purely purge away the drosse, and take away the tin, and make Judges as at the first, and Counsellours as at the begin∣ing; that she may be called, the City of righteousnesse, the faithfull City;
and for these things, the beauty and the glory of the whole Earth. Thus, honour∣able and honoured, is the hearty prayer of
March 1654.

