



I Know no persons in the Nation,
that have a more unquestionable
right unto these Papers, than you;
who have not only running in
your Veins the Blood, but, which is
more material, abiding in your minds
the Endowments of the Great Man,
whose Life is now perfected and expo∣sed
to publick view. In which it must be
acknowledged there is sufficient matter
for an useful History: And either of
you might have named the man, who
had been more able to have underta∣ken

the Writing of it than my self; it
being a very bold attempt for any one
to give an account of the Actions and
Sufferings of Dr. Heylyn, beside Dr.
Heylyn; or at least such an one, who
inherits his Natural, if not his Acqui∣red
Accomplishments, and to whom
an equal, if not a double portion of his
Spirit is imparted.
However, 'tis no small satisfaction
to me, that I have in this Composure
obey'd your Commands, and in some
measure answered your expectations
in doing right to the memory of your
very learned Ancestor, if your Friend∣ship
and Affection did not put a veil
upon your Judgments, when you first
read what I now again offer to your
perusal.
There is little doubt, but in the
publication of these Papers, the very
name of Dr. Heylyn will raise the
Blood, and exasperate the Passions of
some quarrelsom and unquiet spirits,
who like Ghosts and Goblins fight
with those that are dead, as well as

affright others that are living. But
whatever hard censures or harder
names the Writer of these Papers meets
with, 'tis no more than he expects from
those who are such enemies unto
peace, that notwithstanding all their
pleadings for it, yet their souls are so
connaturaliz'd to turbulency and con∣tention,
that rather than have no ene∣my,
they will fall out and fight with
their own shadows. And who can ex∣pect
but that the peace and quiet of
private men should be ruffled and dis∣composed
by those, whose business it is
to embroil a whole Nation? And yet
these persons must by all means be ac∣counted
the only True Protestants. A
name, tho it imports little in it of the
positive part of Christianity (it being
only a rejecting or protesting against
the abominable Errors and Superstiti∣ons
of the Roman Church) yet 'tis too
honorable a Title to be bestowed upon
many that boast of it.

It was in April, 1529. when Refor∣med
Christianity obtain∣ed
the glorious name of
Protestantism;Sleid. Com. l. 6. which in
a short time spread it self not only over
the German Empire, but most of the
European Nations. And here in Eng∣land
(especially) it prevailed over Po∣pish
Darkness and Superstitions by
Peaceableness, Meekness, Modesty,
Humility, Mercifulness; and by teach∣ing
men to be studious of doing good,
and averse to vice and doing evil.
What right then have those to it, who
are Turbulent, Contentious, Malicious,
Proud, Merciless, Wrathful, &c▪ Why
should those be celebrated for zealous
Protestants, who question the Being,
and blaspheme the name of God▪ Who
deny the only Lord that bought them?
Who renounce all the Offices and Insti∣tutions
of Christianity, and whose
lives are a direct contradiction to all
Moral as well as Evangelical Virtues.
In a word, why should the Indepen∣dents
with some other Sects now re∣assume

this Renowned Title, when in
the days of ihe late Vsurper they abso∣lutely
renounced it, calling those,
who would not list themselves as mem∣bers
in their Schismatical Assemblies,
Queen Besses Protestants?
The words of the devout Salvian
are with a little variation applicable
unto these Professors, In vobis patitur
Christus opprobrium, in vobis patitur
lex Protestantium maledictum. The
name of Protestancy which heretofore
commanded veneration from ingenu∣ous
(tho professed) enemies, is now
prophaned and blasphemed through
these persons and stinks amongst Pa∣pists
and Infidels: either of which Sects
do as much deserve the name of Catho∣licks,
as some do that of Protestants.
When 'tis bestowed on them, 'tis only
Titular, and a meer nick-name. They
are Pseudo-Protestants, as Papists are
Pseudo-Catholicks. Neither is it mate∣rial
what way of Religion is embraced
by them; whether True or False, Chri∣stian
or Pagan, Protestant or Popish, any
or none, or all.

God be praised, notwithstanding the
great declensions of true Goodness
amongst us, we have many persons of
Eminency and Honor in the Nation,
who are not carried away from their
Loyalty to their Prince, and Love to
the Church by any popular Artifices
of those Zealots who lie in wait to de∣ceive
unstable and less discerning
minds. Amongst whom I heartily re∣joyce
that both you are in the num∣ber;
and I shall pray to God ever to
continue you in that holy Fellowship,
and to preserve you from the evil of
this world, whilst you remain in it;
as also to reward you for the many
charitable and friendly Offices, which
you have expressed and conferr'd up∣on
Gentlemen,

