


MY dear and deserving Brother, your Valdesso I now return with many thanks, and some notes, in which per∣haps you will discover some care, which I for∣bare not in the midst of my griefs; First for your sake, because I would do nothing negli∣gently that you commit unto me; Secondly for the Authors sake, whom I conceive to have been a true servant of God; and to such, and all that is theirs. I owe diligence; Thirdly for the Churches sake, to whom by Printing it, I would have you consecrate it. You owe the Church a debt, and God hath put this into your hands, (as he sent the fish with money to Saint Peter,) to discharge it: happily also with this, (as his thoughts are fruitfull) intending the honour of his servant the Authour, who being obscured in his own countrey, he would have to flourish in this land of light, and region of the Gospel, among his chosen. It is true, there are some things which I like not in him, as my fragments will expresse, when you read them; neverthelesse I wish you by all means to publish
 it, for these three eminent things observable therein: First, that God in the midst of Po∣pery should open the eyes of one to understand and expresse so clearly, and excellently the in∣tent of the Gospel in the acceptation of Christs righteousnesse (as he sheweth through all his Considerations,) a thing strangely buried, and darkned by the Adversaries, and their great stumbling block. Secondly, the great honour and reverence, which he every where bears towards our dear Master and Lord, concluding every Consideration almost with his holy Name, and setting his merit forth so piously, for which I do so love him, that were there no∣thing else, I would Print it, that with it the honour of my Lord might be published. Thirdly, the many pious rules of ordering our life, about mortification, and observation of Gods King∣dome within us, and the working thereof, of which he was a very diligent observer. These three things are very eminent in the Authour, and overweigh the defects (as I conceive) to∣wards the publishing thereof.
From his Parsonage of Bemmorton near Salisbury. Sept. 29. 1632.
