



Dear Brother!
THough you affect to lead a retired Life—Procul negoti∣is—Ut Prisca Gens mortalium: Yet I presume this Dedication will not be unacceptable to you; since it signifies my Re∣covery
 from those Distempers, which I thought would have left you with∣out a Brother in the World. Ma∣ny indeed were concerned for me; Desired and Prayed, that I might be spared and restored; I wish my Pains may be blesst and benefici∣al to them; according to their Hopes and Expectations. They are thankful to God, that they still enjoy my Labours; and I know the restoring of my Health, will be matter of your Thanksgiving, who are so full of Brotherly Affe∣ction. 'Tis Pitty a Man of your Learning, Parts, and Prudence, has not appeared in a more Pub∣lick Station. You might have been a more Common Good, more your Countreys Ornament and Bene∣factour, if your excess of Mode∣sty
 had not cast a Veil over your great Abilities. I take it for granted, that as you have done, so you will still adhere to His Opinion who said—Bene qui latuit, bene vixit—And may you much enjoy your self, My Dear Brother! and which is infi∣nitely better; may you enjoy much of God in your Beloved oli∣tude! May that small Company, which have the Happiness of your Acquaintance; be directed by your Advice, when they need it; and better'd by your Example! And may all the Gentry in my Na∣tive Countrey of Cornwal, look upon all Debauchery and Wic∣kedness, as Bruitish; and as much below them; as you do! I wish the Sword of Justice were in your
 hand; if it were; I perswade my self, that the Profane who deserve it; woul feel the Edge of it; and your unblemisht Life falling under greater Observation, would make those, that are otherwise, a∣shamed of the Spots wherewith their Lives are stained.
I know you are not a Stranger to Afflictions of diverse kinds; This Book which I here Present you with; is not improper for your Perusal. 'Tis my Desire that no good thing may be with∣held from You or Yours; and that all Evils by their Sanctifi∣cation to you, may have their Nature quite alter'd, and work together for your good! May Divine Grace be sufficient for you; till you are brought safe to the
 Heavenly Glory and Kingdom! There are the best wishes for you that can be; and are the con∣stant, daily ones of

