


My Lord!
THis is a time in which by the Gracious Provi∣dence of God, and by the Unexpected, and therefore more Oblig∣ing Favour of his Ma∣jesty, I enjoy a Liberty more publick∣ly to Preach the Gospel. I now also take the Boldness, to Present some Ser∣mons
 which lately sounded from my Mouth in the Pulpit, unto your Lord∣ship, the Supream Magistrate in the City. I am glad that the Gospel of Peace may now be Preached without Disturbance; and that those hands that without reason were once so Vio∣lent, are now tied up, so that they cannot inflict those severe Penalties, which never were indeed deserved.
I cordially Desire and Pray for the Prosperity and Welfare of London: And were it but a City all of Converts, it would be the Joy and Glory of the whole Earth, and resemble that Hea∣venly Jerusalem above, where there is neither Sin nor Trouble.
Conversion is not to be Pressed on∣ly upon Heathens and Infidels: How many that are called Christians go be∣yond Them in Wickedness! and con∣sequently need it as much, nay, more than they? The Jews of old did make their Boast of God and of his Temple,
 yet the Prophets call them to Turn; and tell them, that Death was no other way avoidable.
The Way to Heaven and a Glori∣ous Immortality is but One, and tru∣ly 'tis a very narrow one: You that are high, as well as they that are low, must tread in the same Path of Holi∣ness, or else your hopes of Everlast∣ing Life will end in a dreadful Dis∣appointment.

My Lord!
'Tis my Prayer for you, that you may be preserved from Temptations; that you may exercise your Authority, so as to Reform the City over which you Preside, from that Debauchery and Prophaneness which has so much Impoverished it; which is its Shame and Disgrace, and which cries so loud to Heaven for Vengeance to be in∣flicted upon it.
A great Trust is reposed in you: I wish you Wisdom and holy Reso∣lution
 from above, to Improve the Price put into your Hands: You must be called to an Account at last, What singular thing you have done for God, and for his Truth and Interest, in this Year of your Maioralty: The greater Enemy you shew your self to all sorts of Vi∣ces, and the more Exemplary you are in fearing God and keeping his Com∣mandments, the greater Blessing you will be to London, and the more truly you will Consult your own Honour and Blessedness. I am,


