



Beloved in our Lord and Saviour!
IT is not a Complement I pass upon you, when I tell you, that your Souls are very dear to me, even as my own; and your Salvation as my own, desired. I am perswaded I was put into the Mi∣nistry specially for your sakes; and that our Lord gave me the Talents I have; that I might improve them to your Spiritual advantage. When first I came among you, most of you were young; and I my self was young also; but many years are past and gone since we were first related
 the one to the other; our Age be∣gins to decline; Old Age and Death are approaching; and who knows but Death may overtake Old Age, and come to many of us before it! You know how I have laboured in the publick Exercise of my Ministry; I have not grudged to spend my self, and to be spent for you. Those Souls who have reaped profit by my Labours; what thanks do I owe them, and to God for them! How have they obliged Me, by having the truest regard unto Themselves! I have been with you in the Calm and in the Storm, and blessed be God that neither you nor I have been Ship∣wrackt! I have gone through Ho∣nour and Dishonour, through evil Report and good Report: And evil report being sanctified to the humbling of me; has done me a greater kind∣ness than the Reporters thought of.
At this day through the Providence of God over ruling and acting power∣fully
 and graciously even to amaze∣ment; both you and I, and many more, enjoy a publick liberty; which under Restraint and Persecution, we earnestly prayed, but could hardly hope for. This liberty is a special fa∣vour from Heaven; is envied us by Hell; and I make no question, but the Instruments of the Evil One will be very active to deprive us of it. Let us but improve it by recourse to the Son of God to make us more free in∣deed, i. e. more free from Sin, and more inlarged in the Lords Service; and I believe we shall find that Scrip∣ture fulfilled, Rev. 3. 8. Behold I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it.
I am now come to the finishing part and work of my life, and are not many of you also? And should it not be our care to finish well? When the Painter has almost done a curious piece, how exact is he in every touch of his pencil? his last hand expresses his greatest
 Skill. If the Lord adds more years unto my days, I wish they may be the holiest and most useful; and then they will be the happiest I have lived. The nearer we approach unto Death, and the day of Reckoning, how ex∣actly should we walk! how clean should be our Hearts! how heavenly our Minds and Conversations! and how doubly refined should all our Ser∣vices be!
You that are Husbands, you that are Wives, the nearer Eternal Life approaches, live together more as the Heirs of such a Life; be more fervent in Prayer, rejoice in Hope, and press towards the mark for the prize of the high calling of God.
You that are Parents and Masters, Oh set fairer copies for your Children and Servants to write after! Be more Exemplary for Faith, for Love, for Meekness, for Truth and Righteous∣ness, for Humility, and Contempt of the World; declare plainly that you
 seek a better Countrey, i. e. an Hea∣venly; and that here on Earth is nei∣ther your Heart nor Treasure. Chil∣dren and Servants Souls are precious, and a great part of your care; give them not occasion to Eternity to curse your unfaithfulness to them, and care∣lesness of them. Your instructing of them being seconded by such an Exam∣ple as may demonstrate to them that you your selves are indeed taught of God; will be most likely to take im∣pression, and to have the desired effect upon them.
And you of the younger sort that are Children and Servants, be sure to value Saving Knowledge and Grace at an high rate, and seek after both betimes. When the Youth of a Land are universally degenerate and cor∣rupt, and affect ignorance, and are filled with prejudices against the pow∣er of Godliness; 'tis a great sign of God his being about to depart from that Land, and that the Gospel is
 ready to be removed. What a sad prospect is there at this day; when the young Generation is seriously considered. Horrible Pride, outragi∣ous Lust, Riotous and Intemperate Eating and Drinking every where al∣most prevail, what will become of poor Posterity!
You young Ones whom I here ad∣dress unto, be intreated to do a kind∣ness to your selves and to the Land of your Nativity. The Righteousness of Ten, would have done more towards the preservation of filthy Sodom; than the wickedness of a multitude would have done towards the destru∣ction of it. If some Tens of you did but prize the Gospel, entertain it in your Heads and Hearts, and adorn it in your Practise, and were instant in Prayer for its continuance among us; you might do more to the fixing of the Golden Candlestick in its place, than the Blind Zeal of the Papists, and the ignorance and disobedience of
 many carnal Protestants; can do to∣wards the taking away the Candlestick and its light from us. If a conside∣rable Company of young ones in every Age, would set their Hearts to study the Word of God, and become true Believers, sincere Lovers and diligent Doers of his Word: The Sun of Righteousness might through a mi∣racle of mercy, as it were stand still in England, and not haste to go down for many Generations.
This little Catechism which I now send forth may be of use to Instructers, and to them that are to be instructed in Families; and as it is very short, so I have endeavour'd to make it very plain to the meanest Capacities. The Scriptures are added at length to shew how every thing therein is proved. That what is learned may come with the greater Autority and Efficacy.
The Assemblies Catechism is in∣deed above my commendation, and will commend it self to them that are
 considerate, whoever go about to dis∣parage it. But This which I have Composed being much more brief, and having words somewhat easier to be understood. I hope may not be unuseful.
I have added a Catechism for Conscience; and have applied my self to the Consciences of several sorts of Persons: And though in a special manner I design your Edification; yet if these few Sheets shall, through the blessing of that God who is and works all in all, be made profitable to a great many more; the greater will be the satisfaction and rejoicing of

