


Honoured Sirs,
IF a Wish might be Granted, to hear the Apostle Paul in the Pulpit, one would be ready to Wish again, that Christ or Conscience might be the Subject of his Sermon. Were He to Preach, how would he set forth Christ, who is the Beloved Son of God! the brightness of his Fathers Glory! who is Ado∣red by all the Angels! and deserves to be the Desire of all Nations! How plainly and im∣partially would he deal with Conscience, ex∣amining, searching, and reproving it, and thereby commend himself to it in the sight of
 God. One Ʋnicuique Liber est sùa Conscientia; & ad hunc Librum discutiendum & emendandum, omnes alii inventi sunt. Bernard. De Interior. Dom. Cap. 28. of the Fathers calls Con∣science a Book, and Affirms, that other Books were invented, that the Errata in this might be Corrected. The Scriptures them∣selves were given by Inspiration of God, to this End, that the Evils of Conscience might be Discovered, and the Man of God made Perfect, throughly furnished unto all good Works.
'Tis therefore a bad World, because Con∣science seems to be Exiled and Banished out of it. Conscience has in these Days lost its Power, and does not Exercise that Authori∣ty which by right it should, as Gods Vice∣gerent here below: But Mens Wills and Lusts have got the head; so that neither God is feared, nor Man regarded: And for their own Souls, they are least of all concerned. If it be a sad Sight to see Beggars on Horse-back, and Princes Walk∣ing as Servants upon the Earth, much more is it to be Lamented, that Mens Corrupti∣ons, which ought to be held in perpetual Restraint, should sway and Command all;
 and Conscience the mean while be slighted, stifled, stupified, and kept under; which, as a Prince should be Obeyed in every thing, and from God give Laws to the whole Man.
What One said of a good Magistrate, may be applyed unto a good Conscience, that . 'Tis a Benefactor and Friend to Mankind. 'Twill never be well with us till this have a Resurrection. This is the way to obtain a Blessing from God, the way to have Prospe∣rity, Trade, Reputation; (and which is more than any, than all these) the Honour and Credit of the Christian Religion revi∣ved; which has sunk in the esteem of many, because so little of Conscience has appeared in those who have Professed it.
That thus it may be, is the end, both of this Book, and of its Author.
And I have Dedicated it unto you (Ho∣noured Sirs) who are of different Perswa∣sions, to shew that great Respect I unfeign∣edly bear unto you All; and because Persons of all Perswasions have need to study the Subject here Treated of. How many bad Consciences are there of every Opinion! And if all of every Opinion would but look
 well to their Consciences, and be so self-denying, as to lay aside their Passions and their Interests: This would be one of the most probable means to bring all to a better Agreement. They are the Carnal and Hy∣pocritical of every Party, who endeavour to make breaches wider, that are the Quarrel∣lers and Disputers. The truly Conscientious abhor Contention; the sincere are very in∣clinable unto Peace.
I shall add no more, but Conclude this my Address to you with an earnest Wish, that All of every Perswasion may imitate You All in regard of Conscientiousness, Moderation, and Wisdom. And 'tis not a Complement to tell you, that in thus Wishing, I Wish well to the whole Nation, and to the Churches of Christ in it.

