



Most Mighty Lord!
A Prisoner approaches to thy footstool, and not without some confidence, be∣cause he is confied not for evil doing but for well doing. That which men account his crime, thou hast made his duty, and by do∣ing this he hath incurred their displeasure; but he hopes he hath avoyded thine. He was willing to cast the Net over a great many, that the more might be taken, and by being taken, set indeed at liberty. He was desirous that the Subjects of thy Kingdome might be multiply∣ed therefore he spake to such great multitudes, and he verily thinks however men may censure it, thou dost not call it Rashness, or Zeal not according to knowledge.
Since thou hast commanded thy Messengers to go into the High-wayes, and as many as they find to bid to the Marriage: Since thou layest an injunction upon them, to preach the Gospel to every creature, surely thou r didst intend their compassion and care
 should be confined to a very few: Oh there∣fore that every Five of them that hear thy voyce and follow thee might be increased unto so many thousands! Thin Congregations are a lamentable sight: Let them therefore fly as a Cloud, and as Doves to their windows.
Incline the hearts of Magistrates to pity and moderation; let their Sword be drawn only against those that are Malefactors truly so called, not against such as would fain be at work for thee, and turning many unto righ∣teousness: Convince them that 'twill be the design and desire of a godly Ministry, to make their Hearers better Subjects to their earthly Rulers, as well as to the King of Saints.
Thy Prisoner who is in this Gate-house during thy will and pleasure, earnestly Petiti∣ons for his liberty. He deserves to be laid aside, but desires to be used: he would fain have the Prison Dore open to let him out, but is a great deal more earnest to have the Pulpit dore open to let him in, that he might again be preaching of thy Gospel. He longs to be warn∣ing the secure, who see not the Sword drawn out against them; to be stopping the madmen who are making such hast to eternal destructi∣on; to be inviting the miserable to mercy, & the lost unto a Saviour. Where is thy zeal & thy strength, O Lord, and the sounding of thy
 Bowels, and thy mercies! are they restrain¦ed? Oh pity immortal Souls that are going to Hell by Droves; and in some places, the Pa∣stours are so far from hindring, that being exemplary for loosness and impiety, they go be∣fore them to perdition.
Thy Prisoner blesses thee that ever he had the honour to be in bonds for thee. The worse of thee, even thy Cross is not at all to be dislik∣ed. The enlargments of his heart have been greater, then when he was at liberty; his peace hath been more perfect: Thy presence is so sweet, that he would go to any place to have more of it. Thou hast given in that grace which is glory begun: he confidently believes this Gaol will make him more meet for the glorious liberty of thy Children; and that he shall praise thee for ever for what he hath endured.
Thy Servant can say it with boldness before thee, that he honours the Authority thou hast set over him; he hath put others in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to be ready to every good work; and remem∣bers it is his own duty to be thus subject. Only he hath preached contrary to the Magi∣strates Command, because thy Command is so express for preaching; and thou pressest it up∣on Pastours, as they love thee to feed thy Lambs, to feed thy Sheep.

Oh thou dreadful and heart-searching Judge! cause the integrity of thy Noneon∣forming Servants to shine so bright, as to break through all unreasonable prejudices! Let their righteousness be brought forth as the Light, and their judgment as the Noon day; that that severity may be at length ashamed of it self that's used towards them. Oh hasten hasten thy second appearing, that the secrets of hearts may be discovered, and that it may be made manifest before men and Angels, who have worshiped thee the rightest way; who most have sought thee, and least themselves.
Thy Servant being taken off from preach∣ing, was willing to be some way beneficial to thy Church; therefore his Pen hath been going when his tongue could not. And if souls are edified and encouraged, if thy Kingdome and Name and Glory be any way by this Wri∣ting advanced, then the highest end will be attained, which is aimed at by him, who is not, who would not be his own, but by milli∣ons of Obligations is engaged to be

