



My much respected Friends!
WHen I preached this Sermon, which now I present especially to you; I was so far from having the least thought of Printing it, that I had not written so much as one word of it; and when your Desires were express'd that it might be Publish'd, I discovered a great averseness, because I knew how much averse my deceased and most true Friend was from a Discourse relating to Himself; and much more would he have been against the Printing any thing con∣cerning Him. But your reitereated Desires prevailed, being seconded by that Argument, that Mr. Law∣rence
 himself went contrary to the declared Will of an Eminent Christian, in Preaching a Funeral Ser∣mon, and giving him his deserved Commenda∣tions: Adding, that because that Excellent Saint was against his Preaching, therefore he was the more forward to do it. So that I have only made bold to mete the same Measure to my Friend who is dead and gone, which He did mete to his Friend that died before him.
This Sermon for the Substance of it was taken from my Mouth in Short-hand, and brought to me written out in Long. And since you have importuned the making of it publick, I desire you may give it a serious perusal.
A perfect Man is the most glorious and love∣ly of all visible Creatures. How much of the Image of the invisible God does shine forth in him! The Grace of God in Truth whereever ▪tis wrought, what a blessed Change does it make! Out of the rubbish and ruins of corrupt Nature, there is built an Holy Temple for the living God! And in this Temple how is He honoured and served! The perfect Man hath an high Aim, and a commen∣dable Emulation; he desires to do the will of God on earth, as it's done in heaven. And Heaven is esteemed a blessed place, because there he shall be able fully to do what he does desire.

 I have heard your deceased Pastor express his long∣ings to be in an holy and happy Eternity. Tho he had many other Loads, Sin was his heaviest Bur∣then; and perfect Holiness was look'd upon as a great part of his expected Blessedness. He was a power∣ful and a profitable Preacher; and this must be added, that he preached continually. His serious Looks, his edifying Communication, which administred Grace to the Hearers; his holy, just, and un∣blameable and shining Conversation, were great∣ly instructive; and by these he was ever speaking to all that observed him, that it was much for their In∣terest to be like him. And now being dead, he yet speaks to you, that the Counsels he gave you, which are the Counsels of God, should not dye with him, nor be buried in Oblivion. The Flock of such a Pastor should be Eminent for Contempt of the World, serious Holiness, and Heavenly-Mindedness, else they will be far from resembling their Faithful Shep∣hard.
I cannot wish you better, than that the Lord would direct you to settle under a Minister most like him who is taken from you; and who will naturally care for your Spiritual Estate. I wish his Family may be cared for by that God, whom he served in Truth and Sincerity, whose mercy is from everlasting to ever∣lasting upon them that fear him, and his righ∣teousness
 unto childrens children, to such as keep his covenant, and remember his commandments to do them.
Earth is emptying apace of them who are ripe for Heaven; I wish the Death of those that are gone, may make both Ministers and Saints that remain and survive, to be more lively and diligent in their Lord's Work! The Time of Labour is short; but to Eter∣nity it will be found, that labour is not in vain in the Lord.
My Friends, I commend you and yours to the Great Shepherd of Souls, and to the Word of his Grace; and wish your Perfection and Peace, living, dying, and for ever.

