



AMong the people in times past, it was common, to praise and extoll by Pi∣ctures and Epigrams, the famous deeds of all such persons, whosoever in any vertuous quality or Liberall Science excelled. Sulpitius Gallus among the Romans, was highly renowned for his singular cunning in Astronomie, by whose meanes Luci∣us Paulus obtained the victory in this Warres against Per∣sius. Pericles also among the Athenians, was had in great admiration and honor, for his profound knowledge in Philosophie, by whom the whole City of Athens was from care and woe delivered, when they supposed their destruction to be neare at hand, by a black darknesse, of some admiration hanging over their City. How hono∣rably was Apelles the Painter esteemed of mighty A∣LEXANDER, by whom onely he desired to be Painted? But amongst all other Arts and Sciences, whose praise
in times past flourished and shined most brightly, Chy∣rurgerie among the Grecians lacked not his Praise, ho∣nour and estimation. For did not that worthy and fa∣mous Captaine of the Greekes, Agamemnon, love deare∣ly, and reward bountifully, both Podalerius and Machaon, through whose cunning skill in Surgerie, thousands of the worthy Greekes were saved alive and healed, who else had dyed and perished? And further, here to speake of Philometur, of Attalus, of Hiero, of Archelaus, and o luba, Kings of famous memory, who purchased Eternal praise, by their study and cunning in Physicke and Sur∣gerie. But now in these our dayes Envie so ruleth the roast, that Physicke should be condemned, and Surgerie despised for ever, but that sometimes paine biddeth Bat∣taile, and care keepeth skirmish in such bitter fort, that at the last his Alarum is sounded out; Now come Phy∣sicke, and then helpe Surgerie. Then is remembred the saying of IESVS the Son of SYRACH, which is notable, Honour the Physitian and Chyrurgion for necessity; whom the Almighty God hath created, because from the high∣est commeth Medicine, and they shall receive gifts of the King. Wherefore we exhort the wise man, that hee in no time of Prosperity and Health, neglect those noble Arts and Misteries of Physicke and Chyrurgerie, because no Age, no Person, no Country, can long time lacke their helpes and Remedies. What is it to have Lands and Houses, to abound in Silver and Gold, to be deckt with Pearles and Diamonds, yea, and to rule over Nations and Countries, and to lacke Health, the onely Iewell and greatest treasure of mans life and delight? Consider then (we beseech your Worships) what praises are due
to such noble Sciences, which onely worke the causes of this aforesaid Health, and how much the Weale-pub∣like are bound to all them, whose cares and Studies dai∣ly tendeth to this end. Amongst whom here is to be re∣membred, Mr. VICARY Esquire, Sergeant Chyrurgion to two Kings and two Queenes of famous memory: whose learned worke of Anatomie, is by vs (the forena∣med Surgions of St. Bartholmewes in west Smithfield, newly revived, corrected, and published abroad to the commo∣dity of others) who be Students in Chyrurgerie: not without our great study, paines and charges. And al∣though wee doe lacke the profound knowledge, and sugred Eloquence of the Latine and Greeke tongues, to decke and beautifie this worke, yet we hope the studious Reader shall thereby reape singular commodity and profit, by reading this little Treatise of the Anatomie of Mans Body; the which is onely grounded vpon Reason and Experience, which are two principall rootes of Physicke and Chyrurgerie. As it is granted by Galen, in his third Booke De Methodo medendi. And we who dai∣ly worke and practise in Chyrurgerie, according to the deepenesse of the Art, as well in grievous Wounds, Vl∣cers, and Fistulaes, as other hid and secret diseases vpon the Body of Man, daily vsed by us in St. Bartholmewes Hospitall, and other places, &c. These poore and grie∣ved Creatures, as well Men, and Women, as Children, doe know the profit of this Art to be manifold, and the lacke of the same to be lamented. Therefore Galen tru∣ly writeth, saying: That no man can worke so perfect∣ly as aforesayd, without the knowledge of the Anatomie: For (sayth he) It is as possible for a Blind man to carve
and make an Image perfect, as a Chyrurgion to worke without error in a Mans body not knowing the Anato∣mie. And further, for as much, as your Worships are very carefull for those poore and grieved Creatures within the Hospitall of St. Bartholmewes, &c. whereof Mr. VICARY was a member. Wee are therefore now the more incouraged to dedicate this little worke of the Anatomie, being his and our Travels, to you as Patrons of this Booke, to defend it against the ravenous jawes of Envious Backbiters, which never cease by all unlawfull meanes, to blemish and deface the workes of the Lear∣ned, Expert, and well disposed persons. And wee shall not onely thanke your Worships for so doing, but also pray unto Almighty GOD to requite your goodnesse, and receive you into his protection and keeping.
