



Almighty Lord!
TO Thee I dedicate my Book, to whom I have devoted my self, all that is good therein, it is thy own; and if it do any good, to Thee I must ascribe the praise. The Innt indeed might be ashamed and dis∣couraged,
 if he did not know that thou canst work as well by weak means as by strong; nay, sometimes thou makest choice of weak on pur∣pose, that flesh may not glory, but the excel∣lency of the power may be of thee alone.
It was most free and rich Grace, (which Eternity it self will be short enough to admire and adore) that I my self was pitied, who once lay as much polluted in my blood as any other; who had run so far in the broad way, and had sinn'd my self so neer the destruction which is everlasting! But if I am not only made a Convert, but also made use of to convert o∣thers, my obligation will be hightned, which is infinitely vast already, to shew forth thy praise.
'Tis the desire of my soul, O Lord! that thy Kingdom may be advanced, and that the Do∣minion which sin and Satan have usurped may be overthrown. Since thy yoak is easie and thy government so sweet, so gracious, why should not thy subjects also be most numerous? Gird thy sword upon thy thing, Oh, most mighty one! and ride forth conquering and to conquer; and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things. Let thine arrows be sharp, and thy Word pierce like a two-edged sword; and let the whole world, either by conversion or subversion, bu especially by conversion fall under thee!

Thou art the God of the spirits of all flesh; is there any thing too hard for thee? When the Devil sinn'd against thee (and thereby be∣came a Devil) thou didst easily throw him out of heaven, and shackle him in chains of dark∣ness; and canst thou not as easily throw him out of those sinners hearts which he has possessed and filled, and pull down all his strong holds? And as for sin, though it be so mighty a thing, that Adam in innocency was overcome by it, that Angels in Heaven could not stand before it; yet thou art able, and hast promised to subdue it. Oh, shew thy power and Grace! Since thy mercy is so great, why should there be so few partakers of mercy? Since thy Son is so able to save to the uttermost, why should so small a number be saved by him? Since the New Jerusalem is so spacious, why should Hell fill so exceeding fast? Oh, let thy spe∣cial love be more generally manifested! Let thy healing and thy saving grace run in a much broader channel! Let thy tents be enlarged, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitation! Let not so many souls be the De∣vils prey, which are of greater value than the world; and which are capable of loving, and admiring, and glorifying thee for ever! An∣swer, O my God, such desires as these, so far  consistent with the secrets of thy Counsel,
 and thy Wayes and Judgments, which are un∣searchable and past finding out!
Let thy Gospel continue in this Land of England! Let the Sun of righteousness shine forth in greater strength and glory, and dispel the mists of error, and chase away the night of Ignorance! Let not the Sea be more full of water, than this Land of the knowledge of thy glory! As long as there is a Church on earth, let there be a Church in England! And let the Lamp of thy Word shine cleerly among us, as long as the Sun and the Moon shall shine in the Firmament!
Thou who hast the hearts of all in thy own hand, incline some to read these following Sermons; and let all that read be the better by them. Let them understand in this their day the things which concern their peace! and obey thy Call to Turn, before thou comest to this Resolution to call and cry no more after them! Oh, let none grow blnder by the light's shin∣ing in their eyes! let none grow harder by the means which were design'd to soften them! Let not the Word of Life prove unto any a deadly savour! Let some souls date their conversion from their reading this Book; and let those who are converted be further strengthned by it. Encourage thy servant more and more, by
 making his labours more abundantly success∣ful, who has resigned and given up himself to Thee; and whose greatest Hnour and truest Happiness it is to be,

