


YOur desires, which also have been seconded by the desires of others, have brought forth this discourse into the World. It is not, I must confess, at all against my inclination to make it Publick; because the deserved Character I gave your Deceased Relation having sounded onely in the Ear, might be soon forgotten; but being Printed, may prove a very good Copy for others to imitate, and write after. How few Saints at this day are exemplary! This is an Age in which those that are Evil wax worse and worse; and many that are gracious are under great languishing and decays. A Christian that grows in Grace, and whose Soul prospers, and whose Conversation is a Conviction to the World, that there is both a reality and efficacy in Religion, is Rara avis in terris; not easily to be found.
I cannot blame your grief that you have lost One who was so dear, and so worthy to be so dearly loved. Onely I would have you remember, That Believers are to weep as if they wept not: they are not to mourn over the Dead as without hope. And Hope being so well ground∣ed, will keep Sorrow within due limits. How easily, when
 the Sun rises, does its light supply the room of the Stars, whose twinkling light is vanisht! Creatures at best, though they have never so great a Lustre, are but little things: and their absence may be brooked well enough, if the All-sufficient and Gracious God, does but vouchsafe more of his special and reviving presence.
My friends! Turn your Sorrow into a right Channel: God puts those Tears into his bottle, which are shed for Sin; but those which the Sorrow of this World draws from our Eyes as common water, are spilt upon the ground. Sin does best deserve your grief; and the Lord, whose Being and kindness is unchangeable, what ever changes are among the Creatures, is as much to be loved, delighted, and rejoyced in as ever. A curious Cistern has been broken to pieces, I wish you may all have recourse to, and drink more largely of the Fountain of living Waters.
That God would sanctifie the breach he has made, and satiate your Souls with himself, and wean you from this World, and bring you at last safe to his Heavenly King∣dom, is the Prayer of

