



My LORD,
SInce I have had the Ho∣nour of Educating Three of your Sons, I hope with no small Assurance of your Sa∣tisfaction, and one of them is amongst our Translators; it
might be thought a Crime not to Dedicate our Endeavours to your Lordship, that others may perceive our Duty to so Ho∣nourable a Father, and so No∣ble a Friend. I must ever be a Faithful Witness, how Zea∣lous and Obliging you are to promote the Advantage of E∣ducation; and that in all Points of Generous Breeding you have endeavour'd to transmit those Ancient and Hereditary Virtues of your Illustrious Fa∣mily to your Posterity. To whom then should Aurelius Victor Consecrate his Illustrious Romans but to your Lordship? In whom are united those great Names of Bertu and Norris; Names so Glorious in our An∣nals,
that the Actions of Heroes cannot be remembred without them, for they both at Home and Abroad have highly Cele∣brated the True English Nobi∣lity and Virtue. 'Tis an Injury to name Particulars, where there are so many eminent Cha∣racters of both Sexes, who have Immortaliz'd the former, and now Adorn the present Age. My Lord, your most Conspi∣cuous House is like Virgil's Sa∣cred Tree, where there never will be wanting a Golden Bough:
— Primo avulso, non deficit alter
Aureus, & simili frondescit Virga Metallo.

I observ'd much of this In∣nate Worth from the Conver∣sation of your Sons, who in the various Scenes of Youth ever discover'd ex Traduce, a strong Byass to Sincerity and Honour. My Lord, I will stop my just Encomium, and not incur the Censure of a common Dedicator, though I need not fear such a Criticism from the vast Merits of my Cause; yet give me leave in Gratitude to declare, I am in∣finitely oblig'd to your Lord∣ship for your constant Encou∣ragement in my Scholastick Way of Life; for your Appro∣bation of my general Method of a Learned Academy, where our English Youth might be
instructed in all Exercises, and the several Parts of Solid Learn∣ing, without the Varnish of a Foreign Excursion; whence much Money is exported, with∣out the Importation of any Staple Commodity: And at last it appears,
Coelum, non animum mutant, qui trans Mare currunt.
I remember your Lordship once discoursing with me, men∣tioned your Recommendation to the Reverend Dr. Fell, that Excellent Bishop of Oxford, how beneficial it might prove to Young Gentlemen to have an Academy erected for their Ser∣vice in that University: That
Arts and Sciences ought to be united, and as formerly at A∣thens and Rome, cohabit in one place. I cannot tell what were the Objections or Impediments of so useful a Proposition, whe∣ther that Wise Governour thought the Design and Fa∣tigue too great, considering the Lazy Temper of our De∣generate Youth, or the Phan∣tastick Frugality of many Un∣happy Parents, who are more Generous to a Foppish Dancing-Master, than a Worthy Tutor, preferring the Motions of their Sons Feet, to the Idea's of his Brain; and think the Bill of an Extravagant Taylor, more satisfactory than the Salary of his Industrious Preceptor.

Hos inter sumptus, sestertia Quintiliano
Ʋt multum duo sufficient, res nulla Minoris
Constabit Patri, quam Filius.
For my part, after some Years spent for the Publick Good, I rest with pleasure, Conscious to my self, that I ever did my Duty, and have done considerable Service, as well present, as future to many Noble Families, that I have never been a Pedant, but made the Gentleman and Scholema∣ster mix together, that I have design'd amongst us a Schola Illustris, Comprehensive of in∣ward and outward Accom∣plishments,
and that I shall leave a Scheme for some more Wor∣thy Undertaker, who may de∣serve a publick Support, and Di∣stinction, so much to our De∣triment neglected in England, and so promoted in every emi∣nent City of Europe. I confess the Satyrist cries out,
Declamare doces, O ferrea pe∣ctora Vetti.
The Life of a Schoolmaster is indeed very sollicitous, though ever judged Honoura∣rable by all Good Men, and the Cares of it intolerable, ex∣cept the happy Genius of the Master, with good Circum∣stances, somewhat alleviates
the trouble. Then since my Qualifications render me the more easie, I will change the Name, and not the Thing, and go on for some time in my for∣mer Course and Method with∣out the Reflection.
My Lord, Give me leave to publish on this Occasion, un∣der your Patronage, my future Determination as to my Im∣ployment: I presume your Sentiments may agree with other Persons of Quality, to whom I have Communicated my Thoughts, with which I have laboured long ago, who have desired me not yet to be tired out, but to contract my Society to a less Number, to turn my Domesticks into
French, for a constant Obliga∣tion to facilitate the Language, to chuse my Pupils, to admit young Gentlemen to have sin∣gle Rooms with Servants, that we may live our Collegiate Life with more Profit and Plea∣sure, excluding forthwith all those of a violent and stubborn Temper.
Dii Majorum umbris tenuem, & sine pondere terram,
Spirantesque crocos, & in urna perpetuum ver,
Qui Praeceptorem Sancti vo∣luere Parentis.
Esse loco.—
This Resolution is much re∣spected, and in the Opinion of
many must produce the happy effect of Civility and Learning. To the promotion of which I have found nothing from ex∣perience more Charming to Youth than the Practice of Translation, and Reading of History with the assistance of Geography and Chronology, which like the three Graces ought Hand in Hand to per∣form their measures, and have always been the Rule of our Studies. Cicero signalized his Judgment when he said, That a Man without History is always a Child, and therefore for its value it is stil'd by him as Testis Temporum, Lux Veritatis, Vita Memoriae, Magistra Vitae; from hence with Livy we are by for∣mer
Examples encouraged to Virtue, and deterr'd from Vice. Thus the great Polybius pro∣nounces it, —
.
But History is lovely to eve∣ry Eye from its Natural Beau∣ties, and wants not to be dress'd with these ends of Gold and Silver: 'Tis no less evident that Translation fixes it, and em∣proves at once two Languages. I hasten to beg Your Lord∣ship's Pardon for this Familiar Epistle, asking leave to intro∣duce these Young Translators who without any trick appear
in their Primitive Simplicity before you.
My Lord, I conclude with my most profound Respects, and most humble Thanks for all Your Favours, for the ac∣cess and ease of Your Conver∣sation, for Your Kind Wishes, which Great and Good Qua∣lities none Expresses and Extends more than Your Lordship; who, besides Your many Virtues, which in Reverence I shall not now mention being so well known, are by Your Conde∣scention, so truly great and Noble. I heartily pray that all things may fortunately suc∣ceed according to Your desires
to Your Self and Your Noble Relations, and that You would believe me to be,
MY LORD, 
