



THE Lord having given me so great room in so many of your hearts, I am the more encouraged to put these few words of Advice into your hands: Upon your request they were preached in your Ears, and it is for your benefit that they are now pre∣sented to your Eyes.
Vox audita perit, litera scripta manet.
That which you only hear, you may quickly forget, and so the words with the sound perish in the Air; when written, especially printed words abide, and may bring to your remembrance the things which you have heard long ago: But if you would have these

words in these sheets abide indeed with you, better than if they were en∣graven upon a rock, and written with a Pen of Iron, and point of a Dia∣mond, you must get them transcribed and reprinted, I mean upon your hearts. Your hearts as yet in a great measure, are a rasa tabula, like a fair table, or white sheet of Paper in which little is written; Do not furrow the Table with Conscience-wounding sins; do not blot and besmear the Paper with the defilements of Lust: But get the Law of God engraven upon the Table of your hearts, and the Counsels of the most High given you out of his Word written upon the white sheet within you. It is true, the youngest of you are defiled with Original sin, and are grown more foul with Actual transgressions, which none of you can in whole excuse your selves from, however for the present

you may be free from the more gross pollutions of the World, and not ar∣rived to that degree and height of wickedness, which the audacious sin∣ners of this vicious Age have attained unto: But if you would get the Word written in your hearts, it will both make you clean, and keep you clean, Psal. 119. 9. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto ac∣cording to thy Word. And v. 11. Thy Word have I hid in my hear, that I may not sin against thee.
Dear Youths, my love is great unto your Souls, and my desires are earnest after your salvation; it rejoyceth my heart to see so many of your faces in my Auditory here, it will more rejoyce me, if I may see all those faces in Heaven at last; and truly I hope that many of you will be my Crown and Glory in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ; therefore it is that I preach,

therefore I have written these Words of Advice unto you, the chief heads of which are, 1. That you would seek First the Kingdom of God, where alone your chief happiness doth lye, as the End. 2. That you would seek the Righteousness of God, which is in his Son, that it might be imputed unto you for your Justification, and that it might be imparted unto you for your Renovation and Sanctification, as the necessary Means to attain this End, without which there is no possibility of admittance for you into the King∣dom of God. 3. That (having ob∣tained Grace in the truth of it) you would labour to grow in Grace, and to be strong therein, that you might be enabled both to do and suffer what∣ever God calleth you unto. 4. That you would get acquainted with the Word of God, and endeavour that it may abide and dwell in you richly, as the

choicest of all Treasures. 5. That you would labour to overcome the Wicked one, and all his temptations, whereby he would draw you unto sin, especially those sins which in Youth you are most inclinable unto.
Beloved young men, you live in the dregs of times, in a wicked and de∣bauched generation; take heed of fol∣lowing a multitude to do evil; save your selves from their sins, as you de∣sire God should save you from their punishments. Come out from amongst them, if you cannot in regard of your place, be sure to do it in regard of your course and practice; refrain too familiar converse with the wicked and profane; let your Companions be such as fear the Lord; walk in the way of Good Men; take that course as the most do that seem to be most serious, and to have their faces towards Heaven. I have endeavoured to an∣swer

and remove the chief prejudices which are raised to discourage and di∣vert from this way: You may safely and confidently venture into it, and walk in it, and you will finde (what∣ever the oppositions and discourage∣ments be therein) the end of it to be peace and happiness. The Lord grant that this Book may be a Means to keep you from sin, and help you for∣ward in the way to Heaven, which is the desire and prayer of

