



Much Honoured SIR,
I Did not Address to you when you were like the Rising Sun, and made the Chief Seat in this City, where you were deservedly placed, to shine with more than ordinary Lustre; when you discovered and were severe against the Works of Darkness; and your Influence was so benign and kind, for the Sustentation and Benefit of London; but now you have run your Course so well, and have set without the least Cloud; nay, with so much Clearness and Glory, I make this De∣dication
 to you, desiring your serious Perusal of a Treatise, the Subject of which is of such great importance. And indeed now you have quitted the Chair, and have less of publick Busi∣ness to manage, and may have more leisure to retire into your Self, and from Company, and from Civil Affairs; this Cure of Distractions in Reli∣gious Duties, knocks at your Door, the Author desiring it may be help∣ful to your Meditations and Devo∣tion.
'Tis a great Respect and Honour that is due to the God's on Earth, so Magistrates are called, and Inferiours should apply to Them accordingly, with a great sense of their distance. With what Reverence then are we to approach the Supream Majesty! The Lord of Hosts, the King of Glory! Our highest Apprehensions are infinitely be∣low him. And the best of Saints do rather wish to Worship him, than per∣form
 any thing that is worthy of the Name of Worship.
Among the many Faults in Holy Du∣ties, there is one that will never be quite mended in this World, and that is Distraction; but yet more and more help may be still attained against it: And these Sermons mhich I now present you with, I hope with a Blessing from Heaven may contribute some∣what, and be successful this way.
If Religious Duties were but well done, every thing else would be done the better; for it is from God alone that we have ability to do as we ought in any matter whatsoever. The Lord gives Wisdom and Grace most libe∣rally to them who most sincerely seek him. And such as have most help from God, will best perform their Duty towards Man; and both Church and State will find them the most use∣ful Members. Religion is certainly the truest Policy. The Wisdom of
 this World, says the Apostle, and of the Princes of this World comes to nought, but Godliness in the power of it, makes Men better in every Capa∣city and Relation. How does it alter and amend Persons, Families, Nati∣ons, where 'tis encouraged and pre∣vails! Righteousness and Peace, Joy, and Love, are found to be the blessed ef∣fects of true Religion! It tames the fierceness, and subdues the malignity of corrupt Nature! And makes Man to look something like what he was in the state of Innocency!
All that wish well to this City and Nation, must needs desire that God may be better served, and that Men by his Service may be better'd. How happy should we be if People were all Righteous! Violence then would be no more heard in our Land, nor wasting and destruction within our Borders; our Walls would be cal∣led Salvation, and our Gates Praise,
 and the Lord himself would be to us an everlasting Light, and our God our Glory!
I wish that all Lord Mayors for the future may follow your Example, and endeavour to suppress Wickedness, and may never be ashamed of Holiness, which is the Glory of God, and is most unreasonably look'd upon as matter of Disgrace to any Man. Sir! You are descended from Religious Ancestors, and Religion is that which does truly ennoble your Blood and Family. An increase of this Nobility and of all other Blessings, is wisht to your self and Yours. By,
Honoured SIR,

