



Dear Demophilus,
I Must ingeniously confesse unto thee, that these crude Conceptions (and which perhaps from some Censurers may have the Epithite of Fanatical) are alltogether destitute of those common Apolo∣gies, for most Publications. It was not the irresistable importunity of soliciting Friends that ravished this Paper from the private confinement of a Study, and prostituted it to a publick view. Neither was it a necessary

obedience to the commands of some Honoura∣ble Sir, or Noble Patron, that influenced my pen: Nor yet self-vindication, or the pre∣vention of false and surreptitious Copies, No, I grant Demoph. it is that General Itch of Scribling, that hath set my pen a scratching. And thou shouldest no more wonder that in this Age one should be a Writer, than that a man should have the Plague in a general In∣fection. Nor could the sence of my own dis∣abilities and infirmities hold my hand, For since the wisest of men hath comprehended all under that diffusive Genus of Vanity, so as the Character of Madnesse and Folly, is as compatible to Aristotles Politicks, as Tom Thumbs. I knew no reason why I might not publish my Follies too, when I had so many precedents for my failings: And in this I thought my self beyond the reach of reprehen∣sion, for whosoever would convict me of Folly, must in the same Act condemn himself of Madnesse; since then my phansie prompted

me, and my leisure from severer studies gave me an opportunity of employing my pen, I thought it could not better be imployed, then in endeavouring a token of my Gratitude and Affection to that Society, and those Gentlemen I am so highly obliged to. I am not so presump∣tious as to imagine I can merit any thing from them, the highest my hopes aym at, is, that perhaps this weak sparke may have the For∣tune to kindle a Nobler flame, which like the Pillar of Fire to the Israelites, may Light us through this Wildernesse of Confusion and Disorder we now live under, to the happy Canaan of a civil and equitable Govern∣ment. To use Arguments to perswade a man to engage in this Quarrel, would discommend the Cause, as if the Justice and Gallantry of the Attempt had not Rhetorique enough in it to awake the most Drowsy Spirit. Is it Noble and Honourable to engage for ones Country? Did Humanity and an innate Compassion prompt Moses for to rescue the distressed

Israelite from the insulting Aegyptian? Hath Shame and Disgrace any influence on a Generous Spirit? Then what greater Re∣nown can be expected, then from a Victory over so potent and continually encroaching an Enemy? What greater a mercy can we shew to our selves and successors, then to restore us and them to those Rights and Privileges, Law, Nature, and Reason have indulged unto us? Nay then we need not blush, as formerly, and be forced, when asked what Government we live under, either to affect an ignorance, to our own disparagement, or forge an Utopian plat-form, or else proclaim that sad Truth, that in those places where the Laws are studi∣ed and professed, there is a Government void of Law and Reason; Vexatious and Oppres∣sive Gentlemen▪ from these hard Inconveni∣ences you may soon be freed, those benefits you may quickly be Blessed with, if you will have but as much Affection for your selves, as you have had Favour and Patience towards your

Enemies. Let your Charity fix its self on its proper Centre at home, Trust not the Songs of Sirens, Nor rush into the Armes of those fawning Sileni, that kill with their Embra∣ces. What, hath His Majesties Happy Re∣stauration Blessed the whole Kingdom with the Enjoyment of a Hopefull prosperity, and must We alone be Banished from this Felicity? When the Nation is freed by this great Ju∣bilee from a Rump Bondage, must a Rump Parliament be still our Masters? When po∣pular Fury sacrificed it to Revenge, did this Phoenix arise from those Ashes? Methinks when I have been at Westminster, and seen those Traytors Heads, and after return to our own Hall, I suspect my Dreaming phansie gull'd me, Solicitor Cooke, (or a Solicitor very like him) Bradshaws, Scots, and Iretons, sure they live, nay, they live and rule within our Walls, or else there is Trans∣animation. For all the Actions of those men, (except their Murthers) are here reiterated,

And the best Account can be given of our Inn of Court Govtrnment, will be from this pa∣rallel; Their Practice is the best Glasse to Represent our Politicks. Perhaps the sower Catoes may frown on this truth, and me for speaking of it, we know Veritas odi∣um parit; but as I was never fond of their Favour, so I shall not be fearfull of their Displeasure: For My part I have passive Obedience enough to Magazine my Breast against the severest Censures their incensed thoughts can frame; 'tis the Duty I owe to those Noble and Ingenious Per∣sons I have had the Honour to converse with which hath urged me thus far, and to suffer for their sakes, I shall rather num∣ber it among my Joyes, then rank it with my Afflictions, for I have allwayes prized the Love of my Equals above the favours of my Superiors. And Dear Demohpil. I have not counted it the smallest Benefit, nor the least part of my Happinesse, that my good genius

hath conducted me into an Acquaintance and Intimacy with you, One whom Nature hath Blessed with Ingenuity, Candor, Fidelity, Prudence, and all those Ingredients requisite to the Composure of a true Friend, and I wish heartily I could give the World a more publick Acknowledgment how much I owe unto you, and though I am something diffident what may be the hard Fortune of this poor Scribble, yet I cannot but be so vain as to applaud my self for wise, in this particular Application of it to you, being one who hath so much Affection for me, as not to be Hypercritical, and hath so large a stock of Wit and Learning, as may patronize it from the Attempts of the strong∣est Opposers. And then I should be proud of my good Service to the Society, if I were in∣strumental in bringing so smart a pen as yours to Vindicate their Cause, and this weak Essay would have the Honour to be a foyle to your polite and sinewy tract, and indeed I should rejoyce, that since I have no parts ca∣pable

of it, that my imperfections may be ser∣viceable unto you, and give some Testimony of that Gratitude I am ever bound to shew for the Happinesse I am Blessed with, that I can subscribe my self

