





May it pleas Your Highness!
AMongst the Roman Emperors, the name Pater Patriae was held their highest title of Ho∣nor; and the surest support of all good Princes, hath been the Peoples hearts: For where the Tongue-string, and not the Heart-string make's the musick, the harmony may, and doth many times, end in discord.
Queen ELIZABETH (that glo∣rious Queen, and England's Deborah) used
 to say, Give mee my People's hearts, and wee shall not need to ask their purses: and this Ma∣xime never deceived her. With what eas¦shee got aids from the Nation in Parlament, the Records of her Reign shew: The chief point that made the People so free to grant in those daies, was, they knew by forty four years. experience, shee was sparing and frugal her self, and God blessed her with a wise and prudent Counsel: And in point of managing her Revenue, That shee never forgave her Accomptants or Receivers of her publick Revenues, where it was possible to bee le∣vyed. The State had had millions of money now in bank, had they followed her Rules to take a strickt accompt of all their Receivers. The monies belonging to her Crown. (as I humbly said) was never forgiven: Insomuch as som of her greatest Servants and Favorites dying in her debt, shee would not discharge their Heirs or Executors, but held their Lands under extent, till shee was paid the uttermost farthing; saying, Shee would not forgive any Officer that was an accomptant; for the publick monies was not hers to give. And the Earl of Leicester, Secretary Walsingham, and Lord Chancellor Hatton (for all their being great Pillars in the Common-wealth, and greatly in her favor) having gotten to bee in her
 debt, their several Lands were held under ex∣tent, after their deaths, till every penny was paid her: Though som of their Heirs petitio∣ned, yet they were forced to pay the uttermost farthing, receiving this answer from the Queen, That if the People should know that shee prodigally gave away the publick Trea∣sure, they might justly denie her when shee had occasion in Parlament, or otherwaies. An ex∣cellent Rule, at this time, and at all times, for all sovereign Princes to follow▪
May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; About the Spanish Invasion in 88, Queen Elizabeth borrowed of the Merchant Adven∣turers about One hundred thousand pound, and kept that money by her for above one year, and paid it exactly at the day, with interest, after 10 per cent. though shee made not any use of one penny of it, but put it in bank with the rest of her Treasure. This shee did out of her fore-cast and providence, that so if the Spaniards had landed, shee would not then bee to seek for Treasure, for to pay her Souldiers and supply her oc∣casions. Her wise, rich and provident Grand∣father Henry the 7th, shee reading his Life and Reign, could teach her that Rule, ne∣ver to let her Exchequer bee empty; hee leaving (as is recorded) in Richmond Hous,
 Seventeen hundred thousand pound in gold; which is now by computation, according to the present value, neer five millions. By these courses that glorious Queen got such reputation, for good husbanding and pru∣dent managing her Revenues; and princi∣pally, by her just repayment, and by her sparing the publick Treasure, that in many of her Parlaments, the subsidies and fifteons granted, re intreated and pressed on her, as a beevolence and free-will offering of the People to her; with many expressi∣ons of thanks from the Parlament for her good and gracious Government: And som∣times their voluntary bounty hath been such, that the Parlament hath granted more than shee would accept; and the Queen hath, with thanks, her self in Parlament, re∣turned Subsidies again. Her Fame extend∣ing beyond Solomon's, even to the farthest and greatest Monarchs in the world. The Grand Seigniour sending his Imperial salutes, and desiring her Peace and Amitie with Commerce and Trade. And the Empe∣ror of Russia, admiring her great Valor, in offering to affront and assault and begin a Warr with the King of Spain, at her de∣sire, did grant to the English Merchants, for the respects hee bore to their glorious Queen
 Elizabeth, many great Privileges and Immu∣nities in his Empire for Him and his Suc∣cessors for ever; which were inviolably ob∣served by his Successors, till about the year 1650. Shee usually said, Shee desired that her Subject's Purses should bee her Exchequer. For, as long as they were rich, shee could not bee poor: These Princelie and Popu∣lar Expressions took so with all her Subjects, (rich and poor) that shee never stirred out of the Court, but shee had the Acclamati∣ons, Praiers and Praises of Thousands of her People, both in City and Country: And shee would shew the like tenderness and affection to her People. And this Bles∣sing God bestowed then on this Nation, that Prince and People were of one Minde, one Heart, and one Faith, (except som few Catholicks). Her watchfull eie was ever over them; and that strengthened, by God's blessing, her hands, that in her time shee did such great things: in her greatest Dif∣ficulties, her Affairs were carried smoothly on by the prudence of her Counsel. If Grievances were by the Commons in Par∣lament presented unto her, it was in such a decent form, (shee alwaies keeping the dig∣nity of her State Imperial) that the Peo∣ple's Grievances appeared unto her like the
 tears of the Turtle and the mourning of Doves. Som of the Representations of their Grievances in Parlament, I have seen and read to this effect, That if there was any thing expressed otherwise then they should have represented, That her Majestie would cast the vail of her Grace upon it, and give a favorable and benign Answer and Inter∣pretation of their humble Petition. And surely, (next to God's gracious protection) her Safetie was built, as Solomon's Throne was, shee was supported by XII. Lyons, a grave and prudent Counsel; the number of her inward Privy Counsellors not much exceeding that number: By her prosperous Conduct and Management of her Affairs, all Christendom esteemed England to have a glorious Prince, a wise Counsel of State, and the People happy in general.
I have read, that my Lord Chancel∣lor Bacon, in a Speech of his in Parlament, had this saying, Sure I am (saith that golden mouthed Orator) that the Treasure that com∣eth from the Commons to her Majestie, is but as a vapor which ariseth from the Earth, and gathereth into a Cloud, and stayeth not there long, but upon the same Earth falleth down again; And if som few drops fall upon France and the United Provinces, it is as a sweet odor of Ho∣nor
 and Reputation to the English Nation throughout the World. Elegantly expressing the relief that the English afforded both to France and the Low-Countries against their then common Enemy the Spaniard.
In her glorious Reign, the Counsells that were then in Parlament, tended ever to the individual prosperitie, and the safety and preservation both of the Queen and People: And like Christ's coat, without seam, all their Counsels were of one piece, the equal pro∣speritie of both. And after 44 years reign, this glorious Queen dyed, rich in Jewells, rich in Money and Plate, the Lands of the Crown; and, above all, rich in the Love and Estimation of her Loyal People, after shee had contended with the King of Spain, by invading him in Spain, in Portugal, in the Indies, firing and burning his Ships and Carrakes in our narrow Seas; and made her Commanders so terrible on the Spanish coasts, that the children when they cryed, their parents would fright them with garda el Draco; which is, Bee quiet, have a care, here is Drake. I pray God, and hope to see the same fear fall on them by the Vir∣tue and Valor of Your HIGHNESS's Admiral Blake, not onely to fright their Children, but their Natives, when they are
 men, making them to cry garda el Blaco, as well as their Fathers said garda el Draco. This great Quarrel at the first was under∣taken by the Queen, for the relief of the miserable poor distressed Dutch Protestants, the States of the United Provinces in the Low Countries, (they had no other title in her Reign). I hope they will for ever ac∣knowledg the Curtesies of English men's blood and money, that hath made them now the High and Mighty Lords the States, and a free State; I wish it bee not now in their Greatness blotted out of their remem∣brance.
Queen Elizabeth's VVarrs in Ireland were very expensive; and also her Reliev∣ing of France both with Men and Money. And at the foot of the accompt, for all these great undertakings, to leav her Successor her Kingdoms in great wealth, peace, ho∣nor, and safety, and her People happy, make's up the macle.
Towards the setting of this glorious STAR, som sons of Belial laid the foun∣dation of the Hellish Powder Plot; and at latter end of her glorious Reign, the Ana∣baptists and Sectaries begin (like Snakes) to engender; but her Successor King James, by his prudence, shook them off, as St Paul
 did the Viper, by several waies and means: First, as the Physition, let's som blood out of the bodie to preserv the whole: Second∣ly, as Sea-faring men in a storm, cast's som goods over board to save the Cargasaon: Thirdly, as a good Husbandman, that will afford som feet of ground for hedging and and ditching to fortifie and secure the rest: Fourthly, as a good Gardiner, that would have his garden plants grow, pluck's up the weeds by the roots: So King James used all these Remedies to the Sectaries, som of their mouths hee stopped with pre∣ferment; som hee committed to the rigor of the Law, which cost them their lives; others to Prison. And after the Dispute at Hampton-Court, hee put down his perem∣ptory resolution by Proclamation, (which I humbly call his hedg, to keep out the little Foxes that spoil the Vineyard of the Church) Requiring a conformity to the same by all Persons upon strickt penalties; which pro∣ved a good temporary Remedy.
May it pleas Your HIGHNESS to read but one touch more of the splen∣dor and glory of this great Queen Eliza∣beth; shee was not without her Eclipses with troubles and fears many waies (to shew the uncertainty of worldly glory) even from
 her nearest Kinswoman Mary Queen of Scots; who, while shee was Queen of France, by her Husband's perswasion, took upon her the stile and title of Queen of England; from which sprung all her troubles in Scot∣land, when shee returned a widow out of France (and this was done by Queen Eli∣zabeth and her Counsel's instigation): These troubles, by her Scotch Rebels, drove the Scotch Queen into England, whither shee fled for refuge; but it proved otherwise: for, upon that score, shee was catch't in the net of death; and so much the sooner, by reason of her impatience not brooking the delayes of her Deliverance; which thrust her head-long into so many Treasons, that Queen Eliza∣beth could not let her live, and bee in safe∣ty her self; for Queen Elizabeth was often times heard to say, Either strike, or bee stric∣ken: and so shee struck first, and cut off her head; and by that means removed her Capital Enemy, (It is a certain truth, It is a dangerous thing for a supreme Magistrate to have the patience to stay to bee first striken) but to put an end to those plots which were daily plotting and hatching against her Crown and Dignity; for the Queen of Scots had real plots for both, having found in her Study the Keys of above fifty seve∣ral
 Characters for several people shee held Intelligence with, both Forain and English Traitors. Queen Elizabeth's grave and wise Counsell would not let her play an after game. They had the Queen of Scots tryed by a Jury of English Noblemen, many of them being Catholicks, & her own friends and neerest relations; and had they not found her guilty, many of their heads had gone off: for which very reason, many that the Scotch Queen took to bee her friends, were her greatest enemies. But do∣ing that business so effectually, the Queen wincked at many Noblemen; for many of her Jury that had been hatching and acting with her, Queen Elizabeth buried their faults in oblivion. But Abington and Babington scaped not so well, being both hanged, drawn and quartered, and their Estates annexed to the Crown. There were others (as Somer∣vill, Parry, Savage, and many more) that sought this glorious Queen's death, but shee vvas still protected by the Watchman vvhich slumbereth not; and dyed gloriously, and in peace.
May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; vvhen King James came to the Crovvn, a Powder Plot vvas laid for him, his Vine and Olive-branches being to bee about
 him, attended by his Nobles and third E∣state in Parlament, who were all designed in the twinckling of an eie to have been brought to ashes, and dispersed by the four Winds: the hellishness of that Treason is beyond the expression of vvords.
That many Treasons have been plot∣ted in other Countries, and on other Prin∣ces as vvell as ours; to Catholicks as well as to Protestants, and have taken effect: They were but plotted with us, but by God's providence prevented; beyond Sea really acted, witness the two great Kings of France, (Henry the Third and Henry the Fourth) one stabbed before Paris, in the face of his Army; and the other King, by a rascally Votary, a fellow conjured into the spirit of a Quaker (by such a base hand died Henry the great King of France in the streets of Paris) and the Prince of Orange murthered in Holland, being a Protestant Prince, by the same kinde of villanous hands. These perils are common in all ages, to good Princes and bad Princes, Pro∣testants and Catholicks. And seeing these daily practices are and have been by God's permission suffered to bee done, what man∣ner of men ought all Princes and supream Magistrates to bee, considering (more than
 other men) they may have their glory ex∣tinguished in a moment, and that by base and unworthy hands.
Som men (in all ages) being possessed and instigated by the power of the Divel, who possesseth them, and put's into their mindes, that a private man may by a dag∣ger or pistol judg and execute a Prince, if they conceiv him a Tyrant: And these de∣lusions many times prevail vvith these in∣carnate Divels, whereby they act Tragedies, and shake vvhole Nations; and thus do supream Magistrates too frequently becom (by these ill-principl'd Miscreants) upon the matter, but meer Tennants at will of their Lives and Dignities.
May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; there is a Pestilent Plague that reigns a∣mongst us, which (I humbly say) ought by the pruning-knife of the Law to bee lopped off from the vvholsom Tree of this flourish∣ing Common-vvealth; and that is the Trea∣sonable Libeller, vvhich of late hath increa∣sed openly every week, producing daily monstrous births of Villany against the State. Great SIR! I humbly say, That these things ought not to bee despised, but rather lookt into; for every Libel is a knock at a carefull Magistrate's door; to awaken
 and caus him to stand upon his Guard; e∣specially in such Times as these, when many men's brains are apt (being like Touch∣vvood) to take fire with the least spark of Sedition. And therefore, even as the Plague and sundry other filthy diseases are obno∣xious and troublesom to both the minde and body; so are all scurrilous Verses and libellous Pamphlets, with their divellish Au∣thors, in a higher degree more infectious and hurtfull to both Church and Common∣vvealth. (Now all diligence should bee used to bring the Offenders to Justice, and by that means to terrifie others.) I have seen som questioned, but I did never see exem∣plary Justice done upon the Offenders, for these many years by-past: Som Juries in this Nation will not believ the ill Conse∣quence of this fire, till (without God's great mercie) all will bee in a flame; for one Vil∣lain may bring a Plague into a City, as well as an Army; and one Conspirator, or one Libeller, one Naples Massanello, against a Prince or State, may bee like a Thunder∣bolt that strike's upon the sudden, and can hardly bee discerned, there is no defence nor preparation against them; one Felton in a moment extinguished the Greatness of a Duke of Buckingham.

 May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; amongst just Princes (in the deadliest warr) assassinators and poisoners of Princes have ever been accounted execrable; and the Actors and Plotters to bee taken off from the face of the earth. And for all these new Doctrines abroad within this Nation, all true Subjects, without distinction or de∣gree, (I most humbly conceiv) owe faith and service to the supream Magistrate, which give's them protection: And it is Treason for any Subject in this Nation, of what de∣gree soever (I humbly conceiv) to bee pri∣vy to any forain Invasion, Rebellion, or Sedition, or any private Practices, to alie∣nate and estrange men's hearts against the State, and so prepare them to burst out in∣to Tumults and Commotions in these dan∣gerous Times.
Most humbly I shall conclude, That as Your HIGHNESS (by Divine Pro∣vidence) hath gotten the Supremacy of Power, and to bee Protector of these Nati∣ons (so it is ballanced with the supremacy of Cares); You must watch, when others sleep; for Your ascent to Greatness hath brought on You a great proportion of cares and troubles. And those men, whomsoever they bee; that look to gather their fruits, and live
 under the shadow of Your Protection, and would bee partakers of the beneficial Advantages, which daily must descend from Your HIGH∣NESS, beeing the Supream Magistrate; if they will not, in requital of Your Protection, bee true and faithfull to Your HIGHNESS and the Common-wealth, Such men (I humbly say) let them pretend what Religion they pleas, (without God's infinite mercy) may bring, both upon themselvs and the Nation in general, great mischiefs, to the destruction both of them∣selvs and many other particular persons.
May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; Queen Elizabeth and her prudent Counsel would never stay to bee first strucken, ei∣ther by a Forain Prince, or home Rebel; when shee saw there was just occasion, shee would alwaies bee before-hand with them: by which her Vigilancy, shee kept her Self and People in safety, being much feared by her Enemies, and honored and admired both at home and abroad by all her Friends.
May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; I most humbly desire Your gracious peru∣sal of these my humble following Proposals, for calling the Accomptants of this Nation in general to accompt; and of Your Prince∣ly Benignitie, to vouchsafe to pardon what You in Your great Wisedom shall see in
 this Book amiss; if it bee my error, it is an error of the right hand, and flow's from a Loial heart, out of my humble zeal and affe∣ction of your Highness Safety, Honor, Peace and Wealth, and for the good and ease of the Nation in general of some of their Taxes, by calling some unjust Stewards, Committee-men, and Treasurers to accompt, according to the Lawes of the Nation;) and that your Highness and the Parlament would be pleased to make such Orders, Ordinances and Rules for the due and just making of Gold and Sil∣ver Thread, VVyer, Purle, Spangles, &c. that the former Deceipts and Frauds, (daily practised and put upon the Nation) may bee prevented; And that an Act may bee made against all persons that have or shall hereafter cull and melt down the currant Coynes of the Nation, for the making of any of the afore∣said Manufactures, or for any use whatsoe∣ver: And that an Act against Transporters of Gold and Silver out of this Nation may bee forthwith passed, to prevent these great mis∣chiefs to the Common-wealth, which daily a∣rise through the Covetousness of particular persons, to the great dammage, weakning and impoverishing of the Nation in general. The long Parlament hath particularly excepted all these offences concerning the Coyn and Bul∣lion
 out of the general Pardon, in Anno 1651. and all the Offenders are at this day liable to bee severely punished. There is the draught of an Act of Parlament against all these Of∣fences and Offenders, twice read in the House and amended, and appointed by the House to bee reported by Mr Augustine Garland in the month of April 153. VVhich Act, if once finished (as it is now drawn) doth appoint Commissioners to examine and finde out both the Offences and Offenders, according to former Presidents in Parlament.
And upon the effectual prosecution (I humbly say) the Offenders may finde the old Proverb true, that Sweet meat must have sowr sawce: Their exemplary punishment will terrifie others for the future from practising such mischiefs against the Common-wealth.
I have humbly presented to your High∣ness a further Narrative of my prosecution against the Silver ships Sampson, Salvador and George in the Court of Admiraltie. The se∣veral witnesses (beeing many of them Pas∣sengers in these ships) confess the Silver and Lading was consigned for Amsterdam; And many other remarkable Proceedings, for to vindicate the Honor and just Proceedings of the then Counsell of State and Parlament, who stayed those Ships and Silver, as Hollan∣ders
 Silver and merchandize, ships and goods, only upon your Supplicants information and prosecution against them. The Hamburgers, Spaniards and Lubeckers had their ships and goods restored by the Judges of the Court of Admiraltie.
May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; I had more trouble to intitle the State to this Silver in these ships, and to disprove the Spa∣nish Ambassadors Claim to this Silver, then I shall have to finde out the frauds of the Ac∣comptants of this Nation: And if I bee im∣powered to bee your Highness's Remembran∣cer, and to have an inspection into the Ac∣compts of this Nation, (by the assistance of God, if your Highness and the Parlament will strictly and effectually proceed in this Busi∣ness) it will bring your Highness in millions of money, for the ease of the good People of the Nation in general.
God defend, the Commons of this Na∣tion should pay their Taxes and Assessments to particular persons, who shall not give a just accompt to the Common-wealth, accor∣ding to the Lawes and Statutes of this Na∣tion. All good people (I most humbly say) ought to part with some part of their Fleece for the Safety of the Nation, when it is le∣gally assessed, and justly and truly accompted
 for; but not to pay their monies to private Treasurers and Committee-men: that by these Imploiments, many of them have gotten vast possessions from the bottom of beggerie and baseness, by fraud, dissimulation and Cozenage.
May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; These men have not moderately shorn the Sheep of these Nations, but they have rent and torn their pelts and skins from them, and they ought (I most humbly say) to pay for the mending of them; and to serve some of these men as Dudley and Emson were ser∣ved in King Henry the Eighth's time, would bee a pleasing sight, and acceptable to the good People of the Nation.
My most humble Suit to your High∣ness is, That none of the Accomptants of the Nation may escape in the croud, from giving up a just, true and perfect accompt; and that Commissioners and Auditors, of approved integritie and trust to your High∣ness, may bee impowered to view and in∣spect into all Orders and Warrants that have or shall bee produced by any Trea∣surer or Accomptant, for all summs of mo∣ney they pretend for their discharge; and where any VVarrant hath been pretended∣ly or really paid, and not legally impowered
 for the payment of any summ of money; all such VVarrants may bee suspended, for the view and inspection of your Highness's Commissioners of the Revenue, or such o∣ther honorable persons your Highness shall appoint for that service: And every Trea∣surer and Accomptant of this Nation, his Body, Goods and Lands, his Heirs and Ex∣ecutors, to bee liable till they have duly ac∣compted, according to the Lawes of the Nation, or obteined your Highness gratious Pardon and Discharge.
May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; Thus farr I proceeded in this my most hum∣ble Epistle, at the first day this Parlament fate, being Sept. 17. and your Supplicant bee∣ing resolved to wait some time, to see how God would dispose of the Counsels of your Highness Supream Court, I did for some daies acquiess in this Business.
May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; It is a reverent Tradition and Priviledg grant∣ed to the Members of the high Court of Parlament, that many things may bee spo∣ken by the Members of the high Court of Parlament within the House, which are not communicable abroad, and punishable for themselvs to speak out of that Place. There are some things which God doth many
 times put into a mans heart, (which is no Member of Parlament, but an humble loial Subject) which are for the good and bene∣fit of the Nation, which one man know∣eth; and peradventure another man that is farr wiser and more learned than hee, doth not know.
May it pleas Your Highness; In a ship, an ordinary Boy thereof is asmuch bound to discover a Leak or a Conspiracie in the said ship, as the Boson or Pilat, and hath as good interest to do it, because his life is endangered in the concealing of it; and a poor mans life may bee as precious to himself as a rich mans: the same thing ought every man to doe, that is a faithfull Sub∣ject on Land, in any Nation where hee hath protection, and much more his Coun∣trey, for preventing all Conspiracies to his power; and if hee make a Discovery of what the Supreme Magistrate knows be∣fore, hee may therein shew want of Judg∣ment, but not want of dutie or affection to the Supreme Magistrate or Government where hee liveth.
I humbly say, That man sinneth a∣gainst God and his Conscience, if it bee for the honor of God, the good of the Na∣tion, and the safetie of the Supreme Magi∣strate,
 if hee do not discover it: (and all men formerly were bound by their Oaths of Aliegiance and Supremacie to bee true to the King.)
For hee that hides and conceals that which God would have revealed, puts Gods light under a Bushel; most especially, if it bee incumbent upon a mans spirits, and such notions dictated unto him by the spirit of God, which hee never had before for the doing it; and upon resisting that spirit, may never have hereafter.
This beeing my present condition, up∣on my knees I beseech your Highness to be graciously pleased to grant your favorable perusal of this Epistle and Book, beeing far larger then at first I intended, proceeding from a most humble, dutifull and loial heart, for your Highness Securitie, Peace, Honor and Safety.
Had Caesar perused what was writ to him before hee went into the Capitol, hee had not died as hee did. The Duke of Guyse in France, and many others (in all ages) that have sleighted information and intelligence, have had the same sad fate.
Great SIR, I most humbly say, your Highness having (by Gods gracious and fa∣vorable assistance) taken on You the Go∣vernment
 of beeing PROTECTOR of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Do∣minions thereunto belonging, You ought and are bound (both before God and to these Nations) to the uttermost of your power to give Protection and equal Justice to all the good people of these Nations, that are wil∣ling to live under your Protection, and to defend them with all your might & strength, and to use the power God hath put into your hands for those ends, to keep your People in peace and safetie against all factious spi∣rits.
In pursuance thereof, You are (asmuch as in you lieth) to keep from power or publick Imploiment all such as You and your Counsel shall know to bee publick or secret undermining Enemies of the peace & welfare of this Common-wealth, by what pretences, titles or callings soever, whether Civil, Militarie or Ecclesiastical. You and your great Counsell (upon my bended knees I say) are to have a special care of some men, who, under the pretence of the Pri∣viledges and Rights of the people in Par∣lament, would (upon that popular score) vent their own discontents, and put all again into a confusion: with what spirits some old Members came to serve the Nation in this
 Parlament, was visibly seen to all men that wished the peace of this Nation, in some Counties upon their election, and in their ordinary conversation and deportment: The scope and drift of some mens designes was to make division and faction between the Parlament and your Highness, between the City and your Highness, and put all things into a confusion this present day, to make way for the publick Enemies of your High∣ness and this Nation. This was by some particular persons (no doubt) intended (and all men that studie and love the peace of their Countrey might see it) under such cunning undermining questions, as was by some dis∣contented spirits set on foot the last Parla∣ment, craftily to undermine the very Body and Beeing of the Government, and sliely to strike at both your Highness and your Posterities Life, Fame and Fortunes, and to pluck up by the roots your Highness Coun∣sel and the established Government, which your Highness (by the Advice of your Coun∣sel had setled); witness, the many Libells of all sorts and tempers, to stir up commo∣tions in several Parts and Parties, the In∣gredients beeing prepared for all Interests to incense and infuse a hatred and detesta∣tion of the present Government; and (with∣out
 Gods mercie) the intentions of som would have before this time burst out into tumults and insurrections: my hopes and praiers are, that God, by your Highness prosperous go∣vernment, hath prepared better things for this Nation.
That some factious Cocks, which crew so loud in the Countrey, now they are kept out of the Pit, may return home to their Houses, Coun∣trey Capons, and sleep quietly in their roosts; it will bee a happiness both to themselvs, their Countrey, their Wives and Children, their Friends, Tennants, Servants and Neighbors (if they do so); and their not doing of it, may bring disturbance on the Nation, and a certain ruine upon themselvs, their Wives and Children. It is an old trick, Divide and Rule: and many that have had the power, will leave no stone unturned to get again into play; so they laugh, they care not if the whole Nation cries.
There are many good People who have been misled, upon the notion of Libertie and Freedom; And if your HIGHNESS and your Supreme Counsel (the Parlament) do not give a stop by your power and vigi∣lancie, even at this juncture of time (with∣out Gods mercie) things may run into great Disorders.
Therefore your HIGHNESS and the
 Parlament (I most humbly upon my knees say) must build the walls of our Jerusalem (England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Do∣minions thereunto belonging) as Nehemiah did that of the Jews. Your Highness and the Parlament have many Samballats that envies your Building and scorns your Re∣formation; there are many of the Children of Separation and Division in these Lands.
When a wise man would keep his House from falling, (that is rent & shaken with great tempests,) he props it up with timber, cramps it with Iron bolts and barrs; and, it may be, upon the propping of it to set it upright, cracks the seiling and fret-work of the best and stateliest room in his House; surely if either the Wife or the Children or the Ser∣vants should come and complain to the Owner what dammage this beautifull room hath received, the Master of the House and his Workmen have at hand a readie An∣swer, which is, Should hee not have prop∣ped and crampt the House with Iron bolts and barrs, the whole fabrick would have fallen, and the House have been made a heap of rubbish, both hee and they would have had no place to keep them from the weather.
By this my propping and cramping up
 my House (saith the wise Master and his VVorkmen) I have secured and got my Esse, I have kept my beeing; when my House is new tiled and tyte, to keep out the wea∣ther, you shall have your desire, I will give you all content, I will cause Plaisterers to re∣pair and garnish that seiling which you are so much offended with the cracking of; I will new gild it, and make it more beautifull then ever it was, provided you will put to your hands to sweep down the Cob-webbs, and carrie away the rubbish, and so cleanse and clear my House; do this, I promise you I will do the other.
No doubt, but a wise and dutifull familie will do it chearfully with thanks, for their Esse and beeing hath been preserved through the Master of the families Providence.
May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; I humbly say, The good people of these Na∣tions under your protection, ought (at this juncture of time) earnestly to pray to God, that the foundations of their Happiness may bee so laid, this Parlament (as to secure firm∣ly their beeing) that they may have an Esse, and then comes the Bene, that it may bee as firmly setled upon as sure a foundation as a Rock, against whom no divisions or force can or shall prevail.

 For the effectual Security of these Nations, that this Parlament would bee pleased to erect a high Court of Justice, to sweep down the cob-webbs, remove the rubbish, clear the house, and by Justice restrain and (if incorrigible) cut off un∣ruly and violent spirits. Wise men cut their coats according to their cloth, and will bee sure to keep themselvs warm, before they buy Lace to trimm them. Ʋpon my knees I humbly desire your Highness, to put the Nation in a posture of defence, against home-bred Traytors and forain Force, and then bee pleased to garnish the Peo∣ple with rich and stately Priviledges.
Security ought to bee provided for before Or∣nament.
The Divisions at home are farr more destru∣ctive and dangerous, than any forain Force or In∣vasion can bee to this Nation. God bee thank∣ed, the Sea is a hook in our Enemies nostrils; they may bee numerous, but they are at a distance. I hope this Nation in one respect may have a Property that Ireland hath, that no Spider or ve∣nemous living Creature but dies assoon as it is put on Irish ground: So, I pray God, none of Eng∣lands Enemies (either home-bred Traytors or forain Nations) that shall invade us, but upon their first Landing, may by Gods Assistance finde English ground to bee their graves, by the vir∣tue and valor of your Highness Armies.

 I have heard of a famous Vaulter, that having once shewed a rare trick, was pressed by some to do it again; and striving to do it the second time, brake his neck.
God divided the red Sea, and made a pas∣sage for the Children of Israël to bring them out of Egypt towards Canaan, this I finde and reade; but I never found nor read, that God would have divided the red sea, and given them a safe Passage, if they would have left Moses and Aaron, and returned into the red Sea again for Egypt.
VVee have a Proverb, The pot goes often to the water, but at last it comes broken home. Gods providence hath gone along with us, while hee bids us go and fight his battell, wee have seen the success. No man can promise a Blessing, when wee fall out a∣mongst our selvs for shadows, and neglect our common Safeties. Many men have laid their designes to bring a mischief about, so deep, that when they spring their mines, the powder that makes the train shall bee free∣dom and priviledge of Parlament, Gods Cause, and what not, to make a disturbance. The truth is, if some men would speak their mindes truly, there are a sort of people do but cajole the common people, and blow them in∣to discontents to get into places of power, as
 Absalom did, with I would I were a Judg in Israël, what Justice would I do? so saies some male-contented Members that were of the long Parlament, If wee can but revive Laza∣rus, get the long Parlaments power to sit e∣verlastingly; VVell, what then? wee will re∣store the People to their Libertie; Even as much as you did it when you had the power; for they had so entangled themselvs and the Nation, that rich and poor, young and old, were glad they were dissolved; and many of them are ashamed of their own doings, yet some of the old Members would fain bee at the old VVork.
They vvould (had they your Highness povver) destroy and pluck up by the roots You, that had vvrung the povver out of their hands, also your Posteritie, your Counsel, Ar∣my, and all your relations. I humbly say, I beleeve these vvould bee the Actions of some of the Members of the long Parlament, had they the povver again; and this is the study of some discontented Members.
To stir up and foment the several hu∣mors and tempers of some factious people, to gather together and involve us in blood a∣gain, vvhat meaneth the daily seditious prin∣ted Libells else? if your Highness, the Par∣lament, and Army look not vigilantly about
 to suppress these male-contents, (before they get a head) by exemplarie Justice. I hum∣bly say, the mischief is not so inconsiderable, that it should bee dispised.
And if it should so fall out, that this mis∣chief should burst out, (as God of his infinite mercie defend) by the neglect either of your Highness, the Parlament or Armie; no doubt but God, having put us of these Nations into your hands for just protection, for such as sub∣mit to you for conscience sake; the same God vvill require a just accompt of your Highness, Parlament and Armie, hovv you have dis∣charged this great trust; and vvheresoëver the failing of the Trust is, God vvill expect a strict accompt, and punish it: for mens lives ought not to bee spilt as water on the ground, nor their goods plundered, to satisfie factious and private spirits: The supreme Magistrate is to see the peace of the Nation not to bee disturbed upon particular factions, though they bee multitudes. The Magistrate set o∣ver us is not to bear the sword in vain: Ju∣stice is somtimes more seasonable for the Na∣tion (upon incorrigible Offenders) then Mercie, that others may take example.
May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; A master of Ship in a storm at sea, may fling goods over-board, for saving the Pas∣sengers,
 Ship, and Loading; and the Owners must bear the loss, with thanks for his care; which if hee should do in a calm, (fling the goods over-board) hee vvould deserve blame and to pay for the merchandize: That may lawfully bee done in dangerous times, which cannot bee justified in quiet times.
There are some Priviledges in a quiet time, vvhich may and ought to bee stood u∣pon, which at this time are destructive to the very beeing and safetie of the Nation; For if every man should bee admitted to give Physick that the Neighbors present and com∣mend out of love to a sick man, the patient may quickly bee purged out of the vvorld: Dangerous times must have skilfull, valiant, and vigilant managers of their Affairs, and not discontented persons.
Wee see in Fevers, Calentures, and Lunacies, wise Physitians sometimes bindes the hands, and give their Patients thin and spare diet; which, by the care and attendance of the Physitian and Friends, the Sick are again recovered: Surely when they are in health, these mad men ought to thank their Physitian and Friends, as beeing (under God) the Instruments that gave them Life and Beeing: When these mad men are well recovered, they need not to bee restrained within doors, they need not to bee debarred of a free
 and plentifull diet, but to enjoy all they have free∣ly, and to dispose of it as they please themselvs. If these Rules vvere not observed, when men are in a Lunacie or Sick, it would destroy Societie, and bee destructive to mankinde. A mad man with a knife may cut his own throat; vvith a sword, kill and wound all hee meets. A Sick man may eat or drink so much as may kill him, fling off the cloaths, or otherwise disorder himself.
Now, may it pleas your Highness; If these bee ordinary bonds and relations of Christianity, Neighbor-hood and Friend∣ship between partie and partie, and is used amongst the most barbarous Nations, as the means to preserve a beeing; hovv much more is it your Highness Dutie and Place, and God expects it from your hands (beeing assisted vvith the supreme Court of Parla∣ment) to bee a good and mercifull Physitian to the distempered and sick men of the Nati∣on, some old Members of the long Parlament? A disease of the minde, and an inveterate heart are not curable, but by Gods blessing: such evil spirits are not cast out but by Praier and Fasting. How mercifully have you dealt with some of them that were chosen to sit in Parlament, in not suffering them to runn upon that (which certainly had some of them been admitted to sit in Par∣lament)
 they would have runn themselves upon a Rock to their own Confusion?
May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; I do not say, all those Gentlemen that were not at first admitted, God defend; for many, no doubt, are honorable and worthie Persona∣ges, and will give your HIGHNESS, the Parlament and Counsel just satisfaction. The like (I most humbly say) for those honorable and worthie Gentlemen, that are gone down into their Countries; no doubt, many upon their private occasions to settle their Business, and return to do the Parlament and Nation Service.
May it pleas your HIGHNESS; there is a saying, Hee is more mercifull that prevents a man from falling, then hee that takes him up after hee is fallen, and could have staid his falling; it shews an aboundance of bowels of mercie, that your Highness would not let some men run their desperate course, that they, when they were entangled in the net of their own inventions, might have enriched your Cof∣fers by their Confiscations, and ruined their families.
God hath put it into your heart, to save them as a brand out of the fire; for had they been let alone, they had some of them burnt their wings. If they reade the Historie of
 former Kings Craft (as King James used to call it); they constantly made Risings and Tumults an advantage unto them by Con∣fiscations and Forfeitures, to augment the Re∣venues of the Crown. And, no doubt, (ma∣ny a man for the very covetousness to get his Estate) some Kings have hatched and re∣vived old Treasons themselvs, to get and en∣snare sometimes Innocents, and sometimes heedless Traitors. Histories, both divine and profane have such examples.
God send some men never to forget your Highness goodness; for when they had runn their course (as some Gentlemen in the North and West have done) some would have com to untimely deaths, others to banishment, and all to ruine and infamie (to the break-heart of their Wives, Children, and relati∣ons); and some others, with sorrow, teares, and unfeigned repentance, to have begged for their lives, and (peradventure) not obtei∣ned it, being cut off in their prime & strength, before half their daies are runn out.
Their Wives, Children, and Relations of some Families in this Nation, are bound to bless God for ever, that put it into your High∣ness heart to prevent some men in this Na∣tion, that they should not forfeit their lives nor estates: a great mercie (with reverence
 bee it spoken) in imitation of the great God of Heaven, that hath said, I will not the death of a sinner; and with long suffering and patience beareth with sinfull man, whose breath is in his nostrils, and lighter then the dust in the balance. What are the private male-contents of this Na∣tion in your Highness hands, so long as you make God your Shield and Buckler? Ʋnder Gods safe∣gard and tuition, mighty Kings and Common∣wealths have not been able to resist the force of your Armies and Navies; (witness, Holland, Denmark, Portugal, &c.) that God that hath delivered you from the Bear and the Lyon, will deliver you from these uncircumcised Philistins, if you put your trust in him.
The Blessing of him that spake out of the burning Bush, bless your Highness and your High Court of Parlament, and direct all your Counsels, that this Parlament may prove a Blessing to this Nation; And that your High∣ness and the Parlament may bee (as Moses and Aaron to the Children of Israel) the De∣liverers of these Nations out of the Land of Egypt; And that God would send the spirit of Courage, Love & Concord upon all your Persons, & bless the Counsels and Acts of this Session of Parlament; That your Highness may bee a Nursing-father, and with compas∣sion ease the Griefs and Oppressions of your
 People, (many of your good and loial Sub∣jects at this day suffering much wrong and oppression, amongst whom your humble Suppli∣cant is not the least, beeing oppressed contrary to Gods Law and the Laws of the Nation.
Your Supplicants daily praier is, That God of his mercie will blast and scatter all in∣ventions & plots that are or shall be hatching against your Highness and the high Court of Parlament, either of forain Foes or native Re∣bells; And that God would turn the Coun∣sels of some of the malicious Achitophels of this Nation that are sequestred and laid aside, and some others that have maliciously deserted their Trusts, into Foolishness; And if they do maliciously, wilfully and foolishly persist still to seek the disturbance of these Nations, over which God by his divine Providence hath made your Highness Governour and PROTECTOR; that then your sword of Justice may fall on some of them, to terri∣fie others, or (which is worse) that some of them may (if they do not repent of this ma∣licious sin to God and your Highness for what they had maliciously designed) they may serve themselvs as Achitophel did, 2 Sam. 17. 23. And when Achitophel saw that his counsel was not followed, hee sadled his ass, and arose and gat him home to his own house to his Citie, and put his
 houshold in order; and HANGED him∣self, and was buried in the Sepulchre of his Fa∣thers.
Let this bee the end of your Highness's malicious and implacable Enemies; others that erre through mis-information or differ∣ence in Judgment, I pray God to shew them a sight of their sins, and give your Highness a mercifull heart, so freely to pardon them, as your Self would expect Gods pardon; that so, through the great mercie and protection of our God, these three Nations (after so ma∣nie Earth-quakes, Overturnings, and most fa∣mous and memorable Revolutions) may bee firmly grounded and setled on the foundati∣ons of Libertie and Freedom, Truth, Mercy, and Peace; to the astonishment and amaze∣ment, horror and confusion of home-bred Traitors and forain Nations, your Highnesses and our Nations Enemies.
VVhen they shall see their hopes disap∣pointed, many of them promised to themselvs, viz, Uproars, Tumults and Commotions, Fire and Blood; every man ready to sheathe his sword in his Neighbors bowels, the rocks to rend, and the Starrs of our Firmament to fall, our Sun to bee darkned, and Moon to bee turned to blood, through the divisions and private discontents amongst us in Parlament.

 But BEHOLD! by the good gui∣dance of God, this glorious Parlament run∣ning its course as the Sun in his strength, to the joy and comfort of our Friends, both at home and abroad, and confusion of our Foes in all parts; that see this Parlament sit in Glo∣rie and Peace, in Love, Union, Order, and Concord, in that form as was wont to bee in Glorious Queen ELIZABETH's daies, every Member making it his studie to get good Laws, Liberties and Priviledges for the Counties, Cities and Burroughs they served for; and for these Nations of England, Scot∣land and Ireland in general, for the individual Safetie, Prosperitie, VVelfare and Honor of Protector and People, all their Interest to goe hand in hand together. And your Highness acting Queen Elizabeth's part, studying al∣waies to enlarge your Self, to give these Na∣tions all just and due Satisfaction and large Immunities.
Your Highness and the Parlament build∣ing up this Common-wealth, as Nehemiah did the walls of Jerusalem, Nehem. 4. every Builder to have his sword girded by his side, and so they builded; there are several other remarkable passages in that Chapter fit for these present times.
By the blessing of God, these glorious Be∣ginnings
 of this Parlament will have as an auspicious and happie end and finishing, to the great contentment of your Highness and all the good people of your several large Do∣minions, to the terror of your Enemies, and the frustrating of many Spanish designes, that were and are hatching here, under specious pretences of several mens Interests and Dis∣contents.
These mens Eggs were buried (no doubt) in India Gold; but, by the good guidance of God, the Spaniards Eggs will prove addle; He is so subtle (by the Counsel of his Jesuites, ca∣sting themselvs into all shapes) for hee doth most of his work by the Jesuites, who sow and foment new Doctrines amongst us, that have bewitched and cracked the heads of ma∣ny men in these Nations, which do the Spa∣niards and Papists work, and know it not.
VVhen your Highness Navies sailed to the VVest-Indies, You caused them to bee sheathed with Planks, Pitch and Hair, that the worms which breed in those Seas might do no hurt or prejudice to the hull or bulk of their Ships.
Great SIR! England, Scotland and Ire∣land may well bee compared to three Roial Ships, and the Dominion of Wales to a most Princely Frigot, Your Highness by the grace
 of God being Protector, General and Admiral.
Your Highness hath now a Warr with Him that stiles himself the Emperor of the In∣dies. This Prince is Master of a Metall that is as dangerous to all Princes in Christendom, their Persons, Countries, Lands and Territo∣ries, as the Worms in the Indian Seas are to the Merchants ships. No Iron barrs can bee made so strong, but this Metall (like Aqua for∣tis) will eat thorough. It is called Gold and Silver; it is so subtle, that it will incorporate (like Quick-silver) almost with all metalls: Men of all Professions, all Ages, rich and poor, young and old, none but are taken and corrupted with it, as hee is a Natural man.
But God hath appointed a Remedie a∣gainst this Poison to some persons through his mercie, the pretious balsom of his restraining Grace; but this hee grants but to a few, whose spirits are elevated above Gold and Silver, this world or worldly things.
God hath appointed another Balsom for these Nations against the Poison of Spanish Gold and Silver; and that is, to bless these Nations with your Highness victorious PER∣SON, beeing assisted with your supreme Counsell the Parlament.
Upon my knees I most humbly say, As you sheathe your Ships you send to India for
 fear of the VVorm; so your Highness must sheathe the Cinque-ports and Creeks of your HIGHNEss Dominions, you must fortifie and garrison the Sea-ports of this Nation, and the People bee alwaies readie (both in hand and heart, all as one man) to fight for our Religion, Countrey, our Lives, Wives and Children, Lands and Estates; and without this bee done, wee shall not have a Beeing, Estates or Proprietie: this is the one thing necessary and chiefly to bee lookt after, to for∣tifie and secure the Nation against home-bred Traitors and forain Forces.
And, if any should presume to assault us, wee may bee afore-hand, and by our Navies destroy their Ships & Vessels in their own Seas, let their Land be died with their Spanish blood, let their barren Countrey bee fatned with their own Carkasses; and as they give in their Monies the Sheaf of Arrows, as a remembrance of the great Victories they ob∣teined by the Valor of the English; so now, for their Ingratitude, the Spaniards may cry as they did in Queen Elizabeths time, to Philip the Second King of Spain and his Counsel, SIR, Let us have Peace with England, and Warr with all the World. And if they did so when this Nation had but one Drake, and a small Fleet (in comparison of what your
 Highness hath, wee having now many score of Drakes, which if they bee impowered with your HIGHNESS Commission, and Gods Blessing thereupon) they shall never bee able to bring home their Treasures from the VVest-Indies; and though our Fleet wait long, no doubt the Vigilancie of your Admirals will make the Spaniards pay for their attendance.
About sixteen years ago, God (out of his secret Judgment) struck the Crown of Spain with a dead Palsie on one side, by the revolting of the Portugals, their right heir and true King assumed the Crown, viz. the Duke of Bragantza; so that now your Highness fights but with one half of the King of Spain, as hee was formerly; the other half the Portugal will assist You in all his Domi∣nions (both in Christendom, Africa, East and West Indies) to destroie the Spaniards.
So that as God hath raised your Highness to this Greatness admirably, to have the Sove∣raignity and Dominion of these Nations▪ so by this rent and division of Portugal from Spain, God hath facilitated and made the way easie for your Highness to cut down and pluck up by the roots this barren Tree the Spaniards. And those Nations in the West-Indies, which at this day live under the Spanish Tyranny, and are now fed with the chaff and bran of Popish Supersti∣tion,
 may bee (by the blessing of God) fed with the pure manchet of the Gospel, and at once bee delivered from bodily and spiritual slavery.
My daily praier to God is, to keep us u∣nanimous in this Nation of England, as wee and our Predecessors were in famous Queen Elizabeths daies; that it may bee the study of every good Protestant in this Nation with heart, hand and purse, to destroy the Spaniards greatness.
The King of Spains Power is now not half so much as it was before Portugal revolt∣ed from him, and his Power is now farr more in shew then substance; his Territories and Dominions are at such a distance one from another, they stand like the haires of King James's beard, scatteringly, as if one was a∣fraid of another: the charges of Garrisons, and to keep his Dominions under his Obedi∣ence, doth cost him (in some Countries) farr more to keep the bare Title, then the Reve∣nues of the Countries amount unto, witnesse our next Neighbour Flanders; and the like is for many other of his Dominions, that year∣ly cost him many hundred thousand pound▪ hee holds a VVolf by the ears; and if the King of Spain could bee well rid of them, both Hee, and his Counsel (no doubt) wishes both Flanders and Holland drowned in the
 Seas; they have been the Spunges that have sucked up all his Treasure yearly.
There was wont of old to bee a saying, No Fishing like the Fishing in the sea; No service like a Kings: so, I humbly say, No Warr like a Warr with Spain, No service like a Prote∣ctors service.
If wee can but light on the King of Spains Indian Fleets, & stop that Course, your High∣ness and these Nations (by Gods assistance) will turn the scales of all the Affairs of Chri∣stendom, and make your Highness appear the true Defender of the Faith in these Imperial Dominions, and the Sword and Buckler of all the Protestant Churches in Christendom.
It is a Rule amongst Gaimsters, Winn at first, lose at last; and great Undertakings are not to be effected but with great Difficulties. If it please God to put it into your Highnesses and this Parlaments hearts, vigorously and vi∣gilantly to pursue the VVarr in the VVest-Indies, all the Protestants in Christendom will bee bound to bless God, and pray for your Highness and this glorious Parlament; and, by the Blessing of God, You and your Armies and Navies will cut the King of Spain in the jugular vein; as the Dutch man saith, Kill him as dead as a herring: which must bee done by the unanimous Power of these three Nations.

 This Course vvill make great Brittany and Ireland, and their several and respective Ports, Havens and Harbors thereof, to act and do Cadis and St Lucars work; our Brittish and Irish sea-port Towns (by the prosperous conduct of your Highness Admirals and Ge∣nerals) to be the Bancks, Magazins and Scales for Return of Indian Treasure, Jewels, and precious Merchandize. The Drumm and Trumpet encourages Horse and Man to Battell. The word India, and to bee master of the Treasure (as Gold, Silver, and other good things) of that new VVorld, no doubt is and will bee more inducing to many noble spirited Gentlemen, Merchants and Mariners of this Nation, then Drumm and Trumpet to Soul∣diers. But when the Land-souldierie shall be likewise interessed in the Purchase and Honor of this noble Undertaking; and the praiers and purses of the good people of this Nati∣on in general, and an Act of this Parlament for setling a way for th vigorous prosecution and maintenance of this just VVarr, for the Good and Peace of Christendom, to goe a∣long in this glorious Action. Then surely it will bee a voice of thunder and terror to the Spaniards; they have seen their best daies, and the Massacres and Cruelties they have com∣mitted in the Indies, confessed by their own
 Countrey-men; now calls them to a strict ac∣compt for the sins of their Fore-fathers.
All good people of these Nations may justly say, your Highness is sent by God as a Blessing of God to Christendom, and as a se∣cond Joshua to our Israël, to fight the Lords Battels; And by your most valiant Generals, Admirals, Land and Sea-souldierie, to put the People of these Nations into possession of the West-Indies.
There is a sort of wilfull People in these Nations, that repine and murmur, and will not see your Highness make these Nations happie. I humbly say, Your Enemies shall see this glorious VVork done by your High∣ness, which shall cause some men to burst with anger. God hath appointed the Valor of this Nation to bee a terror and scourge to the Spanyards.
By this means the Spanish Greatness will go out like the snuff of a Candle, and all Christendom, that hath been disturbed and put into Garbles, con∣fusions, and Tumults, by their Ambition and Pride, to the slaughtering and murthering of mil∣lions of men, wasting whole Kingdomes and Na∣tions, their wounds and scarrs lye bleeding at this day in several places.
May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; The West Indies is the King of Spain's sting; as
 Sampson's strength lay in his Hair, so doth the strength of the King of Spain lye in his Indies: Clip but off his Trade of Returns from the Indies, Your Highness will finde him as weak as water, and so poor, that hee shall not bee able to pay for a Poore-John or a Pilcher; You will hit him in the Ball and White of the Eye: If you take the Indies from him by the valour of Your People, the English may make his Castilianians grinde Su∣gar Canes in the Barbadoes, and use them as Sampson was used in the Prison-hous, and keep the Spaniards so poor, that the Hair of their heads shall never grow again to disturb Christen∣dom.
God still; for ever keep the spirit of Ʋnion in these Nations in general, that every man in his Calling may have a heart and hand to build up our Breaches: that both Your Highness and your People may as one man seek the Individual Pro∣sperity the one of the other, even as it is the study and care of every goo Husband and good Wife to please and content one another: And this is no more then (I most humbly say) Prudence requires at this time; for the Adversaries of our Peace are vigilant, and leave no stone unturned to break in upon us, and to make a division either in hearts or hands, at this conjuncture of time, may hazard and disturb the whole Nation.

 Now the God of Abraham, Isaac and Ja∣cob, which never slumbereth nor sleepeth, di∣rect your Highness and this glorious Parla∣ments Counsels and Actions for his Honor and the Safety and Peace of all these Nati∣ons, over whom your HIGHNESS (by the Grace of God) is PROTECTOR; That as Your Highness is great and glorious in this World, you may bee also great and glorious in the VVorld to come. So prayeth,
 LONDON, Sept. 24. 1656.
