


Most Dread Soveraign!
I Your Majesties most Humble, Loyal, and Dutiful Subject, humbly upon my Knees present this insuing Narrative to Your Sacred Majesty, and to Your most honourable and pru∣dent Councell. I had not presumed to have medled, with this cause and Argument, but that▪ I see with what eagernesse some Merchants of London thought to steal one of the prime Flowers of your Majesties Crown, (from your Sacred Ma∣jesty, and Your most honourable Privy Councell) before the Rising of this blessed Parliament. True it is, Gold and Silver all over the World is a currant Merchandize, it answereth all things, and command∣eth all things under the Sun.
But so, that in all Kingdoms, Gold and Silver is a Kingly Merchandize, and only at the Kings Dispose and Will, and not at the dispose of the Merchants, to be transported at their plea∣sure. May it please Your Majesty, by Twenty Acts of Parliament, the Lawes of this Kingdom of England in all Ages, hath invested it
 in the most Sacred Hands of the Kings of England, and their Privy Councel, and none other (whomsoever, either Lords, Bishops, or Com∣mons).
The Reasons upon perusall of this Narrative, Your Majesty will find to have been done, upon most wise, just, and great consideration, both for the Honour, Strength, and Defence of the Kings Sacred Person, His Crown, and Dignity, and Safetie of the people.
The Money, Bullion, Gold and Silver of this Kingdom in all A∣ges, (till these perillous head-strong Fanatick daies) hath been counted the chief Strength of the Kingdom, the very Soul of the Militia, and the Sinews of Warre and Peace) in Your Majesties most Sacred Hands, and in Your Privy Councels, the Law of this Kingdom hath invested it, (and in none other of Your Majesties Subjects of what condition soever,) and there let it safely remain to the end of this World.
Your Majesties most humble Subject, upon his bended Knees, prayes Your Majesty to keep this Sacred Trust intire in Your Hand, and not to diminish the least tittle, or branch of it.
O never suffer it to be at the will of the Merchant (least Your Ma∣jesty, which God defend, giving some fawning spaniels this Authority, as they desire, out of Your Sacred Hands) You give an oppertunity in a few years, that the breed of them may turn Mastives, and so they may have a power to fly in the Face of Your Sacred Majesty, as some of them did to Your Majesties Royall Father of blessed memory, which God defend; Fore-warn'd, Fore-arm'd: I humbly think I deser∣ved not to live, should I not say this.
The Gold and Silver of the Nation, either Forreign Coyne, or Ingot, or the currant Coin of the Kingdom, is the soul of the Militia, and so all wise men know it, that those that command the Gold and Sil∣ver of the Kingdom, either Coin, or Bullion, to have it free at their dis∣posall,
 to be Judges of the conveniency and inconveniency, or to hinder, or give leave to transport Gold and Silver at their pleasure, is the great Wheell of the State, a most Royall Prerogative inherent in Your Ma∣jesty, Your Heirs and Successors, (and none other whomsoever, but by Your Majesties Licence, and cannot be parted with to any Persons, but by Your Majesties most especiall Grant;) your Majesty, and your Pri∣vy Councell being by the Law the only proper Judges, to have liberty to send to your Friends the Gold and Silver of the Kingdom.
Upon such just Reasons of State, as your Majesty, and Privy Councell shall judg fit for the due relief of your Friends, and Allies, to offend your Enemy, and defend your Imperiall Crown, and Dignity, and strengthen your Friends.
As Queen ELIZABETH severall times assisted HENRY the Great King of France, your Majesties Royall Grandfather; and the States of Holland, with vast sums of Gold and Silver.
The like Royall prerogative is in the Crown, upon Petition of the Merchants, setting forth their just Reasons, and at your pleasure your Majesty to give them leave to send Forreign Gold and Silver either to the Indies, or any part of Christendom; but so as your Majesty, as all your Royall Predecessors, and your Privy Councell being in Commission by your Majesty for that service, are the only proper Judg∣es of this businesse, and have the Lock and Key to dispence with the penall Statutes, to give leave to send so much Gold and Silver of For∣reign Bullion, or the Coin of the Kingdom, as your Majesty shall please in your wisdom for to grant, and to what Prince, or Country, but not at the will of any other Person whomsoever.
Your Petitioner humbly prayes upon my Knees, for your Majesties honor, for your Majesties safety, for the safety and greatnesse of all your Lords and Gentry, for the safety of all your People, that your Majesty keep this Royall Trust intire, and the same always in your Majesty, and
 your most honourable Privy Councels hands, as the Appell of your Eye. Gold and Silver is a Merchandize all over the World, true, but in King∣doms it is a Kingly Merchandize, and not to be transported without the Kings leave. What I hear say, I upon my Knees submit to your Sacred Majesties consideration,
Novemb. 28. 1660. (and shall pray, &c.)
