




Right Honourable!
THis ensuing Sermon which I never thought should have breath'd much above an houre, (unlesse in them that heard it;) is now at your command, to receive a kinde of new life; and to walk abroad in the view of all men. it onely stayes in a line or two to crave your protection; which (being it comes forth only at your Honours call) your goodnesse will not, and your justice cannot deny. — As for the subject of this discourse. I may truly say: it is not unworthy of you, as men; but 'tis highly necessary for you, as Christians. Humanity re∣quires you to skill of the right use of reason: and Christianity ex∣pects you should not be ignorant of the Prerogatives of Faith. Rea∣son indeed makes you men; 'tis Faith onely that can make you good men: and better were it never to have been men, than not to have been good.
I do not at all intend the least prejudice to Reason. I am not so Cynical as to bark at that Moon-light (this would be but an un∣grateful requital for this Royal gift which our Creatour hath be∣stow'd upon us) though I cannot equal it, much less prefer it to Faith. As that houshoulder does not injure his inferiour guests, when he sayes unto them, stand ye here; and to the more honourable, come up hither.

 Of the two I confess, Reason as Leah, is indeed the elder, but ten∣der-eyed: and though seven years service is not too much for her; yet how many more would be well spent for the obtaintng of her youn∣ger, but more amiable sister, Faith? though Reason is the first-born; yet Faith hath the blessing: and concerning these, that determinati∣on holds true too. The elder shall serve the younger.
But oh! What opposition does this meet withal in the minds of men? How hard is it to perswade them to become fools; though it be only as a means to make them wise? I know not which, if compar'd, doth more exert the Almighty power of the Spirit of grace; the bringing into subjection the high thoughts, or the strong lusts that resisted it. I am sure it is full out as difficult to make the blinde to see, as it is to make the lame to walk.
We are then certainly as earnestly to labour to bring our mindes, as our lives unto the obedience of faith. It is no more lawful in the things of Religion to think as we list; then it is in our daily conver∣sation to practice what we please, A defluxion from the head will soon corrupt the other parts: and nothing is more dangerous, then to suffer this childe of the bond-woman, Reason; to laugh at Faith, the heir of the promise: if we mock God, or his Word; he also will have us in derision.
The sum then of what I have in this truth's behalf to require of you; is but what I hope, the justice of this Honourable Court acts dayly; suum cuique tribuere, to give to every one that which is his. When any case betwixt these two parties; Faith and Reason; shall be pleaded before you, or rather in you: give unto Reason, the things that are Reasons; and to Faith, the things that are of Faith. Ho∣nour your God by believing things which you do not see, and he will honour you, causing you to see hereafter those things which you do here believe; which mercy especially I earnestly beg for you of the God of mercy, acknowledging my self,
Right Honourable! 
At Corn-hil, October 26. 1658.
