



SIR,
AS soon as I had resolv'd to make this Address to you, that the Present might not be altogether unworthy of you, I took care to obtain the Consent of my Friends to publish some Let∣ters, which they had writ as Answers to mine.
When I look upon my self, I find I have reason to beg Pardon for my Presumption: But when I consider those Gentlemen, I am encourag'd to hope that you will not be of∣fended

to find your self at the Head of no Vulgar Company; a Company, whose Names and Desert are universally known, a Company rais'd far above the Level of Mankind by their own extraordinary Merit, and yet proud to do Homage to yours. They are Gentlemen, 'tis true, who are di∣vided in their Interests, and who differ in their Politick Principles, but they agree in their Judgments of Things, which all the World admires, and they always consent when they speak of you.
In presenting this little Book to you, I only design'd to shew my Zeal and my Gra∣titude; but they assure me unanimously, that I have likewise shewn my Judgment. Tho' indeed, Sir, the number of the Great, who cast a favourable Eye upon Human Learning, is not so considerable, but that a Man who would Address any thing of this nature to one of them, may soon determine his Choice. Proficients in other Arts are encouraged by Profit, which is their main Design, but he who bestows all his time up∣on Human Studies is incited by Glory alone, and the World takes care that he should have no more than he seeks for. The En∣thusiast, the Quack, the Pettifogger, are rewarded for torturing, and for deluding

Men; but Humanity has met with very barbarous Usage, only for Pleasing, and for Instructing them. The very Court, which draws most of its Ornament from it, has but too often neglected it; there Learning in general has been disregarded: For none but great Souls are capable of great Designs, and few Courtiers have had Greatness of Mind enough to procure the Promotion of Science, which is the Exaltation of Human Nature, and the Enlargement of the Em∣pire of Reason. Our Ministers of State have formerly behaved themselves with so much Indifference, as if it would have lessen'd them to have taken any care of Letters: They have shewn themselves as perfectly uncon∣cern'd, as if not one had discover'd, that at a time when our Neighbours are grown so knowing, the Publick Safety depends on the Progress of Learning, and that to Patro∣nize Science, is to take care of the State. Be∣sides, too many of our States-men have been engag'd in unjust Designs. Most of our Po∣liticians have done their Endeavour to en∣croach on the Crown, or to attempt on the People. Few have had Capacity and Inte∣grity enough to keep the Balance so steady, as to maintain Prerogative at once, and as∣sert Privilege; to serve the King Zealously, and their Country Faithfully; to possess at

the same time the Favour of the one, and the Hearts of the other, to such a degree as to be courted by the People to serve as their Representative, at the very time that they are employ'd by the King in Matrs of the highest Importance. Instead of that, most of them have had reason to be afraid of the King or the Commons; and Men who have been sollicitous for their own Safety, have seldom appear'd concern'd for the good of others. Few then have been and are in a Condition to be Protectors of Learning, and therefore those happy Few, deserve all the Honours which we are able to pay them. Of those, Sir, you appear in the foremost Rank, and are to the Commonwealth of Learning what you are to the State, a great Defence and a shining Ornament. You have warmly encouraged all sorts of Studies, but have been justly and nobly partial to those, for which the State has made no Provision: Which is enough to gain you the Esteem of all who have any Regard for Learning; and to win the very Souls of all, who, like me, are charm'd with the softer Studies of Hu∣manity. For which your Zeal has been so diffusive, that it has extended it self even to me, tho' a bare Inclination to cultivate Elo∣quence and Poetry, was the only thing which could recommend me to you: Yet even this

has been encourag'd by the Promise of your Protection, and by the Humanity of your Receiving me: The Access which I have had to you, has been the greatest Obligati∣on that you could lay upon a Man who has still valu'd Merit above all the World, and who has sought his Improvement more than he has his Advancement. When I have at any time approach'd you, I have found in you none of those Forbidding Qualities, of which they accuse the Great: Instead of those, I have found an Attractive and a Hu∣mane Greatness, the generous Sincerity of the Man of Honour, joyn'd with the Grace and Complaisance of the Courtier, and a Deportment Noble without Pride, and Mo∣dest without Descending. Nature has made me something averse from making my Court to Fortune: But I am proud to attend upon real Greatness; and to wait upon you, since first you encouraged me, has been at once my Duty and my Ambition.
The Permission which you gave me to ap∣proach you, was so great an Incitement to me, that I believe it might have brought me to write well, if I had not a very just reason to resolve to attempt it no more. You had given me one great Encouragement before I had the honour to see you, and that was,

by leaving off Writing your self. For Va∣nity is a greater Incitement to Poets than Pensions, and even Want depresses the Spi∣rits less than the thought of being surpassed. Therefore while Mr. Montague sung, he sung alone. We admir'd indeed our Conquering Monarch, but we admir'd in Silence. We rever'd the Greatness of your Genius, and neglected our Talents. Indeed the Strength and Sweetness of your Voice was fit to charm us alone, and we, who followed, were only fit for the Chorus. But you have left a Pro∣vince, which you have made your own, to the Administration of those who are under you, and are gone on in your victorious Pro∣gress to the Acquisition of new Glory. From which I am sensible that I detract by detain∣ing you: For your Actions are your best Encomiums, and the loud Consent of the Nation your best Panegyrick. It was a glo∣rious one that was spoken to you by the Peo∣ple of Westminster, in the Request that they made to you to serve as their Member in the present Parliament, at a time when they were Caballing all over the Kingdom, and Gentlemen were depriving Peasants of their little Reason, in order to obtain their Voi∣ces; Mr. Montague's Merit, while he was silent, sollicited for him so importunately, that it prevail'd upon a number of conside∣rable

Inhabitants of the Politer Parts of the Town, to come and make it their humble Request to you, to Honour them by Repre∣senting them, which puts me in mind of a Saying of De la Bruiere, That the People are then at their height of Happiness, when their King makes Choice for his Confidents, and for his Ministers, of the very same Persons that the People would have chosen, if the Choice had been in their Power. This, at present, is our own Case; for doubtless the same People, who, without any Brigue or the least Cor∣ruption, came voluntarily to entreat you to suffer them to place you in the Great Coun∣cil of the Kingdom, would, if the Choice had been in their power, have plac'd you in the Privy-Council; and they who frankly offer'd to trust you with the Disposal of the Mony which is in their Houses, would have trusted you, had it been in their power, with the Intendency of that in the Treasury. So that the Peoples Proffer to Chuse you, seems to me to be a loud Approbation of the Choice, which the King had made before of you, and of your Ministration upon that Choice. But I injure the Publick while I detain you: Yet give me leave to end with my zealous Wishes for you, that the Happiness may be multiplied on you, which you so nobly seek to communicate, that you may encrease

in Riches and Honours faster than you ad∣vance in Years, till you arrive at that Height of Prosperity which may be answerable to your high Desert, and till Fortune may be said to pour down her Gifts upon you, in Emulation of Art and Nature: Yet Envy after all shall be forced to declare, that Mr. Montague sprung from an Illustrious Stock, and loaded with Plenty and Honours, is yet Nobler by Desert, than he is by Descent, and Greater by Virtue than he is by For∣tune;
I am, Sir, 
