



THo' I am wholly a Stranger to your Person, I am not to your Character; for who can live in London and not see living Instan∣ces of your Charity and Munificence? You have been the Sanctuary of the Distressed, and even those unhappy Wretches, who found no Benefit in the Public Deliverance of the Kingdom, have ow'd theirs to you. At your own proper Expence, and by a Generosity peculiar to your self, you have done that which has been reckon'd Piety in the greatest Monarchs and Republics, and what Princes have sent Royal Fleets into the Streights to perform. You have rescued Numbers of Christian Captives out

of the cruel Hands of Tyrants, professing the same Religion, and breathing the same Air with themselves. You have redeem'd Slaves in a Country which abominates Ser∣vitude, but by a strange Fascination suffers its Natives to enslave one another: You have deliver'd them out of an unwholesome nasty Confinement, where they dragg'd a Life wretched to themselves, unserviceable to the Common-wealth, lamentable to their Relations, only to gratifie the Revenge or stupid Malice of their haughty Oppres∣sors.
In the best constituted and most gene∣rous Government that ever appear'd in the World, to save the Life of a Citizen, was thought an Action that deserv'd nothing less than a Public Reward. You have resto∣red the Lives of a hundred Citizens, by re∣storing them to their Health, their Liberty and Tranquility of Mind; for what is Life without those Blessings to make it support∣able?
Charity, by what Stupidity it so hap∣pens I cannot imagine, has not that Incense paid it, nor makes that Figure in the World that Heroism does. To lay a whole Coun∣try in Ashes, to destroy Millions of poor Wretches, has for several Ages pass'd for a Royal Vertue, Mankind has been so sot∣tish,

as to deifie those that have perform'd these noble Exploits, and advanced them∣selves by the Slavery or Destruction of their Fellow-creatures.
But tho' the present Age pays a servile Adoration to Heroes, yet Posterity judges of them otherwise; and accordingly we find, that Caesar and Alexander, who were treated as Gods when alive, are now, when all Occasions of Flattery to their Persons cease, treated as Robbers and Usurpers.
It is otherwise with Charity: What∣ever Acknowledgements the Time it lives in pays it, Posterity is sure to reward and honour it; Age only serves to extend it the more, like a well-grown Tree that enlarges its Branches every Spring. 'Tis true, it does not delight in Noise and Ostentation; it flies from that Applause which Heroism courts; it values it self upon no mute In∣scriptions and breathless Statues. It erects to it self living Images, and will be com∣memorated with Gratitude, while there is such a Thing as Memory or Gratitude in the World. The Heroe may extort Flat∣tery even from the Slaves he crushes, or purchase mercenary Praise: but a chari∣table Man is sure to have the voluntary Prayers and Blessings of those whom he relieves, and even Calumny it self dares

not attack him. Thus we see you have the general Acclamations and Applauses of the People, for having done those Actions which the greatest Athenians or Spartans wou'd have been proud of, in a City which in no respect is inferiour to Sparta or Athens.
Pardon therefore an unhappy Man, who has laboured under Affictions, which he might have prevented if he wou'd have gone upon dishonest Methods, by which others have not only repaired, but im∣proved their Fortunes, and whose little All, if it had not fallen into dilatory, I will not say malicious Hands, might have afforded him a Retreat, if not a comfort∣able Support: Pardon him, I say, if ha∣ving experienced hard Usage in the World, he cou'd not forbear to pay his Public Ac∣knowledgment to the Patriot that has re∣deem'd so many Sufferers, if he endeavours to celebrate that Vertue which wou'd have kept him from sinking, and extolls that Charity that may restore him when he is sunk.
For this Reason I have presumed to de∣dicate the following Volume of Letters to your self, which were given me by some of my Friends, who, in commiseration of my hard Circumstances, were willing to contribute something towards my Assist∣ance.

It does not bccome me, who pre∣tend to be no Judge, to say any thing of the Performance. The Gentlemen who are concern'd in the Collection are too well known to want my Praises. I hope that they may serve to entertain you at your vacant Hours, when you can unbend your self from the Hurry of Public Business. At least I beg you to accept them as a Testi∣mony of my Respect, which shall be ever paid you by
Your most obedient and most humble Servant,
SAM. BRISCOE.
