


GReat Travel (saith the Holy Text) is ordained for
the Sons of Adam, and none of his Posterity has been
found without his share, since our Life is but a Pil∣grimage,
and all of us in a way-faring condition on this side
Eternity. No sooner do we leave the little Closers where we were
framed, than we begin our Ramble to those more spacious Cham∣bers
in the bowels of the Earth. Every breath we draw, is a
step towards it; and whilst you are reading this, you pass one
of the Stages on the Road. And therefore, most dear Sir, I do
not at all discommend your present design, that is laid upon so just
and ancient Foundations; but seeing you are going agen to launch
your self into an Ocean in which lye many Rocks, whereon some
for want of skill, or inadvertency, have suffer'd Shipwrack, it
will not be amiss to take a Map along with you; wherein you
may discover those Gulfs on which many before you have bin ruin'd,
and so avoid those Misfortunes which their Destruction has render'd
more signal.
By Travel a Man may be said to reduce into Practice that
which before he only had the Theory of, without being deluded by
the often erroneous Assertions of others; and how fatal unto Truth
the dependance upon the Tradition and Authority of Men has been,
Truth it self can best discover. Not that by this I would seem to impose
a necessity of Travelling upon all Mankind, for I know all are
not equally qualified for it; nor is it absolutely necessary to our well∣being.
But seeing Novelty is a thing so agreeable to our nature,
besides the delight which the mighty Variety will afford you, you
will be thereby rendred more amiable unto all your Acquaintance,
when it shall please God to return you unto them again.
Every body will find something in you that will be pleasing to
himself; one will be ravisht with the Spices of Arabia, and another
with the gaudy Plumes of the Indians, whilst you your self shall be
able to make more advantagious Collections (out of the great
Book of Nature,) and observe how the Image of the Creator, as in
several sorts of shapes, is represented in every Nation, as well as in
every Man.
The Gluttony of the Dutch, and the Drunkenness of the German;
the morose  of the Spaniard, and the fantastical Airiness of

the French; the revengeful Subtilty of the Italian, and the
stable Fidelity of the English, will be no unpleasing Diversion;
when in the enjoyment of the latter, you may recollect the dangers
and inconveniences of the others: The Barbarity of the Heathen,
will make you bless the Fate which has placed you in another Society;
and some good Men which you may find among them, (for Pearls are
ofen in the Sands) will make you admire the Excellency of Mo∣rality,
and perhaps laugh at the idle Otentations of those who after
all ther pretences to more direct Rules, take more oblique Courses.
These will be the noblest Objects of your regard.
And thus you may give a better Account of your time than that
unfortunate Traveller, who being demanded by some Friends, What
kind of place Venice was? made answer, That haste and approach∣ing
night made him gallop through it without taking any notice of
it, and too many may be found of that humour, who to conceal their
Ignorance, often  it with worse Circumstances, as is said of
the Woman who with her Cloaths to save the misfortune which from
a window fell on her head, exposed those other parts which
Decency and Nature obliged her to concal.
I will no longer trouble you with the Advantages of Travel, be∣cause
you cannot be without a prospect of them, by which you are
chiefly induced to undertake it. And I question not but those which
you will make, will give you a view of more to be acquired; of which
when you are Master, they will represent others unto you, and so by
a long Concatenation of what at once doth profit and delight,
ad you to such things as in their fruition will make you capable of
greater Atchievements.
Perhaps the following Observations will not be altogether un∣wornhy
your perusal, and a place in your Palmers-scrip. They have
been the Reflections of my Retirements when in them, as from some
distant height I took a little View of the World, and if you shall
find them either profitable or delightful, my endeavours can receive
no greater Compesation, than to arrive at so desirable a Goal.
And I hope you'll find 'em both, seeing Man is naturally an In∣quisitive
Creature, continually hankering after Novelties; and
though for the most part a meer Stranger at home, regardless of the
Geography of his own Breast, (as I shall shew in a Treatise en∣tituled,
A Map of Man: Or, Vander in Minature, which will
contain my Rambles round the Little World;) the worst and
most deplorable Ignorance, would yet seem acquainted with all the
World beside.
How solicitous are we about the Affairs of Germany! How
curious to understand the Rarities of Egypt! the Situation of Jeru∣salem,
the Magnificence of Versailles, and uncertain Tales of
Prester John! Nay so far is this Itch of Curiosity indulg'd,


a little) but I am continually stopt by one or other, to know what
News from New-England, Holland, Flanders, and those other
Countries I have seen, and what Rarities I have found there.
Where e're I come, I am lookt upon as one arose from the dead,
(having been two Years absent from my Native Countrey) and re∣cved
with as many Queres of what I have both seen and heard,
as would possibly be put to such an one.
First Daphne takes me, and holds me fast by the Fist half an hour,
to know what fashion'd Top-Knots the Dutch Froes wear, and will
 be torturing some News out of me from the East-Indies; for she
hearing I have crost the Seas, concludes (do you judge how ratio∣nally)
that I have been there.
But I am no sooner eased of her, but Mutius catches me by the
Golls, demanding of me whether Boston be a great Town or a little
one? How John. V—r does? How Books sell there? And
whether Ben. H—s be yer living? Or John H— arrived
when I left the place?
His mouth being stopt, a third examins me boldly, what News
from Cullen? Where the Emperor's Army is? How the Duke of
Lorrain died? Of what Form is the Grand Visier's Tent? How
fares it with the Pope? Of what Age is the Mogul? What's be∣come
of Teckely? How fares all the Englishmen in those Parts?
Where lyes Prince Waldeck's Forces? Of what Colour is the Great
Cham's Beard? What Tydings of Tyrconnel? And such a Tem∣pest
of Inquisition, that it almost shakes my patience in pieces. To
ase my self of all which, I am forc'd to set Pen to Paper, and let the
several Volumes of my Rambles talk, whilst I take my ease with
silence; which though they prove like a pratling Gossp, full of many
words to small purpose, yet this I'll fay for this Third Volume,
That it is my Son.
(Then shou'd I not be an hard-hearted Brute of a Father,
if I could be so cruel as to send him into the wide World, without
speaking so much as one good word for him,) and contains, A Con∣tinuation
of several rare Adventures relating to my Seven
Years Prenticeship; Philaret's Friendship; A Countey-Life;
and my Project of Girdling the World, &c. able to make you
smile away an hour or two under the greatest pressures either of
Body or Mind; and will, as the learned S—d has it,
Cure every curable Disease.
Now if this Volume alone will do such Wonders, what think ye will the
whole Work perform when finisht; secing `twill contain
A Little Library:
Or Compleat Help to Discourse, upon all Occasions. By the help whereof
you may cross Rivers without Boat or Bridge, boundless Seas without Ships,
and climb up Mountains without pains, and go down without danger; e∣concile





the Future and the Present Tense: see Asia in England, Travel
the Holy-Land, and go to the Holy War with Mr. Fuller: see the brave
Baker defending Derry the valiant Grafton beating the Irish; the
Electoral Princes storming Mentz and Bonn▪ see the Grand Signior in the
Seraglio: Infallibility in his Grandeur, and C—bussing his Toe;
and with the wandring Knight, Sir FrancisDrake took his Voyage about the World, Decemb. 13. 1577.Drake, put a Girdle round
the World: On which daring Advenure Wit thus pleasantly deants.
Drake, who th`encompass'd Earth so fully knew,
And whom at once both Poles of Heaven did view:
Shou'd Men foget thee, Sol culd not forbear
To Chronscle his Fellow-Traveller.
Would you see the Wars and Actions of the Roman Emperors, you may
here see them trend the Singe again, with less cost and hazard than at
first. You may by the study of these Rambles, live in all Ages; see Adam
in Eden, sayl with Noah in the Ark, sit and conslt with Julius Caesar,
converse with Snec, Plutarch and Horace, conferr with all the wise Ph∣losophers,
go to School at Athens, and with a free access hear all Disputes.
Thus Friend, you see I make bold to imitate one Alexander of Greece,
who still as he went Dragooning about the World, de scribed the Wandrings
and as it were theTom oriat was a lly Traveller, who in King Iames his time beat upon the Hoo about two or three thousand Miles, and returned home as very a Coxcomb as he went out. See his Travels, call'd his Crudities.Tom Coriatilm of his Expeditions.
But what need I go so far as Macedonia for a Pattern, seeing we have so
many Precedents at home? One tells us in Octavo, That he has been in
Turkey; another, That he has been at Rome; a third, that he has bin in
France: (And dotless you my Friend, will e`re long be telling the World (
Folio of your Travels to HambroughThe place you first designed, when we parted at, msterdam, in 186.,Veice, Japan and Greenland.)
When a Fellew (as the Wallagrophist further observes in his Britton
delcrib`d) hath a Maggo in his Fate, or a Breeze in his Tail, that he can∣not
fix long in a place: Or perhaps when he hath entituled himself by some
Misdemeanors either to the Pillory or Gibbet, to disinherit himself of his
deserved right, he irts into Holland, or is transported into some Foreign
Countrey; where conversing a little while, he thrusts into the World, The
History of his Adventures; he varnisheth over his Banishment with the
name of Travel, and stiles that his Recreation, which was indeed his Pu∣nishment,
and so dignifies a Ramble by the name of a Journey. He tells
what Wonderments have surprized him, what fragments of Antiquity have
amazed him, what Structures have ravisht him, what Hills have tired him.
In a word, he is big with Descriptions, and obliges you with the Narrative
of all his Observations and Notices. Seeg every one almost that hath but
untrusd in a Foreign Countrey, will have his Voyage recorded; and every
Letter-Carrier beyond Sea, would be thought a Drake or a Candish.
I thought with my self, why may not I have the liberty of relating my
Rambles, and of communicating my Observations to Mankind.
It is sid, that Onme tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci: If that be
not done here, yet it is an Essay of that kind; being a mixture wherein with
great variety things highly and daily useful ae interwoven with delghtful
Observations. Now Friend, if you by reaping in few Minutes the fruits
of many Hours Travel, shall receive any content, I shall not only be satisfied for
this, but encouraged for a Fourth Volume; and for ever to remain,

