



My Lord.
THE certain hazard of all one hath, or is, in these uncertain times, annex∣ed to the nicessity of a strict account, to be rendred in the porch or passage unto eternity, of the

managing all affairs and offices, re∣lating either to obligation, or resti∣tution in this world; puts me upon a serious review of mine own con∣cernment, wherein, among many instances of chief regard, I find one of my great engagements unto your Lordship with the impresse or chara∣cter of Holy Orders, into which I receiv'd my entrance by the imposi∣tion of your sacred hands, unto whom I take my self, in some degree of duty to stand responsable for what I act by that Commission, or write with any reflexion upon the Doctrine or Discipline of our Church. The Histo∣rical Observations, I here humbly present your Lordship with, are in∣separable from that title in respect of both. the Sect of Schismaticks I describe, having, according to the Tradition I am guided by, in a phrenetick fury from the beginning, thrown the price of their estates at their false Apostles fet, and they with them cast souls and bodies into the fire of a raging persecution, by impious cruelties when predominant

by opprobious calumnies when un∣armed, and by civil wars, when their plough shares and pruning hooks could at any time be fashioned into swords or axes, for the cutting down not onely superfluous innovations in the habit, but the very body and exi∣stence of that Apostolick rule and worship to which pattern we pretend. I pursue them but to the period of their first domestick insolencies, drencht in the bloud of that famous Queen. Whom their best Poet, but one of Her Majesties worst subjects, once thought worth this Distich;
Quae sortem antevenis meritis,G. Buchan E∣pig. ad Mariam illustriss. Sco∣torum Regi∣na virtutibus annos,
Sexum animis, morum nobilitate genus.
What latter attempts they made, when they marched over their bor∣ders to reform according to the my∣sterious model of their new Cove▪nant, that whereunto their old en∣ormous practices ought rather to have been conformed, is declar'd and hi∣storiz'd

by that Royal Pen▪ which hath Registred to their eternal infamy their cutting in sunder the common Tie of nature,. cap. 13. soveraignty, and bounty; their forgetting speciall fresh obligations wherewith their active spirits had been gratified, not without some seeming diminution to, or deprssion of the Doners inte∣rest and honour; their inroad with an intent to confirm the Presbyte∣rian copy they had set, by making our Church to write after them, though it were in bloudy chara∣cters. How infatuated they were in those counsels, how by providence defeated in their most desperate wic∣ked eds, the unpittied spectacle of their downfal demonstrates to all the world. Yet my Lord, this is not to raise a Trophee out of their mise∣ries, or to trample on their dejected persons. If, by pourtraiing the hor∣rid actios of their Ancestours, I can excite their guilty consciences to com∣pare the copy with the original, and repent effectully for the transcen∣dncie of their own rebellions, I shall

have great complacency in the assu∣rance that I have outrun, or out∣writ my hopes. Howsoever in what proportion I may expect credit to be given unto my care, which was not little, in the Collection, and what resignation by the impartial Reader unto the naked truth of the contents. I shall not doubt but hereby I may, in the same, confirm all pious and humble hearts in the preferring the ancient and univrsal successive go∣vernment of the Christian Church before the new Genevatizing bloudy discipline of some heady Scots; and perswade all moderate and quiet mind∣ed men to acknowledge one supremacy over both estates, by trusting the same hand with Christs Scepter here on earth, which himself doth with it and the civill sword. But this endea∣vour may seem impertinent, if not im∣pudent, in the face or memory of that most Reverend heroick Prelate,Archbishop Spotswood. whose greater eminency in authority, and interest in the same Country hath with much more advantage, parti∣cularly and amply satisfied the world

by a grearer Volume, for the sup∣pressing which so many subtilties and violences had been used,At Schidam in Holland. beside the power of a forraign Magistrate, for a surprisal of the Secretarie in his preparing it to the Presse that no∣thing could be a surer evidence, than such self-confessing guiltinesse, against that party, nor ought else, after the Grace and Reverence of the renowned Authour, put a greater estimate and opinion upon the Book, at least if publisht as he writ it. May it please your Lordship therefore to be∣lieve upon my word (who am invested with the second order to make it va∣lid) that this Treatise was designed long since in a preparatorie antece∣dence unto the other, and to that purpose, with more ingenious confi∣dnce than worldly prudence, trusted in the same hand which was to print and reap the profit of His Grace's work, from which, after the dilatory pretences of some judgement to be made by a view to be taken of it, or rather after the Printers turn was served in dispersing the greater Co∣pies,

it was returned with this sen∣tence, delivered by a person (whose name I had not) of much learning, honour, and integrity, upon perusal of it, That there was too much gall in the ink wherewith it was wrote, and supposed that an enemy was the Collector, for that through the sides of those the design is a∣gainst, our own Mother is woun∣ded. My Lord, if the name of that severe person, with a particular of his exceptions, had been sent me, I should have endeavoured his satis∣faction, or if theirs could have been otherwise effected whom I serve in it, and mine own reputation preserved, who have made implicite reference to this in another Book (a sharp reply to which I am yet to expect) perchance I might have chosen rather to lose my pains, than give such a person scan∣dal or confront his censure, professiing in the words of my learned Collegue heretofore,'Dr. Ier. Tay∣lors Epist. Ded. before his Fur∣ther Explic. of the Doctr. of Orig. sn. now a most singularly devout and acute Divine, in the case of like question, and appeal unto your Lordship, That I would ra∣ther

dye, than either willingly give occasion or countenance to a schism in the Church of England (I mean that Church of England which conform'd her self to the Ancient Latin and Greek Church) and I would suffer much evil before I would displease my dear Brethren (I adde such as keep close to their due principles) in the service of Jesus and in the Mi∣nisteries of that Church: Wherefore my Lord, if any thing of that na∣ture have pass'd my Pen, in the va∣cancie of a Synod. I submit to any Canon of retractation or penance shall be prescribed me by your Re∣verence, together with that joint primitive Oracle, and most worthy person, who the Doctor took (and I do by his wary precedent) for the other Pillar of his Sanctuary▪ the Lord Bishop of Sarum, whose coun∣tenace and favour I some years since was honoured with, more I presume for the integrity of my principles, than any meritorious pregnancie in my parts. But my Lord if some timorous or superstitious Catle in

my Grave Censour, would keep me so far from Rome, as to thrust me into the precincts of Geneva, I con∣fesse to him and all the world, that upon demonstrative reasons, I am much more affraid in Christianities behalf of the Leman Lake, than Ti∣ber, and look with more horrour on the rebellions sprung, and reproba∣tory damnation denounc'd from thence, than on any encroachment upon Kings, or indulgencies unto the people, so prodigally made by, and defused from the Papal See. In fine my Lord, the glosses are not many I have upon points controver∣ted between the Church of Rome and us▪ if those few be so short as to render my sense suspected, I will enlarge them when call'd upon, to the full state I have made of them deliberately unto my self. For the gall in my ink, I shall say onely with your Lordships leave, I know not where more commendably or excusably, I may affect to give it a deeper black, than in the relation of their proceedings, whose souls

were as red as scarlet, and the issue of all their enterprises died in bloud. I may be no lesse concerned to anti∣cipate an after cnsure, incident from persons of another rank I mean such of the Scotch Nobility, or related to them, whose faith and gallantry hath effaced such their ig∣noble progenitours impeachments in their coates, and yet may conceive their Names and Families purposely tainted by my Pen, where I make a blot in some branch of their pedigree or descent. To whom I professe I sear∣ched not their Heraldry for a distin∣ction▪ but as I intended no man inju∣ry or disrepute, so I preferred ne∣cessary truth to his or their vulgar honour in my design. Which being in that respect a case of Conscience, craves likewise your Lordships cog∣nisance, though as it regards the rule of prudence, I must answer it at my hazard. For the rest, my Lord, til it appear by more than an obscure single suffering that I have infringed the canon of Christian Charity, or deviated from the doctrine and pra∣ctice

of the Ancient Church. I hum∣bly crave your Lordships favourable protection of this essay, and of my name in that communion into the Ministery whereof your ordination introduced me, which no new dis∣coveries nor discourses, in forreign parts have obliged my reason to de∣sert, nor doth any self-conviction discourage me in my subscription as that Churches, and My Honoured Lord,
Caen
Aug. 27. 1657.

