



Right Honourable,
IT is the happiness of this City, to have a Magistrate that bears not the Sword in vain. Your place

is high; God hath lent you his own Title:Psal. 82. 6. your work is great, it lies in the distri∣bution of Justice, which (ac∣cording to Aristotle) compre∣hends all virtues in it. And in this your high orb you have acted vigorously. Your good Government hath helped to raise, if not London's stru∣ctures, yet its fame. My Lord, to be a , a pub∣lick Good, will both render your life honourable, and your death com∣fortableGratius  pro aliis quàm magnas  habert. Ciccro.. God did reserve you for such a juncture of time as

this. When is there more need of zeal in superiours, than when vice grows heady in inferiours. The subject I here humbly dedicate to your Lordship, is, Violence for Heaven. A Divine , or temperature of soul to be much aspired after; for by this you may help to save not only your self, but others. Put on Integrity as a Robe; and let zealous violence more adorn you than the richest Chain of Gold. But I have cause to break forth into Panegy∣ricks. Indeed your own

works praise you in the gates. Your prudence and cou∣rage; your impartiality in deciding Causes; your pu∣nishing of Oaths, and cor∣recting the false ballance; your compliance with his Majesties Royal Procla∣mation against Health-drinking, have erected for you a living monument in the breasts of all sober and pious men. Among other things, your Self-denial hath been eminent in let∣ing go some of your Per∣quisites for the good of others.

—Posse & nolle nobile est—.
The former Governours that had been before me (saith Nehemiah) were charge∣able unto the people, and had taken of them Bread and Wine, &c. but so did not I. What pity is it that Lon∣don should, like Sparta, keep such a Governour but one year. My Lord, I hate to give flattering titlesJob 32. 22; but I have taken this bold∣ness to say this little, both for your Lordship's encou∣ragement, and the imitation

of those that shall succeed in your Chair. My Lord, this small Tractate comes under your Honours Patro∣nage, and entreat your favourable perusal and ac∣ceptance of it; it was in∣tended you sooner, but some emergent occasions interve∣ning prevented. If this little spark shall give light or heat to any heart, I have my desire. The great God who hath placed you at the helm of this City, fill you with his heavenly benedi∣ction, and so animate you with all might by his Spirit in the

inner man, that you may be an Eben-ezer, a stone of help to us; that you may do wor∣thily in London, and be fa∣mous in your Generation; so prayeth he who is,
Sir,

July 9. 1669.
