


Much Honored Patrons,
THE Subject of this Enquiry low in it self, and accordingly apt to be deprest, is yet a part of this State not altogether inconsiderable, since it hath formerly engag'd the concern of Personages great for Parts and Quality. Onely that Probleme must needs have some∣what Topical in it, upon which able men, and well-affected, and on both sides in

earnest, are divided; though, perhaps, unequally: the practice of some few who had manag'd their own affairs with discre∣tion, and whose good meaning is not doubt∣ed, bearing up against the declar'd sense of many of like unquestionable Prudence. This address in a Cause conjectural and pre∣judg'd by Popular Fame, being devested of other Authority from the Reporter then what the matter furnishes, can onely hope for a Reception, as upon tryal it shall ap∣prove it self to you; before whose impartial Determination, those ill-grounded pre∣judices, which have, for these not few years, averted many charitable intentions for the incouragement of learning, will abate.
Reverend Sir, That which gave occa∣sion to this small discourse receiv'd hopes of life from the Right Reverend Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, at that time our Vice-Chancellor,

in whom, without respect to this instance, was a Prudence watchful a∣gainst surreption: a judgement known to be stable: back'd with Courage, as being the result of his own clear reasonings. He therefore is advanc'd to an Honorable Go∣vernment in the Church. Suffer now with the Service of the Author, the Pa∣tronage of this Work to devolve upon your self. In the Ʋniversities are helps of Stu∣dy, Examples of accurate performance. The Favors of Oxford to me great, as undeserv'd, not obscure. All Motives from without command an humble Defe∣rence of Honor eminently to you, which your own inward worth invites. Give your self the importunity with patience to glance over this piece, and allow some of the imperfections to difficulties to my pre∣sent circumstances insuperable: which dif∣ficulties, upon a nearer Review, may give way to a right understanding through your favourable acceptance.
Nor may I Worshipful Sir, without due Veneration tender these Papers to your Perusal. Provisions for School-Masters while Ecclesiastical Benefices, for Students in the Ʋniversity while Portions of Tythes lying originally in the Canon-Law, be∣fore what more competent Judge can they justify their Reason? The Privileges of Students are there most amply deduc'd: with us in England laid up in Charters through the Royal Indulgence: Their Re∣venues indeed fenc'd by the Statutes of the Realm, Whatever Court take the cognisance of School-causes, let them prove their claim by tenderness to the interess'd: you are more Zealous for Justice then en∣larg'd Jurisdiction. Thus you do right to that Faculty, which manag'd with such Knowledge, Prudence, and Integrity must reconcile Commerce with Church-Judica∣ture; and by Authority justify'd from the strongest Reason happily advance all the ends of right Government.
Many are the Blessings vouchsafed to this place: among the chief of which we thankfully acknowledge a prudent Magi∣stracy: wholesome Laws and Statutes: intent Exercise of Discipline: administra∣tion of Justice temper'd, but not corrupted, with Mercy. Reverend Sir, These Ge∣nial Influences of your unwea'rid Cares, cherish the Studies of Oxford: propagate a lasting honor on your memory: and lay up for you the blessing of many Orators. Give me leave from sense of particular duty to add, increase of Happiness on both your Persons to be the unfeigned Prayer of

