



Christian Reader,
THe Soul being so precious, and
Salvation so glorious, it is the
highest point of Prudence, to
make preparations for another world:
That there is an Inheritance in Light,
 beyond all dispute, and that there
must be an Idoneity and meetness for it,
 in Sacred Writ most strenuouslyColos 1. 12. as∣rted.
If any shall ask, who shall
scend into the hill of the Lord? The
nswer is, He that hath clean hands,
 a purePsal. 2. 4. heart. To describe such
 person, is the work of this ensuing
reatise: Here you have the godly
ans Effigies, and see him pourtrayed
 his full Lineaments: What a rare
ing is godliness! 'tis not airy and

flatulent, but solid, and such as will
take up the heart and spirits: Godli∣ness
consists in an exact harmony, be∣tween
holy Principles and Practises: 
that all into whose hands this Book
shall providentially come, may be 
enamoured with Piety, as to fall 
the hearty imbracing of it: So sublim
is Godliness, that it cannot be del∣neated
in its perfect radiancy and lu∣stre,
though an Angel should take 
Pensil: Godliness is ourVera est  cam He∣brai ele∣anter ap∣pellant  (i. e.) es∣setiam.  3. 1 wisdom
Job 28. 28. The fear of the Lord, th
is wisdome. Policy without Piety,
profound madness: Godliness is a Sp∣ritual
Queen, which whosoever Ma∣ries,
is sure of a large Dowry with 
1 Tim. 4. 8. Godliness hath the pr∣mise
of the life that now is, and
that which is to come. Godliness giv
Isai. 32. 17.assurance, yea holy triumph in Go
and how sweet isOmni melle dul∣cior, omni luce clari∣or. Aug. that? It was 

Latimers Speech, when sometimes I sit
alone, and have a setled assurance of
the state of my Soul, and know that
God is my God, I can laugh at all
troubles, and nothing can daunt me:
Godliness puts a man in heaven before
his time. Christian, aspire after Piety,
it is a lawful Ambition: Look upon the
Saints Characters here, and never
leave till thou hast gotten them in∣stamped
upon thy own Soul. This is
the grand business that should swallow
up your time and thoughts: Other
Speculations, and Quaint Notions, are
nothing to the Soul: They are like
Wafers which have fine works printed
upon them, and are curiously damasked
to the eye, but are thin, and yield lit∣tle
nourishment. But I will not stay
you longer in the Porch; should I have
inlarged upon any one Character of the
Godly Man, it would have required a

Volume, but designing to go over many,
I have contracted my Sails, and given
you only a brief Summary of things: If
this Piece (how indigested soever) may
conduce to the good of Souls, I have
my Option; which that the God of
Grace will effectually accomplish, shall
be the Prayer of him who is

Feb. 26.
1666.
