



MADAM,
I Have presumed upon your La∣dyship, humbly to present you with these few Meditations. As it is a rich mer∣cy

to have a spiritual Ioynture, so it cannot but be a comfort to know what it is. 'Tis a joy to the young heir to have a view of his estate; that is the work of this Treatise, to set before you the Land of promise. While we are here in the combate, we had need look to the Crown to make us fight the more valiantly. Moses had an eye at the recompence of re∣ward, and that did animate him against sufferings; yea, our blessed Saviour himself looked at the joy set before him. Madam, Could we live in the thoughts of these great things to come, what sub∣lime, what sweet lives should we lead! Surely, if there be any sadnesse gathers in our spirits, if any

despondency, it comes in at this leak of unbelief. Vnbelif is a bad neighbour, it is alwayes rai∣sing either Jealousies of God, as if he would not be as good as his Word; Vnbelief with Sarah, laughs at the promise: Or scru∣ples in the heart, whether all these promises belong to us. The Devil shot three fiery darts into the virgin-castle of Eves heart, whereof the first was the most deadly, Yea, hath God said? He would induce this beliefe in her, that God had not spoken Truth: and when he had once wrought her to distrust, then she took of the tree, &c. All he train of tentation that Satan ayes, is to blow up the fort of

our Faith. We had need main∣tain this grace, it is Faith must maintaine us. While the Pilot keeps his ship, his ship keeps him. Right Honourable, Blessed be the riches of Gods grace, who hath set this heavenly plant in your heart, and hath kept you in the faith, insomuch that all the shakings of the times have but settled you the more; and I doubt not but he that hath begun a good work in you, will performe it untill the day of Jesus Christ. What an unparalell'd mercy is it to be kept free in the time of in∣fection? God hath given your Ladyship a sound judgement, and a tender conscience, both which are jewels of great price. I may

say of you, as it is said of Jeho∣shaphat, his heart was lift up in the wayes of the Lord, 2 Chron. 17.12. Yet I have observed, the more you have been lifted up in God, the more you have been cast down in your self. It is excellent, when the higher we grow in knowledge, the lower we grow in humility. I speak it to the praise of free-grace, God hath crowned your silver haires with golden vertues, every one of which doth shine as thos preci∣ous stones, the Sardius, the Topaz, and the Diamond, Ezek. 28.13. Holiness is a beau∣tiful thing, it carries a majesty in the face of it; even those that op∣pose it, cannot but admire it. Grace

differs little from glory; the one is the seed, the other the flower▪ Grace is glory militant, and glory is grace triumphant. Theodo∣sius thought it a greater honour that he was a Christian, then the head of an Empire. Your piety is a greater glory to you, then your Parentage; it is more to be the daughter of faith then to descend from Nobles, or to have the blood royal running in your veins. Madam, There is a time shortly coming, when neither birth, estate, or any worldly embellishments will do us good; you have laid in provision against that time, and gotten the new birth, when all o∣ther birth and Nobility must lie in the dust. This is that which makes

your name smell in Gods Church, as the wine of Lebanon. Go on, Right Honourable, in those paths which have an immediate tendency to life and blessednesse. We are like to meet with many rubs in the way before we get to Heaven: It is said of Israel, their soul was much discou∣raged because of the way.Num. 21.4. Had we more grace, we should have need enough to use it: expect we must fiery serpents; but, the righteous will hold on his way, Job 17.9. Is not every Christian an Ensign-bearer to carry Christs Colours? We must resolve to be good in good earnest. The almost Christian shall be al∣most

saved. It is wise counsel our Saviour gives, that we should count what religion will cost us, Luk. 14.28. It will cost us re∣proach; this is a part of Christs livery which we must weare. Think not that our innocency will priviledge us from the reproaches and slanders of the world; Christ was the most innocent person up∣on earth, never did any unholy thought come into his minde, yet his innocency would not shield him from slander; he was called a friend of sinners. Let us not be discouraged; shall we cease from being Saints, because others will not cease from being Devils? Is it a wonder, when an army is in

fight, to see the bullets fly abroad, and the fire-balls? when the seed of the serpent is fighting with the seed of the woman, is it strange to see the bullets of tentation flie, & the fire-balls of slander? But if our innocency will not keep us from being shot at, it will keep us from being hurt: for as no flatte∣ry can heal a bad conscience, so no slander can hurt a good. Again, Religion wil cost us persecution; this is a part of Christs legacy which he hath left us, In the world ye shall have tribulati∣on. Our ship would soon over∣turn, if it were not ballasted with some afflictions. A Christian is a compounded creature, he hath some evil in him, therefore God

afflicts; and he hath some good in him, therefore the Devil afflicts: Hence that of CyprianCum coe∣peris in Christo piè vivere, in∣grederis torcular., When a man begins to be religious, he must think of going into the wine∣presse: and perhaps the blood of the grapes may be pressed out; but the meditation of things to come, should sweeten the tryals present, and make us, that though we cannot live without them, yet to live above them. What if the times are worse, if they make us better? and if our burdens be hea∣vy, seeing the way we are to go is but short! Madam, I will not hold you longer, I make bold to devote this Manual to your Honour; I acknowledge how weak and unfeathered it is, therefore

unfit to flie abroad into the world; but the importunity of some friends, and principally, the many favours received from your Ho∣nour when I was in your noble Family, and which have been since continued, did press upon me (yet not without some reluctancy in my own thoughts) to commit it to the publick. I hope the discourse may be seasonable, and doubt not but it will take some impression if it be as a naile fastned by the great Master of Assemblies. I have drawn but the , or dark lineaments of that bles∣sed condition which the Saints shall arrive at: expect not to see it in its orient colours till God himself give you the Pattern,

and you shall both see and enjoy it at once. The Lord preserve your Ladyship, and all those Noble Branches descended from you, which is the prayer of,
From my Study at Stephens Wal∣brook.
Feb. 5. 1651.
MADAM,

