



Most Gracious SOVERAIGN,
THAT I assume the boldnesse to tender this Sermon to your Sacred MAIESTY, is not from any the least thought I had that it could be worthy Your reading, who daily hear the best that the best Learned of Your Clergy preach in-Your Royal Chapel; but being preach'd upon that Day which is now made Yours, because Your MAIESTY on that Day was made Ours, first, by Your Birth; and then, by Your happy Return to Your People; and being now printed at the importunity of some of Your MAIESTY's Loyal Subjects that were my Auditors, as also by the approbation of the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Glocester, my worthy and much honored Diocesan; I humbly offer it at Your MAIESTY's feet, hoping with it to gain the favour of kissing Your MAIESTY's Hands, a favour which You have not denyed (such is Your Benignity and Condescention) to Your meanest

Subjects, though I have not yet been so happy as to obtain it. Not that I wanted an heart ready with the foremost to wait up∣on Your MAIESTY, and bid you welcome home; nor that I wanted the like desires and affections, perhaps without other men, (for who is totally free from them) to reap some parti∣cular benefit in the first fruits of the Churches Harvest, which till Your coming lay (as it were) fallow for many years, yielding no encrease to the true Proprietary. But as Impe∣rante Augusto natus est CHRISTUS, CHRIST was born in the Reign of Augustus; so Imperante CAROLO renata esse Ecclesia CHRISTI, this poor Church of CHRIST in England is new born, or rather raised from the dead, in the beginning of Your MAIESTY's▪ Reign, 1 Cor. 8.as if you were resolved to make good to us St. Paul's wish to the Corinthians, Not to reign alone unlesse we also might reign with You, and share in Your Triumphs as we had done in Your Sufferings. Some such thoughts, I say again, I might be tickled with; for 'tis true, which that learn∣ed Knight Sir Robert Cotton hath observed in the life of Your Predecessor, HENRY the 3d, That in every shift of Princes, there is none (either in Church or State) so mean or modest, that pleaseth not himself with some probable object of preferment. But, SIR, so wonder∣ful, and beyond all expectation, was Your Restoration to Your Kingdoms, that it struck me with astonishment, and I became like unto them that dream. Great joy as well as great grief Gen. 45. 26.over-whelm the spirits, as we read of the Patriarch Jacob. And in this Deliquium or fainting fit I lay, whiles all sorts crowded to see Your MAIESTY, and most of my Professi∣on, (which had not bowed their knees to Baal, nor medled with them that were given to change, but feared God and the King, and suffered with and for Your MAIESTY, and Your Royal Father of blessed memory) had preferments an∣swerable to their merits, before I had the opportunity onely of

beholding Your MAIESTY's face; and even then I stood like Phaeton at his fathers Court at an humble distance ad∣miring his glories.
Ovid. Met. l. 2. Consistitque procul: neque enim propriora ferebat Lumina.
My weak sight was satisfied with the reflex beams of Your MAIESTY afar off, which at a nearer approach, and in a direct line, would have dazled, if not blinded my eyes. In this reverential posture I continued a good while, saying with∣in my self as Mephibosheth to David, Let them take 2 Sam. 19. 30.all, forasmuch as my Lord the King is come again in peace unto his own house. It will be honor and prefer∣ment enough for me, if I may be but owned by Your MAIESTY for

