



May it please your Grace,
GReat Presents bespeak their
acceptance, small ones are
modest intreaters, and triers
of the Grandeur of the minds
of those to whom they are pre∣sented,
who value them rather for the respect
and kindness of their Tenderers, then for the
Bulk and Port of such their Tender.
This being the temper of your Grace's
mind, expressive of all Noble Civilities and

Favours, to those that have the happiness to
be known to, and the Honour to be favoured
by you; makes me hopeful that your Grace
will not despise the Patronage of this Dis∣course,
which, as well in the nature of its mat∣ter,
as in the Authors design, and resolve, is most
properly Yours: And in asmuch as it treats of
Vertues and Vices, as they refer to Men and
Families, in the good or bad effects of them,
and subjoins Addresses suasive to the great
ends of Civility and Religion, to whom are
they to be devoted as their Tutelar, next under
God, but to your Grace? who being a Gentle∣man
by Blood and Birth, a Learned man
by Breeding, and Endowment, and an Emi∣nent
Church-man by Dignity and Office, have
the Naturallest, and most Powerfull Influence
to protect and propagate, what, of right
Reason, Civil Insinuation, approved Experience,
and Divine Zeal, Your Paternal Iudgment
shall allow contained in it. Such then as

it is, I humbly beg your Grace to Own, for
the Subjects sake, and for the good intent I
have to the Publique in its publishing.
For since the unparallelled Mercies of
God are so mistaken by men, who build
their hopes and happiness upon this plane∣tary
World, the consistence and glory of
which is but, in Nazianzen's
words,pist. 47. ad Amphiloch. ,
Fabulous and Enthusiastique:
and since we of this Nation, God knows, little
bettered by our past deliverances, are rather
sicci ad ignem, then albi ad messem, as
Lib. 2. de Consider. St. Bernard once wrote to
Pope Eugenius; and since it
is high time to advertise the too
too general Extravagancy of England, of
that sober gratitude, and vertuous con∣versation,
which the abundant Goodness of
God to the whole Nation, and to the Nobility
and Gentry in it, calls for, from them; I

think it my duty, whom God inclined to me∣ditate
and perfect this, now to submit i to
the view and censure of the Readers; besee∣ching
God, the inelaboration of the Method and
Stile, may rather return the Author dispa∣ragement,
then the Argument misfortune.
If then Your Grace, whom to speak
and write of, is to speak and write of
Vertue,. Nazi∣anz. de lau∣dibus Atha∣nafii. as was said of (c) Atha∣nasius
the Great, shall excuse
this confidence, which proceeds
from Conscience of my Duty to do,
what in me lies, to serve the Pub∣lique,
I shall take it as a good
encouragement to hereafter dili∣gence
in this way, wherein in the
worst of times, and on the then least favou∣red
Subjects, I have neither been silent, nor
(I bless God) insuccesfull. Yea, I assure
Your Grace, I am so convinced of the
Activity that Reason and Religion expects from

every one, in whom the Candle
of God shines, and the Zeal
of God burns, that not to
improve the leastQuia non benè utuntur talento sibi commisso, id est, mentis acie quâ videntu om∣nes qui docti aut urbani at faceti nominantur ex∣cellere sed habent cam in sudario ligatam, aut in torra obrutam, id est, delicatis aut superfluis rbus aut terreni cupi∣ditatibus involu∣tam & oppressam, ligabuntur ergo his manus & pe∣des & mittantur in tenebras exte∣riores. Stus August. lib. de vera Religione Tom. 1. Opetum. Talent
of Learning and Grace, I
account Sacriledge and Sin;
which would many of the
Great and Wise men of Eng∣land
think more upon, they
would Fear, what I do, to
wrapp up their Talents in Pri∣vacies,
or to mis-spend them
on sins.
May Your Grace long
live to Edifie this Church, to
Advance Learning, to Foster
Piety, to Suppress Licenciousness; to Pray,
Preach, Rule, and Live down all Malignant
opposition to the Power and Purity of true esta∣blished
Religion, and Practical Godliness: So
shall You obtain the Virgins Crown, and the

Victors Euge; which that Your Grace may
have, when Your Life (not Your Vertues and
Renown) leave this World, He most affectio∣nately
prayes, who now is, and ever resolves
to be,
From Syon-Colledge,
this
5. February
1664.

