



Worshipful Gentlemen and honoured Friends,
I Do not dedicate this piece of my Labours unto you, there∣by to beg protection for it, as fearing either its weak∣ness, or the malevolent censures of the ignorant; for I very well know, and have experienced, that it is the usual property of idle and pragmatical persons to please their own malignant humors, with the condemning and scoffing at the painful lucubrations of others. And I have ever judged that nothing ought to be published, that like a Noun Substan∣tive cannot stand by it self, without being supported by any other adjoined help. Neither is this forth of a vain confidence or an overweening of mine own abilities, though I very well know that some are as much in love with the brood of their own brains, as others are with the fruit of their loines: Be∣cause I have for many years been as wary and vigilant, as any could be, to watch over my self, that I might both know, and keep a clear distinction, betwixt flattering Phantasie, and true and sound judgment. But I shall in brief shew you the true reasons of my presenting of this poor piece to your reading and judgments.
1. The first reason is, because you have all been Gentle∣men, not only well known unto me for many years, as being my near Neighbours, but also with whom I have been freely admitted to a Noble and Generous converse, and have been trusted, and honoured by you in your Destick concerns, wherein by my Medical Profession, I might be  to

you, or your Families, far beyond my poor Merit and Desert. And having been for many years a due observer of your de∣portments in your places of trust as Magistrates, for being but as a stander by, and looking on, may (perhaps) have noted as much, as those that are Gamesters, I was moved to present this piece of my labours unto you, by reason of that knowledge and acquaintance, rather than to others, whose abilities and integrity I did not so well understand. And (I hope) I may without suspicion of flattery (of which I am sure both your selves, and others that know me, will acquit me, that if I be any way guilty, it is rather in being too plain and open) say, that you have been, and are true Patriots to your Coun∣trey, and not only Justices of the Peace, but true conservers of i, and Peace-makers amongst all your Neighbours; and really this is one of the chief causes why I have dedicated this Trea∣tise unto you.
2. Another reason is, you have all fully known me, and the most of the particulars of my life, both my follies and frailties, as also my other endowments and abilities, and there∣fore in reference to these, I thought none more fit than your selves, to whom I might tender this laborious piece. For it is not unknown unto you, that (excepting my Physical Pra∣ctice, which age and infirmities will not suffer me very much to attend) I have for many years last past lived a solitary, and sedentary life, mihi & Musis, having had more converse with the dead than the living, that is, more with Books than with Men. And therefore I present this unto you, as be∣ing better able than most others to whom I am unknown, to judge what I am like or able to perform in such a subject as this is.
3. Also it is not unknown unto you, that I have had a large portion of Trouble and Persecution in this outward world, wherein you did not like many others stand aloof off, as though you had not known me, but like persons of Justice, and true Magnanimity, durst boh look upon and assist wrong∣d innocency, though besmeered over with the envious dirt of malicious scandals, and even in that very conjuncture of time, when the whole giddy Troop of barking Dogs, and ra∣venous

Wolves, did labour to devour me. But then, even then did put to your helping hands, and were free to declare, what you knew of mine innocency: which was so Generous, Noble and Christian a kind of just commiseration, that I should for ever account my self a wretched person, if I should not have deeply impressed in my breast and memory, which no time, nor adversity can ever obliterate. But being in a con∣dition that I may truly say with the Apostle S. Peter, , Silver and Gold have I none (which I know you expect not) and therefore the greatest power I have is my weak pen, thereby to testifie my thankfulness for your unparallel'd kindness. And therefore I offer this Treatise as a perpetual and monumental memorial to all Posterities, of my gratitude, and your goodness.
And further, to whom can a subject of this nature be more suitably and fitly presented than to such Magistrates as your selves, who have often occasion to be cumbred and troubled with the ignorant, envious, and sometimes knavish accusaii∣ons against people suspected of Witchcraft, Sorcery, Charming and Inchantment? Wherein to free the guilty, and condemn the innocent, is equally abominable to the Lord: And there∣fore much judgment, caution, care and diligent inspection ought to be used in the examining and determining of these matters, wherein I have used as much perspicuity and plainness as was possible to distinguish betwixt those that are Impostors, Cheaters, and active Deceivers, and those that are but under a mere passive delusion through ignorant and superstitious edu∣cation, a melancholy temper and constitution, or led by the vain credulity of inefficacious Charms, Pictures, Ceremonies and the like, traditionally taught them. The one sort of which de∣serves to be punished for couzening of the people, and taking upon them, and pretending to bring to pass things that they have neither skill nor power to perform; but the other sort rather merit pity and information, or the Physicians help than any punishment at all. And I make bold to mind you of this one thing especially that in things of this nature great heed ought to be aken of the conditions, qualities, ends and in∣tentions of the Complainants and Informers, who are often

more worthy of punishment, than the persons accused. For many forth of a meer deluded fancy, envious mind, ignorance and su∣perstition do attribute natural diseases, distempers, and accidents to Witches and Witchcraft, when in truth there is no such mat∣ter at all. And sometimes they counterfeit strange fits and diseases, as vomiting of preternatural and strange things, which if narrowly lookt into and examined are but Juglings, and deceitful confederacies, and yet for malice, revenge or some other base ends, do accuse others to be causers of them.
And though you should find some confidently confessing that they have made a visible and corporeal league with the De∣vil, and that he hath carnal copulation with them, and that he doth suck upon some parts of their Bodies, and that they are Transubstantiated into Dogs, Cats, and the like, or that they fly in the air, and raise Tempests; yet (I hope) I have suffi∣ciently proved by the word of God, the true grounds of Theo∣logie and sound reason, that there never hath been any such Witch existent in rerum natura, and so you may know what credit may be given to such Fables and impossibilities.
So wishing that you may long live in Health and Happi∣ness, to do his Majesty and your Countrey service, which is, and shall be my faithful prayer for you, I take leave subscri∣bing my self

