


SIR,
NEW DISCOVE∣RIES make the Lives of PRINCES famous; Their POSTERITY powerful; Their Subjects rich. Most prudently therefore doth YOUR MAJESTY vouch∣safe to encourage them. Which rais∣th a Spirit in the Hearts of Your People to prosecute the same. It be∣ing fully verified in Your Majesty, what was said unto that famous Em∣perour

of CHINA, HIAVOUUS, The vertue of a KING is like the Wind, his Subjects like Corn, which incline all to that part, whereunto they are moved by the Wind.
This ESSAY in all humble submission invokes YOUR ROY∣AL Protection, it pretends to ad∣vance the DISCOVERY of that GOLDEN-MINE of Learning, which from all ANTIQUITY hath lain concealed in the PRIMI∣TIVE TONGUE; whether Religion, Famous Examples of the Wisedom of Old, Politique Rules for Government, or what ever else ad∣vantageous to Mankind be respected. And wherein no doubt, so great My∣steries are involved, as nothing hitherto in all the Learning of the World can either excel or equal.
Hence it is, thatso many Wri∣ters, in almost all Ages since the

Birth of CHRIST have one way or other treated thereof: some as∣serting the Teutonique to be it; some the Samaritan; others the Phaenician; divers Churchmen pleading as well for the Chaldaean, as Hebrew. With what success I question not; my intention being, not to dispute what in Possibility can∣not, but what in Probability may be the First Speech. Neither is it my purpose with others to insist on vulgar Traditions, or licentious Etymolo∣gies of Words; weak and frail Foun∣dations to support such a Weight, but fix my Basis upon Sacred Truth, and credible History. Scripture teacheth, that the whole Earth was of one Language until the Conspi∣racy at BABEL; History in∣forms that CHINA was peopled, whilst the Earth was so of one Language, and before that Con∣spiracy. Scripture teacheth that

the Iudgment of Confusion of Tongues, fell upon those only that were at BABEL: History in∣forms, that the CHINOIS be∣ing fully setled before, were not there; And moreover that the same LANGUAGE and CHA∣RACTERS which long preceding that Confusion they used, are in use with them at this very DAY; whether the Hebrew, or Greek Chronology be consulted.
The Scripture is infallible, my principal Authors, fide Sacerdotum datâ, profess Integrity, as having of very late Daies, by long study compiled the History of CHINA, from the Antient Records thereof, eversince the time of NOAH. The Foundation then not failing, my Superstructure most probably stands, So much the firmer; as that how valid soever transient Words are, written Records be of far more cer∣tain

Credit. As YOUR Serene MAIESTY right well knows.
YOUR MAIESTY may happily say, I have daringly en∣gaged in a bold Undertaking. But difficult things GREAT SIR are as soon effected, as easy, if the true way be observed. However to err in a matter wherein so many of greatest Learning have erred: YOUR MAIESTY pleasing to pardon me, I need not blush.
The LORD GOD of Hea∣ven and Earth, bless, guide, and preserve YOU, in all Your Coun∣cells; and make YOU Religious like Jaus; Wise like Yuus; Victo∣rious like Hiavouus, whose con∣quering sword crowned Him with victory over more Nations, than Alexander of Macedon ever saw or heard of; Like Xunus beloved of all YOUR People: And make all YOUR People as publiquely

minded, as Their People the CHINOIS, Whereby YOUR MAIESTY and ROYAL POSTERITY shall reign hap∣pily to Eternity; and YOUR Kingdoms enjoy Wealth and Pro∣sperity throughout all Ages.
SIR,
 Butleigh 29 May 1668.
