


I Hope it shal not be accounted pre∣sumption (most Noble Prince) to offer to your Majesty, the first fruits of these my simple and rude labors, seeing the cause is JESƲS CHRISTS, that KING of Kings, and LORD of glory, which is here defended, even the everlasting truth of GOD, against the venimous stings of one of the Locusts, Rev. 9.3. of that Antichristian Kingdom. The right whereof doth most justly belong to your Majesty, both in respect of these rare and singular gifts of knowledge and under∣standing, which the LORD hath vouchsafed upon your Majesty, in such a plentiful measure, that your subjects do acknowledge it at home, and strangers do admire it, and commend it abroad: Whereby you are not only able to render a reason of that Faith which is in you, 1. Pet.
 3.15. but also able to stop the mouth of the adver∣sary, Tit. 1.9. and convict the gain-sayer whatso∣ever, by that word of truth, 2. Tim. 3.5. Wherewith your Majesty hath been brought up from your very in∣fancy: So that all the wise men of Babel (I mean the Clergy of that Roman Harlot) is not able to resist the mouth and wisdom which the Lord hath given to your Majesty. And also in respect of that supereminent power (as the Apostle calls it, Rom. 13.1.) whereby as you are most able, so are you most obliged to maintain his truth, propagat his Kingdom, and nowrish his own Spouse, which he hath purchased to himself by his own blood, Acts 20.28. by the breasts of your Maje∣sties government; as it was promised of old, That his Spouse should suck the breast of Kings, Esa. 60.16. So, who is more obliged, then ye, Sir? Who so sufficient and able every way to maintain it, as ye, Sir? Your know∣ledge binds you: Your profession binds you: Your sove∣raign authority, as ye are a King in Israel, binds you. For as the wisest King that ever was, hath said, and left it in writ: or rather that King of Kings, in him, and by him, Princes reign by me, Prov. 8.15. Ye hold your Kingdom of him, Sir, and must lay down your Crown at his feet, and must stand up and give a reckoning of the government of his Kingdom, of the maintenance of his Truth, & of the nowrishing his Spouse, in that day. Your knowledge, Sir, is able to justifie it, : your sove∣raign authority able to defend it, . Ye have recei∣ved that two-edged sword of Gods Spirit in your mouth, able to wound, Heb. 4.12. yea to consume
 that man of sin, and son of perdition. Ye have recei∣ved that sword of justice and judgement, Rom. 13.4. in your hands; able to destroy betimes all the wicked of your Kingdom; and to root out from the city of the Lord, all the workers of iniquity, Psal. 101.8. Ye know, Sir, the abomination of Babel, Rev. 17.4.5. that as it is said of the vertuous woman, Many women have done vertuously, but thou surmounts them all, Prov. 31.26. So the contrary may be said of her; Ma∣ny hereticks have taught erroneously, and worshipped and wrought abominably; but the whoor of Babel, Rev. 17.1. the Church of Rome, in heresie, in abomination, in idolatry, hath surmounted them all, that ever went be∣fore her, or ever shal come after her. Many beasts have spoken blasphemously, Rev. 13.1.3.6. but that second beast that hath two horns like the Lamb, Rev. 13. & 16.13.14. & 17.3.4.5.6. & 18.24. surmounteth them all in blasphemy, tyranny, cruelty, and abominable idolatry, destroying and making mer∣chandise of the souls of men and women. Other heresies did but subvert some fundamental points of Reli∣gion, but the Church of Rome hath subverted them all almost. Of other heresies, some was but against the God∣head of Christ, other some against his manhood, other some against his offices and benefits, or some one head or other: But the doctrine of the Church of Rome, is against them all. Injurious to his Godhead, in making him, not only inferior to the Father, in teaching that he is not ; but also inferior to the very creatures, in praying to Mary to cōmand her Son, Jure Matris impera Redemptori:
 as I heard your Majesty most solidly prove, and so worse then the Arrians. Injurious to his manhood, to all his offices, his benefits, and all the means, inward and outward, of the knowing and applying of him. And last of all, in∣jurious to his soveraign glory, in communicating it to stocks and stones, a piece of bread, bones and ashes, and the skurf skarf of all things; as I hope, I have made ma∣nifest in this my Answer. So that most justly it is called, The speach of the Dragon, and the doctrine of De∣vils, by the Spirit of God, Rev. 13.11. 1. Tim. 4. And if the profession of such a devilish doctrine be too great an evil, what would the practise thereof be? I mean the ido∣latrous Mass, that abomination of desolation. The mi∣sery, alace! were too great, to see the people of this Coun∣trey scattered like sheep without shepherds, Matth. 9.36. dying that second and everlasting death, for want of the bread of life, and Gospel of salvation. But this would be the misery of miseries, if the golden cup of Babel, full of all abominations, Rev. 17.4. should be set to their head again, to drink the deadly poyson of their own damnation. And certainly, if this famine of the Word of GOD, Amos 8.11.12. whereby not only two or three Cities, as the same Prophet saith, ch. 4.8. but twenty or thirty Parishions in some places, should be compelled to go to one, if they were desirous to drink the waters of life; this, I say, is a judgement heavy enough. But what a judgement would this be, if they were com∣pelled to bide at home, and it were but in their own fami∣lies, by that abominable Mass, the round bread, the Gods of Babel? Surely a great many of the people of
 this Countrey, do not halt now between these two thoughts, whither GOD be the LORD, or Baal; 1. Kings 18.21. but have forsaken the LORD and his Gospel, and in their heart desires the opportunity to say to their round bread, These are our Gods who have redeemed us from Hell, and these will we worship; at least secretly, till our strength grow, and our number increase. The rest of the iniquities of this Land, were too great to provoke the LORD of Hosts, suppose this impiety (which the LORD forbid, for his CHRISTS sake) be not added unto all the rest, and above all the rest. For what sin is comparable to Idola∣trie? Or what iniquity hath been ever so severely pu∣nished, as Idolatrie? A sin that is immediatly against GOD, against CHRIST, against his Glory. A sin that made 24000. of the LORDS own chosen inheritance to fall in the wilderness, for the golden Calf, and Baal-Peor, Exod. 32.28. Num. 25.9. A sin that provoked the LORD in such a high measure, that it made him deliver his own peo∣ple (whom he had planted in that Land of Promise, and to whom he had sworn to be their GOD) over in the hands of their enemies round about them, Judges 2.11.12.13.14.15. so that whithersoever they went, the hand of the LORD was sore against them. A sin that rent the Kingdom of Da∣vid asunder, 1. Kings 11.5.11. and made ten parts of it to be given to Jeroboam the son of Nebat, suppose the person was called Jedidiah, the beloved of the LORD, 2. Sam. 12.25. And the promise was
 made unto him, that his house and throne should stand for ever, 2. Sam. 7.13. And finally, a sin that first moved the LORD to put away Israel from before his face: and caused their land to vomit them out, with∣out all hope ever to return again: and then made his wrath so hot against Juda, 2. Chron. 36.16.17.18. 2. Kings 25.10. till there was no remedy, but the Temple, the Kings House, and the houses of all the Nobles, were burnt with fire: the Kings sons first slain before his eyes, then his own eyes put out, himself bound with chains of steel, and he and his people carried captives to Babel, where there they remained for the space of seventy years. Are not these things fallen forth as examples to us? And are they not written for our instruction, as the Apostle saith, 1. Cor. 10.11. upon whom the ends of the world is fallen? And is not the abomination of Babel, Rev. 17.4. their idolatrous Mass, as great abomina∣tion in the eyes of the LORD, as Milcom the abo∣mination of the Ammonits? 1. Kings 11.5. Is it less Idolatrie to worship a golden Calf, the Gods of Egypt, or a graven sheep Ashtaroth, the Gods of the Sido∣nians, Exod. 32.4. 1. Kings 11.5. Judg. 2.13. then to worship a bit of bread, made of wheat, ground in the mill, baken in the oven, conjured and erected up by an idolatrous Priest, which is the God of Babel, the Church of Rome? Is there any more God-head in the one, then in the other? Hath their Idol of the Mass any more life, feeling or moving, then the Idols of Egypt and Sidon had? And doth not the Church of Rome give
 as great, yea rather greater worship and Religion to their round bread, then Juda or Israel gave to their golden Calf, or to Ashtaroth the graven sheep: for they worship it as their Creator and Redeemer? And as the worship of the golden Calf, is called the wor∣ship of Devils in Moses song, Deut. 32.17. so the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, whereof their round bread in their Mass, is one of the principal, is called, the worship of Devils, Rev. 9.20. by the voyce that came from the four horns of the golden Altar. For what Church or Kingdom under heaven is there to be found, who in the time of the blast of the sixth Trum∣pet, when that fearful Army of the Turks was loosed to overrun Christendom, do worship Idols of gold, and silver, of brass, of wood, and of stone, but the Church of Rome? And if the worship of GOD by Images, as Israel did in the golden Calf, which is but the break of the second Command, be called the wor∣ship of Devils; shal not the worship of a false Crea∣tor and Redeemer, as they do in their Mass, which is not only the break of the first Command; but also the treading under foot of the Son of GOD in the Gospel, be most justly called, the worship of Devils? And is not the LORD as jealous of his glory now, as he was then? And hath he not sworn, that he will not give it to another? Esai. 42.8. And hath he not threatned as severe judgements against the Whoor of Babel, and the worshippers of the Beast and his Image, and them that receive his mark openly or privatly, as ever he did against Juda,
 or Israel? Rev. 13.14.15.16. and 14.8.9.10.12. and 16.1.2.10.19. and 17.1.2. and 18.11.2.3.5.6.21. and 19.19.20.21. and 21.21. Did he not cause it to be proclaimed, by an Angel with a loud voyce, that the foundations of the earth might hear it, and tremble, that they shal drink of the wine of the wrath of GOD; yea, of that pure wine, powred out in the cup of his wrath, and they shal be tormented day and night before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb: and the smoke of their torment shal ascend for evermore, and they shal have no rest day nor night, that worship the Beast and his Image? And heard not John, him that sate upon the Throne, the Judge of the whole earth, say, That Idolaters shal have their portion in the lake that burnes with fire and brimstone, which is the second death? And seeing the know∣ledge of our Redemption surmounteth the know∣ledge of our Creation: and the benefit of our Re∣demption exceeds (by many degrees) the benefit of our Creation: shal not the worship of an Idol Redeemer, and of a false Jesus, as they do in their Mass, surmount by many degrees, the worship of an Idol Creator, as Juda and Israel did? For the grea∣ter the light be, and the greater the mercy be that is besto∣wed upon any, their sin must be the greater. And as the light of the Gospel is more glorious then the light of the Law, 2. Cor. 3.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13. so the Idolatry of these that are under the Gospel, must be more abominable then the Idolatry of these that were
 under the Law. Theirs was but the despising of Moses Law, Heb. 10.28. But this Idolatry of their Mass, is the treading under foot of the blood of CHRIST, and so worthy of sorer punishment, (as the Apostle saith; Heb. 10.29.) And suppose that the judgement were to fall but upon the committers of this sin only, it were too great; but it would reach further to a whole Kingdom wherein it were commit∣ted, if by repentance; and execution of Justice, it were not prevented. For shal Abimelech King of Ge∣rar, Gen. 20.9. fear the judgement of GOD upon his whole Kingdom, for one adultery only inten∣ded, and that in ignorance? And what may a whole Land then fear, for such abominable Idolatry in so clear a light of the Gospel? And shal the ten Tribes fear the wrath of GOD, Josh. 22.21. to be kin∣dled against the whole Congregation of Israel, for the rebellion of the other two Tribes, in setting up an altar to sacrifice upon, as they thought? And what should we fear then against this whole Land, if there were altars reared up, not to worship GOD on, but the Idol of Babel. And if Achans theft, Josh. 7. suppose both the person and the sin was unknown; yea, sup∣pose there was no suspicion, neither of the one nor of the other, spoyled all Israel of GODS pre∣sence, made them fall before their enemies, and made the LORD refuse to be in the midst of them, unless the sin and person was tryed and sear∣ched, and the Anathema taken away? And would not Babels Idolatry be much more effectual to spoyl all
 the Land, if it were defiled therewith, of GODS presence; to make us fall before our enemies, and to make the LORD to depart from us, suppose it were but in one person, seeing the sin is more odious in the LORDS eyes, our light greater, and we more obliged then they were? And suppose that this abomination should be but in privat families, yet it is a fretting canker, as the Apostle saith, 2. Tim. 2.17. that when it hath infected a member of the body, it will infect the rest, if it be not prevented by cutting off the festered member. And the Apostle saith, 1. Cor. 5.6. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. And experience hath taught, that by process of time, a little leck hath sunk a great ship: and one person infe∣cted with the pestilence, hath infected a whole King∣dom. The first Idolatrie of the land of Canaan, be∣gan with Teraphim Jehovae, silver sanctified to the LORD, to be an Image, Jud. 17.5.3. but after∣ward it grew up to the worship of Baal and Ashtaroth, ch. 2.13. It was in the beginning but in one only fa∣mily, the family of Micah, ch. 17.1. but in process of time, it passed from that family to the Tribe of Dan, ch. 18. and from that Tribe to all the rest of the Tribes, ch. 2.13.14. till at the last all Israel sinned, and did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD. So there is no question, Sir, if your Ma∣jesty put not to your hand, as you have begun to do, it will get foot in this Land, and it would pass from fami∣lies to Tribes, from privat houses to Temples, from the worship of the round bread, to the worship of stocks
 and stones: and so by one degree to another, till it have made all guilty; what by infecting, what by com∣municating with their sins, and then bring the fearful vengeance of GOD upon all. And suppose, Sir, that you have not need to be taught of any; for that light and understanding wherewith the LORD hath anointed you, in so great a measure beyond many, doth teach you all things: and your Majesty hath laid so sure foundation of maintenance, both of Ju∣stice and Religion within your Land, and hath begun so substantially to prosecute the same (for the which, from our hearts we render glory and praise to GOD.) So that all further exhortation of your Majesty, would seem to be superfluous: Yet I must borrow leave at your Majesty, to be bold, with all humbleness of mind, and reverence of heart, to GOD, and to your Majesty, to beseech you, by the price of JESUS CHRIST your LORD, to stirr up the bowels of your compassion over this desolat Countrey: For upon whom are the eyes of all Israel, 1. Kings 3.20. but upon you, Sir? And what King is there under Hea∣ven, under whose Government the Gospel hath had so free a passage, and the Church of GOD hath had chnrity and liberty, in such peace, for so long a  a whole Kingdom, without Heresie or Schism,  under your Majesties Government? So that we were both ungrate to GOD, and to you, Sir, if with all thanksgiving we did not acknowledge it. Take there∣fore for examples these worthy Kings, who have re∣ceived a good report in the Word of the LORD;
 and now resting from their labors, have received that incorruptible Crown of glory. Put on their affections, Sir, and follow their actions, that your report here, and Crown hereafter, may be equal, or rather above theirs. Let your heart melt, Sir, with good Jo∣sias, 2. Kings 22.19. not for our fathers transgres∣sions, as he did; but for our own sins, and the sins of this Land, Ezek. 9.4. For GOD regarded not the time of their ignorance, Acts 17.30.31. Rom. 2.16. when the Gospel shined not; but now since that light is broken forth, he admonisheth all men to repent, be∣cause he hath set a day (which cannot be far off) wherein he will judge every one by the Man CHRIST JESUS, according to his Gospel. And if that great Angel had not descended unto us, with that little Book open in his right hand, Rev. 10.1.2. and the Land had not been once purged of Idolatry, we should not have sinned; but now we have no cloke for our sin, John 15.21.24. Stir up your anger with Moses; Sir, who suppose he was the mee∣kest man upon the face of the whole earth, Num. 12.3. yet when he saw the golden Calf, his anger was kindled, Exod. 32.19. that he brake the Tables of stone, the LORDS own work and writ, burnt the Calf in the fire, bryed it in powder, scattered it on the waters, and made the people to drink thereof. Follow the example of good Jehosaphat, Sir, who fought the LORD his GOD, 2. Chron. 27.4.20. walked in his precepts, lifted up his heart to the wayes of the LORD, purged his land of
 Idolatrie: And first sent Levits with his own Prin∣ces to teach all the Cities of his Kingdom the Law of the LORD: and after being admonished by the Prophet, for helping of the wicked, and loving them who hated the LORD, (suppose he was his neighbor King, joyned in affinity with him) he so re∣pented, that he went from the one end of his King∣dom to the other; even from Beersheba to mount Ephraim, and brought his people to the LORD their GOD, and established Religion and Justice in all the Cities of his Kingdom; and therefore the LORD was with him: he prospered, and had riches and honor in abundance. What joy of heart, Sir, brought Ezechias to the hearts of all the godly, as well indwellers as strangers, when he purged his land of Idolatrie, 2. Chron. 29. and 30.31. brake the bra∣zen Serpent which the people had abused, opened the doors of the Temple which were shut up, re∣stored the worship of GOD, sent messengers with letters throughout all Israel, to convert them to the LORD their GOD: restored the Priests and Levites in their Ministery, as the LORD had commanded by his Prophets: spake to their hearts, strengthened them in their offices, provided for their maintenance, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the LORD? Follow these examples, Sir: send Pastors throughout all the borders of your King∣dom, to teach your subjects the Law of their LORD, and the Gospel of their salvation: establish Religion and Justice in all the Cities of your Kingdom. Cause the
 waters of life to run from the heart of your Coun∣trey unto the borders thereof, that publickly and privatly, the LORD may be but one, and his Name one, and he may be a soveraign King in all your Land, as it was prophesied and promised, Zech. 14.8.6. Establish Pastors in all your Kingdom: streng∣then them in their offices, and speak to their hearts. Pro∣vide for their maintenance, that they be not distracted; but may be encouraged in the Law of their GOD, and in the execution of their Ministery. And when it is reported to your Majesty, or ye hear of any, be they ma∣ny, or be they few; be they man, or be they wife; be it pub∣lickly, or be it secretly, in any of the Cities or parts in your Majesties Kingdom, that they have gone out to entise others to Idolatry, or have committed Idolatry themselves, ye try it, search it, & seek it out most diligently, for so the LORD hath most straitly commanded. And if it be true and certain that such abomination is done in your Kingdom, Take evil out of Israel, that he may have mercy on us, and multiply his blessings to us. And then may ye, Sir, (having done all these things) take GOD to record, that you are clean from the blood of all your people; because you have kept no mean back from them which your calling craved; but hath caused the whole counsel of GOD to be shewed to them: so that if they perish, their own blood may be upon their own heads. And then shal forrain Nations and strangers say of you, Sir, as Hiram, and the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon, 1. Kings 5.7. and 10.8. Blessed be the LORD GOD who
 hath set such a wise and understanding Prince over Scotland, to build his Church, and to exercise Ju∣stice and judgement there: It was for the love the LORD had to his Church there, that he set such a wise and understanding Prince over them. Yea, the generations to come, Psal. 78.4. shal tell to their children, and their childrens children, the great work of the LORD which he hath done by you, Sir, in this Land. I have heard your Majesty gravely protest, before GOD, in two General Assem∣blies, that it was one of your Majesties greatest desires; and ye were even, as it were, ambitious of that work, to plant every Parochin within your Kingdom with a Pa∣stor: that the posterities to come, might say, King JAMES the sixth hath done such a notable work in his days. Confirm your self, Sir, in that purpose: For ye know, Sir, who hath said, I will honor them that honor me. There is no question, Sir, and I speak with confidence, if ye honor him in this Kingdom, and be faithful to him in the Government of it, he shal honor you; not only by making you to reign in that ever∣lasting Kingdom; but also by lifting you up to be Ruler over mo Kingdoms here. The LORD anoynted David King over all Israel, yet he gave not the possession of it all at once after the death of Saul, but first proved him with the Government of one Tribe se∣ven years and an half: and then finding him faithful over that, he placed him Ruler over all the rest, and established all Israel in his hand. So there is no que∣stion, and I am sure of it, if ye honor the LORD to
 the uttermost of your power, in the Government of this Kingdom, and give him a proof of your fidelity there∣in: that as he hath given you the undoubted right by birth, to be a King over mo Kingdoms then this, so shal he make you Ruler of them, and establish them in your hands. Only, Sir, Be ye strong and couragious to do with all diligence, as the LORD hath comman∣ded you in his Word, Josh. 1.6.7.8.9. and as ye see these faithful Kings have done before you. Decline nei∣ther to the right hand, nor to the left; and then assu∣redly I dare promise you, in the Name of the LORD, he shal not leave you, nor forsake you all your days, and none shal be able to stand before your face. And as he was with Josua and David, so shal he be with you. For the LORD is true who hath promi∣sed, & then shalt thou prosper in all thy ways. And consider upon the other part, who ever prospered unto the end, but these that walked as the LORD had commanded. For true is that which the LORD spake by his Pro∣phet to Asa; He is with you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek him, he will be found; but if ye will forsake him, he will forsake you, 2. Chron. 1.4.2. Was the LORD any longer with Saul, Joash, Amat∣zia, Uzzia, all Kings of Juda, then they were with him? No, no: but from time they forsook him, he forsook them. Because Saul despised the word of the LORD, in sparing whom he should not have spared, the LORD despised him from being King over Israel, and the Spirit of the LORD forsook him, 1. Sam. 15.23. and 16.15. Because Joash forsook the LORD,
 2. Chron. 24.20. in permitting Idolatrie, at the re∣quest of his Princes, the LORD forsook him and his Kingdom, and delivered them into the hands of their enemies. Because Amatzia did evil, and obeyed not the counsel of the Prophet, 2. Chron. 5.16. when he admonished him, the LORD deter∣mined to destroy him. Ʋzzia, all the dayes that he sought the LORD, the LORD prospered him, 2. Chron. 26.5.16.18. but from time he lifted up him∣self, to corrupt himself, & to trespass against the LORD his GOD, in passing the limits of his calling, and invading the Priests office, he had no honor of the LORD, but was smitten with leprosie. But let all these things be far from your Majesty, since you see what every one of these have done to Kings, and King∣doms before you: let your heart be constant before the LORD your GOD, all the dayes of your life, that priores & posteriores, 2. Chron. 25.26. be never registrat of your Majesty, as it was of them; neither in the Books of the LORDS Commentary before him, neither in the Chronicles of the Kings of Scotland; but that both your former and latter may be that which is good and right in the eyes of the LORD. That both the LORD may give this testi∣mony to your own conscience, and to the conscience of all his children, that he gave of David, I have found you a man according to mine own heart, that will do all my will. And also, that it may be written of your Majesty in the Chronicles of the Kings of Scot∣land, as it was written of David, Ezechias, Josias, in the
 Chronicles of the Kings of Juda, That King JAMES the sixth, his heart was perfect toward the LORD his GOD all his dayes, and his Government was in such Peace and Justice, that after him there was none like him of all the Kings of Scotland: Neither was there any such before him, who did cleave unto the LORD his GOD, with all his heart, and followed all his Commandments, and neither de∣clined to the right hand, nor to the left. Now the LORD grant to your Majesty, that ye may find this favor in his eyes, for his CHRISTS sake. I have now taken this boldness, to offer these my labors unto your Majesty, as a testimony of my most humble and loyal heart unto your Majesty, as GOD the searcher of the heart knows. Your Majesty did exceedingly encou∣rage me, to let it go forth unto the light; what by your Majesties most gracious acceptation of mine endeavor, and most favorable censure, and approbation of my la∣bors: what by your Majesties humane counsel and advise, confirmed by your Majesties Priviledge and authority to me to publish the same. Such was Your Ma∣jesties humanity to me, not only in these, but in all your actions, both publick and privat, with all your subjects, of whatsoever rank or degree. Ye shew such humanity and affability, that that saying of Trajanus the Empe∣ror, That a Prince should behave himself so to his subjects, as he would have them to do to him, if he were a privat man, is verified in you, Sir; wherein certainly ye need not to give place to any of whatsoever rank: You express it so lively in all your actions, and I
 have found it for my own part by experience. So that Your Majesty hath often caused me to remember that notable saying of Titus that Roman Emperor, A sub∣ject should never go sad-hearted from the speech of his Prince. The which experience makes me to conceive hope, that Your Majesty will pardon this my boldness, will accept in good part this my smal mite. I therefore most humbly desire Your Majesty to accept it, as from Your Majesties most humble obedient servant and sub∣ject. For whose peace and prosperity, I am always earnest with the LORD. Now the GOD of all Peace, even that KING of Kings, powr all light and grace in all abundance, more and more, upon Your Majesty; and so root and ground your heart in JESUS CHRIST, that ye may honor him more and more in your life and calling here, that ye may be honored of him again, both in this life, and in that day, with immortal and everlasting glory. Amen.
From Air the 18. of November 1602.

