



Much Honoured:
THat the sacred day of God should run the gantlet, and feel the stripes of ma∣ny malepert adversaries, is not miraculous; but that these enemies of Gods blessed day should be reduced under no Head, and cast into no predi∣cament, this accents the wonder; that Ebion a primitive Heretick with his Complices should rob the Lords day of a moity of its Honour, making two
 Sabhaths everyweek, retaining both the Jewish and the Christian Sabbath: That Turrecremata, a politick School-man, should rob the Lords day of its Autho∣rity, and fasten it only upon a Canoni∣cal Law; that others of latter times should rob this blessed day of its solem∣nity, giving way to Sports and Sense∣pleasing Recreations upon this holy season; that another sort with their Confederates should rob the Lords day of its site and position, rebounding it back again to the last day of the week, and so put a Jewish brand upon the Lords day; nay, that some in these dregs of time should oppose the very Being of the Lords day, and pluck up all Sab∣baths by the roots, and confidently, if not impudently affirme, that every day is a Christian Sabbath; this is mat∣ter of amazement; we may truly ad∣mire
 that all varieties should troup to∣gether to fight against the day of God; onely this consideration may a little break the force of the wonder; if holi∣ness which is the impression of Gods 2 Tim. 3. 12. Spirit meet with a constant and violent persecution, 'tis not much marvel if the Sabbath, the genuine promoter of ho∣liness meet with the same dealing. In∣deed in the Primitive times of the Church, those Halcyon dayes of the Gospel, The Lords day, like the be∣loved Disciple, lay in the bosom; we find Ignatius calling it the Queen of dayes, Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes. . Athan. pist. 119. c 13. and s setting a Crown upon its Head; Athanasius making it the first of dayes, the beginning of a new world; Justin Martyr giving us the several Branches and methods of its sacred Solemnizati∣on, and shews us how exact the Primi∣tive Christians were in the several du∣ties
 and services of it; the incompara∣ble Aug Serm. de temp. 251. Augustine lays us down the true and pregnant reason of its rise and instituti∣on; and Ambrose tells us flatly, that Christs Resurrection was a real conse∣cration of this Holy day for weekly and divine worship. I need not mention what Tertullian speaks of the Holy Discourses the Primitive Christians used upon this day; nor what Clemens Romanus saith, of the devout prayers and accurate attentions used by the Professors of the first times on this Ho∣ly Festival; nor yet of the great prehe∣minences given by Hierome to this bles∣sed season; that day alone, saith Hierome, is the one proper Lords day, and better Ambr. tom. 2. in 47. Psal. then all other common dayes, and then all the Festival dayes, New moons, and Sabbaths of Moses his Law. And should Tertul Apol. cap 39. we cast our eye upon what Chrysostom
 hath written in his fifth Homily upon Matthew; how unwearied the Chri∣stians of those times were in the holy duties of Gods day; how their Devo∣tion was a full and a constant stream; we should then conclude, that the Lords day hath had its Heralds to proclaim Clem. Rom. l. 2. c. 59. its glory, as well as its Detractors to de∣cry its solemnity. Thus the Christian Sabbath hath travelled in the Wilder∣nes of this life under the pillar of a cloud. and a pillar of fire; and as it hath its enemies to oppose it, so likewise its Se∣conds Hier. ad Eu∣stoch. to defend it. That which hath cast a spot upon this blessed day in these Chrsost ho∣mil. 5 in Matth. latter dayes of the world, is not so much Errour as Prophaneness; Gods day hath not suffered so much (yet too much) by the blasts of Opinion, as by the blackness of open prophanation: Concil. Prag. Synod. D∣drect. Sess. 4. Were we but sensible of the groans of
 the Council of Prague; how those conveened there, bemoaned the pro∣phanation of Gods Holy day; or had we heard the sighs of the Synod at Dort, Hosp. de Orig. Fest. l. 1. c. 3. how they lamented this evil, and with what pathetical language they impor∣tuned the petitioning of Magistrates for the redress of this great evil; nay, were we sensible of the mournful expressions of many worthy and learned Divines of Simler. com∣ment in Exod. the Reformed Churches, when their Pens seemed more to drop Teares, then Ink; we could not but be much af∣fected Aret. Prob. Theol. loc. 123. and impressed: Nay, should we take a nearer Prospect, and take notice of the prodigious vanities, and great impieties which are acted on Gods Ho∣ly day here at home in our own Nati∣on, Chemnit. ex∣am. Concil. Trident. trembling may justly seize upon us. Now to put some stop to this sinful In∣undation, is the design of this Treatise,
 which (Much Honoured) shelters it self under the Protection of your Patro∣nage: The promoting of Sabbath-ho∣liness hath been the care of Courts, and the zeal of Councils, and the Vindica∣tion of that Eminent Piece of Piety hath been written not only with Pens, but with Scepters. Sabbath-holiness is the glory of Princes; Constantines Edict Euseb. de vi∣tâ Constan∣tini. for the strict observation of the Lords day, is recorded by Eusebius as a Piece Nehem. 13. 15. 16, 17, 18, &c. of Memorable Piety. Sabbath-holi∣ness is the splendour of Nobles. Nehe∣miahs zeal for Gods blessed Sabbath is recorded not by the Historian, but by the Spirit, and made part of Gods sa∣cred Word. Sabbath-holiness is the richest field in the Gentlemans Escu∣cheon. Mr. Bruens piety in an exem∣plary observation of Gods Holy day Mr. Clark in the life of Mr. Bruen and Mr. Dod. is transmitted by a faithful Pen to fu∣ture
 times, as an Emblem of his perpe∣tual honour. Sabbath-holiness is not on∣ly the duty, but the dignity of a Mini∣ster; the rare and strict observance of Gods Holy day, by the most pious Mr. Dod is set down in the History of his Life, as a fair Copy for future suc∣cessions to write after. Nay, Sabbath-holiness is the honour of a people; Chry∣sostom hath left it upon record in one of Chrysost. 19. Homil. in Genes. his Homilies upon Genesis, as the Crown of his people, that with unwearied pa∣tience, and unwonted alacrity they would wait upon his Ministry upon the Lords day, and thought not the circuit of a Sabbath too great a com∣pass, but fill'd up the time of it in holy Devotion. Indeed the Sabbath Crowns them who honour it. Now, (Most Wor∣thily Honoured) I shall make no Appli∣cations; what I could say, is better seen
 in your practice, then in my Epistle: Suf∣fer me only to be your Remembrancer; those who are most spiritual, lie under the motions of the Spirit; if you see your selves in the Glass of this Treatise, pardon me, if I hold the Glass, and let not my service be my offence. Thus Eph. 1. 11. commending your selves, your wor∣thy Family, and this Tract (such as it is) to the grace of him who worketh all Eph. 3. 20. things for us, and in us, Iremain

