


May it please Your Grace,
WHen I preached the following Sermons, I had no thoughts of Print∣ing them. Having now
 on some Reasons, resolved to print them, there is such a Congruity of Debt arises upon them from the Considerati∣on of Your Graces Station, and their Subject matter, that were there no Obligation upon their Author, they ought up∣on their own sole account to be addrest to no other, within this Kingdom, but Your Gra∣ces sacred Patronage. They as∣sert His Majesties Rights, and his Subjects Duties: And Your Grace here sustains and re∣presents His Majesties Person in all the most ample capacities a Subject can do; in Church, in State, and in the highest or∣dinary Judicature.

 But, My Lord, I have, besides this Debt on Them, many Debts on my Self. I can never forget the Enter∣tainment Your Grace was pleased to give me at my first Arrival in this King∣dome, neer fourteen Years ago, when a perfect Stran∣ger therein; together with the sweet, but effectual, In∣terpositions of that Authority, which then preserved me from Ruine; And (what is much greater) the Con∣stancy of Your Graces Favour ever since. These things all live imprinted upon my very Soul, and as they daily draw forth my most ardent Prayers
 to God for Your Graces pre∣sent and future Felicities, so as long as I am capable of Gratitude, they shall be mat∣ter of my publick Gratitude and Acknowledgments: As one in∣stance whereof I beseech Your Grace to accept this present Recognition.
And here I could willing∣ly have closed this Dedicati∣on; but I must now beseech your Grace to become my Pa∣tron in another sense. How of late I have been represent∣ed, is more known, than I could wish it were for the Representers sake. How I deserved it, no one better knows than Your Grace; be∣fore
 whom I had the Ho∣nour to preach that so much scandalized Sermon, on the first Sunday after Your Graces third Reception of the Sword: In which Sermon, if there had been any thing wherein I had made the least disloyal Glance, I should not doubt∣less have carried it away without Animadversion both from Your Grace, and Your Graces no less Loyal than He∣roical and Honourable Collegue.
But I humbly conceive, that as there was no Cause then administred to any ill Censure, so it would have been no more proper for me then and in that Audience to
 have preach'd a Sermon solely pressing Loyalty and Allegiance, than if a man should have come up amongst the Hun∣dred and twenty assembled to∣gether at Jerusalem, fresh af∣ter our Saviours Ascension, and have set himself to per∣swade them to constancy in the Belief of their Lords Resurre∣ction, when they were all of them inspirited with zeal to die for it. I chose therefore to perform the Office of preaching Loyalty and Allegiance in places and times which more required it: and at that time and place I spoke, what I thought might be of more universal Edification and Agreeableness. I herewith
 present some of the Vouchers, which I have of my Fidelity to His Majesty: And I hum∣bly pray and hope, that if Your Grace should judge, I ever needed, or should need, Testimo∣nials of my Loyalty, Your Grace would vouchsafe to represent these where, and as, occasion may serve.
God in his Mercy to the poor Church of Ireland long pre∣serve Your Grace her happy Angel; and a Refuge to,
My Lord,

Cork Dec. 19. 1685.
