



I Would not that any mans name should be questioned, or judgement suspected, for my faults: much less, that the least spot of that dirt which those who are petulantly averse from what I perswade may haply think fit to cast upon me, should glance or reflect up∣on another face than mine own.
This Sermon therefore, however pub∣lished upon the importunity (and truly to
 my modesty almost constraint) of some Reverend Friends, whose patronage therefore it might have presumed upon, and not without the permission of a Right Reverend and Honourable Person, who having received the Authour under his wing would not (I hope) have turn'd away his Labours, shall, notwithstanding the Malignity of some, from which it might seem to need a Protection, come forth Dedicated to no other than those who, amongst the multitude, whether of Neutral or Separating Brethren, are of Nobler and more Ingenuous Spirits than the rest, and dare resolve with patience to read, and impartially to weigh that which good will, with a Charitable and Passionate hand, tenders, to convict them of what (according to its best judgment and clearest reason) it esteems their (at least) neglected duty, viz. Ʋnity and through Conformity.

Were I not, after diligent endeavours to inform my self, and upon as mature consideration as I can take, fully perswa∣ded of what I say, I should not have spo∣ken so boldly: Notwithstanding, this my assurance as to the cause extends not it self to my management of it: Here I am not so confident but that I desire a candid Rea∣der; nor, on the contrary, am I conscious to my self of any thing so raw, that I fear a malevolous censurer. Most candidly shall I think my self to be dealt with, if received with an unprejudiced mind; and most unkind is he, not so much to. Cyril. Hieros. Cat. Illum. 15. me, as to truth and himself, who doth otherwise.
Be intreated then, who read∣est this, to lay aside thine own opinion while thou art a reading, to practise an harm∣less Neutrality for an hour, that thou mayst ever after hate the sinful, to be of no party so long, as while thou canst
 fairly weigh what is said, and having done so, thou hast fully gratified the Au∣thours desire; for let thy sentence be ne∣ver so hard, he will embrace it as his desert,

