



May it please your Grace,
DIvers of my Friends, Auditors of this Sermon, have taken occasion to be so troublesome to me for it, that I saw no way to deliver my self from their displea∣sure, but by gratifying their importunity. The same Persons, as I understood, expresly pro∣fessing when they should have a Copy they would make it publick, I resolved by making the Ori∣ginal such my self, to give both them and the World leave to take as much of it as they
 should list. Being now publick, it comes, as Duty directs it, an humble Present unto your Grace.
I am not at all solicitous as to its Entertain∣ment in the World: being conscious to my self its Contents are wholly sober truth, with which if any should be angry, I am not yet satisfied that I ought to be concerned thereat, otherwise than to vouchsafe such persons my Pity, and the charity of my Prayers.
I only fear how your Grace may resent so bold a Dedication: But I have to say for my self, That, by the laxest Laws of Gratitude, I ought some publick testification of your Graces singu∣lar Sweetness and Constancy to me; That I had no fitter means of such testification than this, this being my first appearance in publick in the Kingdom of Ireland, and besides it being not possible for me ever to present in so short a com∣pass, more of my self and most intimate thoughts in a case of this nature, than I have done here: (Now First-fruits, and what is most sincerely Ours, use to come most acceptable Oblations.)
 That the Experience, which I have had of your Graces favourable admission of Addresses far more troublesome than this, gave me confi∣dence an attempt of Gratitude would not be ill taken.
In this confidence I forbear other Apologies, and most passionately pray to your Grace, amidst the great and various Vicissitudes of Humane affairs, such continuance of Health, Fortunes, and the Divine Blessing, that you may long live, what admirably you are, a glorious Precedent and Patron of all Learning, Worth and Virtue.

Dublin, Aug. 13. 1672.
