


Gentlemen,
THE Worthy Author of the en∣suing Discourses, was a Person of Exemplary Learning, Loyalty, Honour, and Generosity; and his Courage, Adventures, and Suf∣ferings, were so eminent and remarkable in the late times of Rebellion and Anarchy, that to express them truly, and equal to his Merit, would require the Pen of a Plutarch or Sueto∣nius, or, at least, that of One of his more Lear∣ned Friends and Admirers, whereby his hap∣py Memory might be the more justly and pun∣ctually preserved from the consuming Rust of Time, [which by degrees devours all things] whereas it may suffer much by reason of my

Inability in Art, and want of Materials for such a Performance; though (I must tell you) it cannot for want of Candor and Respect.
The loss of his Person I esteemed very great, as well to his King and Countrey, as Rela∣tions, and not easie to be repaired. But that the Muses, or Republick of Learning might not be deprived of so great a Son of Science, without some Pillar or Monument remaining, whereby he might in after Ages be remembred; I have thought fit (for Reasons hereafter men∣tioned) to make this Collection of the most useful of his Learned Labours, and do here transmit them to Posterity for their Advantage and Service.
Learning and Loyalty were the Twins of his Noble mind, which though they were Ver∣tues united in him, I shall here speak alittle of them separately, and as succinctly as I can.
First, For his Loyalty—in our late never-to-be-forgotten Intestine Divisions; this our Author being then in the prime of his Years, and in a full Possession of a good Estate, de∣scended upon him from his Ancestors; but with other Loyal Persons, discontented at the then growing Rebellion, which like an Envious Cloud, began to overspread and darken the Splendor of the Monarchy; He (as I heard himself to express it) turns all his said In∣heritance into Money; and (being a Son of Mars as well as of Hermes) as his Allegiance

and Honour bound him, he espouses his Ma∣jesties Cause and Interest, and raises a Gallant Troop of Horse therewith: And as far as he was able, opposed the Kings and Kingdoms Ene∣mies, endeavouring to settle his Soveraign in his Throne, and restore Peace to his bleeding Country.
But God Almighty (sure as a Punishment for our Sins, both then, and yet of too deep a Scarlet-dye, to be quickly purged, and rendred white as Wool, was pleased to permit the Rebellious Party to prevail against his (then) most Sacred Majesty, and his Arms: And this worthy Man (with many o∣thers) became so much a Sharer in that dismal Calamity, that, after many Noble and Gene∣rous Hazards of his Person in Battel, he was at the last (the Rebel-Party being too powerful) totally routed near Stow in Gloucester-shire, where the Noble and Valiant Sir Jacob Ashley was unfortunately victor'd, and taken Prisoner. In which Battel his whole Troop was cut off, and himself at the same time received several Scars of Honour, which he carried to his Grave with him.
That good, but unfortunate Prince, King Charles the First, of ever Blessed Memory, (in whose Cause our Author thus engaged) be∣ing not alittle troubled, as with the unhappy Loss in General, so with this Loyal Persons Misfortunes in particular, thus sustained in his Service, was most graciously pleased in

some little time after, to confer upon him (in Consideration of his just and faithful Services, as well as his great Losses) an Honourable Place in his Train of Artillery, which he held during the Remainder of the Wars. He ser∣ved his Soveraign faithfully, the King as bountifully requites his Services: Few lose by just and Loyal Services perform'd for Pious and Royal Princes.
By this alone Example, methinks, the restless Plotting Non-conformist should learn to be o∣bedient, and know Allegiance to be, non only his Duty, but Advantage; since of all Grati∣tude, that which proceeds from Princes, is the Greatest, the most God-like, and obliging.
But if our Dissenters (a Title-Rebellious People pride themselves in, and love to be di∣stinguished by, if they, I say) shall in stead of thus signalizing their Loyalty, make it their main work to approve themselves such a Race of true Protestant-Christians, as a late execrable Book (call'd the Life of Julian) most boldly, but falsely affirms the Primitive Christi∣ans to have been, I shall for ever cease to wonder at their constant and causeless Murmurings, or their mutinous Tenets or Actions, since their lost, or Planet-struck Passive Obedience, is always swelling them into a Malicious Hatred, and Provocation against the Government; and by degrees (if let alone) into an Active Rebellion. And this their Hypocritical Zeal,

and pretended Piety we sadly remember, was written by them in Horrid Dismal Chara∣cters, (and at large too) in our late unnatu∣ral Wars, and testified to be true with the Blood of many Thousands, the Ruine of Multitudes of Families, the most horrid and barbarous Murder of the best of Kings, and sundry of the Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy, the sad and lamentable Banishment of his pre∣sent Gracious Majesty, and together with him, all the Royal Line.
These were (but some of) the Effects of the Dissenters Zeal in Anno 1641. began; of which Year (to do them right) they do not delight, yea, may be ashamed to hear. The wretched Consequences therefore of such a Piety all good People have reason to dread; and also to be very watchful that they do not permit or encourage the like damnable Premisses to grow up among them For certainly, even Turks themselves are more tolerable than such Chri∣stians. But this Obitèr.
It having pleased God, in his Anger, (who a∣lone is the Setter up of Kings, and the Dispo∣ser of Crowns and Scepters) to suffer his late Majesty (I say) to be overcome by his own perjur'd Subjects (for they had all sworn Allegiance to him) in that most Bloody Re∣bellion; this Loyal Gentleman is thereby de∣priv'd of that his Majesties said Bounty to

him, and (with the King himself and all the Loyal Party) put once more) to his Shifts.
And what doth he now? Turn to the strongest side, like the Dog in the Apologue, who had defended his Masters Goods and Interest as long as he could, but when overcome, comply and share in the Booty? No! He had a Soul too Noble and Loyal for such base and dege∣nerous Purposes: But rather, like the great Scripture-Philosopher, would still retain his Loyalty and Integrity; and he did so to the last. For being now (as we have said) with all the Loyal Party left naked, and devested of every thing, nay, almost of his Hope too; and his Arms of no longer use to him (unless he would joyn with the Rebels, a thing he totally abhor'd!) He patiently and chearfully be∣takes himself to his Arts; of which he had (for∣merly) worthily proceeded Master at Queens Colledge, Oxon. And rather than not serve the King, his Soveraign Lord at all, he con∣descended to write, among other things, even Almanacks, and thereby took occasion to assert his Majesties Honour and Interest, and in that contemptible way, to make known and en∣large his Authority as much as in him lay to do, when he could perform it no longer by his Sword.
And for his several Loyal Endeavours by his Pen, he had soon made way for New Trou∣bles to attend him, being for that Cause looked

upon as a great Eye-sore to the Men in Power of those Tyrannous Times, and had provoked them so far (as you'l find in several Parts of these his Works) that they thought fit fre∣quently to seize his Person, and restrain his Liberty, hoping thereby to restrain his Pen; and accordingly clap'd him up close Prisoner in the Gate-house, and Newgate sometimes, and other whiles in Windsor-Castle; in which several (to him) doleful Places, he constantly (though like a Bird in a Cage) continued sing∣ing forth his Ditties of Loyalty, thereby re∣membring the then Ruling Rebels, that there was a Lawful King still in Being (though God had suffer'd him to partake of a large and do∣lorous Exile) unto whom they all ought to pay their Duty & Allegiance, as he himself truly did.
Thus we see that even Prisons (the most hated and loathed of Places) and a Reduction to the very lowest Ebb of Fortune cannot per∣mute a truly well-grounded and inbred Loyal∣ty, nor yet the greatest Temptations of Gold and Glory in such a despised Condition, prove an Annulet of Power sufficient to warp or bend a worthy Mind from his Allegiance.
In this suffering Condition he continued from the Surrender of Oxford, which was on June 24. 1646. sharing in the common Fate or Mis∣fortunes of all the Kings Friends, feeding upon the Garlick and Onions of the Usurpers Ty∣ranny,

rather than to eat Quails at the Tables of Rebels; keeping a more than Twelve years Lent, being little better than a Hewer of Wood, and Drawer of Water, at the Com∣mand of those, who (in Right and Justice) were but his Fellow Subjects: I say, in this Condition he continued until the most happy and Glorious Restauration of his present most Sacred Majesty, which was on May 29. 1660. And when the true Son of Great Britains Hopes appear'd, the Clouds that had most enviously so long benighted all Loyal, Honest Men, began to scatter apace: And then our worthy Author (among the rest) crept out of his Obscurity, and received Warmth by those powerful Solar Rays his Majesties most happy appearing had so seasonably scatter'd o∣ver the Nation, to the acquitting of it from its many years bewilder'd Condition, and had a Re-admission into his former Place and Of∣fice. And not only so, but in a short time af∣ter, He received also an Additional Prefer∣ment of good Consequence; which Places of Trust, he discharged so well and so faithfully, that his Majesty thought sit, in Consideration of his former Sufferings under, and for his Royal Father, and particular Services to him∣self, to confer the Honour of Baronet by Pa∣tent, upon him, and his Heirs for ever; which Honour his Son, Sir Polycarpus Wharton now most deservedly enjoys.
Thus this truly Loyal Person lived in the Favour of two of the Best of Kings, and was thought worthy to be rewarded by them both; and died in the Favour of his present Ma∣jesty possessed of that Honour and Office the King had so freely bestowed upon him, and thought he so well deserved.
This is a true, though short Description of his Loyalty, his Sufferings, and Rewards. And, I hope, some others that knew him bet∣ter, and are better furnished for such an Vn∣dertaking, will present the World with a lar∣ger Account of this worthy Persons Original, Life, and Actions; and thereby make amends for my Defects whatever they shall appear to be; which would be (I confess) an extraordi∣nary Delight and Satisfaction to me, that have thus meanly endeavour'd to preserve his Memo∣ry. For I would have a Worthy Good Man no more forgotten, though dead, then I would have the Sun forget to shine again, after it hath left our Horizon in an Evening. And when such Persons are suffered to slide to the Shades of black Oblivion, unremembred, it is no small sign of a wicked, vitious, and pro∣fligate Age.
Secondly, as to his Learning. This our Author was not only Naturally Loyal, but was blessed with a great acquisition of Learning too. He was both an Excellent Schollar, and sin∣gular

Artist, understanding both Languages and Sciences, as sufficiently appears by this Miscellaneous Treatise here published, which is of excellent Service to all men that are in∣clined to a Courtship of the Muses. So that we may most justly say of this Collection, as it is reported, once a learned Critick said of Virgils Works, viz. That if all the Books in the World were burnt, and that only remain∣ing, some Vestigia of all kind of Learning might be found therein.
And that you may know that this is no Ro∣mantick Story, but more than Fancy or Opi∣nion, even a very real and demonstrative Truth be pleased a little to observe with me, how many several sorts of Persons and Sciences we shall find obliged by these his Learned La∣bours.
1. If this Excellent Treatise fall into the hands of the Venerable Theologue, (to say no∣thing of the near Relation Astrology hath to Divinity, as the Learned Dr. Gell, Dr. Swad∣lin, and others have most learnedly proved) here he will meet with the Original of all the Fasts and Feasts of the Jewish, as well as Chri∣stian Church, so excellently and elegantly set forth, and with such aweful Respect to the Preservation of the Honour of God, and the Continuance of Sacred things in Vse among us, that had he been bred to that Holy Function,

more could not have been said in so short a room upon that Weighty, Grave, and Tremendous Subject.—Sure hereafter such mistaken Cler∣gy-men, who have drank too liberally at John Calvins Fountain, and thereby imbib'd his Poyson breath'd forth against the Stars, and the Magnifiers of God in his Works, without either serious Examination or Consideration, will cease to Calumniate Astrologers, and the laudable Science of the Stars, and be brought to confess upon their reading this Treatise, that some of them (at least) believe they have Souls as well as Bodies, and do (as the Holy Church it self) assert their Immortality, and hope for Salvation by the Blood of the blessed Jesus; abandoning all sorts of Atheism, Blas∣phemy, and Imposture.
2. Should the Reader hereof be a Learned Physician, whose business it is to correct the Corporal Infirmities, which the Stars (by Gods Permission) inflict upon Mankind, he will meet in this Collection a most Learned Account of the Crises in Diseases, Illustrated by a Famous Example, and also how the Crisis it self is really made by the Motion of the Moon, and is either Safe or Dangerous, as she applies to Stars therein, either Benevolent or Hurtful, by good or bad Aspect. Nor is it a trivial, but formidable Truth, That Astrology con∣duceth to the Knowledge both of the Theory

and Practice of Physick. And that it is the very Eye thereof, no Learned Physician will disdain to own, that hath but seriously read and consider'd the Second Aphorism of the first Section of the ever Famed Hippocrates, Prince of Physicians. Nay, Galen himself wrote a Book which he entituled de Diebus Criticis. Hasfurtus wrote an Excellent Treatise of Phy∣sick by Astrology, under this Title, de Me∣dendis Morbis ex Corporum Coelestium posi∣tione: Goclenius, Cardan, Camerarius, Argal, cum multis aliis, &c. have affirmed the Excel∣lent Use that is to be made of Astrology in Physick. Nay, sundry Learned Physicians, to my knowledge, do, at this day study the Stars, although, for the avoiding vulgar Cen∣sure, they seem not publickly to own it.
3. Doth the Curious Astronomer fortune to be the Reader hereof? How many several sorts of Subjects will he meet herein to divert him∣self by way of Exercise, in that most Sublime, but difficult Study. Viz. An Excellent Demon∣stration of the Aequation of the Celestial As∣pects, &c. An Account of Years, Months, Days, and also of the divers Epoches and Aera's in use in any Nation or Countrey of the whole World. A most Learned Discourse about the Holy Feast of Easter. Apotelesma, or the Nativity of the World, and Revolution there∣of. An admirable Account of the Nature and

Effects of Eclipses. Multiplicatio effectus Syderum secreta. —Variety sufficient to em∣ploy a mans whole Life in the Study thereof, and attended both with Profit and Delight.
4. Should this Choice Collection (as who knows what may happen?) fall into the Hands of the thinking Polititian, he may find work e∣nough therewith to busie his Curious Genius, arm'd with the deepest Cogitations, that even Saturn it self (in Horoscopo) can confer; if he please but to contemplate our Learned Au∣thors Discourse of the divers Causes of the Mu∣tations, Inclinations, and Eversions of Em∣pires, Kingdoms, and Countries, &c. A Province of Study very large of it self, though here curiously contracted, yet most aptly and usefully distinguished into Causes Remote, and Propinquate; and those again subdivided, and pursu'd with such strength of Reason and Argu∣ment, that he must be forced to allow the Au∣thor, not a Stranger to, but an Excellent Master in Politicks.
5. Let the Natural Philosopher be the Rea∣der hereof, and then his most Elaborate and Learned Discourses of Comets and Eclipses, the Caballa of the Twelve Houses, &c. will, not only most usefully and seriously, but delight∣fully entertain him. They being all of them Subjects so weighty and worthy in themselves, and so rationally handled by our Author, that

they will not only satisfie his curious Enquiry with a Demonstration of the Truths to which they pretended, but even draw out his Soul in∣to Admiration, when he shall find so much of Apodictical Reason urged in the defence of these Curious and Critical Subjects, for which formerly, even the greatest Clerks, and wisest of men were of Opinion, there was no Reason to be given.
6. Nay, let the Peruser of this Learned Col∣lection be either Historian or Chronologer, he will not fail to find herein somewhat wor∣thy of his Pains and Reading. The Account of Years, Months, Days; the divers Epo∣ches and Aera's; the Worlds Nativity, &c. Gesta Britannorum, being a succinct Chrono∣logy for almost Seventy Years. All these (I say) are of singular use and Advantage unto such Readers, and will worthily compensate their time.
7. The sober and diligent Astrologer, who makes it his Business or Study to find out the occult Influences of the Stars, and how, and by what Mediums they affect the lower World, may hereby learn how the Sun, Moon, and Stars praise their Creator. The very best, and most learned among them may be taught afresh, the Reasons of their own Principles, which before they took (in many things) upon Trust. And the Ignorant and Illiterate among them may

also learn to be ashamed of their Foolish-Fi∣gure-casting, when by this Book they shall be shewed the Vanity and Falshood of their Pra∣ctices, and be convinced of their want of Reason for what they do. The Truth to Sci∣ence predictive is here truly taught, and the Impostures of Knaves and Cheats are learned∣ly and truly discovered. The Ingenious and Intelligent Artist will easily find what part of this Book directs to the Knowledge of these Matters, without any particular Pointing.
8. The watchful and industrious Meteoro∣loger, who makes it his Work to attend the Motions of Winds, Rains, Thunders, and Tempests, Frosts, Fogs, and also Fair-Wea∣ther, may out of this Store-house be furnished with apt and certain Rules whereby certainly to presage the various Alteration of the Air. A Speculation so greatly useful, but so little understood, even by our common Calendario∣graphers, that the most of them may, at some times (if at least they have but Modesty and Honesty enough) be well and heartily ashamed to look upon their own foolish Almanacks. So regardless and nescious are they of the very Principles that lead to a Just Discovery of this most Noble and Vseful Knowledge. The neg∣lect whereof hath made the Vulgar Country∣man, from his common and daily Vision of the Clouds, to pass for a Zoroaster in Chief, in

Comparison of most of our Annual Writers, whose exposed skill he yet most justly (though Satyrically) taxes, and parallels with his Co∣mical Observations made upon the Frisking and Winding of his Brended Cows-tail, which yet is a Favour afforded them however, equal to what Gassendus Indulges. Howbeit, let these Rules of our worthy Author be heeded, and then the grave Gassendus that sets the Artists Knowledge in this matter below the Beasts that Perish, shall rather be laughed at, than believed; and a constant verity be herein dis∣covered to every reasonable mans admired daily Satisfaction, which before has been as constant∣ly doubted.
9. And that no useful or delightful plea∣sant knowledge might be wanting in this Colle∣ction, the witty Chyromancer, whose more than common Happiness it is to look into the de∣licate Palms of Ladies, may, by our Learned Authors Excellent Translation of the Ingeni∣ous Rothman upon that Subject, be instructed how to please his soft and amorous Clients, by discovering to them their various and mutable Minds and Fortunes from the divers and sun∣dry Crosses, Lines, and Incisures engraven in their fairer Hands. And it must needs be a more than ordinary Satisfaction to an enquiring mind to observe the orderly and exact Harmo∣ny that is truly found between our Hands and

the Heavens. For there cannot be at the Birth of any Person, Man or Woman, of what Con∣dition soever, a Planet weak or strong in the Heavens, but the Mount or Hill of such Pla∣net in their Hand will answer it punctually, and prove it to be so: The Seven most re∣markable places in the Hand agreeing to the number of the Planets that are constantly mo∣ving in the Heavens.
10. Lastly, if the Prince or Emperour of the Muses, the Poet I mean, happen to wan∣der in this Field of Learning, he also will be certain to find great Relief and Refreshment. There being to be found in our Authors choicest Poems such High, Rare, and Plentiful Flights of Fancy, such clear and curious Strains of Wit, such smoothness of Expression, &c. that for the Subjects therein treated of, he will scarce furnish himself any where so well and so happily. Nay, his Poems do abound not only with great Judgment, but with such apt and excellent Characters as well of Loyalty as Rebellion, that the nimble Drammatick Poet whose busi∣ness▪ it is to furnish the pregnant Stage in these our fertile days, may borrow hence with Ad∣vantage.
It is indeed little less than a compleat En∣cyclopedia, or Summary of all Sciences. And had it not been great pitty that so much exqui∣site Learning should have been lost, by lying

scatter'd among Twenty ad more several little Pamphlets and Almanacks; wherein both the Memory of this Learned Author, and his excel∣lent Works had not only been buryed: without the hopes of any probable Resurrection, but (you see) the Learned in all Faculties, viz. The Divine, Physician, Philosopher, Chro∣nologer, Polititian, Astronomer, Astrolo∣ger, Meteorologer, Chiromancer, and Poet, cum multis aliis, &c. had been deprived of the benefit of so Rich and choice a Treasure.
It it now time to tell you how I came to con∣cern my self in this laborious undertaking, (for I'le assure you so it hath proved much be∣yond my thoughts of it at the first) and also what my Design is in this Collection and Publi∣cation, which I shall briefly do.
And herein I must crave leave to tell you, that I had the Honour to be very well known to this Learned Author, and derived sundry Fa∣vours from him (as studying some of the same Sciences in which himself greatly delighted) which I have freely acknowledged in an Epistle to my Doctrine of Nativities, Printed Anno 1658.—But his greatest and never-to-be-for∣gotten Friendship to me, was, in my late un∣fortunate Troubles (an apt time indeed where∣in to try a Friend) when I was by the most Execrable of Villains, accused as a Traytor to my King, [a Crime I ever did, and ever

shall abhor and abominate with my Soul!] which Misfortune no sooner befel me, but I quickly made it known (by a Letter) to this worthy Person (who knew me much better than my wretched Accuser) praying his good Word and Assistance to the King on my behalf; who (wll knowing my Innocency as to such a horrid Crime wherewith I was charged) upon the receipt of my Letter (being exceeding Lame of the Gout, and unable to wait on his Majesty in Person) he was so generous and readily kind as to write a Petitionary Letter to the King on my behalf, and enclosed mine to him therein, and sent it by an Honourable Hand, unto his Majesty; an Action which at any time must be esteemed a more than ordinary Fa∣vour; but at that time, my Circumstances consider'd, it was so great a One, and so sig∣nally obliging, that I must with Gratitude say, He was a great Instrument under God, to pre∣serve my Life.
And that which exceedingly troubled me, was, that when I had obtained my Liberty, I durst not go to the Tower to give him my Per∣sonal Thanks (so strong and threatning did the Tide of popular Prejudice run then a∣gainst all truly Loyal Persons) for fear of meet∣ing more Swearers in ambush, and s prove the unhappy occasion of either drawing a Cloud upon this Worthy Person that had been so kind

to me, or of bringing my self into another Damned Plot! Plots being then so frequently spawned, that there was a New one almost e∣very Week. [Colledge himself, who no doubt, very well knew, tells us of Speech at Oxon. Twen∣ty.] So that this Learned Person died before I had the Honour to see him after my Enlargement.
My desire therefore is, That this my Colle∣ction and Publication of his Works may remain to Eternity as a Mark of my Thanks and Gra∣titude to this Worthy Authors Memory, which I am only sorry I can perpetuate at no bet∣ter a Rate. But the Monument I have here built for him, being of his own prepared, and curiously polished Materials, may therefore be more likely to remain durable to the Honour of his Name and Posterity, than any thing I could have added hereunto, or yet framed of my self, de Novo.
And it is no small or mean Honour to A∣strology, and also to the learned Astrologers (of which and whom the ignorant Part of the World think so cheaply and enviously) that so learned and judicious a Gentleman, as was Sir George Wharton, Baronet, should so many years together, be, not only a very great and serious Student in it, but give his publick Suf∣frage for it; and at the last to Dye satisfied, that he knew there was Real Truth in Celestial

Influences, though they were too frequently a∣bused by Spurii, non veri Filii Artis, as him∣self in one of his Excellent Discourses most truly speaks; whose Learned Works alone as here published, if well weigh'd and consider'd, are sufficient to convince the Enemies of Astrologi∣cal Learning, That there is an Absolute and Vnerring Verity lodged in the Art, though dif∣ficult indeed to be understood: None being fit, but the Mercurial Columbus to discover the America of this Noble Science.
Astrologus nascitur, non it.
Gentlemen,

Brick-Court, by the Deans-yard, Westminster, Octo∣ber 23. 1682.
