


Brethren and Neighbours, Dearly Belo∣ved; My Joy, and I wish I may be able to say, My Crown:
THat I was not unmindful of you, or wanting to do you jstice, in that my late absence, which bodily indisposi∣tion first made necessary, and then cir∣cumstances, that I could not remedy, protracted (beyond my first or last inten∣tion) to ten tedious months, My Constant Thoughts and Prayers, as well as the Ac∣count I every where gave of you, could you be sufficiently acquainted there∣with, would abundantly manifest: But
 to possess you with such things, is not the design of the present paper to you. It comes only to bring to you an Admoni∣tion or two, which the same, my constant true Affection and Zeal for your good, prompts; Namely, to beseech and con∣jure you, that you will be mindful of, and just to your selves; I mean to those your Vows, which your lips have uttered, and your mouths have spoken when we were in trouble.
Humane nature is very apt upon all oc∣casions to promise fair; but mutable with∣al, and slow to perform: Beware of it.
Though I most intimately knew your sufferings, and felt not only my own share, but by compassion, and sympathy, a great measure of your share also; yet I cannot say I am privy to any special vows then made by any of you: but I am confident this in general was the com∣mon vow of all, or most of us, that If God would please to mend our condition, we would mend our manners. In his name therefore, I importune and conjure you, to Examine strictly, whether you have been faithful herein, to what you then in your hearts intended, and promised. What lives did you, while in pri∣sons
 or restraints, while every minute, as to life it self, in your enemies hands, and at their mercy: when amidst flames and ravage, Amidst bullets (great and small) and Bombs over your heads, What lives, I say, did you then promise to God, and your selves, to live, if God youchsafed to deliver you from those Calamities? How often, and how con∣stantly to pray, to fast, to communicate, & to keep a strict account of your ways? What sobriety, reservedness, and consi∣derativeness in all your Actions did you promise and project? What retrench∣ments of unnecessaries and Luxury? What Liberality in Alms? What aban∣doning of this world, and habitual pre∣patation for Heaven? And have we done all this?
Those of us, who were not in these dangers, being before hand driven away with the terrors of the storm we saw approaching, did notwithstanding, I question not, in the respective places, whither they had fled, make to God like promises or Vows.
I may therefore (generally speaking) say, Then we were all of us in a great measure reformed, serious in our Reli∣gion,
 zealous for it, penitent for our sins, full of Faith and Resignation to God. Nay, really, not only in those our extre∣mities, but some while both before things came to such height, and after∣wards, there appeared much of such hap∣py change upon most of us. Now do we still retain the same impressions? the same resolution temper and endeavour as then we seem'd inspirited with?
I must be plain and vehement with you; for my soul, and your souls, lie at stake: If we are returned again to the mire, o (which is much the same) meer∣ly to minding our thick clay God's Judg∣ments thn, and his Mercies now, are thrown away upon us. And then, see∣ing nothing will finally mend us, what can we expect, but utter excision, and a dreadful portion of wrath to come.
I will be so candid, as to profess I hope better things touching many, and endea∣vour better touching all: But my heart bleeds to see, not a few of us as vain and Luxurious, as loose and licentious, as gid∣dy and negligent, not only in ordinary conversation, but even in the worship of God, as ever we were. I warn you of these things in my Sermons (it may
 be some think too earnestly, at least) fre∣quently; I shall yet, God blessing me, not fail so to do, one way or other, as long as God thinks fit to continue me in a capacity. This present warning perhaps some of you will red, who may not have the opportunity, or will not come, to hear me. I beseech all of you to receive it in meekness cordially, and without of∣fence, from him, who does it really in the fear of God, and to deliver both his own soul, and yours, in the great day of the Lord.
We have seen enough (if any thing can be enough) within these two or three last years, to take us off from flattering our selves or others, either in open sin, or in a lukewarm, formal, heartless profession of Religion. For my own part, if any one see me behaving my self contrary to such vows as those above-mentioned, if any see me vain, trifling away my time, indulging riot, Luxury, or the like, I will be so far from taking it amiss, to be by any one Christianly minded, or reproved, of my forgetfulness of my self, and of my vows, that I will thank the person, praise God for him, yea, and pray to God for him too, who does it:
 and I beseech you, do none of you take this amiss from me, whose duty more especially it is to speak these things, to exhort and rebuke with all Authority. Out of the bowels of Charity, and with tender compassion to all your souls, write I these things unto you.
And now I have begun to deal thus roundly and freely with you; give me leave to add this Advertisement, that perhaps It is highly Necessary many of us Reform farther than possibly our Parti∣cular vows may carry us. It may be, we did not, or have not taken notice in our selves of all the sins, by which we have contributed to the publick miseries. I will not, I do not  say, we have been more guilty than our neighbours in other Counties: but this I may say, we have suffer'd more than many, and as much as most: wherefore it becomes us nar∣rowly to Examine into the measure and particulars of our guilt.
Let us then each particularly, as our sufferings have been, put the question to our consciences, has it not been for such and such our sins, that we have suffer'd thus and thus? that God of late shook us out of the land, which we accounted
 he had given us for an inheritance, that our goods were spoiled, or torn away be∣fore our faces, our houses burnt, our good∣ly plantations destroyed, that our Wives have been desolate, and our Children seeking their bread amongst strangers, that many of our brethren have died for want of food, that our very own ser∣vants have born rule over us, and (to use Holy Job's words) we have been a derision to those, whose fathers we would have dis∣dained Job XXX. 1. to have set with the dogs of our flock? Has it not been for our manifold transgressions and mighty sins, that all these Amos V. 22. evils have fallen upon us? I, in the name of God, require all persons to examine their own consciences, and in the fear of God, as they find things, to repent, and reform.
I will only further add a few Earnest, but plain and necessary requests unto you, which if I can but prevail for, I shall not doubt but a true and general amendment in us will follow, and God's mercies at∣tend us.
The First is, that you would each one of you use daily to pray in secret, though such secret Prayers should be the shorter: and Remember always to put your hearts
 into your prayers. Secret prayers you may truly account your own: As to prayers with the Family, or the Church, the Au∣thority of the chief of the Family, or the custom of the Countrey, puts you upon them, and brings you to them; but secret prayers come only from within your selves, from conscience, that is, from a sense of duty, and from the fear or love of God in you; and so, as said, are pure∣ly your own, and will most surely speed, if sincere. Wherefore omit not any day the practice of this kind of prayer.
Secondly, I beseech further, That all such, who have Families, would set up the daily worshp of God in their Families. Those of the poorer and meaner sort, who cannot use longer prayers, might easily learn the Confession, Almighty and most merciful Father, we have Erred, &c. one of the Collects for morning, O Lord our heavenly Father, almighty and everlasting God, who hast, &c. one for the Evening, Lighten our darkness, and then use the Lord's Prayer, and The Grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, ma∣king all their Family to kneel and with Reverence join. Even this would be of a wholsome effect. Others, of greater
 leisure and ability, both may and ought to use more; and I presume want not help at hand. Besides this, seeing there are daily publick prayers in two Chur∣ches of the Town at least, what would it be for every sufficient Housekeeper, if not to come often themselves, yet to send daily at least, one or two of the Family, to pray there for all the rest? The sense of Religion would hereby grow amongst us, and the face of it daily look brighter.
Thirdly, On what ever daies or times you are forgetful, remiss, or negligent, suffer not the Lord's-day evening to pass without some solemn prayers in the Fa∣mily: And then call to account the younger sort, and servants, how they have spent the Lord's-day? Where they have been at Church? or what they re∣member? and make some of them, that are are able to read in the Holy Bible, or any other good Books, in the hearing of the rest. All professions of Christians condemn, and will rise up in judgment against, the generality of those, who call themselves Church of England men, for neglect of prayers in the Family, and calling their Family to account.
Fourthly, Both your selves in person ob∣serve,
 and see that your Families in some tolerable manner of strictness observe the Lord's-Day. Nothing more promotes the power of Godliness, and keeps up the face of Religion amongst us, than such observa∣tion.
Fiftly, as one branch hereof, send your servants, and younger people, to Church, and Catechism, in the afternoon on the Lord's days. Business is pretended for many servants in the morning. After∣noon there can be little. And Catechi∣sing is the proper preaching for such people. I wish it could be truly said, the Elder sort of the Commonalty did not want it.
Lastly, Of all sins, both your selve be∣ware of, and upon all occasions, as you hear it, manifest your abhorrence of that common, but odious, useless, and unrea∣sonable sin of Common Swearing. Warn your children and servants first, and then, if after guilty, chastise them for it; and if servants will not reform it, turn them away: Keep up the Reverence of God's name, and this will be a means to promote in your own, and others hearts, his fear.
Now the good God make you perfect in
 every good work, deliver you from evil one, and preserve you to his Heavenly Kingdom. This I daily on my knees, more than once or twice (commonly) pray for you. And do you, sometimes, (at the least, when you read this) pray the same for

Bishop's-Court, Corke, Novemb. 27. 1691.
