



MY Deare Children, for so I am bold to call you, though you have had many teachers, yet not many fa∣thers; if I may credit your owne tongues, there is a number of you will say, that in Christ Je∣sus I have begotten you through the Gospell, 1 Cor. 4.15. Let God have the glory: for what is Paul? or what is Apollos: or what am I? But the weake Instrument by whom the all-sufficient God hath wrought faith in your hearts. I therefore according unto my
Duty do here present unto you a tender of my true Affection to∣wards you; in this plaine and short Tract of Conscience. The subject is worthy of all Acceptation, Though the Author bee the mea∣nest of all his Brethren. You may consider it as an Object both to your eare and eye, your eare hath heard it preached, and your eye may see and read it, and if your heart Affect it, the Jewell is your owne. And I who am your Pastor may take the Boldnesse and say. I need no Epistle of Commendation to you, or Epistle of Commendation from you: you are mine Epistle knowne and read of all that have spirituall eyes, and are acquainted with you, yea, you are the Epistle of Christ written not with Inke, but with the spirit, Not in Tables of stone, but in the
fleshy Tables of the heart. I hope I shall not be ashamed of this my foolish Boasting, But that when I am gone from you, this pretious Jewell which now I present unto you, will then be found still to abide within you, and if at any time through carelesnesse, this Jewell of a good Conscience with in you, shall gather Dust and lose it's lustre: Let this little Tract, if better be wanting, be Assumed by you, Read it once and againe humbly and advisedly, so may you have hope, that your Dull and Dusky Consciences will Recover it's former lustre, with more peace and Purity.
And Now my deare children, knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle of Flesh, 2 Pet. 1.14. and be brought to the house appointed for all living,
Job. 30.23. I shall endeavour to give you some few Advertismēts before I goe hence and be seene, no more.
Know (Deare soules) we are the people on whom the ends of the world are Come, and our daies very perilous and Dangerous, as saith the Apostle, 2 Tim. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. In which we find Iniquite to Abound and Damnable Errors & Heresies to Superabound. What Enthusi∣asticall fancy, what Anti-Scriptu∣rall opinions? What Immaginary Raptures and Revelations have we now Amongst us? so that now to Refraine from their evill opinion and practises, is to make our selves a prey. Never were the times more Contagious; Opinions more Infectious, & practises more Dangerous. So that every pious soule had need to be a Spirituall
Physician, and still to have Cor∣dials to fortifie his soule within, and Repercussives to beate back the Infectious Venome of Sin and Error without. Preservatives.
I. Be constant and sincere in the preformance of all holy Duties, both publike and private in the Congregation and the Family. Let your holinesse appeare unto all, Be holy abroad and at home. Despise not ordinances neither in whole or part. But receive them with all thankfulnesse as Love-tokens from your Father, and acknow∣ledg a Necessitie of them all, and that as long as you are Below Temptations, you cannot be above Ordinances, which will be as long as you carry your Fraile Taberna∣cles about you. They are more necessary then your Appointed food; More to be Desired then Gold, yea
then fine Gold; And sincere milke sweeter then the hony or hony Comb, without which, you cannot be nourished up unto everlasting Life.
2. Keepe close to your God in a way of Prayer and prayses. Be Constant in Both: pray alwaies and in all things give thankes. What Grace you want get it by Prayer, and what good you enjoy weare it By Prayse. If you thus draw neare to God in a way of Duty God will be still neare unto you in a way of Mercy. The least Dropp of the wine of mercy, should Inflame your hearts with true thankful∣nesse, and fill your Mouths with constant prayses. So that you lay new Ingagement on the god of mercy to bestow more mercies; Not only to preserve you from the evill of evils, But ever to In∣rich
you with the blessing of bles∣sings.
3. Give not way to a customa∣ry Dulnesse in Duty, but performe every Duty with all your power, with sincere Intention, with heate of Affection, and with Diligence, and Delight. Especially be not slight in secret prayer, meditation, and reading. Doe not the worke of the Lord deceitfully or negligently, least the curse of God fall on you, Jer: 48.10. Mal: 1.14. but zea∣lously and heartily; watch to these duties, Eph. 6.18. Keep your hearts in a good frame for them, undefiled with sin, untainted with the world; Endeavour to feele all Duties at your hearts, inlivening, inlarging, and inflaming your affe∣ctions. Lay not out the chiefe of your zeale on Externals, opinions, and the smaller things of Religion,
but let soule-saving worke be your maine and daily imployment. Ex∣ercise your selves in selfe-examination, looke daiely into your owne bosomes by a serious scruti∣ny, and spare not those beloved Dalilah's, and cursed Achans which are the troublers of our Israel.
4. Get true light in your Under∣standings, not only a speculative, but spirituall light; not a notionall, but experimentall light, the light of the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus. Such a light whereby you may be inabled to see sin to be the greatest evill, and God himselfe to be the cheifest good. Such a light that melts the soule, that humbles the soule, that enlivens the soule, that quickens the soule, and that quiets the soule. Nourish not an head-light, but an heart-light. Let the word of truth dwell in you plen∣teously.
Weake judgments are easi∣ly misled both in opinion and pra∣ctice, but a sound judgement will preserve you in both. So fly one error that you do not fall into an∣other; it is easy to run into ex∣treames, but very difficult to keep the golden Meane.
5. Keep your hearts with all dili∣gence. (4. Pro.) Watch daily to prevent him, which watcheth ever to mischeife you, I Pet. 5.8. And let yours praiers be frequent and fervent, Lord lead us not into temp∣tation. Your enemies are many, mighty, and malicious, which still lye in waite to breake your peace, wound your consciences, lessen your comforts, impaire your gra∣ces, blurre your evidences, and dampe your assurances; and unlesse you stand upon your Guard, & set your selves in battell-array, to
fight with those strong, subtile, sedulous Goliahs, which come out to upbraid Gods little Champion. They (I meane the Divell and his Agents, viz: the world and the flesh) will not only rage but raigne; not only assault, but take your soules captive at their will. There∣fore (as you love your owne soules and the welfare of them unto all e∣ternity) Get unto you the whole ar∣mour of God. Eph. 6. 13. Be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might. Give no faire Quarter unto foule tempations: make up speedily every Breach between God and your owne consciences, and let not conscience loose its Tendernesse, but shun every evill and the appea∣rance of it.
6. Let thy life be the life of faith. Saith Paul, the life that we now live in the flesh, we live by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved us, and gave himselfe for us. Keep fresh the sense of his love, and al∣waies acknowledge a continuall need of his Bloud, Spirit, and In∣tercession, and how much you are beholding and ingaged unto him. Labour to draw and derive from Christ by the powerfull attractive force of faith, spirituall ability, suf∣ficient for every dayes worke. Act your faith dayly in the promises of grace and strength. Go unto Christ still for his wisdome to counsell you; for his righteoussness to cover you, for strength to resist tempta∣tions; for the shoulder that must beare our Crosses; for ability to performe all duties as duties.
7. Resolve with david Ps. 101. that you will not know a wicked person (i.e.) approve of him. If out of your families, have not fellow∣ship
with them, but reprove them; if in your families, let them not a∣bide within your doores, but re∣move him or her as persons most infectious and dangerous. We have sins enough and too too ma∣ny of our owne, therefore let us not encrease them by a base conni∣vency at others mens sins. Especi∣ally avoid that generation of men whose grand designe it is to under∣mine the Gospell, to ruine the Mi∣nistry, and to robb them of that maintenance, which is due unto them by the law of God, and by the Law of Nature, and by the law of Nations. These croaking frogges have overspread our Aegypt, so that they have made it stinke with their damnable Opinions & devi∣lish practises. They creep into hou∣ses and lead aside silly women, 2 Tim. 3.11. and by their faire speeches
deceive the hearts of the simple, Rom. 16.18. And shall, if it were possible, deceive the very elect, Mark 13.22.
8. Affect a faithfull and power∣full Minister, who doth carefully look both to himselfe and his Do∣ctrine. Adscribe neither too much, nor too little to your Teachers. Neither despise them, nor deify them, as the manner of some is. Esteeme him not as a principle Au∣thor, but as a subordinate Actor; not as a Lord, but a Steward; not as a Master, but a Minister, and yet account him more then an ordina∣ry Servant, even a man of God, A servant of the most high God, that sheweth you the way of Salvation. Look on him not only as a Seer, but Over-seer, a Steward of Gods high secrets, a messenger of the Lord of Hostes, by whose Embas∣sage
peace is concluded, and recon∣ciliation ministerially made up be∣tween God and man. He is Gods mouth to you by preaching, and your mouth to God by praying. On that in speciall place standeth before God, and ministreth to him upon earth, as the Angels do it in heaven.Woodnots Aphorisms 1. Cens. p. 42. The Jewes say, that he that di∣eth in the displea∣sure of his Rabbi, shall never be forgi∣ven in this world, nor in the world to come. i.e. of his tea∣cher that hath the charge of his soule. Therefore take heed you fall not out with your Teacher, whome the most wise God hath thought fit to make your Pastor; forsake not the Levite as long as thou livest u∣pon the earth, Deut. 12.19. Doe not desire such a Teacher as thou mayest rule him, but such as may rule you, Magistrates are chosen to governe the people, not the peo∣ple to governe them. So Ministers you are not to command them but obey them. Therefore obey them that have the Rule over you, Heb. 13.17. And submit your selves, for
they watch for your souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do it with Joy and not with greife.
I beseech you in the bowels of Christ, let Death and Judge∣ment possesse your most serious thoughts, waite for the one, and provide for the other. Dye daiely, (with Paul) and you shall dye well. Have thine end ever in thine eye, and sweeten the bitter cup of Death by a dayly preparation. Get your tackling all in readinesse, that you may faile over the Sea of mor∣tall miseries in safety and security to the Port of happinesse. You shall all of you ere long lye gasping for death on your dying beds, and there lye grappling with the King of feares, attended with Terrors. Therefore (as you love your soules) let the whole course of your lives be a conscionable preparative
to dye comfortably. Look on eve∣ry day as your last. So live that you may say with David, Though I walke through the Valley of the shaddow of death, I will not feare. Oh that you would be wise and consi∣der your latter end, before you go downe to the chambers of death, whence you shall never returne. Would you dye willingly? would you dye well? Then get a part in Christ, a Title to him, an Interest in him. Worke out your salvation with feare and trembling. Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure. So live, that you may not be ashamed to die. So number your dayes, that you may apply your hearts to true wisdome. So cast up your Accounts, that you may give them up with joy and not with greife. Judge your selves for your daiely Deviations, and you shall not be
judged; condemne your selves, and you shall not be condemned.
10 Lastly. Let this little Book be in your hands, heads, and hearts. Let a good conscience be written on your soules with Characters inde∣lible never to be razed out, so that when death shall appeare, thou mayest be able to say, I have lived in all good conscience before God un∣till this day.
Now whereas dull spirits are more quickned by Examples then Precepts. This place hath had a great advantage above other pla∣ces adjacent. Mr. John Southmead who is now a glorious Saint in heaven, and his Soule made happy with the Spirits of just men made perfect. You know he was an old Disciple, and served his Master faithfully in his generation for ma∣ny yeares, zealously striving for
the inlargment of the Kingdome of Christ and demolishing the King∣dome of Satan. A great Curb he was to prophanesse, witnesse his great paines and travell in over∣throwing those Heathenish sports and pastimes, which were too common even upon the Lords day. God made him the Instru∣ment to abolish Wakes, Revells, Maypoles and May-games, with their Apurtenances, Fidlers and superfluous Ale-houses, not only in his owne, but in many other Pa∣rishes adjacent. So that not only the Practice, but even the Name of these sinfull Vanities is almost forgotten. Againe, as he was a strong Curb to prophanesse, so was he as sharp a spurr unto holi∣nesse. Witnesse his great cost and paines in getting a faithfull Tea∣cher to instruct the people. Very
carefull abroad to warne the unru∣ly, to comfort the feeble minded,1 Thes. 5.14. and to support the weake. And at home in his Family in repeating Sermons; reading, opening, and applying Scriptures unto such as were under him; constantly pray∣ing for a Blessing on them, and as carefull in returning Praise to God for every Blessing both publick and private. But at last when the evill dayes came on him, so that the Keepers of the house began to trem∣ble,Eccle. 14.3, 4. the strong man to bow, the grin∣ders to cease, and the windowes to be darkened, he was willing for a Desolution, very ready to goe hence, often saying, It is time for mee to be gone, my Master hath no more worke for me to do here upon earth. Now shall we forget such a worthy servant of God? by no meanes. Let his memory be ever
blessed, and his Name as precious oyntment powred forth. And let us honour his remembrance in an ho∣ly imitation of his vertues. But should we forget him, yet his God would not forget his place, his person, his zeale, his labour of love: The Lord shall count when he writeth up his people, that this man was borne there. Ps. 87.6. even in the family of Wrey, within the Pa∣rish of Morton, and in the County of Devon. Now you having such an excellent Patterne and Presi∣dent, let it be your earnest desire and endeavour to run on and not be weary, walke on and not be faint in those waies (paved ith holinesse) in which he hath walked, that so your end may be everlasting life.
To conclude, looke on this small Tract as a Dowry which your dying Pastor hath bequeathed unto you,
whom he loves in the Lord. Re∣ceive this provision which he hath made for you of wholsome meat, not caring for concealed Cookery, or the vaine enticing words of mans wisdome. As it was intended for your Instruction, delivered to your Attention; so let it be digested by your Meditation, and practised in your Conversation. So both Pastor and People shall behold each others face with joy at the Barr of Christ; and have a most happy admission into his most glorious presence, where there is fulnesse of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore, Amen.

