



Right Worthy Sir,
THIS little Treatise speaks somewhat of the great Worth and best kinde of Nobility; And as the Romans had a dou∣bleErat [antiqui∣tus] saccellum Pudici∣tiae patriciae in for Boario ad aedem ro∣tundam Herculis— Posteà, Virginia in vi∣co longo ubi habitabat ex parte aedium quod satis esset loci modico sacello ex∣clusit aram{que} ibi posuit & convocatis plebeiis matronis — Hanc ego aram, inquit, Pudicitiae Plebeiae dedico, vos{que} hortor ut quod certamen virtutis viros in hac civitate tenet, Hoc pudicitiae inter matronas sit, delis{que} operam ut haec ara quam illa si quid potest sanctius & à castioribus coli ditatur. Liv. lib. 10. Altar amongst them, one for the chastity of the Patricians, another for the chastity of the

Plebeians: So this sets up one Altar to the Nobility, and ho∣nour of the Peers and ancient Gentry of the Nation; another to Virtue and Piety, Nobilitas sola est at{que} unica virtus. Juvenal. The best kinde of Nobility; and which we shall take leave to call, The No∣bility of the people or communalty. Not that we look upon Nobles and Gentlemen as strangers to Vertue, and aliens to Piety, to which they sacrifice dayly, and which shine forth in them more then in any else illustriously; but that Vertue and Piety ad∣vance the latter to that honour, in which they have no part nor interest naturally. Now as our intention is in general to mind the one, that they perfect what they have by Nature; and to perswade the other, to gain what

from their birth they have not, by Vertue: and as our desire is in special to contribute some∣thing to the seasoning of Noble youth with Vertue and Piety, Who are (as Ita nati estis, ut bona mala{que} vestra act remp. pertineat. Ti∣ber. de Neron. & Drus. Tacit. annal, lib. 4. he said) so born, that their good or evil example makes much for the good or hurt of their Countrey: So the dedication of all is devolved upon you, not upon a single account, but upon several and different considera∣tions. . The Divine Powers are brought in still by the Prince of Poets, chusing fit in∣struments for the de∣signes they take in hand, sutable Agents for seve∣ral actions: and there is such a sutableness be∣twixt the subject of

this Treatise, and Your self: That as Quod mu∣licres uterum ge∣stantes, quae ut seli∣ciorem de se sobolem gignant, inuentur sub∣inde oculis fixis & vhementibus, in ima∣gines exquisitè ve∣nustas. (Id quod La∣cedaemoniis usitalum esse traduat). Id Eu∣cherius quo{que} fecit ut aliquid laude dignum effiagret. Videtur si∣hi duoum maximè praecllntium viro∣rum non informes pro∣posaisse imagines, ni∣mirum Augustini & Hieroaymi; quorum imitatione sive assiduo aspectu, penitiori{que} contemplatione suos sic insormavit Commentarios, ut nihil illus si vel ductius vel absolutius. Magdeburg. cent. 5. cap 10. Sic Cyprianus, Ambrosius, Theophylactus proposuerunt sibi Tertullia∣num, Basilium, Chrysostomum, & alii alios. some Writers are noted to propose such Authors for their Imitation; and Quod mu∣licres uterum ge∣stantes, quae ut seli∣ciorem de se sobolem gignant, inuentur sub∣inde oculis fixis & vehementibus, in ima∣gines exquisitè ve∣nustas. (Id quod La∣cedaemoniis usitalum esse traduat). Id Eu∣cherius quo{que} fecit ut aliquid laude dignum effiagret. Videtur si∣hi duoum maximè praecllntium viro∣rum non informes pro∣posaisse imagines, ni∣mirum Augustini & Hieroaymi; quorum imitatione sive assiduo aspectu, penitiori{que} contemplatione suos sic insormavit Commentarios, ut nihil illus si vel ductius vel absolutius. Magdeburg. cent. 5. cap 10. Sic Cyprianus, Ambrosius, Theophylactus proposuerunt sibi Tertullia∣num, Basilium, Chrysostomum, & alii alios. some women are said to set the fairest pictures before them for their better Conception: So we may seem, in drawing up this Piece, to have had our eye upon you; but that the picture fals much short of the Pattern.
This is certain, There is not a Vertue named in this Trea∣tise, as belonging to Gentle∣men, but is singularly eminent in you. For matter of Learning, new and old, you may be styled much better then Pindar. Olymp. Od. 6. de AEncâ chorodidascalo. he of whom

it was first spoken, , Secretary and Interpreter to the Muses, their Ambassador or Nuntio, to communicate their secrets far and near to their Disciples. , A sweet cup of pleasant and delightful Discourses; so I take leave to interpret it. Neither doth the book disable you as some, but fit you for business. . Pindar. Nem. Od. 7. When you look off from that, Wisdom doth not look off from you, Psal. 38. but guides you with her eye, that you may Psal. 112. 15. guide your Affairs with discretion. That may be truly said of you, in your Station, which was long since spoken of Pericles in his Generation, L'aus Periclis in multis authoribus. . Idem. testatur de se∣ipso in Thucid. You know what belongs to your place, and can deliver your

self accordingly; without trou∣bling, as he did Greece, or as others of late, either Country or County. And if weightier bu∣siness were imposed, there would not be wanting in you, either These two are required in an Historian by Lucian, and do as well become a Statesman. Lucian. de conscr. Histor. , A Politick capacity; or, , A Rhe∣torical faculty, to ma∣nage them. For matter of Religion; In quo cum pietate doctrina, cum conscientia scientia, cum na∣tura as, cum disciplina rerum usus certavit. Mom. de Hubert. Languet. Lear∣ning and Piety, Science and Conscience are so tempered, that they give to each other Lustre and Beauty. For Humility and Courtesie (which are to eve∣ry Vertue in the Soul, what Beauty is to Health and sound∣ness in the body; to wit, an Ornament and Grace to them

all); . Niceph. Greg. lib. 6. They, as beautiful and fragrant flowers, are so resplen∣dent in you, that they attract the eyes, and hearts of all after you, and make not onely your Society, but very Name also pleasant and pretious to the memo∣ry. What should we speak of other things? We have called out, in this Treatise, some few Vertues to insist on; but you have stored your self with the choysest in every kinde. That not this, or that, but all discover themselves in you in general. So that look what . Julian. Epist de Zen. Schollars and Gentlemen, are to others, that you are unto them, even an Oracle, as it were, and

Ornament unto, Both. And Interest inter eos qui in Principis gratiam incidunt, & qui am promeren∣tur. Strad. — Vespasianus venerabilis senex & patientissimus veri, benè intel∣ligit coeteros quidem amicos suos niti iis quae ab ipso acceperuit, Marcellum autem & Crispum attulisse ad amici∣tiam suam, quod non à principe ac∣cepe, nic accipi pouit. Quintil. de Orator. whereas many go onely to receive Honour and Maintenance from the Prince; you carry that to the Court, where∣with you are able to do Service and Ho∣nour to your Prince, when He shall be pleased to imploy you. . Pindar. Olymp. Od 6. We scorn wittingly to stein our Credit, or Paper, with lies; or to render your Parts suspici∣ous by fabulous reports. Sidon. Apollinar. Epist. l 24. Per unius or is officium, non unius pecto∣ris profunditur secretum. One Pen writes, but every true heart that knows you will give consent, and every ingenuous tongue a testi∣mony to the same truth. This, Sir, is the principal cause of our

fastening this Treatise upon you, that we might present our Reader with a fair President, and give him not only dead, but (as one speaks in another case) Cassius dicebat alios declamasse, Va∣rium Geminum vivum coasilium dedisse. Se∣nec. Suas. 6. living counsel. Again, if it were possible for any Honour to accrew unto any by such a worthless Piece, we know none deserves it better then your self. The high esteem which you bear to our Profession may call for it. Luke 7. 5. You love (as they said of the Centurion) our Nation; and whereas many are ashamed of our Coat and com∣pany, you seem rather to chuse our society; 


Hom. ll. 1.


—Arcanâ sic Fama crumpere porta,
Caelicolas si quando domus, lius{que} rubentum
AEthiopum, & mensas amor est intrare minores.
Stat. Theb. lib. 5.
 like Iupiter and

the rest of the Gods in the Poet, who when they mean to feast go to Sea, , and sit down with the blameless, though black, AEthiopians, as guests. Your special favour to us might challenge it. When we were meer strangers to you Person, though not to your Vertues, you offered to com∣mend us to the Patronage and Protection of a great Peer of the Realm, a personage of sin∣gular worth and honour, Son of a Martyr (who resisted un∣to death for his Soveraign then alive, and on Statua L Vitellii pro rostris hanc habu∣it Inscriptionem, Pie∣tatis immobilis erga Principem. Sucron. in vit. Vitel. whose Tomb that may much more deservedly be engraven, then it was upon an old Romans Statute, Pietatis immobilis erga Principem) and himself also of like eminent

Piety to King and Countrey, Learning and Religion. A fa∣vour that could not but have pleased any, and would have been refused by few. Saepe fit, ut is qui commenda∣tus sit alicui, pluris eum faciat cui commendatus sit, quam illum à quo sit. Cicer. de fin. lib. 3. Indeed the person commended is easily most an end perswaded to forsake him that commends and betroth himself for his in∣terests sake to his service to whom he is commen∣ded. . Zen. Cyr. paed. lib. 3. But as that Princess told her hus∣band (when he asked her whether Cyrus did not seem to be a gal∣lant Prince, who treated them both whom he had taken cap∣tive, so nobly) That she did not so much as minde or look upon him; but her minde and her eyes

were upon him (meaning the Prince her Husband) who of∣fered with his life to purchase her Liberty. So, Sir, Let me tell you, we cannot but (adoratis tamen à longè adorandis) respect him who did so much respect our advantage and advance∣ment.
We have told you, or ra∣ther the World, the reasons of of this our Dedication. Now as we gladly hear you talk in private, so we can as willing∣ly talk of you in pub∣lique. . Nazian. Orat. 20. The eye is not easily taken off from pleasant objects, nor the tongue from pleasing subjects. But we must make an end, otherwise Cri∣ticks will tell us that we exceed

the limits of an Epistle. . Basil. Epist. 355. Yet shortness is no more of the Essence of an Epistle, then it is of a Man. . Nazian. Epist. ad Ni∣cob. It is not the number of lines, but the occasion and busi∣nesse, that puts limits to a Letter. We have more cause to suspect other Objections; but as little cause, we think, to be troubled with them. Some will censure us for writing so Preacher-like: We acknowledge it here a fault, but such as we are in Seneca de Ovid. Non ignoravit vitia sua, sed amavit, Controv. 10. love with, and are content the same Scoff should passe upon us, which the Ora∣tour put upon Aristoxenus, for

defining the Soul to be a Har∣mony, Cicer. Tusc. quaest. lib. 1. Hic ab artificio suo non recessit, This man departed not from his Art. Others may look upon the multiplicity of Quotations, as matter of affection; But the Piece (as we have mentio∣ned) was written chiefly for the use of young Gentlemen. And, as the Title perhaps may somewhat allure them who are such, usually, as stand much on their Birth: So we set on, as they commonly on their Garments, the more dressing; desiring to make it as accepta∣ble to them, as they themselves to others; A thing ridiculous in the Pulpit, but not altoge∣ther improper for such things

as come from the Presse. A third sort may think us too Satyrical in some passages; but we have Spero me secutum in libellie meis tale temperamentum, ut de illis queri non possit quisquis de se benè senserit. Mart. Epist. ad lect. praefix. lib. 1. so writ, that none can conceit ill of us, that can rationally entertain a good conceit of them∣selves. If any be offended for himself or others, that this or that Vice is touched: Judg. 6. 31. Let him plead (if he list) for Baal; and sacrifice still, if he think it can stand with his credit and safety, to his vitious Humour. We cannot commend that which the Scripture condemns, Es. 56. 10. a dumb Dog; nor him that barks without cause. Nor do we think that appellation gi∣ven to Ministers, because they

should be alwayes . Nazianz. Orat. 23. braw∣ling; but we hope (as he said) to live and die Pindar. Nem. Od. 8. , Com∣mending what is com∣mendable, and not a∣fraid to cast a Re∣proof, as salt upon un∣savory persons.
Right worthy Sir, We have now done our business, and shall take our leave; but (as the manner is at parting) not without a Prayer or good wish. And that shall be, what we conceive is, the highest happi∣ness which a Courtier can de∣sire, That you may stand in Fa∣vour, and with Honour in the

presence of your Prince here; and may enjoy the beatifical vision of your God hereafter: So he hear∣tily wisheth, who shall al∣wayes be

