



Madam,
IT is but justice I should give to your Honour some account of my publishing these Sermons to the world, and making bold to pre∣sent them under the protection of your Name.
Notwithstanding the discourage∣ments of the Age wherein we live, which seems to have a fulsom loath∣ing of such Manna; Yet I must confess, I was strongly inclined
thereunto, by the due respects I bear to the memory of my dear deceased Husband; and was willing the world should have some lasting tasts of his worth, which through Gods goodness I had the happiness for di∣vers years to enjoy. Besides a mournful Widow, he left divers worthy Friends, who (to feed their reflecting thoughts) desired some useful (and innocent) Relique of him, whom living, they so much lov'd and honour'd; and dying, so lament∣ed. If I was overcome by the per∣swasions of such as I might well ac∣count wiser than my self; though the action should seem to be in some sort inconvenient, yet I hope with all ingenuous persons, the weakness
of my Sex, and strength of my affecti∣ons, will become my just Apology. They are indeed offered in a homely dress of words, and deprived of that polishing which my dear Husband could well have bestowed upon them; and doubtless would have done, had be thought they should have been thus exposed. They are (for the most part) as they drop'd (with∣out curiosity) from his mouth, and were taken by the pen of an affecti∣onate friend. Nor would a scrupi∣losity which I had, permit they should be so altered (though for the better) as that they might not be wholly call'd his own. Yet must I not here dissemble, that the con∣currence of better judgments than
mine, your Honours encouragement and approbation, made me apt to believe these Sermons (even as they are) might be both accepta∣ble to all that knew him, and in some degree serviceable to the Souls of others, who should please to read them.
These Reasons I think sufficient to mention as inducements to this lication: Which when I had once resolv'd upon, I was held in no suspence to whose Patronage to commit them.
Your Honour hath so many Ti∣tles to them, that it had been a kind of robbing, to alienate or transfer your right to any other person. They are Sermons; and therefore they
ought to be your Honours. If any understand not the force of this con∣sequence, they want Eyes to behold the most eminent Example of true Virtue and Piety. I can fear no imputation of flattery, while I mention your known and exempla∣ry worth, which prescribes to those of your high Degree things truly great, and becoming that Noble Blood that runs in your Veins. You are one (and where's the o∣ther?) that dares be so visibly good, in an Age wherein Virtue is almost scandalous, and Godliness is matter of sport to the froth and smaller Wits of the Town: You therefore (doubtless) will favour and own what others will scorn and disdain.

Add to this (Madam) as a special ground of this Dedication, That constant and singular favour which your Honour hath been plea∣sed to reflect, first, upon my ever ho∣noured Father-in-Law, Mr. Jere∣my Whitaker, whose Name is still precious, as of a man for pie∣ty, learning, and prudence, famous in his generation: Then upon his Son, my dear Husband, who hath also left such impressions on his friends, as I hope will not soon be defaced; and since his death, upon my most unworthy self: so that you have not left off to shew kindness both to the living and to the dead.
The last (though not the least) motive is, That some of these Ser∣mons
were preached in obedience to your Commands (for such were your Honours desires always to my dear Husband), And as they then were, so I doubt not but they now will be therefore the more accepta∣ble.
Some one, or all of these Reasons (however they may acquit me of indiscretion, yet) I hope will pro∣cure at least a pardon for the bold∣ness of,
Madam, 
