



Madam,
HE who has so much arro∣gance as to make his Address to a Person of your Ladiships Eminence, ought also to have so much humility, as to acknowledg
that he derives a greater ho∣nour from the Dedication, than he can expect from the Compo∣sition, of the most perfect Poem; your Favour is more creditable than Ingenuity it self, and an Author need not fear the harsh attaques of Time, and Oblivion, whose Works have the Honor to wear you in their Frontis∣piece. Next to the Ambition of being known to your La∣diship, this consideration was the greatest inducement that led me to this boldness; or as I think, I may rather term it
Ambition, since the minutest of your incomparable Perfe∣ctions could never make so swift an incursion into my thoughts, as not to find them sufficiently prepar'd with a Reverence, and Adoration agreeable to so glorious a Reception. I knew that tho Curious Nature had extended her endeavors in the forma∣tion of your delicate Body, injoyn'd both it and every Limb about you to an exact Symitry, and pleasing Pro∣portion: Tho she had been lavish of her Allurements in
wantonly strewing them a∣bout your Wealthy Face, and to compleat the Fabrick, had enobled it with that brisk air and graceful meen, which certainly she has given you a Patent for, since none could ever acquire it but your Self, yet you could not be content with this her bounty, or think your Self perfect with the additional Blessings of Liberal Fate; you never rated your Self by your Grandure, or took the Dimentions of your worth as others do, by the gilded Coach, gaudie Reti∣nue,
and snorting Six—These are trifles incident to the most empty Darlings of Impartial Fate. But you are more nobly attended with an illustrious Troop of Sublime Thoughts, and fair Idea's which tacitly invading your Great Mind, fill it with that Satisfaction & Delight, which none but a Soul as large as your own, is capable to conceive.
It was this brave Elevation above the unthinking Croud; which induc'd me amongst the rest of your Admirers to
think such extraordinary parts worthy of more than a com∣mon adoration, and therefore I have presum'd to bring the HEATHEN GODS to do you Homage; they lye prostrate at your feet, intreating your acceptance, and protest they shall live longer and happier under your Protection, in these poor Robes, than they can expect to do under any others, tho adorn'd with all the gayest Habilements of Poesie. I, conscious to their Infirmities, quarrelled at their Ambition for imploring so
Judicious a Patroness; but they would hear of no de∣nial: replying, that as you had Judgment, you had Can∣dor likewise; and were more addicted to forgive than cen∣sure. Apollo told me, that in you only he should meet with his Primitive Wisdom. Mercury with his Pristine Wit. Juno with her old Soveraignty or greatness of Mind. Venus with her delicate Beauty. And Alcides with his Godlike Cou∣rage and brave Spirit. And in short, they affirm'd, that all those Noble Qualifications
for which they were formerly Deify'd, were only Concen∣ter'd in your Self, and there∣fore humbly desired the Ho∣nor of your Patronage, tho Presented by so mean a Hand as that of
Madam, 
