



MADAM,
AS all Translations are, without farther ad∣dress, consecrated to your sex, so all that I do, in this, or any other kind, natu∣rally and of it's own accord, is dedicated to your Lap. especi∣ally

this Piece, which makes, as it were, it's proper appeal to the integrity of your un-bias∣sed soul, singling you forth as the most competent Patrone, not only of your sex but Nati∣on. You have often, Madam, whilst his forrain language rendred him unfit for your con∣versation, heard much dis∣course about this Treatise and it's Author (for what English man is there, concerned never so little in the behalf of sci∣ence, whose heart and mouth is not filled either with Admi∣ration or Censure of this great Country-man of ours?) whom if none hitherto hath presumed to vindicate to your Lap. he is therein nothing the less happy, being now to speak for himself, a task scarce ma∣nageable by any, but himself.

Madam, If I may have the honour to be his Introduce▪ into your noble acquaintance, I shall boldly passe my word, that you will find the subject of his discourse truly grave and important, and such as may en∣rich the mind, not with trifling and unprofitable curiosities, but admirable and practical Truths. The middle state of Souls cannot rightly be ap∣prehended without a just mea∣sure of the other extreams; nor can we duly reflect on them, without a knowledg of our pre∣sent order to them, and the inevitable influence which eve∣ry thought, action, and affe∣ction here, hath to our state hereafter.
But, Madam, to enlarge herein, were not to advance, but retard your progress; in

which if your Lap. meet with some one passage, less promptly obeying your first summons (I am confident there is none im∣pervious to your resolute at∣taque) be not discouraged; God and your eminent vertues have furnished you with a noble and expert guide, whom, according to S. Pauls advice, you may at home apply to, where you are at a loss, seeking no further then your own Husband. To conclude (Madam) this small Treatise having served me for an excellent Country-pa∣stime, I could not but take the boldness to recommend it to you both, at your entrance into the same state of Vacancy, assure∣ing my self, that, when you have maturely perused it, you will a∣vow with me that they have

little reason, who tax the Au∣thor with requiring his readers assent, purely and barely upon the accompt of his own credit; for, in my poor judgment, ne∣ver any assertions were better fortifyed; at least I heartily wish it were in my power as so∣lidly to demonstrate the truth of my being
MADAM,

