



Honour'd Cosen,
THough Kindred, Education, and
known love all conspire to make
me obnoxious to any good Coun∣sel
you please to give me; yet the
aversness I have from answering Books,
permitted me not, in our last enterview, to
promise obedience to your directions. But,
since that happines of seeing you, an una∣nimous
consent of other friends has made
me more steadily reflect on what you de∣sir'd;
and considering besides, that the
Doctrine of Rushworth's Dialogues

takes a path not much beaten by our mo∣dern
Controvertists, I resolv'd to imitate
the example of the penitent Son, who, af∣ter
denial, perform'd his Fathers com∣mands.
Behold then, here, the brood hatcht
and brought forth by your advice: 'pray
heaven it prove worthy your acknowledg∣ing!
which I say, not, to engage you in the
patronage of what I deliver, farther then
truth shal convince your judgment; or to
make the World imagin these Conceptions
may find shelter in your breast: No, I am as
cruel to my writings, as the Ostridge to her
Eggs: when once they are laid, let nature
play her part to foster or smother the Chic∣kens,
as she pleases. Let truth commend
or condemn my sayings. He that is ready
to renounce falsity, and acknowledge his
weaknes, is stronger then envy, and beyond
the shot of malice. Neither have I occasion
to suspect any imputation should fall upon
you for this publishing my Present to you,
as I fear it happen'd to another friend:
For, I apprehend, I may have written here
some Periods, which none wil expect should
be approved by you; Only, who understands

the amplitude of your soule, may know, it
is able to harbour with indifferency what
is spoken against your own sense and con∣sent;
it being the gift and task of a wise
man, Imperare liberis. What I have per∣form'd,
wherin fail'd, is your part to judg;
for my self, I can profess I desire not to
irritate the meanest person, nor seek I the
glory of oppugning the Greatest: my ayne
is, to open and establish truth; Frivolous
and by-questions I have on set purpose
avoided. Whether all objections of mo∣ment
are answered, as I cannot affirm, so
I can protest I am no more conscious of
declining any, then of dissembling, when
I write my self

Paris,
Sept. 21.
1652.
