



My Lord,
THE kind Entertainment your Grace was pleased to afford to a former Dis∣course of mine, Of the Redempti∣on of Time, and Your declared Approbation of it, together with the obliging Expressions of Your Favour to it's unworthy Author, embolden and encourage me not
 only to present this small Trea∣tise to Your Grace's Hands, but to make a publick Dedication of it to You.
The Subject is of daily Use; for we are taught by our Lord to pray daily for the Pardon of Sin. This isHeb. 8.12. One of the great Mercies of the Covenant of Grace, and an eminent Branch ofPsalm 32.1, 2. Bles∣sedness. This Tract shews the Way and Means how to partake of this Blessedness; and how to obtain Cleansing from Sin, as well as Forgiveness of it: And fitly serves for the Healing and Recovering of relapsed Souls; and tends to the promoting of true Repentance and Holiness, and real Reformation of Heart and Life.

Your noted Sense of Religion, and Favour to Goodness and good Men, will dispose Your Grace to relish my plain and pra∣ctical handling of it, more than if it were embellish'd and em∣broidered with Gaiety of Lan∣guage; which would be apt to fix it in the Fancy, and hinder it's Passage to the Heart, as Paint∣ing of Glass hinders the Light.
Blessed be God, that Greatness and Goodness are so happily con∣joined in Your Grace. Go on, my Lord, by Your wonted Pie∣ty and Prudence, Fidelity and Integrity, to live and act so, as to be more and more beloved by God, employed by your Prince, and valued by all good Men.

That God would command a Blessing upon Your nearest and dearest Relations, and all the Branches of Your Honourable and Noble Family;
That your Days may still be prolonged to serve your Gene∣ration according to the Will of God, and to perfect a rare Ex∣emplar, and finish a fair Copy of Vertue and Goodness, to be left and transmitted, that God may be glorified, and others ex∣cited and provoked to a zealous Imitation of Your Laudable Life, adorned with worthy and excel∣lent Actions;
That You may continue to shine as a bright Light in this lower World; and when You shall be translated hence to a higher Region, and Heavenly
 Mansion, may shine as a Star in the Kingdom of your Fa∣ther for ever; is his most hearty Desire and Prayer, who is,
My LORD,

