



IN obedience to your Command (Right Hono∣rable) I make bold to present unto your view these Meditations, which in part, I did, and intended fully, to have delivered in your ears, the day wheren, by your appointment, I was called unto this service. I may truly say, I in∣tended it, rather then performed it. For the Meditations them∣selves being conceived (as womens children are, Gen. 3.16.) in sorrow and pain, upon the bed of languishing weaknesse, when they were come to the birth, wanted the help of strength to bring them forth; I felt indeed so much, I will not say sorrow, but extremity of pain, while I stood that day before you, that I was enforced to present you only the heads, for the most part, of what I intended to have delivered then unto you, if the infir∣mity then upon me had not hindered it. You well know (Right Honourable) that the infirmities of the body have a strong in∣fluence upon the soul, and therefore I assure my self you will not expect that from a minde distempered and distracted by the sense of pain and griefe, which might be required of a free and enlarged spirit. I make no question but some may be ready to passe that censure upon this message of mine unto you, which old Cato gave once upon an Embassage sent by the Roman Senate (wherein of the three Ambassadors, one had his head full of
scars, by wounds received in the wars, the second was lame in his feet, the third defective in his intellectuals) Eam legatio∣nem ne{que} Caput, ne{que} Pedes, ne{que} Cor habere, that Em∣bassage (said he) hath neither Head, nor Feet, nor Heart. I passe not for such censures; I only desire, that although these Meditations be the issue of an infirm Head and Body, they may not be taken to be aegri somnia, a sick mans dreams, nor the illusions of a deceiving Prophet, that cryes out, I have dreamed, I have dreamed, Jer. 23.25. The words which I set before you, are the words of truth, the Oracles of God, and if they be so esteemed by you, and all that love the truth, I have my desire, and God shall have the glory. The chief Subject handled, is the Troubles which accompany the Churches Refor∣mation. In that particular God hath made my work suitable to his own, both the restoring of Jerusalem, and my Medita∣tions thereupon were cast into times of trouble, if pains and infirmities may be so accounted. In the close of this Sermon, you shall finde an humble Petition for the cherishing of poor Students, which if you be pleased to entertain with favour, as the last request of a dying man, nay as an intimation from the Man Christ, who dyed for us, I know not whereby you may more ingage, not man, but the Lord himself to make good his promise to you, Mal. 3.10, 11, 12. to open the windowes of heaven, and to powre upon you and the Land, blessings more then you can receive, and to rebuke the devourer for your sakes; so that all Nations shall call you blessed. That your care and endeavour may be, both in this, and all other services for the Church, to fulfill the will of the Lord Christ, and that this may be your reward, is, and shall be, the prayer of

