



RIght honoured Sir, I have but two things to say unto you, and I have done: The first is, why I published this Ser∣mon: The second, why I dedicated it to your selfe. For the first, the Reasons are of two sorts; some negative, others affirmative. Negative, 1. It is not any exalted thought of its worth or excellency that hath prickt me on to publish it: For, I look upon it as the off-spring of the weakest and unwor∣thiest of those that keep watch upon the walls of Jerusalem. Nor is it that I may uncover the Sepulchres of the dead, and represent their exorbitancies unto the eye of the world, which have already come un∣der the strict examination, and severe censure of the righteous Judge of all the world.
Pascitur, ta∣vivis liv post fata qui∣escit. — Affirmative; But, 1. that this present, and suc∣ceeding Ages may see, that the corruptions of Church government, and Governours, upholden then in our land, and the corruptions of Ministers too much connived at, have been witnessed to be unlaw∣full, by which it shall appeare, that the servants of the Lord have not (through base cowardize) betrayed the cause of Christ, but witnessed the truth against his adversaries. 2. That it may appeare how dan∣gerous a thing it is to persecute any for some smal deviation from the path paved by Authority: For, was not the chiefe thing for which I suffered, the confounding of Bishops and Presbyters? Was it not for affirming that they were ejusdem dignitatis & potestatis, of the same dignity and power? which was at that time contrary to Law, though consonant to truth
Ordinis & politiae qui∣dem causa in∣teeos qui docend mun iniunctum  unus aliis pr tre potest. — Sd dignita aut potestat gradum, an  i Ministros  gamus esse 1. quia pri matum Ch∣stus ex professe impugnt, Luk. 22.25. Joh. 13.13 2. Quia  ius concess est a Chri omnibus, Matth. 18. Joh. 20 21. 3. Quia superioritatis invectio primum  mox Tyranni pe pseudoepiscopos, pseudarchiepiscopos, & pseudopatriarchas omnem Ecclesiasticam , ac tandem ipsant E∣clesiam labefactavit, Bucan. Instit. Theolog. de Minist. Loc. 42. p 507..

 Yet, who now seeth it not, who now confesseth it not to be a truth? so that innocent truth was then enforced to put on the hatefull gar∣ments of falshood, and as such to suffer: And may it not be so again, if caution be not used? O! that the consideration of this very parti∣cular might be a means of rendring our honorable and renowned Patriots (one of which you are) abundantly tender in such cases, and sedulously circumspect that such persecution be avoided; lest this Age and Government insisting in the crooked paths of the former, they both partake of the same, if not worse plagues and judgments. 3. That I might vindicate mine innocency from the vulnerating talons of such greedy Harpies as had seized on it at their will: For some there are
Insigne Christopher Pits, and Mr. Barough. in Summer Islands, where now the Lord hath stretched the line of my habitation, who having transported themselves from our Islands hither to negotiate their affaires, and returning back to us again, reported me to be a troubler of the place where I formerly li∣ved. Now certain I am, I never gave any just cause to be so accouted of any, so reported of by them: for I neither have lent on usury, nor have men lent to me on usury, as the Prophet spake of himselfe
Ier. 15.10.. True it is, this Sermon I preached, which I verily beleeve did trou∣ble some, and for which I was troubled; but whether this will amount to somuch as to render me obnoxious to such a report, or worthy to be accounted a man of strife, and a man of contention, I shall desire your Worship to judge when you have read it.
The second thing is, why I dedicated it to your self: Reasons there are many; some are of publick, others are of privat concernment. Those of publick concernment are such as these: 1. You are one of those Worthies of whom it may be truly said as it was of good Jona∣than, You have wrought with God at this time, and you have wrought great salvation in our Israel
Sam. 14.4, 5 par sunt  soris nsi  confilium ., which renders you, with them, honou∣red in the hearts of my self, and of all those that feare the Lord: And you with them, are the more emine at in this, that you have sate out the Apostasies and unhappy fallings of so many (preserved by the power of Christ) of whom it may be said as the Apostle saith in another case, They went out from you, but they were not of you: for if they had been
of you, they would no doubt have continued with you: but they went out that they might be made manifest that they were not all of you
1 Ioh. 2.19.. Ride on (worthy Sir, with the residue of those renowned Sena∣tours) prosperously, because of truth, and meekness, and righteousness; remembring and beleeving, that when the great work of God is fini∣shed, the names of those shall be sought for, that have acted for him, and it shall be said, What honour and dignity hath been done to Mordecai for this
Hest. 6.3.? You that work both for God and the Country, shall be recorded both in the Chronicle of heaven and earth. 2. Let it not be offensive (I pray) if I adde this humble request, as a second reason of publick concernment: You with them, have been famous for your wisdom, courage, justice, mercy, in the vindicating your Civill lawes, liberties, &c. yet let it not be grievous to yours and their thoughts to ponder a little, why all the prayers, tears, and fastings in this nation, have not pierced the heavens, and quench'd these flames, wch yet who knows how far they'l spread, and when they'l out? You with them have broke the jaws of the oppressors, and taken the prey out of their teeth; for which act (I beleeve) it hath pleased the most high God to set a guard (not only of trained men, but) of mighty Angels, to secure your sitting and the Citie. Oh! that there may be a leng∣thening of Londons tranquillity, of Parliaments safety, by mercy to the oore
Dan.. Oh! or the Lords sake, take heed of soul yoaks, soul-op∣pressions, lest the poore cry, and the Lord heare. he saying of the holy Prophet is worthy your sad lest and most serious deliberation. For the opprssion of the poore, for the sighing of the needy, now will I a∣rise (sith the Lord) I will let him in safety from him that puffeth at him
Psal. 12.5.. And if for the oppression of the outward man, how much more for the oppression of the inward man, the soul and conscience? I have done with publick reasons. Privat are such as cocern mine own particular enoagements, and they are, 1. To testifie my gratitude and thankfull acknowledgement not onely of many (more then meri∣ted) favours, conferred on me
Beneficiorum memora sene∣scer non bet Sen lib de Benefic., which the great God will recompence into your bosome with advantage, I question not: for God is not un∣righteous to forget your work & labour of love which you have shew∣ed
toward his Name, in that you have ministred to the Saints, and doe minister
Heb. 6.10.; but also for that countenance which you were pleased to shew unto me, even then when I was (for the preaching of this Sermon only, and for no other cause) under a black cloud
grates per∣svere dignas, Non opis est nostrae, Dido—ii tibi, si∣qua pios respe∣spectant Nu∣mina, si quid usquam justitiae, & mens sibi con∣scia recti, prae∣mia digna fe∣rant. Virg. Aeneid.
Tmpora si fuerini nubila, solus eris, O∣vid de Trist.: then and since, though the world hath looked upon me obliquely, and with a squint eye, as we use to say: yet have you (ever since I had the hap∣pinesse to be acquainted with you) retained (as better knowing me) candid and respectfull thoughts of me; and though you have of late been (in a kind) upbraided with it
Mr Prinnes fresh discovery in B. letter., yet I verily beleeve you shall never repent you, nor be ashamed that you have owned me, no not be∣fore men. And when you shall appeare in the upper world at the Tribunall of God the Judge of all, you are not ignorant that the spi∣rit of glory shall rest upon you, in that you have not been ashamed of the chains and bonds of Christ in his Members, in his Messengers
Tim. 1.16, 17, 18. Matth. 25., 2. And because there were in the world, not only Critical censurers, but malicious detractors, who fear not to speak evill of good, (though a woe be denounced against it
Isa. 5.) I have assumed boldnesse to shelter this Opusculum, (which (though little) may be of some use in the house of God; Etiam capillus unus habet umbram suam, one hair casteth its own shadow) under your worships patronage; beseeching you (as Ruth did Boaz in another case
Ruth. 3 9.) to spread your skirt over it. I have said what I have to say touching my publishing this Ser∣mon, and my dedicating it to your Worship. My prayer is for you, and your worthy consort, and your hopefull progeny, what Pauls was for the house of Onesiphorus
2 Tim. 1.16., that the Lord would grant unto you that you may find mercy in that day: for ye oft refreshed me. And in the interim, that you may be stedfast and unmoveable, always a∣bounding in the work of the Lord, knewing that your labour shall not be in vain in the Lord.

