



NO man (I conceive) will wonder (Right Worship∣full and Dearely Beloved in the Lord) that I present you with this small Treatise: being an accompt of some of my labours which I have taken amongst you. I know not of whom they are likely to finde (nor desire they may have) better acceptance then of those, of whose love manifested unto me in so many honours and fa∣vours, by which you have so many waies engaged me now neere these two and fourty yeares, (wherein I
have continued amongst you) I have had so aboundant and full experience.
Besides, in presenting you with this poore Treatise, I give you of your own (as I may truely say with the Prophet David, 1 Chron. 29.14. although not altogether in his sense.) For am not I yours? as S. Paul tels the Corinthians, that himselfe, and Apollo, and Cephas, were theirs: 1 Cor. 3.22. And by consequent the issues of all my weake abilities, you may as justly challenge to be your own as the Master might claime the issues of the bondslaves borne in his house, to be his: and as in true estimation it is such, so I desire you to accept it, as an acknowledgement (although in no proportion a satisfaction) of that great Debt which I owe unto you.
And, to speake truth, it will be of speciall use to you, to accompt this la∣bour of mine, such as it is, as your own,
that you may so entertaine and em∣brace it, so use, husband, and employ it to your best advantage, as we use to doe those things that are our own. For the chiefe reason wherefore the mani∣fold helps, which God is pleased to af∣ford us by the labours of other men, usually profit us so little, is, because men looke not on them as matters, wherein themselves have a peculiar interest, and so neglect them, as we too usually doe those things which are of common and generall concernement.
As for the matter handled in this short Treatise, I desire you to take no∣tice, that of all the Truths that I have delivered unto you, in so large a time of my Ministery, continued amongst you, I have chosen this, above all other subjects, to recommend unto you in a more especiall manner, and to leave with you as a memoriall of my tender
affection towards you, for these two weighty reasons. First, because this du∣ty of studying the Scriptures (where∣unto this Treatise is intended as an help) is of all others of most generall concernement, and of most necessary and common use. Secondly, because it hath pleased the Lord to cast us into dangerous times, wherein some men endeavour, what they can, to bring the Scriptures into contempt, crying down that sacred booke, as containing no∣thing else but a dead letter, and being a beggerly element, fit for none but the lowest forme of Christians. Others, that are unstable and unlearned, (as the Apostle tearmes them, 2 Pet. 3.16.) wrest them at their pleasure, to their own destruction, and the endangering of their brethrens soules.
Let me, therefore, in the bowels of Christ, beseech you (Brethren) as you
ever hope to get any power of grace into your hearts, to have your spiritual life quickened, your comforts assured, and your wayes directed, to take heed to this Sure and Infallible word of Truth, as to a Light shining in a darke place, (as the Apostle speakes, 2 Pet. 1.19.) as containing in it your Food, your Physick, your Evidences, your Comforts, your Armes, both for of∣fence, and defence; and in a word, which is the very life of your Soules, the Light of your Vnderstanding, the Director of your Wills, and the Mo∣derator of your Affections.
Study this Word, which our Savi∣our tearmes Searching of the Scrip∣tures, Iohn 5.39. which is done not by Reading them over cursorily, but by examining them diligently; comparing Scripture with Scripture, that we may know the full minde of God revealed
therein, who many times layes not down the whole truth together in one place, but leaves us to take in some o∣ther clauses, out of other places, to make up the full of that truth which hee would reveale unto us. For want of this care of laying Scripture to Scrip∣ture, many taking up the truth of God by parts, ground thereupon dangerous errours, wronging God in making him to speake what he never meant, and overthrowing their own Faith, to the hazard of their owne Soules.
Of one thing we must be very care∣full, that we bring with us our minds free, and not prepossest with any Opi∣nion, which we have either framed in our owne phantasy, or received from others: A mind forestalled by an er∣roneous conceipt, is no fit Judge of any Truth, or of any Testimony cōcerning Truth; but as coloured glasse transmits
the light, and represents it to the eye infected with the same colour with which it selfe is dyed: Or as the taste, distempered by some ill humour, re∣lisheth all things which it receives according to that humour with which it selfe is infected: so happens it with a minde prepossest with any phantasie, it apprehends and judgeth of all things according to that opinion which it selfe hath entertained.
Lastly, the Scriptures being in them∣selves exceeding broad (to use the Psal∣mists expression, Psal. 119.96.) that is, of large comprehension, and withall very mysterious, containing in them wonders, (as they are tearmed, ver. 18.) there needs, together with our reading, much Meditation upon what we have read, (as the same Prophet tells us, that he did meditate upon Gods Law all the day, Psal. 119.97.) much confe∣rence,
especially with Ministers, and other experienced Christians, much use of learned mens writings, which give great light to the understanding of darke places in Scripture, which wee shall often meet withall: But above all, fervent and continuall Prayers, wherein acknowledging our owne blindnesse, and inability, of our selves, to search into the deep Mysteries revea∣led in the Word, (with Agur, Prov. 30.2, 3.) we beg earnestly the assistance of Gods Spirit, to open our eyes, Psal. 119.18. to make us to under∣stand the way of his precepts, ver. 27. to give us understanding that wee may know his testimonies, ver. 125. being assured, that as there is no other meanes to reveale unto us the mind of God, but his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.11. so God will not deny that help to those that ask it, Iames 1.5. as his children finde
by their owne experience, 1 Ioh. 2.27.
The publishing of this Treatise is, by the Providence of God, cast into the last of my daies, perhaps, that you might lay neerer to your hearts, and more heedfully remember the last words and counsels of your dying Pastor, as usually the last directions and advise of dying Parents, or other neer friends, make a strong impression upon the hearts of those to whom they are given: Withall seeing, being shortly to be taken from you, I shall be able to doe you no more service, in mine owne person, I desire to leave this monument behind me, that when I shall be seen no more, being dead I may yet speake unto you, as Abel is said to doe, Heb. 11.4.
And now (Brethren) I know you cannot but be very sensible of that sad condition, into which you were lately
reduced, when not onely you suffered the spoiling of your goods, but your very lives did hang in doubt before you, and you feared day and night, having no assurance of your lives, as the Lord threatens it should happen to his people, Deut. 28.66. And I de∣sire, that the memory of those sad times may be still fresh in your minds, that your flesh may still tremble for the feare of God, and you may be afraid of his Judgements (to use the Psal∣mists phrase, Psal. 119.120.) that ob∣serving for what evills the wrath of God was then kindled against you, you may the more carefully watch over your waies, for time to come, that you provoke not the Lord hereafter to powre out his indignation in some more fearefull judgement, whose hand you have found so heavy upon you in what you have felt already.

Notwithstanding, I beseech you withall, take notice of a mixture of many mercies, even with that heavy Judgement. As, first, that God gave you yet your lives for a prey, which is all the favour that he promised Baruch, Ier. 45.5. and that not onely by pre∣serving you from the enemies sword, but besides by withdrawing his owne hand when the last yeare he called to contend by the Pestilence, which brake in upon you severall times and by se∣verall waies, and yet gleaned onely a few amongst you, here and there, at that time, when some other Townes were almost layed wast by the same stroake of Gods hand, but the Lord still repented him for this, and said, it shall not be, Amos 7.3, 6.
Againe, though your estates were wasted, yet your dwellings were preserved, that you might not bee
as Sodome, or like unto Gomorrah, as some other places are: as it was of∣ten threatned, and as often really inten∣ded by your enemies, and had questi∣onles been accordingly executed, had not the Lord by his Power and Provi∣dence almost miraculously prevented it, saying unto them as he doth unto the sea, Job 38.11. Hitherto shalt thou come, and no farther, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed: as if God had reasoned with himselfe as he doth concerning his owne people, Hos. 11.8, 9. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is tur∣ned within me, my repentings are kindled together, I will not execute the fiercenesse of mine Anger, I will not returne to destroy Ephraim, for I am God and not man, &c.

Above all the rest of Gods favours, mixed with those judgements wch you lately felt; esteeme not this as the least, that although your Teachers have been driven into corners, yet they have been by Gods goodnesse preserved for your farther service, and are now restored to you in safety, that your eyes behold them, and your eares heare their voice, shewing you the way that you should walke in, when you turne aside to the right or left hand; a mercy which God accompts sufficient to sweeten even the bread of adversity and the water of affliction, Isay 30.20. And even that want of them for a while, may be of speciall use to you, to warne you to set an higher price on Gods Ordinances hereafter, and to answer them with proportionable fruits, lest God bring upon you that heavy judgement, threatned against his owne people, the
utter taking away of his Kingdome from them, to bestow it on a people, that might yeeld him a better accompt thereof, Mat. 21.43.
As for the losses which you have sustained in your outward Estates (which considering how long you were in the enemies hand, were lesse then most other Townes have felt) if you suffer any hurt thereby, you have none to blame but your selves. If God by your owne experience shew you the vanity of these outward things, which we cannot hold when we have them, that availe not in the day of wrath, Prov. 11.4. that comfort us least when we need it most, that too often prove snares unto us, while we enjoy them, and leave us nothing but sorrowes when we lose them, and thereby take off your hearts from lo∣ving and depending on them, that yee
may take care to lay up your Treasures in Heaven (as our Saviour adviseth, Mat. 6.20.) out of the reach of thieves and plunderers, (which we may truely conceive to be the end that God aimed at in delivering you into the hands of spoylers and robbers) you may be∣come great gainers by all your losses.
I know what carnall reason will suggest, that it stands you upon to bee now more earnest in labouring with all diligence to repaire your losses; and it grieves my heart to see, that this counsel prevailes so much with many, that should by this time have learned Christ better. Give me leave to lay be∣fore you a praecedent of your owne. About 34. yeares since, the Lord sent upon this towne a fearefull fire, which consumed the best part of it, the losse at an under value amounting to more then fourty thousand pounds. What
fell out thereupon? There met toge∣ther about seven or eight well-affe∣cted persons, and agreed to contribute in money, and annuities, out of their Lands, the summe of eight hundred pounds for the erecting of an Hospi∣tall, for the setting of poore children on worke: The whole towne con∣sented to double their weekely rates for reliefe of the poore, enlarged their Churches, and reduced the towne in∣to order by good governement: What gained they by all this? within the compasse of six or seaven yeares, God so poured out his blessings upon the place, that it was in that short space in better condition then it had been be∣fore that calamity fell upon them. Can you have a better argument then that, which is taken from experience a∣mong your selves? Or is there to bee found a surer or more comfortable
way of making up your losses, then that which you found so successefull then? Follow their steps, honour God with the first of your substance, which he hath left you, relieve his poore ser∣vants, set effectually upon the reducing of the towne to order by Govern∣ment, God is still the same God, and will not faile to supply you with such estates as will be best and meetest for you.
I assure my selfe you want neither will, nor resolution to set forward the workes, wherein Gods honour and the welfare of this place are so much concerned: Onely I desire you to em∣brace the first opportunities, which the Lord shall put into your hand, to bring your purposes to effect. Say not with the people, Hag. 1.2. The time is not come, that the Lords house should be built: Things of publike concern∣ment
ought to be our first and chiefest care, which when we labour to set for∣wards with all our power, we engage the Lord himselfe, to take care of, and prosper our private affaires.
Now the Lord stirre up the spirits of you all as he did the spirits of Zerub∣babel, and Ioshuah, Zech. 1.14. to take his work in hand with speed and cou∣rage, and be assured of the same suc∣cesse that these holy men found; and besides honour to your selves, and comfort in your owne hearts at pre∣sent, the entering into the Joy of your Lord hereafter, Mat. 25.21, 23. Which that you may doe, and finde, is, and shall be the prayer of

