



Honoured, Worthy, and Well-beloved Friends,
THe great and good God made Man Lord of theGen. 1.28. Psal. 8.6. & 115.16. whole Earth, but this is not the highest Preferment, and ut∣most Advancement that he is capa∣ble of, and destin'd to. The incorporeal and diviner Part of him sufficiently discovers, and evidently demonstrates that he pertains and belongs to another World. Tully brings in Cato delivering this high point of Philosophy, that thisEst animus coelestis, ex altissimo domicilo depressus, & quasi demersus in terram, locum divinae naturae, aternitai que contrarium. cic. in Cat. Maj. seu de senect. Earth and earthly Body, into which the Soul is sunk at present, is a place ex∣treamly contrary to a divine Nature, and to E∣ternity. This Earth is but ourEx vita ista discedo, tanquam ex hospitio, non tanqu im ex domo. Commorandi enim natura diversorium nobis, non ha∣bitandi dedit. Id. ib. Inn, saies he, in which as Travellers we are to lodg in our Journey, hastening through Time to E∣ternity;
not our House and Home in which we are to dwell continually. This World is appointed only as a Passage to a better place and state: We are now in a way of Prepara∣tion for it. This World (asSir Mat. Hale's Contempl. M. and D. 1 part, p. 263. one saies well) is the great Laboratory for perfecting of Souls for the next. We are here indeed to make but a short stay; yet we must not [repine at the bre∣vity of this Life, but ought to be content with that space of time which is allowed us for our Life on Earth; and to take care, that inNeque enim histriont, ut placeat, peragenda est sabula: modo in quocunque fuerit actu, probetur: nec sapientis sque ad, plaudite, vivendum. Breve enim tempus aetatis satis est longum ad bene honestéque vivendum. Cic. lib. cit. whatsoever Act we are appointed to appear, we perform our particular parts well, though they prove but short ones that are assigned and committed to us, in the great Comedy acted in the Theater of this inferiour World: for (as the forementiond Philosopher acknowledg∣eth) a short time of Life is long enough to serve us to live well and honestly. It concerns us only to endeavour, to use and improve what time God pleases to afford us, in doing those things which will fit and dispose us for a happy Eternity, and make our Translation and Re∣moval hence gainful and advantageous, com∣fortable and desirable to us.

God hath prescribed a course of convenient means to be observed and used by us in this Probation-state.Non per difficiles Quaestiones ad beatam vitam nos ducit Deus. Hilar. He does not lead us to a Life of Blessedness (as St. Hilary tells us truly) through thorny difficult Controversies, and knotty hard Questions. He would have us, not dis∣pute, but live: for (as theMic. 6.8. Prophet informs us) He hath shewed thee, O Man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? And (as theTit. 2 11, 12. Apostle expresses it) The Grace of God that bringeth Salvation, hath appeared to all Men; teaching us, that denying Ʋngodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present VVorld. He requires us to believe in order to Practice and Obedience.
God has given us but aPauca credenda, multa facienda. Cosid. Mod. & Pac. in epist. Praef. few things to be believed; (as Bp. Forbes was wont well to ob∣serve) but he has plainly ordered and appoint∣ed a great many necessary things to be done by us. We mustRev. 22.14. do his Commandments, that we may be blessed, and have right to the Tree of Life, and enter in by the Gates into the City. We mmstRom. 2 7. by patient Continuance in well-doing,
seek for Glory, and Honour, and Immortality.
The Scope and Drift of the following Treatise is, to shew you particularly and fully, how to redeem the Time of this Life, so as to gain a glorious Immortality.
As for the Matter of it, it is useful to in∣struct you in the Divine Arithmetick, to make you wiser thanThe Philosopher affirms that Man is therefore the wisest of all Creatures, because he alone can number; and they note this as an essential difference between them, that Bruta non nu∣merant; Brure Creatures cannot number; I am sure this is most true of that Divine Arithmetick which the Psalmist prays for, Lord teach us so to number our Days, that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom. Dr. Stoughton's Heavenly Conver∣sat. p. 80. brutish Sinners, that know not how to number their Days: It is apt to engage you upon an early, present Industry; a diligent, speedy Care of your Time, and of your Souls; and is a Manuduction to the Ex∣ercise of a great part of Practical Religion.
The Style of it is plain, familiar, and easy to be understood by all, which renders the Treatise the more generally useful. Some affect a Language so gaudy as is not consistent with the Gravity of Theology. Others discourse in so strong a Style, that by their lofty Words and Expressions they shoot quite over the Heads, and so miss the Hearts of too too ma∣ny of their Auditors. Some paint the Glass, till they darken the Window, and keep out the Light. Seneca professes, that he does not
approve of any jejune and dry Discourses a∣bout the great and weighty matters of Mora∣lity; for Philosophy, says he, does not renounce all Wit and Ingeny: but he does not allow much labour to be laid out upon Words.Non quaerit aeger medicum eloquentem, sed sanantem, &c. non erit, quare gratuletur sibi, quòd inciderit in medicum etiam disertum: hoc enim tale est, quale si peritus gubernator et tam formosus est. Quid aures meas scalpis? quid oblectas? aliud agitur, urendus, secandus, abstinendus sum. Ad haec adhibit us es: curare debes morbum veterem, gravem, ublicum. Tan∣tum negotii habes, quantum in pestilentia medieus: circa verba occupatus es? jamdudum gaude, si sufficis rebus. Sen. ep. 75. A sick Man, says he, does not seek a Phy∣sician that is eloquent, but that is able to cure his Disease: no more than the Passenger regards and enquires, whether the skilful Pilot, or Governour of a Ship, be a very comely and handsome Man? Thou hast as much business up∣on thee, says he, to heal the Distempers of Mens Minds and Manners, as a Physician has in a Plague-time; and art thou imployed about Words? be glad if thou canst be sufficient for things. I have not studied for great Words, nor labour'd for high Language; but only sought out, 2 Tim. 1.13. sound, wholsome, healing words.
It may be, some candid, courteous Reader, if he see Occasion, may make the same or like Apology for me, as Seneca once did for Fabia∣nus Papyrius, when Lucilius had taken no small Prejudice against certain Books of that Philo∣sopher,
because his Style was not elaborate and polite, but seem'd to him to beEffundi verba, non fingi. low and mean:Mores ille, non verba composuit; & animis scripsit ista, non auribus, &c. — Electa verba sunt, non captata. — Ad profectum omnia tendunt, & ad bonam mentem: non quaeri∣tur plausus. Sen. ep. 100. He formed Manners, not Words, says Seneca; and wrote to the Minds, not Ears of Men. It does not become a Philo∣sopher to be studious and solicitous about Lan∣guage. He was not negligent in his Style, says he, but only not over-careful about it: and there∣fore you will find nothing sordid or slovenly in it. His Words are chosen, not affected. His Dis∣courses are not flat and low, but pleasing and plain. Look on the whole Body of the Book; though it be not trim, 'tis honest. Would you have him set himself to so small a thing as Words? He addicted himself to the Greatness of Things. — And you may perceive by what he has perform'd, that he felt what he wrote. What ever he delivers tends all to Profit, and a good Mind: Applause is not sought for, or look'd af∣ter by him.
I shall only speak for my self in the Words of Salvian;Nos qui rerum magis quàm verborum amatores, utilia potiùs quàm plausibilia sectamur; — In scriptiunculis nostris non lenocinia esse volumus, sed remedia, quae scilicet non tam oriosorum auribus placeant, quàm aegrotorum mentibus prosint. Salvian. Praefat. ad libros de Gubern. Dei. We that are greater Lovers of
Things than of Words, follow what is profitable more than what is plausible; nor do we seek that the empty Ornaments of the Age, but that the wholsome Emoluments of things may be commen∣ded in us. We would have our Writings con∣tain, not Enticements, but Remedies, which may not so much please the Ears of the idle, as profit the Minds of such as are sick.
The Design and Aim of this Discourse in its composure was, not to tickle the Ear, and strike the Fancy; but to warm the Heart, and reach the Conscience, and direct the Life; to teach Men how to live, and how to die, and how to attain a blissful Life after Death.
I here present you with a plain Discourse in a very learned Age. I have prepared and provided for you, not fine Manchet, but ra∣ther Barley Bread, such asFox Acts and Mon. 2 vol p. 1456. Bucer encoura∣ged holy Bradford, for want of better, to give unto the People. As St. Peter said to the lame Man,Acts 3.6. Silver and Gold have I none; but such as I have give I thee: In the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk: I say to you in like manner; I have no rich Present to offer you; but such as I have give I unto you: I would, under God, be a means to help you to find your Feet, and walk in the way of God's Commandments, and run the Race that is set before you.

I was induced to make these Papers publick, not only to satisfy the Desires of some Friends, but because I found so very little perform'd by others on this Subject, which I thought deser∣ved a larger and fuller Handling: And that by my own appearing in it, I might oblige my self above all others to a greater and strict∣er care of my own Time, and might leave some wholsome Counsels, and seasonable Helps to a holy Life, to my own Children, Friends and Acquaintance; and do some lasting Service to your Souls; and when I shall be dead, may be these Papers continue to speak to you and yours:Phil. 1.7, 8. For God is my record, how greatly I long after you all, in the Bowels of Jesus Christ. I have you in my Heart; andRom. 10.1. my Heart's De∣sire and Prayer to God for you is, that you might be saved.
I shall only here crave your leave to put you in mind of a few very necessary things.
1. Let me earnestly exhort and beseech you, that you would worthily and becomingly act the parts of Men, and Christians. Live as those that have rational Souls, noble and im∣mortal Spirits within you; and do nothing repugnant to the Light of your own Minds and Consciences. Yea live as those that have the benefit and advantage of Divine Revelation.
Let none that name the Name of Christ allow themselves in the constant, confident Practice of any notorious, scandalous Sin or Vice, di∣rectly and expresly contrary to the holy Word, and righteous Law of God; proceeding upon a false, imaginary Supposition; venturing up∣on a fond, ungrounded, foolish Presumption; that the Mercy of God will at last prevail against his Wisdome, Holiness, Justice, and Truth: perswading, promising, slattering themselves in any evil Way, that God (according to their Idea and Model of a Deity) will never find in his heart to punish the unreclaimable Sinner, and obstinate final Impenitent, with everlasting Misery, and eternal Torment; though he has over and over threatned it in the Gospel, and though it stands withSee p. 439, 440, 441. good and great Reason that he should do it. Walk closely according to the Rule, and maintain aPhil. 1.27. Conversation becoming the Gospel of Christ.
2. If any of you, upon search and enquiry into your selves, shall find in your selves any decay of Piety, declining in Godliness, abate∣ment of Strictness, neglect of Watchfulness, any slackness and remisness in Duty, any vani∣ty of Mind, and carelesness of Spirit grow∣ing upon you; if you can perceive you have
Rev. 2.4, 5.left your first Love;Rev. 2.4, 5. Remember from whence you are fallen, and repent, and do the first works: recover, maintain, encrease the old Warmth:& 3.2. Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die. For∣tify natural Principles, suscitate your natural Power, stir up the Gifts and Graces of God in your selves.
Herb. Poem. Employment, p. 71.Man is no Star, but a Quick Coal Of Mortal Fire:
Who blows it not, nor doth controll A faint Desire,
Lets his own Ashes choke his Soul.
Look up to Heaven continually for the help and benefit of Divine Influences, Illumina∣tions, Impressions; and receive not the Grace of God in vain; but up, and be doing; go in the Strength of the Lord, and work out your Salvation with fear and trembling.
3. Take heed of the Prophanation, and be∣ware of a partial, formal observation of the Lord's-Day: Where it is partial, it is likely to be formal. Read attentively and frequent∣ly the earnest Exhortation to a thorough Re∣demption of the Lord's-Day, Chap. 2. pag. 32,
to 73. There you are inform'd, that a due Redemption of the whole Lord's-Day, is the way to redeem all other Days to the greatest Advantage,See p. 66, 67. as to Spirituals, and as to Tem∣porols too. And in reference to this latter, I shall here confirm what is said there, by pro∣posing the Experience, and producing the notable, considerable Testimony of a wise and learned, a great and very good Man, the worthily renowned late Chief Justice Hale, who was (as Seneca says of good Men) natus ad ex∣emplar, born to be an Example to others: In a short Discourse of his about Redemption of Time I find these Words;Sir Mat. Hale's Contempl. Mor. and Div. 1 Part, pag. 258, 259. Be sure, says he, to spend the Lord's-Day intirely in those Religious Duties proper to it; and let nothing but an inevitable Necessity divert you from it. — It is that which will sanctify and prosper all the rest of your Time, and your secular Employments. I am not apt to be superstitious, says he, but this I have certainly and infallibly found true, that by my deportment in my Duty towards God, in the Times devoted to his Service, especially on the Lord's-Day, I could make a certain conjecture of my success in my Secular Occasions the rest of the Week after: If I were loose and negligent in the former, the latter never succeeded well; if
strict, and conscientious, and watchful in the former, I was successful and prosperous in the lat∣ter. And again; in a Godly Letter to his ChildrenGal. 4.19. (of whom he travail'd in birth that Christ might be formed in them) he freely o∣pens his mind in these remarkable Words to them;In his Directions for keeping the Lord's-Day, in a Letter to his Children, Ibid. p. 324. I now write something to you, says he, of your observation of the Lord's-Day, be∣cause I find in the World much Looseness and A∣postacy from this Duty. People begin to be cold and careless in it, allowing themselves Sports and Recreations, and Secular Imployments in it, without any necessity; which is a sad spectacle, and an ill presage. And he there makes this Profession and Declaration to them; I have found by a strict and diligent Observation, that a due Observation of the Duties of this Day, has ever had joined to it, a Blessing upon the rest of my time, and the Week that has been so begun, has been blessed and prosperous to me: And on the other side, when I have been neglignet of the Du∣ties of this Day, the rest of the Week has been unsuccessful and unhappy to my own Secular Im∣ployments; so that I could easily make an estimate of my successes in my own Secular Imployments the Week following, by the manner of my passing of this Day: And this I do not write lightly
or inconsiderately, but upon a long and sound Ob∣servation and Experience. You see how this was much upon his Heart, and how ready he was to remark this upon all Occasions.
4. Let me charge and press it upon your Consciences, that on a Lord's-Day, you would be so kind and charitable, so true and faithful to your Souls, as not to lose the Sea∣son of a Sacrament, if you can by any means redeem it. Let none among you live in a sinful, shameful Disuse, and an unwarranta∣ble inexcusable Neglect of the holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Let me solemnly invite you in the moving pathetical Words of the devout Herbert,
The Invitation.Come ye hither all, whose taste Is your waste;
Save your cost, and mend your fare.
God is here prepar'd and drest, And the Feast;
God in whom all dainties are.
I do not call you to a Prophanation, but to a worthy Participation of this sacred Ordinance. They that do customarily live unholily, must needs receive unworthily. Are they fit to par∣take of the Lord's Supper, who allow them∣selves
in the Love and Practice of any known Sin? Are they dispos'd to eat Christ's Flesh, who will not abstain from fleshly Lusts, but usually walk after the Flesh? Are they pre∣par'd to drink Christ's Blood, who commonly drink in Iniquity like Water, and frequently drown themselves and others in Drink? Are they that walk unworthy of their Baptism, in a condition to venture upon the holy Communion?
I invite you to all that is duly previous and preparatory to the Duty, and to a right and requisite manner of the performance of it.
Come, but take God along with you, when∣ever you intend to come. By the help of God, you may receive this Sacrament as you ought. Excuse not your Astinence and Forbearance by pretending your Ʋnfitness: but set your selves in good earnest, with an honest, wil∣ling, resolved Mind, under God, to fit your selves; and you shall quickly find, that God will readily assist and enable you, promote and further you in the way of your Duty.
Come, but competently understand the na∣ture and ends of this Ordinance; and impar∣tially try, and examine your selves before you come. Come with a hearty willingness to part with your Sins for him, who lost his Blood, and laid down his Life for you; and with a firm Resolution to live to him, that di∣ed for you. Labour by habitual Devotedness to God, and by continual circumspect walking
and holy living to be in a general disposition for worthy Receiving. A well-ordered Conver∣sation is the best Preparation for the Communi∣on, and will most certainly make all other Pre∣parations more easy.
Come for I tell you plainly, it is not at your own liberty and choice, to come, or keep away. There is a special Mandate for your coming,Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. This do in remembrance of me, says Christ. He does not only simply allow, or barely recommend it to his Church; but as a Lawgiver, strictly commands and requires it; and as a dying Testator, orders and enjoins the Observance of it. Christ says as clearly and expresly, Do this; as God in any Precept of the Decalogue says, Thou shalt not do this. Now the Law of Christ should be more for∣cible and prevalent with you, than any Sta∣tute, or Law of the Land, to accelerate the Practice of this Duty.
There is as much Danger in an unworthy Refusing this Sacrament, as there is in an un∣worthy Receiving it. You can go for no more than Half-Christians, if you totally abstain from this Ordinance; which is, equally with the reception of the Sacrament of Baptism, a Badg and Cognizance, Note and Character of your Discipleship; an Evidence and Demonstrati∣on, Sign and Expression, Token and Testi∣mony
of your Profession of Christianity. To live in a constant Neglect of this Sacrament, is a manifest Violation of your Baptismal Vow. You promis'd at your Baptism, that you would obediently keep God's holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the Days of your Lives: But how apparently do you break this part of your Vow, by living in a long continued course of Disobedience to this so reasonable Command of Christ? Yea, this unchristian Practice of yours, is, by interpre∣tation, a kind of Renunciation of your Baptis∣mal Covenant, entred into in your Infancy: you do, in a manner, openly disown and dis∣avow it, when you will not yield, at Years of Discretion, to renew and confirm it; though often minded of it, frequently required, and called upon in the Name of Christ, to do it in the Use and Celebration of this Sacrament. And by being so utterly averse and unwilling to bind your selves by this means to Christ, and to ratify and strengthen your Covenant with him, you seem to quit your Part in Christ, and to disclaim all Interest and Propriety in the precious Benefits purchased by his Blood and Death; and to be guilty of the basest In∣gratitude, and greatest Unkindness imagina∣ble, in refusing to remember in a solemn man∣ner your Blessed Saviour, who has so lovingly remembred you, and been, with so much charge and cost, so great a Benefactor to you; and
in unworthily undervaluing the inestimable Be∣nefits of his Death and Passion, sealed and ex∣hibited in the right Use of this Sacrament.
When Christ has said in plain terms, Do this; will you, in effect, dare to say, We will not do this; we will break a known Law, and will not regard the Authority of Christ? Will you persist in such Omission as you cannot ju∣stify, but are forc'd, if reason'd with, to con∣demn your selves for?
Can you be so weak, and short in your rea∣soning, as to think, you reserve to your selves a freedom and liberty to sin for the pre∣sent, without any great Danger to you, by absenting your selves from the Sacrament, which would closely tie, and straitly bind you up to a stricter way, and more exact course of Life? never considering, that by your re∣lation to God, and dependance upon him; by your early Covenant made in Baptism; by all your hearing, or reading the Word of God; and by every Prayer you have in all your Life put up to God, you are already strongly obli∣ged to all that Duty, which the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper would further engage you to perform.
Will you put off this Sacrament from Time to Time, and satisfy your selves at present, that you purpose to prepare, and receive here∣after? why this is just as foolish and absurd, as to resolve, that when you have very greedily
swallowed much more Poison, then you will take the benefit of an Antidote; that when you have stuffed your selves with trash, and fill'd your selves with abundant crudities, and by so doing weakned and destroyed your Ap∣petite; or by long Fasting quite lost your Sto∣mach; then you will hasten to a Feast: That when you have further despised the Riches of Divine Goodness and Grace, made more light of Christ, and of his pretious Blood and Benefits; and grieved his Spirit by longer De∣ays, and Non-improvement of Gospel-sea∣sons, and golden Opportunities; then you will seek Reconciliation to God, Union to, and Communion with Christ, Purgation from Sin by the Blood of Christ, and the Consola∣tion of the Spirit of Christ, You may delude your selves with Intentions and Resolutions to remember Christ in the Sacrament at some convenient Season hereafter; but if you neg∣lect and closer it now, you may lose your Sen∣ses and Memory, before ye have another Occa∣sion offer'd you of remembring Christ in this Sacrament. You may die and depart; and Christ may come to you in particular Judg∣ment, before you can enjoy another Opportu∣nity of  to the Table and Supper of your Lord: We may tell of your Death, and shew to others where you lie low in your Graves, be∣fore the Times comes that you should shew forth your Lord's Death, in the celebration of
the holy Communion. And ifyou should communicate upon a Death-bed; the Sacra∣ment so late sought and receiv'd, is very unlikely to assure Heaven to you when you die, when it was never desired and used by you, as a ne∣cessary Means of helping you to Holiness, and so of leading you on to Happiness, all your Life long.
Let not humble, honest-hearted Christians debar and deprive themselves of this Ordinance, by over-looking, or mis-judging their own Qua∣lifications: But finding, that they regard no Iniquity in their Hearts; and feeling in them∣selves vehement Longings and earnest Breath∣ings after Christ, and continual Hungrings and Thirstings after Righteousness; let them own with thankfulness any measure of Grace dis∣cernible in themselves; and not deny to them∣selves what Christ so freely affords and offers them; but when invited to this Spiritual Feast, draw near with Faith, and take this holy Sacrament to their Comfort, and use it as a means of supplying their spiritual wants and needs.
Come, yea frequently come to the Lord's Table. The Sacrament of Baptism is the Sym∣bol and Seal of our Regeneration, or New Birth; and therefore it is to be received but once: But the holy Communion is the Symbol and Seal of our spiritual Nutrition; and there∣fore, in reason, we are to receive it often.
When Christ appointed that this should be done in remembrance of him, can you think he intended only a single, or seldom remem∣brance? Did not Christ himself, in giving that Command, and enacting that Law, inti∣mate, insinuate, and suppose a reiterated, fre∣quent remembrance of himself, when he said,1 Cor. 11.25, 26. as oft as ye drink it; the Apostle subjoining, as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup? Will he then accept and take it kindly at your hand, if ye do it so seldom, as is next to a total Omission of it? Did the Primitive Christians communicate every day, or at least every Lord's-Day; and can you content your selves to live many Weeks, Months, and Years without it?
Did you but know and understand, consi∣der and meditate of your own spiritual great necessities, Wants, Weaknesses; and of the cer∣tain, considerable Advantages of a frequent Participation of the holy Communion; you would quickly find a Law within your selves, to bind and oblige you; a strong Argument and Impellent within your own Breasts, a pres∣sing powerful Motive in your own Bosoms, to draw you to the Sacrament of the Lord's Sup∣per: you would as soon forget to take your daily Bread, as neglect to receive this blessed Sacrament, upon any good Occasion, and fit Opportunity offer'd to you.

Among all your Cares, take special care to feed and nourish, to strengthen and comfort, to cleanse and save your Souls. Among all your Employments, find some leisure to remem∣ber your Saviour, to meet with your dearest Lord, and to receive the seasonable, plenti∣ful, richPhil. 1.19. Supplies of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.
Will you pretend to value a Sermon, and yet unworthily slight the Sacrament? seem to make conscience of hearing two Sermons usually every Lord's-Day; and yet let your receiving the holy Communion twice or thrice a Year at most, suffice your Souls, and satisfy your Consciences? Have you been swift to hear some thousands of Sermons in your time; and yet so slow, some of you, as not once to re∣ceive this holy Sacrament in the many Years of your whole Lives; though so very many of the Sermons preach'd to you, urg'd and press'd you, with due Preparation, to receive the Com∣munion? Know ye not, that the Sacrament has, in sundry respects, the advantage of a Sermon? for in the Sacrament there is a Ser∣mon to the Eye, as well as to the Ear. Preach∣ing alone cannot possibly so clearly and lively set forth the Evil of Sin, and the Love of Christ to you; as the visible Representation of the Crucifixion and bloody Death of Christ, made in this Sacrament, by the breaking of
the Bread, and pouring out of the Wine be∣fore you, is apt to do. Besides that; The Sacrament calls you to a more solemn previous Examination of your selves, than a Sermon does; and requires you publickly to renew your whole Covenant with God and Christ; whereas a Sermon ordinarily engages you to some one or few particular Duties only: And the Sacrament is a Seal and Confirmation of the Covenant on God's part, of all the great and precious Promises made in Christ to peni∣tent Believers, as well as a Ratification of the Covenant on your part. Again; The Sacra∣ment has a singular Virtue and Efficacy, to join and unite you more nearly and closely to Christ your Head, and to knit and cement you more firmly and strongly one to another in Christian Love. And is moreover a powerful Instru∣ment, and effectual Means of conveying spiri∣tual Strength from Christ, and Grace sufficient to enable you to perform the Covenant made and repeated by you, and to practise the Pre∣cepts explicated and inculcated in the very many profitable Sermons preached to you.
5. You that are Parents, and Masters of Families; in the Fear of God, set up the Du∣ties, and maintain the Exercises of Christ's Re∣ligion in your Families. Let Prayer, and Reading the sacred Scripture, and a course of Catechizing, be things they are used to, and
well acquainted with. Resolve with Joshua,Jos. 24.15. As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord. And vow deliberately with holy Da∣vid,Ps. 119.2. I will walk within my House with a perfect Heart. Walk so closely and constantly with God, and be so faithfully obedient to him, that your Children may fare the better for your Covenant interest in him, and relation to him. Train, bleed, andEph. 6.4. bring up your Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Teach them to know, fear, love, and serve God; & with Abraham,Gen. 18.19. command your Children & your Hous∣hold, that they keep the Way of the Lord: This will be a means to propagate Religion to Poste∣rity. Suffer not your Children to have their Heads, and Humours; but labour betimes to break them of their Wills, lest by their Stub∣bornness and Disobedience they break your ve∣ry Hearts at last. Adonijah was a Person un∣likely ever to come to good, when his Fa∣ther was so indulgent to him, as1 Kings 1.6. not to dis∣please him at any time, in saying, Why hast thou done so? Follow the Direction, which St. Au∣stin gives, to teach Men to do the Works of Abraham;Omnis qui trucidat sitiorum voluptates, tale sacrificium offert Deo, quale Abraham. Aug. Kill sinful Pleasures, says he, and slay youthful Lusts in your Children; by this means you will offer such a Sacrifice to God, as Abraham did.

Let this Thought often arise in your Minds, that the young Plants, that stand in the little Nourseries of your private Families, will, ac∣cording to your care, or neglect of them, grow up to be good and useful, or vicious and noxious Members, in Church and State: and so, theGratum est, quod patriae civem, populoque dedisti,
Si facit, ut patriae sit idontus. —
Juv. sat. 14.Publick will be profited, or prejudiced, by your well or ill ordering the Dispositions and Manners of those that belong unto your charge.
Restrain and regulate the rude and loose manners both of your Children and Servants; Labour to instil good Principles into them; and to render all your seasonable Instructions, prosperous and profitable by your good Ex∣amples:— Velocius & citius not
Corrumpunt vitiorum exempla domistica, magnis
Cùm subsant animos autoribus, —
Id. ib. Domestical Examples are very no∣tably leading, and drawing, and wonderfully powerful and influential. Your Children and Servants, they have their Maintenance from you, Dependance upon you, and are much inferiour to you; and so are apt to eye and imitate you, and ready to conform themselves to you.

You that are Parents, is it not enough that you have conveyed and communicated a cor∣rupt Nature to your Children; but will you proceed to deprave them further by your ill Examples, and to draw forth the Corruption of their Nature into manifold actual Miscar∣riages and Transgressions? Will you make your Children, as far as ever lies in your pow∣er, the Children of the Devil? You that are Masters, will you make your Servants the Servants of Sin, and bind them Apprentices to the very Devil? Will you dare any longer toNil dictu foedum visíque hac lime ia tangat,
Intra quae puer est. —
Maxima debetur puero reverentia. —
Illud non agitas, ut sanctam filius omni
Aspiciat sine labe domum, vitique carentem?
Id. ib. corrupt and debauch your Children and Seavants, by your frequent Drunkenness, common Swearing, vain and loose Talking, Pro∣fanation of the Lord's-Day, Atheistical, un∣godly Living? Let Governours of Families charge themselves to give better Examples.
6. Yea, let every one of you study to be Ex∣emplary, in every relation and capacity, in eve∣ry carriage and deportment, both within the private Family, and before all the Neighbour∣hood round about you. Let this consideration discourage and deter you from being ill-exem∣plary,
that if at last you should go to Hell your selves, your own Damnation will re∣ceive aggravation from the Damnation of others, who have been Sinners and Sufferers through your ill Examples: Which may be the rea∣son, whyLuke 16.28. Dives desired to keep his Bre∣thren out of the place of Torment. Nay, St. Austin goes a great deal higher, in those very notable Words of his, which deserve to be pondred in your most serious Thoughts;Quantiscunque exemplum malae conversationis, etiamsi non eum illi sequantur, aliquis praebuerit, pro tantis se malis ra∣tionem noverit redditurum. Aug. serm. 163. de Tempore. If thou hast given an ill Example, says he, thou shalt one Day give an account for so many wicked Persons, as thou hast shown an ill Exam∣ple to, though they have not followed thy ill Ex∣ample. For it is no thank to thee, that they did not imitate and take after thee. If thou dost not sincerely repent, and faithfully en∣deavour, to the utmost of thy power, to re∣claim those who by thy means have become vi∣cious; thou shalt at last be sorely punish'd, not only for those that have miscarried, but for all those that might have miscarried, as if they had indeed miscarried through thy ill Example; because if God had left them, thy ill Exam∣ple was enough to make them miscarry for ever.

7. And lastly; Remember and consider every day of your Lives, what are the true and proper ends of Life. Think, and conclude, that you were not sent into this World to eat and drink, to lie down to sleep, and rise up to play. Be asham'd to come short of meer Hea∣thens: Blush to read what Cato in Cicero says of himself;Nemo adhuc convenire me valuit, quin fuerim occupa∣tus. Cic. in Cat. Maj. seu de sen. No body could ever yet find me idle and unimployed. With Curius Dentatus, that noble and worthy Roman, count itSe malle mortuum esse, quàm non vivere. more eligible to be dead indeed, and not to live at all, than to be dull and dronish idle and unactive, useless and unprofitable in the World. Reckon with your selves, thatHerb, Poems, Employment, p. 71. Life is a business, not good cheer: That your work and business in this World, is, not to la∣bour for the Meat which perisheth, to seek and study to satisfy a delicate, wanton, luxurious Appetite, and to take your fill of carnal, sen∣sual, corporeal Pleasure; toMat. 6.19. Luke 12.21. lay up for your selves Treasures upon Earth, toJob 27.16. Zech. 9.3. heap up Silver as the Dust, and prepare Raiment as the Clay; to acquire secular Grandeur, and Honour;
Laborare in titulum Sepulchri, (asSen. de brev. vit. c. 19. in fine.
Quidam disponunt etiam illa qua ultra vitam sunt, moles ma∣gnas sepulchrorum, & operum publicorum dedicationes, & ad ro∣gum munera, & ambitiosas exequias. At mehercule istorum fu∣nera, tanquam minimum vixetint, ad facis & ad cereos ducen∣da sunt. Id. ib. c. 20. in fine. Seneca speaks) to take unwearied pains for a pom∣pous ambitious Funeral, an honourable Inscri∣ption upon your Monument, a swelling Ti∣tle upon your Tomb-stone; but to store your selves with such good things, as will bear you company beyond the Grave, enrich and enno∣ble you, and render you worthy, and ho∣nourable for ever in another World. Give all Diligence to be vertuous, and gracious; to getAbsoluta libertas est, in scipsum habere maximam potesta∣tem. Inastimabile bonum est, suum fieri. Sen. ep. 75. great power over your selves, and to be∣come your own Men; which the fore-cited Moralist tells you, is absolute Liberty, and an inestimable Good: To govern your selves, and to inspect, and do good to others: To lay out your selves for God; toMat. 6.20. lay up durable Treasures in Heaven; to gain and obtain the Praise of God; toPhil 3.14. press toward the Mark, for the Prize of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus;1 Cor. 9.24, 25. So to run, that you may obtain an in∣corruptible Crown; and have2 Pet. 1 11. an entrance mi∣nistred unto you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.

I have written a long, yet, I hope, not te∣dious Epistle to you: It is large, from an3 Cor. 6.11. Heart enlarged toward you. I will detain you no longer from the Treatise it self; to which you will find many Quotations annex∣ed: Let none condemn them, before they have read them: It may be, then you will judg them pertinent, pregnant, pleasant.
I desire you to accept of these seasonable Fruits of my Ministerial Labours among you, as a Token and Testimony of my cordial Love, and unfained Affection to your Souls.
It remains, that you think and consider well with your selves, that when the most impor∣tant Truths are, not only deliver'd in Publick, and spoken in your Ears, but brought home to your Houses, put into your Hands, and presented to your Eyes; how you can escape, if you will not lay them to your Hearts; but neglect and reject such means and helps of your Instruction and Salvation. O read, and consi∣der them, and lay your Consciences closer than your Eyes to them: If they prevail not to re∣form and amend your Lives and Manners, they will come in, and witness against you, and heavily condemn you another Day.
Now that the only wise and good God, who put it into my Heart to undertake this Work, and assisted me in it, to the End of it;
(for though1 Cor. 15.10. I laboured, yet not I, but the Grace of God which was with me) would graciously vouchsafe to guide and direct your Minds and Hearts into the Knowledge, Belief, Consi∣deration, Love, andNon est beatus qui scit illa, sed qui facit. Sen. ep. 75. Practice of the great and weighty Truths contained in it; and would effectually bless and prosper it, (and all other serious, profitable Discourses, that have been already in somewhat more than 20 Years of my Ministry among you; or shall hereafter by me, or others, be further made unto you;) to the spiritual Edification, and eternal Salva∣tion of your Souls, is the earnest Desire, and hearty daily importunate Prayer of,

