


MY LORD,
I Was much perplext when it was told me that some censure was past upon my poor Works by your Lp, whose Ecclesi∣astical Government, for so many years, of the Catholick part of England, hath deser∣vedly so much influence upon

our faith; whose most inno∣cent life, exercised with con∣tinual fears at home, and combats abroad, hath begot in us a Veneration of your Dictates; but above all, whose many and excellent writings in defence of Catholick Tra∣dition, and neer fourscore years exhausted in perpetual study, render your Judgment to us new-men of this Age, as it were an oracle of Anti∣quity. I was therefore about to apologize, and beg pardon for my too much precipitati∣on; But your Lord-ships as∣surance by letter, dated Jul. 6. 1652. that you had pass'd no censure at all; and in effect the non-appearance of any such thing, satisfy'd me of the un∣necessariness of that pains. It was a fiction, contrived

by the envy of some narrow Hearts, and propagated by the unwary credulity of such as took all for Gospel which they said. You declar'd, that you had no other thoughts, then so to dissent from my o∣pinion, as Divines, without the least breach of Charity, are laudably wont to do. But yet, even thus, the weight of so great an Authority over∣burthen'd me, and forc'd me to seek some support for my innocence. And I would to God you had been pleas'd to remark in your Letter what∣soever you dislik'd of mine. I would have spar'd no pains to give your Lord-ship satis∣faction in every particular; now I have singled out one point, but that which, being in every one's discourse, I

thought I could least be de∣ceived in. Be you Judg, my Lord, whether without the suffrages of the ancient Fa∣thers, or against the sence of the sacred Scriptures, or unas∣sisted by the Maximes of true Theology, I have undertaken what may seem exotick to this Age we live in. If I clear my self, that I have opposed none of these, as I am not ambiti∣ous of Victory, so I despaire not of Pardon. However it may succeed, you have an ACCOMPT, by detail, as less subject to deceipt, of my Stew∣ardship. Please you, cast it up, and if you find it Just, give your Blessing to him, who prostrates himself at your knees, in quality of,
MY LORD,

