


To those of the Clergy, and of the Two Universities, whose Kindness and Bounty Francis Bugg boasts of, in his Pilgrim's Progress, Chap. 15.
WHereas the said Francis Bugg appears highly to value himself upon the Countenance of some of the Clergy, in his Contests against the People called Quakers, sounding a Trumpet of the Clergy's Kindness, and being very Bountiful to him; and particu∣larly of the Bishop of Norwich, upon his Request to him, giving him a Certificate in his Recommendation (together with his Bounty, which he says was very Considerable.) Giving also this Account of the Im∣provement he intended to make of the said Certificate, viz. I was minded to make Application to my Lords, the Bishops of the Church of Eng∣land, the two Universities, and to some particular Clergy-Men. All which I no sooner asked, than he granted me; and it pleased God so to open the Hearts of my Lords the Bishops, and Reverend Clergy, that I found help in time of need.
These his Incouragements considered, this Epistle is therefore De∣dicated to you, who are concern'd therein. Friends, Do you de∣sign to promote Christianity indeed? You must use better Instruments for it than Fra. Bugg, the Author of the said Pilgrim's Progress, whose Progress is apparently from Christianity into Apostacy; from Truth, and true Charity, into Falshood and Envy: As hath been evinc'd in divers Answers extant, which he could never wipe off; and is also further manifest in the Sequel. 'Tis no small Offence to God, or Injury to Men, to encourage such Agents, as can Forge, Lye, Calumniate and Asperse, un∣der pretence of Contending for the Faith of Christ, and promoting Christia∣nity; Profanation of the Sacred Name of God and Christ, in idle Romance and Fiction, is no small Dishonour thereto; I hope your Profession does not allow thereof, or of taking Liberty thereunto; as this Agent, F. Bugg, is proved to take very largely; and if you can either Connive at his so doing, or Indulge him therein, how will he and you answer it in the great Day of Account, before the Tribunal-Seat of Christ, the Righte∣ous Judge of Quick and Dead? What Account will be given for the Violation of these Two Commandments, Thou shalt not take the Name

of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him Guiltless that taketh his Name in vain: And, Thou shalt not bear false Witness against thy Neighbour; Both which he has notoriously violated in his forged Sermon in my Name, and many other Fictions and Forgeries: Do you allow thereof, or gratify him for the same? Or is it his own officious, heady Act and Device only? For what then have you been so very Bountiful to him, and Contributed such Considerable Sums of Money to him? Is it for his just Demerits, more than others, in devising how to bring Contempt upon the People called Quakers, by Forgeries and Calumnies; Falsly forming a Judicature, Trial, ridiculous Answers, Pil∣lory, Cage, &c to scandalize honest Men, of good Report, as a Pack of Perjur'd Persons, (as in his New Rome Arraigned) for denying his Calumnies and false Accusations? How should ever Christianity be pro∣moted by such Mockers, who act more like Stage-Players, Merry-Andrews, Jack-Puddings, &c. than sober Christians, or Persons design∣ing to promote Christianity? And 'twill be no Honour for you to promote or abet such Agents; but procure you great Disgrace, if you glory in such shameful Treatment and Abuse, as this of F. Bugg's, against us. Besides, it will be an Indication of your own Weakness, to manage your Cause (if not of the Cause it self) for you to be beholden to such scornful Agents to manage it. What may People think of you? Has all your Learning fail'd you, that you must needs contribute large Money to a busie Body, for his Scribbling against the Quakers? Never complain against Illiterate and Lay-Preachers, or Me∣chanick Ministers, if such an one must be your Champion, who, whilst his great Pretence is to Contend for Christ and the holy Scriptures, can take Liberty to Contradict both, in Practice; if to Lye, Misrepresent, falsly Vilifie and Reproach, be contradictory to both; as we are sure, no Lye is of the Truth. And we are not only for Confessing with the Mouth the Lord Jesus, and sincerely Believing with the Heart, that God rais'd him from the Dead, (Rom. 10.) but also for a Christian Life and Conver∣sation, agreeable to such Confession, and Believing, as is unto Righte∣ousness; well knowing, that to make good Confessions, to speak good Words, and live bad Lives, to confess Christ in Words, and deny him in Actions, will not commend or prove any to be true Christians. The Sincerity of our Belief in, and Confession to, the true Messiah, the very Christ of God, (to whom all his holy Prophets gave witness) together with the Verity and Divine Authority of the holy Scriptures, as being first given by Divine Inspiration, I say, our Sincerity herein

is known to Him who searches and knows our Hearts, however we be misrepresented in these Two main Points, by some ill-affected Per∣sons, perverting, cutting, mangling, and altering the Words, Sayings and Sense of both deceased and living Authors; which this Agent has been and is prov'd notoriously guilty of, as a Person not Consciencious in his Writing, and frequent Repetitions of the same Refuted Calumnies, still imposing the same over and over, without making Defence there∣of, by any serious Answer, Replication or Rejoynder; his Course of Scribbling being to repeat the same Fallacies and Misrepresentations under divers Models, Titles, Forms and Shapes; as sometime to make them in Form of a Creed; another, in the Form of a Trial, in a Court of Júdicature; another while, in the Form of a Dialōgue; another while, in the Form of Queries; another while, in the Form of Histo∣ry; another while, in the Form of a Sermon: Together with his Scoff: and Jeers, Flouts, Boasts, Challenges, intermixt; and thus he can make up numerous Books, fill'd with Repetitions of the same Stuff, in divers shapes, without taking any serious notice of Answers or Confutation: And ac∣cording to his crooked perverse Manner of Writing, picking, mincing, clipping, forging and perverting Words and Sentences. Ill minded Per∣sons may easily abuse, and make the best of Writings look ill. And now, how bitter and envious, and how full of cruel Mocking this Agent is turn'd against us, the said People called Quakers, and with what Contempt he hath writ, concerning the Light within, or in Man, and our Doctrine thereof, that his Self-Condemnation and Apostacy may therein the more appear, please to observe his own solemn Testimony, how expresly contrary it is to his present Treatment of us, the said People (as it is in his Book, stiled, The Quakers Detected, &c. printed 1686. about Two Years after his leaving our Communion, and Con∣forming to the Church of England) as 'tis in his own words follow∣ing, viz.
The first Point under Consideration, is, how I came to be a Member of their Society, &c. (i.e. of the Quakers) In the beginning they taught, That all Men were enlightned, according to John 1. 9. and that this Light, wherewith Christ had enlightned them, was sufficient, if obeyed, to lead to Salvation; and that it was the Work of the Ministers of Christ, to turn the Peoples Minds from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God: Affirming, That this Light was a sufficient Teacher, Leader and Guide to every Believer, without the help of outward Prescriptions, Forms, Orders and Decrees of Men: Upon these and the like Notions, I

became perswaded to make Trial of their Doctrine; and when I came to see and observe their Practice, Conversations and Deportments in the Be∣ginning, and what Simplicity and Plainness attended their Mini∣stry, I was still more Confirmed, that it was a Dispensation of the Love of God, sent as a Visitation to Mankind. And being thus perswaded, I was resolved to bear the Cross, and did utterly despise the Shame that attended them and their Message; and was not behind any of my Equals, both in doing and suffering for the Testimony thereof, as some amongst them can still bear me Witness: And in this manner we went on for many Years, and loved one another with Love unfeigned; and, doubtless, God blessed our Meetings with the Comfortable Enjoyment of his Presence, (p. 3.)
From which solemn Confession thus made by Fra. Bugg, after he for∣sook our Communion, and went to the Publick (as he saith) it follows naturally, that he did not forsake us because of our Christian Principle or Profession of the Light, or because of our Doctrine, Conversation, Com∣munion or Meetings, or any Dislike had thereof; but because he deem'd us guilty of Apostacy from our first Principle and Profession; and that (by his own Confession) he did not thereby make his Progress from Egypt into Canaan, appears by his applying to himself the words of Joseph, when in Egypt, viz. But (I) can say as Joseph did to his Bre∣thren, Gen. 50. 20. But as for you, ye thought Evil against me, but God meant it unto Good: And Chap. 45. 5. Now therefore be not griev'd, nor angry with your selves, that you sold me hither, (Quakers detected, p. 8.) How came F. B. to apply these words to his State, when turn'd from us to the Publick, if he did not think himself then in Egypt, or turn'd from the true Light into Darkness? But we sold him not thither; he fled in Winter, when he had let in Unbelief and Fearfulness, because of Suffering and Persecution, which he had felt something of; but fell into Impatiency and Quarreling under it; and, having lost Sincerity and Truth, turn'd Envious Temporizer. And because he has so frequent∣ly and falsly charg'd the said People with denying Jesus of Nazareth, and Contempt of holy Scripture, I may acquaint you with One or Two Passages more, which concern himself, as recited in my Answer to his New Rome Arraigned, entitled, Innocency Triumphant over Insolency and Outrage, printed 1693. p. 25, 26. as followeth, viz.
And to his saying, The Names Jesus and Christ are given to the Me∣diator, &c. [True, but what follow?] Therefore (quoth F. B.) 'tis no Absurdity to say, It was not Jesus Christ for whom the Body was prepared; it was not Jesus Christ that came in the Flesh, but the Word: John 1. 1. (Apol. Introd. p. 3.]

And yet he has confessed, it was the Son of God, that took the Body, p. 4. What Confusion and Self-contradiction does the Man blindly run into? And how contrary to the Apostle John's Testimony is his Doctrine herein? See 1 John 4. 2, 3. Every Spirit that confesseth, that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God; and every Spirit, which confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is not of God; but this is the Spirit of Anti-Christ. What Spirit is this in our Adversary, which saith, It was not Jesus Christ that came in the Flesh? Who was it then? It was the Word, the Son of God: As if Jesus Christ were nei∣ther the Word, nor the Son of God: O horrible Anti-Christianism! And contrary also to that Martyr, Dr. Barnes his Confession, as cited by F. Bugg himself, p. 4. 5. viz. I believe, that without Man's Will or Power, Christ Jesus was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and took Flesh of the blessed Virgin Mary. Acts and Mon. p. 610. Now, If Jesus Christ took Flesh of the blessed Virgin Mary, then it was Jesus Christ that came in the Flesh: But it was Jesus Christ that took Flesh; There∣fore 'twas Jesus Christ that came in the Flesh. Consequently F. Bugg's Doctrine, That it was not Jesus Christ that came in the Flesh, is Anti-Christian, Anti-Apostolical and Contradictory to the said Martyr's Doctrine.
In his Book, stiled, De Christianâ Libertate, Part 2. Chap. 1. he con∣fesseth in the Name and Person of the People called Quakers, That we told them (i. e. the said People) that the Scriptures were good, and a true Declaration of those things, which were most surely believ'd by the Apostles, and by us ought to be believ'd; yet not the only Rule, but still the Spirit of God, which was the first Principle, &c. And many more Confessions he has given to the Truth of our Principles, both with respect to Jesus Christ, his Light, and the holy Scriptures.
Now I recommend you to the faithful Witness of Truth in all your Hearts, which will Judge Righteously; and desire you seriously to peruse the following Treatise, and hear us in our Answers and De∣fence, as well as our Adversary in his Accusations; remembering that common Maxim, To Condemn no Man, before he be heard.
 London, the 30th of the 4th Month, 1699.

