



SIR,
IT is an undou∣bted Canon of the Apo∣stles, That the Elder that rules well, and espe∣cially that labours (too)
in the Word and Doctrine, should be counted worthy of double honour. Such an One was your Reverend Father, by the good report of all Men, and of the Truth it self. And the dou∣ble honour that the Apostle allowed him, he was once by the bounty of his Chri∣stian Prince, worthily pos∣sessed of; though of late (as we all know) he was muzzled from the Enjoy∣ment thereof. But Envy it self (and if there be any thing worse) cannot
deprive him of his double honour: One part whereof he hath already enjoyed in his life time, in the Hearts, Tongues, and Pens of those that lived with him in this and other Nations. The second part remains still due to him, after his Death, which he cannot want, whiles there are any living whose Tongues are capable of giving a true praise.
This poor Peece was de∣signed to that just end; that is, next to the Glory
of God, to the due Ho∣nour of his Faithful Ser∣vant. That it is no more worthy of his Name, is a second part of my sor∣row, for his Death. It contains a short Represen∣tation of him taken in haste; (as all pictures are which are done after the parties death) yet might it have been done neerer to the life, had it not fallen into a very unskilful hand: But besides that, it hath the common disadvantage of all Writings, which are but the
dead Shadows of the living Voyce; and therefore no marvail, if this wants much of that little Grace and Vivacity, which it might seem to have in the delive∣ry.
Such as it is (Sir) it was (without consulting my voyce) voted to the Press, by them that heard it, and as much desired by them that heard it not, be∣cause they heard not of it till it was past the reach of the Ear. And they were neither few, nor sleight persons that
were much discontented at their absence from the too private Commemoration of so Worthy a Person, caused by the sudden de∣termination of the Time: To give them some satis∣faction, I was enforced to yeeld to the Publication of these Notes. Whereto I was also encouraged, be∣cause promised by the kind judgements of them that heard them, that they could not but find some good en∣tertainment from most men, for his sake, of whom they
represent so willing (though weak) a remembrance. I hope also they may afford some present satisfaction to the many that justly expect a better account of his Life; wch in your name (by whom it is best able to be done) I here presume to promise, in convenient time; and that the rather, because I am not ignorant of your being furnished of some Modest and yet Remark∣able Collections thereof, left by his owne Pen. I doubt not but that you
esteem it a special part of your owne Duty, as well as your Honour, to fol∣low the streight steps of his Industrious and Holy Life. And to afford the president thereof to the Imitation of others, will be a kindness very seasonable in these evil dayes. And very useful it may bee (after many others of the Ancient Bishops Lives, now forgotten, than which it is certain there never were any more Saint-like,
since those of their Pre∣decessors the Apostles) towards a Demonstration that Prelacie and Piety are not such inconsistent things, as some would make them; And that the Men which are of, or for that Order, should not be ex∣cluded (as by the Mo∣nopolizers of that Name they now are) from the number of Saints; and con∣sequently not debarred from that which is now asserted to be the common interest,
and indefeisible right of all Saints of whatever per∣swasion; that is the li∣berty (if not of Disci∣pline, yet) of Wor∣shipping God, according to their Conscience, and the best light of their owne Understanding.
To conclude: Your nea∣rest Relation claims the prime Interest in whatsoe∣ver shall pretend to your Fathers Name; and there∣fore this Sir, (which is to be reckon'd inter pa∣rentalia)
is with the Au∣thor

From my Stu∣dy in St. Peters Norwich, Nov. 10. 1656.
