



Honoured Madame,
DEDICATIONS of Books to Persons of great rank and Quality, are of great antiquity, for St. Luke Dedicates Luke 1. 3. Act. 1. 1. two Treatises To the most excellent Theophilus. And now a daies it's usual to dedicate Books to such Per∣sonages, who are (probably) ready to approve them by their Patronage and practice.

As to my own concernment, I the ra∣ther prefix your name to this little Treatise, not only to acknowledge with all thankfulness, the many great Favours, which I have received from you, but especiall I am en∣couraged to present those things to your view whereof you have had so large experience as you can give Testimony to the truth of them, both as to your judgement and affections.
I therefore am your remembrancer of those things, whereof (as I doubt not) you have experimental know∣ledge, and my design is to comfort you with those comforts, wherewith I my self have been comforted: It's the charge which the Angel gives unto the Church of Thyatira—But that which you have already, hold Rev. 2. 25. fast: And the Apostle's charge is su∣table unto that,—Let us hold fast Heb. 10. 23. the profession of our faith without wavering, (for he is faithful that
 promised.) Likewise for self exa∣mination, and tryal of our eviden∣ces for heaven, we are frequently commanded,—More particularly St. Paul chargeth the Corinthians, and us as well as them.—Examine your 2 Cor. 13. 5. selves: know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you? except ye be Reprobates. So likewise the Church (after she had un∣dergone great afflictions and suffer∣ings) makes this serious deliberate resolution—Let us search and try Lam. 3. 40. our waies, and turn again to the Lord.
You being (Madam) an old Di∣sciple, and an experienced Christian, cannot but know, that it's a duty of great concernment, and in an especial manner incumbent upon all faithful Ministers to endeavour in their Preaching to distinguish the pretious from the vile: for so saith the Lord to the Prophet Jeremiah. If thou Ier. 15. 19.
 take forth the pretiou from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth: let them return unto thee but return thou not to them.
Our blessed Lord and Saviour, the best Example and the exactest Pat∣tern for our imitation▪ in that in∣comparable Sermon which he Preach∣ed in the Mount, makes mention of se∣ven Beatitudes, each of them being a rare discriminatig character, whereby good and bad, blessed and cursed, are distinguished one from a∣nother: For if the poor in spirit be blessed, then the rich & proud in spi∣rit are cursed; & if the pure in heart be blessed, then the impue in heart must be cursed, &c. Because of Contra∣rieties there are contrary consequen∣ces. And Christ himself is the best Interpreter of himself, for when he pronounced blessings upon such as Luke 6. 20. 21. 22. were poor, and hungred, and wept, v. 24, 25, 26. he pronounced woes against such as
 were rich and full, and of whom all men speak well.
Likewise our Saviour shewes the absolute and indispensible necessity of Regeneration and being born from above, as may appear by Christs an∣swer to Nichodemus.—Jesus answer∣ed, and said unto him, Verily, verily Ioh. 3. 3. I say unto thee, except a man be born again he cannot see the king∣dome of God. And Regeneration is a Characteristick note of distincti∣on between the old and new birth. Farther, Christ puts a vast differ∣ence between a good and a bad tree: For (saith he) A good tree cannot Matt. 7. 18, 19, 20. bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not good fruit is hewen down, and cast into the fier, wherefore by their fruits you shall know them: And Christ makes Love one to another, a mark Ioh. 13. 35. af his Disciples.

And after Christs Example, his Apostles lay down marks and signes to distinguish the good from the bad. For instance, How frequently, doth St. John press the grace of love, and lays it down as an infallible sign of one that is translated from death to life—We know that we have passed 1 Ioh. 3. 14. from death to life, because we love the Brethren: He that loveth not his Brother abideth in death. Saint Peter expresly manifests what we should avoid—Wherefore laying 1 Pt. 2. 1, 2, 3. aside all malice and guile, and hy∣pocusies, and envies, and all evil speakings, &c and he injoynes what we should reduce unto practice, As new born babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby. And it follows by way of Character, representing such who are new born babes in these words. If so be that ye have tasted that the Lord 2 Cor. 5. 17. is gracious. Saint Paul gives an e∣vident
 sign of such who are in Christ by the new Creature wrought in them. Thefore if any man be in Christ he is a new Creature: old things are past away, behold all things are be∣come new. And, to mention only one more scripture to this purpose, The Apostle discovers a great difference between the old man and the new, and Eph. 4. 21. 22, 23, 24. thus Presseth our duty upon us: If so be that ye have been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus, That ye put of concerning the former con∣versation, the old man which is cor∣rupt according to the deceitful lusts: And be renewed in the spirit of your minde: and that ye put on the new man, which after God is crea∣ted in righteousness, and true holi∣ness.
Now having such abundant war∣rant from the example of Christ and his Apostles, I question not in the
 least, but that in the exercise of our Ministry we obliged according to the Rule of the word of Gods to lay down Characters of a Regenerate e∣state, and to distinguish sincere and real Professors, from such who are only Nominal and Hypocritical. Many there are who name the name of Christ, but depart not from ini∣quity: But it's the express command of the word: And let every one that nameth the name of Christ de∣part from iniquity. Many there are that content themselves, with the An∣gel of the Church of Sardis, to have only a bare name to live; But he is reproved by Christ, Rev. 3 1, 2. And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis write, these things saith he . 3. 1. 2. that hath the seaven spirits of God, and the seaven Stars, I know thy works, that thou hast a name, that livest and art dead. Be watchful and
 strengthen the things that are ready to dye:  I have not found thy works perfect before God. Many there are who rest satisfied with a bare form, and deny the power of god∣liness: But the Apostles command is—Having a form of godliness, 2 Tim. 3. 5. but denying the power thereof: from such turn away.
The Sincerity of the Heart is that which God requires. Behold thou desireth truth in the inward parts: Psal. 51. 6. Josh. 34. 14. Ioh. 4. 24. God must be feared and served in sincerity and in truth: God is a spirit, and his worship must be a spi∣ritual worship: So saith our Savi∣our, God is a spirit and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit, and in truth. The fruits of the spirit are recknd up by the A∣postle to be in all goodness, righte∣ousness and truth. Goodness may Eph. 5. 9. be reckoned to the duties of the first
 Table, and righteousness to the duties of the second Table, but Truth (i e.) Sincerity, refers to both Tables res∣pectively. Sincerity is the ground of rejoycing, For (saith the Apostle) Our rejoycing is this, the Testimo∣ny Cor. 1. 12. of our Conscience, that in sim∣plicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdome, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation, and more abundantly to you ward. And the same Apo∣stle prayes for the Philippians, That Phil. 1. 10. ye may approve things that are ex∣cellent, that ye may be sincere, and without offence till the day of Christ. And although he is sensible of his own, and of his Brethrens in∣sufficiency for the great work of the Ministry, as may appear by that Question which he propounds: And who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2. 16. Yet he makes this profession of his
 own, and his brethrens sincerity. For (saith he) we are not as many v. 17. which corrupt the word of God: but as of sincerity, but as of God in the fight of God, speak we in Christ.
To draw to a close of this Epistle: It is the sincerity of the Heart, which both to Ministers and people is a great ground of consolation. The grand design which I only drive at in this small Treatise, is to stir up my self and others, that every one in good earnest may Chatechise his own heart, and propound this great need∣ful Question. Is my heart sincere with God? For answer to this question, I have by way of Chara∣cter, according to the Rule of the word of God, endeavoured to declare in several particulars, wherein the sincerity of the heart consists.
This Treatise I preached as to
 the substantials thereof, (which sinc I have unlarged) in the publick Con∣greation at Cosfield in Essex. T you (much Honoured Madam) I of∣fer his Mite, or Testimony of my graceful acknowledgment of these many signal favours, which both my self and my nearest Relations have recieved from you, both in our sick∣ness, and health, God hath made you a worthy instrument to do good to many, and I hope you will fare the better for their prayers. That Bread which you have cast upon the wa∣ters, you shall find after many daies. May the Lord lengthen out your daies, for the glory of God, and for your own good, and the good of ma∣ny others: And may you be one of those of whom the Psalmist makes mention; Those that be planted in Psal. 92. 13. the house of the Lord shall flourish in the Courts of God; They shall
 still bring forth fruit in old age; They shall be fat and flourishing. I commend your self, and all your Relations, to the Gracious Provi∣dence of God, beseeching him to guide you by his counsell till he bring you to glory. I remain
Sible Henningham in Essex, Jan. 1. 1674.
Madame

