



Right Honourable,
IT is to God we live engaged for the blessing of a King so good, he made him good, he made him King, and all his subjects blessed in him; fortunatos nimium bona siVirgil. sua norint. Yet to your good HOONU I stand for ever obliged also, for
 the most early intimations of the Blessing, with the blesseful representations of his Royal good∣nesse. It was a favour like your self, Right NO∣BLE, a very ray of your own Noblenesse, to be a Phosphorus then to one so much benighted with anxietudes for that long absence of our Phaebus. It is nothing now to be shown the day-light of our glorious Day-star, it being of his essence so to Synes. de Regno. a Macroh. shine. As Synesius said of that Light which rules by Day; that King of Stars, the Day making Sun. But in that saddest night to shew his luciflu∣ous irradiations, and to elongate the beams of his glorious lustre to such a distance as Hoxne was some∣thing indeed. Few or none would represent him rightly, as your Honour did, before the smilings of that Aurora, at his rising from the neather world. And that welcome day brake first from your pre∣enlightened self in these obscurer parts. Yea sub no∣cte silenti, your softest syllables of such a day ap∣proaching made me soon rejoyce in hope, and in such hope as made me not ashamed, nor yet afraid to awaken others, and bid them put on their loy∣altiesVirgil. again, so long laid off. Yea those twi-light hopes of having a King again, our own King, and
 he such a King, soon turned darker sayings, and Pulpit Aenigmaes into broad day light expressions, Riddles of danger to Readings of happy delive∣rance, Aposiopsis to Pleonasmus, sic solet laetitia. Greg. arcana mentis aperire. I could not but deem it an offence to the King of kings not to preach my constant Auditors into resolves of open loyalty, or not to presse all others, whereever I came to pray for the blessing of such a Sovereign, and his most expetible Restauration. No duty seemed more incumbent, then the undeceiving of the seduced Many, nor any word of exhortation more in season, then Reddite Caesari quae Caesaris sunt. Nor did any find better liking with the best, then arguments of that complexion. I cannot for∣get the noble favours, that one Sermon, for Gods own government, as the best, did find with all the most honourable loyalties of Audley End, for the Arguments sake, and for the rightest designati∣ons of it. For that was preached to prepare the hearers for the happinesse of a King, this to make its hearers see their happinesse in such a King. It is a Sermon of happinesse, and the happinesse of the Sermon it will be to have your Honours tute∣lation.
 Be pleased to read your interest in Eng∣lands Beatitude. And the God of all Beatitudes and Honours blesse your Honour with Beati∣tudes both lasting and everlasting, it is and shall be the Prayer of

