



MAy it please you to cast your eye upon that, which once had your eare, and to own that birth which received life at first from you: It desires no other Passe-port or protection, but your name, (however vilified) nor doth it care to be distinguished or known by any other livery or cognisance, then that which this Honou∣rable House bestowes upon those, on whom it looks as faithfull and devoted servants.
It is your fate now (as it never was to any Parliament) to have violences offered you, contumelies and indignities cast upon you; your reputation wounded, and your name, (which had wont to be honoured and accounted sacred) profaned and crucified; yet you may comfort your selves in this, that those
 things are done by such whose favour is a blot, and good word an imputation: Your persons and proceedings had been ren∣dred suspected if they did bene audire amongst vile men, of whom it is said, Is. 32. 6. that they will speak villany: If they should undertake your vindiciae by their tongues or swords, or be your advocates in any kinde, we should suspect your persons, and be afraid to own your cause.
Notwithstanding all this, it would argue too much weaknesse of spirit, to resent such injuries too deeply, which can make no such impression as to wound or hurt: Reproaches are Devils Tacit. that are cast out by contempt; spreta exolescunt; si iras∣care, agnita videntur. It was the honour of Theodosius, The ninth Code. Honorius and Arcadius, that they did make an act upon record to pardon and pity such as for want of modesty and ex∣cesse of impudence should invade their reputation by insolent slanders, or bitter calumnies. Alexander the Great is famous for this, that he could contemn slanders; And so is Caesar for passing by the detractions of Calvus the Oratour, and Catullus the Poet: And so is Augustus for pardoning Timagenes the Historian who had defamed him publikely; as also for conquering the affronts of Pollio, with a fruere mi Pollio, fruere. Tiberius himselfe had wont to dissemble injuries in this kind, and Titus to scorne them. But our Lord Iesus Christ is a pattern beyond all, who ut by, and indeed conquered all the horrible insolencies that the wit of malice could inflict, with a Father forgive them, for they know not what they doe, Luk. 23. 34. However you must have a care to vindicate the honour of Christ and Re∣ligion, for though you suffer for Christ, yet you must take care that Christ doth not suffer by you; and though Religion bee wounded through your sides, yet you must have a care that Religion doth not bleed to death through your wounds.

It cannot be expected, but that the eye of envie should bee upon you, and the hand of violence up against you, since you are engaged in such a work, as full of envie as it is of dif∣ficulty and danger: for since your businesse lies professedly against the Apocalypticall beast, and all his complices; you must expect that the militia of Hell and the trayned bands of Satan, (i. e.) those that have received the mark of the beast, shall be put into a posture of warre, furnished with all their traines of Artillery, and the whole Magazine of Satan, to put in execution their black Commission, which breathes forth nothing but blood, and slaughter, and ruine of our persons and our Religion. I hope this discourse will furnish and accommodate you with Antidotes and Preserva∣tives, with weapons and ammunition, with cordials and com∣forts, by which you may be encouraged to goe on, and enabled to hold out and Conquer.
I know you are looked at as a contemptible company, but let those remember (that account you so) that the cake of barley bread which tumbled into the hoste of Midian, and came into a tent, smote it that it fell, and overturned the tent that it lay down, Iudg. 7. 13. It is the condition of Gods people to appeare, and in a sort to be like Christ, of whom it was said, There is no beauty that we should de∣sire him: He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrowes, and acquainted with griefe: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we estee∣med him not, Is. 53. 2. 3. And yet as base as he was in the eyes of men, he had the most glorious titles that ever were given, Is. 9. 6. 7. So farre should this be from disheartning Gods Servants, that it should be accounted their honour to be like their Master; however it be that men have vilified you, yet certainly God hath honoured you more then ever any
 Parliament in England was honoured; for he hath done that by you, which our Progenitours did but intertaine in a bosome-retired thought, and in hopes at so vast a distance from accomplishment, that they seemed rather pleasing fan∣cies, then faire probabilities: There hath beene a concur∣rence of many strange and admirable Acts of Providence, and God hath assembled many and severall events, which have issued out of the multitude of affaires clustering to∣gether; so that wee may truly say, it was the design of Heaven to give you and us a contracted experience of very many mercies, and to instruct us by way of abridge∣ment, and as it were to shew us in a few Months the image of many yeares.
The birth with which you travell, as it was the expectati∣on of Antiquity and Ages past, so it will be the happi∣nesse of Posterity, and Ages future; think not that it is in the power or compasse of devils or men, to make that birth prove abortive, which himselfe has undertaken to bring forth, and to baptize it with the name of Israel, it being a child of Promise, Is. 66. 9. Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth, saith the Lord? shall I cause to bring forth, and shut the wombe, saith thy God? That which makes me possesse my soule with an assurance of successe, and a gratious issue in your great transactions, is this, because I see a Iacob and an Esau in the womb of the great designe, and I am sure the elder shall serve the younger: I finde a competition betwixt the seed of the wo∣man and the seed of the Serpent, and I am sure the seed of the woman shall break the head of the Serpent; whereas the Serpent shall but bruise the heele of the Church, Gen. 3. 15. the wound in the head shall be incura∣ble, that in the heele shall not be mortall. I perceive there is a
 great contention betwixt malice, and envie, and pride, and tyranny, luxury, and rebellion, with the rest of that black guard of Hell on the one side; and faith, and prayers, on the other: Now I am sure that this is the victory which o∣vercommeth the world, even faith, 1 Ioh. 5. 4. And I am sure that prayer can ingage the whole Militia of Heaven, and the Lord of Hosts on its side: I perceive that Babylon and its supporters, and Sion and its Builders are put in the Ballances as it were: And I find a Mene (i. e.) God hath numbred thy Kingdome and finished it, and a Tekel thou art weighed in the ballances, and art found wanting, Dan. 5. 24. 25. written over the one Scale: And I see the Apostles  over the other, we are more then Conquerours: Wherefore if Amalek, or Midian, or Ca∣naanites, or Philistims, or Babylonians can Conquer the Israel of God; who was therefore Christned Israel, because as a Prince he did prevaile with God, and he should prevaile with men, Gen. 32. 28. If now the Lords Counsell may bee frustrated, or his strength mastered, or if there be any that can speak the word and it commeth to passe, and the Lord commandeth it not, Lam. 3. 37. then actum est, periistis, You are all dead men, and the cause is gone; but if that be true which the Lord speaks, Ezek. 12. 25. you need not feare: He sayes, I am the Lord: I will speak, and the word that I shall speak, shall come to passe: I will say the word, and will performe it, saith the Lord God: Now God hath spoken the word, a terrible word, and a word of confusion against Babylon: and hee hath spoken the word, and that a gracious word, for the re∣stauration of Zion, and building up the wals of Ierusa∣lem, and therefore let your Faith hang out its conquering and triumphing Flag, and let Emmanuel be the Motto; and
 then you may bid an open defiance to all your enemies, and with a kinde of exultation, say with the Apostle, Rom. 8. 31. Si Deus nobiscum, &c. If God be for us, who can bee against us? Now that the Lord may bee with you, and for you, it is the constant, instant prayer of

