



GEntlemen, it was the saying of that blessed Saint, Acts 3.6. au∣rum, & argentunt non est mihi, silver and gold have I none, but such as I have, I give unto you. Ingratitude is a great defect in duty; but qui beneficitan grate accepit, saith that sententious Seneca lib. 2. de beneficiis cap. 22. primam ejus pon∣sionem solvit; he that receives a kindnesse thankfully, therby dischargeth his first payment. I desire to be no worse, Officia etiam ferae fentiunt, lib. 1. de ben. cap. 3 even Beasts themselvs that have but instinct of nature, and want reall reason, yet can be sensible of kindnesses done unto them. I came a∣mongst you as a stranger, you received me as a friend, as a Christian; yea, as a Minister of Christ, allowed me competent maintenance to support my selfe in these cloudy and unhappy dayes: let it be left upon record for a memoriall, and encomium of Kingstone, that its a Towne courteous, kind, respective, generous, and liberall to such as labour in it in the Word and Doctrine: a Town neither in docile, nor kicking against the prickes: many of you have seene Gods wonders in the Waters, as the Prophet speakes, Psal. 107.23, 24, &c. And he that shall but reade the Poet, lib. 1. de Tristibus elegia tertia,
Me miserum, quantis nigrescunt aequora ventis,
Erut aque eximis ferver arena fretis,
Monte nec inferior, prorae puppique recurvae,
Insilit, & pictos verberat vnda Deos, &c.
As it followes, might easily be perswaded that the Poet had stollen it out of the Prophet: seeing that the Scriptures were translated into the Greek Tongue, by the Septuagint many yeers before Ovids time: for di∣vers Historians rank him born within 60. years before Christ; yea, Satur∣ni Ephemerides, not 50. before he was born in Augustus his time (in whose raign we know our Saviour was also born, as you may see, Luke 2.1. com∣pared with v. 7. Some Historians say, he was banished by the Emperour the 9. yeer of Christ, and dyed in banishment, Anno Christi 16. So that being Ore vtroque potens, a man skilfull in both the Greeke and Latine Tongues; it was very probable, that he saw the Scriptures after they were translated. In like manner he seconds himselfe, lib. 2.
Nunc quoque contenti strident Aquilone rudentes,
Inque modum tumuli rneavu surgit aqua,

Ipse gubernator tollens ad sydera palmat.
Exposuit votis, immemor artis, opern,
Quocumque aspexi nibil est nisi mortis imago.
Quam dubia timeo menti, timensque precor, &c.
Attigero Portam, &c.
Compare this with Psal. 107. from 25. to 31. I know that the most o∣oyu want not so much learning, but that you are able to conceive of it But more of you have seen Gods wonders by Land, and what great things he hath done for you already, whereof you have cause to rejoyce; for my self, I may say with the Prophet, Psalm. 31.21. The Lord hath show'd me marvellous great kindnesse, in a strong City; and as for you, and it, it shall be my care to pray for your prosperity, that God would still watch over you, and that Peace may be within your Walls, that you may never know the common misery of other men, in these calamitous times, wherein I have deeply had my share. It is not unknowne to the World, how God had blessed me with a competencie, neare the place of my Nativity, and I might say with Job. Job. 29.2, 3, 4. Oh that I were as in times past, when God preserved me, when his light shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked through darknesse, As I was in the dayes of my youth, when Gods providence shined upon my Taber∣nacle. But as the poor Exile complained,
En ego, cum patria caream, vobisque domoque,
Raptaque sint, adimi quae potuere mihi,
Ingenio tamen ipse meo comitorque fruorque,
Caesar in hoc potuit, juris habere nihil.
Which I think may not unfitly be rendred thus;
Behold my Countries wanting, (wherein I
Was borne,) Friends, Houses, where I meant to dye,
All I possessed is clean swept away,
Which unto Rogues and Rapin open lay.
Onely the guifts of minde, God left as free,
Of which great Princes cannot plunder me.
Yet safely I may adde:
Ipse ego nunc miror, tantis animique finistris,
Fluctbus, ingenium non cecidisse meum.
Sure I am, that if Gods mercy had not bin many; so great, and grie∣vous crosses, and losses, and disgraces, as have fallen upon many of the faithfull Ministers of Christ, had been able to have marred their pretious wits, and to have defaced the richest of their gifts: but, Gentlemen, the Lord preserve you and yours, as in a Land of Goshen, under whose pro∣tection, let those lines walk, of which you have beene both the attentive Hearers, and worthy Rewarders: Thus he commits you to God,

