



May it please your Lordship,
HAving these scat∣tered Discourses in my custody, and

wholly at my dispo∣sal, either to republish, or suffer them to sleep in that darkness where∣in they lay; I thought it very incongruous to the necessities of this degenerate age, to let the excellent works of so learned, pious, and worthy a Prelate be ex∣tinct, and lye hid from the open view of the World; sith they are none of the worst of which this Great Man

was pleased to bless our times with.
These Sermons were fram'd for, and prea∣ched before a Great and Regal Auditory; though by their plain, natural, and unaffect∣ed Style (a thing he always delighted in) one would have thought the contrary; since the Chappels as well as Courts of Prin∣ces, are by byass'd and self-interested princi∣ples

so often flatter'd.
And now I thought no man so fitting as your Lordship to shel∣ter these Discourses from the rage and fu∣ry of the Atheistical Male-Contents of the Age; they being the Fundamentals of Re∣ligion that he treats of; which I am very sensible your Lordship well knows, are not only slighted, but bid open defiance to, and

the Authority of their Institution call'd in question.
That man would cer∣tainly be held a no∣torious Delinquent, that should openly affront the King, and disown that Autho∣rity, and Legislative Power, by which he commands Obedience to his Laws. The Con∣sequent may be just∣ly applicable, in the words of a Reverend

and Learned Dr. Stil∣lingfleet. Writer of our times, But to Blaspheme God, and Deride his Service, seems to have a much greater malignity in it, inasmuch as our obligations to his Ho∣nour and Service, are much greater than they can be to any created Being. And to such kind of men it may be said, in the words of a Morn. Du Pless. de veri∣tat. Re∣lig. Chr. Cap. 1. Noble Au∣thor, Agnoscant vero hanc,

suam formam, tanquam in speculo, miseri & perdi∣ti illi, qui Deum obli∣viscendo, se sui oblitos non vident; quia formam na∣turamque, essentiam, quan∣tum in se est, oblitera∣runt.
That I make this DedicatoryEpistle pro∣ceeds not from a desire thus publick∣ly to expose my self, (for as I can have no interest to court the applause, so neither

have I any reason to value the censure of the World) but it is from a sincere prin∣ciple to express that Reverence I bear your Lordship; whom I know as you have Good∣ness to pardon, so I presume to, your Ho∣nour will be both rea∣dy and willing to stand in the defence of this bold Address.
That Length of Days may be in your Right

Hand, and in your Left, Riches and Ho∣nour, is the Hearty and Affectionate Pray∣er of him, who desires nothing more, than to subscribe himself, (in all the circumstances of a becoming Devoir.)
My LORD,

