


MADAM,
HAving long since renounced all
sorts of civill homage▪ which ei∣ther
Custome hath blindly ten∣derd,
or Arrogance insolently
assumed, as the affected ights
of Greatness, being but an osten∣tive
Coloss, nor accessible nor
communicable.
I now can figure to my thoughts no nobler Ob∣ject
of Respect than a clear, high and regular Intel∣lect,
whose Endowments may challenge a more
Plausible and Legitimate Acquisition in such pub∣lique
addresses of Honour, as may sometime reach
to a more remote Posterity; in pursuit of which
consequence, Madam, judging the Dignity of your
Minde the most perfect Model of so equal a De∣signe,
I have presumed (from the obscurity of many
ars) to tender this piece to your view. The na∣ture
whereof, though vilified with vulgar Oblo∣quie
(the unrestrained Fury of whose Ignorance,
hath not of late, left the most high and Sacred My∣steries
unimpeachable) can gain no further access
on your Inclinations, than what a clear and sollid
Argument impartially may produce, which to un∣fold,
it will be requisite to distinguish the Nature,
and the Vse of this our subject now in Agitation.
In Order to which, the Nature thereof is (with∣out
all opposition) Poesie. What that is, cannot in
my Apprehension be more Elegantly and perspicu∣ously

delineated than the agreable Philospher hath
formed it in his convertible definition. Poesie is a
speaking Picture: A Picture is a dumb Poesie. From
which Sence we may extract, that Poesie only is an
Art of lively representation of bodies Natural, Sim∣ply,
without referrence to other, or Compositively
with circumstance to their mutual communities,
either Natural or Civil. Real in respect of their
precedent, present, or future condition: or Imagi∣nary
in relation to their possibility. In the extent
of which Exposition some particulars may poba∣bly
at first Appearance seem Dubious, some Erro∣nious.
Dubious, As how it may fall within compass of
humane capacity: to figure to anothers sence what
falls not under the dimension of our own; our pur∣pose
is not here to search into the causes of so high
an illumination, it is sufficient proof to our Positi∣on,
to affirm such an inspection evident in its Na∣ture,
as may be instanc'd from the sacred Raptures
of the Judahack-Prophets & the Gentique-Sybills,
whomthough we seem improperly to include with
the tractators of our Subject, inspired by a nobler
Object; yet in referrence to the Analogy of
form in their Discourses, preceding Ages have in∣differently
implied the intimation of their Nature
under one and the same Denomination.Pophets. Vates, To
which usage we have extended this our Exposi∣tion.
Erronious, In that the Fancie herein doth assume
too vast a Libertie, to figure forms are visibly to
natural and to civil Rules inconsonant. As in refer∣rence
to the First, Satyrs, Centaures, transmutation

of Forms and the like. In answer whereto although
it be not difficult to prove, that ev'n herein the Art
doth only Nature imitate, who oftentimes from the
Inaptitude of matter doth err from her intention in
the Form; and in her Ministry doth frequently
produce a Prodegie. Yet these inventions may by
mean capities be distinguished, to be bu Meta∣phors
to a Moral sence.
In relation to the Second, inserting things Pro∣phane,
Obscene, Fabulous and Proposterous.
Prophane, As the figuration of their Gods invest∣ed
with our humane Imperfections.
In reply whereto we may alleadge, that in refe∣rence
to the Civil frame, intended are hereby, the
Potentates of the earth, an allusion may be produc'd
from Sacred proofs to form it warrantable. In rela∣tion
to the natural texture, are secretly herein invol∣ved
Moral, Phisical, or metaphisical Mysteries, per∣haps
yet undiscovered, which from the vulgar Eye
should be conceal'd, as the Adulterers of Philoso∣phy.
Obscene, To clear which charge we might inferr,
that if the indecen'st form hereof were figured, it
rather would imply an imperfection in our civil
Commerce than any Imputation to the Art, whose
End is only to expose each Circumstance and acci∣dent
inherent to the subject, in their most proper
and essential Colours, Beauties, or Deformities.
Yet will we not so farre insist on the strict Rules of
the Art, as not to impute such indiscretion to the
Artists Errour. Who may if skilful, nay who ought
(according to the true rules of his pattern, Nature)
so gracefully to over shadow the less decent parts,

as might not raise astrain on the most modest
Cheek to view them publiquely.
Fabulous, This subject bears so little weight in an
objection, that it might rather infer the ignorance of
the Impeacher, than the Impostury of the Artist. All
sorts of Arts having some secret Gloss and reservati∣on
of their mysteries, to support their Honour and
Advantage: This only and alone, pretending unto
none declare things for such as it delivers them,
Fained or Essential, Imaginary or Historical;
though in some textures of the latter kinde may
possibly be interwoven certain enlargements and
digressions (as graces but peculiar to the Art) not
properly consistant with the dignity, weight, use of
such a Subject, requireth simple Truth in every cir∣cumstance.
Yet ev'n herein a clear Intelligence will
suddenly distinguish shadows by the position of
the Natural light; like perfect ears in Muick still
tain the Grounds, Orders, Times of every note,
though the Musitians hand, to grace his Harmony,
cast various flourishes on the suspended Measures
to lend more weight unto the usage of invention in
this rejected Art, we shall not need to instance the
excellence of the nature thereof to Instructtion, to
which the choicest of essential similitudes cannot
exactly reach, wantig such forms of circumstances
as might enlighten the intention of the Deliverer,
restrained and obscured in a real Narration. It may
suffice to silence opposition, to alledge we find our
most authentique precepts couched in such forms
of texture, as Allegories or Parables; a winning
method to attract the grossest tempers, and infix in
All most durable impressions.

From the freedome of this latter objected subject,
issues the objection of the last (Preposturous) in that
it is suppos'd the unprescribed Fancy, haing assu∣med
a liberty to rove, will suddenly contract extra∣vagant
mixtures in her compositions, to form a Pro∣digie
in the civill frame, as formerly in the natural.
To this conjecture we may make reply: That
no Absurdity can be imagined so irregular, which
may not meet a parralel in the occurrences of civil
Actions. Be it, that we should suppose the most e∣vident.
Truth condemned for the grossest Errour:
That Wisedom should be confuted by Ignorance:
Integrity ejected by Hypocrisie, Valour overcome
by Lachety, Industry supplanted by Sloth, the In∣nocent
suffer by the Criminal, Justice smothered
by Iniquity, Love rewarded with Hate; which
without further proof to verify, I only, Madam, will
appeal to you own observation. If any shall aledge
such accidents to be but the effects of our corrupti∣on
which guids us still to satisfie our sence, rather
than an infeasable impropriety in a civill usage,
which the licentiousness of the Art doth often fi∣gure;
not to decline the smallest shadow of an ob∣jected
scruple; we shall in some example devest
the action of this pretended object, leaving the oc∣currence
immaterial or void in any cosnequence
what ever. Can humane sence reflect upon a more
Preposterous transaction than That the Monarch of
the world should in the height of all his Glory, and in the
Eye of all the world manificently solemnize Nuptials
with another Man; the most object of his Domesticks.
Yet such a real precedent we may authenickly col∣lect
from the Records of Nero's Infamy.

Having thus briefly (as the capacity of our Pre∣face
will give leave) discussed of the Nature of
our Subject. Order requires that we should next
insist upon the use Thereof: Whereon depends
the real worth of every Piece, in Nature or in Art,
which to pursue methodically, we should in course
unfold the several kinds thereof, in their particu∣lars;
as Odes, Elegies, Epigrams, and the like: But
since the nature of our present subject may include
them all, as several species under their proper gen∣der,
we only will adhere to agitate thereon, raising
our introduction from the first view of the whole
Frame, without distinction of the Parts thereof.
If intercourse in civill commerce may conduce
to form the Judgement, compose the mind, or
rectify the manners (as none who hath receiv'd
impression thereof, can deny) no form of instituti∣on
humane reason can reflect upon, more suddenly
and more perfectly can attain thereto, than can the
well composed illustrations of a Theater. Where in
few hours we may take full view of such variety in
circumstance, as many Ages cannot represent; and
from the consequence of events collect such rules,
may guide our undertakings with successe to their
peculiar Objects. Whilst being uninteressed Specta∣tors
only, are to us distinguished the secret source
of each Transactors purposes, whose actions leave
so sensible an impression of their Character in our
thoughts, that seldom in our own particular com∣munity
we encounter such an inclination, but that
the prepossession of their figure streight illuminates
our sences to disclose their Tract; whereby our
Fortunes, Lives, Liberties and Fames, are timely of∣tentimes
secur'd from secret Trains.

To yeeld a true allay to the distempers of the
Soul, no Art can form a fairer methode, than thus
to represent the wilde distractions of her irregular
motives, transported with licentious fury, to exe∣cute
the giddy will, with violation to each strict
prescription, Outrage to it self, with the disasters
frequently ensue so stubborn a revolt from that in∣terrior
light, should lend her dignity: if the de∣formity
of the figure may reduce the minde to a
more happy and decent Regulation of her facul∣ties.
To which pattern was among the Spartans
introduced a custom to inebriate their Slaves, they
might expose their loose Demeanors to their chil∣drens
view, that such a loathsome spectacle might
imprint a lasting Detestation of so bruitish a di∣stemper.
Nor yet to regulate our manners can the most
powerfull precepts form the Minde, so willingly
susceptible of her intended Object: If intimation
of the glory and successe of virtue may inflame the
Soul to noble enterprises; or the Infamy and pu∣nishment
of Vice, deterre from shamefull practises,
which are the principall Objects, a well compiled
Piece still viseth at: or, seldome in the most im∣perfect
are omitted. First, in regard the minde is
here no way subordinate unto a more supream suf∣ficience
than her own. Secondly, in that such forms
of Institution do pretend unto no servile impositi∣ons,
the most materiall impediments, why the au∣thentick'st
guides so seldome meet successe in the
Intention of their elaborate prescriptions. Sub∣jects
of this nature propounding no other object,
but delight, unto the Auditory, the sensuall minde

is easily inticed to view such spectacles, where left
unto the freedome of her proper Inclination, she
insensibly assumes a voluntary propension to those
forms are represented in the fairest Characters, with
an aversion to the impeachable.
These are the essentiall uses of our subject; nor
yet are the Collaterall lesse materiall: as, The
Community of a Prince unto his people (at whose
peculiar charge were formerly erected such magni∣ficent
receipts for publique Spectacles, either to
ingratiate himself with his subjects in a mutuall
participation of delight, as an endearing enter∣tainment
from himself, or else to represent the ob∣ject,
by circumstance and issue of some eminent ex∣pedition,
enterprise or treaty within his proper ju∣risdiction,
or with foreign States transacted by him∣self
or substitutes, unto the illiterate and orebusied
multitude: who usually want vacancy or capa∣city
to peruse, conceive, or retain the sence thereof
under the tedious, abstruse forms of publique ma∣nifests:
which figured in such Interludes were e∣ven
obvious, to their very children. A happy piece
of policy to inform with delight the meanest mem∣ber
of the civill frame in what he is concerned.
The means to our security becoming once to us a
mysterie, may justly by us be suspected for disgui∣sed
Furbery.
To this advantage herein doth succeed the be∣nefit
which ariseth from the Peoples intercourse
with one another, not onely in the introduction
ad pursuit of Commerce or Affairs: but in the
initiation and support of mutuall Amities, sprung
frequently from civill and unsought abodes, and
cherished with gracefull entertainments in Society,

which here not limited to particulars, may possi∣bly
be dispensed through the civill structure to the
Composure of a generall Union, the strength and
glory of a Commonwealth. From whence also en∣sues
the requisite relaxation of Minde and Body,
(o'reburdened with the travell of private or pub∣lique
Negotiations) in a plausible divertisment,
whereby become refresht, both may with fuller vi∣gour
and Alacrity, reassume the pursuit of their ci∣vill
Functions.
Nor is the Action of a Theatre lesse usefull in the
Education of our Youth (a frequent exercise in
Forreign Seminaries, Societies and Schools, to in∣animate
their spirits, render them plyant and sus∣ceptible
to every form, might either frame them
more agreeable in their society, or more successe∣full
in their private Commerce; as also, to lend a
more assured gracefull unconstrain'd Demeanour
to their persons and in such Habits, to indue them
with undaunted Confidence, Facility, and readi∣nesse
to communicate in discourse the Image of
their Thoughts to an attentive multitude, an ac∣quisition
of no little moment, in publique Consul∣tations,
Conferences and pleas: In managing
whereof, who hath not gained this Dexterity, shall
finde the weightiest Reasons in his Argument si∣lenc'd,
smotherd, o'resway'd by the lesse pertinent
clamor of an insisting Impudence.
These are the generall Objects, which we but
cursorarily have onely pointed at, omitting them
to mplifie or illustrate with the Honour or Ex∣ample
of Antiquity, in due conformity to the qua∣lity
of our Introduction, and the more clear inspe∣ction

into the nature of our present Subject, which
possibly might appear to rigid Tempers of far lesse
validity, o're-shaddowed with such formalities, as if
they were but artificiall Ornaments, no proper or
essentiall lusters.
The particular Objects have a vaster influence,
which (not to err from our preciption) we will
contract to one united couplet to crown the clo∣sure
of our Texture, affirming that Poesie investeth
vertues, Glory with Eternity on Earth: and im∣spiring
life in Harmony, lends Zeal wings to
scale the vault of Heaven. If this Essay may in
your Honour, Madam, but pretend to the first
branch hereof; my next Endeavour shall in your
Piety attempt to reach the latter.
Madam,

