



THe Anabaptists in New-England, have in their Narrative lately pub∣lished, endeavoured to make Candida de nigris & de candentibs atra, themselves the Innocent persons, and the Lords servants here, no better than Persecutors. In which respect, it hath been judged necessary, that some one should Animadvert upon what they have done, that so such persons as have been imposed upon by their untrue Relations, may be disabused. Many are of the mind, that it is not worth the while, to take notice of what is emitted, by men so obscure and inconsiderable. And I confess I have thought so my self, so far as I am personally concerned in any of their re∣flections; and therefore shall not lose precious time in a needless defence. Ita concurrimus utrinque; illiextremo furore, ego summo contemptu; & vincit mea auda∣cia in Christo. It seems to me, that the Reverend Author of the following Animad∣versions, hath shewed much humility, in condescending to take persons in hand, be∣tween whom, and himself there is such an Impar congressus, and let it be, that for this once, He hath contradicted that proverbial saying Aquila non capit Muss. Had he not been sensible, that by good words, and fair speeches the hearts of the simple are deceived, this pains would have been spared. I verily believe, that the Ana∣baptists by their fallacious Narrative, have grievously offended God; inasmuch as the things by them misrepresented, were not done a far off (for then mistakes a∣bout them would have been excusable) but at home, where right Information was easie to have been obtained; had they been willing to have known, and that others should have known the truth. And by this means, have they done ill for themselves, forcing others to discover the enormities of some, whose nakednss and shame should not have been divulged to the World, and to posterity fore∣ver; but slept in a grave of silence: had not their own Narrative brought them forth. They have also by Letters, misrepresented worthy and honourable persons as well as things, and their reports have been received elsewhere, with too much readiness and credulity, as I perceive by certain Complainants, whosay they under∣stand that the present Honourable Governour of this Colony, had threatned th poor people, their Christian friends (as they stile them) with death: which re∣report of theirs, is like too many particulars in their vindication, an utter mistake; ne qui gravius dicam. The Governour (whose integrity, wisdome, and modera∣tion is well known) hath sometimes moved, that an old severe Law made against those that should manifest any publick contempt of that ordinance of Infant Bap∣tisme, might be lenifyed. So far is the scandalous report which they have raised upon the Governour (and caused it to fly three thousand miles) from being true.
As for the Brethren, that have thought good to prefix an Epistle to such a Narra∣tive, and therein to declare, that Molestation is given, and severity is exercised  Antipaedobaptists in New-England, meerly for a supposed Error about the subject of Bap∣tisme, controverted amongst learned and holy men, they are marvelously deceived in
 that their supposition▪ possibly I do not fully cape their meaning when they say, that for one Protestant Congregation to persecute another; is more unreasonable than all the cruelties of the Romish Church: Some are ready to take it for an intimation that the Churches of Christ in New-England, are more cruel and unreasonable than the Romish Synagogue; like as the Anabaptists in Germany, look d upon such Men as Luther, Bullinger, Calvin, Zuinglius, &c. to be worse than the Pope and his Cardinals. But I ope the are far from any such insinuation, and that they de∣sign no other then to suggest unto us, that for men whom God hath by his holy spirit made one through faith in Christ, to be cruel to their Brethren, is most un∣reasonable. Which Aertion, (though true in Thesi) if applied to the Chur∣ches of the Lord Jesus, in this Wildernss; it is both an erroneous conception, and unut reflection. Protestants ought not to persecute any; yet, that Prote∣sants ma punish Protestants; and as the case may be circumstanced, a Congre∣gation of such as call themselves Protestants: cannot rationally be denied. Those of the Congregational way (as themselves in the preface to their confession of Faith have professed) flly concurre with the old puritan Non-conformists, such as Cart∣wright, Rainold, Whitaker, Bains, Parker, &c. in whose writings, Congregational Princi∣ples, about Church Government, are to be seen Now the old Nonconformists (not∣withstanding their sufferings from those that took delight to smite their fellow∣srvants) did believe that disorders in whole Congregations were liable to the  Magistrates censure, as is evident from that excellent and judicious Book, cal∣led Puianismus Anglicanus, composed by Mr. Bradshaw, and published by Dr. Ames. Affirmant si particul is aliqua ecclesia erraverit, Magistratus civilis debet ean∣dem in ordinem redigere, Cap. 2. Th. 6. Why then should we be rendred as men of bitter, persecting, rigid spirits and principles; when we say nothing bt what our Fathers, the old Puritans, (worthy Confessors, and sufferers for the Truth) con∣stantly affirmed. Our famous Cotton, was another Moses, in respect of meekness, and christian forbearance, as to Dissenters from his judgement in matters of a lesser concernment, yet would he sometimes make a zealous Protestation, that if Ma∣girates in New-England should tolerate Transgressors against the Rules of god∣liness (as well as offences contrary to what the rules of honesty require) he be∣lieved that God would not long tolerate them. And whereas the Brethren that have subscribd the Epistle, pray the Honourable Governours in New-England, to be careful of doing that which may give occasion of trouble to Nonconformists elsewhere: I shall heartily joyn with them in the same request; and I can assure them, that consideration hath caused more indulgence to be exercised towards their Friends (as they call them) here, than ever they were worthy of. And I hope it will be so still, so far as may consist with Scripture Rules, and the safety of the interest of Christs Kingdome in this Wilderness. These Churches are Tender vines, and I cannot perswade my self, that the Brethren when they rightly understand things, will think that the Magistrate should see little Foxes spoiling them, and should look on all the while, as one no way concerned. As for those of the Antipdobaptistical perswasion, which differ from us only in that particular, I would speak to them as unto Brethren, whom (their Error (for so I believe it is) notwithstanding) I love, and would bar with, and exercise the same indul∣gence and compassion towards them, as I would have others do to me, who feel my self compassed with infirmities.
I have been a poor labourer in the Lords Vineyard in this place upwards of twenty years: and it is more than I know, if in all that time, any of those that scruple Infant-Baptisme, have met with molestation from the Magistrate meerly
 on the account of their Opinion. I would therefore intreat the Brethren, (and others of their perswasion; who may be of a Christian and moderate spirit) that have subscribed the Epistle, seriously to consider;
1. That the place may sometimes make a great alteration, as to indulgence to be expected. It is evident, that that Toleration is in one place, not only lawful, but a necessary duty, which in another place would be destructive; and the expectation of it irrational. That which is needful to ballast a great ship, will sink a small boat. If a considerable number of Antipaedobaptists should (as our Fathers here did) obtain Liberty from the State, to transport themselves and families, into a wast American wilderness, that so they might be a peculiar People by themselves; practising all, and only the institutions of Christ: if now Pado-Baptists should come after them, and intrude themselves upon them, and when they cast men out of their society for moral Scandals, entertain them: Surely they would desire such persons; either to walk orderly with them, or to return to the place from whence they came. And if they would do neither, they would think that such Pado-Baptists were blame-worthy: let them thn do as they would be done by; and deal by us, as they would have us to deal by them; were they in our case, and we in theirs.
2. Let them please to consider, that those of their perswasion in this place, have acted with so much irregularity and prophaneness, that should men of any other perswasion whatsoever, have done the like, the same severity would have been used towards them. I truly profess unto them, that if any men, either of the Presbyterian, or Congregational (or never so much of my) perswasion in matters referring to Church-Discipline, should behave themselves as the Anabap∣tists in Boston, in New-England, have done, I think they would have deserved far greater punishment than any thing that to this day, hath been inflicted upon them. Whether the sentence passd on them by the Churches, proceeding in the Name of the Lord Jesus, were only the abuse of an holy Ordinance; or a righteous process according to Scripture Rule: the following Animadversions, will discover unto those that are willing to weigh matters impartially, in the ballance of the Sanctuary. How vain is it for men, after they have received such Excommuni∣cates into their communion, and then perceive that the World cries shame on them for it; and some of their own perswasion reprove them: in stead of abhor∣ring themselves before God and the World; and purging out the old leven, to think they shall come off with saying, It was a defect! and who in this world are without their failings? and then by retaining such in their communion to persist in their scandal to this very day? To parallel the case of the Anabaptists in New-England, with that of the Nonconformisis in England, seems most unreasonable. Do the conforming Congregations there, cast men out of their fellowship for moral, scandalous evils? I doubt the godly Discipline which their Liturgy confes∣seth was in the Primitive Church, and should be in theirs, is not found amongst them: or, if they should, I believe the Nonconormists would be loth to receive any such into their Communion; which the New-England Anabaptists have done, and have persisted therein, from year to year, and that after conviction. And although in their dluding Narrative, they seek to palliate this offence, by a falla∣cious Represntation of things; their iniquity is marked before the Lord, Nitre and much Sope will never wash them clan. If then Dr. Stillingfleet, or any other shall go about to stir up Persecution against conscientious Nonconformists in
 England, and endeavour to justifie it by the practice of Congregational Men in New-England: we see not that any real advantage hath been given, (only taken) from proceedings here. The Author of the Book called The Mischief of Impositions, hath given a fair, and rati∣onal answer to the Doctor, as to this particular. They say, those of the Congregational way in England, plead for Anabaptists liberty as for their own. That they plead for liberty and indulgence to be ex∣tended towards those that differ from them only in that point of Paedo-Baptisme, I believe: when I was in England, I did so my self; and if I were their now, I would do so again: but that they should plead for liberty unto such practices, as our Anabaptists have been guilty of, is not easie to believe; or, if they do, it is because such Narrators as these Animadverted upon, have by untrue Relations misguided them into undue Apprehensions. Nay, I am fully convinced, that those of their own way, if of serious and gracious Spirits, when once they are possessed with a true Relation of things concerning them, will see cause to condemn New-England less, and those their Friends more, than at first they were aware of: How did they bear the World in hand, that the Churches here did Excommunicate them for nothing but their O∣pinion, in scrupling Paedobaptisme! But that therein they have dealt most untruely, and injuriously; the subsequent Answer to their Nar∣rative hath made apparent from the Church-Recodrs concerning those matters.
Finally, let me intreat the Brethren to believe, that some of us would shew as much indulgence unto truly tender Consciences, as themselves It is not so long since our own Necks bled under an intolerable yoke of Imposition upon Conscience; as that we should forget what it is to be so dealt with; or exercise that severity towards any, that we have our selves complained of, in others. But the Bre∣thren will readily own that some men have pretended Conscience, when pride, & perverseness in the will▪ have been at the bottom: They will also confess that a meer pretence of Conscience, is not enough to bear men out in an evil practice. All the difficulty is, in discerning the one of these from the other. Blessed Mr. Burrouhs in his excel'ent Irenicum, hath laid down Rules concerning this: And if that which he saith, pag. 32. be sound Doctrine (as undoubtedly it is) some of our Anabaptists, have not such characters of a tendor Conscence upn them, as were to be desired. If men will call un∣justifiable Practics by the name of their Opinion: and when their evils are born witns against make out cries, that they suffer for their
 Opinion, and for their Conscience: How is it possible, for those to help them, who desire to keep their own Consciences pure, and with∣out offence towards God, by being faithful according to that capaci∣ty the Lord hath set them in; and giving a due testimony against those things, which they believe provoke him to jealousie? And if A∣nabaptists in this Land, have declared their agreement with those of the like perswasion in England, as to matters of Faith and Worship: I doubt not, but that there are many godly Antipaedobaptists there, who will never declare their agreement with those here, as to their evil practices, which have been so offensive to Christ, and unto his People in New-England.
 Boston New-Engl. Nov. 4. 1681.
