



SIR,
AFTER two such obliging Addresses, Vindication p. 120. The Reply, p. 171. as I have now had the honour to re∣ceive from you, I should be very much wanting in my Respects to a Person who has shewn so near a Concern for my Salvation, should I any longer neglect my Re∣turn to you; and might reasonably expect to have my Rudeness and Incivility muster'd up to in∣crease

my Damnation in the next Catalogue your Charity shall prompt you to publish of my Sins. Reply at the end of the Preface.
I cannot indeed tell whether I may not be de∣fective in my Gratitude, by sending my Thanks to your self alone; and your great Caution in the Close of your Vindication made me once think that Vindic. p. 120. I ought to have return'd you your own Inscrip∣tion, To the Author, or Authors of those excel∣lent Vindic. p. 120. Pieces you have been pleased to oblige the World with on my account. For I have some reason to believe, that whatever you were as to the first, yet you are not the only Person concern'd in the second Reply. But yet since your Books run altogether in the singular Number, and that whoever gather'd your Materials first, or super∣vised them after, yet I doubt not but you were the only Architect your self, and alone concern'd in those immediate Addresses to Me; I am confi∣dent I shall not be much mistaken in my particu∣lar Return to you, or at least that you will have the goodness to excuse so easie, and so involun∣tary an Error.
And first, Sir, I desire to return you my Ac∣knowledgments for your great Care of my future Reply p. 171. State. I do beseech you to believe, that it is ex∣ceeding dear to Me; and that I am sensible that

your Advice is very just and reasonable that you give Me for it. And tho' I shall shew you in what follows, that for what concerns either your self or your Church, I had no great need of it; yet it pleases me very much to hope that when I shall have fully proved by Gods Grace, where the Fault lies, one who is so forward to preach to others, 1 Cor IX. 27. will certainly take great heed that he does not in the mean time himself become a CAST-AWAY.
It were perhaps too much to expect that Con∣descension from you, which you are pleased to recommend to Me, viz. To make a publick Ac∣knowledgment Reply p. 172. of the Calumnies you have thrown not upon my self alone, but upon the Generality of our Church, and to retract the false witness you have Ib. p. 173. born against your Neighbours; especially since this, Sir, cannot, you know, be done without acknow∣ledging the Insincerity (for I am willing to give all things the softest Names I am able) of your late Attempts in the new Methods of Conversion. And indeed some Experience makes me think I may without uncharitableness presume, that the Pride of Nature is as powerful on your side to Ib. p. 174▪ hinder Persons from retracting what they have once advanced, as it is on ours: And the Principles of your Church do much more indispose you to confess your Errors, than, God be thanked, ours

do us. But sure, if any one, you, Sir, who so much consider that Eternity is at stake, and that an Injustice which will render us miserable for that E∣ternity, Ibid. cannot be expiated without making satisfaction, will not find it so difficult to acknowledge your mistake; no, not tho it should have been WILFUL; (which I dare not yet say of yours, however you, in Cha∣rity no doubt to my Soul, judge mine to be so;) rather than run into inevitable Damnation. And I pray God give you this serious Thought and Resolution.
Having thus perform'd this first Duty, I must in the next place, Sir, thank you for what, next to my Salvation, has always been most dear to Me, the Care you have had of my REPUTATION. It may perhaps be thought by some that are not sensible how great my Obligations in this particular are to you, that I might well enough have spared this Complement; especially since your Modesty makes Reply p. 4. 172. &c. you utterly disavow any such Tenderness of it. Indeed, Sir, as to your Expressions, it must be confess d you are very free with Me. You not only still adhere to your first Charge of Calumnies, Vindic. p 22. Reply p. 172. Misrepresentations, unsincere Dealings, Falsifications, every thing that you could think of that might serve to bespatter Me, but only false Quotations, which I do not now find you so ready to insist up∣on; but that your Reader might be sure to take

notice of them, you draw them up into a Cata∣logue at the beginning of your Reply, and all a∣long Reply at the end of the Preface. in your Margin you put him in mind to re∣mark them: But yet, Sir, after all this, I cannot but own to you, that your Books have done more to secure my Reputation among all those whose Esteem I value, viz. the honest and judicious Rea∣ders, than any thing my best Friends could have done for Me.
I need not, Sir, tell you, that my Exposition first, and then my Defence, made some noise among very great numbers of both Churches. I had dis∣covered such Secrets as perhaps few could have done besides; such as startled many worthy Per∣sons of your own Communion; and which some even of our own side, who did not know what Evidence I had ready to produce for them, could hardly al∣most believe. Whilst great enquiry was made a∣bout them, some of your Religion knew not what to think, others flatly deny'd all that had been said; you, Sir, more kind, procure Me a Letter from that worthy Person the Bishop of Meaux himself; pretending indeed to disavow, but really acknow∣ledging all that I had said with reference to his Exposition. A Favour for which, now I am discharg∣ing these kind of Debts, I shall not fail to publish to the World my Engagements to him.

It was not long before my Defence made a new noise, and but little inferiour to that of my Ex∣position. For besides that, it confirm'd all my former Allegations with new Proofs; it gave me opportunity moreover to make some further Disco∣veries, both of your Church's Worship, and of your own Sincerity.
And this, Sir, you tell me did induce many others Reply, p. 173. to an imitation of those Calumnies I there threw up∣on you; but I must beg leave to mind you of another Inducement too, and that is, That it did induce the Generality of your side to calumniate Me, as one who had uttered nothing but down∣right Untruths, and charged you with such things as were not to be found either in your Books, or in your Practice. But I may now reasonably presume that they will from henceforth retract this Calumny too, (if at least you will allow it to be a Ca∣lumny to accuse falsely one of our Religion;) since you have here satisfied the World, that these things you do write and practise, tho' indeed for want of an Infallible Interpreter, we who judge according to the Principles of Reason, are not able rightly to under∣stand the meaning of them. And therefore, Sir, tho' your Words still stile me Criminal, yet your Alle∣gations every where protest against them; and I de∣sire no other Advocate than your self to plead my Innocence.

There is, Sir, yet a Favour which I ought not to pass by, tho' I could not a long time divine the meaning of it; and it is your great Self-denial, which prompted you, I suppose, through all your Book, as well as in that single place, where you your self have been pleased to remark it, not to Reply, p. 172. take too much satisfaction in having your Adversary at an Advantage. It was indeed generously done of you; tho' some (considering the Nature of your Church,) will be apt to think it was not merely an Excess of Charity that made you treat your Adver∣sary with so much Favour, but either the insuper∣able ilness of the Cause you had to maintain, or some other Defect, which I shall beg leave not to name. However it puts me in mind of the super∣errogating Merits of many of your Saints, to whose Honour the prudent VVriters of their Lives, have re∣member'd it, that they were wont to counterfeit themselves mad or foolish, and do a thousand ridi∣culous and extravagant things, that being laught at, and despised by all the World for them, they might thereby have the better Opportunity of ex∣ercising their Christian Humility and Self-denial. But, Sir, I fear by this time my Civility may begin to grow more troublesome to you than my Rudeness would have been, should I have dispensed with my self, as to this Point of Ceremony. And indeed





I have so much to say in order to yours and the Worlds satisfaction, that I ought not to spend too much time in unnecessary Preliminaries. Three things there are, which I would willingly do in the following Defence, and which I think will comprise all that can reasonably be desired of Me, viz.

I. To discharge my Obligations to the Bishop of Meaux.
II. To vindicate my self against such Imputations as do immediately concern my own particular, but do not at all affect the Cause I am to maintain.
III. To consider what you have further offer'd to clear your Church of those great Excep∣tions I had brought against it.

And in all these I should be heartily glad I might acquit my self to yours; but however I hope I shall do it to my Readers Satisfaction, and to whom therefore I must now beg leave to ad∣dress my self, as to whose Examen (if I may pre∣sume to borrow your own Phrase) I freely com∣mit Reply, p. 1. it to judge betwixt us.
