



Gentlemen,
I Hope that your design in publishing your little Treatise, was a zealous desire to bring others of your Country∣men into the same Church which you have made your selves Members of, out of pure Love to their Souls, which you (I suppose) think cannot be safe out of its Communion: and I am the rather in∣duced to believe it, because you seem so confident of the strength of your Ar∣guments, that in the Epistle Dedicato∣ry, you reckon them unanswerable, and in that to the Reader you express your Sence of them to be very high. This I take to be an effect of your Zeal, for I am sure it is not of your Know∣ledg, and I would charitably per∣swade my self, that you love the Truth too well, to pretend a defence of what you know is Erroneous, or endeavour to promote the Progress

of delusions; but out of a sincere Heart offer the Reasons which prevail∣ed with you to a Change, not seeing their weakness; which is indeed so ve∣ry notorious, that I never thought to have seen them published, though I have often known them vigorously pres∣sed in private Discourses, where heat and unwariness may let them pass without discovering that there is no∣thing of Force in them; it being generally the Practice of the Roma∣nists, but especially the Jesuits, to have a Set of Arguments for private un∣studied Adversaries, with which they catch too many, who because they carry a specious Shew at first, examine but little farther, and without consulting others, suffer themselves to be led Cap∣tive.
I have in the following Treatise, according to your Desire in the Pre∣face, annexed my Answers to your Queries; for which reason I have done it by way of Dialogue, that so I might be the more brief, and omit no∣thing of what you offered.
I don't doubt but I have shewn the weakness of every particular Argu∣ment; but to save you and my self a great deal of Trouble, if you reply, I

shall here take notice of several gross faults in your Arguing, which if they be not remedied, will create endless dif∣ficulties.
You never tell us what you mean by the word Church; in some places you Qu. 1. take it for the Congregation of the Faithful, in others for a Council, and 41 5. in others for a particular Church.
In your Allegations out of Scripture you bring many Texts, which indeed prove nothing to your purpose. Thus in a question of the universal Church, Qu. 5. 41. 46. you bring a Text that speaks of a par∣ticular one, or of every private Mi∣nister. And in the question about Con∣firmation, in defence of Oyl, and Balm, you cite places which mention on∣ly 111. Imposition of Hands.
You suppose the Roman Church to Qu. 37, 40, 46, 47, 50, &c. be the only Church of Christ, with∣out any Proof, which is plain begging the question, and not arguing: So in other places you beg the question: And you take it for granted that Peter had the chief Charge over the Qu. 54. Apostles committed to him, that all oral Tradition is Apostolical, that 55. God hath commanded nothing con∣cerning a Liturgy in an unknown 64. Tongue: and that because Reliques

have been the Instruments by which Mi∣racles were wrought, therefore they must be Worshipped. 89.
You mistake the Question, and run on upon a Point not contested; which is arguing to no purpose, nothing but making a Puppet, and knocking him down. Thus when the Question is about Praying in an unknown Tongue, you argue for the lawfullness of speaking Qu. 66. with Tongues; in the point of Free Will you plead for Free Will in Mo∣ral actions, which we acknowledge, when the question is about those Actions 93. that are Spiritual: again you argue against Faith without Works, when the question is, whether Faith alone 95. 96. 97. justifies, not whether Faith can be without Works; for that we deny as well as you. So in the point of Religious Vows, you argue for the lawfullness of 102. 103. 104. Vows in general, when the Controversy is about those particular Vows, which we Condemn.
You quote several Scriptures famous, not only as to the particular references, of which there are a Multitude, so ma∣ny that I am afraid you took them up upon Trust; but also the very Texts. Thus you make St. Paul call Marriage a Sacrament, when he calls it only 117.

a Mystery; so you have falsified, Heb. 84. 12 11. and several other places, as I have proved in the Book it self.
I might add several Instances of these and other Particulars, such as your taking the word Universal in three several Sences, and yet applying all Qu. 11. You take Universal for being in all Pla∣ces. Qu. 12. You take it for being existent at all times, &c. Qu. 13. You take it for being called U∣niversal. one way, but these shall suffice, and I am in hopes will let you see how wretchedly your Pretended Fathers have dealt with you, by putting such Arguments upon you, and found∣ing your Faith upon such weak Grounds.
I desire you would not take it ill that I attribute this work to some of them, and do so freely tax you with not seeing the Vanity of it; for I suppose you are Gentlemen, whose Education hath engrossed your time to other Mat∣ters, and cannot therefore be reasonably supposed to have sufficient Experi∣ence in these Points to make you able to discern their Sophisms, and uncon∣cluding Arguments, which they have shamm'd upon you for convincing Rea∣sons.
If you are convinc'd by this answer, I shall bless God for it; if not, I de∣sire you would satisfy the World why you are not: But don't follow tht Me∣thods

of some late Writers, who have wisely withdrawn from the main Busi∣ness, and only cavilled at a word or two, as being. Improper, or something of that Nature, when they could not answer the Reasons of their Adver∣saries, nor defend their own: I might easily have done so by you, but as I have dealt seriously and plainly, I expect the same, and I pray God send us his Holy Spirit to lead us into all Truth. I am,
Gentlemen,

