



Most Gracious Sovereign,
I Do most humbly beseech your Majesty, to give leave unto your Father's most faithful servant, and Your most Loyal Subject, to tell you, of what you cannot choose but know, and what I assure my self you do most thankfully remember, that, besides the many-many great blessings, which the great and good God hath often shewed unto your Majesty; He hath confer∣red and fastened two Extraordinary signal Favours upon you,
1. To preserve your life, after Worster-fight, from those Vulturs that did so greedily thirst after your blood.
2. To render unto Caesar what was Caesar's, that is, by taking away from those many potent and tenacious Tyrants, and Ʋsurpers, what they unjustly held, and restoring your Kingdoms, and setting your Crown upon your Majestie's head; where, our daily prayers are, that it may long and long flourish.
And, as the Prophet David, that had received the like blessings, and favours from God, saith, Quid retri∣buam
 Domino? So let me, as the Embassador of God, most humbly supplicate your Majesty, To render unto God what is God's. And as your Majesty, beyond exam∣ple, to the exceeding comfort of us all, hath most gra∣ciously and Religiously, like the Son of your most pi∣ous, and now most glorious, Father, so freely and so bountifully rendered the Revenues of Jesus Christ, ve∣sted in your Majesty, to his Church; So, by your Royal Edicts, to do what in you lieth, to cause all others to do the like; that is, To render unto God what is Gods; which is but the duty of all, and is now neglected al∣most of all; for, besides the other things, which we owe, and render not to God, Manus auferendi, the Sacrile∣gious hands, have laid fast hold upon Gods right: And not only so, but the great Leviathan maketh it his pastime, to cause his whelps, to swallow up whole Chur∣ches, and, as it were Lege agraria, to take away the Lands, and Houses of the Lord into their possessions: and to make the poor Levite, that serveth at Gods Al∣tar, to lye in the streets, or to lodge in an Irish Cab∣bin; like the Israelites in the Wilderness, when they dwelt in booths, covered over with a few boughs.
I know, your Majesty knoweth, what the Prophet saith of many, that speak friendly unto their neigh∣bours, but imagine mischief in their hearts; so, many Gentlemen, Souldiers, and others will speak very fair, and say to your Majesty, and to us; God forbid, that they should wrong the Church of God, or take any thing from the Church: and yet the mischief that they will do, if they may have their minds, is more than I can divine; For their Covetousness and greedy desire of the Ecclesiastical Revenues, projecteth no less, then that this your Kingdom of Ireland should be full of darkness, and that the poor people should cry for bread, even the Bread of Life, and there should be none, as now we have but few, or few able, to give it them; when they, that should give it them, have scarce bread enough to put into their own mouths; and less shall have, if
 the nefarious Violators of Holy things shall have the least countenance from your Majesty to effect their Sacrile∣gious wils.
But to let your Majesty see how earnestly, and eager∣ly, your Commissioned-Officers in 49. do strive to take away the Houses and Lands of the Church and Pre∣bends, I thought good to insert their Letters in this place.


Gentlemen,
YOurs of the 16th. Instant we have Received, ac∣quainting us that the Corporations in your Com∣mission mentioned, do persist to Claim more then their right. And propounding that (for better distinguish∣ing our Interest therein) you may be by us Impowered to set the same to such a number of your selves, as you shall think fittest, in order to the due Trial, and Ascer∣taining our said Interest, and as are best able to manage that Affair; As also signifying, that the Clergy in the said Corporations, do equally refuse and disappear▪ and therefore desiring our Resolves, and like Order concerning both: which having duely considered; We do hereby ac∣quaint you, that it is our Ʋnanimous Resolve and Dire∣ction, both for the Corporation and Clergy-part, wherein you are Concerned; That you forthwith give notice to the Inhabitants, and Tenants respectively; That if they will not Treat with you, and take out Leases of their se∣veral Holdings (at moderate Rents to be by you impo∣sed) within two daies after such your notice, that then you have (And we do hereby give, and grant unto you, or such a fitting number of you, as shall be amongst your selves agreed upon) full power to become Tenants to such Holdings, and to enter upon, and possess the same, or other∣wise
 dispose thereof agreeable to your Instructions, and as may be for our best advantage; And as to the Clergy-part refusing, or opposing as aforesaid, you are to Sett and Lett all Fee-farms, by the Church formerly granted of any theAnd we must believe them what Houses were set in Fee-farm. premises, or to Impose a Considerable Rent as you see fittest, reserving to the Church the chief Rents, payable there∣out respectively; And of the Rents by you reserved, and other particulars relating to the premises, you are to give an exact and speedy Account unto


According to the purport of the above Letter; We do hereby give notice unto all persons Concerned, that Fryday next being the 30th. of this Instant May, We do intend to sett, and dispose of, all such Houses, &c. Which Letter, we have thought fit to publish, that so none might plead Ignorance;
Dated the 26th. of May. 1662.



Whereby, all men may see how the Church, and poor Bishop of Ossory, do seem to stand in the hands of Scyron and Procrustes: The Souldiers of the Ʋsurpers, that fought against their King, and do still detain the Church-land from the Bishop; And now (like that in the Canticles, wounded in the house of our friends.) the Souldiers in 49. that were most faithful unto your Majesty, do still seek to take away our Houses from the Church. And if we lose both House and Land, we may go to live in the Church, and lie with the Levite in the Streets.
But, as your Majesty hath been most Gracious to the
 Bishops, and to all the Clergy so bountifull, as to grant them almost as much as we could desire; so our hope and humble Request is, that you will not suf∣fer these men to take from us, so much as they de∣sire.
For the preventing of which desire of theirs, if it may be; I have endeavoured to arm my self with a resolution, neither to fear nor flatter any man; : for they that fear the smoak, may fall into the fire, Et qui timet pruinam, opprimetur à nive; that is, as S. Gregory moralizeth it, He that fears the frost of mans anger, which he may tread under his feet, may be overwhelmed with the hail and snow of God's wrath, which shall fall upon his head, so that he can not escape it: And I have studied not to prepare sweet and savory meat unto my Readers, but salubria medicamenta, those medicines, that shall be most wholesome for their Souls. And because the ears of all Church-robbers, are like the ears of the deaf Adder, that will not be charmed, and the walls of this sin of Sacriledge are like the walls of Jericho, that cannot be tumbled down, without the shrill sound of Trumpets and Rams horns; I have sharpned my Pen, and, in the bitterness of my soul, for the havock that I see made of the Patrimony of God's Church, I have indeavoured to speak, not in the mild voice of Eli to his sons; but with the rough speeches of Joseph unto his brethren, that had slept so many years in their sins, as our people have done in their Sacriledge; and yet think it to be no sin.
And I doubt not, but that this my Discourse will prove as the waters of gall, and as bitter as wormwood unto those mens stomacks, that are so greedy, as we see men are, to get away the lands and possessions of the Church, and my self to be maligned and envyed to the full; But I assure them, Non flocci facio, I weigh it not a rush; for I have hardened my face like an Adamant, and as the Lord saith to Ezechiel, Whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, I will speak what I conceive
 to be truth; and nothing but what my Conscience tells me is truth. And if in any thing I shall mistake, it is not amor erroris, the love of error, or the hatred of any of those Sacrilegious persons that rob the Church; but it is error amoris, the error of my love to the Church of Christ, and unfaigned desire, to promote the service of God, and the good of the poor and honest Irish of this Kingdom; and so if I have offended, I shall humbly crave your Majesties pardon, and most willingly submit my self to the censure of the Church; and with my morning, eve∣ning, and noon-daies prayers for your Majestie's long∣life, and much happiness, I rest.

