



My LORD,
WHen your Lordship desired me to Preach be∣fore
you, the improvement of it to the great∣est
usefulness was my concern. To this
end it was needful to fix on Subjects suitable
to an Auditery so promiscuous; none occurred to me so con∣ducive
to my purpose as this, which led me to deal with all
men in things most important to their Eternal Condition;
and yet to mind your Lordship and Brethren of somewhat re∣ferring
to your present Office.
The second Subject I Preached on, was pursuant to this, viz.
The Dedication of our Lives to Christ and his Interests,
from Phil. 1. 21.
After I had Preached the Second time, I was surprised
with a Request of your Lordships and some of the Aldermen
to Publish both these Discourses; but there wanted not many
Reasons, which prevented any design of Compliance with that
desire, tho enforced by your undeserved respects to one so much
a Stranger.
But finding some few days past, that after all my care to
obviate any such snrmises; some passages in that Second Ser∣mon
are misrepresented, as irritating of the Church of Eng∣land:

I am inclined to Publish very soon that Second Dis∣course,
if I may prevent or remove any such offences, which
are now at least more fatal than any Imprudent Propagators
thereof do apprehend.
Being thus disposed to publish the last, I am obedient to
your Lordships repeated intreaties in sending out the First
Sermon in its order.
Tho two days being all the time I had to prepare either of
these Discourses, and absence from my Library limiting me
to the use of no Book besides the Bible, are my just Apology
for some defects in them; yet I must say, that I have deli∣vered
nothing but what I believe to be the Will of God; and
had my helps or abilities been more considerable, I would
not debase matters of so great concernment, by vain Sallies
of Wit; nor deaden their common use by laborious Periods, or
a lighter Stile. The Institutions of God have their proper
decency, and are best managed by a tendency to Spiritual
Ends, and general Edification.
The substance of the Account of the nature of the Kingdom
of God, I give in Scripture-words, tho chiefly for greater Con∣viction;
yet also that none may arraign it as Cant, without
ridiculing the Divine Oracles, which surely must command
dread in all who esteem themselves by a Christian Name.
I believe, Your Lordship in calling us Nonconformists to
preach before you, and we in undertaking that Labour, can
have no Turn to serve, besides the enlargement of Christ's
Kingdom; and the revival of the Power of Godliness, so
much degenerated into Formality among all Parties. We
value Capacious Places no otherwise, than as an opportunity
for this: and now we enjoy such, we desire no attempts for
more Splendid ones, to the offence of any.
Perhaps Your Lordship may share in our wonder at the
silly Descants of some on our Persons and Performances in
this Liberty: We must needs be Tradesmen, because we
have preached so long without Publick Sallary. Our Sermons

are Cant, because we use Scripture-Expressions, though in
their proper sense: They are Enthusiastick, if we say any
thing of Heart-work, or the Spirit's influence; We do no∣thing
but whine, and make faces, if we appear in the least
moved by what we say and believe, or seem concerned to
prevail with our Hearers. We do ill to preach now, we
do not suffer by it: though they know we thought it our
Duty, when we paid so dear for it. Or at best, that Con∣tingent
Events should supersede our Labours, as a pruden∣tial
Act: when we are under a solemn dedication to the
Work of Christ, as Ministers; and our Labours to bring the
Souls of men under the power of Truth, will prove the best
security to the Professors of it; when great Offers, and
awakening Fears will trample on the clearest Notions of an
Vnregenerate Heart. But I enlarge too far.
Your Lordship's acting the part of a Christian Magistrate,
is recompence for whatever Censures you undergo: the
World is not yet of the temper, to speak well of all that
do well: and Christ exempts not the Vsefullest from hard∣ships,
on this lower stage. Peace of Conscience in having per∣formed
our Duty, and the Testimony of Christ to our Faith∣fulness
in the Great Judgment, is all the Comfort a Chri∣stian
can now be sure of, and what he ought to be contented
with.
There are many Prayers sent to the Throne of Grace for
Your Lordship; That you may want neither Wisdom nor
Steddiness in a Place so Eminent, and Circumstances so
perplexing. That Promise (which hath somewhat of a Rule
in it) is applicable to you,Prov. 11. 3. The Integrity of the Upright
shall guide them.
That you may find this accomplished to Publick Convi∣ction,
and a Comfortable Event of your Present Employ, is
the unfeigned Desire of

