



THE Design of these Sermons was to re∣gulate
and improve the state of your
Souls. The Blessing of God having made
them successful to several of you, enclined
me to publish them at your importunity; thô I do
oft refuse a Compliance with many judicious Friends,
in desires of the same kind, even when the Subjects
are more perswading.
Having overcome the Discouragement which I
suggested to my self, from the plainness of these
Discourses, I dare not make an Apology for the com∣monness
of the Stile or Matter. It had been a Pro∣fanation
of an Ordinance, when desired to preach
to Youth, to propose any Subject below what tends to
their Salvation, from that Sin and Wrath they are na∣turally
under. It had been folly to treat of such a
Subject for Edification before Children and Appren∣tices,
in words unapt to inform or perswade them.
I thank God I could rather bear the dislike of a few
less serious wits, than neglect the eternal Concerns
of so many less intelligent Hearers. On the same
account, I am now afraid to raise the Style, or omit

the very repeated Appeals and Pleadings with Chil∣dren,
being resolved to approve my self to the weakest
Reader, and leave the judicious to what is more fit∣ted
to their improvement.
My Prayer and Hopes be, That God will accom∣pany
this Book with powerful effects on your Souls,
and not leave you to that obstinacy, as will render it
a farther aggravation of your sin and punishment;
you cannot pretend that God never informed you of
your Disease, nor directed you to a Cure: You dare
not, after reading this Book, say, My Danger was
concealed from me, and Rules for my Safety were
not prescribed. God will severely witness, that he
condescended to argue matters with thy Soul; he dis∣swades
thee from the Sins that will condemn thee at
last, however thou now flatterest thy self. He useth
many Arguments to encline thee to Duties which
his very Gospel cannot dispence with the want of, in
any person whom he will save.
Let me then acquaint thee, oh young Man! that
God addresseth himself to thee, as by Name. Thou
by nature art brutish and devilish, and as long as
thou followest the imaginations of thy vain mind, thy
case becomes more desperate, thy Lusts by indulgeuce
grow more violent, and Conscience still less concern∣ed
to vindicate the Affronts thou offerest to Gods Do∣minion,
or to represent the injury thou dost to thy own
Soul; yet be assured, whether thou mindest it or not,
there is a God, whose right it is to govern thee, and will
be sure to judge thee: Thou art born his Subject,
thô unwilling to obey, and forward to rebell against
him; thou hast an immortal Soul, how little soever

thou providest for its future State; yea, how much
soever thou actest to expose it to endless misery,
and this for a short and fading Pleasure. Thou
art naturally depraved, and thereby under that Con∣demnation
which was pass'd by the Law of Innocency
against man, in the least sinful.
Oh, then do not fancy that Baptism did regene∣rate
thee whiles thou findest the want of every Grace,
and carnal Inclinations are thy governing Law. Do
not conceit that Baptism delivered thee from thy
cursed State, when thy Vnbelief and Enmity against
holiness, do both express it, and further expose
thee to it. It's true, there is a way of Salvation
for lost man published in the Gospel; but that can be∣nefit
none who continues to reject Christ, and refuse
the terms of Peace. Thou art the dedicated Child
of believing Parents, but their Faith cannot save
thee now that thou art capable of consenting to the
Covenant, and refusest it; yea, thy early Dedication
adds Perjury and Falshood to thy Profaneness. Plead
not thy Christian Name, whiles thou art a Reproach
to it. Boast not of religious helps, when they have
not that good effect on thee, as the light of Nature
hath on meer Pagans; which may convince us, that
where the Gospel fails to convert its Hearers,
Satan oft governs more powerfully, than if the Go∣spel
had never been preached to them. We live in
an Age of wonders, among which it is not the least
strange or awful, that professed Christians are vi∣ler
than Heathens, and most of our baptized Youths
scorn the plainest Rules of Christianity. Ah, wretch∣ed
Age! wherein Gospel-light cannot convince of

that wickedness which even Nature condemns!
what Conceptions have they of God, who think he
can approve of such Enormities as they commit, or
be satisfied with those heartless and trifling Regards
to which they confine all the Homage which they
afford him?
Surely England's Calamities are like to be ter∣rible,
when this jealous God ariseth to force men to
juster Thoughts both of his Nature and his Laws.
I must allow that this Treatise is intended
to convince thee of the great Evil of such things
as most esteem indifferent, and practise as allow∣able;
yea, so far doth their blindness prevail, that
Sobriety (much more Godliness) is ridicul'd as
Folly. But know that the feeling of endless Torments
will soon convince such as dare mock at Divine
Revelations. The Perfections that render God able
to endure their Affronts now, will oblige him to vin∣dicate
his Government and Honour then. Poor
Wretches that would not be ruled by means suited
to their Natures, as rational, shall without their
Consent undergo the inflicted Evils, which, whiles
only threatned, did not move them. Therefore,
young Man, be not affrighted from true Wisdom by
the Clamours of the worst of Fools, whatever Wit
they pretend to. Vndo not thy self for the sake of
a Crowd, for it's better be religious with the lesser
number now, than be damned hereafter with the
multitude: Sure thou must be an Atheist, and
wholly disbelieve unseen things, if the Contempt or
Perswasions of enslaved Factors for the Devil can
encline thee to chuse Hell, by resolving the Course
that infallibly tends to it.

I must acquaint you, That in the last Sermon I
add no Particular to the Notes one of your selves
took from me when I preached, and supplyed me
since with, to help the defect of my own Papers; yet
I have added many of the Directions for avoiding
the eight particular sins I disswaded you from in
my first Sermon. I have also thought fit to sub∣joyn
a short Catechism in the end, wherein you
may learn the Essentials of Practical Religion in fa∣miliar
Terms, if you think fit to learn it, consult
the Proofs.
The good Lord prosper all to you. Could I but see
young ones generally enclined to serious Religion, I
would hope that God hath a mercy in reserve for
England, and the Vengeance that hangs over it
because of the last thirty years too successful Con∣trivances
to debauch the Nation, in order to Sla∣very
and Popery, might be diverted, or at least
confined to such as are too far engaged, or obstinate
to admit a Reformation.
That every Child and Youth who shall read this
Book, may (as many of you already do) thus con∣tribute
to my Hopes and Share in the Benefit there∣of,
shall be the Prayer of

