



Much honoured and esteemed,
THis presents you with a Discourse (for sub∣stance) preached and printed at your de∣sire. I faintly hope its acceptance with many, when Iustice is become a stranger, and a meer honest Man a glorius Title. Publick Useful∣ness must scarce escape with the Brand of Folly with those, whole Trade is turned into tricking, or account publick Employs no more than a de∣cent opportunity to cheat the People. But Truth may profit them, unless a Zeal for their Disease will not allow their reading what is directed for their recovery. To you, and some others, this Subject must appear too plainly instamp'd with God's Image and Authority, and a tendency to Common Weal, to admit the Censure of a Narrow Spirit (however disguised) to be it's Standard. Especially, when this is what com∣mended your late Pastor to such unusual Affe∣ction, as you expressed to him living, dying, yea, when dead. Yet this might be expected, seeing his very Spirit is transfused into his Peo∣ple; by whose Bounty (in good part) he per∣formed such great Things for a common Good. Few Ministers, had such cause of glorying in so many Publick Spirited Hearers, as yours,

Mr. Denham, Mr. Hartley, Mr. Cockerill, with many now at rest, might be named; the living I scarce forbear. The Sermon is much enlarged, and the Method somewhat changed, that it may more contribute to common Ser∣viceableness. What's more desirable than to Vseful in making others so? Hence the emi∣nent Services of Mr. Brand, so revived the Dr. And hereby we most extend and pertuate pub∣lick Benefits; yea, oft above our own Ability, and beyond our Life. Promote you that De∣sign in this barren Age, by putting this Tract into Hands who need it, and by your own vigo∣rous Example and Prayer's; that it may be seen the Spring of your Charity and Christian Activeness, is more lasting than the Exemplary Life or Labours of your deceased Guide. May you find, in Spirituals and Externals, there is that scattereth and yet increaseth: The liberal Soul shall be made fat; and he that watereth, shall be watered also himself And all of us be excited to more holy Fervour, by the Death of two such as Dr. Annesley and fervent Mr. Oldfield in one Day, and worthy Mr. James soon after. I am,

