



May it please your Majesty,
MY present mean condition bids me to lay my hand upon my mouth, to stop my speech to so high a Majesty; but my place and calling chargeth me to tell you, what you have best reason to know, how the long Parliament have put your most religious and re∣nowned Father, of ever blessed memory, to death, the first and chiefest of the two witnesses of Jesus Christ, which, as the Angel saith, the beast that ascendeth out of the bottom∣lesse pit, should kill; And now, according to his promise, God hath raised this first witnesse in your Majesty, to stretch forth your royall hand to the other witness; and as Christ said unto S. Peter, Tu conversus, confirma fratres, so, your Majesty being risen, it is our undoubted hope you will put life into the other slain witnesse of Jesus Christ; and like another good Josias, purge the Church from all false Priests, and restore the Episcopal government to its pristine lustre, for the build∣ing of Gods Church; And the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, and walked with your Majesty in all your tra∣vels, will dwell with you, and blesse you, and preserve you from all dangers; for he tells us plainly that he will honour them that honour him, and they that honour not him, shall be lightly regarded.
And therefore I could wish, that all the Monarchs of the world, would consider Davids entrance into his king∣dom,
and Jeroboams entrance into his kingdom; how like one another almost, they were in all things; for
1.
1 Sam. 16. David is said to be the son of Jesse, none as I conceive of the prime Princes of Israel;
1 Reg 11.26. and Jeroboam is said to be the son of Nebat, and to be a mighty man of valour, and of an eminent place in King Solomons Court.
2.
1 Sam. 16.13. The Prophet Samuel told David that he should be King;
2 Reg. 11.31. and the Prophet Ahijah told Jeroboam, that God would make him King.
3.
1 Chron. 17.23. The Lord told David that he would build him an house and settle the throne on his seed;
2 Reg. 11.38. and the Lord told Jero∣boam, that if he would walk in his wayes, he would build him a sure house, and would be with him, and would give Is∣rael unto him.
4.
1 Sam. 13.14. The kingdom was transferred unto David for the dis∣obedience of Saul,
1 Reg. 11.12. and the kingdome was conferred upon Je∣roboam for the sin of Solomon.
5.
2 Sam. 4.7. David took away the kingdom from Ishbosheth the son of Saul; and Jeroboam took away his kingdom from Reho∣boam the son of Solomon.
2 Reg. 12.20.
6. David was elected and chosen to be their King, by all the tribes of Israel in Hebron;
2 Sam. 5.1. & 1 Chron. 11.1. and Jeroboam was elected and chosen to be their King, by all the ten tribes of Israel; and the Prophet forbad Rehoboam and all Juda to war against Jeroboam for their revolt,
1 Reg 21.20. v. 4. because this thing was from the Lord.
7.
2 Sam. 17.8. David was a mighty man of war, and so was Jero∣boam a mighty man of valour. 1 Reg. 11.28.
But you may observe this difference betwixt David and Jeroboam, that David had many wives and concubines, which we do not read that Jeroboam had; and David committed more personal and particular sins, as his adultry, and the murdering of Urias, and the numbring of Israel, and his rash judgement against honest Mephibosheth, then we find in all the 22. years reign of Jeroboam
And yet David hath this Elogie and commendation, to be a
man according to Gods own heart, and God hath setled and established his kingdom, and his throne to him and his seed for ever; but Jeroboam is said to have made Israel to sin, and the Prophet told his wife, that the Lord would bring evill upon the house of Jeroboam, and would take away the remnant of his house, as a man taketh away the dung, till it be all gone. 1 Reg. 14.10.
And what is the reason of all this, that David, who seem∣ed to be more vitious, and tainted with more sins then Je∣roboam was, should notwithstanding be so perpetually blessed, and the other so severely and so suddenly pu∣nished?
It may be answered, that although David had, as well as other men, many humane frailties, wherein it cannot be said, he was according to Gods own heart; yet his principal care was, and his heart was wholly set, to see the true God rightly honoured, and his service to be duly and truly performed, as you may find how zealous he was to bring the Ark of God, and to set it in his place, in the midst of his Tabernacle that he had pitched for it, and to offer burnt-offerings, and peace∣offerings, before the Lord, and how desirous did he shew himself to build God a Temple? and notwithstanding all his great affaires, and his many and mighty wars, and abun∣dance of troubles; how he composed his Psalmes, and directed them to the chief Musicians, Asaph, Altaschith, Jeduthun, and the rest; and ordered the Priests and Levites to discharge the service of God and of the Tabernacle, according as the Lord had commanded the same to be observed by his servant Moses. So careful was he at all times, and before all things, to have the service of God rightly and duly performed; And therefore, herein he is said to be a man according to Gods own heart, and God blessed him, and established him and his seed in his throne for ever.
But Jeroboam, though perhaps he was freer, and more ab∣stemious from many other sins, then either David himself, or many other men were; and it may be, a very just morall man; yet, when he came into his kingdom; he wholly neglected to see the Lords service truly executed, and out of a politick
conceit, as he conceived, to secure himself and his posterity in his newly gotten power and authority, he cast out the Priests of the Lord, the sons of Aaron, that were the law∣full Governours, and the true servers of God, and gathered together a company of novices and young fellowes, the low∣est and basest of the people, that were not of the sonnes of Aaron, and that for some small preferment, would both say and do, whatsoever he pleased, and serve, what god soever he commanded, and with what service soever he liked, he made them Priests of his high places, to offer sacrifices to his golden gods: And therefore is he said to make Israel to sin, and God soon rooted him and his posterity out of that king∣dom, that God had given unto him.
And so he can do with all those Kings and Monarchs, whatsoever they be, that by their timorous conniving with Sects, or a popular favouring either the greater part, or the stronger side, do think it the most politick course, to be se∣curely established, and so suffer the service of God, to be ei∣ther neglected, or perverted, and the faithfull Governours of his Church, to be suppressed, through the impetuous im∣portunity of aspiring emulators, or the clamorous desire of ig∣norant vulgars; whereas the best policy in the world, to preserve them is, to be men of courage, to uphold the true service of God; this fortitude being a vertue most ne∣cessary both for the Prince and the Preacher, quia timiditas eorum, est calamitas multorum, because their fear will be∣come the fall of many; when the one dares not say the truth, and the other will not do what is just, or will do what is un∣just, for very fear: whereas the upholding of Gods right ser∣vice, is able to uphold them against all opponents.
And therefore, that the true service of God might be pre∣served, uncorrupted, and unchanged, by all Kings and Mo∣narchs, which is the chiefest thing that God requireth at their hands, and is the principal thing that can preserve them in their Majesty, and perpetuate the same unto their poste∣rity, it is most requisite, they should be very carefull in the choice of their spiritual teachers and guides, to direct them for the preservation of the true worship of God; for
we know the Arian Bishops made Constantius an Arian Em∣perour, and the Priests of Baal made Ahab and Jezabell, so zealously affected to the service of Baal, and so the Po∣pish Priests make Papists, and the Run-a-gadoes out of the Church do, when they return, make Sects and Facti∣ons in the Church; and therefore, as it had been good for Ahab, if he would have hearkened to Elias, and Mi∣caiah, as he did to the Priests of Baal, and good for Con∣stantius, if he had as well favoured the Orthodox, as he did the Heterodox, and Arian Bishops; so it will be good, and the best course to guide all Kings, Monarchs, and Go∣vernours of the people, for the setling of the true service of God, to give ear unto, and to countenance those, who are appoint∣ed by God, to direct them in Gods service, rather then to any others; for the grave and reverend Governours of the Church, are like the discreet Counsellours of King Solomon, and will advise them not to listen, nor to relie so much upon the directions of any novices, which may prove like the counsel of those young favourites of Rehoboam.
Thus I have freely exprest my mind to your Majesty, so plain, that he which runs may read it, and reading it, may easily understand it; and I humbly beseech you to bear with my plain dealing; for, though it behoves not us to polu∣pragmatize in things that are beyond our line, and without the compasse of our calling, and to intermeddle with the civil Go∣vernment; yet, as John the Baptist told Herod of his duty to God, so it behoveth us, with the spirit of Elias, to inform our Kings & our Governours, how they should uphold Gods service; or if we neglect the same, for fear of their displeasure, we shall make our selves liable to the displeasure of God Almighty; and so, as Lucian saith, , shunning the smoak of mans anger, we shall fall into the fire of Gods fury, or as Job saith, timentes pruinam, opprimemur à nive that is, as Saint Gregory moralizeth it, by fearing the frost of mans hatred, which we might tread under our feet, we shall be oppressed and swallowed up with the snow of Gods venge∣ance that falleth down from heaven upon our heads, and we cannot avoid it.

And therefore, as Saint Clemens saith, quae vobis expe∣dire novimus, tacere non possumus; we must needs tell you what we conceive makes for your hapinesse; so I humbly be∣seech your Majesty to raise the slain witnesses, which the cru∣el beast hath kill'd, and to redresse in Gods service, what the long Parliament did amisse, and so God will bless you and yours, which is the daily prayer of

