



WHEN First desired by You to Preach the Ensuing Sermon, my Compliance would have been more diffi∣cultly obtained, had I taken time to consi∣der, That it came within the Number of the Discourses that were to be Printed at your Request; yea, to be the last of them.
A Subject, exhausted by Eleven Di∣vines of so great Name and Worth, can receive little Advantage by the succeeding Attempts of a Head so barren, and a Heart so cold as mine.
HOWEVER, My Promise being gi∣ven, I intreated His Assistance whose Cause I plead; and the Event I commit to Him.
IF I have  on any thing said by Others ( its scarce possible to avoid) its not borrowed from them; for I consulted

none of the former Sermons in preparing this.
THE Medium which runs through this Discourse is very fit, I'm sure, to inforce what is said before, and notwithstanding the Defects of my Management, I can say, I believe what I deliver, and approve heart∣ily of your Good Design, and what's bet∣ter urged by others to promote it.
ITS Matter of deepest Sorrow, When Villanies of all Sorts abound, When Men declare their Sins with Sodoms Insolency, When our Settlement is thereby so exposed, and a probable Safety from the awfullest Woes, is held by a Thred so tender as the Life of His Majesty King WILLIAM. That yet some Persons of Note require other Motives to espouse this Work of Re∣formation: And many Magistrates shift off the execution of the Laws, tho the Oath of God be upon them.
HOW rare is a Zealous Nehemiah? Nay, Symptoms of our Condition were less dangerous, if all who served at God's Altar admitted Phineas for a Pattern of Concer∣nedness in resisting Sin as  are capable, tho he is not to be imitated in the manner of his Execution.

BUT amidst great Causes of Fears and Lamentation, let's not ungratefully neglect to adore God's undeserved Goodness, that our Constitution retains so many good Laws against gross Enormities: The Parliament hath made an Address, and the King pur∣suant thereto, published a Proclamation, so excellently acknowledging the dueness, ne∣cessity, and value of Reformation, with Resolves of promoting it to the utmost. It were very afflictive, as well as uncharitable, to think a stop could be made here, and the execution of the Laws suspended as for∣merly, for this would turn to the Nations Reproach, and be an Aggravation of its Guilt, by rendring the forecited Instances, a meer Testimony against future Neglects, and a cause of severer Judgments.
NOR is it an inconsiderable Presage of Good, as well as a probable Means of England's Amendment, that you have formed your selves into Societies for the Reformation of Manners, a Title becom∣ing a Christian Name, an Enterprize alike owing to flagrant Zeal, and amazing Cou∣rage, an ordinary Spirit under common Assistances, had been overwhelmed with the very view of the strength of that Tide

of uncontrouled Wickedness, which was at first to be stem'd by so very few.
HOW soon did Divinely inspir'd Minds coalesce in this Undertaking?—And easily made it evident, That there is no such difference between Members of the Establi∣shed Church, and the Dissenters, that will not be overlook'd by all Serious Persons, when the undoubted Concernments of Christ and Practical Godliness are in danger.
BY an Union founded on a Bottom, and designed to Ends so truly Christian, your Numbers were soon increased; Very many Magistrates and Persons of Eminent Figure gave up themselves to this Under∣taking, fit Rules were adjusted, and the strange Successes which encourag'd your ear∣ly Attempts, do still grow more and more a∣mazing, being as much beyond the hopes of your timerous friends, as the expectations of surprized Offendors, (who as Such only, can be ill-willers to this Design) nay, Men strong in Faith, are as in a Dream, to see the Work of Reformation advanced thus far in so short a time; and induced to hope this to be the dawning of that Season, wherein Reforming Attempts shall succeed to those higher degrees of Pu∣rity

which are prophesied of; altho awful Dispensations may shake the frame of things to introduce it.
BESIDES, it is no mean effect of your successful Example, That Men of the same Temper in other Places in this Nati∣on, are awakened to exert their United Strength in pleading the Cause of Christ against Profaness.
YEA Ireland, as if blushing at enga∣ging so late, when their Distress and De∣liverance had been so astonishing—Do even exceed your Fervour, and Protestants of every Communion in Dublin, account Reformation their greatest Business.
MAY not we hope that your influencing President may in time extend to all other Protestant Countries; that none called Reformed, as to their Faith, may wear the Reproach of neglecting a Reformation in their Manners: They owe the same Love to their Neighbour as you do, their Municipal Laws against Vice, are a Ta∣lent for which they are as accountable as you be for yours: Gross Sins will be as dangerous to every Nation which has equal Light, as they be to England, and the Heart wherein a Divine Principle reign∣eth,

will naturally prompt to the same Zeal against Sin, as they shall hear to be now at Work in your Societies.
BUT let the happy issue of your Under∣taking be more or less extensive; Bless you the Merciful God for inclining your Hearts to this Work, and giving you the present Oportunity to express your good Intenti∣ons, and not denying you such encourag∣ing Success.
BE Conscientious in observing the Dire∣ctions given you in the Sermons of all those Ministers invited to your assistance, and neglect not to apply their Encouragements, that you may be strong and faithful in what respecteth your own Duty in this glorious Attempt, so you will die in Peace in a Re∣view of upright Vigorous Endeavours to serve your Generation.
THAT this Discourse may among the rest, contribute somewhat to your good De∣signs, is the Prayer of,

