



Dear Brethren,
YOU being at this time called upon by Au∣thority to joyn in Communion with the Church, and the Laws ordered to be put in Execution against such as refuse it; its both your Duty and Interest to enquire into the grounds upon which you deny Obedience to the Laws, Communi∣on with a Church of God, and thereby expose our Religion to danger, and your selves to suffering. In which, unless the cause be good,Mr. Mede's Farewel Serm. on 1 Cor. 1.3. the call clear, and the end right, it cannot bring Peace to your selves, or be acceptable to God. Not bring Peace to your selves; For we cannot suffer joyfully the spoiling of our Goods,Mr. Read's Case, p. 4. the con∣finement of our Persons, the ruine of our Families, unless Conscience be able truly to say, I would have done any thing but sin

against God, that I might have avoided these sufferings from men. Not be acceptable to God,Continuat. of Morn. Exer. Ser. 4. p. 92. to whom all are accountable for what portion he hath instrusted them with of the things of this life, and are not to throw away without sufficient reason; and who has made it our duty to do what we can without Sin in Obedience to that Authority which he hath set over us,Read, Ibid. (as you are told by some in the same condition with your selves.)
To assist persons in this enquiry, I have ob∣served that of late several of the Church of Eng∣land have undertaken the most material points that you do question, and have handled them with that Candor and Calmness which becomes their pro∣fession, and the gravity of the Arguments, and which may the better invite those that are willing to be satisfied, to peruse and consider them. But because Truth and Reason do too often suffer by the prejudices we have against particular persons; to remove, as much as may be, that obstruction, I have in this Treatise shewed that these Authors are not alone, but have the concurrent Testimony of the most eminent Non-Conformists for them, who do generally grant that there is nothing requi∣red in the Parochial Communion of the Church of England, that can be a sufficient reason for Se∣paration from it. The sence of many of these I

have here collected, and for one hundred I could easily have produced two, if the Cause were to go by the Pole; so that if Reason or Authori∣ty will prevail, I hope that yet your satisfaction and recovery to the Communion of the Church is not to be despaired of: Which God of his infinite mercy grant for your own and the Churches sake. Amen.
