



I Present to your Lordship the second Sermon, and the Bookseller is accountable
for the late Publication of it.
By the first Sermon, I endeavoured a real Subjection of Hearts to Christ as King:
In this I call Men to the utmost serviceableness to him, as the governing Aim of their
Lives. No Service to Christ is possible, but with respect to his Interests; and
by our devotedness to these, he determineth our Regards to himself.
If we consider that part of the World called Christian, we shall find that nothing is
more pretended than the advancement of these Interests of Christ, even when they are
most disserved. These are made to patronize the great Weaknesses of some, and the
grossest Villanies of others. This induced me to explain and state the Interests of
Christ, as far as one Discourse would admit.
Natural Religion is not so opposed, as the additional and more peculiar Concern∣ments
of Christ as Mediatour: The innate Enmity of Mens Hearts and Satans At∣tempts,
are more directly level'd against these; the former, because they are less ad∣vantaged
by those Remains of Light preserved by God in our Apostate Nature; the
latter, because the Devil well knows, that natural Religion will not be improved to
any saving Purpose, if these additional Interests of Christ prevail not. This Conside∣ration
led me to insist on these Mediatoral Concernments of our Lord Jesus, and per∣suade
to a more special regard to such Points, which Christ is gradually advancing
in the World in our Day; and the rather, because the Testimony of Christ and the
mighty Influences of the Spirit in any day, are much confined to those Points, which
at that time he designs the Advancement of.
I am express and large, in proving that the Dedication of our Lives to the ser∣vice
of the Interests of Christ, is an essential Duty of all Christians; because it is the
great Security to our holy Profession; it's the Spring of all Endeavours whereby God
is glorified, and a common Good promoted; and without it, Truth will be betrayed
by Men that make the greatest Noise.
The Hints I am confined to, may be subject to various Inferences; to direct which,
I do declare, that in general I do intend the persuading Christians to do all that is
lawful in their Places, to promote true Religion and Godliness, and their cautious
Forbearance of whatever is a certain detriment or hazard thereto.
In particular, I would have none in this Crisis (if duly called) scruple Offices
from uncertain Events; much less employ them to lower Ends than the Advance∣ment
of Truth, and that with all Prudence and Meekness.
I would persuade all Nonconforming Ministers not to neglect the present Opportu∣nity
of exercising their Ministry; their Obligation and License to it, is from Christs
prior Commission, and not the present removal of a Physical Obstacle; and woe to
us if the undoubted Interests of Christ gain not by this Liberty. I think I have more
comfort than seeming Caution  Idleness would afford, when I reflect that from the
20th Year of my Age, I remember not three Lords Days wherein I have not
preached in one place or other.

A Subsistence to these Ministers I also aim at. How sad is that narrow and un∣just
Spirit in Men of Estates, which restrains the Gospel for want of Maintainance?
I am sure none that know me will suspect a Selfish Design by this.
The only thing I can foresee the need of an Apology for, is my plainness with some
Persecutors that are Members of the Church of England, and lately monopolized
the Name even from all others of their own Communion. These I call to Repentance
for their great Opposition to the Interests of Christ. Some part of the two Days allow∣ed
to prepare this Sermon, was spent in debating with my self the expediency hereof;
and I judged at last, it was my Duty, and conducive to the publick Good, on such
Grounds as these.
The Crime is too notorious to be palliated, when they have Silenced 2000 Ministers,
because they durst not lye, &c. and with such rage persecuted their quiet Neighbors for
worshiping God according to all the instituted Rules of the Gospel, their Enemies being
Iudges.
The Effects of their Severities are visible in the Danger, that not only the Pow∣er,
but the very probable Form of Religion is reduced to.
The Repentance of these very Men, is necessary to divert the Judgments which
hang over our heads. That Temper continued, makes all healing Methods for accord
impossible. If they repent not, it's of little moment if they be irritated by a Call to
it; being disowned by all serious Men of their own Party, who indeed were hated
and wounded by them as well as the Dissenters.
Yea, God by his present Providence seemeth to design these Mens Repentance, while
he is blowing on them from that very Point, where their Faces and Regards were
directed in all their mischievous Attempts.
I hope no pious Men of that Party, who approved not these Mens Practices, will think
themselves concerned in this Reproof; their Credit and Serviceableness I am tender of. Yea,
I would persuade a Forgiving of the most Guilty, tho I call them to Repentance: And Pro∣vidence
directs the Sufferers not to exert their Resentments, by the Damage it will expose to.
I find it convenient to explain somewhat in my first Sermon.
By Conditions,p. 18. I mean the things which the Gospel injoyneth indispensably on all Men,
that shall partake of the saving Blessings of the New Covenant, which are owing to Christ only
as the meritorious Cause.p. 22. By Spiritual Life, I intend that inherent vital Principle where∣in
all Graces are comprehended.p. 8. By Remedial Law, I mean the Law of Faith, published
for the recovery of Apostate Sinners; and by which God will judge the Secrets of Men.
But yet the Objectors are very weak or uncharitable, and little consider what fatal Influence
their Distempers have on the Interests of Christ, whilst they sacrifice the Serviceableness
of others to their own little Aims and Fancies.
It may be added, that I managed my first Text without much reference to the extraordinary
Power of Apostolical Administrations; as not so suitable to our Day, nor yet principally intended.
Your Lordship is concerned, or I would not Preface your Name to th Apology. I believe
it's your aim to serve Christ in the World. Many of your Actings may convince the Envious,
it is not a Selfish Interest you serve. That you and your Brethren may entirely dedicate your
Selves, Power and Advantages, to the real advancement  the Interests of Jesus; was the
Design of this plain Discourse, and is the Prayer of

