


My Lords:
THere is the same nearenesse of relation betwixt your Lordships and the Parliament of England, which is betwixt the Sunne and Sun-beames. They from their illustrious Luminary dispensing. You disposing those bounties of warmth and a∣nimation, which have enriched the Common∣wealth with all the Ornaments of verdure, re∣pullulation and beauty, which at present she is in production of, and by the blessing of the Sun of Righteousnes (guiding and fortifying your virtuall and healthfull influences) may arrive to an absolute perfection, and be perpetuated to their happinesse, to your glory.
This Introduction which acknowledges so much of your power and greatnes, may make people admire why a Treatise of this mea∣nes for form and delivery, a Presenter of such inconsiderablenes for parts and fortunes, should presume to cast themselves upon your Lordships protection. But my Lords, such disincouragements cannot direct any who know Humility, and a condescending Clemency are the ordinary attendants upon your extraordinary virtues, which take into their Patronage the restauration of the publick liberty, and the felicity of Nations.
The scope of it is the publick benefit of a Nation; to whom should it be dedicated, but to its Supporters, to its Atlantes, to those who designe the aggrandissement of it in their counsels, perfectionate that designe by their Armies? it were impatriotisme not to publish it, sacriledge to addresse it to any other.
It is an indeleble brand to the high-nam'd policy of the 7. Henry, who gave away as rich Provinces as any the eye of the World views to Spain from England, out of avarice, incredulity or contempt (or indeed all of them together) of Columbus his motion and con∣dition. Your Lordships move in too high a Sphere of prudence and circumspection to become his seconds in that his heresie of wisdom.

And who knows but providence has reserved the present opportu∣nity to your times, that under his conduct and auspice you might be designed his glorious instruments of promoving a worke which car∣ries in its bosome the advancement of the Gospel, by reducig the Natives, in its forehead the enlargement of the English greatnesse by extending its Empire.
My Lords, the Parliament of this Nation, and your selves (like the Twins of Hipocrates) having an inviolable correspondence of teares and smiles, of diasters and blessings of life and death toge∣ther, the threads of both your humane emergencies twisted and wound up in the same bottome, makes it impiety to divide the ap∣precation of blessings. All which may be fitly and mutually added is, that your living Persons and Posthume counsels may be had in just reverence and due estimtion: That you may shine like Lumi∣naries in our English Hemisphere, while the Sun compleats his day∣ly, the Moone her nightly Circles, till a totall dissolution of Nature usher in the great day appointed for a generall audit; Where when an account is to be given of humane actions, May the memo∣ry of your owne illustrious generous, and Christian undertakings be a cordill to your consciences, the justice and publick conducement of them, a reproach to others, who have abused equall Talents of parts and power, and the divine approbation of their sincerity, a conviction to all those who know not how to be gratefull for their owne, or the generall happinesse.
And these as they ought to be the publick exorations of all truly English; So in particular are they the devout wishes of,
My Lords, 
