



Honoured SIR,
THIS World, a most stately Stru∣cture, was made to be a Temple to the Eternal Divinitie. For Re∣ligion, which is the Holy Worship of GOD, is the great End of the Life and Being of man, for whom this World was made. Man is both the World's Ora∣tour and GOD's Priest: He, in the behalf of all the Creatures, is to speak the Praises of GOD, and offer∣ing them up as a Spiritual Sacrifice at GOD's Altar,
to implore His Aid and Blessing upon all his Underta∣kings. And for all the Good he receives and enjoys, he is devoutly to give the Glory to GOD.
All Civil Administrations and secular Affairs are sanctify'd by Religion. The Law of Religion is writ∣ten in the Nature of man; and its Obligations inforc'd by Reason. The Heathens in all great Affairs, were wont to make humble Addresses to the supposed Divini∣ties they adored. The greatest Persons among them, before they undertook any Matter of Weight or Impor∣tance, would have Recourse to some Temple of the Gods, to ask Counsel, to offer up their Vows, and to implore their Aid for a good Success. And when they were guided by Oracles, they proceeded with as much Courage and Confidence, as if they expected to be prosper'd by Miracles, in the Pursuit of their Designs. And when they succeeded in their great Attempts, and attain'd their End, they honour'd their Gods as the Au∣thors of their happiness, by Religious Acknowledg∣ments and rich Oblations. How much more does it become Christians, to whom the only true GOD hath not only reveal'd Himself in the Greatness of His Power, and Glories of his Grace, but also by a firm Covenant, obliged Himself to be their GOD, and to do them Good, in all their Undertakings to make their Addresses to Him for Direction, Assistance and good Success! How well does it become Judges and Magistrates, who have so great a Power and
Trust, both as to the Laws, and the Lives of men, when they enter upon a Work of so great Importance, as the Peace and Welfare of the King and People, to go to meet GOD in His House, who as Supreme Lord and Judge presides in their Court! 'Tis by Authority derived from GOD, they sit to judge men: and 'tis by the Light of His Wisdom, and Influence of his Grace that they err not in Judgment. When a Judge comes out of the Church into the Court, he appears with more Majesty, as a God coming out of Heaven to administer Justice to men on Earth. When a Judge has first hearkened to the Voice of GOD, declaring His Will to him in his Word, he comes with more Autho∣rity-to execute his Office, and ought to be attended with more Regard, as a Person who comes with Instru∣ctions from the King, and Injunctions from GOD. And this is agreeable to what the Gospel requires, that what ever a man does, he should do it in the Name of Christ, and for the Glory of GOD.
Now, Sir, the Solemnity of Religion, prepa∣ratory to the Administration of Justice, was by your Appointment and Command, committed to my Care. The following Discourse prepar'd for that Purpose, tho' somewhat contracted in the Delivery, I have here, in Obedience to your Command, presented to you entire; hoping that, at least, it may serve for a Memoriall of that Honour, which His Majesty, our most Gracious Sovereign, hath been pleased to confer upon you, in
appointing you, in so perillous a Time, to be the Guar∣dian of Publick Justice, and in accounting you a fit Person to be intrusted with the armed Power of the whole Countie for the Defence and Safety both of the King and his People. 'Tis a mighty Trust in a Day of so great Danger, wherein wicked men have made a blou∣dy Conspiracy against the Life of our Sovereign, which ought to be Ten Thousand times dearer to eve∣ry one of us than our own Lives.
2 Sam. 18.3. But that Almighty GOD, in whose Hand are the Lives of Kings, will graciously be pleased long to preserve the precious Life of our present Gracious Sovereign, from all the Machi∣nations of his wicked Enemies, and at last, after a long and happy Reign on Earth, crown him with eternal Glory in Heaven, is (I am well assured) the hearty Desire and Prayer of all his Loyall Subjects, and a∣mongst them of
(Worthy Sir)

