



Madam,
YOur favourable, and Christian respects to me (both of former and latter date) your Godly, and Christian Letters to me, so many thousand miles distant in America: And your many gracious Demonstrations of an humble and Christian Spirit breath∣ing in you; are a three fold Cord which have drawn these lines into your presence.
While I have sometimes mused how to express a Christi∣an gratitude, I am at last perswaded to crave your Lady∣ships acceptance of these poore Experiments of each true Christians personall union, and communion with the Father of Spirits.
It is true, I have been sometimes prest to engage in con∣troversies, but I can really and uprightly say, my Witnes is on high, how harsh and dolesul the touch of those strings are, especially, against such Worthies both in old and new-England, in whom I joyfully before the world acknow∣ledge (in many heavenly respects) a lively character and Image of the Son of God. This broken piece, is a breath of a still and gentle voice, none but the God of this world, and the men of this world, can I lightly (at this turne) expect my opposites.
At other times I have been drawne to consider of the lit∣tle flock of Jesus, his Army, his body, his building,

that for these many hundred years have been scattered, routed and laid wast and desolate: At present, I onely examine who are the personall and particular Sheep of Jesus Christ, his Souldiers, his living materials, though scattered, divided, and not compos'd and ordred at their souls desire.
I confess (Madam) it was but a private and sudden discourse, sent in private to my poor Companion and Yoak-fellow, occasioned by a sudden sickness threatning death, into which, and from which it pleased the Lord most graciously to cast and raise her.
The forme and stile I know will seem to this refined age, too rude and barbarous: And the truth is, the most of it was penn'd and writ (so as seldom or never such dis∣courses were) in the thickest of the naked Indians of Ame∣rica, in their very wild houses, and by their barbarous fires; when the Lord was pleased this last year (more then ordinarily) to dispose of my abode and travell amongst them. And yet, is the Language plaine? it is the liker Christs: Is the composure rude? such was his outward Beauty: Are the tryals (seemingly) too close? such is the two edged Sword of his most holy Spirit, which pierceth between the very Soul and Spirit, and bringeth every thought into the obedience of Christ Jesus.
Amongst the many Crowns of mercy (Madam) which it hath pleased the Father of mercies to crowne your soul with, as David speaks of his Psal. 103. there are two which justly challenge (and your Ladiship I know doth hum∣bly acknowledge them) to be the fairest.
The first, That he himselfe most high, most holy, (who makes his common choice, the poor, Jam. 2. and choos∣eth few Lords, few Knights, few Ladies, (few wise, Cor. 3. few noble, few mighty) hath freely chosen you Madam, in so gracious and blessed a measure, to desire to feare his Name.

A second, That for your dearest Companion and Guide in this vale of tears (amongst the famous Wor∣thies of this age) he hath graciously guided you to such a blessed choice, of such an Husband on earth, who beares so bright an Image of your Husband in the Heavens, and in whose most holy and gracious hand, he hath been such a mercifull and faithfull Instrument, for both the free∣doms both of the outward and inner man.
I doe humbly acknowledge (that upon an absolute account) all is mercy, and yet I am also humbly confident, that in a respect (as he graciously remembred his old friend Abra∣ham, and tels us of a speciall love he yet bears the Jewes for Abrahams sake, even so, he hath graciously vouchsa∣fed at this present an honorable remembrance to the NAMES of some of his more eminent former friends and witnesses.
How hath he rowned the memory of those his 2 zeal∣ous Servants in K. Henry the 8th. his days Cromwel and Lam∣bert. with a most eminent and blessed succession of such names and spirits at this day? and in a gracious remembrance of his love to that blessed daughter and witnesse of his the Lady Vane in Q. Maries dayes; how hath it pleased his wisedom and goodnesse, to remember and to honour that Name, both in your Ladiship and so many otherways, with so ma∣ny loving kindnesses at this day?
My humble cry (Madam) to the Lord shall never cease, those all those your many obligations of both temporall and eternall mercies, may (like chaines of Adamant) draw and bind your precious Soul more and more to re∣solve (by his grace assisting) to make his name great, who hath made your so and so to love his Name, his Son, his Spirit, his Truth, his Children, that others at the Torch of your exemplary meeknesse and fear of God, may light and kindle theirs; That your Souls-eye more and

more brightly may see him who is invisible, and may so ex∣perimentally resent those invisible and internal Honors, pleasures and profits that are in him that in comparison thereof the visible and worldly, may be accounted by you but dreams of shadows, &c. That your great desire may be a likenesse of so high and holy, and so dear a Saviour, and (as in other excellencies so) in that especially of a de∣sire of saving others, your Children, Kindred, Servants, Friends, yea, Enemies: that neither the pleasing calme of prosperity, nor the dreadfull storms of changes, may quench or dampe that holy fire of your Souls love (in Life and Death) to Him whom your Ladyship hath so much infinite cause to love, but never yet saw, in whom, and for ever

