



Royal Sir,
THE Most High hath adorned you with an High
Birth, with a gallant Temper, and Endowments of
Nature, with Princely Education, and rare Experi∣ences
&c. The Crown of all, the Sanctifier of
all must be L'esprit de Djeu, or else all that is under the
Sun in fumum abeunt.
Touching this most holy Spirit, and other heavenly Points
in difference between the Protestants and the Quakers, I
present your royal eye with a Lantskip of a Battle fought
this last Summer in your Majestyes New-England, between
some of the eminentest of the Quakers and my self, three
dayes at Newport on Rode-Island, and one at Providence on
the Main in the same Colony.

I am humbly bold to present it to your Royal Hand,
1. That your own precious Soul (infinitely more pre∣cious
then thousands of Brittains or Worlds may see the
Grounds and Roots of these Protestant Disquisitions.
2. That your Majesty may see what your New-English
Subjects are doing under the gracious Wing of your won∣derfull
Favour to us &c
3. Because your Majestyes Name is often mentioned
and concerned in these Concertations.
4. Because it was affirmed by some of my Opposites in
publick, that there were scarce any of their Books came
forth, but the King had one: I thought it some obligation
on me, to present the Protestant Truth (thus publickly and
solemnly asserted) more justly then my Popish and Ar∣minian
Opposites to offend your Royal eyes with Smoak out
of the Deep Pit.
Gracious Sir, I know your precious Spirits and Minutes
are exhausted in managing your Warrs abroad, and in
preserving your Dominions in Peace at home; I cannot
therefore hope for one glance of your eye upon any more
then this poor Epistle.
Charles the Great was one of the greatest Princes of that
name in the world. And Charles the fifth (both Emper∣ours)
had his wonderfull Trick at Helm also; but both (and
all) turn into the Cabbin & Pit of Rottenness. Charles the
5th. in his 58th. year, Charles the Great in his 72d. year:
But were every drop of water between your Old-England
and New, a million of years, yet Mors ultima linea, and tis
but Momentum unde pendet Eternitas.
By Gods most wise and righteous Permission, the Pope
and Quakers pretend their Enthusiasmes and Infallibilityes: I
know and have detected much of both of their Impostures,

and I beseech him who is the eternal Pater Luminum, to
preserve your Royal Spirit from both their Cheatings, that
is from the Oracles of Hell in their mouths.
And I humbly importune your Majestyes continued Grace
and Patience to this poor New-England, which (though a
miserable, cold, howling Wilderness, yet L'eternel hath
made it his Glory, your Majestyes Glory, and a Glory to the
English and Protestant Name: and if the most High please,
Old and New-England may flourish when the Pope and
Mahomet, Rome and Constantinople are in their Ashes.
Providence in N-England,
March 10th. 1672/3.
(ut Vulgò,)

