



Loving and Loyal Gentlemen,
IT is very observable, that most of you (to whom this Epistle is Dedicated) were perso∣nally present at the delivery of the (following) Sermon, which discourse I found to be complyable with your Loyal dispositions: otherwise I had not been so∣licited (by so many of its Auditors) to publish the same in Print. And tho I was much importun'd thereunto, yet I durst not presume upon such an enterprize, until I had taken the (wary) advice of much more dis∣creet and better judgments.
The Text was recommended to my manage∣ment, by a well-wisher (and good benefactor) both to the Church of England and the Common-weal, name∣ly Wi. Swift Esq and it is an undoubted Testimoni∣al, not only of his Religious Principles, but also of his Loyal Practices; whose (longing) desire is to see Uni∣formity flourishing both in Church and State, the
 which happiness would much redound to the satisfacti∣on of all such Persons as have true affection to the present Government; for if we take a serious pros∣pect of the Primitive times, nothing more prejudic'd the Christian Religion, than the irregular discords of disaffected People, as appears in the Faction of the Church of Corinth, where one said, I am of Paul, another I am of Apollo, a third I am of Cephas, and a fourth I am of Christ, as if Paul, Apollo, Peter and Christ, had various Pro∣fessions of the same universal or Catholick Doctrine, which was so far repugnant with the (uniformal) practice of the Apostles, that St. Paul sharply re∣prehended such conceited Parties, for their inordinate and self-will'd distinctions, as if (thereby) they contracted the guilt of Saducaean error, i. e. in de∣nying the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, as appears in his 1 Epist. Cor. Chap. 15. Vers. 12.
This Capital default was attended with many other Criminous (or Enormous) mistakes, by reason of their incongruous Practices and Contentious Customs, which were the perfidious (and unsufferable) Causes, that brought Faith into Faction, and Religion into Re∣bellion; like our giddy Dissenters from the Church of England; who contrary to the course of the Learn∣ed and Holy-men, have imagin'd and fram'd strange
 conclusions in Divinity, as alledging the Choice of Ministers, to stand upon the approbation of the Peo∣ple, and that they are all of equal authority, also they affirm the Church of Englands Government to be unlawful and Anti-Christian, and that the Lords Prayer commanded by our Saviour, must not be used, no Holy-day observ'd but the Sabbath, no Primitive Father scited in the Pulpit, the Book of Common-Prayer (or Divine Service) must be abolished, all Ceremonies of our Church swept away as Popish, that the calling of Bishops is an Anti-christian Hie∣rarchy, that Reformation of Religion belongs to the Commonalty, that the People are better than the King, and of greater Authority, that the Presbitery and not the Prince, should bear the Supream Government, in matters Ecclesiastical. These (and such like No∣velties) are their seditious and confused Tenets, the reason of all which mistakes, as St. Peter remarks in his 2d. Epist. the 2d. Chap. Verse 10, is because they are presumptuous, self-will'd, despising Government, and speaking evil of Dignities; tho the same Apostle obliges them (by the express Rule of Scripture) To fear God and honour their King, but they (by the Magick of their Seperation) divide that Text of Scripture asunder, which Christ and his Apostle have joyned together, yea, it visibly ap∣pears,
 that though they pretended to fear God, yet they so far dishonored their King, as to occasion the death of the Lord's Anointed, to wit, our late Royal Martyr; and it is too apparent, that the like mischief was lately hatcht, in order to depose the Re∣gal Person of our present Soveraign (had not God preserved him by a miracle of unparalelled Mercy) but to prevent such Schism, Treason and Rebellion, I shall conclude this Epistle with St. Paul's rule of Conformity in his 1 Epist. Cor. Chap. 1 Verse 10. where he speaks these expressions to the Seditious Corinthians.—
—Now I beseech you Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joyned together in the same mind, and in the same Judgment:

