



SIR,
WHEN we parted at the Election, you desired me to give you the Judgment of the Foreign Protestants about the Church of England, and particularly as to the Rites and Offices, of which the Author of the Letter to the Convocation tells us, p. 23. That if the Convocation do not alter them, most certainly the Parliament will. The very talk of Change, you know, breeds a Ferment in the Nation, and be sure the discontented will make their advantage of it; but if the Nation finds the Parlia∣ment as steddy as the Convocation, the Heats will soon be over, and the Kingdom return to her Settle∣ment and Peace. Nolumus leges Angliae mutare, was an Answer first in Parliament, and that in opposition to some Ecclesiasticks, who would have introduced several Foreign Rites and Customs, into the room of received
 and approved Constitutions, quae huc us{que} usitatae sunt ac approbatae.
Optatus Milev. l. 3. p. 75. tells us of his time, That there had been a Report spread by some that came from the Emperor, that Alterations should be made in the Liturgy, which startled the People; but when they saw their Solemn Customs and wonted Rites observed, and that nothing was changed, added, or diminish'd in their Divine Service, they were quieted again.
Those Governments have been observed to continue longest that have been most steddy in their Laws; and the Jews who were immediately governed by God, had their very Rites and Ceremonies unaltered for almost 2000 Years, their great Law-giver foreseeing, that every considerable Alteration in an establish'd Religion, or even its Rites and Modes, would put the State into Convulsions, and indanger a Revolution.
As to our present Conjuncture, it was a great over∣sight in those that carryed on the Design of a Comprehen∣sion, to begin with a Toleration; and its unreasonable to think that the Dissenters will unite with Ʋs, so long as their Separation is allowed. Nothing that you can do, will promote their Ʋnion with Ʋs, but that which makes it their Interest, and that can be only done by Rewards and Punishments; and therefore the taking off the Sanctions of the Laws, and making the Separation easie, was beginning at the wrong end, and a certain way to make a Comprehension ineffectual.
But since the Ʋnion proposed is not confined to our Nation, but extended to all the Protestants in the World, that are now united in their Interests; I have here,
 according to your Desires, given you a true account of the great esteem and veneration they all have for the Church of England, and particularly for those very Rites and Customs that are now disputed, and what Offence and Scandal our Dissenters give them; so that by an impartial Consideration of their Opinions, you, and all the Nation may be satisfied that making of Al∣terations in the Instances proposed, will be so far from promoting a closer Ʋnion with the Foreign Protestants, (who have always esteemed Ʋs, as the very Center of Union,) that its the most certain way to hinder it.
For what concerns the late Convocation, I shall re∣fer you to an excellent Paper, Entituled, Remarks from the Country upon the Two Letters relating to the Convocation and Alterations in the Liturgy,
SIR,

