


Worthy Sir,
REnowned Homer, (for whom Seven Cities contended for the Honor of being the place of his Birth,) when he first betook himself to Poetry, thought himself obliged to express his thankfulness to his Benefactors, and first to Mentor who took care of him when he had sore eyes, and to his Master which brought him up in Learn∣ing, and he gratefully requited Tychicus the Leather-seller, that received him into his House.
If I endeavor to imitate the worthy ex∣ample of this darling of the Muses, and render you my most hearty thanks and re∣cord to all ages, your so Generous, Free, and Bountiful love to me, and care of me when a Prisoner deserted by my Kindred and
Relations, not sparing your pains in Tra∣vel, and cost on my occasions, with your bounty to me other waies, (never to be forgot∣ten) which hath set me sometimes into Ad∣miration of Gods great mercy to me, in raising me such a Friend, that hath sent me so many comforting Letters, which as so many Cordials have revived my sad and drooping Spirits. And that you who are so eminently imployed in the publick, and have so many great affairs of your own, should lay all aside, and Travel, and expend on my occasions, which did never, nor ever was in a capacity so highly to engage you. And all this done, when I was cast down so low, when no satisfaction from me was vi∣sible, your favors were then so clear, and continued without any reserve to your self. Your indefatigable pains in being the instru∣ment in Gods hands of setting me at liberty, which is to me the beginning of a new life.
Should not these so eminent favors call me to gratitude, I were worse than the beast that perish.
Sir. It hath not a little rejoyced my soul
that God (in my old Old age) hath enabled me, (amid all this more than Three years cala∣mity) to have something of my own to present you with (though not worthy of you.) They are my Two last years exercises by way of Meditations in the Kings-Bench. They were for the most part written in the House, But Corrected, and Enlarged in the Rules. I beseech you accept them as the most grate∣ful acknowledgment of your so much Care, Pains, Travel, and Expence for me. It is the only requital that ever I can be ca∣pable of, and that I can tell afterages that I can be thankful.
I shall be most rude and ungrateful, if I for∣get the favors which I have so chearfully re∣ceived from the Right Honorable Right wor∣shipful and many of my noble countrymen, and others, by whose bounty and favors I have bin supported in this my so long imprison∣ment. Most thankfully acknowledging their favors (especially of some) which have ex∣ceeded far beyond my expectation and all be∣yond my deserts.
Sir, I pray that you will take these papers
with the author into your protection, and con∣tinue your favor, that God will continue his grace and favor to you, shall ever be the de∣sires of my heart while I breath and remain.

