


Right Honourable and Renowned Patriots:
NExt to the saving of your own soules (in the lamentable
shipwrack of Mankind) your taske (as Christians) is to
save the Soules, but as Magistrates, the Bodies and Goods
of others.
Many excellent Discourses have been presented to your
Fathers hands and Yours in former and present Parliaments:
I shall be humbly bold to say, that (in what concernes your
duties as Magistrates, towards others) a more necessary and
seasonable debate was never yet presented.
Two things your Honours here may please to view (in this
Controversie of Persecution for cause of Conscience) beyond
what's extant.
First the whole Body of this Controversie form'd & pitch'd
in true Battalia.
Secondly (although in respect of my selfe it be impar con∣gressus,
yet in the power of that God who is Maximus in Mini∣is,
Your Honours shall see the Controversie is discussed with
men as able as most, eminent for abilitie and pietie, Mr. Coton,
and the New English Ministers.
When the Prophets in Scripture have given their Coats of
Armes and Escutchons to Great Men, Your Honours know the
Babylonian Monarch hath the Lyon, the Persian the Beare, the
Grecian the Leopard, the Romane a compound of the former 3.
most strange and dreadfull, Dan. 7.
Their oppressing, plundring ravishing, murthering, not only
of the bodies, but the soules of Men are large explaining com∣mentaries
of such similitudes.
Your Honours have been famous to the end of the World,
for your unparallel'd wisdome, courage, justice, mercie, in the
vindicating your Civill Lawes, Liberties, &c. Yet let it not
be grievous to your Honours thoughts to ponder a little, why
all the Prayers and Teares and Fastings in this Nation have not
pierc'd the Heavens, and quench'd these Flames, which yet
who knowes how far they'll spread, and when they'll out!
Your Honours have broke the jawes of the Oppressour, and
taken the prey out of their Teeth (Iob. 29.) For which Act I
believe it hath pleased the most High God to set a Guard (not
only of Trained men, but) of mighty Angels, to secure your
sitting, and the Citie.
I feare we are not pardoned, though reprieved: O that there
may be a lengthning of Londons tranquilitie, of the Parliaments
safetie, by mercy to the poore! Dan. 4.
Right Honourable, Soule yokes, Soule oppressions plundrings,
ravishings, &c. are of a crimson and deepest dye, and I believe
the chiefe of Englands sins, unstopping the Viols of Englands
present sorrowes.
This glasse presents your Honours with Arguments from Re∣ligion,
Reason, Experience, all proving that the greatest yoakes
yet lying upon English necks, (the peoples and Your own) are of
a spirituall and soule nature.
All former Parliaments have changed these yoakes accor∣ding
to their consciences (Popish or Protestant) 'Tis now your
Honours turne at helme, and (as your task, so I hope your res∣lution,
not to change (for that is but to turne the wheele, which
another Parliament, and the very next may turne againe:) but
to ase the Subjects and Your selves from a yoake (as was once
spoke in a case not unlike Act 15.) which neither You nor your
Fathers were ever able to beare.
Most Noble Senatours, Your Fathers (whose seats You fill)
are mouldred, and mouldring their braines, their tongus, &c.
to ashes in the pit of rottenesse: They and You must shortly
(together with two worlds of men) appeare at the great Barre:
It shall then be no griefe of heart that you have now attended
to the cries of Soules, thousands oppressed, millions ravished by
the Acts and Statutes concerning Soules, not yet repealed.
Of Bodies impoverished, imprisoned, &c. for their soules be∣liefe,
yea slaughtered on heapes for Religions controversies in
the Warres of present and former Ages.
Notwithstanding the successe of later times,The famous saying of a late King of Bohe∣mia. (wherein
sundry opinions have been hatched about the subject of Re∣ligion)
a man may clearly discerne with his eye, and as it
were touch with his finger that according to the verity of
holy Scriptures, &c. mens consciences ought in no sort to be
violated, urged or constrained. And whensover men have
attempted any thing by this violent course, whether openly
or by secret meanes, the issue hath beene pernicious, and the
cause of great and wonderfull innovations in the principallest
and mightiest Kingdomes and Countries, &c.
It cannot be denied to be a pious and prudentiall act for
Your Honours (according to your conscience) to call for the
advice of faithfull Councellours in the high debates concerning
Your owne, and the soules of others.
Yet let it not be imputed as a crime for any suppliant to the
God of Heaven for You, if in the humble sense of what their
soules beleeve, they powre forth (amongst others) these three
requests at the Throne of Grace.
First, That neither Your Honours, nor those excellent and
worthy persons, whose advice you seek, limit the holy One of
Israel to their apprehensions, debates, conclusions, rejecting or
neglecting the humble and faithfull suggestions of any, though
as base as spittle and clay, with which sometimes Christ Iesus
opens the eyes of them that are borne blinde.
Secondly, That the present and future generations of the
Sons of Men may never have cause to say that such a Parlia∣ment
(as England never enjoyed the like) should modell the
worship of the living,Essay of Reli∣gion. eternall and invisible God after the Bi of
any earthly interest, though of the highest concernment under
the Sunne: And yet, saith that learned Sir Francis Bacon (how
ever otherwise perswaded, yet thus he confesseth:) Such as
hold pressure of Conscience, are guided therein by some pri∣vate
interests of their owne.
Thirdly, What ever way of worshipping God Your owne
Consciences are perswaded to walke in, yet (from any bloody
act of violence to the consciences of others) it may bee never
told at Rome nor Oxford, that the Parliament of England hath
committed a greater rape,It is rarely seen that ever persons were persed for their  then if they had forced or ravished
the bodies of all the women in the World.
And that Englands Parliament (so famous throughout all
Europe and the World) should at last turne Papists, Prelatists,
Presbyterians, Independents, Socinians, Familists, Antinomians,
&c. by confirming all these sorts of Consciences, by Civill
force and violence to their Consciences.
