


My Lord,
WISDOM and VIRTUE, which oft wait at the Gate of HONOUR, and hardly find admittance, do here present themselves before Your Lordship, in Hopes of that Noble Entertain∣ment, which is wont to be given, by Persons of Honour, to their Nearest Allies. They are never repulst by any without Wrong and Disgrace to themselves; nor by any entertain'd,
with a due Regard, without an Ad∣dition to their Honour and Happi∣ness. The Person, by whose Hand they are brought in this humble Dress into Your Presence, beggs the Pardon of his Rudeness in this Approach, and leaving these Excel∣lencies to Your Lordships Enter∣tainment, instantly withdraws him∣self to his due distance, and waits (with Mordecai, at the Gate) in Hope, that having presented these Virgin-Beauties before Your judi∣cious Eye, they will appear so a∣greeable to Your Noble Mind, that they will presently obtain that entire Affection and Esteem, which will facilitate their Admission into so indissoluble an Ʋnion, as shall for ever exclude the Fear or Suspicion of a Divorce. And by this inno∣cent
and honourable Polygamy, may Your Lordship be Blessed with a Beautiful-Offspring of such excellent and amiable Virtues, as may sup∣port the Honour of Your Name, and be the growing Glory of Your House.
These Excellencies, Wisdom and Virtue, which I have here present∣ed before. Your Lordship, are of more than Noble Descent, of Di∣vine Original, the Offspring of the uncreated Goodness. But I fear that (as sometimes the incarnate Wisdom of God) they find but little Re∣gard amongst the greater Part of the Sons of Men. And therefore that their Reception (particularly in our own Country, for its singu∣lar Honour and Advantage) may be answerable to their Dignity, I
have endeavour'd to unvail their ex∣cellent Beauty, and manifest their singular Ʋsefulness, in the follow∣ing Discourse; which (though its Meanness makes it even afraid of Appearance, yet imboldned by the Assurance of the Goodness of the Design, and Seasonableness of the Endeavour) I do here humbly offer to Your Lordships Hand.
To accept so small a Present from so mean a Person, will be an Act of Humility; to become a Great Example of that Excellency which is here commended to all men, will be a singular Glory. If the Doctrine delivered in this Dis∣course, be commended to our Coun∣treymen, by so Illustrious an Exam∣ple, 'twill certainly be more pow∣erfully operative and influential.
So shall Your Lordship shine as a Great Light among many lesser Stars: neither shall your brighter Glory suffer an Eclipse in Death it self, but shine in a higher Orb amongst those fair Lights, which adorn those glorious Mansions; wherein the Soveraign Goodness reigns in eternal Glory.
May Wisdom so conduct Your Lordship in all Your Affairs, and Virtue so adorn and beautify all Your Actions, that You may be the Honour of Your House, and Ornament of Your Countrey; that having planted Virtues to a hap∣py thriving on Earth, and ga∣thered their pleasant Fruits in Praises and Prosperities, you may at length be carried up in Tri∣umph, by glorious Angels, into
Heaven, there to be crown'd with immortal Glories, in the Kingdom of God. May the Splendour of Your Lordships Virtue and Goodness be so great, that the Spreading Raies thereof may co∣ver your whole Countrey, and extend their exhilarating Light even to the remote Obscurities of,
My Lord, 

