


Great Sirs,
NExt to His Sa-cred Majesty, to
C. 4. Inst. 53. Crompt. Juris. 35. You all Honour and Reverence is due, as being Incorporate to His Person, and Whose
C. 4. Inst. 54: High Office it is, accor∣ding to the best of your Judg∣ments truly and justly to ad∣vise and counsel the King in all things that may be to His Honour and Behoof, and for the good of His Subjects. And though His Majesty is arm'd with several other Councels for several purposes, yet it is with You that he consults and advises (amongst other the most weighty Affairs of State) when, and upon what occasion it is that He is to call to His other Councels for Advice and As∣sistance. It appears by the Writs of Summons of the Lords to Parliament,
Cromp. Ju. fo. 1. and by the Writs to the Sheriffs for Election of Knights and Burgesses, that it is by Your advice the King doth call His Parliament; for after the Salutem in those Writs are these
words, viz. Quia de Advisamento & Assensu Concilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis & urgentibus negotiis nos statum & defensi∣onem Regni nostri Angliae, & Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, quodam Par∣liamentum nostrum, apud, &c. teneri or∣dinavimus. If then it appertains to You to advise His Majesty when it is proper to call His Parliament, it follows of consequence that it appertains to You also to advise Him to call His other Councels upon occasion: And hence I conceive it is that You have been Dignified in ancient Records by the name of Magnum Concilium Regis, and there∣by distingnished from Mag∣num Concilium Regni,
Co. 1 Inst. 110. cites Records to that purpose. which is the Parliament. Therefore, and in as much as frequent supplications have of late been made by divers to His Majesty for Relief a∣gainst mistaken Decrees in Chancery with∣eut effect, by reason of some Opinions that there was no legal Remedy in such Cases, but by Appeal to the Lords House assembled in Parliament: I have, for the advancement of Justice, and maintenance of the King's Right of Jurisdiction, compil'd, and adven∣tured humbly to recommend this ensuing Treatise to His Majesty and Your considera∣tion; which if You vouchsafe to peruse, I
hope it will make it so clear that His Maje∣sty may lawfully relieve His Subjects against such mistaken Decrees in the In∣tervals of Parliament, as to confute all Op∣ponents, or at leastwise manisest so much probability thereof, and that there is so much necessity for the use of it, as may induce You to advise and desire His Majesty to be further satisfied therein by the Opinion of His whole Colledge of Judges, who in case of doubt in matters of Law, our Law-Books say, are his particular and sworn Councel;
Co. 1 Inst. 110. vi. Jurament. Jn∣sticiarior. 18 E. 3. In doing whereof, I humbly conceive you will perform an act that will highly redound to the Honour of the King, & welfare of His injur'd Subjects: my Zeal to Both which hath put me upon begging Your favourable Reception and Interpretation of this Labour of His, who submits both Himself and It to Your Honours Command.

