



Right Honourable:
REmarkable is that pas∣sage in the History of Nehemiah: when the poorer sort of the Tekoites laboured stoutly in repairing the Walls of Jerusalem, their Nobles put not their Necks to the work of their Lord.
Nehem. 3.5. By which
we are plainly taught, that when God commandeth, Nobles are no less straitly bound to obedience, than inferiour persons. Indeed as godliness is profitable unto all things, so the power and practice of God∣liness is necessary for all persons of all degrees. The great men of the earth, yea those that are moun∣ted on the highest stair of earthly Majesty, must not think it any disparagement to labour for un∣derstanding of the Mysteries of Religion, & to exercise the duties of piety: their places cannot pri∣viledge them, their affairs may not excuse them from works of this nature,
Deut. 17.9. Psal. 19.1, 2, & 148.11. & .11. & 72.0, 11. For first, as there is but one God, and one Kingdom of Heaven, so there is but one way leading to that Heaven, which is
the way of holiness and righteous∣ness. Whence it follows that the sons of Nobles are no more ex∣empted from the necessity of hea∣ring, reading, confessing, praying, fasting, holy conference, watch∣ing over their own ways, and the ways of their houses, and such pious exercises which are main duties, means and helps of holiness, than the poorest man in the world, that if they leave the care of these things to the poorer sort, they shall leave Heaven to them also, and be turned into To∣pheth, while the poor take the King∣dom by violence. Secondly, the mightiest are but Gods tenants, farmers, stewards, vassals, vassels as well as the meanest, they hold of him whatsoever they have, to
their very breath, by homage they so depend upon him, that they cannot subsist one moment with∣out him, their greatness as well as their being is from him, a gift of his providence (for promotion cometh neither from the East, nor from the VVest, nor from the South, but from God the Judge, who putteth down one, and set∣teth up another) therefore they owe as much love,
Psal. 75.6, 7. & 113.8. Dan. 4.17. reverence, thankfulness, obedience to their Creator as others, that is in a word, they ought to be as religi∣ous as others.
Gal. 3.28. Col. 3.11. For in the spiritual Kingdom of Christ there is not (nor shall there be in the day of wrath, and before the glorious Tribunal of Christs) any diffe∣rence betwixt the Prince and the
Pesant. Thirdly, Religion and Piety, bringing to Com∣munion with God, and par∣ticipation of the spiritual son∣ship, and the divine Nature, ennobles Nobility, sets a Crown upon Earthly Dignity, makes greatness truly honourable: whereas the most glorious greatness without true godli∣ness and goodness, is not on∣ly vanity, but baseness in the sight of God, despised there∣fore by holy Moses (for can any thing be more base, than to command many, and yet willingly to serve the Devil, the worst Master, the vilest Tyrant in the VVorld? be∣sides that in Scripture, not the great but the good, not the
high but the holy, are sti∣led the precious, excellent, glorious ones, Gods Jew∣els, worthy persons, Tem∣ples of the living God in whom he walks and dwells, Kings born of God, bre∣thren of Christ, the King of Kings, dwelling in Heaven, &c.) and will end in shame and misery, as many testimo∣nies and examples in Gods word prove abundantly? Fourth∣ly, where much is given, much is required; where God sowes liberally, he looks to reap accordingly. Now great men are most indebted to Gods liberality, their heads are anoint∣ed with Oil, their cup runs over, they are fed with the finest of the
wheat, and satisfied with honey out of the Rock, they enjoy the most precious and delicate portions of the world, and suck the sweetest marrow of Gods temporal boun∣ty, they have, or may have if they be not wanting to them∣selves, better means and more time of building up themselves in godliness, than others. There∣fore they have no cloak for their sin. yea double guilt lies upon their souls, if receiving most wages, they give the Lord least glory, least faithful ser∣vice. They that having most allurements and helps to be good, will not be good, shall be deepest in Hell. Fifthly, fewest great ones are called to grace, as few first born, named
in Scripture were vouchsafed the adoption of sons (God delighting to stain the pride of Mans glory, and to spoil him of all matter of boasting, all occasion of putting confidence in carnal priviledges) and its harder for great men to be saved, than others; because there are most and strongest bars to keep them from conversion, they are most hardly brought to emp∣ty themselves by self-denial, po∣verty of spirit, mortification, con∣tempt of the world, that they may be fit to enter in at the strait gate, they are exposed to most & grea∣test temptations and spiritual dangers, as the tal Cedars to stron∣gest blasts, Satan hath many more advantages against them, than meaner persons, they are most sub∣ject
to be poisoned with pleasures, puffed up with pride, surfet of prosperity, let loose the reigns to all injustice, violence, cruelty; in a word, to break the bonds of all discipline, promise to them∣selves impunity, and become in∣corrigible (while they powre out themselves to all licentiousness) because few dare freely reprove them: (hence, no doubt, sprung that Dutch Proverb, which must be taken with a corn of salt, Princes in Heaven are as scarce as Venison in poor mens Kitchins) therefore they have need to be ex∣traordinary careful of their sal∣vation, and guarded with double diligence, watchfulness, zeal in all religious duties. Lastly, their lives are very exemplary, obvious
to publick inspection and imita∣tion, many eyes are fixed upon them, their actions are powerful to command, effectual to corrupt inferiours, who are too ready to follow and conform to their courses, and think, if great men live wickedly, they may do the same by authority, Satanknoweth, that by their exorbitances they not only lose their own souls, but draw much company with them to perdition, Examples e∣ven of greatest Princes, Kings, Emperours further confirming this point are not wanting. David, though entangled in many wars, besides other incumbrances and employments not a few, spent no small time in communing with God and his own heart, as ap∣pears
by this, that 140 of the Psalms in probability are of his penning and composing. King Josiah in the eigth year (not of his life, as some mistake, but) of his reign, that is in the sixteenth of his life, began to seek after the God of David his father, that is to give himself to the private study of piety; to reading, prayer, and such like exercises. Who more de∣vout than Daniel and Nehemiah, two great Courtiers and Gover∣nours? Constantine the Great, be∣sides reading and praying with his family, did every day at set times shut himself in his closet, and there converse with God by solitary Prayer. Alfred King of England spent eight hours (the third part) of every natural day
in prayer, study, and writing. These things I have thus discour∣sed, that your Lordship may see and others acknowledge, I do not without cause offer to your hands and eyes a Treatise, wherein the two main parts of religion, faith and good life, are explained and urged. It pleased your Noble Fa∣ther, while yet he dwelt in the land of the living, to vouchsafe me, the meanest of Gods messen∣gers, that gracious respect, which I could never have expected from so honourable a personage; and your Honour also, in those times to take notice of me. The remem∣brance of those things hath em∣boldened me to this Dedication, which otherwise I should never have presumed to attempt. Where∣in
the Searcher of hearts knoweth I seek and aim at nothing else, but the honouring of his memo∣ry who now sleepeth in the Lord, and stirring up your tender mind to the imitation of his vertues. What honest heart ever knew him and did not lament his departure as a publick loss, or say, this world which now wants him, was unworthy of him? He was a professed enemy of Popery and Prophaneness, a true friend and favourer of all godly and painful teachers, without exception or partiality, receiving their persons and doctrine with such gladness and singular reverence, as I must needs say to me was vvonderful, and in persons of his ranck is rarely seen, ready at all times by
his authority, speech, letter to help and encourage them in their holy function? What shall I say of his supported life in the slippe∣ry time of youth, his religious care of constant frequenting Gods house, not only twice on the Lords day, but ordinarily on Lecture days, and preparing him∣self for the use of the Lords Sup∣per, his sincere affection to the holy ways of the Lord, and all that walk in the same, which to any observant eye appeared by many not obscure signs and te∣stimonies? I shall comprehend all if I do but say, by profane great ones, who openly reveren∣ced him, he was secretly twitted for Preciseness and Puritanism. And could the Epilogue of such a
life, be any other but a blessed death? Though his sickness was violent, yet how sweetly he com∣forted himself in the Lord, and having foretold the day of his death rejoyced in spirit from assu∣rance of being with Christ after his dissolution, how graciously, feelingly, powerfully, he powred out his heart in supplication be∣fore the Lord, those that were pre∣sent can witness, and will never forget, and amongst the rest I re∣member one (an ancient and re∣verend Minister) who professed to me, that himself was exceedingly affected and refreshed by his pray∣er, and that he hath seldom heard any Preacher pray more excellent∣ly, more divinely. Novv (my Lord) vvhy hath the Divine Pro∣vidence
(which doth nothing in vain) sent & set before you such a domestical precedent? Surely, for your admonition and instructi∣on, that you might be warned thereby to tread in the same steps, and learn the path of life by ex∣ample as well as precept. Suffer therefore (I beseech your Honor) the word of exhortation. As God hath made you heir of your fa∣thers greatness, so labour to shew forth an express image of his gra∣ces and godly conversation, and think often you hear his voice thus sounding in your ears (for by his life, being dead, he yet spea∣keth to you) My son know the God of your father, and serve him with a perfect heart and willing mind,

Macte nova virtute puer, sic itur ad astra, By the grace of God I have led you the way, walk as I have wal∣ked, that we may meet and enjoy one another in Heaven. Repel with infinite loathing the whi∣sperings of those witches, who go about to perswade that (though its not amiss for Nobles to have a form of godliness, yet) forward∣ness in Religion is a stain and blemish to Noble bloud. Such things are suggested by the father of lies, to rob you of true comfort in this life, and a Crown of glory after death. For I assure your Lord∣ship in the word of truth, as true piety is able to accommodate Noblemen with the best Musick (peace of Conscience) the best
Counsellor (the wisdom which is from above) the fairest and strong∣est house (Gods protection) the best weapons, defensive, offensive faith and the spirit of prayer) the best attendants (Gods holy An∣gels) so it will wonderfully adorn and beautifie all other excellen∣cies, purchase them more true honour than an external accom∣plishment, even the honour that cometh from God only, a place and a Name better than of Dukes, Earles, Lords, an everlasting name, that shall never be cut off, and at last put them into the possession of im∣mortality, and eternal life. The father of mercies inrich with all blessings of heaven and earth, the noble and vertuous Lady Phila∣delphia your mother, keep your
Honour from every evil now and ever, season and govern your young years by his holy spirit, that as you increase in days and stature, so you may increase in all sanctifying gifts, and in favour with God and men, flourishing in the Courts of our God, as those that are planted in the house of the Lord, and bringeth forth more fruit in old age, to the glory of his blessed name. Amen and Amen, from his heart saith

Apr. 30. 1627.
