



THE Great God, the Lord your God, God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, in pity to his people, and mercy to this Land, hath raised up (in our great distresse) Micah 5. 5. seven shepheards and eight principall men, out of the seve∣rall divisions of the Kingdome; when the enemy would come in like a flood, the spirit of the Lord hath lift up a Sandard against him. God hath called you for such a thing as this, at such a time as this, to this Great Court, your call is high, your work is hard, you know why you are borne, for the benefit of many, as Bucers Physitians said to him, non sibi se, sed multorum utilitati esse natum; You are our deliverers from hea∣vy burdens, our reformers of great corruptions, You

find Church and State bruised and diseased. You are our healers, . Sept. li∣gator vulne∣ram. Chirurgus & Reip. medi∣us.  ab , medela Cornl. à Lap. in Isai. 3.7. What though Israel fret? shall Moses faint? when men of renown murmure at the instruments of good, the Lord will shew who are Gods; no man suf∣fers so much injury as God doth contumely, as Me∣lanchthon said, nullum hominem tantum sustinere malorum, quantum contumeliarum Deus. It is not strange that some preferre Egyptians Onion to Cana∣an, and its dainties; yet their Caleb (a noble spirit) fully followed the Lord. Bucer and Melanchthon fra∣med a form of reformation, with approbation of the Peeres and States, but the Clergy in the Colledge of Colen (wherein were some stood right affected, but more were contrary)  in alta omnia iverunt. Melchior A∣dam. vita Bu∣ceri. p. 217. rejected with slander, and af∣firmed they had rather live in Turky, then under such a reformation, sub imperio Turcico malle se vivere, quàm sub Magistrat qui reformationem illam se∣quatur. Nehemiah, when he was in the Lords work, was scorned, resisted accused, threatned, and by Nobles in Iudah, (sworn unto Tobiah) deserted, yet hee builds and prospers, desists not his work, defieth his adversa∣ries factions, dreads not words, nor letters: Mens Furere istic & emere re∣ges, principes, populos, ad∣versus Chri∣stum Domini: foelix Omen puto, ac meli∣us, quam si blandirenur, &c. Id. vita Lutheri. p. 158. fury against Christ (is a good Omen) is better then their flattery, they laugh at him, (weep not for it) God laugh∣eth at them. Gods infinite providence (the seven eyes upon ne stone, Zechar. 3.9.) is upon the Churches foun∣dation, all things below are wheeled about, as the rngs full of eyes, infinitâ Dei providentiâ, Iun. in Ezek. 1. 18. Build you, God will prosper your work, make up the hedge, (God hath sought you for it) stand in the gap before the Lord, that he may not destroy the Land, who now visits our ingratitude, as Luther to Melanchton, valdè cupio ut sint adversus Satanae furores inaesti∣mabiles

aliquor reliqui, qui se pro do mo Israel mu∣ros opponant, in hoc die furoris Domini visitantis nostram, sicut dignum est, ingratitudinem.Id. vita Melan. p. 358. You love our Nation, your acts are nationall, execute judge∣ment and seek the truth, (thus love our Land) and the Lord will pardon, Ier. 5. 1. Doe men hate him that re∣buketh in the Gate, and abhorre him that spèaketh up∣rightly? it is knowne by it, it is an evill time, you con∣tend for peace and truth, be constant, and confident, your warre is peace, as Zwinglius de bello Helvetico, writing to his friends,Id. vita Zwing. p. 36. Bellum cui nos instamus, pax est, nonbellū, they strove to preserv verity & liberty of the Gospell. Men may (may be not) hurt the body, but they cannot reach, not touch the soule that spirituall sparkle, as Zwinglius his heart was whole (cor illaesum) when his body was turned into ashes. Luther warmed Me∣lanchthons spirit by a letter about the common cause then molested by Pontificall rage and Caesars fury, I (saith he) about the publike cause have a quiet mind, assured it is just, true, and unappalled, I feare not the fierce and cruell Papists,Id. vita Luth: p. 138. if we be overthrowne, Christ shall be overthrowne with us, and come what can, ma∣lo ego cum Christo ruere, quam cum Caesare stare, I had rather fall with Christ, then stand with Caesar. You fast, you pray, you consult with the God of heaven, who will answer in due time with good and comfortable words, Zechary 1.13 Pray (as Tanta reve∣rentia aliquid petit ut cum Do, tanta spe & fide, ut um patre & amico se loqui sntiat. p. 142. Luther was wont to doe) with revernce as to a God, and with confidence as to a friend and father.
The day of fasting allowes no ornaments in lesser things then Sermons, it was only my purpose to speak something pertinent to the day; fasting must have prayer, prayer faith, and faith activity; What can be

more necessary in the case of faith, then faith?Luther ani∣mosa ep. de ne∣gotio Evanglii ad Spalatin. in tantū est opus fidei, ne causa fidei sit sine fide; your difficul∣ties many, faith (which hath a kind of omnipotency) will carry you through all, tantum possumus, quantum credimus. In this service my study was that the word of truth propounded, your hearts (lift up in the way of the Lord to the work of the Lord) might continue in their height and heat by the spirit of burning, till all our filth and blood be purged, and washed away, till fa∣sting be turned into feasting, till men may use this speech in England, concerning the State, The Lord blesse thee ô habitation of justice; and concerning the Church, The Lord blesse thee ô mountaine of holinesse; till there be one Lord, and his Name one. That this Parliament (the repairer of the breaches, the restorer of the Paths to dwell in) by loyalty to our Soveraign, fidelity to the Kingdome, and zeale to Religion may be the joy of many Generations; which is the prayer of

