


Dear Children,
YOU have been acquaint∣ed with the Original of the ensuing Discourse, and the occasion of its Revival at this time: Your especial concern∣ment




in it is from the Character and Account given of the Life and Death of your Grand-Father (our Father) in the Epistle Dedi∣catory prefixed unto it: and al∣though we had not the advantage of knowing him our selves, so as then to have had a sense of the things spoken of him (he being taken away in our tender Age) yet we have a full assurance of the Truth of the Testimony given in the Epistle following unto his Zeal, Wisdome, and Piety.
The known Reputation and Integrity of the Reverend Author of that Epistle, with the time of his Writing of it, being after the Death of our Father, and its Di∣rection to one of us, then a Child, from whom he could expect no
Countenance, nor Reward, do ex∣empt his Testimony from the common Condition of such Epi∣stles and Dedications, even when Written by other good men.
On this Account we do in the first place commend the Treatise it self unto your dillgent perusal, and do leave it as a pledge of our concernment for you in the things contained therein. For being not designed, nor contrived by us, nor the Author for any such end, the Tender of it being made unto you from that hand of Pro∣vidence, whereof ye have heard, it ought to be had of you in espe∣cial regard.
It is a Treasure in, and unto a Family, to have such a Person as your Grand-father is here truly
represented to have been on the Roll of its Progenitors: And we have been taught, that where Soveraign Grace hath made an entrance into any Family, espe∣cially in a principal Root of it, it doth not utterly forsake that Family, at least in some of its branches, unless the Covenant, whereby it is administred, be ge∣nerally neglected or refused.
On this Occasion it is not im∣proper for us to add, what we each of us know, and can with much comfort Witness of the holy and exemplary Lives and Conversations of our dear Mother, and of each of our Wives from whom ye have respectively issu∣ed, on which Account, as the Apostle said of Timothy, that be
called to remembrance the unfeign∣ed Faith that dwelt in his Grand∣mother Lois, and his Mother Eu∣nice, we can truly say the like of your Grand-mother, and respe∣ctive Mothers; and we should re∣joyce in nothing more, than with the like Confidence to add with the same Apostle concerning you all, that we are perswaded the same Faith dwells in you also, as we hope we can say of some of you.
It becomes not us to speak a∣ny thing unto you of our selves, nor of our endeavours to trans∣mit this Priviledge unforfeited unto you? It is sufficient for us, which we must abide by, that, we have not been wanting in any means of Instruction, which we
thought might conduce unto your good and advantage.
You that are our own Chil∣dren immediately are most of you in that State, for Age and un∣derstanding, as wherein you must answer for your selves: We therefore leave it in charge with you, that there be not an Intercision of the Administration of the priviledge and grace of Gods Covenant in, and towards our Fa∣mily by your Default.
Your Lot is fallen into Times of great Advantage on the ac∣count of the Light of the Knowledge of the Gospel, and of great Disadvantage from the abounding of various Tempta∣tions in them; it requires more then ordinary Diligence so to de∣port
your selves, that you neither suffer for abused mercies, nor fall into a Course of sin upon urgent opportunities.
Remember also in point of Honour and Interest that no Fa∣milies are more contemptible in the World, than those, who de∣generate from pious Ancestors; for in that case it is, which God himself hath given that express Rule, They that honour me I will ho∣nour, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.
It is but a little while, that we shall be present with you, neither have we much more to do for your advantage, than we have done: Our principal Design now is, to leave an abiding sense with you of this our present Ad∣vice.
We are not altogether ignorant of what hath been said by others, and of what yet may be said in the way of Advice to Children by Pa∣rents, who have a Care of their Temporal and Eternal good. The substance of all that can be spoken in this Case is comprized in the last words of David to Solomon his Son; And thou, Solomon, my Son, know thou the God of thy Fa∣ther, and serve him with a per∣fect heart, and a willing mind, for the Lord searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the Imaginati∣ons of the thoughts: if thou seek him he will he found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. While Solomon fol∣lowed
this advice, it was his Wis∣dome and Honour, and when he forsook it, it was his Ruine: Nor will they have any better Success, who under the like Admonition in their Circum∣stances do follow his example in his miscarriages.
We could use many words with you unto the same pur∣pose, not without Hope, that, although in themselves they should not be more forcible than the words of others, yet with you they would be more effectual, and prevalent, because they are ours. But our present design is onely to recommend unto your perusal the ensuing small Treatise, which in its O∣riginal and Revival was direct∣ed
by Divine Providence to the one of us, and thereby to be an Admonition, and means of Instruction unto the whole Family.
You will not find in it those Allurements of Style and Lan∣guage, which some in this Age do strive to adorn their Writings with about things Divine. It is the Subject mat∣ter of this Book, and upon the account of your special concernment in it, we propose to your Consideration, and that as declared without Rhe∣torical Ornaments; yet with that Gravity of Speech, and Evidence of Truth, so as to recommend it unto the minds of those, who are sober and
modest, and to vindicate it from the contempt of any.
It doth not belong unto us to pass our Judgement up∣on, or give a Recommenda∣tion unto the particular mat∣ters insisted on, it is sufficient unto us, that we are satisfi∣ed, that in the whole it may be exceeding useful unto your Souls, as to their Direction in the ordering of your ways with respect unto the Will of God. We could not therefore content our selves without the Discharge of our Duty, and shall pray for a blessing upon it unto your Advantage, when we shall be here no more.
