



MADAM,
THese Sermons to which you gave so free enter∣tainment when they were preached under your rof (which you made a Sanctuary) do not doubt of your Coun∣tenance. The first part (being of mans state altogether vanity) was by the reverend Authors own hand scarce finished before his distemper bad disabled him from ser∣vice of this nature. And albeit, the latter part were by him destined to obscurity amongst his private papers; yet by the assistance of special friends, that compared his short notes with what was taken from his mouth. I have answered the importunity of others, that often pressed me to make them publick; being very much perswaded that (howbeit they want those enlargements and pollishings which they would not have wanted, had he designed them for the Press.) I shall not in the least be injurious to his memory, amongst those that were acquainted with his learned abilities; and have the ingenuity to grant what allowance may be justly challenged, where the author is not the putter forth of his own work; and withall, will understand the disadvantagious circumstances he lay under, both in



his studies and preaching. His strong bodie and vi∣vacious spirits being weakned and rendred languid by an inveterate distemper. I presume (Madam) these discourses will have due esteem and value from you, who have made Religion your most serious and close concern, received the word with all readiness, given eminent testimonie of the power of it in a mortified and holy conversation, and especially prized old, plain, substantial truths, which have put you in mind of your frailty, and been furtherance to your faith, love, and holy obedience. Whilst some, either utter strangers to communion with God (or worse) malici∣ous scorners have undervalued the Saints heaven upon earth; and too many others, leaving necessary and ac∣knowledged doctrines, in the study and practice of which, the servants of Christ have lived holily, and died happily and gaping after new-nothings, strange notions, not at all conducing to their improvement of an heavenly life, have puffed up their fancies and thinned their souls. I cannot forget with what pi∣ous zeal, and Christian courage God hath spirited you that have adventured to be singular in the strict∣est profession and practice of piety; and set you aloft, high above all the little dangers and fears of sullying your quality by being thought over serious and too busie about soul-concerns; well understanding that the noblest extraction cannot be embased, but the meanest ennobled by holiness, and that it is honour of a dou∣ble die, for which Ladies are more beholding to their virtues than titles or Escutcheons; their devout lives, than dead Ancestors. With what a publick spirit hath God acted you, to appear so worthily for his de∣sired service? Though well aware that it would cost you the indignation of the greater sort, and the rude taunts of the profane rabble, which have concerned



you no more, than to animate your godly resolution to be yet more vile in the discharge of a good consci∣ence, service of God in your place, and according to your degree. Nay your manner of life so blameless, so exemplary; your zeal for God and his truth are and shall be your lasting honour, and embalm your name, when the sect of the Libertines (that live at so lewd a rate as if their immortal souls were designed only to give a freshness to their faces, gracefulness to their carriage, briskness to their spirits, and in all to serve their vanity) shall be sweetly fed upon by the worms, and leave a memory more odious than their carcases. But, while I am doing Justice to your vir∣tues, least I should offend your humble modesty, (which deserves so much the more, by how much it less affects mention of what is due to the world as well as you) I shall add no more but my humble and earnest prayers to almighty God to sanctifie you wholly to preserve your whole spirit, soul and body blameless unto the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ.
