



ALthough (my Lords and Gentlemen) I have read many Men, yet few Books; so that it is not my Ta∣lent to write in an eloquent Rhetorical Stile, and therefore hope you will pardon my blunt and plain way of writing. The substantial Matter of these following Papers I drew presently after my Return from Holland in Ja∣nuary last was three Years, but did by the Advice of Friends forbear publishing them at that time. The Excuse for my Boldness in dedicating these Papers to you, is because they do of right to you belong: You are the right Heirs at Law to them; for though in the Matter of them I am wounded, yet it was for warding the Blow from you, at you was the Blow aimed. The Reasons for my publishing them now, are, First, to discover some Particulars, which it may be might be un∣known to you, that for the sake of Posterity I would not bury. And secondly, because of my Intentions in some short time for Jamaica, from whence it is very probable I may never return, having here no way to employ my self; and there I hope, with God's Blessing, I may make some Provision for my poor Chil∣dren
How little soever, for your sakes, I am made, or what∣soever coarse Usage I meet with, it will be a Comfort to me, if you make good use of it for your selves and Posterity, that you may not be lessened and made little. I am sure you were not abroad so accounted, nor can be made so at home, without you bring it on your selves by your own Act and Deed, by your Clemency to the Traitors and Betrayers of your Liberties. The choice of three things lies now before you; to be great, or to be little, or to be nothing: Ʋtrum horum mavultis accipite. These Papers are not to stir up your Anger or Revenge at what is past, but rather to look forward, to prevent the like Mischiefs for time coming: and I hope your profound Wisdom and Pru∣dence will take care to build up the old waste Places, and make good the Fences and Bulwarks, that neither the wild Boars of the Forest, nor Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, may be able to break over; and stop up the Holes, that the Foxes, the little Foxes, may not creep through, and hurt the Sheep and Lambs of the Flocks: that all your Fortifications may be so artificially strong, that no Confederacies of Jesuitical Priestcraft, with their battering Rams, may hurt, annoy or indanger them.
Many great and weighty things are before you, and one thing I humbly recommend to you; Let not the black Infamy and horrid Imputation of Self-Murder lie on the Memory of my Lord of Essex, nor on the Family of so great a Man, who was to all that knew him, a Man great for Wisdom and Parts, and for Love to the Liberties of Mankind, valued neither Life nor Honour, nor any thing else in this World, in comparison to them. That which prompts me to say this, is, Though I cannot point out the individual Murderers; yet I can give that circumstantial Proof that shall satisfy all Mankind, that the cutting his Throat was designedly premeditated both for Time and Place, and perpetrated by bloody Men. It may be some Men, for supposed Reasons of State, may oppose doing of Ju∣stice to the Dead, or making Reparation to the Living, as be∣ing
ill Precedents, and which may be of dangerous Conse∣quence to encourage others to withstand the like black At∣tempts, if they should design to begin where the late Reigns left off. I will hope that amongst others of your weighty Af∣fairs, you will carefully maintain and defend the Right of Ju∣ries, which are the Shields and Bucklers under a Civil Govern∣ment, to defend you in the quiet possession of your Lives, Ho∣nours and Estates. If Corruption be amongst them, no Pu∣nishment can be great enough; but if no such thing, it may be of bad Consequence to have them punished, ruined and un∣done, meerly for giving in Verdicts according to their Con∣sciences, guided by right Reason.
Bear with me, I beseech you, my Lords and Gentlemen, in declaring that I am fully satisfied, that before the Sword of the Lord that is drawn be put up, he will convince the World of Sin, of Righteousness and Judgment; he will open the Eyes of this blind World, and make them see their mad Wic∣kedness and Folly. That the great God of his infinite Mercy would give you true Wisdom, to be Healers of our Breaches, and Restorers of our Paths to dwell in, is the Prayer of,
My Lords and Gentlemen, 

