


Christian Reader,
THough thou art entertained with these Contoversies, which are unpleasing to many good and peaceable men, it must be considered, 1. How far they are Ne∣cessary; 2. And who makes them so. This kind of work is more costly and bitter to peaceable Authors that are forced to it, than it is to the Readers. And it's pity that the Ministers of Christ should, for 1500 years be taken up so much with a work that is so unpleasant to almost all. It is unpleasant to the Adversary, to have his Ignorance, Er∣rors, Falshoods and Injuries to the Truth and Church, made known to his disgrace; and to have that proved an odious Error which he taketh to be a Beam from Heaven, and of a Divine Off-spring, and perhaps necessary to Salvation, or at least some excellent thing which the Church cannot spare. It is unpleasant to the sober pious Writer, to think that he must thus displease and exasperate his Brother, and all that are of the way which he oppugneth: and that thereby he must provoke so many to esteem and defame him as an enemy to the Truth. And it is not pleasant to think, what hard study and labour it must cost us to procure this bitter fruit, when by Ignorance, Sloth or treacherous Silence, we could have kept our peace, and such mens Love. And it is un∣pleasant
to the best of Readers, to find mens Minds thus manifesting their dissensions, and to think of the Exaspera∣tions and wrath that will ensue, and to see such Wars kept up among those who should be notified to the World by an Eminency of Love: But it will be pleasant to those Hy∣pocrites, whose Religion consisteth in Opinions, Parties and Disputes, if they be of his mind whose Works they read; and it will be bittersweet to those wise and pious men that find it Necessary.
For Necessary it may be, and too oft is: It's hard keeping our own or the Churches Peace, unless both Parties will consent: As much as in us lieth, and if it be possible, we must live peaceably with all men: But when it is not pos∣sible, we must lament the want of what we are not able to obtain. For all Christ's Ministers to stand by and see well-meaning ignorant people, called as in God's name, to sin against him, and flattered or frightned from Truth, Duty and Privileges, and to let such work go on to the danger of Souls, and distracting of Christ's Churches without contra∣diction, will hardly consist with our Ministerial Fidelity.
Therefore as unnecessary Wars, are the greatest complicate sins in the World, and yet necessary Wars are the means of Peace; so it is in these Theological Wars: And as the vali∣ant Defenders of their Country in necessary Wars, have right to the praises given them by all; so those that neces∣sarily defend God's Truth and his Churches Rights, deserve acceptance. Among whom I judge the Reverend Author of this Treatise to be worthy of the Churches thanks, on several accounts. It is no contemptible Privilege which he vindica∣teth. The Interest of all Christians Children in the World, in the Covenant and Visible Church of Christ, is a matter of greater moment, than most that acknowledge it do duly lay to heart, much more than the unthankful Rejecters of it understand. The Title given to the Pelagians was In∣grati, the Unthankful, because they disputed against God's Grace, which they themselves did need as well as others: Such Cicero thought those Philosophers that disputed against the Immortality of Mans Soul: And Mr. Tombes was long ago angry with me, for giving that Title to them that so vehemently dispute all Infants out of the visible Church and Covenant. But let the Evidence of the Cause well consider∣ed
inform us, and it will be too sure, that Publick Repen∣tance would far better beseem such Writers as Mr. Danvers, than stiff persisting in this unthankful Error.
I have written somewhat my self, upon Mr. Danvers vehement instigation, once more on this Subject, partly in answer to Mr. Tombes and partly to himself. But let not the notice of that hinder you from reading this Treatise: For I have dealt with Mr. Danvers only on the account of his pretended Witnesses for a thousand years after Christ, and his quarrels with my self; having neither leisure, nor will, nor patience (all things considered) to meddle with his Ar∣guments (or the rest of his History) while I know how suf∣ficiently they stand confuted in my own and many other mens Writings long ago.) But this Reverend Author hath dealt with him more particularly, and answered his Arguments sa∣tisfactorily, and search'd into those and all the rest of his pre∣tended Antiquities, and not only done that which I have passed by, but the same also, in a full Confutation.
And it is so sad a Case, that after all our dreadful Warn∣ings, we should still be haunted with this unquiet Spirit which hath been exorcised or laid so oft; and that under all our other Trials, we should have the addition of these vexatious dividing Wranglings, to turn mens hearts against each other, that we owe the more thanks to such as the Author, for bring∣ing so much water to quench these flames: especially in a time when so many disaffected Persons are ready, to impute to Presbyterians, Independents or any such other, that they desire to defame, the Errors of all about them, whom they do not confute; yea too oft also those that they do con∣fute; while some others betray the Cause by silence, or silly unsatisfactory Arguings. Pardon (or chuse) a man that offendeth all Sects by plain dealing, for telling the World, That if the Anabaptists had been no better confuted, than the Papists and the Silencers have confuted them, I verily think that so great a part of the conscientious (though inju∣dicious) Vulgar would have followed them, as would have made work and trouble for us all. Farewell.

June 24. 1674.
