



May it please Your Majesties,
THE Divine Providence, that disposeth all things to the emo∣lument and advantage of those that love God, hath sent Your Majesties to be our Saviours and Deliverers from Po∣pery and Slavery, to the Joy of all sound Protestants, not wholly sunk and buried in prejudice. And we see the Prophecy of Isaiah fulfilled, Kings shall be your Nursing Fathers, and Queens your Nursing Mothers. But the Government of Moses, whom God sent into Egypt to deliver his people, was not without some Murmu∣rers, and men of a revolting spirit, who looked back towards Egypt. Victorious David had that crafty Politician, Achitophel, his Ad∣versary; and Absolom, who stole away the hearts of this people; and Sheba, a Mover of Sedition. The Reign of Solomon had some, who complained of Grievances and Oppressions, tho' he honoured God by building a Magnificent Temple. The most excellent Deborah, tho' she had some that jeoparded their lives unto death with her, yet she had others, who for their Divisions caused great thoughts of heart. It is my affection to the Protestant Cause, and Your Majesties Government, that moves me thus resolutely to rush into your Sacred Presence. I am very sensible that false Principles will create Practices correspondent to them: And therefore I have examined some new and strange No∣tions of Gods Providence, and Humane Governments of late asserted by some Doctors. To say, That a Prince hath Gods Authority, tho' he hath no Humane and Legal Right, and that there is another Person, who hath Legal Right, is dismal to consider in the conse∣quences thereof. If this Poison creeps into the Church, I tremble to reflect upon the Effects of it. It is good for nothing but to pro∣duce Insincerity, and to make men swear to live peaceably, when
they have War in their hearts. I am confident of Your Majesties Protection; for I have acted in this Affair with a full satisfaction of Conscience, and the greatest Evidence of Reason. And no History can exceed, if parallel, so great valour and courage, mixed with so much grace and clemency, as hath shined in King William. This is to be like God, who is Almighty, and yet slow to wrath; whose Power is irresistible, and yet he delights in Mercy. Go on, and prosper, most victorious Prince; and may the God of Heaven bless you with suc∣cess by Sea and Land against that proud and persecuting Monarch, who hath been the Ruine of so many Innocent Protestants in his own Dominions. May God give Your Majesties the Necks of your Enemies, and may they all tast of Your Forgiveness and Bounty, but never forsake Your first Friends, who ran all hazards with Your Majesty. I pray with Tertullian, who saith, We Christians pray for our Empe∣rors; 1. That they may have a long Life; which contains Health, Joy and Prosperity. 2. A constant, safe and secure Government. 3. Faithful and Trusty Domestick Servants, free from Treachery, and secret Conspiracy. 4. A strong and valiant Army. 5. A faithful Senate, Council, or Parliament. 6. Obedient, Submissive and Loyal People. 7. A quiet and peaceable Reign. In a word, whatsoever can be the desire of Caesar.
God inspire Your Majesties with heavenly Grace and Wisdom, and sound Knowledge, and good Ʋnderstanding to go in and out before this great People; and moreover give you Victory, and Peace, and Length of Days; and at last may Angels convey Your Souls into Abraham's bo∣som. This is the constant prayer of

