


Right Honourable Madam, and Truly Honourable Sir.
MY Obedience to the repeated Commands I have received, (for so I shall always esteem your Requests) from both your Honours to publish the Sermon, I was
by the same Authority engaged to Preach at the Funeral of that excellent Lady, the Genuine Sister of your vertue, as well as the Germane Sister of your blood; had not been guilty of these few weeks delays, had not the indisposition which began to seize me at so near and perplexing a stroke, and under which I laboured all the time of my preparations, and in the hour of its delivery, continued upon me many days: After an effect so natural to so pres∣sing a cause, that I know not whether the health of my body could have consisted with the soundness of my mind, under such an inexpressible loss to the Church of God, and my poor self in particular.
But what I was constrained to defer a while,
Ut bonum quo diu fru∣iti sumus, etiam caete∣ris noscen∣dum, imi∣tandumque plenius de∣scriberem. S. Hier. Ep. 10 Epitaphi∣um mercellae viduae. I now multo cum faenore present to you both, with all humble observance: and under your favourable protection to the eye of the world. The Sermon is such, almost verbatim, as my hasty and sickly preparations would then allow: Her Lady∣ships Character I confess is much enlarged, that I might somewhat more fully, than those streights of time would suffer me, propound to the knowledge and imitati∣on
of others;
Grandes materiasin∣genia parva non susti∣nent. Et in ips conatu ultra vires ausa suc∣cumbunt. quantoque magis fue∣rit quod di∣cendum, est tanto magis obruitur qui magni∣tudinem re∣rum verbis non potest explicare. that good we had the happi∣ness to enjoy so long, and yet too short a time.
I am conscious to my self of the great disproportion betwixt my performance and her merit, for which my Apology is that of St. Jerome, weak parts cannot sustain great matters, &c. Yea this is a Fate must have inevitably attended whoever had been her Orator in some degree. When I may say as truly of her as Greg. Naz. of his Gorgonia, her Prudence and Pie∣ty no man living was able to set forth, with proportionable language. And again, It is exceeding difficult to reach the excellencies of her Virtues either by deed or word, by imitation or encomi∣um. And though very many might have praised her more floridly, none could have represented her more truly, no man living having known her so long and so intimately as my self.
And my weakness and plainness may attain this double advantage.
First, Render the Narration more
credible,
Quaedam ab∣straxero ne incredibi∣lia videan∣tur, &c. Hier. ad Demet. which if it had been dressed up with all the ornaments of which 'twas ca∣pable, would have looked in this Age, more like a Romance than an History.
Secondly, It will better suit with the Original it copies, for as is said of Sue∣tonius, he wrote the lives of the Roman Caesars, with the same liberty they led them. So I have writ this excellent Ladies life, with the
Age ad ipsi∣us laudes accedamus neglecta ser∣monis ele∣gantia et concinnita∣tate; nam ne haec quidem quam lau∣dandam sus∣cepimus las∣civo un∣quam orna∣tu delectata est. Naz. same undisguised simpli∣city with which she lived it. And though never any man had a more concescend∣ing, constant, sincere Friend, than she vouchsafed to be to me, yet is not the testi∣mony less true, because of a Friend; but the more scrupulously exact for fear of desecrating so sacred a name, and of∣fending the Genius of her, who above all things hated falshood.
I am not the first, nor shall be the last, whom those (whose charity nd good opi∣nion is not only so wise as to begin at home; but also so kind as to dwell and end there too) will despise or pity, and bless themselves in the conceit, of what mighty matters they could have done; if this Pro∣vince had fallen to their share. It may
be little thinking, how such sorrows as mine justly are, would have blunted the edge of their keener Eloquence; and how unmeet a Theme so calamitous a loss is, on which to shew our wit.
Non opor∣tet ex cala∣mitate ipsa ostendendi ingenii an∣sam arripere.
But let such, for me, enjoy their hu∣mours, I'll say no more lest I awake them, and so deprive them of their pleasant dream.
For my self, I have endeavoured to approve my Conscience to God: Hic murus aheneus esto. And I hope I may appeal to your Honourable Attestation, (whose Testimony will be without and beyond exception) in most things I have written of Your, My,
Marcellant tuam into meam, et ut verius lo∣quar, no∣stram. S. Hier. ep. 16. Our incom∣parable Friend.
And I doubt not but all who knew her Ladyship thorowly, will be able to say as the poor people are reported to have said after the Funeral Sermon of another
The Lady Veer. e∣minent Ornament of this Country.
They could have said a great deal more of Her, than the Minister did: At the hearing of which our good Lady was much
pleased, and said; She should value such a Testimony above all others. The Poor, like the Widows, which stood a∣bout the dead body of Dorcas; shewing the Coats and Garments she made for them,
Acts. 9.39. whilst she was with them, being the most unexceptionable witnesses.
I confess it seems both decent and necessary to suggest some Arguments of Comfort to them whom I know to be op∣prest with so bitter and distressing a loss. And the undertaking would not (in one respect at least) be altogether unsuitable to my self. Because, Great is that Cordial which is administred by those who are partakers of the same sorrows.
Magnum Pharmacum illud est, quod abillis qui eodem dolore affe∣cti sunt por∣rigitur et qui in ea∣dem cala∣mitate ver∣santur eo∣rum in con∣solandis ca∣lamitosis major est Authoritas. And their Authority is greatest in comfort∣ing the calamitous, who bear a deep share in the same calamity, as one of the Ancients hath well said.
Give me leave therefore, much ho∣noured Madam, Sir, besides what you will meet with in the following discourse, to remind you of that great Panpharmacon. It is the Lord who hath done it, that Wisdom and Goodness which commits no errors, but doth all things well and wise∣ly.
And our daily prayers for the fulfil∣ling of whose Will, obliges, at least, to a submiss acquiescence when 'tis done.
And as to her, She hath finished her course triumphantly, and she hath ob∣tained the Crown: She rests from her labours, and her works do follow her. She is landed in safe harbour, got off the rough Seas of sins and sorrows. She is taken from the evil to come, and shall neither feel nor see what our sins may justly make us fear.
Non moere∣mus quod talem ami∣simus sed gratias a∣gimus quod talem habai∣mus imoha∣bemus: Deo enim vi∣vunt omnia et quicquid revertitur ad Domi∣num, in fa∣miliae nu∣mero com∣putatur. Epita. Paul. She would not be a∣gain with us as well as she loved us, let us long and hasten to be with Her: We have used to account her happiness our own, therefore her blessedness cannot make us miserable.
She is not lost, but gone before; and She could not be where She is, nor enjoy what She doth; without being parted from us, till we can overtake Her.
Be pleased also to remember that of St. Jerom, We mourn not because we have lost such an one, but give thanks that we had such an one, yea have such
an one: for all such live to God, and whatever returns to the Lord, is to be accounted in the number of the Fa∣mily.
But I must repress my self, reflecting how needless it is to cast in my Mite into such full Treasuries.
I am conscious to my self but of one offence, which may make me apprehend your Frown: Which is, my adventuring to insert, without your leave or knowledge some short touches of that Noble Stock of which her Ladyship was so conspicuous and eminent a branch.
But as I have the Example of many Ancients,
Praecepta sunt Rheto∣rum ut ma∣jores ejus, qui lau∣dandus est, et eorum ge∣sta altius repetantur: sique ad ip∣sum per gra∣dus sermo perveniat: qno viz. avitis paternisque virtutibus illustrior fiat, et non degenerasse a bonis ipse videatur. Hier. de Nepotia. and almost all Moderns, who write on such occasions; so would it have been a great Hiatus and indecent defi∣ciency to her Story, to have been wholly silent in it. And I have been so concise and cautious, not to offend the humble modesty of those who yet survive.

That when the laws of Order and Me∣thod have obtained the allowance Justice may demand; your Honours kindness will I hope, (at least for her sake) supply what shall be farther needful of Forgive∣ness.
Those few of her Ladyships pious and excellent Papers, which are inserted in the discourse, or subjoyned to it; (as they just∣ly may, so I hope they) will give Ornament and Lustre to it, in the Judgment of all serious Christians: As richer Trimmings of Gold and Silk use to do to Garments made of courser Materials.
I shall not enlarge your trouble by being importune in begging your Patro∣nage: 'Tis Natural to all to defend their own; and surely besides the many Titles you had to me before.
Now by your Executorship, you have an Indefeasable Right to me: For no∣thing
to which her Ladyships Will enti∣tles you, was more entirely Hers, and con∣sequently your Honours, than
Much and Truly Honoured Madam, Sir,

May 27. 1678.
