



DEar friends, and fellow brethren
in the Kingdom and patience of
Jesus Christ: you have been, and
are the object of the worlds ha∣tred
and reproach; not simply as
you are men and women, but be∣cause
the light & beauty of our Father shines forth
of you, which they cannot behold: therefore they
brand you for wicked ones, and your principles to be
errour.1. Kin 18. And under that name of deceivers & trou∣blers
(though indeed they themselves are the only
deceivers & troublers) they threaten your ruine
& death: you are the signes and wonders of the
Kingdom; you are the object of every ones laugh∣ter
and reproach; you are the men, that they would
plunder; you are the men, that are sentenced to be
put to death in these uproar risings,Psal.  under the name
of Round-heads, That the name of Israel may be no
more known in the Land; but they shall never pre∣vaile,
your Father hath blessed you,Num.  12. yea and you
shall be blessed:Dan. 24. D 6. 5. you are the men they would chain
up by an Ecclesiasticall compulsive or coersive

power, you are the men that they would give no li∣berty
to; to practise what God teaches you; you are
the men preached against, writ against, & petitio∣ned
against to the higher Power, II to bring you under
their foot-steps: you are the men that are counted
the troublers of Kingdoms and Parishes where you
dwell, though the truth is, you are the only peace∣able
men in the Kingdom, who love the Kingdoms
peace, the Magistrates peace, and the Peoples
peace; who love the health and peace of all their
souls.
But what's the reason, the world doth so storm
against you;n 19. hn but because you are not of the world,
nor cannot walk in the darkwayes of the world; they
hated your Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, and
they hate you; they knew not him, and they know not
you; for if they had known him, they would not
have crucified him;et. . and if they did truly know the
power of that God, that dwels in you, they would
not so despise you.
But well: these things must be; it is your Fa∣thers
will it shall be so,e  12. the world must lie under
darkness for a time, that is Gods dispensation to
them; and you that are Children of light, must lie
under reproach and oppressions of the world; that is
Gods dispensation to you. But it shall be but for a
little time. What I have here to say, is to bring
you glad tydings, that your redemption drawes
neer; you are come to the half day of the Beasts
reign, which may be very hot, yet it will be short,
for the Son of righteousness and peace i risen; and

he is beginning to disperse those cold, rainy Clouds
of mens lusts and inventions; And to make the
earth, (mankind) to become like the summer sea∣son,
full of light, heat, fruitfulness and comfort.
There are two things which the Lord our righte∣ousness
is in doing.Jer. 23  6
First, He is burning up all the drosse of our flesh,2 Thes 2. 8.
and treading it under his feet; by his bright ap∣pearing
in our hearts;Luke 17. 21. and by the lively and free
discoveries of himself, and doth cast out the accu∣ser,
(The Serpent) and takes possession and dwels
in you himself,Heb. 4. 3. and takes you up to dwell in him:
this is Gods Kingdom, and this many of you have
experience of;1 John 4. 4. and this strength of your God with∣in,
is that which supports you against all the stor∣ming
provocations of the world without; stronger
is he that is in you,Esa. 1. then he that is in the world.
Secondly, the same God of truth, he is burning up
the drosse and shaking and casting down all cor∣ruptions,
which the wise flesh (or rather wicked Ser∣pent)
hath built up in Common-wealths and
Churches; and is beginning to spread the knowledg
of himself over the earth, as the waters cover the
Seas;Esa. 1 But for the present, men are angry & disqui∣eted
at it, they would not know God, nor be saved,
God at first must work against their wills, and
make their swelling spirit to become willing and
obedient,Rev.  before they can be healed. And what's
the reason? Why truly the, Serpent that deceived
the whole earth, doth still stir up the whole world
to wonder after the Beast; and to maintain that

corrupt power as long as he can; for when once
the Anointing takes the Kingdom and
reigns: The Beast, or fleshly wisdom in States
and Churches,Dan. 7. 6. 27. shall never reigne more: this the
Serpent knows, and because God and the Lamb
sits upon the Throne,Rev. 11. 5. judging the Beast and Ser∣pent;
The smoke of their torment ascends up∣wards
day and night, in blasphemy against God,
and bitter language and ill usages of his Saints;Rev. 16. 7.
that live above, in the liberty and life of God, which
is a condition above the bondage and death of the
Serpent;Rev. 14.  1. well it must be thus for a time, but do
you wait patiently upon your God, and you shall see
in conclusion,Esa. 60. 4. he will bring in your enemies to fall
down at Christs feet, and acknowledge love, and
live in the same God with you, and then your joy
shall be more and more fulfilled.
This thing God ere long will do; far he is judging
the Serpent. And if England, Scotland, and Ire∣land;
this three-fold Kingdom,ev. 11. 3. united under one
head or State Government, be the tenth part of
the City Babylon, that must fall off from the Beast
first, as I have no doubtings but daily confirma∣tions
in me,Cor.  4. that it shall be; You shall then see, That
all this envy and bitterness of spirit in these Nati∣ons,
shalldie, and shall be swallowed up, in the spi∣rit
of love: you shall see these great nationall divi∣sions,
to be swallowed up into brotherly one-ness;
you shall see oppressing injustice, to be swallowed
up into righteousness and peace, and the fire of
Gods spirit,a. 4. 4. to burn up the fire of mens lusts and

inventions: so that Magistrates shall love the
people, and be nursing Fathers to them, for that
prophesie comes now to be fulfilled; and the people
shall love and chearfully obey the Commands of
Magistrates;Esa. 49. 22. All striving who shall honour
God most, in their severall places and callings, this
God can do, and this he will do: for he is Comman∣der
in chief, in and of the spirits of men.
There are three Songs, which God hath taught
us, and will have us to sing in experience continual∣ly.
The first is,Rev. 1 7. 8. fear (or rather love) God, and give
glory to him. The second is, Babylon is faln, is
flan,chap. 19. 6. that great City Babylon is faln. And the
third is Haleluja: for the Lord God omnipotent
reigns.
Now brethren,1 Pet. 4. 13. you I speak to, in whom the Ser∣pent
 subdued; you see and feel, that God your
teacher, your comfort, your life, your strength, your
liberty; you are set free by him, and it is a sweet sa∣tisfying
freedom: Now speak plainly, do not your☜
hearts love God, and glory in him, do you not ac∣knowledge
God all in all, in pardoning, healing,
teaching, saving, and manifesting love and life to
you; and that your selves, men and creatures can do
nothing herein, but must let that alone to God for
ever, now you give glory to him, and you love
him, and I beleeve that Scripture that is interpre∣ted,
Fear God, should rather be, Love God, for
the frame of spirit thus set at liberty, in whom Ba∣bylon
is faln, and in whom the Lord God omnipo∣tent
reigns; is rather full of the embracings and

breathings of love and delight to give God all the
glory,John 18. rather then fear; which  of bondage,
which perfect love casts out▪
Well, all that I have 
the midst of this cloud of 
your Redemption drawes near: God is working out,
an inward, and an outward peace, and liberty for
yon all. What I have writ in this following dis∣course,
I could not but write, I was carried by a
strong hand (I believe of God) in writing of it
through much bodily weakness, and yet with abun∣dance
of delight; that gave strength to my spirit;
I leave it with you.ev. 22. 1. But the Crown of Glory I
chearfully set upon his head that sits upon the
Throne, and upon the Lamb for evermore.ev. 5. 3.
May 20. 1648.

