


IN that great Plague, which (as I be∣lieve)
was the most contagious Pesti∣lence
that ever afflicted this City of Lon∣don,
it pleased God to enclose me there,
and to give me grace to make such observa∣tions
upon his Justice and Mercy, as I hope
(however others esteem of them) shall ne∣ver
of me be forgotten during life.
A while before this last Visitation, the
same gracious God provided me a little
place to escape unto, where I did but only

hear of that which my Brethren, suffered,
and therefore (as I may well fear) was
not so sensible of their misery as I ought to
have been.
Yet I was not altogether without Medi∣tations
as became the time, (but as the
necessities wherewithal God hath yet exer∣cised
me would give leave) endeavoured
to employ some hours in the consideration of
things pertinent to the Honour of my Pre∣server,
that I might not appear less thank∣ful
for this deliverance, which was without
Terror, than I seemed to be for that which
I obtained with fear and danger.
Part of my Musings were upon the Moral
Law, the neglect whereof (being the cause
of all Plagues) is never impertinently
thought upon, much less when the hand of
God is extended, to chastise us for infring∣ment
of the same. And what I then medi∣tated,

is now offered unto the publick view,
that it might the oftner occasion me and
others to be mindful of our Duties.
Neither my Estate, nor the place I lived
in would afford me the use of Books, at that
time, therefore instead of them I perused
mine own Heart to to see what I could read
there: For in the Heart of Man it was.
originally written. And though our corrup∣tion
hath now so defaced it that we need
some helps to explain the essential meaning
of the Holy Text long since written in Stone;
Yet if we would but be so diligent as good
Antiquaries in examining defective In∣scriptions
upon decayed Monuments, we
might sometime find the Truth more cer∣tainly
than by trusting over-confidently to
the search of others, who many times deli∣ver
their own Fancies instead of the right
meaning of Gods Law.

Others I confess (though not many in the
English Tongue) have to this purpose de∣vulged
large Commentaries: But some want
Money to purchase them, and some want
leisure to peruse them: for they are so large
that many Readers had rather venture to
break all the Commandments than to scan
over those Tracts; and yet perhaps these
brief Meditations have expressed somewhat
which is not found in any of them.
I profess not (as I have elsewhere said)
to teach the Learned, but to be unto them
a Remembrancer only of what they al∣ready
know (which will otherwhile happen
by this means even when they take up my
Books to peruse them with contempt rather
than for any better end) yet they who are
as Ingenious as Learned, have entertain∣ed
them with good respect as not unuse∣ful.

The same Spiritual nourishment which
others have tendred more artificially dres∣sed
for the publick Feasts of the Soul; I
have here and elsewhere indifferently fitted
for their private refreshments, who are best
nourished with plain Diet, and who have
heretofore wanted either opportunities or
due care to come to those Repasts. And if
I can but find means to relieve the Blind
and Lame in understanding, till a more
powerful means shall fetch them from the
Hedges and High-way-sides to be Guests
at the great Banquet, I shall hope to have
done somewhat worth my pains.
Ignorant persons may be advantaged
hereby mediately or immediately; by re∣ceiving
Information or occasion of Refor∣mation:
yea the Composing thereof in
Verse will cause many to be the more de∣lighted
therewith; Some the better to re∣member
it, others out of curiosity to take

notice of it, who may afterward give it more
serious entertainment, and no doubt all good
men will afford it a favourable censure so
far as it shall deliver the Truth.
So far only I desire it should be allowed,
and in that desire do humbly submit the
same to the Censure of Authority, and the
Success to Gods blessing. Which I beseech
Oh Glorious God so to manifest in this
Mite vouchsafed out of the Infinite trea∣sury
of thy holy Spirit, that like a grain
of Mustard Seed it may be fruitful to the
encrease of Piety beyond the expectati∣on
answerable to so despised a means:
For some in these days have perverted
the plain meaning of thy Law; yea some
have lately strived both by their words
and works to make the same wholly void
and of no use, that they seem either not
to have known, or to have quite for∣gotten;
That thy Truth remaineth from

one Generation to another, or That thy
righteousness is an everlasting righteousness,
in so much that we may justly repeat
unto thee this complaint of thy Prophet
David; Lord it is time for thee to lay
to thine hand, for they have destroyed thy
Law. Hear my prayer O Lord, and
though I am small, and of no reputa∣tion,
yet since I would not forget thy
Law, deliver me from mine Oppressors,
and so teach me thy Statutes, that I
may keep them unto the end; yea
though the proud have me in derision,
and almost made an end of me upon
Earth, yet let my heart be made so
upright in thy Statutes, that I may not
be ashamed to remember thy promise
made to thy Servant, even that where∣in
thou hast caused me to trust; Let
it quicken me, and be my comfort in
my troubles. For thou art all my por∣tion,
and I have determined to keep

thy word; Before I was afflicted I went
so much astray that it was good for
me to have some troubles. O let me
hereafter be always exercised in thy
Law; Let it be a Lanthorn unto my
feet, and a Light unto my path. Look
upon me, and be merciful unto me
as thou usest to be unto those who love
thy name. Let the proud be ashamed
that they have dealt falsly with me
Let such as fear thee be turned unto
me and comfort thou me according
to the years wherein I have been afflict∣ed,
that they who see it may glorifie
thy name for mine eyes have almost
failed with waiting for thy assurance▪
Though I have gone astray like a Sheep,
yet seek thy Servant, and deal with
me according to thy mercy. Let all
these my Supplications come before
thee, that my Soul may live that my
Lips may praise thee, and that my

Tongue may sing of thy Goodness and
Mercy for ever and ever, Amen.
Sir, among other kindnesses vouchsafed
n your Neighbourhood, I received from
ou the Copper Plates, which are now
ade use of in this Book. The words
which I have added unto those dumb
Figures will make them (I hope) much
more profitable, and cause them to be a
means of publishing those Caveats and
niversal Duties which are pertinent, as
ell to the General well-being of Man∣kind,
as to the Glory of God; which two
things were the proper ends of our Crea∣ion,
and ought also to be the chief care
of our life.
To those ends therefore, and that your
ost might not be unprofitably bestowed,
I have returned the Coppies of those Fi∣gures
which you gave me, illustrated with

such Meditations as my leisure and abi∣lity
could afford. And they do now as
well speak as make signs what is prepared
for wilful Transgressors of these Laws▪
whereby if God may receive any honour▪
or his Children profit, I desire it may be
some honour and advantage, which is the
desire of

