




Right Honourable Madam, and Truly Honourable Sir.
MY Obedience to the re∣peated Commands I have received, (for so I shall always esteem your Re∣quests) from both your Honours to publish the Sermon, I was by the same Authority engaged to Preach at the Funeral of that excellent Lady, the Genuine Si∣ster
of your vertue, as well as the Germane Sister of your blood; had not been guilty of these few weeks delays, had not the indispo∣sition which began to seize me at so near and perplexing a stroke, and under which I laboured all the time of my preparations, and in the hour of its delivery, conti∣nued upon me many days after: An effect so natural to so pressing a cause, that I know not whether the health of my body could have consisted with the soundness of my mind, under such an inex∣pressible loss to the Church of God, and my poor self in particular.
Ut bonum quo diu fru∣iti sumus, etiam caete∣ris noscen∣dum, imi∣tandumque plenius de∣scriberem. S. Hier. Ep. 10 Epitaphi∣um mircellae viduae.
But what I was constrained to defer a while, I now multo cum faenore present to you both, with all humble observance; and un∣der your favourable protection to the eye of the world. The Sermon is such, almost verbatim, as my hasty and sickly preparati∣ons would then allow: Her Lady∣ships
Character, I confess is much enlarged, that I might somewhat more fully, than those streights of time would suffer me, propound to the knowledge and imitation of others,
Grandes materias ingenia parva non sustinent. Et in ipso conatu ul∣tra vires ausa suc∣cumbunt, quantoque magis fue∣rit quod dicendum est tanto magis obru∣itur qui magnitudi∣nem rerum verbis non potest expli∣care. that good we had the happiness to enjoy so long, and yet too short a time.
I am conscious to my self of the great disproportion betwixt my performance and her merit, for which my Apology is that of St. Jerome, weak parts cannot sustain great matters, &c. Yea this is a Fate must have inevita∣bly attended, whoever had been her Orator in some degree. When I may say as truly of her as Greg. Naz, of his Gorgonia, her Pru∣dence and Piety no man living was able to set forth, with pro∣portionable language. And a∣gain, It is exceeding difficult to reach the excellencies of her Virtues, either by deed or word, by imitation or encomium. And
though very many might have praised her more floridly, none could have represented her more truly, no man living having known her so long and so inti∣mately as my self.
And my weakness and plain∣ness may attain this double ad∣vantage.
First,
Quaedam aostraxero ne incredi∣bilia vide∣antur, &c. Hier. ad Demer. Render the Narration more credible, which if it had been dressed up with all the or∣naments of which 'twas capable, would have looked in this Age, more like a Romance than an History.
Age ad ipsi∣us laudes accedamus neglecta ser∣monis ele∣gantia & concinnita∣te; nam ne haec quidem quam lau∣dandam sus∣cepimus las∣civo un∣quam orna∣tu delectata est. Naz.
Secondly, It will better fuit with the Original it copies; for as is said of Suetonius, he wrote the lives of the Roman Caesars, with the same liberty they led them. So I have writ this excel∣lent Ladies life, with the * same undisguised simplicity with which she lived it. And though never any man had a more con∣descending,
constant, sincere Friend, than she vouchsafed to be to me, yet is not the testimony less true, because of a Friend; but the more scrupulously exact for fear of desecrating so sa∣cred a name, and offending the Genius of her, who above all things hated falshood.
I am not the first, nor shall be the last, whom those (whose cha∣rity and good opinion is not on∣ly so wise as to begin at home; but also so kind as to dwell and end there too) will despise or pity, and bless themselves in the con∣ceit, of what mighty matters they could have done, if this Province had fallen to their share. It may be little thinking, how such sorrows as mine justly are, would have blunted the edge of their keener Eloquence; and how unmeet a Theme so calami∣tous a loss is, on which to shew our wit.
Non opor∣tet ex cala∣mitate ipsa ostendendi ingenii an∣sam arripe∣re.

But let such, for me, enjoy their humours, I'll say no more, lest I awake them, and so deprive them of their pleasant dream.
For my self, I have endeavou∣red to approve my Conscience to God: Hic murus aheneus esto. And I hope I may appeal to your Honourable Attestation, (whose Testimony will be without and beyond exception) in most things I have written of Your,
Marcellam tuam imo meam, & ut verius lo∣quar no∣stram. S. Hier. ep. 16. My, Our incomparable Friend.
And I doubt not but all who knew her Ladyship thorowly, will be able to say as the poor people are reported to have said after the Funeral Sermon of another
The Lady Veer. e∣minent Ornament of this Coun∣try.
They could have said a great deal more of Her, than the Mi∣nister did: At the hearing of which our good Lady was much pleased, and said; She should value such a Testimony above
all others. The Poor, like the Widows, which stood about the dead body of Dorcas; shewing the Coats and Garments she made for them,
Acts 9.39. whilst she was with them, being the most unex∣ceptionable witnesses.
I. Confess it seems both decent and necessary to suggest some Arguments of Comfort to them whom I know to be opprest with so bitter and distressing a loss. And the undertaking would not (in one respect at least) be altogether unsuitable to my self. Because,
Magnum Pharmacum illud est, quod ab illi qui eodem dolore affe∣cti sunt por∣rigitur; & qui in en∣dem cala∣mitate ver∣santur, co∣rum in con∣solandis ca∣lamitosis major est Authorita. Great is that Cordial which is administred by those who are partakers of the same sorrows. And their Authority is great∣est in comforting the calami∣tous, who bear a deep share in the same calamity, as one of the Ancients hath well said.
Give me leave therefore, much honoured Madam, Sir, besides what you will meet with in
the following discourse, to remind you of that great Panpharmacon. It is the Lord who hath done it, that Wisdom and Goodness which commits no errors, but doth all things well and wisely. And our dayly prayers for the fulfilling of whose Will, ob∣liges, at least, to a submiss acqui∣escence when 'tis done.
And as to her, She hath fi∣nished her course triumphant∣ly, and she hath obtained the Crown.: She rests from her labours, and her works do fol∣low her. She is landed in safe harbour, got off the rough Seas of sins and sorrows. She is taken from the evil to come, and shall neither feel nor see what our sins may justly make us fear.
Non maere∣mus quod talem ami∣simus sed gratias a∣gimus quod talem habuimus imo habemus: Dee enim vi∣vunt omnia & quicquid revertitur ad Dominum, in familiae numero computatur. Epita. Paul. She would not be again with us as well as she loved us, let us long and hasten to be with Her: We
have used to account her happi∣ness our own, therefore her bles∣sedness cannot make us misera∣ble.
She is not lost, but gone be∣fore; and She could not be where She is, nor enjoy what She doth; without being parted from us, till we can overtake Her.
Be pleased also to remember that of Saint Jerom, We mourn not because we have lost such an one, but give thanks that we had such an one, yea have such an one: for all such live to God, and whatever returns to the Lord, is to be accounted in the number of the Family.
But I must repress my self, reflecting how needless it is to cast in my Mite into such full Treasuries.

I am conscious to my self but of one offence, which may make me apprehend your Frown: Which is, my adventuring to insert, without your leave or knowledge some short touches of that Noble Stock of which her Ladyship was so conspicuous and eminent a branch.
But as I have the Example of many Ancients,
Praecepta sunt Rheto∣rum ut ma∣jores ejus, qui lau∣dandus est, & eorum gesta altius repetantur: sicque ad ipsum per gradus ser∣mo perveni∣ar? quo viz. avitis paternisque virtutibus illustrior fiat, & non degenerasse à bonis ipsi videatnr. Hier. de Nepotia. and almost all Moderns, who write on such occa∣sions; so would it have been a great Hiatus and indecent defi∣ciency to her Story, to have been wholly silent in it. And I have been so concise and cautious, not to offend the humble mode∣sty of those who yet survive.
That when the Laws of Or∣der and Method have obtained the allowance Justice may de∣mand;
your Honours kindness will I hope, (at least for her sake) supply what shall be far∣ther needful of Forgiveness.
Those few of her Ladiships pi∣ous and excellent Papers, which are inserted in the Discourse, or sub∣joyned to it; (as they justly may, so I hope they) will give Orna∣ment and Lustre to it, in the Judgment of all serious Christi∣ans: As richer Trimmings of Gold and Silk use to do to Gar∣ments made of counsr Materi∣als.
I shall not enlarge your trou∣ble by being importune in beg∣ging your Patronage; 'Tis Na∣tural to all to defend their own; and surely besides the many Ti∣tles you had to me before,
Now by your Executorship, you have an Indefeasable Right
to me: For nothing to which her Ladiships Will entitles you, was more entirely Hers, and conse∣quently your Honours, than
Much and Truly Honoured Madam, Sir,

May 27. 1678.
