



Right Honourable;
THough I find my present Attempt, not unlike the great Instance of Difficulties in Phylosophy, to divide an Attome, and make two of the least, and last, Unite in Nature; To distribute a∣mongst You, a Trifle, so Infinitely less, then the whole should be, for every of Your Honours: Yet am I pleased the better with it, by how much the more it Corresponds, with this dark Providence; which is a compen∣dious heap of Intricacies: and seems design'd, as an Experi∣ment, what Hard-ships, Great, and Noble minds, sup∣ported with Virtue, and Religion, can conflict with, and Con∣quer.
To Extricate my self out of this streight, I am Constrained,
 to begg Your Honours, (By the prevailing Argument of His Dear Urne) to accept this hasty Monument, (which My Zeal to His Memory, first Offer'd at, by Your Commands, and by the same Influence, hath now made Publick) to be to You, (in that Respect,) as His Sweet Lordship was; Who was so Singly, and Intirely, Every of Your Honours, as if You had had no Joynt, or Common Interests in Him.
And may I, my Lord, be blamelesse, in assuming the Confi∣dence, to speak in the Great Apostles Language; Now I re∣joyce, not that You are made sorry, but that You sorrow af∣ter a Godly manner; and that this deep Channel, now made in Your Soul, is so happily filled, with the Waters of the San∣ctuary.
And if I be Rude in Speech, I am not so in Design; though I whisper so loud in Your Lordships Eares, that the World over∣hear me; that nothing can more rejoyce Your Soul-Friends, and Servants, then to behold Your Christian Submission, to so smart a stroak, without other Indenting with the Almighty; Then that this Heart-breaking blow, may End in a broken heart; and in Your own Significant, though short Expression, that if this DOE, it will be the Happiest Loss, that ever Man had.
All which, (without presumption;) I may Vouch, the Lord takes not amiss, to have impos'd upon Him; the very Errand of His Judgements being, to bring His Children nearer to Him∣self, and such a Frame.
My Lord, sad Providences do then prove sad indeed; when we are forc't to tast the bitter Rind, and Huske; or break our teeth upon the harder Shell; but feed not upon the sweeter Kernel: Partake not the Blessing, God intends us by them. But then are they sweet, and solid mercies, when God doth teach us, with,
 and by his chastning: that this may be such, I know no surer means, then that Your Lordship, Humbly Remember the Vowes of God which are upon You, which You made while the Wound was fresh; and that You Awefully regard, the Resolutions of Your own Heart, and Mouth: And My Confidence You will do so, In∣courages Me to this Boldness, which Your Lordships Good∣ness will not call Rudeness; but Accept, as a Testimony of My Duty, and Faithfulness.
And You Great Madam, whose Modest and Retired Good∣nesse, cannot Abscond it Self, but all the English-World, Sees, and Reveers it.
Go on, to Rayse the Eternal Glories of the Son of God, up∣on the Temporary Ruines, of a Dearest Son; And make the Incredulous, to See, and Know, what Wonders, Solid, and Sin∣cere, Christianity can Work.
What the Wise Moralist Observ'd so long agoe; that, A good Man, contending with bad Fortune, is a sight worth Gods own looking on; I never understood so fully, as since I had the Honour to behold, with what Masculine, Composed, Grave, and which is more then all, what Christian Fortitude, Your Ladyship boar up, above these Swelling, Boystrous, Waves.
Those who have any measures of a Mothers heart, may guess at Yours; But We that have the Honour, and Happiness, to be Acquainted, with the Sweetness of Your Temper, and the Fer∣vours of Your Tenderness, in Others Sorrows; how Inexpressibly You were concern'd, when first Your Noble Son fell Sick; How You Attended him, in all his Illness, and warm'd his very Linnens on Your Heart! What Agonies of Soul You Suffered for Him! and how You Wept, and Pray'd, and Watch't, and could not bear, the supposition of His loss; are put to the Wonder of
 Davids Servants, when the Child was dead.
What is this thing that thou hast done? — And plainly see, it was the Strength of Davids God, which helpt You, as well as his Wisdome, that instructed You, to bear his hand.
My Only Sollicitude, for Your Ladyship, is, least Your Sor∣row worsted in the open Field, and plainly vanquished, by Grace and Reason; should Lye in Ambush, and Surprise You af∣terward, with greater danger: To prevent it, watch it: Still keep Your Eye on Heaven, and that will keep You safe; 'Tis not easie, to benight a Christians heart, with any very dark cloud, while there is brightness, and serenity, in the face of Christ; But if it swell, and flow to an excess, and will not be stanched; then breath a veine, and give it some diversion, take an advan∣tage of it, and turn it into Godly sorrow, and all shall be well.
And You Sweet Madam; whose loss of so Dear, and Kind a Lord, had been Invaluable, had it been never so late (who was so good in all Relations, and whose Indearing Excellencies, in that He bore to You, were Eminent, as that Relation is, above all others:) Yet is it aggravated now, beyond expression, by its ear∣ly, and unseasonable, surprising of You, in so tender years, not yet acquainted with, nor train'd up in the School of sorrow; Will, I hope, therefore accept the Cordialls I bring, because You so much need them.
It were an Unpardonable Rudeness, to Request, that he may ever live, in Your Ladiships best thoughts, and have Your Noble breast, His Dearest Monument; For how can He ever be forgot∣ten by Her; who was not his Bargain; but his Choyce? Not his content and satisfaction only; but his Souls most raysed, and last∣ing, Ravishments; from whom, He was never well, whose Ab∣sence was his constant sickness, and the parting with whom, 

No Madam, I do not beg You to Remember Him, You will do that unaskt; But that You would Remember Him to Spiri∣tual Advantages.
Wean Your Affections, and forget Him, in all those regards, in which, henceforth, You shall know Him no more; and Re∣member Him in those may not perplex, or hurt You, but help, and do You good.
When Husbands dye in debt, their VVidows should discharge and pay it. He hath not left You under other Incumbrances; Only He made Himself Gods debter, on his Death-bed (a Note of which Debts, Your Ladyship may find, in the following Sermon) And if You will Administer, and take these Debts upon You, and discharge them; were I worthy to be Your Counter-Security, I would be bound, in all I have, or am, You would be Eternally the Richer for it; and bless, and hugg his Memory, for this choyce Legacy, more then for all, His, more then Noble, Presents.
And Madam, to help You pay these Debts, He hath left Your Ladyship, (beside Your Honourable Dowre) such a Joynture, as you could have had by none, but him; an Interest in that Real, and Solid Idea, of all that's Excellent, with Men, and Christians; His, and by Him, your Ladyships Dear Mother; whom if you voluntarily loose, as you have done him necessarily, you double your Misery; and leave Charity it self no excuse to make for the Errour; But that your first loss, hath not onely bereft you, of the Object of your Affections; but by its greatness, hath amaz'd your Judgement too.
Now let me joyn your Honours once again, to Beseech your Joynt Patronage, of this imperfect Coppy, of so rare a piece. The better is the face, the hardlier doth the Painter hit it; One deforming mark, (which is seldome mist by a rude Pencill)
 makes all the rest, seem like. I had no such unhappy Advantage here; (though I complain not of that want.) And my hast was such, I had scarce time to prime my Canvas, and to let it dry; to bear the Impressions of a leaden Pencil: you are my witnesses beyond exception; that your Consternation was not off enough, in half the week, to give me my summons, for the following Monday. Such pieces do require the second, and third sitting; beside the finishing stroaks, unless, Immature Sermons best suit with Immature Funeralls.
Involuntary slipps, have their pardon of course, and the flat∣ter touches of an hasty Pencil, all Ingenuity Indulges. The rest must indure its fate, in an unkind VVorld, which still is such, that I truly reckon it among your Comforts, that our Noble Lord is got well out on't. His now secure Herse, must be my Shrine; and if your Honours accept it, (which is the Only Boon I Crave) you then Engage your Greatness, and your Goodness for my Protection: The Confidence of which, shall be the Security, and Ease, of
My very Good Lord, and Ladies, 
