



MY LORD,
SUch hath been the power of Cu∣stom for many Ages, that the Authors not onely of just Vo∣lumes, but of small Treatises too, have ever been desirous (I know not whether I may say, Ambitious) to dedicate them to some person of eminent quality and condition, as it were Clients to their Pa∣trons, for the protecting and crediting them. Hereby the Authors have oftentimes gained their desires, and the Patrons (especially when the excellency of such Books did de∣servedly
acquire it) addition of honour and same, and also propagated the continuance thereof to all posterity. Numerous instan∣ces hereof might be given, but Mecaenas may be instar omnium; which name of a Noble∣man hath in a manner monopolized all noble Patrons, as Patron .
My Lord, I am far from having any such opinion of this small Treatise, (indeed not deserving that name, being in great part but an epitomized Collection, and the rest brief Memoranda's or Notes, rather to excite others to proceed upon that Subject, then to rest on this:) though if by this, or any other Act of mine, any accesse of Honour could accrue to your Lordship, I hold my self justly obliged humbly to present and ten∣der it. But, my Lord, the full scope of my intention in this Model is, to the best of my Judgment, (which I alwayes submit to better) and of my skill and power, to con∣tribute something tending to the further happinesse and continuance of Truth and Peace, with Justice and Honour, in this Church and State, now by Gods blessing (to whom be all Honour and Praise) ex post-liminio, as it were, freed from Slavery and Tyranni∣cal
Oppression, and restored to a capacity of their pristine Beauty and Splendour, by the most happy Restauration of our most Gracious SOVERAIGN, whom God pre∣serve: This, I am sure, (as my Heart prompts me to speak) is my sole intention, which aymes onely at the advancement of the Publick Good, and is not tainted with any drachm of private Interest. And, my Lord, knowing you do Patrizare that most honoured Father of yours, (whose Memo∣ry must never perish, whose Losse this Church and State have too sadly felt, but Quis talia fando, &c.) and that I may say as Tertullian (de Resurrectione carnis) sayes of the Phoenix raised out of the ashes of his dead Sire, Alter idem. Justitiae & Honoris cultor since∣rus maximè, as he was; that emboldens me to desire your Lordships leave to prefix your Name, that this may be as an Acces∣sory to follow its desired Principal: And knowing you to be such, I cannot but (as all, that know you as well as I, I am con∣fident do) wish for the common good, that your Lordship were put in statum merendi, into the sphere of your proper Activity, that the Publick might reap the benefit there∣of,
of, and that your Talent might be no lon∣ger (as it was whilest Rebellious Usurpa∣tion caused it, and did obicem ponere; now removed) wrapt up in a Napkin, nor your Candle hid under a Bushel: So wishes, so prayes,
MY LORD, 
Westminster 11. Novemb. 1661.
