



Right honourable,
HAving upon slow delibera∣tion resolved to publish these Meditations, being, ani¦mated thereunto by some of my good friends, wh are both able and judici∣ous: my next resolution
came more readily to present them unto your honour, not for the worth of the matter, but as wil∣ling to discharge my du∣ty and service;Quod solum nostra opis st gratias ager uti a∣pud Douns seri amat, copiosius sentiende. quam loquen de Auson.ad Imperator em 1 Cor. 2.4. Col. 2.4. for as my first call to a Pastorall charg was by your honors liberall and unspotted bounty: so I here present these the first fruits of my labours (of this kinde) to your honour, as the testi∣mony of my thankfull mind; humbly desiring to shroud them under your honours shadow; which albeit they come in a plaine and homely dresse (mo more) not in wisdome of words to please the curious care, but by plaine demonstratiō fō the holy Scripture, to worke upon
the honest heart, neither was it my intention in penning and publishing of this dis∣cours,Non tonan∣tia & poe∣tica verba proferimus, non aliqua Grammati∣corum ante composita; nec eloquen∣tia seculari, diserto ser∣mone fucata; Sed Christum crucisixum praedicamus. Aug. de ac∣cedent. ad gratiam. Ser. 1.2 Cor. 10.4 Heb, 4.12. to satisfie men, vain phantafies but the con∣sciences: yet notwithstan∣ding, I trust they will bee the more acceptable unto your honour. A souldier that intends to kill his ene∣mie, doth not doe it with a flourish, or flat blowes; but by striking home, even to the fetching of blood. I hope I may be then ex∣cused if I take the same course; it is not paper pellets, that will beate downe strong holds, nor woodden swords, that will wound to the heart. Wherefore I have endea∣voured to lay the Axe to the roote of the Tree, and
to discover that kinde of warre and weapons will be needfull for the work.
To which end I shall humbly crave leave that I may give your honour, in a few wods, the summe of the whole.
1. Here is a discovery of the enemy which is la∣tent in us, sicut Anguis in herba, as a Snake in the grasse, potent against us, building  strong holds against us: lastly, subtile and politick, and so doth beset us round, and hinders the enterance of the good motions of the holy Ghost,Heb. 12.1. Sordes peccati & spiritus sanctus in uno domiclio non mor abun∣tur: the filth of sinne and the holy Ghost will not
dwell together in the same habitation.
2. The combate is set downe in those words, mortifie, &c.Ber. Ser. in Pentecost. Hic jact Similis, cu∣jus atas multorum annorum fu∣it septem au∣tem duntax∣at annis vix∣it Dion. in Hadriano. For the place of this combate, it is the Church; when as once we become the sonnes of God, then also doe we be∣come souldiers of Christ; and for the time of it, it is in and after regeneration, and not before, though our lives may be long, yet our spirituall life in grace may be but short, as it was said of Similis, whose yeares were many, yet li∣ved but seven of them.
3. For our assistance we have the spirit of Christ to arme us with that whole armour of God that we may be able to
stand in the evill day; and withall to put courage and animosity into us, Ps. 7.8.9. Psal. 84.7. . that we faint not like those E∣phramits, that went our and carried bowes, yet turned againe in the day of battel; sine animis nil arma.
4. The reward is pro∣pounded and promised, yee shall live: our fight is here, our crown hereafter; quis sanctorum sine certamine coronatur, Hier. Ep. 22.
To conclude, therefore that we may not bee de∣ceived, behold the enemy discovered, the flesh with the deeds of it; that wee may not pleasantly dream of ease, and security, be∣hold a sad combat, gra∣vis lucta non contra hostes sed hospites. Ber. Not a∣gainst
enemies, but home born seeming friends; that we may not feare, nor faint in our minds; behold the spirit of grace helping our infirmities.
And lastly, that no man may thinke it in vaine to serve God; behold, the reward: wee shall passe from a battell to a ban∣quet, from a combat to a crowne; wee have the life of grace here, and the life of glory hereafter. Wherefore, seeing that this kinde of death is the end of so much misery, and beginning of so great happinesse, which is the maine drift of this dis∣course; I hope at your honours best leasure, it may doe you some service,
though not to informe you of what you know not, yet to minde you of what you know, so that the good worke begun in you may come to per∣fection in Gods best time.

