



AS many have written of ho∣nour and true renown, as Diogenes Babylonius, Metrodorus Atheniensis, Plato,
 Aristotle, and others. So I read of Hieronimus Osorius Lusitanus, more divinely affected,A Ut novis∣simè, ita e∣loquentissi∣mè omni∣um, quo∣rum libros vidimus. Hicronimus Osorius Lufi∣taenus De Nobilitate Christianâ libros tres scripsit. And Tira∣queb. cap 1. composed three Books De Nobilitate Christianâ . The chief aim of that zealous Au∣thor, being to kindle, and raise a flame in all mens hearts and affe∣ctions, and to make them in love with true and Christian Noble∣ness, which once acquired, as far outshineth all other vertuous ha∣bits, as the beams of the Sun the radiation of the lesser stars. This truth seems to appear in the nature and name of this high quality. For the Nobles rightlyNobili∣tatem quasi Noscibilita∣tem, prae caeteris no∣tam, cla∣ram, illu∣strem, aper∣tam, specta∣bilem, con∣spicuam, vulgatam, atque ho∣minum ser∣mone cele∣bratam. Festus Boni∣peius & No∣nius Mar∣cellus. pre∣sented, ought to be persons of greater wisdom, knowledge, and experience, so the Civilians will
 have it. Scire oportet Nobiles, à noscendo dicti, veluti Noscibiles. Noblemen ought to be sharp-sighted, quick and active, ingeni∣ous and judicious. This is taught from the Sacred Dictates of Gods LawDeut. 1.13. which commandeth, That . Septuagint. Ideo Castellio peritos vertit, that wise men, and understanding, known amongst the Tribes, be made Ru∣lers over the people. Some are of opinion, thatNonus Marcellus. Nobilis is used pro noto, as more eminently known. Thus Virgil character'd Aenaeas, that TrojanEt nos aliquod no∣menque de cusque Gessimus. q Aeneid. Prince, as one, whose Name and Renown was great. Some conclude, that he who is Noble is, Vir clarus of great
 honour, & fame. Thus the Histo∣rianIdem fecit clari generis, magnaeque dignitatis Vir Fulvi∣. Valerius Maximus. lib. 5. c. 9. describes Fulvius as a Ro∣man famous for his birth and pro∣geny, and of most transcendent di∣gnity. Thus Tully, pleading for Rabirius Posthumus, urgeth in his Oration, that Clarus, & Nobilis vir, He was a famous and Noble VVorthy. Offilius Calanius had the honour to be stiled, Clarus ge∣nere, factisque, And to be in high esteem, both for his birth and breeding, both for his worth in words, & deeds. Thus the Satyrist observed,Clarus genere at∣que opibus vir. Inen. Sat 2. that some Romans were famous, as well for their wealth, as for their birth and kind∣red. The Hebrews distinguished their Nobles and Ignobles by two
 words, the one presentingAlbr & laudor qui nomine light and brightness, the other obscuri∣ty and darkness. Solomon (the most glorious of all Kings) approvethlucem accedit. Conti this allusionEccles. 10.17. concluding, Beata terra cujus Rex est Nobilis,. sive fi∣lus Nobilium,à tenebris ac∣cepta meta∣phora ad ob∣scuros & igno∣biles. And ∣raq. de Nobil. cap. 2. Blessed art thou O land, when thy King is the son of Nobles. And in this very sense, the VViseman promiseth, that the diligent man shall stand be∣fore Kings, he shall not stand be∣fore mean men. The original bears it more fully, He shallProv. 22.29. not stand before dark, low, and obscure persons: and from hence it is most probable, that the epi∣thete Illustrious is usually attribu∣ted to Kings, Princes, and Noble
 men, because as the light it self, their actions and their passions, their waies, their words, their works, and all their atchievements are more eminent, conspicuous and visible. It was Otho's honour to have the Historians testimony, that Splendidis ortus Majoribus,Aurel. Victor in vi∣ta Othonis. he was descended from splendid Ancestors: and to those additions other adjuncts supervene, as those who are truly noble, have a subli∣mity of spirit, and generosity in their soulsQuis sublime ge∣nus for∣mamque insignis Hetrurci Nesciat. — Stat. lib. Syl. 3. clearly calcin'd and rarified from all sordid faeculency, and Plebeian business. And though Nobility be followed and waited on, with many others, emi∣nent attendants: yet her chiefest
 beauty is made up, and the com∣plement atchieved, by vertue and piety; and these two, do not onely civilize rude man, but in some proportion deifie him, and con∣form the rational creature, in some proximity, to his Almighty Cre∣ator.Bald. Panrm. Hence is raised that En∣comium by universal consent and tradition, Omnes consentiunt bonos mores, sive virtutem, esse Nobilita∣ti anteponendam, that a civil and sweet comportment, and a virtu∣ous conversation, far out steppeth Nobility it self. Some others go further in the commendations of vertue, and boldly assert, that ver∣tueFaten∣tur plerum∣qe virtu∣tem dare causam Nobilitati, quoniam ad eam conseren∣dam Prin∣ceps saepius movetur, & moveri debet illius virtutibus cui vult concedere. Bat. Plat. Rag. gives an esse and beeing to Nobility, and that a King or
 Prince is chiefly moved, and per∣swaded by her directions and counsel, to confer grace and fa∣vour, honour, trust and power, upon the merits of his subjects, whose virtues have an attractive power: and as the Load-stone hath a secret magnetick influence over Princely affections, and their Royal confidence and inclinati∣ons. It was from this firm founda∣tion whence the Noble (o) Ro∣mans elevated their thoughts,Malo pater tibi sit Thersi∣tes, dum∣modo tu sis Aeacidae si∣milis, Vul∣caniaque arma ca∣pessas, Iu∣ven. Sat. 8. esteeming it no dishonour or dis∣repute, though their birth were as mean as from Thersites: so their forttude and courage, were (at least in some degree) equal to that of Achilles. It was this, and one∣ly
 this, that forced the RomansLibera si dentur populo suf∣fragia qis tam perdi∣tus, & du∣bitet Sene∣cam praefer∣re Neroni, Iuven. Sa. 8. to honour a learned, and modest Philosopher, above, and before a puissant Emperor. There is yet an∣other jewel that graceth Nobili∣ty, and outshineth vertue it self, and that is piety, and godliness. This is wisedom which is prefer∣red above scepters and thrones,Wisd. 7.8.25, 26. A pure influence, flowing from the glory of the Almighty, that bright∣ness of the everlasting light, the breath of the power of God; he is truly honourable and most noble, whose soul is embelished and beautified with this grace, which as the VViseman saith, Omnibus nobilibus nobilior est sapientia, is more precious then rubies, and in it
 self is more noble and transcen∣dent then all the accesses and en∣dowments of either nature or for∣tune. In the variety of these ma∣nifold reflections, the eyes of many thousands are intentive with admiration, and their ears listen and hearken after your Grace, as a person perfectly No∣ble, and most richly accomplished with the endowments of clear worth and honour. This truth appears confirmed by heaven and earth, by God and man; and as it hath pleased God to commence his blessings to your Grace, by a most noble birth and pious education: so it hath pleased the Lords an∣ointed,K. Char. I. K Char. II. Two Royal Monarchs,
 successively to confer their high∣est trust, honour and power of their Imperial Crown, and of their three Kingdoms, into your Graces hands and managery: and as their Majesties trust was im∣mense and great, so your Graces fidelity and loyalty hath been as equally remarkable: for when the torrents and inundations of treason and rebellion did first break forth in this Kingdome, your Grace did use your utmost endeavour, to calm and suppress those superbe and foaming waves: and when they did swell to such a magnitude, as not to be reclaimed by Royal authority; your Grace
 (after many dangers & extremities) did chuse rather to endure an exile abroad, then to submit to disloyal subjects at home, Hault & puis∣sant Seigneur (and so the French estimate one rightly Noble, and a great soul) rather to chuse to ad∣venture, to lose lands, liberty, life, and to part with the nearest and dearest relations and concerns, then to hazard the loss of loyalty, or to admit the suspicion of taint∣ing true honour and renown: And as your Graces fidelity to the Crowns, was most conspicuous and impregnable: so; your Graces perseverance and constancy to the truly Catholick and Apostolick
 faith, your Graces practice and adherency to your Religion, professed in the Doctrine and Discipline, and to the Liturgy of the Church of England and Ireland, is most admirable and remarkable. Thus whilest in∣terest biassed some to a Papal perswasion, and faction carri∣ed others to a Presbyterian Combination, and a third par∣ty were deluded and trans∣ported with Enthusiasmes, and the Puffes of new Doctrine, and Phanatique distempers; it hath pleased God to keep your heart aright, in the
 VVorship and service of his Church, and the true Re∣ligion, now replanted by mi∣raculous and Divine Provi∣dence in this Kingdome, These signal testimonies of in∣comparable worth, cannot but raise your renown above the malignant breath of ei∣ther envie or flattery: (be∣sides others your singular ob∣ligations to me) these encou∣rage me to present to your Graces Patronage and favour, this little spiritual Infant, which desires to be in your
 Graces eye, or in your hand, or yet nearer, into your Graces bosome, when you can spare a minute from your great and high employments: The subject is, our Saviour in his birth, his life, his death in his Resurrection and Ascension; and, as in a Chart, or Model in this example, you may see, and measure out much holy ad∣vantage to your soul, in a trice of time, or a short view, which may prove to your future and eternal hap∣piness,
 prayed for most de∣voutly by
(My LORD)

