



I Have formerly sent forth a∣mongst you two little Books, the first called, The Ladies Di∣rectory; the other, The Cooks Guide. Both which have found very good Acceptance. It is near Seven years since I began to write this Book, at the de∣sire of the Book-seller, and ear∣nest intreaties of very many worthy Friends; unto whom I

owe more than I can do for them. And when I considered the great need of such a Book as might be a Universal Compa∣nion and Guide to the Female Sex, in all Relations, Compa∣nies, Conditions, and states of Life, even from Child-hood down to Old-age; and from the Lady at the Court, to the Cook-maid in the Country: I was at length prevailed upon to do it, and the rather because I knew not of any Book in any Language that hath done the like. Indeed many excellent Authors there be who have wrote excellent well of some particular Subjects

herein treated of. But as there is not one of them hath written upon all of them, so there are some things treated of in this Book, that I have not met with in any Language, but are the Product of my Thirty years Observations and Experience.
I will not deny but I have made some use of that Excel∣lent Book, The Queens Closet; May's Cookery; The Ladies Companion; my own Directo∣ry and Guide. Also, the se∣cond part of Youths Behavi∣our, and what other Books I thought pertinent and proper

to make up a Compleat Book, that might have a Universal Usefulness; and to that end I did not only make use of them, but also of all others, especially those that have been lately writ in the French and Italian Languages. For as the things treated of are many and various, so were my Helps.
I hope the Reader will not think it much, that as the fa∣mous Lymner when he drew the Picture of an exact Beau∣ty, made use of an Eye from one, of a Mouth from another, and so cull'd what was rare in all others, that he might pre∣sent

them all in one entire piece of Workmanship and Frame: So I, when I was to write of Physick and Chyrurgery, have consulted all Books I could meet with in that kind, to com∣pleat my own Experiences.
If any shall wonder why I have been so large upon it, I must tell them, I look upon the end of Life to be Usefulness; nor know I wherein our Sex can be more useful in their Ge∣neration than in having a com∣petent skill in Physick and Chy∣rurgery, a competent Estate to distribute it, and a Heart willing thereunto.

The like Apology I have for my Prolixity about Coo∣kery and Carving, which be∣ing essential to a true Houswife, I thought it best to dwell most upon that which they cannot dwell without, unless they design to render themselves insignificant, not only in the world, but in those Families where they are.
As for what concerns Gen∣tlewomens Behaviour, I have the concurrent advice and directi∣ons of the most able Professors and Teachers, both here and beyond the Seas; yet durst not

be so airy and leight in my Treatise about Ladies Love and Courtship as some of the French Authors have been, but have taken out of them what I found most taking with our English Gentry. The like I may say for Habits and Gesture; I am not ignorant of the vanity of some Mens stiles upon these Subjects; and that young La∣dies are too apt to take what may gratifie their Fancies, and leave what may better their Judgments about true Behavi∣our.
I know I may be censured by many for undertaking this

great Design, in presenting to all of our Sex a compleat Dire∣ctory, and that which contains several Sciences: deeming it a Work for a Solomon, who could give an account from the Cedar to the Hysop. I have therefore in my Apology to the Bookseller, declared how I came to be of Ability to do it, re∣citing to him the grounds of my knowledg in all those Sci∣ences I profess; and also what practice and experience I have had in the World, lest any should think I speak more than I am able to perform. I doubt not but judicious persons will

esteem this Essay of mine, when they have read the Book, and weighed it well; and if so, I shall the less trouble my self what the ignorant do or say.
I have now done my Task, and shall leave it to your can∣did Judgments and Improve∣ment; your Acceptation will much encourage
London, Nov. 10. 1672.

