



MY LORD,
I Have had the honour and happines to know
you from your tender years, and have discerned your cordial affe∣ctions and endea∣vours, to serve the Church, as an obedient Sonne; your Prince, as a most Loyal Sub∣ject; & your Coun∣trey,
as a most faithful Patriot. And as Pompey (when but a youth) to expe∣rience your For∣titude, & fidelity to the Crown, and (without injury or flattery) it may, in some de∣gree,
be said of you, as Plutarch writes of that No∣ble Roman, Is etiamnum adole∣scens, totum se fa∣ctioni Syllanae ad∣dixit; cumque nec Magistratus, nec Senator esset, ma∣gnum ex Italiâ
contraxit exerci∣tum. That you were a very early Commander in your youth, and those four terrible wounds, which you received in the fight at New∣berry; three in your head, and one
in your arm: Con∣tinue those marks and cicatrices, which, as honou∣rable badges of loyalty, will bear you company to your Grave. It was a question once started a∣bout Ascanius
by Andromache: whether he was like his Father Aeneas or his Vncle Hector,
Ecquid in antiquam vir∣tutem animosque viriles
Et Pater Aeneas, & a vunculus excitat Hector?
Andromache in Virgil:
Aeneid de Ascanio.
But there is not
any need of such a question concerning your Lordship, in whom the varie∣tie of your Noble Ancestors seem to concenter: So that the pietie of Richardus de Gra∣nâ Villâ, who
founded the Ab∣bey of Neath in Glamorgan-shire, in the fourth year of the raigne of King William Ru∣fus, liveth in you. The courage of Sir Richard Gren∣vil, your great Grandfather who
commanded the Rear-Admiral, a Ship called the Revenge; where∣in he so gallantly behaved himself, that in a desperate fight at Sea with the Spaniards, he sunk & destroyed infinite numbers
of Qu. Elizabeths enemies, when o∣thers made all the sail they could to avoid the dan∣ger.) And the loyalty and great worth of Sir Be∣vill Grenvill seem as thriving seeds to grow up, and
flourish in you. And it will be an honour and hap∣piness to your Lordship, to be not onely a Son and Heire of his Name & loynes, but of his virtues; who so loved the Church of Eng∣land,
that in person he guarded the late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury a∣gainst the fury of the tumultuous Rabbles in all commotions and Rebellions; either of England and Scotland, (in the
late blessed Kings Raign,) he mani∣fested the dutie of a Loyal Sub∣ject, and of a no∣ble Commander, at the fight at Stratton; he was successful against the enemie, with a handful of men;
And at the fight at Lands-downe; like another Epa∣minondas, though he lost his life, he got the Victory: Et cum sentiret vulnus esse lethale, non prius ferrum eduxit, quam au∣disset Thebanos
vicisse, tum satis inquit, vixi, invi∣ctus enim morior. To encourage his Souldiers; he fought with blee∣ding wounds, and finding that his countrey men, like Gallant The∣bans, won the day:
animam efflavit; he fell gloriously into the bosome of true honour & renown: These exemplars of vir∣tue have (doubt∣less) attracted your Resolutions to imitation of your Ancestors,
and have en∣flamed your affe∣ctions with true and right princi∣ples of Nobleness and honour. But that which ren∣ders you most lo∣vely to all who know your Lord∣ship, is that in∣comparable
ser∣vice, which by your prudence, fidelity, secre∣cy, and courage: was transacted & effected, together with the Duke of Albemarle, and his brother the Lord Bishop of
Hereford: in or∣der to his Ma∣jesties Restaura∣tion: which ma∣keth three King∣domes happy. This is the chiefest loadstone & mo∣tive, that makes me address to your Lordship
for patronage and protection in this argument, where∣in I endeavour to prove; that truth may be in com∣pany with Trai∣tors, and Loyalty amongst Rebels, as Hushai the Archite who was
King Davids best friend, and most faithful subject in his greatest dan∣ger. It is true; many worthyes did attend his Majesties Per∣son, in pinching extremityes a∣broad for many
years, and many thousand loyal Subjects of the three Kingdomes indured insup∣portable miseries from usurping & bloody Wolves at home, and the stings of a sort of Trepanning creep∣ing
Serpants, (as equally vene∣mous as dange∣rous) hardly to be avoided. These true Royalists were (on all occasions) active in their persons, in their counsels, in their relations, & their
friends in their purses, and their prayers, and by all wayes and inter∣ests, to promote his Majesties Restauration. But your Lordship (as a more signal in∣strument of much happiness) hath
received gracious markes of Noble trust, honour and favour, from his Majesty; & the thanks of all Eng∣land in the King∣domes Represen∣tative the Par∣liament, which will prove a hap∣py
record of your honour to poste∣rity, and blessed for ever be those hands and hearts, who have contri∣buted much, or cast in, if but a mite, to that bles∣sed work. There is another small
& tender branch, which budded seasonably about seven years since, and appeared in the Kingdom; un∣der the complexi∣on and colour of a Translation in the case and Pa∣rallel of Lewis
the fourth the French King. This, first went abroad to keep alive those loyal sparks, which lay-under the ashes of Cruel∣ty and Persecu∣tion, in the year 1654. & meeting with curteous
tinder, it took fire, and inflamed many affections towards the King. This small piece was reprinted eight moneths before his Ma∣jesties return to England; and it proved so prospe∣rous,
that some thousand copies were dispersed & vented in fourty houres. And then it grew suddenly a publick dis∣course in the City and Countrey (videlicet:) the Kings Case in the
Parallel of Lewis the fourth of France: This Branch leans on your Lordships Patronage and fa∣vour, & is added to this discourse, to perpetuate all Subjects resolu∣tions in their alle∣giance
to their Princes, and as a part of justice and merit, that his en∣deavours nay be discerned, who gave it life, & first fixed and planted it in England, and so not to be any longer fathered




on adopted au∣thors.Tulit alter honores. Virgil. My Lord, I shall not afflict your Lordship with any further present trouble; but wishing the increase of happi∣ness and honour; dayly to redound on your Lordship
and your enobled family. I cordially subscribe my Self; (My ho∣noured Lord,)

