


IT is I think more out of custome than necessity, that I do at this time premise any thing, the Subject whereof we treat, having been fatally felt by most of the Nation in some way or other, yet is it necessary that the histo∣ry of such turgencies in the State should be communicated, that posteity may hereafter see, in their rise and fall, the certain punishment of Treason, though for a time guarded and upheld by armed violence, and the highest policies of a subtle malice.
It is said of the Epicureans, that, though they acknowledged no providence, nor any immortality of the soul, and proposed pleasure as the only end of their lives, yet they maintained (most of them) that they that were lovers of pleasure, must of necessity be lovers of Justice, and that without virtue it was not possible for men to live intrue pleasure, So as it was said of the Stoicks (who were for the most part notable hypocrites) that they spoke good things, and did foul actions, but that the Epicureans spoke and taught things that seemed foul and shamefull, but did that which was fair and honest.
Certenly these two sects of Phylosophers might be the very pa∣rallel of our date times, wherein our Stoicall Grandees could speak nothing but holiness, where the practice of their lives was a continued series of horrid Treasons, while a litle in∣nocent mirth and freeness of speech was the greatest that lay, or indeed could be cast, upon integrity of their despised Anta∣gonists: so that we might see Cucullus non fecit Monarchum.
It had been well for England if the sad occasions of writing
this history of the times had never happened: but they have been: And, as our Saviour saith, Offences must come, but wo be to them by whom they come, so then to declare the actings, and their method and manner, is but so to lay them open, that they may for the future be the better avoided and prevented.
The knowledg of all persons, the meaning of all matters,
Voss. de seri Agt. & de art. histor. and the depth of all secrets, is lockt up in history according to that of Vossius, alluding to that of the Roman Poet,
Qui quid sit turpe, aut pulchrum, quid utile, quid non
Plenius & melius Chrysyppo & Crantore dixit.
And this I dare promise you in the ensuing Manual; with∣out too violent reflections to widen differences: all the obser∣vations arising as naturally from the relations, as suteable words do fitly supply the ready tongue of a Learned Oratour.
It is the general happinesse at this present, that we can, read the downfall of faction, and rejoyce in the glory of restored Ma∣jesty with safety and content; and I pray God, that all the mis∣chiefs of the remaining Achitophel's, Shimei's and Rabsha∣keh's, may sall upon their own heads: but peace, happiness and prosperity, may waite on our Solomon, that he may be blessed, and his throne be established, before the Lord forever.
To Conclude; As your Loyalty in the worst, oftentimes hath been signal (if in nothing else yet in sufferings) so dispise not to read this tractate, wherein, I dare presume, you will find something which before you knew not: the work, 'its true is short, but will not, I hope; want substance, inest enim sua gratia parvis; and to remember these things certainly cannot be irksome—
—Saepe recordari medicamine melius omni. to see and escape danger causeth, not only admiration but plea∣sure: which that you may receive with content by the perusall hereof is desired.

I shall only add one word in particular, first to the Nobili∣ty; You are Right Honourable Princes in the Congregation of our Israel, Men of renown, exemplarily both in your names and honours. Be as eminent in service for your Prince, as obliged to him for favours, that it may be recorded of you as it is of Davids Worthies. These are the mighty men which David had, who strengthened themselves with him in his Kingdom, according to the word of the Lord.
2. To the Gentry, You are they whom Jethro counselled Moses to provide out of all the people to assist him, and be mediatours between Prince and People; approve your selves according to that counsel to be able men, such as fear God, men of truth and hating covetousness, so shall the Lord give a blessing as he hath promised.
3. To the Clergy, God hath made you as a Beacon upon an hill, that you might forewarn Israel of her sins, ye are the salt of the Earth, while you preach to others be not your selves cast away, but in season and out of season labour, labour to declare Christ not of contention and strife, but sowe the word to effect that fruit may grow thereby.
And Lastly to the Commons, who are tumidum & insta∣bile vulgus: I shall only wish that they will labour for peace, and, according to their Royal Princes dictate in his late Decla∣ration concerning Ecclesiasticall affairs, acquiesce in his con∣descentions concerning the differences which have so much dis∣quieted the Sate: by which endeavour all good Subjects will by Gods blessing enjoy as great a measure of felicity as this Nation hath ever done; which is the earnest prayer of

No. 2. 1660.
