



SIR,
YOur Highnesse cannot want Presents, nor Presidents, nor Pre∣cepts; these all waite upon you at every hand, and the choycest of these: You must have the creame, the extract, the quintessence of all those Simples. Most fit you should; For in the per∣fecting your Copy, every hand is taught: and in the advancing your good, the whole land is promoted. God
 blesse every hand, and inspire every mouth, that is ingaged upon this worke, for great is the worke. Pro∣sper the same good Lord, shine upon those endeavours, which would make you excellently good, as you are great. Amen.
I am in some feare, that it will seeme boldnesse to add to such a full heape; and yet my feare will be over, if your Highnesse shall daigne to read unto the bottome. There may come a mite to your treasury, and take up no roomth there: And ever, the more Candles in a roome, the more light: and the wider is the gate, the more easie is the entrance. I took notice of a light (cleare enough as such mate∣rials could make it) set up before your Princely eye, A Light to Lilly, de∣dicated to your High∣nesse, Anno 1637. thereafter to steere your course; A dim light be∣fore the luster of your Star.
I saw also a Port opened before you: Porta Ling: given to your Princely hand by Anchoan. 1633. (the Author of the Dedicati∣on
 (he was Author of no more) had heard more thereof, had hee not some short time after taken Sanctuary at the grave) This and that I have seen; And I assure your Highnesse upon as good security, as the conclusion of experience, testimony of the gravest Authors, judgment truly made, can give you; That here is a light not to Lillie onely, but to all the Grammars necessary in the world: And a gate opened here (that is the proper word) whereat all Arts and Sciences must enter, else they enter like a Thiefe by the wrong way, and will quickly out at the Back-doore; And it were a great impeachment of judgement so to enter, for it were as if I should climbe up a Castle by the outside, when I can stand on the ground, and find no lesse then five faire gates for entrance, and being entred, goodly stayres to ascend thereby. With your Princely leave I take two things
 granted. 1. That at these low points, your Highnesse hath an unerring guide, who hath given you good con∣duct by this very light, and through these very gates; And yet he will not despise, what a very low person holds out unto him, for the clearing of the way, wherein (no dishonour to him, nor honour to my selfe) he may not be so knowing, and experimentall as I am: For, as a poore Musitian once said to a great King, God forbid Sir, that your fortune should bee so bad, as to know these things better then I.
2. Because one saith (as hee did Aenes Silv. wish) Princes doe prize learning like Pearles; which Noblemen esteeme but like Gold; popular men, like silver; and more inferiour persons yet but like lead: I suppose also, that your Highnesse is well forward in your way, which must be compendious, (to Princes) a very short cut. Then
 I presume your leading sense was the best light to Grammar (a good Non debet qu squā ubi maxima re∣rū momnta versantur, de verbis esse solicitus &c. Quint. 8. 3. helpe to other learning, but in compa∣rison a toy) where you stayed not nei∣ther, but hasted to Authors most sen∣suall, materiall, practicall, the most compendious and nearest cut to lan∣guage, (setting use aside) in the world.
And yet what if your Highnesse speake with tongues? you are shewen a more excellent way. Things doe  Cl. Alex. I. 1. p. 215. most accomplish, for they are as the flesh and sinews; Words as they may expresse things, for they are but as the garment of the body. To all, your Highnesse findeth an easie slide, and passe to a quick understanding of them, by those lights, or great In∣telligencers you alwaies carry about with you.
From those lights I have kindled mine which shines dim; nay, being so low, it is not possible it should shine at all: yet certaine it is, your High∣nesse
 hath not a truer light to goe by, though greater, and brighter you may have. They are the gates, (that is the other Metaphor) opened before you; I presume you have no other way to enter, for through them, all the world of disciplines must come in. And now that your Highnesse is entred with the Clue of Nature in your Princely hand, it must needs be that in short time, many will presse to follow af∣ter the same way; nor any dishonour this, that in the best way you should have the most company.
This is my ambition: and it is so, that our lower ranks may not run out good part of their span, and then graspe but a shadow in the end. This is all I seeke after: for if your High∣nesse should please to give me admit∣tance, to stoop at your foote, & to kisse your princely hand, I should do it, hap∣ly, somewhat rudely, having never had so much honour here; (beyond the Sea
 I had, where were some Branches from the same royall Stock) but yet certainly with all the Reverence that could be: And when that were done, I should home againe as fast as I came forth, and with as good a will, having as little minde to stay at Court, as worth to commend me thi∣ther. I can pray for your Highnesse at home: by Gods grace so I will: God make your name precious, and your throne great in His appointed time. Amen and Amen.

