



Honoured and Beloved,
FOr you were these discourses first designed, and into your hands are they now put, with an hearty looking up to Heaven for a Blessing upon them; that neither I may write, nor ye read in vain. My circumstan∣ces are known to many of you; and seeing I cannot be as Generally and Publickly useful to you as I would, I was willing to be as serviceable to you as I can. 'Tis now some years since in discourse with a Friend of mine, who hath often been Sub-Sriff of your County, I was told how many Thousand Sheep were found by com∣putation in your County: So that the Inhabitants of other Counties in this Kingdom did not stick to say, that your Sheep did eat up, not only your Grass only, but your People too: It is so
 thinly planted, in comparison of some other Parts of the Kingdom. This put me upon thoughts how I might direct you to the Improvement of your Flocks to higher advantage than some others. Especially the Providence of God cast∣ing my lot to speak in a Countrey Au∣ditory, to most who are some way or other concern'd with that sort of Cat∣tle: And not having found among the many Booke made publick, any thing of this Theme; I hoped it might be some way useful to stir you up in your management of your stock, to raise your hearts higher than their Wool, Flesh, &c.
I have been but a little while ac∣quainted with this course of life, and therefore if those of you, that are better skill'd herein, find any mistakes or de∣fects in what is offered, besides the common Apology of Humane Error, I have to plead a failure of judgement in the matter, not of Affection to you: Tho
 I have been wanting neither in an endeavour inform my judgement the best way I could.
One thing I foresee the Observant Reader will find deficient, viz. That no place is here allotted to the Follo∣wers, or Under-Shepherds to Christ: Such both Magistrates and Ministers hear in Sacred Writ. But I have this to answer to it; None such heard me when I discours'd these things, nor do I know whether any such will deign the reading them: And to others it would be vain to blot Paper to no pur∣pose. We have but too many who carp at Magistrates and Ministers for the neglect of their Duties, who would better place their time in amending their own.
I have purposely waved matters con∣troversial, wherein I find the Genius of this Age to over-bound. 'Tis practi∣cal Holiness will be the best Evidence to our selves and others, that we are
 indeed the Sheep of the Holy Jesus. And what ever apprehensions some, that are strangers to me, may have im∣bib'd, I can in the words of Truth and Soberness say, I had much rather be useful to bring one poor Lamb into the Fold of the Blessed Jesus, than Prose∣lyte ten to any opinion wherein I differ from others.
God hath blest some of you, My Friends, with large Flocks: I beg they may all bear Golden Fleeces to you, when you shall be much enrich∣ed by them Godward. That we may say concerning you in our requests for you, what the Beloved Disciple pray∣ed for his wel∣beloved Gaius, 3 John 2. ver. That ye may prosper and be in health, even as your Souls prosper. If this Essay (mean as it is, for such it was design'd for the general use) by the Blessing of Heaven may in any measure promote this your Prosperity, it will abundant∣ly compensate this Labour of
Mooretown, 26th. Decemb. 1679.

