



MADAMS,
I Have observed in you both (which was partly a reason of joyning you together in this Dedication) a constant respect (in the worst Times) towards the Old Clergy, when the firmament of our Church was sadly and totally over-cast, with Black Clouds of Novellisme and Heresie; even then your Aspects were benigne and gracious, and rais'd the drooping spirits of the Orthodox Professors round about you. I bless you for it, and God for you, who is faithful, and will most cer∣tainly put it to your account at the general Day of Retribution.
Particularly, I (the meanest in the Lords Vineyard, and save for my sufferings) hardly considerable) have (in reference to my Cal∣ling) receiv'd many Civilities from you, and must profess, that as I always honour'd you both, more for your goodness than your greatness, so I conceiv'd my self oblig'd in
 gratitude to a publick acknowledgment, and wanting other means, have presum'd upon this way. Madams, let it meet (I beseech you) with a favourable interpretation. 'Tis a small Peice, and was the fruit of my younger Studies. If the Style be somewhat Lofty, 'twas like my Thoughts when I compos'd it. Age and the Calamities of the Nation (in which I had a share) have since broken and humbled mee. And 'tis impossible (without the wonder of a Miracle) I should be made whole & rais'd but by Dissolution. Madams, I commend it to you onely as a Remembrancer, being able to add little to your Accomplishments in matters of Information. It hath been preach'd in Three several great Assemblies, and (upon the re∣quest of some Friends) is, (such as it is) sent abroad into the world. I fear not much but 'twill indure the test, and meet with the same good liking in the Reading, which it had the happiness to do in the respective Deliveries of it. It must needs pass the more currant with all that know your Ladyships, if you deign: to stamp it with your acceptance and approbati∣ons. I pray for you, and your Right Wor∣shipful Bedfellows. I rest,
MADAMS, Your hearty Honorer and Servant in Christ Jesus,

