


FOR me that am so Un∣learned and Ignorant, to speak of the Antiquity and Worth of Archery,

were a great weakness; for I find it to be almost as old as Adam: For in Holy Writ, Gen. 21. 20. it is said, That God was with Ishmael, and he became an Archer. And for the fierceness of the Bow and Arrow, Gods Vengeance is sometime in Scripture compared to it. But to come nearer home, and to speak of one or two of those great Victories that have been obtained against the Ene∣mies of England by Archers. As for Instance; first, the Bat∣tel of Cressy in France, in the Reign of Edward the Third, where he himself in Person, with the Black Prince his Son,

with an Army of Ten thousand Archers, overthrew and van∣quished his Enemy, Philip King of France, and his Army, consist∣ing of near One hundred thousand Men; in which Battel were Thirty thousand slain: See the Story more at large in Baker's Chronicle, pag. 124, and 125. But this is not all the harm that Archery hath done to our Ene∣mies, nor honour it hath won to our selves; for in the Year 1415. in the Reign of Henry the Fifth, there was at Agin∣court, in the Territories of France, such a Victory obtained, over the French, by the help of the Archers, that can scarce, if

ever, be parallel'd in any Histo∣ry; where a considerable Number of Archers, under the Command of Sir William Orpington, who with an Ambush of no more than Two hundred Archers, gave the first Onset, (which take in Sir Rich. Baker's own words,) Causing the Bow-men to let fly their Arrows, which so gawled the French Horse, that either they cast their Riders, or through their unruliness so opened their Ranks, that the right Wing of the English Horse had way to come in up∣on the French Foot. The English Army being in Num∣ber not above Nine thousand,

and the French six times, nay, some say ten times as many in Number. The Number of the French slain was above Ten thousand, whereof One hundred twenty six were of the Nobility bearing Banners; of Knights and Gentlemen Seven thousand eight hundred seventy four; and of Com∣mon Souldiers about One thousand six hundred, with a very small damage to the Eng∣lish; as may be seen at large, pag. 175. in Sir Richard Ba∣ker.

It were endless to recount what great Battels have been ob∣tained by the help of the Ar∣chers, and what high Esteem the Turks have of it to this day, I'le refer you to Travellers and Historians; more particu∣larly to that Ingenious Book of Sir Paul Rycaut, in his Histo∣ry of the Turks: and 'tis much to be lamented, that those Wea∣pons by which our Ancestors gain'd so much Renown, should now be almost totally laid aside, save only by your Honours, and those Gentlemen that use it for their Health and Recreation. But we hope this drawing forth may be a means to increase and

add to the Number of those that love Archery; which is the hearty Desire, and Prayer of,
Gentlemen, 
