



My Lord
WHat the wise observing King uttered long agoe, that of making of Books there is no end, was never more veri∣fied in any then it is in the present age, wherein, scribunt docti indoctique, every smatterer and every fancie-full head must have the Presse travel to bring forth their froathy conceptions: And Presses by many are made use of as engines to discharge revylings, reproaches, and blasphemies against the God of Heaven, his blessed Truths, wayes and Ordinances. For my self, I can say in truth, it hath not hitherto been my ambition to increase wearinesse of the flesh by much Reading: And that now I come this way to the worlds view, 'tis not of mine own meer choise, but because a necessity was laid upon me. The Author with whom I have to do in this ensueing debate, having not only opened his mouth to Preach in the
 most eminent-place in this Land, but also adventured to Write and Print against the Orthodox Doctrine touching the constitution and Government of the Visible Church of Christ, revileing in speciall the Church in this Land (yet through its side also stricking at all the Orthodox Churches in Europe) as no Church, but a dead carcasse having neither matter nor form of a true Church; a nest of unclean birds, idola∣trous, &c. And thereupon charging with a great deal of confidence and big words, all truely Godly to come out of it and to separate from it. It was by some Reverend and Godly men thought expedient, that (altho there appear little or no∣thing in what is said by him, which may brangle the mind of any judicious Reader: Yet because it is a thing usuall to adversaries of the Truth, if what they say, be it never so weak, get not an Answer, to brag of it as unanswerable; And unsettled minds that have not their senses exercised to discern good and evill, are ready to be taken with any thing busked up with gay words, and so to be carried about, like weather-Cocks with every wind of Doctrine, as many sad examples of this time prove,) an Answer should be returned to him, lest truth should so much as seem to suffer prejudice any way. And this taske they were pleased to lay upon me. Who albeit I do, and cannot but ingenuously acknowledge my self one of the least and weakest Servants of Christ, and that many others there are in this Church, who might far more worthily acquit themselves in this service: Yet durst not withstand the motion, having so clear a Calling, and con∣sidering withall how I stand oblidged, in my station, to maintain the true Religion, in Doctrine, Worship, Disci∣pline and Government, by the mercy of God established a∣mongst us, in common with the rest of the Lords people in the Land, by Solemn Vow and Covenant, and more parti∣cularly
 by the Lords bringing me, who had been in my young∣er years educated, as to many things, in a contrary way, to the acknowledgment of he truth, in a very gracious man∣ner, with a strong hand, and in much long-suffering patience, whereby he waited to be gracious, that he might be exalted in shewing mercy on me.
Haply it will be matter of talking to some, that this of mine has been so long in coming forth after Mr. Lockier publi∣shed his. But it is not unknown to many who have been wit∣nesses to my diligence, that my Answer was in readinesse within a few Moneths after his Peece came to my hands, and the task was laid upon me. And had come abroad if several difficulties had not interveened,
Now when it is to be published, I desire humbly to present it to your Lordship first, and under your Honourable name to the view of the world. I must spare to expresse all the great causes oblidging me so to do: Because to expresse them would not only be, haply inexpedient; But also would be, I know, unsavoury to your self, whom I have alwayes found desirous to aprove your self in reality of wel doing, but never liking well to hear of other mens euges. Only this much I cannot for∣bear and must begge your Lordships leave to say. The per∣sonall obligations which you have laid upon me by a continu∣ed tract of undeserved respects, ever since the first time I was known to your Lordship, would require a worthier testi∣mony of acknowledgment, then is this mean present, or any thing else my small store of abilities can afford. But to speak truth, it is not so much any personall concernment that hath engaged my heart to your Lordship, as that which hath en∣deared you to all who know the truth and you: That grace which God hath vouchsafed upon you to walk in tendernesse and closenesse with himself in your privat course and with
 constant zeal to improve your publick station wherein ye have stood, for promoving the interest of Religion and righte∣ousnesse and the good of Gods people without byasse or wave∣ring in any revolution of times (wherewith many turning upon the axletree of their own self-interests, have whirled about) the sweet fruit whereof, I doubt not but you find in these glowmie dayes, and trust shall abide with you to the end, through the mercy of the Lord whose gifts and graces are without repentance.
I will not adventure upon such severe self-denyednesse to speak more of what I have had the happinesse to be acquain∣ted with, in your Lordship. I hope this testimony of my sense of the obligation I ly under to honour your Lordship shal finde favourable acceptance at your hands. I will not pre∣sume (for indeed it were presumption) to commend my work in it: I pretend to nothing therein, but that, through the Grace of God, I have ingenuously and in simplicity, tho in much weaknesse, spoken for truth: But the matter it self is precious and of great weight, consisting of two great interests of Christ Jesus his Visible Church, which is his Visible Kingdom on earth. The one touching the qualifica∣tions of the persons that are to be acknowledged members of his Visible Church, and so, in effect, comes to be a Questi∣on de sinibus, of the marches of his Visible Kingdom: The other touching the matter and way of the externall Visible Government thereof.
As to the former, my Author has so straitned the bounds of Christs Visible Church, that by his sentence none are to be acknowledged as members thereof, and consequently to be under the Ministeriall dispensation of the publick Ordinan∣ces of Christ, the ordinary means of saving souls, but such as are already and antecedently found to be savingly conver∣ted,
 regenerated and sealed of God for his by the Holy Spirit, if not in the truth of the object (which yet most part of his reasoning and discourse pleads for) yet in the positive judge∣ment of very spirituall and discerning men: And that as some others of his way further lay out the matter, upon triall and proof thereof given, by a conversation led without the omis∣sion of any known duty, or commission of any known sin: A publick declaration of their knowledge in the fundamentalls and of other points of Religion necessary to lead a life with∣out scandall, together with a narration of the experimentall work of their Effectuall Calling unto Repentance and faith: And all Churches that are not constituted of only such mat∣ter as this, are, to our Author, wrong constitute. In the for∣mer part of this Examination, my labour is to discover the unwarrantablnesse and contrariety of this Tenent, to the Word of God; And to shew that all who being of years does seri∣ously professe the Christian faith, and subjection to be dis∣ciplin'd and governed by the Ordinances of Christ, ought to be admitted into the fellowship of his Visible Church, without any necessity of puting them to a triall touching their inward spirituall estate, and judging upon the same whether regene∣rat or not, as to that effect: And are to be dealt with, by Pastours and privat Christians in their respective wayes as these that are  within, 1 Cor. 5. 12. Upon this point I have insisted the more largely, because not so fully and of purpose handled by others before. And it is, of a truth, of greater importance then many are awarre of. 'Tis far from my thoughts to charge our Independent Brethren with any perverse designe in taking up and following that opinion which I dispute against. Many of them, known to me by their writings, especially these worthy Ministers in New-England, Cotton, Hooker, Shepheard, Norton, &c.
 I do from my heart reverence as godly and faithfull Servants of Christ, and as burning and shining lights in the Reformed Church: But I think verily, the specious notion of a pure Visible Church has duzled their eyes, and led them upon a way which in it self, beside that it hath no warrand in the Word of God, should it get footing in the world, tends to the ruine & loss of many souls, and to the bringing of the greatest prejudice to the present Cause and Churches, that any thing ever yet did since the first Reformation from Popery: And I am per∣swaded that, albeit the intention of those holy and reverend men abettors of it, be honest and from simplicity of heart; Yet Satan is under-board (let no man offend at this I say, Peters example teacheth us, that Satan may abuse good mens zeal and intentions for Christ to wicked ends, contrair to his Cause) Satan, I say, is under-board driving that wicked de∣signe. For if that be the the rule and modell of constituting the Visible Church, which they give us, are not all the Re∣formed Churches by this means condemned of wrong consti∣tution, & razed out of the account of true Visible Churches, as not being conformed, nor ever having been set up according to that modell? And what could more gratifie the Roman An∣tichrist and his followers then to yeeld this? Again, is there not hereby a ground laid to Question all Administration of Ordinances that has been in them, and to justifie the wilde fancy of Seekers, denying that there is, or hath been for many ages any Church or Ordinances in the world? More∣over when as none of the Reformed Churches at this day are thus constitute, if that modell should have place, must not either all of them be dissolved and cast down to the ground, that new ones may be reared up of some few precious ones picked out of their ruines, or to the effect they may consist only of persons regenerated and sealed by the Spirit, all other
 persons who, albeit they professe the truth, subject them∣selves to Ordinances, yet come not up so far as to obtain a positive sentence, that they are regenerat, upon such , evidences, as these men require, must be all cast out and banished the Church, put amongst those that are , with∣out, 1 Cor. 5. 12, left destitute of the custody of spiritual Discipline, Pastorall instruction, inspection, and authori∣ty: And so exposed to be a prey to Satan and his Emissaries, Jesuits, Hereticks and erroneous spirits whatsoever, to be led away unto what soever pernicious soul-destroying errours, or to turn black Atheists? That this is no needlesse fear, but a reall consequent of this way, is too too clear, by the sad ex∣amples of many in these times, who living without the pale of true Visible Churches and not subject to the shepheards staffe and vigilancy, are run out into so many wilde errours in Religion as never age of the Christian Church saw the like. Touching the other head, the Author in his Appen∣dix pleadeth for two things. 1. That the power and exer∣cise of Church Government, should be in the hands of the whole body, or community of Professours as well as of the Of∣ficers appointed by Christ in the Church. A Tenent not heard of in the Christian Church, untill Morellius in France, Anabaptists, and Brownists fancied it, and, as contrary to the Word of God (which to Ministers and other Officers ap∣pointed by Christ in his Church as contradistinguished from common Professours, attributeth the name of Rulers, injoyns the work of Ruling, and prescribes the rules of right gover∣ning, but never to the people) so cannot but unavoidably draw after it much confusion and frequent schisms in the Church of God, whereof experience affordeth plenty of examples. 2. That this power of Government should be solely, intirely, nd Independently in a single Congregation. A Tenent
 that besides the contrariety thereof to the Word of God and the very light of nature, carrieth with it a multitude of gross absurdities and inconveniencies. By this means let a parti∣cular Congregation of 30. or 20. or fewer, 10. or 7. per∣sons (for of so few may a Church, as our Brethren say, be com∣pleatly constitute) run into never so grosse an errour, as to Excommunicate a person unjustly, to hold and maintain He∣resie in Doctrine, to set up idolatrous worship, there is no Ecclesiastick authoritative remedy left under Heaven to re∣ctifie it: All Church-communion amongst the Churches of Christ is taken away: The unity of Christs sheep-fold, the Visible Church upon earth is dissolved, and Christ should have as many visible bodies as there are particular Congregations: A Minister could not perform any Ministeriall act out of his own Congregation: Not Preach but as a privat gifted Bro∣ther: Not Administer the Sacraments out of his own Con∣gregation, nor give the Sacrament to a member of another Congregation (as Mr. Hooker ingenuously acknowledges, Surv. Part. 2.) admission and ejection of mem∣bers should only be into, and from a particular Congregation: A child should be Baptized into a particular Congregation only, and not into the Universall Church: And one Ex∣communicated, cast out only of a particular Congregation, be∣cause the power extends no further: Way is made to let in all errours and heresies, and as many Religions as there are particular Congregations, and none can hinder it in an Ec∣clesiastick way, and many more absurdities should follow, as Learned and Godly men have judiciously observed. Con∣trair to those Assertions, is my second Part imployed for vin∣dication of the true way of Government which Christ has in∣stituted in his Word, and in great mercy set up in this Church, to wit, by his Ministers and Officers, not Lording over the
 people of God in a Papall or Prelaticall way (as this Author either mistakes or calumniats) but Ministerially under Christ the only Lord of his Church, Ruling them according to the Rule of his Word, in a way of rationall obedience: And that in a way of communion and association of Churches, and sub∣ordination of lesser associations unto greater and larger, as the Lord grants by his providence conveniency. On this I have not insisted so largly as the matter it self might affor∣ded occasion of discourse. Because it has been by learned and reverend men already so fully debated, the proofs of the truth so clearly made out, and all contrary Objections so abundantly discussed and satisfied, that I had little or nothing to adde: Yet I trust I have through the Lords help, in some measure, discovered the insufficiency and invalidity of what is brought by this Author, who, I wonder much should have adventu∣red to present the world with such a discourse upon the mater after so learned labours of others, as are extant upon the same.
I have also in two Appendices taken into consideration what is said upon these same points by some in Aberdene late∣ly turned aside from the truth, in a Letter of theirs directed to some Godly men in the South, May 1652. The reasons moving me hereto were 1. Because of their correspondence with Mr. Lockiers Peece, and it seemeth they have been in a manner his proselytes. Then having some time had more par∣ticular and intimat acquaintance with some of them, it would be to me mater of much rejoicing in the Lord, if I could be in∣strumentall to discover to them the we knesse of the grounds whereupon they have fallen from their stedfastnesse, that so, if possible, which I wish from my heart, they might be mo∣ved to remember whence they have fallen, to repent and to do their first works: And finally t what ever should be the ef∣fect as to them, the irrelevancy  the causes of their depar∣ture,
 being laid open, others might see no cause why any should be shaken with their fall. And blessed be God there are not yet many in this Land, that have followed them in this. What may be afterward, the Lord who sees the thoughts of mens hearts afar off knoweth. Times indeed are sifting: And the ignorance of many, the base earthly time serving minds of o∣thers, unadvised principles in some, who, may be sees not yet the far end of their consequences, may prove an advantage to seducements & produce more defection from the profession of the truth, if temptations continue, then as yet we have seen. But let temptations and trialls be what they will, the Cause of Christ, even that part of it which I stand for here, the order & Government of this Church, which he has appointed in his Word, and thereby made known to this Church, shal stand firm. It has been a cup of trembling to all that have hitherto laid siege against it, and a burdensome stone to all that have at a∣ny time burdened themselves wh it, to cut them in pieces: & it will yet prove so to all who will adventure to do the like. And turn their back upon it who will, Christ will not want his witnesses to bear witness unto it; Even if need be, by not lo∣ving their lives unto the death. And O but that man might count himself highly favoured of God, whom he should honour with that dignity! as that eminent servant of Jesus Christ Mr. Welsch spoke in relation to himself of suffering for some branches of the same cause, wged in his time. But having detained your Lordship too , I present this testi∣mony, I have given to it according to my weak measure, to you, commending it not only to your favourable acceptance but al∣so to your judicious censure, and your self unto the Grace of God who has called you unto the uained love of the truth, and is able to preserve you therein lameable unto the end. I am

