



IF the following Sermon be not published in the very same words, in which it was Preach't before the Trustees for your Charity at Fecken∣ham, it must be imputed to the short warning I had to prepare for it; which giving me neither time to pen, nor commit to memory, what I then delivered, obliged me to those sudden, and almost extempore effusions, which 'tis scarce possible so to recollect, as not to varie from some of the phrases, and expressions then made use of: How∣ever as to the matter, and method it is intirely the same, and as such humbly claims your Pa∣tronage, none having so good a title to the subject, as your self, whose Charity was the occasion of it.
On which account I could not but rejoyce, when I first chose the Argument, that I had so eminent an Example before me, of what I was to discourse: For, was I to speak of doing good, and being rich in good works, and were not your Charitable set∣tlements, as in the place, where the discourse was
 made, so at Bromsgrave, and in the Parish where you live, with your large Bounty on other pious occasions, a most proper comment on it? as what you farther design in Oxford, in the Colledge you are founding there, with the other growing Cha∣rities, which you have in the full purpose of your mind, were, of being ready to distribute, willing to communicate? and both, I hope, will end in the full demonstration of what it is, to be laying up in store for your self a good foundation against the time to come, that you may lay hold on eternal life:
Only great pity is it in the mean time, that (to use the Apostle's words, 2 Cor. 8. 11.) where there is such a readiness to Will, any thing should abstruct the performance?
Whose interest it is that such works should be obstructed, is shewed in the 24th, and 26th pages of this Sermon; but even that it self is one of the greatest Arguments, why good men should not be beaten off from their good purposes; and I trust 'twill have that effect with you;
For (not to mention your own honour, or that of your family;) the glory of God so much con∣cern'd in such eminent Charities, will be too strong a motive, why you should be still pressing on toward the mark, which is before you, andPhil. 3. 14. turning the deaf ear to those, who would beguile you of your reward.
Although neither can I imagin, why any one should hope to be able to divert him from his
 good purposes, whose whole life, thoughts, and words are all Charity: I have said it in the following Sermon, (p. 26.) I trust he, for whom I speak, hath too well devised [liberal things] to repent of what he hath done; I trust I can say for our honourable Benefactor in the words of the Psalmist, my heart is fixed O God, my heart is fixed. And I think I have as just assu∣rance for what I say, as can be had by any, but him alone, who knows the hearts of all men.
Busie-bodies in other men's matters, may create trouble, and uneasiness to him, ('tis what that worthy person, who preach't the last year on the same occasion hath observ'd p. 8.) but will never be able, (such is my confidence towards God for him,) to quench his Charity:
If I may judge by his other actions, by the whole course of a serious, Religious life; if the desires, and endeavours of keeping up good order, sobrie∣ty, and moderation in a man's family, and him∣self being the example of it; if to profess piety in ones whole course of living, and labouring to infuse it into them about him; if to appear with the greatest devotion in all acts of divine worship; with that singular reverence to God in his own house, as to allow ones self no other posture, even in the time of Sermon, and reading the chapters, as well as prayers, but that of standing or kneel∣ing: If to be zealous in encourageing the de∣votion of others, to be troubled, and griev'd for
 those, who absent themselves from the publick, neglect coming to the Holy Sacrament, or behave themselves irreverently at either: If to profess, and practice the most universal Charity to all men, to be ready for every good work at present, (as I could instance in very liberal distributions made according to the rule of our Lord, of lending, hoping for nothing again; and nothing hath been receiv'd again, but the blessing of being reviled,Mat. 5. 11. and persecuted for it: If not to give only a cup ofMat. 10. 2. cold water in the name of a Disciple: but to ad∣minister full streams to them, who come in his Master's name: If to what he is daily doing, to add the forecasting for good works for the future, and consecrating, what he shall have, to Charity: If to mix Justice with Charity, according to the Rules laid down, p. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. If to make Charity it self the Legacy, he would willing∣ly bequeath his Heirs, at once quickening their zeal for this Grace, and leaving them wherewith to exercise it: If these are things, which will give a man confidence, in what he speaks, (I speak it not to flatter, but excite to a farther pressing to∣ward the mark, for the prize of the high callinghil. 3. 14. of God in Christ Jesus,) I think I cannot well be deceiv'd; and I trust, (for 'tis part of your Cha∣racter I hear venture on,) through the grace of God continuing with you, you will not let any man stop me of this my boasting.
For no small joy is it to me, that I can thus
 boast; 'twill be the great honour, and happiness of the Society, (wherein I am, if it so please God, like to have so particular an interest,) that it had so good an hand to lay the Foundation: What a comfort must it be (be it upon me what∣ever the defects and errors are, for I must now own my self to have been the Amanuensis in drawing up those Rules and Statutes you have appointed us) to have been imployed in such a work under so good, so pious, and wise a Director? 'twas like receiving the Patern of all, that I was to make, from the Mount, that from time to time I had such instructions from you: What a no∣ble Theme shall we deliver down for posterity in our solemn commemorations, when the genera∣tions to come shall rise up, and bless the memory of a Founder, whose example no less than his Bounty, and the good Rules, on which he hath establish't it, so eminently concurred in the Bene∣faction.
'Tis a very noble monument you have set up, I could not but observe it, when I was in your Parish-Church at Tardebig, and it shews an hand no more straiten'd in erecting it, than the heart was to her (I mean your Excellent deceased La∣dy) for whom 'twas erected: But how much no∣bler a Monument is what you are erecting here! That stands a demonstration of your just piety to∣wards Her, whose memory is, and will be always sweet; and 'tis a very good testimony of your belief,
 and hopes of an happy resurrection, that you desire to sleep, and wake together, (for 'tis the same burying place you have made for your self, in which her remains are;) But this will be the more lasting one; and when that shall molder in∣to dust, or perish in the last great conflagration, this will be then freshest, and ready to accom∣pany you into glory, As, through Christ's me∣rits, all other good works will: and so the Apo∣stle hath said: for in due season we shall reap, ifGal. 6. 9. we faint not: 'tis all, and the best gratitude I can return in my own name, or the name of those, who are subjects of your great Charities, to be putting up our prayers, that you may not be weary in well-doing, there's nothing we can wish happier to your self, nothing more for his glory, to whom your Charities are thus devoted: In whom I am
Most honour'd Sir, 
