



GENTLEMEN,
SHould I tell you. with what Difficulty I was prevail'd upon to Preach the ensuing Sermon before you; and with what greater to Print it, tho' at your De∣sire;
 I should take up the trite Apology commonly used in this Case; and cannot reasonably hope to make it pass for bet∣ter.
The Aversions I overcame, in coming to this Town, to Settle here, cross to all the pleasing Designs I had formed of a more a∣greeable Serviceableness in a lower Sphere were not much greater▪ than those I ha justly conceived against appearing before you, on so Particular and so Publick a Occasion. This Sermon was One of the Thre I Preached in less than Thirty Hours, On of the Seven hard Services put upon me, i Eight Days, in a Time when the Pub∣lick, and mine own Private Affairs, al∣low'd me not One whole uninterrupted Day for all of them. And by this time you wi cease to wonder, why your Desires, and others, to Print it, were so grievous to me did so break my Sleep, and disorder the in firm State of my Body and Mind. I thank fully own, the great Humanity of some o you; who, when you heard the true Stat of my Case, that I neither write, nor us any Notes in Preaching, nor have done fo
 many Years, and having my Thoughts so many Days after, taken up with fresh and various Discourses. on Subjects I had never (to my knowledge) Preached on before; and had not been Master of any time considerable, to write, or reflect upon, and refresh my Memory (not the most faith∣ful) were pleased to interpose for my Ex∣cuse.
But when I was told, several Copies were transcribed, by Persons that wrote after me; and that if I would not, others would Print, whose Copies I could not procure so much as a Sight of, nor had Hopes of, otherwise than Sheet by Sheet, as Printed off, and past Alteration; my most Intelligent Friends told me, I must submit to do it, as one imperfect Copy would enable me, notwithstanding my (long indulged) Aversion to be seen in Print.
Had those of you that know me, known me, as well as I know my self, you would have had less Reason to sollicite this Trou∣ble to me, your selves, and others; but since you say you differ from me, I
 have at last submitted to you. And, no to mention the Deference I have to those of you, that are of my own Perswasion;  must add, that the Veneration I have for such valuable and useful Members of the Church of England (as others of you are known to be), is so agreeable to the Temper and Affection, I have long had to∣wards the Reverend and Pious Clergy o that Communion (with whom I have al along held some Communion, and Brotherly Conversation) that it would have bee some force upon my self, to deny you any thing I could do, toward the Encourage∣ment of others, to aid you in so good  Work, as that wherein you are so happily united.
In a word, it is not without great Sa∣tisfaction that I find (since I was before you) that the many Officers, who joyne together, to inspect the Markets, to find out Drunkards, Swearers, and Cursers, tha formerly swarm'd there, returned with∣out the Discovery of any Criminal of thos kinds.

And I am well pleased with the Hopes I have, of seeing in Publick, a short Scheme of those excellent Models; of the Laws you execute, of the Rules that di∣rect and govern your selves, and Officers, in this successful Ʋndertaking; which may be of greatest Ʋse, to direct and animate those in Places distant from you; to at∣tempt there, what you have more than be∣gun here.
May our Love, and Ʋnion, grow up the better, by that of GOD, and true Good-ness, we see in one another! And may your Converse together (though under dif∣ferent Perswasions in lesser Matters) tell you, you are none of you, the Men, which some of both sides have represented you. May the Exemplary Piety of your Fami∣lies, tell the World, that Divine Ser∣vice is not confined to Consecrated Pla∣ces!
That GOD would further unite you, keep your Hand to the Plough, and ena∣ble
 you to perfect, what you have be∣gun, is, and shall be the Hearty Prayer of,
GENTLEMEN, 
