



SIRS,
I Conceive it very proper for me, and of the greatest Concern∣ment to you, to lay particular∣ly before your Eyes those hopeful Means of Reformation which GOD hath lately pleased, in Infinite Mercy, to raise up amongst you.
I know I need not tell you, That you are Denizons of a City, which for its commodious Situation, Trade, Riches, and Plenty of all necessary
 Accommodations, is inferior to few; and for its Evangelical Enjoy∣ments, Liberty, and Laws, is happy above all the Cities in the World.
But I must in Conscience mind you, That all these great Enjoyments are in manifest Danger of being lost by those horrid Enormities, which have for some Years past abounded in this great City: for indeed they are gross, scandalous, and crying, even to the Reproach of the Government of your City, and to the great Dishonour of the Christian Religion. And therefore, I beseech you, even by your Hope of Mercy in both Worlds, that you would effectually set your selves to pull up those Pestiferous Roots, which will produce nothing but Gall and Bitterness to You and Yours in this Life, and that to come.

AND I entreat you, with all possi∣ble Earnestness, that you would not trifle nor deliberate long in a Case of such absolute Necessity, but set to it with as much Earnestness and Assidu∣ity as you would to quench the Flames which you saw kindled upon your Houses (of which you above others have had awakening Instances) or as you would remove Persons infected with the Plague from among you; A dismal Case too! which you have reason to remember. And I am sure the least Measure of Christian Faith will assure you, that these are but some of the smallest Instances of the Vengeance of an Angry God.
IT greatly concerns us of this Na∣tion to look back, and take notice how many ways God hath tried us, both in the Methods of Mercy and
 Judgment; and how long God has suffer'd our perverse Manners, even till both the Providences of GOD, and the Sins of Men, seem to be ad∣vanced to a full Crisis, either for our Reformation or Destruction. And London, in particular, is many ways loudly warned to reform, that it be not ruin'd.
HOW can you then, in Reason, in Policy, and in Self-love, (as well as in Conscience, and in the Faith and Fear of God) delay to take away the Causes of God's Wrath? How long shall those worse than Midianitish Women be a Plague and Reproach to your City? How long shall they be tolerated to spread their Nets in the very Streets, yea, before the Sun; and to bring their Rottenness into the very Bones of so many Persons and Families? How
 long shall the Disorders of Publick Houses go unpunish'd, whereby many a young Man (that might have done good Service to his Country many ways) is utterly emasculated, and becomes feeble as Old-Age, and trembles like a poor enervate Paralitick?
IS it not absolutely necessary to our Prosperity (as well as Salvation) that the Holy Name and Day of the Lord be sanctified, which have been so dreadfully polluted and pro∣faned among us? And that every Family which would be thought de∣sirous of God's Blessing, should daily seek it by solemn Prayer? And that they seriously set up Religious Hous∣hold Government within their Walls, as they would not be of the Number of those who disown all Rela∣tion to God, and Dependance on Him?

VVILL you be discourag'd from this, because some distracted People will call it Fanaticism, and give it sundry ill Names, which the Enemy of all Goodness puts into their Mouths? VVill you be mock'd out of Religion, and the Worship of God, and the Pro∣mises of his Favour and Kingdom, by such Unreasonable Revilings? Or rather will not every one that knows the Duty and Reward of a Christian, re∣joice and glory in trampling down such puny Enemies of their Salvation?
YEA, Let no Man's Heart fail him, tho he sees some Sons of Anak appearing as Champions in the Cause of these Uncircumcis'd Enemies of God. You may, in the following Pages, behold young Striplings going forth with a generous Courage against these blaspheming Goliahs, who defy
 God and his People: And, praised be God, we have some Honourable Magistrates, who go forth as Leaders in this Divine Cause; and we hope they will at last smite overgrown Vice in its impudent Forehead, and cut off the Head of it by the Sword of Justice, since they go forth against it in the Name of the Lord.
AND, O! what a brave and bles∣sed sight is it, in these degenerate and debauch'd Times, to behold young Men (not led by ill Women to the correction of the Stocks) but lead∣ing them to a just Correction! And to observe them taking greater Pleasure in Singing of Psalms, than others can possibly take in their profane and obscene Songs; and in short, better pleased in the punishment of Wickedness, than the poor abandon'd
 Wretch is in the commission of it?
AND in this happy and blessed VVork you have in your City some of almost all Ranks and Qualities of Men, effectually, tho secretly engag'd, thro the late Mercy of God to us, viz. Members of the Honourable House of Commons, Justices of the Peace, and Gentlemen; together with Citizens of all Ranks, Officers of divers Qualities, and private Per∣sons of all sorts; So that you may have Society to join your self to, suta∣ble to your respective Quality and Con∣dition, be it what it will: And there∣fore every Inhabitant of this great City has at this day a most valuable Opportunity of doing great Service to God and his Country, of what Quality or Capacity soever he be.
AND shall I now need to ask you
 what you resolve to do in this matter? Or which side you will take in this Strife, betwixt the Kingdom of God, and that of the Devil? Dare you be of the number of those who re∣vile, discourage, and oppose such as apply themselves to the prosecution of scandalous Sins, which are our worst Enemies, and sorest Plagues? Yea, can you be cool and unconcern'd in this important Affair?
I must tell you, That there can be no Neuters in this VVar betwixt the Prince of Light and that of Darkness. It is the known Rule of our Lord and Master, That he that is not for him, is against him: and, That he that gathereth not with him, scattereth abroad. So that your neglecting to oppose the growth of Sin, according to your Place, is a manifest
 cherishing of it in God's Account, and consequently an Enmity to Him. And if you are against GOD, he will be against you: and if so, nothing in the VVorld can befriend you.
THERE is a natural tendency in Vice to ruin any Person, Family, City, or Nation, that harbours it. It engenders Sloth, Variance, Profuse∣ness, Pride, Falshood, Violence, and a Neglect and Betraying of the Pub∣lick Good. It dulls the Understand∣ing, takes away the Sense of Honour, dispirits Manhood, cuts the Nerves of Diligence, and destroys the true Principles of Commerce and just Dealing. And by these means it di∣rectly tends to undermine and over∣throw the Prosperity of any City, or Publick Body.
BUT Ruin will pursue Vice the
 more swiftly and surely, because it is push'd on by the just Vengeance of Almighty GOD, the righteous Governour of the World; of whose direful Judgments up∣on other Cities abroad you have been suf∣ficiently inform'd of late, if you have forgotten the former Strokes of it upon your selves. You hear from Smirna, Jamaica, Malta, Sicily, and other Pla∣ces, that many great and famous Cities have been shatter'd and swallow'd up by dreadful Earthquakes; whereas the same GOD (tho mightily provoked by us) was pleas'd only to shake and jog us in a ve∣ry gentle manner by the same Expression of his Displeasure.
O Sirs! take the gentle Warning, and improve the Merciful Reprieve, lest His Vengeance swallow us up also, when He next ariseth to shake terribly the Earth. This is, in Duty, laid before you, by

