



My LORD,
THAT Noble Delight and Indu∣stry wherewith your Lordship ad∣vances the Knowledge and Ser∣vice of God, demonstrates the Honour that Almighty God does You, in making You Eminent in that Work, for which He sent his Son into the World. And on this Account, those Schools of Cha∣rity which your Lordship, together with Other Persons of great Worth and Quality, have studiously Advanced in this City and other Parts; those Good Books which are by these Means distri∣buted into poor Families; and those Ca∣techetical Libraries which are about to
 be compiled in this Nation and our Plan∣tations abroad, will be acknowledged with sensible Respect and Gratitude, by all but such as have slight Thoughts of the Benefits, of God manifest in the Flesh to destroy the Works of the Devil: Which is such a Pitch of Gross and Odious Insensibleness, as one would hope, could never have appear'd in a Chri∣stian Land; but yet, alas! we have too many Notorious Instances of it, thro' the desperate Depravity of Men in their Minds and Manners.
I KNOW, I need not mind your Lord∣ship, tho' some others cannot be call'd upon too often to Consider it, That our Adored Lord and Saviour, arose as a Sun of Righteousness and Truth, to give Light and Warmth to this Dark and Degenerate World: And that the Splendid Beams of his Glorious Gospel ex∣cel the Prov. 20. 27. Candles of Hu∣mane Reason, and those Tapers which the
 best Philosophers held forth to Men; as much as the Glorious Sun exceeds those Twinkling Lamps and Torches, where∣with we endeavour to supply its absent Light: Yet, alas! thro' the Depravity of Humane Understanding, and Men's con∣demning Love of Darkness more than Light; We find some, like the Moles and Bats, declining the Splendor of Di∣vine Revelation, and doting on the Dim∣ness of Humane Reason: Saying with Philostratus, Porphirie, and the Anti∣ent Humanists, or rather with Julian and former Apostates, Let my Soul take its Risque with Philosophers, and the Followers of Natural Reason; rather than with the Disciples of a Re∣vealed Religion, and the Admirers of the Book which God sent from Hea∣ven. Like the wayward Jews, who were for deserting the Pillar of Heavenly Fire, which led them into Canaan, and conspired to make a Captain of their own,
 who might lead them back into Egyptian Darkness again. An amazing Choice! and what cannot otherwise be accounted for, but by what the Apostle hath told us;2 Cor. 4. 4. Namely, That If the Gospel be hid, 'tis hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this World hath blinded the Minds of them that believe not; lest the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine into them.
WE see indeed with sorrowful Hearts, that it pleases God, to permit the Legions of the Prince of Darkness, to oppose the Kingdom of his Dear Son. And in this great and general Contest, all Men upon Earth are engaged on one side, or other: For our Saviour has declared Mat. 12. 30. that none can be considered as Neuters, but that Such as are not with him, are against him. And tho' there be but few of the Devil's
 Confederates, that are hardy enough to own the side they take, but call it the De∣fence of Humane Reason, or Humane Liberty, or some such Thing; yet, alas! they busily do the Devil's Work, they sap the very Foundations of the Christian Religion (which is the only true) and sub∣vert the Authority of its Sacred Author.
IT is therefore, My Lord, to the great Honour of God, and the great Comfort of devout Minds, that we find some Persons of Eminent Rank, Piety and Honour; who in the Vigor of Youth, in the Height of Worldly Blandishments, and in the Crowds of Corrupt Examples, bravely Trampling on All that the Usurping God of this World can offer, to draw them to his Party; and who in Christian Zeal for the Prince of Light, oppose the per∣nicious Encroachments of the Spirits of Darkness, and are daily instrumental in discovering to ignorant Souls, the certain Paths which lead to Eternal Light
 and Bliss. In which Glorious Work, Your Lordship and the Worthy Gentle∣men with You, are very happily engag'd, and will certainly find the Blessed Account of it, in the Accomplishment of those Great and Precious Promises, which are made to such as glorifie their Creator, and administer to the Salvation of Men; which are Things most truly Great and Noble, for which a Wise Man would chiefly wish to Live, and a Good Man would not grudge to Die. And that your Lordship may long be successful in these Divine Enterprizes, and at last reap the Immortal Glory of them, Is the Earnest Desire and In∣cessant Prayer of,
My LORD, 
