



Right worshipfull,
THis in your hand speaks to a Childe, but a Childe growne up, no Childe in understanding. Such are mine yet, being yet in their Childish yeers. So it might have staied a longer Time, but I knew not how short my Time might be, and I made all speed, when I was upon it, to leave such instructions as might be of use to them,
 when I could not, and to make them Le∣gible. They should have been more con∣tracted, for so I intended at the first, but a sheete or two, and so, to have spoken much in a Little; but so I could not doe, nor was it proper if I could; for then it had been of little use to those, unto whose hands it is more specially commended.
It had gone forth alone, without a for∣mer Part, if so it could have been thought entyre; But so it was not thought. It was specially intended, but the use of generall concernment, not so particularly any ones, but that it doth concerne every one, that will reade it. It leads on a Childe through all the Stages of his life (which are im∣plied here, supplied in the First Part,) and through the great occurrences, we meete with therein; And, for our clearer pas∣sage through them all, It supplieth such Doctrines, which I may call, as the Apostle doth, Strong meat, because none but a Man-Childe can digest them.
It supposeth a Daughter rather, as there was reason, and so goeth on in that Gen∣der,
 and in strict proprietie of speech for matter and forme both, for (both) were to be observed for Gender-sake; but yet, whether sonne or daughter, it respecteth both alike, for its Scope and white is, To improove the soule, which hath no Sex.
The margent is sometimes (yet as sparingly as might be) charged with a Barbarous Language: (such is that to you and me, which wee understand not 1 Cor. 14. 11.) One reason was, That it might both please and profit more then one; The o∣ther, That the line might be kept free, and not a word there to hinder the un∣derstanding; for I considered still all a∣long, whom I would teach to profit, and therefore if there be any word in the line not so familiar in our Language, it hath al∣waies a second to explaine it. I have often thought of the Apostles words, and very observable they are. "If ye speake with Tongues to the unlearned, will they not say, ye are mad vers. 23.? Truely I affect not words, but matter; and such words too, if my heart deceive me not, which may yeeld the most profit.

That I have Intituled this yours, there was a kinde of inforcement, which hath not alwaies good reason to strengthen it, but yet, as it falls out, I have reason too. Things of this nature are not thought comely nor well addressed to goe abroad, unlesse they carrie some persons In front, to whom they are specially Devoted, so here I was inforced.
And that I made choice of the Mother, and the Daughter, I had reason for that, which ye shall heare, and, how reason∣able it is, of that ye shall judge.
We make choice of such persons, to whom our personall relations are strong∣est: In this then, I am sure, I am right, and have right good reason.
And of those also, whom we most ho∣nour. I am right here too, and by the same reason, for there are no two in the world (for these personall and particular re∣spects, so I must be understood) whom I more honour then your selves; or, who have more deserved honour, in your pri∣vate and particular waies, then your selves have, from all that know you. And this
 I speake clearely without the least shew of flatterie, which I hate, as I doe that, my stomack most loatheth.
Besides all this, there are vertues point∣ed at here, which claime acquaintance with you, and say, ye have an interest in them, for they are yours. When I come to the Middle-Age, you shall finde the Pa∣rent Advising about A match for the Childe, and so on, where ye shall reade these particulars pointed at (for though I am verie long in the whole, I am short in the parts▪ pointing at things in passage briefly, So giving the Reader an hint for further inlargement) pointed at, I say, a discreet Parent; a vertuous Wife; a grave Matron, an honourable Age. And, in the shutting up of the book, a closing of the ie; yeelding up all into the hands of Death, which yet is to such, as Iosephs wagons, serving onely to convey those, who are such, To the place of rest, where they would be. And such ye are, I think, and an interest ye have in those vertues be∣fore mentioned, ye may lay claime to them, and call them yours, else I know
 not where to finde a vertuous woman, a True wife, a grave Matron, an honourable Age. Therefore I conclude, such ye are; And that your departure out of this life will be joyfull, for ye go to the God, whose ye are, and whom you serve Acts 27. 23., the strongest ground for comfort that ye can stand on.
And now that I have concluded so, I have excluded none from partaking with you in the same vertues, and re∣ward, and wish that all were even so, and more abundant. So it puts you on to strive, to improve, to grow, to increase. It is the Apostles inocuragement often, none more often, and to those, who had gone verie farre, even to perfection; where note our perfection here, is our strife after per∣fection.
And after this ye strive too, as the Apo∣stles wish was, even your perfection 2 Cor. 13. 9.. O how good and blessed a thing it is, to stirre up, to encourage one the other, the husband the wife, the wife the husband; the Parent the Childe, the Childe the Pa∣rent, &c. Let us go on to perfection Heb. 6. 1.: ye doe, I doubt not but ye doe, strive after this,
 ye doe labour (it is a grave word, but itf 2 Cor. 5. 9. looseth of its weight in our Language, for it implieth such paines, as a man will take to climbe up to the pinnacle of honour See the Book, page 9., lesse labour will not serve, for we intend an higher place, so ye strive) That ye may be accepted of the Lord, that ye may live for ever with Him. Oh, it is good to strive here, and not to faint; It is for eternitie, and for a crowne lasting so long, and (un∣like other crownes) still flourishing, even to everlasting. Gird up your loines; That is, put to all your strength, and the Lord strengthen your hands to lay hold hereon; and strengthen you the more, the more feeble Age hath made you, and the nearer you are to the putting it on. Be as ye have been, and be more abundant, "Eies Job 29. 13 to the blinde, feete to the lame; that the blessing of them, that are ready to perish, may come down upon you, as the Dew upon the grasse; and your praiers may ascend as Incense, coming up in remem∣brance before the Lord.
But above all, look to the root of all, Faith, Gods great work John 6. 29. and gift; restore
 that, renew that, the fruit See the Book pag. 46, 47. will be, and be alwaies greene, like a Watered garden, wch doth not fear the yeer of drought Jer. 17. 8.. Quicken the Mother-grace, it will quicken you and every grace, that ye cannot be unfruitfull; ye cannot but adde one grace to another, so building upwards stil towards heaven, where we hope to see our Parents againe, our yoak-fellows againe, our children againe, &c. This is somewhat quickning; but where we shall see our Lord Christ againe, even as He is John 3. 2.. Lord, what a joyfull vision will this be! Thou knowest, we know not, nor know how to expresse it, for it pas∣seth all understanding.
Be abundant therefore in the work of the Lord, in the labour of love, work of faith, patience of hope; none of this can be in vaine in the Lord. In vaine? more is understood then spoken: An Abundant recompense there shall be, pressing down, running over.
For Temporalls, eternalls; for a sprink∣ling of mercy, a weight of Glory; for re∣specting His Christs here, ye shall be ever with Christ and with His Christs hereaf∣ter;
 where there shall be All peace, (and peace is all) passing understanding; where ye shall see the glory of His Inheritance, and partake with the felicitie of His Cho∣sen; When all the Crannies of your right precious soules shall be filled with joy unspeakably glorious.
Our thoughts are too short to reach here, much more short are our words; Their scope is, to set your hope before you, and to make it precious in your eies; that in this earthly Tabernacle, ye may have your conversation in the highest hea∣ven, from thence looking for a Saviour, Who shall change this corruptible body, to make it like to His glorious body, in that blessed Time, which shall scatter a∣way all afflictions, and seale within you the happy assurance of immortalitie, there∣with cloathing a weake body, and recom∣pensing a few sorrowfull daies, with ever∣lasting peace. In which hope, say now and alwaies, "Lord encrease in us our faith, and hope, that in assurance of Gods love, our consciences may be at peace, and in the revelation of Gods glory, our hearts
 may be filled with joy in the Lord. Yee see now the full scope of my words, even to leade you to hopes on high, for they will send your thoughts on high, they will purge, quicken, stirre up, they will ele∣vate and advance the soule to a wonder∣full height. And now that my words have attained this end, as I hope they have, even to set your affections, hearts, heads, hands, all a work, (ye labour to be accepted of the Lord) my words shall here end also, so soone as I have onely mentioned the A∣postles fare-well; I commend you to God, and the word of his Gracen, and have sub∣scribed my selfe,

