



My Lord,
SINCE nothing in the following Dis∣course can be supposed to have re∣commended it to the Hearers, but those serious and seasonable Truths, whereby it recommends it self to every Man's Conscience. It must be look'd on as a Specimen of your Lordship's and your Worshipful Brethren's Integrity towards God, and Fidelity to the present Government (in a time when some so easily shake hands with both together) That you desire to re∣view what was humbly offered upon our late Fast-Day, on those two Topicks (of Duty to God and the King;) which the Nature of the Things, and
 the Duty of the Day entwisted together. And may these Heaven-born Twinns never be devided upon Earth: For indeed, they are but half-Friends (if we may not call them Enemies) to any Civil Go∣vernment, who are impatient of the Government of God; by whose Blessing alone Kingdoms Flou∣rish. The sins of such Persons hurt the side they take, more than their Assistance helps it.
And therefore, when all is done; unfeigned Ho∣liness (how lightly soever esteemed in these filthy dreggs of time) is surely the most Honourable and useful accomplishment of Humane Nature. The real Servant of God is the true Person of Quality, being one of the Household of God. And till any Empire can be found equal to that of God; no Title or Employment can be of equivalent Ho∣nour to that of belonging to the Court of Hea∣ven.
Yet we see, the World laughs at this. And ac∣cording to the Notions of some, there is Glory in the service of the Devil. And the most like him in Pride, Falsehood, Revenge, and Blasphemy are the finest Men. But, are not these very horrible and very perverse Sentiments? Has Bedlam it self any such reverse to common sense, as this? And will not insupportable shame succeed this Phrenzy, when once they come to see things in a true light? And
 this they will see to the purpose, within a little while, either in their Conversion or Condemna∣tion. God Almighty grant it them in the first Method, not in the last.
It is not more evident that the Sun guilds and cheers this lower World, than that Religion is the Light, Glory, and Advancement of the Intellect∣ual part of it. Happy are its Votaries, yea blessed are its very Martyrs. It is a very light thing to bear the mockery and Affronts of this World, if we do but pass on directly to the Glory of the other. Those that are blind will be apt to jostle those they meet in the streets: But it is the Duty of such as see, to endeavour to put them into the right way.
And therefore, there is no Post beneath the Clouds so honourable, as that of a Person in great Power, employing it to reclaim and reform the Community to which it belongs. It is like the Good Angel's leading Lot and his Family out of the reach of the descending Flames. The comforts of which here is almost as inexpressible as it's Re∣ward hereafter.
Ʋpon the whole, if there be any such Great and Blessed Man (or set of Men) upon Earth: by whose Piety, Prudence, and Power (under God) Christianity is to retrieve its Credit, and God his Honour in the World. Blessed is He (or They)
 above the common rate of Mortals! All the sober part of Mankind will kiss their feet, and the most remote Posterity will bless their Memory.
I confide, My Lord, That your just indignation to the wretched Atheism of this prophane Age will incline your Lordship to excuse the Prolixity of this Address to you; to which shall now put a speedy Pe∣riod, so soon as I have implored this one mercy of God, viz. That your Lordship and your Worship∣ful Brethren, may by your pious and prudent Con∣duct, establish the Peace, restore the Piety, and advance the Prosperity and Renown of this Great and Famous City: And hereby ascertain to your selves abiding Mansions in that City which has Divine Foundations: which is the unfeigned Desire of
My Lord,

