



IT is a Divine and Blessed Work, my Honoured Brethren! to which you have so heartily and effectually applied your selves. And may the God
 of Heaven and Earth prosper your Handy-work, or rather, his own Work in your Hands.
The Reformation of wicked People is ever very requisite, but in the pre∣sent height of our Impieties it is not only seasonable, but of absolute Neces∣sity to be done without Delay; lest our Iniquity, which has visibly been our lan∣guishing Distemper, should speedily be∣come our utter Ruin; which shews the Ʋnreasonableness of such who call your Zeal an unseasonable Heat.
And as far are they from Truth, who call it a medling with things which do not belong unto you; since God makes it your bounden Duty in that Text which is the Subject of the following Discourse. And as little Reason have they to call it Cruelty, since God there calls it Cha∣rity, and assures us that the contrary is Hatred in the very Heart. So that my Text is both your Commission and Vin∣dication.
 And truly, it is your Plea of furthering this your excellent Design by the publication of this Sermon, which alone induces me to consent to it. For I know no greater Good that can pos∣sibly come upon this corrupt World, than its Reformation; yea, I do not see how any Good can come unto it, or abide with it, without this. And this is indeed a direct way to prevent not only the Calamities of Kingdoms, but the Eternal Miseries of Humane Souls.
And therefore it cannot but be mat∣ter of great Joy to all good People to hear of your successful Progress in this your pious Enterprize. What exalted Praises will they offer to God, when they hear of your Order, Courage, and Ʋna∣nimity in a Work of such absolute Ne∣cessity; and when they understand that Thousands have been brought by your means to legal Punishment, for their abominable Enormities; and that Mul∣titudes
 of scandalous Houses, which were the odious Nurseries of Uncleanness, have been suppress'd by you; and that publick Vice and Profaneness is mani∣festly check'd, and in a way to be rooted out by your exemplary Diligence, Zeal, and Expence in this great Ʋndertaking? As it is more particularly related in an Account of the Rise and Progress of the Religious Societies of Young Men, lately published.
It was indeed impossible that an Af∣fair of this general and important Na∣ture could have been carried on with any probability of Success, but by the conjoined Prudence, Power, and Cost of an Associated Body of considerable Per∣sons. And blessed be God who inclined the Hearts of so many of you to unite together in an Affair of such difficult and discouraging Circumstances; and that he hath guided your Motions in it with such irreproachable Justice and Prudence.

For your Method of Procedure against Offenders is so strictly Legal, and your Rules of Management so Prudential, that you have not only drawn many to incorporate with your Societies, but have very much silenced the Calum∣nies of all but vicious and unreasona∣ble People against them.
So that when your noble Design, your just Proceedings, and your considerable Success comes to appear to the World in a true Light, it cannot reasonably be questioned, but that you'll gain all the Honourable and Sober part of it (by the pure worth of your Cause) to pray for you, support, and vindicate you, according to their Place and Power.
For, how can the Magistrate, who would be thought Righteous in his Place, or faithful to the Vows of his Religi∣on, or to the Oath of his Office; in the
 least decline his Assistance to that which so manifestly asserts the Authority of God over Men, and so directly sutes the very End for which Magistracy was ordained in the World?
And will not every Minister of the Gospel of Christ depart from his Sa∣cred Character, yea, revolt from his Lord and Master, if he be wanting to assist you in any thing proper to his Function?
Yea, every private Person who hath or desireth to have a clear and comfor∣table Conscience, or has but a just Sense of Moral Decency, and of Civil Government, will find himself in Du∣ty and Interest obliged to join with you, in a seasonable informing against Vice, and endeavouring to suppress those in∣tolerable Impieties which have so long been a Reproach to our Religion and Government.

So that Peoples agreeing with you, or being against you in this your Un∣dertaking (which all the Sense of Man∣kind must pronounce Pious and Just) will be a sort of a Test to discern Reli∣gious and Vertuous Minds from others: In which, I pray God, none be distin∣guisht to their Reproach here, and Con∣demnation hereafter.
But as our Blessed Lord himself was injured, reviled, and opposed when upon Earth: So, you must expect (yea, I know, you have experienced) the in∣jurious Treatment of a sinful and per∣verse Generation. But here you are to tread in the Steps of your Saviour in his Sufferings, as well as in his Do∣ings: And with him, pray, That such may be forgiven by a Merciful God, who do they know not what against him. And whilst you bring poor sense∣less Sinners to undergo the just Penal∣ties of the Laws, let your Prayers fol∣low
 them, that it may indeed be an effectual Method of their Reformati∣on.
But there is one Great Thing want∣ing yet to accomplish this desired A∣mendment of wicked People, (the want of which I have heard some of you la∣ment) which is, A due Provision of Work and Work-houses to imploy the Hands of the Poor, which other∣wise will most certainly be misimployed in sinful and vicious Courses.
If we ask any Thief, Strumpet, or other Malefactor; What it was that brought them to their wicked way of Life? They usually reply, That it was their want of an honest Employ∣ment, and that they did it to get Bread. And 'tis very probable that they speak the Truth: For had they been bred up to diligent Labour, and been inured to Business, it is very like∣ly, that neither the Devil nor their
 Lusts had ever gotten such Dominion over them.
Nor indeed is there any probability of reclaiming them, but by such means as these. Were every Malefactor who is sent to the Prison, kept there strictly to the utmost bodily Labour that they are capable of, and this for a competent Time: And had they withal, the Bene∣fit of frequent Prayers and Sermons sutable to their Condition: This would make their Prison a proper House of Correction and Instruction too. And when they had once found the Benefit and Comfort of honest Labour and a good Conscience, it might be hoped that most of them would never return back again to their former course of Life. Whereas now, if a Felon be sent to the Jail, he there finds the most invete∣rate Villains in the whole County for his Companions and Tutors, and he has leasure in abundance to con over their Lessons, so that he becomes seven-fold
 more a Child of Hell than before, if he escapes the Gallows. Or if a Slut be sent to Bridewell, and be there severely lasht, and then set free again: 'tis true, she comes out corrected, but not at all amended; for still the first Cause of her Misbehaviour continues; and if want of Imployment brought her to her former ill Life, it will be like to reduce her to it again. And thus they har∣den in their Vices, and the Keepers of those Prisons find them their constant Visitants.
And, alas! what pity is it? And what a shame in truth to such a Weal∣thy City and Nation! Yea, what a Reproach to the Faith and Charity of Christians, that due Provision is not made to imploy the Poor? For want of which, not only our Prisons and Houses of Correction, but our very Alms-houses seldom answer the End of their Foundation.

And therefore it would be one of the hest Charities in the World, if a competent Number of Gentlemen and Wealthy Citizens, expert in Manufa∣cture, would endeavour to obtain an Act of Parliament in this behalf; and in the mean time contribute to a common Stock, and employ it to this End. And it would become every Person of Abi∣lity to contribute towards it, either by giving something to the Fund, or tak∣ing the Goods thus wrought from off their Hands that out of Charity imploy the Poor.
It can scarcely be imagined, that Peo∣ple could better serve their Generation than in this Method, or more admini∣ster to the Glory of God and the com∣mon Benefit of Men. For who can sum up the Advantages that would accrue to any State by the ceasing of the Vices of such multitudes of People, and the Income of their Labours? And if this were generally encouraged, the Wealth a∣rising
 from it in time, would probably be a visible Reward of the Charity of it in this World; as it has been demon∣strated by several Ingenious Pens.
The good God vouchsafe to prosper all necessary Means of a General Reforma∣tion of Manners amongst us, that we may appear (from the highest to the lowest) worthy of the glorious Name of a Reformed People. Which is the ear∣nest desire of,
Gentlemen,

