



Gentlemen,
AS it is generally agreed, that you have one of the most prudent and well-advised Charities under your hands, so it must be granted, that you have managed it with great Honour. For, as the Worthy Founder took all imaginable Care to have his Charity as lasting as the World it self, so have you, for many Tears past, put your Accounts into such an exact Method, as will not only justifie your own Faithfulness, but make it difficult for any that succeed you to be Ʋnfaithful.
And perhaps it is in some Measure a Fruit of this Noble Charity, that a most Commodious School At South-Mol∣ton in Devon, for 30 poor Children, ere∣cted at the Cost of 700 l. and endowed with 50 l. per Ann. for ever, by Mr. H. S., for the Education of Youth, has been Erected and Endowed by one of you, for the perpetual Benefit of
 Posterity: With many other very To the value of above 3000 l the whole. considerable Deeds of Charity.
Had Plato seen such Pious Improvements of Wealth, he might have struck out that uncharitable Reflection of his, That it is impossible for any one to be very Rich, and very Good. Nor would Celsus (had he well consider'd it) have been so fond of that false Sentence of Plato's, as to commend it even to Blasphemy.
May it please God therefore to stop the Mouths of the Adversaries of our Holy Religion, by the exemplary Lives of all its Votaries. May all Persons who are eminently Great, be conspicuously Good; and give such Demonstrations of the Mistake of that Philosopher, as Abraham, David, and many others have done, who though vastly Rich in Worldly Possessions, were yet more so in Good Works.
And may it please Him, who sometimes delighteth to choose Mean things, to confound things that are Mighty, to assist this Sermon with his Grace, that it may somewhat retrieve us from that Selfish narrowness of Spirit, which hath been our great Reproach, and al∣most our utter Ruin: And may it excite a publick and generous, that is, a truly Christian Spirit amongst us, to the Glory of Almighty God, the just Honour of our Divine Religion, and to the Peace, Safety, and Re∣nown of our Native Country: Which is the earnest Desire of,
Gentlemen,

