


My Lord,
SInce it has pleased your Lordship to introduce the following Sermon into further Light; I crave leave to prosecute the Subject of it so far as to intimate, that since the Idleness which the Text condemns is usually the Parent, or at least the Nurse of the other Vices therein mention'd; it seems very natural to conclude, that a general Engagement of the many idle Hands among us in sutable Employments, would be a most direct means to suppress our other pestilent Enormities. We could scarcely be imagined liable to be over-run with Sodom's Pride, Luxury, and Uncleanness, if we did not give way to Sodom's Idleness.
The setting up of Publick Work-Houses for the Encouragement of the Diligent, the Relief of the Poor, the Employment of the Idle, and the Correction of the Criminal, is a Noble and Excellent Design, which has been long in the Thoughts and Wishes of many Great Men and Brave Spirits amongst us. And it is hoped, that it may now be seasonably and successfully proposed to that August Assembly which superintends the grand Interests of this Nation.
For, a greater National Good can hardly be ima∣gined than this would soon appear to be; it being un∣doubtedly
 a much greater Chari to any poor Person that is able to labour, to supply im with constant Work to get his Living, than to afford him a constant Mainte∣nance in Idleness: for as much as Idleness would natu∣rally mourish many Diseases in his Body, and Vices in his Soul, which an habitual Employment would be apt to prevent.
And in this Opinion, my Lord, (if I may not call it a Demonstration) I am supported by that Great Phi∣losopher of ours, the Lord Verulam; who advised  his  to R. James I. Hern's Dom. Crthus. that all Houses of Charity should be Houses of convenient Employment and Industry: which would at once enlarge the extent of the Charity, and make it of greater Benefit to the Partakers of it; besides those great Advantages which would accrue to the Publick by a general Employment of all Hands, in the increase of our Manufacture, Trade, and Navigation: which are none of the least Interests of this famous Island.
And now, since the Advantages of a general Em∣ployment are so very great, and so evident to every considering Person; it is very strange that in such a tra∣ding, wealthy, and populous City as this, which is ho∣noured by the Residence and Government of so many Wise and Industrious Persons, there is not yet any effectual Provision made to set and keep those Idle People to work, who now perplex the Business of the more Dili∣gent, disturb their Quiet, pilfer their Goods, and who are in truth the Sin and Shame, the Burden and Annoy∣ance of this Opulent and Magnificent City.

 And since the Sequel of my Discourse leads me to it, I crave your Lordship's leave to suggest further; that it is (I humbly conceive) a fundamental Error (which the Industry of a Neighbouring Country may teach us to correct) that we inure not our Youth to diligent and constant Labour, by which they would be brought to ac∣count Idleness a Torment in their adult Age. And by this Expedient our Commonalty would be brought to better Behaviour in time of Peace; and be rendered more obe∣dient to Orders, and more able to endure Toils and Fatigues in time of War.
For, the Nature of Men is in this respect very like that of Waters; the purest of them gather Filth by stand∣ing still: and therefore that coarse and drossy part of Mankind which never had any Refinement by Learning, Education, or Religion, will be apt to degene∣rate into the very Dregs of corrupt Manners, if their peccant Humours be not carried off by wholesom Labour and Exercise. These Hands, My Lord, must be kept close to commendable Employments, or they will tear and undermine the State that breeds them.
And therefore, it is the Hope and Expectation of all good People, that since our Renowned Soveraign has (by the great Blessing of God) reduced our Foreign Enemies to Reason, He will now apply the Thought∣fulness of his Royal Mind to correct our Domestick Enormities and Impieties; which will otherwise most certainly destroy our Peace and Hope, our Prosperity and Renown, and will (in a word) be the Bane of all our Interests and Blessings.

 Now, since we have been often told, that the Calm of Peace is the only proper Scene of such a Reformation, the good God grant that we may make a due Improvement of the present Opportunity, and that we abuse it not after that ingrateful sort that we have many others.
In these Noble and Divine Enterprizes would the Great Soul of our Dread Soveraign be shewn in its matchless Glory; when his Royal Breast shall appear to glow with a Zeal for the good Manners of his People, sutable to that Martial Prowess whereby he has asserted their Liberties and Rights. Then will He shine with a brightness of Majesty that will be conspicuous to all Mankind; beloved of the Good, dreaded by the Evil, admired and honoured of All.
And finally, then shall we indeed render a meet Thank-Offering to the God of our Mercies, who has by an extraordinary Hand of Providence supported us these many Years; who has marvelously succoured and deliver∣ed us in the most extreme Dangers; and in fine, who has mercifully setled us (as we now hope) on the Basis of a good and honourable Peace; which, that God would vouchsafe to sanctify to us, that it may in Mercy be continued with us, is the earnest Prayer of,
My Lord,

