



My Christian Friend:
BEing bound by many Obligations and Ties of love and ser∣vice to serve you as a Christian in what I am able, I knew not wherein I could better express it (wherein I might in∣deed be serviceable to you) then in presenting you with this Piece; the Lines of which have been in part the fruit of my Prison Medi∣tations: Wherein, as in a Glass, you may see, to your great admi∣ration, the wonderful glory of Christ which lay hid under the ashes of those Jewish Types; the which when duly read and inquired into, shew you the blessed statue or representation of Christs Church, together with the hidden work of Christ intrinsecally wrought by him in the minds of his dear Children upon their Con∣version, the thoughts of which hath made me deeply to bewail the loss that some weak Christians have sustained, who out of ignorance and blind conceitedness of mind, slight the reading of the Books of Moses; because (as they say) it is the Law, who judge that the Law in no sense hath any thing to do with them, or they with it; and as S. Paul said to Timothy, 1 Tim. 1. 7. They (in speaking of the Law) understand not what they say, neither indeed what they affirm. I do not say the Ceremonial Law is any way binding to us, I am so little either a Jew or Papist, but I say it is instructive to us, having the Gospel to compare therewith, so saith S. Paul, Gal. 3. 24. And the more we read it and peruse it, the more we see into the Gospel by it, and the more is our comfort raised thereby in the sub∣stance, which is Christ. I do confess I am the meanest of Christ his Servants to attempt such a work as this is; but when I consider that he that had but his one talent, was accursed for the Non-improve¦ment of that, and that out of weakness God brings the greatest
 strength sometimes, and that out of the mouths of Babes and Suck∣lings, he sometimes brings out matter of praise to Jesus Christ. Up∣on these considerations I was encouraged to send forth these Lines un∣to you, hoping that God will make them both acceptable and profita∣ble to you, and it may be to other souls likewise; I know men of grea∣ter parts and gifts have commented on these things already, whose Volumes are answerable to their gifts and parts very large, which every ordinary capacity could not fathom, neither could every ordi∣nary purse procure: Therefore did I take the boldness, for the profit of such, to appear in Print in this Piece. You must not expect it alto∣gether free of Correction, I hope-both you and any else that shall meet with it will overlook common Infirmity, and make favourable construction of my honest Intention; for the Lord knows my heart, that if I had affected popularity more then singleness of heart to God and his people, I should not have dared to put Pen to Paper in this work: Therefore for an Apology for those errours and common in∣firmities, that you or any other may meet with in this Tract, I must tell you that I was onely left to my Bible, and my Meditations which I had in Prison with me, being denied the use of any other helps in this business, as to that outward means, which other men are attended with, you your selves do partly know that my Library of Books which I did use to consult with lay for the most part in my Pocket, the which I diligently searched in Prison, which made my Task more then ordinary; but I hope I was not left to my own wis∣dom alone in my labours in the Production of this Book, And I like∣wise hope God will not leave you or any else that shall read this Piece, to your bare reason in the reading of it, but will accompany it with his holy Spirit: That you may understand it to your great pro∣fit and comfort, is the desire of him who subscribes himself yours and the Churches faithful Servant while I live in the body,

