



TO whom may I so fitly Dedicate this short Discourse, concerning Love and Faithful∣ness to our Native Country, as to You, Gentlemen, who are (under the Divine Providence) the Bullwarks and Ramparts of it. We have but few strong Garrisons, save what are lodged in our Wooden Castles floating on the Sea: And we hope that these, together with our Land-Forces Headed by so brave a General, will (with Gods Blessing) keep the Land of our Nativity from being the dis∣mal Seat of War and Misery; and make it at last a Scene of Triumph and Peace.
Our English Arms by Sea and Land, have been famed and feared all over the World within a few years past; and many of you give us the happy de∣monstration,
 that all our English Valour is not withered. But there is one thing too sadly, and alas! too ge∣nerally forgotten, though it be very necessary both to True Valour and Good Success; and that is, True Piety.
We cannot but own, That there is a Holy and Almighty God, the Disposer of all Events: How much does it concern us then, to secure an Ally∣ance with him, that he appear not against us! For he is the Lord of Hosts, and will appear on one side or the other, where Armies engage; and what Part soever he takes, it will be sure to be Victo∣rious: It is God that girdeth me with strength, said Valiant David, Psal. 18. 32. He is the God of the Spirits of all Men, and can either advance them to an unsurmountable Height of Valour, or sink them to a base and contemptible feebleness and fear.
No Souldier therefore marches in so good Array, as he that is girt with the whole Armour of God, mentioned Eph. 6. 11. and hath the Praises of God in his Mouth, as well as a Two-edg'd Sword in his hand, Psal. 149. 6. Goliath, the Champion of the Philistines, wanted no Weapon nor Strength of Arm; but he came forth defying God, and so he blasphemed himself to death, and fell by the sling of a despised Stripling.

 Wherefore, as you would approve your selves great and brave Men, labour to gain the Victory over base and shameful Vices. Your Victory here will be a most happy Presage of the Fall of all your other Enemies that rise up against you: For even Death it self will become your Conquest through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Let me therefore entreat you, My Brethren, with the most Affectionate Bowels of a Friend and Brother, That you keep the fear of God before your eyes, and call devoutly on his Glorious and Fearful Name. And since you have not often fit places of retired Prayer, be the more frequent and earnest in short Ejaculations at all times. Let not the Fury of any Lust or Passion make you forget God, in whose hands your breath is, and whose Blessing alone can make you prosperous. Consider therefore what a Mad∣ness it is, to be accustomed to that common, but dreadful sin, of Swearing and Damning. 'Tis a sin of no Temptation, but of infinite Guilt, so that it seems to need no Argument to induce a Souldier to leave it, but to consider, that it is Fighting under the Devil without Pay, and that against an Omni∣potent GOD, who will destroy his Enemies eternally.
Be entreated also to keep strict sobriety, or you cannot be Men, much less Heroes: And be just,
 civil and modest, in your Deportment, or you will want the hravest Method of Conquering, and bring∣ing all People over to your side. And when you come to face your Enemies, let Love, Honour and Concern for your GOD, and King, your Religion and Countrey, make you Resolute and Couragious: And let not Despair it self encline you to turn your Backs, for then you give opportunity to the veriest Coward to kill you without danger; the greatest Slaugh∣ter is ever made in the Pursuit.
In a word, I beseech the Invincible God to lead you on inspirited with true Gallantry, and to bring you back laden with the spoils of your Enemys; that so our latest Posterity may Crown you with Im∣mortal Honour, as the Preservers (under God) of our Lives, Liberties, and Religion; and the Con∣querors of our most Desperate and Dangerous Ene∣mies.

