


Imperial CHARLES, my King and Master.
ACustome it was anciently, among the civiller Nations, so oft as they enjoyed a just and a Graci∣ous King, (that their mute feli∣city might not contract a dulness in their brests) to pour forth their affections and joyes in elo∣gies, wishes, and applauses; But chiefly then, when any nobler occasion invited the rejoycers expressions. Which sacred customes Emulation in some sort, having transported me, and dispell'd

the chilness from my brest, which the weight of age hath introduced, I shall with flagrant confidence betake my self to celebrate this Day, whereon your Majesty doth restore your Self to us, and us unto our selves. So far indeed am I from being discou∣raged by the weakness of my own elocution, that I am even ready to esteem my self thereby the abler. For, what need is here of dressings Rhetorical? Wherefore over sollicitously ballance the weight of words? Susfice it this day simply to rejoyce. Sin∣cerity is a plain and impolite thing, the less trick∣ed, the more chearful; and Eloquence while it adorneth, corrupteth our gladness. Nor is it my fear, that this shall seem a flatterers act, (as it were) ambitiously prostrate at Fortunes feet, which in truth were unworthy of that ingenuous modesty, derived from my Parents, unbefitting that blessed Rest of mind I drew from liberal Stu∣dies. Yet doth one solitude at the very entrance, I confess, surround me, lest (namely) even with true praises I offend that modesty, wherewith Your Majesty useth so sweetly to season your other Ver∣tues: for whereas you are most stout in all things else, that requires Validity of Body, or Constant∣ness of Mind, I only doubt, lest you should beat this dayes Applauses and Elogies, by so much the more tenderly, by how much they are the more justly due.
We read that Germanicus (and yet how great a Personage!) not long before the battel against the Chatti; did under the disguise of a beasts skin, (that he might not be observed) by night, ap∣proach his souldiers tents, to catch up by dark what they conceived of him. So do those commonly with most tenderness admit their own commendations, who most deserve them.

Whence I sufficiently foresee the necessity of as∣suring my access to your Sacred Ears, not by Ar∣guments drawn from the slight Magazines of Rhe∣torick, but by others of a soberer sort. I shall therefore affirm it most equitable, that neither the gallant, nor the baser lives of Princes be pressed down in ignoble silence. But that both good and bad be transmitted equally to the knowledge of Po∣sterity, in a like freedome of writing, as living: and with no less reverence of Truth, then of Ma∣jesty. Those, least vertuous examples failing, Vertues themselves by degrees decay: These, that evading the power of Laws, yet may be bridled through some awe of Record. This to you, I may dare to speak (my most Gracious Master) and even that I may dare, I owe to your self alone, who now have so lived 33 years, and so reigned near to nine, That you dread not truth.
Most famous was of old, and will live for ever, that answer of Virginius Rufus, to Cluvius: You know, Virginius (saith he) what credit is due to Hi∣story: wherefore if you read any thing in my books, other∣wise then you would have it, pardon me. To whom Virginius, Thou canst not (Cluvius) be ignorant of this, That therefore I did what I have done, that it might be free for you to write what you pleased. This was indeed the confidence of a gallant, but yet of a private man.
How much more eminent may the joy be of this day, for a King returned, of whose Life and Mo∣rals we may speak both openly and safely. Yea, let me adde this with confidence, that if Nature her self (the first Architectress) had (to use an expression of Vitruvius) windowed your brest: if your Majesty should admit the eyes of all men,

not only within the privatest parts of your Bed-Chamber, but even into the inwardest closets of your heart: no other thing at all would there ap∣pear, save the splendor of your Goodness, and an undistemper'd serenity of your Vertues. What said I? if you would admit? As if those whom the Supreme Power hath set on high, and in the light, could be hid from our eyes? or cover, as it were by a drawn cloud, the wayes of their Lives and Government? Herein, no doubt, Obscurity and Solitude it self, is more vailed then Majesty. Thinks that Abissine Emperor (whom men report to appear to publick view but once a year) that therefore it is less known what he doth in secret? Know we not at this day, that Domitian even in his closest Cabinet, wherein each day he shut up him∣self, did nothing but stick flyes with a pointed Bodkin? Lay Tiberius hid in his recess to the Islands of Caprea, when among so many wounds and tortures of his conscience (which as so many furies tormented him) many tokens of a distracted mind did daily break forth? Surely no.
Your Majesty hath taught the Princes of your own, and future times, the only and most whol∣some way of self-concealing, in that you indea∣vour nothing to be concealed. There are certain creatures of ingrateful aspect, as Bats and Owls, condemn'd by nature to hate the light. I know al∣so that some in power have also held it among the secrets of State, and as a great mystery of craft, to be served at a distance: as if reverence did only dwell in Dens, and Caves; not in the light. Whence then these Subtilties of Government? In a word, and freely; they walked in crooked paths, because they knew not (the shortest way)

to be good. But, your Majesty doth not shun the eyes and access of your Subjects, delight not in covert; nor withdraw your self from your own people: you do not catch at false veneration with a rigid and clouded countenance; yea, sometime you vouchsafe to descend even to some familiarity without offence to your dignity: for thus you rea∣son with your self in the clearness of your own bo∣some; If it were not above our power to lye concealed, yet were it below our goodness to desire it: then which nothing surely can be in effect more popular; for good Kings all good men openly revere, and even the worst do it silently: Whilest Vertues beauty, not unlike some brightest Rayes, strikes into the most unwilling eyes. Wherefore as of late, I took in hand Tranquillus Suetonius, (who hath laid open the very bowels of the Cesars) to beguile in the time of your absence with some literate diversi∣on, the tedious length of those dayes, and fell by chance upon that passage, so lively describing the wailings of Augustus, after the Varian defect, of∣ten crying out, Render me, Quintilius Varus, my Legions; my desires of Your Majesty instantly fla∣med out, and my wishes gowed for your Return: for it seemeth then much juster for England to have solicited her SISTER with these panting suspi∣rations, then Augustus the Ghost of Quintilius, Re∣store to me, Scotland my Sister, our King; Restore the best of men, whom none but the wicked love not; none but the ignorant praise not: Restore both the Director and Rule it self of Morality, whereby we may become not the gladder only, but the better too, while at hand we may contemplate (a thing most rare) One in highest Place, not inaulging to himself the least excess. Since there∣fore, such you are (O best of Kings;) suffer I

humbly pray, if rather by Prayers then Arguments you choose to be inclined, That the nine Nations of different Language (for I reckon them no few∣er) over which you gently reign, may glory in your being such: and may each declare it, not in their native Dialects alone (which would not give sufficient compass to our joyes) but however, in this also more publick Tongue; That even for∣raigners may know your Britany, which formerly bestowed upon the Christian World their first and most renowed Emperor, is not become so barren yet as not to afford, even at this day, a Type of the highest-famed King.
Having now thus (I hope) somewhat smooth'd the way to your patience, in hearing: good it will be henceforth out of the whole state of your Life and Carriage thus far, summarily to pick up some particulars, as those do who make their choice of Flowers. For I please my self more in the choice, then in the plenty of my Matter. Al∣though I am not ignorant neither, that in this kind of speaking, the diligence, or ambition of the Ancients was so profuse, that perhaps Timeus said not unwittily, That Alexander the Macedonian sooner subdued all Asia, then Isocrates did write his Panegyrick. Certainly, there seems then to have been too great an indulgence to Art, while the Wits of Orators were wanton in that fertile age of Eloquence: but it becometh me (mindful both of my simplicity and age) to touch rather the heads of your praises, then to prosecute them all; that even the succinctness of my speech, may as it were, resemble the passage of my fleeting years. In the first place is offered the eminent Nobleness of your Extraction: whereby in a long Order of antece∣dent

Kings, your lustre is above them all, your Father himself not excepted. This in brief I will deduce more clearly: Your Great Great-Grand∣father Henry the Seventh, (whether more valiant, or fortunate, I know not) being almost at once an Exile, and a Conqueror, united by the Marri∣age of Elizabeth of York, the white Rose, and the red, the Armories of two very powerful Families, which being in division, had so many years pollu∣ted their own Countrey with bloud and deadly Fewds. The more blessed Colligation of the King∣domes, then that of the Roses, we owe to the Happiness of your Father, who even for that alone were to be remembred ever with highest venerati∣on. But, in you singly (most Imperial Charles) is the conflux of the glory of all Nations, in all Ages, which since the Romans have possessed Brita∣ny, either by right, or by Arms; in you, I say, alone: whom the Cambrians first, the English-Sax∣ons, Scots, Normans, and finally the Danes do ac∣knowledge with us, to be the branch of that Stock that hith erto hath worn the Crown. In this per∣chance (if the meanness of the comparison be not rejected) not unlike to Europes famous Ister, which rolling along through vast Countreys, is ennobled with the waters of so many famous streams. One not obscure among our Authors, hath written, that our Ancestors would not ac∣knowledge the Norman Rule in England for legiti∣mate (which had so weak a beginning) until Maud marrying with Henry the First, had brought into the world a child of the bloud of the ancient Saxon Kings: she was Sister to David, Nephew twice re∣moved off King Ethelred, your Progenitor.
How much is there now a nobler cause for our

imbracing your Majesty with open arms, who are descended unto us from so plentiful a Race of Kings, since the access of the most ancient Cambri∣an Bloud to the rest of your Nobility, by Queen ANNE your Mother, a Lady of a great and masculine Mind? And how much the more truly may we now repeat, that which in the former Age Buchana (a Poet, next the Ancients, of most hap∣py invention) sang to your Grand-mother, I wish with happier fate!
From numberless Progenitors you hold
Transmitted Scepters, which they sway'd of old.
But all these hitherto you scarcely account your own. I pass then to such as are your own peculi∣ar, which conferre no less of lustre, then they admit.
Three particulars we observe (O best of Kings,) which Appellation I now again willingly, (and shall often use) in your Beginnings, of no small importance to your succeeding Progress; as for the most part the first favour of Principles, conti∣nues in the after-growths.
First, That you were not born to the supream hope of Soveraignty, so as flattery (though an evil swift and watchful) which attends the Cra∣dles of Potent Heirs, more gently pressed on your tender years. And the whiles your native good∣ness drank in with a draught more uncompounded the generous liquor of Integrity; for no doubt, how the earliest dispositions of private persons (much more of Princes) be at first formed, and as it were instilled, that I may so speak, is of highest importance to the Commonwealth; whereof they

are to become afterwards not only the Props, but also the Precedents.
Next, That you succeeded a Brother of no small Natural Endowments, which begat thence-for∣ward in your Parents a more industrious and closer sedulity (for it surpasseth care) for the accom∣plishment of their only Son: Nay, your own spi∣rits daily grew the more intent, when now the weight of so vast an expectation was lodged on your self alone. Then were advanced to you such who faithfully instructed in learning that youth of yours, as yet unapt for business. Then such were sent for, who as your strength increased, dressed you in the exercises of the Horse; which I call to mind with how graceful a dexterity you managed: until afterwards at a solemn Tilting, I became un∣certain whether you strook into the beholders more Joy or Apprehension.
In the third place, It comes to mind, that for some time, while Nature was as it were in strug∣ling, you were somewhat weak of limbs, and far below that vigour, which now with gladness we admire: which I may judge to have befallen by the secret Councel of Providence, thereby at that time to render more intense the care of furnishing your mind, as became the Heir, then secretly designed of a King; whom Malignants themselves deny not to have been the wisest of all Princes from many Ages past. From your first Essaies I shall hasten to your stronger times, not unmindful of my promi∣sed business.
After your forraign Travels, obnoxious to ma∣ny hazards, you came unto the Crown, whence it appeared, how much your self then dared to ad∣venture, when the while at home each one was

trembling for your sake. But the favour of Hea∣ven brought you back safely to us; not so much as coloured with out-landish Dye; not unlike ano∣ther Ulysses, who accounted it sufficient (even by Homers witness) To have known the Morals of Men and Cities.
When you had assum'd the Crown, before all other things, there was resplendent in you a Religious mind: the Support of Kingdomes: the Joy of good men. The Chappel Royal was never more in order. The number of eminent Divines daily increased. Sermons in no age more frequented; In none more learned; And the example of the Prince more effectual then the Sermons. No execrations rashly proceeded from your mouth. Your ears abhorring, not on∣ly any wanton, but even the least sordid word: which perchance under Edward the 4th, while toy∣ish Loves did raign, passed for Courtly eloquence; Neither stopped this piety within the Walls of Court, but was diffused also through the King∣dome.
The Church Revenues were not touched; Tem∣ples here and there new founded; Dapidations repaired; And, (which Posterity will chiefly speak of) the Riches of your Kingdome, excited by your most religious exhortation, for restaura∣tion of the Church consecrated to the Apostle of the Nations, (out of question the amplest and equally ancient of the Christian world) which had sustained the injuries of time. Where your Maje∣sties care was greatly conspicuous in demolishing those private dwellings which disgraced the aspect of so goodly a Fabrick: And not less in imposing the management of that whole business upon that

most vigilant Prelate, who for his singular fidelity and judgement, hath lately merited far higher place.
Now (next to God) how tender was your af∣fection to your People? When the Sickness raged, by your Command recourse was had to publick Fastings. When we were pressed with greater fear then evil of Famine, the Horders of Provisi∣ons were constrained to open their Garners, and the prices of grain abated. Among these most pi∣ous cares, I cannot omit one peculiar Elogy, pro∣per to your own providence, whereof I must re∣peat the Original a little higher.
There were hatched abroad some years agone, or perhaps raked up out of Antiquity, certain Controversies about high points of the Creed, which having likewise flown over to us, (as flames of Wit are easily diffused) lest hereabout also both Pulpits and Pens might run to heat and pub∣lick disturbance: Your Majesty with most lauda∣ble temper by Proclamation suppressed on both sides all manner of debates. Others may think what pleaseth them; In my opinion (if I may have pardon for the phrase) The Itch of disputing, will prove the Scab of Churches. I shall relate what I have chanced more then once to observe. Two (namely) arguing about some subject so eagerly, till either of them transported by heat of contenti∣on, from one thing to another, they both at length had lost first their Charity, and then also the Truth. Whither would restless subtilty pro∣ceed, if it were not bounded: there is of captious∣ness no end: but seasonable provision was made against it.
To these praises of Piety, I will adde a very

great evidence of Gratitude: and almost a greater of Constancy, towards George Villiers Duke o Buckingham: him, when amidst the dangers of the Spanish journey, he had been the nearest of your attendants, your Majesty afterwards, as in requi∣tal, bore safely with you at home, through all the rocks of either Fortune, till an unforeseen day was his conclusion.
We observed also no ordinary beams of your Favour to be cast upon another of your trusty Asso∣ciates in the same Journey, a Person of approved Judgement, Neither do I recount these only among the arguments of an heart mindful of faith∣ful Offices (which indeed is Kingly) but likewise of singular obsequiousness towards your Father, even when deceased; to whom the Duke of Buck∣ingham had been for many years a Favourite: as i Your Majesty had reputed your self as much the Heir of his Affections, as you were of his King∣domes; An Example rare among the Memorials of all Ages. This Duke was indeed amiable in many respects, which seldome are concurrent. Each limb of his body almost very exactly composed: yet doubtful it was, whether his shape, or grace∣fulness excelled: undubitably of an undaunted spirit; equally intent upon his cares, whether imposed, or assumed: There was present with him in the midst of so many distractions an incredible temper and equability. I will not deny his appe∣tite of glory, which generous minds do ever latest part from; but, above all, the most pleasing was, That he had no austerity of behaviour, nothing outwardly tumerous: but was obvious, affable, and almost to all men free and open: as if in so high a felicity, he had scarce been sensible of his

happiness: for which alone he may seem to have deserved a more gentle end.
Hence forward there began to be powerful, and so daily holds on in your Majesties most important cares, a person unquestionably of an habitual mo∣derate life, and sober counsel: and the oftner try∣ed, the more acceptable; not sway'd to vanity, born to a solid prudence, whom to name might be injurious: for he that is described ingenuously, may be known without a name.
But the highest Empire over your affections, is deservedly challenged alone by the most worthy Consort of your Royal Bed, Her self likewise pro∣ceeding from a long descent of Kings. But suffi∣cient it is to know she is THE DAUGHTER OF HENRY THE GREAT, AND THE SISTER OF LEWIS THE JUST; Whom, for dearest pledges already of either Sex; for the comeliness of chastest graces, and (which chiefly blesseth the nuptial bed) For congruity of dispositions, Your Majesty so religiously and so particularly doth love, that justly you appear to have passed from the Title of the best Patron to that of the best Husband.
To Chastity, you have added Temperance, her nearest Companion: which in miserable and impo∣tent men, who would not pass by with silence? but these in a King! in one so young! of such vigo∣rous age! and in such a promptness of satisfying all desires, I know not whether we should more commend or admire them. Now, after these Elogies (which in part beget affection, in part also astonishment) to doubt once of the justness of your times, were most unjust. Yet shall I not think amiss to repeat a little at large, a thing of

noble example, in a person of obscure condition. There fell out at London, I know not what tumult, for one rescued from the Serjeants hands, whom for debt they were leading to Prison. Amidst those confusions, one or other (as oft it chances) died of sudden hurts; whereupon one John Stam∣ford, a man of a ready hand (who had fatally run into the broyl) was apprehended as guilty of mur∣ther: He wanted not intercessors of great power about your Majesty; and there seemed an assured hope of obtaining his pardon (as the vulgar be∣lieved) because he had attended on the Duke of Buckingham in his Chamber, and among the follow∣ers of his own condition, had been for some time very acceptable to his Lord, for his singular abili∣ty of body, and skil in wrestling, whereof the re∣membrance as then was fresh, which perchance had made the poor man the more audacious. But nei∣ther the intercessions of the living, nor the mans own well known valour, nor finally the remem∣brance of such a Favourite but lately dead, whom he had served, could prevail with Your Majesty above Justice, but that (which is glorious to speak) he concluded his life at the Gallowes. Fresher is the remembrance of that Noblemans Death, a Baron of very ancient linage, who suf∣fered publickly for a fact, unworthy of his Birth. But, if a witty Authors old observation may yet have place, that some examples are nobler, others greater, I should verily believe the Barons Nobler, but Stamfords Greater.
But whither doth this pleasant meditation tran∣sport me, while I revolve these things? At Com∣mon-Law Your Majesty hath in the Courts of strict Justice, able Judges, which pronounce severely:

you have also a most learned Chancellour for right and equity (not inferiour to the ancient Pretors) who, for the peoples relief, qualifieth that severi∣ty; But these are in distinct Courts placed apart. And if one should ask by chance, Why not toge∣ther, since that might seem the more dispatching way? I will deliver my opinion: It was the Wish of our Ancestors (out of a most grave providence) that Justice and Lenity, which have their seat dis∣joyned in the inferiour Magistrate, might be con∣sociated in the only brest of the Soveraign. And truly so it is; for your Majesty being composed as it were, according to the wishes of those our Fore-Fathers, hath so tempered these together, that nei∣ther the evil presume, nor the good repine. Hi∣therto I would be understood to have only spoken of the restraint of common vices, which swarm in all parts of the world; for of more hainous trans∣gressions among our selves (by Gods goodness) we have not a word, no not so much as a dream: we suffer under an excellent ignorance: we know not what a Rebel is; what a plotter against the Common-weal: nor what that is, which Gram∣marians call Treason: the names themselves are an∣tiquated with the things: and (in truth) no marvel; for, what wretch (unless he were of all mortal men the most stupid and wicked, and as foolish as malicious) would violate the quiet of so just and pious a Moderator?
Now as you maintain your Justice, (which I may call the health of your Kingdome) in a most even ballance, that is neither too much strething, nor slackning the Reins; so neither do you omit what concerneth security; The like else would be∣fal Empires that happens to our bodies, which sub∣sist

dangerously, if nothing but meer health sustain them. Wherefore after a War with two mighty Kings together, with various event (as it chances in humane affairs) and quieted by new Consedera∣tions on either side; your principal care at home, was to repair the Maritime strength, as became the Defender of Insular Kingdomes. Hence was the Navy Royal yearly more increased and furnished; and more commodious Harbours chosen for the Ships, and of reader issue upon sudden occasion; Your Majesty not only commanding, but with your own eyes surveying the places, as if in a mat∣ter of that moment you might scarce trust another mans: Then a more exact view of Arms then for∣merly had been used, and generally the Militia at set times much better trained.
Amidst these things, it were unhandsome to pass by with silence that which the prudent of the time have noted; namely, that Your Majesty is more frequent at the Councels of State (as we call them) then any of our former Kings, except happily we cast back our eyes upon Edward the Sixth, whom they say, even in his Child hood, to have been seldome absent.
In that assembly of your Councel, the chief Pre∣lates adde reverence, the Nobles chosen out of both Kingdomes dignity.
Some are there, whom forraign experience, some whom the knowledge of our Laws adorns: and the learned and faithful Sagacity of your Se∣cretaries watched over all accidents; but above these, the presence it self of the Soveraign breaths alwayes, I know not what of happiness. Your presence only, have I said? That is little; yea, of those who participate in your Counsels, have I

many times heard (not uninquisitive, I acknow∣ledge, for which pardon me, I beseech you) how attentively (as often you are pleased to be pre∣sent) you revolve things propounded; how pa∣tiently you hear, with how sharp judgement you ponder the particulars; how stiff you are (for I will use no milder word) in good resolutions, and how stout in great.
Finally, in secret affairs, what a close secrecy you command, and how severely you exact an ac∣count thereof; in this also, your own example leading your Commandement. For besides other, there are two things which Your Majesty hath most blessedly bound together; namely, There was ne∣r Prince since the Constitution of Empires, a safer preserver of a secret, and yet none whose secrecy and si∣lence we less may fear; which we read anciently no∣ted of that excellent man Julius Agricola, who was the first Roman that invaded the skirts of your Ca∣ledonia: for Your Majesty doth not nourish secretly in your bosome fierce and crafty thoughts, nor co∣ver the embers of offence till they break forth into heat; but out of a high and most Noble Candor, if any chance to be conceived, Your Majesty vents them, and (as I may say) exhales them. Truly I confess, I do not more willingly insist in the re∣verence of any of your Vertues, then in this very attribute of your heroical ingenuity: for as the supreme Character of the MOST HIGH is Verity: so what can more become or more magni∣ficently deck his REPRESENTANTS on earth, then Veracity it self?
Hitherto we have observed your obsequiousness towards your Parents, constancy towards your Friends, fidelity towards your Consort, and to∣wards

cherishing of the Commonwealth, not only the affection of a King, but of a Father. Neither amidst these (as the condition of the times, and the perplexed state of things would bear) did you neglect the offices of an excellent Brother towards your only Sister, whom I have alwayes thought the only Person of her Sex, greater then all troubles, and even by her obscurity the more resplendent: indeed, placed within the chances of Fortune, but out of her command: Whom how much Your Majesty loves, nay, how much you esteem, did appear by a late Ambassage, when in the depth of her Widow mournings, your Majesty, to carry her consolati∣ons, sent the chief of your Nobility, and him a Personage of most ancient vertue and behaviour; that to a most affectionate Legation, some additi∣on might be made of Dignity, from the choice it self of the Ambassador. This of Consolation.
Concerning her Support: did not Your Majesty give leave to a Marquess of the chief Nobility in Scotland, though tyed here to your Person by nea and assiduous Attendance, to exercise his valour abroad? through intricacies most studied, in such a stop of passages; through hazards by Sea and Land; through Places and Towns beset with Plague and Famine: where it was almost easier to conquer, then to get entrance, and harder to suf∣fer, then to act? If after this, Success was want∣ing, yet was not the generous affection of a King; not the valour of his Subjects, not expences of di∣vers kinds; not Legations (the while) upon Le∣gations, to appease (if it were possible) by equal conditions, and by friendly Treaty, the frenzy of the time: for the rest, we must repose our selves in Solon's advice, Let no man glory before his End.

Now amongst so many cares (wherewith even e best of Kings are chiefly opprest) it will not be pleasant to enquire a little, how elegantly Your Majesty doth dispose your vacant hours.
You delight in the use of the great Horse, whom already dressed, no man doth more skilfully ma∣nage; or better break, if rough and furious: In∣somuch, as I doubt whether it were more aptly or deservedly done of him, who hath lately erected an Equestrian Statue to Your Majesty of solid brass, the lively work of Lisierius.
To this I must adde Musick, both instrumental and vocal, which under you grows every day more harmonious and accurate, as being fitted to the judgement of your ear. This (lest it should seem too tender a delight) you temper as it were with hunting. In which Image of War you do so exer∣cise your vigorous spirits, that it is hard to say, whether you love the pleasure more, or the labour; or whether you had rather wish the killing, or the long standing of the Game.
But the most splendid of all your entertainments, is your love of excellent Artificers, and Works: wherewith in either Art both of Picture and Scul∣pture you have so adorned your Palaces, that Italy (the greatest Mother of Elegant Arts) or at least (next the Grecians) the principal Nursery may seem by your magnificence to be translated into England.
What can be more delightful then those sights? nay I am ready to ask, what more learned then to behold the tongueless eloquence of lights and sha∣dows, and the silent poesie of lines, and (as it were) living Marbles? Here would the spectator swear the limbs and muscles design'd by Tintoret to

move; there the birds of Bassano to chirp, the oxe bellow, and the sheep to bleat: Here the faces of Rafael to breathe, and those of Titian even to speak: there a man would commend in Correggio delicate∣ness, in Parmesano coninnity. Neither do the Belgians want their praise; who if they paint Land∣skips, all kind of vegetables seem in their verdure; the flowers do smile, the hills are raised, the val∣leys in depression: In your Statuary vvorks the like learned variety; of vvhich some glory in a kind of vivacity, some in tenderness of parts; but those are the entertainment of your eye. Now to recreate your mind, sometimes a Book of choisest subject: but oftnest, Men you read, knowing full vvell how much it doth import a Prince to under∣stand the conditions of his people. There are times also vvhen you refresh your thoughts in the rehearsal of some ancient Epigr, with no less acuteness then they vvere composed.
Thus have I cursorly run over your serious times, and your remions: but the very pleasure I have taken in passing through these, though but very lightly, doth (I know not how) infuse in∣to my pen now in motion, a new spirit, to repre∣sent (vvith Your Majesties leave) though it be but to my self, your true pourtraiture in little, and (as it vvere) in one short view together, vvhich I thus conceive in my fancy.
I may say your stature is next a just proportion; your body erect and active; your colour or com∣plexion hath generally drawn more from the vvhite Rose of York, then the red of Lancaster; your hair nearer brown then yellow; your brow proclaim∣eth much fidelity; a certain verecundious genero∣sity graceth your eyes, not such as vve read of

Sylla, but of Pompey; in your gestures nothing of affectation; in your vvhole aspect no swelling, nothing boysterous, but an alluring and vvell be∣coming suavity: your alacrity and vigour, the celerity of your motions discovers; otherwise your affections are temperate, and demeanour vvell setled; most firm to your purposes and promises. Loving Truth, hating Vice; Just, Constant, Couragious, and not simply so, but knowingly Good.
Such you are; and being such; vvith vvhat ap∣plause shall vve receive you! Me thinks I see, vvhen sometimes I compare together horrid and quiet Times, as often as Rich. the Third return'd, per∣chance from his York, or further off, to London, and assembled his Peers about him; how the heads of Noblemen did hang! how pale their cheeks! vvhat solicitous suspicions and murmurs they con∣ferred together; as if suddenly some dismal Co∣met or inauspicious Star had risen above the Hori∣zon! But contrariwise, the return of a just, and a good Prince, is in truth nothing else but the very approach of the Sun, vvhen vvith his vernal beams he doth expel the deformed Winter, and vvith a gentle heat doth comfort and exhilarate all things about us.
Live therefore, O King, to all that are good, most grateful. But in vvhat vvishes shall I end? After Trajans times there vvas among the ancients (vvith vvhose example smitten, I have too boldly undertaken this small labour) under every re∣nowned Emperour a form of acclamation in this kind, Long maist thou live, Antoninus; Long maist thou reign, Theodosius; happier then Augustus, bet∣ter then Trajan: but let this be the concluding

Character of Your Majesties time; That the things we can wish, are fewer then those we praise.
Wherefore, vvhen I have out of an ardent zeal only vvished this, that Charles our excellent King and Master may reign and live like himself alone, and long;
Be this the Conclusion,
In what transcendent happiness were we,
If know we would how fortunate we be!

