


GENTLE READER,
I Indeavour not to hold a Tortch to the Sun; I am conscious our Age and Nation afford us many ex∣cellent and expert Chyrurgeons, and strive not (ex novo fonce haurire aquam, quasi ex eo dulcius peteretur.) I bring my judgement accompanied with the best of our modern Authors, nor find I any whose expereince have raised any note of excellencie upon them, but they have added some En∣comium to my Authors worth. I will begin with Joannes Bap∣tista Vanhelmont, a man of a Noble Family, not easily par∣rell'd, and present him unto you in his own Language.
Felix Wurtz modernorum Chyturgorum meo judicio pa∣tesignanus. Page 214.
I shall second his apprehension with that of Joannes Antoni∣dae Vander Linden, who in his Manuductio Medicine stu∣diosae juventuti, page 234. sic scribit. Abunde me vobis praeivisse puro, ad auctorum non tantum selectionem, lecti∣onem{que} sed universam insuper rationem studij vestri medici bene incipiendi, et cum fructu promonendi, et cum hunde perficiendi; sane ad scopum hunc acriter tonsis ingenij mei nervis collimani: ut ipso usu discatis, quanti sit aliquo per ignotam vium proporanti ductorem esse fidum, qui itimeris omne compendium monstret. Et idcirco Astoristcis signa∣ni indices eorum, quos aut Plempius meus aut ego singulari∣ter commendatos habemus cupimus{que} Nos si auditis, haec suffici aut studiorum instrumenta. Amongst whom Felix Wurtzius de vulneribus curandis, is marked.
Glandorfius and others mention him with honourable respects;
 nor can I conceave if his method had been vulgar and common, the Germans would ever have printed him eight and twenty times in his own Language, and twice in the Belgick. I presume the Epistle Dedicatory, and Epistle to the Reader prefixed, speak so liberally in my Authors commendation, that though I were silent, he need no greater applause then the general fame of his worth to set him forth to the world, who hath so much admired him.
Other Nations have made such honourable mention of his pra∣ctise at Basell, with such happy successes, that I could not so much undervalue his worth, as to conceale and eclipse him, from our English Character and knowledge. Therefore now having (up∣on the importunitie of some friends) presented him to publick view, not binding him up under the protection of one Man, but giving him free leave to sojourn all the Nation over, that he may do the most good he can, not in the least questioning, but that he it able to make good shift for himself, in the greatest difficulty, though but a stranger in this Land; for I do not in the least think, but that he will meet with very many Carpers and Cavilers, may be some upon this account, because he is not Dedicated to some learned English Doctor; but let them know, that when he was in his native Countrie, he had a worthy Defender, the fame of whom, (though he be dead) still is able to protect him from scandalous and reproachful speeches. Now as for the judicious and understanding Reader, to whom especially I present him, I humbly desire him, to consider the frailty of Mans nature, that if he find any thing, either not perfectly Translated, or mis-re∣printed, loveingly to amend it with his pen, and defend its cause therein; and still to ascribe that which is good in him, to the Praise and Glory of God: in the doing of which, he will very much oblige his friend, and servant in the like case.


