



My Lord,
I HAVE conceived many Reasons, why I ought in Iustice to Dedicate these Reliques of Your Great Uncle, Sir Henry Wot∣ton, to Your Lordship; some of which are, that both Your Grand-mother and Mother had a double Right to them by a Dedication when first made Publick; as also, for their assisting me then, and since, with many Ma∣terial

Informations for the Writing his Life; and for giving me many of the Letters that have fallen from his curious Pen: so that they being now dead; these Reliques descend to You as Heir to hem, and the Inheritor of the morable Bocton Palace, the Place of his Birth, where so many of the Ancient, and Prudent, and Valiant Family of the Wot∣tons lie now-Bared, whose remarkable Monu∣ments You have lately Beautified, and to them added so many of so great Worth, as hath made it appear, that at the Erecting and Adging them, You were above the thought of Charge that they might, if possible, (for 'twas no casie undertaking) boldsome pro∣por mith the Merits of Your Ancestors.
My Lord, These are a part of many more Penso that have inclin'd me to this Dedi∣cation; and these, with the Example of a Liberty that is not given, but now too usually taken by many Scriblers, to make trifling De∣dications,

might have begot a boldness in some Men of as mean as my mean Abilities to have undertaken this. But indeed, my Lord, though I was ambitious enough of undertaking it; yet, as Sir Henry Wotton hath said in a Piece of his own Character, That he was condemn'd by Nature to a bashfulness in making Requests: so I find my self (pardon the Parallel) so like him in this, that if I had not had more Reasons then I have yet exprest, these alone had not been powerful enough to have created a Confidence in me to have at∣tempted it. Two of my unexprest Reasons are, (give me leave to tell them to Your Lord∣ship and the World) that Sir Henry Wot∣ton, whose many Merits made him an Orna∣ment even to Your Family, was yet so humble, as to acknowledge me to be his Friend; and died in a belief that I was so: since which time, I have made him the best return of my Gratitude for his Condescention, that I have

been able to express, or he capable of receiving: and, am pleased with my self for so doing.
My other Reason of this boldness, is, an in∣couragement (very like a command) from Your worthy Cousin, and my Friend, Mr. Charles Cotton, who hath assared me, that You are such a Lover of the Memory of Your Generous Unkle, Sir Henry Wotton, that if there were no other Reason then my endeavors to preserve it, yet, that that alone would secure this Dedication from being unacceptable.
I wish, that nor he, nor I be mistaken; and that I were able to make You a more Worthy Present.
My Lord, I am and will be
Your Humble and most Affectionate Servant,
Iziak Walton.
Feb. 27. 1672.
