



WE say, all is not Gold that Glisters, and that Most worth lyes not ever hid under a fair Outside. A Comet seems sometimes as glorious as a Star; a Parelion like the Sun; and Falshood got un∣der a handsome Visard well trim'd up, may take with many and pass Disguised for current Truth: But such slight Beauty beguiles not long. True Worth undoes it. The Suns lasting Glory, the Stars constant Bright∣ness, enough Dislustres both Parelion and Comet: And Truth, though perhaps it may not here quite vanquish Falshood (for Some will Defend it to the Worlds end) is able at least to pull of it's Gaudy Visard, and put it out of Countenance.
A World of this Counterfeit Lustre, we have now a days in Books, set forth (as is pretended) to Beautifie the Heaven of Christianity, and Englighten a People that sit in Darkness. One I have met with ('tis the Dis∣swasive from Popery) that Parelion▪ like in a Triple Cloud is (as I am told) Gloriously out in three Editi∣ons;
 and lately appeared in the two Kingdoms of England and Ireland. More I believe have been Gazing on it then well discovered the faulty Lustre: Real Worth I cannot mention; for what find we I beseech you con∣siderable in this Book, but a useless Repetition of old de∣feated Objections? which have now for a whole Age run through a few Vulgar worn-out Controversies, and in Rigor require only a Return of the Old Answers gi∣ven a hundred times by Catholick Writers: new Ar∣guments, which one might have expected from so Great a Doctor, seldom appear. You have moreover, more then a few Mistakes relating to Catholick Doctrine: Want enough of Divinity: A seeming Zeal, ('tis true) but ill season'd with Jeers and harsher Language: Ca∣lumnies vented: Talk and no Proof. Here is, what I think, the Doctor must own, the Inside and best sub∣stance of his Disswasive.
The Flash therefore and fair Lustre of his Book lies neither in the choice of Matter, nor manner of handling it; but in specious Quotations that flourish in the Mar∣gents. These set down in the ensuing Treatise, I have carefully examined; Read with my own Eyes in the O∣riginal Authors; (not one have I taken on trust) and af∣ter a diligent search must profess with all Candor; not one (worth notice) have I found, but 'tis either whol∣ly impertinent to what he would Prove; or strangely wrested to a sinister Sence; or not found at all in the O∣riginal (nor a Word like it:) Or finally, (which is most usual and to be pittied in a Doctor) unpardonably cor∣rupted. To insist on every less valuable Authority, or on such as shew themselves Profless even Read in the Disswasive, would be Time mispent, and weary a Rea∣der. These I offer to your View, are of the grosser Sort; and Numerous enough to Evidence that the Doctors
 pretended Faultless Book is Proved Faulty; and no more powerful to Disswade from Popery, then Error is to draw men from Truth.
Far am I off from the Doctors Humour, in Judging this small Treatise Faultless. I willingly acknowledge many Faults, but know not how to mend Them. One is, no little want of English; but this I hope dear Reader you will easily Pardon; I am sure you would, did you but know how long I have been a Stranger to my Country. An other is, too tedious a length sometimes in Latin Sen∣tences: The Fault (if any) is unavoydable: For while the Charge is laid on ill Quotations, the Right ones must appear, and in their proper Terms. To give an Authors Meaning only, and Wave his Words seems Forceless: And in stead of laying Difficulties may Raise up more. Where it most Imports I have done my best to English the Latin faithfully, Ad pedem literae: the Translation therefore cannot but look Rugged; yet that is better, then to have the Genuine Sence miscarry in smoother Language. Lastly, a harsher Word may per∣haps, through hast or unawares, have casually fallen from me; if so, I here unsay it, and Humbly crave Par∣don: And were my Papers (now out of my reach) in my Hands again, I would in this Correct whatever might justly seem offensive.
If Doctor Taylor shall please to warn me of greater Faults, I'll thank him for his Charity: And if he thinks it worth his Pains to take notice of my Exceptions a∣gainst his Book, my earnest Request is, that he mispend not Time in Trifles, nor weigh only lesser Matters, while he hath greater charged on him that justly require Sa∣tisfaction. For Example: I have plainly tax'd him of wrong done to Sixtus Senensis, to the Expurgatory Index, to Petrus Lombardus, Otho Erisingensis, and others in the
 beginning of my Treatise; let him as plainly Purge him∣self in these Particulars, and shew me my Error: for most certainly I have either wronged him, or he these Authors. I press him afterward with undeniable Au∣thorities of most Ancient Fathers, both for the Use and Worship of Holy Images. His express Answer is herein required also, chiefly to St. Basil, and St. Iohn Damascen. I have told him of his Forging strange Do∣ctrines, and Fathering them on Tolet, Suarez, Bellarmin, Emanuel Sa, and others: If he be injured he can Right himself, and shew where Sa affirms, That if a man lies with his intended Wife before Marriage it is no sin, or a light one. Whether the true Sence of Bellarmin in his Quotation, pag. 167. be not wholly perverted, If the Pope should Err by Commanding, &c. These for an Essay only; more you will have, and of greater Concernment hereafter. May it please the Doctor to clear himself by a solid An∣swer, he'll hearten me to Reply: Or if he can produce against me but one Quotation so fowly amiss as that one Charg'd on Emanuel Sa (to say nothing of many worse) I do here profess a Readiness, and will comply with it, to publish my Fault to the Whole World. O, would he Encourage himself to proceed with like Candor! and unsay only what his own Conscience knows Faulty in his Disswasive, he might be Eternally Glorious. And why should I forbid my self to hope for so Laudable a Retractation? Justice requires it: Conscience forcibly presses: Truth, that suffers, strongly Pleads for it: Chri∣stian Humility easily submits: And Gods Victorious Grace is now no less Powerful to do this Work on him, then once it was to Reclaim a Blessed St. Austin. Quare Arripe obsecro te (they are the Pious and well meant Words of this Saint, Tom. 2. Epist. 9. to a Great Doctor, and my Submissive Petition to Doctor Taylor.) Arripe
 obsecro te; ingenuan, & vere Christianam cum charitate severitatem ad illud (tuum) opus corrigendum, atque eman∣dandum &  ut dicitur, cane: Incomparabiliter enim pulchrior est Veritas Christianorum quam Helena Grae∣corum, &c. Such I say is my Petition presented to our Doctor: and if the Love of Truth bears sway in his Breast, yeeld he needs must to a speedy retractation. Nothing can Retard him from so generous a Resolution, but either Motives of interest drawn from a naughty World; or his own once vented . So, (for∣sooth) he hath said in his Disswasive, and so it must stand: though all run to Ruin, and Christianity suffers.
The Doctor I confess hath been most Unluckily in broaching Heresies, and wanting Grace to retract them. Some years are now past since he was so Unfortunate as to become a Patron of the Pelagian Heresie; when ex professo he Writ a Book against Original sin, and stoutly defended it: and being Friendly told by his own Brethren, that what he said was not only opposite to Catholick Faith, but also to the very Doctrine of the Church of England expresly deliver'd in her Liturgy, in 39. Articles, in the Office of Baptism, &c. He had yet the boldness to deny all, and assert that the Church of England held not Original Sin, though both Prince and Prelate knew then and believ'd the contrary. I know not that he ever yet Recanted this Heresie; if not, 'tis now high Time to do it: and with it, to Weep for the Errors in his Disswasive: if he fails in both Duties, the World will say (and say truly) that Dr. Taylor is No∣tior peccans quam paenitens; more known for his Sin then for his Repentance; and may Prudently Judge that he of all others was the unfittest Man to Write against Popery that disowns the Doctrine of his own Church: unless this makes him fit; that being a Pelagian, his Words
 (though he multiplies Volums) will want weight a∣gainst Catholicks: For this is my reflection (and I think a true one) that this man who dar'd to say that the Church of England holds not Original Sin, so plainly taught and believ'd by all; will not Boggle to miscite the Fathers, remote from our knowledge, Read by few, and Understood by fewer.
Farewel Gentle Reader, with a thousand well-wishes for thy profitting by this Treatise; I bestow as many on Dr. Taylor, whose Enemy (God knows) I am not: Nor can he think me one, for laying out his Errors, and telling Truth: Upon this very Account he ought (and I hope will) to return me Thanks. If now I Merit none, I may hereafter have better Luck and deserve them. If plain dealing may do it, he shall have Reason to account me, as indeed I am, his Faithful True SERVANT, and Friendly ADVERSARY.

