


My LORD,
WERE we to judge of Men by the Dedi∣cations of this Age, we should have now as many Hero's as ever fought for the Con∣quest of Troy and Carthage, as many Politi∣cians as ever sate in the Senate of Rome, and as many true Wits as ever flourish'd in the Times of Augustus: But such is the fulsome and lavish Flattery of our mercenary Wri∣ters, that it is almost become a Reproach to a Pa∣tron to be Commended; for while their common Topicks of Praise, applied right or wrong, make all alike, What Rule can we go by, to make a difference between a Cox∣comb and a Man of Merit?
Having therefore so far studied your Lordship, as to be satisfied, That you hate Commendation as much as you de∣serve it; I shall forbear imposing upon your Patience and Mo∣desty with a large and methodical Account of your own Ver∣tues,
 I leave to the World the Pleasure to find 'em out; they are too many, to be concealed long; and too great, not to be admir'd as soon as known.
And without the Ceremony of a tedious Apology, I crave Your Lordship's Patronage for my FEMALE VERTUOSO's; the Design of which, as it was drawn some Years ago from the great Original of French Comedy, by an Ingenious Friend of mine, who bears now too serious a Character in the World, not to reckon such a Trifle among his Delicta Juventutis, was last Winter, by my Importunities, extorted from him.
I shall not tire your Lordship with an Account of some frivolous Objections rais'd against this First Essay of mine, by the factious Demi-Wits of the Town, who judge of a PLAY, not by the standing Rules of Art, they never understood, but by the narrow Fancy, or mere Caprice, of some Conceited Fops their devout Ignorance adores, as Oracles of Sence and Ingenuity.
I shall only take notice to Your Lordship, That the nice and more judicious sort of Criticks, whose Approbation only a Writer should value, have observ'd, That my Vertuoso's stretch in their Projects beyond the Limits of Na∣ture and Reason; I do here, with the Candour of an Author not yet hard'ned in the vicious habit of Scribling, freely own it appear'd so to me, at first; but having, besides some modern Poets, Aristophanes for a Pattern, I thought that what diverted the Ancients, might meet with some Indulgence from our English Audience. I am sure, the Athenians could laugh to see no less a Man than Socrates expos'd upon their Stage,See the Clouds, Act. 2. Scene 2. for contriving a ridiculous way to measure the Jump of a Flea; but we are grown Serious, and cannot relish Fooleries: I submit, only desiring my Judges
 to remember that a Poet may challenge it, not only as his Excuse, but his Privilege, to carry sometimes a Jest beyond the Bounds:
—Liberius si
Dixero quid, si forte Jocosius, hoc mihi Juris cum venia dabis.
Horace.


