



Honoured Sir,
THat Relation which these Discourses have to One who a few days ago stood in the nearest upon earth to your self, rendering them peculiarly Yours, doth intitle them to your Patronage; And considering that upon the same ac∣count they may be acceptable to many others unto whom her Memory is pre∣cious, tho' as they are Ours we have little reason to expect they should be so to any: We do with the greater rea∣diness, in Obedience to your Commands, here humbly present them to your Hand in that plain Countrey-dress in which they were lately directed to your Ear among many others, to whom they were in that respect the more suitable,
 as well as to the solemnity of the Occa∣sion; Hopeing that as through the Di∣vine Grace they found some Access un∣to your Heart, when they first visited your Ear, so they may be of some fur∣ther use by the blessing of God to renew, or rather fix and settle the impressions which were then made, being now again presented to your Eye.
Sir, As there is none more deeply sensible of the greatness of the loss, which You and Yours have sustained by the Death of so near and dear, and e∣very way useful a Relative; so there is none more sincerely desirous than We are, to the utmost of our power, to be assistant both to You and them in bearing your present Burdens, as far as Christianity doth oblige, and Ca∣pacitate us to be mutually helpful to one another in fulfilling that part of the Law of Christ. And surely it cannot choose but be a very relieving thought to you to consider what a vast disproportion there is between your Temporal loss, and her Eternal gain,
 by her happy Exchange of a frail, Tot∣tering Earthly Tabernacle for an House not made with hands Eternal in the Heavens. It may very well be a comfortable Alleviation to your Grief and Sorrow under the present afflictive dispensation, when you first look backward and reflect upon the ma∣ny wearisome and painful Exercises, which One whom you so Dearly loved, and then so heartily pityed, did for so long a time undergo in a distempered body; and then look forward, and con∣sider that She is now Eternally freed from all, being happily arrived at that Everlasting Rest, where there is not only perfect ease, but fulness of joy to make it the more compleat, compla∣cential and delightful. That Eternal weight of Glory which she is now in the possession of doth infinitely prepon∣derate both her former sufferings in a mortal body, and your present hea∣vy affliction and sorrow upon her going out of it. And therefore You have greater reason to rejoyce than to weep
 for her, in as much as she is now gone unto her Heavenly Father. And tho' it cannot be denyed, but we have all reason to weep for our selves; as in∣deed the state of this wretched World in general, (as well as of particular Families) is sadly to be lamented, when Persons of Eminent endowments, and singular usefulness in their respective stations are in so great numbers (as they have been of late) translated out of it, as being no longer worthy of such excellent Inhabitants, and so few in many places springing up in their room: Yet even in this respect we have no reason to sorrow as those that have no hope; For, As there are in your Fa∣mily many pleasant and hopeful young Plants, upon which the Blessing of Gen. 17. v. 7. Abraham is continually descending to make them yet more and more fruitful in every good work, that it may still retain the beautiful Complexion of a Watered Garden, and all that see Isa. 58. v. 11. cap. 61. v. . them may acknowledge that they are the Seed which the Lord hath
 blessed: So with respect to the poor adjacent Countrey, who also have sus∣tained a great loss (of which they are very sensible) in the Decease of One who, by your kind assistance and chear∣ful Concurrence, was more immediate∣ly instrumental in procuring for them such plain wholesome food for their Souls, as they had a grateful relish of notwithstanding what in that kind they do otherwise enjoy; We are greatly encouraged to hope that the Father of Spirits, will in his wise, and good Providence make up this loss also to them by continuing your Affairs here in such a posture, that you may yet fur∣ther pursue your own beneficent and charitable inclination towards your Neighbours and Country-men, in affor∣ding them the like additional helps still for their spiritual improvement. And in so doing We doubt not but You will find the Blessings of Heaven still mul∣tiplied upon your Family, and abun∣dance of peace and satisfaction in your own Spirit, in persisting in and reflect∣ing
 upon such a charitable piece of Ser∣vice to the Souls of men. In order whereunto both You and Yours (of whose numerous favours to each of us we shall ever retain a most grateful sense) are with no less sincerity than constancy recommended daily to the Compassionate Care of the Father of Mercys, and the God of all Grace and Consolation, by,
Honoured Sir,

Thurlow-Hall March, 7th. 1691/2.
