


SIR,
IT is Gods Will and pleasure to make it a duty to every one, to do good unto his Neighbour, which befitteth every one in his calling to express that du∣ty according to the gift God hath bestowed on him: your Honour is herein well dis∣posed, to put to use that talent you have re∣ceived; no better opportunitie may be had for it following the calling then this present work: in which simply is presented that, which another with great toil hath brought together for the benefit, and comfort of fore wounded Men: it being the twenty eighth Copie published in the German
 Tongue, still augmented and corrected by that most famous Surgeon Felix Wurtz, Ci∣ty Surgeon at Basell; whose notable and good doctrinals I have successfully practi∣sed these many years, which urged me to undertake the Translating of it into our Belgick Tongue; the rather because I am well versed in the German Tongue, counting it worthy of our Nation, to the praise of that greatly experienced Surgeon, and the benefit of our people. And knowing your Honour a sound Doctor in Physick, not onely well experienced, but doubtless well seen also in the German Tongue, and a great practitioner in Chymicks, and deeply en∣lightned therein: in consideration where∣of, I present this out of a good affection to your Honour, the rather, because Mr. Iohn Watshaert, Stationer and Printer, hath re∣commended your Honour very much, knowing my intention was no other, but that I would Dedicate this my labour to a Learned Man. To which end I present it to your Honour, praying you would be pleased to peruse it, and upon your worthy judgement to commend it to the judicious, and to protect it against the ignorants, in
 the way your Honour shall think most fit.
Therefore Honourable Doctor, be plea∣sed to accept of it favourably; to that end that those, which are of mean capacitie, and are of small gifts may be incouraged by your gracious acceptance, and may put out to use their small talents also for the pub∣lick good, which happily may be practised shortly, if your Honour be pleased gracious∣ly to accept of it; it will be an incourage∣ment to the desire of my affection, to get new supplies the more willingly to accom∣plish that which is begun, that I may speed the better in the pursuit of my intention, as well in the hitting of the sense, as in the fra∣ming of the stile, I thought it to be necessa∣ry, to take in hand the readiest means, as to help my neighbour in the speediest way, and through the same means also to get into practice the more conveniently. Therefore with the greater courage I dedicated this my labour to your Honour, as a well expert Dr. in Physick, to the end, that when your Ho∣nour hath perused it, to receive better instru∣ctions in that, where I mistook Herein I seek no other, but your Honours good affection towards me, not only to protect the Work,
 but also to learn some good instructions from your Honour in Surgery, as being ne∣cessary for my calling. If I might be so hap∣py in such enjoyment, I should value it at the greatest rate of my worldly things. Your Honour hath greater judgement of the uti∣litie of the work, as well of its Manuals, as of its Medicaments, more than my expres∣sions can reach at; notwithstanding I have followed them in Surgery above these nine∣teen years. I commit most humbly this my labour to your learned and grave judge∣ment, and my self into your gracious fa∣vour, thus closing I commend your Ho∣nour into Gods most gracious and fatherly protection, to keep your Honour in health, to the welfare of his Church, and the good of his People: Amen.
Dated at Zaerdam, the 28. Of October, Anno. 1632.

