



MADAM,
YOur Ladyships long-continued favors to me and mine, do exact of me by way of just retribution, some monument of my Obligations to your La∣dyship. Here therefore according to my small a∣bilities do I erect a little Pillar of Gratitude unto your name (a Name to which I am sure Christ is precious, a Name which I assure my self is precious unto Christ) Dedicating unto it this short discourse of the pre∣ciousness of Christ. Which Monument though little, yet I hope may be lasting, because that so long as there shall be believing souls in the world, which I perswade my self will be as long as the world shall last, (for all the Apostatizing of this last and worst age of the world, so much as it doth from the Faith of Christ) so long there will be souls in the world unto whom Christ Jesus will
 be precious. And with those to whom Christ himself is precious, any discovery, any discourse of the preciousness of Christ will be sure to be in some esteem; and so this, I hope, among the rest; both because the subject of it is sweet, and because the discourse thereon is short, as ra∣ther giving brief Hints to it, than being any full hand∣ling of it. And to this pass the world is grown, that even amongst some that are good, that which is good is the bet∣ter liked, if there be but little of it. I shall not here put your Ladyship so much to the blush, though I should there∣by add a yet more lively tincture of Grace to those lovely features which you have from nature, and which you keep too as you had them from nature, neither spotted, nor stained with adventitious complexion, (a rare thing in these Hyppocritical days of ours, when it is in the fashion forsooth, under one hood to carry two faces, one of Gods making, and another of our own) I say, I shall not here put your Ladyship so much to the blush, as to lanch forth into any large discourse of your many and ex∣cellent vertues and graces; that were the way to bring Envy instead of honour upon you, and to expose my self to be accused for Flattery, whilest I spake but the Truth. For so is the world now, that anothers Goodness is our Envy, and their Commendation for it, our Accusation for the want of it; and what we have not of it our selves, must needs be flattery if ascribed to any other: Else if the curious carping folks, that can espie a single hair where it chances to lie awrie on a Ladies forehead, would look off a while. I could discourse of your great Affecti∣on and Loyalty to your Husband; a thing which is grown to be a very considerable commendation now a dayes, in as much as through the like animosity betwixt Husband and Wife, to that which was of old betwixt Caesar and Pompei, whereof the one would bear no equal, and the other could brook no superiour; some scarce Lords, are
 enforced to keep Houses like Kings, that is two a piece, one for themselves, and another for their wives. I could discourse also of your prudent Ordering of your Family in that Christian way, that if St. Paul himself were on Earth, and were to write a Letter to you, as once St. John did to an Elect Lady, he would undoubtedly not let it go without a salutation to the Church which is in your House. I could discourse of your Love to the Ordinances of Christ, and of your constancy in attend∣ing on them, and of your Reverence and Devotion du∣ring that attendance; which also is no small commen∣dation in this irreligious age, wherein Gods Publike Service, anciently the Saints delight, is become the Peo∣ples Publick grievance; so that few have any affection for it, many absent themselves wholly from it, and of those that afford their presence at it, how many be there, of whom the Lord may justly say, what once of old he said of the Jews, This people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, Isa. 29. 13. Much after the rate of their carriage at a Play-house is the carriage of themselves at the House of God, save that they give not half that heed to the Preaching of the Word, which they give to the Acting of the Play. To look about them, and spie marvels; to see fashions and studie faces, this is, (is it not) the main business that many mind whilest they are at Church, forgetting in the mean time where they are, and what they are about, and in whose presence they are about it. I could discourse also of your zeal and care to bring others to the Ordinances, as well as to come to them your self. O how comely is the sight of your Ladyship marching together with your Husband in the Head of your following Family to the House of God! Which is so much the more commendable in you, in regard of the great neglect in this Point, which too many great
 ones are guilty of, who quite contrary to the temper of Joshuah (whose resolution was, that though all Israel beside should go away from, and forsake God, yet he and his house would serve the Lord,) are neither for serving the Lord themselves, nor for having so much as their house to serve him; but to the great discountenancing of the Ministers of God, and to the great discouraging of Godliness it self, the nearer they are in respect of dwelling to the Church, the farther in respect of devoti∣on they are from God. I could further tell what a pre∣cious esteem you have of the Ministers of Christ, and that for their Work sake: (Large is that share of respect which I my self have received from you, even but for my relation that I have to that work, though far short from being any workman at it.) And this also is by much the more commendable, in regard the Atheisme and Infidelity of this age is grown to that height, that those Embassa∣dors of Christ, and for Christ, whose business is the nego∣tiating of that great work of Reconciliation betwixt God and man, whom the Primitive Saints would have pluckt their eyes out for, and have given entertainment unto, even as unto Jesus Christ, are made amongst Chri∣stians, what the Apostles were amongst Jews and Pa∣gans, as the filth of the world, and the off-scouring of all things: Fellows, whom some account as unfit to live, as the Jews did our Saviour; to whom it would be the greatest pleasure in the world, to have the power & opportunity of serving those servants of the high God, as Hanun the Ammonite did the servants of King Da∣vid, 1 Sam. 10. 4. or putting any other, as ill, or worse indignity upon them. I could tell also of your tender Care for any poor afflicted Member of Jesus Christ, that comes under your notice, relieving them both spiri∣tually and corporally, as their wants are; which is not at any time the least commendation of a Christian Lady,
 but the greater now in regard of the deplorable neglect thereof that is generally observable in most places and persons; so that instead of going to visit and relieve Christ in any of his afflicted distressed Members, too ma∣ny of us I fear should Christ come himself to us in his own person in any afflicted condition for comfort and relief to him in his distresses, I say I fear too many of us would let him go away from us unrelieved, even as cold and comfortless, hungry and naked as he came. These and many more things, (excellent things) I could tell of your Ladyship, which would be very much to your ho∣nour, but I forbear, because they would be no less to your envy; and leave them to God, who sees them in secret, to reward them openly; only wishing here withall, that those that do themselves see the excellencies that I have mentioned in you, or by report from others shall hear them of you, may so glorifie God by a diligent imitation of them, that they may hereafter be glorified by God, in an abundant compensation for them. And now that my Pedestal prove not too big for my Pillar, nor my Epistle too large for my little Book. I will dismisse your Ladyship from this trouble, and leave you to the more delightful contemplation of the precious∣ness of him whom your soul loves. And as I have in my preaching commended him unto you, so I shall in my pray∣ers recommend both you, and all that is yours unto him; and rest,
MADAM,

From Colsterworth, in the County of Lincolne, Decmeber 1. 1666.

