



SIR,
YOUR very great Civility in Perusing, and in some Particulars Animadverting upon these Collections, have given me the Confidence to recommend them by prefixing your Name. Be∣sides your Eminency in this Study, and your Plentiful, and not with∣out great Skill and Difficulty, well chosen Treasure both for this and other parts of Natural History; and your unparallell'd Readiness to further and assist all Ingenious Lovers of this most Copious and

Gentile Study, do justly challenge a more Universal and Publick Te∣stimony of your Singular Worth and Eminent Goodness. For what more Honorable Intention can be proposed, than to endeavor the In∣troducing the Knowledge of the former Ages of the most Wise and Powerful Empire, out of their most Authentick Records? And what doth not he deserve, who labours a Resormation of the most Inge∣nuous part of the Nation? But this is not my Business at this time: the narrowness of this room will only permit me to present to your self, and the Candid Readers, thse few Considerations.
1. The Catalogues of the Greek and Roman Coins discover to any one minded to furnish a Cabinet,

which are in either sort most Rare and Curious, i. e. which are not yet described in Print. It is true, there are many Families not found amongst these, but the Collections of that most Learned Ant. Angu∣stinus, will give a great Essay to∣ward compleating that Number.
2. It was not proper for my Design, to take notice of all the Criticisms amongst Authors learned in this Art; but to prescribe gene∣ral Directions for Interpreting the greatest Number and most com∣mon, as is done in the first part, wherein they are reduced to the most ordinary Topicks; and in the second, to give so far an ac∣count of the greatest Actions of the Romans, when come to their Maturity under the Emperors;

for though not all performed by them in their Persons, yet the Princes attributed them to them∣selves, rationally enough, because they paid for them. And amongst these I have only chosen those; wherein seems contained the most useful Erudition. And herein I have chiefly made use of those very eminent Persons, Onuphr. Pan∣vinius, and the excellent Conte Tristan, whose first Volume only seems compleatly finished accor∣ding to his Intention; the second is not so well laboured, but the third is little better than Adversaria. I thought it not necessary to pro∣ceed much lower than Constantine, because after Aurelian very few, but after Constantine's Family I know not whether any either of good Masters, or considerable Eru∣dition.

The Greek Emperors, which have, till of late, lain Fallow, chiefly because thought unintelli∣gible, have now at length, by the great Industry of a most Learned French Gentleman, found their In∣terpretation; and we despair not also of understanding those few of the Caliphs found amongst us, by the help of another.
3. It may be some Invitation to this Study, if we consider the great Obligations this Country had to the Romans, not only for their improving it in Buildings, High-ways, Artifice of War; but also by rendering a great part of it Habitable, which before was Lakes and Bogs. Romney seems to have been the first Essay and Pattern of their Draining; for

which reason to this day it re∣tains the Name of the Roman Island, or their Dry-land, which before was Bog and Water. The working of our Minerals, espe∣cially Iron, which the ordinary People attribute to the Danes, seems to have been the Romans Diligence. Not long ago I have seen divers Coins, fresh and rough, as if newly then coined, taken up under a great Mountain of Cin∣ders, which were wrought over again to good Profit, finding that the first Miners were not furnish∣ed with sufficient Instruments for drawing out the finest parts of the Mettle. To this I add, that though very many Roman Coins be found here, yet not many of great Rarity; they being generally of those, who setting up for them∣selves,

against the lawfully-esteem∣ed Emperors, were called Tyrants, especially such as reigned here and in France. Such were Carausius, Alectus, Marius, Maximus, Postu∣mus, Tetricus, Victorinus, &c. till the time of Constantius Chlorus, who dying at York after divers Years reigning; and his Son Con∣stantine here taking up the Em∣pire, there are many of them and their next Successors, till the entry of the Saxons, which was about Four hundred and fifty Years after Christ.
4. Many Particulars may be in∣terposed, but I shall here take notice only of that wherein this Discourse differs from most Au∣thors; who say, that because the Tribuneship was Annual, there∣fore

the TRIB. POT. was so likewise, and consequently the Years of the Emperors Reign to be accounted by it; which to me seems a great Error. Be pleased to take notice of these Instances. It is confessed that Tiberius reigned not full Twenty three Years. But in Gruter's Inscriptions, P. 235. conc. Tiberius TRIB. POT. XXVIII. and P. 236. TRIB. POT. XXXIX. The same is in a Coin of Patin's Edition of Sueton. in Tib. c. 18 wherefore he had TRIB. POT before he was Emperor, together with Augustus. Accordingly Sue∣tonius in Tib. c. 16. Data rursus Tribunitia potestas in quinquennium. Again in Gruter, p. 295. You have


AUG. TRIB. POT. XXX.
both in the same Year.


TIB. TRIB. POT. IX.



AUG. TRIB. POT. XXXI.
both in the same Year.


TIB. TRIB. POT. X.


So Augustus's XXXII. with Ti∣berius's XI. and Aug. XXXV. with Tib. XIV. Augustus had in all TRIB. POT. XXXVI. Years, as Tacitus saith, Annal. l. 1. And so, if Augustus's XXXV. was Tiberius's XIV. then Augustus's last or XXXVII was Tiberius's XVI. and Tiberius's XXXIIX. was the last of his Reign.
Commodus was Emperor not full Thirteen Years, but there is a Coin of his TRIB. POT. XV. COS. VI. and in his seventh Consulate he died; so that he had TRIB. POT. XVII. Years, which was four Years with his Predecessor.

SIR,
I will not trouble you any more with the like Particulars, perhaps some other Opportunity may be offered for them also: Mean while most heartily wishing you an Addition of new Happiness with the renewal of the Year; I take leave and remain,
SIR, Your Humble Servant, O. W.
