



SIR,
IT is the Sanction of long-liv'd Custom, that no one appear to publick view, with∣out Dedication to some conside∣rable Friend. And while others affect to chuse Nobles by Nativi∣ty, and mutable Titles; I, one Noble by Nature, and a better portion of her endowments, the most primary, true and immuta∣ble dignity; which is not, in ho∣norante, nor in the power of Men or Laws, to give or take away; but immures it self in your Prin∣ciples,
and sheds its beams of love and favour on all ingenious men (known) of what faculty so∣ever. Sir, Bountifull Nature (to give an instance of what she can do) hath bestow'd on you (not lavish'd) much more than a child's part, (the lesse she hath for some others, for her store is not infi∣nite.) I write not this to make you known, whom all Europe knows already: Much lesse would I offer dirty Wits an occasion to slurre you, by this Dedication, as if the Argument ensuing spake your disease, and therefore fittest for your view, study, and coun∣tenance. No, Eagles are not wont to prey on carrion. Great minds, sublime fancies, (furnished with
Arts, Tongues, enriched with the advantages of Travell, kept in busiest speculative employments) I say, Great Souls, (whose acti∣vity the locall world is too nar∣row to circumscribe) are above these carnall inescations, & leave them condemn'd to those, whose souls dwell in their senses. This Treatise hath lien in broken pa∣pers some years past, (penned for private use) and had never seen more light, but by your encou∣ragement. And now, being got abroad, first offers self to you, to pay its birth duty and respects for publick freedom. It lies in a small bulk, and without Rheto∣ricall ornament, for, it intends the diseased, to make them known
to themselves; appales to abide the narrow scan of your curious fancy, which knows neither bonds nor rest, (the more's your danger.) For, let me tell you, Sir, you have a mind, (whom to supply with necessary animal-spi∣rits) is able to depauperate the most just and equilibrious Tem∣per. And provident Nature will store her Head-quarters, and not fail to send enough to her Court and University, though the lower Towns and Villages of the Mi∣crocosm fail and pine for it. For the animal spirits luminous and aetherial, (fit to irradiate the soul's commands through the im∣perforate Nerves) are raised out of the Vitall (in the Plexus Cho∣roides)
by further elaboration; whence Nature amaunds the more foeculent part to the sewers of the Brain, and the residue by the veines to the Heart, for fur∣ther concoction. Hence, the weak and depopulate bodies of busiest minds. Hence, those trou∣blesome floods of rheums and de∣stillations in them, whose nature delights to dwell largely in the Animals, (especially, quibus natura mater, fortuna noverca.) And such would be your condition, did not Fortune and Prudence conspire, to prompt you a more elegant and defoecated diet to prevent it. But what do I, setting up my Candle to your Torch, casting my Mite of advice into the Trea∣sury
of your prudentiall Rules? Your Tongue and Pen drop little else, and your loving Soul can do no lesse, than to publish and en∣large the stock of Learning, with your methodicall Digests.
All the divertisement that I shall further give your serious em∣ployment, is, to signifie and as∣sure you, that I am,
SIR, 
Duresm-Yard 3d Nonas Decemb. 1659.
