





Dearly Beloved,
THE wisest of Men hath told us (excepting Christ) that a word spoken in Season, (or, as it is in the Original, upon his Wheels) is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, Prov. 25. 11. Oh how excellent are Words, rightly ordered,
 placed, and circumstantiated; such words of all are the most excellent, the most prevalent, and the most plea∣sant Words that can be spoken; they are most precious, most de∣sirable, and most delectable; the Lord grant that what is here spo∣ken in this Treatise, may be such kind of Words, that all that read them may find them most precious, most sweet, and very seasonable.
To time a Word (Beloved) in Season is to set it upon the Wheels. And, Oh that this might be a Word well timed! To speak a word to the purpose (si Deo placuerit, if it shall please the Lord) is the project and design of this Book; there is a great glory upon all words of Truth, but there is a double Glory upon seasona∣ble words of Truth.
Therefore in the following discour∣ses I have made it my Care and Bu∣siness to set before you a seasonable,
 comfortable, and encouraging Truth and if the Lord will set in by his Spirit, (I am sure) you will find it such to be sealed by the Spirit, and to have his Witness in our Hearts, (that God loves us with an Ever∣lasting Love, therefore with Loving Kindness he hath drawn us, Jer. 31. 3. And that we are the Children of God) is most sweet and comforta∣ble; there is nothing can, or will encourage the Saints of God, living, and dying, and comfort their Souls more than this.
A Seal beloved is for two Ends, viz. Safety, and Secresie; and Sealing is used in three Cases. First, to keep things secret, that they may not be seen. Secondly, Distinct, that they may not be confused. And Thirdly, Safe, that they may be forth-coming; these uses you will find opened in the Book: To set forth the unspeakable Priviledges
 of Believers Sealed by the Spirit, from which may be drawn much com∣fort and sweetness: there is not a more encouraging and comforting Truth in all the Book of God, well understood and applied, than this is of Sealing by the Holy Spirit to the Day of Redemption, Eph. 4. 30.
In these Sermons of Sealing by the Holy Spirit, I may say, There is Milk for Babes, and Meat for strong Men. I hope all that see, or read them, will reap benefit by them.
Many of you (Beloved) were well pleased, and much refreshed in the hearing of these Sermons; and I trust, yea, and shall pray, that you may be also built up, and nourished in the reading of them.
'Tis true, they are brought forth and set before you in a homely Dress,
 not garnished with fine Phrases, and Rhetorical Expressions; but such as they are, I hope you will accept of them: The design of them is honest, viz. God's Glory, and the edifying and building up of your Souls in Christ Jesus.
What you find of God in them, to the use of Edifying, give him all the Glory of it; and bless his Name, for making the hearing, or reading of these Sermons beneficial to your Souls.
I am well aware, That some will censure me, for what I have here done and offered to the World. But if God may have Glory by these weak Endeavours of mine, and any poor Soul reap Spiritual Comfort and Ad∣vantage, then I shall have my end, and bear up chearfully under the va∣riety of Censures, which may be pass'd upon me

To conclude, Consider this one thing Christians, for your comfort and establishment in Christ Jesus, viz. That those who are Sealed by the Spirit of God here, shall be crown∣ed with Eternal Glory hereafter, Rev. 2. 10. Such shall have a Crown of Life. Christ has bought the king∣dom of Heaven for them that Be∣lieve, and hath paid for it at an high rate; even his most precious Blood is the price paid for it, Eph. 1. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 17, 18, 19. And he hath prepared for them Mansions, who are Denisons; Crowns for them who are Heirs: And pray who are these, but such as are born again, and Sealed by the Spirit of Promise, Rom. 8. 16, 17.
Believers have Assurance of Hea∣ven three ways.
First, By Faīth in Christ, 1 Pet. 1, 9. Receiving the end of your faith, even the Salvation of your Souls.

Secondly, By their hearty and real Conformity to Christ, Rom. 8. 29. For whom he did fore-know, he also did Predestinate to be made conformable to the Image of his Son.
Thirdly, By the Sealing Work of the Spirit. For they are Sealed unto the Day of Redemption, Eph. 4. 30. And says Paul, in the Text, Eph. 1. 13, 14. After that ye Be∣lieved, ye were Sealed with that Holy Spirit of Promise, which (says he) is the earnest of our In∣heritance, &c.
Believers shall as certainly be glorified, as if they were Crowned already, John 14. 1, 2, 3. They be Heirs to Heaven's Crown here, and shall be possessed of it when they come there: What the Saints hold now in reversion, they shall then have in full possession, and be with their God in the Impyreal Heaven, where there
 will be nothing present, that offends, nor nothing absent that delights.
Now that you may all (Beloved) arrive at this place of Blessedness, and be for ever with the Lord, is, and shall be the prayers of him, who subscribes himself, Your Servant in the Gospel, for Jesus's sake,

Decemb. 4. 1696.
