


My Lord,
THis is an Age of Projects and Experiments, much is done both ways, as well in Specu∣lative as Practical Arts and Sciences. No wonder therefore, if
 amongst the rest of the busie-headed, and busie-handed ones, I also have busied both my head and hand to be doing something, though all I could do, were but like Diogenes, to rum∣ble my Tub up and down the streets, and keep others from sleeping at noon day. Example, though it be no irre∣sistible Compeller unto action, yet is a very powerful Perswader unto imi∣tation. Here I do with all humility offer to your Lordships hand, and by that (as that which will be its best recommendation) unto the World something both of Project and of Experiment, in that part of Litera∣ture, wherein my self have for the most of my time been more or less con∣versant, which is The Grounding of a young Scholar in Grammar Learn∣ing. That I dedicate it to your Lordships Name many are the induce∣ments that draw me to it. To say I do it to welcome your Lordship into this your Diocess, by an honourary
 testification to the World of my joy for the coming of a Bishop among us, from whose Presidency over us, so ma∣ny good things do promise themselves to us, and do seem, like golden Ap∣ples from a laden bough to bend down toward us, and court their acceptance from us, and even ready to drop them∣selves upon us, this alone were a com∣petently fair account thereof. Those Primitive Episcopal Vertues in your Lordship, whose bright emanations from you, like beams from the Sun, do irradiate your Diocess, to the chearing and comforting of the hearts of all the Sons of true Piety and Ho∣nour in it, and to the obliging of all persons who have in themselves any sense of, and are capable of being ob∣liged by, anothers Goodness, both are of worth to deserve, and of power to command a much more noble Gratu∣lation, than this Dedication can possibly amount, or dares indeed a∣spire unto. Honour to your Lordship,

'tis a debt which all men owe to your Vertue, and which I this way chuse to pay, because 'tis not only the best, but the properest, if not the onliest way that I have to pay it.
But though this be the first, and my most noble inducement, yet there are others, which do sway very much with me also. This is one, that as your Lordship doth excel in the high∣est, and most noble parts of Litera∣ture, so you have great skill in this also, though less noble and less honou∣red, yet no less useful, no less necessa∣ry part of it, and so are the better able to take the true measure of, and to give the right judgment upon my design in this Manual. It is a com∣fort to a Writer to have a judicious Patron to countenance his Work, that being the first thing that be∣speaks his entertainment as an Au∣thor into the World. Another (and I shall trouble your Lordship with no more) is this, that it seemed a most
 suitable thing in me then to dedicate a Book of the Grounding of a young Scholar in Grammar Learning to your Lordship, when your Lordship was just a designing the setting up of a Grammar School in the City of Lin∣coln (the place of my Nativity and Education) for the Grounding of young Scholars therein. Wherein you shew your self a right Wise Master-builder, and so the fitter to be ordain∣ed a Repairer to the ruines of this de∣cayed Church: for to see that the Churches foundation be rightly laid, is the way to have its Superstructures long to hold; and the School is the properest place for the laying of the first stones of the Churches foundation in. Towards which, as it is my desire so it will be my honour, and shall be my happiness to be serviceable in any way in any measure, and under any capa∣city, though it be but that of the meanest under-server. If I may but fetch, though I cannot fit materials
 for the work, or if I may but hew stones, and temper morter; though I be not able yet to lay a stone in the building, it will be a very great sa∣tisfaction, and no less a contentment to me. And now, that I be not un∣pardonably tedious in the address of so little a Present to so great a Pa∣tron, I shall beg your Lordships par∣don for the boldness of this attempt, and beg of God for your Lordship length to your days, health to your person, success to your designs, and a blessing upon your labours, that the work of the Lord may prosper in your hands, to his glory, your honour, and the good of this Church both in this present and in the future ages of it. And so rests
Colsterworth, Decem. 1. 1668.

