



IT may seem a thing very strange in nature for a Lamb, without fear, to meet a Lyon in the open field: As it was in Little David, when by faith he Encountered with great Goliah; the Cham∣pion of the Pblistines; even so it may seem strange to some, that so mean an instru∣ment shall without fear meet. Dr. Stilling∣fleet, fo great a Champion, in the open field. But seeing he hath, with Goliah, de∣spised or desied that little flock of Christ's faithful Servants, the heavenly Armies of the living God; therefore I cannot keep si∣lent, having, with David, the Lord on my side; his Truth for my Sword and Buckler; therefore for the Honour of the Lord Jesus Christ, and love I bear to all his Servants, I shall herein defend the Rights and Prero∣gatives of my Lord and Saviour; That he is the only Archbishop, Lord Spiritual, and Lawgiver to his Church, in all things apper∣taining
 to the worship of his Father; And shall stand by the same testimony which any of the Lords Servants have born against the Doctor, and all the Canons of his Church to the contrary.
Secondly, Among all the Enemies of Gods people, the most wicked'st are those that under the Visage of Christianity, would be reckoned among the Lords Protestant people; in word, declaring they are on Christs side, but in their Works and Writings ma∣nifest their hatred against him, and all his faithful Servants, for no other cause, but by manifesting their love to Christ, in keep∣ing his Commandment in Gods Worship, and bearing their testimony against all mens inventions to the contrary: such an enemy hath the Doctor manifested himself to be to the Christians herein mentioned, in the false Reports published against them, to the Defamation of their persons, their Writings, and the Truth they professed and main∣tained, as is hereafter plainly discovered concerning their Faith in the Description of the true Church of God, with all her Officers, and in what order Christ hath commanded in his Testament, for them
 to walk therein, with Church. State Mi∣nistry, together with its holy Order, I desire the Doctor to compare with his Church and Ministry, and then declare to the world, which he believeth in his con∣science is the true Church of God. If God be pleased to open his eyes, and carry him above all earthly Wisdom, by his Spirit, un∣to an exceeding high Mountain, the height Rev. 21. 10. of Israel, to behold the City filled with the glory of God; and unless God doth be his Ezek. 17. 22, 23. & 40. 2. Rev. 21. 11. Eccl. 10. 15. help, he, with the Apostate Israelites, will still weary himself, and not know how to find the way to the City; in which City, by the Canon or holy Rules thereof, Christ hath appointed for her Officers, Pastors, Teachers, Elders and Deacons, Ephes. 4. But the 7th Canon of the Doctors Church saith, Whosoever shall affirm, that the Govern∣ment of that Church by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and the rest that do bear office, is Antichristian, or repugnant to the word of God, let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and so continue, until he repent, and publickly revoke his wicked Errors. Christ Jesus hath appointed the whole form of Gospel-worship to be learned out of his
 Testament, and that it be agreeable to the Isa. 8. 20. Act. 20. 27. same, upon pain of all the Curses in Gods Book, to him that addeth or diminisheth to Rev. 22. 18. Prov. 30. 6. or from. But the 4th Canon of the Doctors Church saith, Whosoever shall affirm, that the form of Gods worship, established by Law, and contained in the book of Common-prayer, is a corrupt and superstitious, or unlawful worship of God, or containeth any thing in it that is repugnant to the Scriptures, let him be ex∣communicated ipso facto, and such like, wherein is preferred the Traditions and Or∣ders of men to be equal to the inspired Rules in Christs Testament.
Now let me ask the Doctor, whether he believeth in his conscience, that when he cometh to appear before the Lord Jesus, the chief Judg, that he shall be judged for the breach of his Church Canons, or for the breach of Christs Canons, in his Testament; seeing the word of God telleth us, that whatsoever man that hath engaged himself to be a worshipper of God, and shall break the holy Rules in Worship he hath pro∣mised to keep; and after Gods order, by brethren, used for his recovery, Matth. 18. if he stand obstinate, then that which the
 Church, by the Rules of Christ, doth by ex∣communicating him on earth, is confirmed in heaven: but the curse for the breach of mans Canons in worship, though pretended to God in worship, is the curse causeless, which shall not come, Prov. 26. 2. But the curse turn'd into a blessing, upon all that do, Rev. 22. 11. to wit, the Commandments of the Lord Je∣sus: they only have right to the Tree of life, and may enter in through the gates in the City. So that it is not enough for the Doctor to think it is sufficient for him, or his hearers to believe verbally that Christ is the Son of God come in the flesh, as the only founda∣tion of Religion; but they that do expect salvation by Christs Merits, must not only believe he is the Son of God, but by their obedience confess the same, that as a Son was he faithful in his house or Church, as Moses the Prophet, like unto Moses the only Law∣giver for Gospel worship, as aforesaid; which the Doctor doth not obediently believe, so long as he retaineth the Popish Office of a Dean, for one of Christs Gospel-Ministers, as though Christ was not wise enough to give Titles fit for his Ministers. But as we read of the Romish Church, that woman which sitteth
 upon a sear let coloured beast, full of the names of blasphemy: this name Dean pro∣ceeding from thence, may be reckoned among them, Rev. 13. 1. & 17. 3.
And, lastly, as every true Christian must not only believe that Christ is the Son of God come in the flesh, but also they must walk in him, rooted and established, follow∣ing Christ by the example of the Primitive Churches commended in them: As when Is∣rael had gone from the pure keeping in wor∣ship to God, his Ordinances, and the Cove-Hant Mal. 2. 8. of Levi, the call of the Lord to them, to reform their ways by the prophet Malachi, was to remember the Law of Moses, and not Mal. 4. 4. the Tradition, or Canons of men: and un∣til this was done, they that feared the Lord had separated from them, and spake often one to another, and a book of remembrance was Isa. 42. 4. written for them, that thought on his Name, even his Law, and partook not in the evil of the transgressors. Even so, when after the long Mat. 12. 21. Apostacy of Christians, the Lord called them to come out of Babylon, and to reform their Rev. 18. 4. ways, but not by the Canons of men, but by the everlasting Gospel, taught by the Ser∣vants of God in King Edward, Queen Eliza∣zabeth,
 King James, and in King Charles the 1st and 2d. to this day; and until this work be done, all that fear the Lord do sepa∣rate themselves, and speak often one to another: for which they are and were still persecuted, reproached and defamed; but by whom but by the Devil, called the Dragon and Serpent, Rev. 2. 10. in his servants, out of whose mouths comes floods of teproaches to destroy the woman, Rev. 12. 15. had not the earth then, and still doth by more than an ordinary Providence help the woman, in drinking up, or rather hindering the work Verse 16. of persecution.
Thus hoping the Doctor will lay these things to heart; and who knoweth, seeing a∣mong Adams Sons some men for their malice and fury are compared to Lions, 2 Tim. 4. 17. but God in his mercy may give him grace to the changing of his fierce nature. If the Lord by the Arrows of his Truth prick his heart, Psal. 45. 5. Acts 2. 37. Heb. 4. 12. that so he may yield obedience to Christ Je∣sus, and lie down with the Lambs in the Lords holy Mountain, even Sion his true Church, Isa. 11. 7. Heb. 12. 22. where it is said, the Lords people shall be all Righteous, Isa. 60. wise as Serpents, harmless as Doves,
 men in understanding, children in malice, 1 Cor. 14. for such only can have right to enter into the Kingdom of God, Mat. 18. 3. that so he may for the time to come see himself in the glass of Gods word new born, all his fleshly glory and honour fading away by the Spirit of God blowing on him; so shall he beat his sword of bitter words into plough∣sheares, that by the word of God the fallow ground of his uncircumcised heart be broken up, the seed of Gods truth sowed therein watred by the heavenly dew of his grace, that he may bring forth the fruits of righteousness, Jam. 3. 18. Heb. 12. 14. which is peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the face of God; which is and shall be the prayers for the very enemies of him who is the Lords unworthy servant,


