



SIR,
SInce I came home from London, I have taken some time to consider of those Solids and Lines made by the Sections thereof; proposed to Consideration (to my Lord Brouncker and your self, at your Lodgings, where I was also present) by Mr. Pett, one of His Majesties Commissioners for the Navy, and an excellent Shipwright.
The Bodies proposed to consideration were all of this form. On a plain Base, which was the Quadrant of a Circle, (like that of a Quadrantal Cone or Cylinder) stood an erect Solid, whose Altitude (being arbitrary) was there double to the Radius of that Quadrant; and from every Point of its Perimeter, streight Lines drawn to the Vertex, met there, not in a Point (as is the Apex of a Cone), nor in a parallel Quadrant (as in a Quadrantal Cylinder), but in a streight Line or sharp Edge, like that of a Wedge or Cuneus. On which consideration, I thought fit to give it the name of Cono-Cuneus, as having the Base of a Cone, and the Vertex of a Cuneus.
By the various Sections of this Solid, in several Positions, he did (rightly) conceive, that divers new Lines must arise, in great variety, different from those arising from the Section of a Cone. Some of which he supposed might be of good use in the Building of Ships; in order to which it was, that he proposed them to Consi∣deration
Now because he judged it troublesom (as indeed it would be) first to form such Solids, and then cut them by Plains in such Po∣sitions as he desred; he had (for avoiding that trouble) ingeniously contrived this Expedient. He caused divers Boards, of a good solid Wood, to be exactly planed, some of an equal thickness, some meeting in a sharp edge; those of the former, he caused to be glewed together in a parallel Position; those of the latter sort, he caused so to be glewed together, as that their sharp edges met in one common Angle. And having thus formed several Solids, of Boards thus glewed together, he then caused them to be wrought into such a form as that before described: Which being done, he then caused the Glew

to be dissolved in warm Water, whereby the several Boards, falling asunder, did exhibit, in their several faces, the respective Sections of those Solids. And such were those he shewed us; which being put together, made up such Solids; and taken asunder, shewed the several Sections of them.
I do not intend at all to disparage the ingenuity of that Con∣trivance, which was indeed very handsom, and neatly performed, but do withall suppose, that it would not be unpleasing to your self, or him, to see those Lines described in Plano, which would arise by such Section of the Solid.
That therefore is the work of these Papers, to represent the true nature of such Lines, and the ways to draw them, without the actual Section of a Solid.
Which I have the rather undertaken, because this is a Solid which I do not know that any other have before considered. And because this may be a Pattern; according to which, other Solids of like nature may be in like manner considered if there shall be occasion.
If beside these Sections which he hath already considered, there be any other Sections of this or other the like Solids which he shall conceive useful to his purpose; the same may in like manner be represented (without the actual Section of such Solids) by Lines thus described in a Plain.
But which of them may be most advantageous to his design, I do not pretend to understand so well, nor can with so much cer∣tainty affirm; as, that I am,
SIR, Your very humble Servant,
Oxon, Apr. 7. 1662.

