



Most humbly shewing,
THat the most Wise God, who hath made all things for his Rev. 4. 11. Pleasure, hath ordained in every Nation but two States, Pillers, or Legs, to stand upon; the one Civil, and the other Spiritual. The Civil State is God's Ordinance of Magistra∣tical Government, under divers Titles, as Kings, or other Chief Gover∣nours, unto whom an excellent Dan. 4. 36. Majesty is given them of God, as next under Rom. 13. God, Head of the Commonwealth, the Lord's Lieutenants here on Earth. And seeing since the Fall, Mans Heart is Jer. 17. 9. deceitful, and in Mans Flesh dwelleth no good thing, so that the Good he would do, he doth not; but the Evil he would not, that he doth Rom. 7.. There∣fore for guide in Government, God hath given Kings the second Exod. 20. Table of his Royal Law, as a most sure Foundation and Rule, to square all their Laws by to govern their People; so that by it they bear not the Sword in vain, but use it to the Glory of God, for the punishment of Evil-doers Rom. 13., and the praise of them that do well: Of which Trust and Stewardship committed to them, they must shortly give an Account to their Chief Judg, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, the Lord Jesus, at the last Day.
The other State or Piller is the Rev. 15. 3 Mat. 28. 18 Kingly Government of the Lord Jesus in his Church, or John 18. 36. Kingdom, in all things Spiritual. As Christ hath his Of∣fice under God, the only Head of his Mystical Body Ephes. 5. 23. Col. 1. 17. the Church, unto whose Government is given the first Table of God's Law, according to which most sure Foundation are all the Laws made in all Ages for his worship: And though Christ was not manifested in the Flesh till these last Times, yet was he from the Days of Adam King in his Church, on his holy Psal. 2. 6. Hill of Sion, in those who were Figures of him, as Heb. 7. 1. Ps. 110. 4. Melchisedeck, Acts 3. 22. Moses, and David; so Christ was the same Yesterday, to Day, and for Heb. 13. 8 ever, who now in his Church sitteth on the Throne of his Father David, as it is written of him, Isa. 11. 3, 4. That he shall not judg after the sight of his Eyes, nor reprove after the hearing of his Ears; but with Righ∣teousness shall he judg the Poor, and reprove with Equity, for the
 Meek of the Earth: and shall smite the Earth with the Rod of his Mouth, and with the breath of his Lips shall he slay the Wick∣ed. So that his Weapons are not Carnal, as his Kingdom is not of this World; so differing from the Civil State.
Moreover, as these be the only States ordained of God, and the na∣ture of them being so different the one from the other, as the nature of a thing Civil and Spiritual is, so that the one State may not meddle with the Work that belongeth to the other. And hereupon did the Lord in his Wisdom, constitute the Civil State in the Tribe of Gen. 49. 10. 2 Chron. 5. 2. Judah, and the Spiritual State in the Tribe of Levi; but when King Uzziah would presume to break God's Order, to do that Work which 2 Chron. 27. 16, 17, 18. belonged not to the Civil States Office, the Lord smote him with Leprosie to the day of his Death; that others may be warned, not to presume above what is written, 1 Cor. 4. 6.
Therefore the Lord Jesus, our High Priest, and only Lord Spiritual in his Church, would not meddle with the Magistrates-work nor Office, to give Judgment on a Woman taken in Adultery John 8. 3, 4, 5., nor divide Inheri∣tances between Brethren: And likewise commanded his Disciples, and all Bishops and Ministers to the Worlds end, not to take on them the title Luke 22. 25. Mat. 20. 25. of Politick Princes, but rather he that would be Chief, to be Servant to all; and not as Lords, either in Title or Rule, over God's Heritage 1 Pet. 5. 3., or Churches of God.
Therefore we see God in his Wisdom hath limited either State to keep within the limits he hath ordained for them. Therefore as touch∣ing the Civil Magistratical State, we may justly conclude, That whatso∣ever Person he be, whether Noble or Ignoble, that shall presume to Alter, Change, or Diminish to, or from any part of the Laws, Ordinances, Offices, or Order, contrary to the King's Royal Crown and Dignity established by Law, according to the second Table of God's Law, must needs be accounted a Traytor to the King, and suffer his high Displea∣sure.
Accordingly may we conclude, concerning the Spiritual State of Christ's Government in his Church, That whatsoever Person he be, whe∣ther Noble, or Ignoble, that shall presume to Add or Diminish, Alter or Change any thing in Government, or Ministry, Time, Maintenance or Order, contrary to the Rules or Laws of Christ's Testament, founded on the first Table of God's Law, in all things pertaining to the Worship of God, may justly be deemed a Traytor to the Royal Crown and Dignity of the Lord Jesus; and may hear the Sentence out of his own Mouth against them, saying, Bring those mine Enemies that would not that I should Reign over them, and slay them before me: Either
 by casting out of his Church, or by everlasting Wo at the last Day.
May it therefore please your Majesty, in your Wisdom to consider these things, That it is one of the Crying Sins in this your Kingdom, for which God's Judgments are threatned against it, because the Civil and Spiritual State is mingled together; the Civil State assuming into the Spiritual Prerogative of the Lord Jesus (who hath this Testimony from God, that he was faithful in his House, or Church, as Moses, to give Laws and Directions in every thing appertaining to the Worship of God) to make Laws and Directions how, and what we must worship God with and by. The Ministers, or Bishops, contrary to Christ's express Word and Practice, do take on them the Office of Civil State, and Titles of Politick Princes, to be Lords in Councils, as Parliaments, and Lords Spiritual in and over Churches, if not Justices of the Peace; so that by this breach of God's Order, there is such a state of Confusion; to wit, A third State, or Leg, a Compound of both Civil and Spiritual, yet neither really Civil nor Spiritual; but a Monster, called a Beast, Rev. 13. 1, 11. Which, as Writers say Plat. Politiq. See Hen. Ains. Ar∣row., was first brought forth in Egypt, by those Heathens void of God's Order in Grace and Nature, and there∣fore they would have all their Kings, Priests; so commingling the King∣dom and Priesthood together in one Person. And this abominable In∣vention was the Romish Church, when fallen from Christ, enamoured with; for which sinful Act, among others, she is called not only Baby∣lon Rev. 18. & Rev. 11., Sodom, but Egypt, because the Romish Church would have the Magistracy and Ministry, Princedom and Priesthood, in the persons of her Popes, Cardinals, and Bishops, to be Church Princes, and indeed above Princes, to Dethrone them at their pleasure; and from Rome was this Egyptian Fashion brought by her Rev. 18. 15. Merchants into England. And this being such a Confusion, that the very Pont. l. 5. c. 9. Philosopher condemneth it by the light of Nature, and says, it could not stand with the actions of those two Offices (meaning the Civil and Spiritual) so different the one from the other, that one Man should perform both at one time toge∣ther; but must needs fall out, when both Duties are to be done, that the one would be omitted. So either God is not duly served, or the Civil State suffers Damage.
And for as much as it is a work belonging to the Civil State to re∣dress, which your Majesties Ancestors, King Henry the 8th, King Ed∣ward the 6th, and Queen Elizabeth of happy Memory, began (as God had promised, That he would put into the Hearts of the Kings of the Earth, to hate the Whore, eat her Flesh, and Rev. 17. 16. burn her by the Fiery Law of God, in making her desolate and naked) to abolish out of their Dominions the Pope's Supremacy, the Lord Abbots, Car∣dinals,
 Jesuits, Monks, Friers; and the rest of that Ministry is left for your Majesty to abolish; which if your Majesty refuse to do, it must be done: And why? Because the Lord hath said it; who will (by whom he pleases) give them Blood to drink, for strong is the Lord that judgeth her. And the Kings of the Earth, who have committed Fornication, and lived deliciously with her, yet now shall bewail her, and lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her Burning; as more at large is written, Rev. 18. 8, 9, 10, 11. And all Magistrates that endeavour to hinder it, are withstanders of God's Word; because in her is found the Blood of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth (Oh Bloody Papists!) Rev. 18. 24.
And hereupon it is written, Rev. 17. 6. I saw the Woman drunken with the Blood of Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. Which Woman, is clearly in this ensuing Book, proved to be the Church of Rome; For every Tree is known by its Fruit Mat. 7. 20.. Therefore the chiefest Article of her Faith, is to Murder all that believe not as She believeth. Now so far is that Church from being the Church of Christ, or Children of God; that they are Children of the Devil John 8., who was a Murderer from the beginning, so have him (and not God) for their Father; because they do his works to the uttermost of their power. Witness their Cruelty in Queen Marie's days, the Pow∣der Plot, and now this Hellish Plot to take away the Life of your Majesty, and your good Protestant Subjects: As they began with that wor∣thy Knight, Sir Edmondbury Godfrey; and will never be out of hopes of coming to possess this Land, whilst Protestants can imbrace their Brethren in Office of Arch and Lord-Bishops, Arch-Deacons, Deans, Prebends; which Offices for Gospel-Ministers, Christ's Testament knows nothing of, but the Pope's Records. Oh therefore,
That the Lord would be pleased to open your Majesties Heart, to Act as a most Worthy Protestant Prince, as with the Isa. 14. 22, 23. Beesom of the Lord, to sweep out of your Dominions (not so much in their Persons, as out of Office) the remaining part of the Romish Ministry, by Law of oversight established in Protestant Churches, together with all other Popish De∣vices in Worship; some of many are after noted. And for your Ma∣jesties glorious President in this so excellent a Work, for the Honour of God and good of his People, who as Protestants will live and die with You; Cast your Majestie's Eye on that young King 2 Chron. 34 Josiah, who so soon as he heard of the Judgments of God denounced against his Land and People, called for, the Book of the Law to be read before him, and by it comparing the Acts of his Fore-Fathers, and present state of his Kingdom, rent his Clothes; And for fear of the Judgments of God, in the 16th
 Year of his Age, and 8th Year of his Reign, began to seek the Lord, and in the 12th Year began to purge out of his Dominions the Reliques of Ido∣latry, all Devices of Men in Worship, set up by former Kings, together with the false Ministry, called Zeph 1. 4 Chemarims, either for their Black Gar∣ments they wore, or being smoked in offering Incense to Idols; (as the Margent of the great Bible noteth) and restored the Lord's true Ministry and holy order of Worship, as the Lord had appointed by the hand of Moses. Which if your Majesty will do this like Glorious Work by the Light of Christ's Testament, comparing the Acts of your Predecessors, and present state of your Kingdom, so poluted with a Romish Ministry, and other Inventions in Protestant Churches, that so a true Ministry, according to the Lord's Will in Christ's Testiment, may be enjoyed, and the People left free to choose their own Ministers (according to Nature and Grace) to grow out of every particular Can. 8. 8. Ezek. 16. 7. Acts 14. 23. Body, or Congregation, and not by Humane Art for Ministers to be made by they know not whom, and set after∣ward to the Body whether they will or no, as an artificial Eye or Brest. So shall your Majesty and People hope, as King Josiah and his People did, that the Judgments threatned against this Land may be turned away, as it was from his. As it is proved in the following Lines, that it was chiefly for corruptions in Faith and Worship, that God brought his Judgments on his own People.
Now, would it please your Majesty in your Civil Kingdom to suffer your Self to be so abused, as to have no Servants to serve You in your Kingdom, or at your Table, but what the King of another Nation think∣eth fit? No sure.
How then shall the Lord Jesus, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, suffer himself any longer to be so Abused, as to have no Servants to serve Him in his Church of his own Appointment, either in Name or Office, as Pastors Teachers, Elders, and Deacons, but what the Pope, or other Mortal Men think fit?
Neither would your Majesty accept of the Service of any Subject, Noble or Ignoble, that should proffer his Service to serve You in your Civil Affairs, if he did not do the same as your Majesty had given him Command, and not as he pleased?
How then shall the Lord Jesus accept, nay, he doth not accept of the Service of any Person, of what Degree soever, that shall in his Spiri∣tual Kingdom, or Church, serve him never so zealously, except he do that Work and Service to God, as Christ in his Testament hath commanded him.
If it were not so, the very Turks that boast how they are Worshippers of the Living God, and do abhor Idols, would go beyond many that bear
 the name of Christians; who though they do zealously worship the Living Beal. Ep. to image of both Churches. God, and concerning Christ, allow him to be a great Prophet, the Word of God, the Spirit of God, born of Mary the Virgin; yet because they worship not God by the Appointment of the Lord Jesus in his Testament, but according to the directions of Mahomet, therefore are they and their services rejected of God. So likewise, the Papists boast how they worship God, (yet abhor not Idols) but because they do it by direction of sundry Popes, and not by Christ's Appointment, they are rejected of God and their service. But if a Turk or Papist should ask many Protestants, By whose Appointments do you worship God? If truly answered, must say, Partly by the directions of Christ, (for we have his Ordinances of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper) and partly by the Appointments of sundry Popes and Bishops, as after is shewed. So that for these things, among other Evils, God is bringing his Judgments on your Kingdom. Oh therefore, that your Majesty, together with your Honorable Council, would seriously consider these things, that the Wrath of the Lord may be turned away from us.
And lastly, Seeing there is but one way to escape God's Judgments threatned, let not a Heathen Prince (as Christ told the Jews) come in Judgment at the last Day against a Christian Prince, viz. the King of Jonah 3. Nineveh, who so soon as he heard the Judgment of God threatned against him and his People, arose from his Throne and laid his Robes from him, issued forth a Proclamation to his People, to keep a true Fast to the Lord as he required; that is, to break off their Sins by Repentance, in turning every one from his evil way, and from the violence that was in their Hands, who did so; so that it is written, God saw their Works, and repented of the evil he threatned against them.
Thus having discharged the part of a true Protestant Subject, presen∣ted to a Wise Protestant Prince, not doubting but this Mite shall be ac∣cepted and protected by yonr Majesty in Christian love to the Truth, for the Honour of God, and comfort of your Soul, and the joy and comfort of your Protestant Subjects: So that your Majesty (with the Godly Kings of Judah) doing the Will of God herein, may have many Years Acts 13. 36. Rev. 21. 24. on Earth a prosperous Reign; and having brought your Honour and Glory to the glorious State of Christ's Kingdom in his Church, whereby She may enjoy all her Rights and Priviledges, you may undoubtedly receive with Christ a Crown of Glory eternally in the Heavens; which is and shall be, the Prayer of your most humble Subject.

