



RIGHT REVEREND,
THough it be true which SENECA writes, ipsi nobis ma∣gnum Theatrum su∣mus: that every good man
 is a Theater to himselfe; and hath somewhat with∣in whereon he may reflect with comfort and delight: using that of Persius in a sense, —Nec te quaesiveris extra: yet give me leave amongst diverse glorious sights of publicke rejoycings, to ex∣hibit one text of holy Scri∣pture to your view, the fairest spectacle that ever was presented upon the
 Great Amphitheater of the round world: The Salvation of God, the Salvation of Christ; most worthy to be had in oculis and in osculis (as my Authour speakes) by all such as kisse the Son, and desire to embrace the sweetnesse of divine mer∣cies.
Non hic Centauros, non Gorgonias, Harpyásve
Invenies, hominem pagina nostra sapit. vel potiùs Deum: the man that is brought forth with an Ecce in the Go∣spell [Behold the man] the Mediatour of God and man, the man Christ Iesus. O let him be ever in your sight, that hath made you so great a Light, and set the lustre of Your Wisdome
 and Piety, as a Lan∣thorne in a Watch-tower, or a candle on the house top for direction unto many. My song is with the Prophet DAVID, [Good lucke have you with Your Honour] that runnes after you, though you runne from it: Since it is a good say∣ing, which Aenaeas Syl∣vius left as an Axiome, Quòd Viri Dignita∣tibus,
 non Dignita∣tes Viris, sunt quae∣rendi; that men are to be sought out for praefer∣ments, more then praefer∣ments by men.
The Patriark Ioseph beareth encrease in his name, and is likened to a flourishing bough, whose branches runne over the wall: may it be so with your Lordship, while the sheaves of others bow to
 yours; and men delight (as it were) to behold the Salvation of God in the purity of your Do∣ctrine, and the blessed example of a good life, and holy Conversation. For that (as Saint Basil writes in a Letter to his brother Nyssen) is both  and  an honour∣able possession to those which have it, and a delectable Vision to all
 that looke on it.
For my part, I must needs rejoyce, and claime a priviledge therein, when I consider the blessed in∣crease of so choyce a plant, whereof I had the first watering in this Vniversity, when it was but in the budde; though now it beare much fruit, and may be compared to the Rod of Aaron which sent forth ripe Almonds.

We read of Plato, quòd Socrati, illo di∣scipulo, nihil conti∣git foelicius: quòd A∣thenis, illo cive, nihil gloriosius: That no∣thing befell Socrates more fortunate then such a Scholar, nothing be∣fell Athens more glori∣ous then such a member: Let others make what Parallel they please, I thinke my selfe happy in
 your Prosperity, and do wish you strength answe∣rable to your burthen, for the Honour of God, and Comfort of your Bre∣thren; that your Graces may be multiplyed with your Honours; and the Spirit of God doubled u∣pon you, as heretofore upon Elizaeus: that you may be as Napthali satis∣fyed with favours; and with Asher yeelding roy∣all
 dainties, or pleasures for a KING; that you may be as the belo∣ved Disciple, on whose breast JESƲS leaned when he inspired him with his Oracles; or the blessed Apostle, who was a Vessell of Election ad portandum nomen co∣ram Regibus: at least in the words of Homer, —. Deare unto Princes, and
 such as are stiled God's upon earth: studying all∣wayes prodesse quibus datur praeesse, if St Ber∣nard be worth the hea∣ring.
More desires I have of this kind, which I had ra∣ther poure forth in secret, then expose openly.
Tu, quamcunque Deus tibi fortunaverit horam
Gratâ sume manu.

And be pleased to re∣ceive the humble tender of the fruit wee gather de ligno vitae (as Saint Bernard speakes) from the tree of Life in the mid'st of Paradise; though herein I may seeme to bring Apples to Pomona, or as wee have it in the Epigram∣matist Hyblaeis apibus Corfica mel∣la dare.

For I am not asham'd to professe that I wept for joy when I first read your Coronation Ser∣mon, to see how di∣vinely it was perform'd, to the Honour of GOD, the delight of His M A. JESTY, and the Gra∣cious settlement of Church and State in their Anci∣ent, and Fundamentall Government and Splen∣dour,
 the continuance whereof I do heartily pray for, and rest

