



My Lords, Fathers, and Gentlemen,
HOw customary soever amongst Writers, both an∣cient and modern, sacred and profane, the Dedi∣cation of Books hath been, as well sometimes only to desire patronage, as at other times gratefully to acknowledge benefits; yet I do in∣genuously confess, it was nor this, nor that end, nor indeed any private regard whatsoever made me (after some debate with my self) resolve at last upon a Dedicatory Address to the most illu∣strious name of British and Irish Catholiks; that name of names and most glorious of titles, so peculiarly challeng'd and zealously contended for by you, as the proper inhe∣ritance of those in this famous Empire of Great Brittaine that continue in Eccle∣siastical Communion with the Catholick Bishop of old Rome.

What induced me to this Dedication, or rather what required it as a duty of me, was your undenyable concern above others in the subject, or matters treated in this Book, and indeed whole design of it; even that very publick and great concern of yours appearing all along to be so proper, so intrinsick, nay so essen∣tial to the Book it self; and (if I may speake freely) that very concern of yours the most universal and most considerable of any can be thought of at present by you.
To evidence your being every one so concern'd, I think there needs no more than to consider what the said subject is.
It is 1. in general, the old and fatal Controversie, of late again much more unreasonably and vehemently, if not more unhappily too, then at any time before renewed amongst his Majesties Roman Catholick Subjects, especially those of Ecclesiastical Function, about the nature, measures, and obligation of Allegi∣ance due to His Majesty from them in meer temporal things only.
And 2. in particular, it is for one moyety or principal part thereof, the Loyal Formulary of remonstrating, promising, and protesting indispensable Faith and Obedience to our Gracious King Charles the Second, in all civil and temporal tings whatsoever, according to the Laws of the Land, or of His Kingdoms re∣spectively. Which Formulary was first conceived and agreed upon in the Reign of His Majesties Father of glorious Memory, about five and thirty years since, by the Roman Catholicks of England, or at least some leading persons of them; but more lately (viz. after His present Majesties happy Restauration) and more effectually too was espoused by considerable numbers of those of Ireland, for many evident Reasons. The chief Reason was, the rather by that means to induce His Sacred Majesty to command the ceasing of a rigorous persecution, which was then1661. actually on foot in that Kingdom, under the Triumvirat of Sir Maurice Eustace Lord Chancellor, and the Earls of Orrery and Mountrath, against all Roman Catholicks universally, without distinction or exception of any.
After much both private and publick debate about this Formulary in the years 1661, and 1662, it not only was subscribed at several times and places by the pro∣per hands of threescore and ten of their Clergy (whereof a Bishop was one) and a hundred sixty four of their chiefest Lay Nobility, Gentry and Proprietors (whereof one and twenty were Peers, viz. seven Earls, nine Viscounts, and five Barons) but (immediately after the first Subscription at London anno 1661.) was solemnly presented to and graciously accepted by His Majesty. And I suppose they that had any dislike of it in those dayes, were well enough pleased with their shares of the success; which was His Majesties effectual countermand∣ing the winds and tempest of persecution throughout Ireland, and his gracious smiling on the distressed Catholicks, both People and Clergy, of that Island.
This honest Formulary (now commonly called the Irish Remonstrance) so necessarily and piously espoused thus by so many good Patriot-Subscribers, as a conscientious, Christian, full, and satisfactory profession of the duty which by all Laws, divine and humane, they (as well as all other Subjects) owe His Maje∣sty against all pretences of the Pope to the contrary, was even for that very cause (i. e. for being so Christianly honest and sincerely loyal) soon after tra∣duced and impugned by sundry Ecclesiasticks of the Roman Communion, and chiefly by many of those Irish who had received most benefit by it.
These good men were not content by their reproaches and calumnies to make it odious at home, but also dealt so by their disloyal Arts and powerful Friends in other Countries, that they got it to be censur'd and condemn'd in formal terms, as unlawful, detestable, sacrilegious, yea, in effect, as schismatical and he∣retical, by the publick Censures of the Lovain Theological Faculty, and publick Letters also both of the Bruxell-Internuncio's De Vecchii, and Rospigliosi, and of the Roman Cardinals De propaganda Fide, under the presidency of Cardinal Fran∣cis Barbarin himself, though amongst other his many titles at Rome stiled Protector of England.
Having thus gotten the face of Authority on their side, they have not ceased

ever since, for twelve years to the present 1673, but especially these five or six last years have in a most furious manner proceeded even with all the vilest arts of malicious Cabals, Conspiracies, Plots, Libels, and an Impostor Commissary, and a forged Commission, and all the most lying slanders imaginable to persecute and defame the few remaining constant Ecclesiastical Subscribers. They have kept them in continual chace with all the greatest and all the most illegal, most uncanonical extent of an abused Power, with monitories, citations, depositions, excommunications, denunciations, and even publick affixion or posting of them. Of which extremely unjust and scandalous procedures against men no way contu∣macious (as I have sufficiently provedVid. Hiber∣nica Valesii, Tert. Part. & Epist. Prim. ad Haroldum.) there was no cause in nature that ap∣peared, or was pretended, but a manifest design to force them to renounce their Allegiance to the King by retracting their Subscriptions.
When they had found them of proof against these attempts under colour of Law, they broke out into rage, and being now resolv'd to hunt them to death, they left no way untried, direct, indirect, overt, covert of truth and of lies, of force and fraud, of secret machinations and open violence. They laid about them every where, both abroad in other Countries of Europe, and at home in His Majestie's Dominions, being every where back'd with the special authority of the Court of Rome, and even here at London (which may be thought stranger) being assisted by the special ministry of those who pretended still to be neverthe∣less very loyal Subjects to the Crown of England. But no where so effectually as in the Kingdom of Ireland, where His Holiness made thirteen Prelates, viz. four Archbishops and nine Bishops in a very short time1669. 1670. 1671. (that is immediately upon and soon after the Duke of Ormond's removal from the Government of that Kingdom, in that very nick of time and opportunity so long expected, and so passionately desired by them) of meer purpose for that very Apostolical work. So dangerous a thing it is reputed at Rome for the Subjects to give their natural Prince any pledge of their Faith which the Pope cannot undo. It is no less cri∣minal in the esteem of that Court than if the triple Crown it self, and Keys of Heaven, and Peter's Chair, i. e. all the authority of the Holy See, and all the very essentials of the Papacy were invaded by it.
In opposition to this no less persecuted than Loyal Instrument, there was (af∣ter four years consultation) another of quite different words, matter, ends, and consequently fortune, set up by a general consent or rather intrigue of the Adversaries. And this other Instrument is it which at least occasionally makes up the other half of the whole subject of this Book; as it is that which was the Remonstrance, Act of Recognition, or Formulary propounded in, and approved and subscribed by the National Synod or Congregation of the Roman Catholick Clergy both Secular and Regular, Archbishops, Bishops, Provincials of Or∣ders, Vicars General, and other Divines of Ireland, convened at Dublin, and there continued from the eleventh to the twenty fifth of June 1666.
Now this being the onely National Synod or Assembly of Roman-Catholick Ecclesiasticks, that with licence or connivence from the lawful Magistracy, hath been held in any of His Majesties Kingdoms, at any time, since Queen Mary's Reign; Who would have thought but that this singular Grace of His Majesty should have produced and even extorted from them some sutable extraordinary de∣monstration of their Loyalty? It appeared not in their said Remonstrance or For∣mulary; which was so fallacious and delusory, so void of any assurance, or so much as a promise, of that indispensable Obedience and Faith which we owe to His Majesty in all Temporal things according to the Laws of the Land, nay, which was so void of so much as a promise of such Obedience or Faith in any one Tem∣poral thing whatsoever, according to those Laws, that it was in effect little less than an open profession of Disloyalty in the Contrivers of it. And therefore no wonder it was not censur'd or condemn'd, but rather approved and applauded in the Roman Court.
And indeed there was no other to be expected from that Synod. At the ope∣ning whereof it being propounded by a Subscriber of the persecuted Remon∣strance,

and by many clear unanswerable Reasons both urg'd and evinc'd by him, that they should desire His Majesties pardon to the Irish Clergy in general for their guilt, or the guilt of such of them as were obnoxious to the Laws for their carriage in the late Rebellion and Civil Wars (in which even many there present were known to have been deeply engaged) the prevailing Party (for the rest were silent) refus'd not only to ask pardon, but so much as to acknowledge that there was any need of it. From the acknowledgment of which they were so far, as in express words before all publickly to speak and answer, That they knew none at all guilty of any Crime for any thing done in the War. Nay, when His Majesties Lieutenant (the Duke of ORMOND, at that time Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governour of the Kingdom) desired this of them, at least, that they would give His Majesty some assurance of their future obedience, or peaceable demeanour upon any contingence either of Deposition or Excommunication by the Pope, they refused even this, without so much as putting it to the question. It was more indeed than they thought fit to undertake for themselves.
But whatever their thoughts upon that, or any other Subject were, what I am now to re-mind you, is That these two so different Formularies, Remonstrances, or Acts of Recognition (whereof I have given hitherto that brief account which is proper in this place) and all the Disputes concerning the former, and all the Intrigues of the latter, and all the material proper immediate Antecedents, Con∣comitants and Consequents of both are equally the Subject of this present Book. And that both of them equally concern (although with different Aspects) the Roman-Catholick Faith and Professors, especially in these Kingdoms; the former tending directly, yea necessarily to the true advantage of that Religion; but the latter, by no less necessity of evident reason, tending to the great disadvantage, nay to the utter destruction of that which you hold dearer than your lives.
Without peradventure then you are universally so concern'd in the Subject of this Book, as I have said; and not only you, but your Posterity after you, and your Priests and your Nobles, your Gentry and People, your Peace and Quiet, Religion, Estates, Liberty and Lives; in short, all your happiness and being in this World, not to say also in the future.
If any yet doubt of this, I desire him to look back and consider, how many thundering Bulls have been issued from the Roman See, at several times, since the year 1535, some excommunicating, others deposing our Princes, and others even disposing of their Kingdoms, and exposing them as a prey to Forreigners. How many dangerous Invasions from abroad, and rebellious Insurrections at home. How many other treasonable Conspiracies and horrid Plots that followed those Papal sentences. And all the ill success of such unchristian bloody undertakings; the extinction of so many hundred illustrious Families; the desolation of so ma∣ny thousand ancient Houses; the destruction of so many Myriads of poor harm∣less innocent People on every side; and all the unspeakable miseries of the van∣quish'd Party, the pitiful Groans of surviving Heirs, and the penitential Sobs of their dying Fathers, for having, under pretence of Catholick Religion, or for any other cause whatsoever, lifted up an armed hand against their Prince, or his Laws. I am deceived if these be not as many unanswerable demonstrations that you are, without any doubt, so universally and deeply concern'd in that Subject.
Whereunto if the penal Laws be added, what can be desired more to evince, even perceptibly to sense, your great concernment therein? All Roman-Catholicks uni∣versally, without any distinction of Countrey or Degree, or Sex, or Age, Men, Women, Children, from the most illustrious Peer, to the most obscure Plebeian, wheresoever in any of His Majesties Kingdoms or Dominions, even at this present, lie under all the rigorous Sanctions, and all the severe Penalties of so many inca∣pacitating, so many mulctative Laws, nay, and so many sanguinary, which reach even to life in several cases. And your Predecessors, before you, have well nigh a whole Century of years been continually under the smart or apprehension of the severity of them. And so may your Successors, and your Children and Posterity after you, for so long more, if the true causes of Enacting at first those Laws, and

continuing them ever since, be no better considered (i.e. no more narrowly search'd into) nor more effectually regarded by you than they have been by your Fathers, for you, or themselves. But whatever Gods providential care of, or goodness to your Posterity after you may be, I am sure it cannot be denied but all Roman-Catholicks universally now living any where in England, Ireland, or Scot∣land, must, upon due reflection, find themselves highly concern'd in having the Sword-point of those penal Constitutions hanging continually and even perpen∣dicularly over their heads. Do not we all manifestly perceive they are with-held at present from execution, by a very small and weak Thred, not only of one life that is mortal, but even of one will alone, that yet may be alter'd of a sudden upon many occasions which may happen when least expected?
Now seeing you are all every one thus concern'd in those Laws, surely so you must all be in the causes of them, i.e. in those genuine, true, proper and onely causes, which continued, must necessarily continue those very Laws; and which removed, will naturally remove them. But if in those causes your concernment be such, how can it be other, or indeed how can it be any way less in the Subject of this Book? All the several Treatises and Parts thereof, and all the several Re∣lations, Discourses, Disputes, Animadversions therein, occasion'd by either of the two Formularies, drive, ultimately, at a plain and full discovery of those very cau∣ses, and of their continual dependance on your own proper will alone, and how lawfully and justly you may, or rather how strictly you are even by all the known Maxims of Christian Religion, Catholick Faith, and Natural Reason, bound in Conscience to remove them.
Your Concern therefore, above all others in the Subject, being thus at last, clear∣ly manifested, I need no further Apology for the Dedication. A Consecratory Address to you appears now evidently enough to have been required by the Na∣ture of the Work it self, as a necessary Appendage of that real duty which I have endeavoured, to the best of my understanding, all along in this Book to pay the most sacred name of Catholicks. And, in truth, to whom other, than to your selves, ought or could I, upon any sufficient ground, dedicate a Book of so universal and weighty a Concern of yours?
Yet after all I must acknowledge, that besides your propriety in the Subject, I had the current of my own desires, and my own Ideas to exact this Duty. I have, in truth, these many years had continually even passionate desires of some fair opportunity to offer unto you (but with all due submission still) some far∣ther and more particular thoughts relating both to the proper causes and proper remedies of all your foresaid evils. And have at last entertain'd the pleasing Idea of a Dedicatory, as the fairest occasion I could wish to speak directly and imme∣diately, to your selves, all whatever I think to be for your advantage on that Sub∣ject, and sutable to the measures of a Letter; and what I moreover know some others think, who yet have not the courage to speak, or to inform you.
And therefore to pursue my old method (I call it old, having held these 26 years) of delivering my thoughts fully and throughly in all Points which I conceive to be material; though at the same time expecting from some contradi∣ction, and from others worse; but comforting myself nevertheless with the con∣science of very great Truth, with the zeal of your highest advantage, and with the certain expectation that all judicious good men will approve what I shall say, and lay all to heart as they ought; I must now tell you, that if we please to ex∣amine things calmly with unprejudiced reading, and unbyass'd reason, we may find without any peradventure,
I. That the rigour of so many Laws, the severity of so many Edicts, and the cruel execution of both many times against even harmless People of the Roman Communion, have not intentionally or designedly from the beginning aim'd, nor do at present aim so much at the renunciation of any avowed or uncontroverted Articles of that Christian or Catholick Religion you profess, as at the suppression of those Doctrines which many of your selves condemn as Anti-catholick, and

for the prevention of those practises which you all say you abhor as Anti∣christian.
II. That it is neither the number of Sacraments, nor the divine excellency of the Eucharist above the rest either by the real presence in, or Transubstantiation of the Consecrated Host, nor the communion thereof in one kind onely, nor the more holy and strict observance of Confession, nor the ancient practice of Extreme Ʋnction, nor the needless Controversies 'twixt Ʋs and the Protestants (if we un∣derstood one another) about Faith, Justification, Good Works, or those termed Supererogatorie, or about the Invocation of Saints, Veneration of Reliques, Wor∣shipping of Images, Purgatory and Pardons, nor is it the Canon of the Bible, or a Learned Liturgy, or Continency of Priests, and obligation of certain Vows, or holiness of either a Monastick or Cloystered life in a well-ordered Community of devout Regulars, nor is it either a Patriarchical power in the Bishop of Rome over the Western Church, according to the ancient Canons and Customs, or (which is yet somewhat more) an universal Pastorship purely spiritual acknowledg'd in Him such I mean as properly flows from the Celestial power of the two Keyes of Peter, as far as ever it was acknowledged by all or any of the ancient Councils; I say, it is not any of all these Articles or Practises, nor all together (not even join'd with some others, whether of lesser or greater note) that is the grand Rock of scandal, or that hath been, these last Hundred years, the cause of so many Penalties, Mulcts, Incapacities, of shameful Deaths inflicted, and more ignomini∣ous Characters given us.
III. That of our side, the original source of all those evils, and perpetual spring of all other misfortunes and miseries whatsoever of the Roman-Catholicks in England, Ireland, Scotland, at any time since the first change under Henry VIII, hath been a System of Doctrines and Practises, not only quite other than your selves do believe to have been either revealed in Holy Scripture, or delivered by Catholick Tradition, or evidenced by Natural Reason, or so much as defined by the Tridentine Fathers, but also quite contrary to those Doctrines and Practises which are manifestly recommended in the letter, sense, and whole design of the Gospel of Christ, in the writings of his blessed Apostles, in the Commentaries of their holy Successors, in the belief and life of the Christian Church universally for the first Ten Ages thereof, and moreover in the very clearest dictates of Nature it self, whether Christianity be supposed or not.
IV. That of those quite other and quite contrary Doctrines, in the most general terms, without descending to particular applications of them to any one Kingdom or People, &c, the grand Positions are as followeth, viz.
That by divine right, and immediate institution of Christ, the Bishop of Rome is Ʋniversal Monarch and Governour of the World, even with sovereign, indepen∣dent, both spiritual and temporal authority over all Churches, Nations, Empires, King∣doms, States, Principalities; and over all persons, Emperours, Kings, Princes, Pre∣lates, Governours, Priests and People both Orthodox and Heterodox, Christian and Infidel; and in all things and causes whatsoever, as well Temporal and Civil, as Ecclesiastical or Spiritual.
That He hath the absolute power of both Swords given Him.
That He is the Fountain of all Jurisdiction of either kind on Earth, and that whoever derives not from Him, hath none at all, not even any the least Civil or Tem∣poral Jurisdiction.
That He is the onely Supreme Judge of all Persons and Powers, even collectively taken, and in all manner of things divine and humane.
That all humane Creatures are bound under forfeiture of Eternal Salvation to be subject to Him, i. e. to both His Swords.

That He is empowred with lawful Authority, not only to Excommunicate, but to deprive, depose, and dethrone (both sententially and effectually) all Princes, Kings, and Emperours; to translate their Royal Rights, and dispose of their Kingdoms to others, when and how He shall think fit, especially in case either of Apostasie, or He∣resie, or Schism, or breach of Ecclesiastical Immunity, or any publick oppression of the Church or People in their respective, civil, or religious Rights, or even in case of any other enormous publick Sins, nay, in case of only unfitness to govern.
That to this purpose, He hath full Authority, and Plenitude of Apostolical Power, to dispense with Subjects in, and absolve them from, all Oaths of Allegiance, and from the antecedent tyes also of the Laws of God or man, and to set them at full liberty; nay, to command them, under Excommunication, and what other Penalties He please, to raise Arms against their so deposed, or so excommunicated, or otherwise ill-meriting Princes, and to pursue them with Fire and Sword to death, if they resist, or continue their administration, or their claim thereunto against His will.
That He hath likewise power to dispense, not only in all Vows whatsoever made ei∣ther immediately or mediately to God himself, nor only (as hath been now said) in the Oath of Allegiance sworn to the King, but in all other Oaths or Promises un∣der Oath made even to any other man, whatsoever the subject or thing sworn be.
That besides Oaths and Vows, He can dispense in other matters also, even against the Apostles, against the Old Testament, against the Four Evangelists, and (conse∣quently) against the Law of God.
That whoever kills any Prince deposed or excommunicated by Him, or by others deriving power from Him, kills not a lawful Prince, but an usurping Tyrant; a Tyrant at least by Title, if not by Administration too: and therefore cannot be said to mur∣ther the Anointed of God, or even to kill his own Prince.
That whosoever out of pure zeal to the Roman-Church, ventures himself, and dyes in a War against such a Tyrant (i.e. against such a deposed or excommunica∣ted Prince) dyes a true Martyr of Christ, and his Soul flies to Heaven imme∣diately.
That His Holiness may give, and doth well to give, plenary Indulgence of all their sins (a culpa & poena) to all Subjects rebelling and fighting against their Princes when He approves of the War.
That antecedently to any special Judgment, Declaration, or declaratory Sentence pronounced by the Pope, or any other subordinate Judge against any particular person, Heresie does ipso jure both incapacitate to, and deprive of the Crown, and all other, not only royal, but real and personal Rights whatsoever.
That an Heretick possessor, is a manifest Ʋsurper, and a Tyrant also, if the pos∣session be a Kingdom, State, or Principality; and therefore is ipso jure, out-law'd; and that all his People (i. e. all his otherwise reputed Vassals, Tenants, or Subjects) are likewise ipso jure absolved from all Oaths, and all other tyes whatsoever of fidelity or obedience to him.
That he is truly and certainly, and properly an Heretick, who misbelieves, calls in question, or even doubts of any one definition of the Tridentine Council, or of any one that is of meer Papal Constitution, or of any one of those Articles profess'd in Pius Quartus's Creed.
That not only the Pope, but any Patriarch, nay, any inferiour Bishop acknowledg∣ing His Holiness, may (if need be) both excommunicate and depose their own re∣spective Princes, Kings, or Emperours; and may also without their leave or knowledge reverse the Decrees of their Vice-Roys or Lieutenants, and even censure, depose from, and restore again such Lieutenants to their former dignity and charge.
That all Ecclesiasticks whatsoever, both Men and Women, Secular and Regular, Patriarchs, Primas, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Abbesses, Priests, Fryars, Monks, Nus, to the very Porter or Portress of a Cloyster inclusively, nay, to the very Scullion of the Kitchin, and all their Churches, Houses, Lands, Revenues, Goods, and much more all their persons are exempt by the Law of Nature, and Laws of Nations, and those of God in Holy Scripture, both Old and New Testament, and those of men, i. e. of Christian Emperours, Councils and Popes in their respective Institutions and Ca∣nons,

and are indeed universally, perpetually and irrevocably so exempt from all secular, civil and temporal Authority on Earth, whether of States or of Princes, of Kings or of Emperours; and from all their Laws, and all their Commands, that is, from both the directive and coercive virtue of either, or (which is the same thing in ef∣fect) from sin against God, and from punishment by God or man for only transgres∣sing them.
That consequently, if any Church-man should murder his lawful and rightful King, blow up the Parliament, fire, burn and lay waste all the Kingdom; yet he could not be therefore guilty of Treason, or truly called a Traytor against the King, or against the Kingdom, or People, or Laws thereof; no nor could justly be punish'd at all by the secular Magistrate, or Laws of the Land; without special permission from the Pope, or those deriving Authority from Him.
That nevertheless all Clergy-men regular and secular in the World, from the meanest either Accolits or Converts, to the highest Generals of Orders, and greatest Patri∣archs of Nations inclusively, may be out of all Kingdoms, and even contrary to all the Municipal Laws and Oecumenical Canons too, summon'd to Rome by His Holiness; and are bound in Conscience to obey; yea, notwithstanding any command of the King, or supreme temporal Magistrate to the contrary.
That not only the Commands of His Holiness, but those also of His Delegates (for example, the Generals of Orders) are to be in the same manner punctually obey'd by their respective Inferiours, notwithstanding any contradiction of the Laws, or King, or any other; onely the Pope excepted still, who countermands all, both men and Laws at His pleasure.
That He can suspend, correct, alter, and utterly abolish any Imperial, Royal, or Municipal Constitution, Custom, or Law whatsoever, in any State or Kingdom of the World, as He shall think expedient.
That even so He may all Church-Canons of Discipline or Reformation, whether they were made by a Diocesan, or Provincial, or National, or even Oecumenical Synod truly such.
That neither the very Canons of Faith agreed upon by the most truly Oecumenical Council that ever was, or can be, are of any force, if He alone dissent, though otherwise all the Bishops, Priests, Doctors, and People too of the Christian World, every one had unanimously consented to them.
That His Papal Decretals, Constitutions or Bulls, from the instant that they are publish'd or fix'd up in acie Campi Florae, or wherever else He ordains, do according to their tenour presently oblige in Conscience all the Faithful throughout the whole Earth, or such as are respectively concerned.
That He alone hath the absolute power of bestowing all Ecclesiastical Titles, Bene∣fices, Offices, Jurisdictions, Cures, from the Patriarchical to the Parochial; and that being otherwise given than from Him, or assumed otherwise than by His Authority, they are Nullites before God, and ought to be so reputed by all men; and that whoso∣ever denies this to be so, is an Heretick.
That He alone hath likewise the absolute power not of translating only, but of sus∣pending, excommunicating, deposing and degrading all of them, even the very Patri∣archs themselves, without being tyed in such procedure to the formality of Laws or Canons.
That He alone hath power to erect New Bishopricks, unite and divide the Old, give the Pall, priviledge Ʋniversities, create new Religious Orders, multiplies them to what number He please, extinguish them when He will, &c. exempt them, and whom He please besides, from the jurisdiction of Bishops, Ordinaries, and all other Persons and Powers, except from Himself, and His Authority.
That finally He alone is the Vicar of Christ on Earth. And therefore, in the first place, He must have not a Paternal power only, but a Despotical, Princely, and absolute Lordly power in and over the Church Militant, and consequently over all General Councils, to do therein what seems fit to Him: in the second place, His jurisdictional Authority must extend to Heaven and Hell, and Purgatory: thirdly, without any question, He hath a never-failing assistance of the Holy Ghost, so that all His defi∣nitions,

at least in matters of FaithThe Colledge of the French Jesuites a Clermont, in their printed Theses of the 12th of De∣cember 1662, held, That the Pope is Infallible also in matters of Faith.
XIX. Christum nos ita caput agnoscimus, ut illius Regimen dum in Coelos abiit, primum Petro, tum deinde Successo∣ribus commiserit, & eamdem quam habuit Ipse Insallibilitatem concesserit, quoties ex Cathedra loquerentur.
XX. Datur ergo in Ecclesia Romana Controversiarum Fidei Judex Infallibilis, etiam extra Concilium Generale, tum in Questionibus Juris, tum Facti, &c.
Propagnabuntur, Deo Duce & auspice Virgine, in Aula Claromontani Collegii, Societatis Jesu, die xii De∣cembris 1661., are and must be universally and perpetually true and Himself an infallible Judge in them: in the fourth place (which is consequent to the other) He hath owing to Him from all Mortals, such a perfect, nay, such a blind obedience, That if He define Virtue to be Vice, and Vice to be Virtue, they ought to believe Him; and if they do not, they cannot be saved, unless peradventure invincible ignorance excuse them: and lastly, to sum all in a word, He is Dominus Deus noster Papa, our Lord God the Pope, as the GlossatorZenzelinus de Cassanis, in fine Glossae extravag. Cum inter. de verb. signif. of His own Canon Law stiles Him.Astimant Papam esse unum Deum qui habet potestatem omnem in Coelo & in Terra. Johan. Gerson. Tom. ii. circa materiam Excommunicationum & Irregularitat. Consider. 11.
V. That notwithstanding the incredibility of these, and some other such vain Positions, and of all and every of their necessary antecedents and consequents; yet they all, and especially the Monarchical or Despotical, or rather indeed Tyran∣nical (I am sure unreasonable, and very destructive) Powers ascribed in them to the Pope, are every one (with no lower pretence than of Divine Right and Imme∣diate Institution of Christ) maintain'd either in formal or virtual terms (nay in formal the chiefest of them, and such as infer the rest) not only by too many of our most Famous and most Classical AuthorsFor Au∣thors, at this time, Cardi∣nal Peter Ber∣trand onely, who lived 300 years ago, may suf∣fice; whom a numberless number have ever since followed in his pernicious Doctrine, which you may read, Addit. ad Gloss. Extr. unam Sanctum. de Major. & Obed. of all sorts, Canonists, Historians, and Divines, since the Schools began; but also by the far greater authority of the Ro∣man BishopsFor Popes also, in this place, let Boniface VIII. alone suffice, both in his said Extravag. unam San∣ctam; and in many other Decretals, but especially in his famed Letter to Philip Le Bel of France. themselves, since Pope Hildebrand's time. And three only (but wretchedly abused) Texts of the Gospel, viz. Ecce duo gladii, Luc. 22.38. and Quodcunque ligaveris, &c. Mat. 16.19. and Pasce Oves meas, Joan. 21.17. must serve the turn, however against the plain design of the whole Gospel it self, to drive directly by such Positions at the proper scope of the Alcoran, and establish in the Church of Christ a worser Tyranny than that of Mahumetans and Ma∣malukes.
VI. That Cardinal Caesar Baronius (the famous Ecclesiastical Annalist) who seems in truth to have had no other end so much to heart in writing his twelve laborious Tomes, as to heap together how well or ill soever all the Topicks he could imagine for asserting to the Bishops of Rome the foresaid universal Monarchy both in Spirituals and Temporals over the whole Earth; yet fearing his Arguments driving at, and deriving from, or grounding it on a Jus Divinum, or Divine Right, and immediate institution of Christ, would not convince any, labours at last exceedingly (though all in vain) in several of his said Tomes of Annals, to entitle His Holiness at least by Humane Right, or Humane Title (as for Exam∣ple, by Donation or Oblation, or Submission, or Prescription, or by the payment of Peter-pence, or other Tribute, or by Forfeiture, &c, and to entitle Him, I say, on some such meer humane account) to the Supreme Temporal Dominion of all (or I

am sure at least almost all) and every particular Kingdom in Europe (scarce one, if one excepted.Baron. ad an. Christi) Namely, of Arragon97., Portugal1144. & 1179., Castile, yea, all Spain701, & 103.; of Corsica1077., Sardinia1073., Sicily, and so many Provinces in Italy704, 71, 715, 755, 1077, 1133, 1168, 1059, & 1080, &c.; of Provence1081., and Little Britany869. in France; yea also of the whole Kingdom of France782.: and then of Denmark1062., of Saxony782., of Bohemia1073., of Dalmatia1076., of Croatia and1000. Hungary, of Po∣land1013., of Russia1075.; and finally of England740, 775, 847, 1135, 1172. and Ireland1159.. If he has omitted Scotland, his Continuator Bzovius1299., fetches it in. But Baronius himself comprehends it, in Adrian's Bull to King Henry II. in which His Holi∣ness assumes to Himself by humane right, all the Islands in general on which the Sun of Justice, our Saviour Christ, did shine with the glorious beams of his Gospel; besides, out of Europe, he makes the Pope in like manner capable to dispose of the Kingdom of Armenia1197. at the foot of Mount Taurus, in the very Continent of Asia. As for the Eastern and Western Roman Empires, the Pope has dispo∣sed of them by what right He pleased. But for the East and West-Indies, divi∣ded equally betwixt, and bestowed perpetually upon Ferdinand King of Castile, and John King of Portugal, by Alexander VI, in two several Bulls, whereof that to Ferdinand, is datedMay 4. 1443. at Rome, the 4th of May 1443, Baronius could find no pretence at all of humane right or title in the See Apostolical, to either of them; and therefore leaves them at large, together with so many other King∣doms of Asia, Africk, America, and the Terra Australis incognita, to be assert∣ed onely by His jus divinum, or claim of divine right to the whole circumfe∣rence of the Terrestrial Globe, without exception of so much as one single foot of Land.
VII. That for the practises answerable in all respects, not only to those Po∣sitions, but to the Conclusions from them, which I pass over now, though they are no less clearly derivable from those Premises, than properly appliable even to His present MAJESTY, and His present people (as they have, without questi∣on, formerly and frequently de facto been applied to the preceeding Princes and Subjects of England, Ireland, and Scotland) I say, for such practices, which are likewise quite other than any, and quite contrary to all recommended in the Gospel, &c,
There is no need to go so high as Gregory VII, or to any of His Three im∣mediate Succssors, Victor, Ʋrban, and Paschal, who created so much evil to the Roman Empire, and Emperours Henry IV, and Henry V.
Nor even so high as Innocent III's interdicting England near seven years to∣gether, and compelling our King John to that extreme vassalage of kneeling, and pulling off his own Crown from his head, and laying it together with the Royal Scepter, Robe, Sword and Ring at Pandolfo the Legat's feet, at Dover, and receiving them back no sooner than the fifth day, and then onely in farm, and on condition to pay a Thousand Mark a year, and acknowledge for ever both England and Ire∣land Tributary to, and held of the Roman See.
Nor yet so high as Frederick II. Emperour of that name, his Excommunicati∣on and Deposition first by Gregory IX, and then again by Innocent IV, the very original sources of that miserable condition of Italy for so long after, worried by the incredible fury of Guelphs and Gibellines.
No nor so high as the like Thunderbolts of Boniface VIII, against Philip le Bel of France.
Nor even as John XXII, and His two immediate Successors Benedict XII, and Clement VI, their equal rage exprest in the like procedure against the Empe∣rour Lewis of Bavier, for Thirty three years continually, involving the whole Empire in extreme Confusion, Germany in Blood, and Italy in horrible Dis∣orders.
Nor yet so high as Pope Julius II, his armed Thunders against Lewis, XII of France and for his sake against the poor unfortunate John Albret, whom He de∣priv'd

of the Kingdom of Navarre; even those very Thunders which not only so al arm'd, but incens'd the said Lewis, that he stamped his golden Coyn with this inscription against Rome, Perdam Babylonis Nomen.
We need not in truth for instancing even manifoldly those practises go so high as the very lowest of these now related, nor at all further than our own Kings Do∣minions.
Witness in the first place that terrible thundring, that more than excommunica∣ting, more than deposing, nay, more than exposing Bull of Paul IIIDated at Rome at St. Marks, anno 1535, Aug. 29. though not published till Decemb. 1538., in the first year of His Papacy, against Henry VIII, even that extraordinary Bull of this angry Pope, and such a Bull indeed as never was used by His Predecessors, nor imitated by His Successors against any, sayesHist. Conc. Trent. Padre Paulo.
And Pope Pius V, His Declaratory Sentence (in the fifth year of His Pontificat) against Queen Elizabeth, intituled, S. D. N. Pii Papae V. Sententia Declaratoria contra Elizabetham praetensam Angliae Reginam & ei adherentes Haereticos. Qua etiam declarantur absoluti omnes subditi a juramento fidelitatis & quocunque alio debito, & deinceps obedientes Anathemate illaqueanturDated at Rome at St. Peters, in the year of Christ 1569, February 24; but by John Felton so daringly, or rather desperately, fixed on the Bishop of London's Palace-gates in Pauls Church-yard, May 25. 1570..
And the Bull or Breve of Gregory XIII, (in the eighth year of his Pontificat) directed thus, Gregorius XIII universis & singulis Archiepiscopis, caeterisque Prae∣latis, nec non Principibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Clero, Nobilibus, & Populis Regni Hiberniae salutem & apostolicam benedictionemDated at Rome, at St. Peters, May 13. 1580., and granting to all the Irish that would join and fight in the Rebellion of the Fitz-Geralds of Desmond against Queen Elizabeth, even the same plenary pardon and remission of all their sins, which is granted to those engaged in a Holy War against the Turk,Dated at Rome at St. Peters under the Fishers Ring, April 18. 1600. or other infidel possessors of the Holy Land.
And that other of Clement VIII, (and of His Papacy the ninth year) to the same purpose, i. e. of the like tenour and direction to the Irish Nation in gene∣ral, animating them to join unanimously in Tyr-Oen's Rebellion against the self-same heretical Queen (as they call'd her) not to mention here any way His Breve to Tyr-Owen himselfDated in January the said year of His Pope∣dom, but of Christ 1601..
And the Theological Judgment of the two famous Universities of Castile, Sala∣manca and ValladolidThe for∣mer at Sala∣manca, dated the second of February 1603. (albeit the Jesuits Colledge there begun, and Signed it before on the seventh of March 1602.) the latter dated at Valadolid the eighth of March 1603., both justifying the lawfulness of Tyr-Oen and his As∣sociates, their taking Arms against the Queen, and condemning as guilty of mor∣tal sin, all the other Roman-Catholick Irish that obeyed the Queen, and fought against them for Her Majesty.
And the two several Breves of Paul V.The first dated at St. Marks in Rome, sub an∣nulo Piscatoris. x. Cal. Octob. 1606, and the second next year after (which was the third of his Papacy) dated likewise there at St. Marks on the 23d of August., in the second and third year of His Papacy, and both Breves directed to the Catholicks of England against the Oath of Allegiance made by King James in Parliament a little time before.
And lastly, the other two several Breves of Ʋrban VIIIAnd that dated at St. Peters at Rome, under the Signet of the Fisher, May 30. 1626., whereof one was in like manner to the Catholicks of England, exhorting them to lose their lives, ra∣ther than be drawn to take (noxium illud & illicitum Anglicanae fidelitatis Jura∣mentum, quo non solum id agitur, ut fides Regi servetur, sed ut sacrum universae Ecclesiae sceptrum eripiatur Vicariis Dei omnipotentis, &c.) that pernicious and unlawful Oath of Allegiance of England, which His Predecessor of happy memory Paul V, had condemned as such. The other was that Bull or Breve of Plenary In∣dulgenceDated 1643. May 25., given yet more lately to all the Roman-Catholicks of Ireland, who had join'd in the Rebellion there begun in the year 1641, even that very Bull I mean, which the Person of Quality objects in his Answer to P. W.

Besides all these Publick Instruments (and many more I omit) of Paper and Parchment, and Hands and Seals, which are not denied, nor can be on any suffici∣ent ground, witness in the second place all the no less unchristian, than unhappy effects of these very Bulls, Breves, Judgments and Indulgences.
Particularly witness first the Rebellion of the Lincolnshire Twenty thousand men under that sturdy Monk Doctor Mackerel, alias Captain Cobler; and imme∣diately after their suppression, the much more terrible Insurrection of Forty thousand Yorkshire, and other Northern men, formed into a complete Army, and even provided with a Train of Artillery, calling themselves the Holy and Blessed Pilgrimage: or, the Pilgrimage of Grace; and both Rebellions raised on pretence of Religion against Henry VIIITwo Rebellions in the year 1537. against Henry VIII. Two more against King Edward VI. Several other in England and Ireland against Q. Elizabeth., in the year 1537.
Next, those other two great Bodies of Northern and Western Roman-Catho∣lick Zealots, against his son King Edward VI; and the latter marching into the Field with a Crucifix under a Canopy, which instead of an Altar was set in a Cart accompanied with Crosses and Candlesticks, and Banners, and Holy Bread, and Holy Water, &c.
Then the unfortunate Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, with all their Adherents, drawn so temerariously into the Field at Cliflord Moore (not far from Wetherby in the West-riding of Yorkshire) against their lawful Queen Eliza∣beth.
Then the Earls of Desmond, Tyr-Oen, Tyrconnel, the Viscount Baltinglasse, O Docharty, and so many other Septs and Names as at several times Rebelled against Her in Ireland, and from first to last continued there a long and doubtful War against Her.
Then the Invincible ArmadaSpanish Invasion 1588., or Spanish Invasion, in the memorable year 1588; besides those more private Plots of Parry, Babington, Savage, Cullen, Lopez, Squire, York, and others, to take away Her Life by Sword or Poyson.
Then against King James, not only in ScotlandThe armed Con∣federacy of several Earls in the year 1592., (and while He was only King of Scotland) the armed Confederacy of the Earls of Montrosse, Bothwell, Crawford, Arrol, Huntley, Anguss, the Lairds of Kinfawns, of Fintrie, and others, in the year 1592, by the advice, and at the sollicitation of the Jesuits, Hay, Creighton, Abircrumby, Tyrie, &c; but in EnglandGun∣powder-Treason, Nov. 5. 1605., (after coming to that Crown also) both against Him, and all the Three Estates of that Kingdom in Par∣liament assembled) the most Execrable design of the Powder-plt Traytors on the Fifth of November 1605; besides other Designs, and less famed Contrivances formerly both in England and Scotland against His own Person, Liberty and Life.
Lastly, Under King Charles I, of Glorious Memory, the Universal Rebellion or Insurrection (which you please to call it) of all the Roman-Catholicks of Ire∣landThe Irish Rebelli∣on, 1641., a very few excepted, against His said Maiesties Laws, Authority, and Deputies of that Kingdom in 1641, their Confederacy formed, and War continu∣ed by them for so many years after, and even Two several PeacesThe first Peace, in the year 1646, and the second, in the year 1648., with His Majesties LORD LIEUTENANT in that interim, so scandalously viola∣ted by the prevailing Party amongst them.
To all which matters of Fact of both kinds relating only to the proper, and even latter, as well affairs as times of these Kingdoms of England, Ireland, and Scotland, if we please to add the strictest Oath of Fidelity that can be imagi∣ned, which all even our own Archbishops, Bishops and Abbots do and must take at their Consecration (that I may pass over now in silence not only the other Oath, which all Beneficed Church-men whatsoever that have Collation or Insti∣tution by Bull from His Holiness, nay, all graduated Lawyers and Physitians do likewise take, but also the false and yet both practical and general interpretation of the solemn vow of Obedience which all even our very Regulars do make) there can be nothing more desired, to shew, That we need not go higher up than our own Dayes and our Fathers; nor farther off, than the peculiar Concerns of these very Nations, to instance both manifestly and abundantly such practises as in

all respects are answerable to the very worst of those Principles to which they relate.
VIII. That notwithstanding the great multitude of Roman-Catholick Wri∣ters, and greater authority of other Patrons of the same Church (viz. the Ro∣man Bishops themselves commonly these last 600 years) maintaining even the very highest Enormities of the now related both Principles and Practises; yet even continually since the very first time, that any  in those Principles, or any law∣fulness in those Practices hath been asserted, either by Pope Hildebrand Himself, or whoever else indoctrinated Him, there have been of the other side, and of the same Church, as there are even at this present day, many Thousands or the most Learn∣ed, most Zealous, most Godly Prelates and Priests, and Doctors, besides Laicks, who have cryed them down as not only false, wicked, impious, heretical, unchri∣stian, but as absolutely tyrannical, and as plainly destructive of all Government and Laws, and of all Property and Peace, and of all whatsoever is or can be the felicity or comfort or even freedom of the children of men.
This hath sufficiently appear'd in the mighty oppositions made as well from the Pulpit, and by Writing, as by Arms, in all Countries of Europe, to so many fulminating, so many King-deposing pretended universal Monarchs of the World in all things both Spiritual and Temporal, to these only Vicars of Christ on earth, to these onely infallible Judges of his Faith. Witness the Concordates of Ger∣many, the Sicilian Monarchy, the Pragmatical Sanction of France, the Laws of Provisors and Premunire in England and Ireland, and the two Oecumenical, or at least Occidental Councils of Constance and Basil, and many more National Sy∣nods both before and after them, held some in Italy, others in Germany and others in France, and held in plain contradiction to those high claims and usurpations. Witness also of very late dayes the Third Estate of France, in the General As∣semblyJan. 1614/5. of the Three Estates held under Lewis XIII, Jan. 1614/3, yea, not∣withstanding Cardinal Perron's Oratory;) and of later yet, all the eight Uni∣versities of that Kingdom in their sentence of Sanctarellus1626., ann. 1626. and of others too before and after; besides the known practice all along of their Parliaments: and st of all the Theological Faculty of Sorbon, and the rest of the Paris1663. Divines in the year 1663, May 8. headed by the Archbishop of that See, and presenting their si Declaration against the Pope to the present French Monarch Lewis XIII. All which are certainly manifold, clear undeniable de∣monstrations of what I said immediately before, viz. How of the fame Roman-Ca∣tholick Church, or Faith and Communion, there have been all alone, as there are at this present, many Thousands of the most Learned, Zealous;  Godly , Priests, and Doctors, as well as Laicks, who never approved of the foresaid either Pra∣ctices or Principles; but alwayes reproved, condemned, abhorred, detested; and pro∣tested against them both, as not only heretical, but tyrannical, &c.
IX. That consequently since the owning of such intollerable Maximes, and wicked Actions, or the not disowning of them, cannot be justly said to be any of the peculiar Notes, or characteristical Marks of a Roman-Catholick in general, but only of a certain Sect or  or Party amongst them, whom some call Papalins, others Puritan Papists, and others Popish-Recusanta: and since none of all the undoubted either Articles or, Ri which all Roman-Catholicks universally without any distinction of Party or Faction do and must espouse, have been hitherto repu∣ted, accused or suspected of being (in themselves abstractedly and purely taken) in any manner dangerous to any Government Temporal or Spiritual, or to any persons either of Princes or Subjects, or to the property or liberty of any Man or Woman, or to the peace or quie, or security or conte f any humane Crea∣ture, however in the mean  al, or some of them, do or may seem erro∣neous to the learned  Protestants: and further since King Henry VIII; and the Protestant  Parliament of England, Ireland, and Scotland af∣ter him; a  one  could not  throughly understand both these

things which I have now mention'd, so on the other hand they could not but ob∣serve, how ever since the Oath of Supremacy (though framed only by Roman-Catholick Bishops, Abbots, and Doctors of the English Nation, and defended by the PrincipalBishop Gardier in his Book de ea Obedien∣; and Bi∣shop or in his Preface before it. of the same) occasioned the first Separation or Schism amongst the Subjects of England and Ireland, the far greater part of such as con∣tinued in the Communion of the Roman Church, did seem also to adhere to the foresaid dangerous Doctrines and Practises (i. e. to all the pretenses and actings of the Roman Court) forasmuch as they generally refus'd to disown them, either by that Oath of Supremacy, or by any other: and moreover, by consequence, since the same Princes and Parliaments could not but manifestly discern all their own very being, as also that of all the People under their Government to be sin∣gularly marked out, and even devoted to utter extirpation, by a party of men so madly principled, and furiously bent, living amongst them: out of all that has been said, it must follow, That the onely original, and the onely true principal causes which moved them to proceed with so much severity of Laws, Proclamati∣ons and Executions against all Roman-Catholicks in general of these Dominions, could be no other of our side, than our Fathers, and our own very great neglect and folly, or contempt, and wilfulness, not to disown and renounce for ever pub∣lickly, as we ought, all such whatsoever wicked Positions and Practises; nor any other indeed of their side, than their firm persuations of our being therefore, so desperately both principled and inclined, nay, resolved also, and ready to give the greatest possible evidences of fiery Zeal whensoever the Commands of His Holi∣ness from abroad shall meet with a fair opportunity at home.
X. That it is unreasonable to think, and incredible to believe, That so many judicious Princes, Parliaments, and Convocations, who had themselves gone so far, and ventured so much, as they did, only because they would not suffer them∣selves, or the Protestant people govern'd by them, to be imposed on against their own reason, in matters of Divine Belief, Rites, &c, should at the same time be so concerned to impose on others in the like (i. e. in Spiritual matters purely such, in those, I mean, of Religion and Rites, no way intrenching on the Jurisdiction, or other Temporal or Spiritual Concern, either of King or Bishop, or other Subject whatsoever) as to Enact Laws of so many grievous punishments, yea, of Death it self in some cases, of meer purpose to extort from them a complyance or submissi∣on in such matters. It is no to be believed, that they would Enact those Laws against their own flesh and blood, and some their nearest Relations too, only for not renouncing such harmless and meer Religious Tenets or Rites which all their Predecessors before them had for so many Ages held without disturbance to the Publick, or inconvenience to private Persons, or hindrance to Virtue, or counte∣nance to Vice, if the testimony of all Christendome for so long time be of any weight; and to Enact those Laws intentionally or designedly against those things which at the very worst in all possible and conditional Contingencies, are but er∣roneous Tenets, and insignificant unprofitable Rites, not otherwise at all noxious to humane Society; and then also and there to Enact those penal Laws where at the same time, the Lawmakers could not but have continually before their eyes all those beforemention'd Positions and Practises, which they could not but judge to be indeed of the greatest Danger, Insolence, Pride, Injustice, Usurpation, Tyran∣ny and Cruelty imaginable; even those very Positions and Practises which they knew to threaten themselves above others most particularly, and which they saw themselves Ten thousand times more concern'd to persecute, than any pure Reli∣gious Rites or Articles; nay, which they also knew to be such, as even accord∣ing to the judgment of the greater and sounder part of the Roman-Catholicks themselves abroad in other parts of the World, did of their own nature require all the severity of Laws, and all the anger of Men, to prosecute them. I am sure the Third Estate of the Roman Catholicks of France anno 1514/1. did think so when they desired it should be made a fundamental Law of FRANCE, to be kept and known by all men, That the King being acknowledged Head in his

Dominions, holding his Crown and his Authority only from God, there is no power on earth whatever, Spiritual or Temporal, that hath any right over his Kingdom, either to depose our Kings, or dispense with, or absolve their Subjects from the fi∣delity and obedience which they owe to their Soveraign, for any cause or pretence whatsoever. That all his Subjects, of what quality or condition soever, shall keep this Law as holy, true, and agreeable to God's Word, without any distinction, equivocation, or limitation whatsoever; which shall be sworn and signed by all the Deputies of Estates, and henceforward by all who have any Benefice or Office in the Kingdom, before they enter upon such Benefice or Office; and that all Tutors, Masters, Regents, Doctors, and Preachers shall teach and publish, that the con∣trary Opinion, viz. That it is lawful to kill and depose our Kings, to rebel and rise up against them, and shake off our Obedience to them, upon any occasion what∣ever, is impious, detestable, quite contrary to Truth, and the establishment of the State of France, which immediately depends upon God only. That all Books teach∣ing these false and wicked Opinions, shall be held as seditious and damnable: All Strangers who write and publish them shall be look'd upon as sworn enemies to the Crown: and that all Subjects of His Majesty, of what quality and condition so∣ever, who favour them, shall be accounted as Rebels, Violators of the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and Traytors against the King, &c.
And I am sure also, That all the Parliaments and Universities of the same Kingdom did likewise think and believe so, when at several times they proceed∣ed with so much severity in their censures against so many inconsiderate Writers, that maintain'd the Papal vain pretences of Authority to depose Kings, and ex∣empt their Subjects from the obedience due to them.
But to say nothing at present of the many several Arrests of the French Parliaments on this subject, and speak only of their University Censures; how smart these were in general, the Universities of Paris,1626 4. April. and Caen,7. May. and Rheims,18. May. and Tholouze23. May. and Poitiers,26. June. and Valence,14. July. and Burdeaux,16. July. and Bourges,25. Novem∣ber. sufficiently tell us in their special Censures (anno 1626.) against the Jesuit Sanctarellus in particular, i. e. against the Doctrine of such a power in the Pope, asserted by him the said Sanctarellus in his Treatise of Heresie, Schism, Apostasie, &c. The first of them, viz. the University of Paris, finding in the said Book this Assertion, That the Pope may with temporal punishments chastise Kings and Princes, depose, and deprive them of their Estates and Kingdoms for the crime of Heresie, &c. condemn'd it in formal words, as new, false, erroneous, contrary to the Law of God, rendring odious the Papal Dignity, opening a gap to Schism, derogative to the Soveraign Authority of Kings, which depends on God alone, retarding the conversion of Infidels, and Here∣tical Princes, disturbing the publick peace, tending to the ruine of Kingdoms and Republicks, diverting Subjects from the obedience due to their Soveraigns, and pre∣cipitating them into faction, rebellion, sedition, and even to commit Particides on the sacred Persons of their Princes. And the other seven Universities, were not much behind; for they also every one condemn'd it as false, erroneous, con∣trary to the Word of God, pernicious, seditious, and detestable.
XI. That if any shall object those penal Statutes, which may perhaps be thought by some to have all their quarrel, and bend all their force, and level all the rigor of their Sanctions, against some harmless Doctrines and practises (whether in themselves otherwise true or false, good or bad) I say against the meer spiritual, meer sacramental rites of our Religious worship of God, and our Belief of meer supernatural operations following, as for example against our Doctrines of the Consecration and Transubstantiation, and our practice withall of the adora∣tion of the Host, which this present Parliament at Westminster in their late Act against Popish Recusants may be thought by some to make the principal mark whereat all the arrows of disfavour must now be shot: the answer is both conse∣quential and clear, viz. That the Law-makers perswading themselves, 1. that the Roman Catholicks in general of these Kingdoms, both Ecclesiasticks and

Laicks, had alwayes hitherto since the schism either out of ignorance and blind zeal, or a mistaken interest, or irrational fear refused, or at least declined to disown by any sufficient publick instrument the foresaid Anti-catholick Positions and Practises, which maintain the Popes pretences of all Supreme both Spiritual and Temporal Dominion, Jurisdiction, Authority, Power, Monarchy and Tyranny, &c, 2. That their Missionaries, i e. their Priests not only day and night labour, to make new Proselytes, but also to infuse into as many of them and of their other Penitents as they think fit, all their own Principles of Equi∣vocation and mental Reservation in swearing any Oath even of Allegiance or Su∣premacy to the King, and forswearing any thing or doctrine whatsoever, except only those Articles which by the indispensable condition of their communion they may not dissemble upon Oath, 3. That the Tenet of Transubstantiation is one of those Articles; therefore to discover by this (however otherwise in it self a very harmless Criterium) the mischief which they conceive to go along with it thorough the folly of Roman Catholicks in these Dominions, they make it the test of discriminating the Loyally principled Protestant from the dis∣loyal and dissembling Papist. Which otherwise they would not have done if the Romanists themselves in general, who are Subjects to our Gracious King, had by any sufficient Test distinguished amongst themselves, and thereby convinced the Parliament, and all other Protestant people of his Majesties Kingdoms, that the belief of Transubstantiation amongst English, Irish, and Scottish Catho∣licks, is no more a Sign or an Argument of a Puritan Papist, than it is at pre∣sent amongst the French.
XII. That we have no cause to wonder at the Protestants Jealousie of us, when they see all the three several Tests, hitherto made use of for trying the judgment or affection of Roman Catholicks in these Kingdoms, in Relation to the Papal pretences of one side, and the Royal rights of the other, I mean the Oath of Supremacy first, the Oath of Allegiance next, and last of all that which I call the Loyal Formulary or the Irish Remonstrance of the year 1661, even all three one after another to have been with so much rashness and wilfulness, and so much vehemency and obstinacy declined, opposed, traduced, and rejected amongst them: albeit no other Authority or power, not even by the Oath of SupremacyArt. 37. of the Church of England: And Admoni∣tion after the Injunctions of Queen ELIZABETH. it self, be attributed to the King, save only Civil or that of the Sword; nor any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power be denied therein to the Pope, save only that which the general Council of Ephesus,In the year 431. under Theo∣dosius the Younger, in the Case of the Cyprian Bishops, and the next Oecumeni∣cal Synod of Chalcedon,In the year 451, Can. 28. under the good Emperour Martianus, in the case of Anatolius Patriarch of Constantinople, and the two hundred and seventeen Bishops of AfrickIn the year 419. (whereof Saint Augustine was one) both in their Canons and Letters too, in the Case of Apiarius, denyed unto the Roman Bishops of their time: and albeit the Oath of Allegiance was of meer purpose framed only to distinguish 'twixt the Loyal and disloyal Catholicks, or the honest and Loyal party of them, from those of the Powder-Treason Principles; and al∣beit the Remonstrance of 1661, was framed only at first by some well mean∣ing, discreet, and learned Roman Catholicks of the English Nation, and was now lately signed by so many and such persons of the Irish Nation as we have seen before; and was so far from entrenching on the Catholick Faith, or Ca∣nons, or Truth, or Justice in any point, that saving all these it might have been much more home than it is (though indeed as from well meaning honest men it be home enough;) nay, and albeit neither of these two later Tests, (the Oath of Allegiance or the Irish Remonstrance) promiseth to the King any other than meer Civil obedience, and this obedience too in meer civil or temporal Affairs only, according to the Laws of the Land, nor denyes any canonical obedience to the Pope in either Spiritual or Ecclesiastical matters purely such, nor indeed in any matter at all, wherein the Canons of the Catholick Church impower his Holiness, and wherein his Key does not manifestly err.

How much more may it provoke them, to see the few Ecclesiastical approvers of the said Tests (especially of either of these two last) to have been therefore persecu∣ted, amongst and by the foresaid generality of British and Irish Catholicks? yea to have been look'd upon as Outcasts, Excommunicants, Schismaticks, Hereticks, and what not? And that excellent man, that most loyal and learned English Monk, Father Thomas Preston, for having formerly (both under his own name and that of Roger Widrington) so incomparably defended the foresaid Oath of Al∣legiance, to have been forced, nay content and glad at last to shelter himself in aIn the Clink at Lon∣don. prison, from the furious persecution of the Opposers? And after him so lately again, Father Peter Walsh, of Saint Francis's Order, only for having promoted the said Loyal Irish Formulary of 1661, and for having Subscribed it himself, and refused to retract his Subscription, to have been reduced to a far worse condition than Preston, even that of a Bannito or an Out-lawed man, by publick denunciation and affxion of him as an excommunicate person; to be shun'd by all former Acquaintance, except a very few, and to be left alone at last for the matter, one single person to maintain the justice of that Formulary, and of his own defence, and cause, and carriage all along, and consequently to grapple with a numberless number of subtle and powerful, and implacable Adversaries?
How much more to see so many Books of Roman Catholick Doctors, Italian, Spanish, German, Dutch, Candian, English, of Bellarmine, and Becan, and Suarez, and Singleton, and Sculkenius, and Tortus, and Eudamon Johannes, and Gretser, and Parsons, and Fitzherbert, &c, to have been writ∣ten, printed, and published against the foresaid Oath of Allegiance, enacted by King James? And amongst the generality of the Roman Catholick Readers, so many practical Students to have been indoctrinated by those very Books or some of them? Although Books in truth wholly composed of lying Sophistry, i.e. of very false Doctrines in point of Religion, and very treasonable and pernicious in point of subjection; as it hath been sufficiently proved concerning all the above mentioned Doctors, by the foresaid indefatigable Writer Thomas Preston, who has not left his Antagonists either place or possibility of saying a word to his last Pieces, wherewith he so incomparably baffled all their Answers, Replies, Rejoinders, &c.
How much more after all this, and even since his present Majesties Restauration, to see so much wrath and rage against so innocent a Formulary of their own, and of professing Allegiance in meer temporal things only? So many forreign Cen∣sures of Divines, and forreign Letters of Inter-Nuncio's and Cardinals, to have been procured? And so many forreign both Citations and Excommunications to have been issued forth against the Subscribers of it, with professed design both to suppress it utterly, and either to silence them eternally, or to destroy them for subscribing it; yea so many Missionaries to have been employed, and Commissaries authorized? and for a dead lift, and when opportunity served, at last in the year 1669 (besides Provincials instituted, and Vicars Apostolical made) even so many Bishops and Archbishops on a sudden to have been created in Ireland by his Holiness for that end chiefly? And all this strange and late procedure against so harmless a profession of Allegiance to have been hitherto look'd upon by the generality of British and Irish Catholicks (I mean by such of them as knew thereof) not only with indifferent eyes and thoughts, but by the far greater part of them received with complacency, and by all (for ought appears) submitted unto with a perfect resignation of their Souls to the good pleasure of his Holiness and his Ministers?
I say, it is not to be imagined that all these matters concerning those three several Tests, one after another, should have been and happened thus, even publickly before the Sun, and to the full Knowledge not of Catho∣licks onely, but of Protestants; but it must of necessity give very much ground to the more considering persons amongst the same Protestants, to perswade themselves, that however in our neighbouring Catholick Kingdoms the Article of Transubstantiation, and the Doctrine of the Bishop of Rome's universal Mo∣narchy, or of his both spiritual and temporal supreme Jurisdiction, do not

walk hand in hand together; yet amongst the generality of Roman Catholicks in these Nations, it hath been otherwise continually these last hundred years, and is at present; whether in the mean time this proceed out of Ignorance, or Interest, or both.
XIII. That thus at last, the only true both original and continual causes on our side of all the severe Laws, and of all the other grievous misfortunes and miseries, past and present, which we complain of and groan under, as peculiar to the Professors of the Roman Catholick Religion in these Nation, appearing to be, and really being such as I have hitherto discoursed; none can be so short sighted, or so unapprehensive, as not without further discourse to un∣derstand likewise the only Christian, and proper efficacious remedy of all the said evils; for what I mean concerns the future, and our own endeavours, and concurrence with God and man to help our selves. For certainly nothing can be more obvious to reason, than that since our own, either formal or virtual, express or tacit owning of so many uncatholick Positions, and so many unchri∣stian practises (by our continual refusing to disown them, or either of them, in any sufficient manner, or as we ought by any proper Test) hath been of our side hitherto the only immediate cause of all our woes, and especially of all those legal Sanctions, which upon due reflection do without doubt render our best condition even at present anxious: it must follow, That the only proper, true, and efficacious remedy on our side also, must be at last our own free, and unanimous, and hearty, and conscientious disowning of all and every the said erroneous Positions, and wicked practises, even by such a publick, full, and clear Instrument, or Declaration and Oath as may satisfie all Protestants of our utter Aversness and Enmity to all Rebellious Doctrines and Practises whatsoever; especially to those which tend to the maintaining of any kind of temporal Do∣minion or Jurisdiction, direct or indirect, or even any spiritual Power or Au∣thority, which may have the effect of such temporal, in the Pope or See of Rome, over his Majesty or any of his Majesties Subjects, or at all within the Realms of England, Ireland, or Scotland, or within any of the other Dominions acknowledging his Majesty, even in any case of contingency imaginable, espe∣cially in case of either true or only pretended Apostacy, Heresie, Schism, &c. and such publick Instrument, Declaration, and Oath so full and clear even also against all equivocations, and both mental and vocal evasions whatsoever, to be in your name, together with your Petition most humbly presented to the King and Parliament (some time this present Session) by your sufficient Represen∣tatives, the Roman Catholick Lords, or such of them as will be pleased to take these matters to heart.
XIV. That when in such manner, as you ought, you have performed that duty which you have so long owed to God and the King, to your Country and Religion, to the Christian Church in general and all mankind, and amongst them to your selves and your posterity after you: and when you have thereby done your part to disarm all the anger of the Presses, and to silence all the clamor of Pulpits, and put an effectual stop to a thousand new Invectives, and ten thousand more Sermons, preparing to incense the Protestant people against you; i. e. when by such a publick Instrument, or solemn Declaration, and Religious Oath of the generality of your Nobles, Ecclesiasticks, and Gentry, you shall have quite rendred unsignificant their, I know not which, more affrighting or bewitching, Theme, quite destroyed their Common place, and no less effectu∣ally than clearly answered their only grand Objection against your Liberty, viz. That of The inconsistence of the safety of a Protestant Prince, or State, or Kingdom, or People, with Liberty in the same Dominions given to Roman-Catho∣lick Subjects: and consequently when by doing so, you shall have done your selves all the greatest right you can think of, viz. you shall have conform'd to the inward dictates of a good Conscience, wiped off from your holy Religion

the outward scandal of most wicked Principles, yielded to victorious Truth wheresoever you behold her; and which is and must be consequential, when you shall have thus, after a tedious contest of above a hundred years, advan∣ced on your side, the first considerable step to meet half way the Right Reve∣rend Prelates, and other learned Teachers of the Church of England, in order to a happy reconciliation at last of the remaining differences: then may you confidently expect from their side also (i. e. from his most Gracious Majesty, and the great Wisdom and Piety of both Houses of Parliament) all that ease, relaxation, indulgence, peace, kindness, love which by any men dissenting, yet in so many other points from the Religion established by Law can be in reason expected, even a Repeal at least of all the Sanguinary and Mulctative Laws. For to expect an equality in all priviledges with those that are of the Protestant Church, un∣til God be pleased to bring you nearer them, or them to you, than in a meer profession (how real, and cordial, and universal, or comprehensive soever) of Allegiance to the King in Temporal or Civil Affairs only; I say, till that day come, which we pray for, it will (I believe) seem unreasonable to your selves, to expect that equality with them, which they were not to expect of you, if you had the power in your hands, and they were in your condition. How can they in reason expect so much favour as they now shew us, if they retain any memory of former times, and consider the now prevailing Party amongst us, and Papal Constitutions even at this present governing that Party, at least in relation to such as are reputed Hereticks or Schismaticks by the Consistory at Rome?
XV. That of those Ecclesiasticks, who (as the English Opposers of the Oath of Allegiance, or the Irish Persecutors of the Loyal Remonstrance) shall endea∣vour to persuade your continuing alwayes Rigid Papalins, maugre Heaven and Earth; and to stifle any motion or thought of giving a Protestant Prince or Par∣liament any more satisfaction in the principal point either of Consistence or Incon∣sistence, &c, than your selves or your Predecessors have given hitherto; some of them are naturally averse to the Crown of England, and would be so, though it were as entirely devoted now to the See of Rome as it was at Dover, when King ohn laid it there at the Legat's feet; others are daily expectants of Mitres, and Titles, and Bulls, and Dignities, from that City of Fortune; others have already taken the Formal or Ceremonial possession of their now most Illustrious, and most Reverend Lordships (and these also have already at their Consecration bound them∣selves Liege-men to His Holiness, even by the very strictest OathSee this Oath in the Roman Ponti∣fical of Cle∣ment VIII, anno 1596, Pro universo Orbe Christia∣no, Printed at Antwerp by Plantinian, in the year 1626. It is there pag. 59, 60, 61, under the Title, De Consecratione Electi in Epis∣copum: and again, under the Title De Pallio, pag. 86, 87, and 88. In both places it is word by word in this following manner or Fory.
EGO N. Etus Ecclesiae N. ab ha hora in antea fidelis & obediens, ero heato Petro Apostolo, Sanctaeque Roma∣na Ecclesiae, & Domino nostro, Domino N. Papae N. suisque Successoribus canonicè intrantibus. Non ero in con∣siio, t confe,  facto, ut vitam perdent, aut membrum, seu capiantur ala Captione, aut in eos violenter manus qomodlivet inger, vel injuriae aliquae inferantur, quovis quaesito colore. Consilium verò quod mihi credituri sunt, per , aut nctos suo, s litteras, ad eorum damnum, me sciente, nemini pandam. Papatum Romanum, & Regalia Sancti Petri, adjutor eis ero ad retinendum, & defendendum, salvo meo Ordine, contra omnem hominem. Legatum Apostolicae Sedis in eando & redeundo honorifice tractabo, & in suis necessitatibus adjuvabo. Jura, honores, privilegia, & aucto∣ritatem Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, Domini nostri Papae, & Successorum praedictorum, conservare, defendere, augere, promo∣vere curabo. Neque ero in consilio, vel facto, seu tractatu, in quibus contra ipsum Dominum nostrum, vel eamdem Ro∣manam Ecclesiam, aliqua sinistra, vel praejudicialia personarum, juris, honoris, status, & potestatis eorum machinentur. Et, si talia à quibuscumque tractari, vel procurari novero, impediam hoc pro posse; & quanto citius potero significabo ei∣dem Domino nostro vel alteri, per quem possit ad ipsius notitiam pervenire. Regulas Sanctorum Patrum, decreta, ordina∣tiones seu dispositiones, reservationes, provisimes, & mandata Apostolica, totis viribus observabo, & faciam ab aliis ob∣servari. Hereticos, Schismaticos, & rebelles eidem Domino nostro, vel Successoribus praedictis, pro posse persequar, & im∣pugnabo. Vocatus ad Synodum, veniam, nisi praepeditus fuero canonica praepeditione. Apostolorum limina singulis trienaiis personaliter per meipsum visitabo; & Domino nostro, ac Successoribus praefatis, rationem reddam de toto meo pastorali officio, ac de rebus omnibus ad meae Ecclesiae statum, ad Cleri & populi disciplinam, animarum denique quae meae fidei traditae sunt, salutem, quvis modo pertinentibus: & vicissim mandata Apostolica humiliter recipiam, & quam diligentissine exequar. Quod si legitimo impedimento detentus fuero, praefata omnia adiplebo per certam Nuntium ad hoc speciale mandatum habentem, de grenio mei Capitli, aut alium in dignitate Ecclesistia constitutum, seu alias per∣sonatum Ecclesiasticum habentem; aut, his mihi deficientibus, per Diaesinum Sacerdotem; & Clero dificiente omnino, per aliquem ali Presbyterum Secularem, vel Regularem, spectatae probitatis & religionis, de supradictis omnibus pienè instructum. De hujusmodi autem impedimento docebo per legitimas probationes, ad Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinalem proponentem in Congregatione Sai Concilii, per supradictum Nuntium transmittendas. Possessiones vero ad mensam meam pertinentes non vendam, nec donabo, neque impignorabo; nec de novo infedabo, vel aliquo modo alienabo, etiam cum consensu Capituli Ecclesiae meae, inconsalto Romano Pontifice. Et si ad aliquam alienationem devenero; poeas in quadam super hoc edita Constitutione contentas, eo ipso incurrere volo.
Sic me Deus adjuvet, & haec Sancta Dei Evangelia.
Tum respondet Consecrator, Deo gratias.
Whosovever shall consider all and every the special tyes of this Oath, will not much admire at the carriage either of the Ecclesiastical and National Congregation of the Irish Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiasticks at Waterford in Ireland, under the Presidency of the Papal Nuncio Rinuccini in the year 1646, against the Peace of the same year, or of the other of the Prelates of the said Kingdom after at Jamestown, against the Peace of the year 1648. Both the one and the other, as to their Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots, took the said Oath to the Pope. And none of them took either of the Oaths of Supremacy or Allegiance to the King, or indeed any other at all to Him, save onely that of the Irish Association. Whence moreover is consequent, That we must not wonder, if their Successors, the present Irish Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots of the Roman Communion (besides the Doctors of Divinity, Law and Physick, of the same Communion and Nation, gradua∣ted abroad in Catholick Universities, and consequently tyed to the Pope by another special Oath) follow up∣on occasion the example of their said Predecessors. Nay, there is not so much as an Irish Oath of Association to oblige these latter to acknowledge the King, much less to be true to Him. For we know they condemn not only the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, but even the Irish Remonstrance of the year 1661, and perse∣cute it to boot. Nay, we know they must be perjured to the Pope, if they prove faithful to the King. Whe∣ther so, or no to God? judge you. I am sure, if they were not Traytors in taking the foresaid Oath to His Holiness, they were at least Renouncers of their Allegiance to His Majesty, and of their Obedience also to the Catholick Church. that could be sworn or pen'd, especially being the Pope Himself is the onely Interpreter thereof; and those that now gape for Promotion, must hereafter, when they can catch it, be likewise sworn by the very same Oath, before they be either Installed, or Consecrated) others are not only by the general Vow of Regular Obedience, but either by another special one of meer Blind Obedience, or, at least, special Inter∣pretation of the said General Vow, tyed for ever to Travel into any part of the Earth, and do whatever His Holiness shall command them, without examining the reasons of His Will; and these are they who fith most and best in troubled wa∣ters, nay, who make all Fish that comes to their Net; others are of the Sect of Indifferents, except where their own Individuals are concerned, and in order to some peculiar temporary advantage to themselves; others are meer pretending Zealos, Bigots, Hypocrites, but withall ignorant enough most of them. I have the Charity to think there are others, who either dare do no other for Fear, and that partly excuses; or who want parts or means to know better, which is the onely thing that can make them innocent in this matter.

XVI. That, specially where the matter in it self is so clear and evident, there is but little reason why you should be either persuaded or dissuaded by any of these men. It is not really your salvation they promote, by dissuading or diverting you from such a profession of your Allegiance to the King, as would in part for∣mally, and for the rest virtually and consequentially, renounce, abjure, condemn, abhor, detest, and even in formal terms protest against all those uncatholick Posi∣tions, and unchristian Practises before related. It is indeed their own worldly gain and greatness, that the leading men aim at. They drive at all; and if they thrive, they will have all. If they fail in their great and bold attempt (an attempt for∣sooth pro bono Ecclesiae Dei) yet they know where to live as well for the conve∣niencies of this World, as they do at present with you, and many of them much better. But when that happens, you may starve many of you in a Jayle, and your Posterity after you be for ever miserable, not knowing where to find relief. And by losing on such an account all the lawful comforts of this life (to say no worse) you cannot with any certainty, or even the least intrinsick probability, expect to be therefore crown'd as Martyrs or Confessors in the next. However they may glorifie you, to incite others to do as you have done, you cannot, amidst your Sufferings have the comfort of believing them, or account your selves Martyrs of Christ, or of the Christian, or Catholick Religion; unless you are silly enough to be persuaded, That such Positions and Practises as the whole Christian Church from the beginning, and even for Ten whole Ages after, con∣demned

in effect as erroneous and wicked, be that Righteousness, or part of that Righteousness whereof our Saviour speaks in St. Matthew, declaring there unto us, ThatMat. 5. Blessed are they who suffer persecution for Righteousness sake, because theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
XVII. That no less a man (yea, no less a Saint, a Holy Doctor and Pope too) than Gregory the Great Himself, writing above a Thousand years ago to all the Bishops of IrelandWhe∣ther of Hi∣bernia, as in the common Editions; or of Iberia, as in Rom. Correctan Gratian. de Consecrat. dist. 4. c 144. Ab Antiqua. it matters not; for ei∣ther way it serves to my purpose., on the subject of their being then under a grievous persecution for a less improbable, less reprovable, and I am sure less interested cause, viz, That of the Tria Capitula, relating to the great Council of Chalce∣don, hath spoken as plainly to them, as I do here to you. For in his EpistleL. 2. Re∣gist. Indict. x. Ep. 36. Which Indiction fell into the year of Christ 592. superscribed, Ad universos Episcopos per Hiberniam constitutos in causa Trium Capitulorum, He told those Irish Bishops in plain terms, That they were not to expect in the other life any rewards for their suffering in this for the cause of the Tria Capitula (or for any other unreasonable cause whatsoever, i. e. for any at all which was not of divine Cathloick Religion, but of humane uncatholick Opinion or Faction) not even for suffering so grievous a Persecution as they complain'd of, nay, seem'd also by their Letter to glory in. Prima itaque (sayes he) Epi∣stolae vestrae frons, gravem vos pati persecutionem innotuit. Quae quidem persecutio dum non rationabiliter sutinetur, nequaquam proficit ad salutem. Nam nulli fas est retributionem praemiorum expectare pro culpa. Debetis enim scire, sicut Beatus Cyprianus dixit, quia Martyrem non facit poena sed causa. Dum igitur ita sit, incongruum nimis est, de ea vos quam dicitis persecutione gloriari, per quam vos con∣stat ad aeterna pramia minime provehi. And yet we know that cause of the Tria Capitula, for which those ancient Bishops of Ireland did then suffer, was in it self far more specious, than yours can be in the Case proposed. Nay, we know it was indeed so specious and probable, that they of Ireland then had not only the Bishops of many other Provinces, even of the Roman Empire, concurring with them in opinion; but the chief of all Bishops in his time (that was a little before St. Gregory the Great's Pontificat) even Pope Vigilius of Rome, and Him also extream∣ly persecuted for the same cause, yea buffeted, drag'd, imprisoned at Constantinople &c. by command of the Catholick Emperor JustinianBaron. ad ann. Christ. 552.. Nay, we know it was so specious a Cause, as not only to have in the bottom of it nothing of worldly In∣terest, Dominion, Power, Riches, nothing of Supremacy or Primacy, even Spiri∣tual, much less any thing at all of Rebellion, or Blood, or Wickedness, under any pretence whatsoever. For these Sufferers both pretended and intended the sole ho∣nor of Christ against Nestorianism. And yet we see how severely and positively they (i. e. those ancient Bishops of Ireland or Iberia) were by Gregory the Great dealt with on the point of their suffering persecution for that cause, how specious or probable soever, which a greater body of Christians did condemn, and which all Christians might be sure was no part of those undoubted verities of Religion, for which if occasion were, they were bound to suffer, and suffering and dying so, were also to expect certainly and confidently the reward of the blessed, a Crown of Glory in Heaven.
Whence you may judge what he would say to you at this present, for being led by men who would persuade you still to suffer persecution for a Cause which hath nothing of that speciousness in it; a Cause which hath nothing to make the suf∣ferance for it appear, in any wise rational, to sober men; a Cause that hath not the ancient, nor even the modern Bishops of any one other Kingdom or Province in the World to make it seem the less improbable, no nor any one of those ancient Bishops of Old Rome alone; and yet a Cause that in the very outward Superficies hath nothing clearer than worldly Pomp, Power, Vanity, Pride, Usurpation, Re∣bellion, Treason, Blood, and all kind of Injustice and Vice to brand it; and fi∣nally, by very evident consequence, a Cause that in its own nature conduces to no∣thing (not according to reason can promote any thing) less than the honour of either the Divinity or Humanity of our Saviour Christ against any Sect whatso∣ever.

XVIII. That in the last place, having your eyes thus prepared, all these things being consider'd, you may clearly see thorough that other sly artifice of those self same interested men, whereby they would perswade you at least to so much filial Reverence to the great Father of Christendom, as to acquaint Him first with your present condition; send him a Copy of the publick Instru∣ment you intend to fix upon, with the Reasons also inducing you thereunto; pray His approbation thereof in order to your signing it; and then expect a while his Paternal Advice and Benediction, before you make any further pro∣gress.
You may at the very first hearing of this Proposal plainly discover their de∣sign to be no other, than by such indirect means of cunning delayes under pre∣tence of filial reverence forsooth, to hinder you for ever from professing (at least to any purpose, i. e. in a sufficient manner, or by any sufficient Formula∣ry) that loyal obedience you owe to his Majesty, and to the Laws of your Country in all Affairs of meer temporal concern. This you cannot but judge to be their drift, unless peradventure you think them to be really so frantick as to perswade themselves, That from Julius Caesar, or his Successor Octavian, after the one or the other had by arms and slaughter tyrannically seized the Commonwealth, any one could expect a free and voluntary restitution of the People to their ancient Liberty; or (which is it I mean, and is the more un∣likely of the two) That from Clement the Tenth now sitting in the Chair at Rome, or from his next, or from any other Successor, now after six hundred years of continual usurpation in matters of highest nature, and now also after the Lives of about fourscore Popes, one succeeding another since Hildebrand, or Gregory the Seventh his Papacy, and since the Deposition of the Emperor, Henry the Fourth by Him, in the year of Christ 1077, any one should expect by a paper-Petition, or paper-Address, to obtain the restoring or manumising of the Christian World, Kingdoms, States and Churches, to their native rights and freedom; or that indeed it could be other than ridiculous folly and mad∣ness to expect this. And yet certainly thi must be the natural consequent of the Popes, or present Papal Courts, giving you licence to sign such a publick In∣strument, as will do your selves and Religion right amongst his Majesties Pro∣testant Subjects, or as even amongst your selves will satisfie the more ingenuous, loyal and intelligent Persons.
Thus at last in so many several Paragraphs (in all eighteen) I have given at large, those farther and more particular thoughts of mine relating both to the pro∣per causes and proper remedies of those Evils, which, as you so much complain, lie so heavy on you, as Papists, to wit, the rigorous Sanctions of the penal Laws, &c. And consequently I have given you those conceptions, whereof I said also before, not only That without peradventure you may find them to be right, if you please to examine things calmly with unprejudicd reading, and coolely with unbyassed reason; but also That beside your great concern above others in the peculiar Sub∣ject of the Book, it was my desire to speak directly and immediately to your selves all, that moved me to make this consecratory Address to you, as esteeming the knowledge of such matters to be for your great advantage, and withall con∣sidering a Dedicatory Epistle as the fittest place in which I might present them to your view.
A third motive yet, and this the onely other (if in effect it be another) of this Dedication, was my further desire of choosing you as the fittest Judges of such a Work; seeing you are the only Professors amongst all those of so many different Churches in these Kingdoms, who peculiarly derive your Faith from that of Old Rome, which will still be famous throughout the World. For although I thought it excusable not to importune you for Patronage to a Book whose Nativi∣ty

is, I know not which, very hard or very easie to calculate; nevertheless I held it but reasonable to submit wholly to your judgment the Book it self, and the Sub∣ject therein handled, or the Controversie 'twixt the persecuted Remonstrants of the year 1661 of one side, and their persecuting Antagonists of the other. In which judgment of yours I have the more reason to be concern'd for both, That this, and some other Books or Tracts of mine already printed and publish'd (besides some other well nigh ready for the Press, as well in English, as in Latin) do in that cause wholly decline the Authoritative udgment of His Holiness, and consequently of all His suspected Ministers, and all other suspected Delegates whatsoever: as hold∣ing them in that Controversie not to be competent Judges, but criminal Parties; and knowing that not only in common reason and equity, but also by the express Canons of the Catholick Church, they cannot be Parties and Judges in the same cause with authority to bind others. Therefore until His Holiness, or His subor∣dinate Ministers, Officials, or Delegates under Him, in point of, or in order to such Authoritative Judgment, be pleased to proceed Canonically against me, and other Remonstrants, i. e. to proceed against us in a Regular Judicatory or Tribunal, and in a Regular way, that is, by giving us indifferent Judges, and a place of safety to appear in, and both beyond all exception, according to the Canons of the Univer∣sal Church; I and my said Fellow-sufferers (the few remaining constant Remon∣strators) must be in a high measure concern'd in that other (I think) more ex∣cellent kind of judgment which is common to you, and to all judicious, sober, con∣scientious Men; a judgment not of authority or power to bind others, but of dis∣cretion and reason to direct your selves in order to that opinion you are to hold of, and communication you may have with us, after you have throughly and seri∣ously ponderd the merits of our Cause, and the proceedings of those who would make themselves even against all the Rules of Reason, and all the Canons too of the Christian Church our Authoritative Judges in that very Cause, in which they are the principal Parties. However, though I cannot for my own part, otherwise choose than be somewhat sollicitous for the succes while it is a meer future con∣tingency; yet I hope, and am almost confident, That my integrity and constancy in the Roman-Catholick Religion, shall be vindicated against all Aspersions and Misconstructions, when I Appeal to you for Justification, whose Censure would be the most grievous that can befall me. For in truth I do so Appeal to you in this very passage, most humbly and earnestly demanding of you,
1. Whether in those two grand Controversies, one succeeding another, the for∣mer, that of the Nuncio Rinuccini's Ecclesiastical Censures of Interdict and Ex∣communication in the Kingdom of Irelandan. 1648. against all the Adherers to the Cessation concluded by the Confederate Catholicks with the (then) Baron (now or late Earl) of Inchiquin, who had then declared for the late King; the later of the Remonstrance presented to His Majestyan. 1661/. since His Happy Restauration; in both which I have ever since continually engaged against the Roman Courts de∣signs on the Supreme Temporal power of these Kingdoms, Whether, I say, my Sermons or my Books, my Doctrine or my Practice in the Concerns of either Controversie, can be justly tax'd with so much as one tittle, or one action against that Roman-Catholick Faith which you all together with the Roman-Catholick World abroad believe as necessary to Salvation?
2. Or, seeing there is not so much as any one tittle, or any one action hitherto alledg'd against me as such, other than what is in effect and substance my Asser∣tion or Vindication of the Supreme Temporal Sovereignty of the Crowns of these Kingdoms, i. e. of their being in all Temporals, and all Contingencies what∣soever, independent from any but God alone; and therefore in Temporals no way de∣pendent from the Pope either by divine or humane right; Whether any person may on such ground call in question the sincerity of my believing, or professing as I ought, all the undoubted Articles of the Roman-Catholick Faith?
3. And seeing there was never yet any other matter, not even by my greatest Persecutors at any time, objected, articled, o pretended against me beside that, i. e. besides my former opposing the Nuncio's Censures, and my later promoting

the Remonstrance, and my endeavours in both against the pretences of the Ro∣man Bishops to the Crowns of England, Ireland, Scotland, &c, Whether it may in any wise be said or thought by unbyassed learned men, That I have given any real ground for the vile detraction of those who treat me every way as if I had been a desertor of the Church?
4. Nay, Whether considering first, The nature of those two grand Contro∣versies, wherein I have so freely engaged against all the power of the Roman Court abroad, and all the endeavours of the Nuncio's Party, and Antiremonstrant Cler∣gy at home; secondly, The most grievous, manifold, and continual persecutions I suffered in both Causes, one while by Suspensions and Deprivations, another while by Excommunications, then by Imprisonment in a Forreign Countrey even as far off as Spain, and then again by new Thunders of Ecclesiastical Censures, and by scandalous Declarations, and posting of my Name, besides other frequent enter∣prizes on several occasions against both my Liberty and Life; thirdly, My con∣tinuing constant in both Causes even all along to this very day, even also then (and that not only once happening) when I had no support in this World but my own Conscience of suffering, i. e. my own certain knowledge of my suffering onely for Righteousness sake; nay then also, when some of my chiefest Adversa∣ries laboured with all their powerful malice even here at London to compel me, and spared not to speak openly, that either they would compel me to renounce the Roman-Catholick Church, and declare my self an Heretick, or they would make me submit to the Roman Court in the latter of these two Causes, viz. that of the Loyal Remonstrance; it being the onely matter then prosecuted against me; fourthly, Their failing nevertheless to this present, in obtaining their will of me in either the one or other; Whether, I say, considering all this (whereof, besides many men, I am sure the All-seeing God is witness) it be not more likely, That no kind of prejudice against the Roman-Catholick Faith or Church, but a true and powerful zeal according to knowledge for the primitive Christian purity of both, is it that hath set me against those opinions and practices flowing in the corrupti∣on of latter Ages from the Roman Court, which have shaken Religion, divided Christendom, and brought a scandal upon Faith, as if it were to be supported or advanced by the wrath and rage of men, by Rebellion and Slaughter, by Subver∣sion of Government, and Confusion of the World; so making it a ground of jealousie to Magistrates, and diverting peaceable and charitable Souls from that union which ought to be amongst the Disciples of Christ?
5. Also whether it may not by rational men be at least charitably believed, That I would not so often at several times, and upon several occasions, since first I engag'd in either Controversie, especially in the last, have refused many Preferments in my own Order, have rejected many tempting proffers too even of Episcopal dignity in my own Countrey, have also particularly and lately in the National Synod or Congregation held at Dublin, anno 1666, and that in publick, before all the Fathers, refused to yield by any means to their pressing offer not only of all the best Commendatory Letters that could be drawn on Paper in my behalf both to His Holiness Himself (who then was) and the Cardinal Patron, and the Con∣gregation de Propaganda, and all other Ministers of the Roman Court, as many as were concern'd in the Affairs of Ireland; but also of a yearly and very conside∣rable Salary too by general Applotment, amounting (as they esteemed or com∣puted it) in Three years, to Two thousand pound English money; and in lieu of all these offers, have deliberately chosen to run the manifest hazard of under∣going, and accordingly since to have in very deed undergone all the vexatious in∣famy of Ecclesiastical Censures in my own Church, Order, and Countrey; and all the further Evils not only of some (at least consequential) hardships, but of many black Calumnies, many bitter Reproaches, yea, and some yet more inhu∣mane Machinations of cruel men, even here in England these four last years since 1669, Whether (I say) it may not by rational men be (and be at least charitably) believed, That I would not have rejected freely all those tempting offers, and in lieu of them, voluntarily chosen to lie under all these Sufferings, for any thing

less than the keeping a good Conscience, and the preserving the honour of Chri∣stian Catholicism untainted at least in some Priests and Religious men of the Ro∣man-Catholick Religion in these Nations, and the justifying my self, and those of my way (the few Irish constant Remonstrants, with such others who communi∣cate with them) Loyal Subjects to our Prince the King of England, and the win∣ning also (for the good of Catholicks in general) upon His Majesties Councils, Parliaments, and all good Protestant people, by our peaceable Conversation and Faithfulness amidst all our Sufferings from every side, notwithstanding any diffe∣rence from the Protestant Church in some few Articles of Religion? Whereas such other Church-men of the Roman Communion as by their practises or principles have formerly shewn themselves, and still appear to continue Enemies to the Su∣preme Temporal Government of these Kingdoms, may in all reason expect the se∣verest Laws to be edg'd against them by Authority, under which, it will be sad, to suffer as evil doers.
6. Lastly, Whether it had not been very much for the advantage of Roman-Ca∣tholicks in general, and their Religion, in this Monarchy, That these last hundred years they had been indoctrinated onely, and wholly guided as to their Conscien∣ces, by such Roman-Catholick Priests and Church-men as are of my principles in relation to the Temporal Powers independence from Rome, and the indispensable obedience of Subjects in Civil matters, and both the injustice and invalidity, or nullity of Ecclesiastical Censures pronounced against either Prince or People, or Priests, for maintaining these not onely Rational, but Christian Principles; or asserting any of all their necessary Antecedents, Consequents, or Concomitants?
And now (my Lords, Fathers, and Gentlemen) to your impartial judgment on all and each of these Queries, I do with due submission most heartily and freely appeal; That you may determine (for what concerns you) of the truth or fal∣sity, likelihood or unlikelihood of that worst of Scandals, viz. Desertion of my Order and Religion, wherewith I have been frequently asperst on several occasions, as in former times, even Twenty years ago by some of the Nuncio's Faction, so of late, during all these four last years, by others of the Anti-remonstrants; especially by some Church-men, who so little consider their holy Function, that they seem to have lost all regard to Truth and Honesty, and do not boggle at the shame of being daily found in manifest Forgeries, so they may but do their work to serve them∣selves by it, or to rid out of their way any person who they fear may obstruct their ambition, i. e. their design of confounding all again, if they alone cannot otherwise command all. Onely I shall further beg as to this matter, that before you determine of it, you would be pleased to read over these following Appen∣dages.
First Appendage relating to the Fourth Querie. That in regard of the times, places and occasions I lived in, and employments I had, and Books and persons I conversed with of every side, and my own both curiosity and concern to under∣stand matters aright, and to see into their genuine causes, I may without vanity say of my self, That I have had more than common opportunities to know the Doctrines and Practises of the Roman Court, what they are, and how hurtful, how pernicious to these Kingdoms, and to the Roman-Catholick Religion. And that ever since I came to see into these things, at least ever since I gave my self to a se∣rious and full consideration of those principles and wayes (which was about Twenty seven years since, upon occasion given me by that Faction) I have most heartily abhor'd, and at all times and upon all occasions, protested against them; and the more I have known of them, still the more I have seen cause to detest, and to protest against them, as I do at this day.
Second Appendage relating to the Fifth Querie. That I can, and do appeal to God Himelf, That next after the regard of not wounding mortally my own Conscience by a manifest desertion of Truth, and equivalent profession of such

Errours as I know certainly to be against the Doctrine of the Catholick Church, and Gospel of Christ, the chiefest motive I had for bearing up constantly so long a time against all Censures, Precepts, Monitories, Denunciations, Affixions, Decrees, and other grievous concomitant Persecutions in the often mention'd Cause of the Loyal Formulary, was the regard of not doing you all the Roman-Catholicks of His Majesties Three Kingdoms the greatest injury that I could possibly do you (or perhaps any man of my degree) by confessing the grand Objection against you to be insoluble. For I saw clearly, That if either the temptation of preferment to Offices and Dignities, or the tryal of punishment by Censures and Calumnies, and all their Consequents, at the pleasure of some Grandees at Rome, should have had that influence on me as to make me in effect absolutely to renounce my Alle∣giance to the King, by retracting the Subscription of my hand to that Instrument professing it in meer Temporal things onely, the Argument thence derivable must have been obvious to any judicious knowing Protestant inclin'd to do you a preju∣dice, as soon and as often as the Parliament sate, and were moved in your Con∣cerns. Such an Argument I mean, as urged home by a good Orator, would even before indifferent Judges give much colour to that grand Objection, viz. The in∣consistence in these Nations, 'twixt the safety of a Protestant Government, and the giving of Liberty to Roman-Catholicks, by repealing the penal Laws yet in force against them. In substance it would have been alledg'd, That the Roman-Catho∣licks (at least for the generality of them) would be alwayes (right or wrong) directed by their Priests. That their Priests are most of them on the Popes side in this Controversie. And if any of them be so hardy to oppose his usurpations, there is no trusting of them; for there is no reason to expect that any of them will stand to his principles, and hold out. For Example, they might have instanced in unworthy me, if I had fallen off, after so long, and such manifold tryals of my con∣stancy for Twenty years past, and after so many and so great obligations, to per∣severe until the end of my life.
This, and much more would in all probability (I am sure might in all reason) be alledg'd to make that great Objection hold against you, had I hitherto submit∣ted to the dictates or pleasure of the Roman Court in either Cause. But it is not my business here to open more at large, or press more home this Argument with all the aggravating circumstances, both such as are fresh in memory, and such as might be derived from the memory of former times. My purpose was to hint it onely, as believing this enough to shew you the reasonableness of that second Motive I had for holding out so constantly in such a Cause, and in the very manner I did, all along against so numerous and so dangerous Adversaries; especially see∣ing that very manner of my holding out so, or of defending my self the best I could against them, was, and is authorized not only by the Divine Laws of Nature and Christianity, but also most expresly and clearly by the positive Constitutions of men, even of Roman-Catholicks: viz. the fundamental Laws of England and Ireland (not to speak now of other Catholick Nations of Europe) so many Hundred years since Enacted by the Roman-Catholick Princes and Parliaments of these Kingdoms, against all Forreign Citations, or Summons from a Forreign Pow∣er beyond the Seas; and also the Ecclesiastical Canons of the Catholick Church throughout the World (nay, of the very Papal Canons themselves) forbidding in express terms Judicia ƲltramarinaVid. S. Cyprian. Epist. 55. ibi, Statutum esse omnibus nobis, &c. Concil. Affrican. (Episcop. 217. inter quos Divus Augustinus erat) Can. 92. (relatum pari∣ter in Cad. Can. Eccles. Affric. Can. 125.) & Synod. ad Coelest. Item 3. q. 6. (haecce capita, viz.) Ibi. Ʋltra. Si quis Clericus. Peregrina. Qui crimen. & q. 9. cap. Nec extra. Item cap. Nonnulli de Rescrip. Item Stat. General. Barchinonensia Ord. Min. cap. 6. §. 1. num. 1. & 2. ubi Patres rationem habent illius naturalis Canonum aequitatis., and expresly decreeing against many other special Injustices and Nullities on other grounds in the late procedure against meIf you would see more Quotations both of the Canon and Civil Law against every particular In∣justice committed in Summoning me to appear beyond Seas, and which do justifie in all respects my procedure in not obeying such Summons, you may consult my Latin Epistle to Harold, pag. 6, & 7. besides my Latin Hibernica, Third Part, and you will find a very great abundance of the clearest both Texts and Reasons ima∣ginable..

Of all which manifold Authorities of Reason, Gospel, Humane Laws and Canons, having had sufficient knowledge when I engaged in the Controversie, and more when for so engaging and for that only, I was so strangely prosecuted by Summons, Censures, &c, I thought that even my duty to you, and the regard I was bound to have of your common interest, required of me to make the best use I could of that knowledge in order to your publick good, as well on the one hand to assert your and my both Native and Christian right against them that invaded it by those unlawful proceedings; as also on the other hand to shew at least in one instance the untruness of that Proposition whereof depends, and wherein lies the whole stress of the grand Objection against you; which (if I be not much de∣ceived) is in substance this, viz. That for any Roman-Catholick Priest, holding firmly to all and every the Articles of Faith undoubtedly believed, or at least own'd as such amongst all Roman-Catholicks universally, and observing all other duties re∣quired of him by the Canons received generally in the National Churches of that Re∣ligion, it is impossible to be in all cases or contingencies whatsoever indispensably or unalterably obedient and faithful to a Protestant Prince or Kingdom, or Government, not even in so much as in all meer Civil or Temporal things onely according to the Laws of the Land, especially if the Pope command him to the contrary under pain of Excommunication. Now as I have behaved my self hitherto, I am sure I have ma∣nifestly enough proved the untruth of that Proposition, and by consequence (for as much as pertains to me) have really answer'd the grand Objection deducible from it. And so have not a few other Irish Priests, even all those who together with me suffered very much for many years in the former Cause of the Nunoio, or in this latter of the Remonstrance, or in both, and have not as to either condemn'd or contradicted themselves hitherto by any unworthy submission, though at last compelld to silence, and in other matters forced to desert me, and to submit to their Adversaries. Nor do I at all doubt, but rather am certain there are this day within England above Five hundred Native Priests (beside a great many more in Ireland, however at present weathering out the storm) so fully resolved for the future in their own persons and cases, likewise to disprove that Proposition, and to satisfie the Objection built thereon, That, if His MAJESTY, and both Houses of PARLIAMENT, may be graciously pleased to try them once with an Act of Grace after a hundred years punishment, and to take off, I say not any other Incapacity, but onely that of living in their Native Countrey (that when at home they have satisfied the State, they may not be driven abroad to beg or starve, and be there exposed to all the rage and violence of the Roman Court) they will by a publick Instrument signed under all their hands, declare as amply and clearly, and heartily against all the foresaid new Doctrines and Practises, and all other whatsoever groundless vain pretences of Rome, as I have done, or as that Act shall require; and will be ready to renew that Assurance as oft as shall be re∣quired, and even to expose their Lives (if need be) in defence of it, notwith∣standing any Declarations, Precepts or Censures of the Pope to the con∣trary.
Third Appendage, relating to the Sixth Querie. That I know, and cannot but mind you of what the Roman-Catholicks of these Kingdoms have lost, even since the King's most happy Restauration, by not being advised by Church-men of honest principles, in point of His Majesties independent Power, and the Subjects indispensable Obedience to Him in all Civil or Temporal things, according to the Laws of the Land. They have lost three fair opportunities of being not only ea∣sed of all their pressures from the penal Statutes, but rendred as happy as they could in reason desire, or even wish, under a Protestant King and Govern∣ment.
The first opportunity was offered them in England in the year 1661, when it was earnestly and strongly moved in their behalf in the House of Lords, to Re∣peal the Sanguinary Laws in the first place, and a Hill was drawn up to that pur∣pose.

The second and third were in Ireland; the former in the year 1662, when a discontented Party of the Adventurers and Souldiers there had laid their design for surprizing the King's Castle at Dublin; and the latter in the year 1666, when we were in the first War with Holland, and near to it with France, and the Irish National Congregation of the Roman-Catholick Clergy, was by occasion of that War suffered to convene at Dublin, in order to assure the King of their fidelity. How happy the Roman-Catholicks in general might have been, if they had taken time by the forelock in any of those three opportunities, especially in the first, may be easily understood. And how unhappy their neglect or wilfulness hath proved to themselves, I cannot but with grief of heart consider. The rather, because I was my self the onely man employed first to the Roman-Catholick Clergy both of England and Ireland, on the foresaid occasions, to prepare them against any ob∣struction from themselves of the favours intended towards them; and that no∣thing else was required on the first occasion from those in England, but their being ready to take the Oath of Allegiance onely, as in the Statute 3 Jacobi; His Ma∣jesty being then inclined to have dispens'd with them for the Oath of Supremacy: nor in the second and third occasion was any thing required from those of Ire∣land, more than their Signing the Loyal Remonstrance or Formulary, which had been Sign'd before in the year 1661, by some of their own Ecclesiastical Bre∣thren and so considerable number of their Nobility and Gentry. For my own part, I am morally certain, that if those fair opportunities had not been slighted, or if either the one or the other condition had been embraced, you should not have seen in your dayes any such tryal of men for bearing office, as that you com∣plain of so much now, a renouncing of the Doctrine or Tenet of Transubstanti∣ation, according to the late Act of the Parliament of England. And I am no less certain, that had you hearkned to the advice of any of those many virtuous learn∣ed Church-men amongst you, who have as much true zeal according to knowledge, even for the splendor of Catholick Religion, and as much true reverence for, and obedience to His Holiness, as according to Reason or Christianity they can have, and withall are truly well affected and rightly principled as to that faith and obe∣dience which they and you all owe by the Laws of God and man to the Tempo∣ral Government, you had neither slighted any of those good opportunities, nor neglected to embrace either of those two most reasonable conditions.
Fourth Appendage, but relating to all the Queries generally, though somewhat more particularly to the Fifth. That besides the facilitating all I could, the Re∣peal of penal Statutes, by overthrowing the grand Objection against it, I had no other extrinsick end hitherto in any of the Controversies wherein I am engaged, nor shall (God willing) have at any time hereafter, save onely that which must have been consequential, nay, that which is very well becoming not only a Ro∣man-Catholick Priest and Votary of St. Francis's Order, but any Christian of whatever Church or Profession, viz. the breaking down of so much of that mid∣dle wall of partition between us, which hath separated first the Orient from the Oc∣cident; and then again in the Occident it self hath divided from one another so numerous, flourishing, and conspicuous both Nations and Churches, holding them so long involved in a direful Schism, to the great hurt of Christianity, and to the destruction of so many Souls.
This so great and so desirable a blessing of Peace, and reconciliation of one to another in God by the Cross, and by the breaking down the wall of partition, all enmity being slain on both sides between the Churches, i. e. between the Sons of the Church of England on this side, and those of the Roman-Church on the other, as many at least as are subject to His Majesty, I must confess I have these many years regarded as my chief and ultimate end (howsoever unlikely it seem'd) in this world. To this most desirable end all my Studies, Writings, Elucubrations, and Books, have been principally directed. At this, my Remonstrances, Profes∣sions, Protestations, Renunciations have perpetually aimed. For this I took so much pains, devoured so many labours, underwent so many hazards, and suffered

those well nigh innumerable Evils, whereof I see not even yet either period or measure. And finally, this happy end is it that hath made me (as elsewhere in some other of my Writings, so now in this Epistle) declare so plainly and openly against so many embroiling Positions, notwithstanding they be the Doctrines of a very powerful Faction amongst Roman-Catholick Professors, nay the beloved Maxims of the Roman Court, and its Minion-writers. Whose soever they be, it's clear enough, that of them is built one entire side at least of that middle wall of partitionEphes. 2.14., which to the unspeakable reproach, and further unvaluable hurt of the Christian Church in general, hath so often both formerly and lately engaged (yea, and doth at present engage) People, Nations, Principalities, Republicks, King∣doms, Empires, not only unhappily, but damnably in mortal feuds one against an∣other; but which therefore ought and must for the great end of Peace, amongst the Children of God, be broken down of every side by Him who is our Peace; by Him who not onely in former times (as you read in the Prophet, and Apostle, in IsaiahIsa. 57.19. and inEphes. 2.14, 17. Paul) hath evangelized Peace, Peace the fruit of the lips to them that were far off, and to them that were nigh; but now also at this present, to the now divided Parties, Preaches the same Peace, to the end that the Sons of Peace on each side co-operating, He may again make in himself of twain one new man, so making peace, and reconciling both unto God in one body by the Cross, having stain again the enmity in his own flesh. Oh that we might live to see once that day! That day so fervently, so anxiously beg'd of God by all his Saints! That day so long desired by Princes, expected by Prophets, wished for so passionately by all the Children of God! That day in which there will be neither JewColoss. 3.12. Galat. 3.28., nor Gentile, nor Barbarian, nor Scythian; nor Protestant nor Papist (I mean) nor Reformist nor Romanist; nor any other names or symbols of Discord! That day wherein once more Christ himself will be allColoss. 1.18, 24. Ephes. 5.23., and in all, both head and body, and consequently there shall be one foldJohn 10.16., and one shepherd! Oh blessed day, and blessed eyes that shall behold it! And oh! how willingly, how heartily with all my Soul would I to see that most happy day run into the arms, kiss the hands, embrace the knees, lie down at the feet of those who have bereft me of all things else, and fought my life? How freely, how gladly for that end would I moreover (if they pleased) even appear before them as a Criminal, even in the habit of a publick Penitent, my head co∣vered with Ashes, and my body with Sackcloth; my eyes running down with tears, and my flesh pined away with fasting? How lastly to see that greatest bliss in this life, would I prostrate my self before them on the earth, even without the door and porch of the Church, and with humblest prayer beg admittance, and not only reconciliation, but pardon, where even (I mean) according to my own proper judgment there was no need of it, no fault committed by me to require it?
These have been the wishes, God knows, and this the constant disposition of my Soul these many years. And therefore as an universal condemnation of the new Doctrines to eternal night and silence hath continually appear'd to me no less than necessary of one side for breaking down the middle wall of separation: so amongst the Christian Churches, that blessed, that heavenly reconciliation, union, coalition in the Spirit of God, and Peace of Christ, which is above all sense, hath alwayes been the very ultimate end in this world, that I have propos'd to all my Labours and Sufferings.
As for the rest, I know that how Divine soever the Wishes be, how proper and pure and holy and excellent soever the Means that we employ for attaining them, yet the Success must be in the hand of the Almighty alone, whoWisd. 8. reaching from end to end strongly, and disposing all things sweetly, makes the morning star to arise in his appointed time, and the evening star on the sons of the earth, who2 Cor. 4.6. commands light to shine out of darkness; and who alone with one word of his pleasure, determines the roughest Tempest in the gentlest Calm, Hatred in Love, Schism in Unity, and the bloodiest War in the most blessed Peace, whenColoss. 1.20. he will, and as he will, reconciling all things (whether Terrestrial or Celestial) by the blood of his Cross.

Fifth Appendage, relating also to all the Queries. That notwithstanding any whatsoever excellence of all and every the ends both intrinsick and extrinsick, which I had proposed to my self in the Controversies, yet I have continually shun'd (as I would a rock or a shelve in a Tempest) that other late Doctrine (of those Schoolmen of ours who are called Probablists) which teacheth the sancti∣fying (forsooth) of all wicked means by good intentions. And therefore that, as far as I know my own heart and actions, and the Laws of God or man, I have at no time hitherto been wanting, nor shall hereafter (with the grace of God) be wanting, in any reverence, duty, or obedience, which by Vow or Rule, or Canon or Reason, I do, or may, according to the Faith or Doctrine of the Universal Church, owe either to the most Holy Father the Bishop of Old Rome, or to any other Bishops, or to any other Prelates or Superiours in their respective places, whether Secular or Regular: because doing otherwise, I could not but condemn my self of using evil means to attain or drive at lawful ends, and consequently of being as bad an Interpreter of that saying of our Lord in St. MatthewMatth. 6.22., Si oculus tuus fuerit simplex, totum corpus tuum lucidum erit, as any of the late extrinsick Probablists are. Whereunto also is consequent, That I never at any time hitherto intended, nor shall (I hope, through the same grace of God) for the future wil∣lingly or wittingly intend, either in my Writings, Actions, or Designs, any thing against the Divine Authority of the Catholick Church, or even against the vene∣rable either Majesty or Primacy, or even Power, Authority, and Jurisdiction of the First of Bishops, or First of Apostolical Sees the Roman; I mean not alto∣gether so far as a number of Popes speaking in their own cause, or a company of Schoolmen prepossessed by them, or frighted, or hired, or misled through cor∣ruption and ignorance of the later times, have asserted the former in their Canons, and the other in their speculative Writings; but as far as the Catholick Church in all Ages hath believed or taught, how great soever or whatsoever that Patriarchi∣cal or Jurisdictional power be which she believes, or acknowledges to be in the Roman Archbishop, either from divine Title, or humane onely; nay, which but the National Churches hard by us (though composing her but in part) the Spanish, and the Sicilian, the French and German, the Venetian and the Polish, not∣withstanding they be of strict communion with the Pope, do universally or unani∣mously believe. For I think it too hard a task for any private man, much more for me, to know better what hath been delivered in all former Ages, or is believ∣ed in this present (as an Article or Doctrine of undoubted Faith divine) by the Universal Church of Christ on earth, than may be learned from the unanimous consent of those very National Churches of Europe alone, agreeing together up∣on any Article, as undoubtedly such. Other humane Laws indeed, or Canons, or Customs they may agree in, that oblige not other Catholicks of their com∣munion in other Kingdoms or Nations; but where and as much as they are re∣ceived, and not abolished again, or antiquated either by a Municipal Law, or National Canon, or even by general Custom, prescribing against the former.
The Sixth and last Appendix, relating likewise generally to the former Questions. That as (notwithstanding my Appeal to your judgment of discretion) I never intended to exempt or withdraw my self, i. e. my person from the Authoritative or binding sentence of Canonical Delegates, if my Adversaries continue their prosecution, and His Holiness may be induced to grant me such Delegates (as He is certainly bound to do, or at least to acquit me, and rescind all the illegal pro∣ceedings hitherto of his subordinate Ministers and Officials against me:) so nei∣ther do I decline their judgment of my Writings. Nay, on the contrary, my re∣solution hath alwayes been, and I hope shall evermore be (which I do now the second or third time declare in Print under my own hand or name) to submit with full and perfect resignation every word in my several Books, even to the Authoritative judgment not only of the Catholick Church (the House2 Tim. 3. of the li∣ving God, and the pillar and foundation of truth) or (which is the same thing) of

its lawful Representative an Oecumenical Synod truly such, that highest Tribunal on earth in matters of Divine Faith, and Holy Discipline; nor only of a free Oc∣cidental Council of the Latin Church alone; but even of any other Judges what∣soever, many or few, or even so few as two or three, that shall in the interim of such a Council be delegated by His Holiness, or any other that hath a lawful Church-power to require obedience from me in such cases; provided those other Judges Delegate be competent, i. e. indifferent, or above all those exceptions which the Canons of the Catholick Church allow. To the Authoritative sentence even of any such Delegates, I will and do submit both my Person and my Writings, in this sense, that if I cannot conform my own inward opinions, reason, or belief to theirs, yet I will abide whatever punishment they shall therefore inflict upon me, and patiently undergo it until absolv'd from it, or dispens'd with, by a higher or at least equal power. But to that of such an Oecumenical Synod, or even such an Occidental onely, as before, I shall moreover, God willing (as I do at this very present for all future times most heartily) conform all the most inward di∣ctates of my Soul, for what concerns any matter of pure Christian Faith, and shall throughly acquiesce in their determination; whatever may be in the mean time disputed (by others, or even my self) of the absolute Fallibility, as to us, of the very most General Representatives, or most Oecumenical Councils them∣selve, before their Decrees be at least virtually or tacitely received by the Repre∣sented or Diffusive Church, without publick opposition to them from any consi∣derable part of the said Church. Besides, for what concerns not the binding pow∣er of publick Tribunals, but the discerning of every private Conscience, I shall, and do most readily submit even every word also in my Writings, not only to your ensure, but to that of all such learned men (of whatsoever Nation or Religion) as diligently and sincerely seek ater Truth.
And God forbid I should be otherwise disposed; or that I who believe and maintain the Pope himself not to be Infallible, not even in His definitions of Faith (if made by Him without the concurrence either of the Catholick Church dif∣fusive, or of its lawful Representative, a General Council truly such, wherein He is but the First or Chief Bishop onely) should think my self not Fallible, or not subject to Errour. Yet I hope, and am sufficiently assured, that in any material point either of Doctrine or Practice, relating to the publick Controversie in hand, I have not hitherto fallen into Errour.
After all this submission, it must not seem strange if I except, as I do plainly in this Cause, both against the Authoritative and Discretive Judgment of all the Roman Ministers, Cardinals, Consistories, Congregations, Courtiers, and all their Clients whatsoever. And yet it is not their Fallibility, but their Partiality, their extreme blindness or wilfulness, or both (in their own Cause, and for maintain∣ing their own worldly Interest) and consequently it is their actual Errour, yea, and actual prejudgment too of the Cause, without so much as giving any reason, nay, without so much as hearing once the Parties concern'd on the other side, or even calling for them by Summons, or otherwise, at any time before such pre∣judgment given or made; This, I say, is it that both obliges and warrants me in all reason to except against them as incompetent Judges of me, or my writings, in that Cause, i. e. to except against their individual persons, but not against their Authority placed in other men of less interested or byass'd judgment.
Nor certainly will this Exception appear strange, or ill-grounded, to such as shall be pleased to turn over in this Book not only to the many divers Letters of Roman Cardinals and Bruxel Internuncio's, written at several times, and upon several occasions since the year 1661 to Ireland, against the same Cause and me, and the rest of the Remonstrants; but also to the Louain Theological Faculty's CensureDated at Louain 1662, Dec. 29. against it, i. e. against the Loyal Irish Remonstrance, and Subscribers of i.
I pass oer wholly in silence, at this time, the Bull of Pope Alexander VIIDated at Rome 1665, Aug. 27., (in the former cause of the Appeal made anno 1648, to Innocent X, by the then Supreme Council of the Roman-Catholick Confederates of Ireland, from those

wicked Censures of Interdict and Excommunication fulminated that year, and in that Kingdom against them, and all other Irish joining with, or obeying them in the Cessation of Arms concluded with the Royal Party of Protestants; I say, fulminated therefore against them by the Archbishop and Prince of Fermo, Joannes Baptista Rinuccinus, Nuncio there from the foresaid Innocent X.) though a very partial inconsiderate Bull grounded falsely, and given directly against all the more Loyal Irish Catholicks, and given so of meer purpose to make them re∣ceive absolution in forma Ecclesiae consueta, and consequently to do publick Pen∣nance for having return'd but onely so nigh their obedience to the late King, of ever blessed Memory, as a meer or bare Cessation of Arms, in order to the preser∣vation of His Majesties interest, when their own could not subsist without it in that Kingdom.
And these being the Six Appendages of so many Questions going before con∣cerning my own constancy or inconstancy in Religion, you are now at liberty to determine as to that matter what you think fit.
So having by this time inlarged my self, I hope, sufficiently enough for the in∣formation of some, conviction of others, and satisfaction of all ingenuous lovers of Truth; having discharged my Conscience, and spoken my Mind touching all the three Motives that induced me to this Dedicatory Preface to you: it remains that howsoever, or whatsoever you judge of me, or my carriage, or my writings, I nevertheless continue my due regard to your Benefit, and conclude this Discourse (as it almost begun, and for the matter proceeded all along) with re-minding you most affectionately of your own and your Posterities, and your Religions great Concern, both in the Loyal Cause I contend for, and in those happy ends at which I drive.
Therefore in the Apostles words, Before God and our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearing, and his Kingdom, by all the desires you have of your own, and your Posterities living comfortably in this world, as free∣born Subjects in your Native Countrey, and by all the hopes you have conceiv'd of enjoying that better Countrey with eternal life and rest in the world to come, by all your zeal, not only for the vindicating of your Religion from the scandal of Disloyalty, Perjury, Cruelty, Inhumanity, Tyranny, &c. both in Principles and Practices, but of inviting also (by taking away the grand Rock of scandal) those of other Churches, to save their Souls in the communion of yours, or of the Roman-Catholick Church, if indeed you believe there is no salvation for them otherwise, and by all your godly wishes of a true understanding, recon∣ciliation, union, peace between all Churches professing the Name of Christ, and more especially between His Majesties Protestant Subjects, and your selves, en fine by all that is Sacred, and by all that is (according to reason and grace) desirable, I conjure you, that your selves mind as you ought that great Concern of your own, and mind it both effectually and speedily without further delayes.
I beseech you as Christians, and as Catholicks, by the onely adorable name of the Holy Jesus, whose Doctrine you should desire to follow above all things, con∣sider That his Kingdom was not of this worldJohn 18.36.. That surely he gave neither to St. Peter himself, nor to any other of his eleven or twelve Apostles separately, nor even to all the same twelve or thirteen with Peter and Paul collectively taken any other sort of Kingdom, or the Lieutenancy of any other Kingdom, than what himself had in the dayes of his abode in flesh, or as he was a mortal man before his ResurrectionSee ∣lius him∣self, lib. 5. de Rom. Poti. c. 4. itt. D.. That the Keyes of Heaven, and the Crowns of earthly Kingdoms import very different things. That as his Father sent himJohn 20.21, 22, 23., so he sent all the twelve with equal and with onely Commission to remit, and retain sins, viz. by his Power, and by his Word, and by his Sacraments, but not to give or to take away Scepters or CrownsNon eri∣ mortalia  regna dat lestia. by any means whatsoever. That he commanded what is due to Caesar, to be paid to Caesar, as well as to God what is due to GodMatth. 22, 23.. That Paul the thirteenth Apostle, and Vessel of Election, in

his Epistle to the RomansRom. 13.1, 5., plainly declares, That subjection to the supereminent secular powers which carry the Sword of Justice, and receive Tributes, is due from every Soul; and that not onely out of fear of their Sword, but for Conscience sake, and for fear of hell and damnation; it is due from every Soul among you, even from those who are the most spiritual in profession, even from those who are the most high in Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Function, Priests, Monks, Bishops, Archbishops, nay, were they Apostles, were they Evangelists, were they Prophets, whosoever they were, as Chry∣sostom spakeChrysostom Hom. 23. in Epist. Paul, on this Text, Rom. 1. Om∣nis anima, &c. near Thirteen hundred years since on this very Text of the Apo∣stle; and in effect with Chrysostom all the Holy Fathers of the Christian Church (before and after him) for a Thousand years from the Apostles time, until Gre∣gory VII. That Exemption from, and much more Dominion over the said Pow∣ers, ate inconsistent with Subjection to them in the same Temporal matters. That other Divine right of Dominion either direct or indirect, His present Holiness of Rome cannot justly pretend, than what He derives from Christ by or through St. Peter; nor other Humane right to any Kingdom, than what the free consent of the Princes, People, and Municipal Laws of the Land does warrant, or hath at least sometime warranted. That to the Crowns of England, Ireland, and Scot∣land, as we can see no derivation of Divine right from Christ by St. Peter to His Holiness; so neither can we see any colour of Humane right by any such con∣sent, &c. That the late and last evasion of BellarmineBellarmine against Bar∣clay., and others, from the Argument grounded on that before-mention'd passage of St. Paul's command to the Romans, and on the conformable practice of the primitive Christians, when be∣ing most numerous, and able to defend themselves, they suffered nevertheless pati∣ently under the Sword of persecuting Emperours, is such a wicked device, as makes the Apostles meer Temporizers in their Doctrine, and consequently such as calls in question the whole truth of the Gospel. Which to assert, though onely by the squel of a slie distinction, or unevading evasion, is clearly no less than Blasphemy in Christian Religion. Lastly, That to approve so much as by silence those Principles and Practices, the defence of which drive their Patrons at last to such Blasphemy, yea, not to condemn expresly those Positions and Actions, which declare or infer it to be lawful for Subjects to dethrone, nay, to kill their Prin∣ces, and embrue their hands in the blood of those Fellow Subjects that are defend∣ing their Princes; and to act so much horrid cruelty upon the onely account of such improbable Rights, Titles, or Pretences of the Pope, and See of Rome, or even upon the joint account of introducing, or re-establishing the Roman-Catho∣lick Religion, is no other than to approve at least consequentially or tacitely that which overthrows all Divine both Law and Testimony, all Religion and right Rea∣son whatsoever. Nay that, it is no other indeed than not onely to contradict the whole Doctrine, but even to frustrate the whole design of the Gospel; which ei∣ther was none at all, or without any question was to convert the world to God by the word of the Cross1 Cor. 1.18., and lead Souls to Heaven through the strait gate, and narrow wayMat. 7.14.. And what are these, but the mortification of our senses, the con∣tempt of riches, pleasures, greatness, honour, dominion, and all the gaities of this world? The crucifying of our Lusts, whether Pride or Vain-glory, or whatever else is, or leads into sin? Finally, the practice of all contrary virtues, especially those of humility and charity, and meekness, and a patient suffering in this life all the evils that God permits man to inflict?
Persuade your selves hence, That the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God; That the wisdom which is from above, is gentle and peaceable, as well as pure; and That 'tis a more glorious thing to gain one Soul to Christ by the soft and still voyce of the Gospel, than to destroy a multitude because they will not come into the Fold before the chief Shepherd leads them.
Think besides, that if the Church from particular grew Universal (or Catho∣lick) by persecution, and that the blood of Martyrs was the seed of the Church, we should remember from whence we were hewen, and tremble by contrary me∣thods to be the Instruments of bringing Religion to that pass, that there shall scarce be found Faith upon earthLuc. 18.8..

See moreover with your own eyes, the fatal Catastrophe of all those Roman-Ca∣tholicks who in these very Nations have pursued such contrary methods at any time since 1537. Behold so many thousand heads crush'd in pieces under the Divine vengeance, as broken Masts advanced on the Promontory of Rocks, to give notice of the deplorable Events they have found even in this world; whose example nevertheless, but too many of your present Teachers advise you to fol∣low, when they dissuade you from condemning, or disowning the same contrary methods, the very same unchristian wayes. Yea particularly, behold on the most eminent place of the Promontory, those Apostolical Mini∣sters and Legats of the Holy See in Ireland, NicholasHe was, an. 1579, by Gregory XIII. sent Nuncio to Ireland, but with a Conse∣crated Banner, and some Italian and Spa∣nish Troops to invade that Kingdom, as they did, but were defeated by the Lord Grey. Sanders, an English man, wandring alone in the Moun∣tains of Kerry, and starving there to death under a Tree. Owen Mac EganAlias Eugenius O Hegan. He was (in the Rebellion of Tirowen) made Bishop of Ross; was great with the King of Spain; was Vicarius Apostolicus in Ire∣land, under Clement VIII; had power from His Holiness to dispose of all the Ecclesiastical Livings of Munster; but as Captain, leading a Troop of an hundred Horse against the Loyallists, with his Sword drawn in one hand, and his Bre∣viary and Beads in the other, he was Slain, and his Troop Routed, an. 1602/3., of Irish birth and race, giving up his last breath even yet in a much more unepiscopal, unclerkly, unseemly manner. And John Baptist Rinucci∣niThis good Italian Archbishop, Prince, and Extraordinary Nuntius in Ire∣land, after many former practises (by himself, and his Dean Dionysis Massarius) at last in the year 1648, May 27. issued out his Excommunication, &c. July 13 following, he summoned a National Synod to appear at Galway. After which, the Supreme Council declaring on the 28, that such a National Synod could not be, he issued out his Bloody Declaration; which, together with the effects of it, put all Ireland in confusion, and obliged the Loyal Party there to drive him out of the Countrey; which he left Febr. 23. the same year 1648/9. What happened in the mean while at home in his own Diocess, and especially in his Episcopal See of Fermo, you may read in the Moderate Intelligencer. Where, in the Letters from Rome of July 11/2, and July 17/27, of that year I find, That lately before, there had been an Insurrection of that people of Fermo against their Governour Seignior Visconti, whom they slew, and made themselves their own Masters. They endeavoured to excuse this to the Pope their chief Lord, under whom the Bishop is Prince of that City. But the Pope, not satis∣fied with their excuse, sent Seignior Imperiale, his Apostolick Commissary, with an Army of Horse and Foot, to chastise them. He sent a Company of Corsicans before; whom they received into the City, and then fell upon them, and made them Prisoners. Other Towns in that Countrey of Marca dell' Ancona, Rebelled by their example, and the secret encouragement they had received from the Spaniards of Naples. By the Let∣ters of Aug. 3. S. N. it appears, that they sent again to the Pope; but then He would not hear them. The mean while Impiriale (I know not how) became Master of the City, i. e. Fermo. By the Letters of Aug. 15. S. N. 'tis said, he had then filled the Prisons with the Inhabitants of that City. By those of Sept. 1. S. N. 'tis said, that yet they were in Arms about the Countrey, and that he sent against them some 400 Corsicans, whom they beat back, after they had slain divers of them. I had almost overseen the Letters of Aug. 8. S.N. which say 'twas on the 19th of July, S. V. that Imperiale came to Fermo, and drove out the People with their Magistrate. This was (as you see above) while the foresaid Nuncio Rinniccini, their Archbishop and Prince, was in the heat of his business in Ireland. The last that I find of them of Fermo, is in the Letters from Rome of Novemb. 16. 1648. S. N. where 'tis said, that Imperiale, in prosecution of the Murtherers of the late Governour Visconti, had caused the Seignior Marco Paccharont, one of the principal Gentlemen of that Town, to be Beheaded, seven Artificers to be Hanged, and some other that were less guilty, to be Whipt, and Banisht to Civita Vicchia; that is (as I understand it) to be sent to the Gallies. It is said also, that he con∣demned to the Gallies many Gentlemen who had absented themselves, being also condemned to Death for continuance, or executed in Effigie, their Houses razed, and their Goods confiscated.
I leave it to the Reader to determine, Whether it be unlike, That when the said Nuncio came to Rome, the sad account he found there of his own City, might be no less an ingredient of the sorrow that soon after broke his heart (perhaps more) than the ill success of his business in Ireland? Though I be withall for my own part much persuaded, that his frowning reception by the Pope (Innocent X.) in these words onely, Temerariè te gessisti; and his downfall from all his former hopes of the Cardinalitial Eminence, wrought more upon him, than either the Ruine of Ireland by him, or the Fate of Fermo in his absence. But that such in short, and no other was his reception by Innocent, my Author is the Reverend Father John Rot, Pro∣vincial of the Excalceat Carmalites of Ireland, and Procurator for the Supreme Council of that Kingdom, to the said Innocent, in the Cause of the Appeal from this Nuncio Rinuccini; who (I mean the said Father Roe) in the year 1651, after his return from Rome, meeting me at Limmerick in Ireland, and giving me there a full account of his Negotiation, amongst other things, assured me of that particular of the said Nuncio's sad Re∣ception, and no less sad dispatch immediately to his Diocess; which disgrace, together with his other affli∣ctions, he did not long survive., the late Italian Archbishop and Prince of Fer∣mo, after he had first by his wicked Excommunication and Interdict, divided the Roman-Catholick Irish Confederates, then by his bloody Declaration engaged them all in a Ci∣vil War one against another, and thereby at last ruin'd both sides for ever, surviving onely for a little time the fu∣neral Rites of that unfortunate Countrey of his Nuncia∣ture, to see himself in utter disgrace with his own Apo∣stolick Master in Italy, and in extreme affliction too even also for his own beloved Fermo; where it seems some evil Genius was his Vicar at that very time wherein he play'd his own reaks in Ireland, by approving himself there so unlike the Nuntius of the Vicar of Christ on earth.

And after all consider, That seeing Catholick Religion (maugre all the new shifting distinctions or evasions of vain men) teacheth most certainly and consci∣entiously even indispensable obedience in all Temporal things as due by the Laws of God to all Supreme Temporal Princes, whether Orthodox or Heterodox; and seeing our gracious King (though of a different profession from us) hath vouch∣safed to acknowledge, That he sees no inconsistence between the Faith of Roman Catholicks in general, and the Allegiance of good Subjects: it highly behoves us all at present to slight no opportunity, omit no endeavours, lose no time for confirming of His Majesty in this favourable belief; and so to assure His Parlia∣ment of our stedfast and inflexible Loyalty, that in passing of Laws for the future, there may be no occasion to consider us, or any of us, as men whose Faith is Faction, and whose Religion is Rebellion.
May these Considerations (my Lords, Fathers, and Gentlemen) May all whatever else I have said in this Letter, and all I have omitted therein, but remit∣ted to the Book at large, may what more or better your own Reason or Tutelary Angels shall suggest, persuade you at last upon the reading hereof, to end imme∣diately, and no less happily, the tedious Consultation since Queen Mary's Reign, about the measures of your Allegiance, and Formulary of professing it to a Pro∣testant Prince! May thatIsa. 65.20. Infant of an hundred years old (as the Prophet Isaiah speaks) be no more but dye, and that Sinner of a hundred years old be accursed, to the end you may live and be blessed; and not only you, but all tongues and people, crying after Zorobabel in EsdrasEsdr. 3.4, 40, 45., Magna est veritas & vincit, Benedictus Deus veritatis! May you therefore now without further deliberation, or pro∣crastination, resolve unanimously on such a Loyal Address to His Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, as shall convince all Protestants whatsoever, that you have at last ingenuously and fairly bid an eternal adieu to all those new Positions and Practices, which not disown'd, might any way continue their jealousie of you! May you therein most humbly offer, that you will at the choice of the Parliament, either take the Oath of Allegiance, Enacted 3 Jacobi, or Sign the Loyal Formulary (alias, the Irish Remonstrance of 1661) with due additional amendments where∣insoever it is defective or short, or frame a new and more ample one than either (even such a one as shall meet with no kind of Exception, or Objection in the controverted point) and that you will chearfully take it, and Sign it! May you thereby convince all the World, that if you must suffer still, you are notwith∣standing resolved (by the grace of God) for the future to suffer onely on ac∣count of the undoubted, the innocent, the sacred mysteries of Catholick Religion, but never in any case or contingency for either the nocent or doubtful, or peculi∣ar Opinions, Intrigues, Designs of any uncatholick Faction! May you even in your own life here enjoy the benefit, and at your death the comfort of it, in or∣der to a better life above, by seeing first the penal Laws repeal'd, and then imme∣diately the great work of Reconciliation, Union, and Peace, between the Churches advancing on apace, yea, throughly finished upon this very foundation, this very Corner-stone, which you shall have so laid, as becomes Christians! And may the present, and all future Ages, and all your own Posterity in particular, bless you therefore in this World, and in the other, the Angels of peaceIsa. 33.7. meet you as the Children ofLuc. 2.14. God by special right, and lead you into the eternal joyes of your LordMat. 5.9.25.21..

These are the wishes for you of him, that to make you so happy, could more∣over with the ApostleRom. 9.3. wish himself were accursed from Christ, and with Moses, pray to be blotted out of the BookExod. 32.32.,
My Lords, Fathers, and Gentlemen,

London, Octob. 28. 1673.
