



SIR,
I. Appear before Your Maje∣sty with the ill grace of a Man who comes for a Par∣don, and confesses he did the faut in hopes of it. For 'tis undeniably a guilty presump∣tion in me to make bold with Your Royal Name, and that to a slight Ar∣gument, or at least made so by ill handling; such as will give People too
 much reason to say, Your Name is the only thing, which shews handsom in the whole Prospect. Neither have I any, but the sorry excuse of defence∣less guilt: I was drawn in, though not by others, by Counsellors as dan∣gerous and deceitful as my own thoughts. I considered that This, in the original design, was part of a Book which has the honour to be made Your's, and thought my altering the Method did not alter Your Majesties Property; neither could I conceive, when Your Name appear'd on the one half, any but Yours could shew well on the other. I considered that 'tis an account of part of Your People, and contains an account of part of Your Pedigree. To the King, and to the Head of the Family, Justice I thought appropriated both, For it is the glory of the Irish Nation to have contributed to Your Sacred Blood, as well as the rest under Your happy Government: and when they shed their own in Your defence, to know
 they spend an inconsiderable part for preservation of the most Noble and most Precious: a sweeter and some∣times a stronger tye than the Duty of Subjects. As reciprocally, Nature with its secret allurements of propen∣sion towards a Country, from whence we are derived, and where our An∣cestours have lived great and glori∣ous, joyns with the common care of a King, and Father of all his People, to move Your Majesty to cherish them with the rest. Thus much I beg leave to say by the by in behalf of my Native Countrey, because e∣very Writer has not been either so curious to observe, or so kind to pub∣lish it. But leaving that matter, these reasons persuaded me I might find at least Companions in my fault, and where Your Sacred Name has been made bold with as improperly. Yet what wrought most, was a strong temptation, and which I could the less resist, because it came in the dis∣guise
 of gratitude, to appear as little unworthy, as I could, of many and signal effects of Your Goodness. E∣very body knows I am deeply in Your Debt, and I thought it but just every body should know I own it, with the ense which becomes me; though I have not hitherto said so much as bare, I thank you, no not to Your Majesty Your self sometimes. The thoughts of Death, which it con∣cerns a man of my age to enter∣tain, would be too terrible to me, if it should carry me away with the imputation of an insensible or ungrate∣ul man. As I have always thought the best return a Subject can make to the favours of his Prince, is by his service to deserve them; I have in∣deed the comfort, that I cannot re∣proach my self with not having done my best. But alas! I must say to You as to God, after all I have, to my great grief, been but an unpro∣fitable servant. That thought is a
 misery, which I am ill able to sup∣port. Should Ungrateful be added to Useless, it would certainly and soon sink my gray hairs to the Grave. Fear of this, as fear sometimes pro∣duces boldness, has cast me into that, of which I am now guilty, and in which my ill Fate still pursues me. For I am useless now too, having with much pains got a Present to make You, for which neither Your Maje∣sty, nor any body else perhaps will be the better, and I know not whe∣ther worth more, than just so much Paper. But yet 'tis all I can do. For we of the Scribling Trade are like Merchants who trade upon cre∣dit, and pay altogether in Bills. Be∣sides that in truth, there lives not perhaps the man, whose stock, or luck in managing it is great enough to an∣swer the mighty sum I owe You. These were the thoughts which slat∣ter'd my presumption with hopes of Pardon, to which all even Your Mer∣cy
 will yet be needful. For I am an unrepenting Sinner, and who, far from sorrow, glory in the fault which gives me an occasion to tell all the World, I have lived and mean to die,

