


SIR,
WHen this rela∣tion of the life of Doctor Donne was first made publick, it had besides the approbation of our late learned & eloquent

King, a conjunction with the Authors most excellent Sermons to support it; and thus it lay some time fortified against prejudice; and those passions that are by busie and malicious men too freely vented against the dead.
And yet, now, after almost twenty yeares, when though the me∣mory of Dr. Donne himself, must not, can∣not

die, so long as men speak English; yet when I thought Time had made this relation of him so like my self, as to become useless to the world, and content to be forgotten; I find that a retreat into a de∣sired privacy, will not be afforded; for the Printers will again ex∣pose it and me to pub∣lick exceptions; and without those supports,

which we first had and needed, and in an Age too, in which Truth & Innocence have not beene able to defend themselves from worse then severe censures.
This I foresaw, and Nature teaching me selfe-preservation, and my long experience of your abilities assuring me that in you it may be found: to you, Sir, do I make mine addresses

for an umbrage and protection: and I make it with so much hum∣ble boldnesse, as to say 'twere degenerous in you not to afford it.
For, Sir,
Dr. Donne was so much a part of your self, as to be incorpora∣ted into your Family, by so noble a friend∣ship, that I may say there was a marriage of souls betwixt him and

yourIohn King. B. of Lond. reverend Grand∣father, who in his life was an Angel of our once glorious Church, and now no common Star in heaven.
And Dr. Donne's love died not with him, but was doubled upon his Heire, your beloved Uncle the Bishop of Hen: King now B.C. Chichester, that lives in this froward genera∣tion, to be an ornament to his Calling. And this

affection to him was by Dr. D. so testified in his life, that he then trusted him with the very se∣crets of his soul; & at his death, with what was dearest to him, even his fame, estate, & children.
And you have yet a further title to what was Dr. Donne's, by that dear affection & friend∣ship that was betwixt him and your parents, by which he entai∣led

a love upon your self, even in your in∣fancy, which was en∣creased by the early tes∣timonies of your grow∣ing merits, and by them continued, till D. Donne put on immortality; and so this mortall was turned into a love that cannot die.
And Sir, 'twas pity he was lost to you in your minority, before you had attained a judge∣ment

to put a true va∣lue upon the living beauties and elegancies of his conversation; and pitty too, that so much of them as were capable of such an ex∣pression, were not drawn by the pensil of a Tytian or a Tentoret, by a pen equall and more lasting then their art; for his life ought to be the example of more then that age in

which he died. And yet this copy, though very much, indeed too much short of the Originall, will present you with some features not un∣like your dead friend, and with fewer blemi∣shes and more orna∣ments than when 'twas first made publique: which creates a content∣ment to my selfe, be∣cause it is the more worthy of him, and be∣cause

I may with more civility intitle you to it.
And in this designe of doing so, I have not a thought of what is pre∣tended in most Dedica∣tions, a Commutation for Courtesies: no indeed Sir, I put no such value up∣on this trifle; for your owning it will rather increase my Obligati∣ons. But my desire is, that into whose hands

soever this shall fall, it may to them be a testi∣mony of my gratitude to your self and Fami∣ly, who descended to such a degree of humi∣lity as to admit me into their friendship in the dayes of my youth; and notwithstanding, my many infirmities, have continued me in it till I am become gray-hea∣ded; and as Time has added to my yeares,

have still increased and multiplied their fa∣vours.
This, Sir, is the intent of this Dedication: and having made the decla∣ration of it thus pub∣lick, I shall conclude it with commending them and you to Gods deare love.
I remain, Sir, what your many merits have made me to be, 
