



HOnourable Patrons, although there is often no propor∣tion betweene the Giver and Recei∣ver; yet there should bee be∣tweene the Giver and the Gift.
This I speake, that you might please to accept of a small Gift, from a meane and poore Giver, although you have deserved not meanely, but mightily of me. If the world admire, that I should have two Patrons, and never had but one living; they must know, that I neither could, nor would hold two, although by you two, I had two given. And therefore in duty I am bound as well to acknowledge my engagement to you, my Honourable Patron, Sir Iohn, al∣though I refused your Living, as I am, and doe to you, my No∣ble Patron whose offer I willing∣ly embraced.
Not onely dutie, custome, and thākfulnes requires that I should dedicate this worke unto your Worships, but also policie, & neces∣sity: for by how much the more unworthy the Treatise is, by so
much the more it craves worthy Patrös, to protect it; & who more worthie then the Patrons of the Author? The Lord hath abun∣dantly enriched you both, both with temporall blessings, and eminent endowments of lear∣ning, and naturall parts, and al∣so with the love and honoura∣ble respect of those among whom you live. And there∣fore seeing the Republique is like to receive such benefit from you both, this unpolished, and rough-hewen Discourse doth beg your serious view, because therein you may read Morbum, Medicinam, and Medicum, both the Maladies, and Remedies of a Republique, and who are ap∣pointed, and destined by God, both for the preservation of Churches and States, in puritie, prosperitie, and peace, and also for the reforming, and re∣dressing
of what is amisse. As Architecture teacheth, that there should be in buildings a symme∣try, and decent proportion, be∣tweene the Gate and Fabrique: So Oratory telleth, that there should be in Speeches some Ana∣logie, betweene the Exordium, and Narration. Wherefore, that I may not put a large preoe∣mium before a little Tractate, I will draw to an end: but first I must entreat your Worships to be pleased to take notice. That future obligements doe not disa∣nul & make void former engage∣ments: and therefore, although for your cleare handednesse in your free and favourable pre∣sentations, you deserve mee wholly, and whatsoever I can doe; yet in regard that this worke was behight, and dedica∣ted unto another Worshipfull, & worthy friend the last Parlia∣ment,
when it should have come forth, if the sudden dis∣solution thereof had not stopt it: I have made bold with you, and him, to joyne him with you in the Dedication, though in severall Epistles. Thus with my heartie prayers to God, for the corporall & spirituall health, and eternall happinesse of you and yours, entreating you to accept of this small Tractate untill time produce some more worthie worke, I humbly take my leave. Remembring till death.

