





Much Honoured and Worthy SIR,
THese two short Treatises must either have come into the World without a Patron; (which at first I thought) or must shelter themselves under your Patronage, which upon second thoughts, I have presumed to doe, for this Cause: In the Dedication of Books Authors usual∣ly aim at such Mecaenas's, as either they have some Ecclesiastical Relation unto, or have been long acquainted with, or have been greatly obli∣ged unto; or such as are able to understand and judge, of what is written, whether Corrupt or Sound, whether chaffy or solid; or such as are able, in regard of their Parts, Place, and Power, to give countenance, and patronage to the Books dedicated unto them. Now Sir, You above all
the Friends I have, may most justly chalenge the Patronage of this Piece, in all the forenamed re∣gards. For
When your high Employments, and important Affairs will permit you to be in the Countrey, you are then under my Ministery.
I have had the honour and happiness to know you, to be thorowly known unto you, and inti∣mately acquainted with you, for many years.
You have been a constant Friend, yea as a Pa∣tron to me and mine.
Your singular Parts, general Learning and know∣ledge, and transcendent Judgement, makes you abundantly able to understand and judge what Books are of worth, and which are worthless; what Books are profitable, and which are use∣less; what Books are Orthodox, and which are Heterodox: And therefore if this short Manual be approved by you, I hope it will please the most and best.
Again, so eminent is your place in the State, and so great your Power, through the Favour of His Majesty, your Princely Master, for your ex∣traordinary parts, personal worth, and singular Faithfulness and Loyalty; that you are fittest and best able to patronize this poor Infant, that flies unto you, as its only Guardian, for Protecti∣on.
Concerning these two Treatises presented un∣to you, be pleased to observe, That Books may be distinguisht by these four Notions; some are to be spit out, some to be swallowed, some to be eaten, and some to be chawed.
 I. Some Books are to be spit out; as imperti∣nent, erroneous, heretical, lying, scurrilous, scof∣fing, seditious, and obscene Discourses, and the like; which neither afford any lawfull Pleasure, or true Profit unto the Reader; but rather bring with them a danger unto him. These Books I say, are not to be relished, but rejected, lest the Appetite by them should be infected.
II. Some Books are to be swallowed; as Ro∣mances, Histories, Poetical Fictions, and all such Books as are written only for the Solace and law∣full Refreshment of the Minde; these are perfun∣ctorily to be perused, and cursorily to be read.
III. Some Books are to be eaten; as Books concerning Morality, Nature, Liberal Sciences, Illiberal Arts, and the like; these may diligently be read, and carefully studyed, in respect of their benefit, but yet neither in such manner or measure, as if those only were the Breasts of true Nourish∣ment, or Books most worthy our study.
IV. Some Books are to be chawed, and scriously ruminated and pondered; as those which are writ∣ten for the understanding, explicating, and apply∣ing of the Sacred Oracles of God; because these minister Comfort to the Minde and spirit seaso∣nably; these suffer no inordinate Affection to do∣mineer over the Will imperiously, yea these tend wholly to the spiritual and effectual accomplish∣ment of the Reader; wherefore such Books are most diligently, and principally to be studyed. Now of this nature, and kinde are these two Tractates, which I here present to your favoura∣ble and judicious perusal; wherein my endeavour
hath been, that there may be as many Sentences as Lines; and that it may be a serious and sin∣newy Piece without any affectation.
Dear and highly honoured Sir, that your Health and Life may be long continued, and your Ho∣nour and Happiness encreased, is and shall be the hearty Desire and Prayer of,
SIR, 
