



May it please Your Majesty,
IF, when the present Service
was with great Favour laid
upon me by that most Reve∣rend
Person, to whom I not
onely ow Canonical Obedience,
but a free disposal of my Con∣cernments,
I did not without
fear address my self to the
Undertaking; and if now I make my humble
approach into Your Presence with Diffidence,

and Trembling, and without those Tokens of
Ioy, which would be agreeable to the Honour I
have received in being by Your Majesty encou∣raged
to make this Offering: Your Majesty (being
as an Angel of God) will graciously be pleased to
discern, that no Aversness from the service of Your
Majesty, and the Church, Nor apprehension of Dif∣ficulty
in what I was to undertake, Nor fear of
the Adversaries of the Truth, have created these
Passions in me; but that they are wholly derived
from other Causes. For, next to the greatend
of all my hopes, I shall not so earnestly snatch at
any thing, as the opportunities of serving God in
that station he hath ordered for me in the Church
of Christ, in which service I apprehend the acts of
Loyalty, and Duty to Your Sacred Majesty, and of
teaching men so, to be most eminently involved.
As for the easiness of this performance, I am
perswaded in my Conscience, that to him, who
hath embraced Christianity in the true and genuine
Spirit of it and to those, who without vile Affe∣ctions,
and Carnal Interests, shall apply themselves
to know the Mind of God (delivered in the
Scriptures) no one thing is more clear, and evi∣dent,
or pressed more urgently by the Holy Spirit,
then is the Doctrine, which I have delivered. If
there be such things, as damnable Heresies, the de∣nial

of Christ himself (the Lord that bought us, bles∣sed
for ever) is not more truly an Heresie, or a
damnable Heresie, then that Doctrine which doth
encourage Subjects to despise Dominion, and speak
evil of Dignities. We are not to mavail, if we
have seen, that, after this grand Heresie had bro∣ken
its way thorough the Consciences of men, the
sholes of others passed clear without control, and
that those Doctrines, and Practises, which, in the
purest Times, were abhorred as most heretical,
and profane were made the marks of the greatest
Godiness, and instances of the highest attainments
in Religion. But on the other side, it is consi∣derable,
that in the late days of darkness, and of
gloominess, God did not leave this Truth without
witness: but, amidst all the Blasphemies, where∣with
Your Glorious Father (now with God)
was, in the day of His Calamity, blasphemed,
even RabshakehJ. G. Anti-Ca∣val. was driven to acknowledge,
that the Doctrine of Resistance was a Mystery con∣cealed
from the Prophets, the Apostles, and Primi∣tive
Christians, and reserved to be revealed in our
Times; upon whom the ends of the World are come.
And that our teaching Souldiers (who taught the
Nation with Briers, and Thorns, as Gideon did the
men of Succoth) not able to resist the Spirit
speaking in the Apostles, were wont to re∣sort

to this foolish Refuge, that the Doctrine of
Obedience was a2 Pet. i. 12. present Truth (an  not
to continue) abusing the Saying of St. Peter, as
they did other Scriptures, to their own Destruction.
As for the Adversaries of the Truths, which I have
delivered (either on the one hand, or the other)
how great soever they may appear in their own
Eyes, or in the Eyes of their Admirers, I hum∣bly
conceive it may be no Transgression of the
Lines of Modesty, if I shall freely profess, that
they are not terrible in mine: no man hath more
reason, then my self, to be laid low on the con∣sideration
of days, and years, withdrawn from
that Study, whereunto I had been consecrated:
yet (after what hath been spoken) me thinks in
this Cause I should not fear. My fear hath been,
that in a Cause of so great consequence, so clear,
so nobly handled by the greatest Worthies of the
Church of England, I should not finde any thing
to be tolerably spoken, before the greatest, and
most revered Judgment under Heaven. And
I now tremble to think that such Failings, as in
the current of Pronuntiation might disappear,
being now brought to view, the Present, which I
tender, may instead of an Offering be an Offence.
My fear hath been, and still is, lest the Truth of
that Gospel, wherein I stand, should any way

suffer prejudice by the Weaknesses, and Disad∣vantages,
wherewith it hath been delivered:
but we have a gracious God, and Your Majesty
is gracious. I am not ignorant how much the
true Cause of God in the World (which is truly
stated to lie against the Carnal, and Spiritual
wickedness of men) is entrusted in the hands of
Princes. I know likewise, and am assured, that
if men be taught, or brought to believe, that the
utmost hazard of the greatest Transgressions is
onely the loss of a few days, or years of life,
(such as they finde it) it will be impossible for
humane Laws to give check to the unruly Lusts
of men, or for Society to consist. Knowing
this, and knowing likewise the Scandals laid
upon Religion, I have proposed, in all humble
sincerity, to lay before Your Majesty the true
state of these matters; to separate the pretious
from the vile (the sincere spirit of Religion from
the adulterate pretenses of it) and (if it should
please the Authour of Religion, and Govern∣ment,
so far to bless my poor endeavours) by un∣affected,
and unstrained Arguments, to do right
to the Doctrine of our Church, and render our
Religion lovely in Your Eyes, to represent to
Your Majesty how much You have been fa∣voured
of God, who hath so far wedded Your

Concernments, and interwoven his Interests
with Yours; and of how great Concernment it
is to Your Majesty, to endeavour the settlement
of the true Religion, and to exert that Power,
wherewith You are entrusted, to the eradication
of Atheism, and Prophaneness, and to the pulling
down of the strong Holds of Satan. That this
Resolution is deeply fixed in Your Bosom, God
hath put into the Heart of Your Majesty to de∣clare:
may the same God be pleased to perform
this great and true Work of Reformation by Your
Hand; may Wickedness be rooted out, and all
things, that are generous, and praise worthy,
flourish in Your time; may Your Majesty live
many, happy, and glorious days upon Earth,
and be afterwards crowned with Glory, and
Immortality,

