



MUch Honoured and Kind Gentlemen and friends, re∣volving many times with my self the unanimous en∣trance I had among you, my peaceable continuance to this hour with you, the experience of your love generally towards me, (when
 being disturbed by an unworthy person, who endeavoured to sequester me, not one inhaibitant in the whole Parish assist∣ing him, or giving his hand against me) and your in these daies) rare and singular freedom from division and distraction in point of opinion, not so much as one in judgement declining the good old way of sound and solid Doctrine; Pondering (I say) these things with my self, I con∣sidered both How by way of thankful∣ness I might make them known unto others; and also How I might testifie to the world my desire to recompence your love; and for this double end, I have presented this small Tractate unto you, entreating you, and all those who shll peruse it, to consider seriously these five things.
First, That the great aime and scope of a faithful Minister is, the salvation of his people, Rom. 10.1. Heb 13.17. whence they are said To save, 1 Tm. 4.16.
Secondly, That a cordial and real love ought to be between Minister and People,
 2 Cor. 1.14. Those being as Fathers, these as Children, Judges 18.19. Gal. 4 19. Those being as Guardians, these as Orphans: thse as Captains, these as Souldiers: those as Shepherds, th se as their Flocks. The inhabitants of Dalmatia in Sclavonia, as they were by the Romans often subdued, so they as often revolted: and the last re∣bellion was raised at the instigation of one Batto, a man very poet with the People; who having ten years together maintain∣ed the liberty of his Countrey, at last, broken and wearied by and with the for∣ces of Germanicus, and Tiberius, he sub∣mitted himself unto the two Captains, who asking the reason of his revolt, was answered▪ Becuse the Romans send no Shep∣herds to keep, but Wolve, to devoure their flocks. Some soudiers once mutinying in their Captains tent, and offering to go forth into the open field to fight it out; their Captain laid him down upon the thresh ld, with these words▪ If you go forth, it shall be by treading on your Geerl. Thus, such is the love of a good Minister to hs
 people, that he will expose his life to ha∣zard, and himself to death, for their good: and a religious Flock will not stick to do the same for a faithful Pastour.
Thirdly, The Gospel hath the more free passage where such reciprocal affecti∣on is; for love makes all things light, and the pains undertaken for those whom we love, is (though great) the better under∣gone: Lve takes all things with the right hand, and receives in good part what cos from, and is spoken in love.
Fourthly, The true love of a Minister to his People, is to their persons, not to their sins, Exod. 32.33. Rom. 9.3. 2 Cor. 6.11. and that both in regard,
I. Of his Duty, which is care of, for, and over them, Acts 20.28. to reconcile fathers to their children, Mal. 4. and God to man. 2 Cor. 5.19. And,
II. Of Gods glory, which will be ad∣vanced by their peoples conversion and holy conversation. And,
III. Of their peples good; who be∣ing verted, reconciled unto God, and
 devoted unto his service, are happy here, and shall be eternally blessed hereafter.
Fifthly, Observe, that a Ministers love to his people is best known and shown by these waies and means.
I. By preaching the mysterie of the Gospel unto them, Rom. 16.25.
II. By preaching rather profitable things then pleasant: for as he is an ill Cook who rather dresseth such meat as will please the pallat then help the sto∣mach; and provides for hungry hearts rather Spice-cakes then wholsom food: so he is no good Minister of Christ, who in his Preaching seeketh rather to tickle mens phansies, and please itching ears, then to build them up unto a holy build∣ing.
III. By preaching according to the capacity of their Auditory; Solomon saith, concerning children, Prov. 22.6. Hanoch lanagnar gnal Pi, Instrue vel initiare puerum ad os, Teach the child according to his capacity; even as we feed children with such meat as they are able to disgest set∣ing
 down before them  a plain form of Doctrine, Rom. 2.20.
IV. By praying publikely and private∣ly for them; as Moses did, Exod. 32. as the Priests were commanded to do, Levit. and as the practise of the Apostles is fre∣quently in their Epistles. Hence Ministers are Types of Christ, 1 John 2.2,
V. By endeavoring that faith may be wrought in them; not only an Historical saith (as Cadinal Ascanius Parrot could pra the Creed all over) but a true and lively faith, testified to be such by its works.
VI. By desiing, and endeavouring, that Religion may be propagated, and the truth of the Gospel preserved to posteri∣ty: this is done,
1. By planting the Gospel, by instructi∣on, and Doctrine.
2. By perswading to the practise of the things aught and learnt.
3. By commtting to writing or publike view, what is most necessary to be known and dn. is the principal scpe of our
 labour, that our people should remember what we teach: and hereunto writing or printing avails much, Rom. 15.15. 1 Cor. 4.17. 2 Pet. 1.15. Wherefore seeing I can no way better express my love unto you, then by endeavouring to the utmost that your souls may be saved in the day of the Lord; and nothing being more abso∣lutely necessary unto eternal life, then these three amiable, superexcellent and divine graces, Pallas, Juno, and Venus, or, Faith, Hope, and Charity; I have taken off the Veil, and drawn aside the Curtain, and ex∣posed them to publique view, that by a serious animadversion of the Doctrine thereof, your judgements might be infor∣med, your affections enflamed, and your conversations so religiously regulated, that the end of your daies may bring you to the end of your hope, the salvation of your immortal souls; which is the earnest desire, and shall be the hearty prayer, of
Gentlemen,

