




RIght Honourable, Right Worshipfull, and Religious Senators;
 I know, that to the ayd, and furtherance of some great enterprize, and design, there is more required then Wishes and Desires; and therefore (as to the building of the Lords House, every one brought some thing, according to his ability, so) to the Prosperous successe, and happy issue, of this long desired Parliament, there is required not only a Religious care, and endeavour in your Honours; but also, that we (whose causes you are pleased to agitate, and manage, and whose grievances you take in∣to your grave considerations) should afford unto your Honours that furtherance, and assistance, which lyes in our power; that is, both in zealous, and fervent calling upon God for you, and in a modest, and humble enforming, and advising of you.

The secious Animadversion hereof, emboldened your humble Ora∣tor, to present this Petition (for it is no other) unto your Honours, for Unity, and Unanimity in Religion among yourselves, con∣sidering with my self, the necessity, and excellency of the Theam, (for the furtherance of your Christian consultations, and deep designes) and that none as yet have tendred any Treatise unto your Honours of this Subject.
As fair faces need no Painting, nor good Wine a gaudy Bush; So a rare and transcendent Subject, needs no poor Oratory to praise it, nor affected Language to set it forth. And therefore, I will not make any Encomions in commendation of that religious Amity and Uni∣ty, which should shine, and shew forth it self, in your Honours; but only give you a short hint of the necessity, and excellency thereof, and then referre your Honours to the pious consideration of the Treatise Andreas Alci∣atus, Lib. Em∣blem. pag. 144. it self.
An Emblematist, by an acute Embleme endeavours to shew, the excellency of Unity, Unanimity, and mutuall accord, and ayd, in those who are joyned in Commission together, for any publike good. His Impresse, or Embleme is, Diomedes, and Ulisses, the two Gretian Worthies; The former whereof be supposeth to be wise, politike, and prudent, able to advise, counsell, contrive, and manage a Warre; and the latter strong, couragious, and bold, yea able to atchieve any feazible enterprize. His word, or Motto is, Unum nihil, duos plurimum posse, One is as good as none, but two can do much. The decla∣ration, and amplification of the Embleme is expressed in these verses:
Viz.

Viribus hic praestat, hic pollet acumine mentis,
Nec tamen alterius non eget alter, ope
Cum duo conjuncti veniunt victoria certa est.

That is,

When one is strong, the other very wise,
To help each other, they must not despise.
For when both strength, and wit, conjoyned are,
Then crowned victory doth follow warre.

I have so amply, amplified, and applyed this Embleme, in this Discoursive Petition presented to your Honours pernsall, that I will wholly here balk the application thereof.

That the Treatise dedicated unto your Honours, might carry the more weight, the Dedicator being of small worth; I have not stoln a Coal from the Altar, but borrowed a sentence from Haven, (of Him, who spake nothing but Golden Sentences, and unto whom Kings, Princes, Peers, and the mightiest Monarches must stoop) that your Honours may look upon, and accept of this Present, as a Stem sprung from that Stock, (though it be very rough hewn) as an explication of our Saviours own prayer, for your prosperous Proceed∣ings, (although not unfolded with hat curious art, that it deserves) as a sacred, saving, and necessary truth, (though folded up in course cloath) and as a Message sent unto your Honours from Heaven, from the King thereof, though by a most mean Messenger, and unworthy servant of his. And then he shall think himself happy (in being an instrument of Peace, Love, Unity, and Concord, unto your Honours) who will alwayes pray for your Persons, and proceedings, and all that concerns you, and acknowledge himself ever,

