



Dear Christians,
OF all the opera∣tions of the life of man, and indeed of
the whole Creation, and of the highest and most perfect creatures that are found in the whole extent thereof, The most Noble and Excellent, the most Profitable and truly Delectable, and that which is the Crown and Diadem of their perfection and being, is the operation of Re∣ligion, as that where∣by the creature hath Communion with God, which is the most
excellent being, and the chiefest good, and whereby it offereth homage and acknow∣ledgement unto his Infinite greatness, and receives again the in∣fluence & enjoyment of his Eternal and In∣finite goodnesse. And indeed without this the generality of man∣kinde is not onely de∣graded from its digni∣ty, but deprived of its use; and in the useles∣nesse, or unprofitable∣nesse
of mankinde, all the creatures that were made for his comfort and preservation, are rendered uselesse and unprofitable: So that the end of the whole material Creation is in a sort lost, in the want of Religion in mankinde; for if man∣kinde be good for no∣thing without Religi∣on, if he loose that action, then all the creatures would be∣come serviceable for
the preservation of them that are good for nothing, and so being ordered unto a vain end, they would all be as it were vain and unprofitable crea∣tures, which would lay an unsufferable charge upon Gods wisedome as well as goodnesse, not onely that he made all men in vain, but that he made the creatures of the world for a vain end and purpose, 
(which God forbid.) Now there is no reason in the world, why mankind should live, or be in the world, if man be not a worshipper of God, whereby he is to attain the enjoy∣ment of God.
Other Creatures indeed have their se∣veral ends inferior un∣to this (yet in order unto this in man) some are made for the preservation of o∣thers,
and all for the good and preservati∣on of man. But if man be not the ser∣vant of his God here, what is he but fruges consumere nat us, an un∣profitable plunderer of the world, and de∣stroyer of the rest of the creatures, whom he wastes and devours in great multitudes daily, whilest he him∣self liveth to no con∣siderable end, that may be answerable
for so great a ruine.
And if his end be in the Grave and in the Dust, when he hath spent a few dayes and hours in eating, and drinking, and sleep∣ing, and enduring many calamities and troubles in this world, it may put all the world to a stand, how it could stand with the wisdome of God to make such an ex∣cellent Creature to no better end; and as the
Apostle tells us of Christians, That if in this life only we have hope, we are of all men most miserable. So it may be said of all mankinde, that if in this life onely, we have our end, we are of all creatures in the world the most mise∣rable and unprofita∣ble, and the rather, because man hath so much knowledge of his infelicity, and such a stomach unto eter∣nity,
which he cannot upon that supposition upon any terms ever attain unto.
Which is (to me I confesse) one of the strongest arguments to prove the immor∣tality of the soul of man, and the assu∣rance of another and better life after this; that I know how to draw out of the qui∣ver of humane rea∣son, without the clea∣rer light of Divine Revelation.

For though it may be said that particular men are made, and are of use for the good of Community; (which hath, it may be, gi∣ven the occasion un∣to some Philosophers that could see no higher to place the end & final operation of man in politique good, or advantage of humane Society,) Yet when all is done, if man hath no other end but this: that
Society, Community & Generality of man∣kinde, for the service whereof every parti∣cular man is supposed to be made, will prove in the end to be either of no use at all, or of none proportionable to such a multitude of so many, so excellent beings, if that Gene∣rality of mankinde be not appointed for some end higher than it self, which what o∣ther can it be imagi∣ned
to be, than the holy worship and en∣joyment of his God, which is indeed the great end for which man was made, and for which both all and every of them have their beings, and their lives, and all the com∣forts, and either gene∣ral or particular ad∣vantages in this world that they may be unto them engagements, encouragements and helps, to promote
them in the worship of him, who is the Fountain of them all: That as they live by his Mercy, they may live unto his Glory here, and attain unto the enjoyment of his Glory hereafter.
By all this that hath been said, we may then see, that it is a ve∣ry great and intolera∣ble mistake that hath possessed too many in the world, that Reli∣gion and the service
of God is a kinde of impertinent thing, or at the best but such as is to be attended up∣on at our leisure, or when we have nothing else to doe; whereas in truth it is the great reason why we live, or enjoy any comfort, or blessing here in this world; and of so great weight and concern∣ment, dignity, profit and advantage, that all other things ought to be ordered unto
this, and are no other∣wise allowable, profi∣table, or advantagious than as they are con∣ducible hereunto.
And if Religion, and the Worship of God be the most Glorious, Honorable and Ex∣cellent imployment, and operation of the life of man, then cer∣tainly it doth most properly belong, and best become those that are of the most Ho∣nourable condition a∣mongst
mongst the Children of men, since there is nothing more decent or correspondēt, than that the most eminent persons should be ex∣ercised in the most e∣minent and excellent operations, and ought to be therein patterns and examples unto o∣thers, looking upon e∣very degree of ad∣vancement that God hath given them a∣bove others in point of Dignity, as an ob∣ligation
laid upon them by God, who hath bestowed those preheminencies, to be afore others in Devo∣tion and Piety, that they may advance him the more, that hath advanced them so much; according to that resolution of Da∣vid, a man of the high∣est degree of honour in this world, where∣with he dedicates him self and his house un∣to God, I wil extol thee,
O Lord, becaus thou hast lifted me up, and hast not made my foes to tri∣umph over me. Ps. 30.1.
It is a great defor∣mity in the eys of God of Angels, & of good men, for people to be high in outward ho∣nour and dignity, and to be low in Spiritual Grace and Piety; and that they, unto whom God in his bounty hath given most lea∣sure and convenien∣cies to serve him, by
the freedome (that they enjoy in their a∣bundance) from world¦ly necessities & distra∣ctions, & upon whom he lath laid the grea∣test obligations to ho∣nour him, by those honours that he hath bestowed upon them, should take discharge from these very obli∣gations, and turn their Bonds into Acquitan∣ces without the pay∣ment of the Debt, whilest they of all o∣thers
are too often most negligent of his worship, and least frequent in the ho∣ly assemblies of his people, the attendance whereupon is in a sort their peculiar calling; and that they should look upon Religion, as a businesse below their greatness, which is indeed the Crown and Dignity of their life, so that it is be∣come (as I have found it to my sorrow) one
of the greatest difficul∣ties of the work of the Ministry to work up∣on a people that are rich and honourable in this world, and to perswade them to a constant attendance upon Religious Du∣ties in the service of God. I have given some blows at this Nail, but it would not enter as I could wish, but I must not leave it, but tell them again and again, that they
are the people of all others, whom God doth expect (as to be most exemplary in all other vertues) so to be most daily and fre∣quent in his publick worship. The great ob∣ligations that I have received from some of them (which I do with thankfullnesse acknowledge) must not be turned by me into a bribe, to make me flatter or spare them in this miscar∣riage;
I must rather venture the loosing of their favour and their bounty too, than coun∣tenance the ruine and destruction of their soules. The more li∣berall they have been unto me, the more plainly and sincerely I must deal with them in this matter, remem∣bring that excellent expression of St. Am∣brose unto his great be∣nefactor, Theodosius the Emperour, in case
wherein he held him∣self engaged, in thank∣fullness unto him as well as duty to God, to deal plainly with him: Tantum debeo beneficis tuis, ut male de beam pro salute tuâetiam offensio∣nem animi tui non time∣re; Iow so much unto your bounty and benificence. That I am bound there∣by to despise your anger, that I may contribute to the salvation of your soul. This is a sort of thankfulness, that few
benefactours will ac∣cept of in this world, because they are grea∣ter friends unto their sins, than to them∣selves. And upon this account, it may be, I have lost some friends and some Auditors, but I cannot help it; but must yet say, that I can never be satisfied with the carriage and conversation of such eminent persons, un∣till I se their pitty endeavouring to keep
peace with their dig∣nity; Because I know that God expects it at their hands.
Now as Religion is the most eminent and excellent operation of humane life, so of all the operations of Re∣ligion, those are of the greatest power and concernment, most prevalent with God, and most profitable to man, which are offer∣ed unto God in the ho∣ly consort & heaven∣ly
Harmony of the Congregation of his people. These are they that have the special promise of Christs presence, and the spe∣ciall assurance of his blessing and approba∣tion, Math. 18.19, 20. These are they that are graced with the atten∣dance of Angels, 1 Cor. 11.10. Psal. 68.18, 19.
These are the war∣like forces of Gods peoples whereby they offer an holy and ac∣ceptable
violence unto God, to obtain blesings at his hands, accor∣ding to that of Tertul∣lian in his excellent Book of Apology for the Christians against the Gentiles, Coim. saith he, in coetum, & congregationem ut in deum, quasi manu â precationibus ambia∣mus orantes. We gotegether into the Con∣gregation and Assem∣bly, that we may, as it were, joyn ourselves
into an Army to as∣sault God with our prayers.
These Religious per∣formances in the Con∣gregation are the Mu∣sick, wherewith earth ravisheth heaven, an harmony that charms the very power of God.
These are the Bat∣teries of heaven gates, and that beats down the partition wall that sinne hath raised be∣tween God and us.

These are the strong and the powerfull en∣gines, that pull down mercies from God up∣on us.
That repair the ru∣ines of Churches and Nations, that Buoy up sinking States and Kingdomes.
To conclude, Holy congregations are the Work-houses, & their Religious operations, are the works where and whereby Fetters may be forged, that
may binde the Devil & all his instruments; nay, golden chains to binde God himself from proceeding in judgement against his people: Pillers to sup∣port the ruinous fa∣brick of the tottering societies of men, & to keep the world from ruine and destruction, according to that say∣ing (I take it) of the Jews, Sine stationibus non consisteret mun∣dus. The world is held
up by the Congrega∣tions of Gods people; and if there be any charms to be had, that may raise up our dry bones of this confused and distracted and de∣molished Church and Nation, they must be had, not from Coun∣cels or Armies: but from the devout per∣formances of the con∣gregations of Gods people; which may shew you the reason, why I have been so
earnest with you for your presence and as∣sistance in these assem∣blies, in these times of our calamity of non conformity. Sure I am, if the Devill trembles at any thing that can be done upon earth, it is at the gatherings of holy Congregation, and at the work that they have in hand.
And of all the holy actions of a Congrega∣tion, the most heaven∣ly excellent, the most
perfect glorious, and comfortable, is the Holy Solemnity of the Supper of the Lord, which is as it were the summe and recapitu∣lation of all other du∣ties.
There the Cove∣nant of Baptisme is re∣nued and confirmed.
There the Word is administred and seal∣ed.
There the Laws of God are owned and subscribed, as the ar∣ticles
on our part in that treaty of Peace between God and us, which is there presen∣ted and managed.
There the promises, the articles on Gods part are made sure, & established particular∣ly unto every faithful receiver, which are promised in general in the Holy Book, and the Gospel is brought home unto every de∣vout soul, with all the blessings thereof; for
look what the Gospel promiseth, that the Sa∣crament sealeth, and delivereth unto every faithfull receiver in particular.
Their solemn praise and thanksgiving is offered unto God in the thankfull memo∣rial of the death and passion of Christ, which is there presen∣ted unto us, for that great redemption that he hath wrought for us.

There the sweet in∣cense of most earnest prayers and holy de∣sires are exhaled unto God.
And there we have our petitions granted, subscribed and sealed with the blood of Christ.
There we offer up our selves in homage unto God and Christ, that gave his Son, and that offered up him∣self for us.
There we present
our Almes and Obla∣tions to the Lord, that we may answer his Mercy and Compassi∣on unto us, in mercy unto others, and de∣votion unto him.
There we binde up our selves afresh, and more and more in the holy Communion of Saints, with the Church triumphant in Heaven, and mili∣tant upon Earth.
There we are con∣firmed in our Union
and Communion with Christ, and receive his body and blood inseparably united to his Divinity, with all the benefits of his Death and Passion, really and truly appli∣ed unto our soules, that by the merrit of his death and suffer∣ings, our sins may be pardoned, that by the merrit of his Righte∣ousnesse our persons may be justified, that we may be enlighten∣ed
by the beams of his heavenly Wisdome, sanctified by the holi∣nesse of his heavenly Graces, refreshed with the cordials of his hea∣venly Comforts, that we may be strengthen∣ed by the might of his heavenly Virtue that we may be enriched with the riches of his heavenly Blessings, & that we may be crow∣ned at length, and sa∣ved by his heavenly Glory and Salvation.

And receiving Christ, we have power in him to become the Sonnes of God, John 1.12. And if Sons, then heirs, heirs of God, and joynt heirs with Christ: If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glo∣rified together. Rom. 8.17.
Yea, we have God in him. For in him dwelleth all the fulnesse of the God-head bodily. Col. 2.9.
We have the Father
in him. For he that ac∣knowledgeth the Sonne hath the Father also: and truly our fellowship is with his Father, and with his Sonne Jesus Christ, 1 Joh. 2.23. 1 Joh. 1.3.
And if we have the Father and the Sonne, we have the Holy Ghost: For hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the spirit which he hath giveu us, 1 Joh. 3.24. So that the whole blessing of the
Apostle is upon us in the use of this holy Sacrament. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the Love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen.
What shall I say, it is visibile Evangelium, a visible Gospel; and (if you use it as you ought to do) it will be to you vivum Evangelium, a living Gospel, a work∣ing Gospell, a Gospel in possession, not in
your ears, but in your hearts.
Here all mercies are conveyed and sealed, all graces are confir∣med and exercised.
Here repentance is imployed & quicken∣ed, faith is actuated & strengthned, hope en∣couraged, devotion enflamed, charity kin∣dled, peace & concord established, & if there be a heaven upon earth it is in the holy opperation of a con∣gregation
devoutly celebrating the holy Supper of the Lord.
This is the Holy plaister or love-charm to make us in love with God, and one another, and to make God also in love with us.
The , or soveraign antidote a∣gainst sin.
The food of life, the viaticum of eternity: The universal medi∣cine for all our disea∣ses,
and an Ark of safe∣ty against all our dan∣gers.
And now by this you may know the reason why I have been so earnest with you of my Congrega∣tion, not to neglect the blessed opportunities that God offers you for your addresses un∣to him in the use of this holy mistery, and to prepare your selves thereunto, and why I have offered you this
help, which is presen∣ted unto you in this ensuing Treatise.
The truth is, that I finde my self under very great obligations unto you, I have recei∣ved much of the com∣fort of my life from you, and the great tenderness, love, and care that you have shew'd unto me in my late sickness (the reco∣very from which Low under God) in a great measure unto some of
you, addeth unto the endearments that are upon my soul toward you, and it lies upon me to do my endea∣vour to answer your love, which God in his mercy inable me, and direct me to do in such a way as may be most for your good and spirituall advan∣tage, and truly I think I am in the way, for I cannot pitch upon any thing that can be done more summa∣rily
or effectually in order to all your good and happinesse, than to assist you in that great and excellent performance of the use of the Lords Sup∣per, for since it is a du∣ty of so great perfecti∣on, and so comprehen∣sive of the whole busi∣nesse of a Christian, and so entitling us to the whole treasure & comfort of the Gospel, if I shall prevaile with you to be good Com∣municants,
I am sure I shal have then prevai∣led with you to be good Christians, and then you must needs be both a holy and a happy people.
Now there are three things that I finde ne∣cessary to be done, that you may become good Communicants, and use that holy and excellent Ordinance to Gods honour and your own comfort and salvation.

The first is to con∣vince you of the ne∣cessity that lies upon you to make a fre∣quent and a diligent use of that great means and pledge of your salvation, and to per∣swade you that it is your duty to be con∣stant therein, and that you cannot neglect a∣ny oportunity where∣by you are called thereunto in the Con∣gregation of which you are members, un∣lesse
you have some weighty and innocent cause to the contra∣ry, without violating both the authority of Christs command, and the love of his invita∣tion in the institution of the Lords Supper, and if you do but con∣sider these obligati∣ons that Christ our Lord hath laid upon us, and the great and excellent duties that we there are called to offer unto God, and
the great & manifold graces & mercies that God therein offers un∣to us; and remember what I have often said unto you, touching this matter, I cannot see how you will be excusable, if you shall wilfully without some very weighty & war∣rantable impediment abstain from the use of this holy Ordinance of God; assure your selves, neither pride, nor sloath, nor love
unto any sin, nor wil∣full ignorance, when the means of instructi∣on is offered and de∣spised; no, nor servile fear, nor the love of this world will be ac∣cepted for discharges of our attendance up∣on God in this Chri∣stian duty, for all those are sinfull, and there∣fore are not like to ex∣cuse us from duty.
The Second is, that you be directed and perswaded to a due
preparation of your selves unto this holy Sacrament, that we may not eat that bread and drink that cup of the Lord unworthily, least we bring thereby both great guilt and judgement upon our soules, and make even that Table to be a∣suare unto us, whilest we approach with im∣penitent, unbelieving uncharitable, unthāk∣full, cold and earthly minds, not discerning
the body of Christ.
The Third is, that we be rightly advised and assisted, for the due disposition of our hearts, & imploy ment of our thoughts and affections, in & about the time of the recei∣ving the holy Supper of the Lord.
You will I hope, finde somthing in this little Manuall, that may be serviceable to you for all these pur∣poses, as in the little
Catechism, and some devotions, that are ad∣ded unto the former edition thereof, and I do earnestly desire all of you from the eldest to the youngest, that are capable, to ac∣quaint themselves with that little Cate∣chisme, so as to be able to give an account thereof, and if they would exercise their humility so farr, as to give me leave to re∣ceive it from them, it
would be a comfort to me, & I hope no hurt or dishonour unto them; remember that of our blessed Saviour, Except ye become as lit∣tle children, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Mat. 18.3. And that of St. Peter, Be rea∣dy to give an answer unto every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear. 1 Pet. 3.15.
But the first and pe∣culiar
business of this Book, was to be help∣full unto you and o∣thers, for their more easy and orderly deli∣very of holy thoughts, about the time of the receiving of the Lords supper, and after the use thereof.
The work that is done in that holy So∣lemnity is of that na∣ture, that though it aimes at the greatest unity and fellowship that can be in an holy
Congregation, which are all thereby gather∣ed up close together into Christ; yet it of∣fers particular and re∣tired employment to thoughts and affecti∣ons of every particular receiver: Unto whom (being rightly quali. fied and prepared) it offers & seals all that mercy & grace which the Gospel promiseth in general unto all that are penitent Sin∣ners & true Believers;
and requires of every one a very serious at∣tendance unto private and secret meditation and holy devotion. There are in the time of that sacred Celebra∣tion many pauses and intermissions of the joynt imployment of the Congregation, which doth, as it were, separate them unto their several works in their Soules. Whilest some are Receiving, it is the businesse of o∣thers
to be in the holy preparation of them∣selves to the Duty; And they that have thus passed through both these performan∣ces, are to be exercised in the admiration of that mercy they have received, & in the in∣flaming of their hearts unto the holy praises of the Lord. Some course hath been taken heretofore in some Congregations to pre∣vent the chasme that
might be in the spiri∣tual work, & the fal∣ling of thoughts for want of holy suggesti∣ons, by the singing of a Psalm at the very time of the celebrati∣on: But besides that the pattern of our Saviours practise, Mat. 26.30. leads us to be∣lieve that to be a work more proper and fit to succeed than accom∣pany that holy Busi∣ness: The very noise of that service, in those
that are at leasure to be employed in it, ap∣pears to be too great an Enemy unto that severe attention and holy sequestration of spirit that is required in those that are to be employed in Recei∣ving, which doth least of all admit of the of∣fers of distraction. I know no way better to prevent all incon∣veniencies, & to make up all gaps in that sa∣cred celebration, than
to offer some variety of short Meditations & Devotions, into the hands, and unto the hearts of the parti∣cular Receivers, to be used according to those severall works that they have to doe, which may be as so many several notes of the Spiritual Song; which being compo∣sed in their right or∣der and consent, will make up an holy Har∣mony in the ears of
the Almighty. If any part seem too long, there is nothing impo∣sed, but every Com∣municant may satisfie the bents of their own devotions, & answer the measure of their time and leasure, by marking out some of the shortest forms un∣to themselves, especi∣ally in that which is to be done about the time of the receiving; Or, if they have better of their own, or from
any other, they may spare their troubling of themselves with this.
God (I hope) will pardon the infirmi∣ties, and his people ac∣cept of the poore en∣deavours of him

