



SIR,
AS for my Preaching this Sermon, there needs no Apology. I hope it was a word Prov. 25.11. Verbum dictum juxta modos su∣os. Vel super, suis rotis. Fitly spoken: and that's enough not only to excuse, but also to justifie the speaking of it.
If there needs one for Publishing it, I have one ready. the whole Nation is now (as it were) upon a Vie of Loyalty; and Good Subjects are zealously expressing their Duties to their MIGHTY SOVEREIGN in all meek acknowledg∣ments. And my sending out this Sermon, being but an At∣tempt or Instance of that nature; here's sufficient vindica∣tion for the doing of it, though otherwise it might have seem'd too forward a performance. For thus I act but as a Living Member of the Whole; and as inclin'd or drawn by true natural sympathy, into decent compliance with the General tendency.
Who may not lawfully run with the Public, when its Course is not onely Regular but Commendable? And when all sorts are eager to pay their just Tribute, why may not I also tender mine? If it be but a Peny, yet it must be current, as having CAESAR's Image and Superscription upon it.
And then besides; Joy is a volatil and vehement thing; and when 'tis strong and high, is hard to be suppress'd. So that if amidst those common Triumphant Joys, which swell'd our Hearts, to see our Rightful PRINCE succeeding to these Crowns (when our last GREAT MONARCH laid them down with His Mortality) my share was too big for my Breast to contain, and I was fain to give vent to my Exultancy thus: none surely will turn
 it upon me as a fault. But in case they do, I am willing to bear all the Dint of their Censure, for the Redundant Satisfaction I feel in my self, transporting me into this LOYAL Guiltiness.
The Papers I presume, Sir, to put into your Hands. But not so much as a Guide, or fit Rule for your Practice; as an imperfect Idea, or Copy of your Virtue. Of that RELIGIOƲS LOYALTY (a Thing as noble as necessary) in which you are eminent according to, if not beyond the Character here given of it. I nothing doubt, but for the Honesty of them (which is al they pretend to) they shall be favourably accepted. And the rather, as being a real (though too slender a) Testimony of my Observance and Veneration of your Known Worth. The deep and lively sense of which, makes me justly desirous of being ever continued, in the Relation of,
Sir,

