



My Lord,
I Here present Your Lordship with the Sermon, which I Preached before You, being Requested by Your Lordship to Print the same.
And that I might choose the most suitable Subject that I could, in so short a time al∣lowed me; I considered the great Consterna∣tion and Amasement that is fallen upon all People, at the Appearance of the sore Trou∣bles
and Impending Judgments that seem near approaching, and are taking hold of us.
I knew all would be for avoiding of them, because 'tis natural to us to shun whatever we apprehend may do us hurt.
But herein, I saw, would be our Misery, That we should be too prone to struggle a∣gainst God, as the Prophet saith Israel did, Isa. 51.20. Like a wild Bull in a Net: The more we strive to avoid Trouble, the more we are encompassed with it, until we repent: This has been a practise fatal to all ages. The Israe∣lites, when besieged, repaired the Breach when made by the Enemy, but looked not to the Maker of it, the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 22.8, 9, 10, 11. who was the Hand that moved those Instruments of Trouble. Instances of this in∣discreet acting we have given of Ahaz and others; and indeed the Scripture History a∣bounds with many of them; for upon surpri∣sing trouble we start from dangers approach∣ing, faster oft-times than the well informed Judgment can move: From hence arise the many Rash and Precipitate Actions in a fright, many whereof are Ridiculous; some fatal to People in their Direful Effects.

Now to inform the Judgments, and Con∣vince the Consciences of all Men in such a Jun∣cture as this present Season is, of these two things.
First, What the Efficient and First Moving Cause of all their Trouble is, which if but re∣moved, the Effect must needs cease. And,
Secondly, What are the Effectual Means, Ef∣ficaciously to remove the Cause of our Trouble to all intents and purposes, so as not to hurt us, hic labor, hoc opus est.
This is our present and Principal Work and Business: I beseech God to give us all Grace, that we may successfully attend thereunto.
And according to my Ability and Opportu∣nity, I have demonstrated in the following Di∣scourse; these two things among others, in An∣swer to those before mentioned.
First, That the Reins of all Trouble, and all the Instruments of it, are intirely held in the Hands of the Great and Holy God, who order∣eth and disposeth of them for his own Glory; and that they go at his bidding, for the punish∣ing of Evil Doers, and the praise of them that do well. And,
Secondly, That an Unfeigned Repentance, at∣tended with a thorough Reformation, and fer∣vent
Supplication for Pardon and Forgiveness, are effectual means for the compleat Removal of all the Troubles we feel, or fear will befall us.
If this be first well done, then we may on good grounds expect a blessing from God on all our Endeavours, and on those prudent and likely Measures, which, as Christians, and as Reasonable Creatures, we may be guided unto as lawful, useful, and necessary Mediums to re∣move what we seek to avoid.
But if this work of Repentance, Reformati∣on, and Uncessant Seeking of God and his Fa∣vour, at whose disposal we stand or fall, be not speedily and resolvedly set about in the strength of the Grace of God, we are undone; and all o∣ther attempts will prove abortive and fruitless; and all our hopes and expectations from any o∣ther Counsels or Designs, will come to no∣thing.
Nothing less than the Infinite Unaccountable Free and Sovereign Grace of God, can save an Impenitent and Unreformed People; I pray God to Pity, Pardon, Spare and Save this sin∣ful City and Nation, for his own Name and Glory sake, and for his Word and Promise sake, that the set time to favour Sion may now come,
and then we shall certainly be delivered, Psal. 102.13, 14, 15.
But sure I am, nothing else can help us, with∣out Repentance, Luke 13.3.
And if God should for his own Name sake save us, as he did Israel; yet the Impenitent and Unreformed are not like to be the better for it, unless the goodness of God lead them to Repen∣tance by it, Rom. 2.4. and to fear him for it, Jer. 33.9. Hos. 3.9. For there is no peace to the wicked, saith the Lord; and when he saveth the Righteous out of Trouble, then he bringeth the wicked in their stead, 2 Pet. 2.9. When the one rejoyce, the other shall mourn, Isa. 65.13. So that we must repent and reform first or last; we ought to begin, 'tis best so to do, God grant we may accordingly.
And to prevail on this City and Nation to Consider their ways, to Repent and Reform, and and seek the Favour of God alone, is the design and endeavour of this Undertaking, and the Purport and Intent of the following Dis∣course.
And therefore it is dressed in a plain and homely stile, to reach the meanest capacity, not to please the over-curious and nice Palates of too dainty Hearers, but to reach the Heart, Inform
the Judgment, and convince the Conscience, as most suitable to such a subject, rather than to humour the fancy.
In a Storm none desires the Pilot to give his directions in a gilded Oration, but to tell quick∣ly, and speak plainly, what is most necessary to be done: And what Ovid saith of his Book de Tristibus,
Vade sed incultus, qualem decet exsulis esse,
Infelix habitum, temporis hujus habe.The same may be said of the present Season: Nor indeed would the time allotted me, admit; it being so very short, that constrained me to thrust it forth courser than I desire to present the Publick withall.
I shall not further detain you Lordship, but with a Tender of my Thankful Acknowledg∣ment of your former Favours to me, which though I cannot requite, yet do not forget.
And also, humbly to manifest my Grateful Sence of the kind Acceptance my poor Labours found with your Worthy Brethren the Al∣dermen, who were pleased to vouchsafe the hearing the following Discourse. And,

Lastly, To express my joy at the News of the Restauration of the Rights and Priviledges of the City; things which I have publickly ex∣pressed the high value I had for them former∣ly to my cost, which I do not repent of; it be∣ing the Duty of an English Man, and a Chri∣stian, on all occasions to own and esteem them: And I am satisfied your Lordship doth so, as well as any other person.
I pray God give this City and Nation Re∣pentance and Reformation, and then we may hope for a Blessing on all Endeavours for its welfare; which that God of his Infinite Mercy will yet be pleased to afford them, is, and shall be the Prayers of,

