



SIR,
IT was St. Cyprian's Complaint long since (and a very sad one, because a very true one)Videns ille idola dere∣licta, & per nimium creden∣tium populum sedes suas ac templa deserta, excogitave∣rit novam fraudem, ut sub ipso Christiani nominis titulo fallat incautos. Haereses inve∣nit & Schismata, quibus sub∣verteret fidem, veritatem cor∣rumperet, scinderet Ʋnitatem. De Ʋnit. Eccle. That the Devil see∣ing his Idols left, and his Seats and Temples forsaken by a Multitude of Believing People, thought of a new Cheat, how under the very Title of the Christian Name, he might de∣ceive the Unwary. He invented Heresies and Schisms, whereby he might subvert the Faith, corrupt the Truth, and cut UNITY asunder.
 And how very successful this Invention of his has been, and how many and grievous Mischiefs it has wrought, and may still produce, Experience shews us, and gives us but too good Grounds to suspect. I pray GOD make us throughly sensible of it, and so deeply affect every one of us with it; as that the Dangers which threaten us, and grow upon us from our unhappy Di∣visions, may be timely prevented, and for ever super∣seded, by a speedy and perfect Closure of all sides. And O what a Blessed Change would it be (considering how we are crumbled into Sects and Factions) to have our many Differences moulded up into one common Interest; and all separate Parties melted down into Christian Unity!
Might this Discourse in the least Measure contri∣bute to that Glorious Work, I should never repent of its Publication, though I was drawn to it with Re∣luctancy.
I confess, Sir, when I outstood your first Motions to it, and those that were made by other excellent Per∣sons, while I was in your City; I hoped and concluded that I had finally freed my self from farther Solici∣tations of that nature. But when I found that they followed me into the Country, and when I met with this Passage, amongst others, in your Letter, It is not only my Opinion, that your Sermon will be Serviceable to the Publick, towards Healing the
 Breaches that are amongst us; but others of bet∣ter Judgment than my self, do unanimously agree to the same; and all People that I converse with, desire that I would use my Interest, to perswade you to Print it. I then thought I had reason to sub∣mit, and accordingly have done it.
And truly fear of Censure, as well as force of Intreaty, prevailed with me to gratifie you in the In∣stance. For in case I had refused, they who desired the Sermon might come abroad, would have condemn'd me, it may be, for not duly practising my own Do∣ctrin, which press'd Men by all the means they could use, to endeavour Unity: Than which (you both wisely and seriously note in your Letter aforesaid) as nothing can be more seasonably discoursed on; so there is not any thing more desirable by good Christians, or more to be sought after in this divided Nation. I heartily wish that All were of your Mind, then it might be hoped that their En∣deavours after Spiritual Unity, would be such, as GOD would Bless with Happy Success. At least, Sir, it would make People very careful to omit no∣thing conducive thereunto, if I may judge by your Procedure. For not so much as One single Ser∣mon, tending to Union, could be heard by you; but as mean as it is, you would have it made publick. In case it proves Instrumental that way, I shall
 greatly rejoyce in my compliance with you. And if it does not, I shall still have the Satisfaction of answering the Desires of many Good Men; and more particularly of testifying my self to be,
Honoured Sir,

