


My Lord,
REligion being not that Melancholy Piece, that Obligeth us to be∣come Unsociable, and Ene∣mies to all that hath any dif∣ference to Chearfulness & Plenty; but rather Instru∣cteth
us, how to make use of Both, so as we may best enjoy our Selves, and benefit Others: I hope that inherent Goodness, which hath rendered you so Remarkable for your Cha∣rity, will not refuse Her now Your Refuge, when by Your Noble Dispositions she is En∣courag'd, not only to pretend to, but confidently Plead a just Title to your Patronage.
'Tis true, the Receders from this Duty, neither re∣gards her Rule, nor owns her Practice, but are afraid of all that carries the Face of Love, and true Munifi∣cence; and are only Valiant in breaking those holy Laws, which Heaven hath made Eternal: That would have no such Images of God in the World, as the Distres∣sed; and seem to believe, Liberality, at best, but a Romish Superstition.
But let these, I say, do Right to Julian the Apo∣state, and Confess, it was no Aspersion thrown upon our Religion, when he gave out,
there was nothing in it beyond a Mode of Believing, that will not allow her Sacred Sanction, nor submit to the Rule of Charity; but had rather acknowledge Her a Popish, or an Italian Ver∣tue, than have Her Natu∣raliz'd here, to the Prejudice of the Exchequer.
This part of it, that is here presented, is but the Imperfect Effigie of the Precept, per∣form'd by one that is at pre∣sent, render'd by his ill Cir∣cumstances, too great a Dependent on its Mandates.
I know You would even dote upon the Piece, were it well Drawn, because it is impossi∣ble, for Right-Reason, to resist the Charms of Truth and Love, Painted in good Colours to the full Proportion.
My Ambition, at present, extends but to Your Pardon, not to Your Esteem; and it is my Request, that where it cannot be admitted as a Counsel, it may serve for an Admonition: Hoping you will have the same Vene∣ration
for the Vertue, and not look upon Her as the less a Beauty, because I have shew'd Her in so mean a Habit.
Charity takes most de∣light in her Self, when she goes Plainest, and is in a Dress of Condescention; affecting no Garbe so Little, as that of a Great Fortune.
If you discern Imperfections in the Copy, let not Charity for my Sake, fall under an Imputation; That needs no such Advocate as I am, nor such a Common Pen, but one from an Angels Wing, to advance Her Esteem.
There is a Beauty in Ho∣liness, exceeding that of State; and a Glory in Hu∣mility, Superior to the proud Inscript of Monarchs: Both of these waits upon Charity, and are the proper Orna∣ments of Her Profession.
But here the known Antipa∣thy which some Persons visibly Bares to the disregarders of this Duty, diverts my for∣ward Pen, believing it not
Pertinent to be too Nice in my Description of that, which hath been already so excel∣lently well expressed in your Life and Conversation.
The Consideration of which, obliges me to an unwilling Silence, by Humbly taking leave to Subscribe my Self,

