



My Lord,
WHAT a worthy Pattern of Orthodox steddiness your Lordship has been, in our infamous times of mobility and mutation, is evi∣dent to all: And therefore this discourse
 knew not whither so naturally to direct its motion, as to such a Center. Nor was it sooner determined into that ten∣dency, but it was greatly confirmed and quickened in the same, by this conside∣ration: That your Lordship was ever a strenuous Assertor of Really Ancient and Catholick Truth. Yea, when others durst not give it so much as due coun∣tenance; your Lordship afforded it generous Entertainment, and Honoured it with Zelous Vindication and Patro∣nage. And where Truth in general found such noble Wellcome and Protection; the sacred Verities here contained, pre∣sum'd themselves intitled to kind re∣ception, sutable to their respective weight and dignity. This encouraged them to present themselves to your Lordships hands, when the joynt importunity of Friends and Strangers, temted them from mine.

I could wish, my Lord, that the Sermon held better proportion to its ex∣cellent subject. But so pregnant and vastly fruitful is that; that to discourse it up to its genuine faecundity, would be a task too great for the Tongues of Angels; and therefore no wonder if mine faultered in it.
It was grave advice of the wisePorph. in vit. Py∣thagoras, . Not to carry the Pictures of the Gods in little Rings. Thereby in∣sinuating how improper it is, to exhibit the DEITY in narrow Symbols, and pourtray His MAJESTY in slighty semblances; to stamp His Greatness in a trifling impress, and crowd him into a diminutive and incompetent Cha∣racter. This admirable Rule I must own I have violated, nor need any im∣peach me as guilty in the case, but my conscious apprehensions. I know I have
 injured the Divinest JESƲS by stri∣ving to magnifie Him. But so must the best do as well as I, that dare venture to describe Him in His lowest Glories: Tho this is extremely laudative too; as it bespeaks Him exalted above all com∣mendation.
Should any go about to Paint a Voice, to show its sweetness; or to Landskip Music, to express its harmony: Their endeavours must needs prove insignifi∣cant, because Art affords no Analogous Images or Types so curious as can exem∣plifie them. And for the same reason, vane must the attemts of all Mortals be, that would fully accompt for JE∣SƲS'S Perfections. They want expressions to decipher them, nor can they tell where to find a supply. Were Rhetorick it self Subpoena'd in, with all the copious variety it has; and set to declare His inexplicable nature, or
 indearing favours to the Children of Men; all it could say, would amount but to florid and decent obloquy; to an elegant Libell, or Gentiel disparage∣ment.
But then (which is the scope of all this) how happy, my Lord, are we Christians, that serve a Master, of such ineffable magnificence. A Prince so incomparably Sweet and Heavenly, that there is no uttering His nature or his kindness. To at∣temt to do it, is at once to undertake an impossible work, and run our selves directly upon most certain frustration.
Pray, my Lord, I most humbly be∣seech you, to this Illustrious JESƲS (the Glorious, but wronged Argument of my Discourse) that I may serve Him conscionably in my inferior capacity; and honour Him in imitating that rare example of vigilance and fidelity;
 which your Lordship, in your eminent and deserved station, laudably sets be∣fore me. So I shall be sure to approve my self,
My Lord,

