



Most dread Soveraigne.
WHen that Maiden-Monarch, the Won∣der of the World in her time, Queene Elizabeth (of famous memory) swai∣ed the Imperiall Scepter of this King∣dome, in her latter dayes, my deere Fa∣ther, Doctor Philemon Holland, pre∣sented unto her Maiesty, his English Translation of the Romanes most re∣nowmed * Historiographer.Tit. Liv. Anno. 1600. And it pleased her Highnes full of Clemency, to reach out the Golden Scepter of her gracious acceptance thereof.
Sol occubuit, nox nulla sequuta est:
For, no sooner was that glorious Sunne set, to our sight on Earth, in our Horizon, and translated to shine in heaven, but your Royall Father King Iames (of blessed memory,) appearing even then by his radiant beames out of the North, in maturitie of time, came to we are the same imperiall Diademe lawfully descended upon his Head. At whose very first entrance,Plutarch. Anno. 1603. my said Father dedicated his translation also of * Traja∣nus his Masters Morals unto his Majestie, who was no lesse pleased to hold forth his Gracious hand and accept the same.

Also, when my unworthy selfe offred mine owne Collections,Anno. 1610. en∣tituled (Herωologia Anglica) unto his Highnesse, he most graciously received it.
And now, most deare Soveraigne, unto this present version of Xe∣nophons Cyrupediam out of Greek, which is, as I may say, the Authour his Master-Peece, and my fathers worke likewise, your Majestie hath the sole right; in regard that he enterprized it long since, and that by speciall order and direction from your Royall Father, delivered unto him by one of his neere servants in Court, (even when your selfe were in your tender yeeres) for the contemplation and use of your most Ge∣nerous and Magnanimous Brother, Prince Henry, now in Heaven. Of whose vertuous life and Princely exercises, more may bee seene in the said Herωologia.
His death caused a demurre as it were in publishing thereof: untill of late my father, importuned by some friends, having revised and fini∣shed his said Traduction, destined it to me his sonne, that in regard both of the Author and Argument, it might lie no longer in obscurity, but at length (and as I hope in good time) see the light of the Sunne.
The Author then of these books, Xenophon, a deepe Philosopher, a politike Counseller of State, and an expert Warriour beside, how-ever hee penned them Non ad Historiae fidem,Epist. ad Quin∣tum Fratrem. as Cicero writeth, sed ad Effigiem justi Jmperij: yet in such request they were, that Scipio Africanus the famous Romane Commaunder, was never wont to lay them out of his hands; for, as the same Oratour recordeth, Nullum in hijs praetermissum est officium diligentis & mo∣derati Imperij. No mervaile then, that L. Lucullus A noble Generall under the Romanes, being at first a raw and unexpert Commaunder, by serious studying upon these books on ship-boord, became so wor∣thy a warriour, and compleat Generall, as that he vanquished the most puissant, politick, and victorious Mithridates, King of Pontus, who had before, subdued in manner all Asia. And all these books wrote he so sweetly and eloquently in Greek, that he was named the Muse, or (as Suidas writeth,) The Bee of Athens. Insomuch as the very Mu∣ses were reported to have spoken in Xenophons voice; as out of whose mouth, by the testimony of thatCicero Orator. Romane Oratour, alluding to Nestor in Homer, melle dulcior fluebat oratio Which albeit my father in Eng∣lish could not Parallele: yet treating as he doth of the life and atchieve∣ments of so worthy a Prince; of whom may I seeme to crave Patro∣nage, in the first place but of your sacred Selfe, my liege Lord? For these
books how ever Englished, may haply hereafter, if your Majesty shall thinke so good, be held worthy the view and imitation of your right Roial Son, our most hopeful Prince Charles whom I cānot name but with this zealous and devout prayer, That he may grow up in stature and in favour with God and Man. Vouchsafe therefore, I most hum∣bly crave, of your innate Clemency, which makes you renowmed throughout the Christian world, not to withhold your Golden Scep∣ter, but in like manner as your late Predecessours and Progenitours have done, to welcome into your Court, Greeke Xenophon his Cyrus, a Persian Prince by birth, but now clad in English Accoustrements, speaking our Language, and hither arrived to kisse your Roiall hand: especially seeing he is that Cyrus the elder, of whom the holyEzra 1.2. Scrip∣ture maketh honourable mention. And why should I doubt hereof, considering he being a warlike Monarch and skilfull in Armes, accor∣ding to the auncient discipline, tendereth discourse of military Prepa∣rations, Stratagems and Expeditions, now in these dayes (not with∣out Gods providence,) of Action: when as your Majesty and your subjects are so deeply engaged with your Royall Allies and Confede∣rates, in Martiall Actions, who fight the Lords Battailes; and that, blessed be God, with late good and victorious successe; so as we can∣not but hope still, for better, now that your Royall Aide is not wan∣ting, and the Britains Banners are there advanced. For although your Majestie, in great wisedome hath of late laid downe Armes, and en∣tertained Peace with some Christian Princes; so as wee for the time may say, Dulce bellum inexpertis: Yet, as the wisest of Kings said,Eccles. 3.8. There is a time for Warre, as well as for Peace.
Demaundeth your Majesty now, what he is, that dareth to ap∣proach so neere your Presence, as to speake of Warre in time of Peace? Give your poore vassall leave to answer in the submissive voice of a loyall subject: He is no Schollar professed, nor Martiall man, yet a lo∣ver of learning; and being one of the Trained Band, to guard CA∣MERAM REGIS, alwaies prest without your Imprest money, to fight, if occasion be presented, in defence of your Majesties person, of the Realme, of that Faith and Religion, whereof you, under God, are entituled The sole Defender: yea, even to lay downe his dearest life: For according to my fathers Jmprese, Pro Christo & Patria, dulce periculum: Which I desire of God, may be my last Cygnean song.
However, The Lord of Hosts fight for you: The God of Iacob protect you: The King of Kings preserve your most excellent Maje∣stie
in health and safety of soule and body, from all your enemies, spi∣rituall and temporall, Foraine and Domestique. The same IEHOVAH preserve you from all Warres, Disasters and Diseases; and in the end, he give you one Coelestiall Crowne, for your three Terrestriall. And let not him prosper or thrive that will not eft-soones say and pray, LET THE KING LIVE: yea and I adde,
Methushelahs life the King of Heaven Him lend,
Vpon Whose life, Millions of Lives depend.
To conclude these illiterate Lines: The English Translatour of this Booke (my deare Father) now an old man, full of yeeres, and living still in your Mediterranean City Coventry, (named in former times CA∣MERA PRINCIPIS) farre remote from Court, could not himselfe present this last labour of his unto your Highnesse hands, but hath left it unto me so to doe. Deigne therefore my Liege Lord, and deare Soveraigne, with my Fathers loyalty and mine prostrated, your benigne Aspect hereunto and gracious Protection thereof, though from the unworthy hand of him (who thrice humbly beggeth par∣don for his boldnesse)

