



Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,
I Had no purpose to come in Print, but Your Majesty com∣mands it, and I obey. Most sorry I am for the Occasion that induced me to speak, and that since hath moved You to command me to Print. Nor am I ignorant that many things, while they are spoken and pass by the Ear but once, give great Content; which when they come to the Eyes of Men, and their often Scanning, may lie open to some Exceptions. This may fall to my Lot in this particular, and very easily, considering my many Diversions, and the little time I could snatch from other Imployment to attend this. Yet chuse I rather to obey Your Majesty, than to Sacrifice to mine own Privacy and Content.
Since then this Speech uttered in publick in the Star-Cham∣ber, must now come to be more publick in Print; I humbly desire Your Sacred Majesty to Protect me, and it, from the undeserved Calumny of those Men, whose Mouths are spears and arrows, and their Tongues a sharp sword, Psal. 57. 4. Though as the wise Man speaks, their foolish Mouths have already called for their own stripes, and their Lips (and Pens) been a snare for their Souls, Prov. 18. 6, 7.
The Occasion which led me to this Speech is known. There have of late been divers Libels spread against the Prelates of this Church. And they have not been more bitter, which is the Shame of these raging Waves, than they are utterly . 13. false, which is Our Happiness. But I must humbly beseech Your Majesty to consider, That 'tis not We only, that is, the

Bishops, that are struck at, but, through our sides, Your Ma∣jesty, Your Honour, Your Safety, Your Religion, is im∣peached. For what Safety can You expect, if You loose the Hearts of Your People? And how can You retain their Hearts, if You change their Religion into Superstition? And what Honour can You hope for, either present, or derivative to Po∣sterity, if You attend Your Government no better than to suffer Your Prelates to put this Change upon You? And what Ma∣jesty can any Prince retain, if he lose his Honour and his People?
God be thanked 'tis in all Points otherwise with You: For God hath blessed You with a Religious Heart, and not subject to Change. And he hath filled You with Honour in the Eyes of Your People: And by their Love and Dutifulness He hath made You safe. So that Your Majesty is upheld, and Your Crown flourishing in the Eyes of Christendom. And God forbid any Libellous Blast at Home from the Tongues or Pens of a few, should shrivel up any growth of these.
We have received, and daily do receive from God, many and great Blessings by You: And I hope they are not many that are unthankful to You, or to God for You. And that there should be none in a Populous Nation, even Enemies to their own Happiness, cannot be expected. Yet I shall desire even these to call themselves to an Account, and to remember, that Blasphemy against God, and slandering the Footsteps of his Anointed, are joined together, Psal. 89. For Psal. 89. v. 50. Wherewith thine Enemies hath Blasphemed Thee, and slandered the Footsteps of thine A∣nointed. he that Blasphemes God, will never stick at the Slander of his Prince; and he that gives himself the liberty to Slander his Prince, will quickly ascend to the next Highest, and Blaspheme God.
But then, as I desire them to remember, so I do most hum∣bly beseech Your Majesty to account with Your self too: And not to measure Your Peoples Love by the Vnworthiness of those few. For a Loyal and Obedient People You have, and such as will spare nor Livelihood, nor Life, to do You Service; and are joyed at the Heart to see the Moderation of Your Go∣vernment, and Your Constancy to maintain Religion, and Your Piety in Exampling it.
And as I thus beseech You for Your People in General, so do I particularly for the Three Professions which have a little suffer'd in these Three most Notorious Libellers Persons.

And first for my own Profession, I humbly beg of Your Majesty to think Mr. Burton hath not in this many Followers, and am heartily sorry he would needs lead. The best is, Your Majesty knows what made his Rancour swell; I'll say no more.
And for the Law, I truly Honour it with my Heart, and believe Mr. Prynn may seek all the Inns of Court, (and with a Candle too if he will) and scarce find such a Malevolent as himself against State and Church. And because he hath so frequently thrust mistaken Law into these Pamphlets, to wrong the Governors of the Church, and abuse your good and well∣minded People, and makes Burton and Bastwick utter Law which, God knows, they understand not, (for I doubt his Pen is in all the Pamphlets) I do humbly, in the Church's Name desire of Your Majesty, that it may be resolved by all the Reverend Judges of England, and then published by Your Majesty, That our keeping Courts, and issuing Process in our own Names, and the like Exceptions formerly taken, and now renewed, are not against the Laws of the Realm, (as 'tis most certain they are not) that so the Church-Govern∣nors may go on chearfully in their Duty, and the Peoples Minds be quieted by this Assurance, that neither the Law, nor their Liberty, as Subjects, is thereby infringed.
And for Physick, the Profession is honourable, and safe; and I know the Professors of it will remember that, Corpus Humanum, Man's Body, is that, about which their Art is con∣versant, not Corpus Ecclesiasticum, or Politicum, the Body of the Church, State, or Commonwealth. Bastwick only hath been bold that way. But the Proverb in the Gospel, in the St. Luke 4. 23. Fourth of St. Luke is all I'll say to him, Medice, cura teip∣sum, Physician, heal thy self. And yet let me tell Your Ma∣jesty, I believe he hath gained more by making the Church a Patient, than by all the Patients he ever had beside.
Sir, both my self, and my Brethren have been very course∣ly used by the Tongues and Pens of these Men, yet shall I never give Your Majesty any sow'r Counsel; I shall rather manifie Your Clemency, that proceeded with these Offenders in a Court of Mercy as well as Justice: Since (as the Re∣verend Judges then declared) You might have justly called the Offenders into another Court, and put them to it in a way

that might have exacted their Lives, for their stirring (as much as in them lay) of Mutiny and Sedition.
Yet this I shall be bold to say, and Your Majesty may con∣sider of it in Your Wisdom, That one way of Government is not always either fit or safe, when the Humours of the People are in a continual Change: Especially, when such Men as these shall work upon Your People, and labour to infuse into them such malignant Principles, to introduce a Parity in the Church or Commonwealth. Et si non satis sua sponte in∣saniant, instigare, And to spur on such among them as are too sharply set already: And by this means make and prepare all Advantages for the Roman Party to scorn Vs, and pervert Them.
I pray God bless Your Majesty, Your Royal Consort, and Your hopeful Posterity, that You may Live in Happi∣ness; Govern with Wisdom; Support Your People by Ju∣stice; Relieve them by Mercy; Defend them by Power and Success; And Guide them in the true Religion by Your Laws and most Religious Example, all the long and lasting Days of Your Life: Which are and shall be the daily Prayers of

