

To the HOLY, ORTHODOX CHURCH OF CHRIST. Happily cleansed from the filth of POPERY, My dear Mother, GRACE and PEACE.
THe Church of Christ in old time, appealed to the Scrip∣tures, Councils, and Records of the Ancients, in deciding of que∣stions, whereby the Peace of the Church was disturbed, or course of the Gospel retarded: and then the An∣tients did interpret the Scriptures, not as they were by the crooked in∣terpretations of Sectaries, or Hereticks,

accomodated to their own dreams, but according to the Analogy of Faith, by the consent of other Scriptures. In the Church there hath alwayes been great profit by, and very much need of Councils: and in conclusion, if ill-employed men had rejected the Records of the Antients, they were forthwith exploded by the Church.
To these, I say, did the Church go straightway, as to an holy anchor, when any tempest arose, as may be seen in Sisinnius, who perswaded The∣odosius, studying to put an end to the unseasonable controversies of that time, ,Sozom. 7. 12. &c. to avoid disputations, with Se∣ctaries, & to require of them, Whether they would receive those, who before the distraction of the Church, were the interpreters of the Scripture and Doctors? Unto whom pronoun∣cing judgment on the questions e∣mergent, according to the Scrip∣tures,

they should submit them∣selves.
I judged the same was to be done by me, (O Spouse of Christ, and be∣loved Mother) when this unhappy question about the Lords Day solem∣nity (alwayes in use and esteem in the Christian Church) arose: that the things which the Lord hath written upon this matter in the Holy Records, being first observed, I might betake my self to the Councils and Records of the Antients: by whose engines, (for no new ones do I judge to be ne∣cessary to vanquish the enemies which oppugn the solemnity of this Festival) I may assault the adversaries of this ordination, both with the authority of Scriptures, and likewise with the consent and records of reverend Anti∣quity plainly attested: in gathering whereof, I thought it expedient to dis∣cover to Thee the purpose of my mind, which take briefly thus.
First of all, I gathered into one, the judgments of the Antients, upon this Subject, not that I ascribe more to An∣tiquity than Truth: for that I leave to the Papists: but I am determined with St. Hierom, to read the Antients, tryEp. ad Alex. all things, hold fast what is good, and not recede from the faith of the Catho∣lick Church. I run not unweaponed, that is, deprived of spiritual know∣ledge, revealed in Gods Word, to the Antients; as to the Philistian Smiths, for sharpening my husbandry instru∣ments, but because I see that the Holy Ghost hath very sparingly delivered himself in the Scriptures (although in them he hath recommended to us its name, use, and Apostolical institu∣tion) about the Lords Day, I there∣fore consult the Antients, who faith∣fully retain what they received from the Lord by the Apostles, that their pious opinion and practise being observed, we may observe like∣wise

what we are to do in this case.
Secondly, Divers have set out sun∣dry things upon this subject, to the great profit of the Church: but few have touched what was the sacred pra∣ctise of the more pure Church, in keeping this solemnity entirely. These things gave me occasion to enquire more deeply into the question; not onely to help me against my own for∣getfulness, but also to mitigate tedi∣ousness to others, into whose hands Ecclesiastical Writers have not ei∣ther fallen, or being detained with the weighty offices of their charge, could not peruse them. Ut profit homini∣bus, si fie∣ri potest, multis; si minus, paucis; si minus, pro∣ximis; si minus sib Senec. de tio sapien¦tis. It was in my design hereby to make provision for both vacancy and studies, whilst I present unto their eyes a brief account of the antiquity of the Lords Day. This is required of every man, e∣ven▪ nature dictating it, That he profit many, if it can be; if not so, yet a few; if not so, yet his

neighbours; if not so, yet himself.
Thirdly, I judged it not unsea∣sonable, in this deplorate state of the Church, to set forth this solemnity; and that for a two-fold reason; be∣cause the abominable, and un-chri∣stian-like violation of the Lords Day, doth expose the holy Worship of God Almighty to the wicked's scorn: and from hence, even hence, hath flown an inundation of all that mise∣ry, whereby the darkened glory of the Church hath fallen. Alas! with what squalor and miseries, is the face of the Church, sometimes shining and happy, now in all Nations obscured! They who love it with a sincere love, do see, and lament it; although they who are bewitched with the malignant spirit of Popery, see, and rejoyce at it: Neither is there among us anyPs. 74. 9. that knoweth how long; the godly are fallen by the sword, the little ones are dashed together; and they that

are with child are cut asunder: oh, woe is me!
—Quis talia fando
Temperat à lacrymis?—
—Who can forbear
At telling such events to shed a tear?
This afflicted face of Christs Church doth call us to true repentance, in performing whereof, the violation of the Lords Day (which bringeth fuel to this fire) in the Church of every Nation, ought to grieve us. For this Festival hath been solemnized, as was fit, in the exercises of piety, ac∣cording to the rule of Gods Word, but by few: which the many Fairs upon it, for gainful labour, in all Nations, feasts, drunkenness, dancings, and the impious profanations of it, by Stage∣playes, do testifie. These flagitious Crimes (which do obscure the grace of

Christianity, and give farther oc∣casion of slander to those who blaspheme the name of Christ; and which the pu∣rer Church abhorred) do every where rage on the Lords Dayes, without pu∣nishment, to the great scandal of Reli∣gion.
In another respect also any man sees that this argument agrees not with the secure condition of these times: be∣cause in this age, if ever, Religion a∣mong many, languisheth under a bare profession of the Gospel, and its power lies down almost extinct, and dead.
I judge the sanctification of the L. day, to be a present remedy for both these maladies. First, it will prepare a way to extinguish that vehement flame where with the Church is every where a burning. This may easily be taught by the example of Gunther amnus, that most pious King of France: who, after he had observed, not without grief ofonc. Ma∣s. 2. c. 1. mind, that the State of his Kingdom

waxed worse, and that he fought with unhappy success against the Goths; the source of so great an evil being a little more deeply sought out, he reproved the Bishops which sed not with Gospel Doctrines the people committed to them, who, by their profligate manners stirred up the wrath of a revenging God against him: to prevent which evil for the future, it was ordained in a Council, That the Lords day should be kept religiously. The pattern of this most Christian King, while the victory in this our age inclineth to the enemies, perswades us devoutly to keep the L. day solemnity; for which we have ought unsuccessfully almost these twenty years, against the enemies of our liberty, that have roared in the Churches of God, to our great sor∣row. When we count the causes of this will, why should we not ap∣ply our minds with Gunther amnus

to bewail the heynous violation of the Lords day? and with the an∣cientConc. Pa∣ris Can. 50. Fathers, who observed, that the Lords day was not reverently kept, ordained, That first of all the Priests, then Kings and Princes, and all the Faithfull, should chief∣ly see to it, that the due observa∣tion, and Religious Devotion of so great a Day, now in so great a part neglected, be hereafter for a sign of Christianity more devoutly exhibi∣ted: and that the Christian Ma∣gistrates excellency be humbly desi∣red of the Priests, that in honour and reverence of so great a Day, all may be put in fear, that men pre∣sume not to keep markets, do their own pleasure, and works, on this Holy and Venerable Day. For when this solemnity is either taken a∣way, or neglected, there is no more hopes of the other parts of

Religion, than there is of the bodies safety, when the head is cut off.
Neither can there be used a more excellent remedy for curing the o∣ther malady, than the holy obser∣vation of this Festival; for the zeal of Religion waxing cold, and purity of holy Doctrine being ob∣scured, what will be more fit to heal errours, and stirr up the lan∣guishing strength of zeal, than that an entire Worship be offered up both publickly and privately, to God on this day? while the ho∣ly Word of God is piously preach∣ed, attentively heard: the Sacred Mysteries devoutly, and according to Christs institution celebrated: Prayers poured into the hearts of the Faithful, by the Holy Ghost, are with all humility offered up to God: Sacred Hymns sound in the Church, with a godly joy; the af∣flicted

members of Christ, and the poor provided for bountifully by the rich; and those that are sound in mind do mercifully comfort them that are sorrowful.
These are those exercises of the Lords Day, which will uphold Re∣ligion, when it is falling: which, if they be religiously observed of the Church, every one seeth how great an access will be made from thence to the Christian Religion, which we all profess. And these are the things (Most Holy Church of Christ) which in this elabo∣rate Treatise I do not utter foo∣lishly of my self: but humbly offer all things to Thee, as they are taken out of the Holy Scrip∣tures (where they afforded me any light in discussing of this dis∣pute) and the lights of purer Christianity: not because, as some∣time

Chrysostome, Homil. post prioris exilii reditum; Thou stand'st in need of my Doctrine, which in∣deed, I acknowledge to be but small, but that I might testifie my good will to thee, and that at length thy natural Sons (to whom Reli∣gion is both their care and their pleasure) may in some sort see what works they are to attend on that Day, and from what to ab∣stain, and with what authority the institution of this solemnity is sup∣ported. With Gods assistance I will briefly shew from the Holy Scriptures, and Fathers of better credit, asserting all these things.
Thou hast therefore (most Beloved Mother) the purpose of my mind in sending forth this little work. Do thou then, of thy humanity to thy friends, pardon the mistakes how great soever they be, in collect∣ing these things, and take in good part

the slenderness of my wit, which en∣deavoured according to its power, to benefit chiefly thy natural sons that sojourn in Germany (which I love upon many accounts:) This doth he humbly ask of thee,

