



Learned and Wortly Gentlemen,
HEalth is not only the Feli∣city, and Interest of eve∣ry individual Man in a Body Politick; but of the whole Community; because Diseases and Hurts (by disabling Pri∣vate Persons from Publick Service) do weaken and infeeble the Common∣wealth.
It's therefore a great wonder, that in this Age of Regulation and A∣mendment, nothing is done to recti∣fie the notorious Abuses, and secure us from the Mischief done by those
Men; who (without Skill or Autho∣rity) under pretence of restoring and conserving, do destroy Mens Lives and Estates; and more especially at such a time when the Nation is in need of both, for its Defence and Preservation.
Reformation is a Name we are very fond of, and a Work we seem to be alway doing: But when will it be done? We have lately gained a new Law to secure Apothecaries from being Scavengers; Is there not more need of one to keep Shooemakers from turning Doctors and Moon-Prophets? What else means the bleating of those Sheep in our Ears? If the Body Politick con∣sist of many Natural ones, the Con∣servation of the one, is the Mainte∣nance of the other; and that's be∣yond a Cobler's Last.

Why then should Impudent, Ignorant Quacks and Empiricks (Smiths, Weavers,3 Hen. 8. c. 11. Cob∣lers, Draymen, Women) &c. boldly and accustomably take upon them great Cures, and Things of great Difficulty? In the which, thy partly use Sorcery and Witchcraft, partly apply such Medicines unto the Disease, as be very noyous and nothing meet therefore; to the high Dis∣pleasure of God, great Infamy to the Faculty, and the grievous Hurt, Damage and Destruction of many of the King's Liege People; most especially of them that cannot discern the uncunning from the cunning.
And yet notwithstanding this Pub∣lick Declaration by a Statute Law of this Nation, these Impostors, as if they were Paramount to all Law, Superior to the Supreme; or Ty∣rants cum Privilegio, do with Impuni∣ty Defraud Men, not only of Health and Wealth, but Limb and Life too: And this, not only in the Coun∣try,
but in our Metropolis, in the Face of the Government, and of You, whose Province it is (if any Bodies) to Suppress such Pernicious and Destructive Vermin.
Gentlemen, It plainly appears by Se∣veral Statute. Laws of the Kingdom, and the Royal Grants of Kings and Queens of England, that you do not want sufficient Authority for this Good Work; and I am sure you cannot want Skill and Learning e∣nough to Alarm the Nation against them, to Baffle and Expose them to the World in their true Colours, that People may see in what Hands they trust their Lives.
It's your Duty and your Interest so to do. It's a Noble Work to re∣move those Nuisances; though the Subject of your Censure be vile as the Person is, whom I have now in
hand, yet the Undertaking is Gene∣rous, and worthy of You. Hercules thought it a besitting Labour to cleanse Augeas's Stables. Justice is not disparaged by Sentencing the vilest Malefactor to the Gallows. The Good atchieved to the Publick by a∣ny Act, hallows it. And thus may present Undertaking becomes worthy of your Patronage, and Imitation; and I presume to crave both.
For, beside the Common Injury Empiricks do to Mankind in general, they have a particular spight against you, which they spare not to disco∣ver on all occasions. Culpeper in one Breath Sentenced a whole College of your most Learned Predecessors, and King James their Patron, to the De∣vil. And this his Zany not only commends, but imitates him; affron∣ting you to the Queen, in a Dedication
of that Book wherein he abuseth me to the Reader, and in many other Rude Libels. I am therefore obliged to him, for giving me such good Com∣pany, and shall be quit with him anon.
He hath indeed a peculiar Merit in him which ought to be regarded: he is an Astrologer, as well as an Empirick; and that's a Composition, which Poy∣sons both Body and Soul; cheats Men not only of their Money and Health, but of their Loyalty too; whereby he becomes obnoxious to the Go∣vernment more ways than one; and ought to be Chastised by them with a Whip in the House of Correction, as well as by us in the Press.
These Astrological Quacks do not on∣ly Reproach, Libel and Rail at you, but Usurp your Office, contra∣ry to Law; taking upon them to Re∣form
the Settled Rules, Methods, and Medicaments, and give Encou∣ragement to all sorts of Empiricks, and Quack-salvers. So that the Faculty is in danger of being overthrown, and the Nation subjected to all those inconve∣niences, which the want of Able Phy∣sicians, and the multiplying Cheat∣ing Mountebanks, can introduce.
I know what I am to expect from these Men for giving them this Di∣sturbance; it's like stirring a Nest of Wasps; and accordingly I expect all the Mountebanks and Astrologers in the Nation will fall on me: for they, like Swine, if you take one by the Ears, the whole Herd will squeal, and gruntle at him who doth it. He that tosseth a Whelp in a Blanket, must expect much noise, and a filthy stink. And of this I am the more assured, because the fear of it only,
hath made this Hocus extract the Quintescence, or Powers of Billingsgate, and Bedlam, and throw it in my Face.
But these Foresights do not discou∣rage, nor damp me at all. If I serve Truth and the Publick, I gain my Point, let the Quacks and Astrological Impostors Rail on, and fling Dirt as fast as they can. If I but continue in the Favour and Reputation I am Honour'd with by you, none of it will stick upon

