



Right Worshipful and Reverend,
I Have made bold to prefixe your Names to this short Discourse, since you were pleased to honour it with your

courteous acceptance, I cannot but pay it down as your own by grateful acknowledgment. The Benignity of which I have had experience, makes me confident the second time: your Candor takes off those feares, which otherwise I should justly enter∣tain, upon the thoughts of your Judgement. I have here repre∣sented to your eyes what you heard, with a small addition of some things which could not conveniently be spoken for want of time, which was then more then ordinarily, but very justly, shortened by the Commemo∣ration.
My designe in the choyce of this Argument was not to in∣form you; 

; But, as it is one of the great Truths taught by our learned and pious Mother; of whom I received it, and confirm∣ed with the testimony of all Pro∣testant Churches, so when I weighed the Importance of it, I thought there was scarce any thing, that could be known, more necessary, and considering some things, which I shall by and by set down, I judged it not unseasonable,
I was satisfied as to the Im∣portance of it, since it includes the Fundamentall concerne∣ments of Christian Religi∣on, and the opening of it disco∣vers the strong Pillars upon which it leanes, and shewes written upon them clear testi∣monies, that it came from God;

by the consideration of which, well-meaning Christians will strengthen a rational belief in God, and easily perceive that Unbelievers, of what sort soe∣ver, are not such, because the Christian Religion doth not give proof of its Truth, but because they have either by some sad mis-hap, lost the faculty of believing most necessary Truths, or because something or other doth hinder them from consider∣ing that which is more then sufficiently credible.
Not that I presume to com∣prehend all those things which belong to the full explication of so great a matter, much lesse to comprise them in this small Treatise (for that I may with Alexander Aphrod. 

) but however it will briefly exhibit several things towards the vindication of di∣vine Truth from Atheistical unbelievers, for the justifica∣tion of our profession against Romish aspersions, some of which are foul enough; and take off that which is said against the perfection of the Scrip∣tures by dreaming Enthusiasts; and so may possibly contribute something to undeceive some which are in errour, or rescue from temptation an endangered soule.
Indeed the comprehensive sence of this Truth, That the holy Scripture does perfectly contain, and plainly discover

all things necessary to salvati∣on, doth include the Defence of our Saviours honour, the Demonstration of the Grace and Wisdome of the divine Providence, and the Churches security in point of salvation.
As for the honour of our Lord and Saviour, how shall that be safe, if it can be proved, that when he came to declare Gods mind to us, he went home again, having done but half his errand? if being to write an Epistle from God to us, he left some of the main con∣cernments of it, to be supplyed in a Postscript, to be written by any that would take up his Pen? and being about to make his own will, he was so forgetful of that which is to be done in such a

matter; that he left out many principal things, to be inserted in unattested posthumous Co∣dicills?
But it was quite otherwise; for Christ in the close of his Sermons declareth plainly, that he had perfected the Revela∣tion of necessary Doctrine, say∣ing a little before his Death, Go and preach what I have taught you, and those which believe, shall be saved.
And for the Grace and Wis∣dome of divine Providence, how can they but suffer, if God, pretending a great love to the happinesse of Man-kind, hath either not appointed sufficient meanes for their salvation, or not let them know what and where it is? If the Scriptures

be not plain, what wisdom, was it to write our highest concern∣ments in such words as we can∣not understand? If they be not perfect, how is his good will reall? for having given us but an imperfect notice of our way there, he doth not mention any power to make the supply, nor say whom he would intrust with it.
From both of these, the inse∣curity of our salvation is a ne∣cessary consequence. For how shall we attain so great an end, with uncertain and insuf∣ficient meanes? But as our Ma∣ster, that would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledg of the Truth, taught all that Truth before he left this world, so the Evangelist Luke,

in his Preface to the History of the Acts of the Apostles, af∣firms, that what Christ taught before his death, and till the Ascension was written by himself, not long after.
The Truth of these things doth so distresse those that en∣deavour to believe against it, that they are fain to summon their wits to find evasions from the mighty power of it.Exomo∣logesis. Cap. 32. To salve the Honour of our Master, one whom Cressy selects as the in∣comparable assertor of Roman opinions, and therefore chuseth him for the chief guide of his Apostasie from the Protestant Church (having rejected Cas∣sander, Padre Paulo & Piche∣rellus, for their moderation, and forgotten that,Cap. 22. ten Chapters

before, he professed to chuse such as had expressed themselves most moderately, and allowing the greatest latitude, viz. Sta∣pleton sayes, Praef. Relect. princip. fidei do∣ctrinali∣um.
Printed a year after Doctor Whitta∣kers death.That, what they adde to the Scriptures, is not aliud à Christo (quod esset ab illo recedere) sed à Scripturis, A pretty Sophisme! As if the subjects of a lawfull Prince, ma∣king such additions as they please to his Lawes, could de∣fend themselves by saying they added not aliud à Rege, sed à Legibus, (i.e.) a subject doth not derogate from the Kings Ho∣nour, though he accuse his Go∣vernment of Imperfection, and his Lawes of Insufficiency.
To avoyd this Imputation, he sayes, as his Partners do, that Christ made Delegates, and

gave them authority to teach other things besides the Scrip∣tures,Ibid. (praeter illas multa do∣cere.) But as this power is very great (for he sayes of it, Tantùm sanè ac tale est eorum ministerium, ut eorum vox, do∣ctrina, testimonium fundamen∣ti vice nobis esset, non secus at∣que ipsius vox, doctrina, testi∣monium fundamentum verita∣tis fuit, (i.e.) That their word, doctrine, and testimony, is no lesse a foundation to us, then the Word, Doctrine, aud Te∣stimony of Christ, is the foun∣dation of Truth:) So being well aware, that whosoever should lay claim to it, either those fifty bold mercenaries at Trent, who called themselves an Oecumenical Counsell, any

other Assembly of Papists, the Pope in his chaire, or the Ro∣mish Church under any capaci∣ty, if perchance they shall ever agree, as they have not yet, upon any, that they joyntly pro∣nounce Infallible, would be que∣stioned concerning the Right∣fulnesse of the Title, he endea∣vours therefore to frame them a Commission out of severall Scriptures; by which, as he doth acknowledge the Soveraign Authority of the Scriptures, so with what poor successe he en∣deavours to get countenance from them for his boldnesse, will easily appear, if one do but re∣peat the Scriptures, which he alledgeth, and joyn with them their true and plain Interpre∣tations: which I do more wil∣lingly

endeavour, though I fear to be tedious, for two rea∣sons.

1. First. because they are such considerable quotations in the esteem of his followers, that for want of better, (which they have sought in vain) though they be sufficiently impertinent, they are fain to make use of them still.
2. Secondly, because their Interpretations which are our Answers to them, may enable some that are weak to defend themselves against disputers, who shall endeavour to discom∣pose the quietnesse of their true beliefe from acknowledged grounds of faith misinter∣preted.

His first place is,Luke 10.16. He that

heareth you heareth me, &c. May they therefore say what they will? these words were spoken to the Apostles, whom Christ commanded to preach, and told them what they should say; and the Church now, speaking as it ought, declares nothing but what Christ said before, for ne∣cessaries, and whatsoever it doth according to his sayings, is war∣ranted by his authority, and so he that heareth them, heareth Christ. But what proof is here for saying any thing else besides that which is written?
Mat. 5. 14.The second is; You are the light of the world, &c. Yes, so they were; for Christ shined up∣on them, and they enlightened others, but it was by the reflexi∣ou of his beames, (i. e.) the

Truths that he taught them, and their writings are like Lan∣thorns of transparent glasse, in which that divine light is pre∣served, and through which it shines. But those Popish Tradi∣tions are like new thick horn, through which we cannot discern the old Apostolical Truth, only it glimmers through those holes which are necessarily left open, because their odde stuffe was ir∣reconcileably unfit to be close and handsomely joyned in one entire body with the verities of the written Word.
The third is, You shall be my witnesses in Jerusalem, in Ju∣daea, in Samaria, and to the ends of the earth. It's true, the Apo∣stles were Christs witnesses, for they testified his Life and Do∣ctrine,

and wrote them for me∣morials to succeding ages, but they would have been strange witnesses of his doctrine, if they should have told other tales of their own invention, and ri∣diculous assertours of his In∣stitutions, if they should have changed them at their pleasure; as for Example, If after he had given the bread and wine to his Disciples in his last Supper, they should upon the first repetition of that Sacrament have given only the bread to the Communicants, and so have contradicted Christs order with pretence of Tradition.
To prove that the Rock in the 16 of Matth. is the Pope, whom he calls the supreme Vicar of this Ministery, he quotes with it a place of Scripture, that over∣throwes

his interpretation. O∣ther foundation can no man lay,1 Cor. 3. 11. then that which is laid; which is, Jesus Christ. Which place, as it tells us plainly, who was meant by the Rock, so it is as strong a witnesse against his assertion as any thing that I have the ability to imagine, yet as if it were not full enough, he addes confirmation unto it, though contrary to his intention, by citing with it that famous te∣stimony of Eph. 2. where Christ is called the great corner stone, and the foundation of the Pro∣phets and Apostles. (i.e.) the foundation upon which they were built themselves, and preached as such to others.
In the close of that paragraph to prove a little better, that the

Church hath power to teach that which the Scripture doth not,John 16. 13. he quotes two places, I will send you the Spirit of Truth, which shall lead you into all Truth;Mat. 28. 20. and, I am with you unto the end of the world. And af∣ter this, triumphs as if nothing could be desired further.
But for all that, what this should be to his purpose, I am not able to ghesse. For what can be inferred from these pla∣ces, but to the benefit of our as∣sertion? for if Christ promised the spirit to lead them into all Truth, did he not teach them it perfectly? and if he promised to be with them unto the end, did he faile to assist them in their work, which was to pub∣lish the Truth by writing as well

as preaching? as we learn from S. John,Chapt. 20. v. 31 These things are written that ye might believe, &c. where he addes also, that this was done so perfectly, that whosoever should read and believe through their writing, might have eternal life. And as it appears from the 20. ver. of the 28. of Mat. read all together, all the assistance that the Church for future times could expect from this promise, is only while she does teach others to observe what Christ commanded, unlesse we will break that sacred con∣nexion, which all true Christi∣ans know to be between the pre∣cepts and promises of God. But to what precepts, except those which we find upon divine Re∣cord the promises should be an∣nexed,

we understand not, nor why they should not invent new promises, as well as pretend to other precepts. Neither do we trouble our selves at all with those big words, which, to amuse ignorant people, they speak con∣cerning the imperfection of the Scriptures, to be supplyed by the dictates of a pretended infallible Church, since we could never yet hear of any one Truth necessary to salvation, but we found it in Scripture, nor had any certain newes of one Tradition that is universall, and of Primitive de∣rivation, and so of good use in the Church of God, but we re∣ceive it willingly.
I have judged this Discourse the more seasonable, because the adversaries of our Church make

account that we are in such a strong tendency to the Romish belief, which contradicts what is here asserted, that one of their late Proselytes, with high approbation of his Fellowes, doth not fear to publish to the world their swelling hopes,Cres∣sy his Exo∣molo∣gesis. Cap. 21. That the fields are even white unto the harvest; and thereupon with other of his companions doth thrust in his sic∣kle, which he sharpens with such assertions as these; viz. That the Scriptures contain only such ne∣cessaries, as may serve in some de∣sperate cases,Cap. 10. Rush∣worth dial. 2 sect. 4. that they were pen'd only for some particular persons or congregations, that it is impos∣sible but that the text of the Scri∣pture is corrupted, That the Pro∣testants do but guiltily defend the universal sufficiency of the Scrip∣tures, &c. I know not why he de∣lights

so much in that word, guilty, for he useth it more then once, in the forementioned application; un∣less he was an Hypocrite when he was of our Religion, but I am sure he doth it not without grosse im∣pudence. For he knew well enough with what hearty courage, such ar∣guments of Truth as he thought un∣answerable, and all other testimo∣nies of a good conscience, the learn∣ed Protestants have discharged themselves in that point.
Having disparaged the Scrip∣tures. He and Rushworth in his Dialogues reprinted with Whites enlargements, endeavour to lodge amongst us again, as if they had ne∣ver been rejected before with de∣served scorn, a sorry company of their beggerly Innovations, great strangers to the Word of God, and

the Primitive Church,Exo∣molog. Sect. 3. Cap. 2. as Tran∣substantiation of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, Invocation of Saints, Ve∣neration of Images, Prayers for the dead, & Purgatory, Indulgen∣ces and publick services in Latin, nay,Rush. dial. 1. sect. 8,9, 10,11. the generality of Romish Ce∣remonies, and that we must be∣lieve there to be necessary for∣sooth, and that they were ever used in the Church of Christ.
Now this is but to revive the old trick, by which they still endevour'd our revolt to their Religion, viz. by making us disbelieve the perfection of the Scripture, & that we must for a supply receive their Traditions, as that unworthy Faction of Trent sayes,Sessio 4.
De∣cret. 1. Pari pietatis affectu & reve∣rentia, with the same holy regard which we give to the Scriptures,

concluding absurdly, that because some silly people, and others disaffe∣cted to our profession, by the trouble of worldly temptations, that have happened of late among us, are un∣warily inclined towards them upon shallow or perverse grounds, there∣fore few or none of us understand the Truth of our own Principles, or the impertinency & danger of their bold additions; or, as if because they had no mind to remember, it being to their grief, that therefore we have forgot that Bishop Jewel did long since shew them, that for six hun∣dred years after Christ, the Church taught not many of those things, which Rome did in his time; and as if Doctor Featly had not put the Jesuits to a loss, to prove, that for the first five hundred years, there was any City or Parish, in which there

was any visible Assembly that taught the Articles of the Councel of Trent. As if we did not know by their writings, that the Fathers ac∣knowledged the Perfection of the Scriptures, that we were at last by some strange Accident grown so foolish, as to take their corrupt present party for the Catholick Church, or that they could make us tamely believe that we differ from the ancient primitive institu∣tion, if we reject their Innovati∣ons, or as if we did not understand their horrid uncharitablenesse, which denies salvation to those multitudes of Christian Churches and Nations in the world, that re∣ceive not their new doctrines, and also as absolutely necessary, though they have no testimony of antiqui∣ty, and are contrary to Scripture,

and therefore for our selves, were as much afraid of their Excommu∣nications and sentences of dam∣nation, as we should be in danger of burning or hanging, if they had the same power over us now, which they cruelly executed in Queen Maries dayes. But I will insist no further upon this discourse.
Some attempt the disgrace of the Scriptures another way, making the pretence of the spirit an argument of the imperfection of holy Writ: and of such I think it is no of∣fence to affirm, that they do not con∣sider what they say. What good man ever denied the necessity of the help and guidance of the divine Spirit? We stand not in so much need of fire and water, as of Gods Grace and Spirit; but what wise man ever made this an argument of the Scri∣ptures

imperfection? but such a proof as this serves the inconside∣rate, God helps us to understand the Scriptures, & therefore they are an imperfect Revelation of his wil.
And if the Spirit be pretended fur∣ther then so, i.e. to teach us other ne∣eessaries to salvation, besides the Gospel of Christ. I answer, that this is such a spirit, as was not promised to the Primitive Church, no nor the Apostles, for the spirit was to lead them into all Truth,John 14.26. but by bring∣ing to their remembrance what Christ taught them, and that was enough. As Christ had received a commandment from the Father what he should say. Joh. 12.49. so he gave the words to them, which he had received. Joh. 17. 8. all of them. Joh. 15.15. all things that I heard of my Father, I have made

known to you. So that those which pretend the assistance of the spirit for divine teaching, & neglect these incomparable directions, do not well know what those words, The assi∣stance of the spirit, do signify, and so slight that, which they pretend to desire. For the Scriptures given by inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and written by his instinct for our instruction, are a great part of his assistance, and are therefore most truly called by the Italian Poet.
Dan∣tes.—La larga ploia
Dello spirito sancto, ch'e diffusa
In sù le vecchie' en sù le nuove coia.
i.e. a great shower of the holy spi∣rit powred down through both the Testaments, for the refresh∣ment of Gods Church.
These few things designed to do honour to the H. Scriptures, I hum∣bly

devote unto you. That approba∣tion which you have bestowed upon them already, shall be to me a suffi∣cient defence against any petty fro∣ward dislike. I hope they will be more acceptable to good men, and that, the businesse to which they are destin'd, will be more effectually pro∣moted by your recommendation. I have only further to pray that God would continue your prosperity, and this I do, not referring only to your particular capacity, though that well deserveth my best wishes, but also to your publick; looking upon you, if I may use the Emperours words,  Your private welfare is a great publick good. May those which wish you ill, repent, and instead of doing you harm, may they receive that benefit, which you are never

unwilling to administer, as any op∣portunity presents it self to you. Ju∣lian and some others used to despise the Galileans (so they termed the Christians) for fools, and to make them more such, they interdicted their children the use of Schools, in∣tending by, this means to deprive them of that wisdom & divine ac∣complishment which ariseth from true learning. It were a shamefull thing if Christians should grow so silly now, as to chuse that for a pri∣viledge, which he forced upon them, and they resented as a grie∣vous affliction. God of his Grace preserve both the Universities, till education be no necessity, and the want of learning no imperfection; which is and shall be the daily prayer of
Eton Coll. Aug. 16. 1650.

