



WHither should we fly for suc∣cour against approaching dangers but to such whose goodness and abi∣lity

hath both sheltered and protected us heretofore? 'Tis hard for a Cock-boat to venture to confront a Storm, when the ablest Ship must be in a great deal of dan∣ger. These Tempestuous times seem to threaten Ship∣wrack to the Common∣wealth her self, and what must a single member there∣of expect, when he steers himself betwixt the violence of Opposite Interests and Factions? Liberty! Li∣berty! was too lately the

Cry, when in the consequence the whole Kingdom la∣boured under the greatest Tyranny and Slavery; and those that affect the People with that, surprise them to their own purposes, in the unjust and covert pro∣pagation of their own af∣fected Superiority: Thus you see the Rocks on both sides, and from your ex∣emplary moderation I have studied and learned an im∣partial guidance in these distractions of time.

Happy is he who can di∣scriminate his Judgement, and (in these times) anchor his Affections in the blessed Haven of Peace, and infal∣lible impartiallity. We ought to be as sollicitous about the lawfulness of the means, as about the good∣ness of the end; It is a rule in Ethics that Bonum oritur ex integris, and in Christ's Schole, that We must not do evil that good may come of it; and we may possibly pre∣vent

future cousenage, if we examine the Lawfulness of every circumstance leading to the end propounded, be∣fore we are tickled and transported with the beauty of the pretence. This Ar∣mour I have always thought and learned from your ex∣cellent Example, and from the Principles laid down by the best Authors to be Faction proof.
This Compendium as your Relation claimes your Care; and under

that pretence the Author is emboldned to thrust it into your Closset. It claimes your perusal, because it is Political, and strikes at the Root of such Errors as are too frequently vi∣sible both in the Prince and People: Under the Go∣vernment of the first you are concerned in respect to the King's Care, as your Sovereign, and under the Obedience of the latter, with relation to your Duty, and Allegiance as his Sub∣ject.

It had been needless to have writ any Epistle at all, had I had no de∣signe more necessary, than that of commenting on my Labour (the full Bulk whereof extending it self not beyond the bigness of a moderate Dedicati∣on) But the most enforcing enducement was that of taking hold on this occa∣sion publickly to exert my gratitude.
And that the World may know how much I am

obliged always to render my self,

Grayes-Inne Feb. 8. 1679.
