



IT is notoriously known, when the Old Papists, the Fathers of the Quakers, could neither by Scripture or Reason, con∣fute the Doctrine of Luther and Calvin, they invented and publisht Libels instead of answers against the Men and their Mo∣rals: Luther was a Drunkard and had his Familiar: Calvin was an Intempe∣rate Man, and would often call for Wine, and they had sound the myste∣ry in his name; he was also a second Lucian, and by an Anagram, they had found this in his name also.





That their Children, the Quakers, have taken the like method with the best Mini∣sters and People in the World, is so notori∣ous, that it needs no proof; that they have done the like also with some, that, for their Blasphemies and other wicked procedures, have deserted them, is too well known; Mr. Bugg, Mr. Pennyman, Mr. Keith, Mr. Crisp, are Madmen, &c. I therefore can expect no better Treatment.
I am charged, by B. C. the Quaker, and by W. C. the Churchman, their Advocate.
1. With Love-Melancholly, and what Confessions I made on that Subject.
2. With being clapt up in a Mad∣house (BOX)
3. With high demands for Preach∣ing, and what befell me for it nigh Bristol.
To all which, I Answer.
1. That they are stories all False; and I declare, I never beard any such things charged on me by my greatest Enemies, till I read them in their Libels.
2. That I will give to any man Five Pound, that shall prove, that ever I was
 in Box, or any such place, One Hour.
3. That I never got much by Preaching, but at Brislington, named, I offer'd to give all their dues to a Minister, 10 year Fellow of Lincoln-Colledge, but then Poor, if they would employ him, ad I freely gave him his Table also.
Who shall regard a Quaker, who tells a story, That I or my Brother (for he can∣not tell which) were found in bed with I know who, by an Officer. Not I, fr I ne∣ver heard the story till now; and to be plain, I believe he neither: That al o aff rms, That Bristol Friends, Steel, &c. never left the Place of their Publick Wor∣ship, unless when sick, &c. When I ap∣peal to the whole City (particularly the disappointed Informers) whether, for seve∣ral years before King James's Indulgence came out, they could find Men or Women there. That also denies, That the Qua∣kers Bow to any Man, except a few, Corrupted by us, and Reproved by them: When it is so notorious to all the World. You (their Infallible head) are a great Bower, and so a common Idolater; that B. C. imitates you his Master, and con∣tinueth the Custome, since his denial of this,
 to his and the Quakers perpetual shame, as some of them confess.
Who shall regard what this Church man says after him, that talks of the Fable of the Mad-house, &c. and in such a stile, as if he were hastning thither, or lately came from thence; Cur, Yeing Cur, Mr. Woodcock, Goodman Goose, &c. this is no banter but amongst Children Young and Old: Whether, You Sir, were the Athor f the Quakers no Apostates, or helper to the materials (or rather immateri∣als) of that Boo, or only the Licenser, or Approver, mn think as they see cause; no Book must now go without consent; thus the Lords Mssage is stopt, curtail'd or chang∣ed, since it pleased you to set up Ecclesi∣astical Courts, and make Canons to try the Light by.
What if I should have affirmed stories, perhaps too true, of friend Green of Colchester, that Cleveland speaks f, that bugger'd a Mare; I had been guilty of too great rashness.
Help, Woodcock, Fox and Naylor,
For our Friend Green's a Stallion;
Alas what hope of converting the Pope,
When the Quaker turns Italian.

And that in good time of Christmas,
Which tho' our Friends have damn'd all
Yet when did we hear, of a curs'd Cavileer,
E'er play'd such a Christmas gambal?
But thus our matters teach us,
The intent being well directed,
Tho' the Devil trapan, the Adamical Man,
The Saint stands uninfected, &c.
Had your Friends and Advocates these stories of me by Revelation? as the two friends that came to Henry Windor had of the murther of his Child, and that the Spirit should appear in the Court before the Judge, which proving false, were impri∣soned, &c. Is it true, that in Pensilvania some have been put to death on friends Spirit of Discerning? When Christ was Crucified, had you been there, had you not told five false stories to their one? B. C. talks of my Learning, and that I am now the Champion of the Cause; that my Book was handed up and down the Ci∣ty as an unanswerable Book: I doubt
 not but you thought it unanswerable from the time you saw it; and I thank your scribe (as is said) for contributing his best help to prove it to be so, though you were plea∣sed (unaskt) lately to send me word, You had no hand in the Book; yet your so∣phistry is so great and abominable, I can∣not understand you. Such a man was Drunk, said a friend, when found to be false, yea with passion, hath been the an∣swer, &c. such Tricks are often among the erfect ones.
Y u have lately, to serve a turn, declared, That you believed Imputed Righteous∣ness in the sense we plead for; the Bo∣dy of Christ that was crucifi'd, Rose again, and is circumscrib'd in Heaven; That there shall be a Resurrection of the same Body laid in the Grave; that you believe 1 Cor. 15.20, 21. in a li∣teral sense, without an Allegory, when it was proved upon you, you had Printed the contrary, You made answer That was against Mens Relying on this &c. as I had it from that good Minister to whom, with others, you said all this.
Oh! How deceitful are Sinless Men? Goldney (that Creature in the shape of a
 man) lately deny'd he said this and that of such a place; when proved on him at my Lodgings, said, I did not name the place, though I pointed to it and spoke of it; like him that said, George Fox never said, He was the Son of God; which when proved, said, No, his words were, I am the Son of God. But there is no end of this Villany.
No Papist shall Lye or Equivocate more for the Church, than the gretest Quakers for the Light; You having refused the pro∣posals for a meeting, to consider my Que∣stions, and not owning the late Reply, I purpose to trouble you no more.
Pardon me that I begin with George Fox's Journal, a new Folio, Printed lately, since his death, and your large Preface; if I prove him a Lyar, &c. your Cause falls to the ground, for he was your first Apostle, or rather Deceiver: I doubt as you do not, so you cannot believe the Fables you relate of him.
Some think, You Sir, in another disguise, to be the Author of the book W. C. Willi∣am Calamus; I fear it is so, I hope it is not; if not, I question not but you know him, I appeal also to you, whether the da∣sign
 of my Reprimand were to answer both Papers, as he said, when I never saw the first, till I finisht my Reprimand, and then put in a few lines about Cato, &c. or not.
1. To prove G. Keith no Apostate, tho' very Erroneous, and proved the contrary from his charge of Election, &c. Then.
1. The Arminians in their Church are Apostates too, which must not be granted.
2. Then t New Church of England is an Apostate Church from her Doctrine, Discipline and Manners; which I have done at large, The Ʋnion with Rome, &c.
Is this an answer to say I am no Armi∣nian? What then? Are such as be, Apo∣states? You are an Ungrateful Wretch thus to reflect on the Church of England▪ What if I were? my Argument leads me to it; I am provoak'd to it; yet the N Church I reflected on; my work lay not so muh with them that own her Doctrine  Old Discipline, that keep from the Lord Table, Men Ignorant, Scandalous, Con∣tentious, that use not the new uninjoyn'd Ceremonies, lowing to the High Alt &c. What is he, that writing of Reproba∣tion, could not distinguish between a N
 possibile, and a Non futurum? Who says, God makes any mans Salvation im∣possible? others, besides G. Keith, have denied it: God hath made my being una∣ble to flee, a non possibile (naturally) but ne'er ordain'd my being born in Con∣stantinople so; he made it a non futu¦rum: so of Christs Legs not broken, he made it not an impossible thing, but a thing not future.
2. My design was to reprove him, for favouring the Foxonian Quakers, whom I proved to be Blasphemers, Imposters, &c. by proofs not commonly known, there∣fore I intituled my Book a Reprimand, not a Vindication; I dare appeal to you whether things are not so, and therefore such is he; as if unparaled Lying, Rudeness and Impertenencies had contended, which should make his Reply most Infamous.
To all this account of the Foxonian Quakers, he replies, without attempting to vindicate them, We are Fools.— and he hath found me, I thank him; very good Company; worthy good men of his own communion, and zealous for it too, as Mr. Bugg and Mr. Snake, for so I us'd to call him, seeing he puts not his name to
 his book as I do not to mine, yet all know the Authors. Mr. Keith's being my Tutor, I laugh at it; I speak it without vanity, and I suppose he knows it, he need be no more my Tutor, than I his; nothing is more evident to me, that W. C. wants not only a Tutor but Schoolmaster, to teach him to make True Latin and Verse, as the after account will prove; I take him to be a man of no True Learning, though a man of some wit, only childish terms and nauseous phrases sometimes spoils that too; the broken Latin Sir, looks like yours, who have little knowledge of that Tongue, less of the Gree, though you once would venture upon a criticism, forsooth, with Mr. Faldo, , which occasions a little merriment, there are that know your Ex∣cellency lies not that way, but in some other parts of Learning, Politicks, History and Theology.

