



MY LORD,
HAD I no other grounds whereon to warrant this Intrusion into your Lordship's Patronage, no o∣ther pretence to court your Protection, than barely by Prescription from your Lord∣ship's accustomed Favours, (which are the common effects of your uni∣versal Goodness) I should not have presumed, especially in thisWen e∣ one tt in∣t s Ctry's , is ei∣ter ate or md∣. Cri∣sis, to offer this Dedication: But 'tis from and under Principles, and those most eminent and invincible.
(like refulgent Attributes) your Lordship's Loyalty and Courage, that I presume to crave shelter: And the world knows the exube∣rous current of your inexhausted Virtues cannot be oppugn'd, even by the strength of the greatest ma∣lice; nor can the strongest Venome either hurt or prejudice amidst the glowing Beams or Sun-shine of your Lordships Excellence, but must, like the unwholsome Foggs, yield and flie before the vigour of the rising Sun.
Though (my Lord) I could plead my Innocence, and both justifie and cry out, Qui nihil injustè agit nullà opus habet lege, in bar to all the ma∣lice I must expect to meet with; yet that alone is not of force sufficient, but I must have Recourse to your Lordship for Succour and Defence. And I finde by common Experience from the Methods of Fanaticism, that by how much the greater my Innocence is, by so much the greater is the Danger I am to encounter;
and that not so much from the knowledge I have of my own weak∣ness, but much rather from the strength of Malice and Revenge, which are of the Leaven of Popery and Presbytery. However,Sir Ed∣mund-bur. Godfrey. The Archb. of St. An∣drews. I shall not fear under the defence and con∣duct of so good a Patron, being fortified with Truth and good De∣signe. The damnable practices of some men now-a-days, and the ac∣cursed cruelties of former times, are but Emblems of those insupportable Miseries which these Kingdoms (di∣vided into Schisms and Pies) have too evident grounds to pect and dread from the devouring jaws of Ambition, Self-interest, and Fa∣ction.
I have endeavoured in the Sequel of this, to represent unto your Lord∣ship and all good men, the arcana Ambitionis, by giving you the pi∣cture of a person over-covetous of Glory. The Piece is coarse, but yet ad vivum pictus; 'tis the vera Effigies or Expression of that which
was the life of our late abortive Troubles and disastrous Miseries. But here I meet with the mighty Objection of that Party which were either active in the late Rebellion, or are now about to act over again and revive that bloudy Tragedy, (viz.) The Act of Oblivion, which is strongly pleaded in bar to all discourses of this kind; and is so strangely wrested by some men of these times, even to anticipate our Oblivion to what they are now a∣bout to act.Qutre. But I would fain know, whether it be an offence against the Clemency of his Majesty and that Parliament, so to remember the old Rebellion,An. 1641. as a caution to prevent the multiplied Oppressions and Mi∣series that must necessarily happen upon a new; when (alas!) 'tis too evident, that men act now-a-days upon the same principles with those of Forty One; and it can never be intended, but that this Act ought to bury both theTot Fa∣cions of te times td t a Rebellion. Offences with the punishments due to the demerits and guilt of the Offenders.

'Tis true (my Lord) that trans∣cendent Act of Mercy, the Act of Oblivion, did for some while rake up the Ruines of our Late Times; and we rested quiet, till some of wretched and restless principles (who are always busie for the sake of Strife and Contention) did first begin to spread abroad those Embers, to search for old matters to work new Mischiefs: But I hope the all-discerning Providence of Heaven will surprize them in their own Snares, and so direct the prudence of our Governours, that by their wise Counsels they may timely crush the Cockatrice in its shell.
Shepherds of People had need know the Kalendars of Tempests in State;Bacon's Essays, Tit. Sedi∣tions. for as there are certain hol∣low blasts of wind, and secret swel∣lings of Seas, as the certain signes of a following Tempest; so are there in Kingdoms and Commonwealths.
—Ille etiam caecos instare Tumultus Saepe monet, Fraudés{que} & operta tu∣mescere Bella.

Libels and licentious Discourses a∣gainst the State, when they are fre∣quent and open; and in like sort false News, often running up and down to the disadvantage of the Government (and hastily embraced) are amongst the signes of Trouble. Virgil giving the Pedigree of Fame, saith, She was Sister to the Gyants.
Illam Terra Parens ira irritata Deo∣rum,
Extremam (ut prohibent) Caeo En∣celado{que} sororem
Progenuit. —
As if Fames were the reliques of Seditions past; but they are indeed no less than the Preludes of Seditions to come: However, he noteth it right, that saith, Seditious Tumults, and seditious Fames, differ no more but as Brother and Sister, Masculine and Feminine, especially if it once come to this, That the best actions of a State, and the most plausible, and which ought to give the greatest
contentment, are taken in an ill sence, and traduced; for that shews the en∣vy great, as Tacitus saith, Conflata magna invidia, sen benè, sen malè, gesta premunt.
Private Cabals.There is no Kingdom but hath a Race of men, that are ingenious at the peril of the Publick, that are bu∣sie and at work always to undermine that Government that is uppermost; such whose shoulders are so gauled, as they cannot endure the least touch of Obedience: So that as one said of Galba (in respect of his withered crooked body) Ingenium Galbae ma∣le habitat; so may I say of these, in regard of their crooked use, That Wit could not have chosen a worse Mansion than where it is vitiated, and made a Pander to Wickedness. There is, I say, a Generation of men that are born to be the plague and disquiet, and scourge of the Age they live in; that gladly sacrifice the pub∣lick Peace to private Interest; who when they see all fired, with joy warm their hands at those unhappy
flames which themselves kindled; tuning their merry Harps, when o∣thers are weeping over a Kingdoms Funeral.
Your Lordship is of another stock, so that whosoever contemplates your Actions, must conclude, that Nobi∣litas est sola atque unica virtus: Your Family hath stood against the Waves and Weathers of Time, im∣movable, fixt, and always loyal. Je feray mon devoir, is the Motto of your Lordships Coat; which I can∣not better understand than in allusi∣on to that excellent Axiome of the Roman Orator, Omnis laus virtutis in actione consistit. And now, my Lord, I humbly beg that your Lord∣ship will be pleased to own me for such, as I am obliged in all Gratitude to render my self,
Oct. 5. 1680.

