


SAlomon the peaceable Prince of Israell, as we read in the thirde of Kynges, after he had finished the buildyng of the Lordes Temple (which he had vij. yeares in hand) made his petition to the Lord for all that should pray in the sayde Tem∣ple, or turne theyr face toward it. And his request was graūted, the Lord aunswering him, as we read in the sayd booke. cap. 6. I haue heard (sayth he) thy prayer and haue sanctified this place. &c. Al∣beit the infinite Maiesty of God is not to be compassed in any materiall walles, yet it so pleased his goodnesse to respect this praier of the king, that not only he promised to heare thē which there prayed, but also replenished the same with his own glory. For so we read again in the book aforesayd: Et non poterant mini∣strare propter nebulā, quia repleuit gloria domini, domū domini. 3. Re. 7.
Vpon like trust in Gods gracious goodnes, if I sinnefull wretch, not comparing with the building of that Temple, but folowing the zeale of the builder might either be so bold to aske, or so happye to speed, after my vij. yeares trauayle about this Ecclesiasticall History, most humbly would craue of al∣mighty God to bestow his blessing vpon the same, that as the prayers of them, which prayed in the outward Temple were heard: so all true disposed mindes which shall resort to the reading of this pre∣sent Hystory conteining the Actes of Gods holy Martyrs, and monumentes of his Church, may by example of theyr lyfe, fayth, & doctrine, receiue some such spirituall fruit to theyr soules through the operation of his grace, that it may be to the aduauncement of his Glory, and profite of his Churche, through Christ Iesus our Lord. Amen.
But as it happened in that Temple of Salomon, that all which came thither, came not to pray, but many to prate, some to gaze and see newes, other to talke and walke, some to buy and sell, some to carpe and finde fault, and finally some also at the last to destroy and plucke down, as they did in deed. For what is in this world so strong, but it will be impugned? what so perfect, but it will be abused? so true, that will not be contraryed? or so circumspectly done, wherein wrangling Theon will not set in his tooth? Euen so neither do I looke for any other in this present Hystory: but that amongest many well disposed Readers, some Waspes nest or other will be styrred vp to busze about mine eares. Such a daungerous thing it is now a dayes to write or do any good, but either by flattering a man must of∣fend the Godly, or by true speaking procure hatred with the wicked. Of such stinging Waspes and buszing Drones I had sufficient triall in my former edition before, who if they had found in my book any iust cause to carpe, or vpon any true zeale of truth had proceded agaynst the vntruths of my story and had brought iust proofes for the same, I could haue right well abide it. For God forbid, but that faultes, wheresoeuer they be, should be detected and accused. And therfore Accusers in a Common wealth after my mind do serue to no small stead.
But then such Accusers must beware they play not the dog, of whom Cicero in his Oration spea∣keth, which being set in Capitolio to fray away Theeues by night, left the Theeues and fell to barcke at true men walking in the day. Where true faultes be, there to bay & barcke is not amisse. But to carpe where no cause is, to spye in other strawes, and to leape ouer theyr owne blockes: to swalow Camels, and to strayne gnattes: to oppresse truth with lyes, and to set vp lyes for truth, to blaspheme the deare Martyrs of Christ and to Canonize for Sayntes, whom Scripture would scarce allow for good Sub∣iectes, that is intollerable. Such barcking Curres, if they were well serued, would be made a whyle to stoope. But with these brauling spirites I entend not at this time much to wrastle.
Wherefore to leaue them a while, till further leasure serue me to attend vpon them, thus much I thought in the meane season, by way of Protestation or petition, to write vnto you both in generall & particular the true members and faythful Congregation of Christes Church, wheresoeuer either cō∣gregated together, or dispersed through the whole Realme of England, that forsomuch as all the see∣king of these Aduersaryes is to do what they can, by discrediting of this History with slaunders & si∣nister surmises, how to withdraw the Readers frō it: This therfore shalbe in few wordes to premonish and desire of all and singuler of you (all well minded louers and partakers of Christes Gospell) not to suffer your selues to be deceiued with the big brags, and hyperbolicall speeches of those flaundering tongues, whatsoeuer they haue or shall hereafter exclame agaynst the same. But indifferently staying your iudgement till truth be tryed, you will first peruse, & then refuse measuring the vntruthes of this Hystory, not by the scoaring vp of theyr hundreds and thousandes of lyes which they geue out, but wisely weying the purpose of theyr doinges, according as you finde, and so to iudge of the matter.
To read my bookes I allure neither one nor other. Euery man as he seeth cause to like as he list. If

any shall thinke his labor to much in reading this history, his choyce is free either to read this, or any other which he more mindeth. But if the fruite thereof shall recompence the Readers trauell, then would I wish no man so light eared, to be caryed away for any sinister clamour of Aduersaryes, who many times depraue good doinges, not for the faultes they finde, but therefore finde faultes because they would depraue. As for me and my history, as my will was to profite all and displease none: so if skill in any part wanted to will, yet hath my purpose bene simple, and certes the cause no lesse vrgent also, which moued me to take this enterprise in hand.
The partiall delig of storie writers.For first to see the simple flocke of Christ, especially the vnlearned sort, so miserably abused, and all for ignoraunce of history, not knowing the course of times, and true discent of the Church, it pittyed me, that part of diligence so long to haue bene vnsupplyed in this my countrey Church of Englande. Agayne considering the multitude of Chronicles and story writers, both in England, and out of Eng∣land, of whome the most part haue bene either Monkes or Clientes to the sea of Rome, it grieued me to behold how partially they handled theyr storyes. Whose paynefull trauell albeit I cannot but cō∣mend, in committing diuers thinges to writing, not vnfruitful to be knowne, or vnpleasant to be read: yet it lamented me to see in theyr Monumentes the principall poyntes, which chiefly concerned the state of Christes Church, and were most necessary of all christen people to be knowne, either altoge∣ther pretermitted, or if any mention thereof were inserted, yet were all things drawn to the honor spe∣cially of the Church of Rome, or els to the fauor of theyr owne sect of Religion. Wherby the vulgare ort, hearing and reading in theyr writinges no other church mentioned or magnified but onely that Church which here florished in this world in riches and iollity, were drawne also to the same persua∣sion, to thinke no other Church to haue stand in all the earth, but onely the Church of Rome.
In the number of this sort of writers, besides our Monkes of England (for euery Monastery almost had his Chronicler) I might also recite both Italian, and other countrey authors, as Platina, Sabellicus, Nauclerus, Martinus, Antoninus, Vincētius, Onuphrius, Laziardus, Georgius Lilius, Pollid▪ Virgilius, with many more, who taking vpon thē to intermeddle with matters of the church, although in part they expresse some truth in matters concerning the Bishops and sea of Rome: yet in suppressing an other part, they play with vs, as Ananias and Saphira did with their mony, or as Apelles did in Pliny, who painting the one halfe of Venus comming out of the sea, left the other halfe vnperfect. So these writers while they shew vs one half of the B. of Rome, the other halfe of him they leaue vnperfect, & vtterly vntold. For as they paynt him out on the one part glistering in welth and glorye, in shewing what succession the Popes had from the chaire of S. Peter, when they first began, and how long they sate, what Churches and what famous buildings they erected, how farre theyr possessions reached, what lawes they made, what councels they called, what honour they receiued of Kynges and Emperours, what Princes and Countryes they brought vnder theyr authority, with other like stratagemes, of great pompe and roy∣alty: so on the other side what vices these Popes brought with them to theyr seat, what abhominatiōs they practised, what superstition they mainteined, what Idolatry they procured, what wicked doctrine they defended contrary to the expresse word of God, to what heresies they fell, into what diuision of sectes they cut the vnity of christian Religion, how some practised by Simony, some by Necromancy and Sorcery, some by poysoning, some indenting with the Deuill to come by theyr Papacy, what hy∣pocrisy was in theyr liues, what corruptiō in theyr doctrine, what warres they raysed, what bloudshed they caused, what treachery they trauersed agaynst their Lordes and Emperours, imprisoning some, betraying some to the Templaryes and Saracēs, in bringing other vnder theyr feet, also in beheading some, as they did with Fredericus and Conradinus, the heires and ofspring of the house of Fredericus Bar∣barossa. an. 1269. furthermore how mightely almighty God hath stand agaynst them, how their warres neuer prospered agaynst the Turke, how the iudgementes of the godly learned frō time to time haue euer repugned agaynst theyr errours▪ &c. of these and a thousand other mo, not one word hath bene touched, but all kept as vnder Benedicite in Auriculer confession.
This partiall dealing and corrupt handling of Historyes, when I considered, I thought with my self nothing more lacking in the church, then a ful & a complet history, which being faythfully colle∣cted out of all our Monastical writers & writtē Monuments, should conteine neither euery vain writ∣ten fable for that would be to much, nor yet leaue out any thing necessary, for that would be to little: but with a moderate discretion taking the best of euery one, should both ease the labor of the reader from turning ouer such a number of writers: and also should open the plaine truth of times lying long hid in obscure darcknes of antiquity. Wherby all studious Readers, beholding as in a glasse the state, course, and alteration of Religion, decay of doctrine, and the controuersies of the church, might dis∣cerne the better betwene antiquity and nouelty. For if the things which be first (after the rule of Ter∣tullian) are to be preferred before those that be latter, then is the reading of histories much necessary in the church, to know what went before, and what folowed after. And therfore not without cause Historia,Primum quod{que} vemum est Tertul. in old authors is called the witnesse of times, the light of verity, the life of memory, teacher of life, & she∣wer of antiquitie. &c. Without the knowledge wherof mans life is blind, and soone may fall into any kind of errour, as by manifest experience we haue to see, in these desolate latter times of the Church, when as the Byshops of Rome vnder colour of antiquity haue turned truth into heresy and brought such new found deuises of straunge doctrine and Religiō as in the former age of the church were ne∣uer heard of before, and all through the ignorance of times, and for lacke of true history.
For to say the truth, if times had bene well searched, or if they which wrote Hystories had with∣out partiality gone vpright betwene God and Baall, halting on neither side, it might well haue bene foūd the most part of all this catholicke corruptiō intruded into the church by the bishops of Rome,

as Transubstantiation, leuation, and adoration of the sacrament, auriculer confession, forced vowes of Priestes not to mary, veneration of Images, priuate and satisfactory Masses, the order of Grego∣ries Masse now vsed, the vsurped authoritie, & Summa potestas of the sea of Rome, with all the route of their ceremonies and wiedes of superstition ouergrowing nowe the Churche, all these (I say) to bee new nothinges lately coyned in the minte of Rome without any stampe of antiquitie, as by readyng of this present history shall sufficiently, I trust, appeare. Whiche history therefore I haue here taken in hand, that as other story writers heretofore haue employed their trauayle to magnifie the Church of Rome,Image of both Churches. so in this history might appeare to all Christian readers the Image of both Churches, as well of the one as of the other: especially of the poore oppressed and persecuted Churche of Christ. Which persecuted Church though it hath bene of long season troden vnder foote by enemyes, neg¦lected in the world, nor regarded in histories, and almost scarse visible or knowne to worldly eyes, yet hath it bene the true Church only of God, wherin he hath mightely wrought hetherto in preseruing the same in all extreeme distresses, continually stirring vp frō time to tyme faythful ministers, by whō alwayes hath bene kept some sparkes of hys true doctrine and Religion.
Now for asmuch as the true Church of God goeth not lightly alone,The descent of Christs Church from the Apo∣stles time descri∣bed. but is accompanyed wyth some other Church or Chappel of the deuill to deface and maligne the same, necessary it is therfore the difference betweene them to be sene, and the descent of the right Churche to be described from the Apostles tyme. Which hetherto in most part of histories hath bene lacking, partly for feare, that men durst not: partly for ignoraunce that men could not discerne rightly betweene the one and the other. Who beholding the Church of Rome to be so visible and glorious in the eyes of the worlde, so shining in outward beauty, to beare suche a porte, to cary suche a trayne and multitude, and to stand in such hye authoritie, upposed the same to be only the right Catholike mother. The other be∣cause it was not so visibly known in the world, they thought therfore it could not be the true church of Christ. Wherin they were far deceaued. For although the right church of God be not so inuisible in the world, that none can see it, yet neyther is it so visible agayne that euery worldly eye may per∣ceiue it. For like as is the nature of truth▪ so is the proper condition of the true Churche, that com∣monly none seeth it,How the tru Church of Christ is visible and not visible▪ but such onely, as be the members and partakers thereof. And therefore they which require that Gods holy Church should be euident and visible to the whole world seeme to de¦fine the great sinagogue of the world rather then the true spirituall Church of God.
In Christes time who would haue thought, but the congregations and Councelles of the Phari∣sies had ben the right church: and yet had Christ an other Church in earth besides that, which albeit it was not so manifest in the sight of the world, yet was it the onely true Church in the sight of God. Of this Church ment Christ speaking of the Temple, whiche he woulde rayse agayne the thyrd day. And yet after that the Lord was risen, he shewed not himselfe to the worlde, but onely to his electe which were but few. The same Churche after that encreased and multiplied mightely amonge the Iewes, yet had not the Iewes eyes to see Gods Churche, but did persecute it till at length all their whole nation was destroyed.
After the Iewes, then came the heathen Emperours of Rome, who hauing the whole power of the world in their hands, did what the world could do, to extinguish the name and church of christ. Whose violence cōtinued the space of 3. hundreth yeares. All which while the true church of christ was not greatly in sight of the world, but rather was abhorred euery where, and yet notwithstanding the same small elly flocke so despised in the worlde, the Lorde highly regarded and mightely pre∣serued. For although many then of the Christians did suffer death: yet was their death neither losse to them, nor detriment to the Church: but the more they suffered, the more of theyr bloud encreased.
In the time of these Emperours, God raysed vp then in this Realme of Britaine diuers worthy tea∣chers and witnesses, as Elnanus, meduinus, Meltiuianus, Amphibolus, Albanus, Aaron, Iulius and other moe In whose time the doctrine of fayth without mens traditions was sincerely preached. After theyr death and Martyrdom, it pleased the Lord to prouide a generall quietnes to his Church, wherby the number of hys flocke began more to encrease.
In this age then followed here in the sayd land of Britayne Fastidius,The antiquitye of the Churche here in England with the des∣cent of the same. Niuianus, Patricius, Bacchiarius, Dubricius, Congellus, Kentigernus, Helmotus, Dauid, Daniell, Sampson, Elnodugue, Asaphus, Cildas, Heulanus Elbodus, Dinothus, Samuell, Niuius, and a great sort moe, whiche gouerned the Churche of Britayne by Christen doctrine a long season, albeit the ciuil gouernours for the tyme, were then dissolute & care∣les, as Gildas very sharply doth lay to theyr charge, and so at length were subdued by the Saxons.
All this while about the space of foure hundred yeares, Religion remayned in Britayne vncorrupt and the word of Christ truely preached, till about the comming of Austen and of hys companions from Rome, many of the sayd Britayne preachers were slayne by the Saxons. After that began Chri∣sten fayth to enter & spring among the Saxons, after a certayne romish sort, yet notwithstanding some what more tollerable, thē were the times, which after folowed, through the dilligent industry of some godly teachers, which then liued amongest them: as Aidanus, Finianus, Coleman Archbishop of Yorke Beda, Iohn of Beuerlay, Alcuinus, Noetus, Hucharius, Serlo, Achardus, Ealredus, Alexander Neckam, Negellus, Fenallus, Alfricus, Sygeferthus & such other: who though they erred in some few thinges, yet neither so grossely,Transubstantia∣tion not yet re∣ceaued for a publicke doc∣trine. nor so greatly to be complayned of in respect of the abuses that followed. For as yet, all thys while, the error of Transubstantiation and leuation, with auriculer confession was not crept in for a publicke doctrine in Christes Church, as by theyr owne Saxon Sermon, made by Aelfricus, & set out in the second Volume of this present history may appeare pag. 1114. During the which meane time although the Bishops of Rome wer had here in some reuerēce with the Clergy: yet had they nothing

as yet to do in setting lawes touching matters of the Church of England: but that only appertayned to the kings and gouernours of the land as is in this story to be seene. pag. 754.
The Church when it began to fall from  Aeneas Siluius ayth that Ma∣thila made the Pope heyre of those landes, which is called the Patrimonye of S. Pter. Ex Auen. lib. 6. Monkery when it beganne to ignem Eng∣land.And thus the Church of Rome albeit it began then to decline a pace frō God, yet during all this while it remayned hitherto in some reasonable order, till at length after that the sayd Bishops began to shout vp in the world through the liberalitie of good Princes, and especially by Mathilda a noble Duches of Italy. Who at her death made the Pope heyre of all her landes, and indued his sea, with great reuenewes. Then riches begot ambition. Ambition destroyed Religion, so that all came to ru∣ine. Out of this corruption sprang forth here in Englād (as did in other places more) an other romish kind of Monkery, worse then the other before, being much more drowned in superstition and ceremo¦nies, which was about the yeare of our Lord. 980. Of this swarme was Egbertus Aigelbert▪ Egwine, Bo∣niface, Wilfrede Agathon, Iames, Romayne, Cedda, Dunstane, Oswold, Athelwold, Athelwine Duke of Eastan∣gles, Lanfrancke, Anselme and such other.
And yet in this tyme also through Gods prouidence, the Churche lacked not some of better knowledge and iudgement, to weigh with the darcknes of those dayes. For although king Edgar, with Edward his base sonne being seduced by Dunstane, Oswold and other Monkish Clerkes, was thē a great author and fautor of much superstition, erecting as many Monasteries, as were Sondayes in the yeare: yet notwithstanding this continued not long. For eftsoones after the death of Edgar came king Ethelrede and Queene Elfthred his mother, with Alferus Duke of merceland, and other peeres and nobles of the Realme, who displaced the Monkes againe, and restored the maryed Priests to their old possessions and liuings. Moreouer after that followed also the Danes whiche ouerthrew those Monkish foundations, as fast as king Edgar had set them vp before.
And thus hetherto stode the condition of the true Church of Christ, albeit not without some re∣pugnance and difficultie, yet in some meane state of the truth & veritie, till time of pope Hildebrand called Gregory 7. which was nere about the yeare. 1080. And of Pope Innocentius 3. in the yeare 1215. By whome altogether was turned vpside downe, all order broken, dissipline dissolued, true do∣ctrine defaced. Christian faith extinguished. Instead whereof was set vp preaching of mens decrees dreames, and idle traditions. And whereas before truth was free to be disputed amongest learned men, now libertie was turned into law, Argument into Authoritie. Whatsoeuer the Byshoppe of Rome denounced, that stode for an oracle, of all men to be receaued without opposition or contra∣diction: whatsoeuer was contrary, ibso facto it was heresie, to be punished with fagot and flaming fire. Then began the sincere fayth of this English Church,The true Church when it began first to decay. which held out so long, to quayle. Then was the clerre sunne shine of Gods word ouershadowed, with mistes and darcknes, appearing like sacke-cloth to the people, which neither could vnderstand that they read, nor yet permitted to read that they could vnderstand. In these miserable dayes, as the true visible Church beganne now to shrinke and keep in for feare: so vpstart a new sort of players to furnish the stage, as schole Doctours, Cano∣nistes, and foure orders of Friers. Besides other Monasticall sectes and fraternities of infinite variety. Which euer since haue kept such a stirre in the Church, that none for them almost durst rout, ney∣ther Caesar, king, nor subiect. What they defined, stode. What they approued, was Catholicke: What they condemned, was heresie: whom soeuer they accused, none almost could saue. And thus haue these hetherto continued or raigned rather in the Church, the space now of foure hundreth yeares and odde. During which space, the true Church of Christ, although it durst not openly appeare in the face of the world, oppressed by tyranny: yet neyther was it so inuisible or vnknown: but by the pro¦uidence of the Lord, some remnaunt alwayes remayned from tyme to time, which not onely shewed secret good affection to sincere doctrine, but also stode in open defence of truth agaynst the disorde∣red Churche of Rome.
The true Church conti∣nueth in the middest of their enemies.In which Catalogue, first to pretermit Barthramus and Barengarius, which were before Pope Inno∣cent 3. a learned multitude of sufficient witnesses here might be produced, whose names neyther are obscure nor doctrine vnknowne: as Ioachim Abbot of Calabria, Almericus a learned Byshop, who was iudged an hereticke for holding agaynst Images, in the time of the sayd Innocentius. Besides the Martirs of Alsatia, of whome we read an hundred to be burned by the sayd Innocentius in one day, as writeth Hermanus Mutius. Adde likewise to these Waldenses or Albigenses, which to a great number segregated themselues from the Church of Rome. To this number also belonged Reymundus Earle of Tholose, Marsilius, Patiuius,Extrauagant cap Non sine multa.
Ex Nicholao Emerico. lib. Inquisitionum. Gulielmus de S. Amore, Simon Tornacensis Arnoldus de noua villa, Ioannes Semeca, besides diuers other preachers in Sueuia standing agaynst the Pope. Anno. 1240. Ex Cranz. Laurentius Anglicus a Mayster of Parris. anno. 1260. Petrus Ioannis a Minorite, who was burned after hys death. anno. 1290. Robertus Gallas a Dominicke Frier, anno. 1291. Robert Grosthead Byshoppe of Lincolne which was called Malleus Romanorum. anno. 1250. Lord Peter de Cugnerijs. anno. 1329. To these we may adde more our Gulielmus Ockam, Bongratius Bergomensis, Luitpoldus Andraeas Laudensis. Vlri∣cus Hangenor Treasurer to the Emperour, Ioannes de Ganduno. anno. 1330. mentioned in the Extraua∣gantes, Andraeas de Castro, Buridianus, Euda, Duke of Burgundy, who counselled the french king, not to receiue the new found constitutions, and extrauagantes of the Pope into his realme, Dantes Allige∣rius, an Italian, who wrote agaynst the Pope, Monkes and Fryers, and agaynst the donation of Con∣stantine. anno. 1330. Taulerus a Germayne preacher,Ex Ioan. Auen∣tins. lib. 7.
Extrauagant. cap. Licet inta doc∣trinm. Conradus Hager imprisoned for preaching a∣gaynst the Masse an. 1339. The author of the booke called, Poenitentiarius Asini, compiled about the yeare 1343. Michael Cesenas a gray Fryer, Petrus de Corbaria, with Ioannes de Poliaco, mentioned in the Extrauantes and condemned by the Pope, Ioannes de Castilione. with Franciscus de Arcatara, who were burned about the yeare of our Lord. 1322.Ex Bulli qui∣bdam Otho∣nis Epist. Her∣bipoensis. Ioannas Rochtaylada, otherwise called Haybalus, with an

other Frier martyred about the yeare. 1346. Franciscus Petrarcha,, who called Rome the whore of Ba∣bilon. &c. an. 1350.Extrauagant Ioan. 22. Ex Io∣an Frosiardo volum. 1. Cap. 211. Ex Trite∣mio. Georgius Ariminensis, an. 1350 Ioannes de Rupe Scissa, emprisoned for certayne pro∣phesies against the Pope. an. 1340. Gerhardus Ridder, who also wrote against Monks and Friers a book called Lacryma Ecclesiae. an. 1350. Godfridus de Fontanis, Gulielmus de Landuno, Ioannes Monachus Cardini. Armachanus, Nicholaus Orem preacher. an. 1364. Militzius a Bohemian, which then preached that An∣tichrist was come, and was excommunicate for the same, an. 1366. Iacobus Misnensis,Ex Bulla Gre∣gorij cap. 11. Mathias Pari∣siensis a Bohemian borne, and a writer against the Pope, an. 1370. Ioannes Mountziger, Rector of the Vniuersitie of Vlme,Ex Illirico. anno. 1384. Nilus Arch. of Thessalonica. Henricus de ota, Henricus de Hassia. &c.
I do but recite the principall writers and preachers in those dayes: Howe many thousandes there were which neuer bowed their knees to Baall, that is knowne to God alone. Of whome wee finde in the writings of one Ex Brushio. Ex Christiano Masseo. Brushius that xxxvi. Citizens of Maguntia were burned, an. 1390. Who follo∣wing the doctrine of the Waldenses, affirmed the Pope to be the great Antichrist. Also Massaeus re∣cordeth of one hundred and fourty, which in the prouince of Narbon were put to the fire, for not re∣ceiuing the decretalles of Rome: besides them that suffered at Paris to the number of xxiiij. at one time, anno. 1210. and the next yeare after were foure hundred brent vnder the names of Heretiques. Besides also a certayne good Heremite,Ex Ioan. Bacon Dist. 2. Quest. 1. an Englishman, of whome mention is made in Iohn Bacon. Dist. 2. Quest. 1. who was committed for disputing in Paules Church, agaynst certaine Sacramentes of the Church of Rome. an. 1306.
To discend now somewhat lower in drawing out the discent of the Churche. What a multitude here commeth of faythfull witnesses in the time of Iohn Wickleffe, as Ocliffe, Wickliffe. an. 1376. W. Thorp White, Puruey, Patshall, Payne, Gower, Chaucer, Gascoyne, Williā Swinderby, Walter Brute, Roger Dexter, Wil∣liam Sautry about the yeare. 1400. Iohn Badby, an. 1410. Nicholaus Tayler, Rich. Wagstaffe, Mich. Scriue∣ner, William Smith Iohn Henry, W. Parchmenar, Roger Goldsmith, with an Ancresse called Mathilde in the Citie of Leicester, Lord Cobham, Syr Roger Acton knight, Iohn Beuerley preacher, Iohn Husse, Hierome of Prage Scholemaister, with a number of faithfull Bohemians and Thaborites not to be told with whō I might also adioyne Laurentius Valla and Ioannes Picus, the learned Earle of Mirandula. But what do I stand vpon recitall of names, which almost are infinite.
Wherfore if any be so farre beguiled in his opinion to thinke the doctrine of the church of Rome (as it now standeth) to be of such antiquitie, & that the same was neuer impugned before the time of Luther and Zuinglius now of late, let him read these histories: or if he thinke the sayd historie not to be of sufficient credite to alter his perswasion let him peruse the Actes and Statutes of Parliamentes, passed in this realme of auncient time and therein consider and conferre the course of times; where he may finde and read.Statut. in An. 5. Rich. 2. An. Do∣mini. 1390. An. 5. Regis Richardi. 2. in the yeare of our Lord. 1380. of a great nūber (which there be called euill persons) goyng about from town to town in freese gownes preaching vnto the people &c. which preachers although the wordes of the Statute do terme there to be dissembling persons, prea∣ching dyuers Sermons contayning heresies & notorious errours, to the emblemishment of Christen faith, & of holy Church &c. as the words do there pretend: yet notwithstanding euery true Christian reader may conceaue of those Preachers to teache no other doctrine, then nowe they heare theyr owne Preachers in Pulpits Preache, agaynst the Bishoppe of Rome and the corrupte heresies of his Churche.
Furthermore he shall finde likewise in Statut. An. 2. Henr. 4. Cap. 15. in the yeare of our Lord. 1402. another lyke company of good Preachers and faythful defenders of true doctrine agaynst blynd he∣resie and errour. Whom albeit the wordes of the Statute there, through corruption of that time, do falsely terme,Ex Statut. in An. 2. Henr. 4. cap. 15. An. Do∣mini 1402. to be false and peruerse Preachers, vnder dissembled holines, teaching in those dayes openly and priuely new doctrines and hereticall opinions contrary to the faythe and determination of holy Churche. &c. yet notwithstanding whosoeuer readeth histories and conferreth the order and discent of times, shall vnderstand these to be no false teachers, but saythfull witnesses of the truth, not teaching any newe doctrines contrary to the determination of holy Church: But rather shall finde that Churche to be vnholy, which they Preached agaynst, teaching rather it selfe hereticall opinions contrary both to antiquitie, and veritie of Christes true Catholicke Churche.
Of the lyke number also, or greater, of lyke true faythfull fauourers and followers of Gods holy worde, we find in the yeare of our Lord. 142. specified in a letter sent from Henry Chichesley Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, to Pope Martin 5. in the fift yeare of his Popedome, where mention is made of so many here in Engand infected: (as he sayde) with the heresies of Wickleffe and Husse, that without force of any army they could not be suppressed. &c. Whereupon the Pope sent two Cardinals to the Archbishop to cause a tenth to be gathered of all spirituall and Religious men,Ex Literis Ar∣chiepiscopi Cant. ad Marti∣num. 5. Anno. Domini. 1422. and the money to be layde in the chamber Apostolicke, and if that were not sufficient, the residue to bee made vppe of Chalices, Candlestickes, and other implementes of the Churche &c.
What shall neede then any more witnes to proue this matter, when you see so many yeares agoe, whole armyes and multitudes, thus standing agaynst the Pope? who thoughe they bee termed here for heretickes and schismatickes, yet in that, which they call heresie, serued they the liuing Lord, within the Arke of his true spirituall and visible Churche.
And where is then the friuolous bragge of the Papistes, which make so muche of there paynted sheath, & would nedes beare vs downe, that this gournment of the Church of Rome which nowis, hath bene of such an old standing, time out of minde, euen from the primitiue Antiquitie, & that ne∣uer was any other church demonstrable here in earth for men to follow, besides the said only Catho∣lick mother church of Rome? whē as we haue sufficiently proued before by the continual descēt of the

Church till this present tyme, that the sayd Church, after the doctrine which is now reformed, is no new begunne matter, but euen the olde continued Churche, by the prouidence and promise of Christ, still standing, which albeit it hath bene of late yeares repressed by the tyranny of Romayne Byshops, more then before: yet notwithstanding it was neuer so oppressed but God hath euer main∣tayned in it the truth of his Gospell, agaynst heresies and errours of the Church of Rome, as in thys history more at full is to be seene.
Bloudy markes of Christes pas∣sion seene on mens garmentes in Germany. Anno. 1501.Let vs now proceede farther as we began, deducing this descent, of the Churche vnto the 1501. yeare. In which yeare the Lord began to shew in the partes of Germany wonderfull tokens, and blo∣dy markes of his Passion, as the bloudy Crosse, hys nayles, speare, and Crowne of thornes, which fell from heauen vpon the garments and cappes of men, and rockes of woman, as you may further read in this booke pag. 816. By the which tokens almighty God (no doubt) presignified what grieuous afflictions and bloudy persecutions shoulde then begin to ensue vppon his Churche for hys Gospels sake, according as in this history is described, wherein is to be seene what Christen bloud hathe bene spilt, what persecutions raysed, what tyranny exercised, what tormentes deuised, what trechery vsed agaynst the poore flocke and Church of Christ, in such sort as since Christes tyme greater hath not bene seene.
Seuentie yeares of captiuitie well neare ex∣pired.And now by reuolution of yeares we are come from the time of .1501. to that yeare now present 1570. In which the full seuenty yeares of the Babilonicall captiuitie draweth now well to an ende, if we count from the first appearing of these bloudy markes aboue mentioned. Or if wee recken from the beginning of Luther, and hys persecution, then lacketh yet xvi. yeres. Now what the Lord wil do with this wicked world, or what rest he will geue to hys Church after these long sorrowes, he is our father in heauen, his will be done in earth, as seemeth best to his diuine maiestie.
In the meane time let vs for our partes with all patient obedience wayt vpon hys gracious leysure and glorifie his holy name, and edifie one an other with all humilitie. And if there cannot be an end of our disputing, and contending one agaynst an other: yet let there be a moderation in our affecti∣ons. And for asmuch as it is the good will of our God, that Sathan thus should be let lose amongst vs for a short time: yet let vs striue in the meane while what wee can to amende the malice of the tyme with mutuall humanitie.Exhortation to the Church of England. They that be in errour, let them not disdayne to learne. They whiche haue greater talentes of knowledge committed, instruct in simplicitie them that be simple. No man liueth in that common wealth where nothing is amisse. But yet because God hath so placed vs Englishmen here in one common wealth, also in one Church as in one shippe together: let vs not mangle or de∣uide the shippe, which being deuided perisheth: but euery man serue in his order with dilligence, wherein he is called. They that sitte at the helme, keepe well the poynt of the needle, to knowe how the ship goeth, and whether it should. Whatsoeuer weather betydeth, the needle well touched with the stone of Gods word will neuer fayle. Such as labour at the oares, start for no tempest, but doe what they can to keepe from the rockes. Likewise they whiche be inferiour rowmes, take heede they moue no sedition, nor disturbance agaynst the rowers and mariners. No storme so daungerous to a shippe on the sea, as is discord and disorder in a weale publique. What countryes and nations, what kingdomes and Empyres, what Cities, townes, and houses discord hath dissolued, in storyes is mani∣fest: I neede not spend tyme in rehearsing examples. The Lord of peace, who hath power both of land and Sea, reach forth hys mercifull hand to helpe them vp that sincke, to keepe them vpp that stand, to still these windes and sourging seas of discord and contention among vs: that wee professing one Christ, may in one vnitie of doctrine gather our selues into one Arke of the true Church together, where we continuing stedfast in fayth may at the last luckely be conducted to the ioyfull porte of our desired landing place by hys heauenly grace. To whome both in heauen and in earth be all power and glory, with his father and the holy spirite for euer. Amen.
