



Right Honourable & Right Worshipfull,
IT was an excellent saying of a Martyr, 

: That is, Of all things, by which we most industriously design the advancement of Gods ser∣vice, there is none so ac∣ceptable unto him, as those endeavours, by which we strive to make men better. He needeth not any of our services, but he accepts what we do in conformity to his God-like actions: And as they do naturally terminate themselves in the happinesse of his Creatures, in which the Divine goodnesse plea∣seth it selfe: So He takes our hearty diligence in good part, when we shew our selves true Co-workers with Him. This is the greatest Honour, of which a Crea∣ture

is capable, and the highest instance of subservi∣ency to our Maker. Our Saviour hath said this in other words,John 5.17. My Father worketh till now, and I work: My Father, though He rested upon the Sabbath day from the works of Creation, having made the world, such as He had designed it to be, yet He continues the work of the gracious preservation of his Creatures; And I, having no∣thing of my own to do,V. 19. work with Him: In his great love to me, He hath shown me what He doth, made me par∣taker of his Counsels, and is always with me in rare instan∣ces of His Presence, because I ever do what pleaseth him. John 8.29.
Our Lord knew with what great desire of restoring the state of the fallen Creation, He was sent into the World; And being fully fatisfied in the worthi∣nesse of the divine appointment, rejoycing that it was so accep∣table to the Father, that He should become a Saviour, He omitted no fit meanes to bring that purpose to effect; For which He received publickly great approbations from above, declared not onely in words, but other most significant Te∣stimonies.
It was my design to throw a mite into this Treasury by the preaching of this Sermon; which exhorts us unto the pur∣suit of Goodnesse, that by it we may attain a noble confor∣mity

to God, and do honour to Him by the lively expressions of it in our actions. As men can be made good only by re∣semblance of that Archetype Image, so I know nothing, by which one may so plainly mani∣fest the excellency of Goodnesse, as by making it appeare to be the Glory of God, and that none do truly worship him, but such as are like Him in dispo∣sition and practise.
All the world hath acknow∣ledged the Imperfection of Hu∣mane Nature: And those which have had the happines to under∣stand better than others, have perceived that its defects are onely to be made up by a parti∣cipation of a Divine Nature. Neither have they more clearly

discerned, that the perfections of God are the infallible pat∣terns of all worthy imitation, then they have confidently pro∣nounced, that the chief thing in Divinity is Goodnesse.
In the early dayes of the Heathen world, this notion was so deeply implanted in their minds, that when Pytha∣goras had raised the Italians out of the miseries of vice by his excellent precepts, and formed them into the happi∣nesse of a well-governed life; whilest their neighbours won∣dred at their felicity, which they themselves perceived to be true by their inward sense, and general experience; what said they? 

,amblich. de vitā Pythag. cap, 6. &c. Thence∣forth they reckoned him a∣mong their Gods, they took him for a good Doemon, and lover of mankind: And whilst every body gave their opini∣on; some said, he was one of the heavenly Gods come down in the shape of men to teach the world, and to reform hu∣mane Naure, being , an happy spurre to prick on sluggish men to ver∣tue and happiness, than which a greater good could not come to men. So the Lycaonians, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles, seeing one of Lystra,Act. 14.11. which was a creeple from his

Mothers womb, enjoy the use of his feet by the charity of Saint Paul; cryed out: The Gods are come down to us in the likenesse of men. As they esteemed God to be the Authour of all Good, they were right; but thinking every good thing to be God; by a grosse mistake they brought in Idolatry; be∣ing not able to distinguish be∣tween the giver, and receiver, or between Him, that was the Original spring, and such, as by the Fountains leave, derived the streames to others, taking every good thing for the best of all.
Whether there had a tradi∣tion continued to them from the beginning, That God in the similitude of mortal man,

should bestow great blessings upon the world, I know not; If they had, it was made good in Christ, or God manifest in the flesh: But they plainly de∣clared, How much they believed Goodness convertible with God, as also, in that, rather than they would attribute any evill to Him, as indeed they ought not, being ignorant to answer the Question; ; they would needes set up another Principle for the Authour of vill: not discerning, it seems, that the Creature, upon which goodnesse is derived, but not im∣mutably fixed, might degene∣rate into evill by its own will, and so bring in mischief without setting up an Anti-God.
As these things do suffici∣ently

declare that inseparable connexion, that is between the Nature of God, and supreme Goodnesse: So concerning his worship, it hath been pronoun∣ced on all hands, that there is no instance so considerable and proper, as the imitation of his goodnesse. They said of old, , Then we worship God best, when we imitate him most. This is a most reasonable service; For, how highly must they needs ho∣nour the Divine Nature, that count themselves, and all things else utterly contemptible, so far as they are unlike unto it? And have no Standard, by which they estimate worth, besides the resemblance of that Holy Image,

and knowing that to be such, do carefully endeavour to make themselves and others parta∣kers of it.
By these things we see what need we have to acquaint our selves well with the Divine Nature, and to take care, that we understand God aright: (not only) because true appre∣hensions of Him are necessary to bottome a good confi∣dence, and are the roots upon which Love, and Adoration grow, but also, because if we form wrong imaginations con∣cerning God, we shall quote him for a defence of our own un∣worthinesse, and make the blasphemy of our errour very hardly curable. It was an un∣answerable Argument, by which

the ancient defenders of chris∣tian Religion reproved the folly of the Heathen world, for attempting to introduce vertue into men,Iust. Mar∣tyr, Theo∣philus, An∣tiochenus, Athenago∣ras. and yet ac∣knowledged vices, and enor∣mities in the Gods, whom they adored: For when they had said all they could to shame a sinner, which was guilty of the worst crimes, , that is, He will make a fair evasion of punishment by alledging, that it is no sin to imitate the Gods. Cle∣mens Alexandrinus quoting against the Greeks that ugly passage in Homer concerning Mars and Venus, sayes, ,

. Away with your song Homer, it is not good, it teacheth Adultery. So the wicked Hypocrites in Davids time, utterly unwilling to raise their low soules up un∣to God, would needs call him down to themselves; And that they might continue more se∣curely, what they were, they would needs perswade them∣selves, that God was such as themselves. So the Dirty Ran∣ters of our times, that they might wallow more quietly in filthi∣nesse, thought they had Apolo∣gized sufficiently for their vil∣lanies, by saying, That every thing is God.
It is not impertinent to this matter also, that we take notice, that there are many things in

God, which are not imita∣ble by us; because they sute not our Nature, or else tran∣scend our State. Which is no wonder at all, for there are divers things in the created world, which though they are in themselves Excellencies, yet do not fit our constitutions: A man cannot shine as the Sunne doth, nor is he strong as an Oake.
How shall we guide our selves then? Easily. Such as will be at leisure to think, will soon perceive many imitable Perfections in God: And, that we may misse none, God mani∣fest in the flesh, both by word and deed, hath shewed us, what is good, and what the Lord re∣quires us to follow; And, ha∣ving

commanded us to do no∣thing, but what he hath done before us, He hath both given us encouragement by shewing us the practicablenesse of God-like vertues in our Nature, and hath excellently taught us the performance of our Duty.
By his Gospel, that com∣mands us to be perfect, as our Heavenly Father is per∣fect; it is plainly revealed, wherein that perfection consists, as in Love, Charity, Mer∣cifulnesse, Forgivenesse, Righ∣teousnesse, Purity; and indeed the compleat beauty of all Ho∣linesse. I need not transcribe the Scriptures, which have pointed out this truth to the life, you have them before you. I shall only write an excellent

passage out of Justin Martyrs Epistle, which he wrote to Di∣ognetus, in which they are ve∣ry well summed up; His words are these, , &c. It is not blessednesse to have domi∣nion over others, nor to seek the advantages of a worldly condition, nor to oppresse those, which are be∣low us; neither can any man by such things imitate God; For they belong not to his Greatnesse. But to bear your neighbours burdens, and by how much you are above o∣thers, so much the more to do good to those, which are below you; and to relieve those which want, with such

things, as you have received from God, makes you a God to those, who receive them from you: This is to be a true follower of God.
To conclude, since by the premises we see laid before us, the divine pattern of necessary Duties, God grant, that none of us be like the man, of whom Saint James speaks; Who looking into the Law of Li∣berty, the Royall Law of our King, that frees us from the slavery of sin, and death, takes notice of his face, and perad∣venture of many spots there, but having beheld himselfe goes away, and forgets what manner of man he was, nor re∣members to wash them off: But rather, that we may look care∣fully

upon our selves, as we are represented by this holy mir∣rour, and continue, till we understand perfectly, what we ought to be, and then not for∣get to reform our selves wholly according to the prescriptions, that are there, and so attain the blessednesse of the Gospel, of which none but obedient Chri∣stians are capable. You have great abilities, and constant opportunities, Let the same mind be in you, that was in Christ Jesus, who in the ful∣ness of time put on the form of a srevant to save the world. By being in the world, as he was, that is in the same temper, and practise, () you shall know, That you are of the truth, and secure your

confidence in God for the present, and afterwards, through his unspeakable mercies, you shall be counted worthy to stand before the son of Man in the great day of his most glori∣ous appearance: Which Grace that you may obtain, is the prayer of
Eaton Coll. Iuly 26. 1659.

