



SIR,
I Have not plac'd your Name before these Papers, that from thence I might take an Occasion to flatter you with that sort of lavish Praise by which many make their Epistles Dedicatory Romances. The Notices of your Generous Temper which I have received in your Acquaintance would forbid that Vanity, if no∣thing else hindred me; For they have assured me that you are rai'sd far above such a Lowness of Spirit as will be taken with Adulations. The Worth which deserves highest Praises doth most scorn Flattery.
Neither do I design the Patronage of my Imper∣fections by devoting to you the Book in which they are discovered. If I should have forgotten my self so far as to have made such an unworthy Applica∣tion of your Name, I should have abus'd you, I confess: For, as he said, Nè si deve chiamar un Giove per  un' Pigmeo, and my Expecta∣tion would have been frustrate; for the world is not so foolish as to think it a part of the Homage

which it owes to Illustrious Persons, to judge every thing Excellent which hath put on their Livery.
My desire is to manifest a sincere Resentment of the Civilities which I have received from you, and to reveal the inward Sense of my Heart in which I do unfeignedly honour your True Worth, which is made up of a Great Wisdome and Much Good∣ness. Not that I presume so much upon the Value of these Leaves, as to think that they either carry any Obligation or pay much respect: but I send them as Instances of that Good will, which wanting more acceptable Expressions bespeaks your favou∣rable Reception for these.
If they had any Worth, I should have thought none fitter to whom I might commend them then your self, who have patroniz'd Wisdom with your Noble Choice, and honour'd Vertue with an Ex∣emplary Life. As you are grac'd with the Nobili∣ty of your Birth, so you are deservedly loved by many who accompany their Affections with Judge∣ment, because you have adorn'd your Quality with those Excellent Accomplishments, by whose ab∣sence Nobility is dishonour'd.
Those which unwisely lean upon the Fame of their Ancestors, and make boasts of Honour which is not supported with their own Vertues, but only derived with the Bloud which they received from others, whilst they are themselves destitute of those Heroick Graces for which their Fathers or Grand∣fathers were justly admired; they overturn their Sta∣tues, prophane their Urns, and blast the Glory of

their Memories by Ignoble Practises: as the Poet reprov'd the degenerate Roman,
Squalentes traducit Avos, emptorque veneni
Frangendâ miseram funestat Imagine Gentem.
It afflicts Ingenuous Persons when they see the Ancient Splendour of Great Families eclips'd by those which should make them more Illustrious; especially when they consider those slight Motives by which they suffer themselves to be withdrawn from the Pursuit of true Glory. For, as the Philoso∣pher observ'd concerning such in his Time, , they are chea∣ted with soft Pleasures, specious Evils. But no body must tell them of it. For though they condemn, and, it may be, punish their own Sins, when they are committed by Pesants;
At vos Trojugenae vobis ignoscitis, & quae
Turpia Cerdoni, Volesos Brutumque decebunt.
By which means though they might in regard of the Advantages of their Higher Condition be most like unto God, that is, Saviours of their Country, which Title is not unjustly given to some; yet ma∣ny slighting the Deserts of Noble Vertues, augment the Miseries of the World both with the particular Harms which necessarily go along with Vitious Actions, as also by the Contagious Influence which falls from the evil Examples of Great Persons.
But what do I talk to you of this Mischief, who have so advanc'd your Mind by the Study of the

best Knowledg, and perfected your Faculties with those Vertuous Habits which become a Christian and a Gentleman, that I may not only call you, as the Emperour modestly limited his own Praises, , a Lover of Philosophy, but rather, in regard of your rare Attainments, the Love of Philosophers?
I will not be further troublesome unto you. That you may enjoy a good Health and a long Life; that you may encrease the Honour of your Fami∣ly and promote the Good of Your Country, and at length be received into the Regions of Immortall Glory, is the hearty Prayer of
Sir,

