



MY LORD,
THe Obligations which your Lordship hath laid upon me are so great, that I disputed a good while with my self whether it were not better to continue an unthankful Negligence, then to at∣tempt a Gratitude in this poor Expression. When I perus'd the Number of your Lordship's Civili∣ties, I felt something of those troublesome Passions which surprize a Merchant when by the Foot of his Accompts he perceives that his Debts have overgrown his Ability to make Payment. But re∣membring how unworthy a thing it is ingratefully to conceal another's Right, I thought it was ne∣cessary to acknowledge what I owe, though I am not able to discharge it: and when besides this I consider'd that your Lordship's Goodness can as easily take a small Acknowledgment in good part as bestow Courtesies without the Expectation of any, I grew a little confident, and thought that the Forbear∣ance of a due Address would be as unjust a Mode∣sty in me, as it is in any Tenant who is asham'd to carry his Rent because his charitable Landlord re∣quires only a Pepper-corn.

This Motive, yes, my Lord, this Motive is the Root upon which my Boldnesse grows. A mean Sacrifice is not incapable of Acceptance with God, nor a little Present with such as are like him, if they be offer'd with a sincere Mind. With my own Intentions I am indifferently well acquainted, and I have receiv'd such Assurance of your Lord∣ship's generous Disposition, that I think I may lawfully say that in your Lordship's behalf which Pindar did long since for Theron the Prince of Agri∣gentum;


Olymp. Od. 2.


But lest I should offend your Lordship's Mode∣sty with a Recital of your just Praises, or presse too rudely upon your Patience with a long Epistle, I will only crave leave to tell you a short story, (which is also a Cast of my present Office) and then kisse your Lordship's Hands.
As I went one day since your Lordship's De∣parture from hence to that part of the Neighbour∣ing Hill which riseth with a lofty Grace upon the South-side of the pleasant Valley Aquedon, where I had the Happinesse first to know your Lordship, I chanc'd to arrive at that hollow part of the Rock where your Lordship was sometime imprison'd, just as Apollo accompanied with his Vir∣tuosi was making a Visit to the Muses who inhabit

there. They to our great trouble were at that time weeping. We having ask'd the Reason of their Tears, they answer'd, that it was not possible to be so stupid as not to resent the Absence of one of their best Lovers, and that they had not been able to sing as they us'd to do when they thought of the Losse which they suffer'd by his Remo∣vall. VVe were going to ask the Name of that so worthy Friend; but when by chance we saw the Door of your Lordship's Cell thrown open, we knew well enough whom they meant, and replied thus; Most gentle Muses, It is inge∣nuous not to forget one to whom you are obliged; but you must take heed lest under the Pretence of Grief you enviously resent your Friend's Hap∣pinesse. VVould you confine him to your petty Conversation who is design'd to the Service of one of the greatest Princes in the VVorld? You do too fondly love your private Concerns, if you are displeas'd because such a Gallant Soul is taken from you, and you do not consider that it is to promote a General Good, and to undertake a part in those useful Cares to which the Muses themselves owe their Tranquillity. If great Minds should resolve to decline the troublesome Affairs of Courts, the most flourishing Kingdoms would soon find the same miserable change of their happy Con∣dition which the Athenians brought upon their once famous City, after they had depriv'd them∣selves of their best Statesmen by a brutish Ostracism:

with which Fate the Syracusans also were justly pu∣nish'd, for making an Apish imitation of that perni∣cious Custom by a foolish Petalism. The first of these States might with as good reason have built their Acropolis without Foundations, and the other have sent their Fleets to Sea without Bal∣last and Pilots. The Truth is, if Vertuous Persons would not be drawn out of their quiet Privacies to attend Publick Businesse, Devils and the worst of Men would only be left after their wild fashion to govern, that is, to destroy, the World.
Civility made the Muses silent till we had done speaking, and then they wept again. Whereupon one of our Company demanding what it was that could trouble them still; one of them (as I remem∣ber, it was Vrania) replied thus, We are not capa∣ble of envying one whom for many Reasons we are oblig'd to honour with our best Love; neither are we so poorly-spirited as to repine at the publick Benefit which many may reap from our Lover's Employment: our Tears do only signifie our De∣sires of our Friend's Security, and expresse the Fears which we must have for One incompass'd with those Dangers which commonly attend the Flou∣rishing Seasons of Humane Life. We have been told that a Royal Poet us'd to call great Prosperities () Flattering Lubricities; and that Atossa the Mother of Xerxes express'd the same sense in words not much different;

 AEschyl, in Perf.


To which our great Lyrick speaking upon the same Argument hath added,

 Olymp Od.x.


Here Apollo smil'd and said, I see that all true Lovers are a little Jealous. I cannot but pardon that carefulness which springs from tender Affec∣tion; but withall let me advise you to comfort your selves, and to lay aside those Apprehensions which you might not  entertain for low Spirits; they are impertinent here. I suppose you have had so much Experience of your Friend's Vertue, long tried by many Assaults of Adverse Fortune, that you cannot wish his Return to the old Dun∣geon in Portland for your fuller satisfaction in that Point; and therefore it is unreasonable to distrust him now when he is brought upon the Theatre to shew the same Vertue in a new Scene of Life, to perfect his Courage in the Probations of a bright Prosperity, and to receive that Honour which is due to Fortitude when it hath prov'd it self Invinci∣ble by blunting both the Horns of Tentation. Leave weeping, Dear Muses, and pray that your Friend may doe honour to God proportionable to the Advantages of his Condition, that he may

happily serve and be alwayes loved by his Royal Master, that he may encrease the Glory of his Noble Family, and after many peaceful dayes in this World be admitted into the Beatifick Presence of the Eternal King.
Here the obedient Muses dried their Eyes, kneel'd down and pray'd heartily (as true Lovers use to doe) for your Lordship's Happiness; which Performance is also the daily Task of,
MY LORD,

