



SYR, it is not without cause, nor without ex∣aumple, that I dare take vpon mee to dedycate vnto your high∣nes, this litle A∣pologye, which contayneth a de∣fence of the re∣formed Religion, and of the Professors of the same. For in asmuch as your Maiestie hath euen from your youth, vndertakē the defence therof with the hasard of your life & gooddes for the same: I could not more fitly preferre the iustification of so holy a cause to any, than to your Highnes, who haue alwayes maintayned the same: not onely in words, but also by deedes, and that with most noble and Princely courage, following the renowmed footsteps of the late Queen of Nauarre, your mother, whose godlynes, curtesie, and other heroicall vertues, are consecrated for euer to most honorable eternitie. And I haue beene led to take vpō me this defence & to dedicate it to your Maiestie, by the example of many good and godly men in the Primitiue church, who in their times wrote diuers Apologies,
 in defence of the Christians against the mis∣reportes and illusions of the heathen, and did put them vp to the Romayn Emperors that were in those dayes: who (notwithstanding that they were heathen Princes, and ignorāt of the true Religion) were moued by them to succor the Christians, and to surcease the persecutions that were made against them.
Quadratus and Aristydes wrote Apolo∣gies in their times, in defence of the Christi∣ans against the heathen, and dedicated them to the Emperor Adrian, who hauing reade them, and perceiuing therby that the Christi∣ans worshipped the great God which gouer∣neth all the world: and that in the exercising of their Religion, they did not any thing that was preiudiciall to the lawes of the Romain Empire, but rather prayed for the prosperitie of him and of his Empire: sent a Proclama∣tion to Fundanus the gouerner of Asia, wher∣in he forbad the persecuting of thē any more, as in respect of Religion, and commaunded that the slaunderers of them should be sore punished.
And moreouer he caused diuers faire chur¦ches to be builded in many places, without a∣ny Images, pictures, or portratures, greatly allowing the doctrine of the Christians, for that it forbiddeth the painting and portray∣ing of God, the worshipping of Images, or the hauing of them in their churches.
Likewise Iustine the Philosopher wrote in his time two Apologies that are come to light, in defence of the Christians against the false accusations of the heathen: whereof he dedicateth the one to the Senate of Rome, & the other to the Emperor Antonine the god∣ly: who being moued therat, made a generall
 law, wherby he restrayned the heathen from their false blaming of the Christians, for the earthquakes and other publike calamities, willing them to impute them to their owne sinnes, for he sayd that the Christians wor∣shipped the great God more deuoutely, than the heathen themselues worshipped the mul∣titude of their Gods.
And he prohibited all men, aswell Ma∣gistrates as priuate persons, to persecute the Christians any more, or to slaunder them with accusations or false crimes: commaun∣ding them to obserue the foresayd proclama∣tion of his father and Predecessor the Em∣peror Adrian, in all pointes.
Also Melito the Bishop of Sardis, wrot an Apologie in defence of the Christians a∣gainst the Heathen, which he dedicated to the Emperor Marke Antony the Philosopher, who was moued therby to fauor the Christi∣ans, and to cause the persecutions to cease, which had bin made in the Prouinces of the Empire without his knowledge and com∣maundement, by the Gouernors and other Magistrates which abused the mildnes and clemency of their Prince, as a number doe in these dayes. Yea and this good Emperor fin∣ding by experience, that the Christians were the good and welbeloued seruants of the true God, (for he wan a great battell against the Marcomannes and Quades, by the only pray∣ers of a Legion of Christian Soldiars that were in his army) not only forbad the perse∣cuting of the Christians by open Proclama∣tion, but also gaue leaue to become Christi∣ans to as many as would: willing and com∣maunding that all such as accused any man alonly in respect of Christian Religion, shold
 be greeuously punished as cosoners and slan∣derers, and that no Christian should be com∣pelled to change his Religion.
Many others besides these (as Tertulian and Appollinaris) haue pleaded and mayn∣tayned the same cause, by setting forth A∣pologies, which haue greatly auayled, yea e∣uen with the Heathen Emperors of their times: who (to say the truth) as heathenish as they were, haue treden out the way to the Princes of our dayes, which beare the titles of Christians and Catholicks, to shew them what vprightnes and modesty they ought to vse in the case of Religion.
Forasmuch therfore, as our reformed reli∣giō is blamed and outragiously defaced now∣adayes, by such as neither do nor wil vnder∣stand it: I, after the example of so many good persons, haue set my hand to the pen, to shew by this short defence, that the same is not on∣ly grounded vpon Gods pure word, and con∣sequently agreeing with the Christen Reli∣gion of the primatiue Church, but also that it is warranted by the very Canons of the Popes themselues, and of the Church of Rome, And I am sure that your maiestye (being naturally enclined to the peace of Fraunce) will not onely take more pleasure to heare the sound of these Canons, than the sound of those which haue so often times ter∣ribly thundered, to the destruction of this de∣solate kingdome of Fraunce, but also be mo∣ued to maintaine the same Religion constant∣ly more and more, and to be a meane to the French king our soueraign Lord, for the re∣liefe and quietnes of such as professe the same. For if the heathen Emperors (whom I haue named afore) haue vouchsafed to releeue and
 fauor the Christians in their times, without hauing any further knowledge of the Christi∣an Religion, than that it contayned not any thing contrary to the Ciuill Lawes: how much more ought we to hope for the like at the handes of our most Christian king, by your intercession, specially seeing that our Re¦ligion (thanks be to God) contayneth not any doctrine which may not well beseeme good Christians, and which tendeth not to the ad∣uancing of kings, and of their estates, as his maiestie may easely discerne, if it may please him to heare our reasons, or but only to looke vpon this litle Apologie.
And surely Sir, we assure ourselues that you will alwayes continue to be a mean to his Maiestie euery day better than other, for the maintenance and quyetnes of vs and our Religion, because you were brought vp in it in your young time, and haue made a good pro¦fession of it. Besides this, the famous exam∣ples of your noble ancestors which haue been euer renowmed for their godlynes, doe direct you to the following of their footesteps. For the Histories doe auow vnto vs, that your Ancestors of the renowmed house of Burbon, (for I will not speake of those of late time, whose remembrance being yet fresh in mens mindes, and will continue honorable for euer among them that come after vs) haue al∣wayes been had in honor for their great zeale towards the Christian Religiō, and for their feruent loue to the mayntenance of the crown of Fraunce, & of the quyetnes of their coun∣trey, which are two principall points where∣in godlynes shineth forth.
For first of all, the great and dangerous voyages which your Ancestors haue made
 with men of warre into the East countreys, and into Affrike, against the Turkes & Sa∣rasyns, for the great desire they had to ad∣uance the Christian Religion, (as the two voyages of king Lewis the saint: The two voyages of Lewes Duke of Burbon: and the voyages of many other princes of their race) doe yeald sufficient record of their Religious and godly disposition. And although that in those dayes (by reason of the great ignorance of languages, and of good learning, and conse∣quently of the pure doctrine) Religion was not so well vnderstoode, nor so purely taught as it is nowadayes through the grace of god: yet it is not to be douted but that if they had had a purer and cleerer vnderstanding therof, they would haue been so much the more ear∣nest and zealous in it.
And as touching loue and dutifulnes to∣wards their countrey (which is the second poynt wherin godlynes consisteth) your sayd aūcestors haue geuen so good tryall therof, by their contynuall imploying of themselues va∣lyantly in the defence and inlarging of the Crown of Fraunce, aswell against forrain e∣nemies, as against the disturbers of the pub∣lick peace, that the house of Burbone hath al∣wayes iustly had this honorable reporte, to haue been alwayes a florishing branch of the bloud Royall, and a sure piller of the liberty and safety of the Realme: As for example, Iaques of Burbon Earl of March, and Cō∣stable of Fraunce, gaue good proofe of his loue towards the welfare of his countrey, and towards the Crown of Fraunce, in hazar∣ding himselfe in many battailes against the English men, then almost inuincible enemies of this Realme, specially at the battel of Poy¦tiers
 in the time of king Iohn, and also in do∣ing his indeuour with great good will to con∣clude the peace at Britany, and to driue the Companions and Outlawes out of Fraūce, which tooke their pleasure in spoyling the coū¦trey, and in maintayning of trouble in the Realme.
Also Lewis of Burbon the first Earl of Vā∣dome, (for that Earldome fell vnto him by his mother) made warre against the Eng∣lishmen in the time of king Charles the sixt, not only in Fraunce, but also euen in Eng∣land, and he was a curteous Prince, and ve∣ry profitable to his Countrey, aswell in mat∣ters of war as of peace.
His sonne (named Lewis also) being then Lord great master of Fraunce, was in many battailes, where he fought valiantly, special∣ly at the battaile of Agincourt, notwithstan∣ding that he was taken prisoner by ye Eng∣lishmen, with many other great Princes and Lords of Fraunce. Likewise he was one of those that toke most paines to make the peace at Arras, in the time of king Charles the se∣uenth, for the suppressing of the Ciuil wars, which had indured so long time, welnere to the vtter destruction of the Realme.
Iohn of Burbon Earle of Vandome and sonne of the sayd Lewis, was also a virtuous Prince, and a valyant warryor, and aduentu∣red himselfe in many a battaile, specially at the siege of Fronsack in ye Marches of Bur∣deloys, where he was made knight for his va¦liant desertes: and he was one of the Princes which tooke part with Lewis the Dolphin, and with the Dukes of Burbon and Alaun∣son, in setting themselues against the wicked and tirannicall dealings of certayne timeser∣uers
 and flatterers of king Charles the se∣uenth, Fraunces of Burbon his sonne, a good and stout prince went in the viage to Naples with king Charles the eighth, and behaued himselfe nobly in matters both of peace and warre, to the honor and profite of the Crowne of Fraunce, and of his whole country. But I should not soone make an end, if I minded to recken vp all the excellent princes of your maiesties most renowmed house of Burbon: and much les should I do it if I ment to take vpon me to rehearse their heroycall deedes and vertues, which would require many great volumes. But I thinke it inough for me to haue named some few of them, that might serue for examples to prin∣ces and to all other men, to speed themselues valiantly in the defence and mayntaynance of the peace of their countrye. Which examples wil (in my opinion) be the better liked of your maiesty, because they come not onely of your owne house, (which hath alwayes been most fruitfull in noble and vertuous princes:) but also of the Linial discēt of your progenytors. For ye late king of Nauare your father, was the sonne of Charles of Burbon the first duke of Vandome: who was sonne of the foresayd Fraunces Earle of Vandome: who was sonne to the forenamed Iohn, who was sonne to the foresayd Lewis Lord great ma∣ster of Fraunce: who was the sonne of the o∣ther Lewis, the first Earle of Vandome: who was the son of Iohn Earle of March: who was the sonne of Iaques Earle of March and constable of Fraunce: who was ye sonne of Lewis first duke of Burbon surnamed the great duke: who was the sonne of Robert of Fraunce Earle of Cleremount and Beaw∣uoysin:
 who was the Sonne of good king Lewis the saynt.
And so your Maiestie is the eleuenth in order, descending in the right line from S. Lewis your great Ancestor, whose vertues I hope that God will make to grow more and more in your Royall person, making you to be a follower of his steps in that he was a good defender of the Christian Religion, a lo∣uer of vpright iustice, a natiue example of good manners, a seuere correcter of partiall & corrupt Iudges, an vntreatable punisher of blasphemers, Atheistes, and vsurers, and a zealous furtherer of all good reformation.
But now to come back agayn to my mat∣ter: I hope that such of the Romain Religi∣on as shall reade this my wryting, shall haue no cause to finde fault with me, or to say that I deale to roughly with them. For hauing once simply and without any bitternesse, set down my reason vpon euery point, and hauing alleadged the very text of the holy Scripture to confirme our doctrine, and to disprooue theirs: I geue them yet this aduantage fur∣ther, that I come into the listes against them with their own weapons, which they take to be most for their own defence, and most hurt∣full to vs, that is to wit, the Canons, made or authorised by the very Popes themselues. Wherein I thinke I haue done so much by the grace of God, that either they must con∣demne the Pope and his Canons, or els con∣fesse that our Religion is voyd of all error.
True it is that many learned men of our time, haue sufficiently already set forth the purenes of our Religion by the holy Scrip∣ture, yea and that much better than I could skill to doe: Insomuch that in that respect,
 many may thinke that I doe but make repe∣titions. Howbeit forasmuch as I haue ta∣ken in hand (as you would say) to leuell or bend the Canons in defence of ourselues, a∣gainst such persons as beate vs with them, and vnduely doe attribute asmuch or more authoritie to them, than to the holy Scrip∣ture it selfe: I haue considered that it were no reason for me to commit the same faulte, which they doe. And therfore my intent is, to alleadge the very text of the scripture vp∣on euery poynt, for the true and sure groun∣ding of our doctrine, and not to bestow the Ca¦nons otherwise, than in beating downe the contrary doctrine.
I know well that the time is now so mi∣serable and sorrowfull in Fraunce, that most men take all good things in ill part, and that euen those which best know the way how to heale our sores, are so ill minded, that they will not vse it. And (in good hower be it spo∣ken) we may well say as Liuie sayd speaking of the time of the Ciuill warres in Rome,Tit. liu. lib. 1. in praefaci¦one. (which began vnder Silla and Marius, and contynued vnder Pompey and Cesar, and so held on in quarrelling and parttaking stil vn∣der their successors: (a time in all points like to this sorrowfull time of ours) that this Realme of Fraunce is brought to so extreme corruption, as it may no longer indure, either her owne vices, or the remedy of them.
And in good sooth, euery man may well perceiue the vices of dissention, rancor, ciuill warre, and corruption both of manners and doctrine, which are sowed at this day, and al∣ready to deepe rooted in our French nation. And likewise all men of any vnderstanding, doe well see that the very remedy to rid away
 these mischiefes, were to admit some good re∣formation, aswell in doctrine as in discipline, and in outward behauiour.
But France is in the same taking that a poore sick man is, when the extremity of his fitte is vpon him: who can neither suffer his disease patiently, nor willingly receiue the me¦dicine that should doe him good. For all of vs doe well inough perceiue our disease, and we know well it is great and dangerous, and we would faine be healed of it, but the most parte of vs doe finde that the medicine of reforma∣tion is to irkesome, wherein surely men doe greatly ouershoote themselues, for there is not so much payne nor displeasure in leading of a sober & modest life, as ther is in leading of a lose life. Besides yt, ye sober, wel staid, & wel reformed life in good māners & doctrine, is ac¦companied with great quietnes of cōscience: & (as sayth Cicero) doth commonly lead ye body to a healthfull and honorable old age. But al∣though we had no other cause to desire refor∣mation, than for the ceasing of our vntollera∣ble troubles: were not that cause inough, sith it is not to be douted but that they will neuer be throughly brought a sleepe, vntill the cause of them (that is to wit, the error, corruption, and loosenes that is among vs) be first quen∣ched and done away, by a sound reformation aswel inwardly as outwardly? For naturally all causes bring forth effects like themselues.
And againe it is certayne, that God being righteous, is wont to continue in striking with his reuenging roddes, vpon such as har¦den themselues in their sinnes, and stand kic∣king against the spurre. If we considered the monstruous wasting and spoyling of things which Ciuill warres are wont to breede,
 (whereof we haue seene but too many by ex∣perience) the heare of our heads would stand vp at it.
Cornelius Tacitus (rehearsing the mis∣chiefes that befell to the Empire of Rome, by the Ciuill warres that were in the time of the Emperors Galba, Vitellus, and Otho) sayth that in those fiery broyles, the goodliest Prouinces of the Empire staggered, incly∣ning to a change of state, and to an ouerthrow of the Monarchicall gouernment, where-through they had felt so many oppressions, by meanes of the quarrels and parttakinges of great men, who shot at no other marke, but to destroy one another. Insomuch that in those times, there was euery where greate murthering of men, burning of townes, defi∣ling of holy thinges, excessiue cruelty, euen in the Citie of Rome it selfe, deflouring of the noblest Ladies, and banishing of the honest∣est and honorablest men. The vertuousest folkes went soonest to wrecke. Notable va∣liancy, and great riches, dignitie and authori∣tie, executed, or left vnexecuted for feare, were taken for crimes. The seruant was wrought either by terror or by treachery, to be against his master, and the bondman was set at liber¦ty against his Lord. Such as had no enemies were ouerthrowen by the suttle packing of their frends. Truth was oppressed, partly through the ignorance of the Gouerner, part∣ly through the crafty iugling of flatterers, and partly through the spyting of such as held the helme.
It was not lawfull for a man to thinke what he listed, nor to speak what he knew. The wickednes of the flatterers who had wonne the eares of the Prince, and the great
 rewards which they obtained for their flatte∣ring, (as Consulships, gouernments of Pro¦uinces, preferments to Priesthods, spoilings of Countreis, and excheting of mens goods,) were hated and abhorred alike of all people. The small Countreis, which sometimes were intangled in those Ciuill broyles, were full of cruell deedes. The seas were coue∣red with folke that had been banished and dri∣uen out of their own houses: the rocks of the sea were pestered about with the carkases of folke murthered: and the good Cities were quite & cleane soked from all their substance.
These are the fruites in effect, which the great and pollitick wise man Tacitus affir∣meth to come and grow ordinarily of partta∣kings and Ciuill discords. Whereof we haue felt so good store by the space of seuenteene yeares alredy, or there abouts, that we ought now long ere this to haue desired and sought the remedye that might haue cured our so strange misfortunes and barbarous calami∣ties. Yea and euen they which are the most sworne enemies of the reformed Religion, ought to become assured by the proof of time past, that for all that euer they can doe or de∣uise, they shall neuer so deface the truth, and vertue, but that they shall stand still spight of all the corruptinges and darckninges of this world, and of the maintayners of them.
And in very deede, God (who gouerneth the doings of all men in the world by his pro¦uidence) hath reserued still in this miserable world, a great number of good and honest mē and of such as loue vertue. And like as in the foresayd time of the Ciuill warres among the Romaynes, Tacitus sayth that that age was not so barrayn of honest men, but that
 it brought forth some good examples: so also may we say that euen in this age of oures, how much soeuer it be infected and corrupted, yet hath God of his gratious goodnes reser¦ued many still, which to follow the pure Re¦ligion and vertue, haue constantly indured po¦uerty, losse of their goods, the cruell murthe∣ring of their children, kinsfolke, and frendes, banishment out of their Countrey, absence from their houses, and an infinite number of other aduersities and inconueniences. Which thing geueth vs assurance that our Lord god will alwayes maintayne a certayn number of good men here below, which shall imbrace vertue by maintayning good lawes and disci∣pline, and follow the light of the truth which abideth inuincible for euer, and shall scatter the mistes and cloudes that set themselues a∣gaynst it.
Esd. 3. cap. 3. 4.The worthy iudgement of that great mo∣narch Darius king of the Medes and Persi∣ans, will neuer slippe out of the remembrāce of men. For this king hauing vpon a time made a royall feast to all the Gouernors, Cap¦taynes, and other Officers of his Dominion, (which was so great that it extended ouer a hundreth and seuen and twenty Prouinces,) was contented to heare a disputatiō between three young Gentlemen of Iury, that were attendant vpon his own person. Of whom the one maintayned that nothing is stronger than wine, because that commonly it ouer∣commeth aswell the great as the small. Ano∣ther sayd that nothing was stronger than a king, because that with one only word of his mouth, he can make men to be slayne, Cities to be razed, and Fortresses to be beaten down when he listeth. And the third named Zoro∣babell,
 (a gentleman of the bloud royall des∣cended of the line of Dauid) vpheld that truth is strongest of all things, because it conty∣nueth in force euerlastingly, and shall raigne for euer and euer.
Darius hauing heard this disputation, and knowing well how it is most certayne, that truth is the thing of greatest strength, and of longest contynuance in all the world, gaue the prize to zorabable as to him that had been of best opinion, and gaue him great giftes and priuiledges, aswell for himselfe as for all his wholl nation, commaunding that from thence forth Zorobabell should be called the kinges Cosen. Which iudgement of this great king, ought to be wel considered of all persons, and specially of kinges and Princes, that they may geue themselues earnestly to the seeking out of the truth in all thinges, as well in case of Religion as in Ciuil and worldly affaires, and esteeme it more strong and inuincible thā any force of man.
For certainly, there is neither king nor Emperor, fire nor sword, payne nor tormēts, that euer could quench the truth, or ouercome it. But forasmuch as in these dayes, many men are doutfull in the case of Religiō, where they should seeke the truth, I will not here forget the rule which the great Emperor of Rome Constantine did set down at the cosi∣cell of Nice in Bithinia,Trip. hist. li 2. cap. 5. for the decyding of the points of doctrine, which were to be han∣deled and treated of there. For hauing assem∣bled the Councell together, to determine vp∣on the doctrine that Arrius had sowed at that time: When he had made the Bishoppes to take their places euery one in his degree, (which were to the number of 318. besides
 the Elders and Deacons that accompanyed thē, who were aboue 500.) he sate him down among them in a low chaire, and made this Oration to them well beseeming his Maie∣stie and godlynes.
My Lords and fathers (quoth he) foras∣much as God hath vouchsafed to put down the cruell Princes by my hand, and to geue peace to the world vnder my raign, it is meete that you also in this holy assembly, should doe your indeuoures to set a stable vnitie and cō∣cord in the Church. For it were to euill an example if after the ouercomming of our ene∣mies, the publick peace should now be distur∣bed by the controuersies and disagreementes of the Shepheards of the Church, a thing that would minister occasion and matter to the vngodly to mock our Religion, & to laugh it to scorn. Now then, sith we be to treat here of diuine matters, we must tak ye doctrine of the holy Ghost for our rule, and resort to the bookes of the Euangelistes, Apostles, and Prophets, which teach vs what opinion we ought to be of concerning Gods holy law.
Therfore setting aside all stoutnes of con∣tention, let vs seeke the resolution of our que∣stions in the word that is inspired by God.
After this short and notable speech made by that great Emperor, the Councel was held, and the doctrine of Arrius was throughly debated by the only word of God, and in the end iustly condemned by those holy Fathers, as vtterly contrary to a number of expresse places of the holy Scriptures, which auow vnto vs the Godhead and euerlasting∣nes of the sonne of God, which thing Arrius did wickedly deny.
But I must tell you by the way, that in
 this speech of Constantines, we haue three dueties to marke, which doe wel beseeme a great Prince. The one is to be inclyned to publicke peace and tranquillitie, and to pro∣cure the maintenance thereof by all lawfull meanes. Another is to loue the truth aboue al things, chiefly in cases of Religion. And the third is, to seeke the same truth in the Scripture inspired by God.
Now I beseech God of his gracious good¦nes, to make your Maiesties vertue & god∣lines to shine forth dayly more and more, in those holy dueties, and to cause your Royall highnes to grow greater and greater in all his heauenly giftes, and in all ho∣nor and felicitie.
Dated the 15. day of February, ye yere of our sauiour Christ. 1578.
