



BEcause wee are created for Gods glorie, and the edification one of another in Christe, and are all bounde to serue therevnto by wealth or woe, life or death: & chieflie they, to whom God hath giuen the greater giftes, & whom he hath called to greater roomes, are most boūden to be zealous for gods glorie, with godly ie∣lousie to present the church & spouse of Christ vnder their charge, a pure Virgin to Christ hir husband: and that by no subtiltie, as the Apostle warneth, they should bee corrupted from the simplicitie in Christ. Therefore I nothing doubting of your zeale and diligence, my reuerende Fathers & deare Brethrē, who being in authoritie, are first called to the battell to striue for Gods glorie, and the edifi∣cation of his people, against the Romishe reliques and ragges of Antichrist, but that yee will coura∣giously and constantly in Christ throwe out these ragges of Gods enemies. And I do further re∣quire you in the name of God (so farre as my sim∣plicitie may be bolde to require your wisedomes) that ye will by this occasion, laye open other as great enormities, that we all knowe, and labour to race out all the dregges and remnauntes of trans∣formed

Poperie, that are crept into Englande, by the too much lenitie of them that wilbe accounted the Lordes of the Cleargie. And for my part, by the grace and power of my God, though I sinfull wretch haue no such giftes nor authoritie, as can much further the cause or comfort you in your god∣lie trauailes: yet shall I and many more with me, A good de∣sire. pray for you, and with our simple giftes will desire you, that we may ioyne together with you, to suffer togither in so good a cause, that is so much for gods glorie and the edificatiō of his Church, in the pure simplicitie of Christes worde and Sacramentes, wherein our enemies and persecutours are straūg∣ly bewitched, I wote not by what diuelishe cuppe, that they do make such a diuersitie betwixt Christs wordes and his Sacramentes, that they can not thinke the worde of God to be safely inough prea∣ched, & honorably inough handled without cappe, Cope, or surplesse: but that the Sacramentes, the Marrying, the Burying, the Churching of wo∣men, and other church seruice, as they call it, muste needes be declared with Crossing, with Coping, with Surplessing, with kneeling, with prety wa∣fer kakes, & other knackes of Poperie. O Paule that thou wert aliue, thou durst tell these politicke gentlemen, that there hath bin to much labour be∣stowed vpon them in vayne. Thou durst say vnto them as thou diddest to the Corinthes, That they éate not the Lordes supper, but playe a pageaunt of their owne, to blinde the people, and keepe them still in superstition, farre from the simplicitie of Christes supper: to make the selie soules beleeue, that they haue an Englishe Masse: and so put no Too true. difference betwixt trueth and falshoode, betwixt Christ & Antichrist, betwixt God and the Deuill. They are straungly bewitched, I saye, that will binde their Englishe priesthoode and sacramentes

to garments: but much more enchaunted, that can finde no garments to please them, but such as haue bin openly poluted with Poperie, superstition and Idolatrie. But most of all in this poynt shall their madnes appeare to al posteritie, because they make these Antichristes ragges Causa sine qua non, in Christes holy Ministerie: so that these shall make an English Priest, be he neuer such a dolt or vil∣laine: as we haue very many, and without these Romishe reliques not Paule him selfe (as one of them did blaspheme) and the reste in effect do plain∣ly affirme. Well, by Gods power wee haue fought with the wolues, for these and such like Popishe chaffe, and God hath giuen the victorie: wee haue nowe to do with the Foxes, let vs not feare. There is no crafte, cunning, or pollicie against the Lorde. Our B. are Foxes. We haue Christ and his Apostles, and al the Pro∣phetes euer stryuing against the hypocrites of their tyme, on our side. A strawe for Popishe policie. We haue the worde of God to warrant vs to roote out all monumentes of superstition and Idolatrie: and are charged to abhorre them, to count them accursed, and to defye them and deteste them, as a menstruous cloathe. They haue not the worde of God. And what wisedome is in them sayeth God by his Prophete Ieremie? They talke of obedi∣ence and concord, but there is no obedience against the Lord, nor any concorde to be desired, but where Gods glorie and veritie is preferred. Else better to haue all the worlde to runne in hurlie burlie, and heauen and earth to shake, then one iote of Gods glorie should decay, so farre as in vs lyeth. Wee haue their owne lawes and proclamations to roote out all monumentes of superstition and Idolatrie, and their owne wordes are contrarie to these their owne doings. They repent the reformatiō proclai∣med, as did the Israelites. They buylde agayne

that which they once destroyed. And this do they openly, that all the worlde may wonder at their follie. But what they do secretly, God will one day haue declared openly: yea they make the name of God, and his doctrine that we professe, to be e∣uill spoken of already by many of their doinges. Their iudgement hasteth, that for such causes per∣secute Gods true Preachers. Wherfore let vs not feare their threateninges. There can none per∣secute vs for this trashe, but such as are neyther whot nor colde; and then they shalbe vomited out, vnlesse their zeale increase, or they that are Athe∣istes, such as haue no god before their eies, but their god is their belly. And those are worldpleasers, or open Papistes, whom God hath giuen vp to a re∣probate sense. Wherefore we must thus take it, that they are gods roddes for our sinnes, because wee haue bin no more zealous in Gods cause, nor carefull to seeke his glorie. That wolfe winche∣ster, & his butcher Boner fought once against vs. for the groundes of this geare: but loe, howe the Lorde, within two or three yeeres ouerthrew them all to giue vs courage to goe forwarde. We are to slacke and negligent: That monster remayneth & is fedde, as the Papistes saye, for their sakes. And we graunt that his paūche is fedde for some secrete purpose. We do crye, kill this traytour, enemie to the Crowne, to the Realme, to god & man, whiche burned Gods holy Testament, and murthered his Saintes and seruauntes. We haue the lawe of god and man for vs. We are answered. Nay your sel∣ues shalbe compelled to turne your cloathe, your coates and cappes, and to get you into his liuerie, and to be like him in his garmentes. O Elias that thou haddest liued, or that thy spirit were amongst vs. The Papistes which are in the countreys glo∣rie in theyr assemblies, that the whotte gospellers,

shall now be dryuen to weare their attyres. Let vs neuer giue them any cause of ioye, though we shuld dye for it. Moyses will not yeelde a hoofe of a beast in Gods busines. He will not leaue a loupe of a Curtayne vnmade, nor make a buttō or a claspe more or lesse. Eleazar would not dissemble by ea∣ting of vnlawfull meates. The faithful Israelites would not receyue so much, as an Iuey bushe. Cō∣trariewise, Origen carrying a braunche, and pro∣fessing that he bare it for Christe at the firste, was compelled afterwards to open Idolatrie: So cur∣sed a thing it is to giue any place to the wicked. All the Papistes that say, they worship Christe in the crosse and God in the Sacrament, doo still vnder these wordes continewe in Idolatrie. Beware of deceytfull wordes that couer wicked purposes to drawe vs from Christian simplicitie. And let vs stande constantly agaynst all abuses: repent for our former coldnes in Religion and other sinnes, and call for helpe from aboue. For the arme of our Lorde is not shortned. Wee are assured that wee seeke Gods glory, and our aduersaries may see if they can see any thing, that this thing whiche they seeke is not for Gods glory: seeing the Papistes the enemies of God, do so desire it, and glory in it, that we, whom they most hate, can not be safe, but vnder their garmentes. We are assured that wee seeke Gods glory, when wee followe Christe, his Apostles and Prophetes, who euer dispised these Pharisaicall outward faces and visardes. Christe Mat. 15. findeth faulte with the garments of the Pharisees. Paul counteth all his Pharisaicall shewe to bee dounge. Zacharie sayeth, that the false Prophete Phil. 3. shalbe ashamed of his prophecy, and forsake his garmentes, wherein he deceyued. And shall the Zacha. 13. true Prophets be faine to creepe into their cowles? For by the same authoritie that the Queene com∣maundeth

one, she may commaunde any peece of Popery, so that she name it policie. But Ezechias and Iosias knewe no such authoritie. They saye, that it is for pollicie, and I do easely beleue it, that they do care, lesse for Christes Religion, than for pollicie. But let them beware that they follow not Ieroboam, that made such like Priestes for poli∣cie, as would do as he commaunded them. Achaz of pollicie brought such an Aultar into Ierusalem 1. Reg. 12. as he did see at Damascus, where he had ouercome the Idolaters and their Idolles. But cursed was 2. Reg 16. his pollicie, and so are they all, that will retayne a∣ny thing of their old Idolatrie. Nabuchodonozors Idoll was set vp for vnitie & pollicie: But with∣out Daniel. 3. the warraunt of Gods holy word, there is nei∣ther good vnitie nor pollicie. That godly Father Bucer calleth the Tenthes and first Fruites, sacri∣ledge and robberie, though they bee kept still for pollicie. The Crosse and Candlestickes vpon the Queenes altar, are superstitious, though they bee kept there I wott not for what pollicie. The ado∣ration of the Sacrament, in the Countreys where they knocke and kneele to a wafer, is a Popishe pollicie. That VVomen baptize, that pluralities, tot quots, impropriations, non residences, dispen∣sations, suspensions, excommunications, and ab∣solutions for money are graunted, it is euill, like as are many other enormities borowed from Rome, which remayne in the name of pollicie. All these thinges were abhorred as Popishe, superstious, and Idolatrie among our Englishe Gospellers, both Bishoppes and others, when they were vn∣der Goos rodde in pouertie. But they haue nowe learned Courtly Diuinitie, to grounde all vppon pollicie. Humble them agayne (O Lorde) that they do not forget thee nor thi poore people: whom thou hast so dearely bought, whiche by these their

policies are blinded, and careth for no more, but that they may haue this superstitious shew, which is still so maynteyned. Let him mumble as he list, if he be thus apparelled, all his seruice is good y∣nough, otherwise it is nothing worth. Thus cause you them to perishe, by your pollicies, for whome Christ hath dyed. Furthermore, if Popery be su∣perstitious and Idolatrous, euill and wicked, as yet there was neuer a worse thing in the worlde, then are we commaunded to absteyne from all par∣ticipation thereof, and from all the shewe thereof: Ab omni specie mall, that is, from all shewe of wic∣kednes. These garmentes were the shewe of their blasphemous priesthood: herein they dyd sing and saye their superstitious Idolatrous seruice: they dyd sence theyr Idolles and helpe forwarde their Idolatrous Masses. What pollicie can it bee then to weare this geare, but a superstitious, wicked & Popish pollicie? They do it for policie, they say, that theyr Priests may be knowen and magnified of men Did not the Pharisees vse the same polli∣cie, to do all theyr workes and make all their gar∣mentes, both Philacteris vpon theyr heads, and theyr wyde and syde Robes and borders, that they might be more aspectable and notorious to the peo¦ple? but theyr woo is threatened aboue all other sinners. To such hypocrites, as beyng voyde of all true holynesse, delite in all outwarde shewes: theyr curse is most inculcate. Their pollicie is, that the Priestes shall weare white in the Churches, to signifie theyr vertue, their purenes, & holynesse: and when they go forth of the Church, they muste weare blacke gownes and blacke hornes, for con∣trary pollicies, and for diuers significations. Our Maister Christes pollicie was expressed in one worde, Feede, Feede, Feede: and the Prophetes before, and the Apostles afterwarde. If Christ be

the wisedome of the Father, the true Ministers shalbe well ynough knowen, by that one marke which he giueth: And if he haue not that marke, better vnknowen then knowen, both for him selfe & others: therefore lett them not saye for shame, that they seeke gods glorie, Christes will, or the edifi∣cation of his Church, by their pollicie. Whyles they threaten and stoppe the spreading of Gods worde and feeding of Christes flocke, commaunded by writing to excommunicate the most faythful labou∣rers in the planting of the gospell, because they will not weare the ragges of Poperie, to expulse the most valiaunt Souldiours agaynst the Romishe Antichrist: the most earnest ouerthrowers of the kingdome of Satan, which standeth in sinne and blindnes. O beware you that wilbe Lordes ouer the flockes, that you be not sore punished for your pryde towardes your brethren, and your coward∣linesse in gods cause: that for Princes pleasures & pompose liuings, do turne Poperie into pollicie, and to become our persecutours vnder the cloake of pollicie: It were better to loose your liuings, then to displease god in persecuting of your brethren, and hinder the course of the worde. But as our duetie is, we will praye for you, and for all our Brethren in the Ministerie, that God of his grace woulde graunt vs more zeale for his glorie, than any of vs hath had heretofore: more desire to edifie Christes people in pure simplicitie, to present them a chaste Virgin vnto Christ, then hitherto hath appeared, that when the head shephearde shal cal to account, wee bee not ashamed: but being founde perfecte in all good workes, may receyue the Crowne prepa∣red. As for you deare brethren, whome God hath called into the brunte of the battell, the Lord keepe ye constant, that ye yeelde neyther to tolleration, neyther to any other subtill perswasions of dispen∣sations,

or licenses whiche were to fortifie theyr Romishe practises: but as you fight the Lordes fight, be valiaunt. God will not leaue you, ney∣ther forsake you, as you seeke gods glorie: god wil glorifie you: and as by you Christes Church is e∣dified, comforted and confirmed in Christian sim∣plicitie, so shal you receyue comfort by Christ your head Captayne, when you shalbe called to giue ac∣comptes of your stewardshippes, and to be rewar∣ded for your fidelitie. The matter is not so small as the worlde doth take it: It will appeare before all be ended, what an harde thing it is, to cut of the ragges of the Hiora of Rome. It is beautiful, but poysonfull: there is no dallying with such a moun∣ster, beware of looking backe to Sodome, or de∣light any whit in ther garments of Babilone: nei∣ther once touche the poysoned Cuppe, though it be of golde or glittering. Let vs repent of our former sinnes vnfaynedly, and then shall we abhorre and stampe vnder our feete these ragges that were ap∣poynted to superstition and Idolatrie. Let vs hate the blasphemous Priesthood, so iniurious to Chri∣stes priesthoode, that euery patche and token of it, be in execration, detestation, and accursed: and take no parte of it vpon our heades nor backes, least we be accursed as it is. Let vs not make the heritage of god as a byrde of many colours, holding of di∣uers religions. Let vs not mixe the Iewes with the Gentiles. Let vs not in no wise mixe this our Religion with any thing of Antichrist: Let vs not confirme the blinde in their blindnesse, neyther the weake in their superstition. But rather let vs take awaye, if we can, the names, memories, and al mo∣numents of Poperie, and that Antichristes priest∣hoode. Let vs open our windowes with Daniel, and professe what we are: their crueltie shalbe our glorie. Let vs followe Paul, that knewe that the

true gospell could not be retayned, if any Iewishe cerimonies were maintayned. Let vs rather neuer weare any garment, then we should weare those, whereby our brethren should be weakened, offen∣ded, or boldened to take parte with the Idolaters, and so through our hautines in knoweledge, our weake brethren perishe, for whom Christe dyed. Beholde and marke well, howe they fall backe∣warde that yeelde in any iote, and see howe they are edified, and increase in godlines, which holde that right way that you go, in the which the Lorde in∣crease you, and vs all, and strengthen vs with his holy Spirite, that we may continewe to our lyues end, always both by our thoughts, wordes, and works, to aduaunce his glorie and honour, dayly more and more, nowe and for euer, Amen.

