


RIGHT noble Lords:
Lartius telleth vs, that in old time there were but seuen wise men to be found in the world: but now it seemes there are hardly seuen igno∣rant. For a man can no sooner set a faire marke, but euerie bungler will out with his bolt (as though he could cornicum oculos configere) and like a Roman Censor will giue his censure, though (often) no more to the purpose then Magnificat for Matins, as it is in the French prouerb. VVe are now fallen into that criticall age, wherein Censores liberorum are be∣come Censores librorum; Lectores, Lictores: and euery mans works and wri∣tings (both prime inuentions, and second hand-translations) are ar∣raigned at the tribunall of each pedntical Aristarches vnderstanding. For if a man follow the point orderly and well, he is curious: if he di∣gresse neuer so little, he is friuolous: if the style be elaborate, it smel∣leth of the socket: if somewhat neglected and incult, it is good for nothing, but to be paper for his pocket. If the worke swell with quo∣tations and carie a large margent, it is nothing but a rhapsodie. If it be naked, without all allegations, it's plaine Dunstable, and a meere fopperie. If the author write in praise of any, they fine him for a flat∣terer: if of none, for a maligner. Our ancestors called HERODOTVS Patrem Historia: these censorious Sirs, Patrem Fabularum. They thought him worthy to be read at the games of Olympus▪ these men reade him but as a Canterburie tale, to hold children from play, and old folkes

from the chimney corner. Notwithstanding, if the Readers were onely censorious, the matter were the lesse; but they are also humo∣rous: For mens faces are not more differing then their fancies and affections. ZENO hath still two sorts of schollers in euery schoole,  and ; some affecting nothing but subiectam scientiam, soli∣ditie of matter: others respecting nothing but subiectam sententiam, quaintnesse in regard of the manner. The former being (like vnto CATO) heluones librorum (men of steele stomacks) can digest any dis∣course (though neuer so course) that comes to hand. The later (like our daintie dames) can away with nothing, except they haue finer bread then can be made of wheat. Some are like SOCRATES, whom nothing can please but Ethicks, some discourse of morall Philoso∣phie. Others (like EPICVRVS) can relish nothing but Physicks, some subtill disputation of natural Philosophie. Some take pleasure in no∣thing, except it be full of plainnesse and perspicuitie. Others (of a more refined and sublimate temper) can sauour nothing but that which exceeds the vulgar capacitie. Some with PLVTARCH cannot fancie ARISTOTLES Metaphysicks. Others with CAPELLA & POL∣LIO find Soloecismes in TVLLY, and I know not what Patauinitie in LIVIE. So that it may be truly said, Vt rerum omnium, sic literarum quoque in∣temperantiá laboramus: As we are sicke of a surfet of all other things, so of learning also. Therfore considering there are so many theeues lying in the way, and so many pirats in this our paper-sea (as wel sea-dogs as land critickes) it cannot be that any mans writings should safely trauaile into any country without safe conduct, nor ariue at any coast without a conuoy.
Vouchsafe therefore (Right honourable Lords, and by right most worthy to be honoured, because deserts haue made you truly honorable) to giue your passe to this Apologie, now that it is to passe the file of so many and so diuerse iudgements: and to let the Sunne of your fauourable aspects giue shine to this new world: the Author whereof being a man so well knowne to the learned, and so deare to your renowned Vnkle (that worthy Knight of famous memory Sir PHILIP SIDNEY) cānot be vnknowne nor vnwelcom to your Lord∣ships. Of whom albeit I cannot say as NAZIANZEN doth of BASIL, that there is no more comparison betweene him and his fellowes, then betweene the pillars in the Church and their shadows: Yet thus much I hope I may speake without offence, that as he was a man of the rarest skill in the Greeke tongue; so of the finest conceit in plea∣sant

discourse that euer this age affoorded. I appeale no further then to this Apologie, wherein (to parallele those histories in HERODO∣TVS, which seeme to some so incredible, and so to stop the mouthes of those Didymists, who will beleeue nothing except their senses say Amen) he hath so artificially couched diuers Centuries of our stran∣gest moderne histories (as an abridgement of the wonders of former Ages) and that with such festiuitie, varietie, breuitie and perspicuitie, as the like (I perswade my selfe) is not to be found in the French, and I dare boldly say was neuer in the English tongue before. Here your Lordships shall see the rusticitie of former times, and the fashions of forrain countries: as also the cheating cunnicatcher, the quacksaluing mountebanke, the kind cuckold, the rigging huswife, the mercilesse murtherer, the griping vsurer, the lawlesse Lawyer, the ignorant, co∣uetous, and fantasticall Physitian, &c. so liuely described & laid forth in their colours, as if APELLES had bene here with his pensill. But es∣pecially (as a garland to all the rest) the gluttonie, lecherie, crueltie, felonie, blasphemie, stupiditie, and the like cardinall vertues of our good Catholicks of the Romish Hierarchy: and that (how euer they beare it out with a Romane resolution, in arrogating to themselues the glorious name of Catholicks, and branding their opposites with the odious tearme of Hereticks, as certaine Heathen in old time called themselues Deists, and all men else Atheists; and the Turke at this day, who wil needs be the true Musulman, and all the world besides Pagan;) that (I say) their Catholick religion is nothing but catholick corrup∣tion, and Catholicke Papists, catholicke heretickes.
Seeing therefore (most noble and my most honoured Lords) the qualities of the mind (as Philosophy teacheth) do commonly run on a blood, (as in Rome the Lelij were wise, the Publicolae curteous, the Pisoes frugall, the Metelli religious, &c.) I am in good hope that as your honourable Vnkle highly esteemed the Author of this Apologie in regard of his excellent parts, and incomparable knowledge in the Greeke tongue, and kindly entertained him in his trauaile, and that at sundrie times; as first at Heidelbergh, after that at Strasburgh, and last of all at Vienna in Austria: and curteously accepted the two books which he dedicated vnto him, the one Graec. Test. An. 1576. coming out of his presse, the Gnomolog. Graec. M.S. other onely from his pen: so you (who forerunne all as farre in curtesie as in pedegree) will as kindly entertaine this his poore Orphane newly come into a strange country, and hauing lately learned the language of the place. And were it but onely that your renowned Vnkle (I can

neuer name him too often whom I can neuer sufficiently honor) and your honourable Mother (the vertuous Ladie, and thrise renowned Countesse of Pembroke) haue trauailed in this kind,De veritat. Christ. relig. by Sir Philip Sidney. His discourse of life & death by the Countesse of Pembroke. in translating some of the workes of that Phoenix of France, the Lord du Plessis, into our English tongue; I perswade my selfe, it would not be vngratefull to your Lordships: especially being dedicated by him who hath dedi∣cated and deuoted himselfe, to employ his pen and paines, and what seruice he can else performe for the honour of your house. In confi∣dence therefore of your accustomed clemencie, as the Author dedi∣cated his VVORLD OF VVORDS (I meane his treasury of the Greek tongue) to the greatest Princes of Europe; that vnder their names it might passe with greater applause to their Vniuersities: So I do here humbly commend this his VVORLD OF VVONDERS (a work of farre lesse volume, but no lesse value) to your honorable protection, that vnder your patronage it may passe to the vniuerse of our Brittish natiō. And verily among those many radiant Diamonds which do so beautifie his Highnesse Crowne & Diademe, I could see none more resplendent, and consequently fitter to be placed in the Frontispice of this worke (like two great lights to shine in the heauen of this new world) then your two Lordships. For who more fit to patronage so conceited a worke, then they who for their sufficiencie are best able to iudge of conceits? and by their excellent discourse (as it is said of ASHER) to affoord pleasures for a King?Gen. 49.20. And to whom should stu∣dents haue recourse, but to those who are amici studiorum & studiosorum, both louers of learning and of learned men? (whose recompence in this barren Age, were it not for such bountiful benefactors, would be but small; their bed might be vpon the straw at the signe of the Star, and they get nothing but their labour for their paines.) And if it be a true saying, Temples are to be dedicated to the Gods, and bookes to good men; to whō may I better dedicate this Apologie, then to your good Lordships, in whom those eminent parts and almost heroicall vertues of your dearest Vnkle (whose vntimely death hath bene so infinitely regret∣ted) are now (as out of the ashes of the Phoenix) quickned and reuiued again? and in whom the blossoms of many rare vertues putting forth so timely in this Aprill of your age, do promise more then ordinary fruite of great good in time to come?
But lest I should seeme to guild gold: and for that you are not wont to feed vpon the wind of mens words; I cease to be further troublesome: though neuer ceasing in my best wishes and desires to

pray to the highest Maiestie, that great God of heauen and earth (who is great without quantitie, good without qualitie, infinite with∣out place, eternall without time; whose prouidence reacheth from the Center to the Circumference; from the silliest Scyniph, to the highest Sraphin,) to blesse your Lordships with health of body, peace of conscience, increase of honour, and length of daies: that his most excellent Maiestie may long enioy such faithfull ACHATESES, and learning such bountifull MECAENATES: and that in the end of mortalitie (after the reuolution of many happy yeares) you may attaine to that happinesse that neuer shall haue end.

