


AMong al thinges that are in the vniuersall worlde, moste vertuous and gentle prynce, it semeth that man onely can chose of him selfe, a state and ende after his owne mynde, and walkynge in that pathe, that most pleaseth him, canne rather rule his lyfe freely ac∣cordinge to tharbitremente of his owne will, then to thinclination of nature. For if ye nature of thin∣ges be diligently considered, to all the special kinds of them, there haue bene appointed and wyth an in∣uyolable lawe assigned, by him who is cause of all, certeine boundes, out of the whiche they canne by no possible meanes passe, chaunging into better or worse sort, that beinge, that at the beginning was graunted them. Whereas in the power of man there hath bene frely put an abilitie to chose a way wher∣in he mought lede his lyfe moste at his owne plea∣sure. Ind almost like a newe Prometheus, to trās∣forme him selfe into what he most willed, takynge lyke a Cameleont the colour of al those thinges vn∣to the whiche with thaffecte he is most nygh.
And finally to make him selfe eyther earthly or di∣uyne and to passe ouer to that state, that to the elec∣tion

of his free wil shalbe most agreable Whereby it is plainely sene, that whiles men, either by their ill chaunce, or their noughtie choyse, lyue holy bent and occuped in worldly thinges, fixinge their eies in these sensible obiectes, without any lifting thē vppe to the heauens at all, their condition is verye litle better, then that of brute beastes, or rather they become almost like thother beastes, who whollye lacke reason. And contrary when they wythdrawe them the most they may from thence, and retourne to ther owne true and proper operation, and lifting them selues from things base and earthly, to things high and diuine, are broughte to their owne trewe perfection, like vnto those happie spirites, who out of this corruptible world, liue in contemplation of diuine thinges, their life is most happy and blessed. This is the thing most myghty and excellēt prince, to helpe others the most that in me lieth, as the pro∣per and true duetie of man is, folowing the steppes of the most learned Pluache, that in these my pre∣sent dialogues, I haue sought as I haue bene best able. And for that like as men are naturally bounde to geue honor to God, not onely with their minde and wordes, but also wyth some outward signe, of∣feringe him of the most dere and precious thynges they haue, they also oughte in that sorte they beste knowe and can, to honour alwaies their Princes, because they are (as the same Plutarche saide) the very and true Images of god, for that they kepe the same degree in their states, that the most hygh and myghtie God holdeth in the vniuersall. I bothe by nature and election seruaunt of your highnes, kno∣inge howe muche aswell naturally, as by benefites receiued, I am bounde alwaies to honour ye same,

and not being able to do it in such sort as I gladlye would, desiring at the lest to shewe the redines of my good will, haue taken corage to presente the same with these, such as they are, my smal trauails, humbly praying your highnes, that like as god him selfe, as greate as he is, neuer despiseth anye gyfte, thoughe mooste smalle and of litle valewe, offered him of a pure and sincere minde, the same now like wise will not set light this my most litle gift, sins although it be of the best and most dere thinges I haue, it maye seme in very deede, to smal and poore, in respect of your highnes and desertes of the same. I beseche then finally your excellencye, that recom∣pensinge euery lacke with the goodnes of my will, you will gentellye receiue the same. Sins I desire nothing more, then as my duetye is (beinge your moost faithfull and obedient seruaunt) alwaies to serue and honoure your highnes. From Florence the first of Marche. 1548.

