



MY right deere, and deseruedly be∣loued
Allies; finding among my
loose papers the notes of that
Sermon that I made at the
enterrement of that blessed
Saint, lately wife to the one,
and mother to the rest of you,
collected and transscribed not
long after at the request of some of you for your owne
priuate vse and benefit: I thought it would not be
amisse to make it more publike; (the rather for that
diuers seemed to desire it) and to adde vnto it the

testimonie then truly and vpon good ground giuen vn∣to
her: partly for the propagating and perpetuating
of the memory of so worthy a seruant of God, and
partly also and more principally for the enciting and
egging on of others, of that Sex especially, to the imita∣tion
of her. Aristo. ethic. l. 10. c. 1. Exempla maximè mouent. Cic. de orat. lib. 3. Validiora sunt ex∣empla quàm verba, & plenus opere dcetur quàm vcce. Leo serm. de ieiun. Good Examples (as the Heathen man
obserueth) are of great force; and are therefore (not
without cause) so frequently propounded1. Cor. 11. 1. Ephes. 5. 1, 2. Phil. 3. 17. Hebr. 12. 1, 2. & 13. 7. Iam. 5. 10. in Gods
word.Longum est iter per praecepta: breue & fficax per ex∣empla. Sen. epist. 6. They preuaile oft more then precepts. Precepts
shew vs what we should do: Examples goe further,
and shew vs how we may doe it; andHoc plus valent exempla, quod fieri posse docent quod factum est. Sermo quidam vinus & efficax exemplum operis est, facilè per∣suadens quod in∣tendimus, deum fa∣ctibile probat esse quod sademus. Bern. de resurr. ser. 2. Ex aliorum fa∣ctis fieri poss cre∣dunt, quod forte, dā putant non fieri posse, pigrescunt. Aug. epist. 134. Adiuvari se exemplie exoptat humana infirmitas, quo facilius ipsa etiam nunc faciat, quae ali fecisse ante cognoscat. Saluian. ad eccles. cath. l. 3. that the things
enioyned vs may be done of vs, because they haue been
done by others Iam. 5. 17. Lege Bern. serm. de Martino. like our selues before vs: and so they
take away that obiection of impossibilitie, as if that
were required of vs, that could not be done, or that
none before vs euer did. Againe, as Examples in ge∣nerall
are vsefull; so Examples of this Sex are in
some respect of the twaine the more needfull. That Po∣pish
conceit sticketh still in the mindes of many; that
knowledge and booke-learning is for great Clarks one∣ly;
meane men, and women much more then, haue no
neede of it, neither indeed can attaine vnto it. Yet
God telleth vs that they mustIerem. 31. 34. all know him from the
highest to the lowest,Iohn 17. 3. whom he sheweth mercy vnto in
the remission of their sinnes. And surely, if to know
God in Christ be life eternall; thenSi cognitio Dei vita aeterna, tum igno∣rantia Dei mors aeterna. Bern. in Cant. to be ignorant of
him, cannot be, or bring but eternall destruction. Be∣sides
thatGalat. 3. 28. . Basil. Sel. hom. 2. Christianitie maketh no distinction of Sex.

1. Tim 2. 15.  Clem Alex. Pae∣dg l. 1. c. 4. The same common saluation is propounded to both
Sexes: Basil. the same meanes of attayning it are likewise
common to either.Act. 4. 12. 1. Cor. 11. 11. No saluation to man or woman but
by Christ:Mark. 16. 16. John 3. 16. no interest in Christ but by Faith,1. Tim. 2 15. Iohn 11. 27. 2. Tim. 1. 5. exa∣cted
therefore of either: andRom. 10. 14, 17. . Clem. Alex. strom. l. 5. . Marc. de lege spir. 102. Indiget fides cogitine, si∣cut & cognitio in∣diget fide: neque enim esse potest si∣des sine cognitione, ne{que} est cognitio aliquid sine fide. Theodor. de cur. Graec. aff. l. 1. no Faith without know∣ledge,
the maine ground-worke of Faith. Now as there
is a necessitie of knowledge, faith, feare of God, and
other spirituall graces in either, so there is no impossi∣bilitie
of attaining them, and some good measure of
them, vnto either. Examples of the weaker Sex appa∣rantly
prouing this, are in that regard the more effectu∣all;
for that, as they shame men, if they come short of
such, so they giue women incouragement to contend,
and good hope to attaine vnto, what they see others of
their Sex haue before them by like contending attained.
But domesticall examples are of all other the most
powerfull. And therefore whatsoeuer effect this shall
haue with others, it ought in speciall manner to preuaile
with you, who had so speciall interest in her, whose
memorie is so sacred with all those that here knew her,
and who were continuall eye-witnesses of those her gra∣tious
parts and godly courses, which most others had in
part onely by heare-say. And doubtles that is the grea∣test
honour we can doe to our religious Auncestors de∣ceased,
if we endeuour so to resemble them in goods
and godlinesse, that by our religious courses and cariage
we may be knowne to haue come of them, and they may
seeme to surviue in vs. The manner of her end, so
sweet, so cheerefull, so comfortable, should the rather
encite you hereunto, that, if you desire to finde that
comfort then that she did, and to giue that comfort to

others, that you had then in her, you take that course
that you saw shee did, lay a sure foundation in life
for comfort in death, and be continually building vpon
it when it is once surely laid. Now that this weake
worke may a litle at least further you therein, he vouch∣safe
to grant, whose power appeares in our weaknesse,
and who by weake meanes is able to effect weighty mat∣ters:
To his blessing, I commend both you and it, and
so rest

