



HAuing no other meanes out of my small fortunes to do you honor (right worshipful and worthy Gentlemen) and to make your worthinesse knowne to the world, but only this paper present: J do here (according to my long intended purpose) present you with the second part of Stephens Apologie: desiring it may remaine with you as a pledge and testimony of my thankeful∣nesse, for the continuall flow of your manifold fauours (farre aboue the proportion of my deserts) and as an earnest of that propense mind and vnfained affection which J beare to your house and name. The worke you may iustly chalenge at my hands by a double right. First in that it was begun at my ho∣norable good Lord your fathers house in Essex: where being destitute of other bookes, and knowing not how to passe those long nights with better recreation: at your entreaty together with my entire friend Monsieur Beaufort (thē your school∣master for the French tongue, and now Doctour of Physicke in Basil) I first vndertook the work: beginning (as you know) , with the second part in the first place. Secōdly in that it is done by him who oweth himselfe and all he can do, to your loue and seruice. But as the first borne among the Jewes had a double portion; so you Sir Robert haue a double

right herein aboue your brother. First, in that your helping hand hath not bene wanting to the worke, in translating (at my motion, and for your owne recreation) the 36▪ Chapter: which without any great filing or fourbishing of mine, went to the presse as it came from your pen: being done so faithfully according to the French, and so fitly and finely in regard of the English phrase, that J feare nothing so much, as lest (like a peece of veluet in a beggars coate) it should shame the resi∣due of the worke. And this I both should and would haue se∣conded with your other translation of D. Tylenus his con∣futation of the Bishop of Eureux (which you left with me when you left the Vniuersitie) but that it was preuented by a worse. Secondly, in that you were not onely Primus motor, the man that first set it on foote; but also , and he that kept it still on the wheeles. For had I not bene first moued by you, it had neuer bin begun (at least by me:) and had you not so often called vpon me, as well by word as writing, it had lyen still in loose leaues as an idle toy, fitter to be udibrium ven∣ti, or meate for the mothes, then matter for the Presse. They therefore that shall reape either profite or pleasure by this my translation, are to thanke you for your good motion, without which it had neuer seene the light of the Sun. And thinke not (M. Henry) that you are here excluded; for as it was begun, so was it also finished with special respect to your inten∣ded trauaile, that it might furnish you with matter for dis∣course, in keeping complement at the French Court, whither you haue bene so often sent for by your respectiue God-father his Maiestie of France. To you both therefore I send it, as well to do you honor, as to receiue honor frō you. Yet know this, that paper praises (being nothing but the wind of mēs words) can neither eternize your name, nor blazon your fame to po∣steritie (as that proud pedanticke thought,Appion Grā∣matic. who promised im∣mortalitie

to those to whom he dedicated any of his works.) Vertue onely and valour are the highway to true Honor; which Marcellus signified by the two Temples which he dedicated to the Goddesses Vertue and Honour, being so contriued, that no man could enter into the Temple of Ho∣nour, but he that had first gone through that of Vertue. And the truth hereof may appeare in the glasse of these ex∣amples: For these foure worthies of the world, Alexan∣der, Caesar, Augustus, Constantine, of whose names cities were built and moneths denominated, con∣tinue famous euen to this day. And so long as the two mo∣neths in the yeare, Iuly and August; and those two renow∣ned cities, Alexandria and Constantinople remaine, their memory shal neuer perish. Whereas Nero, Commo∣dus, and such like monsters,Suet. in N∣rone, cap 5. Aurel. Vict. de Caesarib. c. 17. & Eutrop. i. 6 who attempted the like (the first laboring to haue April called Neronius; the second, Sep∣tember Commodus) haue fallen to the very counterpoint of that they aymed at, dying like a candle which leaueth the snuffe stinking after it; being now no way famous but by the infamy of their wicked liues. And what can be said of the Kings of France called the idle, saue onely this, that they haue left nothing memorable, but that they left no memorie? The like inglorious end cannot but befall all those who either with the idle drone eate more then they earne; or waste the candle in idle play, which was allowed to haue lighted them to bed. This I speake not as taking vpon me to schoole you, or to reade you a lecture as if you were still in the Vniuersitie; but in dutie to your Father (to whom J am so infinitely indebted for his honorable fauours) and in loue to your persons, to en∣courage you on in a good course, by adding fuell to the fire, and oyle to the flame: that as you are rich in name and in outward goods, but more rich in those of the body, so you may be most

rich in those of the mind, and so be true inheritors not onely of your Fathers name and goods, but also of his vertues, in be∣ing the shadow of his mind; making his example and honora∣ble courses the Cynosura by which you are to direct your course. For (doubtlesse) in so doing you shall not onely auoid Scylla and Charybdis, those dangerous rocks and deuou∣ring gulfes which lie in your way, where so many are either swallowed vp, or suffer ship-wracke, (you know what J meane:) but arriue in the end at the hauen of eternall happinesse. And there J leaue you.

