



SIR, euer since J began to bestow my selfe vpon the common good, studying wherein my labours might be most seruiceable; J still found they could be no way so well im∣proued, as in that part which concerneth de∣uotion, and the practice of true pietie. For on the one side I perceiued the number of Polemicall bookes, rather to breed, than end strifes; and those which are doctrinall, by reason of their multitude, rather to op∣presse than satisfie the Reader; wherein, if we write the same things, wee are iudged tedious; if different, singular. On the other part, respecting the Reader, J saw the braines of men neuer more stuffed, their tongues neuer more stirring, their hearts neuer more emptie, nor their hands more idle. Wherefore, after those sudden Meditations which passed me without rule, J was easily induced by their successe (as a small thing moues the willing) to send forth this Rule of Meditation; and after my Heauen vpon Earth, to discourse (although by way of example) of Heauen aboue. Jn this Art of mine, J confesse to haue recei∣ued more light from one obscure namelesse Monke, which wrote some 112. yeeres agoe, than from the directions of all other Wri∣ters.
 J would his humilitie had not made him niggardly of his name, that we might haue knowne whom to haue thanked. It had beene easie to haue framed it with more curiosity: but God and my soule know, that J made profit the scope of my labour, and not applause; and therefore (to chuse) J wished rather to bee rude than vnprofitable. Jf now the simplicitie of any Reader shall beeaue him of the benefit of my precepts, I know hee may make his vse of my examples. Why I haue honoured it with your name, J need not giue account to the world, which alreadie knoweth your worth and deserts; and shall see by this, that J acknow∣ledge them. Goe you on happily (according to the heauenly ad∣uice of your Iunius) in your worthy and glorious profession, still bearing your selfe as one that knoweth vertue the truest Nobili∣tie, and Religion the best vertue. The God whom you serue, shall honour you with men, and crowne you in heauen. To his grace J humbly commend you: requesting you only to accept the worke, and continue your fauour to the Author.

