



Most gracious Soueraigne:
I Cannot so ouer-loue this issue of my owne braine, as to hold it worthy of your Maie∣sties iudicious eyes; much lesse of the highest Patronage vnder Heauen: Yet now, my very duty hath bidden mee looke so high; & tels me it would be no lesse then iniurious, if I should not lay down my work, where I owe my seruice; and that I should offend, if I presumed not. Besides; whither should the riuers runne, but into the Sea? Jt is to your Maiesty (vnder the Highest) that wee owe both these sweete opportunities of good, and all the good fruites of these happy opportunities: Jf we should not therefore freely offer to your Maiestie some praemetiall handfulls of that croppe, whereof you may challenge the whole haruest, how could wee bee but shamelesly vnthankfull? J cannot praise my Present otherwise, then by the truth of that heart from which it procee∣deth: Onely this J may say; that seldome any man hath offered to your Royall hands a greater bundle of his owne thoughts (Some
 whereof as it must needs fall out amongst so many, haue beene con∣fessed profitable) nor perhaps more varietie of discourse: for here shall your Maiestie finde Moralitie, like a good handmaid, wai∣ting on Diuinity; and Diuinity, like some great Lady, euery day in se dresses; Speculation interchanged with experience; Positiue Theologie with Polemicall; Textuall with discursorie; Popular with Scholasticall.
J cannot dissemble my ioy to haue done this little good: And if it be the comfort, and honour of your vnworthy seruant, that the God of Heauen hath vouchsafed to vse his hand in the least seruice of his Church; How can it bee but your Crowne and reioycing, that the same God hath set apart your Maiesty, as a glorious instrument of such an vniuersall good to the whole Christian World? It was a madde conceit of that old Heresiarch, which might iustly take his name from madnes; That an huge Giant beares vp the earth with his shoulder; which he changes euery thirtieth yeere, for ease; and with the remouall causes an Earthquake. If by the deuice hee had meant onely an Embleme of Kings (as our ancient Mythologists vnder their Saint George, and Christopher, haue described the Christian Souldier, and good Pastor) he had not done amisse; for surely, the burthen of the whole world lies on the shoulders of Soue∣raigne authoritie; and it is no maruell if the Earth quake in the change. As Kings are to the World, so are good Kings to the Church: None can be so blinde, or enuious, as not to grant, that the whole Church of God vpon earth, rests her selfe principally (next to her stay aboue) vpon your Maiesties Royall supportation; You may truly say with Dauid, Ego sustineo columnas eius. What wonder is it then, if our tongues and pens blesse you; if we be ambi∣tious of all occasions, that may testifie our cheerefull gratulations of this happinesse to your Highnesse, & ours in you? Which, our hum∣ble prayers vnto him, by whom Kings reigne, shall labour to con∣tinue, till both the Earth and Heauens be truly changed.

