



RIGHT HONORABLE:
VPon how iust reason these my Contemplations goe forth so late after their Fellowes, it were need∣lesse to giue account to your Lordship, in whose traine I had the honour (since my last) to passe both the Sea and the Twede. All my priuate studies haue gladly vailed to the publike seruices of my So∣ueraigne Master: No sooner could I recouer the happi∣nesse of my quiet thoughts, then J renued this my diuine taske: Wherein J cannot but professe to place so much contentment, as that J wish not any other measure of my life, then it; What is this other, then the exaltation of ISAACS delight to walke forth into the pleasant fields of the Scriptures, and to meditate of nothing vnder heauen? Yea, what other then IACOBS sweet vision of Angels, climbing vp and downe
 that sacred Ladder, which God hath set betweene heauen and earth? Yea, (to rise yet higher) what other then an imitation of holy Moyses, in his conuersing with God himselfe, on the Horeb of both Testaments? And if J may call your Lo. forth a little from your great affaires of Court and State, to blesse your eyes with this prospect, how happy shall you confesse this change of ob∣iects? and how vnwillingly shall you obtaine leaue of your thoughts to returne vnto these sublunary imployments? Our last Discourse left Gods Arke amongst the Philistims; now we returne to see what it doth there, and to fetch it thence: Wherein your Lo. shall find the reuenges of God neuer so deadly, as when he giues most way vnto men; The vaine confidence of wickednesse ending in a late repentance: The fearfull plagues of a presumptuous sawcinesse with God, not preuented with the honesty of good intentions; The mercy of God accepting the seruices of an humble faithfulnesse in a meaner dresse. From thence you shall see the dangerous issue of an affected innouation, although to the better; The errors of cre∣dulitie, and blind affection in the holiest Gouernours, guilty of the peoples discontentment; The stubborne headdinesse of a multitude that once finds the reynes slacke in their necks, not capable of any pause, but their owne fall; The vntrusty promises of a faire out∣side, and a plausible entrance, shutting vp in a wofull disappoint∣ment. What doe J forestall a Discourse so full of choice; your Lo. shall finde euery line vsefull, and shall willingly confesse that the Story of God can make a man not lesse wise, then good.
Mine humble thankfulnesse knowes not how to expresse it selfe otherwise, then in these kind of presents, and in my heartie prayers for the encrease of your honour, and happinesse, which shall neuer be wanting from

