



MOST REVEREND FATHER, and no lesse honored Lord,
IT was my desire and hope, to spend the residue of my Time and thoughts in sweet and sacred Contemplation. Satan enuying me this happinesse, interrupts me by the malice of an importunate Ad∣uersarie. Twelue yeares agoe I wrote a little Apologeticall Letter for the Mari∣age of persons Ecclesiasticall; and now thus late, when I had almost forgot that I had written it, a moody Masse-priest drops out a tedious and virulent Refutation; thorow my sides striking at the most Honorable, and flourishing Clergie of the whole Christian world; labouring not so much for my disgrace (what would that auaile him?) as the dishonour and scorne of our holy Profession, in the eyes of our people. I could contemne it in silence, if the Quarrell were onely
 mine; Now my wrong cannot be distinguished from thou∣sands: God and his Church are ingaged in this cause, which in my foile could not but sustaine losse; neither may I be now silent with safetie, without misconstruction. Let this hand and Tongue bee no longer mine, then they may serue my Master in Heauen, and his Spouse on Earth. That which I wrote in some three houres, he hath answered in three qua∣ternions of yeares; and what I vvrote in three leaues, hee hath answered in no fewer Pages then 380. Should I follow him in this proportion; hee might after some Centuries of yeares expect an answer in Tostatus-hydes; whose first word should be, Quis legit haec? Or if my patience would delay my Reply to the iust paces of his Answer, this Volume of his vvould perhaps bee vanished into Grocers shops for waste Paper in thuris piperisue cucullos; and vvould no more need answer then now it deserueth one. But hearing of the insulta∣tion of some Popishly affected, who gloried and triumphed in this ACHILLES pro Catholicis, I addressed my selfe to the Worke, vvith no little indignation, and no lesse speed: That my selfe-conceited Aduersarie, and his seduced abettors may see how little a well-ordered Mariage is guilty of deadding our spirits, or slacking our hands. At the beginning of this Summers Progresse, when it pleased his sacred Maiestie to take notice of this sorie Libell, and to question vvith me con∣cerning it, I had not so much as read it ouer, so newly vvas it come to my hands; ere his happy returne, (be it spoken to the onely glory of him that inabled me) I had not only finished this Answer, but twice written it ouer with my owne hand; and yet made this but the recreation of the weightier businesse of my Calling, which now did more then ordinarily vrgeme.
It was my purpose to haue answered (as beseemeth the per∣son à quo, not ad quem) mildely, according to my knowne dis∣position: but vpon better deliberation, I found the insolency of my Refuter such, that I could not fauour him, and not bee cruell to my cause. If therefore for many (it is his own art and
 word) railatiue Pages, he receiue from my vnwilling and en∣forced Pen now and then, though not a Relatiue to such an Antecedent, yet perhaps some drop of sharper Vineger, then my Inke vseth to be tempered withall, he may forgiue mee, and must thanke himselfe: What needed this cause so furi∣ous an Inuectiue? As if the Kingdom of Heauen, and all Re∣ligion consisted in nothing but Maiden-head, or Mariage? Cardinal Bellarmine, when he speakes of the Greeke Church, wherein a maried Clergie is both allowed and required,Si errerem alium non haberent, cise pax conce∣leretur, Bell de Cleric. lib. 1. c. 21. shuts vp moderately; That if this were all the difference be∣twixt them, and the Romane Church, they should soone be at peace. If my Refuter had so thought, this had not been his first Controuersie: Both estates meet in Heauen. John the Virgin rests in the bosome of maried Abraham; This inordinate heate therefore of prosecution rises from faction, not from holy Zeale: Hence it was that my Aduer∣sarie cunningly singled out this point from many others, ranged in my poore Discourses, as that wherein (Bishop Je∣wels confession) hee might promise to himselfe the likeliest aduantage of Antiquity; and how gloriously doth he vaunt himselfe in the ostentation of Fathers & Councels! Which vaine flourish how little it auailes him, the processe shal shew; where it shall appeare vpon what grounds no small piece of Antiquitie was partiall to Virginitie, and ouer-harsh to Ma∣riage, as Beatus Rhenanus,B. Rhenan. Arg. lib. de exhort. Castit. Tertull. a learned and ingenuous Papist confesseth. But this we may boldly say, that if those holy men had out-liued the bloody Times, and seene the fearfull in∣conueniences which would (after a setled peace) insue vpon the ambition, or constraint of a denyed Continencie, they had doubtlesse changed their note; and with the moderate and wisest spirits of the later times,Eneas Syluius. Panormitan. Durandus. Peresius. Montuanu. Erasmus, &c. Che Coll intro∣ductione del matrimonio ac Preti si farelle, che tutti volt assetto l affetto & amor lor alle moglie, a figli, & per consequenza acasa, & alla patria; onde ceserebbe la dependenza fretta chl Ordine Clericale ha con sede Apostolica, & tanto sarelbe. Conceder ill matrimonio a Prti, quanto distrug∣ la Hietarchia Ecclesiastico, & ridur it Pont. che non fose pu the Vescuo ci Roma. Histor. Concil. Trid. pag. 662. Troppo fste, troppo teste, troppo tempeste. Vid. Dallngt. obseru. vpon Guicciard. Doctor Mart. against Pr. Marr. pleaded for that libertie which the Reformed Church now enioyeth. The vniuersall concession whereof (after the priuate Suffrages of worthy
 Authors) came to a publike treaty in the Romane Church, amidst the throng of their late Tridentine Councell, and it is worth the while to obserue on what grounds it receiued a re∣pulse. If Priests should be allowed Mariage (say those wily Jtalians) it would follow that they would cast their affecti∣ons on their Wiues and Children, and consequently on their Families, and Countries, whereupon would cease that strait dependance, which the Clergie hath vpon the See A∣postolike; In so much as to grant their Mariages, were as much as to destroy the Hierarchie of the Church, and to re∣duce the Pope within the meere bounds of the Romane Bi∣shopricke. This was the plea of the Clergie; their thriftie Laitie, (together with them) enemies to the blessing, (or, as they construe it, the curse) of fruitfulnesse, are wont to plead, Troppo teste: our Gregory Martin of old computes the pre∣iudiciall increase that might arise from these Mariages to the Common-wealth. It is not Religion, but wit that now lyes in our way. Fond men that dare offer thus to controll the wisdome of their Maker, and will be tying the God of Hea∣uen to their rules of state. As it is, no Church in the vvhole World (except the Romane) stands vpon this restraint, vvhereof the consequences haue been so notoriously shame∣full, that wee might well hope, experience vvould haue wrought, if not redresse of their courses, yet silence of ours. And surely, if this man had not presumed that (by reason of the long discontinuance of Popery) time had worne out of mens mindes the memory of their odious filthinesse, he durst not thus boldly haue pleaded for their abominable Celibate; The question vvhereof, after all busie discussions, and pre∣tences of age, must be resolued into no other then this, How farre the Tradition of a particular Church is worthy to pre∣uaile against Scripture: yea, and against other Churches. A point, which a very vveake iudgement will bee able to de∣termine.
In this returne of my Defence, I doe neither answer euery
 idle clause, nor omit any essentiall: this length of mine is no lesse forced then mine Aduersaries Continencie: wherein yet my Reader shall not sigh vnder an irkesome loquacitie: I presume to dedicate this vnworthy labour to your Grace, whom this famous Church dayly blesseth, as her wise, faith∣full, and vigilant Ouerseer, as a renowned Patterne of holy Virginitie, and Patron of holy Mariage. The God of Hea∣uen (whose watch you carefully keep) preserue you long to his Church; and make vs long happy in your Grace, and you euer happy in his plentifull blessings. Such shall euer be the Prayers of

