



RIght Honorable my ve∣ry good Lord, your fa∣uourable affection hath bene euer so euident and your bountifull hand al∣vvaies so open vnto me, that I can neuer vvilling∣ly come vnto you vvith∣out some schollerly exercise or other. The rea∣diest at this instant, though perhaps not the fit∣test altogither is a theologicall treatise or diui∣nitie Discourse vpon the chiefe or rather onely point of christian Religion, vvhich I here offer vp, if percase your Lordship vvill at the most fa∣uourably admit it into your studie, or at least af∣fectionately allovv it as one small part of my du∣tie and thankfulnes, for vvhich only cause I pre∣sent it, not in any other respect, euen vpon for∣mer premisses heretofore since your Lordships being in Cambridge to this daie, not for any future consequents hereafter, the Booke desi∣reth not your speciall patronage, it is not vvor∣thie of so honourable a specialitie, neither may

I trouble your excellent Lordship vvith Theo∣logicall peculiars and proprieties further then as they belong generally to all noble and true Christians; In defending and maintaining the religion of their God, and faith of their country, as the principall ground and very roote of all their ovvne politicke defence and maintenance. Herein I remember the common voice of schol∣lers and souldiers, of citizens and yeomen, of gentlemen & their betters: That the Noble Earle of Essex is behind none, but afore the rest, euer ready and more forward then the forwardest in Gods bat∣tels and his Princes quarrels with horse and speare to ouerthrow & ouerrun Gods foes and hir enemies, euen in their owne gates, euen in Portugale it selfe a gallant kingdome & the most venturous place of such enemies, euen at their most populous and royall cittie Lysbon, approuing his vertue, with as much and hap∣ly more felicitie, absit assentationis suspitio, ne∣que enim soleo auribus verba dare, then euer A∣lexander himself did his valiancy at the cittie Mal∣la. (Q. Curtius l. 9.) neuer vnready with good words and magnificent deedes, to honour his Prince or enno∣ble his countrie, when God and Right shall employ him; neuer vnready to help any man, no not any com∣mon man, no not with hazarding of his owne person in common sight which I trust is garded with good an∣gels

and in truth no hazarding, and now lately by vn∣horsing himself he mercifully saued a poore wounded souldier from the mouth of the sword, therein equall or somewhat comparable with the foresaid great A∣lexander in right manly nature and honourable dis∣position, that so gratiously relieued and reuiued a silly frosen souldier in his owne chaire at the fire; (Valer. Maximus l. 5. c. 1.) but assuredly euen beyond him adsit bonus candor bono lectori, in brooking the rough sea water at Peniche neere Noua Lisbona, more easily all day then he did the gentle riuer Cyd∣nus at Tarsus in Cilicia one halfe quarter of an hower. (Q. Curtius l. 3.) When I remember these & such Honorable famous reports cōmonly de∣liuered of my vvorthie good Lord, among ma∣ny other men of Superiour qualitie, I am right hartilie glad, to see my lot in so faire a ground, as to ovve dutie & thanks to that Noble good Earle, which is so couragious vvith his yeares & knovvledge and so courteous vvith his knovv∣ledge and yeares, vvhich more and more increa∣seth that most excellent opiniō euer heretofore conceiued of him for moral and martiall procee∣dings, vvhich vvith prosperous & novv renovv∣ned vertue fretteth enuie in peeces & neuer tea∣reth himselfe; I pray God He may alvvaies vvith all blessed increase be like himselfe, that for action

is naturally borne Al Hart of his Noble Father, for Instruction since his death is artificially made All Studious of his careful Tutor, for higher di∣rection & counsell hath made al notable choise, for ioyful successe vvill assuredly proue All Hap∣pie by Gods diuine assistaunce. But I must not seeme long vvithout cause, lesse I become tedi∣ous vvithout effect: Novv therfore I most hum∣bly beseech my Noble good Lord, only to re∣ceiue this little Pamflet for an vnfained remem∣brance & infallible proofe of my continual du∣tie & thankfulnes, desiring no further regard or revvard any vvay, then his Honour in vvoonted fauour shal thinke good, seeing It is old inough & best at leysure to speake for it selfe, vpon any contingent of confutation or disliking that may ensue. With vvhich dutie I daily still and stil re∣commend your vertuous studies & valiant acts, to al good and admirable successe, euen beyond the impeachment or compasse of doubtfull and deceitfull fortune through the blessed sonne of God, the blessed lamb of God, our blessed God, our blessed Sauiour, to the full fruition of his grace euermore redounding in your vvoorthie and noble mind.

