




AS Man the ex∣cellentest Creature, doth confesse the Al∣mightie to be the au∣thour and framer of the whole worlde, with all things contayned therein, e∣uen so of duetie must hee faithfullye graunt, God to be the fountaine and spring of all wisedome and know∣ledge, out of which, this science and Arte of Phisiognomie (as a part of Philosophie) hath hir proceeding, for if a man diligently beholde, not only the sundry and variable formes and shapes of liuing creatures, but also

the forme & fashion of man himself, shall wel perceyue such marueylous differences of countenances, such di∣uers lineaments of the body, & they all greatly diffring one frō another, so that man maye not, nor ought to attribute it to hap, casualtie, or for∣tune, but onelye to the great proui∣dence and will of almighty GOD, which extends it selfe vnto the num∣bring of the heares of mans heade, as our sauiour witnesseth in the E∣uangelist S. Mathevve. And there∣fore it is no absurde thing to affirme those small and little lineaments ap∣pearing on sundrye parts of mans bodye, by God to be appointed, for the great comfort and behoofe of mans nature, to thende he might enioy the perfite vse, and full know∣ledge of them. And althoughe the weakenesse of mans nature be such, as it cannot redily attaine the know∣ledge of them, yet it is the part and

dutie of euery good and well disposed minde to searche oute the excellent workes, and secretes of nature, so farre forth as the almightye power and heauenly gouernor doth permit and suffer him, and therein to note and consider the magnificencie and wme of the highest workeman: the which very bright shall shine out, and as apparauntlye be seene in the least and smallest creatures, as in the greatest and largiest bodies. The learned Aristotle in his booke De ani∣malibus, diligentlye beholding and considering the two small beasts, the Bee and the Ante, doth not a little marueyle at their diuine workman∣ship and cunning. But to be briefe▪ there is nothing contained in the ex∣cellent frame and Theatre of this worlde, that requireth not great ad∣miration, and the same of purpose appointed, for the only vse of nature▪ therefore in times past among▪ the

auncient Philosophers, it was an vndoubted principle taught in their schooles, that all things were formed and made vnto some certaine ende and purpose. This mighty wisedom of God, although it doth most boun∣tifully shewe and expresse it selfe in euerye worke, yet in mans nature, which farre excelleth all other in dignitie and worthynesse, and in whiche the singular impressions of God are decerned, it doth offer all thinges to consideration and vewe more plainly, more cleare, and more abundaunt. This well vnderstoode and known to the auncient students of wisedome, did preferre mans na∣ture to be considered before all o∣thers; and in the same they asmuch arueised at the great diuersitie and disposition of minds, as at the linea∣mentes of the bodye. And they both carefully and diligently endeuoured to appoynt euery condicion and qua∣litie,

his proper body, and to ech body contrarywise, his proper qualities and condicions, thereby to obtayne and purchase the truth. The aunci∣ent Poete Homere tooke vppon him liuely to describe that worthy Ther∣sites, in comparing his maners and condicions to the notes seene on his body. The lyke also did Dares Phry∣gius in his long Catalogue of noble Piers, where he cunningly applyed their condicions with their formes and lineamentes seene. This Dares wrote that the valiant Aeneas was well coloured of body, tending vnto a rednesse, in personage square set, hauing cheerefull and smyling eyes, and these somewhat declining to a blacknesse, and therfore Dares repor∣teth him eloquent, gentle, friendlye of behauiour, wittye and politike in his counsels, pleasant at times, va∣liant in his attempts, and vertuous. The iolly warrier Antenor, he descri∣beth

to be talle of stature, slender in bodye, in his members nimble and quicke, and therefore iudged to be warie, and craftie in his doinges. But the valiant Achylles is described to be bigge and large breasted, fayre spoken, gentle, strong membred, and with great strength of the armes; ha∣uing a curled heade, a cheerefull or smyling countenance, and the heares of the heade of a browne Chest nut colour, by which notes, he was iud∣ged not only fierce in armes, but al∣so of great courage, mixed with cur∣tesis & liberalitie. Many moe exam∣ples of antiquity might herebe alled∣ged, were it not that I thinke these sufficient for our turne, to note the antiquitie of comparisons, betweene the bodily formes & lineaments, and betwene their dispositions, courage, and wit: Like to these, many may be read & seene in Aristotle, Suctonius▪ & other of the Poets, who haue left in

wryting to vs, sundry Pamphlets of this Art, extant in manye places, in which, it may euidently appeere, how much it hath bene accounted and es∣teemed in times past. For the skilfull Antenor (by the report of Homere) being a man expert in the Arte of Phisiognomie, tooke vppon him to consider, and diligently to vewe, the personages and formes both of the couragious Vlysses & Menelaus, pro∣nouncing the one in condicions & na∣ture, farre diffring from ye other. Me∣nelaus, sayth he, was a person of few wordes, yet graue & wise in counsel, but the iolly Vlysses for his prowde shewe and boasting in words, did he pronounce like to ye winter snowes. Seeing this knowledge hath so long time bene obserued and exercised of so excellent and famous men, what shall it let or staye me, not to applye my study and penne thereto, and the rather for that it is lawfull for euery

man to decerne, as farre as he can, the qualitie and condicions of the hart: seeing the secret matters lying deepe in the breast, are many times bewrayde by the outward gestures, what singular cōmoditie the know∣ledge of this Arte bringeth with it, may euidently appeare in this, that oftentimes men happening into ac∣quaintances and friendshippes, such as they suppose to be most friendly, most sounde, and most faythfull: for the more parte are founde dissem∣blers, vnfaithfull, turnecotes moste hurtfull, and most peruerse in their doinges. And without this Arte, a man can not so well detect their fals∣hoode and doings, as to find out and know Thersites from the mighty He∣ctor, or the effeminate Vlysses & sub∣till Catiline, from the worthie Fabius and Camillus. If euer this were in any age a necessary science, then no doubt in this our time, being moste

peruerse and wicked, it is most pro∣fitable and necessary. For who doth not see in our dayes, how the impu∣dent Thersites, the subtill Vlysses, and the most seditious Catiline, do rage. For this cause most prudently were appoynted in times paste (as some report) in the Courtes of kings, and noble Princes, certain learned men able to discouer the facts and minds of their subiectes, souldiers, and o∣thers conuersant about them. The learned Aristotle in his booke of go∣uernement, willeth that comely men be chosen in office and made Magi∣strates, and not mishapen and de∣formed. In another place he admo∣nisheth men to beware of those per∣sons, which are marked by nature, according to the common opinion of men: an euill fauoured and crabbed countenance, doth euermore yeelde vntoward condicions. For by the a∣greement of all writers, the counte∣nance

is euermore a bewrayer of the minde, and Martiall in his twelfth booke describeth by these signes and notes, his pieuish Zoilus and wicked backbyter, in two proper verses.
Crine niger, ruber ore, breuis pede, lumine laesus, Rem magnam praestas Zoile, si bonus es.
These englished, are thus much in effect.

Thy heares are black, thy fete be short,
purblinde to, vvith bearde readde,
A good deede do (the Prouerbe sayth)
and then cut of thy headde.

The Greeke Poet Agadius, des∣cribed also a certaine lymping or halting person in this sort, .
Which may thus be translated.

VVhy doste thou limpe and halt,
thy minde is lame I see,
These outvvard signes are tokens plain
of secrete yll in thee.

If Pompeius had vsed this dili∣gence in beholding and considering the countenance, hee woulde not so lightly haue credited, and bene sedu∣ced by Achylles and Septimus, nor the valiant Caaesar had happened into the hands of Brutus and subtill Cas∣sius, by whome they and their com∣pany were lamentably murthered, Further, this Art procureth no smal commoditie and profite to Schoole∣maysters, in searching out & know∣ing the aptnesse and pregnancie of their scholers vnto learning. For if they deale like honest and faythfull tutors, they ought to receyue none into their schoole to be instructed in learning and Arts, contrary to their capacitie, but rather followe the ex∣ample of Apollonius Alabandensis, that deuine and rare Schoolemay∣ster, of whom Cicero writeth in his booke De Oratore. This man (sayth he) although he customablye reade

and taught schollers for a stipende and gayne, yet would he suffer none vnder him, to lose their tyme, if hee perceyued their wittes vnapt to at∣tayne Oratorye: but rather wylled them to leaue of and cease that stu∣dy, and to follow that skill and Arte that he knew and saw them inclyned vnto. Which example if our schoole∣maysters and tutors would indeuor to practyse and followe, we shoulde then enioy and haue many more ex∣cellent scholers, in all laudable stu∣dies & Artes, than at these daies are knowne to be. Here I thinke it good tyme to ende, not meaning to wade or proceede any further in the infinit prayses of so singular an Art, therby to hinder your honors graue & seri∣ous studies, with this my rud & sim∣ple worke, the which although it be not worthye to craue the protection of so Noble a personage, yet am I (the author thereof) bolde to intrude

and thrust it vppon your Grace, to thintent that through your Graces fauorable protection, it may possesse a free passage, Zoilus be put to si∣lence, and I encouraged to shewe my simple skil and small iudgement hereafter in matters more pleasant and delectable. God preserue your Grace, and increase your meditati∣ons and thoughtes, in all godlynesse and vertue, and sende you long helth, and the yeares of the mightye Nestor.
Amen.

