


DETESTING your heresie, yet louing your person, and therfor
wishing your reformaciō and correctiō, I haue, M. Iuell cōpilled this
booke, wherbie as I trust the vanitie of your bragge ys and shalbe
disclosed and perceaued: so do I wish that by the same both yowe and
soch as haue erred, maie be reduced from your foule errour, and all the
people of my natiue contrie, for whose cause especia¦lie I haue takē
these labours, so staied in faith, that by your manifold vntru∣eths they
be not seduced. Yow haue not onelie enwrapped your self in er∣rour, but
also to maintein the same cōmitted three heinouse offences. One is the
abuse and contēpt of the authoritie ād doctrine of the holie Fathers of the
primitiue ād aunciēt Church. Those Fathers youe do not onelie truncate¦lie
alleage, ād with craftie sleight abuse ād falsifie: but also although
yowe e∣uidētlie see thē impugning your doctrine and heresie, yet without
all regard of their great learning ād authoritie, of their perpetual cōsent
ād agreement,  of their reuerēd antiquitie, of their
famouse holinesse, yowe runne stil in the race of your deuised
inuencion, and phantasie, vtterlie cōtēning whatsoeuer hath ben by thē
saied or doen contrarie to your blinde affection, and wicked opinion. Now to
vse to yowe the woords of the holie Father Leo to Eutyches: Quid
iniquius, quam impia supene, & sapientioribus doctoribusq́ue non
credere? What ys more wicked then to haue vngodlie opinions, and not to
beleue thē that be wises and better learned: Decet enim sequi patres
nostros, nec cōmutare definitionē eorū perpetud; quorli regulā
secundùm sacras scripturas esse didicimus. Yt becometh vs
(saieth Flauianus) to folowe our Fathers, and not to chaunge their
perpetuall defini∣tion, whose rule we haue learned to be according to the
scripturs.
But yow staied not here. Yt was not enough for yow to cōtēne
or abusethe perpetuall definitiō of the Fathers, but youe proceaded to the
second offēce euē to mocke ād skorn the learned ād holie Fathers of
Chrysts Church not onelie thē of the later daies, but soch as liued a
thousand years agon, wherof some were famouse for their learning, some
so constant in their faith and per¦fect in life that of the vniuersal
Church thei haue bē hitherto, ād yet be repu¦ted  ād
esteemed blessed Saincts. Soch I saie as God hath exalted to his
glo∣rie, soch, as in heauē be honourable soch haue yow in earth
dishonoured yea mockt ād skorned, ād as moch as in yow laie, made
despicable to the worlde. Thus haue yow vsed or raither abused S.
Siluester, who liued in the time of Cōstātine the great, a māright
vertueouse ād holie, ād so reported in al good histories, as yourself
know, ād so esteemed ād reuerēced of the whol Church. Thus haue yow
vsed S. Isidore, a mā of great fame, ād an holie bishoppe in
the time of S. Gregorie. Thus haue you vsed Innocētius, the third,
Thomas de Aquino ād Roffensis all mē of singular vertue, ād in
learning not inferiour to yowe, I am sure, but a great waie befor yow,
wherfor no soch as yow aught to deride and mock. As for the Bishoppe of
Rochester, who both learnedlie ād godlie wrote against both Luther and
Oecolāp. his works stand yet vntouched, but of your mock, not able
to be impugned by any Lutherā, Oecolāpadiā Caluinist, or
otherlike, for of which sect yow be, I think yow disclose not. In this
your moc¦krie yow are the right imitatour of Porphirius the enemie of
all chrystianitie. For he (as Euseb. ād Niceph.
wittnesse) derided the Euāgelists ād Apostles the writ¦ers
 of the scripturs: yow deride the holie Bishops ād
saincts their successours, writers vpō the script. He cōtēned the
holie scripturs, he reprehended them; imagining cōtradictiōs in thē, he
reputed thē (saith Niceph.) as things of naugh toyowe
contēne the learned cōmentaries ād writings of the Saincts of God v∣pō the
scripturs, ād matters incidēt ād apperteining to the scripturs, with
skof¦fes yowe trauail to reprehēd their graue authoritie ād godlie
writings. Yowe  plaie and dallie with them before the people
like a ioung Porphirie, as though they were things of naught. Thus yow
maie see, as all that be wise and staied by Gods grace doo see, howe
fullie herin yowe bear the image, and iustlie fo¦lowe the steppes of him,
that fiercelie (as yowe doe) persecuted with deadlie hatred the church and
religion of Chryste.
Your third offence ys yet worse and more heinouse, wher yowe
haue vt∣tered so manie vntrueths and lies euen aduersus Dominū, &
aduersus Christū eius, against our Lord, ād against his Chryste,
against his holie gospell, and against his holie woord. Ys yowr matter
soch (M Iuell) as yt can not be mainteined without lies? and (as the holie
man Iob saied) Nunquid Deus indiget vestro menda¦cio? Hath God
nede of your lies? No, so litle nede hath he of lies, that he will destroie
al thē that speak lies, as the psalmist saieth. But that I seē not
to charg yowe without proof, as yowe do other, ys not one of your chalenging
arti∣cles against the presence of Chrysts bodie and blood in the
blessed Sacr? ys not the doctrine yowe teach and preache in that poinct
directlie contrarie to the doctrine of our Sauiour Chryst? Whē he saieth:
This ys my bodie, This ys  my blood: and
yowe auouche and teache that yt ys verie bread and verie wine ys not this a
contrarie doctrine to his? ys yt not plain against his manifest woorde? ys
yt not in effect to charge him with vntrueth, though yowe daie not yet in flat
woordes saie that he lied? The craftie sleight yowe vse in hand¦ling the
scripture, wher the trueth of Chrysts doctrin doeth appeare, ād your
wielie suppressiō of those woords which cheiflie declare the same
trueth, ād opē yowr vntrueth, doe wel proue youre wicked meening to be none
other. For taking the woords of S. Paule for the theme of your sermō, yowe
produ¦ced thē truncatedlie, and passed thē with moch sleight. Thus yowe
vtter thē: I haue receaued of the Lord that thing, which also I
deliuered vnto yow: that ys, that the lord Iesus in the night that he was
betraied took bread, ād ther yowe end. Wher, although yowe pretēted to
teach the first instituciō of the Sacr. yet either of malice to
suppresse Christs trueth, or for feare to disclose your own
vntrueth, you wold not or durst not reherse the verie words of the
instituciō, which I wish al mē to note, but both in the latin ād
inglish, as your faith staeth in bread, and as yow wold the faith of your
audiēce should do the like, your theme ended in  bread, in
so moch as whē yowe come to your last matter, to speak of priuate
Masse (as yow tearm yt, though falselie, for ther ys none soch) and, to
proue yowr Cōmuniō, beginne again to repete the woords of the instituciō,
Lord, what shift yowe make to suppresse the words of Chryst: This
ys my bodie, This ys my blood in the which lieth al the effect of his
instituciō. These woords yowe flie, as frō a serpēt, yowe cā not
abide the sownd of thē, ād therfor with sham∣ful craft, yowe passe
thē saing thus: Chryst in the last supper ordeined a Cōmuniō,
ād she¦wed no maner token of priuate Masse, as maie plainlie appeare both
by the woordes that he spake, and also by the order of his doings. For be
tooke the bread, brake yt, deuided yt, ād gaue yt to his Disciples, and
saied: Drinke ye all herof. These be yowr own woords. Yowe pretēded
to proue your matter by Chrysts woords ād order, but whē yowe come to the
verie point yowe do not as moch as touch his woords, but skip∣pe ouer thē,
so well maie your prof appeare bi thē, ād so loath are yowe to vt¦ter
Christ words, that his trueth might appear, ād your falshead be
disclosed. Against your first offēce (which ys your abuse of the
doctours in mutilating  their saings, as yow doo
Anacletus: in falsifieng their meening, as yow do
Ter∣tullian, and S. Cyprian: in craftie alleaging two or three
woordes, that appa∣rantlie maie seem to make for yowe, leauing oute the
rest that mighti∣liemaketh against yowe, as yowe doe sainct
Augustine: in corrupting authours by putting woordes to their saings, which
they haue not, as yowe  doe with Leo: wherbie
euidentlie appeareth yowr contēpt of their autoritie, whom by so manie means
yowe labour to abuse, to shadowe, and hide the trueth by them so clerelie
settfurth) I come in right vse, reuerentlie allea∣ging them, whollie and
fullie producing them, truelie reporting them, and their mening, iustlie
letting euerie of them plainlie to testifie that, whiche he hath written, and
causing euerie one to speake his owne woordes wi∣thout corruption. And that
yowe maie perceaue that the catholique Chur∣che ys strong, against the
whiche the gates of hell, the power of heresie shall not preuaill, knowe
yowe, that yt ys Terribilis castorum acies ordinata, a terrible
fortresse in most goodlie order appoincted. Oute of the which
fortresse in goodlie order ys comed a great nombre against yowe, marching
by cooples, eche coople to shewe the vnitie of trueth and faith professed
in bothe Churches, being one of the greke church, and other of the latine
churche, and the se∣niours for the most part placed in the forewarde.
These haue I brought furth not one alone and by piece meale so to rume
awaie with the matter, as yowe doo, but in good nombres, and with their full
saings, and the same doo I oftentimes conferr together, that the full and
perfect cleernesse of the  trueth in ther consonant
sentences maie appear, and shine to all that list to looke therat, and be
disposed to knowe the trueth.
Against yowr second offence, which ys the mocking of holie
writers and Saincts, wherbie yowe seke to dishonour and deface bothe them
and the re¦ligion they professed, I come with due reuerence and honour of
them, whō I knowe by Chrysts promesse to be honourable before the Father
in heauen for their constant confession of his holie name whilest they
liued here vpon earth. Wherfor as being vpon the earth they were not gests
and straungers but the felowes of Saincts, and of the house of God, I
tearme them as sena¦tours of the Parliament house of Chryste, as knowing
the enacted and recea¦ued trueth of the matters of faith perteining to that
house. For this cause I regard all their writings which the catholique
Churche hath allowed, consi¦dering that the same Churche that hath taught
me that the gospell, that ys the verie woorde of God written by the mocion
and instruction of his holie Spirit, hath taught me that these mens
wiritings vpon the same are good  and commendable. And as
with S. Augustine I saie, that I wolde not beleue the Gospell but that
the authoritie of the Churche moueth me therunto: no more wolde I beleue the
Fathers expownding the scripturs, but that ther¦vnto I am moued by the
Churche. Then yt foloweth well that as I ought to beleue the Gospell for the
authoritie of the Churche: so ought I to bele∣ue the doctours for the
autoritie of the Churche. And here to ouerthro∣we your contempt of them and
your self also, I do oftentimes conferre the expositions of the later
Fathers with the expositions of the elder fathers, and finding them
alltogether grauelie against youre euell doctrine to consent, and yt to
confute as hereticall and deuelish, I let your light mockes and skor∣nes flie
home again to yowe as fleshflies to their carien.
Against your thirde wickednesse, I meen your cōtempt
abuse and vntrue handling of the holie scripturs, I come in euerie place,
where mencion ys made of the bless. Sacrament, with the wholl processe
ther conteined. In the vi of S. Iohn, the xxvi. of S. Matth the xxiiii, of S.
Luke, the x. and xi. of the first epistle to the Corinth, the v. to the
Ephesians, and the xiii to the Hebru¦es, somoch as the Fathers expownd to
appertein to the holie Sacr. I produce  not truncatelie and
falselie, but fullie and trulie euery sentence, and euery woord,
submitting my self to the authoritie of gods woord, ād not bi sleight
subdewing yt to mine owne autoritie.
But here the learned perchaunce maie merueill, that I
wold ioin with yowe in the scripturs considering the auncient counsell of
Tertullian, who wolde not that anie catholique shoulde entre into
disputacion with an here∣tique  with the scripturs.
Nihil proficit congressio scripturarum cum haereticis, nisi
planè vt aut stomachi quis meat euersionem aut cerebri &c. To
ioin (saieth he) in disputacion with heretiques with scripturs
yt doeth nothing auaill, except a man will turne vppe side down either his
stomacke or his brain. what shall thowe gain, thowe great learned man in the
scripturs, when yf thowe defend anie thing yt shall be denied of the
contrarie part: yf thowe denie anie thing, yt shall be defended &c.
And after he concludeth thus: Ergo non ad scripturas prouocandum est
&c. We maie not therfor appeall to the scripturs, neither maie we
appoinct our disputacion in them, in the which ther ys either none or vnceten
victo¦rie, or not verie certen. For this cause, and for that S. Hierom
saieth that Scriptu¦rae non in legendo cōsistunt, sed in
intelligendo the scripturs cōsist not in reading but in
vnderstanding: I haue trauailed by diligent scarching of the fathers from
the Apostles to this our time, to trie oute by ther common consent howe the
scripturs are to be vnderstanded, and so haue I (as by a line drawen from
hand to hand) descended from age to age, that the true vnderstanding of
 them receaued and approued in all that diuersitie of ages
and places, might be perceaued and knowen.
In this my doing I haue fulfilled the counseill of
Vincentius lyrinen. who for remidies against errours among other
willeth, that if anie errour hath ben committed in the olde time, either by
certain men, or by anie one wholl ci∣tie, or by anie Prouince, to reforme that,
the decrees of auncient generall Councells must be sought, and yf none
soche can be founde (as in these daies though they be fownd, they be
not regarded) then (saieth he) operam dabit, vt collatas inter se
maiorum consulat, interrogetiq́ue sententias &c. He shall gene
diligence to seke and learn the iudgemēts of the elders, and cōferr thē
together but of those elders onelie, which although they were in diuerse
times and places abiding: yet in the Cōmunion and faith of one catholique
Churche, were allwaies allowed as masters, or men of autoritie. And what
soeuer he shall knowe, what not one or two of them, but what alltogether with
one consent haue hol¦den, written, and taught openlie, cōmonlie, and
continuallie, let him vnderstand, that that ys without all doubt to be
beleued. Thus he. As this counseill ys on my part fulfil∣led in that I
haue searched and conferred the iudgements of the fathers, and
 fownd them (though they were in diuerse ages and places)
fullie and whol¦lie agreeng in the matters of the presence of Chrysts bodie
and blood in the blessed Sacrament, of the oblacion of the same, and of
other articles apper∣teining ther to, whiche (as in this worke yt maie be
clerlie perceaued) not one or two, but euery one of them haue, not obscurely
but manifestlie, not in one place, or at one time, but cōmonlie and
continuallie, holden, taught, and written: So wolde wolde I that yowe, M.
Iuell, if yowe regarde the Fa¦thers of the primitiue Churche in dede, as yowe
bragge in woorde, that yowe (I saie) shoulde receaue and embrace these
scripturs as expownded and deliuered to yowe by their hands, and their
expositions to accept as a cleer and certen vndoubted trueth, whiche trueth
so opened by thē, I bring furth against your vntrueths, and not the bare
scripture alone, as Tertullian wolde I shoulde not. This, I
trust, yowe shall well perceaue, if leauing your corru∣ted affection apart,
yowe will with a cleer eie and vpright iudgement read this worke, wherin yowe
shall see all the Fathers that commonlie haue, ex∣pownding the scripturs,
written of these articles of the Sacrament, whiche  yowe in
your iolitie (I will not saie more arrogantlie than as a chrystian
pre¦acher should, mekelie and lowlie, more rashlie, then wiselie or
aduisedlie) with so great bragge wttered in your sermon, all soche
Fathers, I saie, shallyowe see, aswell grekes as latines,
aswell auncient, as of later time, with one cōmon consent and agreement,
so expownding the scripturs as though they  had ben in one
time, and had cōspired vpon one sense and vnderstāding: all those
shall yowe see impugning your negatiues, ād by the scripturs affirming
the catholike doctrine, and faith catholiquelie and vniuersallie
professed, ād thus shal the trueth of the scripturs ouerthrow the
vntrueth of your heresies.
Nowe I haue in a generall maner shewed your offences, whiche
moued me to write against yowe: in like generalitie I haue shewed howe I do
proce∣ad against yowe: the specialitie of your offences and of the
processe aunswe¦rable to the same, yowe shall finde in this worke,
though simplie without coolour, yet plainlie without craft, declared. Yf my
trauaill herein obtein not his enrēded effect, namelie your conuersiō and
amēdement, and to doo yowe that good that yow maie be staied frō running to
pertual damnacion: yet staing other that by your pestilent heresies might
be brought to that wo¦full daūger, I shall not onelie do thē that good I
wish, but also helpe to make your dānaciō the easier, whiche howe
greuouse yt shall be, he knoweth best, that knoweth howe manie soules
yowe haue brought to damnaciō. Yf yowe being obdurated persist in your
impietie, yt cā not be auoided but yowe doe yt of malice, hauing ben
aduertised and admonished of your wicked errours  and
heresies hertofore by doctour Harding and other, and nowe by me. Yowe knowe
who saieth: Haereticum hominem &c. after one or two admonicions flie
the companie of an heretique, knowing that soche one ys subuerted,
forsomoche as he ys euen by his owne iudgement condemned. In dede being,
as I saied, thus admonished, and seing with all your wicked doctrine by
the whol multitude here alleaged, so plainlie and cleerly condemned, yt can
not be but by your owne iudgemēt yowe must be condēned. For this ys so
euidētlie true that yowe or any man can not denie yt, that no doctrine, nowe
holdē of the catholique Churche for a trueth, and impugned by the
Sacramentaries, was euer yet at anie time by the churche, or by any catholique
writer, reputed as heresie or errour. Again this ys as true that euerie
doctrine holden of the Sacramentaries, and nowe impugned by the catholiques,
hath ben before time of the catholique Church and wtiters reputed and adiudged
erour and heresie, a fewe late in¦uencions onelie excepted, which also are
now by catholikes impugned, and by plain testimonies of the auncient Church
proued to be erours and here¦sies,  and so condemned.
To make good the first saing, I will reherse certain
catholi{que} propositions: Chrysts bodie ys verilie in the
blessed Sacrament. Chrysts bodie ys ossred in sacrifice in the
Masse. The holie Sacrament ys to be reserued for the cōmunion of the
sicke. The blessed Sacrament maie be receaued vnder one kinde. The bodie
of Chryste in the Sacrament ys to be adored. Saincts in glorie praie for vs
and are to be praied vnto by vs. The dead receaue great benefitte by the
sacri¦sice of the Masse. Praier and almose dedes doen for the dead
doe auaill them. These and soche like the catholiques doe holde, the
heretiques denie. I will not here proclame against yowe, but I will ioine
this issue with yowe, that if yowe can bring anie catholique Coūcell or
catholique doctour impugning these or anie of thē, as hereticall or
erroneous, I will subscribe vnto yowe and saie as yowe saie: yf yowe
can not (as I am sure yowe can not) thē will I saie, as I maie well, that
your doctrine ys erroneous, hereticall, and deuelish. Nowe to saue your
doctrine frō this fowle reproache, proue by soche testimonie as I haue
saied, that our doctrine ys erroneous, or ells the shame will be on your
side that teach the contrarie
To make good my second assertion, I will also reherse
certain propositi∣ons  of your doctrine: Chrysts bodie
ys not reallie in the Sacrament. The Sacrament ys onelie a figure of Chryste
and not his bodie. The substance of bread ys not by due consecra∣cion
chaunged, turned, transmuted, nor transelementated into the
substance of the bodie of Chryste. Ther ys no sacrifice of Chrystes
bodie offred in the Masse. Praier and almose dedes nothing auaile the
dead, neither the sacrifice of the Masse. These and soche like
do  yowe and your likes teache and defend, for the whiche I
will ioin this issue with yowe, that if I haue not in this booke
sufficientlie proued, or can not hereafter, if I be required, more fullie
proue euerie of these to be erroneous and hereticall, and long agon for
soche to haue ben condemned, I will sub∣scribe to them, and
consesse thē to be good? Yf I haue or can euidentlie pro¦ue thē so to
be, then confesse yowe thē to be naught and deuelish. Yf yowe refuse
thus to doo: yet for the defence of your doctrine, yf yt maie be defen¦ded, doo
that to vs, that I haue doen to yowe. I haue doen to yowe in this booke three
things. First, I haue shewed yowe the beginning of the doctri∣ne of the
bless. Sacramēt, the progresse and cōtinuance of yt, and the defence
of yt. Secōdlie, of the Masse which ys the solēne sacrifice of
Chrysts Church, I haue shewed yowe good presidents, certē and
assured practises, and these right auncient. Thirdlie, for the
Sacramētaries doctrine, I haue shewed whē yt began, by whō yt was
inuēted, whē and wher yt was condēned, and so ce 
assed, and by whom yt was raised again in these our daies, in the
whiche yt ys also laufullie again condēned. Nowe doo yowe the like, for your
doctrine, and against ours, Shew the beginning, progresse, cōtinuance
and defence of your Sacramentaries doctrine. Shewe the originalls and aunciēt
presidents of your Cōmunion, which ys the kaie, and note of your religion,
and cōfer¦re thē as we haue done the Masse, with the aunciēt
presidents of the primiti¦ue Churche. Shew howe all your innouacions, whiche
within these fewe¦years were in no place of the christian world vsed,
were put down, howe and by whō that was compased: in what Popes time and
Emperours reign they were suffred to be doen, yf anie suffred persecuciō
or exile for thē, who stoo¦de against these that ouerthrewe them, who
wrote against thē that banished your religiō, and wher be the bookes, Yf
your doctrine be so notablie good and ours so notablie wicked as yowe
teache and preache yt to be, so great an alteraciō and decaie of religion
frō so great a good to so grete an euell, coul∣de not be doē in the world
withoute great note, without large testimonies of histores and cronicles of
so lamentable a chaūge. Bring furth therfor yf  yowe can
the monimētes and testimonies of this chaunge: Yf yowe can not, wise mā
will thinke and beleue that ther was neuer none soche: Yf ther was none, thē
be your procedings but nouelties, inuēted in these later daies, and neuer
before in vse, and therfor well tearmed the newe religiō, newe doctri¦ne,
newe faith, newe churche, newe Communion.
Two things, M Iuell, I doubt not, but yowe knowe. Thone, that in
the pri¦mitiue and auncient church ther arose no notable heresie, but yt
was spede∣lie impugned: Thother, that of the originall and progresse of
euerie soch ther were notes made and moniments for memorie left. As
concerning the first, yt ys certē, that euē in the beginning of Chrystes
Church Ebion and Ce∣rinthus sowing their heresie were
streight impugded by S. Iohn, against whō he was moued to write
his gospell and epistles. Against the same also with other, as
Valentinus, Marcion, Cerdon, Symon Samarites Basilides, Carpocrates,
and soch like, wrote the holie Father Irenaeus not long after, who,
as in his workes yt maie be seen in diuerse places, vsed for an argument
against those hereti∣ques, the presence of Chrysts bodie in the
Sacramēt, and yet the same Irenaeus  was neuer
noted of errour for his so affirming and teaching. Origen his works
being fownde inspersed with diuerse errours, was noted for them, but wher
he testifieth the presence of Chrystes bodie in the bless. Sacrament,
he wasneuer blamed: Ciprian the holie martir was verie vehemēt
against Nouatus the heretique, and his sect, he diligentlie
laboured to cut of soche weedes.  This holie mā in the
matter of the presence wrote so plainlie as no mā more plainlie, he wrote
also of baptisme. In the matter of the presence, the church hath allowed
him, in the matter of Baptisme notwithstanding his holinesse they haue
refused him. To be short Epiphanius and S. Augustine wrote
boo∣kes of the heresies of them that were before and in their times, and
although manie besides the fore mēcioned had spoken so plainlie of the
blessed Sacr. that they cleerly cōfessed the presence of Chrysts
bodie in the same, as Mar¦tialis, Ignatius, Iustinus, Tertullianus,
Hilarius, and manie other: yet be none of all these nor none other for
that doctrine nōbred ther amōg heretiques, which vndoubtedlie they should
haue ben, if the matter had so deserued. But tru∣lie yt was neuer yet red
in anie god writer, nor somoche as dreamed, that the cōfessiō of the
presēce of Chryste in the bless. Sacramēt ys heresie or errour.
Nowe as touching histories witnessing the wicked beginning
the misera∣ble progresse, and open end and confusion of heresies, yt
were superfluouse for me to write, sith ther hath ben no notable
heresie or heretique, which are not recorded either by Eusebius,
Teodoret, Sozomenus, Nicephorus, Aeneus Silui¦us, and soche other
whose bookes be dailie in mens hands. By whom when  your
Sacramētaries heresie begā we knowe, howe lōg yt continued openlie we
knowe, who withstood yt and wrote against yt we knowe, in howe ma∣nie
Councells yt hath be cōdemned we knowe. Furder who haue renewed the same in
these later daies we knowe, when and howe Luther reigned we knowe:
howe Oecolampadius folowed, though an other waie, we knowe, howe
Caluine hath cōtroled both catholiques and heretiques we knowe, what
the doings of these and their complices haue ben and be, we knowe, and that
they haue ben and be condēned for heretiques we know. To be short, ther hath
ben no notable alteracion or molestacion in religion by heresie, but yt ys
committed to memorie in histories. Yf thē your doctrine and faith, your
religion and profession, your notable Cōmunion, or raither confusiō, were
once good and catholique, yt can not be but of so great an alteracion as to
make catholique faith damnable heresie, or holie cōmunion wicked diuisiō
ther must be some notable mencion in histories or some auncient
monimēt in writing to declare yt. Yf yowe haue anie soche bring them furth,
and thē  yowe shall doo fōwhat to allure wise men vnto
yowe. For in this poinct I hold him nothing wise that will repute either your
doctrine, faith, religion or communion to be good and catholique vntill yowe
shewe good testimo¦nies and presidents of the catholique vse of them,
which I am certen yowe can neuer doo. As for soche euidences as your self
nowe and your aun∣cetours heretofore haue picked oute of the right and true
euidences of the catholique Churche, I meen the holie scripturs, Councells,
doctours, and approued histories, and with great boldnesse haue shewed
thē to the world and auouched them to be yours and to assure your cause,
they are allreadie well knowē ād tried not to be yours in dede, but to make
all for the catholi∣que faith and religiō, and mightilie against your
singular phāsies and to ouer throw your wicked heresies, when they be
plainlie opened, and deliuered frō your craftie corruptions, as they haue ben
by sondrie and manie famou∣se learned men as well in this age, as before
our time. And I, to my power, haue in this booke, for soche matters as I
hādle, detected your forgerie, and corrupting of the euidences therto
appertening, by your wresting, glosing, cutting, peicing, diminishing,
adding, and other wise falsifieng the right,  cleer,
wholl, perfect, godlie and true testimonies of the scripturs, Councells ād
aunciēt doctours. And soch as be so flatte against your cause, as yowe
canhaue no aide of them, but be forced therfor either to depraue
their authori¦tie with mocking and skorning, or flatlie to denie their workes,
they are de∣fended,  and holdē in their woorthie
estimacions, and their denied works re¦stored to the right authours. The
first therfor, that ys the scripturs Coūcells and aunciēt doctours yowe
can no more abuse for shame and chaleng to be on your side, whē being
sifted frō your sleights, and clered frō your falshead all mē maie
perceaue thē not to be your right euidēce, making, as thei do, so plainlie
against yowe, ād mightilie ouerthrowing your cause. The other, that ys,
the later learned writers and holie fathers, yow maie no lōger contemne being
proued to agree, as they doe, with their elders and approued, as they be of the
church, to be catholique and holie writers, your skoffesand mocks against
them, will stand for no reason before wise men.
Nowe yowe vnderstand, M. Iuell, what I haue here doen, to the
whiche yf either yowe or anie other for yowe shall by railing Rethorike make
a pretensed answer, I do yowe to witte, that I will not vouchsafe to putt
my penne to the papire for that kinde of answer. For I haue begon∣ne with
yowe in an other sort, and like a diuine, railing I haue left to ruffins
 and skoldes, and coolours of persuasions to rethoricians,
directlie according to my profession with all plain trueth haue I proceaded.
Yf answere therfor shall be made, let yt be either a direct answere or
none. Direct answer ys so∣che as I make to yow, where yowe abuse the
vnderstāding of the scripture, or doctour, to proue the same vnto yowe:
where yowe falsilie, to alleage the pla¦ce truely: where yowe corrupt, to
shewe the right saing: when yowe adde and put to, to declare what yowe adde
and put to: whē yowe leaue oute, to expresse the woordes so by yowe left
oute. And finallie, by full, plain, and expresse testimonie of
scripturs, Councells, or doctours, as the condiciō of the matter requireth,
to open and declare the trueth, and by like authoritie to proue and cōfirme
the same. Thus haue I doē to yowe in plētifull maner, in euery matter here
by me handled, so that the trueth of euerie thing ys so fullie opened, and
by good authoritie so confirmed, that I trust, euerie man that will see
maie see, and euerie man that will vnderstand, maie vnderstand, where the
weight of the trueth ys.
Read therfor, M. Iuell, and diuorcing your self frō vainglorie
to the which ye haue hen a lōg time maried, let your vnderstāding be
captiuated vnto the  seruice of Chryste, Let not your vain
estimaciō in errour and heresie detein yowe to come to the honorable
estimacion, that ys gotten in the professing of Gods trueth. Let yt not be
saied of yowe, as the holie father and Pope Leo saied of
Eutiches: Noluit intelligere vt bene ageret. Iniquitatē meditatus est in
cubili suo. My good will was that this mi doing should haue bē in
your hāds a lōg time¦er this, for yt was finished full three years past,
but sicknesse, pouertie, and lac¦ke of oportunitie to printe yt haue thus
long staied yt. But sith nowe at the last yt ys by Gods helpe comed
abroad, I heseche him of his great goodnesse to graūt that it maie be to
his honour, ād to the helpe of his people ād that it maie be a medicine of
health to yow, ād all that by your false doctrine ād sle∣ight, haue bē
entrapped ād deceaued. Yowe promised that yow wolde yelde to him that wolde
bringfurth to yowe one scripture, or one doctour, or one Coūcell &c. as
yow knowe: This being nowe doē by me ād other I wish that yow maie yeld
your self prisoner, not in warrelike maner to vs, but in lowlie maner to
Christe, ād his dere spouse the catholi{que} Churche, by acknowleging
their faith, and professing their religion to saue your soule, which we
shal be  most ioifull to vnderstād, ād for your soch
cōuersiō yelde to God most hūble thanks. Yf yow doo not, yet let me
wish yow for some better staie of your self hereafter, to haue this
olde saing in minde: Ante victoriam ne canas triumphum.
