



RIght Honourable:
IF euer any men had reason to be in loue with the face of a forraine entertainment, those are they, which were admitted to the atten∣dance of the truly Generous and Honora∣ble, Lord HAY, your most noble Sonne, in his late Embassage to France; in which number my vnworthinesse was allowed to make one; who can therefore well witnesse, that no man could ei∣ther receiue more honour from a strange Countrey, or doe more honour to his owne. What wanted there that might make men confesse themselues more welcome than strangers? Neither doubt J, but that after many ages, France it selfe will wonder at the bountifull expressions of her owne fauours. But whiles o∣thers were inioying the noble courtesies of the time, my thoughts entertained themselues with searching into the proofe of that or∣dinarie Trauell, wherewith I saw men commonly affected; which J must needs confesse, the more I saw, the lesse I liked. Neither is it in the power of any forraine munificence, to make me thinke ours any where so well as at home. Earthly commodities are no part of my thought: I looked (as J ought) at the soule; which I well saw, vses not only to gather no mosse in this rolling, but suf∣fers the best graces it hath to moulder away insensibly in such vn∣necessarie agitation. J haue now beene twise abroad: both times (as thinking my selfe worthy of nothing but neglect) J bent my eies vpon others, to see what they did, what they got: my inquirie
 found our spirituall losse so palpable, that now at last my heart could not chuse but breake forth at my hand, and tell my Country∣men of the dangerous issue of their curiositie. J meddle not with the common iourneyes to the minerall waters of the Spa; to which many sicke soules are beholden for a good excuse: who whiles they pretend the medicinall vse of that spring, can freely quaffe of the puddle of popish superstition; poysoning the better part, in stead of helping the worse. These J leaue to the best Physitian, Au∣thoritie; which, if it may please to vndertake the cure, may per∣haps saue as many English soules from infection, as that water cures bodies of diseases. J deale onely with those, that professe to seeke the glory of a perfect breeding, and the perfection of that, which we call Ciuilitie, in Trauell: of which sort I haue (not without indignation) seene too many lose their hopes and them∣selues in the way; returning as emptie of grace, and other ver∣tues, as full of words, vanitie, mis-dispositions. J dedicate this poore discourse to your Lo: as (besides my daily renued obligati∣ons) congratulating to you the sweet libertie and happy vse of your home; who like a fixed starre may well ouer-looke these planets, and by your constant settlednesse, giue that aime to infe∣riour eyes, which shall bee in vaine expected from a wandring light. The God of heauen, to whose glory J haue intended this weake labour, giue it fauour in the sight of his Church, and re∣turne it backe, but with this good newes, that any one of the sonnes of Iaphet is hereby perswaded to dwell euer in the tents of Sem. Ʋnto that diuine protection, J humbly betake your Lo: iustly vowing my selfe

