



INdeed, my Poetrie was long sithence out of date, and yeelded her place to grauer studies: but whose veine would it not reuiue, to looke into those heauenly Songs? I were not worthy to be a Diuine, if it should repent mee to be a Poet with Dauid, after I shall haue aged in the Pul∣pit. This work is holy and strict, & abides not any youth∣full or heathenish libertie; but requires hands free from profanenesse, loose∣nesse, affection. It is a seruice to God & the Church by somuch more careful∣ly to be regarded, as it is more common. For who is there that will not chal∣lenge a part in this labour? and that shall not finde himselfe much more af∣fected with holy measure rightly composed? Wherefore I haue oft won∣dred, how it could be offensiue to our aduersaries, that these diuine Ditties which the Spirit of God wrote in verse, should be sung in verse; and that an Hebrew Poeme should be made English. For if this kinde of composition had beene vnfit, God would neuer haue made choice of numbers, wherein to expresse himselfe. Yea, who knowes not that some other Scriptures, which the Spirit hath indited in prose, haue yet beene happily and with good allowance put into strict numbers? If histories tell vs of a wanton Poet of old, which lost his eies while hee went about to turne Moses into verse; yet euery student knowes with what good successe and commenda∣tion Nonnus hath turned Iohns Gospell into Greeke Heroicks. And Apolli∣narius, that learned Syrian matched with Basil and Gregorie (who liued in his time) in the termes of this equalitie, that Basils speech was , but Apollinaries , wrote, as Suidas reports, all the Hebrew Scripture in He∣roicks, as Sozomen (somewhat more restrainedly) all the Archaiology of the Iewes, till Sauls gouernment, in 24. parts; or as Socrates yet more particu∣larly, all Moses in Heroicks, and all the other Histories in diuers metres: but how-euer his other labours lie hid, his Metaphrase of the Psalmes is still in our hands, with the applause of all the learned: besides the labours of their
 owne Flaminius and Arias Montanus (to seeke for no more) which haue wor∣thily bestowed themselues in this subiect. Neither doe I see how it can bee offensiue to our friends, that wee should desire our English Metaphrase bet∣tered. I say nothing to the disgrace of that we haue: I know how glad our aduersaries are of all such aduantages; which they are ready enough to finde out without me, euer reprochfully vpbraiding vs with these defects. But since our whole Translation is now vniuersally reuised; what inconue∣nience or show of innouation can it beare, that the verse should accompanie the prose? especially since it is well knowne how rude and homely our Eng∣lish Poesie was in those times, compared with the present; wherein, if euer, it seeth her full perfection. I haue beene sollicited by some reuerend friends to vndertake this taske; as that which seemed well to accord with the for∣mer exercises of my youth, and my present profession. The difficulties I found many, the worke long and great; yet not more painefull than bene∣ficiall to Gods Church. Whereto as I dare not professe any sufficiencie; so I will not denie my readinesse, and vtmost endeauour, if I shall bee employed by Authoritie: wherefore, in this part, I doe humbly sumity selfe to the graue censures of them, whose wisdome menageth these common affaires of the Church: and am ready either to stand still or proceed, as I shall see their Cloud or Fire goe before or behinde me. Onely (howsoeuer) I shall, for my true affection to the Church, wish it done by better workemen. Wherein as you approue, so further my bold, but not vnprofitable motion, and commend it vnto greater cares: as I doe you to the Greatest.
Non-such.
Iuly 3.

