

¶ To the moste excellent and moste vertuous ladye, and our woste gracious soueraigne, Mary by the grace of God Quene of Eng∣land, Spaigne, both Sicilies, Fraūce, Hierusalem, and Irelande, Defendour of the faithe, Archeduchesse of Austria, Duchesse of Millaine, Burgundie and Braband, Countesse of Haspurge Flaunders and Tyrole. Your Maies∣ties moste faiethfull, louinge and obe¦dient seruaūt Myles Huggarde, wis∣sheth all grace, long peace, quiet raygne from God the father, the sonne, and the holy Ghoste.
HAuing called too my remem∣brance my most drede soueraign the manyfolde miseries, which by the iuste plague of God dothe

nowe raigne amonge vs, thoccas∣ons whereof thoughe euerye man may trulye thinke his owne sinnes to deserue (as they doo in dede) yet other special causes there be, which prouoketh Goddes vengeaunce to light vpon vs: as cheifly infidelitie, wherby God is most hainously dis¦honored, for the whiche wee are most iustlye punished: and also our rebellious murmuring against our regalerulers, appointed of God to raigne ouer vs, to whome we owe our due allegiaūce. The punishmē∣tes of which offēces (beside al other vices whiche dothe abondauntlye flowe amonge vs at this daye) God hathe most greuouslye executed in the olde time, to the terroure of all traitours and riotous rebelles. As namely for rebellion, and mrmu∣ring against the magistrates, Chor

Dathan, and Abyron, with manye hundrethes mo, may be examples. Whose terrible punishemntes the worlde dothe nowe litle regarde, nether fearing God nor man. And also where Christ cursed two great and notable cities for infidelitee, whiche was Chorazin, and Beth∣saida giuinge them ouer to their own vanities for their faiethles be∣hauoure: This curse alsoo is cleane forgot amōge vs, which appeareth by the infidelitee nowe raininge. But god hath not forgot to plague vs for it, yet mercifullye, and not to our desertes▪ This I saie, most noble Queene, hath moued me with the assistence of my frēde to make this litle worke (moore profitable in matter, then pleasaunte in stile, for lacke of eloquence) this moued me, I saie, as I can to displaie and

opē the horrible inormities of the protestantes. Whose murmuringe against their magistrates may well match the rebelious Israelites, & in their infidelitee the cursed cities of Iurye condemned by the mouth of Christ. Whiche ennormities to re∣moue, so much as lieth in me by the helpe of Goddes grace, though not in those whiche are peruerse in opi¦nion, yet I trust those that be waue∣ring shal heare iuste cause to discre∣dit them, and to abhorre their detes¦table factions, and also constant ca∣tholikes better confirmed in faieth and good liuinge. Whiche thing to that ende being finished, my dutie being considered in this behalfe, I am thus bold to trouble your high∣nesse with this lile volume, which beyng before this tyme imprinted, althouh not in suche perfection as

the same is at this present, hauyng called sith the first edicion, the ayde of my frende, and therfore thought it more mete the dedication vnto your maiestie, moste humbly be∣sechyng the same to pardon this my rude enterprise, praying our LORDE GOD in whose han∣des are the heartes of all kynges, longe to preserue the kinges ma∣iestie. And graunt vnto his highnes a safe retourne to bothe your noble heartes desires, and comforte of both your maiesties realmes, and also preserue your grace in long prosperitie to the discomfiture of all youre highnes enemies Amen.

