



YEe are not forgetfull (worthy Colleagues) when I entered into your Societie: how I spake of the great Harmony that was betweene Mars and Minerva, and the necessitie of their coherence, although the Igno∣rant vulgare conceaue in them, a great repugnance and contra∣rietie: And how that I comming from my trauells, where I had studied to better my minde, aswell with the knowledge of Armes as of letters, and had laboured to approue my selfe such a one Quem fora pacatum bellantem castra decerent. did enter in judiciariam Palaestram, where with you I might
Exercere Togatae,
Munera Militiae —& sine Sanguinis haustu,
Mitia legittimo sub judice bella movere.
But now the tymes are changed, according to the Dispensa∣tion of the Almighty, and euer-turning vicissitude of the World: The Temple of Ianus which hath beene long shut, is now opened, & there is an Invasion threatned by the Enemies of this Kingdome: It is your partes to put off your Gownes, and to take the Sword in your hands for defence of your Country: Yee are Patrons of all men in this State, and with your tongues yee defend their Lands, & their goods as your Clients, and ought yee not aswell to proue Patrons to them, when not their goods and their Lands, but their lifes, and their libertie are in question, & not theirs, but your owne also: & not only theirs and yours, but the Honour of our Prince, the safetie of our Country, th standing of our State is in danger: Nunc pro aris & fois diicandum est. Yee have examples of this, in Ancient times, and all well gouerned Common-wealthes had their men ready for both: The fountaine of Greeke eloquence Demosthenes (to omite Pericles, Themistocles, Alcibiades, Epaminondas, and many other Braue Grecians, who did excell both in learning and faits of Armes) was a resolute Souldiour and did use the Sword for defence of his Countrie (although Plutarch most vniustly▪ blae¦misheth his courage, with the note of couardice at Thermodon) and did behaue himself very valiantly in all exployts, as he shewed at the taking in of
Polye∣nus Stra∣tag. lib. 3. in Demost. Pilus from the Lacedemonians & in overthrow∣ing the Peloponesians, who exceeded him farre in number. All the
Graue Romā Orators: The Fabii, Camilli, Scipiones, Pisones, &c. were also expert Souldiers, and beeing In utraque militia fagata & togata pariter exercitati did as good seruice to their Country in time of warre with their Swords, as they did in time of peace in their Robbes. And there was none of eminencie amongst them that did not enable himselfe to bee such a one, who
Si bella vocabant,
Miles erat, si pax positis toga gestiat armis. Cato was a graue Orator and braue Souldier, and did write of the Arte Militarie. Plutarch in his life setteth downe his valiant actes against Antiochus & testifies of his learned writings
Veget de re. milit lib. 2. cap. 3. Vegetius sayeth thus of him: Cato ille maior cum & armis invictus esset, & consul exercitum sepe duxisset, plusse reipu∣blicae credidit profuturum si disciplinam militarem conferret in literas, Nam unius aetatis sunt res quae fortiter fiunt, quae vero pro utiltate Reip. scribuntur aeterna sunt: And in ano∣ther place, he citeth
Veget de re. milit. lib. 1. cap. 15. his Books, de disciplina militari, which by iniurie of time are perished. The Prince of Latine Oratours himselfe if he had not bene sufficientlie instructed in the knowledge of Armes, hee could neuer haue acted his part so brauelie in preseruing the Common-wealth from the coniuration of Catiline: And hauing the Roman Armie committed vnto his charge in Cilicia did wisely & valiantlie carie himselfe in all exploites, and gained such notable victories at Amanus, that he was declared Imperator, & a Triumph
Plut in Cicer. decerned vnto him by the Senat, which out of a humble modestie hee refused. A short narration of this, ye shall finde in his owne
Episto∣la. lib. 2. ep. 10 & lib. 45. ep. 4. Epistles: And in diuerse of them, hee stileth himselfe M. T. Cicero Imperator: That hee did alike worthilie behaue himselfe in his Armes as in his Gowne for his Countrie, yee shall see the testimo∣nie of Cato in an Epistle to him:
Episto∣la. lib. 15. ep. 5. M. Cato. M. Cicer. Impe∣ratori. S. P. D. Quod & Resp. me & nostra amicitia hortatur libenter facio, ut tuam virtutem innocentiam diligētiam cog∣nitam in maxi nis rebus, ogati domi, Armati foris, pari in∣dustria administrari gaudeam. Calphurnius Piso, descended of the Noble and warlike house of the Pisones To whom it is saide, Armorumque decus praecede forensibus actis, was himselfe a braue and renowned Warriour, and also such a facound & eloquent Orator, that, how much hee did by his discourse in pleading, rauish the heart of the Iudge, and by his forceable speaches moue his minde to sorrow, ioy, anger, or any passion hee pleased, may bee seene in these words,

Luean. ad Pisonem Laudibus ipsa tuis resonant fora: namque ubi Piso
Iudicis affectum, possessaque pectora tentas
Victus sponte suà sequitur quocunque vocasti,
Flet si flre libet, gaudet gaudere coactus,
ttedante capit judex si non habet iram. And thereafter,
Quis non attonitus judex tua respicit ora?
Quis regit ipse suam nisi per tua pondera mentem.
I will giue you but one instance of our owne dayes: Braue Des∣disguieres, so much beloued of Henrie the Great, the late French King, was an Advocat in the Parliament of Aix, and finding that hee might bee also steadable to his Countrie by the Sword, did take Armes, and by long and fortunate service came to that per∣fection of the arte Military, that for his martiall valour he was both honoured at home, by receiuing the Supreame Dignitie of his King∣dome, & was also such a terrour to the Enemies of his Countrie, that I haue sene them affright their children, with the name of Aldiguera. But what doe I talke of Mortalitie? The fountaine of all Artes and Sciences, The Eternall Himselfe is a Souldier as the
Exod. chap. 15. vers. 3. Scripture sayeth: The Lord is a Man of Warre, His Name is IEHOVAH. But I will goe further on with you, and evidentlie proue the profession of Armes, not onelie to become your profession & fitlie to bee ioyned therewith, but also to bee farre more Noble & more excellent, then yours, or any other else: I will not produce Testimonies from martiall men least yee reiect them as partiall, but I will bring an irrefragable conclusion from him, whose sentence I hope yee will not decline, and it is from your owne Doctor and Master, who although out of an inconsiderat Poeticall humour, did cry, Cedant arma togae: Yet when hee was in his owne setled and wise disposition, hee freelie con∣fesseth the veritie, and sayeth.
Cicero. in Orat. pro L. Muraen Acnimirum (dicen∣dum est enim quod sentio) Reimilitaris virtus praestat caete∣ris omnibus, haec nomen populo Romano, haec huic urbi aeter∣nam gloriam peperit, hec orbem terrarum parere huic imperio coegit: Omnes urbanae res, omnia haec nostra praeclara stu∣dia, & haec forensis laus & industria, latent in tutela, ac prae∣sidio bellicae virtutis: And immediatelie before, hee said; Mul∣to plus affert dignitatis res militaris quam juris civilis glo∣ria; Vigilas tu de nocte ut tuis consultoribus respondeas, il∣le ut quo intédit mature cum exercitu perveniat; te gallorum, illum buccinarum cantus exsuscitat, tu actionem instituis, il∣le
aciem instruit, tu caves ne tui consultores, ille  urbes aut castra capiantur. And a little thereafter, Summa dignitas est in iis quae militari laude antecellunt, Omnia enimquae sunt in Imperio & in statu civitatis, & iis defendi & firmari putantur: summa enim utilitas, siquidem eorum consilio & periculo cum repub▪ tum etiam nostris rebus perfrui possu∣mus: What can be better and more truelie saide for the Dignitie & Excellencie of Militarie profession? Since then the carying of Armes is a thing so Noble, so Generous so befitting your profession, I doubt not but yee will all applie your mindes to the vnderstanding and practice of the Arte Militarie: For yee haue Strength, Cou∣rage, Iudgement, Learning, and other qualities befitting a perfect Souldier: and in this yee adde great praise and happinesse to your Countrie: Seeing
Veget. de re milit. lib. 1. c. 13. Nihil est neque firmius, ne{que} laudabilius, neque foelicius republica in qua abundant milites eruditi: I haue set downe some Militarie instructions for your vse, which I haue learned by sight and practice abroad in my Trauells, or by dis∣course of learned Commanders, or by my owne reading: Whereby I doe not presume to instruct You, whose knowledge exceedeth mine in all things, but onlie to stirre vp you of greater gifts, than I, not onlie to take the Penne and publish more perfectlie in this kinde, but also to put the same in practice, as I haue done, either abroad, or at home, for service of your Countrie. For Bellona and Minerva are my two Mistresses, whom I haue this long time equallie Courted, whose Ser∣vice I haue with equall affection prosecuted, although of them I haue obtained but small Fauours, beeing alwayes infortunate in my loue: Yet if anie of you of better merite wil giue attendance vpō them, yee may bee better rewarded, and in this loue, I will not envye, but will cherrish my Corrivalles, and shall bee readie to impart to anie the small fauours which I haue receiued. So that at this time I haue set downe in the first part of my Treatise, as copiouslie & perspicu∣ouslie as I could, the moderne Exercise of Infanterie, and hath clear∣lie descriued all the Postures and Motions belonging to Companies, of Foote, together with them vse, and manner how to performe them, and hath illustrate them by precepts of the best Tactict writters Ae∣lian, & the Emperour Leo, giuing you their owne wordes, & con∣firming them by examples of practice, of the brauest Greeke Com∣manders, to show you a conformitie betweene the Auntient Milit∣rie Discipline and our Moderne. I doubt not therefore (worthie Colleagues) but yee will follow out reallie, that which I haue aymed
at; & heereafter accustome your selues to doe service to your Coun∣trie, as well by the Sword as the Gowne, Seeing it is a thing so Gene∣rons so Honourable, & so convenient for your calling: I speake not to Base Spirits, whose onelie happinesse is to liue in a brutish sensualitie, and to deride all Vertue, But to the Generous minded, who by follo∣wing Vertue: and doing actions worthie of memorie; are desirous, Ipsorum ut vivat post funera fama,
Those I loue, those I honour, to those I offer my endeuours, and to those I will bee while I liue.

