



AMong al other
moste noble and fa¦mous
dedes of kin∣ges,
and Princes,
none is more god∣lye,
commendable,
nor profytable to

the cōmon wealth, then to promote,
and set forthe vnto their subiectes
the pure, and sincere religion of the
eternal God, kyng of al kynges, and
Lord of al Lordes. Then shal iustice,
peace, and concord raygne, the doore
of Idololatrie be shut vp, vi the why¦che
hath entred all euyl, and kynges
and kyngdomes fallen into ieopar∣dye,
as the writinges of y• Prophets
do testifie. But the more thys noble
fact is glorious, godly, and princely,
the more difficile & hard it is. For the
enemy of God & of al mankynd, the
Deuyll, customablye is wont to de∣ceiue
the princes of ye world, so that
eyther they vtterly neglect the reli∣gion
of the true God as a thynge fo¦lyshe,
and of no estimacion, eyther
prouoke thē cruelly to persecute it.
If he cā bryng neither ye one, neither
the other of these to pas: he wyll do
the beste de can to preserue a myxte,
and myngled religion, that shall ne∣ther
playnly be agaynst, nor wholye
wyth hym: And so vse the matter,
that partly goddes truth shall take
place, partly the supersticious inuē∣cion
of man. The whych myngled

and myxed religion is so muche the
more daungerous, as it is accomp∣ted
for pure and good. Therfore it is
earnestlye forbidden by God, as the
examples of the scripture declareth.
Iehu the kynge of the Israelites
when he had remoued all grosse and
sensible Idololatrye: and with the
swerde had taken away all the Ido¦lolatricall
priestes. iii. Reg. x, is re∣proued
of God, neuertheles because
he walked not in the lawe of God
wyth all his herte, and lefte not the
wayes of Ieroboam. And againste
these minglers and patchers of Re∣ligion
speaketh Elias the Prophet,
iii. Reg. xviii. Howe longe sayth he
wyl ye halt on both sides. If y• Lord
be God, folow hym, if Baal, go ye af¦ter
hym. Euen so we may iustly say:
If y• priesthod & ministery of Christe
with his notes and markes be true,
holy, & absolutely perfect, receiue it:
in case it be not, folow y• pope. Christ
can not abide to haue the leuē of the
pharises myngled wyth hys swete
flowre. He wold haue vs ether hote,
or cold, the luke warme he vometeth
vp: and not wythout a cause.

For he accuseth God of ignorancie
and folishenes, that entendeth to ad¦orne
and beutifye his doctrine and
decrees with humaine cogitacions.
What kynge or prince of the world
wold suffer hys statutes, lawes, and
testament to be cut of, and set on at
euery mans libertie and pleasure?
Shulde not the same glory, maiesty,
and honour be geuē vnto the lawes
and testament of Christ, that is sea∣led
wyth hys precious bloude? The
worde of God wherwyth he gouer∣neth
and ruleth his church, is a sep∣ter
of yron. Psal. ii. and not a rod of
wylowe to be bowed wyth euerye
mans finger, either a rede to be bro∣ken
at mans wyll: no, neither a pece
of lether to be stretched and reached
out wyth any mans teth.
These thynges be spoken of me
most gracious and vertuous kyng,
to commende youre maiestyes and
your moste honorable councels do∣inges
that seke the glorye of God
and the restituciō of hys holye and
Apostolycall churche. The whyche
thing, as your highnes & your most
honourable and wyse councel, haue

gracyouslye be gon: goddes mercye
in the bowels of Chryst Iesu graūt
you moost gratiously to perfourme.
The people of Englande were op∣pressed
wyth the vyolente and cruel
tyrannye of Antychryste: darckenes
and ignorauncie occupied y• mindes
all moost of all menne, so that fewe
knew the true way to eternal salua∣tyon.
And yet manye Prynces and
wysemen delyte and tarye in thys
darckenesse, and can not or wyll not
bare nor suffer the radiant and shy∣nynge
beames of the Gospell, more
then the night crow can the beames
of the sonne: but the merciful father
of heauen shall better their syghte
when hys good and mercyfull plea∣sure
is. But the Lorde be praysed
your magestye: youre moste honou∣rable
and wyse counsel, haue not ca¦red
what y• greatest parte, but what
the better dothe, that the lawe of
the hyghe and myghtye God, maye
be knowne to your hyghnes people,
as did Dauid, Iosaphat, Ezechias
and Iosyas. And in your maiesties
so doing, ye bynde not only the true
and lyuynge members of Chryste to

geue God thanckes in thys behalfe
but also declare your selfe to be the
verye fauroure, nource, and helper
of the word of God according to the
sayinge of Esaye .xlix. Perseuer gra¦cyous
kynge in thys quarel & daun∣gerous
enterpryce. Youre hyghnes
shall not neade to feare eyther the
strength or cautelles of your enne∣myes
for there is no witte, wsdome,
nor coūcel against ye Lord as Salo∣mō
saith pro. xxi. No although they
had syluer as the grauell of the sea,
and golde as commune as the claye
of the stretes. zach. ix. for albeit the
horse is prepared for the day of bat∣tell,
yet the vyctorye commeth from
the Lorde Prouerb .xxi. I am he
sayth the Lord that do comfort you,
what art thou that fearest mortall
manne, eyther the sonne of manne,
that shalbe made as haye, canst thou
for got the Lorde thy maker, yt strea∣chith
forthe the heauens, and laieth
the foundacion of the earthe? Esa.
li. Let these diabolycall soundes, &
speakynges of euel menne, nothyng
trouble your highnes, nor your wise

and godly councellour. As long as
the kynge is in hys tender age hys
councell shulde do nothinge in mat∣ters
of religyon. For those mens fo∣lishenes
(rather I shuld sai malice)
is condemned by the worde of God
that teacheth howe a kynge in hys
younge age wyth hys wyse and
godlye counsell shoulde abolyshe I¦dolatrye,
and sette forthe the true,
& godly religyon of the liuing God.
Thus declareth the notable & god∣lie
facte of Iosias that folowed the
relygyon of hys father not Ammon
the Idolater, but of Dauid, nor de∣clynynge
to the rightt hande, ney∣ther
to the left hand. And destroyed
not onlie the Images of his father,
but also of Ieroboā, & of Solomon.
iiii. Reg. xxii .xxiii. This scuit of Io∣sias
holp his godly coūcellers, & ver¦tuous
priestes. Euē so Ioas beynge
but a child was holp by his coūcel∣lers
in the lyke procedinges & refor∣maciō
of religion. In case yt princes,
Bishops, & priests had not knowen
it to be the cōmaundemēt of God to
haue obeyed these .ii. yonge & godlye
kynges, they wold not haue consen∣ted
vnto his procedinges.

But we see howe gladde they were
to do it. The Princes and councel∣lours
moued no sedicion, the Bishop
and the priestes soughte not for the
defence of their proper doctrine, ey∣ther
to myngle theirs with goddes,
but were content wyth the sole and
onely lawe of God. Ye noble Prin∣ces
and councellours, praise be vnto
the liuinge God for your great wis∣dome,
and godlye assistaunce in this
behalfe. And the Lorde be magnify∣ed
in all the godlye and learned Bi∣shoppes,
and others of this Realme
that haue, and do put to their helpes
and studies to brynge the churche of
Chryste to her olde, and reuerende
perfeccion agayn. And al other that
hynder your maiesties godlye pur∣pose,
openly, or secretelye, God wyll
douteles reuenge at length.
The godly and vertuouse begyn∣nynges,
moste noble Prince, of your
father the kynges maiestie, Henry
the eyght of a blessed memorie, shall
by your hyghnes godlye be ended,
in hym that can and wyl do al thin∣ges
for Christ his deare sōnes sake.
And a thousande tymes the rather

shal your maiestie restore agayn the
true ministerie of ye church, incase ye
remoue & take away all y• monumē¦tes,
tokens, & leauinges of papistry.
For as longe as anye of them re∣mayne,
there remayneth also occa∣sion
of relapse vnto the abolyshed
supersticion of Antichriste. Seynge
I see in the writynges of the Pro∣phets,
God to require the obserua∣cion
of his lawe onely, concerninge
religion: and threatneth all Pryn∣ces,
priestes, and prophets wt his dis∣pleasure
that neglecte or contami∣nate
it with their own cogitacions:
I can do no lesse, howe soeuer the
worlde shall take my doynges: but
exhorte and pray the magistrates to
brynge the churche to her fyrst per∣feccion.
For if I shulde studye to
please man herein, I were not the
seruaunt of God. And I am afrayd
leste the dissease that infected the
Pharises, infecteth also many now
a dayes, that minister in the church,
vnto whom Chryst spake. Ihon .v.
Howe can ye beleue, that seeke glo∣rye
one of other, and the glory of
God ye contemne. God geue grace

I maye not saye. Hinc ille lacrime.
Helpe ye therefore O ye Byshop∣pes
and pryestes, the kynges ma∣iestyes
and hys noble couurelles pro∣cedinges,
that all thynges maye be
broughte to a perfecte and Aposto∣licall
reformacion, it is not inoughe
to laye the foundacion of the tem∣ple,
but there muste bee buylded vp∣on
it golde, syluer, and precyous
stone. But in anye case wee muste
take heede we laye no strawe, nor
stubble upon the foundacion, if we
do, it wyll be burned. i. Corrinth. iii.
If wee do not buylde vp vpon the
foundacion, then shal we be shente
as the Israelites were. Agge .i.
Lette no manue excuse hym selfe vp¦on
the kynges maiesties age, for the
age canne not excuse the kynges ma¦iestie
it selfe, If hys relygyon in
hys youthe be accordynge to god∣des
woorde, he hathe the fauoure
and promyses of God to blesse, pre∣serue
and keepe hys maiestye, and
hys Realme, thoughe the Deuyll,
and hys members wolde saye nay.
If in youthe hys maiestye take a

wronge relygyon, he shall bee assis∣ted
of goddes displeasure, as it is
to be seene .iiii. Regum. xxi.
Manasses beynge of twelue yeres
olde was crouned kynge, and in his
youth reuoked the Idololatry that
his father Ezechias had abolished,
and in hys so doing displeased hay∣nously
y• maiestie of God, & at lēgth
was sore afflicted, and punyshed for
his so doyng. Behold y• displeasure of
God in a yonge kynge for a false re¦ligion.
Ieoachim crouned the eyght
yere of hys age, for the euyll he dyd
in the syghte of the Lorde, he was
taken prisoner by the kynge of Ba∣bilon
.ii. Paral. xxxvi, wyth all the
goodly vessels of the Lorde
Thys kinge raygned but thre mo¦nethes
& ten dayes before the Lorde
reuenged the false doctrine he main¦teined.
These examples I dout not,
moste godlye kynge, and vertuouse
councellers, moneth you to be care∣full
of the true religion. The Lorde
hathe strengthe and power inough,
seeke ye hym, and geue no place to
the infirme perswasions of the flesh,
for the Lorde shall be wyth you.

Souche as thynke peace and quyet∣nes,
shal come to the realme a better
waye, then to haue the true relygy∣on
of God restored, they shal knowe
the contrarye in the Prophete. Ie.
Chapter .vi. the whyche Chapter if
the kynges maiestye bare in mynde
and folowe it is wourthe a kynges
reuenue: If a Lord, the value of hys
lande: if the Byshoppe, the estimaci∣on
of hys Byshopprycke: if the mar∣chaunte
the gaynes of hys laboure:
if the husbande hys Oxen & plough.
And the same commaunded God, Le∣uit
.xxv. Obserue my statutes, and
my iudgementes then shal ye dwell
safelye in the earth: and the earthe
shal brynge forthe her frute, ye shall
eate and be satyfied, and dwel in the
earthe wyth out feare. It is a fonde
opynyon most gracyous kynge, and
vnmete for a chrystyan man to bare
the Magystrates of God in hande
that incase the doctryne of Chryste,
and hys holy sacramentes shuld not
be decked and set forthe wyth these
plausible, and well lykynge ceremo¦nyes
(that is to speake playnelye wt 
papysticall superstisticion) it were

to be feared of sediciō and tumults.
Doutelesse if the Popes members
woulde not deceyue the people, but
teach thē gods word, y• people wold
sone see the truthe, and willingelye
leaue asmuch as God and their king
shulde commaunde them, as y• gests
and factes of Iosyas, and Ioas de∣clareth.
Moste gracyous kynge and
noble councellers as ye haue taken
away the Masse from the people, so
take from them her fethers also: the
aulter, vestmentes, and suche like as
apparelled her. And lette the holye
communion be decked wyth the ho∣lye
ceremonyes that the hyghe and
wyse preyste Chryste deckyed and
apparelled her fyrste of all. And frō
whence (myghtye Prynce and soue∣raygne
Lord) spryngeth warre, and
sedicion? Come they not frome the
onlye God beynge angrye, for the
neclectynge of hys lawe: so we be
taughte by Esa. l. And Ieremye .ix.
sayeth, who is wise & vnderstandeth
thys, and he vnto whom the mouth
of the Lord hath spoken & declareth
wherefore the earth perisheth, and is
like vnto the burned wildernes yt no

man maye passe by it. And the Lord
sayed, because they haue forsakē my
lawe, whyche I put vnto them, and
hearde not my wayes, and walketh
not therein, but folowed the desyre
of theyr owne hertes, and after Ba∣alimas
they were taughte by there
fathers: And because wee myngle
mennes inuencyons wyth his lawe.
For he sayeth menne worshyp hym
in vayne wyth the preceptes of men
Math. xv. And in the .ix. of Ieremy
the Lord declareth other manner of
causes of warre and sedicion. The
forsakynge of hys lawe, not to har∣ken
vnto his voyce, nor to walke in
hys wayes, to go after the prauitye
and euylnes of euer owne hartes.
The viciatynge and iuste vse of the
Lordes supper. i. Cor. xi. Also y• neg∣lecrynge
of wydowes and orpha∣lynges
causes, not to iudge ryghte
iudgemente to the power Ierem. v.
These causes muste be auoyded or
else truelye thy sayinge of Ieremye
wyll take place. Chap. vii. You trust
in youre selfes and in lyes that no∣thynge
profytteth. The nexte waye
to returne the hande of gods angre,

& great displeasure against vs is to
folowe Iosophat the kinge, that ap¦poynted
good iudges and godlye
pryestes in euerye cyty. The iudges
to iudge after the true lawes of the
realme, and the preystes to do all
thynges in the churche accordynge
to the worde of God which teacheth
suche knowledge and feare of God
and of the magystrates, that all the
wysedome, lawes, and bokes that
euer were made be but counterfeete
and folyshe in respecte of it. Nor e∣uer
had God in heauen, or kynge vp¦on
the earthe suche a frende as is
the holy Bible. For it reacheth y• peo¦ple
and subiectes of the realme, the
feare of God, obedyence to the kyn∣ges
maiestye and hys Magestrates
and all mutuall and fraternal loue.
Thys example and counsel of Iosa∣phat
if it beneglected ther cā no god¦lynes
be amonge the people as the
texte sayeth when Prophecye wan∣teth,
the people shall be dysipated &
scattered abrode Prouerves. xxix.
To the doinges of these godlye offy¦ces
shoulde all menne be exhorted spe¦cyallye
suche as bare the name of

Bishoppes and preistes. If they will
not be desyrous and glad to haue, &
helpe the mynistery of the church to
the primatyue and perfecte estate a∣gayne,
the Lorde dothe crye venge∣aunce
towardes them, and wyl not
onlye requyre the lose of them selfes
but also of all the people at theire
handes Ezech. iii. xxxiii. Let them
remember the complaynte of God
hym selfe Ierem. i. My people hath
haue a loste flocke, my shepperdes
haue deceiued them, and haue made
them go astraye vpon the hylles. If
these threatnynges wyll not amend
theym Gracyous Kynge, and you
my honourable Lordes of his highe
counsel, muste do wyth them as the
mariners did with Ionas. What y•
is, seing it pleased the kinges maie¦stie
and you my Lordes of his moste
honourable councell in the lente to
heare by me, I haue nowe at the re∣quest
of manye godlye persons cau∣sed
it to come abrode, and dedicated
the same to youre Pryncelye maie∣stye,
and mooste prudente Counsell
that youre hyghenes maye be bothe
iudge and recorde of my doctrine vn¦to

youre Maiestyes true and louing
subiectes. The whyche doctryne is
Catholyke, and godly in al thynges
nothynge dyssentinge, but agreable
wyth the Prophetes and the Apo∣steles,
as I am, (accordynge to my
bonnden dutye) redye at all tymes
to make answere, if anye thyng shal
be attempted to the contrarye. In∣case
ther be now & thē added a word
more or lesse, or peraduenture some
sentence, yet I know well ye matter
is not chaunged nor aultered other
wyse then I spake it before youre
maiestye, for I haue memoryaies,
wherin I wrot before y• inuenciō, or∣der,
& disposition of al the matters
I wolde entreate vpon: As I vse, &
euer wyl doo of all thinges I speake
in goddes behalfe to the people, wryt
my selfe, or cause an other to wryte,
the pethe, and disposycion of al thin∣ges
I speake vpon, that I maye
as well learne a farther knowe∣ledge
my selfe thereby, as make an∣swere
to myne enemyes, if any shuld
accuse me of false doctryne. The
God of all strengthe and consolati∣on
gouerne poure maiestye an youre

mooste honourable counsell wyth
hys holye spyryte, and gyue you the
vyctorye of all your ennemies Ami.
Anno. M. D. L. Septembris .vi.
Sence y• angel of god slew in
the armye of Senacherive
gods ennemie a hundreth
thousand and syue thou¦sande
menne. Anno.
M.M.C.C.
lxxx. viii
