


THe Almightie God (Right Honourable and Worship∣full) in all ages of the woride, hath euer reclaimed his peo∣ple Psal. 105. 45. Deut. 28. 47. Ps. 78. 10. 17. Ps. 81. 13. from their sinnes, by sun∣dry his most iust indgements, and correstions: and warned them by his ma∣nifold mercies, and blessings, saith the holie psalmist, To walke vprightly in his sta∣tutes, and to obserue his lawes.
There is no nation in all Europe, freed from the bondage of Antichrist, and profes∣sing the bolie Gospell of Iesus Christ, so en∣treated

both waies for many yeares as we haue bene. The Lords mercies and blessings cannot be numbred, take a short view of his chastice∣ments and fatherly corrections vppon vs. He hath put vs in minde of our disobedience often by the pestilence, which is one speciall reuenger of his couenant. And for many yeares past he Ann. 1588 Ann. 1589. Psal. 107. 18. Psa. 78. 37 An. 1592 neuer left pleading with vs by warres, famine, or by pestilence: but in all euils, when we cried vnto him, he soone called backe his anger, and did not stir vp all his wrath against vs. Now againe when we thought all our sorrowes to be paft, & that our blessed King should seale vp & conclude our peace with God & man: yet still the Lord proclaimes his wrath against vs, For we be not vpright with him, neither Psa. 78. 37 An. 1593 Anno. 81. An. 188. Ioachim. Camerar. synopsi de peste. pref. Euseb. in chro. An. 254 Act. & M. P. 74. are we faithfull in his couenant.
Sundrie stories haue recorded, how in all ages the Lorde hath swept away multitudes with the pestilence.
In the yeare of Christ, 81. when Vespasi∣an was Emperour, and againe in the yeare of Christ 188. in the daies of Commodus the Emperour, there dd daily in Rome of the pestilence no lesse then 2000.
Againe in Anno. 254. there were fifteene prouinces of the Romane Empire, Incredibi∣liter

exhaustae (saith one) wonderfully wasted Lauathr se de peste. with the pestilence.
In the yeare 530. in Iustinians time in Ann. 530. Constantinople and there-abouts, there died 5000. euery day, interdum etiam decem Euseb. lib. 9. cap. 8. & 8. cap. 16. sub fine, & 7. cap. 21. millia, sometimes 10000.
And in an other part of Greece it is said, the plague destroied so many, that there were none liuing to bury the dead.
The stories of the Church speake often of most greeuous plagues vpon the Pagans for af∣flicting An. 540. Gods people: for this cause Anno. Euagr. lib. 4. c. 24. &. 2. c. 6. An. 1359 540. there was an vniuersall plague 50. yeares togither, which most greeuously consu∣med and tormented (saith Euagrius) all the world. And in Italy, it is said, that An. 1359. the pestilence destroied so many that Anno. 1521. Act. &. M. P. 682. there scarce remained 10. of a thousand. And in Rome where the sonne of perdition sit∣teth as God in the Temple of God, was a plague Ann. 1521. that consumed aboue an Anno. 1576. Anno. 1577. Ioachim. Camerar. insynopsi de pe. hundreth thousand people.
And since the Gospel began to shine foorth in Germany and other parts of the world, the Lord hath consumed and wafted diuerse Cities in the Popes dominions in Italy again, as Mil∣lan, Padua, Venice, and many moe, about

the yeare 1576. and 1577. with a most greeuous pestuence, which destroied a hun∣dreth thousand in a Citie. And it is thought the Petrach ex millenis qui busque hom. vix. 10. super essent. Num. 25. 9. Psal. 106. litle kingdome of Bohemia lost no lesse then 300000. of the plague about the same time.
In the elder Church of the Iewes, the Lorde often in a short time destroied thou∣sands & millions: as for the sinnes of his peo∣ple with the Moabites, the plague burst in vpon them (saith the psalmist,) and smote There was avehement Pestilence in England. Anno. 348. Act. & M P. 484. and. Anno. 1314. Anno. 1591. Anno. 1592. Odisea∣ses. 8351. An. 1593. 24. thousand. And in Dauids time, in three dates 70000.
When we consider this hand of God so mightie in consuming thousandes in great wrath, both in the Church and without, both in elder times and of late yeares, both in forrein nations, & otherwhiles in this land, and in this Honorable Citie: how is it, that we do not extoll the most admirable lenitie, and fatherly forbearing hand of the Lorde vppon vs in these daies? for we shall seldome read or see such gleaning of a few, with such patience and long suffering as the Lord hath done with vs.
Manie haue a brutish feare & worldly sorow, & as it seemeth, because of the losse of

their long peace & prosperitie? but some again on the other side, are so foole-hardie, that they Carnal and irreligious feares pre∣sumption and securitie feare nothing, and thinke these louing warnings of the Lord to be but ordinarie and therefore not to be feared: and neither regard as Chri∣stians anie amendment of life, nor as good Citi∣zens good and wise orders appointed for the preseruation of this honorable Citie, and the health of the Lordes people. The greatest sort flie alwaies from the Lord as in the lesser euils, so in this great calamitie to all the naturall helps that can be found, and yet receiue small benefit (as we all see) in the end, because they seeke not in the first place to those most preci∣ous spiritual preseruatiues & helps which the Lord offereth vs against the pestilence. Reason, phisicke, & daily experience can teach vs, that some secret causes worke in this plague more then in any other. For this cause (R. H. & W.) and to satisfie the request of some friendes, I was content this Treatise (containing I trust some comfortable spiritual helpes against the pectilence) should be published for the benefit I hope of some of Gods people.
Now my humble request vnto your Honor and Worships is, that as you be wise, prouident and circumspect, and verie care∣full

to remoue all naturall causes which seeme to breede, and do indeede give strength vnto this venemous contagion, by obser∣ation of politicke orders in all the parts of this Honorable citie, so you would also be as vigilant, & striue with strong hand to re∣moue the spiritual causes of the same; I mean that you should pare away all the rotten proud sinnes of this citie (which are cor∣rigible by good lawes) as much as in you lieth with the sword of instice. our will is good, and hath beene (I heare for manye yeares) for to cast downe the diuellish theaters, the nurceries of whoredome and uncleannesse: they are Cupids and Venus temples, they are Bacchus and Sathans pallaces, they corrupt the youth of your citie intollerably: all eies can see, and all chast eares can witnes, & some of the maisters of these euil artes (when the Lord had humbled them by some great ter∣rors) were driuen to confesse the same in ex∣treame passions and pangs of death.
In all ages God and his Church hath euer abhorred these wicked abbominations: let one man speake for all. Tertul shewing how Gods people differed from the Pagans in his sweet apologie for the Church against the gentils, he

saith: Nihil est nobis dictu, visu, aud, Abolog. c. 8. cum impudicitia theatri. We cannot abid to speake, to see, or heare anie thing of the shamelesse and vnchast wantonnesse o your theaters. They replied vpon you in t citie often, as elsewhere with authoritie and  censes, euer allowed by the almightie. T idle drones greatly prophaned, as in all the la so specially in this citie, the Lords Saboth, and carried away great flockes, or heards rather of blinde people from the holy worship of Al∣mightie God. But our gratious King seeing the greatnes of this impietie, hath alreadie by Edict reformed this euill: The Lord will not be vn∣mindfull of him, for being thus mindfull of his holy Saboths. Lord open thou his eyes to see the manifolde impieties that as yet re∣maine in Church and Common-wealth, and giuc him a wise heart to reforme thy sanctuarie, according to the diuine rule thy most holy word. As for naturall preser∣uatiues the learned Phisitions can best direct you. Yet giue me leaue onely to put your Honor and Worships in mind of such helpes as some of the learned haue greatly commended, and ma∣ny godly wise men, haue of ten wished for the benefite of this citie.

The first thing to bee desired is, that God would stirre vp your hearts and others to pro∣uide more new burials for the citie, where the dead might better rest from the liuing, and the liuing better auoyd the contagion of the dead.
The second thing to be wished is, that many Leu. 13. 46 2. Kin. 15. 5 houses were prouided (as in elder times for the contagious leprosie, and many cities in other countries and kingdomes haue at this day) where the sicke of infected houses (if they de∣sired more libertie) might haue more freedome of aire and benefit of the place for diet keeping, &c. For such as be pind vp in their owne houses in the citie, as birdes in their cages, are often greatly plagued, the rich with want of ayre, the poore with famine. The last thing is this, that the sicke be committed to the custody & cure of such selected & chosen men, mercifull men, men fearing God men of iudge∣ment and knowledge, meete to minister helpes both corporall and spirituall to ease the grie∣uances of Gods people both for their soules and bodies, and that such be well prouided for, and encouraged with a most competent and suffici∣ent salarie.
The Lord guide your hearts and spirits by his almightie spirit, and graunt you such spi∣rituall

courage, wisedome and iudgement, as that ye may faithfully execute the Lords iudge∣ments in this Honorable Citie, to the glory of God, the good of his Church, and the euer∣lasting comfort of your owne soules, through Iesus Christ. Anno. 1603.

