



MY Noble LORD,
It is not vnknown to Your Lo. what perfect cōcord is betweene Mars and the Mues, and how much the Braue & renowned Persons of Antient times were endued with the knowledge, both of Letters and Armes, that both in Peace & Warre, they might be serviable vnto their Countrie: Epami∣nondas, Themistocles, Aristides, Phocion, Alcibiades, and mante other Braue Grecians, As also Fabius, Cato, Piso, Pompeius, and manie other excellent Romans can beare witnesse: But the Grecians did excell all Nations in both, and were the first, that out of a long practice & experience, reduced the knowledge of Armes to an Arte, and gaue instructions for right exercising and due ordering of a Battel: for which effect, they had Schoole-Masters called , who taught the Arte Militarie: whose precepts the
Veget. de e milit. lib. 3. in Prologo. Romans themselues thought no disparaigement to put in practice, & commit to writ: Wher∣fore a well gouerned Common-wealth, ought to haue a care, so to instruct her Children, that they may be steadable to Herboth in Peace and Warre: And a well affected Subject ought to en∣able himselfe to doe seruice to his Countrie, by the studies, both of Mars & Minerva. Hence is it that I, although least in power, yet not the last in affection, haue euer endeuoured to enable my selfe to serue my King and Countrie, both by Booke and Sword, and applyed my minde in my Trauels, to learne and practise all that I could in the Arte Militarie: wherin, what I haue obtained by mine own experience, studie, or conference with learned Soul∣diers. I haue adventured to publish for the vse & benefite of my Countrie-men, and chiefelie of my fellow Lawers, not so much that I thinke anie Workes of mine worthie of light; but onelie to
stir vp those of better spirits to do more perfectly in this subject. This Treatise I haue presumed to Dedicate vnto your Lo. in respect the matter doeth much become You, as well for the martial Vertues already shining in You, as for the Simpathy that your honourable Birth and Nobilitie hath with this subject of which I treat, being Warre and Armes: VVarre, the exercise of true Courage and Fortitude, the Arte and pastime of Kings & Princes, the Theatre of Honour and Glorie: And therefore a fitte Court for your Lo. to walke into, who aimes at nothing, but what is Noble, Heroicke, and Glorious. And moreouer, your Lo. being not onlie a Favorit of Mars but also of Minerva, hauing your minde equallie affected, & perfected in the studies, both of War & Peace (although your yeares and the quietnes of by past times, in the first, hath not yeelded you much experience) deser∣ueth to bee crowned, as well with the Laurell as the Oliue and therfore fitlie chosen by me to be a Protector to Armed Gowne; men, seeing most justlie, yee deserue to bee a Tutelar Patron to men of both professions; So that men of Armes ought to offer vnto You, as to their Mars, & men of learning ought their vowes vnto You, as to their Apollo. Pirhus, Hannibal, & Iulius Caesar, the brauest Generals that euer liued, were both learned, & Martiall, & did use the Penne no lesse, than the Pick as their memorable exploites, & their choise writtings doe testifie: The works of Caesar are amōgst our hāds: the writtings of the other two, are perished by the iniurie of time, but were extant in the days of
Aelian▪ Tact. lib. . cap. 1. Plutarch. in Prro. & in Hanib. Emil. Prob. in Han ib. Aeliā Plutarch & Aemilius Probus. Great Alexā∣der himself is not renowned so much for his many Diademes, as that he did delyte in the vnderstāding of the Acroamaticke Sciences: Of those Heroicke Spirits. Your Lo. is a liuelie image, who trading their honourable steppes, doeth imitate them both in learning and Martiall courage. I will not heere speake of the compleatnesse of your other eminent Graces and Vertues, wherewith yee are endued farre aboue your yeares (without any blemish of vices) of your beautifull Personage, your admirable Prudence, your rare & pregnat Wit, Your gratious affabilitie,
and courtesie, the onelie token of a true Noble mind, your zea∣lous affection to doe service to your KING and your Countrie, Your forewardnesse to assist and advance all honourable en∣terprisses, your singular judgement and vnderstanding in affaires of all Natures, and the rest of your eminent and con∣spicuous Vertues, whereby Yee adorne and decore your Noble Race, which is one of the most Antient, and most Illustrious of our Kingdome: So that I may boldlie affirme, that Your Lo. in the Hight and Aboundance of all Honourable and Heroicke Vertues, doeth Excelle, and Shinne amongst the rest of the Nobiitie of our Age.
Sicuti inter Stellas, Luna Minores.
And therefore, how can I who am , but loue and admire in You, that , which most gloriouslie shinneth in You, to the admiration of all men. I haue offered these instruc∣tions to your Lo. vew and protection, that vnder the shaddow of your name they may bee sheltered from the envious censure of the Critickes of our time, who are more readie to reproue, thā to amend, to carpe, than to set foorth of their owne. Neither doe I offer this tribute to your Lo. as to adde anie thing vnto your knowledge, whose minde is plentifullie enriched with the perfection of all noble Artes, and Sciences, But onelie to testifie my humble and bound duetie to your Lo. For, the honour that I haue to be tyed to Your Lo. by Blood, being discended of your House, by my Grandmother, doeth oblish me to consecrat all my endevours vnto You. Wouchsafe then My Thrise Noble Lord, out of your gratious generositie, fauourablie to accept, and protect this poore Present of mine, and to esteeme the Author thereof to bee for euer.

