


YOV nobly-witted, and inge∣nuously-studied
Academians:
whose excellency in all kinds of
learning, all forraigne Vniuersi∣ties
doe admire, and none atteine
vnto. I here present you a Voy∣age
to Cholcos, though not the
Golden-fleece with it: the Searche,
I meane, but not the finding; of that so much talkt
of, so often sought for, North-West Passage, and
neerer way into the South-Sea. That, wherein so
much Time and Treasure haue beene expended, so
many braue Spirits employed, and yet none discoue∣red.
Perchance, there is no such Passage to be found:
and that the Spaniards, by the gullery of their false
Sea-Cards, and the fable of an old Greeke Pilote;
haue but diuerted our English and Dutch Sea-men,
from their golden Indyes. This plot of theirs hath
taken, for these many yeeres: and it appeares to bee
but a plot, for that themselues neuer make vse of
this Passage. For mine owne part, I suppose that
the Philosophers stone is in the North-West Passage. My
argument for it is, For that theres so much Philoso∣phy
in the way to it.

So much, and such variety: such variety, and that
so various, (I thinke) from what is receiued in the
Schooles: that it were well worth the disquisition of
an Vniuersity, (and I wish you the first honour of it)
either to find out, how these Obseruations may bee
reduced to Aristotles Philosophy: or whether they need
any other enquiry, and ought to be examined by
some other Rules, then Aristotle hath yet light vpon.
This is my purpose of inscribing it vnto you. Of
this one thing am I confident: that you are all so
rationall, and ingenuous, as to preferre Truth, before
Authority: Amicus Plato, amicus Aristoteles, but magis
amica veritas. Your Sciences, then, being Liberall;
your Studies, I know, haue so farre passed into your
maners, that your minds are so too, and that such
as haue already profited beyond the credulity requi∣red
in a yong learner, and are themselues promoted
to be Masters of the Arts; though they still reue∣rence
their old Greeke Tutor, yet they will not suffer
that of Pythagoras Schoole, so to domineere in Aristo∣tles,
as to let an Ipse dixit, goe away with it: much
lesse allow it the authority of a Mayors hammer, with
one knocke to silence all arguments.
Vpon this confidence, I, with all due respects,
here preferre two Propositions vnto your discussing.
The first this, Whether those Rules of Aristotles Phi∣losophy
be to be allowed so Vniuersall, that they hold all
the world ouer. The second this, Whether they ought
to be so magisteriall, as to prescribe against all other exa∣minations.
The first of these, I shall but problemati∣cally
propound vnto you: but in the second, I hope
a man of my cloathing, may bee allowed the free∣dome
of being something more earnest.

But that I may not come with preiudice to the
making of these motions, or bee thought, vpon
some ignorance or ambition, to speake against the in∣comparable
Aristotle; I shall desire all my fellow Aca∣demians
to allow me so much discretion, as to know,
That he that shall in your hearings, oppose your A∣ristotle;
does like the Ship here spoken of, runne
against a Rocke, endanger his owne bulge, and the
stauing of his vessell. No, I so farre honour the old
Aristotle, that I well allow him to bee Master and
Moderator of the Schooles: and that there is the same
respect due to him in the Schooles, which, by Reason
and long Custome, is due to one of the Kings Ships in
the Narrow Seas; That in acknowledgement of a Soue∣raignty,
euery other name ought to strike sayle to him.
Aristotle (it must be confest) hath made all learning
beholding to him: no man hath learned to confute
him, but by him; and vnlesse hee hath plowed with
his heyfer. He had the most incomparable wit, and
was the most Logicall and demonstratiue deliuerer
of himselfe, of all the Sonnes of nature: One, who
best of all deserued to be cald Her Principall Secreta∣ry:
one, who not onely adornes a Library, but
makes it: Qui habet Aristotelem, habet Bibliothecam,
is truer of him, then of the Great Comparer. This
is my opinion of him; and I wish him more stu∣dyed.
Tis not,1. therefore, the name, or the authority of
the great Aristotle, that my Propositions meddle
withall: but whether his obseruations gathered out
of this part of the world alone, could, like a
royall Passe or a Commission, carry a man all the world
ouer?

It must be confest, That in respect of the Equi∣noctiall
and the Latitude that Aristotle liued in, hee
was but a Northern man: and twas his owne Rule,
that Nihil agit extra Sphaeram actiuitatis suae. So then,
it would bee put to voyces to consider, whether he
that knew but these Northerne parts, and the Me∣diterranean
Sea; could possibly make such collecti∣ons,
by what was here to be learned, as should bee
vnfaileable in the Southern Haemisphere and the two
Indyes? Plainely, those that are conuersant in the
nauigations and bookes of voyages into those parts;
haue found so many contrarieties to obserue; that
it were rather tedious, then difficult, to fill vp a Note∣booke
with them.
The Ancients, wee know (as if they had measured
the world by the Yeard-wand) restrained the limits
of temperature, and habitation, by the fiue Zones:
without consideration of any interloping or concur∣ring
causes, which experience hath now found out,
to haue quite altered their obseruation. I adde, that
a good leisure and diligence might obserue, how in
the contrary part of the world, there be found cleane
contrary Causes and Effects, vnto those in this part
of the world. The South-wind there, brings cold and
Winter: and the North, is the rainy wind. How will
the Thunder and the Wind, be made agree with Ari∣stotles
definition of a Meteore? In some places of the
Mountaines Andes by Peru, it thunders euer. The
East-Indyes haue their Monsons and their steady
winds, constant for sixe moneths together: and who
shall assigne their causes? Then the doctrine of
the Tydes, nothing so vncertaine: which ebbe and
flow in some places, different; and in others contrary,

to the Moone and her motions. This (as I remember)
is Aristotles definition of a Meteore,Aristoteles, 1. Meteor 1. That it is, An
imperfect mixt body, generated out of an infirme and in∣constant
concretion of the Elements; which therefore can∣not
be durable. Now the Monson, is both constant
in his continuance this yeere, and in his returne next
yeere; most constantly keeping his seasons halfe yeere
one way, and halfe yeere another way, for all ages:
nothing more constantly or durably; and therefore
nothing like Aristotles Meteore. And so for the Thun∣der
vpon the Andes: it is first perpetuall; secondly,
not caused by a dry exhalation, (as Aristotle wills) but
hanging ouer such hils as are couered with snow and
a perpetuall winter. Witnesse the Thunder on the
Alpes also: yea and that in the middle of the Sea,
500. leagues from shoare, or any thing that is dry.
yea, it frequently both Snowes and Thunders vpon the
Andes, at one instant: and in dry places that are hard
by, scarce euer Thundering.
But not to passe the Line for it; You see in this
little Booke, how Charlton Iland, which is no more
Northerly then your Cambridge; is yet so vnsuffera∣bly
cold, that it is not habitable: and that there en∣counter
so many different, (at least so seeming) occur∣rences
of nature, as were well worth the disquisition
of a Philosopher. I could, (in my smal reading) instance
in many many other particulars: which I had rather
should be found out by some industrious searchers
after Nature, in the Moderne Relations of our Disco∣verers,
then in this my short Proposition. Tis not to
be doubted, but that the carefull reading of our
Books of Voyages, would more elucidate the History
of Nature, and more conduce to the improuement of

Philosophy, then any thing that hath beene lately
thought upon. These Navigations haue in part ful∣filled
that of the Prophet,Dan. 12. 4. Many shall passe to and
fro, and knowledge shall be encreased. This, I suppose,
might be obserued from this study, That the great
and infinite Creator hath so disposed and varied euery
thing, that it is impossible for mans reason and obser∣uation
to conclude him: and therefore, though vul∣gar
and receiued Philosophie, may giue a man a generall
hint, all the world ouer; yet no Vniuersall and vnfay∣ling
certainty.
This brings mee to my Second Proposition,2. That
seeing God will not haue his works, (no more then
his Kingdome) to come by obseruation;Luke 17. 20. Whether,
then, ought any humane dictates to be so Magisteriall, as to
prescribe against all other examination?
No humane study more conduces to the setting
forth of Gods glory, then the contemplation of his
great workes, in Philosophie: for though a smattering
knowledge in Second Causes, warps the mind towards
Atheisme; yet a higher speculation of them, brings
about againe to Religion. No man, I beleeue,
will thinke it fit for vs to haue a Pope in Philosophie;
one, that no body shall presume to censure of: but all
be bound to aduance his Decretalls, aboue the Holy
Scriptures. This is the scandall that my selfe, and di∣uers
good men take, at the vndue authority in some
heates pinn'd vpon the Stagerite.
I am sorry that the Israelites dotage vpon Salomons
Philosophie,Suidas, & Rabbini. should haue caused the zealous Hezekiah
to call in and to suppresse those vnualuable Physicks:
for feare, I suppose, lest their credit should haue as
much derogated frō the authority of the Holy Scrip∣tures;

as the brazen Serpent (which he destroyed about
the same time) had done from Religion. None will be∣leeue,
that Salomons Philosophie was contrary to the
Scriptures; seeing the Scripture commends Salomon
for them. Twas not Hezekiahs feare, therefore, (or
not onely) lest there might haue beene a competition
betweene them, but a neglect of one of them: he was
iealous lest the Scripture might haue any writing set
vp by it, though not against it.
Can Diuines, then, be blamed for speaking, when
they heare Aristotles Philosophy to be solely magni∣fied,
and the study of the Scripture Philosophy, disre∣spected?
Or that when tis confest, That such a thing
is true in Diuinity, and yet the Moderating of the point
determine for Philosophie? Nay, to heare it cald ab∣surd
and ridiculous, to haue Scripture vrg'd at all, in
point of Philosophy? No doubt there is, But whatso∣euer
is false in Diuinity, is also false in Nature, how
much show of truth soeuer it passes with, in Philoso∣phy.
Philosophy hath taken its turne in the Schooles: and
the holy Texts by the Schoolemen, haue euen been sub∣mitted
vnto Aristotles: yea, to the great corruption
of Theologie, as the complaint is, hath this man been
so farre aduanced, That Contra est Philosophus, & Con∣tra
est Apostolus; haue familiarly passed vp and down,
for equall Oppositions: so that it hath been a measuring
cast oftentimes, betwixt the Prophet and the Peripate∣tick:
and by foule play hath the measure beene made
to stand the harder at the Peripatetick, for that the
Prophet hath beene enforced to comply with him by
a wrested interpretation. Thus had S. Paul need giue his
caveat vnto Theologie, as well as vnto Theologues, Be∣ware
lest any man spoyle you through Philosophy.

All this were to no purpose, vnlesse the Text of
God were excellent in this kinde; and embellished,
here and there, with most admirable Philosophy.
What incomparably rare foot-steps of it, haue we in
the Bookes of Genesis, Iob, and the Psalmes? How
noble a Study then were it, and how worthy the lei∣sure
of some excellently learned; to bestow some
time vpon it? Valesius the Physician, hath in his Sacra
Philosophia done something in this kinde: who yet
might haue done better, here and there, for the ho∣nour
of the Scriptures. I am not so sottish to beleeue,
That euery particular is to be drawn out of Scripture:
tis none of my doteage, that. Or that God in Scrip∣ture
did intend, euery where, the accuratenesse of
Philosophy; or stand to be so curious in definitions and
decisions. Nor so foolish would I be thought, as to
haue all Philosophy taken in pieces, and new moulded
by the Scriptures. Nor, that nothing should be de∣termined
on, till a Text confirmed it. But this, per∣chance,
might profitably be thought vpon: That
where the Scriptures haue any thing in this kinde, it
should more reuerently be esteemed; Collections
out of scattered places, (as is done out of Aristotle)
made: these compared, and their Resultances obser∣ued.
This, surely, would amount to more, then is
yet thought of: and, a-Gods name, let Schollers be so
bold with Aristotle, as to examine him vpon good
assurance, by what is Truths Touch-stone: Receiued
Philosophy is a most necessary hand-maid to the Scrip∣tures;
but let her not be set aboue her Lady, nor no
competition be maintained betwixt them.
Something else remaines to be thought of: That
seeing the same God, who gaue Aristotle these good

parts; hath, in like manner, raised vp many excellent
Spirits moe: whether it were not iniurious vnto
what is done, and a discouragement to what might be
done; to haue the inuentions or obseruations of those
excellent wits and great industries, so abasht with
Aristotles authoritie; that they can haue no credit in
the world, for that his Dictates haue pre-occupated
all good opinion? Let it not then be thought vne∣quall,
to examine the first cogitations of the old Phi∣losophy,
by the second thoughts of our more moderne
Artists: for that the same improuement may by this
meanes accrew vnto our Physicks, that hath aduanced
our Geography, our Mathematicks, and our Mechanicks.
And let it not be thought so insolent, to refuse Ari∣stotles
authoritie singly, where his reason is not so
concluding; seeing other men haue taken the bold∣nesse
to doe that before vs, in seuerall kinds. Some
haue perfected, and others controld his Ethicks, by
the Scriptures: as Scultetus, Wallaeus and some others.
Iustin Martyr sir-named the Philosopher, hath purpose∣ly
written Contra dogmata Aristotelis: Basson and Gas∣sendus,
(two braue men) haue newly written point∣blanck
against him: nor haue they taken away all li∣berty,
from those that are to follow them.
And thus, with renewing my former protestati∣on
for mine owne respects to Aristotle, I conclude my
two Propositions: which I desire may receiue a fa∣uourable
construction from all ingenuous, imcaprici∣ous
Schollers. I meant them, out of good will to pro∣mote
learning; to encourage and countenance future
vndertakings: and in such a case, a little too much
saying, may be thought not to haue exceeded an ho∣nest
Rhetorication: for I would not be thought too

earnest in it. The hint for all this, I tooke from this
booke: which in mine owne and some better Iudge∣ments;
is (to say no more) as well done, and enriched
with as sure and vsefull obseruations, as any in this
kinde. I was desired by the able Author, and some
other friends; to ouer-looke the written Copy of it,
and to amend the English here and there; in which I
did not despaire of doing something: for that, in my
yonger time, I had a little acquainted my selfe with
the language of the Sea. That which put me in the
head to inscribe it vnto your Names (most excellent∣ly
learned Academians) was, for that the place of
this Wintering, was within a minute or two, of the
heighth of our Cambridge. Which my prayer to God
is, that your Studies may make famous.

