



IT pleased your good Lordship to re∣quire a Copie of my sermon which I prea∣ched lately at Paules crosse: which albeit I had denied to my lord of London, & diuers others before, yet see∣ing it pleased your good lordship at your leasure to vouchsafe the reading of it, I haue now at my returne hither, put it downe as
neere as I could, and I thinke almost verbatim, as I vttred it VVherein as my chief purpose was to asswage (if it might bee) and for my small measure I endeuou∣red it, the contentions stirred vp amongst vs: so haue I not kept backe my opinion, nay my conscience, tou∣ching the man that troubleth vs, and the matter by him entended. VVherein I protest (before God) that as I flattered not the Church gouernment (of I owe to no bishop therein for any benefite receiued, any thing farther then dutie and good will:) so if it had bene my last speach that euer I should haue had, euen for the dutie I owe to Gods Church, either this, or what so e∣uer God should haue giuen to this sence, should haue bene sayd. I am sory, and it grieueth mee to see the heapes of Nouelties that in her Maiesties most graci∣ous raigne, and in so plentifull a light of the Gospell, our inconstant Islanders haue brought into the world. It argueth that the enuious man sleepeth not, but hath sowed tares, and that they fructifie, and laboureth by all meanes, by sea and land, to make Proselites. There was a time when a learned ministerie (a thing much to be desired, as also your Lordships great care in bestow∣ing the liuings in your gift, and the regard which they haue, whom your Lordship putteth in trust, by prefer∣ring learned men and Graduates of the Vniuersities, doeth testifie to all the world, that your Lordship doeth
seeke the like) was by the wisest and most zealous thought sufficient. But if our brethren in zeale thinke that this can not be done, but by extinguishing the an∣cient names and functions of Bishops in the Church, (a calling begunne and continued from the Apostles time vnto this day) and ouerturning the estate establi∣shed: I will say with the Apostle, zelum habent, sed non secundùm scientiam. It is no way to bread a learned ministerie, either to pull downe the reward that should encourage them, or the meanes to maintaine them, when they are bred. If any Bishops haue trans∣gressed in their callings, especially in admitting of insuf∣ficient Ministers, (as it must be confessed they haue done) be it that he were an eie (though blind in this) that is, a chiefe one, or but a hand, or a foote, that is of a lower place, surely it is ill physicke for this bleard eye, or for this sore hand or foote, to choppe off the head, or kill the body.
It is hard that nothing can please these men, vnlesse the Church possessions, in deede their mothers bowels be pulled out: and the cause why they begin with vs, is this, they must first haue a footing somewhere, and here they see the hedge is lowest. It is pitifull to see howe to this purpose in many places of this land, he is thought the onely zealous, learned, and godly preacher, that can finde most faults, pretend most wants, neuer giuing God
once thankes for the aboundance of his blessings vpon this Church, and nation, which for these 32. yeeres hath bene, yea euen at this day is a nurse, nay rather a mo∣ther to all the Churches almost in all Christendome. And whereas we ought to teach repentance, amende∣ment of life, faith to God, obedience to superiors, and charitie one to another, to rebuke pride, couetousnes, wantonnes, newfanglednes, slaunderings, backbitings, and the like: if none of these be once named, but our spirituall Pastors torne and traduced, our owne vices not once touched, but the Church and Church-men paid home, then is he in many mens iudgements, a zea∣lous man, a childe of God, neuer man spake on this wise. In this simple sermon I did cast in my mite: if it perswaded, I haue my hearts desire, and God, I trust, hath the glory: if it but a litle staied any, but to make a pause, some Apollos may water it, and some others may build vpon it. If it offended, I knowe the trueth doth not alwaies purchase friendes, and that nulla medicamenta tam faciunt dolorem, quàm quę sunt salutaria. Surely as my meaning was not to sowe pillowes vnder any mans elbowes, so was it not to grieue any, or to be contentious. For my owne part, Liberaui animam meam. This I here haue sent, submitting it, and my selfe wholly to your Lord∣ships good pleasure, humbly beseeching Almightie God
to guide your Lordship to the glory of his name, the good of his Church, and Common wealth, and of this Vniuersitie (not the mea∣nest member thereof.) From Christes-Church in Oxford the 17. of Decem∣ber. 1589.

