



SYR,
I must euer acknowledge my selfe obliged in term's of Friendship to satisfy your so reasonable demaund, which is only to shew you my opi∣nion concerning a late borne Treatise, The Religion of Protestantss a safe way &c. For your owne part you pro∣fesse you are satisfied already for the matter it self, that nothing solid or substantiall can come forth, for the defence of so bad, or offence of so good a cause; but the world (you say) cries it vp, and you would gladly see it disabused. Indeed, as concerning the vulgar ac∣ceptance, I vnderstand no lesse, and withall I remem∣ber how the Father, or grand-Father of this, was the popular applause and acclamation for a while, & those vpcryes comming often to my eares, I said as often I confesse,
— O saclum insipiens, & infacetum! Grieuing togeather with some litle indignation, that
of true iudgment in writings of this nature, there ap∣peared so great penury and barrennes in this Land: though I was not ignorant that very many were to be found of either Vniuersity, whose more solid erudition and vnderstanding decry'd it as fast, though not so lowd.
But before you haue my censure of the worke it selfe, I shall acquaint you with the common voyce (if per∣chance you haue not hard it) concerning certaine cir∣cumstances of the Worke; the why's and wherefor's, the motiues to these enterprizings and aduocating for other men: & first of all concerning his ioint-printing and coedition of his Aduersary with his owne worke, some said it was square and faire dealing; other's that it was a prodigious coniunction, no losse then the Hip∣pocentaure; others that this committing himselfe with his Aduersary in the same volume, would cause an o∣dious comparison, disaduantagious to the Author.
Sic interpositus vitio contaminat vncto
Vrbica Lingonicus Tyrianthina Bardocucullus.
Sic Aretinae violant Chrystallina testae.
Sic niger in ripis errat cùm fortè Caeystri
Inter Laedeos ridetur coruus olores.
Sic vbi multisonâ feruet sacer Athide lucus,
Improba Cecrpias offendit pica querelas.
Vindice nil opus est, aut charactire malign,
Stat contra, & cuius tua sit mihi pagina clamat.
Which superlatiue difference they obserued (as I conceaue) rather in the spirit of writing, then in the wording. And namely they obserue that his personall reproaches, his style of contumely, compared with the ciuil and mild composure of his aduersary; his iocula∣rie and geering humor, with the others graue and se∣rious
menage; his fraudulent and sophisticall syllogi∣zing, with his plaine & regular discourse; his lurking, and scotizing, and affecting obscurity, his ouercasting with mist's of subtile interpretations his aduersaries plaine wordes, seeking or making the Knot where it is not, parallel'd with the others opennes and endeauour to giue day to truth; lastly his immethodicall structure and digesture of the whole worke confronted with the others perspicuity and light of order, will appeare in this neerenes and vicinity much more contemptible, then if they stood aloof, and at distance in seuerall im∣pressions.
Yet others say againe, that euen in this he was wise, and prouident in his generation: yea that surely some higher power directed his designe; as the Goddesse of wisedome is said to haue carried the arrow drawne at the brest of Menelaus vpon his belt, & so of no force to wound as was intended, but yet inough to occasion continuance of the War, and the ensuing victory of the Grecians; that by these two prouisions diuine and hu∣mane, of God & M. Ch. (if this commission be not yet more odious then the former) many things are effe∣cted commodious to all sides.
To his aduersary; whose worke by this opportunity is euery man's money, and in euery mans hand's Cum Priuilegio, hath his protection from his aduersarie; and out of a strange mistaking Charity, is permitted to fight vnder his Shield, like a little Teucer vnder his cozen Aiax buckler, shooting not only at the common enemy, but euen at Aiax himselfe, out of a like confi∣dence perhap's that, hauing combatted himselfe, and hauing beene too hard for himselfe so often, he is vn∣conquerable by any other,

Nec quisquam Aiacem poterit superare, nisi Aiax.
Commodious to the reader, who hath the ioint-im∣pression at an easier rate both of price and pain's; hath now no more to do, but turne the leafe, and (if he please) sing a new song: yet with this odd's, I confesse, that while he read's, or hardly read's the Catholique volume miserably contracted like another Homer into a nut-shel; he beholds the Protestants Atturney like a new Edgar vnder saile, gloriously swelling in dis∣played Characters,
Vt populus tumido gaudeat Antimacho.
Gainfull lastly to himselfe, who by this co-impres∣sion becomes more vendible, and makes a more swift returne of the commodity; his friends buy him more greedily, out of an appetite and curiosity to see the man, committed face to face with his aduersarie, how manfully he bestir's himselfe. The friends of his ad∣uersarie perhap's conuinc'd with the euidence of his discourse and deductions, will be couetous to see what can be said to these; how such arguments will be clea∣red; how the Aduocate will vnty the Gordian Knot like an Aristotle, or like an Alexander: All men I thinke, after so large and low'd promises of an vtter confuta∣tion will be desirous to vnderstand,
Quid dignum tanto ferat hic promissor hiatu.
Thus all sides, a man would thinke, will be pleased, and he, the author of this co-impression, most of all; who hauing beene at great charges, and hauing his money out vpon the worke, would gladly, no doubt, see it backe againe, together with the fruite of his ex∣pectation. And to say sooth, who sow's but he would reape? who plant's a vineyard but he would eat the fruit therof?

I haue met with some other Censurers, who in my iudgment proceed too far this way, taking the boldnes to penetrate those adita, those very conclaues of men's intentions. And, whereas there are to be considered two ends in euery artificiall worke, the one intrinsi∣que, the other extrinsique, the former the end of the Art, the later of the Artist; this being so sacred, that he might iustly interdict all ingresse to any mortal man, might paint two snakes at the entrance with this Epi∣graphe,
— Sacer hic locus, extra &c.
Yet to such an Hyperbole of presumption are men arriued in this age, that enter they will like any Purse∣uant, into the very in-roomes, and bowels of the most secret counsail's and designes of other men. But while by glossing his intention they will seeme forsooth to excuse him, in my opinion, they do but geere him; who, as though they had heard what he spake in his hart, take vpon them to personate him in his owne words.
What I do in this writing for Protestant's, I do it not, out of malice; nor out of any ill will towards the cause I impugne, no nor good will towards the cause I propugne: but, (vt verum fabuler,) to deale plainly with you, reflecting vpon my selfe standing thus neu∣tral between two potent factions, and being now as weary as any Posthorse with Canterburying so oft from Thebes to Athens, and from Athens to Thebes, and by all these iourney's and defatigations, hauing gained nothing by either but sweat and iealousie; cal∣ling often to mind the wise sentence of Salust, Frustra niti, neque aliud se fatigando, nisi odium quaerere, extremae de∣mentiae est; t'is mere madnes to take paines to no pur∣pose,
to make no other purchase, but displeasure; I resol∣ued vpon a course how to endeare my selfe vnto one, and the rather to that part, which professed most fayth, as the most likely to belieue me. But these truly I hold to be but idle comment's and surmises, wholy Hetero∣dox from his true meaning and intention.
As that likewise of some others, that by these so ma∣ny his turn's and return's, he affects a Name, to make himselfe knowne to the world, vpon that knowledge and diffamation to raise his fortunes; or to lye like a foot-ball betweene the Goales, to become the ambition of Competitors,
— Multorum spes inuidiosa procorum: and then, a Qui plus, qui potior est ad dandum &c. win me, and weare me.
Now this Fescennine liberty of Censure, for myne owne part, I vtterly dislike. For I loue the man, and wish he may so come off after all these changes, that he may not be loued without a riual. And t'is well, yea surely a singular argument of Gods goodnes and pro∣uidence, that the things in nature most necessary for man's vse, are the readiest at hand, and the most ob∣uious acquest: as euen here, for this aduocate, I hold it much more easy to become a good Christian, then to be thought so. And if it be true which one sayth,
Nec vixit malè qui viuens moriens{que} fefellit, He hath not liu'd amisse whom no man know's how he hath liued or died; I am in good hope he may yet liue and dye well, and begin then to be Magnus coram Domino, great in Gods ey's, when he shall be little in the ey's of men, especially in his owne.
To returne now to the matter in hand, permitting these and many the like censures to his verdict who
hath one common key to vnlock all closets of harts, to whom alone that office belongs, it shall be far from any presumption of myne to passe any censure vpon these extrinsecall ends. The fines Artis alone, shall be my ayme; so far forth as to discouer in this worke, or rather in some part of it, what is pernicious of it selfe, and of force to do more harme then he perhaps in∣tends. If more then this, any personal touch of cen∣sure chance to fall from my vnwilling pen, meeting with his like humor and begotten of it, as simile gignit sibi simile, like begets the like, heate produce's heat, & fire produce's fire; and as his personall humor running along through his discourse (indeed a very salt hu∣mor) may cast some salt into my pen, I shall hope that a reasonable defence or excuse may be presumed from any indifferent man, euen out of the consideration of these Premises; wherin also I can easily maintaine a ve∣ry honest intention, as to shew the man himselfe in a conuenient distance from himselfe, for that indistancy of the obiect is wont to hinder sensation. In the meane tyme verily it may seeme an incredible effect of a pro∣digious Philautie, or Authadie, or what else you will please to call that darke and cloudy affection, able to put out the light of the sun at midday, if it could reach it, that a man otherwise rational, yea who makes rea∣son his Oracle, his Card, his Cynosure; witty too, yea an idolater of wit, should owe so little to either, as not to haue discouered his owne, so many grosse follies er∣rors, vanities, indecencies, yea inciuilities; besides his so many fraudes and shiftes, and Paralogismes and fal∣lacies, his wilfull and affected mistakinges and mis∣vnderstanding his Aduersary, and the like, for which his conscience hath more to answere then his wit; and
that after making so large an ostentation of all kind of literature, he should do nothing else in all, but abuse all; and fall so short of the expectation of those who knew him, that now they can by no meanes know him, in his Worke. For my owne part, I haue beene so charita∣ble as to thinke the Worke none of his who entitles it; or his so altered, and Sophisticate, that he may iustify the disclayming it: Therefore as conceaued such vpon good groundes I shall make the more bold with it.
Now then only to satisfy your intreaty, what I haue heere censured in general termes, I shall apply to particulars as they lye in my way, whyle I run along with this whosoeuer, or incerti generis Author; but yet so, as to be at liberty, to take vp when I list. For I am not match't with him; and I doubt not, but he hath met with his match: yet perhap's, I shall take vp so, as it shall appeare I might haue made it good to the last.
