



Most Gracious, and Dread Soveraigne;
I Had no purpose to come in Print, but Your Majesty commaunds it, and I obey. Most sorry I am for the Occasion, that induced mee to speake, and that since hath moved You to com∣mand mee to Print. Nor am J ig∣norant that many things, while they are
spoken and passe by the Eare but once, give great content; which when they come to the Eyes of men, and their often scan∣ning, may lye open to some exceptions. This may fall to my lot in this particular, and very easily, considering my many di∣versions, and the little time J could snatch from other Imployment to attend this. Yet choose J rather to obey Your Maje∣sty, than to sacrifice to mine owne priva∣cy and content.
Since then this Speech uttered in pub∣like, in the Star-chamber, must now come to be more publike in Print; J humbly de∣sire Your Sacred Maiesty to protect mee, and it, from the undeserved Ca∣lumny of those men, whose mouthes are spears and arrowes, & their Tongues a sharpe sword.
Psal. 57.4. Psal. 57. Though as the wiseman speakes, their foolish mouthes have already called for their owne
stripes, and their lippes (and pennes) been a snare for their soules, Prov. 18.
Prov. 18.6, 7
The Occasion which led mee to this Speech is knowne. There have of late beene divers Libells spread against the Prelates of this Church. And they have not beene more bitter, which is the shame of these raging waves,
Jude ver. 13. than they are ut∣terly false, which is Our happiness. But I must humbly beseech Your Maiesty to consider, that 'tis not Wee onely, that is, the Bishops, that are strucke at, but through our sides, Your Majesty, Your Honor, Your Safety, Your Religion, is impea∣ched. For what safety can You expect, if You loose the hearts of Your people? And how can You retaine their hearts, if You change their Religion into superstition? And what Honour can You hope for, ei∣ther Present, or derivative to Posterity if you attend your Government no better
then to suffer Your Prelates to put this change upon You? And what Majesty can any Prince retaine, if hee loose his Honour and his People?
GOD be thanked 'Tis in all points o∣therwise with You: For God hath blessed You with a Religious heart, & not subject to change. And He hath filled You with Honor in the Eyes of Your People: And by their Love and dutifulnesse, He hath made You safe. So that Your Maiesty is upheld and Your Crowne flourishing in the Eyes of Christendome. And God forbid any Libellous blast at home from the Tongues or Pennes of a few, should shrivell up any growth of these.
Wee have received, and daily doe re∣ceive from GOD, many and great Bles∣sings by You. And I hope they are not many that are unthankfull to You, or to God for You. And that there should bee
none in a Populous Nation, even Ene∣mies to their owne happinesse, cannot bee expected. Yet J shall desire, even these to call themselves to an account, and to re∣member, that Blasphemy against God, and slandering the footsteps of his An∣nointed are joined together, Psal.
Psalm. 89. ver. 50. Wherewith thine E∣nemies have blasphe∣med Thee, and slan∣dered the footsteppes of thine Anointed. 89. For he that blasphemes God, will never sticke at the slander of his Prince; And he that gives him∣selfe the Liberty to slander his Prince, will quickly ascend to the next highest, and Blaspheme God.
But then, as J desire them to remem∣ber, so I doe most humbly beseech your Maiesty to account with Your selfe too: And not to measure your peoples love by the unworthinesse of those few. For a loyall and obedient people You have, and such as will spare nor Livelyhood, nor
Life to doe You service: And are joyed at the heart to see the Moderation of your Government and your constancy to maintaine Religion, and your Piety in Exampling it.
And as I thus beseech You for Your People in generall, so doe I particularly for the three Professions which have a little suffer'd in these three most Noto∣rious Libellers Persons.
And first for my owne Profession, J humbly begge of your Majesty to thinke M. Burton hath not in this many fol∣lowers, and am heartily sorry hee would needs lead. The best is, your Majesty knows what made his Rancour swell; Jle say no more.
And for the Law, J truly honor it with my heart, and believe Mr. Prynn may seeke all the Innes of Court, (and
with a Candle too if he will) and scarce find such a Malevolent as himselfe a∣gainst State and Church. And because hee hath so frequently thrust mistaken Law into these Pamphlets, to wrong the Governours of the Church, and a∣buse your good and well-minded people, and makes Burton and Bastwicke utter Law which, God knowes, they under∣stand not, (for J doubt his Pen is in all the Pamphlets,) J doe humbly in the Churches name desire of your Maje∣stie, that it may bee resolved by all the Reverend Iudges of ENGLAND, and then published by your Majesty, That our keeping Courts, and issuing Pro∣cesse in our owne Names, and the like Exceptions formerly taken, and now renewed, are not against the Lawes of the Realme, (as 'tis most certaine they
are not) That so the Church-Gover∣nors may goe on cheerefully in their du∣ty, and the peoples mindes be quieted by this assurance, that neither the Law, nor their Liberty, as Subjects, is there∣by infringed.
And for Physicke, the Profession is honourable and safe; and I know the Professors of it will remember that Corpus humanum, mans body, is that, about which their Art is conversant, not Corpus Ecclesiasticum, or Politicum, the Body of the Church, State, or Com∣mon-wealth. Bastwick onely hath been bold that way. But the Proverbe in the Gospell,
S. Luke, 4.23. in the fourth of S. Luke is all I'le say to him, Medice, cura teip∣sum, Physician heale thy selfe. And yet let me tell your Majestie, J believe hee hath gained more by making the
Church a Patient, than by all the Patients hee ever had beside.
Sir, both my selfe, and my Brethren have been very coursely used by the Tongues and pennes of these men, yet shall J never give your Majestie any sower counsell; J shall rather magnifie your Clemencie, that proceeded with these Offenders in a Court of Mercie as well as Iustice: Since (as the Reve∣rend Iudges then declared) you might have justly called the Offendors into another Court, and put them to it in a way that might have exacted their Lives, for their stirring (as much as in them lay) of mutinie and sedition.
Yet this J shall be bold to say, and your Majesty may consider of it in your Wisdom; That one way of Government
is not alwayes either fit or safe, when the Humors of the people are in a continu∣all Change. Especially, when such men as these shall worke uyon your people, and labour to infuse into them such ma∣lignant Principles, to introduce a Parity in the Church or Common-wealth. Et, si non satis suâ sponte insaniant, instigare, And to spur on such among them as are too sharpely set already: And by this meanes make and prepare all ad∣vantages for the Roman party to scorne Ʋs, and pervert them.
J pray God blesse Your Majestie, Your Royall Consort, and Your hopefull Posterity, That You may Live in happinesse; Govern with Wisdom; Support Your people by Iustice; Relieve them by Mercy; Defend them by power
and successe; And Guide them in the true Religion by Your Lawes and most Religious Example, all the long and lasting dayes of Your Life: Which are and shall be the daily prayers of

