


SACRED Maiesty,Plin. l. 11. cap. 16. natural History teacheth vs, that Bees appeare at their be∣ginning, like a little white worme, all except him that is to be their King: which commeth forth with wings, & is of yellow colour, be∣cause he is formed of the most ex∣quisite flowers. And if the Mo∣narch of all the world hath giuen such priuiledge to the King of so smal creatures: what are we to be∣leeue of him, whom he hath esta∣blished to command ouer men, & honoured with the title of Most Christian? To confirme which be∣liefe in the harts of your subiects, & to destroy the opiniō of the do∣ctors
 of lies, which falsely main∣taine, that the Kingly power is not absolute, & that it is an inuention of mē; I haue aduentured to frame this little discourse, & to present it to your Maiesty, to the end that by the reading of the same, they may learne no more to blas∣pheme against the powers esta∣blished of God alone, and that they may know, that it is not the antiquity and greatnesse of your house, the Nobility of the Prin∣ces which your Maiesty com∣mandeth; the wisedome of your Soueraigne Courts; the order Ecclesiasticall: the large extent of your Prouinces: the strength of your places; the affection of your peoples: the faithfulnesse of the confederates of your Crowne: the experience of your Cap∣taines: the vallour of your Nobi∣ty: the thunders of your Arsenall;
 the greatnesse of your treasury, that mainteineth your Crowne. But that diuine character, grauen by the finger of God in the face of the King,Prou. 20.8 who sitting vpon the throne, chaseth away all euill with his eyes. He hauing giuen to your Maiesty in these tender yeares, wings to flye ouer peoples, which are but as creeping wormes of the earth, in comparison of the de∣gree he hath giuen your Maiesty: euery good subiect, by the yoake imposed of God to his owne conscience,Rom. 13. acknowledgeth him∣selfe bound (as I doe) to make a vow to remaine for euer, without dispensation from such a duty.


Vltima talis erat quae mea prima fi∣des.Propert. 20 20.

