


ALTHOVGH I CANNOT (right Honorable) procure my Coun∣tries commoditie as I woulde, for that my power is not to my pretence, my might to my meaning, nor my abilitie to my industrie: yet I cannot choose but vtter my goodwill, in shewing what I wishe to the same. But because I would not be thoughte to counsel others, that haue more need my selfe to be taught: to set forth orders for others that ought rather to be guided: and to direct others that am more meete to be ledde: therefore what I haue written to that end is none other thing than that whiche now is obeyed, and most diligently folo∣wed throughout that most ciuil countrey called Mauqsun. The like whereof is not elsewhere so vniuersally practised. And thoughe the things thereof written, wil be hardly credited (but more faintly folo∣wed) for that they are so rare and strange, and in such an vnknown place: yet they are not to be reiected as false, considering it is harder for the reporter thereof to tel a lye, than for a common lyar to tell a true tale, which must needes be granted, if his name called OMEN, and the name of his Countrey called Mauqsun (before mentioned) be aduisedly marked and considered, especially è conuerso construed. And nowe▪ for that the maruellous maners, the honest behauiour, the faithful friendship, the curteous conditions, the commendable cu∣stomes, the plain meaning and true dealing, the Lords liberalitie, the Ladies great curtesie, the husbands fidelitie, the wiues obedience, the maydens modestie, the maisters sobrietie, the seruants diligence, the Magistrates affabilitie, the Iudges equitie, the commons amitie, the preferring of publique commoditie, the generall Hospitali∣tie,

the exceeding mercie, the wonderful Charitie, and the constant Christianitie of that Countrey is such: I hope the honest affectioned wil hereby take no small pleasure and profite. Not ignoraunt, that there are not a fewe of an other secte, that loath they ought to loue: disdaine, they ought to desire: fleere at that they ought rather to fa∣uor: and discommend that they cannot amend. Which if euery Wri∣ter shoulde haue weyed, many good things had lyen hid, that now are vttered: great knowledge would haue bin kept close, that now is dis∣couered: and many profitable things vnknowen, that now are practi∣sed. And therfore, as they respected rather to pleasure some honestly, than to please many foolishly: so I meane hereby rather to content the wel minded with things commendable, than to flatter fooles with vnnecessarie matter. Trusting your Honor wil rather weigh my good wil and zeale, than my rude rashenesse: in that I presume to presente vnto you such a simple gift. Cōforted herewith, that seeing the Per∣sian Prince was contente to accepte a poore mans handfull of water, (which had no better thing to giue him) I hope your Honour will take in good parte this handful of paper, not withoute something in it, whiche is the beste thing nowe I am able to giue you. And though this is not the first booke that hath bene dedicated vnto you: yet your Honor is the firste man to whome I haue dedicated any. Whose wis∣dome hathe willed me, whose modestie hath moued me, whose cle∣mencie hath encouraged me, whose loue to learning hathe allured me, and whose common commendations hathe enticed me to offer it vnto you. Thinking my selfe happily recompenst, if you receiue it but halfe as thankefully, as I doe giue it faithfully and willingly. Thus o∣mitting any further herein to trouble your Honour, desires God ear∣nestly to guide you in goodnesse, to defende you from dangers, to fence you from foes, to lende you long life, and to bring you to blisse,

