



I Haue (moost doughty prince) receaued your graces letters at the last, the whych (accor∣dynge to my deutye) I haue humbly taken in my han∣des, and chearefully and wyth entyer consyderacyon thoughte vpon theyr argument and meanynge. But seynge I haue lōge sence promysed vnto your hygh∣nesse the declaracion of the virgins songe of prayse called Magnificat, (frō yt whych pur∣pose of myne, the wycked enterpryses of ma¦ny myne aduersaryes haue ofte wythdrawē me,) I haue thought now at the laste to an∣swer your hyghnesse letters wyth this trea∣tyse, (fearynge lest the farther delaye therof myght be to my reprofe, and that farther ex∣usaciō shulde be of no value) that your hygh¦nesses noble yonge corage were steared to the loue of scripture, & by farther exercyse

in the same myght be more feruenter & sta∣blyshed, to the whyche thynge I praye God to sende his grace & to helpe, for it is greatly necessary: seynge that in the persone of so great a prince, the whych beynge wythdraw¦en frō himselfe, is gouerned by Gods grace, ye saluacion of many one cōsysteth: & agayne ye perdiciō and damnacion of many one yf he beynge permitted to hymselfe, is gyded with out grace. For though it be sayd of al mens hartes: that the kynges harte is in ye hande of God, whych can wende it where it plea∣seth hym: yet is it not for nought sayd of kyn¦ges and prynces▪ Where by God wyll beate hys feare in the superiours, that so they may learne and be sure, that they can not once thynke ought in theyr mynde, wythout God do geue it seuerally in theyr myndes. The dede of other men doth ether hurte or profit only them, or a fewe besyde: but princes and superiours only be set in that rowme, that they ether profyte or hynder so many more, as theyr dominion doth reach farther. For the whych cause doth scripture call the godly and fearynge God princes, angels of God, yee goddes also, as in the .vii. chap. of Exo: I haue made the a God ouer Pharao. And in the .xxii. Chapter: Thou shalte not speake e∣uell

of the Goddes. And agayne, ye wycked & vngodly princes she calleth Lions, Draggōs and furious beastes: whom God also calleth one of hys .iiii. plages whan he rehearseth them, namely: pestilence, derth, warre and furious beastes. Because then that the hart of man, beynge naturall, fleshe and bloude doth presume euery thynge lyghtely, & coue∣teth therby dominion, ryches & honoure, he is steared out of reason by suche occasion to a rash tranquillite and reste, so that he for∣getteth God, and careth nothynge for hys subiectes, and vsynge the brydle to hys plea∣sure in synnynge, he becōmeth a wodde & fu¦rious beaste. It chaunceth also, that a prince takynge hys pleasure only, and vsynge hys affecciōs, by name he is a lorde, but in dede he is a beaste, so that it was well sayde of Bias one of the seuen sages of Grece: Magistratus uirum ostendit, that is: Autho¦rite or rule of a cōmunalte declareth what a man is. For dominion doth vtter a man what he is, seynge also that the commune people darre not wythstande for feare of punyshment the cōmaundementes of theyr heades, though they were wycked and vn∣godlye. For thys cause ought the superiours greatly to drede God, seynge they nede to

feare men so lytle, and to knowe hym & hys workes perfectly, and wyth greate care and diligence to walke and exercyse hymselfe therin, as Paul doth exhorte in the .xii. chap¦ter to the Romaynes, sayenge: Let hym that ruleth, be diligent.
Moreouer ther is nothynge in all the scripture that doth so greatly concerne the superiorite, as thys moost holy songe of the blessed virgyne & mother of God, the which ought to be well learned and exercysed of all them that wyll rule well and be good go¦uernours. For the mother of God syngeth here moost pleasauntly of the feare of God, what LORDE our God be, & what hys wor¦kes be in hygh and lowe estates. Let other geue ear to theyr paramours, syngyng some wanton worldly songe: but vnto thys so ma∣nered virgine becōmeth a prince & lorde to geue eare, yt whych syngeth a spiritual, chast and wholsome songe. Nother is it a costume reprouable, that in all churches thys songe is dayly songe at euensonge, & that wyth a sundery & honest tune (yf ye vnderstandynge therof were also so earnestly declared) Now wolde God ye sprete of the same beawtyfull mother of God were geuen me, whych may so pythfully & profytably declare hyr songe,

that your princely grace, & all we may sucke therout a healthfull vnderstandynge, a law∣dable lyfe, & after this lyfe, to synge the euer∣lastyng Magnificat in the lyfe to come. Amē
