


IN CALLING TO minde (Right Honou∣rable) the manifold fa∣uours of your most no∣ble father, shewed me in the raigne of the rare Imp of grace King Edward the sixt,1547. 1. Edw. 6. and weighing I serued vnder him, at the battel of Muscleborough, your father then Lord Lieuetenant Generall of the English Ar∣mie: I found my selfe for sundrie causes much bound to all his most noble house and familie. And so a long season wat∣ching opportunitie to doe some accepta∣ble seruice to his noble children, I could not happen on any matter (touching my pen) worthie acceptation. Then reading

of a booke in Latine, written by a graue writer, called Emanuell Meteranus: who wrote fifteene bookes de Historia Belgica. I found so great profunditie in the man and matter, chieflie because hee exactlie (without adulation) wrote of martiall af∣faires, and exployts done by mightie Go∣uernours and valiant souldiers: that not onlie attained honour in the field (some of them honourablie borne) but also wanne euerlasting fame by their prowesse and seruice. A while considering the conse∣quence and worth thereof, I thought God would be offended, my countrie dishono∣red, and worthie men should be in time to come forgotten and discouraged: where∣on I took in hand to reuiue dead men and their actions (for fames sake which all men shoote at) that time past and time present should be so remembred, as time to come, and all ages should admire on, and meruaile at the most manlie enterpri∣ses (make Sir Frauncis Ʋere and the true Captaines of Ostend an example) that cou∣ragious souldiers dare aduenture, take in hand, and accomplish. I being pricked on

with their incredible valour, diuine vertue of mind, & manly resolution (considering mine own professiō long that way) I took it as an iniurie done to all Souldiers: if I a poore plaine writer should not as much honor them with my pen, as they haue ho∣nored God & Prince with their sword: So in my great age I clapped on a youthfull corage (imagining I saw all the worthines of men) and stoutly stept into the transla∣tion of Meteranus workes of Historia Bel∣gica: but often falling sick, and like to passe from world, I called vnto me one Richard Robinson (a man more debased by many then he merits of any, so good parts are there in the man) one whom I might com∣manud and keepe a long while for this purpose, and who tooke great paines (I being sicke) in the translation, and in wri∣ting the other Collections of this booke: but my studie, knowledge, experience, and eye witnes for all or most actions in this book, perfected euerie point and peece of matter pertaining to the truth of al here in this volume printed: my selfe beholding herein a world for a great personage to

patronage, bethought me of your hono∣rable Lordship. So aduisedly & somewhat fearefully to presume, I haue humbly pre∣sented my paines to the wel liking of your honor: accepting my good wil & boldnes as far as my honest regard leads me. I pro∣test neither matter of State, nor vaine in∣uentions drew my muse to this hard attēpt and presumption: but the loue and lauda∣tion of Lordlie minded souldiers, loyall subiects, vnconquered courages, and aspi∣ring mindes, that dare fight with fortune, flie in the face of all forraine enimies, and daunt the pride of all false harted people of the whole world whatsoever. So for the commendation of an infinite number of Lyonlike champions, this work was com∣piled, printed, & presented: hoping it shal purchase fauour of your Lordship, and of all noble minded personages, that prefer euerie excellent exercise aboue al slouth∣full dronish idlenes.

