



Right Honourable Lady,
THough a Woman was the Mo∣ther of all mans miserie; yet of a Woman came saluation, to bring vs out of that estate vn∣to Grace and Glory, and for womens comfort, God of his mercy hath beene pleased to make their Sexe renowned in many examples. To some he hath giuen supernatu∣rall knowledge, by enduing them with the Spirit of Prophecie, as Miriam, Deborah, Huldah a An∣nah. Vpon other some he hath bestowd singular wise∣dome, as vpon the woman of ekoah, and hw se
 woman of Abel, in Bethmaacah. Rare was the faith of many, as the faith of Sarah, of Rahab, of the wid∣dow of Sarepta, and of the Canaanitish woman; who haue put on better resolutions, and greater cou∣rage for the Church in the time of perill, then some men haue done. Did not Deborah encourage Ba∣rak to the warres, aduenturing her selfe with him, when otherwise he without her was afraid to go? Did not Iael, the wife of Heber, kill the great Captaine and Generall Sisera? And who more resolued to ico∣pard her life for Gods people, then beautifull Ester, with her If I perish, I perish?
Haue there not been of them famous in many other things? For attention to the Word, as the Virgin Marie and Lydia. For going farre for knowledge, as the Queene of Sheba to heare the wisedome of Sa∣lomon. For workes of charitie, as Dorcas. For workes of piety, helping forward the building of theExod. 35. 21, 22, 29. Tabernacle, as were many women. For feruency in prayer, as Hannah. For daily deuotion in fasting and prayer, as Anna. For entertainement of Gods Messengers, as the Shunamite, as Lydia, and one Mary. For the feare of God, as the Mid wiues ofRom. 16. 6. Egypt. For courtesie to a meere stranger, as Rebec∣ca. For humilitie and patience, as old Naomi. Who can out-strip Ruth in loue? Are there not re∣corded not meane ones onely, but also honourable per∣sonages for Religion and Grace? as wee may reade in the Acts 17. 4, 12. Will a Dionysius become a belee∣uer in an Vniuersitie, from among the Athenians? You shall finde a Damaris to second him.
In what haue men been renowned, wherein some
 women (according, yea, and beyond the nature of their Sex) haue not been remarkable? in Wisedome, Faith, Charitie, loue of the Word, loue to Gods Messengers, feruent affection, and desire of heauenly things? If men haue suffered imprisonment, cruell persecution, and Bands for Christ, were women behind? No verily, Acts 8. 3. & 9. 2.
Nay, haue they not in somewhat excelled men sometimes? Who entertained Christ so much, and so often as Martha and Mary? Who are noted to con∣tribute to Christs necessities, but women? Luk. 8. 3. Who (sauing Iohn the Apostle) followed Christ to his Crosse, lamenting and weeping, but women? Who ofLuke 24. 24. all the ordinary followers of Christ obserued where Christ was buried, but women? Who first went to hisMark. 16. 1, 2. Sepulcher with sweet spices to anoint Christs body, but women? We may reade of a Congregation of women,Acts 16. 13. to whom Saint Paul preached, being gathered toge∣ther to the accustomed place of prayer, as more for∣ward, as it may seeme at that time, then men.
It would be tedious to repeate by name all the nota∣ble women in the holy Scriptures, and their excellent graces; yet can I not let passe Priscilla her knowledge with her husband A quila in the ministerie of the Gospell, able to teach an eloquent A pollos; nor Loys and Eunice, Trayners vp of the famous Euangelist Timothie in the holy Scriptures; nor Persis, whichPhil. 4. 3. laboured much in the Lord, as many other women did. Not to stand vpon more instances, one thing for their more worthy praises, is to be obserued, and not to bee forgotten; I haue read of men well esteemed of to haue been Apostates, as Demas, Alexander, Phyletus,
 and others; but of neuer a woman by name, once recko∣ned among the Saints in all the new Testament; this is singular glorie.
But the Lord hath not thought it enough to honor women thus, by endowing them with excellent gifts, and by their praise-worthy works, but also hee hath graced them otherwise. To whom did Christ first ma∣nifest himself after his resurrection, but vnto women? Of what act did euer Christ so speake, to make it perpe∣tually famous, as that of the woman, that powred vponMat. 26. 7, 17. him an Alabaster box of oyntment, promising that wheresoeuer the Gospell should bee preached in the whole world, there should her worke bee remembred? Hath not also the Lord directed his Penmen, and by name his beloued Apostle, to write an Epistle vnto an Elect Lady? And are there not whole books of Scrip∣ture dedicated to their names, as this of Ruth, and the other of Ester, for an eternall remembrance of them?
I hope (Right Honourable Lady) therefore, that I may bee bold to present your Honour with this my Commentary vpon Ruth, which you may challenge of right before all others, for your bountifull and libe∣rall contribution towards my maintenance in the Vni∣uersitie of Cambridge, by the which I am now that I am; and for which, as also for your Honours euer-con∣tinuing fauours to mee and mine, I remaine euerla∣stingly a debtor.
Accept therefore, I humbly beseech your Honour, this my best testimonie of all dutifull seruices, and of the acknowledgement of my most thankfull remem∣brance of the same. And my hearty and daily prayer is, that the Lord would blesse your Honor, that as both
 you haue intended, and also begun good works, so you may goe on with encrease therein to the end; it beeing the greatest honour before God and men, to bee great and rich in good works, for which you shall haue, for the present, many peoples prayers; for the time to come, of mindfull posterities, also great praises; and with all in heauen (which is the best of all) reward with God; who euer preserue your Honour in all happy peace and prosperitie.
 Batcombe, March 22.
