



I Did suppose (my very good Lord) that the sembable opposition of Papist and Puritane, against the Protestant, concer∣ning the supremacie Ecclesiasticall, and De∣position of Kings, might haue beene con∣striued into a fewe sheetes of paper; which I finde both tedious, and intricate: because the opponents, (though they agree against Kings, as Herod and Pilate did against Christ) are at diuers irreconciliable iarres among themselues. And no maruell, quia menda∣cij multiplex diuortium: Liers neuer agree in one tale. There are among the Papists three different opinions concerning the Popes power ouer Kings. The first opini∣on (whichAlexand. Car. de potest. Rom. Pontif. lib. 2. c. 9. Alexander Carerius holdeth) is, that the Pope hath absolute power ouer all the world, both in Ecclesiasticall, and Politicall things. The second opini∣on is Bellarmines,Bellar. de Pontif. lib. 5. c. 6. who affirmeth, that though the Pope haue not meere temporall power ouer Kings, and king∣domes, directly; yet hath he supreame authoritie to dispose of the Temporalities of all Christians, as well

Kings, as others, by an indirect prerogatiue, tending to the aduancement of the spirituall good. The third is the opinion ofGuliel Bar∣clay. cont. mo∣narchomacos, l. 5. cap. 8. Barclayus, who auerreth, that the Pope hath spirituall power to excommunicate Kings, but no tem∣porall authoritie, directly, or indirectly, to afflict the per∣sons of Kings, to transpose their kingdomes, to perswade forrainers to make warres, or subiects to rebell against them. And with him agreeth M. BlackwellIn the letter annexed to his large examina∣tion at Lam∣beth, p. 157. in his let∣ter to the Romish Catholiques of England, wherein he saith, that the keyes Ecclesiasticall, doe no way extend themselues by Gods law, vnto kingdomes terrene, to open or shut, to tosse, or turmoile any of them, they haue no wardes in them, to turne, or ouerturne Kingdomes, or to open any lawfull entrance, into such disobedient and doubtfull courses. Wheresoeuer (most noble Lord) any Papist hath laid a stepping-stone in this water of strife, any man may plainely trace the Puritanes treading. Although they denie an vniuersall absolute power ouer all Kings, which the Pope claymeth, they contend for a nationall soue∣raigntie, in euery kingdome, ouer Kings, to dispose of them and their kingdomes. Although the Popes (saith Christopher Goodman)Treatise of obedience, pag. 52. 53. for sundrie enormities, haue depo∣sed Kings, by vnlawfull authoritie; the reason that mooued them so to doe, was honest, and iust, and meete to be receiued, and executed by the bodie of euery common-wealth. haec ille. The Statesmen of the kingdome (saithPolit. Christ. l 6. c. 3. p. 156. Lambertus Danaeus) may punish their King when he transgresseth the fundamentall lawes of the kingdome, yea if he be obstinate, they may depriue him of his royall dignitie. M. BezaTheses Gene∣venses, p. 249. in a scholasticall dispu∣tation (one Iohn Iobert beeing Respondent) did deter∣mine, that the officers of State, such as are the 7. Electors in the Empire of the Romanes, and the Three States in euery Mo∣narchie,

haue authoritie to represse tyrannous Princes: which if they doe not, they shall answer before God, for their treacherie against the people. Dudley Fenner an English Sectarie, iumpeth with them: He is a Tyrant by practise (saithSacra Theo∣logia. lib. 5 c. 13. Fen∣ner) that dissolueth all, or the chiefest compacts of the Common∣wealth, let them that haue that authoritie, as the Peeres of the kingdome, or the publike assemblie of all Estates, make him a∣way, vel pacificè, vel cum bello, either by peaceable practise, or open hostilitie. Cardinall Bellarmine giueth this reason for the Popes indirect power ouer Kings:De Pontif l. 5. cap. 7. The Ecclesi∣asticall Commonwealth must be (saith he) perfect, and of it selfe sufficient, to attaine vnto the ende whereunto it was ordained: for such are all Commōwealths that are well instituted. Therfore it ought to haue all necessarie power, to attaine to the spirituall end, but power to dispose of all temporalties, is necessarie to the spirituall end: for otherwise euill Kings will foster heretikes, and ouerthrow religion, wherfore the Church hath this power. Haec ille. Banosus a Puritane in a tractate of Ciuill and Ecclesi∣asticall Politie, hath the very same reason, for the power of the Presbiterie:lib. 2. pag 51. If the Church (saith he) haue not power, by forcible meanes to compell all sorts of men to liue in order, this absurditie will follow, euen vnder a faithfull magistrate, that the Church can not defend her selfe, with her owne forces. What (I pray you) will become of the Church, when the Magi∣strate is either an Infidel, or so negligent, as to suffer euill to be done without punishment? and those things which are hallow∣ed to be profaned, or remooued? Should not the Church be vt∣terly ouerthrowne in these eases, if it had not peculiar right to make powerfull resistance? Haec ille. I appeale (my good Lord) to the consciences of all good men, whether this reason of Bellarmine and Banosus be not a wicked ouerthwarting

of the counsell of God, and his gratious prouidence, to∣wards the Church, yea an open bewraying of their vn∣quiet hearts, and seditious disposition. Our Sauiour Christ (foreseeing and foreshewing, that his Disciples the chiefe pillars of the Church, should be brought before Kings, hated of the world, yea and put to deathMatth 10.18 &c 24 . for his names sake,) teacheth not, to resist, or rebell, but to abide, andMatth. 24.13. endure, not with violence to withstand authoritie, butLuk. 21.19. with pa∣tience to possesse their soules. This is a remedie against Ty∣rants, and there is no other meanes reuealed in the word of God against persecution thenMatth. 10.23. Desertion: if they perse∣cute you in one citie, flie to an other: orPsal 0.15. Praier and Patience; HappieM. 5.11.12. are you, when men shall doe all manner of euill vnto you for my names sake, reioyce and be glad, for great is your reward in heauen. Let not man therfore resist their power, which God ordained, but with all meeknes endure persecution in earth, that they may be crowned in heauen. Lambertus Danaeus a Puritane of the best note, doth freely graunt Bel∣larmines Thesis, viz. that there is a power in ordine ad spi∣ritualia, to punish kings: denying his hypothesis, viz. that the Pope hath such power. This beeing granted (saithRes. Dan  ad ella de pontif. lib. 5. cap. 7. pag. 541. Danaeus) that Bellarmine contendeth for: it doth not followe that the Bishop of Rome, or any other Prelate, hath temporall iurisdiction ouer that ciuill Christian Magistrate, which doth either enact lawes against the spirituall determination: or go∣uerne the Commonwealth contrarie to the spirituall regiment of the Church. We confesse those lawes, and that gouernement, should be reformed, but it ought to be done, by the publike as∣sembly, by the Parliament of the kingdome, or by the Peeres themselues of the whole kingdome. Yea in case the king de∣serue to be deposed, the Pope, and other Bishops, or Priests,

haue no right to dethrone him:Neither batell better hering. Verùm id fieri debetIdem ibidem pag. 517. à con∣cilio publico, à Parliamento regni, vel ab ipsis regni ordinibus, but that ought to be done by the publike Councell, the Parliament of the kingdome, or by the Estates of the land: Haec ille. Thus farre (my good Lord) they agree in substance, touching the punishment, and depriuation of Kings, though they vary in this point of circumstance, whether the Pope, the Peeres, or the people shall punish or depose them.
As concerning the third opinion, which is for the ex∣communication of Kings; all Presbyteries which are the tribunall seates of Iesus Christ (as Beza saith in his book against Erastus) do chalenge right and power,Theodorus Be∣za, pag. 116. Guli l eppe∣tus Discipl. Eccl si. as Christs immediate Commissaries in earth, to excommunicate the chiefe Christian Magistrates, as may appeare by these places: viz. Beza de Presbyterio, pag. 115.Thomas Cart∣wright. Lamb. Danaeu. Gellius Sneca. Thomas Cartwright in his last reply, pag. 65. Lambertus Danaeus in his Christian Policy, lib. 3. pag. 232. Gellius Snecanus in his booke of discipline, pag. 456.Galil B Herm Re. William Bucanus in his common places of Diuinitie, pag. 582. Hermanus Rene∣cherus in his obseruation vpon the first Psalme, pag: 68.The counter pson. The humble petition. The defence of . The counterpoyson, pag. 175. The humble petition to the late Queene, pag. 55. And the defence of discipline against M. Bridges, pag. 127. And this power, haue they put in practise to the glorie of Sion, against diuerse kings in the Christian world, as the said disciplinarianpag. 8 Cham∣pion boasteth, in more then insolent manner. Consider (honourable Lord) whether any King may thinke his state secure, where euery offence, though but suspected, doth procure a citation, euerie citation, doth inforce apparence, euery apparence doth vrge confession, or inioyne purgation,

and the least contempt doth breed a contumacie, to drawe the greatest censure. These Parish-popes shall neuer be able to shewe any record in the sanctuarie, or practise of Pre∣lates, for a thousand yeares after Christ to warrant this Puritan-popish manner of proceeding against Princes. I like well of the opinion in Iohn de ParisijsDe potest. reg. & papal. cap. 13. Euerie Minister of God must ra∣ther submit his life to the Prin∣ces pleasure thē admit him to the Sacrament, that sheweth manifest tokens of impietie, or infidelitie: but the Puritans speake not of the Church mi∣nisterie, but of their Lordly consistorie, at the Papists due of the Popes court: whom not God but the Deuill and Antich ist hath exalted ouer Kings. concerning the power of the Keyes. Non quilibet peccator, &c. Euery offender, neither is nor ought to be subiect to the power of the keyes, and Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction, but the sinner which is subiect thereto. And therefore the said power hath no effect, ex∣cept against them that are subiect vnto it, which subiection, maketh a man fit matter, whereupon the power of the keyes hath his effectuall operation. Haec ille.
The politique Puritans meddle not with this dange∣rous question, of Deposing and Killing of Kings, but stand aloofe, to giue ayme, while other desperat, archers shoote, that if they misse, they may step aside to saue themselues, or in case the marke be hit, they may step in to part the stakes. I accuse not without cause: M. Beza beeing seriously consulted by some brethern of England, whether inferiour officers, might not lawfully arme themselues, against him, who beeing lawfully confirmed Magistrate, doth take away the pri∣uiledges, and infringe the liberties, which he hath sworne to performe to the subiects; or doth oppresse them with manifest tyrannie, &c. returned this fectlesse answer,Beza epist. 24. cogitmur : We must demurre vpon this point, not onely because it is dangerous (specially in our time) to set open such a window, but also for that we may not determine the state of this question, simply as you propound it, but vpon con∣sideration of many most waightie circumstances.Ira{que} in hoc Aphrorismo  And there∣fore

for the present we deferre our answer to your demaund: Thus Beza demurred at Geneua, in communi fratrum ex verbe, & agro collectorum caetu, in the common assembly of the Brethren, out of the Citie, and Suburbes: 25. Iunij. Anno Domini. 1568. the very yeare before Morton the Popes Nuncio, came to England, to stirre vp the Peeres of the North, against our late Queene, for pretended here∣sie, and tyrannie. While the proposition was demurred at Geneva, the Assumption was framed at Rome, and the conclusion practised by traytors in England; could not Beza answer? why did he not confesse it? or if he could, why doth he dissemble it? It is truth without colour that must direct the conscience, and settle the simple, desi∣rous to be resolued. Dissimulation is but dawbing with vntempered morter, ad perdendos homines in sermone men∣dacij, to bring men to destruction, with the words of lying: and a verie readie way to bring religion to scandale Princes to iealousie, and male-contented men to mutinie. I haue endeuoured (according to my mediocritie of learning) to set downe the iudgement of the Church of God in all the former ages, concerning the Authoritie of Kings, and the Dutie of subiects, that the late learning of Papist and Puritane, (compared with the old doctrine of ancient Orthodoxals) may appeare to be as new as it is naught: which I offer to your Honourable protecti∣on, aswell in respect of your dutie to God, as of my seruice to your Lordship. Your dutie to God: for he that hath made you his instrument of honour to saue the Kings life, doth require at your hands, the maintenance of the Kings right. And seeing it hath pleased you, to admit me into the number of your servants, I hope you will fauoura∣bly

accept of this my seruice, wherein I doe my best en∣deauour, to make vp the gappe against Schisme in the Church, and sedition in the State. The great God, and King of heauen graunt your Lordship many dayes, much ho∣nour, the loue of your Countrie, inward peace, and e∣uerlasting glorie. From Clarehall in Cambridge. 12. Octo. 1610.

