



RIght Reuerend, I heer pre∣sent vnto your perusal this dialogue of dying wel, a woork more of woorth for the goodnes then in value for the greatnes.
It was first written in the Italian tongue by a deuout Chanon of Luca, & by M. Peeter Frison a deuout Chanon of Rhemes (wel knowne through his pietie vnto many of our nation) it was since translated into french.
The remembrāce of death as Bishop fisher (of blessed memory) was wont to say, doth neuer come out of season, and this spake that good father in regard that the remembrance of death tendeth vnto a care to endeuour to dy wel, a matter of moste important consideration vnto all that liue.
There are sundry serpents and mon∣sters that out of filth and corruption do take their originals, and so in lyke man∣ner was that vgly monster, called death; out of the filth and sin of our first aunce∣ter, first engendred. The agillitie & arte of this moste mercilesse tyrant cōsisteth in the continual casting of deadly dartes,

and infynit hee throweth out, euen in euery moment, neuer ayming but at ly∣uing hartes, neuer missing those hee ay∣meth at, neither is there any armour to bee found that may withstand his hart-piersing force. VVherefore seeing to a∣uoyd death there is no remedy, the reme∣dy then that remayneth, is the lear∣ning how to dy wel: this lesson the ensuing dialogue teacheth, only truants neglect to learne it, but attentiue schollers do deepely imprint it in me∣mory.
To your good Ladiship I dedicate the same: vnto you the first Abbesse of your holy order reuyued in our nation, whose posteritie by the diuine prouidence may come to brighten our country with their shyning sanctitie as your predecessors heretofore haue donne: after that S. Au∣gustyne had brought and taught vnto the English people the first knowlege &

belief in the true God and his deer sonne and our Sauiour, Christe Iesus.
A religious man was this first Apostle of ours, and of your order, as also were those holy Abbesses and religious virgins so much comēded by the venerable Bede and other veritable writers, in there relating their holy liues and wonderful miracles, yea euen after their deathes, which were true arguments of their dying wel, the which they wel learned to do whyle they liued, as he graunt wee al∣so may to whose holy tuition I leaue your Reuerend Ladiship. This 3. of April 1603.

