

Noble Worthies
NOW is the time to shew wisdome and courage, for acclamatur v∣bi{que} ad bellū: yet to rush vnadvisedly into Battaile, is not the way for vi∣ctory. I here in my labour doe not so vndertake to prescribe Rules, as to write an History of Holy Warres. Here is a Patterne from Gods people, who fought many set Battailes, and commonly got the day; for God was with them. They stood out
 stoutly for him, his worship and service. Their footsteps if you follow, you shall surely speed the better. Let none say that this Treatise will not suite well to these times. For the true diffe∣rences are not many heretofore and now in the vniversall Course Military. But what∣soever the differences be therein my principall aime in the vse of Armes is to bring into the Campe the Practise of Piety. For the ill (though an overtrue saying) hath beene, Rara fides, pietas{que} viris qui castra se∣quuntur. These seeming exiled Vertues I desire to be welcomed amongst you Valiant Wor∣thies;
 and Vices sent packing from every true Souldier with detestation. To this purpose tend my endeavours with full cur∣rent. To follow this Streame is to make your Armies strong, and your selues victorious.
And here I haue a Sute to you (ô you Sonnes of Valour) In going forth, consider what you be, against whom you fight, and for what. Remem∣ber that Great Brittaine is in∣feriour to no Nation; and that by the prowesse and valour of English and Scots, glorious vi∣ctories haue beene obtained. You cannot you may not forget the valiant acts of Generall No∣rice
 in the Low Countries; of the worthily honoured Lord Grey in Ireland, of the never dying Names of Drake, Furbi∣sher, & Hawkins, of the right famous Earle of Essex, of the deservedly eternized Veres, of the invincible▪ spirited Green▪ field, of the noble Cicill, with many others worthy of an ever∣lasting Name: Be couragious still, and cease not to vpholde the renowne of this our Name and Nation.
Weigh your Enemies. They prosper you will say; oh that our Sinne & Slacknesse were not the cause. Their successe is but now of late, consider you
 the former times; stay and won∣der at our incredible victo∣ries: we may yet hope well, if we would do well for our selues. They are in their height of Pride, and their downefall is neere: Courage then, and expect the issue.
Our cause is iust, though God please a while to afflict vs. Set the worth of our Religion be∣fore your eyes: Its the truth of the eternall God. The Scrip∣tures command it; and thereby our consciences bound▪ doe tie vs vnto it. It hath beene con∣firmed by the blood of Martyrs, Reverend Bishops, and god∣lie Divines, learned Law∣yers,
 and innumerable others. Our Kings haue established it; good Lawes are inacted for it; peaceably we haue enioyed it: Miraculous deliverances we haue had, since we professed it. And what still maintaines it? Power or Policie of man? No, no such thing; but the hand of the Almightie. Who it was that delivered vs from the in∣tended Invasion; who it was that prevented the hellish Powder-plot, who it was that freed vs from the many Trea∣cheries and Treasons practi∣sed against vs.
Remember these things (ô yee true-hearted English)
 stand ye (ye Valerous Minds) closse to the cause of God. Fight vnder his Banner against these Enemies of our Faith, our King, and Kingdome: goe on so, and prosper; and the Arme of Iesus strengthen you.
Doe not marvaile (Honou∣rable & honoured Martialists) that I, Vnus de multis in¦ter Obscuros, & not de mag∣nis inter Notos, should thus presume to speake vnto you. I hope you will rather consider the worth of the matter, then weigh the defects of the man. Neither let me be blamed, that being by profession Ʋir Pacis, Minister Ecclesiae Anglicanae, should
 thus thrust my selfe into Cam∣pum Martis. The Sacred Bi∣ble, my daily studie, gaue mee the grounds; my delight in Hi∣stories of this subiect enlarged my meditations. That I finde in holy Writ. I thinke I may write of: Hoc instituto meo alienum esse non putavi. The Priests of God went out with the Lords Hosts in former times, and that by his appoint∣ment. Iohn the Baptist spake vnto Souldiers; they asked him what they should doe; and he advised them in some things. I haue laboured for your good, bonâ saltem intentione: I pray my endeavour may not be
 reckoned minoris pretii, quia ego Minister. The worth of a true Souldier I haue ever ho∣noured; I prize at an high rate a Man os valour▪ and hee well deserues it. I wish ex animo that illustrious eminency may e∣ver attend him, that is by ver∣tue Valiant.
I doubt not therefore, but that this Work, from the word (not hitherto published by any) will be favourably accepted of you. That if it make you not Souldiers according to Men, (because perhaps more you know already by practise and experi∣ence) yet am I sre it may make you vertuously valiant, and
 good men according to God. And being so, then, though you die here in Battell, you may hereafter liue in blessednesse: Which I heartily wish you may attaine vnto, there to triumph for ever.

