


HAuinge reade ouer this worke (right honorable) printed in the Frenche tongue, and also know∣ing the aucthor, and be∣ing somewhat acquayn∣ted with him, who for his singular godly learning, knowledge, and conuersation, s estéemed of those y• be godly, for a pre∣ious pearle sent amongst vs from God  this our troublesome age: I thought t my duety to put it forth into the Eng∣ysh tongue, that those my natiue coun∣rymen, which doo not vnderstande the French: might be partakers of the fruit

of so godly a worke in Englishe. And al∣so haue as it were a weapon in hande, to defend themselues against the ministers of Sathan, who be euer ready to cauyll against the trueth, more ready to putte men in doubt, then to establishe them in the true Christian faith. The true vn∣derstāding of our beléefe is the pure gyft of God, and among his gifts the chiefest Beleefe with knowledge of Gods word, ordereth the minde, gouerneth the body, dyrecteth all our workes and affayres, teachinge what wée ought to doo, and what to leaue vndone, without whiche neither can King, Lord nor subiect, well order them selues, nor those things that bée committed to theyr charge. Nowe if we esteeme other things to be of valewe and can prayse them: your honour kno∣weth that the knowledge of true beléefe grounded vpon Gods word, doth so farre excell all other things, as heauenly trea∣sures excell the commodityes of the earth. And this is moste profitable to kinges, Dukes, Earles, and Lords, (as

appeareth in the 2. Psalme, Deutero. 17 chap. and Esay 46. chap. where they be named the nurces of religion) and vnto all other degrées spyrituall or temporal. And vaine are all men which know not this truely. And S. Paule sayde because it séemed not good to them to haue the knowledge of Gods word, he gaue them vp into a lewd mind, & to all vncleanes, For if God be the lyght, suche as knowe him not stumble in darknes. If he be the only way, the ignoraunt go stray. If he be the trueth, they that knowe him not be deceyued. If he be onely good, all good thinges must be borrowed and craued of him alone. If all knowledge & learning be his, wée must be Gods scholars. If he be life, not to knowe him his eternall death. For it is written, this is eternall lyfe, to know Iesus Christ whome thou hast sent to be very god. But this know¦ledge muste wée haue and learne in the scriptures, as S. Paule sayth, the scrip∣ture is profytable to teach, to controll, to amende, and to instruct in all ryghteous∣nesse

that the offyce of saluation is lyttle re∣garded: But this myngle mangle of spi∣rituall and temporall regiment, is vsur∣ped by them, as if no Christian Magi∣strat ordained of God, sufficed to redresse such abuses. What maruell if mans or∣dynaunces be broken, where the ordy∣naunce of God is playnlye resysted. Also in the country where most nede of prea∣ching and instruction is, there bée ydell chaplaynes, which possesse and withhold the Preachers liuings, and most special∣lye in the Cathedrall Churches: many of the which bée but onely a very refuge and denne of ydell, ignoraunt, and vn∣preaching lubbers. Is not the ordinance of God, and good meaninges of noble founders broken here? Is not his procla∣mation disobeyed, who proclaymed by the mouth of saint Paul, hée who labou∣reth not, ought not to eate? Among the Iewes temporall men, and those that erued not the Altar, were not suffered to liue of the altar, as they now do vnder the gospel. Behold y• Apostles, Timothe

Tite, and many others. If we do alowe the order of the primatiue & holy aposto∣like church, let vs folow their examples. Beholde the fathers, as Origine, Cipri∣an, Ambrose, Iherom, Augustine, Chri∣sostome, and others, who spent the grea¦test part of their lyues in preaching and teachinge the people, as appeareth by their workes, which be for the most part Sermons, Lessons, Homelies, disputa∣tions, and confutations of heresies in their tymes. They preached on the son∣dayes and expoūded the scriptures. And on the wéeke dayes they procured theyr Sermons and expositions to be written. There were no pluralities of liuings in those dayes, neither dispensations, Tot∣quottes, nor Residences, qualifications, nor improperations. Chyldrē and boyes enioyed no Benefices in those dayes by no manner of means, or considerations to come. God graunt vs shortly to sée a redresse of spirituall abuses, and tempo∣rall disorders, in spyrituall gouernours without respect of priuate gaine. And y•

we maye say with the Prophet Dauid the word of God is my counseler. Exce such thinges be amended, neyther Eng¦lishe seruice▪ Homelies, Ceremonies, no sacraments, do make vs christians. W differ from the Turks but in outward rites & ceremonies, and outward profe¦siō of our faith in words. But not in th true signe of Christian integrity, whic is vpryghte conuersation and good ly Thus héere in Englande many idle v learned Chappelaines and Priestes b founde of the costes and charges of poor Parishes, so that for lacke of preaching many poore Soules be defrauded of th swéete mylke of Gods woorde▪ and lac teachers to declare to them their duty towards God and their Prince. This  a reioysing to the enemie, and pleasau newes to those whiche gape and loo that the ende of these abuses, & disorde wyll be the destruction and ruine of th florishinge Realme. And so is to be fer¦red that it wyll, except the insatiable c¦uetousnesse, and carnall lybertie e w

d out. And that wicked Idolatrous murderers of Gods people, and disobe∣dient to his word and lawes, may be cut off, that Gods wrathe and indignation maye bee pacifyed by amendemente, accordynge to Goddes expresse woorde, Deuteromie thyrtéene Chapter: Thine eye shall not pyttye suche one, nor shewe mercye to him, but hee shall bée slayne. And so shalte thou take the euyll awaye foorth of the myddes of thee, sayeth the Lorde God. (Reade the whole Chapter.) Also Saint Paule to the Hebrewes the tenth Chapter. If he that despiseth Moises Lawe, ought to dye without mercie, howe muche more punishment deserueth hee that treadeth vnder foote the sonne of God, and coūteth the blood of the newe Testament an vn∣holie thing? But some haue not onely troden vnder foote, but also mocked, des∣pised and most cruelly brent the Testa∣ment and woorde of the eternall God, and also tormented and shamefully mur¦dered his true and faythfull seruauntes,

and preachers the deere members of Ie¦sus Christ his sonne. And most blasphe▪ mously contemning the holy sacraments truely mynistred, and all godly ecclesia∣sticall orders and discipline. To redresse of these enormities must come by y• ma∣gistrates, for they are powers ordayned and exalted of God, for the same entent▪ If they be not redressed, and that short▪ lie, in stéede of the comfortable promises of God, wée shalbe oppressed with the terryble plagues whiche hée threatneth to the breakers of his lawe. As dearth, warre, pestilence, and other his scour∣ges, as wée be threatened now of late by the punyshmente of our neyghbours in Fraunce. Happy are those that can bée admonyshed by the fall of others, and amend. I would thinke my labour well bestowed, if I mought obtayne of your honor, and other that be of a godly mea∣ninge, to reade this ouer with good de∣lyberation, and Iudgement: And also suche as be in doubte whiche is the true religion. And those that thinke we be in

an errour, I would to God they woulde vouchesafe to reade and conferre it with the scriptures, and doctours, as is noted in the margine. And in reading, to put a syde disdayne, contempte, and all singu∣lar and pryuate affections. And then I doubte not but God wyll open vnto them further knowledge, and mooue them to be more studious in Gods word and also haue a better opinion of the true religion.
I haue for my Countryes sake tran∣slated this godly and necessarye woorke, wherevnto I haue added nothyng of myne owne, but symple, and playne∣lye, according to my small vnderstan∣ding, I haue kepte the wordes and mea∣nyng of the authoritie, as neare as our English wyl suffer mée, rather shewing mee selfe homelye and playne, then by ouer muche fynenesse to dissent from the mynde of hym, who in the feare of God, and for his Bretherns sake set it foorth.
Humblye beséechynge youre ho∣nour,

and all godlye Readers, to take this my small labour in good parte, and accept my good meaning, which tendeth to the profite of my Country men, and especiallye to the glorie of God, and ad∣uauncement of his kingdome. Who prospere and maintaine your honour in his feare, long to continue, enrytching you with all good blessinges, and gouer∣ninge you and yours by his holye spirite, vntyll he shall call you to come vnto him selfe, there to continue in his glo∣rious kingdom, for euer and euer.
Amen.
