


I Haue perused your booke, as farre as the shortnes of the tyme would suffer me: which was not so farre by a great deale as I glad∣lyest would, if it might haue longer continued with me. Your tra∣uaile and good mynde most iustly deserueth in my opinion, both thankes and commendations of all your countrey men. I wish with all my heart it may so be accepted of those, in whose handes the only remedie lyeth, that some good order may be deuised for the reliefe and encouragement of such vertuouse myndes as are contented with the ex∣pens of their bloud to benefite their countrie. Which kinde of men aboue all others, ought most to be esteemed as the very sinowes and strength of euery common weale, howe mighty or wealthie so euer shee be. For according to the opinion of a late lear∣ned writer, Pertinet autem maxime ad Reipub. fortitudinem, vti milites peritos & exerci∣tatos habeat. Sic enim & tranquilla vita fruetur, & a terroribus tumultibus{que} vacua e∣rit. The onely strength of euery common wealth is, To haue skilfull and well trayned souldiers: so shall they liue in happines, being free from all kinde of terrour and tu∣mult. And agayne, Dum belli furor insurgit, hostis{que} Reipub. bonis occupandis inhiat, eorū in manibus Reipub. Salus, Religio, Fides, Libertas est reposita. When the rage of warres doth suddainly burst out, and the enemie at hand, gaping for the spoyle of the coun∣trey, then both Safety, Religion, Faith and Libertie resteth wholy in the hande of the souldiours: who are the onely terrour to the enemie, defende their countrey from present danger, and bring the common wealth to safetie and quietnes. But our coun∣trey hath alwayes had that faute (and I am afrayde will neuer be without it) of being vnnaturall and vnthankfull to such as with their great hazard, paynes and charges haue sought to attayne to the knowledge of armes, by which shee is chiefly maintey∣ned, succoured and defended. To bring one example amongst thousands▪ What a num∣ber was there of noble Gentlemen, and worthy souldiours, that in the dayes of that vi∣ctorious prince King Henry the fifth (after the honourable behauing of them selues, as well at Agincort, as other places, to the discomfiture and vtter ouerthrowe of the whole Chiualry of Fraunce) returning to their countrey, were pitifully constrained (& which was in deede most miserable) in their olde and honourable age for very want and necessitie to begge, whyle a great number of vnworthie wretches that lyued at home, enioyed all kindes of felicities. That Noble Gentleman Syr William Drurie a Paragon of armes at this day, was wont (I remēber) to say, that the souldiers of En∣gland had alwaies one of these three endes to looke for: To be slayne, To begge, or To be hāged. No doubt a gentle recompence for such a merit. Yet want there not some, yt dare affirme it a vayne burdē to a cōmon wealth, to mainteine souldiers, as the cōmon disturbers & hinderers of publike peace. Such a one was sometime Syr Thomas More, who hauing more skyll in sealing of a writte, then surueying of a Campe, was not a∣shamed most vnwisely to write (if I may so speake of so wyse a man) that the commō labourer of Englande, taken from the plowe, was hee, that when it came to the mat∣ter, dyd the deede: whose goodly seruice in tyme of neede, is better knowen then I neede to speake of. But what hath this Realme gayned by her small accompt of soul∣diers? Shee hath of barbarous people bene foure or fyue tymes inuaded and ouer∣tunne. I pray God the sixt be not neerer then men looke for. It is not money nor multitude of men that in extremetie preuayleth, but skyll and experience that safe∣ly mainteyneth and preserueth. Rome, whyle shee maynteyned her souldiours, was mystresse and commandresse of the whole world: but when shee fell to her owne de∣licacies, and neglecting of them, she became not only a triumphe, and contempt to the

rude Vandale and barbarous Gothe, but as yet shee remaynes a spectacle of miserable ruine to the vniuersall world. Wee haue a number of Captaynes, such as neuer came yet vnder enseigne in their life: happy shall that realme be, that shall haue neede of such expert souldiours, but most vnhappy and vniust men that dare chalenge to them selues the place of so great a charge Souldiers ynough we haue that in time of peace can range their battailles, cast out their skirmishes, assault townes, and cōquer king∣domes, that a man would iudge them at the first sight, for very Hectors and Hanni∣balles. But these be they, (I knowe not how it happeneth) that are the first that wil be gone, when they come to it. We haue on the other side, a number of good captaynes, who by their skilfull experience, are well able to trayne and leade a gallant companie of souldiours, who perceyuing their colde entertaynement, do dayly (as no man can blame them) abandon, and vtterly renounce their profession, or serue in other places where they should not. These disorders and great numbers more, your booke (if it continew according to that part that I haue seene) will sufficiently lay out at large, and with his larum awake (I trust) the mindes of those, in whose handes it lyes to re∣dresse them: whether it do or do not, your well doing deserueth of all men to be em∣braced, that haue with learned authorities, and sufficient eloquence, done what in you lyeth to mooue it: the rest is to be supplied by him, that being of that Maiestie, vouch¦safeth, in signe of his well liking of so noble a profession, to be called by the name of Dominus exercituum, the Lord of Armies. And thus with my harty thankes, I sende you your booke agayne. From Kingstone in haste.

