



Most Excellent Prince,
MAy a poore Pilgrime salute Your High∣nesse in the words of a better SAMVEL and SEER,1. Sam. 9.20. On whom is the desire of all Israel? is it not on Thee and all thy Fathers House? In this House we ad∣mire the innumerable Royall Ancestrie, wee triumph in His Maiesties present light, wee praise God and pray for the two hopefull Columnes, that they may be Pillars of Stabilitie and Strength in the Lords House,1. Kin. 7.21▪ Apoc. 3.12▪ firmer then SALOMONS IACMIN and BOAZ.
SIR, hauing out of a Chaos of confused intelligences fra∣med this Historicall World, by a New way of Eye-euidence; Your Princely pietie, innate clemency, and the Time it selfe (festiuall both in the ordinarie season and extraordinarie pre∣paration) emboldned my obtrusion on Your Highnesse. The Magnificence of Your Princely Court hath entertayned Men of

many Nations, yea hath admitted (in Parkes and Places fit∣ting) Beasts, Fowles, Plants of remoter Regions: and now much more, in a World of acclamations to Your ioyfull designes, a world of Pilgrimes seemed sutable; each of which presents one or other Countrey; and all, the rarities and varieties of all. Here also Your Highnesse may refresh Your wearinesse from State-affaires (if any of these Lines may at any time be ambi∣tious of such lustre) in seeing at leisure and pleasure Your En∣glish Inheritance dispersed thorow the World, whereof these Twentie Bookes are the Euidence and Records: the English Martialist euery where following armes, whiles his Countrey is blessed at home with BEATI PACIFICI; the Merchant coasting more Shoares and Ilands for commerce, then his Pro∣genitors haue heard off, or himselfe can number; the Mariner making other Seas a Ferry, and the widest Ocean a Strait, to his discouering attempts▪ wherein wee ioy to see Your Highnesse to succeed Your Heroike Brother, in making the furthest Indies by a New Passage neerer to Great Britaine. Englands out of England are here presented, yea Royall Scotland, Ireland, and Princely Wales, multiplying new Scepters to His Ma∣iestie and His Heires in a New World. In all, the glorie of His Maiesties happy Raigne, and thereby of the English Name and Nation, by a poore Zelote of both, is truly and amply related, beyond the coniectures of the passed Ages, to the admiration of the present, and amusing (if not amazing) of the future. In which so long a Worke humbly craueth pardon for other errors, for this presumption.

