



Right Honourable, & Right Worshipfull,
AS this Sermon was Prea∣ched in your hearing, and allowed by your approbati∣on: so now, the Doctrine of it being so generally neces∣sary, I haue thought good to send it forth into the world, that whereas, while it was deliuered by voice, it could extend but to a few, now being committed to the Presse, it might be communicated to many. I con∣fesse the maner of handling it is plaine & homely, without any Rhetoricall Orna∣ments, or eloquent stile, (For I euer desired rather to speake to the edification of my

hearers, then by vain-glorious ostentati∣on to seeke any applause to my selfe.) But I doubt not but the matter is sound and wholesome: and therefore will be accepta∣ble to all good Christians, that loue rather to haue their hungry soules fed with the substantiall food of Gods word,2 Timoth. 4, 3 1 Cor. 2.4. then their itching ears tickled with the intising speech of mans wisedome.
Now the reasons that haue moued me to publish it in your Honors and Worships names are diuers. First and principally, because by your fauourable kindnes (thogh being no free-man among you) I am ad∣mitted to be Tenant to this Honourable City, and so by your meanes, next vnder God, do enioy a comfortable habitation, to the future benefite of me and mine. In re∣gard whereof, I haue thought my selfe bound to leaue some testimony to after times, of your singular loue to men of my profession, and some pledge and token of my thankefull affection. Besides, I acknow∣ledge I haue receiued much kindnes from many of you in particular, which I would be loath should be buried in forgetfulnesse. And howsoeuer this gift be in it self poore

and base, not woorthy any way of your ac∣ceptance: yet seeing it is the best which my meane condition can afford, I hope you will receiue it as willingly, as I tender it sin∣cerely: measuring rather the affection of the giuer, then the worth of the gift.
I pray God blesse your Honor & wor∣shippes all, and inflame your hearts with a true zeale of his glory,1 King. 19, 14 that with holy E∣lias you may bee iealous for the Lord God of hosts, in those high places wher∣in the Lord hath set you: that all the wor∣kers of iniquity (especially the propha∣ners of the Sabbath) being by the sword of Iustice cut off from this famous City,Psalme 101, 8. God may still continue his blessings vpon it: so as there may neuer be inuasion,Psal. 144, 14. nor lead∣ing into captiuity, nor crying in our streetes,Psalme 122, 7. but that still peace may bee within our wals, and prosperity with∣in our Palaces: but chiefly that his glori∣ous Gospell, the meanes of our saluation, may remain to vs & to our posterity, euen to the end of the world, Amen.

