


MADAME,
I Could not approach, but with a MIRROVR in my hand, before your Majestie, the splendour of whose mag∣nificence dazles so power∣fully all the world, that I am not able to behold the immediate presence on't, but by the reflection of its Rayes. Without fiction, MADAME, your Glory is
arrived to the point of rendring your per∣fections so unknowne, as being so above the commune; that I beleeve most men honour you now by observance and ex∣ample onely, as not able otherwise to reach the depth of the just reasons they might have for it. Nor is this All, to say that you are solely faire, and perfectly chaste; but it is necessarie, beyond all this, to intimate secretly, in the Lan∣guage of Thought, all the divine qua∣lities which you possesse of Super-emi∣nence in all things, since their puritie cannot discend to the capacitie of our dis∣course, without suffering a kind of pro∣phanation. From hence is it, that if I should call you, THE COMPLEATLY-PERFECT, I might well say in effect that which you are; but never thus should I represent the greatnesse of your merits, since every of them in it selfe has such particular perfections, as might challenge
Altars from us, if your humilitie could permit it. These are such Truths (MA∣DAME) as hinder me from praysing your Majestie, not knowing how to expresse my selfe condignely. Well might I perhaps suggest it to remembrance, that your par∣ticular inclinations are the publike Ver∣tues which we adore, and that of the same temperament of humour, Nature composed heretofore the Sages of the World: But of all these discourses notwithstanding, I can∣not frame one onely prayse sufficiently ad∣aequate to your worth, seeing 'tis elevated beyond all Eulogiums. Insomuch, that if Admiration it selfe teach not a new Lan∣guage to posteritie, wherein to proclaime aloud the favours and graces wherewith Heaven hath accomplisht you; it must con∣tent it selfe, to reverence your Name, and adore your Memorie, without presumption of speech of your actions, as being ever above all valuation, as well as imitation.
To instance the immortalitie of your Au∣GUSTICK Race, although it be a pure Source of Honour, which can never be dry'd up; yet all these Titles of a Kings Daughter, Sister, and Wife, can never adde to your Renowne, which derives its value rather from the admira∣bilities of your Life, then the greatnesse of your Birth. Insomuch (MADAME) that the Scepters and Crownes of your Royalties, are the meanest Ornaments wherewith your Majestie can decke it selfe; since the least glympse of the least of your Actions, duskes the luster of all the other magnificences, which environ you. And I beleeve, had those Wonders of the World beene of such a worth, as every day you descry, they had power∣fully resisted against the assaults of Ages: but as they had nothing admirable in them, but the Name, Memorials have pre∣served that, and let them perish. But
yours (MADAME) which are too perfect for a sutable Name, shall not cease to survive the revolutions of Times, as being enlivened by Vertue, which a∣lone can exempt from Death. Let it not seeme strange then, if I hazard the perils of the Sea, to render Homage to a QUEENE, whose Greatnesse per∣force humbles the most arrogant spirits, being not able, so much as in thought, to reach to the first degree of her Glory. The GRACES themselves are hers, and the VERTUES have allianced their owne and her Name; and all the adorable qualities which are found here below, are admirable in her alone, as in their Source. I am constrained to be silent (MADAME) being over-charged with too much subject of speech. The number of your Perfections astonishes me, the greatnesse of your Merit ravi∣shes me, the splendour of your Vertue
dazles me: And in this dazle, this trans∣port, this excesse of admiration, wherein my senses and spirits are all alike enga∣ged, I am compell'd to cast my selfe at the feet of your Majestie, and demand pardon of the boldnesse which I assume onely to enjoy the stile of
MADAME, 
