


MY Lords, I have sundry times heard both of you joyntly and severally pro∣testing even in open Court, not onely in the In Master Thomas Brewers, Doctor Bast∣weekes, and sundry other cases. High-Commission, (but in Dr. Laytons and two other cases since) Starchamber too, (whether seriously or vauntingly onely let the event determine;) That if you could not proove your Episcopall Iurisdiction and function which you now claime and exercise over other Ministers, and your selves as you are Bishops to be superior in power, dignity and degree to other Ministers Iure Divino (a do∣ctrine which An. Mel∣vini Patri∣cij Adam∣soni Palino∣dia, printed An. 1630. Patricke Adamson Archbishop of S. An∣drewes in Scotland, publikely recanted in the Synod of Fiffe Anno 1591. as directly repugnant to, and having no foundation at all in the word of God;) you would forth∣with cast away your Rochets of your backes, lay downe your Bishoprickes at his Majesties feet, and not continue Bishops

on ehower longer. What your Lordships have so oft averred and publikely promised before many wit∣nesses, (I hope bonâ fide, because judicially in full Court upon goodadvise, not rashly on some sodaine fitt of choler,) I shall make bold, to challenge you to make good without more delay; either by giving a solid satisfactorie speedy answere to this short Treatise (consisting onely of 2. Questions, which you may de∣vide between you, and so speedily reply to, if your great See Ma∣ster Tyn∣dals Obe∣dience of a Christian man. The holy Practise of Popish Prelates. secular occasions, not your praying and 1. Tim. 3. 2. 3. 2, Tim. 4. 1. to. 5 Tit 1. & 2. 1 Pet. . 2. 3. fre∣quent preaching, which are onely truly Epicopall, though you deeme them overmeane imployment for Arch-bishops interrupt you not:) which manifests all that Jus Divinum which hitherto both or either your Lord∣ships have pretended for your Episcopalities to be but a meere absurd ridiculous faction, having not the least shadow of Scripture to support it; or in case you either cannot or faile to give such an Answer to it in conve∣nient time; by pulling off your Rochets and resing∣ning up your Archbishoprikes (which without all question are but a meere humaine, and no divine In∣stitution, as I have evidenced:) into his Majesties hands, 31. H S. c 9 37. H. 8 c. 17. 1. E 6. c. . & all the Bi∣shops Pa∣tents for their conse∣cration and Cong. from whom you dare not deny you onely and wholly received them, with all your Episcopall Jurisdiction and Authority thereunto annexed, whereby you difference your selves from, or advance your selves above your Fellow-Ministers as their supreme Lords, unlesse you will split your selves against the hard rocke of a Prae∣munire, and the Statutes of: 26. H. 8. c. 1. 31. H. 8. c. 9. 10. 37. H. c. 17. 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1. 5. Eliz. c. 1. 8. Eliz. c. 1. which Acts as they will in∣forme

your Lordships, notwithstanding all your former vaunts and brags of divine right, That the Archbishops, Bishops, Arch-deacons and other Ecclesiasticall persons of this Realme, HAVE NO MANER OF IVRISDICTION ECCLESIASTICALL, BVT BY, VNDER AND FROM THE KINGS ROYALL MAJESTY; to whom by holy Scripture ALL AVTHORITY AND POWER IS WHOLY GIVEN, to heare and determine all maner causes Ecclesiasticall, and to correct vice and sinne whatsoever, and to all such persons as his Not Arch-bishops or Bishops; who can make no Chancel∣lours, Vicar generals Commissa∣ries or Offi∣cials unlesse the King by his speciall Patent give them power so to doe in expresse words, as these Sta∣tutes evi∣dence and the Bishops Patents in Edward the 6. Raigne. Majesty shall appoint thereunto: That all autho∣rity and Iurisdiction spirituall and temporall is derived and deducted from the Kings Majesty, as supreme head of the Church and Realme of England, and so justly acknowled∣ged by the Cleargy thereof: That all Courts Ecclesiasticall within the Realme were then (and now ought to be though they are not) kept by no other power or authority either forraigne or within the Realme, but by the authori∣ty of his most excellent Majesty onely; and that by vertue of some speciall commission or letters Patents under his Ma∣jesties great Seale, and in his name and right alone: That all power of Visitation of the Ecclesiasticall State and Persons (much more then of our Vniversities exempt from Archie∣piscopall & Episcopall Iurisdiction) is united and annexed as a royall prerogative to the Kings Imperiall Crowne, and to be executed by none but by Patent under him: And that all your Citations, processe, Excommunications, Probates of Wils, Commissions of Administration &c. ought to be made onely in his Majesties name, and sealed with his seale (as they were in King Henry the 8. and King Edwards dayes,

witnesse the Bishops Registers, Proces and Probates of wils in their two raignes, and now are in your High-Commission) that so both the Courts and processe migth be Matth. 22. 20. 21. Sir Iohn Davis his Irish Reports. p. 97. 98. knowen to be his Majesties by leaving his Image, stile and superscription ingraven on them, and to be derived unto you, not by any divine right, but by his Princely grace alone, who hath as absolute an Eccle∣siasticall Iurisdiction, as any of his royall progenitors enjoyed, both by the Lawes of God and 26. H. 8. c. 1. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1. E. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1. 5. Eliz. c. 1. 8. Eliz. c. 1. of the Realme: So they will inforce your Lordships to acknow∣ledge, (unlesse you will renounce your Alegiance to your most gracious Soveraigne, whose meere grace hath advanced you to what you now are,) that all your Episcopall Iurisdiction, whereby you are distinguished from, or elevated above any ordinary Presbyters and Ministers, is not from any divine Charter or Com∣mission from Christ, but In case they have  Character or Commis∣sion under his Ma∣jesties Seale which all of them now want, and so are meere usurpers on his Ma∣jesties Crowne and Ecclesiasticall Prerogative in keeping Confistories, Visitations, and Exer∣cising Episcopall Iurisdiction in their owne names, with Patent or Commission from the King. onely in, by, from, and under his Majesty; and so not Jure Divino, as you have thus frequently craked and boasted to the world; so as you must either now forthwith renounce your Bishoprikes according to your Protestations, or else be guilty of breach of promise; unlesse you can proove you enjoy them onely by a divine right, and yet onely in, by, from, and under his Majesty, which is a contradiction.

If your Lords to maintaine your divine pretended Episcopall Iurisdiction shall flie to Sunday no Sabath. p.  & 44. Doctor John Pocklington for ayd (who by W. Bray. one of your Domesticke Chaplaines approbation) hath verily published in print, That you by Gods mercy to our Church, are able lineally to set downe your Succession in your Episcopall dignity, from S. Peters Chaire at Rome, to S. Gregory, and from him, from our first Archbishop S. Augustine (though we had many See Anti∣quit. Eccles. Brit. Bod∣wines Con∣version. of Brittanie with others, who write of King u∣cius and Speedes History. Booke. 6. c. 9. p. 73. to 82. Archbishops before his comming) our English Apostle (so the Papists would have him stiled; though Defence of the Apolog. part. 5. c. 1. Divis. 1. Artic. 1. Divis. 24. Bishop Acts and monum. f. 2. p. 9. to 120. lewel, Fox, and Sped. Hist. l. 6. c. 9. others, renounce him) downe∣ward to his Giver that now sits in his chaire, Primate and Metropolitane of all England. I shall then desire your Lordships and this Doctor to proove.
First, that S. Peter was a Bishop by divine Insti∣tution.
Secondly, that he was Bishop of Rome? of which this Doctor is so impatient, that he breakes out unto Page. 43. these passionate words well worthy your Epis∣copall Censure: Whereby See Quest. 1. Object. 6. Answer 2. and most of our learned writers, who have affirmed, that Peter was never at Rome much lesse Bishop there, upon such grounds as this Doctor cannot answere their vanity may ap∣peare, that upon idle ghesses against all antiquity, makes fooles beleeve, that S. Peter w as Epiphanius Contr. Haereses. l. 1. Haer. 27. col. 88. 89. Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 21. Irenaeus. l. 3. c. 3. 4. 5. write that both of them were Bishops of Rome at once, and not Peter the sole Bishop, and Eusebius writes Paul in the first place before Peter. never at Rome; mking the

Succession of Bishops and truth of the Latine Churches, as questionable as the Centurists orders.
Thirdly, Wheter Peter was sole Bishop of Rome, or rather Paul also Bishop as well as hee at the same time, and that by divine institution? whence it will follow, that there ought to be See Euseb. s: 3. c. 10. 11. or Sor. Schol. Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 3 how Bishops of Rome and so of Canterbury, at the same time, not one alone, as two severall persons at least to constitute one Bishop?
Fourthly, Whether it will follow from Peters being Bishop of Rome Iure Divino, that the Arch-bishops of Canterbury and Yorke most necessarily be Archbishops Iure divino?
Fifthly, Whether if this Doctrine be true, this Proposition can be denied; that your Lordships being lineally descended from the Church and Popes of Rome, are both the true and genuine sonnes and members of these two ghostly Parents? If you deny this inference, then you must renounce this divine Title to your Prelacies; if you subscribe unto it (as I presume you dare not, then all his Majesties loyall subjects (who have in their 28. H. 8. c. 10. 1. Eliz. c. 1. oath of allegiance and supremacy, renounced all forraigne Iurisdiction with the Bishops and Church of Rome, abandoned by See Rastall Tit. Rome. severall Acts of Parliament,) must renounce both you, and this your Episcopall Iurisdiction to, thus claimed: which since you can no wayes substantially proove to be Iure Divino, I hope you will now lay downe your Bishop∣riches, according to provise, or else be thoughnever worthy faith or credit more in future time.

Neither may the seeming strangnes of the thing it selfe, deterre you from it, this being no new thing for Bishops to resigne and give over their Bishoprikes. For not to mention, that famous Oratio ad  50. Epis∣copus, in his life before his workes. Socrates Ec∣cles Hist. l. 5. c 7. p Isidor. Pe'usiotae Epist l. 3. Epist. 223. Gregory Nazian∣zen, that great Patriarke of Constantinople, or p Hirax, Nicepho∣rus Eccles. Hist. l. 10. c 11. Iohn of Antioch, with sundry others in the primitive Church, who either out of conscience or for quietnes sake, voluntarily renounced or repudiated their Bishoprikes be∣taking themselves to a more retired private life, wherein they might serve God better. Nor yet to recite the History of Socr. Scho∣last l. 4. c. 18. in the Greeke 23. Niceph. Ec∣cles. Hist. l. 11. c. 37. Petrus Ble∣sensis Epist. 23. Ammonius, who when the Cleargy and people elected him for their Bishop, and urged him to take a Bishopricke upon him, fled away secretly, and cut off his right eare, that the deformity of his body might be a Cano∣nicall impediment, to his election, and, being yet deemed meet▪ to be a Bishop by Timothius the Patriarke, though his Nose and eares had beene both cut off by reason of his lear∣ning and vertues; and the people drawning him against his will to accept that office, hee replyed that hee would like∣wise cut off his tounge to, which pleased them unlesse they would specdily let him goe. Nor yet to remember Socrates Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 18. Niceph. l. 11. c. 37. Euagrius the Philosopher, who when he was constrained to accept a Bishopricke by Theophilus Alexandrinus, renoun∣ced his Ministery rather then hee would accept it, such a dangerous and ill office did hee then repute it, and many good men else, who as Nicephorus records, refused aun∣ciently to accept thereof, though nothing so dangerous and pernicious an office, then as now. Or Nicephorus Nicephori Gregorae Hist. Rom. l. 3. c. 1. 2. f. 9. Cent. Magd. 13. Col. 982. Blemmides, who being elected Patriarch of Constanti∣nople absolutely refused to accept it upon any termes▪ Or Cent. Magd. 10. Col. 599. Werinbaldus unanimously elected Bishop of Spier

who could by no meanes be induced to embrace it: Or Cent. Magd. 6. Col. 644. Theophilus Archdeacon of Adaina, who being chosen Bishop of that See, refused to receive it, and being forced both by the Ministers and people to take it against his will, relinquished it shortly after though in an idle manner. I find it recorded of Niceph. Greg. Hist. Rom. l. 4. 2. 1. f. 11. 13▪ 14. l. 5. fol. 16. l. 6. f. 20. 21. 22. 24. l. 7. f. 29. l. 8 f. 31. Cent. Magd. 8. Col. 669. 672. Cent. 11. Col. 516. 518. Cent. 12. Col. 1384. Cent. 13. Col. 932. 983. Arsenius, Germanus, Paulus Cyprius, Iosephus, Becus, Gregorius Cyprius, Athanasius, Iohn, Ioannes Glicis, Antonius Studites, Cosmas, and Theo∣dosius, all Patriarkes of Constantinople▪ as likewise of Vincentius Spec. Hist. l. 24. c. 25. Cent. Magd. 7. Col. 502. 507. 508. Cent. 8. Col. 763. 786. Cent. 10. Col. 586. Cent. 11. Col. 515. 576. Cent. 12. Col. 1387. 1458. 1468. 1484. 1486. 1491. 1519. 1530. 1544. Cent. 13. Col. 1042. 1052. 1057. 1062. 1078. 1092. 1093. 1094. 1102. 1146. Gildenutus Bishop of Malden, Vlfranius Bishop of Shetne, Arnulphus, Bishop of Mets, Addo-Bishop of Lyons, Victerbus Bishop of Ratisbon, Herigerus Bishop of Meniz, Michael Bishop of Ephesus, Adelberus Bishop of Wirten∣burg. Michael Opites, Patriarch of Athens, Desiderius, Bishop of Flaunders, Bruno the third, Bishop of Colen; Vlrious the second Bishop of Constance, Walther Bishop of Augusta, Gerhardus Bishof Herbipolis, Vlricus Bishop of Rhesia, Brincingus Bishop of Hildeshem, Conrade the se∣cond Bishop of Lubecke. Adam Bishop of Morini in Flaun∣ders, Christianus the second Bishop of Marcte, Sebotho Bishop of Augusta, Everhardus Bishop of Reformes, Vl∣ricus Bishop of Saltsburg, Conradus Bishop of Hildes∣heim, Conradus Bishop of Halberstat, Ludolphus Bishop of the same See, Gunterus Bishop of Magdeburge? Iosia Odol∣pleus, Archbishop of Vpsal in Shland, with sundry other Patriarkes, Archbishops and Bishops, many of them by reason of age or sicknesse, others out of discontent, others

out of a desire of peace, quietnesse, and case from unnecessary cares, and troubles, others of them meerly out of conscience of the unlawfulnesse, danger, hurt, and sinnes accompa∣nying the very office of Bishops as then it is, and yet is used▪) have voluntarily renounced, revived, relinquished, their Patriarkships, Archbishoprikes, and Bishoprikes, and betooke themselves to a more retired, religious, quiet, private, godly life, wherein they might serve God better and showe those manifold occasions of e∣vill and temptations unto which their Episcopall fun∣ction would expresse them both a hazard of their Soules.
If these many forraigne examples, will no wayes moove your Lordships as seeming over strange, we have many pregnant Domestique presidents of like nature, which may perswade you, to make good your promise and induce you to an imitation of them. For I find that Godwine Catalogue of Bishops London. 1615. p. 70. 113. 118. 120. 188. 192. 219. 305. 306. 313. 318. 323. 336. 353. 397. 413. 414. 437. 438 446. 447. 456. 477. 487. 504. 508. 532. 536. 543. 559. 565. 567. 581. 596. 629. 631. 632. 635. 636. 654. 655. 675. 676. Robert Geme∣tiensis, S. Edmund, Boniface, and Robert Kalwar∣by Archbishops of Canterbury; Richard Beaueyes, and William de sancta Maria Bishops of London, Iohn Bokingham, and Philip Ripingdon, Bishops of Lin∣colne, Richard Peche, and Roger de Weseham Bishops of Coventre, and Lichfeild, Herman Bishop of Sherborne, Shaxton Bishop of Sabisbury, William Warmest, Iohn Voysy, and Miles Coverdale (who being deprived in Queene Maries time, cared not to returne to his Bishoprike in Queene Eliza∣beths, setling himselfe in London and there leading a private life as an ordinary Minister) Bishops of Exe∣ter, Iohn Carpenter and Master Hugh Latimer, Bishops of Worcester (the later of whom Fox Acts and Mo∣numents p. 1578. His 2. 3. and 4. Ser∣mons be∣fore King Edward. skipped

for joy when hee had cast off his Rochet, for that hee was eased of so heavy a burthen, and blessed God that he had given him grace to make himselfe a Quondam Bishop;) Ralfe de Maydestan Bishop of Hereford. Putta, Quickhelmus, and Haymo Bishops of Ro∣chester, (the first of them becoming a Schoolemaster, spent the residue of his dayes in that kinde of life, and could never abide to heare of returning to his Bishop∣rike;) Dubricius Bishop of Carleon, Sulghein Bishop of S. Davids, Iohn Hunden, Bishop of Landaffe, Ca∣ducanus Bishop of Bangor, Elguensis Bishop of S. Assaph, Colman, S. Cuthbert, Egelrit and Nicholas de Farnham Bishops of Lindesfarne and Durham, (the later of whom first of all twise refused and then at last resigned his Bishoprike out of conscience) Paulinus de Leedes (who peremptorily refused out of conscience to accept the Bishoprike of Carlile though thereunto elected, and earnestly intreated by King Henry the second to accept the place, who offer him 300. Markes yearly revenue for the increase of his living there, as did Sylvester de Everdon for a time to,) Walter Malclerke Bishop of Carlile; Cedda, Coena aliàs Albert Athelwold, Thurstan, William Wickwane Archbishops of Yorke, who all voluntarily, (most out of conscience, some out of choller, others for their ease, some for their age, others for other causes, best knowen to themselves) resigned both these their Archbishops and Bishop∣rikes, being so many domesticke presidents to your Lordships (who have long since given over the maine part of your Episcopall function preaching,) now to doe the like,

according to your joint and severall Promises, in case you cannot proove your Archiepiscopall and Episcopall lurisdi∣ctions lure divino, and give a satisfactory Answer to these few papers, which I presume you can never doe; since not onely Epist. 2. 83. 85. in Tit. 1. Phil. 1. & 1. Tim. 3. Hieron, In Eph. 4. & 1. Tim. 3. Ambrose, Rom. 1. in Phil. Hom. 11. in 1. Tim 3. Hom. 2. in Tit. 1. Chrysostom, Ep. 19. 83. 85. Quaest. ex utro{que} im∣pert. 100. 101. Au∣gustine, In Phil. 1. 1. Tit. 1. 5. 7. 1. Tim. c. 3. & 4. Acts. 15. & 20. 17. 28. Sedulius, Remigius, Primasius, Theo∣doret, Haymo, Beda, Rabanus Maurus, Theophi∣lact, Ori. l. 7. c. 12. l. 8. c. 5. De Ecclesiast. Officiis. l. 2. c. 7. Isidor Hispalensis, De divinis officiis l. 2. c 35. 36. Alcuminus, In Acts. 15. & 20. 1. Tim 3. Phil. 1. 1. Tit. 1. 5. 7 Oecume∣nius, Distinct. 80. 93. Causa. 2. Qu. 7. Gratian, the Councells of Carthag 4. Con. 22. to 26. of Aquisgran c. 8. 10. 11. Decretal. pars 5. c. 58. 59. 72. 107. 143. 144. Iuo Camo∣tensis, Sent. l. 4. Distinct. 24. Peter Lombard, In Phil. 1. Tit. 1. & 1. Tim. 3. Bruno and Amalarius Fortunatus de Eccles. officiis, l. 2. c. 13. Basilius Magnus, in c. 3. Isayae. Nizianzen. Orat. 9. 13. 15. 21. 28. other an∣cient, but even Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Archbishop of Ardmagh, all the Archbishops, Bishops and Cleargy of England in 37. H. 8. in their Institution of a Christen man chapter of Orders sub∣scribed with all their names, Stokesly Bishop of Lon∣don, Tonstall Bishop of Durham, Reginald Peacocke Bishop of Chichester, Bishop Hooper, Bishop La∣timer, Bishop Iewel, Bishop Alley, but even. Arch-bishop Whitgift himselfe and Bishop Bridges, to o∣mit Wickliffe, Swinderby, Walter Brute, S. Iohn Oldcastle, Master Iohn Lambert, Master Iohn Brad∣ford, and other our Martyrs, Master Thomas Bea∣con, Master Iohn Fox, Master Alexander Novell,

Doctor Whitaker, Doctor Humfry, Doctor Willet, Doctor Agray, Doctor Taylor, Doctor Ames, Doctor Raynolds, Doctor Fulke, and others in Quoted by Gerso∣nius Buce∣rus, the Pe∣tition to Queen E∣lizabeth, Master Parker, & Doctor Bastweeks Bookes. their authorized writings printed here in England cum pri∣vilegio, and publike allowance, with the forecited sta∣tutes of our Realme, and all the Bishops Patents in the Raigne of King Edward the 6. in expresse termes, conclude your Archiepiscopall, and Episcopall Iuris∣diction to, over other Ministers, to be a meere hu∣maine invention long after the Apostles time, to pre∣vent, (or rather as the event hath ever since prooved, to engender, foment, & occasion) all schismes factions, errors and disorders in the Church; when as Matth. 20, 20, to 29, Marc. 10, 35, to 48, Lu. 22. 23, to 28. Christ himselfe and 1. Pet. 5, 1, to 6, Acts. 14, 23, c. 20, 17, 28, Phil. l, 1, Tit. 1, 5, 7. 1. Tim. 3, &c. c. 5, 17, c. 4. 14, Iam. 5, 14▪ his Apostles since, ordained a Parity, an equali∣ty both among his Apostles and Ministers, and ever in∣stituted many Bishops, elders over every particular Church, but never any one Bishop or Minister over many, as the best meanes to preserve unity and roote out sinnes, occasioned onely by the pride, ambitious couvetousnesse, power, and Tyranny of domineering Prelates. Thus craving pardon for my boldnesse in pres∣sing your Lordships, like two honest plaine dealing men, to make good your words, that so we may once againe become fellow-brethren, and walke hand in hand together like e∣quals m See Bp. Iewels De∣fence of the Apologie. part. 2, c. 3, Divis. 5, an excellent place for this purpose. without that infinite Lordly distance, which is now between us. I take my leave and rest

