



Reverend and Worthy BROTHER,
IT was well said of one, That Honour as a shadow flies the pursuer; but is al∣waies at the heeles of him that flieth from it. A∣mongst thankfull men, desert will sooner be descried, the more it muffleth it selfe; and published with the greater applause, the lesse it is affected. You therefore that haue beene free to doe,
may giue vs leaue to acknowledge; for if wee hold our peace, the stones would speake. It is no new observation, that lesser Socie∣ties, as well as larger, haue their periods, of growing, flourishing, and declining; which most men sooner espy, then few giue a reason of. About your standing in Exeter Colledge, what a knot of noted Schollers ap∣peared in sight one of another, to the cre∣dit of our common Mother, Who supplied her other defects with such a faire issue? I hope none can censure amisse an innocent boasting of Gods blessings. It was the Ho∣nour of my eminent Predecessour Dr HOLLAND, His MAIESTIES Professor in Divinity, and Father of so many famous Bishops and Doctors, to be Rector here at that time, when Dr CHETWIND, and Dr DAN. PRICE, now both Deanes, the one of Bristoll, the other of Hereford, D• CAR∣PENTER, Dr FLEMMING, D• WINNYF, Dr WEETCOMB, Dr STANDARD, Dr SAMPSON PRICE, besides Dr BASKERVILE, and Dr VILVAYN, knowne to be worthy Physici∣ans, laid those grounds, which improued
since, haue attained that height the world now takes notice of. Most of these began to shew themselues in their seuerall stati∣ons, together with your selfe, vnder the Moderation especially, of that painfull and judicious Director, M. William Helme, long since a learned Bachelor of Divinity, but then Deane of the Colledge; my faith∣full and deseruing Tutor, ever with thank∣fulnesse of me to be remembred. With this man, in a godly emulation of industrious study, and joynt care for the Colledge good, liued those two religious and constant Preachers, Bachelors of Divinity, M. WIL∣LIAM ORFORD, and M. ISAIAH FARRING∣TON; who forgot vs not when they left vs, but so wrought vpon the pious dispositi∣ons of those Excellent Men, Sir Iohn Acland and M. Iohn Periam Esquire; that Exceter Colledge by their bounty, got a New Hall and Lodgings, of more charge and worth then all the former Bulding. But a greater defect then all this was, of a fit House for Gods Service, that which wee had, being too scant for the Company, and otherwise
very incommodious: This God put into your heart to supply, before wee complai∣ned, or others saw cause; which resoluti∣on could scarce be so naturall to any other, as to Great Sir Thomas Bodley'es Kinsman, and worthy Mr Periam's Nephew. They that view and consider the Worke, will hardly be perswaded, that it was erected at the sole cost of one, Fellow of Exceter Col∣ledge, not preferred, as many are, and ha∣uing two Sonnes of his owne to provide for otherwise.Iohn and George Hak will. But where God inlargeth the heart, such difficulties restraine not the hands. Promise, performance, founding, finishing, came freely on together: which (Wee trust) in time some other of our Worthies will hereafter imitate, as all are ready to commend. All succeeded the better, through your owne carefull presence and directions; and will proue (I am perswa∣ded) more auspicious, in that it was con∣triued by you to be consecrated vpon that very Day, which made England most hap∣py and triumphant, by your Noble Master Prince Charles his Returne from beyond
the Seas. This Sermon was over-hasty to beare any correspondency with the so∣lemnity of a Consecration: But such as it is, you may claime it as your owne over-va∣lued purchese; together with the Author; Whom long sithence you haue obliged vn∣to you by many real kindnesses. Which here he thankfully acknowledgeth, who desires ever to continue
Exceter Colledge. Novemb. 15.

