


SIR,
BEING over-ruled by some friends to print this Sermon, not framed, nor intended to a∣ny such purpose: my choice was easier to whom I should dedicate it. The world seeth how much I am bound to you for the late reall kindnesse confer∣red on me. For which, to shew my selfe thankfull by all honest meanes, the lesse
you expect it, the more I hold it due. Our Saviour, Who most avoided popular ap∣plause, See thou say nothing to any man,Mark. 1.44. mis∣liked not the Samaritane,Luk. 17.16. that turned backe to giue thanks. And much it were to bee wished, that in these daies thanks would serue.Mat. 21.12. But since buyers and sellers haue bro∣ken into the Temple, Iudas'es what will you giue me,Mat. 26.15. and Simon Magus's offering, make most bargaines for Benefices.Act. 8.18. Whereby God is dishonoured, worthy men dis∣heartned, hirelings preferred, good lawes deluded, holy things prophaned, the Church stained, the people starued. The more remarkable therefore hath beene your free dealing with me, and your reli∣gious kinsman's M. Periam's, with M. Or∣ford of our College. If such Patrons might be patternes for disposing the Lords por∣tion many in the country might be better taught and in our Vniversities sooner im∣ployed. My selfe with this sauour of yours am the more affected, because it comes from my natiue country, to which my best services were otherwise devored. Besides,
it stands with a kinde of conveniencie (in my desires at least) that Exeter Colledge e∣specially, should be patronized from Exe∣ter; from which it first had it's name and Founder, and for which it hath bred (as by Gods grace it shall continue to doe) so many men of worth. Concerning this en∣suing discourse, I haue little to say. It must speak for it's selfe, now it appeares abroad. Iudicious is that position of S. Augustine,Haud quic∣quam facit bonos vel ma∣los mores, nisi boni vel mali amores, ep. 52. Amor est vis animae, natu∣rali quodam pondere ferēs eam in locum vel finem suū. Lib. de nat. & dignit. di∣vini amoris cap. 1. Mens liues are as their loues: whereof Ber∣nard giues the reason, because loues is to the soule, as waight to the body, it caries it to the right place, if it be rightly placed. As long as the Larke soareth vpward, shee sings without danger of the Net: but stooping to gaze on the Fowlers deceitfull glasse, she is quickly ensnared. We are all too far inamour'd with the glympses of things below; where the Divels ginnes are al∣waies in a readinesse. Our ancestors first loue was more wisely fixed. My song therefore hath beene, returne, returne,Cant. 6.13. O Shulamite, returne, returne! Which how∣soeuer may sound harsh in some mens
censures; yet the better sort (I trust) will conceiue my meaning to bee good He that runnes in a race,Hòmil. 7. in ep. ad Philip. (saith Chrysostome) is not so much to eye the spectators, as the marke. And Readers it cannot meet with more vnderstanding, then it had hearers. Next to God glory, and the Churches good, if you accept it kindly, I attaine my scope. To whom it is due first fruits, from him that assuredly resteth.
From Exeter Colledge in Oxford, August. 5.

