



Madam,
FOure yeares a∣gon, I preached upon this sub∣ject of spirituall desertions, not having then the least thought to put it to the Presse. But a strong streame of importunities hath borne me downe. My love to my friends hath subdued me to them. They
besieged me so strongly, that they have entred and taken away the keyes of the City, and pillaged me of my pur∣pose; and this little thing, which they cal good booty; but they are mistaken: But now they have it, much good may it doe them; I stood out against them, not because I prized it, but be∣cause I thought it not good enough for them. It shall much please mee, if they ha∣ving made a prey of it, find it worth their having. Since it doth fall into their hands,
the good blessing of GOD goe with it, that it may bee better to them than the ri∣chest spoyles. Madam, in this businesse, the next thing that I desired was to reserve the first for you; and to stamp upon every one, some small impresse of my obliged respects unto you: Ladyship. Besides mine owne engagements, which are neither few nor meane; your great worth was sufficient to wheele my thoughts in this kind to∣wards you.

Among other excellen∣cies, your charitable dispo∣sition, like a rich fountaine, running with large streames of goodnesse many wayes, renders you deservedly ho∣noured of all. It is true noblenesse to bee of a large and diffusive spirit. He that is all for himselfe, must re∣ceive all his thankes from himselfe; but to doe good to others, begets a strong reflexion of true honour. Selfe is a poore center of a mans actions. This is right earth: All things that have
affinity with the Heavens, move upon the center of another which they bene∣fit. Madam, I beseech you seeke to bee still more blessed in a close conjuncti∣on, and sociall operation of true charity, and sincere piety, that these may stand as unwithering Crownes upon your head: and when your old age shall give up to approaching death, you may goe to Heaven full of faith, and full of workes. These asunder are dead; but where they meet they
have life in themselves, and give life to their owners. This life, when your life shall end, he wisheth to you, who is and will be

