



IF Rome, from Peter to this day, had seene such Bishops as your Holinesse is (most High Father and Prelate of Chri∣stians) there had been no place for this Question at this time. Your Moderation and Gentlenesse, answerable to your Name, either had not opened any gap to this Busines, or had barred the same by some graue Prouision, that it should not be opened. I haue here discussed the Question, touching the Temporall authoritie of your See ouer Kings and Princes; which hauing been canuassed with so great Trou∣bles, and so much Blood, hath as oft afflicted the Church, as the Princes themselues: I haue also de∣dicated the same to you, lest I might seeme either to haue shunned your Iudgement, or to haue ma∣naged rather the Cause of the Kings, then of the Church. If I haue not pleased euery mans taste, I desire them to consider, That no Medicine brings

Health without bitternesse. It is peraduenture an odious argument to such as be scrupulous, or mali∣tious, to peruert my sense and meaning: which not withstanding, most Holy Father, I haue vnder∣taken, partly out of the loue of the Truth, partly al∣so, for that, I haue been of opinion, that this Autho∣ritic is the fountaine of all those tempests, where∣with Heresie tosseth your ship at this day.
Pope Iulius the 2. being alienated with a sudden vnkindnes, did not only thunder against Lewes the 12. King of France, but also depriued Iohn King of Nauarre of his kingdome, because hee assisted the French. And out of question Lewes his good for∣tune put by that Thunderbolt from France: but the Nauarrois hearing the Spaniard of one side, and being excluded on the other side by the Mountaines of Pyrene from the helpe of France, was not able to make his part good against the furie of Rome, and the ambition of Spaine. Being spoiled of the greater part of his kingdome, he retired into France, where he had a large and ancient Patrimo∣nie. In the neck of this came the fire which Luther kindled, and the Heires of Iohn, King of Nauarre, inflamed with their priuate hatred, did very soone passe to that side, which bandied against the See of Rome. Therefore came Heresie first to be seattered thorow France, by the partialitie of those Princes, which through the fiaming fire, and after through warres, hath continued to this day. As for Henrie the 8, King of England, who doubteth, that he de∣parted not so much from the Religion as from the Pope, out of his Hatred against the very same Au∣thoritie?

Clemens the 7. had denounced Henrie de∣priued of the Right and Interest of his Kingdoms: and he againe conceiued an anger, which perad∣uenture was not vniust of his part, but blinde and intemperate. He opened England to Heretikes by the occasion of this schisme, who afterwards grow∣ing strong vnder Edward the 6, destroyed the an∣cient Religion. Againe, Scotland affected with the Neighbourhood and Communion of England, hauing held out vnder Iames the 5, at length was attainted in the beginning of Maries raigne, and presently after infected, when the poison had ga∣thered further strength.
So what Heresie or Heretiques soeuer are in France and Britannie at this day (which is their on∣lie strong hold) was conceiued and hatched by this lamentable warmth of the Temporall Autho∣thoritie, as a pestilent egge. Behold, most holy Fa∣ther, how little good it doth the Church to chal∣lenge this Command, which like Scianus his Horse hath euer cast his Masters to the ground. There∣fore haue I vndertaken this worke, out of my affe∣ction to Religion and Truth, not to the Princes, and of a sincere and humble minde haue presented the same to you the Chiefe Pastour, to whom it ap∣pertaineth to iudge of leper and leper.
If there be any thing in these writings, which you shall thinke good and profitable, I shall com∣fort my Old age with the most sweete remem∣brance of so great a Witnesse. But if allowing my affection, yet you shall not allow my Iudgement, it shall be to posteritie an argument of your Mode∣ration,

that vnder you the simple libertie of Dispu∣tation hath not been preiudiciall to any. Let this be an argument of your Moderation, but neuer of my Obstinacie. For whatsoeuer is in this businesse I leaue it to your Censure, that in this booke I may seeme not so much to haue deliuered, what I thinke, as to haue enquired of your Holinesse, what I ought to thinke.
Fare you well.
