



RIGHT Wor∣shipfull, cu∣stome doth claim by pre∣scription, that such bookes as come under the Presse to bee made pub∣lick, should be ushered forth with an Epistle Dedicatory, which if it want, it calleth into suspition, that either the Author hath no friends of
 worth, or that the worke is not worthy patronage. Wherefore having suffered this Tract on the Lords Prayer, to come forth, I tread the common path. The profit of him to whom dedication is made, or testi∣fication of respect and thank∣fulnesse of him that dedica∣teth, or credit and counte∣nance to the booke dedica∣ted, is the marke that is ay∣med at in dedications. All these respects have moved mee to make choyce of your selfe. For though you be al∣ready furnished and fully e∣stablished in the truths there∣in delivered, yet it shall bee profitable unto you, that with some variety you bee put in remembrance of the same things: your children
 likewise (who may reape some good hereby) will bee induced to read and make use of this booke the rather, because it commeth through the hands and under the pa∣tronage of their so loving and beloved father. These are likewise to acknowledge that dept of thankes due to you for the many kindnesses you have shewed mee, for which I do and shall for ever stand beholding unto you: also to signifie my well wish¦ing to your children, and that for the well deservings of those which are come to age, and for the sake of their mother, your deerely belo∣ved wife, now with the Lod, to whom my selfe and mine stood much indebted, whom I could not but admire and
 affect while she lived, whose remembrance I shall alwayes honour, and whose name I desire to keepe alive, for to quicken others now she is dead. For, to speake within compasse, without hyper∣bole, amongst the many gra∣cious women that I have knowne, a more compleate Christian, to whom the Lord had bestowed such a sweet concurrence of gifts of grace and nature, have I  knowne.Nam gau deant bene nati, modò renati. Gratier est oucho ve∣niens è cor∣pore virus. And though birth, beautie, wit, a large heart, and good elocution (all which were eminent in her) without grace are vanitie; yet when these are accompanied with love out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfained (all which abound∣ed in her) each doth make
 other admirable. I would say more, were it not that I shold renew your griefe in remem∣brance of your losse: but I am assured you have learned to bee thankfull for the enjoy∣ment of so rare an helper so long, rather then to over-grieve or bee impatient that you could enioy her no lon∣ger. If you shall please to suf∣fer these my first fruits in this kinde to passe into the world through your hand, they will be the better accepted of the good, and defended from those that are bad, and I shall remaine much bound to you. All that I can say, why I pub∣lish this booke, is, I desire by all meanes, according to my abilitie, to do good in the Church of God. I ac∣knowledge, many have writ∣ten
 worthily upon this sub∣iect, whose helps I have used, yet none that I know in this manner; and I finde that va∣riety in this kinde doth much good. Now the God of hea∣ven, whose glory I intend in this worke, give it favour in the sight of his Church, to the edifying thereof, to whom be praise and glory for ever, Amen. Thus commending you and yours to the pro∣tection and blessing of the Almightie, I humbly take my leave, this 26. of May.

