



Noble Sir;
IVstice, no lesse then Obseruance, vrges me to inscribe this Historie of Tithes to your name. So great a part of it, was lent me by your most readie Courtesie and able Direction, that I restore it rather then giue it you. And it cannot but receiue an increase of estimation from your interest thus seen in it. For to haue borowd your help, or vsd that your inestimable Library (which liues in you) assures a curious Diligence in search after the inmost, least known and most vsefull parts of Historicall Truth both of Past and Pre∣sent Ages. For such is that Truth which your Humanitie liberally dispenses; and such is that which by conference is learned from you. such indeed, as if it were, by your example, more sought after; so much head-long Er∣ror, so many ridiculous impostures would not be thrust on the too credulous, by those which stumble on in the Rode, but neuer with any care looke on each side or behind them.

that is, those which keep their Vnderstandings alwaies in a weake Minoritie that euer wants the Autoritie and Admonition of a Tu∣tor. For, as on the one side, it cannot be doub∣ted but that the too studious Affectation of bare and sterile Antiquitie, which is nothing els but to be exceeding busie about nothing, may soon descend to a Dotage; so on the o∣ther, the Neglect or only vulgar regard of the fruitfull and precious part of it, which giues necessarie light to the Present in matter of State, Law, Historie, and the vnderstanding of good Autors, is but preferring that kind of Ignorant Infancie, which our short life alone allows vs, before the many ages of for∣mer Experience and Obseruation, which may so accumulat yeers to vs as if we had liud euen from the beginning of Time. But you best know this; in whom that vsefull part is so fully eminent, that the most learned through Europe willingly acknowledge it▪ and so o∣pen hath your courtesie euer made the plen∣tious store of it to me, that I could not but thus offer you whatsoeuer is in This of mine own also, as a symbole of some thankfulnes. It was at first destind to you. And howeuer through the hastie fortune that (I know not why) it sufferd at the Presse, some pieces of it haue been disperst without the Honor that

your Name might adde to them; I shall be yet euer so ambitious of that Honor, that the whole shall ne∣uer (for so much as I can preuent) be communicated without this prefixt testimonie of Dutie to you. Re∣ceiue it fauourably, Noble Sir; and continue to me that Happinesse which I enioy in that you neither re∣pute me vnworthy of your Loue, nor permit me in Ignorance when I come to learne of you.
From the Inner Temple,
April. IV. M.DC.XVIII.
