


WHen it pleased God (most woorthy and honorable mē) of his mere goodnes, and not for any my vertues or merites, to cal me to the obe∣dience of his sonne our Lord Iesus Christ, to ex¦ercise my selfe in setting forth his Gospel, in such maner as hath pleased him, I thought it my du∣ty, as much as lay in me, to execute my vocation and assigned burthen, not onely in teaching, but also in minde, lyfe, and maners. For thus I rea∣soned with my selfe: If vnto al men, being iusti∣fied onely by the mercy of the true God, through Iesus Christ our Sauiour, not vndoubtedlye by woorkes, but freelye receauing forgeuenes of synnes, there remayneth no other thyng in the course of this short lyfe, then that hauing obtay∣ned the holy Ghost, and nature being somewhat relieued from his proper cor∣ruption, they should by pure lyfe, and holy actions liuely expresse God hymselfe their regenerator, and Christ their redeemer: the same thing without doubte is much more required of men of my profession, whom the ecclesiasticall spirit hath appointed to administer liuely doctrine vnto other men, that whylest they teach vprightly, by their euil deedes they deface not the waight, and al the authoritye of their doctrine, which thing if they do, they shal in the darknes of this worlde most brightly geue light vnto other, and cause them to lift vp the eyes of theyr mindes vnto God the chiefe fountayne, head, and beginning of al good things, and to honour him with prayses and most vpright religion. Wherfore I gather, and that truly (as I am most fully perswaded) that I my self, and the rest of the Ministers of the doctrine of the sonne of God, ought aboue al other to liue most iustly. But when I considered that the office of this vertue Iustice (whiche shy∣neth among mortall men like the bright starre Lucifer) consisteth wholy in this, to render to euery man that which is his, I desired verely to performe the same not maymed, nor diminished, nor shortened, but consisting of all his partes, so much as humane weakenes would suffer me. And among other excellent parts or kindes therof, a thankfull minde, and mindfull of a benefite receaued, is not to be numbred among the least, whose property is not onely to acknowledge be¦nefites receaued, but also earnestlye to bee desirous to geue thankes for them. This thing when I weigh with my selfe (for I thinke on it oftentimes, I wyll not say continually) there cōmeth into my remembrāce very many & great bene∣fites, which your publike welth, churche & schoole haue heretofore bestowed vpō me. And assuredly, when I recken them, & more depely weigh them, they appere vnto me so many & so great, that I am excedingly afrayd, least I should happen to depart out of this life vngrateful, which thing vndoutedly should be more bit¦ter vnto me, thē death it self. Ye, when I came out of Italy for religiō sake, with most incredible humanity receaued me: ye gaue me the fredome of your most am¦ple city: ye placed me in that Schoole, which ye not long before with great praise of wyse & godly men had erected: ther ye appoynted me a Professor of holy scrip∣tures, wheras I liued a fellow with most learned and excellent men, more then fiue yeares. All which time ye mayntained me with a very liberal stipend. Ye, when I was called into England, decreed that I should go thither, where cer∣tayne yeares I was teaching the Gospel in the Vniuersity of Oxford, namelye vntil such time as Edward the sixt of that name, that most woorthye King, and which can neuer be praysed inough, was taken away by vntimely death, which brought vnto all the godly, griefe, mourning, and sundrye and hard vexacions. Ye exceding louingly receued me, when I returned thence to Argentine, & pla∣ced me in the same roume, wherin I was with you before. Also, when the most noble Senate of Tigure called me into the place of Pellicanus, which was ther
 a Professor of Diuinity, ye, although both to your great griefe and also to mine, did yet most louinglye let me go. The cause of my departure I wyll not nowe speake of, bicause it is to all men knowen wel inough. Thus much onely wil I say, that I do both vehemently desyre, and also hope, that this stop or let may be taken away out of the field of the Lord. These your benefits, which are of them selues ample and noble, I do nothing encrease nor amplify: But this one thing I testify, that they neuer slipped out of minde, neither is it possible but that they being layd vp in the bottom of my hart, shal there abide for euer. Howbeit, bi∣cause the remembrance and thinking on the benefites which I haue receaued of you doth not satisfy me, I haue alwayes desired to make open vnto al men my good will and gratefull hart towardes you, which haue bene so wonderfull be∣neficial towardes me, wherefore I haue very often times determined with my selfe, one tyme at the length to declare by some signification or monument my singular affection, and ardent loue towardes your publike wealth, Church and Schoole. But for as muche as touchynge ryches of thys worlde, I haue no∣thing wherwithal to performe the same, least. I should dye frustrate of my so ho∣nest and vehement a desire, being about now to set forth a Comentary vpon the holy history of the Iudges: As I haue taught it in your Schoole, I haue deter∣mined to dedicate it to your name, where as otherwise I would haue offred vn∣to you thinges much greater and better, if strength & ability had answered vnto my minde. Neither was I hereunto perswaded onely by the reason now alled∣ged, namely by some maner of meanes to shew my good wyl towards you, and not to geue any man occasion of suspicion, that in chaunging my place I should haue shaken of my endeuour and study towardes you: (which thing vndoubted¦ly is not so: For I haue not laid aside these things, but they most firmly sticke in my mind daily more & more.) But this also did driue me to do this, for that this boke was writtē in your city. And therfore I thought it meete, that in the posses¦sion therof no man should be preferred before you. Farther, this did not a lytle moue me, for that the argumēt of this history most aptly agreeth with you. For euen as God at sundry times stirred vp Iudges vnto the Hebrewes, to deliuer them when they were oppressed with the tiranny of their enemies: So wer you not amonge the last stirred vp by his goodnes and grace, to bring to lyght the Gospell of the sonne of God, when it was held captiue in darknes by the domi∣nion and violence of hipocrites, and when the mindes of Christiās as touchyng godlynes were euery where in a maner baren and vnfruitfull. Here assuredlye I could make mencion of very many your actes both godly and honorable: but I ouerpasse them, for that you haue manye eloquent and notable publishers a∣broade of your doinges, which most aboundantly and elegantly haue set foorth your valiantnes of minde, your constancy in embracing and spreading abroade of the Gospel of Christ, and your liberality in maintaining your notable, moste learned and famous Schoole. Neyther vndoubtedly can the praises which they haue geuen you bee reproued of anye lye, for as muche as you haue with great seruentnes of fayth receaued the doctrine of the sonne of God, and ye are made vnto other a notable example of renuing of piety. And afterward when by rea∣son of iniquity of times thinges which wer wel ordered, semed somwhat to slide and fall to decaye, ye hauing firme confidence of the ayde of God, verye godlys and wisely tooke courage vnto you, and euen now in this time ye stoutly and luckely did driue out the remnantes of the Amorrihites and Chananites out of the inheritance of the Lord, which pertayned to your lot. Which your act hath wyth al the godly, gotten you great grace, prayse, glory, and fauour. Wherefore I, as which vehemently desyre honor, fame and dignity vnto the City of Argen¦tine, do excedingly reioyce, for your most excellent and holy act. And I do desyre god the father of mercy, that ye being inflamed and kindled with his spirit, may alwaies go forward to better thinges. For so long as we wander here on earth, as straungers from our country which is in heauen, the Church is not fully per¦fect, neither in al partes absolute: For alwayes somthing is therein wanting, e∣specially seing we are fallen into the yron age of the latter time. For was there not in the goldē world of the Church many discords, troubles, and maners not agreable vnto a Christian life? And shal not that part of the world which is chri¦stened, be now sycke of the same discōmodities and vices, when for age it nowe doteth? Let vs looke vpon the Church of the Hebrues, which at that tyme was the peculiar people of God, seperated from al nacions. Vndoubtedlye we shall
 there finde sundry courses and alteracions of thinges. Some times they slipped out of the rightway. Sometimes they repented and lamented and amended the synnes wherin they had fallen. But whilest they lay in their sinnes and wicked¦nes, they were by God corrected with greuous afflictions, and most sharp pu∣nishments. But returning vnto him, they faithfully implored his ayde: which when they had obtayned, they agayne preuailed against their enemies. In them (except we be vtterly blinde) we see the image of the goodnes of God towardes the sayntes, and his seuerity vpon the wicked painted, and liuely expressed as it were in a table that is most rightly polished. Blessed is God, which defendeth his in most great daungers and calamities, and faythfully keepeth his safe and found: which commeth of his goodnes, neither suffereth he them wholye to fall from piety, or vtterly to be consumed with miseries and aduersities. And we, if we note these thinges in thys holye historye, shall not maruayle that the peo¦ple of God were often times tossed, and euen in maner oppressed with so many and greuous chaunces: for whether we behold the godly, or whether we behold the vngodly, we shall perceaue that al these thinges were done with great fruit, and most wyse consideracion. For vnto those, whom God the heauenlye father hath euen from without beginning chosen vnto him by Iesus Christe, and our of an innumerable number of mortall men adopted to be his children, aduersi∣ties did to this end happen, that euen as gold and syluer are by the power of fire purged, so their mindes should proue more pure by aduersities. For by them as by lyuelye flames, the loue of our selfe, and of frayle and transitorye thinges is burnt vp. But the studies of piety and innocency are wonderfully kindled and inflamed. But of the vngodly, whom the diuine prouidence hath most iustly de∣creed to punish with eternal death, the consideracion is farre otherwise. For ad∣uersities do not burne away their spots and vices, but rather encrease and aug∣ment them, by the augmentaciō of which aduersities the impiety of their minds also increaseth, euen as we see that with one and the selfe same fyre claye waxeth hard, and wax melteth away.
Wherefore the reading of the golden history of the Iudges is most profitable, so that there want not fayth in reading of them, and prayers be without ceasing added, whereby we may pray vnto God not fayntly, but feruently, to make his woordes of efficacy in vs by the holy Ghost. For those holye narracions are as it were certaine nourishments or stayes, whereby our confidence towardes the promises of God is wonderfully confirmed, and our minde is erected to a most firme hope of obtayning of them. For whylest we diligentlye consider the won∣derful notable actes which God did for the health and safety of the nacion of the Hebrues, it is vncredible to be spoken, how our hartes are styrred vp to woor∣ship and honour him sincerely and religiously. Farther, in those heroicall actes the incredible power and wysdome of the prouidence of God doth euery where aboundantly and brightly shine forth, which receaued with no lesse pleasure thē fruite. For by those thinges which are declared (except we wyll wyllynglye be blinde) may easely be vnderstand, that whatsoeuer was done, or succeded lucke¦ly or vnluckely, at home or on warfare, the same is to be attributed either to the iustice, or els to the mercy of the eternal God. We are also most plainlye taught, that God neglecteth not thinges humane. But that he hath a consideracion and regard ouer the godly and the vngodly, and of them to the one he giueth ioy and pleasure, but the other he at the last moste greuouslye punisheth. Farther, thys thing is chiefly to be marked, that Iesus Christ the sonne of God is not secluded from thys holy history. For for as much as he is the end of the law, and sūme of the holy scripture, as much as this booke pertaineth vnto the law, and is a part of the holy scripture, so much doth it shew and most euidently preach Christ vn∣to the Readers. For the actes of noble captaines are here rehearsed, which (as it is written vnto the Hebrues) through fayth wan kingdomes, wrought righ∣teousnes, and obtayned the promise. But that fayth which is natural and sound includeth Christ him selfe, vnto whom singularly and in a maner onely it hath a regard. For by him the promises of God are made of efficacye. Wherfore whilest we behold the wonderful actes of the Iudges, we ought to haue before our eyes the excellent fayth which brightly shined in them, & together with it the cōmon deliuerer of humane kinde, namely the sonne of God Christ Iesus, whom they beheld as their Captaine and Emperour. And that not vnwoorthely, for he by them wrought, and by them did set the people at liberty, in admonishing them
 by the voyces of Angels, and oracles of Prophetes, in confirming them in daun¦gers, and at the last not vnconstantlye but most faythfullye performing those thinges which he had before most liberally promised. Lastlye, when we heare that the Hebrues, which were the members of the same Christ, were sometime oppressed and slayne of their enemies. Let vs in them acknowledge the death and tormētes of our head. And in their victories and triumphes. Let vs behold his resurrection, kingdome and glory. For God hath framed vnto vs winges of his spirite and woord: but if through our own default we become fleshy and hea¦uy, we shal not be caryed vp into heauen, but together with beastes bee drawen downewarde.
I haue hetherto spoken of the history, how commodious and profitable it is to all the worshippers of god, and how aptly it pertayneth vnto you (most ex∣cellent rulers.) Wherfore it should seme that I should now somwhat speake of the interpretacion, which I haue added. But therof I wyll speake nothing: for I feele that those thinges which come out of my study and labour, are so scien∣der and small, that I thinke them not worthy of commendacion.
There is one thing onely which I dare boldly affirme, that I by this my doc¦trine, howsoeuer it be, my wyl was to be a helpe to the faythful of Christ. Ney∣ther do I deny, but that there wer other much better learned then I am, which with great prayse and fruit exercised themselues in this selfe same course of stu∣dy: howbeit, bicause I excedingly allow the sentence of Basilius (who in his .18. Epistle writeth: Euen as welles, the more they are drawen, the better they are, so vndoubtedly are the wordes of God: for the more diligently they are handled and vsed, the more plentiful fruit is by them receaued) therfore I tooke in hand to interpretate this history. And although I am not ignorant, that you do so a∣bound with the most learned woorkes of other men, that ye neede not thys my commentary: yet to that I answer, that to riche men also are debtes payde, and giftes are geuen vnto kinges, who otherwise are more riche. Who is more riche then God himselfe? Vnto whō neuertheles al the godly do both geue thankes, & also to their power referre thankes. Wherefore I doo not offer vnto you thys slight gift, bicause I thinke that ye haue neede thereof, but that your benefites should not remayne with me longer then is meete, as though they wer neglec∣ted. Farther, that we might be styl more and more bound together in amity. For these duties are certayn common bondes, wherwith men are pleasauntlye and profitably bound together betwene themselues. I haue in deede bene long in your debt, yea rather I shal alwayes be in your debt (for I shal neuer be able to pay al that I owe vnto you) wherfore I wil gladly be perpetually in your debt. And wil with great pleasure alwayes behold, keepe and preserue your benefits layd vp with me, so that they shal neuer dye, nor neuer at anye time slyp out of my mynde. So fare you wel (most worthy and noble men.) God the father of mercy encrease, prosper, and for euer blesse you together with your publike wealth, Church and Schoole, in al good thinges, through Iesus Christ our Sauiour. Amen.
At Tigure the .22. of December. 1560.
