


THe old opinion (right hono∣rable and my singuler good Lord) being no lesse auncient then true, whiche accomptes hym an ill man, that is good but for him selfe (as who saye, from whom no goodnes commeth to the help of others) most like a Drone in a Bee hiue, shrow∣ded there for his owne sucke, not for the common wealth of Bees, whom therefore they suffer not a∣mong them, but kill & cast out, as an vnkinde member, vnnaturall, and not to be endured in their state: hath bene alwayes the rappyng ham∣mer in my head, and the spurre to my side, to knocke and pricke me for∣ward (that am of my selfe lytle able to do) to procure what I can (to my calling at least) for the profit of my vniuersal country men, by whom & among whom, as a member I lyue.
In respect whereof, among other it hath pleased God, to geue me leaue (by your Lordships meane, vnder the lisence of my most dread so∣ueraigne Lady and Prince) to publish and set out to the glory of Gods Maiestie chieflie: I haue taken vpon me to plant and put foorth (lyke such a husbande, as can not endure the plowe of my profession to stande vnoccupied) this notable and right excellent woorke of that famous, graue, and great learned Doctor, Maister Peter Martir (entiteled His Commentary vpon the booke of Iudges) being turned, at the request of the learned, out of that tounge, wherein he wrote it, into our English phrase, in which it is most meete for vs. As who shoulde saye, what he published into one toung priuately, he ment (as I take it) shoulde be de∣liuered to all men generally (Christians or other) to whom it maye doo good. VVhose labour tending to suche effect, cannot, but like a tree that beares many braunches, spread it selfe abroad, tyll it stretche with hys fruit to many countries, nacions, and languages, out of the same spryng
 and stocke, wherin he first planted it to grow, and hath graffed it for vs, And happy that spring (yea very happye) that caries such course of wa∣ter, to furnishe so many Conductes, for the necessity and helpe of so many inhabitors, as it can not but haue concourse among. And happy that ser∣uant that hath so bestowed his maisters talent, as it cannot but turne a∣gayne with so great an interest to the owner. And twise happy they, that may so taste and drinke of it, as the glory may be Gods, and the comfort theirs, which being the onely but and marke wherat this Markmā shot: what deserueth such an Archer to be accompted of? I that thinke my selfe scant meete to set out his booke, do recken my selfe much more vn∣meete to expres his prayse. As if I were either able or meete, what should I labour to shewe your honour a whole man by his peece, vnlesse (as it might he said) I ment to shewe your honour the Sunne by a candle. Him selfe therfore that hath taken this paine vpon him, and best can shewe him selfe by his owne shape: shall report him selfe in his owne labour to your honour, as he is best able. VVho as he thought it most meete for his part, to vnfolde the secretes of that cōmon wealth in the time of the Iud∣ges, for the plainer vnderstanding of the sence therof, to the commoditie of vs, and others after vs and him: So haue I thought it meete for me, and my very duty to your honor, humbly to present and offer the same (by me now published) vnto your honorable hands, as from the Iudges of Israel and him, to one a Iudge and Ruler of this my natiue countrye and people, vnder our supreme Iudge, our most dread soueraigne Lady the Queenes Maiestie. Hauing had nothing meeter wherby to expresse my faithfull hart, good mynde, and duty, to your honourable Lordshyp, then thys the simple laboure of my plowe: the fruite wherof cannot be but yours, that are owner of me.
Humbly beseching the same to accept it in as good part, as my faith∣full seruiceable hart towardes your honour, hath and doth meane it. Beseching God, that so graciouslye hath lyked to beginne wyth your Lordship hitherto, mercifullye continue and keepe the same, to hys glorye, to the comfort of your selfe, and hope that this your Countrye of Israell (whereof you are a Iudge) hath concea∣ued of you.

