



LEt it stand with your pleasures, whome one profession of religion towards God, and execution of iu∣stice towards man, whom one neere neighbourhood, and one neere af∣fection combine, to be conioyned al∣so in this dedication: wherein, as my desire is to manifest my dutifull respect of you both, so also to entreate your fauourable construction and acceptance of this my presumption: whereof I want not iust reasons, whether I looke vpon you ioyntly, or seuerally. Your ioynt gouernement vnder which we the inhabitants of this towne of Watford

enioy our publike peace, bindeth all of vs wherein wee may, to testifie our thankefulnes for so great and publike a good. God might gouerne the world (if he pleased) by himselfe immediately, yet he committeth it to Magi∣strates and Rulers, both supreame, and delegates; whom he honoureth with an high style,Zach. 4. calling them assistants to him that ruleth the whole earth: yea the sheilds of the earth, to beare off wrongs and euills from men.Psal. 47.9. The boughes of this faire tree of magistracie (as in that sacred em∣bleme) are shelter for all,Dan. 4.7.17. and the fruit meat for all. And the welding of so stately an ordinance, is not to be com∣mitted, but to fit and qualified persons, as they are de∣scribed by Iethro to Moses by fowre most worthie pro∣perties.Exod. 18.21.
First; they must be men of courage, stout to vndergoe  all the parts of their calling. How fit a vertue this is for a Magistrate will appeare, if we consider, 1. the good and godly in the land,Rom. 13.3. who are to be incouraged and praised in well doing by their Rulers: which will neuer be, if a man be afraid to be seene, or be timorous, as Ni∣codemus was, who would faine be with Christ, but cast himselfe into the night, as though that had bin a worke of darknesse. Moses for his courage was called Pharaohs God, hee told Pharaoh to his face, hee would not leaue an hoofe behind him, that Pharaoh himselfe stood in awe of him. 2. The wicked, who are stout in their wicked∣nesse; and sinne is with them as bold as an harlot, as Sa∣lomon speaketh. Now the Magistrate with Iob, must bestirre himselfe, and cloath himselfe with zeale and courage, that the young men may hide themselues, and the olde rise vp at his presence:Iob. 29.8. whereas an irreligious mild∣nesse and remisnesse, strengthneth the hands of the vn∣godly. 3. The wicked one, euen Satan himselfe, who emboldneth offenders against the cheifest ordinances of God; I meane Magistracie, and Ministrie, to bring

them into contempt▪ and so bring in all confusion into the earth.
Secondly, they must be men fearing God, and they are  specially called vpon to kisse the Sonne of God. For,Psal. 2 1. Gods feare is the beginning of wisedome: and who should be wise, if not Magistrates, to iudge and discerne of the most difficult cases amongst men? 2. If hee feare not God, hee will feare the face of man, and so accept of persons condemned, Deut. 1.17. 3. Hee must here∣in assist the Lord himselfe in planting the feare of God in all his gouernment. Cyrus must performe not his own, but all the Lords desire: hee must say to Ierusalem, thou shalt be built, and to the Temple,Isa. 44.18. thy foundations shall be sure∣ly laid. Euery Christian Magistrate must be a nursing Fa∣ther to the Church: and here begin his gouernment, as Moses with celebrating the passeouer, Ioshua with renew∣ing circumcision, Gideon, with destroying Baal,Exod. 12. Ioshua, 5.7. Iudg 6. Dauid with establishing the Arke, Salomon with building Gods house, Asa with renewing the Lords Altar. And where∣as many inferiour Magistrates looke on, whilest this care slippeth into other mens hands; yet must they all knowe, that they are Gods vicegerents; and the iudgement is Gods, that is, from God, and for God: and therefore they must not onely cut off thefts, murders, adulteries, and such barbarous outrages, and riots against publicke peace and humane societie; but blasphemies, heresies, swearing, sabbaoth-breaking; and such sinnes as more directly oppose God and his worship: and these will the feare of God where it is especially hunt out. This was the grace that made Nehemiah seeke the wealth of Israel, by making the Princes sweare to Gods couenant: this made him almost forget himselfe in zealous reuenge against the Sabbath-breakers: all Ierusalem could not maintaine this one sinne against that one godly magistrate.
Thirdly, magistrates must be men dealing truely. 1. af∣fecting 

sinceritie, truth, and iustice, which are the verie sinewes of humane societie. 2. effecting it by taking true paines, that the truth of euery cause may be sifted out; and receiue a true sentence,Exod. 23.6. Deut. 16.20 that the poore may not bee borne downe with power and greatnesse, nor goe away in a good cause disappointed. 3. opposing with all their strength, whatsoeuer is opposite vnto truth: not suf∣fering the truth to be clouded and vailed by flourishing pleas,Optia res∣pub. quae maximè le∣ges minimè rhetores au∣diat. or shewes of truth: but resembling God, whose iudgement seat is said to be a throne of white yvorie, for the puritie and innocencie both of the Iudge and iudg∣ment, before which euerie secret shall one day be set in a cleare light.
Fourthly, they must be men hating couetousnesse. For,  1. a publicke person must seeke the publicke good, and not be priuately minded, or selfe-seeking. 2. Hee will then hate gifts, which blind the wise, and peruert the words of righteousnesse: Now what a fearefull inuersi∣on of Gods order were it, if hee who is set vp to exe∣cute iudgement, should peruert it? 3. Hee is in place wherein (if hee be corrupt) hee may helpe himselfe by the damage of others: but who should hinder the con∣fusion that would flow in as a deluge, if the meanes ordained by God to helpe the oppressed, should be cor∣rupted to helpe forward oppression? Now such a man thus qualified, Iethro thought fit to be set ouer thousands, and ouer hundreths; ouer fifties, and ouer tens. To this serue those auncient ceremonies vsed among Gods own people, in the installing of their gouernours: example whereof we haue in Ioash, whom when Iehoiadah had set into the right of his kingdome,2. King. 11▪ 12 they did three things  vnto him. First, they crowned him with a crowne of pure gold, set with pearles and precious stones: and these signified both the integritie of his person, and the incor∣ruption  of his manners. 2. They gaue him the booke of

the testimonie: the booke shewed that wisedome is meet for a Ruler: and that it was the booke of the testimonie, sheweth, that 1. the most necessarie wisedome for a Ma∣gistrate, is the wisedome of God: 2. that hee must iudge by Gods booke and directions, and therefore must be learned in Gods lawes, and skilfull in the cases of Gods statute booke: and 3. the booke was giuen him, that he might keepe and preserue it, and see the contents of it obserued in others: for he is a keeper of both the Tables. 3. They annointed him, to signifie the power and gifts of courage, magnanimitie, and other  ornaments fit to attend Magistracie. And indeed it no∣tably preserueth the honour of this ordinance, when the person executing it, is as eminent in gifts and graces, as in place, and preheminence. I take not vpon mee to teach your Worships how to gouerne, but only declare how the Lord would euery way haue this ordinance of his, and the bearers of it honoured, and what be the spe∣ciall ornaments which draw the eyes, and reuerent re∣spect of inferiours vpon you.
Now more seuerally, your grauitie (Reuerend Iudge your humanitie, your equitie in the lust and vnpartiall carriage of causes, your zeale against vice and vicious persons, who gladly decline your censure, your diligent frequenting the house of God; your care of promoting the pure worship of God, which you witnesse by your new erection dedicated thereunto▪ haue got you a wor∣thy and due regard through all our countrie, wherein though I be but a stranger, yet must he be more strange that meeteth not with the report of your vertues. And you noble Knight (whome I haue knowne of lon∣ger time) will giue mee leaue to conceale a great part of that I conceiue of your worth. You doe well to imitate your worthie parents, one of whom hath left you with a faire inheritance, a patterne (as I haue heard)

of many vertues, from which you may not depart: the other, God hath yet left vnto you, to follow you with motherly aduise and counsell, to set before you still the best patterns: but aboue all, the glasse of Gods word; the reuerent obseruation whereof, if you adde to the other excellent indowements of your minde, person, and estate, you shall giue a number of your yeares and ranke leaue to come behind you, and follow you a farre off, whilest your country shall be reaping the encrease, and your selfe the comfort of those hopefull seeds which everie one that know you, acknowledg with gladnes in you.
Thus humbly craving pardon for my boldnes, I com∣mend this booke to your worships acceptance, which for the whole argument (containing a plaine vnfolding of the most grounds and maine pillars of our religion) is worthy your respect; and your selues, with your vertu∣ous Ladies, and hopefull children, together with all your studies and endeauours for the Church or Com∣monwealth, to the rich blessing of God: who fill your hearts with heauenly wisedome, and preserue you both blameles till his appearing, Amen. Watford, Iuly 20.


