


HONOURED Friends: By your experienced kind∣nesse I have emboldened my selfe at this time, to present you with a few pa∣pers of our ancient friend, Reverend Do∣ctor Taylor, whom alive you heard glad∣ly. The subject of them is, the Principles of Christian Practice. All Philosophie saith: such as the Principles are, such



are the Affections, and the Conclusions. The world seeth it in those famous divi∣sions, of Gentilisme, Judaisme, Maho∣metisme, and Christianisme: wherein, as any is more throughly grounded, so he is more resolved in himselfe, and divi∣ded from others. The Church also seeth and bewaileth it in her wofull divisions. To let passe the Theorie, and consider the Practice (wherewith wee have now to doe:) wee shall easily observe in the course of Christians, that, as they lay downe their Principles, and frame their plots and projects, so their lives also, and particular passages thereof, are framed.
The maine aime and plot of a true Christian is, to please God and save his soule howsoever. Accordingly hee re∣solves to denie himselfe, that hee may give up himselfe wholly unto God: hee seekes out after Christ, and will get this great pearle, though hee sell him∣selfe out of all his worldly endowments and comforts: hee meanes afterward to follow Christ, even through thicke and



thinne, and though hee bee daily compelled to take up his crosse in following him: Hee knowes, that by overmuch daintinesse and deli∣cacie in the way of holy obedience, hee may hazzard his soule, which, if hee had lost a a temporall life, hee might have received againe in life eternall. Hee considers, that if hee could get or hold ne∣ver so much of these worldly com∣forts, yet all would bee meere losse upon the losse of his soule: and, if his soule be once lost, it can ne∣ver bee recovered againe. And howsoever hee may cheare up him∣self for a while with those vanities, yea perhaps for a long while, yet in the day of judgement at farthest; when Christ comes to reckon' for e∣very mans talent and employment; hee knowes he must rue the time of his former securitie, or licentious∣nesse; whenas only those that have aimed aright, and rightly steared



their course for God and heaven, shall (though with much hardship) arrive at the wished haven of rest and glorie. Hereupon it is, that many a poore Christian wades a∣gainst the streame, and labours still to approve himselfe unto God, by 2. Cor. 6. 4. honour and dishonour, by good re∣port and bad report, by the armour of righteousnesse on the right hand, and on the lest. So that hee may obtaine that incorruptible crowne of life, which is set before him, he cares not what paines hee takes in running, nor how hard censures hee endureth from carnall specta∣tours. That hee may not mistake his way, through blindenesse in himselfe, or false guides abroad, hee useth the means of sound and heavenly knowledge, and in them all intreats the Lords helpe and guidance, who alone is able to di∣rect, comfort, and strengthen him in his pilgrimage: and, when hee



obtaines this, hee soots it lustily along, till in the strait way, though rough, and full of crosses, hee gets into his Fathers house, where is bread enough, and comfort, and glory. And whereas in his travel∣ling hee espies a number of sensuall men, who are wholly taken up with Jude 19. their pleasures, treasures, honours, friends, seastings, or other trifles, these hee pitieth, and prayeth for them, and resolveth for his owne part, not to entangle himselfe with the affaires of this life, that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a souldier. 2 Tim. 2. 4.
This is the disposition, and these the behaviours of a Christian well principled and bottomed; The effe∣cting whereof, both the Authour intended in preaching these things, and I now intend in publishing them: together with encouragement to all those, who stand stoutly, wisely, and constantly to their own



Principles, whatever the affecti∣ons and conclusions of the world be toward them.
But on the other side, numbers of men and women, missing of these Principles, and falling upon other which are deceitfull, doe spend their lives in meere vanities, and lose both God and their soules before they are aware. Some meane to bee rich howsoever, esteeming wealth to be the blessednes of man: accor∣ding to which ground, they sticke not for injustice, bribery, oppression, cheating, and other indirect arts of getting. Others attend their plea∣sures, and account it happinesse to live deliciously for a season: which therefore they will enjoy, though with uncleannesse, intemperance, unthriftinesse, prodigalitie, other sinnes, and totall forgetfulnesse of the Afflictions of Joseph. Others Amos 6. 6. admire the honours of the world, or credite with men of the world, or



applause of the people: which to ob∣taine and hold, they care not though they undermine, traduce, flatter, smooth, betray religion, any thing: Yet honour me before the peo∣ple. And others, taking up other 1. Sam. 15. 30. ends, and grounding themselves upon Principles of their owne, goe wide of Christ and heaven, as farre as East and West.
Yea though they will seeme sometimes to put on a vizard of re∣ligion. The Hypocrite mindes no∣thing but his owne selfe-respects; to have his Minister thinke well of him, to be accounted some body in the profession, to get credite with some who may doe him a good turne another day, to get friends, custo∣mers, chapmen, and worke out his owne advantages the more freely and slily: Accordingly hee holds none but an hobling course in pro∣fessing religion, halts betweene two opinions, sayes and unsayes; in one



companie speakes well of good men, and good things, in another companie quite otherwise, pretends God, and intends himselfe, in fine, makes nothing of his religion, and if the winde serve right, hee will take the next occasion to strike saile, and become a Persecutour of religion and religious persons.
The like of many Apostates. What other cause can be given, why numbers of Christians fall off from the profession or obedience of the Gospell, but that they never lear∣ned well and throughly these Prin∣ciples of Christian Practice, to denie themselves, to take up their crosse, to follow Christ, to looke to the welfare of their soules how∣soever, to provide for the day of their accounts, to run and strive lawfully, to depend on God by prayer for direction and blessing, and to save themselves from this untoward generation, of Epicures



and worldlings? If these grounds had beene well laid, they had ne∣ver left off building so shamefully, as now have done: nor had their house come tumbling upon their heads, but that their foundation was laid in the sands.
Others there are, that abuse good Principles (as, concerning the infinite mercie of God, and me∣rit of Christ:) or settle upon false and insufficient Principles, out∣ward prosperitie, deliverance out of trouble and danger, example of the multitude, rulers, preachers, and the like; thereby bolstering up themselves, either in grosse pro∣saneness, or a refined Atheisme, till their soules be utterly lost, unlesse the mercie and grace of God doe greatly prevent them.
They are thrice happie, who are thus prevented. It is the Lord only, who gives us both a Saviour, and the knowledge of salvation, and



wisedome to attend our Principles aright: hee doth it for us, and must therefore have all the glory. To his grace and mercie I commend you both (my much respected Friends:) intreating your acceptance of this small present, and pardon for this large Preface. The Lord often re∣new your yeares upon you, with all heavenly and earthly blessings, and peace upon Sion. So prayeth,
Isleworth. Dec. 20. 1634.

