



Right Honourable
THe Church of God in the Scriptures is not unfitly compared unto a Kingdome, and unto a family; And first un∣to a Kingdome, where∣in there are filij regis Kings sonnes, who suc∣ceede to their Father as heires of the King∣dome; secondly, filij regni the children of the Kingdome, who sometimes mendaciter se subijci∣unt regi, Psal. 18. Thirdly, exteri who doe not acknowledge the King, nor he them for his subjects. So in the Church there are filij regis,
 who are the true children of God, and heires of eternall inheritance, and filij regni, who make a shew and profession of Religion, yet many of them may be cast out of the King∣dome into utter darkenesse Mat. 8.12. Lastly, there are exteri, who live altogether without the Church and hate her, those doth God abhorre Secondly, she is compared to a family where∣in there are some who are begotten of the same father, borne of the same mother, and , sucking one milke, and those are said to be borne at home, or home borne Levit. 18.9. Jer. 2.14. Those were heires succeeding to their fathers inheritance. Secondly there were those who were borne of the same mother, but not begotten of the same father, and those were called foris nati Levit. 18.9. because fami∣lia matris (as the Hebrewes say) non est familia; and thirdly, those who are cast out of the family and belong not to it, as bastards; such a one was Jepthe Judg. 11.5. who got no possession with his brethren in his fathers inheritance. So it is in the spirituall familie the Church, those who are begotten of the immortall seede of the VVord by God their Father, and borne in the Church their mother, and  nursed upon the sincere milke, 1 Pet 2.2. those are
 borne at home, or homeborne; There are others who are borne of the same mother  mothers children, but not begotten by one father, and many of them are foris nati, when they are members of the visible Church onely, who if they be not begotten of the im∣mortall seed of the word, and are not mem∣bers of the invisible Church also, the Lord reckons them not as his children. The Church their mother bestowes some outward favours upon them, but yet they are not those true children who shall be partakers of the inheri∣tance, and those mothers children onely often∣times persecute their brethren, Cant. 1.6. My mothers children were angry with me; but the third sort are those who are altogether out of the Church, and those the Church acknowledg∣eth not as her children. Such are those foure degenerate sonnes, the Atheist, the Magician, the Jdolater, and the Jew, whom the Lord ac∣knowledgeth not for his children, but will have them cast out like Hagars brats. Those foure doe hate the true Church most, per∣secute her, and detest her; and the Church to them is like a speckled bird or Owle Ier. 12.9. who all set themselves against the Church; these foure are mightily increased now in the
 world, they are the bane both of the Church & Commonwealth, seeking like the Boare in the Forrest to roote out the Lords Vineyard; but the Lord hath put a hedge about his Vineyard to save it from them, and hee hath set up a watch-tower within her, to discover those ene∣mies; he hath set the magistrate about her as a wall to defend her, and the Pastors as watch∣men to observe them, and it is a blessed thing when these two agree for the safetie of the Church, then Moses and Aaron meete together and kisse one another, Exod. 4.16. there is a great relation betwixt these two, the Church and Commonwealth, and they have not beene unfitly compared to Hippocrates twinnes, when the one laughed so did the other, and when the one wept so did the other; so when the Church of God prospereth so doth the Com∣monwealth, and when the Commonwealth decayeth so doth the Church, but when the care of both these is matched in one worthy person, that is an happie union, then they are like the two eyes in the head, which although they be two, yet they looke both one way, and although they be two, yet the radij visuales draw both to one object. Your Lordship hath an in∣terest in both, you are a chiefe  in the
 Church, an under rower under our Lord Iesus Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1. and in the Commonwealth another Eliakim, in whose hands much of the governement is committed, Esay 22.21. and the key of the house of the Kingdome is layd upon your shoulder, verse 22. and upon whom all sorts of vessells great and small doe hang, ver. 24. I have endeavoured my Lord to discribe those foure sonnes according to that gift which God hath bestowed upon me, that men may abhorre those vile sonnes, and learne to become Christians; And I have done here as the Painters doe when they draw their draughts, they draw first , some darke lineaments, and afterward they adde , and last they superinduce the vive colours, and that is : I have drawne the first draughts and lineaments of those foure leud sonnes, but if any would be pleased to adde to those first draughts the vively colours, he shall doe a good worke, and profitable to the Church of God. I have taken the boldnesse to Dedicate these my travels to your Lordship desiring that you would be pleased to accept of them, remembring that Apologue of the Iewes;Cholin folio 92. 1. the Vine grapes of Babylon upon a time sent to the Vine trees of Judea and beg'd some of their
 leaves to cover their grapes (for if there were not leaves to cover them, the grapes would quickely perish; If such as your Lordship doe not favour our poore grapes, they will sudden∣ly goe to decay; accept therefore (my Lord) of these my travels, and looke upon them with a favourable eye, and when I shall see that they shall profit any thing the Church of God, and be approved by your Lordship then I have ob∣teined my end.

