



RIght honourable, since I first began to keepe house in this Citie, it hath been no small comfort vnto mee, that a great number of Gentlemen and Merchants of good accompt (as well of this realme as of forreine nations) haue taken in good part such entertainment of pleasure, as my poore abilitie was able to afford them, both by the exercise of Mu∣sicke daily vsed in my house, and by furnishing them with Bookes of that kinde yeerly sent me out of Italy and other places, which beeing for the most part Italian Songs, are for sweetnes of Aire, verie well liked of all, but most in account with them that vnderstand that language. As for the rest, they doe either not sing them at all, or at the least with litle delight. And albeit there be some English songes lately set forth by a great Maister of Musicke, which for skill and sweetnes may content the most curious: yet because they are not many in number, men delighted with varietie haue wi∣shed more of the same sort. For whose cause chiefly I endeuoured to get into my hands all such English Songes as were praise worthie, and amongst others, I had the hap to find in the hands of some of my good friends, certaine Italian Madrigales translated most of them fiue yeeres agoe by a Gentleman for his priuate delight, (as not long before cer∣taine Napolitans had been englished by a verie honourable personage, and now a Coun∣cellour of estate, whereof I haue seene some, but neuer possessed any). And finding the same to bee singulerly well liked, not onely of those for whose cause I gathered them, but of many skilfull Gentlemen and other great Musiciens, who affirmed the accent of the words to be well mainteined, the descant not hindred, (though some fewe notes altred) and in euerie place the due decorum kept▪ I was so bold (beeing well acquainted with the Gentleman) as to entreat the rest, who willingly gaue me such as he had (for of some he kept no Copies) and also some other more lately done at the request of his par∣ticular friends. Now when the same were seene to arise to a iust number, sufficient to furnish a great sett of Bookes, diuers of my friends aforesaid, required with great instance to haue them printed, whereunto I was as willing as the rest, but could neuer obtaine the Gentlemans consent, though I sought it by many great meanes. For his answere was euer, that those trifles beeing but an idle mans exercise, of an idle subiect, written onely for priuate recreation, would blush to be seene otherwise then by twilight, much more to bee brought into the common view of all men. And seeing me still importunate, he tooke his

penne, and with an obstinate resolution of his former speech, wrote in one of the Bookes these verses of the Poet Martial.
Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas,
Haec hora est tua, dum furit Lyaeus,
Dum regnat rosa, dum madent capilli,
Tum te vel rigidi legant Catones.
Wherefore I kept them (or the most of them) for a long time by mee, not presuming to put my sickle in an other mans corne, till such time as I heard, that the same beeing dispersed into many mens hands, were by some persons altogither vnknowen to the ow∣ner, like to be published in Print. Which made mee aduenture to set this worke in hand, hee beeing neither priuie nor present, nor so neere this place as by any reasonable meanes I could giue him notice. Wherin though he may take a iust offence, that I haue laid open his labours without his licence: yet since they were in hazard to come abroad by straun∣gers, lame and vnperfect by meanes of false Copies, I hope that this which I haue done to auoide a greater ill, shall deserue a more fauourable excuse. But seeking yet a stronger string to my bow, I thought good in all humble and duetifull sort to offer my selfe and my bold attempt to the defence and protection of your Lordship, to whose honourable hands I present the same. Assuring my selfe, that so great is the loue and affection which hee beareth to your L. as the view of your name in the Front of the Bookes, will take away all displeasure and vnkindnes from mee. And although this may bee thought a greater boldnes then the first (I beeing not any way able to doe your L. such a seruice, as may de∣serue so great a fauour) yet I hope these Songes beeing hitherto well esteemed of all, shall be so regarded of your L. as I for them, and they for themselues, shall not be thought vnwor∣thie of your honourable defence. With which hope I humbly commit your L. to the pro∣tection of the Almightie: wishing to the same, that encrease of honour which your true vertue deriued from so noble and renowmed Ancestors doeth worthely deserue. From London the first of October. 1588.

