



SO mercyfully dyd almightie God poure his manifolde benefites vpon hys people of Israell in the tyme of theyr deare Soueraigne Moses, that in consi∣deracyon of so gracyous a god, who so louynglye had chosen them to himselfe afore all other people, done so greate thinges for them euen in the myddes amonge their enemies, so wonderfully deliuered them from the tyrannye of Egipte, so fatherlye noryshed them in the wildernesse, yea and not only gaue them the deare lyght of knowlege by o∣penyng vnto them his holy lawe, but also sent them suche a gouernor, as a∣boue al other Princes of the erth in his time (scripture witnessing the same) bare the name of faithfulnesse and louyng kyndnesse. (For as he was mosteNum. xii. Eccle. xlv. Hebr. iii. feruente and erneste in the cause of God, so was he also moste gracyous to∣ward hys subiectes.) They, I saye considering such euident demonstracy∣ons of gods inestimable loue and fauor toward them, thought themselues moste bound (as the trueth was) euen of veray loue to serue hym agayne: whiche thing they notably declared, whan at the commaundement geuen them by theyr Soueraigne, they shewed them selues so willing, so glad, so cherefull, and so fre harted, to further the worke and settyng vp of the Ta∣bernacle. To the whiche worke who so brought that he had, though it were but brasse, fyrre tre, or suche other thynges, farre vnder the estymacyon of golde, siluer or precious stone, was yet welcome and accepted for his vnfai∣ned hert and good willes sake: As was also the poore wedow with her twoMarke. xii. Lu. xxi. . Cor. viii. mytes. For as the holy Apostle Paul witnesseth, yf the mynde be willynge, it is accepted, accordynge to that a manne hathe, not accordynge to that he hathe not.
Whiche cherefull readynes of minde in those subiectes, as it came onely thorowe the mocion of the holy gooste: Euen so dyd it greately reioyce the heart of noble Moses. In so muche that (as the texte sayeth) whan he sawe how vniformely they brought theyr gyftes, and endeuored them selues to perfourme euery thing in the Tabernacle, according to the cōmaundement of the Lorde, he blessed them, that is to saye, commended and praised them for theyr labor: So well lyked he theyr doynges, and so well was he plea∣sed withall. For suche godly prynces are so wedded to almighty god, so fer∣uent in settinge forthe his honor, so ready to take paynes in redressing such thinges as are amysse, so desyrous to haue the house of god repayred, hys tabernacle set vp, his trewe seruice & worship restored, his people brought to the vnitie of faythe and loue in hym, and amonge them selues: that it is

theyr onely studye, delyte and pleasure to haue suche a louyng sorte of sub∣iectes: who beholding and consideringe so greate godlynes and gracious diposicion in theyr Soueraigne, muste nedes not onely aknowlage suche infinite kyndnesse of god in him, but also at the remembraunce thereof, la∣boure and studie in theyr vocacion to shewe them selues agayne (and that gladlie) aswell thankefull to so mercifull a god, as obedient to so louynge a Prynce, and consequently of veray loue to serue them both, and to be chari∣tably disposed to theyr neghbours: yea moste willynge to brynge that they haue, to the furtheraunce of gods honoure, to the repayringe of his house, and to the edifiyng of his true congregacyon and church. And though some laboures of such true subiectes be but rude, homely and vnperfecte, yet pro∣ceade they of a mynde that is both willing to geue that it hathe, and dei∣rous also to do more then it yet is able to do.
Your highnesse, as high and chiefe Admirall of the great nauy of the lord of hoostes amongst vs, Principall Captaine and gouernour of vs all vnder hym, the moste noble ruler of his shippe, euen our most comfortable Noah, whom the eternal god hath chosē to be the bringer of vs vnto rest and qui∣etnesse in him: your most Royall Maiestie (I say) going before in your Im∣periall office, & hauyng after you your most intierly beloued vncle the Lord Protectours grace with the residue of your highnes worthy counsailours, your nobilitie, your clargie, your deputies and officers in all estates, with al other youre louyng subiectes: hath set vp your sayle already, and is so well forward on your most godlie iourney (the gracious winde of the holy gost seruing you) that it maketh many a faythfull subiecte of youres, according as his calling requireth, to come after a good pase: yea and to be aswel oc∣cupied as he canne, and to do as good seruyce vnder you as to him is possi∣ble, within the feare of god and your graces obedience. Your Royall Ma∣iestie: to whome the high gouernaunce of youre realmes and dominions is committed, being most godly occupied with the prudent and wholsome ad∣uyce and ministerie, of your noble vncle and counsail, continueth stil in stop∣ping vp the gappes, that Antichriste and his false doctryne hath made into the byneyarde of the Lorde: and to buyld agayne the walles of hys house, whiche thorowe ydolatrie, superstycyon, euel custome, and horryble abuses hathe bene broken downe. Truly youre noble actes and statutes, your pro∣clamacions and iniunccions testifie the same. The godly Homelies and no∣table worke of Erasmus Paraphrasis vpon the holy Euangelistes, if they be distinctelye red, and practised with suche discrecion, as youre highnesse hathe commaunded, they are worthy to be compared to the ryche Iewels, that Moses vsed to the pleasaūt garnishing of the Tabernacle. And as for the sacred Byble and volume of gods holy boke, set forth by your Maies∣ties appoyntment, to be dewly practised in all holy exercyses within your churches: like as it is the fayrest floure of the garden & most precious perle of gods iewel house, euē so because your Maiestie as gods high minister in y• behalfe, hath so graciously made vs partakers therof, thorow your most vertuous proceadinges: we againe, acknowlege our selfes no lesse boūd to your Maiesty (as y• trueth is i dede) thē y• Israelites were first, to their so∣ueraigne Moses for brīging thē out of Egipt. &c. & for setting vp of the ta∣bernacle: And afterward, to noble king Iosias, not only for restoring thē a∣gaine

the boke of y• law that was cast aside, but also for abolishing so great ydolatrie and sinne from among them. Who then would not be veray loth, to bryng nothing to this moste excellent worke, wherin youre Maiestie so godly proceadeth, like as youre moste noble father of moste famous memo∣ry moste valeauntly begonne?
Certes, whan I loke behinde me, and call to remembraunce but euen the shorte daies of my tyme: how sore we haue bene blynded, seduced and hindred from the true waye of Christes doctrine: how strongly the wicked delusion of Antichriste (according to S. Paules prophecie) hath preuailed: what sectes of perdicion, what deuelishe doctrines, what straunge inuen∣cions of corrupte menne, what vayne pylgremages, what offerynges and lyghtes to stockes and stones, what costly deckyng, lyckinge, censinge and worshipping of ymages, what horrible abusing of gods holy sacramentes, and good creatures, with thousandes moe inconueniences, that moste wic∣ked beast of Rome hathe brought specially in to thys youre realme: howe shamefully and presumtuously (euen after the nature of proude Lucifer) he hathe vsurped the Imperiall power therof: how horryblye he hathe abu∣sed the Maiestie of the kynges (your highnesse moste noble progenitours) in this your realme of Englande: howe cruelly also and vnreuerently he and his hathe dealte with theyr moste Royall personnes: yea and howe theishlye (vnder the colour of gods seruyce) he hath robbed both them and theyr good herted subiectes of theyr substaunce & goodes: Thus my moste deare soueraigne, whan I remembre this moste lamentable case, wherein your graces realme hath bene, and considre now againe on the other syde, the moste pleasaunt shape and bewtifull face of the same (as concenynge the deare knowlege of god in your Maiesties most gracious proceadinges) moste like vnto the prosperous raigne of the blessed kinge Iosias, I fynde myselfe most dette bound (and so doe all other youre graces trewe subiec∣tes esteme them selues without doubte,) not onely with all thankefulnesse moste humbly to embrace suche inestymable kyndnesse of God, but also to sprede the same abrode: and that in suche a godly and quyet sorte, as maye serue moste to the sainctifiyng and halowing of hys holy name, to the fur∣theraunce of hys kingdome, & to the encoraging of other men to increase in the knowlage of his good pleasure and will, and gladly to obeye the same.
Considering then that your Maiestie is in the saide most godlie worke of the Lordes Tabernacle all ready, youre worthy counsaillours, officers, seruauntes, and other your heauenly endewed subiectes bothe of the clar∣gie & of the laitie, bringing to the same, some gold, some siluer, some brasse, sum other presentes. &c. according to the measure of such giftes as Almigh∣tie god hath richely reposed in them: youre trew and faithfull subiectes the Translatours and Printer of this right fruteful volume, cōteining the Pa∣raphrasis of the famous Clarke Erasmus vpon the Epistles of the holy A∣postles, moste humblye offre vnto your highnesse, their trewe and faithfull diligence herein: and that with such chereful hertes, glad and good willes, as they trust youre Royall. Maiestie (after the ensample of noble Moses) will bothe blesse and graciously accepte: According as your pryncely benig∣nitie can not but fauoure those that desyre none other wyse to spende theyr time, saue onely as may be moste to the glory of god, and to the discharge of

the duties of the vnfayned loue and obedience, that they within hys feare, do owe to your grace.
The comfortable remembraunce of the whiche moste vertuous dispo∣sicion in your Royall Maiestie: hathe greatly encoraged me (as I was de∣syred) moste humblye to wryte thys litle epystle vnto the same: and not so muche to be afrayed thus to doe, at the respecte of myne owne greate vn∣worthynesse, as I was moued therto thorowe the most plentifull grace of almightie god and incomparable clemencye, whiche is so notablye placed in your highnesse. For all we your graces trewe, faythfull and louynge sub∣iectes that beholde and se, how lyke ye are vnto the auncient Kynges and Princes, (as Moses, Iosua, Dauid, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Iosias, and such other,) in the moste rightfull and wholesome administracion of your highe Imperiall office, can not, but as to oure greate comforte we finde it all rea∣dy, euen so still to loke for like prosperous successe of welth & felicitie with increase and contynuaunce. Whiche in dede muste nedes ensue and folowe amongst vs, yf thorowe the wicked perswasyon of Sathan, and corrupte examples of the world, we our selues increase not in vnthankfulnesse.
As for your moste Royall Maiestie: like as it is called of God to thys supreme office of gouernyng his people, and enclyned by the moste blessed mocion of his holy spirite still to excute the same in al gracious wise: Euen so proceading therin, your highnesse may be assured, to haue the same most gracious defence from god, with like prosperous increase of his moste ex∣cellent giftes, that the sayd noble kinges were partakers of. The eternall & euerliuing god, possessor of heauen and erthe, strengthen and establish your highnesse in suche sorte as maye be moste to the glory of his holy name, to the increase of his kyngdome, to the cherefull perfourmynge of hys wyll, to the honour and quietnesse of your Maiestie: and fynallye to the comforte and welthe of all youre louynge subiectes.

Amen.
