


RIght Honorable, hauing by chaunce reco∣uered of late into my handes (after I had once lost the same) a copie of the Discourse of our late VVest Indian voyage, vvhich vvas begun by Captaine Bigges, vvho en∣ded his life in the said voyage after our de∣parture from Cartagena, the same being aftervvardes finished (as I thinke) by his Lieutenant Maister Croftes, or some other, I knovve not vvell vvho. Novve finding therein a most true report of the seruices and other matters vvhich happened in the sayd voyage, the sight vvhereof is vvonderfully desired by manie honest and vvell disposed persons. I haue presumed to recommend the pub∣lishing thereof, vnto your Lordships protection and fauour, for these tvvo causes. The one, for that your Lordships Honoura∣ble disposition is in the knovvledge of all men that knovv your selfe most thirstingly affected to embrace in your ovvne person,

the brauest enterprises, if the time vvould once affoord anie such fit occasion, as might be agreeable to her Maiesties re∣solution: vvho vvisely (and long may she do it) gouerneth all things to the greatest aduantage of her selfe and people. The other, because my selfe hauing bene a member in the sayd actions, and vvas Lieutenant of Maister Carleils ovvne companie, vvhereby I can vvell assure the truth of this re∣port: I thought it my bounden duetie, hauing professed my seruice to your Lordship before all men, to dedicate the same rather vnto your Lordship then to anie other. And although it be novve a yeare and a halfe sithence the voyage ended, vvhereby some man vvill say, that it is novve no nevve matter: yet the present time considered, hovv doubtfull some of our meaner sort of people are of the Spanish preparations, I thinke this Discourse a very fit thing to be published, that they may see vvhat great victories a fevve English men haue made vpon great numbers of the Spaniardes, euen at home in their ovvne countreyes. The beholding vvhereof vvill much encourage those, vvho by fame and bare vvordes are made to doubt much more then there is cause vvhy they should. Vpon vvhich point, as there may be much sayd: so my selfe being no Discourser, do desire to be held excused therein: and there∣fore doe onely commend the trueth of this report vnto your Lordship: vvhich vvill be also auovved by diuers Captaines that vvere in the sayd voyage. And so in all humblenesse do take my leaue, readie to do your Lordship all faithfull seruice.
Your Lordships souldier and humble seruant.

