



SIR, as the Scriptures excel other writings in veritie; so the Psalmes, other Scriptures in va∣rietie: for whereas some sacred bookes are le∣gall, as the Pentateuchue of Moses: other historicall, as the Kings, Chronicles, Acts: a third kinde Propheticall, as the Ʋision of Esay, Sermons of Jeremie, Reuelation of Saint John: a fourth Euangelicall, as the Gos∣pels
 and Epistles: the Psalter (asProlog. in lib. 3 Psalmorum. Augu∣stine,Hom. de lau∣dibus & virtute Psalm. Basile,Praefat. in Psalm. Euthymius, andAthanasius. Chrysostom. other an∣cient Doctors honour it) is a common trea∣sure-house of all good arguments and instru∣ctions: and in this respect aptly tear∣medCaluin. epist. praefix. Com. in Psalm. The Soules Anatomie, theTremel. argu∣ment. in Psalm. Lawes E∣pitomie, theSee Victorinus Strigellius epist. Dedicat. & Tilemanus, Heshusius prae∣fat in Psalm. Gospels Jndex; in one word, TheTurrecremat. prolog in Psalm. Register,Io. Gaineius epist. lect. in od. Dauid. Enchiridion,Ex ceteris omnibus quasi Collectus. Hen. Mollerus praefat. in Psalm. Summarie pith, and (as it were)Agellius pro∣log. in Psalm. Briefe of the whole Bible.
Vpon this ground the Church inPreface Com. Booke. old time, diuiding the Psalmes into seuen portions, inioyned that they should bee read in diuine seruice (thorough) once euery Weeke: and in our time parting them into thirtie, once euery Moneth: where as other parts of holy writ are read thorough but once in the yeere. And the Nouelists, howsoeuer they mislike bare reading of Chapters, approue notwith∣standing by their positions and practise, singing of Psalmes in the Congrega∣tion.
By which it doth appeare that no∣thing
 is esteemed generallie more ne∣cessarie for the worshippe of God, then the word of God, and no parcell of the word more full and fit then the Psalmes; vnto which I will adde, that no Psalmes are more profitable then the proper, as vnfoulding the foure chiefe mysteries of holy beliefe; namely, Christs Jn∣carnation, Passion, Resurrection, Ascen∣sion.
An exposition whereof I haue begun in the name of the Lord Iesus, and that for his Sions sake; the which I dedicate to your worthie selfe, as being a noble Theophilus, that is, a true seruant of God, and obseruant of his Church, affected so right honestly (which is right honora∣bly) to her doctrine and discipline; that your humble Comportament in Gods house, giueth vnto the world good hope, that you will become an open booke of vnfained deuotion and pietie. Now the God of all comfort, according to the multitude of his mercies, and riches of
 his glorie, blesse you and your Honou∣rable Familie, that you may long en∣ioy good dayes on earth, and here∣after eternall happinesse in Heauen.
 Hollingbourn. April. 2.
