



RIght Honourable, and right Worship∣full; Theologie, Nature, Moralitie, and Heathen Philosophers, do all condemne and brand

(Ingratitude) and disciplines Man (gratefull Retribution) Whence (Benefits) receiued and conferred in the seuen∣teenth Chapter of S. Luke, verse 18. ten Lepers were by Iesus Christ cleansed, and but One returned for to giue God prayse: the Nine are recorded for their Ingrati∣tude, and that One stranger, for his thankefulnesse, com∣mended by Christ for the same, and in holy Scriptures recorded, of all good Chri∣stians to be imitated. In the seuenth Chapter of S. Luke, verse 37. is likewise pub∣likely noted, with the brand of Ecce, that all might ob∣serue and take notice, what strange newes should ensue, Behold a Woman in the Citie, which was a sinner. As her sinne did defame her; like∣wise

her teares and penitent behauiour did wash away and blot out her crime and infamie: for Christ Iesus, her most mercifull Sauiour, to whom shee sued, and wholly applyed, pittied her vnfained Teares, cleansed and remitted her Soule of all her Sinnes, commended her Faith, and recorded her Zeale and Charitie: That wheresoeuer that Gospel should be read, or preached; that which was done by her vnto him, should likewise be spoken of, and be remembred. Na∣ture instructeth; and thank∣full Dauid blusheth at Man in the 49. Psalme, verse 10. Man being in honour, hath no vnderstanding, but is compa∣red to the Beasts that perish. How farre the Beasts, in whom there is but instinct

of Nature, excells many men in gratefulnesse to their Be∣nefactors; the first Chapter of Isaiah, verse 3. expresseth: The Oxe knoweth his Owner, and the Asse his Masters Cribbe; but Israel hath not knowne, my people hath not vnderstood. The Horse neigh∣eth, when his Owner com∣meth to Prouender him; the Oxe, and Cow, loweth, when their Owner fodde∣reth them: the Sheepe know the Voyce and Whistle of their Shepheard; for at the Eccho thereof, they looke vp, and flocke together, and then bleat, as an acknow∣ledgement of him. Aesope in his Fables maketh menti∣on of a Lion, out of whose Paw a Shepheard tooke a Thorne; and gratefully the Lion requited the Shep∣heard

for such his former kindnesse: for when the Shepheard, for a notorious Crime, was adiudged to be put among Lions, of them to be deuoured; it happe∣ned this Lion was one of them, and knew the Shep∣heard, and came and fawned on him, and saued him from the others: and so his life was thus strangely preser∣ued. Aesope in his 22. Fable thereupon insculped this Motto, Accepti memores nos decet esse boni; It behooueth vs to be thankefull, and al∣wayes mindfull of them, that doe good vnto vs.
Moralitie iustly exacteth, where kindnesse and cour∣tesies haue been performed, Men to be Reciprocall, in some measure, and not to burie them in obliuion; no

sooner done, but forgotten, and written in the Dust: These kind of People are Sordidum genus hommum, the basest and respectlesse Ge∣neration, not worthie to be accounted as a People; Hea∣thens, not Christians, for they scorne it: and I would that Christians did not too much affect, and disgrace Religion by it. Bias sayth, That two Heads in one Bo∣die, is a monstrous sight; but one vnthankfull Heart, in one Bosome, is more o∣dious to behold. Nay, Cui beneficia excidunt, haerent in∣iuriae? Some are such Pa∣gans, and Iudas-like to their friends, that they who haue fed them at their Table, cloathed their Nakednesse, harboured them in their Houses, succoured them

at all times in all their Di∣stresses, and supplyed their Wants, and Necessities: these, with Iudas, for base Gold and Siluer, will sell and betray an invaluable trustie and louing friend. The Heathen Philosopher Simonides beeing demaun∣ded, What would quickly grow out of date, or bee soone forgotten, and waxe old? thus answered, Bene∣ficium, a good Turne, or Be∣nefite. Seneca sayth, Me∣moria Beneficiorum labilis, in∣iuriarum vero tenax; Good Turnes done, are soone forgotten, and slide sudden∣ly out of Mens minds; but reuenge for Iniuries done vnto them, they will hold that in memorie, and for a thousand good Turnes that you haue done to them,

requite and repay you with mischiefe, for a small iniurie or trespasse, vnwillingly or not wittingly, committed by you against them. Dio∣genes sayth the same. Plato sayth, All humane things grow old, and come to the end of their time, except Ingratitude; for the greater the encrease of mortall man is, the more doth Ingratitude augment. That Heauenly Propheticke Dauid would not be guiltie of this mon∣strous sinne; but in his 116. Psalme, verse 11. inquireth, Quid retribuam Domino? What shall I render vnto the Lord, for all the bene∣fites that he hath done vnto me? And so proceedeth in others of his Psalmes; zea∣lously stirring vp his Soule to a recapitulation and re∣membrance

of Gods great Goodnesse towards her: Prayse the Lord, O my Soule, and forget not all his Benefits. Lucian compareth an vn∣thankefull Man to a Vessell bored full of holes, which is neyther apt to contayne nor receiue any thing. Au∣relius sayth, It behooueth a Man, in receiuing of Bene∣fits, to be thankfull, though hee want power to requite them. And Seneca 38. Epist. Beneficia bene soluere, inter∣dum solutio est ipsa confessio; To repay, and well requite, whence a Benefite was be∣stowed; sometimes, the ac∣knowledgement, and con∣fession thereof, is an accep∣ted Solution, and an ac∣knowledged Satisfaction: Which willingly and hum∣bly I pay at this present to

your Honor and Worships, and come with the poore Cottager and Tenant at Will, to present, with him, as this Time it is vsuall, a few Le∣mons, Oranges, or Dish of Pippins; shewing with him therein my Loue, and the meanenesse of my Estate, who am not able to present Gifts of better value: but therein expressing my duty, and a poore Beads-mans heartie praysing, and pray∣ing to God for your Honor and Worships health, and prosperitie: by whose kind permission, and mutuall generall consents, in the Maioraltie of the late de∣ceased graue Senatour, Sir Iohn Swinnerton, which is se∣uen yeeres and a halfe since; I was admitted Preacher to the Gaole of Ludgate, and

by your Honour and Wor∣ships Predecessors, hitherto successiuely therein haue bin continued: And most wil∣lingly, long since, your Honour and Worships, in Court, did generally con∣discend, the Stipend there∣unto belonging, to augment. In acknowledgement, hear∣tie thankefulnesse, & in some lieu thereof, vouchsafe to re∣ceiue the first Fruits of my poore Haruest, a Bunch of Grapes, of my first Vintage, a Flower from a Slip of the first growth. I do vnfained∣ly acknowledge, I owe my self, and mine, by your Hon. and Wor. all to be comman∣ded, who haue been so good and beneuolent lately to me & mine. Continue fauorable still, in receiuing of this my small grown Wheat, & leaue

the Chaffe; my Wine, leaue the Dregges; my sweete Flower, leaue the vnpleasant sented Earth: nay, I hope, a little Treasure, though in a base Earthen Vessell presen∣ted to your view. I am the miserable Sonne of Man, that is subiect vnto Muta∣bilitie; but poore & meane, and therefore the more re∣spectlesse, and least regar∣ded, in these dayes, wherein Money is so loued, and Mammonists adored, re∣spected, and of all, capped and crouched vnto with low-bended knee. I am a Vine, whose Branch is weake, young, and tender, and stands in need of sup∣porting: Will your Honour and Worships vouchsafe, with your powerfull hands, to support mee? I am a

new gathered fresh flourish∣ing Flower, which soone fa∣deth. I am in the Bud, and Bloome, soone blasted: Vouchsafe your carefull O∣uersights, and Protections, that the Critikes of this our Age, wherein we liue, may not breake into your Fields, Orchards, or Gardens, which like a wild Boare will extirpate me wholly: and I will, by Gods grace, as by dutie bound, for euer hear∣tily and dayly pray and sup∣plicate vnto the Almightie, for continuance of his great goodnesse, and mercie, to∣wards your Honour and Worships. Now the Lord Almightie, who of his infi∣nite goodnesse feeds you all with the finest Wheat, and cloatheth you with the pu∣rest Wooll, continue Peace,

Plentie, Prosperitie, Safetie, and Health within the walls of that most famous and Ho∣nourable Citie, whereunto God hath elected and made you the prime Gouernour, and eminent Magistrat, next vnder our most gracious So∣ueraign, and dread Lord, the K. Maiestie; a place conspi∣cuous to the whole World, and admired at the state and ciuill gouernment thereof. May it still so flourish, in Plentie, Honour, and with discreet vnderstanding Ma∣gistrates. The Lord God grant, that all your successors may be such vigilant Watch∣men, for the preseruation & maintenance thereof, as now it is; may that good care be continued still, from genera∣tion to generation, from pre∣decessors vnto all successors;

and from this your Lo. time, wherein all things quietly are gouerned, and safely rest. And when ye shal surcease to liue amōg men, your names may liue for euer, and be re∣membred for the good you haue done; that as now men do reioyce to heare of your names, whilst you are liuing; they may lament for the losse of you, when you are gone. May this be an Inheritance bestowed by the Almighty, to cōtinue vnto all your Ho. and Wor. successors, to the Worlds end. Amen. Now that Blessednesse, the Lord vouchsafe your Ho. & Wor. which is mentioned in Psal. 128. To feare him, & walke in his wayes, & quietly to eat the fruit of your endeuours, the fatted Oxe in your Stalls, the Sheepe of your Fould, and

the Doue that flyeth about the Courts of your owne Houses. The Lord make your Wiues like Dauids Vine, fruitfull; make your Children like Oliue Bran∣ches, decking and standing round about your Tables; and may they drop sweet∣nesse and goodnesse to the Church, and Common∣wealth, wherein they are borne, bred, and brought vp. O Lord let them ve∣stigiate the steppes of their Fathers, to be an honour vn∣to their Posteritie & Linage, a godly President vnto suc∣cessiue Posterities, and Ge∣nerations; that many hun∣dred yeeres hereafter it may be spoken both of you and your Children: Loe these are the Men that feared the Lord; and therefore God

did so blesse them, that they did see their Childrens chil∣dren, vnto the third and fourth generation, to flou∣rish, prosper, graciously and vertuously to liue; and in Magistracie, & doing good, their Parents to succeede. Furthermore, the Lord Iesus giue vnto your Honour and Worships, from the first day of this New yeere, at the expiration of your dayes, the New Heauens, and the New Man, Christ Iesus, in the immortalitie of your Soules; and of his infinite mercie graunt, that as here on Earth yee feast like Prin∣ces, yee may be partakers of that most Royall Feast and Banquet of Iesus Christ, the Prince of Glorie, and Light of the whole World, who came a Light at this

time into the World, to light all thither. And this blessednesse, I will dayly and heartily pray vnto Al∣mightie God, to bestow on you all, at the end of this your mortall liues. The Lord Iesus, with that bles∣sed Life of Glory, indow you and all your Posterities for euermore. Amen.

