



PLease it your excellēt Ma¦iestie to vnderstande, that where as, more then thre yeares passed, my verye good lorde and olde may∣ster my lorde Priuie seale for such qua¦lities as he thought to haue espyed in me (whych I my selfe neuertheles ac∣knowlege not) preferred and delyue∣red

me vp vnto your graces seruice, and sythens that tyme, to thintent he wolde make me the more hable & mete to serue your hyghnes in my callyng, hath enured me with dyuerse transla∣cions and other exercises: So it is moost gracious and moost redoubted soueraigne lorde, that amōges other thynges, he hath cōmytted thys boke of prayers to my pennynge & transla∣tynge into the Englysh tongue. The selue prayers, no doubte, be excellent, pure, syncere, godly & Christian. But my translacion, I feare, is rude, base, vnpleasaunt, grosse, and barbarouse. I feare, I saye, lest accordynge to the prouerbe I shal rēder pro aureis fer∣rea, lest of good latine I haue made euil English, lest I haue turned wyne into water. My courage & good wyll is much, thexpectacion of myne olde Mecoenas is of me great, finally the celsitude of youre maiestie requyreth

no base thyng. But I am sore afrayed that myne industrie herin imployed shal answere nether to your maiesties most royal dignitie, nether to my sayd lordes expectacion, nether yet to myne owne good wyl & desyre. Neuertheles how so euer my translacion is (for vn∣to your maiesties moost exacte iudge∣ment & censure as vnto another Ari∣starchus I moost humbly submyt it) certes the incomparable benignitie of your moost gracious person, hath im¦pelled me wyth a bolde spirite to of∣fer and dedicate the frutes of these my labours vnto ye same, to thintent that vnder the moost noble patrocinie of youre royall name, the boke maye the more plausibly and gredely be deuou¦red of your louynge subiectes. Truth it is, that my poore degre & basenesse of condicion is farre vnmete to offer any thynge vnto your moost excellent hyghnes. Howbeit, yf Hethen kinges

haue very thākfully receyued of their subiectes hādes, Pome granates, hād¦fuls of water, and such other tryflyng thynges, estemyng rather the prompt and ready wyl of the gyuers, than the pryce of the thynges gyuen, yf also Christ hymselfe our myghty sheperde (whose vicare for the church & realme of Englande youre maiestie is recog∣nised) not onely accepted but also pre∣ferred the two minutes of ye poore wy¦dowe afore the precious oblacions of the rych personages, I doubt not, but your maiestie beyng a christiā Kynge and such a kynge, woll not ingratelye receyue at youre humble seruauntes hande, these hys symple lucubracions whych tende to the hygh benefyte, edi∣ficacion, and cōmoditie of youre gra∣ces people. But leste wyth my loqua∣citie I myght be an impediment vnto youre moost serious occupacions, I make an ende. The God of peace and

of consolacion graunte, that lyke as your hyghnes most lyke vnto the god¦lye kynge Ezechias ernestly go about the perfecte instauracion of the true religion and thauauncement of gods glorie, all false religion destroyed: so he woll vouchsaue, to sende you the thynge that the most wyse kynge Sa¦lomō estemed for the swetest and beste porcion of mans lyfe, and for a trea∣sure inestimable, that is to wyte, a pru¦dent and wyse lady to your maiesties wyfe and to our youre moost addicte subiectes Quene, whyche accordynge to the voyce of the prophete, maye be as a frutfull vyne in your maiesties house, furnyshed wyth chyldren lyke olyue braūches roūde about your gra¦ces table. For lo thus shall the man be blessed (sayeth he) whyche feareth the Lorde. What shall we saye? God hath alredy herde our moost ardent vowes and peticions. Thys lady moost excel¦lente

is prepared of thalmyghtye for your maiestye, she is in iorney readye to be transported into your graces re∣alme. The God of spirites mought so tempre and breath the weather and so graciously conducte her in her iorney, as she maye moost happely arriue at the tyme desyred into your graces pre¦sens, to the full contentacion of your hartes desyre, to the plausible expecta¦cion of your graces subiectes, and fy∣nally to the true honoure and glorie of almyghty God. For the accomplish¦mente wherof, we all wyth one ac∣corde mought poure out these prayers folowing & sem¦blable to the Lorde of all. Amen.
Domine saluum fac Regem.
