



MOST GRATIOVS AND DREAD SOVERAIGNE. Albeit, my slender skill cannot afforde any discourse worthy the view of your Excellency, neither my deadded, and daylie interrupted, and perse∣cuted studies, will giue me leaue to accom∣plish that litle, which otherwise I might vn∣dertake and performe: Yet being enbolde∣ned, both by your high Clemency, and Gratious fauour, euer shewed vnto all good litterature, especially concerning diuinitie: & also vrged by mine owne bounden due∣tie, and particular affection; I presume to present vnto your highnes this shorte ensaying treatise. For your exceeding Clemency, mildenesse, and rare modestie, in the most eminent estate of so mighty a Monarche; as it cannot but winne vnto your great loue, in the hartes of all conside∣rate Subjects: so on the other side doth it encourage them confidently to open their mindes, and in dutifull manner to vnfolde themselues vnto their so louing and affable a Soueraigne. And whereas (to the no vulgare prayse of your Majesties pietie) you haue made open and often profes∣sion of your Vigilancie and care, to aduaunce the diuine honour of our Sauiour Christ, and his most sacred Religion: Then what faithfull Christian should stagger, or feare to lay open, and deliuer publikely, that which he assureth himselfe to be very expedient, necessary, and agreeable towardes the furnishing, and setting forward of so heauenly
 a worke? Moreouer, if I your Majesties poore subject, haue by studie at home, and trauaile abroade, attayned vnto any small talent of lear∣ning, and knowledge: to whome is the vse and fruit thereof more due, then vnto my so gratious, and withall, so learned a Liege? Finally, for a proofe of my sincerity, affection, and dutifull loue towardes your Majestie, this may I justly say, that in time of vncertaine fortune (when assured friends are most certainely tried) I both suffered disgrace, & hin∣derance for it, being stiled in Print, A Scotist in faction: therein farther employing my penne in A two-folde discourse (which I hope hath beene presented to the viewe of your Majestie) the one conteyning a defence of your Highnes honour: the other of your title, and interest of the Crowne of England. And if then my zeale and loue of truth, and ob∣ligation to your Majesty, drewe me out of the compasse of mine owne profession, to treate of lawe courses: I trust your benigne Grace will now licence me, out of the same fountaine of feruencie and like zeale vnto Gods truth, no lesse respecting your Majesties eternall honour, and heauenly inheritance, something to say in matters of diuinity: ha∣uing beene the best part of my studie, for more then thrise seauen yeares.
Whereinto I may conueniently enter with that golden sentence, with which your Majestie beganne the Conference, holden in Ianuary last, betweene certaine of your subjects, about some controuersie in Religion: A loue principium:Apoc. cap. 1.8. or conformable to that in holy writte, I am Alpha, and Omega, that is, The beginning, and the end, saith our Lord: And applying it vnto Princes, I may be bolde to say, that nothing is more expedient, and necessary for Kinges: nothing more honourable, and of better as∣surance for their estate, then that in the very beginning of their raigne, they take especiall order, that the supreame, and most puissant Monarch of heauen and earth, be purely, and vprightly serued, aswell in their owne exemplare liues, as throughout their Dominions. For of Almighty God his meere bountie and great grace, they receiue and holde their Diadems and Princelie Scepters: and cannot possesse and enjoy them (their mighty Forces, and most prudent Counsailes notwithstanding) one day longer, then during his diuine will and pleasure. Which that wise King witnesseth,Prouerb. 4 speaking in the person of Gods wisedome, Per me Reges reg∣nant. By me Kinges doe raigne. And Nabuchodonozer sometime King of Babilon,Dan. 4. was turned out to grase with beastes, for seauen yeares, and made to knowe and confesse, that the highest doth commaund ouer the Kingdomes of men, and disposeth of them, as pleaseth his diuine wise∣dome. But I neede not stande vpon this point, being so well knowne, and duely confessed by your Majestie.

But sithens there be in this our most miserable age, great diuersities of Religions, and but one only, wherewith God is truely serued and plea∣sed, as saith the Apostle. One body, one Spirit,Ephes. 4. as you are called into one hope of your vocation, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme: My most humble suite and supplication, to your high Majestie is, that you to your eternall good, will embrace, maintayne, and set forth that only true, Catholike, and A∣postolike faith, wherein all your most royall progenitors liued and died: or if you cannot be wonne so soone, to alter that Religion in which it hath beene your misfortune, to haue beene bredde and brought vp: That then in the meane season, you will not so heauely persecute, the sincere professors of the other.
Very many vrgent, and forcible reasons might be produced, in fauour and defence of the Catholike Roman Religion, whereof diuers haue bin in most learned treatises, tendered to your Majestie already. Wherefore I will only touch three: two of them chosen out of the subject of this booke: The third selected from a sentence of your Majesties, recorded in the aforesaid Conference.
And because that argument is, as most sensible, so best assured, which proceedeth from a principle that is either euident in it selfe, or else graun∣ted, and confessed for true: My first proofe shall be grounded vpon that your Majesties owne resolute, and constant opinion (as it appeareth in the said conference) to witte:Pag. 75. That no Church ought farther to seperate it selfe from the Church of Rome, either in doctrine or ceremonie, then shee hath departed from her selfe, when shee was in her flourishing, and best estate. From whence I deduce this reason: The principall Pillers of the Church of Rome in her most flourishing estate, taught in all pointes of Religion, the same Doctrine, that shee now holdeth and teacheth; and in expresse tearmes condemneth for errour and heresie, most of those Articles, which the Protestants e∣steeme to be the principall parts of their reformed Gospell: Therefore if your Majestie will resolutelie embrace, and constantly defend that do∣ctrine, which the Roman Church maintayned in her most flourishing e∣state; you must forsake the Protestant, and take the Catholike into your Princely protection.
To demonstrate vnto your Majestie, that we now holde in all points, the very same Doctrine, which the most approued auncient Doctors, and holy Fathers held and deliuered: Because it is to long for an Epistle, I reserue it to the booke it selfe, for the points it handleth; and will here briefly note out of it, some such old reproued errors, that the Protestants doe reuiue, receiue, and avowe, as the very sinnewes of their Gospell. Martin Luther the ring-leader of the newe pretended reformation, layeth for the ground-worke of his Religion, That man is iustified by only faith: and
 in this he is applauded and followed of all Protestants: and yet as testifi∣eth the most sound witnes of antiquity,Au de side & operi∣bus ca. 14. S. Augustine, that only faith is suffi∣cient to Saluation, was an error sprong vp in the Apostles dayes; against which, the Catholike Epistles of S. Peter, and S. Iames, and S. Iohn, were principally directed. And the authour of that error was that infamous Sorcerer Simon Magus;Cap. 20. as the blessed Martir Ireneus hath recorded in his first booke against heresies.
Test. Socr. ib. 1. hist. cap. 17. S. Hier. pref. lib. cont. Pela. & S. Aug. de fi∣de cont. Manich. Epiph. her. 64. PERKIN. Pag. 29. Aug. retra. lib. 2 c 22. & here. 82. PERKIN. Pag. 163.An other principall piller of Fryer Luthers Religion, consisteth in De∣niall of free will; wherein he jumpeth with the old rotten heretike Manes, of whome the Manicheans were named.
One Proclus an erronyous Origenist taught that sinne was not taken a∣way in Baptisme, but only couered, as is recorded by that holy man, and auncient Father Epiphanius. M. PERKINS (in the name of Church of England) affirmeth in like manner, the originall sinne remayneth still, and raigneth in the regenerate, albeit it is not imputed vnto them.
Iouinian was accounted a Monster by S. Augustine, for defending honest Marriage to be of equall vertue, and meritte with chaste Virginity: and saith further that this heresie was so sottish & fleshly; that it could not de∣ceiue any one learned Priest, but only some few simple & carnall women. Yet this our English champion blusheth not to affirme that marriage is not only equall, but better also in diuers respects then Virginity.
The same olde reprobate heretike, barked also against approued feasts and fasting dayes, so doe most of our Ministers at this time.
Vigilantius was sharpely reproued by Saint Hierome, in a booke written against him, and hath beene euer since vnto this day, esteemed a wicked hereticke, for denying prayer to Saintes, and honour to be donne vnto their Relikes: And yet, what pointe of Doctrine is more currant among the Protestants, then this.
In like sorte, one Aerius to the Arrian heresie, added this of his owne; That we must not pray for the soules of our friendes departed;Aug. ad q. vult heres. 53. as S. Augustine hath registred. And doe not all Protestants embrace and earnestly defend the same;
A common custome it was of the Arrians, and of other more auncient heretikes, to reject all Traditions, and to rely only vppon the written word,Lib. 3. c. 20 Lib 1. con. Maximinu. as testifieth S. Ireneus and S. Augustine. Doe not ours the same, rejecting all Traditions, as Mans Inuention.
Xenaias a Barbarous Persian indeed, yet in shew a counterfeited Chri∣stian; is noted for one of the first among Christians, that inueyed against the Images of Saintes, and the worship donne by true Christians vnto them;Niceph li. 10. cap. 27. as both Nicephorus, and Cedrenus in compendio doe recorde. The re∣probate Iewes indeede before him, and after euen vntill this day, the
 miscreant Turkes (enemies of all Christianity) doe dwell still in the same error: And yet is not this most vehemently auerred by our Protestants, and all Caluinists; although they cannot denie but that aboue 900. yeares agoe, in the second generall Councell holden at Nice, they are by the consent of the best, and most learned of the world, for euer accursed, that doe denie reuerence and worshippe, to be giuen vnto the Images of Saintes.
I will omitte sundrie other heades of the Protestants Religion, by all approued antiquity reproued, and condemned, that I passe not the boundes of an Epistle, and seeme ouer tedious vnto your Majestie. Espe∣cially considering that these are sufficient, to conuince that those points (wherein the Protestants affirme the present Church of Rome, to haue so farre degenerate from the auncient) are the very essentiall partes of faith, then maintayned by the Romans: And the contrary opinions no∣thing else, but wicked heresies, of old inuented, and obstinately helde a∣gainst the same Roman See, euen as they are nowe in our time: and of old also condemned by the same Church in her most flourishing and best estate. Wherefore your most excellent Majestie, being resolute in that singular good opinion, (that no Church ought farther to depart from the Church of Rome, then shee is departed from her selfe in her flourishing estate,) must needes recall the Church of England, from such extrauagant opinions, to joyne with the Roman church in the aforesaid articles, which shee in her best time helde for partes of pure faith: And in all others also which they cannot directly proue (in a lawfull disputation before your Majestie) to haue beene altered by her, particularly naming the point of Doctrine; the author of the chaunge: the time and place, where, & when he liued: who followed him, who resisted him, and such other like cir∣cumstances, which all be easely shewed in euery such reuolte or innoua∣tion: because the vigilant care of the Pastors of Christes flocke, haue bin alwaies so great, as no such thinges could be vnknowne, let slippe, or vnrecorded.
Thus much for my first reason, collected from the vntruth of the Pro∣testants religion.
The second shall be grounded vpon the vngodlines of it, where I will let passe that high point of impiety, that they make God (who is goodnes it selfe) the author of all wicked actions, donne in the world: And will besides say nothing of that their blasphemie against our Sauiour IESVS CHRIST, that he ouercome with the paynes of his passion vpon the Crosse, did doubt, (if not dispaire) of his owne saluation: being vnwil∣ling to touch any other pointes, then such as are afterwardes discussed in this booke.

The triumphant Citizens of heauen (who enjoy the presence of God, and happiest life that can be imagined) are by Protestants disdaynefullie termed, Deadmen, and esteemed neither to haue credit with God to ob∣taine any thing, nor any care or compassion on men, among whom they once liued and conuersed so kindly.
And as for the poore soules departed, who in Purgatory fire pay deare for their former delightes and pleasures: they depriue them of all humane succour, by teaching the world to beleeue that there is no such matter.
Concerning vs Christians yet liuing on earth, there is no lesse impyetie in their opinions: For they teach that the best Christian is no better in ef∣fect, then a whited Sepulchre, being inwardly full of all wickednes, and mischiefe; and onlie by an outwarde imputation of Christes righteousnes vnto them, are accepted of God for just. To thinke that there is inhe∣rent in the soule of Man, any such grace of God, as doth cleanse it from sinne, and make the man just in his sight; is with them, to raze the foun∣dation of Religion, and to make Christ, a Pseudochrist: wherein, I knowe not whether they be more enuious against the good of Man, then they are injurious, eyther to the inestimable value of Christes bloud, as though it coulde not deserue any better estate for his fauourites: or vnto the ver∣tue and efficacie of the holy Ghost; as not being able (by likeliehood) to purge mens soules from sinne, and endue them with such Heauenlie qualities. I omitte the disgrace thereby donne to the Blessed God-head it selfe, making the Holie of Holies, rather willing to couer and cloake our iniquitie, then to cure it: And contrarie to his infinite goodnes, to loue them whom he seeth defiled with all maner of abhominations.
Vnto these paradoxes, impious against God, and slaunderous to Man. If it will please your Majestie to adde, the prophane carnallity of some other points of the Protestant Doctrine; you will (doubtles) in short time loath it. As for example: That it is as good & godlie, by eating, to feede the body, as to chastize it by fasting. That it is as holy, to fulfill the fleshly desires of it by Mariage, as by Continencie, to mortifie them; yea that it is flatte against the word of GOD to vowe Virginitie: And also con∣trarie to his blessed will to bestowe our goodes on the poore, and to giue our selues wholy to prayer, and fasting. All which, this Aduocate of the English Congregation teacheth expreslie.Pag. 132. 162. 166.
Is this the purity of the Gospell? Or is it not rather the high way to E∣picurisme, and to all worldly vanity, and iniquitie.
I need not joyne hereunto, that they teach it to be impossible to keepe Gods Commaundements; and therefore in vaine to goe about it: And farther, that the best worke of the righteous man, is defiled with sinne. Wherefore, as good for him to leaue all vndone, as to doe any.

Nay, if this position of others were true, it would followe necessarily, that all men were bound vnder payne of damnation, neuer to doe any good deede, so long as they liue: for that their good deede being stay∣ned with sinne, cannot but deserue the hyre of sinne, which according to the Apostle is: Death euerlasting. If your Majesties important affaires,Rom. 6. would once permitte you to consider maturely of these impieties, and many other like absurdities, wherewith the Protestant Doctrine is stuf∣fed: I dare be bold to say that you would speedely either commaund them, to reforme themselues, and amend their errors; or fairly giue them their Congie. I will close vp this my second reason, with this Epiphoneme. That it is impossible for a Protestant, firmely cleauing to the groundes of his owne Reli∣gion, to hope for anie saluation. For they doe, and needes must graunt, that no man can be saued without a liuely faith; and also that a liuely faith can∣not be without charity, for otherwise it were dead: Now then to the pur∣pose; No Protestant can haue charity: for as witnesseth S. Iohn.1. Epis. cap. 5. 3. This is the charitie of God, that we keepe his commaundements. But it is impossible (ac∣cording to the Protestants) to keepe the commaundements: therefore al∣so impossible to haue charity; Which is the fulnes of the lawe:Rom. 13. & consequent∣ly impossible to haue a liuely faith, which cannot be without charity. And so finally through want of that liuely feeling faith, whereby they should lay hold on Christs righteousnes, to hale and apply that vnto themselues, they can haue no hope at all, of any fauour, and grace at Gods handes: Without which they must needes assure themselues of eternal damnation, in steede of their pretended certayntie of saluation. To these two argu∣mēts, gathered out of the treatise following, I adde a third, collected from these your owne memorable wordes related in the aboue named confe∣rence: viz. Are we nowe come to that passe,Pag. 69. that we must appeache Constantine of Poperie and superstition? Which argueth that your Majestie judgeth them, to haue litle regard of either piety or ciuility, that would admit such a thought into their mind, as that the first Christian Emperour (our most renowmed countriman, should be nousled & brought vp in superstitiō: wherein your Majestie hath great reason, for he was most carefully instructed, & taught the Christian Religion, by such holy Confessors, whose sincerity in faith had bin tried in the hotte furnace of many strange persecutions: And he farther had the good happe to see, and heare together in the first generall Councell of Nice, many of the holiest, and best learned Bishops of Chri∣stendome. Therefore, is it most vnlikely that so Royall a Person, deuoted to Religion, and hauing so good meanes to attayne to the perfect know∣ledge thereof, as no man could haue better; should neuerthelesse in the pu∣rest time of it, be mis-ledde into errour, and superstition. If then, it may be proued, that this most Christian Emperor (the glittering ornament of our
 noble Iland) did beleeue such articles of the present Roman Church, as the Protestants teach not to be beleeued: Will not your Majestie rather joyne in faith with so peerles a Prince, who by the consent of all antiqui∣ty, was for certayne right well enformed, then with these, whome (doubt∣les) most men deeme to be pittifully deceiued? Nowe that Constantine was of the same opinion, in matter of Religion, with the present Church of Rome, may euidently be gathered out of this that followeth.
First, he was so affectionate vnto the signe of the Crosse, that he would haue it gloriously appeare, both abroade in his banners, and at home in his Pallace:Euseb. de vita Con∣stan. lib. 3. cap. 2. Lib 2. c. r 4. Lib. 4. c. 26. and in the middest of the Citie of Rome, with this Poesie: In this signe of saluation, I haue deliuered the Cittie. With it also he blessed his visage.
With fasting and other corporall affliction, he chastized his body, that he might please God.
He with incredible admiration, honoured professed Virgins, and made lawes in their fauour.
Ibidem lib. 3. cap. 47. & alibi. Chry. hom. 66. ad pop. Antioch.He builded many Churches in honour of the Apostles, and Mar∣tirs.
And as S. Chrysostome recordeth: He that was reuested in purple, went to embrace the Sepulchres of S. Peter, and S. Paul, and all Princely state laide aside, stood humbly praying vnto the Saints, that they would be in∣tercessors for him vnto God.
He farther tooke order for the burying of his owne body, in the mid∣dest of the Tombes of the twelue Apostles, that after his death he might be partaker of the prayers,Euseb. in vita Const. lib. 4. ca. 60. Ibid cap. 71. which should be there offered in the honour of the Apostles. Neither was he frustrated of his holy desire, for as it followeth in the 71. Chapter of the same booke, at his funerals, the people joyning with the Priestes, with many teares, and great sighes, powred out prayers for the good Emperours soule.
Againe, at a solemne feast which he helde at the dedication of the Church built by him in Ierusalem; some of his cleargie preached and ex∣pounded the holy Scriptures:Ibidem de vita Const. lib. 4. ca 45. and other some with vnbloudy Sacrifice, and Mysticall consecrations, appeased the Godhead, and prayed for the health of the Prince.
Zozom. lib 1. hist. Eccl. cap 21.Moreouer this zealous Emperour reprehended Acasius, (a Nouatian heretike) for saying, that it was not in the power of Priests, but of God only to forgiue sinnes.
Finally, toward true Bishoppes, the lawfull Pastors of Christs Church, he caried such a reuerend respect:Socr. hist. lib 1. cap. 5. that being in the Councell of Nice, he would not sitte downe, before they had beckned vnto him so to doe. And was so farre from taking vpon him to be supreame judge, in causes Eccle∣siasticall; that he openly there professed, that it did not belong to him to
 judge of Bishoppes, but to be judged by them.Ruffi lib. 1. hist. cap. 2.
If then this right Puissant Emperour, and most sincere Christian, reue∣renced the Sacrifice of the Masse, and beleeued that there was power in Priests to remitte sinnes, that Saints were to be prayed vnto, and that prayer was to be made for the dead, and such like, as appeareth by the e∣uident testimonie, of most approued Authors, that liued with him: hath your Majestie any cause to doubt, but that in matters of faith, he agreed with the present Roman Church? Wherefore my hope and trust in Al∣mighty God is, that you in your high wisdome, vpon mature and due con∣sideration, how many old condemned errors the Protestants hold; and with all well weighing that the whole frame of their Doctrine tendeth to the disgracing of God, and his Saints, to the discouragement of men, from well doeing, and doth (as it were) loosen the reines vnto all fleshly liberty: will in time make a most Godly resolution, to imitate that famous Emperour Constantine. He contrary to his former education, embraced with all his power that same Romane Religion, which we nowe professe: And (which is worthy to be obserued) he feared nothing the contrary dispo∣sition of the multitude, or greater parte of his subjects, that were wholy ledde another way. But following the blessed example of his most ver∣tuous Mother S. Helena, reposed himselfe in the powrefull assistance of the Almighty, and chased all other Religions into corners, setting vp and firmely establishing the Roman. There can be no cause aleadged, why your Majestie may not doe the like, if it shall please God effectually to stirre vp your gratious minde, and to bende your hart to vndertake it: for at that time there was more likelyhoode of resistance, then nowe: and nowe much more helpe at hand, if any resistance should be offered.
Pardon me deare Soueraigne, if before I finish this argument, I seeme ouer-bold here to present vnto your memorie, that all your most gratious and Godly Progenitors, and all our holy Predecessors, who now (assu∣redly) stande before the tribunall of God; doe demaund and expect no lesse at your handes. For they founded not Bishopricks, Deaneries, and other spirituall liuinges: they builded not Colleges, and Schooles, for Protestants or their fauourers. Ponder well therefore I beseech your Majestie, whether they doe not, or may not justly chalenge of you, (to whome the administration of justice belongeth,) to see and prouide: that such Churches, Church-liuinges, and spirituall rewardes of learning, as they erected and bequeathed to Roman Bishops, and Priestes, be dispo∣sed of, and bestowed according to their erections, and foundations. If it shall please the Protestants to erect any new Churches, or bestowe any other reuennues towardes their Ministers mayntenance, let them haue them hardly, and enjoy them quietly: only let them be content, out of
 their equitie: to leaue vs that which was prouided for vs, and bequeathed vnto vs by our most Religious Auncestors.
If all these reasons, and exceeding manie other which might be mu∣stered, and produced to the same purpose, will not suffice to effect in your Majestie, a loue and desire, to embrace that auncient Roman faith, which all your Renowmed Progenitors, so highly reuerenced, loued, and esteemed. Yet let me (prostrate on my knee) most humbly beseech your highnes, in the name of thowsandes: that so farre forth they may preuaile with you, as you will not permitte those rigorous lawes, fra∣med against recusant Catholikes, to be put in practize and executed. For howe can it seeme conformable to reason, in your Majesties deepe wisdome, and judgement? that your louing Subjects should by com∣pulsion and constrainte, vnder that intollerable penaltie of losse of all their goodes, conforme them selues to such articles of Religion, that by the purest antiquitie were censured to be erronious and execrable? And what misery, and pitty were it, to driue them perforce, either to swallowe downe the deadly poyson of their soules, or else to endure besides the disgrace of the state, the losse of their worldly wealth and liberty. Consider, and weigh with your selfe, my most gratious Liege, whether it will not be thought ouer great seuerity, to presse men (euen against humane nature and condition,) with patience to heare their owne profession and beleefe, both vntruely slaundered, and most bitterly re∣uyled and inueighed against: as in most Ministers sermons it is common∣ly. Yea to giue patient eare to them that blush not publikely, to call our blessed Sauiours body in the holy SACRAMENT, an abhominable I∣dole; his glorious and immortall Saintes, senceles dead Men; his Vicar and Vicegerent on earth Antichrist, and euery Catholike an Idolater. With infinit other intollerable reproaches; Our constant hope, euen yet, (though against hope) is, that your Majestie out of your owne sweet naturall disposition, and most milde carriage in gouernment hi∣therto, will not onely moderate, but suspende all such extreamity: And not suffer it to be extended against them, who in former doubt∣full times, were (in manner) the only men, that defended and made ma∣nifest to the world, your Title and interest to the Crowne of England; and were no lesse willing to receiue you, when the time came: and as forward to haue assisted you (if neede had required) as anie sorte of Sub∣jectes within the lande. And neuer since wittingly offended your sa∣cred Majestie in any thing. It may be objected that they doe not con∣forme themselues vnto a statute lawe, made against their Religion: Be it so. Then their Religion toward God, not any contempt of their law∣full Superiour, doth commaund them from the conformity, which is
 pardonable. Considering that they be no inuenters, or followers of no∣uelties, but onely hold on and perseuere in the faith of their forefathers. And what subject is the among the most duetifull, that doth not often transgresse and giue offence to one statute lawe or other: yet for no o∣ther lawe, men are so hardly dealt withall, albeit they violate many of them together. Only Catholikes are for the transgressing of one, hus∣peled and handled as though they were some haynous rebbels, and traytors: Who (be it spoken without disparagement to others) are (by them that liue neare them) esteemed commonly, the most orderly sub∣jectes; as true of their wordes, as sound in their deedes, of as greate charity and hospitality towardes their neighbours, and compassion of the poore: briefly, of as moderate and ciuile carriage and behauiour, as most men in their Country: So that to begger and vndoe them (as the execution of that lawe established, must needes doe the poorer sorte of them,) would be litle lesse then vndoe and destroy all good order, and Discipline in the common weale.
Before I make an end, I beseech your Majestie, that the old worthy saying of Cassian may diligently examined: Cui bonum? For whose com∣modity, to what end and purpose must such numbers of most ciuill sub∣jectes, be so grieuously molested? What is the cause, why your peaceable and joyfull gouernment, should be so mingled with such bitter stormes of persecution. Is it to extinguish the Catholike faith? It lyeth not in mans power to suppresse and destroy that, which the Almighty suppor∣teth and maintayneth.Matth. 16. The gates of hell shall not preuaile against the Catholike Church. And let but those graue & wise counsailers, (who haue mannaged the state in our late Queenes dayes) enforme your Majestie whether all those terrible persecutions that then were most vehemently pursued, did any whitte at all, diminish the number of recusantes: or rather did not greatly multiply and encrease them, from one at the first to an hundred and moe in continuance. But it may be, they entende by those penall lawes, to enrich your Majestie, and to fill your coffers: Surely the receipts will fall out much to short, to grow to any such reckoning. And what delight to enrich your treasury, and stuffe your coffers with regrets, and out cries of the husband, wife, children, widowes, and poore infantes, when as the best and most assured treasury of a King, (is by the prudent esteemed) to consist in the loue, and harty affection of his people? Or are these penall lawes, and forfaitures ordayned for rewardes vnto such dependents, as for these or the like do follow you? But the reuennues, pre∣ferments, & offices, belonging to your crowne of England, are abundantly able to content and reward them, that shall deserue well of the common weale, without that so heauy agrieuance and hart bleeding of others your
 Majesties good subjectes. And your Majesties high wisdome, and long experience in gouernment, can best remember you, that such men are not so mindefull of benefits receiued, as the daylie want and miserie, will continually renue and reuiue the memorie of the oppressed.
And when they shall see no hope of remedie, the state being nowe set∣led, and a continuall posterity like to ensue of one nature and condition: God knoweth what that forceable weapon of necessitie may constrayne and driue then vnto at length.
If then there be no greater reason of waight and moment, why such du∣tifull and well deseruing Subjects, should be so greeuously afflicted for their conscience. Let others conceiue as they shall please, I will neuer suffer my selfe to be perswaded, that your Majestie will euer permitte it, before I see it donne: If it be further objected, why should not your Ma∣jestie aswell punish Catholikes in your Kingdomes, as Catholikes doe Protestants in some other Countries: I answere, that in all Countries where multitudes of both sortes are mixed, as it is in England: The Pro∣testants are tollerated, as in France, Polonia, Bohemia, the Catholike states of Germanie, and Cantounes, according to that of the Gospell. Suffer both the wheate and cockle to growe vntill haruest.Math. 13. In Spaine, and Italie, where scarse any Protestants be, the case is otherwise. But what is that to England? Where are very many Catholike Recusants, and Catholikely affected in euery degree, not only of the Temporalty, but in the Clergie also, hardly of the highest degrees of honour to be excepted: therefore for their number and quality to be tollerated.
Lastly, if there were no other cause, but the innumerable benefittes which euery degree and order of men throughout England, haue, and doe daily receiue from our most Catholike Auncestors: As the constitu∣ting of so many holsome lawes; founding of so many honourable, and rich rewardes of learning, as Bishoprickes, Cathedrall Churches, Dea∣neries, Arch-deaconries, Residencies, Prebendes, and Benefices: the erecting, and building, of so goodly Schooles, Colledges, and Hospi∣talles, and endowing of them with so ample possessions, which all pro∣ceeded out of the bowelles of the true wisedome, pietie, and vertue of their Catholike Religion: Is not this much more then a sufficient mo∣tiue why their heires in faith, should be most benignely, and louingly dealt with? and not for the profession of the same Religion, so seuerely afflicted? Let the Protestants in those countries, where they are most molested, appeare and shew, that their predecessors in beliefe, haue beene so beneficiall vnto the publike weale: And I dare vndertake, that for their Auncestors sake, they shall finde much more fauour, then wee sue for. Wherefore they can haue no just cause, to repine at your Majesties
 goodnes, if vpon men of that Religion, which hath beene so beneficiall vnto your whole Realme, you take extraordinary compassion.
It lying then in your Majesties free choise and election, whether you will enlarge and extend your Royall fauour, vnto an infinite number of your most dutifull and affectionate Subjects, who are the most vnwilling in the world to transgresse any one of your lawes, were they not there∣unto compelled by the lawe of God: or else vtterly to beggar and to vn∣doe, both them, and theirs, for their constant profession of the Aunci∣ent Roman faith. My confidence in the sweet prouidence of the Al∣mighty is, that he will mercifullie incline your Royall heart, to choose rather to pardon, then to punish; because the way of mercie, consor∣teth better with your kinde and tender nature: it is of better assurance to continue your peacible and prosperous Raigne: it will purchase mercie at Gods hands, according to his owne promise. Blessed be the mercifull,Math. 5. for they shall obtayne mercie.
I need not adde what a Consolation, and Comfort it will be, to many score thousands of your subjects, and the greatest obligation that can be deuised, to binde them to you, and yours for euer: Nowe what ap∣plause, and congratulation from forraine Catholike countries, would fol∣lowe this your famous Fact. Vndoubtedly all the glorious companie of Kinges and Queenes, (now in heauen) of whom your are lineallie descen∣ded: and among all the rest, namelie, your most sacred and deare Mo∣ther, that endured so much for her constancy in the same Catholike faith, cannot but take it most kindly, if for God and their sakes, you take in∣to your Princelie protection their folowers in the Roman faith, and de∣fend them from oppression.
Thus most humbly crauing pardon of your Highnes, if I haue in any thing exceeded the limittes of my bounden dutie, I beseech our blessed Sauiour to endue you, both with the true knowledge of his diuine veri∣tie, and with the spirit of Fortitude, to imbrace and defend it constantly; or that at the least, gratiouslie to tolerate and permitte it.

