


RIght Honorable: It hath pleased God to giue vs in this Church, verie many remarkeable testimonies of his mer∣cie, whether we looke to the heauens aboue vs, the earth beneath vs, our Princes who rule vs, our Pastors who teach vs, our lawes which command vs, or the singular mercies which we haue receiued, or the fearefull iudgements which we haue escaped. Our heauen is not brasse, as it was in Achabs time1 K. 17, 1, , our earth is not barren, as it was in Pharaohs timeGen. 41, 55: our Princes are not Lions, as the princes of IudahZeph, 3.3: our Pa∣stors are not wolues, as were the shepheards of IsraellMath, 7, 15: our Lawes which commaund vs, are not as the Lawes of Dra∣co: and our mercies receiued, are Gods mercies: our iudge∣ments escaped, are mens cruelties. Yet, of all the testimo∣nies
 of Gods loue vnto vs, this is, and ought, to be estee∣med the greatest, that we are come out of Babylon, know God in Christ, may read the scriptures, heare Gods word, be partakers of the sacraments, pray in a knowne tongue, worship the true God, and that of mortall and sinfull men, we are made the immortal, and righteous children of God.
But, because wee are so blinded with the loue of this world, that we see not, or perceiue not this note of Gods loue: therefore the Apostle Iohn setteth an Ecce vpon it, and saith, behold, what loue the father hath giuen vs, that we should be called the sons of God1 Ioh. 3.. Behold we there∣fore, not the loue of Sampson to DelilaIudg. 14.3, for that was a wanton loue, nor the loue of Iaakob to RahelGen, 29.17, for that was a carnall loue, nor the loue of Dauid to Ionathan1 Sam, 18.3, for that was an humane loue, but the loue of God to man, the Creator to his Creature, & a good father, to a multitude of prodigall and rebellious children.
Hee loued vs in our creation, for he made vs men, but more in our redemption, for he mad vs saints: he created vs with a word of his mouth, he redeemed vs by the bloud of his sonne: he created vs whē we were nothing, hee redeemed vs when we were worse then nothing: he created vs to liue before him on earth, he redeemed vs to liue with him in hea∣uen. He created vs, and so did he others, he redeemed vs, but did not redeeme others. He hath not dealt so with euery nation, neither haue the heathen knowledge of his lawesPsal. 147 . If there were in vs, eyther Nobility of birth, or comelines of beautie, or correspondence of vertue, or aboundance of ri∣ches, our God might loue & like vs for these, as men doe affect and follow vs for these. But since, by discent we are Cananites,EZ. 16.3: by deformitie polluted in our owne bloud,v. 6 by sin, there is none that doth good, no not oneRom. 3, 12, & that our pouerty is
 such, that we are poore, naked, and miserable creaturesReuel. 3.1, it is not our old birth, but the new birth, not our owne beautie, but Gods bountie, not our vertue, but Gods grace, not our goods, but Gods goodnes, by which we become Gods children.
If I were (Right honorable) as profound as Paule, as eloquent as Apollos, as deuout as Dauid, and as zealous as the Prophet Elias was, I could neither expresse the quantity of this loue, it is so great, nor the quality of this loue, it is of such efficacy. By this fauor of God, we of seruants, become sonsGal. 4.4, of enemies frindsRom. 5.10, of diuorced, espousedHos. 2, 20, of prophan, priestsReuel. 1.6, of captiues kingsReuel. 5.8 of Cananites, IsraelitesActs. 11.26,, of heathens, christians, of inheritors of hell, heires, nay felow heires, with Iesus ChristRom. 8, 17.. By this fa∣uor we enioy, the forgiuenes of sins, peace of conscience, ioy in the holy ghost, protection of angels, the communion of saints, audience in praying, acceptance in obeying, security in life, com∣fort in death, and eternal glory after we be dead. By this fauor we are written in Gods book, receiue a new name, incorporated into Christs body, clothed with Christs righteousnes, indued with Christs spirit, and one day shall be partakers of his glory.
But as Augustine was swallowed vp, by the admiration of Gods Maiesty: so am I with the consideration of this mercy; I say of this mercy, which is giuen vs by the father, purchased by the son, assured by the holy ghost, offered in the word, sealed in the sacraments, apprehended by faith, tried by tribulation, and, though not deserued by vs, yet reserued for vs in the high∣est heauens. Is God our father? behold our dignity, are we his children? learne we our duty. The consideration of this digni∣ty, made Theodosius to thanke God more, that he was a christiā then a King, Moses to refuse the crowne of AegyptHeb. 11.24, Dauid to desire the place of gods doorekeeperPsal. 84.10., and Paul to make a base account of all things in this worldPhilip. 3.9.. The consideration of this duty made Abell to sacrifice his sheepGen. 4.4,Gen, 26. Abraham to sacrifice his son, and the Romans to sacrifice thēseluesRom, 12.1, Ioseph to flie
 adulteryGen, 39.9, the three children to flie idolatryDan, 3, 16, Nehemiah to fly tyrannyNeh▪ 5, 15, and all Gods children to abandon impietie1 Ioh. 3, 4,. Now then, If we call him father, which without respect of persons iud∣geth according to euery mans work, let vs passe the time of our dwel∣ling heere in feare, knowing that we were not redeemed with cor∣ruptible things, as siluer and gold, from our vaine conuersation, re∣ceiued by the tradition of the fathers, but with the pretious bloud of Christ, as af a Lamb vndefiled, and without spot1 Pet. 1:17.
And surely, God is our father though Abraham be ignorant of vs, saith the ProphetIsa. 63.16. For, he begetteth vs by the seed of the wordIames, 1, 18:, giueth vs a new nameReuel. 2, 17, nourceth vs with the milke of the gospellHebr, 5, 12, instructeth vs in true religionIer. 31, 33, teacheth vs euen ciuill conuersationColoss, 4, 5, & prouideth instructors to teach vs moreMt, 28, 20 yea he placeth vs in our callingsGen, 2, 15, is an example of holines1 Pet. 1, 16, correcteth vs when we sinProv. 3, 11, trieth our obedienceGen. 22.2, exerciseth our patienceIob. 1, 16, deferreth our petitionsMath 15, 23, and pitieth vs vs when we be in miseryPsal. 103.13. Hee, as a good father, prouideth for vs in this life1, Pet, 5.7,, protecteth vs against wrongs2 K. 6.16.17, is sory when we sinnePsal, 81.13, glad whē we do welProv, 10, 1,, admonisheth vs of dangersReuel. 18.4, beareth with our wantsPsal. 103, 9, 10, heareth our criesIoh, 15, 16, and for our sakes is good vnto othersGen. 39.3. To conclude this, he loueth vs all, but most of all such as feare him mostGen, 6.8, he is not ashamed of vs in our poorest estatesHebr, 15, 19,, he blesseth vs as Iaakob did his childrenGen, 49, 2, and, like good father Abraham, all that he hath belōgeth vnto vsGen, 25, 5. God is your father, you see your dignity: men thinke it a great dignity to be borne of the bloud royal, to descend of ancient fa∣milies, to be blazoned by gentry, to stand before princes, to be honored and enriched in this world, to cōmand many, to obey few, & to be called the sons of nobles: and so it is indeed. But say that we could draw our pedegrees, not from the conquest, but from the flood, yet we might as well descend of cursed Cham, as of blessed Sem. But if we can draw our pedegree from the line of Christ, it is better then to deriue it from the line of
 princes. To this end Iuuenall said well.
Tota licet veteres exornent vndique cerae,
Atria, nobilitas sola est atque vnica, virtus.
Though all thine house about, with ancient armes be set,
As sole and sure Nobilitie, see that thou vertue get.
And better another.
In relligione, vera virtus,
In virtute, vera nobilitas.
True vertue, is in pietie,
In vertue, true nobilitie.
But Prudentius best of all, as I once writ to an honorable familyTo the Hono∣rable House of the Monag..
Generosa Christi secta nobilitat virt,
Cui quisquis seruit, ille verè est nobilis.
He noble is that comes of Christ his race,
Who serues this Lord, he surely is not base.
Wherfore as Ambrose said to Auxentius, so giue me leaue to say to you; saith he, Quid honorificentius quam vt imperator Ecclesiae filius dicatur? What honor can be greater, then that the Emperor should be called the son of the Church? Of the Church? nay, say I, that noble men should be called the sons of God?
I haue spoken of our dignity, but what is our duty? by this we must learne to admire this mercy of God the father, to a∣dore this loue in God the sonne, to keepe this assurance in god the holy ghost: and that the more fauors he hath shewed to vs, the more we are indebted to him. By this, we must learne, to haue this adoption written in our hearts, sealed in our con∣sciences, & to esteeme it the greatest blessing in the world. By this we must learne, to loue him who thus loued vs: for amante non amato, nihil est miserius: and to loue all such as belong vnto God, for, he that loueth him which begate, loueth also him who is be∣gottē1▪ Iohn. 5.. In a word, are we Gods childrē, we must loue his house, not sell our inheritance, desire to bee with him, pray onely vnto
 him, depend vpon his prouidence, be patient with his correc∣tions, content with his allowance, and as glad to see his great name honored, as we would be sory to see the Kings name ab∣used. And to conclude this point, as Menedemus, tutor to a kings son, said vnto him, Remember that thou art the kings son; so say I, Remember that you are the King of Kings sonnes, so that you must neither think, speak, nor do any thing but that which becomes the sons of God. I had almost forgotten the greatest duty; we liue at this day among pseudocatholick pro∣fessors, who loue an Idoll more thē God, the Pope, more then the King, Italy more then England, & who vse all equiuoca∣tory means to draw disciples after them: are we sons? therfore depart frō amongst thē,2 Cor, 6.17 18 saith the Apostle, & separate your selues, & touch none vncleane thing, and I will receiue you, yea I will be a father vnto you, and ye shall be my sons, and daughters saith the Lord God almighty. Let vs therfore separate light from darknes God from an Idoll, the Israelites from the Cananites, the pre∣tious from the vileIer. 15.15, the beleeuer from infidels, and Protestants from Papists. Let them returne vnto vs, but let not vs returne vnto them: who in superstition are heathenish, in tradition Ie∣wish, and in treason diuelish. I am the bolder right honou∣rable to write of this argument, because I doe write vnto the sons of nobles, that therby I may stirre vp your pure minds, to vse all diligēce to become as great by grace, as you are by na∣ture, & as Honorable in the Church, as you are in the common wealth, that as you are the children of mighty men on earth, so you may be the children of the Almighty God in heauen. If I did present this booke to some great Counsellor of State, I would haue vsed the art of Brachyography,shrt vvri∣ting: lng speach but since I am bold to make choice of you (who as yet liue vnder the coūsel of others) I hope it wil not be offēsiue to vse this Polylogye Habet hoc proprium generosus animus (saith Seneca) vt excitetur ad honesta. It is proper to a noble mind to be excited to honest
 actiōs. Whē Luke did so, it was wel liked of noble TheophilusActs 1, , whē Paul did so, it was wel aproued of the noble mē of BereaAct. 17.11 , & when Daniel did so, it was wel takē of that great Nebucadnet∣zar, though it were to the breaking off, of his sinsDan. 4.24.. How neces∣sary it is for young noble men to be stirred vp to true nobilitie, Isocrates shewes by his Oration to Demonicus, Agapetus by his precepts to Iustinian, Tully by his Offices to his son, Plutarch by his institution of children, Pythagoras by his golden verses, Phocylides by his pithy sentences, Sir VValter Mildmay by his coū∣selto his son, Solomon by the prouerbs taught by his Parents, and our noble King Iames by his booke to Prince Henry. Remem∣ber therfore (my Lords) that you are called Nobiles, as it were noscibiles, because others must see wherin you excell: and that thē you shalbe noble indeed, if as Chrysostom saith, you do disdain to be seruants to sins: &, as saith Apuleius, When to the nobility of birth, you adioyne also the nobility of life. The nobilitie of vertue it is your owne, the nobility of birth it is your ancestors. If you be honored for the one, thank your predecessors, if for the other, ascribe it to your selues. If you consider your Honor, many bad persons are partakers of as great, if you looke vnto vertue it is appropriate only to the good▪ your Honor without vertue is a Iewel of it selfe, your Honor with vertue will be as a Iewel set in gold▪ your Honor it makes you esteemed of men, your vertue it wil cause you to be respected of God. By your Honor you may glory in your parents, by your vertue your parents shal glory in you. By your honor you shal command many, by your vertue you shal command your selues. Summa apud Deum nobilitas est (saith Ierome) clarū esse virtutibus: Before God the soueraigne nobility is to be famous for vertue. To stir you vp to this, I need not to cō∣mend vnto you the examples of kings before Christ, Em∣perors in the primitiue Church, & many heathen gouernors who excelled in vertue: looke vpon that king vnder whom you do liue, vpon that admirable prince before whom you do stand, and you shall see that the table of the one is a schoole of Diui∣nity,
 the familie of the other a court of piety. Besids consider, I beseech you, that most noble Earle Salisbury, who though by nature he be father but to one, yet in affection and tuition he is a father to you both: doth not he build his religion vpon the sacred grounds of faith & hope,His ansvvere to certain scan∣dalous papers. in the pretious bloud of his Re∣deemer, without presuming vpō any particular merits? doth hee not promise, Nec Deo, nec patriae, nec patri patriae deesse? is he not an Hushay to our Dauid against rebellious Absolon2 Sam. 15, 37,? a Morde∣cai to our Ahashuerosh againg Bightana and TereshHester. 6, 2? an Antipa∣ter to our Alexander to watch when he sleepethAntipater vigilat,? a Zopyrus to our Darius for the subduing of BabylonHerod. L: 3? and a Zabud to our Solomon, euen the Kings friend1 King. 4, 5.? Is hee not a star in our heauen, to enlighten many? a tree in our ortyard, to shadow ma∣ny? and such an eysore to our euill sighted & blindfolded ad∣uersaries, that next to the extinguishing the light of our Israel, they foolishly forewarne him that they seeke his life? But, the soule of that worthy Earle shal be boūden in the būdle of life with the Lord his God: when the soule of his enimies, shall be cast out, as out of the middle of a sling1 Sam: 25:29. Remēber him O Lord according to all the goodnesse which he hath done for this peopleNeh, 5, 19. As therefore A∣lexander was moued by the vertues of Philip, Scipio the lesser by Scipio Africanus, Octauian by Caesar, and Pyrrus by Achilles, so let the examples of Princes in times past, of gouernours in this present age, and especially of your noble progenitors, be glasses for you to behold your selues in, that whatsoeuer they haue gotten, it may be reteined by you, & if any thing hath bin lost, by you it may be recouered. And if it please god, that the fruit of your age be like to the sap of your youth,Si non sit vi∣tim in radice, non erit in fructu: si fons purs etiam rils. the streams of your manhood be answerablie current to the fountaine of your minority, I doubt not, but the generation to come, shall as greatly reioyce at the possession of your honours, as they are much cheered in the hope of your vertues.
I do obserue my Lords (though what can a man of my parts, and pouerty obserue) that many great men in our kingdome
 haue bin for a while like vnto the great tree which Nebucadnet∣zar saw in the Prophecy of DanielDan, 4.6, but either by vndermining Iesuits, or discontented followers, or Parasititall seruants, or enui∣ing of superiours, or desire ef greatnesse, or seeking of reuenge, or excesse of life, the roots of these trees haue beene so stubbed vp, that the place of their aboad is no where to be founde. The Lord grant that you may take heed of these things (especiallie in your youth) that we who see you now as Ioseph and Beniamin, may see you hereafter as Dauid & Ionathan: so this twofold cable shall neuer be broken.
Quò vosfata vocant, seu quò vos fata vocabunt,
Sint semper vobis prospera fata precor.
What Destinies you present haue, or haue you after may,
That these to you be prosperous, my Lords, I humbly pray.
Now albeit you haue many liuing libraries to take counsell of, yet since books are, as one saith, muti magistri, & trusty coūselors, it is good for you to take aduise from them. By them you may confer with the prophets, speak with the Apostles, & though Christ himselfe left nothing in writing, yet by them you may read the Sermōs of Christ. By these you may cal a council of holy Fathers, wise Philosophers, eloquent Orators, acute Logitians, learned Hi∣storians, & great Mathematitians, to resolue any euen the grea∣test doubt. In the first place I cōmend vnto you the word of god: which is not a dumb doctor, a nose of wax, a Shipmans hose, a dead let∣ter, an Inky Gospel, as our aduersaries would haue it, but it is a di∣recter of our waies, a comfort in calamity, a searcher of the heart, mighty in operation, a lanthorn to our life, & a counsellor to the Christian statesmen of the world. Habetis oracula Dei? saith Chry∣sostome, ne moremini aliā doctorē: nemo docebit vos quemadmodū illa. Haue you the Oracles of God? care not for other teachers, none will in∣struct you better then they.
But amongst many diuines which are worthy your reading, giue me leaue to commend vnto you this Christian Institution: The order of this author is methodical, & manifest, setting down diuinity in questions & answers, which order of instruction is an∣cient
 in the Church, as may appeare by the practise of Augustine, & Iunilius, & many worthy writers since & before them. The mat¦ter of this booke is very profitable, being the sūme & substance, or a body of Theology. For what point of piety may not be learned out of this booke? do you desire to know the Doctrine of one God, the trinity of persons, Christ crucified, the holy Ghost? and the Scriptures of God? Here you haue that doctrine set downe? would you be ac∣quainted with the creation of the world, the natures either of An∣gels, or mankind, or mariage, or diuorce? Behold in this booke you may see them all. Is it the gouernment of the world, the doctrine of sin, the power of freewil, the law & the gospel, the agreement or dis∣agreement of the old and new Testament, which you are willing to learne? here is a teacher fit to instruct you. Here you haue a Synop∣sis of Faith & repentance, iustification & sanctification, of a Christi∣ans works, & christian liberty, of prayer & predestination, of the Re∣surrection & last iudgement, of eternall life & eternal death. Here you may read of the true Church, of the nature of Vowes, of the Sacrametns of the old & new Testament: and the office both of Magistrates & subiectes. And concerning these questions, what∣soeuer is material, in Luther, Melancton, Caluin, Peter Martyr, Zan∣chius, Hipperius, Hemingius, Vrsinus, and the rest, it is here set be∣fore you in one viewe. How necessary it is for young men, espe∣cially young noble men to read such bookes, the seasoning of their tender years with piety, & the future good which may come by this to posterity, doth easily proue. If young Alexander will bee studious of philosophy, why shal not young Theodosius be studious in diuinity? if he said to his master, mallem singulari disciplina quam potentia praestare, why should not you say, mallemus Christiana disci∣plina quam potentia praestare? But as Alexander was offended with his tutor Aristotle in making cōmon those acroamatical books in which he alone desired to excell: so many, I feare me, will be offended with mee, in making this booke familiar to all, which many would haue to be reserued for Diuines. If any be scandali∣zed at this labour of mine, it is an offence taken not giuen, I desire
 with Moses, that all people might prophecie: and since the Ie∣suites by their late inuented Catechismes, haue made thou∣sandes skilfull in errours, why should not we who are Chri∣stians, labour by institutions, to make ten thousands skilfull in the trueth? We commend them who bring vs either com∣modities, or drugs, or delites, or fashions, or fruites, or trees from forraine countries: and shall we discommend them who to the building of our Church, do bring from other countries euen the gold of Ophir?
Now, right Honorable, hauing finished this booke, I am bold to present it to your most Honorable patronage: and as that most Reuerend father, the late Archbishoppe of Canterburie, commended to vs students of our Vniuersitie, Caluins Institu∣tions, so do I commend vnto you Bucanus Institutions. You haue, both of you, bin two worthy members of our two Vni∣uersities, and the oneThe Lord of Cranborne is now in, and of that famous Colledge of Saint Iohn the Euangelist, where I haue bin fellow, now neere eighteene yeares. If it please your Honors to pardon my boldnesse, to peruse diligently mine Epistle, and to be as wil∣ling to read this excellent booke, as Alphonsus did Tully, Eras∣mus did Terence, Bishop Iewell did Horace, the Lady Iane did Plato, and Antoninus the Emperour did read all good bookes, I haue all that I desire or expect. The God of Heauen so blesse you, that, whether you trauaile abroad, or stay in this King∣dome, you may so, by your Christian Tutors, bee seasoned with pietie in your youth, that, learning with those young chil∣dren, to sing an HosannaMath. 21, 9., to Christ in your life, you may af∣ter this life ended, with the blessed Saints, sing HalleluiahReuel. 19.10 to him in the Highest Heauens. London, Saint Martins in the fieldes. March. 3. 1606.

