



Right Honorable
THE Dutifull zeale I beare to the
safety of my dread Soueraigne, and
deare Country, inforceth mee, (other∣wise
loth to put my finger into the
fire) in the second place to sollicite
Your Grace, to bee the more carefull to preuent the
danger. When King Saul and Abner, with the
whole guard were in a dead sleepe, so that Dauid
had the opportunity to take away the Kings speare,
and Pot of water by him, onely to testifie his fidelity
to the King, hee called alowd to Abner, and awake∣ning
him said, Art not thou a valiant man? and
who is like to thee in Israell? wherefore hast
thou not kept thy Lord the King? surely
yee are worthy to dye, &c. But neither can
I say so altogether, nor neede I cry so loud to your
Grace, vnlesse these many businesses, which will
scarce suffer you to sleepe so soundly as did Ab∣ner,
will neither suffer such a dwarfe as my selfe




easily to bee heard. But speaking for the King, I
hope I shall not be denied Audience. Nor are they
good subiects, persecuted as Dauid, of whom the King
is in danger: but such, as though they haue small
cause to complaine of persecution, yet are instigated
to deny vnto their Soueraigne that loyalty and Allegi∣ance,
which all true subiects owe vnto their lawfull
Prince. Doth not your Grace erect your most ear∣nest
attention to this? But who dare thus instigate
the Kings subiects against him? No lesse then the
Pope, and that by a Breeue or Bull lately sent ouer
into England, wherein he straitly chargeth his Ca∣tholique
Sonnes (as hee termes them) vpon no
termes to take the Oath of fidelity to the King, in∣citing
and animating them, as against their Enemy,
as the Breeue can testify. Nor had I, I confesse,
beene thus bold to meddle in such a matter, if I had
seene but some publique Edict for the burning of the
Breeue, as also for the effectuall banishing of all Ie∣suites,
the onely Factors for the Pope in such Ad∣ventures,
for Treason and Rebellion. But be like
notice hath, not as yet beene giuen thereof to your
Grace. And that you may bee not the lesse sensible
of the danger of a Papall Breeue, You may be pleased
to know, that such neuer appeareth, but as some pro∣digious
Comet, not signifying only, but designing and

producing some sad fatality. Thus did the Pope in
88; thus at the Gunpowder plott: Thus, now.
This Romish Lightning may warne vs of a Crack
not farre off: God keepe vs from the Thunderbolt.
If it were only a bare prognosticating signe, it were
the lesse; Sapiens dominabitur Astris: but being
an operatiue Instrument, wherein the Iesuites are A∣gents,
to improue it to the vtmost of their Masters ad∣uantage,
it is not so to be slited. Iesuits? why are not
all Iesuits packed away long since by Proclamati∣on?
Alas Sir, you may be pleased to know, they are like
cunning Iugglars, that can passe and repasse at plea∣sure.
They say, England is fuller of them at this day
then euer. And now while the Popes yron is in the
fire, how doe they sweat, in beating it to perfection?
But if they be catcht, they are put in prison. Alas,
they are there, but as a bird tyed to the nett, to call
in other birds, which seeming to come to releiue the
prisoner, they are more intangled themselues. But
thence they are quickly dismist to bee gone, and voyd
the Land. Alas; they doe but play the cunning Duck,
which sent out, doth by her wily insinuation, tolle
and traine hundreds, and thousands into her Masters
Nett. Thus cunningly can they play at fast and
loose. How then shall these Proteus-like Foxes be
taken? Certainly there is no other way, but to hunt

them out with the Kings owne doggs. Your Grace is
the great Iusticiarius Forestae. And anciently Iu∣stices
in Eyre were sent with Commission into
sundry Counties, to heare such causes especially, as
were termed Plees of the Crowne. Lo here a
great plee of the Crowne, yea such, as wher in
the title of the Kings Crowne is not onely questio∣ned,
but strongly vsurped by the Claime of a for∣raigne
Power. What English eares can with pati∣ence
heare such an insolencie? When King Aha∣shuerus
did but vnderstand of the desperate estate of
the Iewes, wherein that wicked Haman (as
Hester told the King) had brought them: the good
King by and by sent forth his Edicts by Post into e∣uery
Prouince, to incourage and arme the poore
people of God, to stand vpon their guard, and so
they preuented and ouercame the perill. Now who
stand more deeply charged with the care, of the
Kings Crowne, then your Grace? So that I
neede not (I trow) in such a case, vse spurres to
your agility and readines, for the putting of all dull
courses in speedy execution, for not onely the ap∣prehension,
but the condigne punishment of such
kinde of Malefactors. Why, what Malefact∣ors?
such, as Iesuits are: not onely of factious,
treacherous, traiterous spirits, as they are men,

possessed with the spirit of Iesuitisme: but euen by
vertue and force of their Order and Profession,
Traitors ex professo. They must be so, they are
bound to bee so, else they are no Iesuits, else must
they renounce their Holy Order of the society of
Iesu. And is it possible that such should roust in
England? Nay reuell and riot? Nay, not onely
bee profest traitors themselues; but drawing Parties
to their side continually, euen to the diuiding of the
limmes, the armes, and shoulders, legges and feete
from the Head of this goodly Politicke body? It is
the fashion indeed, in other neighbour Popish
States publickely to allow and auow such kinde
of Creatures in the State. But none haue more rea∣son
to vphold them then, the Spaniard, their good
Master. For certainly in time, if they be suffered to
goe on, they will bring all Christendome vnder the
Spanish yoake, God forbid. Yet if they should so do, I
make a question, whether the Spaniard would suffer
such pragmatical spirits any longer in Christendome,
lest, as the restles sea, hauing wrought as far as it can
one way, it worke as far as fast the contrary
way. It is likly then; that he would send them into the
Turks Dominions; into Persia, & all those Easterne
Empires to make compleat the Monarchy of Spaine,
that ioyning the two Indies together, and circling in

whole globe of the earth, his Motto may then be, Ne
plus vltra. But why doe I roue so farre, when our
home is in such danger? What is to bee done? shall
I shoot a fooles bolt. Shall I bee bold with your
Grace? Why not? I haue heard men say, you are of
a noble disposition, which will easily pardon a fooles
bluntnesse. In briefe then: Your Grace knowes,
the King wants money extreamely. You know a∣gaine,
that Treason is vnsufferable; to wink at it,
to conceale it, brings a man within Misprision of
treason. You may be pleased all to know, that all
Iesuites, as by their profession, so in their practise,
are high Traitors to Kings and States. You know
againe, that all Iudges and Iustices of peace in
this land, are sworne to the King, to see the lawes
duly executed, but especially vpon fellons and trai∣tors.
You know, that all such, as shall bee found
guilty of such Periury, or Misprision of treason.
are punishable, not onely in their persons, but in
their purses and estates. Can the King then lacke
money, so long as there are (as they say) so many
Iesuits in the land, which passe euery where vn∣punished?
O that your Grace would finde out the
Delinquents in this kinde? Nay let your Grace be
assured, if you will but take a round course with the
Iesuites, in rooting them out, according to their de∣merits,

as it would bring safety & security to the
Kings Person and State, so being the faithfull dis∣charge
of that trust reposed in you, what a comfort
will it be to your conscience, what a blessing from
God might you expect, yea, what loue also from all the
Kings louing subiects? Then would all things pro∣ceed,
succeed happily: whereas on the contrary, so
long as Iesuits with their factions and treasons are
suffered in this land, what can wee expect, but that
euery thing we take in hand, should proue very vn∣prosperous
& crosse? For God is highly displeased
with vs, for suffering such miscreants to practise
their impieties on this his Church, to the great disho∣nour
of his Name, and Religion. And how shall we
be worthy to inioy such a King, such a Country, such
a Church, so many blessings of God, if we be so prodi∣gall
of them? All the world admires the wonderfull
trust, that the King hath reposed in you: I pray God
your Grace may answer it, in your faithfull, prudent,
and vigilant care. I remember a speech, which his
Highnesse, when he was Prince, vttered among vs,
that were his seruants: that when he had once com∣mitted
any businesse of trust, though of the highest
nature, to a seruant, he would neuer conceiue the least
suspicion of his fidelity: adding, hee had rather run
the hazard of his loyalty, then imbitter his generous

trust with mixture of feare. A strong obligation
sure to a seruant so intrusted. But some of his ser∣uants
trembling replyed: what if he proue treache∣rous?
hath hee not the more free and secure opportu∣nity
to worke his wicked ends? But (quoth his High∣nesse)
my care shall be such in the Choyce, as my trust
shall bee built vpon a sure ground. Pray God it bee,
so, said his seruants. Now this wee see verefied on
the Kings part towards your Grace. What a liberall
trust hath he reposed in you? such, as not all the
gold of Iudai should euer ouer ballance. But we all
beseech the Lord, that his Maiesty may not bee decei∣ued.
And haue we not cawse? Doth not the safty
of the Kings Person & Crowne, of this Church &
State, of three goodly Kingdoms, yea of the Gospell of
Christ, and of true religion at home and abroad, euen
ouer Christendome, & throughout the world, depend
in a maner vpon this trust, committed to your Grace?
King Achish would haue made Dauid keper of
his Head for euer. But his Nobles thought it not
safe least all their own heads should haue payd for
it. But the trust committed to your Grace, is not on∣ly
of the Kings head but of all our heads, & of ma∣ny
millions more, that neuer, saw your face. Haue you
not neede then not only of Davids true heart toward
his King but of Argus his 100 eyes, in watching o∣ver

Io, committed to his trust? Yet Argus for all his
eyes, was so inchaunted with Mercuries pipe, whom
Iupiter had sent to steale her away: that falling all
a sleep, Io was taken away, and Argus had all his
eyes puld out, and put into the peacocks traine. But
where are any such Mercuries to inchaunt your
Grace? Where? Alas, where are they not, specially
where reatnes dwelleth, at ourt? Haue we any
need of madd men, said the King of Gath? And
may not the Court say, haue we any need of flat∣terers?
These be the inchanting Mercuries. And of
all other, none more to be feared, then the Iesuites,
whom the Iupiter of Rome sends into England, to
inchaunt and impose vpon our most prudent, and vi∣gilant
Arguses, as the learned Bishop hath well ob∣serued
in his Tortura Torti. Iesuites, a generation,
who as they are the most exquisite Artists in the sci∣ence
of flattery, so none hath more cause to beware &
abhor them, then your Grace. But you know no Ie∣suites.
The greater is your danger, and ours. For they
cōe in sheeps clothing, in disguised habits, so bold, as
they can no more blush then their visards, lowly low∣ting,
charming thechiefest with a counterfet adorati∣on,
& admiration of their I wot not what excellency.
And were it not miraculous, if the Court it selfe, espe∣cially
your Graces house, should be free even from

many of such flyes, which fliblowe the purest flesh
with their flatteries? The croaking Froggs of Ae∣gypt
crawled up into the very Kings chambers: and
are not these cōpared by the Holy Ghost to Froggs,
which goe vnto the Kings of the earth, and by
their crouching and croaking, and their Sardonian
smiles, would allure them to warre against Christ
and his gospell? It is good therefore your Grace
should make a speedy & diligent search in the Court,
in your owne howse, and in all the skirts of it round
about, and so also throught the whole land, what
Iesuites are lurking any where, and to giue them the
reward of Traitors. Shall wee dally with such
shall wee thinke to winne them with complements?
Wee know the fable of the snake fostered in the mans
bosome: it is but the Morall of a Iesuite, intertained
with a Court-like Curtesy. Jesuites are nettles, if gen∣tly
handled, they sting: but if hard grasped, they
hurt not. Contrary to the Basil (the Embleme of the
Throne established by mercy) which being gently
stroked on the hand, yeelds a pleasant smell, but crush∣ed
hard vpon it, vnsauory. Your Grace takeing this
course, Parcere subjectis, et debellare superbos,
therein you truly discharge the trust committed vnto
you. Whereas if the execution of good lawes should
bee suspended, if treason & traitors suffered, &

Yf in this perillous season, our potent & profest ene∣mies
should thus be armed against vs, what can wee
expect, but confusion of all? And how shall your
Grace, in the ruine of this goodly state, escape scot∣free?
shall your house stand notwithstanding? Nay,
assure your selfe, if at this time you doe not bestirre
your selfe, to reforme things amisse, but that they bee
suffered to runne on headlong to destruction, I may
apply that speech of Mordecai to Hester, vpon the
like occasion: Thinke not with thy selfe, that
thou shalt escape in the Kings howse: for yf
thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time,
then shall inlargement and deliuerance arise to
Gods people from another place: but thou
and thy fathers howse shall be destroyed. Nor
let this my boldnesse seeme strange to your Grace,
though perhaps you bee not much acquainted with
such, as will speake the downe right truth. Of all
Iobs friends, hee found but one Elihu, who sayd,
Let me not, I pray you, accept any mans person:
neyther let me giue flattering titles vnto men:
For I know not to giue flattering titles; in so do∣ing,
my Maker would soone take me away. If
Iob in his Misery found but one such: no maruaile
if your Grace find scarce one. As for mee, I am an En∣glish-man,
a free borne subiect, a true louer of my

King & Countrey; yea I am also an vnworthy Mi∣nister
of Christ, a poore watch-man of Israell: and
when I see my soueraine King, my Mother Country,
the Glory of God, the Gospell of Christ, the Church of
England, yea the Church of Christ ouer the world,
in danger to bee destroyed, and all brought vnder the
tyranny of Antichrist, and the Spanish yoake: shall
I bee silent? shall I not speake? shall I not lift vp
my voice like a trumpet? shall I not thus free
my soule, whatsoever shall become of my body? Yea,
for Sions sake I will not hold my tongue, and
for Ierusalems sake I cannot rest, vntill the righ∣teousnesse
thereof goe forth as brightnesse, and
the salvation thereof as a Burning Lampe. I
feare neither prison, nor death it selfe, that I may
discharge a good conscience both towards my God, &
my King, & Countrey. Nor feare I to be censured
as a Polypragmaticke. What haue Ministers to doe
to meddle in State-mysteries? Sir, let mee speake
boldly, it were happy, if, as in the apostatized King∣domes
of Christendome, the Priests of Baals coun∣sels,
I mene, Iesuites, & Priests (which must needs
bring ruine to them) are followed: So in this King∣dome
of Iuda, onely the truth-telling Micaia's were
heard. Good King Dauid could say, I am wiser
then my teachers, then the aged, then mine E∣nemies;

for thy testimonies are my delight,
and my Counsellors? Hee that will bee a wise
states-man, & politician indeed, let him take Gods
word for his card & compasse. For euen the
foolishnesse of God (as sayth the Apostle, as the
world accounteth foolishnesse) is wiser then men.
But you want not those, that are able to performe the
office of good Chapleins. Yet if any, instead thereof,
shall not onely bee silent, & negligent, but on the o∣ther
side, bee too officious to sow pillowes vnder your
Elbowes, to applaud and approue you in all your do∣ings,
yea to perswade and counsell you, wherein per∣haps
theyr conscience tells them, it ought not to bee so:
woe be vnto them. Only wee hope better things. But
if any shall goe about to find a knot in a Bullrush, by
picking some quarrell with this booke, where hee hath
noiust cawse (bee his pretence neuer so faire guilded
ouer, or seeme his reasons neuer so farre fetcht, yea
from his abstruse speculations in state-pollicy) &
shall by hooke or crooke labour the suppressing of it,
or hinder your Grace from reading of it, though so ne∣cessarie
to imploy your saddest thoughts in, it so neere∣ly
concerning the safety of your gratious Master our
dread Soueraine, & of our sweet Countrey, & euen
of your selfe and whole family: no doubt but your
Grace will take that man for no other, but a pestilent

Traitour, & if hee be not a Iesuite, yet certainly pos∣sessed
with a Iesuiticall spirit, as seeking to smoother
such an important Ouerture, as this. Now the
Lord Iesus Christ, who sitts in his throne of Maie∣sty,
the great Protector of his Church, the most potent
and terrible auenger of all his aduersaries, especially
of Antichrist, with all his Adherents & confederates
to crush them with a rod of yron, and to breake
them in pieces like a Potters vessell; who in hea∣uen
sitts, & sees, & laughes all his Enemies to
scorne; who therefore admonisheth Princes and
Potentates, saying, Be wise now therefore ô yee
Kings, bee instructed yee Iudges of the earth;
serue the Lord with feare, and rejoyce with
trembling; kisse the Sonne, least hee be angry,
and yee perish from the way, when his wrath
is kindled but a little: Blessed are all they that
put their trust in him: the same Lord make your
Grace so wise, so well instructed, as setting your selfe
to bee a noble instrument of his glory, of the Kings
safety, of your Countries welfare, in seeing Gods truth
maintained, the lawes duely executed, heresies sup∣pressed,
and their authors censured, Idolatries cashe∣red,
treasons and treacheries discouered, and discum∣fited,
Jesuites and Priests abandoned, the Kings
Liege subiects countenanced: your Grace may not on∣ly

show your selfe to all the world to be worthy of that
high opinion, which so gratious a Master hath concei∣ued
of you, but may also procure to your selfe and your
numerous family the fauour and blessing of the great
King of heauen and earth, and may merit also the
hearty loue and good will of this whole state, when in
these times of danger threatned to this land, and has∣tened
by the Popes Breeue, they shall behold your
faithfull vigilancy, most honorably & generously to
acquit it selfe, in so faire an occasion offered once for
all.

