


1. BOOKES of greatest estima∣tion and noblest subiect (most gratious Virgin) ought to be dedicated and offred to the no∣blest and eminentste personages, and that for two causes; th'one to be protected and patronized by them against malignant and malitious people, to whome the obiect or matter might be offensiue: the other to gra∣tifie them for the benefites receaued of thē. the obiecte of this booke which is the thea∣ter and true representation both of the Ca∣tholique, and protestant religion, being so eminent that it excelleth and exceedeth all obiects whatsoeuer, ought to be dedicated and consecrated vnto thee most sacred Vir∣gin, being the worthiest creature amongest all meere Creatures that euer were.
Contraria se posita magis ilu∣cessit.2. The opposition of two extremities can neuer be better declared or knowen, thē to oppose the one to the other, as things po∣sitiue, and thinges priuatiue, light and dark∣nesse, thinges contrarie, as heate and cold, thinges contradictory, or thinges affirmatiue and negatiue, as a man, and noe man: no∣thinge is soe repugnant or hurtfull to the Catholique religion, as heresie, and especi∣ally that of the sectaires of our vnfortunate daies: nothinge soe contrary to Christe as Antechriste: nothinge soe offensiue to the Catholique Church, as the malignant Con∣gregation of Caluinistes & Anabaptistes. So as the trueth of the one, cānot be made more apparant, more euident, and more cleere, then by the falshoode of the other: nor the goodnesse of the one, be better made knowē, then by the mischeefe & euill of the other.
3. Vouchsafe therfore (ô gratious virgin and mother of the Sauiour of the worlde) that the trueth and goodnesse of the one, be∣inge made knowen, and the falshoode and wickednesse of the other, being detected: with thy most precious intercession to thy Sonne Iesus, to lighten and illuminate the hartes & vnderstādings of such as are ouer∣whelmed, and ingulfed in the dangerous a∣bisme of darcknesse, and are gone astraye in the intricat labernith of heresies. Deliuer thē (ô blessed mediatrixe) that doe walke awry in the darcknes and shadowe of death. Pro∣tecte

and defend the Catholique Church (for the saftie of which, Christe Iesus tooke flesh of thee, and for the establishing whereof, he suffered his bitter passion, yealded himselfe to death, and triumphed ouer the powers of darcknesse) from the malice and danger∣ous purposes, of all such as bend all their plotts and pollices to destroy her.
4. By whom should the religion of vir∣gins, vowes, and votaries be protected and vpholden, but by her that made the first so∣lemne vowe and profession thereof? To whō should the religion of Christ be dedi∣cated, but to the mother of Christ? Or the law of grace be addressed, but vnto her that is ful of grace? What better aduocate can the Church haue, then shee who is placed bet∣wixt the sunne and the moone, as S. Ber∣nard saieth, which is mary betwixt Christ & his Church? What better defense can there be against heretiques, then shee (as S. Bona∣uenture saith) that destroyeth all heresies? and according to S. Bernard, omnis haeresunt ineremptrix, that killeth all heresies. Ther∣fore, ô blessed Virgin, Dignare me laudare te Virgo &c. Vouchsafe me to praise thee, ô sa∣cred virgin: fortifie me against thine enemies, and the enemies of the Church of Iesus Christ; which being his only comōwealth, kingdom, patrimony, vineyarde and mysti∣call body, euery member thereof, ought to defend, yea is more bound thervnto, then

to the defense of any earthly comon wealth.
5. As for thyne incpmparable, and vn∣speakeable merittes and benefites towardes me, and towards the whole world, all true Christian hartes doe acknowledge them; & with Aristotle I confesse, Qui beneficium ac∣cipit,De cōgruo uon de cō∣digno. libertatē perdidit, He that receueth a be∣nefit loseth his liberty & becometh a slaue to his benefactors. How then should not I & the whole world, confesse our selues to be obliged vnto thee for soe generall and soe worthy a benefit as we haue receaued at thy handes, Iesus Christ taking that flesh of thee, in which he would dye for our offēces? Therfor (ô blessed virgin) I offer my self with this my labour as a poore slaue vnto thee, I prostrate my selfe like a poore wretched & sinfull creature before thee, confounded and oppressed with many imperfections and de∣fects, voide of merits, destitut of grace, ouer∣charged with the dreadfull assaultes & ma∣chinations of powerfull enemies, they to stronge to offend, and I to weake (without thy helpe) to defend my selfe against them. We therfore, Sub tuum praesidium confugimus sancta Dei genitrix, &c. flie vnder thy saue∣gard, ô mother of God, for none that euer relyed vpon thee, was frustrated of his expe∣ctation, none was euer deceaued of his hope, none was euer cōfounded or discomforted, who hath at any time fled to thy intercessi∣on, as holy Church in all ages by experience

hath proued, and all holy sainctes, that e∣uer were, haue solemnly auouched.
6. Thou therfore, ô onlyAug. ser. 2. de An∣nunc. hope of sin∣ners. Thou, ôS. Ephrē de laud. B. Mariae. ioy, saluation, and peace of the worlde. Thou, ôDamasc. orat. 2. de Assump. ocean & gulfe of grace Thou ôDamasc. orat 2. dormit. Virg. liuing arke of the liuing God. Thou,Epiph. l. 3. Hier. 78 the mother of all liuing, and the cause of life, who broughtest forth life vnto the world. ThouCyril. A∣lex. hom. 10. the pretious mar∣guerit of the worlde, the inextinguible light thereof, the crowne of virginitie, the scepter of the Catholique faith, and the in∣dissoluble temple containing him, who can be no where contained. Thou, ôIerem. adu. Iouiu. East gate, euer shut, and euer shining, bringing forth the holy of holies. Thou ôS. Greg. in 1. Reg. mountaine which far surpassest in height, all height of creatures. Thou,Rup. lib. 3. in cant. in heauen the queene of Sainctes, in earth the queene of Kingdomes. Finallie thou art she, then whichS. Chry. ser. de Natiuit. nothing was euer seene more noble or more excel∣lent, thou art she who only surpassest hea∣uen and earth: what can be more holie then thou? Not Prophets, not Apostles, not Martyrs, not Patriarkes, not Angels, not Dominations, not Seraphins, not Cheru∣bins, nor any thing amongst the visible or inuisible creatures, can be found more ex∣cellent then thou, ô Marie, for thou art his mother, who was begotten of his father before all begininges. Will we know ther∣fore how far thou excellest all celestiall

powers? These with feare and trembling stand hiding their face, but thou doost offer vp mankind vnto him whome thou hast begotten, by whom we obtaine the pardon of our offences.
I therfore thy humble and most vn∣worthy suppliant, doe here present and of∣fer vnto thy protection, this worke and la∣bor (though far vnworthy of thy patronage) beseeching thee, that through thy fauora∣ble assistance (O most glorious virgin) it may serue for the reclayming of deceaued soules into the sheepfould of Iesus Christ; for the confusion of Heretiques, and conso∣lation of Catholiques; for the detection of falsitie, and aduancement of verity; and last∣lie, for the greater honor and glory, both of thee, and of thy B. Sonne, our Lord and Sauiour Iesus, to whom with the Father, & the Holy Ghost, be honor and glory, world without end, Amen.
