



Dread Soveraigne.
I ACCOVNT it my
greatest misery, that being
to present Your Maiestie
with a busines of such con∣sequence,
so neerelie concer∣ning
the safety of Your sa∣cred
Person and Crowne:
I am inforced to adventure so rich a fraight
in so brittle a barke, so ticklish to be over∣turned
with the least disgust, or blast of
displeasure; wherein yet I should bee
happy▪ if miscarying herein, I might but
perish alone. Mine owne experience might be

sufficient to teach me to feare. For if the noble
Queene Hester, so gracious in the Kings eyes,
yet feared to hazard her person into the Pre∣sence
vncalled: how much more a poore Out∣cast?
yet betweene feare of the yron law, and
hope of the golden scepter shee pressed in with
this resolution, And if I perish, I perish; chusing
death rather, then not to discharge the duty
she owed to Gods people, now destinated, and
doomed to destruction. Only this is my com∣fort,
looke what advantage that excellent
Queene had of my despicable person, as a Peti∣tioner:
no lesse haue I of her, in regard of the
royall Person petitioned. Shee had to deale
with a heathen King, the Captiuer of Gods
people, and who had already consigned their
Massacre, and that by a Decree irrevocable, ac∣cording
to the Law of the Medes and Persians,
(though, a it appeared, without his speciall
knowledge, Haman hauing abused the Kings
hand and seale, to his owne wicked purposes,
as chap. 5. 7.) besides (which might be, not the
least discouragement) she was to passe the Pikes
of a most tyranni all and vnkingly law, forbid∣ding
any, vpon paine of death, to enter into
the Kings presence, vncalled, as Hester now

had beene for 30. dayes, Haman in the meane
time hauing the onely Monopoly of the Kings
care, who like the vast lunary body, eclipsed
the beames of his favour, especially from Gods
owne people, whose cause the while lay a blee∣ding,
and became the more desperate, through
the inaccessiblenesse of intercessors to moue
Kingly compassion vpon their iust complaints;
such were the difficulties, which the noble He∣ster
was to incounter with: yet poore I, liue
vnder a more benigne Climate, vnder a Chris∣tian
Prince, a Protector of Gods people, Defen∣der
of the faith, one, whose royall presence is not
by any seuere law locked vp from the free ac∣cesse
of the poorest sutors, whose naturall dis∣position
also, like the Sunne vneclipsed, is free∣ly
to impart light and heate to the inferiour
Creatures; yea whose owne deare Person and
crowne is imbarked in the same adventure of
Gods people and His, to reioyce or suffer toge∣ther:
all these giuing mee incouragement, and
as it were reaching forth the goldē scepter, while
I humbly present to Your sacred Maiesty, the
dangerous condition, wherin the royal scepter it
selfe (by all the prognosticating signes of a Pa∣pall
Bull or Breeue, lately come into England) is

like, without speedy preuētiues, to be involved.
Dauid, now desolate and disconsolate about
Ziglag, was willing to harken to a poore
starueling Amalekite lad, giuing him intelli∣gence
where his enemies were. I acknowledge
my selfe vnworthy to doe Your Maiesty the
least seruise, and I could haue wished this Task
rather to any other: yet the indeleble charact∣er
of my fidelity, so often reimprinted in my
heart by sacred Oath in Your Highnesse ser∣vice
(besides the habituall affection of a loy∣all
subiect) deeply ingaged me (rather then it
should be vndone) in this addressement. And
God forbid, that by ouercautelous, or rather
cowardly silence, I should contract the guilt of
Misprison, of no lesse then high treason against
Your Maiesties Crowne and Scepter. Yea o∣therwise,
I should be also vngratefull to God,
who of late hath mercifully if not miraculous∣lie
preserued my life from a Iesuited Assassin.
The causes, with the Circumstances, I here o∣mit
to trouble Your Maiestie withall Onely
I take occasion to mention it, as not altogether
vnworthy of Your Maiesties knowledge. For
what assured confidence may not Your Maie∣stie
haue in the protection of that God, whose

eyes runne to and fro throughout the whole earth, to
shew himselfe strong in the behalfe of them,Chron. 16. 9. whose
heart is perfect toward him? If his diuine vigi∣lant
eye watcheth ouer the life of the poorest,
yet faithfull Ministers, to deliuer them euen in
the midst of danger: how much more ouer
the more precious persons of Kings and Prin∣ces,
while, as Gods Vicegerents, they faithfully
and diligently execute his will by iustice and
iudgement? It is for the Infidell Virginians, for
feare of the Devil, to adore and please him with
their gifts, neglecting God, because he is good:
but faithfull Christians, doe by the true feare
and worship of God, secure themselues from
all Devills, and Devills incarnate, as the bloudy
Iesuites. His Promise is, which is specially
made to Christian Princes, Hee hath giuen his
Angells charge ouer thee, and they shall keepe thee
in all thy wayes; which (In all thy wayes) tea∣cheth
vs, how necessary it is, to haue the wis∣dome
of the Serpent combined with the Doues
simplicity, in the vse of due meanes to prevent
dangers. For if Iesuiticall malice will not spare
the lowly shrubb: how much lesse the lofty
Cedar? If a poore subiect may bee the obiect
of Popish revenge, for standing for the truth:

much more a noble King, the Defender of the
Faith. Which hath possessed me with the grea∣ter
iealousie, and feare for your Maiesties safe∣ty.
Nor is it a Panicke, or causelesse feare. If
I did but dreame of any danger towards Your
Maiesty, how should I feare it waking? But
here is neither Dreame, nor Diuination, but
plaine demonstration of imminent, if not ra∣ther
present danger; such as is worthy to pos∣sesse
Your Naiestie with a most prudent, and
vigilant feare; such as the learned Bishop in
his Tortura, wished to abound in your royall
Father of famous memory, and wee no lesse in
Your Maiestie. The cause (I say) of all is, the
Popes Bull or Breeue, even now perswading and
straightly charging his Catholique Sonnes in En∣land,
(as hee calls them) vpon no termes to
take the Oath of Allegiance to Your Maiestie, as
being not their King, but their enemie. Such
Breeues never come, but they betoken some
notable mischiefe not farre off. Like the Coote,
which flying to the shore crying, prognosti∣cates
a sharpe storme at hand: or as the Owle,
which being seene in the City, portends de∣struction
to it: or as a prodigious Comete; pre∣saging
the fatall periods of Princes or States,

specially where they exercise theyr maliguant
influence. Yet howsoeuer these may proue vn∣certaine,
as being Signes only, but no causes
of future euents: yet the Popes Bull, being not
only a Signe, but a cawse conducing to, and
producing mischiefe, and that even exprofesso;
ought not slightly to be regarded. Omne malum
à Breuibus, Breuia a Pontifice sayde the foresayd
Bishop vpon the same occasion. A Breeue was
sent from the Pope, to prepare the way for the
Spanish Inuasion in 88. Another, for the Gun∣powder
Treason. Remarkable instances, suffice∣ent,
if any, to admonish England euer to looke
for a terrible thunderclap, vpon such a flash of
Lightning Nor euer came Bull from Rome,
more cunningly couched, and fuller of subtill
insinuations, then this, as being the expresse I∣mage
and Modell of the Mistery of iniquity. For∣merly
in the darker night of ignorāce, the Owle
of Rome durst fly and flutter about, seasing
plūme vpon the prey: but here, where the Gos∣pell
shineth, she is faine to winke with her eyes
and to retire her selfe in the reserued corners of
her ambiguous and twi-light Equiuocations.
Such is the curious frame of this Breeue being
such, as Paul 5 said of his, written 
post lngam et 
grauem deliberasionem de omnibus, quae in illis con∣tinentur,
adhibitam. No doubt but this Beere
was a long time a licking into this forme it
hath. But the summe is, the Breeue containeth
nothing, but matter of high Treason against
Your Maiesty, inciting Your Subiectes to de∣fection
from You, and erecting their hopes for
Trophees and triumphs, which the Pope plen∣tifully
promiseth to them. I haue adventured
(the weakest of ten thousand) to vnty this
Gordian knot, vnmasking the mystery there∣of
in a convenient brevety: but all is of no
force, without Your Maiesties sword, like that
of Alexanders, to hew it in sunder. The lesuits
at this present, like Sampsons foxes with their
firebrands, are busy kindling combustion e∣very
where in your Kingdom, vsing this
Breeue as Bellowes to blow to the fier. A man
would thinke, that seeing the foxes & woules
are so rife, the dogges should be muzzled and
tied vp. Or when theeues are so briefe and
bold, the sword of Iustice shouldly rusting in
the sheath. But howsoeuer, wee are sure Your
Maiesty hath not beene wanting in publishing
Proclamation vpon Proclamation, to banish them
the Land. Only they learne thereby, to walke

the more invisible, hoping by Gyges his Ring,
to obtaine their desire. And when they are ta∣ken,
no ligatures of lawes can long hold them,
but Proteus like they haue their evasions. Some∣thing
is the reason, that our Lawes haue lost
their sting, and become Drones: and the Iesu∣ites
proue the waspes to robb vs of our honey.
It was wittily sayd of Polydor Virgil, Regnum
Angliae Regnum Dei: his meaning was, because
none seemed to take care of England, but God.
And true it is, his diuine Prouidence hath from
time to time, beene a miraculous preseruer of
it. Yet some meanes must be vsed. In 88 that
Masculine Queene slept not. At the Powder∣plot,
Your royall Father, by commanding dili∣ligent
search, prevented the blow. God gaue
a happy successe to both. And no doubt, but
he will be the same God to defend Your Maje∣sty,
blessing Your pious zeale, in the rooting
out of his and Your enemies, whose prime Ar∣ticle
of their faith is, treason to Kingdomes and
States.Prov. 6. Salomon sayth, How shall a man carry fire
in his bosome, and not bee burned? What should
I need to propouud to Your Majesty, the exam∣ples
of those noble and religious Kings of Iuda,
who, setting themselues resolutely to reforme

the decayed and disordered state of Gods wor∣shippe,
proued through Gods speciall blessing,
miraculously victorious ouer all their enemies.
Your Majestie knowes them of a childe; which
imitating now being a Man, and a King, God
shall bee with You, as hee was with them, and You
with him. King Ahashuerus, setting apart but
one night to more sad contemplations, and rea∣ding
ouer the Chronicles (a worthy Precedent,
for a prince sometimes so to breake his sleepe)
how was it a meanes to cawse the light of Gods
people, to breake forth from obscure darknesse?
Wee poore swaines espying the storme com∣ming,
to whom should we runne, but to our
Pilot? Or being sicke, but to the Phisitian?
Vnder God, Your Maiesty is the great Pilot of
this Iland, which like a goodly shipperides at
Anchor in the midst of the Sea, now in danger
to be tossed with terrible stormes; which the
leakes will hardly brooke, yf they bee not the
sooner stopt. You, are vnder God, the great
Phisitian, who onely can cure (as the Kings e∣uill,
so) the inveterate Gangrene of this body,
whereof Your Maiesty is the head. Giue vs
leaue, dread Soveraigne, in our extremity of
danger, to cry out to Your Maiesty for helpe.

We know, as God hath dignified You with a
Diademe: so he hath qualified Your Maiesty
with most excellent Princely indowments. For
instance, vouschsafe leaue to Your poore old
servant, to remember a most Princely speach
vsed often by Your Highnesse, HONESTY
IS THE BEST POLICY. A Motto
for a King, and worthy to be ingraven in the
lasting Monuments of Your Kingly Actes, e∣ven
with Your owne royall hands. I may not
presume, least I should offer both violence
and wrong, with my vnskilfull pensil to limme
out more largely this most beautifull, and well
proportioned Image of a Princes vertuous
mynd. But I dare say (which I referre to the
best judgement of Your Majestie, ablest to
judge of Your owne noble sayings) it is an ex∣quisite
Aphorisme, or Abstract of that divine
Rule prescribed to Kings by the Lord and
Iudge of Kings: It shall be, when the King sitteth
vpon the throne of his Kingdome, that he shall write
him h copy of this Law in a Booke, out of that which
is before the Priests and Leuites: and it shall bee
with him, and he shall read therein all the dayes of
his life, that hee may learne to serue the Lord his
God, to keepe all the words of this Law, and these

Statutes to doe them; that his heart be not lift vp a∣boue
his brethren, and that hee turne not aside, from
the Commandement, to the right hand, or to the left:
to the end that he may prolong his dayes in his King∣dome,
hee and his children in the midst of Israell.
Now what is the summe of all this, but, Ho∣nesty
is the best Pollicy? From this Root, to
wit, Honesty, the heathen deriued all the bran∣ches
of vertue. As, those foure Cardinall ver∣tues,
Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Tempe∣rance,
the subiect of those three bookes of Offi∣ces,
Tully draweth from the force and nature
of Honestie, as himselfe expresseth. And those
foure also, Iethro, Moses father in law, in his di∣rection
to his Sonne, requireth to bee in all
Magistrates, saying, Thou shalt prouide out of all
the people, men of Courage, such as feare God, men
of truth, and hating Couetousnesse. Still the
summe totall is, Honestie is the best Policy. Thus
neede wee goe no further, then Your Maie∣sty,
to learne the rule of all good policy, where∣of
Honestie is the ground, as containing all
duties both to God and man, in Prince, or
people.
Thus haue I, though slenderly (for the
which I most humbly craue Your Maiesties

generall pardon) discharged my faithfull du∣tie,
in discovering so great a danger towards
Your Maiestie. It pertaines to the wisdome
of Your Maiestie, to provide speedy meanes
for the prevention; that Your Kingdomes
may not become a prey to the enemie, nor
Your sacred Person exposed to the perill of
beeing forsaken by Your owne Subiects,
whom the Pope instigateth, by the autho∣rity
of his Bull, and by the incessant indu∣strie
of his Iesuites, to stand closse to his
Holinesse, against Your Maiestie, when oc∣casion
serveth. His Breeue also mentioneth
whatAs a little be¦fore the Pow∣der-plott, the Iesuites publi∣shed a booke intituled, The seuen spark, and it inciting the Romish Catholicks to pray for the good succes of the Catholicke enterprise. anxious prayers the Church of Rome
now maketh for hir Catholicke Sonnes in En∣gland.
There is some waighty cause in hand
sure. Wee poore Ministers hope, that Your
Maiestie will bee pleased to call a generall
Fast, to frustrate all Romes prayers. Wee
haue all fared the better for the last pub∣licke
Fast, which Your Maiestie proclaimed
for the averting of vnseasonable weather, a∣gainst
the last harvest. And it is memora∣ble,
that on the same day wherein the
Fast was kept generally over all England,
began the heavens to cleare vp their clowdy

countenance, and so continued, till they had
brought vs in a plentifull harvest, in stead of a
feared famine: Not that wee place any ver∣tue
in a Fast: but because a Fast with humble
prayer preuaileth much with God,Iames 5. not onely as
being commanded by him, and hauing a pro∣mise
annexed: but for the necessity of it to bee
joyned with true repentance, and reformation,
not onely of mens manners, and all raigning
sinnes, publicke and private, but also of the
worship of God, being purged from all the pol∣lutions
of Idolatry and superstition, which are
an abomination in Gods sight, and especially
a clearing the Coast of all Romish Iesuites and
Idolatrous Priests, whose religion is treason a∣gainst
Your Majesty, and God himselfe. When
the good King Hezechiah had received the
blasphemous letter of Senacherib King of Assyria,2 Kings 19. he
went into the Temple of the Lord, humbled
himselfe, and prayed, spreading the Letter for
the Lord to read and revenge all the blasphe∣mies
contained in it, both against God, and the
King, perswading his subjects to defection from
him. But loe here a letter sent into England
from the King of the spirituall Babylon, full of
most impious blasphemies against Your Maie∣sty,

most Antichristianly vsurping a power o∣ver
Your subiects, charging them to disavowe
their fidelity vnto Your Maiesty: shall not this
iustly provoke Your Maiesty with Hezechiah,
to go into the Lords Temple, and there publick∣ly
intreat the Lord to take revenge on such bla∣sphemies,
and to turne the mischiefe, which
Rome and her confederates now intend and
machinate against Your Person and Crowne,
vpon their owne head, as Ezechias obtained of
the Lord? yea, Your Maiestie thus doing, all
Gods faithfull Ministers,2 Chron. 15. as so many Esayes to
King Ezechiah, as so many Azariahs to King
Asa, dare promise Your Maiestie, both certaine
victory ouer Your enemies, and a constant
peace with prosperity, while You constantly
follow the worthy examples of those religious
Kings of Juda: which grace the Lord giue vn∣to
Your Maiestie in abundance. Amen.

