



RIght Reverend Father in God, I have often with great comfort re∣lated among my friends what I ob∣served about five yeares agone at my being at Buckden (an ancient house belonging to the Bishoprick of Lincoln) how bare, naked, and ruinous I had seen it in former times, and now worthily repaired and adorned by your Lordship: The cloisters fairly pargetted and beautified with comely coportments and inscripti∣ons of wise counsels and sentences; the windows
enriched with costly pictures of Prophets, Apostles, and holy Fathers; and beyond all, the Chappell for Gods immediate service, most beautifully fur∣nished with new Seats, Windows, Altar, Bibles, and other sacred books costly covered, clasped, and embossed with silver, and gilt with gold; with Bason, Candlesticks, and other vessels all of bright shining silver; and with stately Organs curiously coloured, gilded, and enameled: no cost spared to set forth the dignity of that house dedicated to Gods worship: And the whole service of God therein performed with all possible reverence and devout behaviour of your own person, and all the assembly; and with the organs of sweet ravishing angelicall voices and faces of young men, lifting up with heavenly raptures all the hearers and beholders hearts to heaven, and enforcing me to think and meditate, When such things are found on earth in the Church Militant, Oh what uncon∣ceivable joyes shall we finde in heaven, in the Church Triumphant! We have great cause to glo∣rifie God for your Fatherhoods excellent care and cost, in this and many
At Lin∣coln, West∣minster, Cambridge, Oxford, &c. Where this Bishop hath built chap∣pels, libra∣ries, &c. or garnished and furnished them with excellent books and maintenance for Scholars. other places, where (as I heare) you have done the like: As also now more lately, for our most excellent worthy-minded Archbishops Grace, who prosecuting his own and some other Bishops preparations, hath now nota∣bly begun, and happily gone forwards with the repairing of that most honourable ancient monu∣ment of Christendome, S. Pauls Church in Lon∣don, to the comfort of all good hearts, and glory
of our nation; and also to work an unity of faith, and uniformity of practise in the service of God, and by all possible means to winne all adversa∣ries thereunto: which would be an incomparable joy to all true Christian hearts.
But to return again to Buckden, to my observa∣tions there, and to my present purpose; I did also ordinarily speak among my friends, of the govern∣ment of your great house, with all subjection and gravity; and of your hospitalitie (such as S.
1. Tim. 3.2. Paul prescribes to Bishops) entertaining your nume∣rous guests with bountifull provision, and feast∣ing them with variety and plenty of all good things, (but with exemplary sobriety in your own person) and with wise, learned and religious dis∣course, as wholesome for their souls, as your meats for their bodies. But this I passe over now slight∣ly, as beside my present purpose: for my purpose was onely to shew, how by the former sight of your house and Chappel, and the manner of Gods service therein, I well understood your Father∣hoods religious minde and intentions; but much better by your private words to my self after∣wards, viz. That your desire was, to have the Consciences of all people (preachers and others) in your Diocesse, rightly informed, and soundly convicted of the lawfulnesse, and perswaded to the practise of the established service of God, with the Rites and Ceremonies of our happily reformed Church; and that your self would leade them the way, and give them a fair
S. August. epist. 86. in fine. Si consilio meo acqui∣escis, Episco∣po tuo noli resistere; & quod facit ipse, sine ullo scrupulo se∣ctare. In using Rites and Ceremo∣nies. example. This glad∣ded
my heart more then the rest. So that, not long after, being appointed by your Lordship to preach at a Visitation at Leicester, I addressed my self to improve my best service to God and his Church, to our gracious Soveraigne Gods immediate de∣puty, to your Lordship the generall spirituall Fa∣ther of these parts, and to our Countrey both mi∣nisters and people, for the better setling of their Consciences in these and other necessary points.
My sermon presently upon the hearing procured me thanks from many, even from the contrary-minded (formerly) and many desired copies or the publication, as did also some of your own of∣ficers; which I also promised. And shortly after, having made my copie ready (with some additi∣ons which time would not give me leave to utter; and with a brief Appendix at the end, fitter for young preachers to reade at home, then for people to heare from the pulpit) I gave it to a friend to procure the printing: but my friend unfriend∣ly kept it in his own or his friends hands so long, that till neare the end of this last yeare I could not get my copie again. At last having reco∣vered it, and communicated it to some other learned judicious friends, they again importuned me for the publication, as a thing that undoubt∣edly would do much good to many unsetled souls. To which now I have condescended.
My good Lord, I beseech you (and all my Readers) to beare with my long preface. I
thought it necessary to let the world know the two occasions, one of my preaching, the other of the late publishing of this sermon. Now, such as it is, I send and dedicate it to your Fa∣therhood, whose it is by the first appointment and all the service it can do: and so is the Authour thereof


