




WHen the Queene of SHEBA (most noble PRINCE) had heard the wisedome of SALOMON, and ob∣serued the order of his house; shee pronounced

his seruants Happy, that did attend vpon him, and heard his Wisedome. It is true, that not onely the houshold seruants find an happines in a wise Prince that feareth God, (for in the feare of God consi∣steth all wisedome) but this fruit of happinesse is also spread and powreth it selfe (as blood frō the heart through all the veines) to all the Subiects that are to bee gouerned by such a Head. Behold then, how your happinesse draweth with it the happinesse of

all other vnder you. Of this, my selfe haue had some experience, which I thinke my selfe bound with my humble duety and thankefulnesse to re∣member: For not many yeeres since I published a Booke of the consent of the Catholicke Church against the Tridentines: wherein I was desirous to offer my seruice to God for the ma∣nifesting of his truth. But your Royall Father, our gracious Soueraigne, and your Highnes were plea∣sed so effectually to declare

your gracious acceptance thereof, as if it had beene a seruice done to your selues. May wee not then say with the Queene of SHEBA, Happy are the seruants of such a King, and of such a Prince the Kings sonne? And herein wee finde great difference be∣tweene the case of your seruants, and the case of them that serue the Pope, who is found to be the trobler, not only of yours, but of all the Kingdomes in Christendom: For your seruants cannot doe any

true seruice to God, but it pleaseth you, and is accep∣ted as a seruice done to you: But his seruants can∣not please him by seeking to please God but if they will haue his fauour, they must loose the fauour and seruice of God, by ventu∣ring vpon some bloody seruice acceptable to him: for what other are now acceptable to him but such? This thing must needes giue your ser∣uants vnder your graci∣ous Fauour and Prote∣ction, a greater encou∣ragement

then our aduer∣saries can finde. So that if wee should be slacke in promoting GODS cause vnder such gracious Pro∣tectours, a great condem∣nation might iustly bee laide vpon vs. And this maketh me the bolder in this present seruice. Since the time of the publishing of that Booke, being writ∣ten in Latine (for I refer∣red it to the iudgement of the learned, and thought the vulgar sort were not to be troubled with such things wherof they could

not iudge) diuers bookes haue come to my handes that are written in English to seduce the simple that cannot iudge, insinua∣ting to them faire preten∣ces of a shewe of the Church: Which shewe of the Church is the thing that carrieth away many that cannot iudge be∣tween trueths and shewes. These bookes being writ∣ten with great confidence, and little knowledge, doe worke much harme a∣mong many of his Maie∣sties Subiects, that are led

with appearances and sha∣dows. Now for the helpe and information of these, I haue drawen out of the greater worke, some short Directions to know the Church, (the want of which directions seemeth to trouble many of the weaker sort) which may giue some light to those that are so seduced, and may helpe to dispell that darkenesse, which their blinde Teachers haue brought vpon them, and would therein hold them still blinded. This I pre∣sent

to your Highnesse, and am bolde herein to seeke your gracious pro∣tection, both because my seruice, and whatsoeuer I can doe, is a due debt to your Highnesse, and also that by your fauourable countenance it may finde more fauour abroad, that the imperfections of the Writer may bee couered and excused by the wor∣thinesse of the Patrone. And thus with my daily prayers to God for an in∣crease of these graces in your Highnesse, that may

leade you both to tempo∣rall and eternall happi∣nesse; I humbly take my leaue, and rest

