



AL men can skill to complayne vvith Iob, that this short lyfe of ours is fraught with many miseries, afflictions, and aduersities, and verie experience sheweth it to be so. For we see dayly in others and feele also in ourselues, the continuall perils and crosses that beseege vs and perce vs to the hart, euen from the tyme of our birth to the giuing vp of our last gasp. VVe find them painful, irksome and tediouse to vs, and therfore we would faine shift them of. But in the meane whyle, do we looke vp to the hand that smiteth vs? do wee consider the causes why they be layd vpon vs? do we seeke out the ends whervnto they tend? or haue we an eye to the frutes and effects of them? Nay rather degenerating into a kind of brutishnesse and hanging our heads groueling downe too the groundward, wee eyther imagin them to growe out of the earth, or impute them to the influence of the skies, or father them vpon fortune, or attribute them vnto men, or wite them vppon the vnhappinesse of the tyme, or tie them to the place, or finally stand amazed at the afflictions themselues, surmizing any thing rather than the truthe, as who should say that God eyther could not or would not gouerne all things by his onely will and prouidence, which is as much as to denie that there is any God at all. By reason wherof we seeldome or neuer enter into ourselues to consider our owne state and the inestima∣ble goodnesse of our God, too thinke how iustly wee haue deserued too bee scourged for our sinnes, and how fatherly hee dealeth with vs in clensing the corruption of our infected nature, and in shewing the perfectnesse of his mightie power in these frayle earthen vessels of our weake and mortall bodies. None of these things do wee take heede of: and therfore much lesse do wee looke so farre afore vs, as too consider that the ende why God scourgeth vs, is to bring vs backe againe to him by repentance, that he myght shewe himselfe a mercyfull father too vs, and heape vp his benefits and graciouse gifts vpon vs, too our greater comfort. VVee consider not that the end of worldly afflictions is alwayes happie too such as feare him, and that the short induring of he troubles of this lyfe, procureth an inestimable weight of glorie in the lyfe too come. Finally wee consider not that God being our maker and gouernour, hath by good right a soueraine dominion ouer vs and all other his creatures, too order and dispoze vs at his good will and pleasure, and that the same his doing is wrought by incomprehensible power, wisdome, and rightfulnesse, so as there cannot iustly anie fault or blame be found in any of his proceedings. By meanes wherof it commeth too passe, that if he giue vs ease and prosperitie, we be so farre off from thankfulnesse for the same, that we mount vp into pryde, and not only step forth to disdeyning and skorning of those to whom he hath giuen lesse abilitie: but also procede too the vtter forgetting and despi∣sing of his maiestie, as though wee had all things of our selues, and were not beholding too him for any thing. And if he touch vs eyther in our goods, bodie, name or otherwiise too our mislyking: then eyther wee storme, chafe and fret against him, (specially if we see not an apparant cause of his doings) wherein wee blaspheme him by accusing him indirectly of vnrightuousenesse: or else wee fall into despaire, thinking it vnpossible for vs to scape out of the present daunger, wherin wee bereue him of his cheef glorie, which is to shew mercie by preser∣uing the afflicted, and by raysing vp such as are vnder foote. Thus (as much as in vs is) wee vtterly shake off his yoke, taking him to be nother our father nor our God. Heerby it is manifest, that wheras euery of vs hath the name of patience in his mouth, fewe knowe what right patience is, and in maner none at all do put it in vre. Some thinke it to be a stout bearing out of aduersities without admitting anie greef or hartbyting for the same. And othersome take it too be a yeelding too the present affliction vpon hope to outweare it by length of tyme.

But none of these twayne is the true patience, which is allowed of God, and meete too be in a Christen man, as will appeere too the diligent reader of this present woork. For the one is but a lingering in distresse without certaintie of good issue, and the other is but a dulling and amazing of the senses, too make mannes nature more stubborne against Gods hand, which is too stubborne of it selfe alredye. God therfore knowing the froward∣nesse of mankind, and minding eyther too bring vs home too himselfe or too leaue vs vtterly vnexcuzab doeth in this booke purposely aboue all other parts of the holie Scripture, bothe defend his owne Maiestie in mainteyning his ryghtfull soueraintie ouer all his creatures: and also set downe a perfect paterne of patien conteyning the due obedience and subiection of the creature too his maker. These are the twoo cheef poin wherevpon the whole booke of Iob is grounded. In the discourse wherof, there is shewed the incessant d∣rousenesse and indeuer of Satan too bring man too destruction: and mannes vnabilitie too stand against hi without the speciall prouidence and protection of God. VVhereof, the first warneth vs to stand alwayes v pon our garde, that we be not surprized by our so suttle and cruell enimie: and the other bereeueth vs of a selftrust, driuing vs too seeke our refuge and succour no where else but in God. And too the intent wee may the more willingly suffer all crosses, and take all things in good woorth at Gods hand: it is shewed that God neuer forsaketh vs in our troubles, but vpholdeth and maynteyneth vs euen in our vttermoste extremities, by a secret and incomprehensible woorking, not alwayes seene of the world, nor presently perceyued of our∣selues: and that his afflicting of vs is not for anye hatred or ill will of purpose too destroy vs, but of a fatherly louing kyndnesse, too make vs knowe better bothe our selues and him, which is the soueraine goodnesse and perfect felicitie: and therfore that hee alwayes giueth them a happie ende, too our singular welfare and salua∣tion, making vs too triumph victoriously ouer sin, death, hell, the diuell, damnation, our selues and all the assaults of the world, through the tryall of our fayth, which by that meanes becommeth more fine and pre∣ciouse than golde. Againe, too the ende that the wicked may not thinke themselues too haue sped the better by Gods long forbearing of them, and by their hardening of their harts against his manaces and warnings: it is told them, that the longer that God winketh at them, the heauyer his hand will bee vppon them, and that wheras these temporall afflictions are but sweete chastizements and assurances of Gods inestimable loue, and of eternall reward too the Godly: they are too the others sharp punishments in this world, and authenticall warrants of Gods vtter displeasure, and as it were foretastes of their owne vnauoydable damnation in the world too come. Thus is the pryde of our rebelliouse nature beaten downe on all sides, that by learning true humi∣litie, wee might receyue the comfort which God giueth too his chozen. Manie other notable doctrines are di∣uersly interlaced: as, that Gods wonderfull working in his creatures and in the order of nature, ought to leade vs too the knowledge of the creator: That wee ought not too bee inquisitiue of Gods secrets further than hee listeth too vtter them vnto vs, nor negligent in seeking so farre foorth as bee sheweth them: That his onely word is the absolute and only sufficient rule, too direct the religion and liues of all men in alcaces and all re∣spects: That nothing in all the whole world happeneth by casualtie, but all things are guided and gouerned too their appoynted endes by the fore determinate purpose and prouidence of God: That man being corrupted by originall sin in the fall of Adam, hath not anye enterance of reconciliation, or any continuance of attone∣ment with God, but by the mediator, through the only free mercie and gift of God: and finally (with innu∣merable other like) that there is no difference of the Iewe or Gentile, Greeke or Barbarouse, learned or vn∣learned, hygh or lowe, or of anye other state or persone before God, but that whosoeuer serueth him fayth∣fully and vnfeynedly, the same is accepted of him as his deere chyld, notwithstanding that hee seeme not to be within the bounds of the visible church. Heerevnto are added the duties of all degrees, states, and callings, with a perfect patterne of a pure and vncorrupted lyfe, specially in those whom God hath aduaunced too ho∣nour, welth or authoritie, to the intent they should be as it were bright mirrours of Gods Maiestie vpon earth, by sheading foorth the light of their vertues too the good example of others, in preseruing the common welth by iustice and pollicie, and in maynteyning Gods Religion. For it is manifest that Iob was not of the meaner sort of men, but comparable (bothe in riches and authoritie) with the greatest men in his tyme, and farre aboue the most of those that beare greatest porte and countenance in these dayes. Therfore vnto all such as loue the true nobilitie, (which descendeth not too posteritie by ryght of inheritance, nor is purchaced by riches, fa∣uour, or any worldly meanes, but is the free gift of God, consisting in the excellencie of the mynd of the pos∣sesser, and not in the opinion of the variable multitude) it shall bee verie good too consider, not only the ge∣nerall commendacion which the holie Ghoste giueth vntoo Iob, in that hee calleth him a sound man, euen such a one as feared God and eschewed euill: but also the particular protestations which Iob himselfe maketh in the xxix. and .xxxi. chapters, and in the xxv. verse of the xxx. chapter of this booke. For there in defence of his innocencie agaynst the wrongfull surmises of his freendes, hee setteth downe xvij. poynts, wherof al∣though some do fitly agree too the common lyfe of all Christians: yet do they all linke wholly together intoo the nature of true nobilitie, and belong cheefly too such as are of moste preheminence: and without them no man can iustly account himself too be noble or honorable. The first poynt is the comly and reuerend grauitie of his persone, wherthrough hee was feared of his inferiours, honored of his equalls, esteemed of his supe∣riours, and loued of all good and honest men. The second is his pitifulnesse towards the distressed, as well in feeling inward compassion and greef for their miseries, as also in comforting, cheering, succoring and hel∣ping them. The third is his stoutnesse and vigilantnesse in executing of iustice, so as he ministred right to euery

man indifferentely without respect of persones, boulting out the truthe of things that were cloked or vn∣knowne, punishing open enormities though they were not presented nor complayned of, and himselfe plea∣ding and maynteyning the rightfull caces of the ignorant and such as wanted abilitie too help themselues. The fourth is the vndefiled chastitie of his bodie proceeding from the chastnesse of a pure hart, so as hee did not cast anye lewd or wanton fancie towards any mannes wyfe or daughter. The fifth is his playne dealing, in vtter absteyning from all deceyt, craftinesse and guyle. The sixth is his stedfastnesse, in that he could not be allured by the intycement of his eyes, nor prouoked by flatterie, too step aside from the truthe, or too commit anye vnseemly thing. The seuenth is his gentle clemencie, in suffering his bond seruants and vnderlings to reason their caces with him when they thought themselues wronged, and in yeelding them ryght euen against himself. The eyght is his speedie dispatching of mennes sutes, so as hee suffered them not too pyne with long lingring. The nynth is his liberalitie in maynteyning such as were destitute of liuing. The tenth is his abstinence in for bearing too do anye man wrong, hurt or hinderance, notwithstanding that hee myght scape vncontrolled for it. The eleuenth is his hating of couetousnesse, in that no welth nor riches could infect his hart. The twelfth is his stayednesse, in that no abundance could make him proud to disdeyne others, or to set more store by himselfe, or to haue the lesse care and regard of God. The thirteenth is the noblenesse of his hart, in that he was so farre from reioycing at the fall of his enimies, that he rather pitied their miseries, and could not by anye meanes bee persuaded too be reuenged of them, or to speake euill of them. The foureteenth is his hospita∣litie, in giuing interteynement too straungers and such as wanted releef. The fifteenth is his lowelinesse, in that he was contented to heare of his faultes, and cloked not his sinne when he had doone amisse, but suffered him selfe too bee reproued euen of his vnderlinges. The sixteenth is his iuste and vpryght dealing with his Tennants, in paying them truely for whatsoeuer he tooke of them, and in not oppressing them with greeuouse rentes, incommes, or seruices. And finally (which is the verie welspring of all vertue, the moother of all true nobilitie, and (as ye would say) the verie locke and key of all good conuersation among men) hee protesteth that he had God alwayes before his eyes, or (which is all one) that he was of a pure, sound, and vncorrupt Re∣ligion. For too feare God, is not too be afrayde of him as the bondman is of his Lord, the Trewand of his Schoolemayster, or the theef of the gallowes: but too conceyue such an inward reuerence of him, by reason of his iustice, mercie, wisedome, power, prouidence, and ryghtuousenesse, as too thinke him woorthie of all ho∣nour and obedience, and too yeeld the same willingly and hartely vnto him, so as wee would be lothe and sorie too offend him, euen though wee myght be sure too scape vnpunished. The onely meanes too bring vs wher∣vnto, is the ryght knowing of his holie woord and the stedfast cleauing therevnto, without swaruing one way or other, and without taking leaue too do anye thing that is not warranted there. This feare of God caused Iob too drawe his eyesight alwayes inward, and to looke only vnto Gods will, not regarding eyther what his owne affection and lustes stirred him to, or what his power, riches, and authoritie inabled him to doo, or what any outward occasions and oportunities moued him to, or what the intycementes of the world and the persua∣sions of men allured him to doo, or finally, what fame or infamie, gayne or losse, loue or hatred, or anye thing else prouoked him to doo, but what he knewe ought too bee doone of ryght, equitie, reason, and conscience. For when mennes eyes (I meene their myndes and wittes, which are in deede the very eyes or lampes of lyght too the whole man) are occupyed outwardly: eyther they rushe foorth into all lewdnesse and become vtterly wicked, like wild horses that haue cast their ryders, and runne looce withersoeuer furie inforceth them: and the greater that such persones are, the more harme do they bothe by deede and by example: or else they bee da∣zeled with the glittering glosse of vainglorie, accompanied with feare of punishment or hope of reward, and so finally fall into the sound sleepe of senslesse hypocrisie, doing all things in obedience of their owne will, and not of Gods will. These later sort are tolerable in the actiue and ciuill life, and oftentymes do greate good bothe too their neyghbours, and to the whole common weale, but neuer too themselues, bycause their good doing springeth not from the right roote, which is the hartie obedience of God, ne tendeth too the right end which is the only glorie of God: and therfore they may well bee likened too the shipwrights that builded the Arke of Noe, and yet perished themselues in the flud. But the other sort do good nother too themselues nor to others, except it be against their wills, when God maketh them an ensample of his rightfull iustice, by giuing them the due reward of their wickednesse. Howbeeit forasmuchas these things together with all others poynts before rehersed in this Epistle, are largely and substātially discussed by the faithfull and learned seruant of God Maister Iohn Caluin in these Sermons of his vppon the booke of Iob, and it were an vnseemly thing for an vnexpert scholer to wryte the battell of Troy againe after Homer, as the Prouerb sayeth: I will not be tediouse in with∣holding your L. long from the reading of the Sermons themselues. Neuerthelesse I haue presumed vpon your L. patience to set downe this foresayd breef abstract of this woork, to the intent your honour and all other no∣ble men (to whom cheefly vnder our most graciouse soueraine Ladie Queene Elizabeth, the care of Gods Re∣ligion and of this common weale belongeth) beholding the groundwoorke and as it were the platforme of so many excellent matters, and thervpon considering the goodnesse, necessarinesse, and profitablenesse therof to the whole churche of God, and too the furtherance of eche mannes saluation, myght like the better of the booke, (as I doubt not but that the oftener your L. shall reade any part of it, the better you will like it) and by your wellyking cause it too be the more imbraced of others too their singular comfort, edifying and welfare. For although the books of holie Scripture take no authoritie or credit of man, but haue a singular kind of spirit,

lyfe, and woorkfulnesse in themselues: Yet notwithstanding forasmuchas it is incident to the nature welneere of all inferioures, too regard or neglect euen the best things, according as their superiors seeme to make more or lesse account of them, and when godly and well disposed men haue taken peines to open the Scriptures too the vnderstanding and capacitie of the people, their doings and writings are oftentymes more slightly and ne∣gligently receyued than they deserue too be: The wellyking of such noble men and magistrates as God hath moreouer innobled with the knowledge of his Gospell, is a greate furtherance to the good accepting of bothe of them among all inferiour degrees, and God looketh to be so glorified at their hands. VVherfore I humbly commend this woork, together with my translation therof, vnto your good L. accustomed fauour, wherof I haue had so often trial heretofore in accepting of diuers woorks of mine, though conteyning good, commen∣dable, and godly matters, yet not of like substance, importance and trauell vnto this. And my trust is that your goodnesse, bothe in respecte of the newyere, (vnder the benefit whereof I am the bolder to present it as a token of my bound dutie and thankfull mynd towards your honour,) and also in respect of the woork it self, (which being aduizedly red will doubtlesse yeeld much more frute than can be expressed in woords:) will beare with my faults and imperfections where any shall occurre. For although my cōscience beare mee witnesse that I haue delt playnly and faithfully in all respects, and not stepped aside willingly in any poynt from the beaten path: and although some may thinke it straunge that hee which aduentureth vpon so greate and weightie woorks, should in any wyse seeke excuse of ignorance or ouersight: yet notwithstanding forasmuchas I knowe the generall infirmitie of mannes nature, how easie it is too slip vnwares, and this woork is the first of any greate weyght that euer I translated out of the French oong to be published, I craue it as a speciall fauour to my self, and as a benefite to the Churche of God, that where any fault shall be found, I may be made priuie to them, and I will be as forward as the forwardest to amend them. Thus beseeching God too graunt your L. to see many happie and prosperouse newyeeres vpon this Realme, and vpon the Churche of God furthered and aduaunced by your good counsell and indeuer, to the increace of your owne honour bothe here and in the world to come, I humbly take my leaue. VVritten the last of December. 1573.

