


WHereas in these our daies, (wherein the light of the glorious Gospell begins to reuiue and spring a fresh) there be many poynts called into controuersie: there is not among them any one (Most noble Prince) more difficult, or lesse agreed v∣pon by such as write, then that question which concerneth Antichrist. The knowledge whereof, al∣though it be most necessarie, both for the vnderstanding of that truth which God himselfe hath reueiled, & exceeding profitable for the staie of the Church: yet in this poynt the opinions of the auncient Fathers, haue bene so variable and diuers, that we are almost altogether to seeke, what we are to follow and hould in this behalfe. And this diuersitie of theirs, came to passe by this meanes partly, for that they li∣ued in those dayes wherein all the marks and tokens of this Jniquitie, (the which notwithstanding the Spirit of God be∣wraied and poynted out beforehand) were not manifest, as not come to light (for as yet Antichrist was not come to his height or perfection:) and partlie also for that the minds of men were so fore-stalled by preiudice of an other matter, and so dazeled, yea and blinded with the glorious shewe of the Sea of Rome: that they could neuer bee perswaded that such mischief could possibly euer rise from thence. And although in time by little and little, those foresaid tokens began to ap∣peare and shew themselues, whereby that horrible Monster might be discerned; and withall although that Sea it selfe be∣gan now in that behalfe to bee suspected by manie: yet so great was the dreadfull power and authoritie of the Bishop of Rome, that they who had espied the light of the truth, durst not for their liues mutter or speake the least word. For if they did, they were by and by not onlie condemned in the next
 Synods as Scismaticks, but also put to death by Magistrates as Heretieks more pestilent and haynous then any that euer liued. And so by meanes of feare and terrour they held their tongues. Notwithstanding, in the time of our Auncestours, namelie about the yeare 350. when Leo the first was Bishop of Rome: one Hilarious Bishop of Vienna in Fraunce, did open∣lie gaine-saie the tyrannie of the Roman Bishop which then began to aduaunce and enlarge it self. After that, about 400. yeares ago there arose one Arnold in Italie, surnamed Brixi∣anus, who with strong arguments and vehement perswasi∣ons (for he was a man accompted for his time both learned and eloquent) handled plainelie, and vrged pithilie this poynt and that verie commonlie, publicklie and euen in the midst of the Cittie of Rome itself: by which his labours and force of the truth, he moued manie indeed, but yet general∣lie he could not preuaile.
So great a coyle t'was alwaies found,
To plucke the Romish Sea to ground.
In so much as one Bernardus Clareuallensis (a man who o∣therwise stoode not so greatlie affected to the tirannie of the Romaine Bishop; yet by meanes that men in those dayes were generallie so bewitched with a reuerend opinion of the Maiestie of that Sea:) tooke vpon him to tosse, and canuasse that censure of Arnolds although it were most true and iust. And this auncient and receaued opinion touching the sa∣cred authoritie of the Bishop of Rome, continewed many ge∣nerations and was neuer in the meane time controuled by anie, saue onlie the Greeke Bishops, and that but by a few of them. And in truth therein the Grecians shewed themselues to bee of a more free iudgement, and wiser disposition then were our men, and the Bishop of the Latine Churches, for they (as appeareth by the writings of Nilus Bishop of Thessa∣lonica, an eloquent man) earnestly auouched that Antichrist, was not onelie come, and seated in the Church of God, but that the Bishop of Rome himself was the very partie, and this they enforced with such pregnant and strong proofes: as the best proctours that euer that Sea had, were neuer able as yet to ouerthrow. But as for the Westerne Bishops, they indeed
 disagreed in this pointe, but not vpon anie good ground or setled iudgement, but only caried away by the preiudice of commō custome: nay, they being deceiued by the great sub∣tilty of Satan (who now begā to worke the misterie of iniqui∣tie as Paule had fore-tould) proceeded further, and gaue their helping hand to the spreding abroad of that pestilent infectiō (the suppression whereof it behooued each christian to haue endeuoured) and very busie and pettish they were in helping and vpholding it, and in putting Oyle as you would saie, to the fire. And so in processe of time the said Bishop of Rome became as big asMonstrous Giant which had a hundred Armes. Briareus (as it is in the Prouerbe) who be∣fore was as little as a foolish Leueret. At first in verie deed, vn∣der the raigne of the Henries, and after of the Fredericks, Em∣perours of Germanie the Kingdome of Antichrist receiued great strength and encroched vpon the consciences of men of all sortes. For although euen from the daies of the Apo∣stles themselues, Sathan began to lay the foundation thereof, yet by reason of the bright shining light of the Gospel, which in those dayes was kept in all integritie in the Churche, hee tooke repulse, and so by meanes of the worke which GOD himself had (as it were) newly proclaimed and taken in hand he was inforced to be quiet & to defer his busines vnto some other time. Afterwards, looke what he had long since begon and somewhat brought forward hee found the meanes to fi∣nish and bring to perfection vnder the Raigne of Constanti∣nusBearded or which had a great beard. Pogonatus, an Emperour of Constantinople. Now Sathan being by the meanes and industrie of Antichrist (as it were his legate) once set ouer the Christian Church as it were in a Chaire of Estate: he nestled himself therein so sure, that after it proued a thing almost inpossible by any power or pollicie to remoue him thence: but (euen as the strong armed man of whome Christ speaketh in Mathew) looke how more ve∣hemently he was assaulted by the valiant Souldiers of Christs Church Arnold, Wickliffe, Husse, Jerom of Prage, and some moe such like. So did he as busilie oppose against them more wic∣ked and vncleane spirits, as a supplie of fresh Souldiers in way of reskew. For the pompe & power of Antichrist was main∣tained by such men as were of as lewd a disposition and of as
 brazen faces as euer liued; and that not onlie long agoe: but euen of late in our dayes as by Eckius, Faber, Cochley and such other prating Iackes, of the like stampe, by whose toyle-some trauailes, mingled with cauills, coggs, and couzning trickes, the cause was a while cherished and vpheald. But God, the father of all mercies, in great compassion, pitying the estate of the world; vouchsafed in this old-age thereof to raise and send amongst vs the light of his glorious Gospel: the power whereof, is the onlie instrument to bring Antichrist vnder∣foote. Therefore, he lightened the minds of our vnderstan∣dings, displayed the foggie Mists of Antichristian darknes, and stirred vp his worthy seruaunts, as valiaunt Champions, to bruse and breake, to quell and kil the power of Antichrist. For in this quarraile wherein Antichrist was to be encounte∣red, manie haue dealt with verie prosperous successe. As first and cheiflie M. Luther, and after him, (for let me speake it without the offence of some, hee was not the last of the Pro∣phets) Hen. Bullinger, & Ralfe Gualter: all which, were great and excellent men both for learning and godlines, and who of set purpose wrote treatises against Antichrist (as for Iohn Caluin, Theod, Beza, Ierom Zanchus, verie worthie Captaines, and continual wrestlers with Antichrist: I purpose to preter∣mit as also those more auntient fellowes, Math. Parris, Mich. Cesennate, Io. de Poliaco, Militzius of Bohem:) by whose lear∣ned writings the foundations of the Antichristian King∣dome, haue bin shaken, yea and shiuered.
Notwithstanding, seeing that there still remaine in the mindes of some,Note this and applie it to our time through out the booke. some rubbadge, and relliques of that old building, I also haue endeuoured (most worthie Prince) ac∣cording to my power, to scatter and set packing, into the pit of perpetual forgetfulnes those shreds and sheards, & that by the force of the mightie gunne of Gods holy word. For such is the nature of this quarrell and controuersie, that it requi∣reth the helping hands of manie workmen: the state where∣of is such, as by means of some darke places in the Scriptures it could not on a suddaine so throughlie bee seene into, but daylie more and more be cleared and made plaine. Againe, there haue of late started vp new Proctours, and Pettie-fog∣gers
 to plead and prate in defence of this vsurped tyrannie, I meane the Iesuites (a kinde of Droanes among the Monkes, the vilest dreggs of all poperie, and as may be supposed, the last brood that the hāmering head of Sathan hath to hatch:) who endeuour by might and maine, to make vp the breaches which their kingdome hath sustained. Subtle workmen they are, who although they may seeme to counterfet the Syrens, yet in truth they are but Iayes, & Magg-pies: in life & practi∣ses drawing nere to the fishMugill is a fish rauenous and swift. Mugil, & the fowleLarus, a bird that maketh a great noyse, hauing laid but a little. Larus. And being but yesterday skipped out of the Cock-boat, (arroga∣ting to themselues the workes of other Monkes) are by & by with a mischeif mounted on Cock-horse. Now although these vpstart Hucksters, bring indeed nothing els, but the stale arguments, and as it were the foreworne and forelorne stuffe and baggage of the Papists, saue onlie that they haue disguised, painted and trickt it after the best fashion, & kepe a craking like Parrats, as if they were come from the farthest Jndies: yet among the rude people, they are taken for mar∣ueilous men, and such as haue brought straunge, and that ve∣ry precious marchaundise. These fellowes taking themselues for the principall supporters of the Antichristian Kingdom, they vaunt and bragge it out Iustelie, (as indeed they sweate sore, poore soules, in doing the best they can:) It is meete therfore that somewhat were said, to thwart their wilful and obstinate frowardnes especiallie if we consider the times and dayes wherein we liue.
Now as for this my defence of the Kingdome of Christ a∣gainst Antichrist himself and his wholeWhich be∣fore he called the taile of Antichrist and the rubbadge of his building rabble, to the end it may be gladly accepted, and safelie passe through the hands of men, I cannot see (most gratious Prince) to whom I might better or vppon more iust occasions dedicate the same then vnto your honour. For from your verie cradle you haue bin so trained vp in godlie education by your woorthie Father Frederick Countie Palantine and Prince Electour, (a man of renowned, or more then Heroicall minde) and so indued by God himself with such a kindlike and vertuous disposition: that you among manie maie iustlie be supposed to be borne and giuen, by GOD himselfe vnto his Church for the ouer∣throw
 of Antichrist what a profest enimy your selfe haue bin against the enimies of Christ (according to the example of Dauid) both the former course of your life doth sufficiently declare, and the general speeche of all the Godlie in Fraunce wil witnes the same vnto al ages. For Fraunce thankfullie ac∣knowledgeth you and your famous father (next vnto God) to be her Patrons, Reuengers, and such as enfraunchised her into the libertie she enioyeth: and therefore she (that out of mine onlie mouth you may perceaue the minds of al the rest which are godlilie affected) taketh this right heauilie, that she is not able to commend and set out your excellencies de∣serts towards her in such sorte as is meet. For what Oratour is able to frame any still so statelie, but that it will seeme vn∣woorthie your vertuous deseruings. You being of such yong yeares, as wherein fewe, or none can tel what warr-fare mea∣neth: (did take vpon you twise) for the name of Iesus Christ, and for the defence of his Church against Antichrist and his mighty confederacy: to leade an army with great difficulty and daunger into Fraunce: you, by the only brute and fame that went of you, did twise terrifie the power & hoast of the French-men, whose dreadfull force is knowne & felt in other nations. You haue twise procured peace among Nations, Cuntries, and Houses, for such as were exiles, and the free∣dome of the Gospel to Churches distressed. You to shut vp al in a word, haue restored vnto vs our liues, naie, that which is dearer to vs then life it-self, the light of the Gospell, the which in deepe dispaire, almost wee neuer looked for.
The which great benefit, of vs al receiued from your High∣nes, to the end I might in some measure, according to my hearts desire, commend vnto posteritie: and so leaue behind me some record of my thankfull minde for the same: I haue thought good in all humble and dutifull manner to of∣fer vnto your Excellencie this simple worke. The which I entirlie befeech your said Highnes to take in good worth. Farewell, dated the first day of August, in the yeare of this last age. 1576.

