



THere were three causes, righte Honou∣rable, and mine espe∣cial good Lord, which moued mee at this time to take penne in hande.
The firste and principall, vvas the dutie and seruice, vvhich I ovve to God, vvho vvoulde not onely that by preaching and reading, but also by al other meanes pos∣sible I should seke the aduauncement of his kingdome.

The nexte vvas my zele tovvardes the house of God: the ruinous and decayed state wherof in this later age of the world I coulde neither forget vvithout impietie, nor remember vvithout compassion, nor passe ouer, and neglecte vvithoute great burden of conscience.
The third and last cause that prouoked me, vvas that I mighte enter into some pore account touching the course & race of my vvhole life, spent for the most parte of it in the Vniuersitie of Oxford, asvvell to other my good Lords and Patrones, to whom I am muche beholding, as namely also to your Honoure, vvhom not only we Oxford men acknovvledge as oure good Lord and Chanceller, but also next vnder the Queenes Maiestie, our cheefe heade. VVhose honourable and curteous nature both shevved to other my far betters, and from me, thoughe vnworthye, at no time vvithdravvne, vvhat it mighte iustly cha∣lenge, and whose great authoritie and iu∣risdiction ouer vs, what laufully and or∣derly it might commaund, I could not be ignorant in any vvise. It came therfore of∣tentimes to my remembraunce, that seing
 your Honor, with other the furtherers of our studies, haue so honorably spared me your good vvord, I could neither without infamie hold my peace, nor without want of good aduisement, not giue oute some testimonie of my bounden duetie.
And for this purpose (to confesse vnto your Honor the very truthe) howe small soeuer mine habilitie vvas: yet rather con∣uenient leasure of me muche desired this great vvhile, than any goodvvill vtterly was wāting. But as God worketh secrete∣ly many sundry vvayes to helpe that for∣ward which he wold haue done: at the last in dede fell oute oportunitie of me not so muche coueted or vvished for, as heartily lamented and bevvailed, that the plague daily growing and encreasing in the Vni∣uersitie of Oxford, & the publike lectures being for the very same cause intermitted hoping by Goddes assistance to prouide sufficiently for meself, more of a studious minde, than greatly vrged by any neede (for my frendes, hearing at the last where I vvas, vvrote me earnest letters to come downe vnto them) amongst other I there remained. VVholely therefore being ad∣dicted,
 and giuen to contemplation, from the which at that time there was no great encombrance that might pull me backe, I began nowe seriously to minde the set∣ting oute and publishing of some booke.
And being fully determined to wryte, vpon the matter notwithstanding vvher∣vpon I might fitliest groūd my processe, I was not by and by resolued. Sometimes it came into my minde, to take in hande some controuersie of this time. But con∣sidering with meself what great learning hath bene lately shewed in such questiōs, I was quickly chaunged from that mind. For vvhat could any body novv vvryte of, for the improuing or defending of suche things, which very plentifully alredy hath not bene discoursed? VVould a mā gladly be instructed touching the vse of images? let him peruse D. Calfehils boke against Martial. VVold he heare what can be said of the Masse? Not only master Deane of Paules his bokes against Dorman are to be sene, but also the treatise of the righte reuerēd father bishop Cowper, entituled The defense of the truth against the masse, and the works of the late famous bishop
 of vvorthy memorie D. Iewel. VVho in tvvo of his greate Volumes, hathe gone through with so many, & so profoūd ma∣ters of religion, that for diuers needefull poynts to be spoken of, they might vvell serue a Diuine for common place bokes.
Therfore taking more diligent & per∣fite deliberation, after many other things vvhich I thought vpon, the very time and place vvhere I then vvas, and the remem∣brance of Goddes Prouident care for me from my youth, and (notwithstāding my diligence in taking heede,) not least of al declared towardes me at that time, made me in loue (as it vvere) vvith the argu∣ment of Gods Prouidence.
Therwithal (which inflamed me not a litle the more) it could neither be hidden nor vnknowne vnto me, howe graciously besides our deseruing, hovv vvonderfully beyond al reason, God hath lately prote∣cted with his mightie hand, not only our soueraigne Lady the Queenes highnesse, but vniuersally the vvhole state of this realme. For (o good Lorde) vvhat subtile vndermining what crafty cōueying, what cruell conspiring hathe bene attempted?
 VVhat mischeuous heades, vvhat slie pra∣ctises, vvhat vngodly deuises haue beene founde oute? VVhiche neither by anye mannes vvisedome coulde come to light, vvhen they vvere hidde: nor by mannes strength and pollicie coulde be repressed, when they were broken out. But that god, whose prouident eye neuer slepeth, whose head is alvvayes carefull and mindefull of vs, whose arme stretched out is neuer idle, vvhen none other vvise coūsel could take place, by his maruellous forsighte hathe prouided for vs, and vvhen strengthe see∣med to faile vs, hath pitched his tent roūd about in our defense. Therfore may it wel be saide of these our priuie vnderminers, as Tullie that Romaine oratoure spake in his first inuectiue against Catiline: They doe nothing, they goe aboute nothing, they thincke of nothing, but by and by we do not heare of it only, but we see it also, and plain∣ly feele it with oure handes.
And vvhereunto, I beseeche your Ho∣noure, shoulde vve ascribe this so greate a benefit, but to the Prouidence of almigh∣tie God? By whose aide and furderance (to vse againe Tullies ovvne vvords, vvhich he
 hath in his oration pro Rabinio) this com∣mon weale is much better gouerned, than by any reason or counsayle of mortall men. whereof (as Pindarus also sayth in quarta Oda Pythiorum) to shake in sunder the foundations, it is for them also an easie mat∣tier, who them selues be weaklings, and of fe∣ble strength, but to set a Realme agayne in order, as it was before, if god be not the guide of Princes, it is a harde poynte.
Hovv greatly then haue vve cause to giue God thankes, to prayse him, to pray vnto him, to seeke his glory, and the furtheraunce of his Gospell, to stay oure selues quietly vnder the vvings of his most gracious protection, to flee to his almigh∣tie Prouidence, as to our sure ship of safe∣tie, our hope, our helpe, our refuge farre and neare.
VVhereof vvhen I vvel considered hovv svveete and pleasaunt is the knovvledge, hovve profitable and commodious the vse, hovv full of maiestie the vvhole mat∣tier: it came streightvvay to my mynde, that I coulde not by any meanes attempt a more godly labour, or more fruitfull for the edifying of the faythfull Christian.
 Of vvhome vvhat great care I haue had, both by the very playnnesse and simplici∣tie of my style, vsed for the moste parte throughout my foure bookes, and by that paines and trauaile vvhich I haue taken in opening & dissoluing of perplexed douts, I truste to the indifferent reader it shall vvell appeare.
VVhich discourse of mine (such as it is) not ouer curiously in dede attired, but yet (as mine hope is) enspired vvith a vvell meaning spirit, cōmitteth it self presently into your Honours hands, as a refuge and sanctuarie poynted out and assigned by God him selfe, to be a supporter of all godly quarels.
Sheelde therfore (I beseech your Ho∣nour) that vvorke, vvhich (according to that habilitie that God hath lente it) is a defence and mayntenaunce of that cause, vvherby not your Honour only hath ben maruellously preserued and aduanced: but the Queenes Maiestie also, our most gra∣cious and soueraigne liege Lady, yea the good state (as I sayde) of this vvhole Realme, so sore shaken and lyfted at vvith rebellious blastes, hath bene straungely
 and vvonderfully protected. I meane al∣vvayes the good Prouidence of almigh∣tie God: vvhich, as it hath bene euer hi∣therto your Honors most trustie and assu∣red stay: so God graunt it may neuer fayle your Honour to the end, still furthering, blessing, and prospe∣ring your good Lorde∣shippe. Amen.
Dated in London, Anno Domini. 1572. Maij 19.

