



COnsidering with my selfe to whom I might present this worke, bee∣ing the third fruits of my labours in this kinde, I thought vpon a saying of Salomon in his Prouerbes, A man that hath friends, must shew himselfe friend∣ly.
 Prou. 18. 24. Which speech beeing oft recalled, was the occasion of this pre∣sentation, and impulsiue cause of the dedication of these Sermons to all your most respected worthinesse. The most deseruing cause I confesse, was the acknow∣ledgement of wonted bene∣uolence, and your annuall beneficence, whereof these few yeeres I haue been par∣taker. So that, Commemo∣ratio beneficij, became Commendacio officij, to mee, .i. The remembrance of your vndeserued bounty, was a commending and commanding of this my most deserued duety. The fi∣nal cause, in regard of God, is to seeke his glory, in the good of his Church; in re∣gard
 of you; to testifie my thankfulnes for your choice of mee among some other of my fellow labourers, in this case; And as hee that for∣gets the benefits of God or men, cannot but bee vn∣thankefull to both; so on the contrary, Qui quanta sibi gratia collata sit, nescit, quantas largitori grates debet, non intelligit .i. Hee that knowes not what fa∣uour is bestowed vpon him, vnderstands not what thankes hee oweth to him that gaue it. And the more deserued praise belongs vn∣to you, because yours is a vitall, not a funerall bene∣ficence: Concerning which, it is well of some obserued, that beeing vitall, it is free, and such as God accounts
 of; it shewes, first, your faith in Gods prouidence; Se∣condly, your loue and care to doe good to Gods Mini∣sters; Thirdly, that you trust not in vncertaine ri∣ches; Fourthly, it gaines you the prayers of those to whom you are beneficiall; whereas a funerall benefi∣cence, is most commonly formall, for fashion, to doe as others doe; or extorted to the hazzard of their goods, or for vaine-glory, or to stoppe the mouth of an accusing conscience. Now because I could no way bet∣ter expresse my thankefull heart, nor knew, hauing so many friends, how to shew my selfe more friendly, I haue presumed to make an exchange; for your tempo∣rall,
 to bestow amongst you all, this spiritual gift; it be∣ing the best requitall I can make, or cotent that I could giue. I acknowledge my selfe much obliged to you, though vnknowne to most of you; I praise you in God, and blesse God for you all; and though I cannot say, I am yours to liue and die with you, yet by Gods grace I shall euer bee yours to liue and pray for you; that I may vse the words of Sa∣muel; As for me, God for∣bid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you; but I wil teach you the good & the right way; Onely feare the Lord, and serue him in truth with all your heart, for consider how great things, hee hath
 done for you, 1. Sam. 12, 23, 24.
And now giue me leaue, I beseech you, to speake free∣ly to you all, as Paul did to the Corinthians, My mouth is open vnto you, my heart is enlarged; Now for a recompense in the same, be ye also enlarged, 2. Cor. 6. 11, 13. Let your good workes be continued; And bee not weary in well doing, for in due season ye shall reape, if yee faint not, Gal. 6. 9. It is constancie in well-doing, that crowns the worke; In cassum, bonum quid agitur, si ante vite terminum, deseratur. i. It is in vaine to doe any good thing, and to leaue off be∣fore death; as, Non coe∣pisse, sed perfecisse virtu∣tis
 est, saith Ierome, .i. It is the property of vertue, not to begin well, but to end well. Let your good workes be plentiful and abundant; More at last, than at first, Reuel. 2. 19. Yea, sometime superabundant; like the Macedonians, who to their power, yea, and beyond their power were willing of themselues, &c. 2. Cor. 8. 3. Let all be done discreetly; making much of them that feare the Lord, Psal. 15. 4. Distributing to the necessi∣tie of Saints, Rom. 12. 13. doing good to all, but spe¦cially to those which are of the houshold of faith, Gal. 6. 10. so regarding, and rewarding most plentiful∣ly, those that labour paine∣fully in Gods haruesi. Thus
 let good doing be cheareful∣ly; not grudgingly, or of ne∣cessity, but willingly, for God loues a chearefull gi∣uer, 2 Cor. 9. 7. if there be first a willing minde, God accepts it, 2 Cor. 8. 12.
And to stirre you vp the more, remember I be∣seech you what Salomon saith, He that pittieth the poore, lends vnto the Lord, and what hee hath giuen him, will he pay him againe, Prou. 19. 17. Re∣member what Saint Paul saith; To doe good, and to communicate, forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well-pleased, Heb. 13. 16. Remember what our Sauiour Christ saith; Hee that receiueth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet,
 shall receiue a Prophets re∣ward, Math. 21. 22. God will reward you here and hereafter; Hee will reward you, 1 Donando, by giuing you all necessary good; 2 Condonando, by forgi∣uing you all your sinnes; 3 Coronando, by crowning you with euerlasting life. God will be with you; 1 Di∣rigendo; by directing you in his waies, and guiding you in alyour affaires. 2 Por∣rigendo, by reaching out his helping hand in all your distresse. God will bee with you. 1 Detegendo, by dis∣couering the plots and de∣uices of your enemies. 2 Protegendo, by defending you against all dangers at home and abroad, both by sea and land. Thus, the
 Lord is with you, while ye be with him, no longer, 2 Chron. 15. 2. And if you become like Dauids blessed man, whatsoeuer you doe it shall prosper, Psal. 1. 1. 2. 3. If you shall meditate in the law of God day and night, and obserue to doe what is written therein, then shall you make your way prospe∣rous, and then you shall haue good successe, Ioshua 1. 8.
Now giue mee leaue, I humbly beseech you, to ad∣uance my speech a little fur∣ther to you all; you encoun∣ter with the mighty bil∣lowes of the great Sea; you indanger your selues, and yours, both in body and goods; In the middest of life,
 they are in death; If it please God to honour you in a strange Land, with the treasures of it, and to giue safe returne home, then la∣bour to honour God in your owne Country, with that which he hath lent you. So you honouring God, hee will still honour you, 1 Sam. 2. 30. If aduersity comes, be humble; if pro∣speritie, bee thankefull; if death it selfe, be patient. I would not haue you timidi, nor tumidi; neither ouer∣much timerous, as doubting of Gods fauour, despairing of his loue, or distrusting his prouidence; nor too pre∣sumptuous, relying on your owne meanes, trusting to your owne merits, and so to sacrifice to your owne nets,
 Habak. 1. 16. for the first, remember, He that keepeth Israel, shal neither slumber nor sleepe, Psal. 121. 4. for the latter, know, it is Gods blessing which maketh rich, Pro. 10 22. He giueth, and he taketh away, Iob 1. 21. If riches increase, set not your harts vpon them. Let not the wise man glo∣ry in his wisedome, nor the mighty man in his might, nor the rich man in his ri∣ches; but let him that glo∣rieth, glory in this, that he vnderstands and knowes God, who exercises louing kindenesse, iudgement and righteousnesse in the earth, Ier. 9. 23. 24. For though you may bee domini titula∣res; onely Lords in name, yet God is dominus tutela∣ris;
 a God of power, a rocke of defence, your refuge, Ca∣stle, and deliuerer. But first seeke the Kingdome of God, and his right ousnes, as the principall, (and all other things (as appurte∣nanc) shall bee cast vpon you, Math. 6. 33. Seeke it first; primò et maximè, first of all and most of all; first in order, first in degree. Delight your selues in the Lord, and he shal giue you your hearts desire. Com∣mit your way vnto the Lord, trust in him, and hee shall bring it to passe, Psal. 37. 4. 5. And I beseech you lay to heart Saint Pauls charge, Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in vncertaine ri∣ches,
 but in the liuing God, who giueth vs richly all things to enioy; That they doe good, that they bee rich in good workes, ready to distribute, willing to communicate; laying vp in store for themselues a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternall life, 1 Tim. 6. 17. 18. 19.
Now crauing pardon for my boldnesse; I commend you to GOD, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you vp, and to giue you an inheritance, among all them which are sanctified, Acts 20. 32. and these my labours to your Patronage, against al preiu∣dicate opinion, calumnies, or supercilious censures of
 any ouer-curious, or too en∣uious; humbly beseeching Almighty God, to giue you and al yours, all happinesse. i. Externall, in your bodies; Internall, in your soules; E∣ternall, both in body and soule; for Iesus Christ sake, To whom, for all his bene∣fits, both temporall and spi∣rituall; receiued and promi∣sed; positiue, and priuatiue; be all thankes, and praise. Amen.

