


GOOD M. Doctour, As yourself were occasio∣nally the principal motour for me to compose this Treatise following, so haue seueral reasons since summoned themselues to my serious thoughts, for the further presenting of the same vnto you. For who now more renowned in the new English Church for his supposed learning, then yourself? Who more paynefully hath laboured for the promoting of the Protes∣tant Ghospel, then D. Morton? Who higher aduanced meerly for the former respects from his lowest fortunes, then the Superintendent of Lichfield? And therefore I cannot but expect, tbat your kinde acceptan∣ce wil afford some luster vnto it, at least in the eyes of your illumina∣ted Brethren. Wherof I rest also very confident, in that the method generally obserued therin, by concluding my intent from the confes∣sion of my Aduersaries, is the course specially affected and studyed by yourself in al your writings, which cannot but beget some better liking in your setled iudgement therof.
But that indeed, Sir, which did chiefly induce me aboue the rest both to compile and dedicate this Work, as you see, was your Appeale for Protestants made in answer to the Protestāts Apologie for the Roman Church. For hauing diligently perused and examined this our Apologie, and finding the Arguments there framed to be most concluding, the testi∣monies produced to be most pertinent, and al this euer to be backed
 and strengthned with the answerable acknowledgements of Protes∣tants themselues, I must confesse, my thirsting curiositie was such, as that neither my thoughts nor desires were at rest, vntil with like dili∣gēce I had perused and examined your Protestants Appeale. Which finding to be such, as I wil shortly describe, I was hēce encouraged, to make yet further vse of the foresayd Apologie, conioyning therewith some la∣bours of my owne in that kind; which as I desire they may be profita∣ble to al, so to yourself most earnestly I wish.
And so now briefly to discouer to yourself and al other iudicious Readers the manner of your answer vsed throughout your whole Ap∣peale, M. Brierlie, a Catholick Roman Priest, presuming to present vnto his Maiestie of Great Britanie our Soueraigne Lord King Iames, his hum∣ble Petition in behalf of the Catholicks of England, so grieuously pressed and persecuted, during the Raigne of Q. Elizabeth his late Predecessour, amongst innumerable Motiues, which as so manie darts would pre∣sently wound a hart so sensible of his Subiects miseries, iniuries, and oppressions, he specially selected the sweetest harmonie and most plea∣sing concord in matters Diuine and Celestial, between the Ancient, Apostolick, and Catholick Faith of the Primitiue Church of Christ, and our present Roman; nothing doubting, but that the bare presen∣ting of the louelie face of so gray Antiquitie would timely beget in so generous and noble a Mind an immouable loue and liking to al her true heires and lawful posteritie.
But M. Brierlie further knowing the malignant Enemie his ordina∣rie imposture, in sending forth Emissaries for the dazeling and deluding of the best aspects, in preuention therof and al other imaginable deceit in that kind, the self-same Emissaries, his greatest enemies, he specially picked for his chiefest Aduocats; strangely, but indeed most strongly affecting the equitie of his Cause to be finally decided by no other Iudge then the Aduersarie therof. For wheras the indubitate writings of the ancientest Fathers, the sacred Decrees of al General Councels, the credible Histories of al times and places, the surest records of al Lawes and Countries, yea al monuments of greatest Antiquitie doe ioyntly contest and depose, not only for the vniuersal and vninter∣rupted continuance of our Roman Faith from Christ's verie time vntil the Date heerof, but also for the sympathie or rather Identitie of our same Faith with the Faith of the Apostles and their first Disciples: M. Brierlie often obseruing al these our honours and helps to haue been so strangely defaced, blemished, and obscured by the art and malice of the foresayd Emissaries, as that their true face and beautie were neuer suf∣fred to be seen or knowne to vulgar Protestants, purposely therefore forbare, to presente Antiquitie only in her natiue colours, and chiefly to rest contented with that stayned dye and luster, which the Prote∣stant pencil, through her clearest splendour, durst not denye her; pro∣ducing to that end the plentiful and clearest testimonies of almost al the primest Writers, that euer Protestancie brought forth, al of them
 as it were conspiring in flat charging, reprouing, and impugning the learnedst Doctours and most renowned Bishops of the eldest and purest times for the self-same doctrines and practise of Religion, which the Roman Church at this day exerciseth.
Now supposing M. Brierlie his sincere and faithful demeanour heerin, what could the wit of man produce more palpable and concluding for our foresayd harmonie with the Primitiue Church? For if the volumes of Fathers and Councels be so clear in themselues for our Catholick, Roman, and Papistical Faith, that the learnedst Protestans most playnly studying and perusing the same, are finally enforced through euidence of their words and deeds to acknowledge and reproue the self-same Doctours and Bishops for Roman Catholicks, then M. Brierlie his desire and intent of prouing our Roman Faith and Church to continue most agreable with the Primitiue Faith and Church of Christ and his Apostles is fully accomplished.
And that M. Brierlie his candour may more clearly shine, and his so vnanswerable Arguments be the better conceaued, I wil therefore dispel those thick clowdes, wherewith yourself (M. Morton) hath most painefully laboured to couer or darken the foresayd brightnes. What then must we expect from you for an Answer pertinent, and direct, and as proceeding from a iudicious and learned Doctour, yea from a Mini∣ster of simple truth, but either ingenuously to confesse with the Puritans and so manie your other Protestant Brethren cited by M. Brierlie, that the sayd Primitiue and purest Church of Christ was one and the same for Faith and Religion with our now Roman: or else that M. Brierlie had cunningly corrupted, maymed, and defaced the sayings and writings of your foresayd Brethren in his owne behalf. If you seing the first to be most true would haue honestly subscribed therunto, as manie more learned Protestants then yourself had formerly done, then your Answer or Appeale had been altogeather needles. The second you durst not auouch, knowing right wel, that M. Brierlie his affected nicenes and pre∣cisenes in so particularly quoting his Aduersaries Bookes, Chapters, Pages, lines or letters would ouer strongly contest for his Religious integritie, industrie, and fidelitie in handling the same.
What then is imaginable for you (M. Doctour) to answer against such pregnant testimonies of other Protestant Doctours? Nothing at al, but what M. Brierlie foresaw, and accordingly premonished (and wherof yourself also taketh notice in the beginning of your Appeale) would be only trifeling, vnworthie, extrauagant, and impertinent.
As first, when your other Brethren are plentifully produced confes∣sing and reprouing the Fathers for teaching our Roman Faith, yourself often very honestly ioyne with them, acknowledging the same in our behalf, and against yourself; so that in this Case in steed of Answer or Appeale you make a strong Apologie for M. Brierlie and the Romish Church. Doe not you yourself speaking of the Antiquitie of our Doc∣trine concerning the Popes Primacie confesse and say:Prot. Apol. p. 72. Be it granted
 (for so it is) that the Papal Primacie, beginning in Boniface the Third, is now 900. yeares old? Doe you not arise and write of S. Gregorie, thatIbid. p. 31. whether or how farre &c. S. Gregorie did reach his arm of Iurisdiction beyond his Dioces, is a que∣stion, by reason of his diuers obscure speaches and some particular practises, diuersly answered of our (Protestant) Authours? Doe you not charge S. Leo to haue been in this respectIbid p. 283 285. peremptorie and ambitious; and that he was soIb. 294. 295. peremptorie, that for his presumption he found in his time brotherlie checks? Yea doe you not confesse, that certainIb. 294. 295. Sentences of S. Cyprian may seeme at their first view vnto the vnexpert Reader to obserue in the Church of Rome both a Grace of impossibilitie of erring, and also a prerogatiue of the Mother-Church of al others? But though yourself may be deemed an Expert Reader, yet no otherwise doe you euade those cleerest sentences, then by affirming, that such like speaches are but the languages of Rhetorical Amplification, which commonly the Fathers vse by way of perswasion rather then by asseueration. And seing you admit that the Fathers did commonly vse such speaches by way of perswasion, you must needs admit, that they being holie and learned men did also beleeue and affirme the same. Yea you approue suchIb. pag. 300. Protestant Authours as reprehēd Victor for arrogācie & transgressing the bounds of his Iurisdiction in Excōmunicating the Churches of Asia. Lastly, wheras in proof of Antichrist's short raigneIb. pag. 143. M. Brierlie pro∣duceth M. Fox teaching, that almost al the holie and learned Interpreters doe by a time, times, and half a time, vnderstand only three yeares and a half; affir∣ming further this to be the consent and opinion of almost al the ancient Fathers; Doe not you likewise subscribe therunto and say:Ib pag 144. Now therefore, &c. why might not these Fathers be sayd to haue erred in prefining the time of Antichrist? &c. So that you are inforced to confesse, that in the Fathers opinions al our precedent Popes are cleered from being Antichrists.
In like sort concerning Vnwritten Traditions, you grant that S. Gregorie vsethIb. pag. 62. to confirme some things by Tradition; and that the ancient beleeuing IewesIb pag. 377. pretended vnwritten Traditions. As teaching Pur∣gatorie and Prayer for the Dead, you reproue S. Gregorie touching, thatIb pag. 19. 20. the Sacrifice of the Altar is profitable for the Soules departed. And againeIb p. 498. S. Austin speaketh with a Peraduenture; but S. Gregorie kindled the fire with a Credo. But you somewhat passed Peraduenture, when you writ that Pro∣testantIb. pag. 495. Authours haue obserued S. Augustin to haue been the first, who opened the window vnto the doctrine of Purgatorie, by whose owne direction (say you) we haue a good warrant to dissent from him.
You further admit, that Inuocation of Saincts was the doctrineIb pag. 27. of S. Gregorie; and that hisIb pag. 28. not suffring Images to be broken, when there was so publick and general Idolatrie committed with them, seemed vnto (your) Osiander although not a direct, yet an occasional approuing of Idolatrie, or rather a cloaking therof. Yea you admit further, thatIb pag. 586. about the foure hundredth yeare Ima∣ges erept out of priuate mens houses, and went into the publick churches standing there. And as for Relicks, youIb pag. 583. wish that Hierome had been a Vigilantius in the case of the Relicks of Saints.

You further affirme, that theIb pag. 38. Apologists do truly obiect, that Osiander noted S. Gregorie to haue been a vehement vrger of single life in the Clergie. You confesse, thatIb pag. 604. Vigilantius and Iouinian are condemned for impugning the vnmarried life of Priests; and that theIb. pag. 480. Councel (of Nice) restrayneth them from marriage, who were vnmarried, when they entred into Orders; AndIb. pag. 88. we finde (say you) that the Age next abutting vpon the Apostles time did practise a perpetual vow of Virginitie. You likewise auouch, thatIb pag. 46. Monachisme is a state of life greatly commended by S. Gregorie, who had been himself a Monk. And speaking of ancientIb pag. 89. Votaries, you write that the Apostle requireth in his widowes the age of three score yeares; and after times would not admit Virgins vnder 25. yeares old, nor veyled Nunnes til fourtie; for which you cite seueral Councels.
As touching the Fast of Lent, you write:Ib pag. 303. This Fast we confesse was of great antiquitie, and &c. had in general vse and obseruation; which S. Ambrose teacheth to haue been ordayned by the Diuine institution of Christ. AndIb. pag. 04. S. Au∣gustin doth sometimes write of the fourtie dayes Fast, that it hath a Diuine authoritie. And where other Protestants do charge vs with the Heresies of the Manichees and Tatianists for abstaining from certain meates vpon prescribed dayesIb pag. 00. yourself doth cleare vs and defend vs therin; as also against the Heresie of the ManicheesIb pag. 139. 140. Communicating vnder one kind. And as concerning Ceremonies, you auouch thatIb. pag. 53. in the innouating and multiplying of new Rites Gregorie himself was not the least agent. AndIb. pag. 58. Be it knowne to al our Aduersaries, that the too manie Ceremonies vsed by Gregorie cannot excuse their now farre more multitudes; nor can some of his not good &c. You charge him further to haue vsedIbid. p. 53. Superstitious manner of Consecration of Churches; In whichIbid. p. 57. he indeed requireth lights. And as for Holie-water, you say, thatIbid. p. 5. true it is, that Aqua lustralis was vsed, but &c. as an inuention of Pope Alexander, who liued An. 109. And it was applyed in the dayes of Gregorie by Augustin to the Consecration of Churches, togeather with Prayers for the casting out of the filth of Idols and Diuels. And so likewise concerning the mingling of water with wine in the ChaliceIbid. p. 142. you referre this new Romish custome vnto (the sayd) Pope Alexander the supposed authour therof.
Lastly as touching Free-wil, you acknowledge, thatIbid. p. 201. 201. Protestants haue particularly and by name obserued, that Iustinus, Ireneus, Clemens, Tertulian, Origen, Cyprian, and others, albeit manie times they pleaded for the Free-wil of the corrupt nature of man &c. Thus not being able to giue other answer, your∣self confesse with M. Brierlie, that our Catholick doctrines of the Pope's primacie, of the Pope not being Antichrist, of vnwritten Traditions, of Purgatorie and Prayer for the dead, of Inuocation of Saints, of Images, Relicks, of the vnmar∣ried life of Priests, of Monks and Nunnes, of the Fast of lent, of mingling water with wine in the Chalice, of Consecration of Churches, of lights in Churches, of Holie-water, and Free-wil, were al of them taught in the times of the Pri∣mitiue Church of Christ; and that not by anie infamous and condem∣ned Hereticks, but euen by the clearest Lamps of those Ages, namely by S. Gregorie, S. Augustin, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Leo, S. Cyprian, Iustinus,
 Tertulian, Origen, Victor, Alexander, Clemens, Ireneus, the Councel of Nice, the 3. of Carthage and others. And so to conclude this first obseruation, you see yourself, that in steed of Answer you make a good Apologie for the Roman Church.
But to leaue this your so plaine dealing, and to come to some of your more slipperie tricks: wheras M. Brierlie obiecteth sundrie Protestant Writers confessing and reprouing the Fathers of the Primitiue Church for the self same points and conclusions of Faith, which the Roman Church now beleeueth and practiseth; you for your easiest answer most commonly passe ouer al or most of the said Testimonies with deepest silence, not answering anie thing at al vnto them; so that as vn∣answerable you concealed them in your Answer. But what child or Idiot professing Arianisme, Pelagianisme, Donatisme, or the like, might not with like facilitie haue answered al the bookes and proofes made by S. Athanasius, S. Augustin, S. Hilarie, and other learnedst Doctours against the foresayd heresies? Now to giue you example heerof, euen in the first entrance M. Brierlie in his 1. Section intending to proue that the Faith of S. Gregorie, and wherunto England was conuerted by S. Austin, was the same with our now Catholick Faith, confirmeth the same by the testi∣monies and grants of D. Humfrie, Osiander, the Centurie-writers of Magdeburg, D. Fulk, Daneus, M. Harrison, and M. Bale, the three first instancing the same by manie particular points of Religion, and the rest confessing in general, that our Conuersion by S. Gregorie and S. Austin was to Poperie or the Papistical faith; Now al this being comprehen∣ded by M. Brierlie his Booke within the compasse of lesse then one quarter of a sheet of paper, you spend in answer thereto aboue 60. pa∣ges, and yet in neuer one therof do you fully and directly answer to anie of your said Authours cited against you, yea some of them you do not so much as mention or take the least notice of; and the like might I shew throughout your whole Booke.
At other times you admit, that the Protestant Writers alleadged by M. Brierlie did indeed reproue the Fathers for seueral points of Papistrie; but therewith you are displeased, and oppose yourself against your owne deare Brethren, charging them to haue done the same without iust cause, and with greatest wrong and iniurie to the said Fathers. But now you go by the eares with very manie Protestants, no lesse, if not more, renowned, then yourself. And what man of ordinarie sense and reason wil not giue more credit to manie of the primest Protes∣tants, inhabiting seueral nations, through euidence of truth, thus wri∣ting and confessing against themselues, and in behalf of Catholicks, then to you, M. Morton, through want of good conscience or solid iud∣gement, impugning the truth and your more ancient and learned Pro∣testants?
Againe, you being vnable directly & punctually to answer the fore∣said testimonies of your Brethren acknowledging and reprouing the Fathers for teaching our Catholick Faith, you thinke to bleare the eye
 of an ignorant Reader, by obiecting sundrie sayings of the sayd Fa∣thers, as making against those seueral points of Fayth, for which they were formerly confessed by other Protestants; and this is an ordinarie shift throughout your whole Booke. But yet this doth lesse satisfye then al the rest; for first if the other Protestants perusing the Fathers writings, no doubt with as great diligence as yourself hath done, had found such pregnant places in behalf of thēselues, as you now pretend, they would neuer haue written and diuulged the direct contrarie ther∣of to the vtter ruine of their Cause and the eternal shame of themsel∣ues. Besides, sundrie Protestants citing seueral Texts of the Fathers as making for Papistrie, and you heer alleadging seueral others as impug∣ning the same and making for Protestancie, what should this inferre, but that the Doctours & Bishops euen of the Primitiue Church should make mutual contradiction and warres amongst themselues in the chiefest articles of our Christian Faith and Religion? yea, which is more absurd, it would further conclude one and the same Father, S. Austin (for Example) to be contrarie to himself; for as you do heer of∣ten alleadge him in proof of seueral particulars of your new Reformed Faith, so do manie Protestants produce him as impugning the sayd particulars. Now what more grosse absurditie can be vttered, then that S. Austin not in one but in manie points of Faith should thus con∣tradict himself? Lastly such sayings of Fathers as you heer produce in behalf of yourself, are but the knowne obiections made and answered by Cardinal Bellarmin and other Catholick Writers.
M. Brierlie affecting through his whole Booke to confirme and con∣uince his wished intent by the clearest testimonies of his Protestant Aduersaries, you wil needs follow the same course, producing in that behalf the plentiful sayings of our Catholick Writers; but with a dou∣ble difference, your Conscience wel knew. For first M. Brierlie allead∣ged such Protestants as for learning and iudgement were most renow∣ned and respected through the whole Protestant Church; such were Luther, Melancthon, Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, Chemnitius, the Centurists, Caluin, Beza, Whitguift, Bale, Whitaker, Iewel, Humfrie, Reynolds, Parkins and sundrie such others. Secondly, these Protestants he produceth as confessing the Fathers to agree with vs Catholicks, not only in matters of dispu∣te, indifferencie, or such as are not yet determined by the Church or General Councel, but euen in the chiefest and most important Arti∣cles and Conclusions of Faith, controuerted at this day between Ca∣tholicks and Protestants.
Now as for the Catholick Writers alledged by you, M. Morton, a great part of them are such as for their knowne errours haue their writings already censured and condemned by their Mother-Church; such were Erasmus, Valla, Cassander, Nilus, Agrippa and such like; and from these only doe you fetch such testimonies as concerne matter of some moment; for as for other approued Catholick Writers, as S. Thomas, S. Bonauenture, Lombard, Scotus, Bellarmine, Sanders, Allen, Parsons, and innu∣merable
 others, though you cite them often, yet neuer as denying anie one Article or Conclusion of Faith, defined at anie time by the Church of Christ, but only as dissenting amongst themselues in matters dispu∣table and indifferent; nor euer as confessing the Fathers of the Primi∣tiue Church to make for Protestants in matters of Faith, as now con∣trouerted between them and Catholicks.
And as for the testimonies gathered from the former and worser rank of Catholicks, they can nothing preiudice our Catholick Cause. For first, as before, their errours and bookes are censured, condemned, and prohibited by that verie Church, wherin they were Baptized or first became Christians, to wit, the Roman. Secondly, most of the sayd Authours finally recanted their errours, submitting themselues and their writings to the Censure of the Catholick Church. And lastly, as it may not be denyed, but that in the State Politick the Prince with his Councel may iustly punish, censure, and correct such men with their errours, as shal seeke to innouate in anie thing against the former receaued and established lawes of the whole kingdome; so much more is the like iustifyable, expedient, and necessarie in the Spiritual gouer∣ment of the Church of Christ.
I might heer proceed to sundrie other such like euasions of yours; but I feare to exceed the ordinarie bounds, and therefore wil con∣clude, assuring the iudicious and impartial Reader, who shal diligently peruse your swelling and ample Appeale written in answer to a smal part of M. Brierlie his first and least Apologie, that certainly he may expect in lieu of a Due and satisfyable Answer, first, that yourself is often enforced to confesse with M. Brierlie and against yourself, that the ancient Fa∣thers in seueral important points of Religion were Roman Catho∣liks. Secondly, that manie of the strongest allegations brought by M. Brierlie are not so much as named, and much lesse answered by your dumb Spirit. Thirdly, that you are often compelled to impugne and disgrace your owne Protestant Brethren, vtterly denying and disclai∣ming in that, which they through the Sunne-shine and splendour of truth haue plentifully acknowledged, though against themselues, you so Appealing from them no lesse then from M. Brierlie himself. Fourthly, that finding yourself not able to euade such conuincing proofes taken only from Protestant Doctours by anie direct and pertinent Answer, you fil vp your paper with such Sayings of Fathers, as are either cor∣rupted by yourself, or frequently alreadie answered by Catholick Wri∣ters; which is no other answer neither, but that Protestants amongst themselues do alledge the Fathers, yea one and the self-same Father as fighting with himself; the affirming wherof is as grosse an absurditie, as my self would desire my greatest Aduersarie to be plunged in. And lastly, that for such testimonies as you draw from Catholick Writers, they are either such, as are already condemned by the Catholick Church, or els are not concerning anie Article or Conclusion of Faith, but only matters indifferent and disputable in Schooles.

Now as euerie one of ordinarie iudgement may clearly see, that these poore shifts patched togeather are but beggarlie rags seruing to hide or couer from the weake sight of an ignorant Reader, the loth∣some sores and shameful deformities of your diseased Bodie, the Pro∣testant Church; so hath M. Brierlie his sincere and solid proceeding not only encouraged others to make the whole world acquainted with so precious a iewel, by translating his Apologie into Latin, but hath also in∣duced me to make further vse therof for the special good, as I hope, of our owne Countrie: To which if you also out of conscience and true knowledge would also dedicate your further labours, I doubt not but you would become a dutiful Child to your Mother-Church, and a paineful labourer in Christ's Vinyeard; for which I wil not cease to en∣treate his Infinit Goodnes; and wil euer rest

