



Right Honorable:
THE publishing of these Sermons hath, by some who are iu∣dicious, been thought necessary for the pre∣sent times: They may happily stirre men vp to a serious consideration, and correspondent thankefulnesse for these blessed daies of Peace and
 Grace which wee enioy, vnder the gouernment of the most Wise, Lear∣ned, and Religious King, that euer this Nation had.
And peraduenture, the view of this excellent Ornament,Peace. may moue some, who are now contentious, to become studious, according to the Apostles precept,1 Thes. 4.11. of Peace and Qui∣etnesse.
Being resolued for the publish∣ing of them, I wanted no motiues for dedication. As my selfe haue duely obserued, and others ingeni∣ously acknowledged your Lordship, in your generall carriage,Doctor Hall. A worthy patterne of all true honour: So haue I much reioyced to obserue your Lordships religious disposition (the life and lustre of true Noblenesse) and your constant sanctifying of the Sabbath, both at the prayers of the Church, and preaching of the word, without neglect or diuorce of those sacred ordinances.
And who doth not honour you
 as a worthy instrument of our hap∣pinesse, in the happy rescue of the deere life of our gratious Soueraign? For had the bloody designes of the insolent Gowries taken effect, the light of our Israel had beene put out;2. Sam. 21.17. and wee (for ought that any mortall eye can see) left altogether hopelesse of those great blessings we now enioy. But in more particular, the respect your honor hath had to my Ministery, euer since I was knowne vnto you, and your gracing of me both in Court and Country, doe worthily challenge some testifi∣cation of thankfulnesse, without which I might iustly incurre Claudi∣us Caesars censure vpon ingratitude.Ingratos reuoca∣uit in seruitu∣tem. Sueton, And as your Lordships fauours haue beene publike, so the Philoso∣pher hath taught mee not to tender my thanks in angulo, & ad aurem.Seneca de Bene∣fic. lib. 1. c. 23.
Therefore (insteade of better meanes) these two Sermons, like the widowes two Mites, doe humbly present themselues to your Lord∣ships
 hands, crauing your accep∣tance, and the continuance of your fauour to him, who heartily pray∣eth for your prosperous estate, and hath vnfaynedly deuoted himselfe

