



REVEREND and Vertuous men, though I hope, that this ensuing Trea∣tise will become profitable to diuers of the Catholike Laity; yet ingenuously I confesse, that it was chiefly and prin∣ciplly vndetaken for the aduancement of your Stu∣dies in Cntrouersies of Fayth: I meane, on∣ such of you, who haue spent your last yeares in umane learning, and points of School-Diuinity, nd are therefore in regard of such your want of ri∣rage, as yet litle conuersant in Controuersies of fayth, ventilated at this day betweene the Ca∣tholike and the Protestant. To those others of your owne function, which are of full, and great yeares, this Discourse (I confesse) is lesse seruiceable; since themselues through their owne reading are (no doubt) well acquainted with most of the Animaduersions ere set downe; and therefore I would not haue any such graue and learned men thinke, that I adresse this Worke vnto them for their further benefit: for I willingly grant, that though my selfe be of their owne
 course of lyfe, I shall be euer ready rather to be in∣structed by them, then vndertake to instruct any of them.
Touching the Subiect of this Treatise, it contay∣neth certaine Controuersiall Animaduersions (for so I here call them about Mattes of Religion. These Animaduersions are of most different ad seuerall points and in regard of such their diuersiy they can hardly be reduced to any certaine Heads  can be set downe in any praecise Method, with m∣tuall dependency one to the other. And therefore i regard of the want of such Method, I haue entituled the whole Worke Miscellania, as being a mixture of things in themselues heterogeniou, and of dif∣ferent natures. And although some of them might (as touching the same point) be ranged and set downe to∣geather (and this chiefly in those which do concerne the Reall Presence;) yet I haue purposely, for the most part, marshalled them in different places, the better to obserue the , required in the ta Method of Miscellania; that so no one part of  Booke shall differ in fome from the rest, or fr the whole: imitating herein the vsuall Order of E∣grams, whose Method in setting them downe co¦sists in not obseruing of Method. There except ce¦taine Animaduersions in defence and proofe of  Deity, and of the Immortality of the Soule, i the end of the Booke, which I haue thought ex¦dient to amasse together, against such Men, w mke their Infidelity vnder the ecture of Prote∣stancy.
 And as these Animaduersions (being promiscuously deliuered, without any punctuall order) do in part resemble a great plot of ground (not deui∣ded into any certaine beds or quarters) wherin con∣fusedly and scatteringly grow many flowers of diffe∣rent kinds & odours: So here you shall find sparsed∣ly Obseruations of so many points in number, and of such different Natures, as that I hold it more con∣uenient to refer the Reader immediatly to the pe∣using of them, then to particularize but any few eads, in this Dedicatory Epistle.
Let no man muse at this vnexpected Method: We see, the world in most things is extrauagant; the Method here vsed is also (through a kind of ne∣cessity) extrauagant; and thus I am forced at this present to humour the World. And I adde hereto that e vncertanity contayned in this Method, may beget  the Reader (as often it doth in Bookes of this na∣re and forme) an inquisitiue desire to see what lloweth in ech ensuing Animaduersion; as pre∣sming them to be of different Subiects; and so may ore easely draw on the Reader, to the perusall of the whole Treatise.
This Rapsody of Obseruaions (if it be lawfull so far to impropriate the word) is taken partly out of that most Eminent Cardinall Bellarmine, of orthy memory; partly out of the most paynefull and lrned worke of the Protestants Apology; and t of other of the said Authours writings, (out of hich, many choyse Obseruations are now
 fully published, which (before, and till now) did ly much hidden & concealed in Marginall references; partly also out of all the chiefe Bookes written by th Catholikes, during these last thirty, or fourty yeares and partly out of the diligent perusall of the chiefe Protestant Writers.
And as we obserue, that a man comming into  curious Garden, layeth not hold of euery flower, which first presenteth it selfe to his sight, but will ga∣ther here and there such, as are most pleasing to th eye, & smell; So I hope, I may here boldly say, I haue forborne all vulgar and obuious Obseruations (as presuming them to be knowne to you allready) resting only (and this with the iudgment of other graue me of my Coate, already acquainted with this Worke) in such, as are choyse, selected, and full of matter; the which (Vertuous Men) you may vse, as so many sho Prolegomena, or briefe instructions, cond∣cing to your future more full, and exact study of Controuersies. Here now you haue in these fe sheets, a full Synopsis, or view of the most weighty Obseruations; which being made familiar an knowne to you aforehand, may much facilitate a make easy your otherwise more painefull search an study hereafter in those matters, and may furni you with extemporall and present discourse touchi most Controuersies: all which seuerall Obserua∣tions being (as it were) a formlesse materia prim of Controuersies, or to speake in the Poets Dialect — rudis, indigestaq́ue moles, would re∣quire
 no small labour, toyle, and disquisition in any of you to collect out of the Authors themselues.
The Animaduersions in this Treatise set downe, are in number, only two hundred. Many ore (I grant) might be added for the increase of he Number: But these I hold to be most forcing; &  am loath, that this worke through any affected pro∣xity, should become fastidious, or wearisome vnto you. And wheras you shall find some acknowledg∣ments of Protestants, to be oftener set downe, then nce, you may conceaue the reason therof to be, in re∣gard of the seuerall or different Illations, or Infe∣rences, drawne from the said acknowledgments, in seuerall Animaduersions.
If any of you reape profit by this my Labour (as  hope diuers of you may, and will) my humble re∣uest then in recompence of my paynes taken herein,  that you wld vouchsafe your remēbrance of me in ur prayers, at the chiefest tymes of your Deuotions.  knowe many, of Custome and Vse, in Dedicating eir Bookes to Catholikes, do intreate of them this nd of fauour; But as for my selfe, my desire and irituall need of your good prayers is so vehem d vnaffected, as that I earnestly beseech you, euen  the most precious Passion of our Lord and auiour, suffered for the cancelling of our sinnes, by ur owne charitable Disposition towards others, for resume those words of the Apostle to be imprinted  your soulesRom. 5.: Charitas Dei diffusa est in ordibus vestris.

Finally by what is most sacred and holy, that yo would vouchsafe (now and then) your particular re∣membrance of me (either yet aliue, or hereafter dead in that your most retired and Religious Memento (vsed in the celebration of the most Blessed and Re∣uerend Sacrifice of the Masse) for the expiating of my manyfold sinnes. This I humbly beseech; this in all prostration of soule I implore, and begge a your hands; and in such your performance, ech of yo iustly may comfort your selues in those words of ou Sauiour: BeatiMatt. 5. misericordes, quoniam ip∣si misericordiam consequentur. And thus in th good hope thereof I cease, referring you to the peru∣sall of the Treatise it selfe.

