


AMonge the in∣numerable be∣nefites whiche we haue recea∣ued of almigh∣tye God (moost worthy and ex∣cellente Prin∣cesse) there is none in mine opinion for the whiche we are more bounde vnto his mercifull goodnes, then for that it hath moued hym of his
 gentle benignite, to call vnto vs agayne his trewe religion, whiche our forefathers hath kept from ye beginninge. For who knoweth not that this noble realme of England hath ben seduced euen now of late dayes, thorough ignoraunce, naye, naye, rather thorough stubbernes, and for lacke of grace. For they knowinge him as God, honoured hym not as God: but thinking thē¦selues wise, became fooles. Who e∣uē among ye symple people, percea¦ueth not what intollerable abuses haue ben (vnder pretence of true relygion and godlynes) vsed and maynteyned in this churche of En∣glande? As false interpretinge of Scriptures, vtterly denying of ye holy doctours and fathers of Chri¦stes churche, but only such as made for their purpose. Tyll suche tyme that it pleased hym of his infinite
 mercy, to sende vs a newe Iudith, by whose godlines the trewe light and knowledge of Goddes worde is nowe by her broughte agayne, whiche frome the death of that no¦ble prince her father Henry ye. viii. was here in this realme extuncte, and vtterly abolished, to the vtter vndoyng of mens conscience: but now thankes be to God the father of our Lorde Iesus Christe, it be∣ginneth to springe and shyne a∣gayne. This noble Iudith is oure moost soueraygne Ladye Quene Mary, a Princesse garnished with so many excellent giftes of grace, vertue, nature, and fortune, that she is in verye dede, (and therefore most worthely called) the perfecte mirroure, and pearle of al Christen Princesse. To wade her in ye prayse of her Princely qualities, and no∣ble actes, it is not my purpose, for
 that I know it to be an enterprise farre excedinge the compasse of my symple wyt and vnderstandynge. But onely to declare howe muche we are bounde, cheifly vnto God, and next vnto her moost excellente highnes, that we haue nowe oure olde and true religion broughte home agayne: and are cured again through God by her, of oure olde blyndenes that we were in, by the medecyne of veritie. For we nowe hauynge agayne the true knowe∣ledge of God, whiche oure forefa∣thers hath lefte behynde them by wrytinge, we begynne agayne to se and perfectly to knowe Christe to be in the Sacrament of the aulter, whome to knowe perfectly, is euer lastynge lyfe and saluation. But so longe as the sayde Scriptures were falsely interpreted, by Sedici∣ous and false preachers, and ye true
 knowledge of Scripture kept frō the people, fewe or none knewe Christ aryght: and none lesse then they, who toke vpon them to be ye cheif professours, and setters forth of Christes religion. For what els is it knowe Christ, but to beleue his worde? Who sheweth me which is his word, but the catholike chur∣che. For S. Augustyne sayeth: I wold neuer haue beleued ye Gospel but by the churche. So that it ap∣peareth therby, howe greatly they are deceaued, that wyll take vpon them to denye the olde fathers of Christes churche, to maynetayne their vnthrifty purposes: yea, and not onely those: but also certayne places of ye Bible that maketh not for them. For surely it is the holye fathers that sheweth and expoun∣deth vnto vs playnely the Scrip∣tures, which nowe of late hath ben
 in controuersy, not with good men, (but with those that be of the euyl sort, as hereafter shal folow) whose iudgementes be verye godlye.
Teachinge vs truely to knowe by fayth, howe that the body of Christ is in the Sacrament of the aulter: because his wordes doth so euident¦ly declare the same, sayinge: This is my body. And forasmuche as these ho∣lye fathers hereafter folowynge, hath left theyr myndes in wryting (as concernyng ye presence of Chri∣stes reall body, to be in the Sacra∣ment of the aulter, and not only of this, but of certaine other matters whiche hath ben in question) vnto all people that wyll be saued, none excepte. For nowe (thankes be to God) I trust that Idolatry, hypocrisye, and all vngodlynes, is cleane plucked vp by the rootes: and that the trewe religion of God
 hath taken his place agayne. Now is false doctrine exiled, and Gods worde truely preached & set forth. Nowe is that abhomination and desolation pluckte downe: and the true worshyppyng of Christ in the Sacrament set vp agayne. Nowe I trust in almighty God, that En∣glande hath forsaken all theyr ab∣hominable preachers and teachers agaynst the presence of Christ to be in the Sacramente of the aulter, with al theyr vngodly deuises, and deuelysh inuencions. For if that yu (O Englande) had that grace geuē vnto the of God, that thou woldest call vnto thy remembraunce, howe that this Iudith, at the risynge of our Holifernus, had the hartes of men, and not the bodyes: And that at the risynge, and proceding forth of that pestiferous traytor Wyat, had the bodyes and not the hartes
 and yet ouercame her enemies by the power of God, it were suche a miracle vnto the, whereby to cause the to forsake all thy noughty opi¦nions and errours. But yet this yu must thinke that it cōmeth by the mere mercy & goodnes of almigh∣ty God towardes vs, and not of our deseruinges: who hath raised vp vnto vs, now in these our lat∣ter dayes, this noble Iudith, a La∣dy of moost excellente giftes, and singuler qualities, whollye geuen to the study of vertue & godlines. Wherfore all Englande hath iuste occasion to reioyce at this youre graces doinges, in that ye be so stu¦dious to call vs home agayne (like lost shepe that hath runne astray) to our olde and true religion, whi∣che our olde fathers hath left be∣hynde them from tyme to tyme: be¦sechinge almightye God therin to
 be your strength, shielde and buck∣ler. Most humbly beseching youre grace (most gratious Lady) in good past to take this my good zele and diligence. And in case any thinge shall not sufficiently aunswer your graces mynde, or desire, the same to impute rather to the lacke of facul∣tie and knowledge, then to any de∣faute of good wyll in me. I shall here without any farther circum∣staunce of wordes, commende, and leaue this small worke to the dili∣gent reading, and folowinge of all true Christen people. And with moost harty prayer, beseche almigh¦tye God longe yeares to prosper and continewe the prosperouse e∣state of youre hyghnesse, to thende that by youre good helpe and meanes, the deuoute people of this youre realme, maye receaue
 this whiche is Gods procedynges, and your graces gentle embracin∣ges, to theyr continuall helth, and comforte both of body and soule, to the wyll of GOD, thorowe Iesus Christ oure Lorde: To whom with the father, and the sonne, and the holye goost, be all laude, ho∣nor, and glory, both in hea∣uen and earth, for euer and euer. Amen.
