



WHat may be thought meete to be spoken in the behalfe of this booke (right Honorable) I sup∣pose may bee found sufficient in the preface ensuing made by the Author himselfe, and addressed vnto his Lord, the Lord Casimire. But what occa∣sions moued me vnto the translation of the worke and to offer it to your Honour, it may perhaps bee looked for that my selfe should signifie. VVe haue seene Antichrist euen in this our Realme, (as well as in many other places of Christendome) to haue taken a notable, both fall and foyle. Jn so much as who so had liued in the daies of the famous King Henry the eyght. (VVhome it pleased God to vse as the chiefest instrument to dismount the mon∣ster, and giue him his deadly wound) to haue seene then the zeale and forwardnes that was in the Nobilitie, the painefulnes of the Cleargie, both by pen and in pulpit, the triumphes and ioyfull accla∣mations
 of the people, he would haue thought that neither Antichrist himselfe would euer haue looked back, with hope to haue set foote in amongst vs a∣gaine, nor that in the heart of any one true Eng∣lish-man (especially after so long a farewell) hee might finde any residence or fauourable entertain∣ment. But (tantae molis erit Romanam euertere gen∣tem) it fell out otherwise. For not long after it ap∣peared that it was an easier matter to hurle out the Pope then poperie at a suddaine. In so much asOuld Docter Turner. one in a prety pamphlet, intituled, The hunting of the Foxe, by the industry of such hounds as there he set on worke, and by print of the Beasts footing which in many corners he obserued, he descried, & withal cried out that the Foxe was still in the land. And as for our time, late, and that daungerous experi∣ence hath toulde vs (both in respect of Rome and Rhemes abroade, and of Jesuites and Seminarie Priests sent ouer vnto vs, and of hollow harted and trayterous subiects fostered amongst vs, (who all haue made waie to this late cruell attempt of the Spanyards) that both the Pope himselfe hath long since cast more then a glauncing eye toward Eng∣land, and that many amongst vs (yea such as haue bin borne in time of her Maiesties most happie Raigne) haue liked, and longed for that vnhappie
 euent of that vngratious aspect. But long may they looke in vaine as hetherto they haue done, by Gods mercifull prouidence ouer vs, and by the carefull gouernment of such as are our Magistrats. VVhose labour and watchfulnes as it becommeth eache christian (in loue of the Churche) to support and further by al such good meanes, as where-with God hath enabled him: So J being not able otherwise, haue endeuoured hereby to do the best I maie; not for the helpe of the learned, who are able themselues to consult with the Author in the originall: but of such as to whome without such helpe this worke might seeme to bee a treasure hid in the ground. And they be the men that be most endaungered, as not being able to discearne the Beast though daily they see his footing before their face; and therefore had most need of a Mithridate to withstand his infection. And in my simple opinion, there is no one booke among many that hath bin penned of late to this purpose; which more fitly, and effectually per∣performeeh the same then this doth, in thwarting the enterprise of the Rhemist, and cracking the cre∣dit of this Romish maister: which also might daunt the desperat attempts of his fauourites amongst vs, considering the Beast vnder whose banner they fight.

This little labour of mine being finished, consi∣dering with my selfe the place which your Lord∣ship sustaines to the seruice, and saftie of her Ma∣iesties person, hir country and common-weale; and good of the Churche: J was easely induced to pre∣sume to make offer of the same vnto your honour. And in so doing withall J conceiued hope, to com∣passe that which the Author himselfe affected in making his dedication vnto Prince Casimire, name∣ly, that vnder your Lordeships name and patro∣nage, it may be the more willingly accepted, and the more safely passe through the handes of men. The which J beseeche your good Lordeship in such fauourable sorte to accept as you did the former. The Lorde of Lords preserue your Lordship to see the happie and ioyfull returne of many a newe yere, and prosper your Honorable endeauours ten∣ding to the aduauncement of his glorie and sup∣planting his, and her Maiesties enemies, to the good of the Church, the safety of the Realme, the furthe∣raunce of Religion, and learning, and your owne endles comfort in Christ Jesu. Amen.
From the Colledg of Wye in Kent,
the first of Ianuary. 1589

