



Most Dread Soueraigne, &c.
SEneca saith,Lib. 1. de Clemē∣ta c. 1. nullum ex om∣nibus
clemētia magis quam
Regem aut principem de∣cet;
Clemency becomes
no man better then a
King or Prince, and be∣ing
fully perswaded, that this, together with
all other both Princely and sauing graces
meete in your Maiesties royall breast, euen
as the lines of a circumference meete in the

center or middle point: I am encouraged to
present this Sermon to your Princely view.
I know indeed it is not with Kings asEidyl. 15. v. 26. Theo∣critus
saith, it is with persons without im∣ployment,
 which keepe euery
day holy day: the imployments and labours
of Princes are farre greater then ordinary
Subiects can conceiue: yet I hope I may say
of your Maiesty, asLib. 1 c. 1. ad Thrasimund re∣gem. Fulgentius saith of Thra∣simund
the King vnto whom he writes, te nu∣merosis
Regni curis iugiter occupatum, feruenti
cognoscendae sapientiae dilectatione flammari; that
howsoeuer your royall heart be much taken
vp with manifold cares cōcerning the King∣dome,
for the common safety of all your
Subiects, yet it is inflamed also with a god∣ly
zeale after the best things; your Maiesty
is a Defender of the true Christian Faith, in
which respect you are highly honoured and
sincerely beloued of all your true hearted
and truely Religious Subiects: no doubt
they dayly pray for you, they blesse God for
you, they esteeme you the breath of their
nostrills, and this loue of the Subiects is to
be esteemed by Kings their strongest De∣fence
or Castell in respect of ordinarie

meanes; asIn Orat. ad Nicocl. de regno. Isocrates saith to Nicocles the
King, in his Greeke Oration made before
him, :
i. e. thinke the loue of the Citizens
the safest guard of thy person: & indeede so it
is vnder God. There hath bin discouered of
late vnto your Maiesties high Commission-Court,
a dangerous familisticall sectarie, one
Iohn Hetherington, by trade a Boxmaker,
who hath seduced and withdrawne many as
well men as women from the Church of
England, in the famous Citie of London, by
his subtile suggestions, as hath bin proued
against him. I cannot more fitly describe
him then by the words of my Text; Lupus
est ouili pelle tectus: hee is a Woolfe in a
Sheepes-skinne: for outwardly if he liue a∣mongst
Protestants, hee will seeme to be a
Protestant, if a bare profession ore tenus, will
serue the turne, whilst in the meane time hee
may gird at them in his writings, and con∣demne
them as adulterous Congregations
in his Conuenticles or otherwise. Secondly,
hee will seeme to be a conformable man to
the Doctrine of the Church, if subtile equi∣uocations
and cunning euasions will passe

for conformitie. Thirdly, hee will seeme an
innocēt person, if impudent denials or cast∣ing
of aspersions vpon honest witnesses will
goe for innocency. And in this, that honou∣rable
quicksighted and Eagle-eyed Court
deserueth great encouragement; in that,
when they had to deale with one that would
deny almost all that was laid to his charge,
yet they discerned aright of him, and accor∣dingly
censured him; and thus the Greeke
Prouerbe is verified . The
Woolfe thinkes to run from the Eagle, and
so to escape, but all in vaine: and amongst
those worthy and learned Commissioners,
he that is the chiefe, optimo iure primas agit:
whose acumen, whose soundnesse in the faith,
whose singular grauity, whose happy speech,
whose excellent parts euery way are the ve∣ry
grace of that venerable Court: it may be
said of him asOrat. 30. in laudem Basil. Gregorie Nazianzen saith of
S. Basil Archbishop of Caesarea (whom he
stiles ) that he is like vnto No∣ah,
vnto whom the Arke of the Church is com∣mitted,
and so kept from drowning, whiles it floats
in the turbulent waters amongst Haereticks. And
whiles I am speaking of Ecclesiasticall wor∣thies,

very dutie will not suffer me to be vn∣mindfull
of him, vnder whom the Ministers
of London liue as children vnder the care of
an indulgent Father: his great humility will
not suffer him to Lord it ouer the Clergie,
nor his peaceable disposition to yrannize:
it may be said of him asLib. 4. epist. 9 Saint Cyprian Bishop
of Carthage saith of himselfe in one of his E∣pistles;
Humilitatem meam & fratres omnes &
gentiles norunt & diligunt. I finde that I haue
stirred vp to wrath against my selfe the most
part of all the factions in England by this
publike Sermon, which I made in the de∣fence
of Gods eternall truth, in loue to my
Country, and in compassion of weake bre∣thren
which are in the most danger of se∣duction.
I remember Saint Paul saith, that he
had fought with beasts at Ephesus, after the
manner of men, and in like sort it befalleth
vnto mee at this time: I haue to deale with
young Foxes which spoyle the Vine of the
Church, and with Wolues, which seeke to
strangle the Sheep of Christ: but what then?
so long as I stand for that truth, whereof
your excellent Maiestie is a defender, I doe
not doubt of acceptation, and if my poore

endeauours shall be so happy as to finde ac∣ceptation
with your sacred person as they
haue found in the learned Court before
your Maiesties Commissioners, and in the
audience where the Sermon was preached,
euen this acceptation greater then all the
rest, shall be all-sufficient to blunt the edge
of all the power of the aduersary, and to se∣cure
the Author from wrong and violence;
yea, it shall no doubt encourage many able
men in the Kingdome to take paines in the
suppressing of faction, both by preaching
and writing, so farre as shall be thought fit by
authoritie. Thus crauing pardon for my
boldnesse, I beseech almighty God to blesse
your Maiesty with long life, & many happy
dayes, with abundance of all gifts and gra∣ces
in this world, and with eternall glory in
that which is to come.

