


MOST dread Soueraigne, your Maiesties gratious acceptance of my late Treatise against Recusancy, causeth me to present vnto your Highnes this poore Mite, which out of my penury I offer into the trea∣surye of the Church: being no way comparable to the Talents which others out of their great plentye, Luc, 21, 2. haue cast into the offrings of God. Albeit the right worshipfull Sr. George More knight, hath learnedly and religiouslie handled the same subiect, yet may I tread the same wine-presse againe, by the example of Saint Augustine, which confuted the Arrians whome Athanasius had confuted before him, and the learned of our age which dayly write bookes, notwithstanding others before them haue written bookes of the same argument. And as S. Augustine in his time, because there were many haeretikes, wished that all men which were able to write, would write against haeresie: so because now Contrà men∣da: Chap, 6. Dè Trinitat: Lib. 1. Chap, 3.  many Atheistes, it is to be wished that many would write  Atheisme.
The state of religion dependeth vpon the state of the Pastors and Ministers. And therefore S. Iohn prophecying of the decay of it, first discouereth the defects of them, as the cause therof: That he of

Ephesus had lefte his former loue: he of Pergamus had them which Apoc, 2, 4. & 14, 15. & 20. maintayned the doctrine of Balaam and the Nicholaitans: he of Thyatira suffered Iezabell to make the people commit fornication, and eat meate sacrificed to Idols: he of Sardis had onely a name that he liued, but was dead: he of Laodicia was neither hotte nor colde, Apoc, 3, 1. 15, & 16. but such a one as the Lord would spewe out of his mouth, that he which tooke vpon him a greater charge then all they, should haue onely hornes like the lambe Christ Iesus: but as for his doctrine, he should speake like the dragon Sathan. And S. Paul prophecying of Apoc, 13. 17 that great Apostasie and reuoliment from true religion through the world, shewed the cause to be in him which tooke vpon him to be the vniuersall Pastor of the world, That he should be an aduersaerie, ex∣alting 2, Thes, 2, 39. him-selfe aboue all that is called God: that sitting in the Temple of God, he should not shew himselfe as the minister of God, but as God. The holy Ghost deriued the corruption of religion, and calamitie of the Church of Israel, from the base condition of the Priestes in the dayes of Ieroboam, saying: that he made Priestes of 1, King, 12, 31 the lowest of the people. And it is a curse denounced against them from God by the Prophet Malachye, that their Priestes should be Mal, 2. 9. despised and vyle before the people.
Your Highnes vnder the Maiestie of Almightie God, now sitteth in the seate of Dauid, and vpon the throne of Salomen: You haue the same authoritie ouer vs, which Iosias, Iosaphat, Ezechias. and the other Godlie Kinges had ouer Iuda. The Lord therefore of his infinite mercie toward you his anoynted, and vs your people, continue in your Princely heart this your zeale of his house, and great care of the aduancement of the state of the ministerie for the aduaunce∣ment of the Ghospell, the increase of Godlines, the subuersion of A∣theisme Act, 13, 22. and all Impietie. The Lord make you such a King as Da∣uid was, a man according to his owne heart, that your Highnes may raigne ouer vs religiously, peaceably & happily, to his glorie, our comfort, and the saluation of your owne soule. The Lord graunt to our noble Queene that she may be an auncient Mother i Is to Prince Henrie a large heart as he did vnto Salomon.  blesse all your posteritie, that they way continue in his▪  the worlds end.

