



THere are no diseases, (right Honourable) so dangerous to a Country or Common-wealth, as those which being Epidemicall, infectious and of a spreading nature, are also mortall; and yet so desperately negle∣cted by the people, that they have not any providence to prevent them, or care to cure them: neither do any more neede the skill and care of the learned Physitian,
 seeing the Patient being insensible of his sickenesse, is carelesse of his owne recove∣ry. And the same also as it may bee true∣ly said of all vices, the sickenesses of the Soule, which are then most perillous, when as they are common, over-spreading all sorts of men with an universall infection, deadly dangerous, and yet so stupifying those that are tainted and taken with them, that they are insensible of their dis∣ease, and shunne carelessely the meanes of cure; so especially, it may fitly be applied to this vitious habite of Lying, which is so universall an infection, that wee may particularly apply unto it Salomons que∣stion, who can say I have made my heart Prov. 20. 9 Psal. 5. 6. Apoc. 22. . & 21. 8. cleane, I am pure from this sinne? So mortally dangerous, that without repen∣tance it bringeth certaine destruction, ex∣cludeth us from Heavenly Happinesse, and casteth us headlong into the fire of
 Hell; and yet so pleasing to corrupt na∣ture, and so availeable (as men thinke) for the atchieving of their worldly and carnall ends, that they are insensible of their danger, love their disease, and neg∣lecting all meanes of cure doe live and die in it without repentance. In which re∣gard as it is the duety of those whom God hath called to bee the Soules Physitians, that they shew their skill and care in dis∣covering this dangerous disease, and in using all good meanes both for the pre∣venting and curing of it: So I thought my selfe interessed in this worke, and the rather because being an argument of such necessary importance, yet there hath beene hitherto little written of it. Of which my poore labours, I have made choyce of your Honours as Patrons, be∣ing hereunto mooved, partly by that ex∣perimentall knowledge which I have had
 of your piety and love to religion, approved by your practice of Christian duties in your daily exercise, your good respect to the Mi∣nisters of Christ, and all that feare God; as also your delighting in Truth, Justice, and all other Vertues: For who are more fitte to protect those workes that oppose vice, than such whose course and conversation is ennobled with Vertue, and Goodnesse; and partly that hereby I might make an acknowledgement how much I am obliged to your Honours for your undeserved favours: And because Iam so deepely indebted, that it is not in my power to make any satisfaction, to leave unto the world a gratefull remem∣berance of my many obligations: Not doubting but that our great LORD and MAISTER, (whose rewardes and retributions are like Himselfe, In∣finite and Everlasting, and hath taken
 whatsoever kindnesse is done unto any of his poore Disciples and Ministers up∣on his owne account, (and made it his owne debt) will out of his All-suffici∣ency, bountifully supply what is wanting on my part through inability, and richly recompence all your many favours to∣wards me, with the Blessings of this life; and Eternall Happinesse in the Life to come: which shall bee the dayly prayer of

