



HE GIVETH twise that gyueth quyckly (sayth Se∣nek.) Bis dat qui cito dat. The griefe, which I had for your lordshyps dis∣ease, with the desyre that ye mought lyue longe with out syckenes, caused suche spede in buyldynge the Ca∣stell of helthe, that therein lacked som part of perfectiō, but yet the prompt∣nes in gyuyng that thynge, whyche I thoughte necessary, to declare myn affection, I doubt not, was no lasse estemed of your good lordshyp, thā afore is rehersed. Not withstandynge, whan I had eftesones pervsed that lyttell fortresse, and founde here and there some thynge that lacked, I toke my penne in the stede of a truelle, and a∣mended the faultes, and added somwhat more, where I thoughte it conuenyent: And yet per∣chance some thynges mought happen to escape, which were as nedeful to be corrected: myne at∣tendence on the parlyament, I being a member of the lower house, withdrawyng from me ley∣sure conuenyente, to fynde in this warke all the

faultes, whithe moughte be amended. Maye  nowe lyke your good lordshyppe to take in good parte, not eftesones the caslle, whiche I all re∣ye haue gyuen you, but my good wyll and dy∣lygente in amendynge or repayrynge the same, whiche is also prynted in a moche better letter, consyderynge that I no lasse do beholde you cō∣tynually with myne eye of remembrance, than they, whiche at dyner and supper do dayly loke on you, the cause I wyll not repete for suspition of flattery. Frendeshyp (as men saye) shulde be requyted, but yet craue I none other thyng, but onely equall beneuolence, and fayth without a∣ny suspition: wherevnto actuall demonstration is so moche requisite, that without if they both, seeme to be drowned, sens amonge vs that be mortall, thynges are moste iudged by outwarde tokens. And yet also in them men be sometyme deceyued, Hypocry hauynge in this worlde soo greate a preemynence: but in amitie is one rule, which seldom faileth. He that lyueth moderatly, doth loue alway faithfully: for ouer hym affec∣tions and passions haue lefte authoritie: and he that standeth iuste in the myddell, standeth most surely. Also in the worlde there is no more foly, than to these frendes of them, whiche do folow Fortune, lyke as swyne do folowe the mayden, whiche beareth on her heed a payle ful of mylke. And yf the payle falle, or happen to be emptye, they wyll folowe no lenger. The moderate per∣son, where bothe authoritie and vertue be in his frende equell, bycause that vertue was the on∣ly cause of his loue, that remaynyng, his mynde is in suche wyse thervnto ioyned, that although

authorytie happen to slyppe, yet that loue and vertue maye neuer be seuered. I haue spoken of frendeshyppe perchaunce more than nedeth, but who wylle not wysshe, (yf it moughte happen) to haue suche a treasour, as neyther the moun∣taynes of Ethiope, nor the ryuers of Inde do conteyne in them, to be therto compared. Cal∣limachus an auncient poete sayth, Puissance is dredefull: Rychesse is honourable: but loue for suretie is moste incomparable, who perceyueth herein more than your good lordshyppe, whyche besydes the aboundaunte knowledge of hysto∣ryes and naturall wytte, also concernynge this matter in your owne sondry experiences, I dare saye without flatterye, are equalle to any noble man lyuynge. Yet this my longe tale is not su∣perfluous, whyche is tolde not to teache you, but onely to renewe your lordeshyppes remem∣braunce, whyche is not alway present, specially where the brayne is choked with worldely mat∣ters of weyghtye importaunce. In suche as I am, hauynge lyttell and lyttell to doo, remem∣braunce standeth more at lybertie, and therfore we may more often thynke on that, whyche we haue bothe herde and sene, and in chesyng fren∣des, be the more circumspecte. But leste I shall make the name of frendshyppe edyouse, by of∣ten rehersalle, I nowe conclude, that I leaue this lyttelle warke a monumente of the longe contynewed affection by me borne towarde your lordeshyppe, and a perpetuall wytnesse, that I haue deserued soo moche of youre fauoure, as in mutuall frendshyppe is of rayson requy∣red; whyche maye be as easylye payed, as it

is graunted, yf in place, where it oughte to be shewed, ye do not forgette it. In the meane tyme I shall pray to God to adde to your good fortune and helth, contynuance with his grace and fauor wherein onely is most per∣fite suertye.
