



Right Worshipfull and right Worthy SENATORS;
SOme ignorant People imagining Logick to be no∣thing else but a kind of Sophistrie to deceiue the simple, haue not
 spared to cast aspersions vpon this noble Art, and also vpon the pub∣lick Schooles where it is taught; affirming that such as were sent thither did but learne to turne white into black, & black into white, to serve their owne purposes, and to make people beleeue what they list. I wish that such men would take the paines to reade over this Booke, or at least consider but the definition and nature of Logick here set downe in the very first lines of the same, and then I suppose they will easily perceiue that they haue but small reason to speake against the rule of reason. The best things may be abused; and so may Logick by a contentious caviling spirit: but the fault is not to be imputed to the thing, no more then drun∣kennesse to good Wine; but to the person, as good meates are corrup∣ted by a bad stomacke, or sweet
 oyle by a stinking vessell For Lo∣gick teacheth not to practice quirkes and deceits, but to dis∣cover and avoyde them; as the last lines of this booke doe shew. All Iudicious Authors both sa∣cred and prophane haue ever honoured this Art, and endow∣ed it with right noble Titles. They haue styled it the Art of Arts, the science of sciences,Dounha∣mi Orat: ad audito∣res. the learning of learnings, the chiefe of all knowledges, the instrument of instruments, the hand of Philoso∣phy, an Art sent from God, yea and said that God himselfe is , the best Logician: for indeed He is the best and truest Rule of all reason and vnderstanding. Which being that facultie that Logick laboureth to perfect, this Art is so much more excellent then all other Arts and Sciences, by how much the vnderstanding
 surpasseth other faculties and powers of soule and bodie. It is the mould and frame into the which all other Arts and Profes∣sions must be cast, and without which they are no arts. It frames it selfe and them, and trieth them all by the infallible Rules of Truth, Iustice, and Prudence, ter∣med by the Greekes , and . It is the liuely spring of invention, the tribunall of iudgement, and the best Art of memorie. And say that a man be of the soundest braine and best naturall parts that can be, yet he may be bettered by this Art of Logick. For Art per∣fects Nature. And indeed with∣out this helpe, nothing can be so wittily and readily invented, nor so truely and confidently affir∣med, nor so methodically and or∣derly disposed, nor so well and
 safely remembred. This is the onely Art which diving into the depth of mans vnderstanding, teacheth how to teach, and how to learne, and makes a man know that he knoweth; as the eye seeth that it doth see, by reflection vp∣on a looking Glasse.
Now considering that every man hath a speciall interest in the vse of naturall reason, why should any man envie another the sight and knowledge of this Art, which should direct it. The learned Author having long since published a very excellent Logick in Latin for the Schooles, hath notwithstanding thought it not amisse to giue his Coun∣trymen this other in their vulgar Language. I hope therefore that sheltring my selfe vnder the Shield of so judicious a Prece∣dent, I shall easily escape the
 darts of such as would carpe at this my Translation of it out of the French into English; seeing it may as well profit the English as the French. And howsoever our Country wanted not this Art al∣readie in English, yet the more Candles the better light. I will not heere enter vpon the com∣mendation of this learned man, or of his Worke: I should but lessen his worth by the meaness of my person and skill, and as it were light a Candle to the Sunne.
I had rather turn my speech vn∣to You, (worthy Senators,) vnto whom I haue emboldened my selfe to Dedicate these first fruits of my Studies, hūbly entreating your Worships to accept of this my poore labour, as a publicke testimony of my desire to bee thankefull vnto you all, for that
 it pleased your worthy Senate∣house to choose me out of your Grammer Free-Schoole, & to send me as your poore Scholar to Corpus Christi Colledge in Cam∣bridge in the yeare 1618. Thus craving pardon for my boldness, hoping your kinde acceptance, I shall still pray for your Worships long liues, and happie governe∣ment of this famous Citie, resting

