



MY LORD,
That which the hand is among Instruments, the same is Logick among other Arts and Sciences.
 For as the hand is a generall Instru∣ment that handleth all other instru∣ments: So Logick is a generall In∣strument, the knowledge whereof serveth to handle all other know∣ledges, and to make a skilfull vse of them. And as it is the propertie of Art to polish and perfect Nature: So it is the propertie of this Art to polish and direct naturall reason. For there is a certaine naturall Lo∣gick, which man vseth naturally, without any art; even the vnlear∣ned sort will sometimes make a Syl∣logisme vnawares. But Philosophie, having searched out all the secrets of naturall reason, hath obserued the causes of a good Discourse, and hath set downe rules to that purpose,
Wherein appeareth the excellen∣cy of this Art aboue the rest. For see∣ing that man is discerned from a beast by the vse of reason: other Arts and Sciences frame man as he is a
 Citizen, or a Magistrate, or a Law∣yer, or a Physician; but Logick fra∣meth man as he is man, and maketh him after a sort a more reasonable creature by the right vse of reason.
But this Art hath chanced to fall into bad hands, that haue robbed it of her naturall ornaments, and by a strange Metamorphosis haue turned it into a faggot of dry thornes, which pricketh on every side; and in stead of drawing the rules thereof from naturall reason, and fitting them for the vse of man; they haue entan∣gled it with Metaphysicall questi∣ons, which are like vnto Crabs, where there is much pickling, but little meat, and are for no vse, nei∣ther civill, nor religious.
This inveterate evill, which by custome is turned into nature, would require a skilfuller Physici∣an, and a quieter minde then mine is now, and a calmer season then
 this wherin we are. Notwithstan∣ding being cast vpon this place by the tempest, as a planke of the gene∣rall shipwracke, and brought to a sorrowfull rest, I haue bestowed cer∣taine houres vpon this Worke, and haue endevoured to giue a milder looke and countenance to this Art, plucking those thornes from it, which it had gotten in the Schooles; and cloathing it with a French ha∣bit, that it might no longer walke in France like a stranger. For these many Ages past it hath beene com∣monly taught in a most barbarous and thornie Latin, as if sweetnesse and elegancie could not stand toge∣ther with soliditie.
If the publicke receiue any bene∣fit out of this my labour, it shall be wholy beholding to my Lord the Duke your Father for it. Who ha∣ving received mee into his house, and given me a favourable enter∣tainment,
 with all kinde of respect and benefits, hath exhorted mee to vndertake this taske, and to teach you the Precepts thereof; wherein I haue taken a singular delight. For, besides that it was a great ho∣nour to mee to doe you any service, it hath also given mee the occasion to try your wit; which I haue ob∣serued to be endowed with a strong imagination, and a solide iudge∣ment, and which is not discouraged through difficulties: and by a lau∣dable curiositie will not be satisfied but with reason, and where the same is not evident enough, moo∣veth doubts of it selfe. Whence it is easie to conceiue how great the dex∣teritie of your wit will be, when time and necessitie shall giue you occasion to make vse of it in things of a higher and more important na∣ture.

The feare of God being ioyned to this so quick and iudicious a spirit, which hath planted in your heart a hatred of vice, and mooved it with a holy ambition, to consecrate your life to the service of God, what may wee not hope of such a disposition, which God hath so greaty favou∣red? especially considering that you are brought vp in a familie, whence all bad examples, and all idle words are banished, and where the ser∣vice of God is carefully maintained: and haue before your eyes the exam∣ple of my Lord your Father, who a∣mong Princes is a notable patterne of wisedome, of great experience, of singular vnderstanding, and of wise governement: whose courage rouseth it selfe against adversitie, and whose minde is not daunted through affliction. To whom na∣ture hath given more than others
 haue gotten by studie and indu∣strie, having a naturall facilitie to compasse that, which others by long meditation cannot attaine vnto. Whose words are to you as daiy les∣sons, and his wise actions as a con∣tinuall patterne.
He it is from whom you haue re∣ceived, that Learning is a goodly ornament to a Prince. Because he that guides others must haue the clearer sight; and that hee must haue most knowledge, that hath most imployment. There being no∣thing more vnbeseeming a Prince, then, to bee inferiour to the most part of his Subiects in vnderstan∣ding and good knowledge, and to owe all the preferment he hath to his birth, and nothing to his ver∣tue; and who to iudge aright of things, must search into another mans braine for that which hee
 should finde in his owne. This happeneth vnto such Princes as haue spent all their younger yeares in learning how to manage horses, rather then to governe the mindes of men, who are creatures a thou∣sand times more vnruly and vn∣tamed. Whose outword behaviour is taught, whilest their soules are left vntaught: who imploy moneths and yeares in hunting after wilde beasts, whilest they themselues are caught by domesticall beasts, that is to say, by flatterers, that intan∣gle them in vices. Who are taught to liue, as if their Subiects were made for them, whereas they are made for the good of their Subiects; and to remember that they are Princes, but not to call to minde, that they are men subiect to the same infirmities: and that ha∣ving received of God more graces
 then others, they haue the greater account to giue vp vnto him; and that being the image of God vpon earth, they ought to striue to bee like vnto him, not onely in Iu∣stice, clemencie, liberalitie, and fore-sight; but chiefly in that GOD raigneth over his Subiects, not for his owne good, but for theirs.
Now when I speake of Learning, I doe not meane a laborious know∣ledge, busying it selfe about words or swelling Discourses, or about heaping vp of much Latin. But I am of opinion that the true lear∣ning of a Prince consisteth in the knowledge of God, and of the world, and of himselfe, and of the affaires of his owne Estate and of his neigh∣bours; and to be a Scholar of the dead, I meane, to search in Histo∣ries the examples of wisedome;
 and to learne the trade of a Prince, which is the hardest of all. Because it is a hard matter to walke steadi∣ly vpon the top of a very high place, the braine of him easily turning that is very high mounted. And also because the actions of Princes are most controuled, and their life most crossed, and their faults most exposed to view, and that they authorize vices by their exam∣ple.
These instructions, my Lord, are familiar vnto you, and you want no domesticall helps. Notwithstanding I haue thought that you would not take it amisse, if I endevoured to contribute somewhat thereunto: and that by this my labour, as by a small evidence, I should testifie my ac∣knowledgment of the honour which I haue receiued of my Lord your Father, and how earnestly I pray
 vnto GOD for the prosperitie of your most illustrious house, and more particularly for your selfe, my Lord, as being

