



Reuerend and Right Worshipfull,
HAuing within these few daies lighted vpon this booke, by the meanes of a familiar friend of mine, who lately had receiued it out of France, and considering the happy subiect and methodicall composure thereof, I thought it would not be amisse (nay rather a very profitable worke for the Church, at least for the bringing home of such, of whom there is yet good hope they may be reclai∣med) if I did set by some few of these vacation

houres for the translating thereof. And I was the rather induced thereunto, by reason of a more particular charge, which not long since it pleased you to lay vpon me, to the perfor∣ming whereof this might (with Gods helpe) not a little auaile. The points perhaps that are handled in this Treatise, or at least most of them, haue beene formerly and often discus∣sed to the full by others, but yet very seldome (would to God it happened more often) by way of recantation or reclaiming: and if in that manner, as of late we haue had an exam∣ple thereof, The aduice of a sonne, &c. printed at Ox∣ford, 1616. and our Presse is yet hot with it, (I would our affections were so also) yet most seldome by men of my Authors coat, by such I meane who are so farre gone, and sunke so deepe into the whirle-poole of their supersti∣tions, that they haue with a neerer bond, and as it were an apprentiship for terme of life, bound themselues neuer to depart, I will not say, from their religion (for that is common to them with others) but from their particular order and quintessence as it were of religion; it being from thence that such only (and no others, either of their Clergie or Laitie) are called , and by way of eminencie, re∣ligious.

Hauing thus shewed the profit which (I trust) may come from this my small ende∣uour, or rather from the Authors owne la∣bours & trauels (his indeed being as the very waters of life, the only tasting whereof is salvi∣ficall, and mine but the channell to conuey them) it remaines now that I recommend this my labour to your patronage, from whom I first receiued the occasion of taking it in hand. I will not now stand vpon Apologies (as the manner of most is) either for my selfe or the booke. The booke (I am sure) needs none; and for my selfe, I trust, I haue met with a Pa∣tron that wil reade me without any Apologie. If any shall thinke I haue beene too busie herein, it being a subiect for the which I am scarce ripe; let him know thus much, that what I haue done, may be the worke, nay ought of dutie so to be, I say not, of euery Di∣uine, (Quanquam ô, would to God euery such would put to their helping hands) but of euery one that is onely brought vp in the bare schoole of Christianitie. Thus committing my selfe and these my labours to your good ac∣ceptance, I pray to the Almighty God, that he will continue and confirme in his Church

those that to all appearance are in already, with the ninety and nine of that good Shep∣heard in the Gospell, and that it will please him, with the same Shepheard who brought home his one sheepe, daily to bring home and adde vnto his true Church, such as either by others seducing haue straied from, or out of forced ignorance neuer could finde the way to his fold. Amen.
From my Study in Christ-Church, Oxford this 31. of Iuly. 1616.
