



THe booke of holy Scriptures (Right reuerēd father in God) is as the princely Prophet Da∣uid calleth it, Alanterne to our Psal. 119. feete, and a light vnto our pathes; and as the Apostle Peter ter∣meth it, it is As a candle shining 2. Pet. 1. 19. in an obscure place, which so il∣luminateth the eyes of our mindes, through the in∣ward operation of Gods Spirit, that we are thereby enabled in this vale of darkenesse to make choice of the narrow path of righteousnes, which conducteth vs to Gods kingdome, and to decline from the by∣waies of sinne and error, which leade to destruction: yea it is a glorious and bright shining sunne, which (as it is said of Christ the author of this word) doth giue light vnto them that sit in darknesse and in the sha∣dow Matth. 4. 2. Luk. 1. 79. of death, guiding their feete into the way of peace. But
 withall it is a certaine truth, that this heauenly light is in some places more resplendent, in others more obscure; this candle sometimes shineth so clearely, that it giueth light to the whole houshold, and some∣times it burneth so dimly, that those only discerne it, who haue better insight, & approch neerer vnto it by diligent studie and meditation. This glorious sun in some places shineth clearely, and euidently shew∣eth it selfe by his owne light; but otherwhiles it is shadowed with the clouds of obscuritie, and the fog∣gie 2. Pet. 3. 16. mistes of our ignorance, interposing betweene it and vs, doe hide it from our sight. The which (no doubt) the holy Ghost hath purposely affected, that neither the great easinesse of holy writ might cause in any idle neglect, nor yet the inextricable difficultie might discourage any from reading of it; that neither the simple plainnesse thereof might work in the wise and learned cause of comtempt, seeing in many pla∣ces they might haue a fit subiect, whereupon they might exercise their greatest learning and deepest iudgement; nor the obscure profoundnes of it might make the simple despaire of receiuing any fruit by their studies and labours, seeing a great part therof is so plaine and easie, that it is within the compasse of a childs capacitie. And finally, as hee hath prouided milke for babes, so also stronger meate for those who are of riper age, that none who are inuited to this heauenly banquet might go away with emptie sto∣mackes for want of conuenient food, whereby they should be nourished. Neuerthelesse the Popish crew (who because their works are euill, loue the darknes of ignorance better then the light of Gods truth)
 take occasion hereupon to declaime against the ob∣scuritie of the Scriptures; and to disswade all the common people from reading of them; and lest the sight of this heauenly food should sharpen their hun∣grie appetite, & work in them a desire to feed vpō it, they carefully locke it frō thē, ouer whom they haue any authoritie, in the darke closet of an vnknowne tongue, that so being out of sight, it may also be out of mind; and in stead hereof they feede them with their lying Legends, and with the poysonous hem∣locke of their owne traditions: pretending that out of their great care, they keepe the Scriptures from them, lest they should peruert them to their destru∣ction, and abuse them in their ignorance vnto here∣sies and errors. Wherein, what do they else, but like cruell nurses, keepe from Gods children the milke of his word, whereby they should bee nourished, for feare lest any thereof should droppe vpon their clothes? What doe they else, but like hard hearted stewards, depriue Gods familie of their allowance, and so starue them to auoide surfeting? And what doe they by this their either foolish or malicious course, but quite extinguish the light of Gods truth, because it doth not shine in all places with like clearenesse? But wee who professe our selues chil∣dren of the light, and true disciples of the schoole of Christ, must be otherwise affected, continually pray∣ing, that though there be nothing but palpable dark∣nesse in all the dominions of the Romish Pharaoh, yet this light may still shine in our Goshen, as long as the Sunne is in the firmament, and neuer be extin∣guished. And seeing our heauenly school-master, in
 his abundant mercie giueth vnto vs this booke of di∣uine knowledge, which alone is sufficient to make vs wise vnto saluation, let vs with the Prophet Dauid, take our chiefe delight in this holy learning, medita∣ting therein day and night: and when wee finde our lesson cleare to our vnderstandings, let vs labour to imprint it in our memories, by the holy vse and pra∣ctise which we make of it in our liues and conuersa∣tions: where it is obscure and difficult, let vs ende∣uour to informe our iudgements in the true meaning thereof, by diligent studie and meditation, compa∣ring one Scripture with another, and clearing those places which are hard and darke, by others which are more easie and perspicuous. Neither doth this hea∣uenly sunne, when it is couered with clouds of ob∣scuritie, need any earthly meanes to cleare & restore it to his brightnes; seeing his owne heate and light is sufficient to dispell these foggie mists, and the winde of Gods Spirit so driueth these darke clouds of igno∣rance from before the eie of our vnderstanding, that we shal need no other helpe for our enlightning. But 1. Ioh. 2. 20. 27. as all those who are schollers in Christs schoole, ought to spend their time in these holy exercises; so especially the Ministers of the Gospell, who being placed (as it were) in the highest forme, are enioyned by God, not only to learne themselues the lesson of his holy and hidden mysteries, but also to reade a le∣cture Matth. 2. 7. of them, to those who are in inferiour places, that they likewise may bee inlightned in the know∣ledge of Gods truth. The consideration wherof hath moued me, whom the Lord hath called to this fun∣ction, though far vnworthie (I ingenuously confesse)
 of such high aduancement, to vndertake in consci∣ence of my calling, the expounding of a part of these holy Scriptures, namely, the Prophesie of Hosea: which as it giueth place to none of the writings of the other Prophets in worth and excellencie; so in regard of the abstruse depth, and obscure difficultie therof, it doth as much as any other stand in need of explanation. In handling whereof I haue chiefely endeuoured to cleare the text from all obscuritie; and hauing laid open and discouered the hidden treasures therein contained, to communicate and ap∣plie them to the inriching of all those, who are wil∣ling to receiue them by their reading and meditati∣on. The which my labours I desired should come forth into publike view vnder your Lordships patro∣nage and protection, in respect of that great loue which you haue shewed to learning and religion, e∣uen from your tender youth. For howsoeuer you were descended of a noble house, and from parents of great worth and worship, yet you made choice of a schollers life, and of the profession of a Minister of the Gospell; which howsoeuer it is in it selfe a calling most honorable, and best replenished with happie contentment; yet is it so contemned and vnder va∣lued by the world & worldly men, that many, much your inferiours, both in birth and meanes, do thinke this profession a great disparagement to their state and credit. The which also would haue discouraged you from entring into this calling, had you not with eyes spiritually illightned, beheld the inward dignitie and glorie thereof, through the ragged
 vaile of worldly contempt. And as your loue to learning moued you to enter into this profession, so the same loue incited you to take such extraordi∣nary paines in your studies, that I may truely say vp∣on mine owne knowledge (being a poore member of that Colledge whereof you were once a chiefe ornament) that scarce any of the poorest schollers (who had no other meanes but learning to aduance either state or credit) did goe before you in vnweari∣ed paines and industrious labour. The which your diligent studies the Lord so prospered with his bles∣sing, that the plentifull haruest answered and sur∣mounted the greatest expectation which could bee had of such an hopefull seede time; insomuch that in the iudgement of the most iudicious Vniuersity, you were thought fit for the greatest honour, which it could yeeld vnto any, before the ordinary time, which you preuented not onely by noblenesse of birth, but also through sufficiencie and desert: and since, haue been thought the meetest by our So∣ueraigne King, who is best able to iudge of those gifts wherein himselfe excelleth, to bee his assistant in his most learned studies; and after manifold expe∣rience of your great sufficiencie, to be aduanced vn∣to one of the chiefe preferments which our land affordeth to those, whose gifts are of greatest emi∣nency; whereby you, who haue alwaies been a louer of learning, are now enabled to be a chiefe patrone of the learned. Of all which I now put you in minde, not in base flatterie, which the searcher of hearts knoweth my soule detesteth, nor to angle your affe∣ction
 by casting before you the bait of your owne praises; but rather to admonish you of your dutie towards God, which worldly prosperitie causeth vs too often to forget; namely, that with your whole endeuour you seeke to honour him, who hath thus highly honoured you; and to imploy those rich talents of learning, authoritie, honour and fauour with your Soueraigne, which your great master hath bestowed on you, to the aduancement of Gods glorie, and the good of his Church, ouer a part whereof you are now made a steward and ouer∣seer. Otherwise, howsoeuer these gifts may adorne you in this life, in the eyes of worldly men, yet they will not profit you in the life to come, but rather the greatnesse of your receits will inlarge the bill of your accounts, in that great and last audit, which you must make in the presence of God and his holy Angels. More especially, I entreate your Lordship to labour, that in all places where you haue any authoritie and iurisdiction, God may be glorified in the propagation of his truth, and in the diligent preaching of his Gospell, which is the spirituall sword and scepter of his kingdome, whereby hee raigneth and ruleth in the hearts of men; and to this end, that as much as in you lieth, you will en∣deauour to plant vnder you a godly, learned and faithfull ministerie, who may instruct the people committed to their charge, in the true religion of Iesus Christ; and to countenance and patronize them being placed, against wicked Atheists, pro∣phane worldlings, and idolatrous Papists; that so
 vnder the shade of your protection, they may com∣fortablie persist in the painfull worke of their mini∣strie, and be sheltered from the scorching furie of all opposers. So shal the Lord inlarge his mercies more and more towards you, perpetuate vnto you an honorable name and memorie amongst his faithfull seruants in this life present, and crowne you with endlesse glorie and immortalitie amongst his holy Saints in the life to come.

