



Worthy Sir,
THE unhappy Contentions▪ which have now broken the Church into so many Fa∣ctions, began first about Ceremonies. A slight quar∣rel in outward Appearance. But the Apostle hath told us, that a little fire kindleth a great quantity of Fuell.
 Jam. 3. 5. And this Age hath found it too true. The same spirit of Disobe∣dience, which began at these dry leaves, or Chips of Discipline, as they seemed unto most at the first, invading by Degrees the solide Timber, and setting the whole wood in a flame. Great Differences have arose about these small matters. And we have at length almost lost the Substance of Religion, through our eager and unseasonable contending a∣bout the Circumstantialls. The Non-Conformists indeed, with much confidence and Clamour, lay the Blame of these Divisions upon the Rigour of their Supe∣riours, in requiring an exact obedi∣ence to the Ceremonies, and pressing too hard upon tender Consciences. I could heartily wish, that some of Them who pretend so much to this Tenderness, and are so sensible of the least Burden bound by the Hand of Authority, had Consciences of a more even Temper, and a more constant Size▪ But it is strange to me, to see them contract and dilate their Consciences at pleasure,
 according to the Difference of Objects, (like the Pharisees of old, who strained at Gnats, and swallowed Camels) at the same time scrupling at small Duties, and swallowing down great Sins; and making disobedience to Mans lawes, one of the best Characters of Gods Servants, as if the fifth Commandement were abro∣gated among the Jewish Ceremonies; and Christian liberty consisted in oppo∣sing Those whom Christ hath set over us. Would to God they would at length lay aside their Prejudices and Passions, and shew themselves as zealous for the Peace of the Church, as they have been for main∣taining of Parties. Which I hope they will do, when they consider seriously with themselves,
First, that the smaller the Ceremony is, which they contend about, in opposition to lawfull Authority, the Disobedience is the greater, because in a matter of so easy Per∣formance; and consequently, the Schisme is more Groundlesse, and the offender more Guilty.
Secondly, that these unhappy Con∣tentions
 among the Guides of Religion, whether True or pretended ones, have already produced most sad effects a∣mong the People; whilst some have been misled into the grossest errours, and others have thought themselves the onely Christians, by confederating in a Schisme: some, distracted amongst the multiplici∣ty of opinions, and walking uncertainly after contrary calls; others amazed, and at a stand; and too many, willing to perswade themselves, that Religion it selfe is scarce worth the seeking, or con∣tending for.
Thirdly, that the experience of these late years hath sufficiently taught us, there's no hope of unity in the Church, without Ʋniformity in the Service of God, and the Rituals of our Religion. Severall Churches indeed, who are Independent of each other, (as the States are wherein they are seated, being ruled by different Lawes and Governours) have, and may vary in Ceremonialls, without breach of Peace. But to suffer every private Person to follow his
 own fancy in matters of Religion, or the Dictates of some idolized Teacher, whom he hath chosen for his spirituall Guide, in opposition to the Government of the Church and State, wherein he lives, is the ready way to bring in an Infinity of Schismes, and confound all.
A small Gap, or two, in a Hedge seems inconsiderable at frst; and the thin, tender Rind of an Apple seems as inconsiderable a Fence to the Fruit which it incloseth: yet frequent experience in∣structeth us, that the neglect of the one hath made way, both for the Cattle within to stray forth, and loose Themselves, and perish in their wandrings; and for stran∣ger Cattle, to breake in, and devoure the Field. And the paring away of some small Portion of the other, hath caused the whole Fruit, first to discolour, and then to putrify. Such an Hedge, such a Rinde, is the Order and Discipline of the Church, which consists in Ceremo∣nies, and externall observances; the least breach wherein, though not con∣siderable at the first making, yet waxeth
 larger by insensible Degrees, and at length eats out the very Substance of Reli∣gion; as the late Times have evidenced to our Smart and Shame.
Now to close up these Differences in the matter of Ceremonies, which first occasioned them, I humbly conceive it the most faire and rationall way (seeing that holy Scripture saith little, or no∣thing of Them in particular) to make an impartiall search into the Records of Antiquity, and the Judgement of those neighbouring Churches of ours in the West, which generally passe amongst us under the Title of Protestant, or Refor∣med. For none of the contending parties, who pretend to any Christian Modesty or Ingenuity, will, I presume, disavow either of These, to both which they make an open claime. Seeing They pretend all to follow primitive patterns, and the example of those Neighbour Churches which have purged themselves from the Su∣perstitions, and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. Yea they frequently make the pretended Conformity to
 These, a specious plea fortheir own Non-Conformity to the Lawes and Orders of their Mother Church. Now it is the Designe of this small Treatise, to demon∣strate the Consonancy of the Church of Englands Judgement and Practice unto Both these, in the Gesture of kneeling at the Holy Eucharist. A Gesture which hath been much scrupled at by some, and absolutely cryed down by others, as Superstitious, if not Idolatrous; as quite contrary to the nature of the Sa∣cramentall Supper, which it attends, and to the Practice of our Saviour, and his Apostles at the first institution. Ʋpon what Grounds these Clamours have been raised, whether true or mistaken, let the indifferent Reader Judge, upon the Survey of these Papers; wherein I have taken some Paines, to track the foot∣steps of the Churches Practice in all Ages and Places, as farre as the light of History, and my slender Reading could discover. Withall, I have en∣deavoured, to cleare the Mistakes of Those, who have so eagerly set them∣selves
 against kneeling, whilst they plea∣ded for sitting at the receiving of this Sa∣crament.
And I have made choice of This, a∣mong some other Ceremonies that are questioned, because it is of a more generall Concernment. The Surplice, and Crosse in Baptisme, with some o∣tbers that are stumbled at, concerne the Clergy alone, who are injoyned to use them in their Ministry. But as for knee∣ling at the Sacrament, it concernes all alike, the People as well as the Priest, who are Both commanded to use it, and in case of Non-Conformity debar themselves of the many and great Advan∣tages of so Blessed a Sacrament, and so exclude themselves from the Com∣munion of the Church, in the highest Mystery of our Religion. Now if this small Discourse prove so happy, through Gods Blessing, to scatter the Prejudices of some, and confirme the waverings of others, and so become a meanes of contributing ought towards the Peace of the Church, I have my much wisht
 for end; and shall have just cause of joyning my Thanks and Prayses, with Theirs who receive any Benefit there∣by, unto the great God of Truth and Peace.
As to the choice of the Person, to whose Protection I have made bold to recommend so inconsiderable a Treatise; the very Title in the Front of this E∣pistle will, I hope, either defend or excuse me to the World, though the Discourse it selfe be unworthy of his Acceptance. For the very name of Patron is a sufficient Evidence of my Obligations, and may justly claime whatsoever I can do in this kind, as a Testimoniall of my Grati∣tude; which I must shew as I can, when I cannot as I would. And your Noble∣nesse, I well know, looketh not so much at the Greatness of the Gift, as the good will of the Giver. Who, if God please to grant him life and leisure answerable to his Desires, will be ready to second this with some farther proofs of his ob∣servance. But this is not all. Your known zeale for maintaining the good Orders
 of the Church, with your exemplary Re∣verence at the publick Service, and par∣ticularly, at this holy Sacrament; be∣sides that Influence which your Suffrage and Authority had, in reviving the Aun∣cient Law for the Gesture of kneeling thereat, might justly challenge this Dedica∣tion at my hands, though I had no other Reason or Relation.
I have nothing more to adde, but what I am bound vpon all good occasions to remember; my hearty prayers for a Bles∣sing upon Your Selfe, your Noble Lady, and all the Branches of your Ancient Family. And more especially, at this Present, that God would so prosper your Counsels and endeavours for the Publick Peace, as we may once more Wor∣ship God in the beauty of Holiness, glori∣fying Him with one Minde and one Mouth, and serving Him with that Edification, that Order and Decency, which he hath commended unto us by the great Apostle of the Gentiles; that so you may prove an eminent Instrument of Glorifying God in this world, and as eminent an Object
 of his Glorification in the world to come. Which is the Cordiall and Constant Prayer of,
Worthy Sir,

