



SIR,
THese Papers are ambitious of accompany∣ing those against Popery into your High∣ness presence, for the tender of their ser∣vice, and that upon the same account. The Controversies here decided, are those that have had a hand in most of the great transactions that of late years have here past; and that still have a hand in the differences that hinder our desired peace. I

observe that the Nation generally rejoyceth in your peaceable entrance upon the Government. And are af∣fected with indignation, if they hear but any rumors that troublesom persons would disturb their hopes. And many are perswaded that you have been strangely kept, from participating in any of our late bloody contenti∣ons, that God might make you an Healer of our breaches, and imploy you in that Templework, which David himself might not be honoured with, though it was in his mind, because he had shed blood abundantly, and made great wars, 1 Chron. 22.7, 8. I perceive also that some settlement of Church-affairs will be expected from you by the most. And therefore it concerneth all our welfare that you be well acquainted with the state of those differences, about which all will expect your judgement. For my own part I think not that mat∣ters are half so far out of order in the Churches, as most discontented men imagine: But yet I know there is much to be mended, wherein both God and most good men expect you should contribute a considerable part. Some think there is no settlement in the Church, till they are in the saddle, and all their Brethren are become their servants, and do them obeysance. And alas, we have those that take it for no settlement, till they have the sword in their own hands, or have engaged you to use it at their discretion, and may again fill the Prisons or other Lands, with their Brethren that are far better then themselves▪ Those I mean that in their writings so glory that their predecessors hang'd the Puritans, and lament that of late they were but silenced, as being a less effectuall means. Some would have no other settle∣ment then we have, or else would have Licentiousness settled by a Law, and have unlimited Liberty in Religion. Doubtless these are conscious what it is that they have

need of: If Heathens, Infidels and Papists be but ex∣cepted out of the Toleration, it displeaseth them: And we can easily conjecture why. If we grant them all the Liberty of their consciences (that is, of their mis-belief, because, alas, we cannot cure it) it satisfieth them not, unless they may have also Liberty of tongue and Pra∣ctise. When I have heard and read the Reasonings of some of them against the Immortality of the soul, and the Christian Religion it self, I have wondered why they should take it for such a point of Liberty, to have leave to draw others to their opinion, when they seem to think that mens Happiness or Misery is no more concerned in it. These are the men that tell the world that Magistrates have nothing to do with Religion, but only with our Peace and Bodily welfare, contrary to the fullest Testimony of the Scriptures: Which is but to perswade men to esteem you as the dirt of the earth, and to value the Ministry above the Magistracy, as much as the Soul is better then the Body, and as Heaven is better then this dunghill-world. And for this odious doctrine, they have no stronger reason, then because that Heathen Princes are uncapable of deciding matters about Religion. As if mens wilfull and wicked indis∣position would change the office, and disoblige both them and those that are guilty of no such unfitness, from the obligations laid upon them by the Lord: They may as wisely say that a sober Physitian is ob∣liged to no more then a drunken one can perform; or that a seeing man may do no more then the blind can do: Or that a Learned Prince may not meddle with Learning, because an unlearned Prince is unfit for it. But any man that hath read Bellarmine, Parsons, Gretser, or such like Jesuites, may know the Fathers of this do∣ctrine: Nothing more familiar with them, then that

Princes have nothing to do but for our Bodies, and the Common Peace: but forsooth it is the Pope that must Rule all about our Souls. The Libertines know whose cause they plead. But verily men that re∣gard the Interest of Christ and their salvation, would set light by Princes, if they believed them to be such terrestriall animals as Papists and Libertines would make them.
Some also there be, that would have a settlement up∣on too rigorous terms, though they would not have it executed with cruelty. Most men would fain have their own opinions prevail, and too many place too much of their Religion in censuring as Heterodox all that differ from them, and think it an evidence of their God∣liness that they are Uncharitable; and seeing many minds and waies, they think that punishment must heal them all: Not that they would be driven to their Brethren, but all their Brethren must be driven unto them.
In the midst of all these cross expectations, if you will consult with, and obey the Lord, I dare boldly tell you, it is past all doubt, that you must avoid extreams, and keep as tenderly the golden mean, in this point, as in any that concerns you. If you give Liberty to All that is called Religion, you will soon be judged of no Religion, and loved accordingly. If you so far close with any Party of them that walk in the faith of Christ, and the fear of God, as to deal rigorously with the rest, you will be hated by them as a Persecutor. And if men be oppressed in that which they value above their lives, it will tempt them to neglect their lives for their relief. If you joyn with no Church in the Lords Supper and other holy Communion, lest you seem to espouse the party that you joyn with, you will by most be judged to

be carnally wise, self-seeking and irreligious, or one that is yet to seek for your Religion. If you restrain all that are against the great undoubted Truths of Christ, from infecting others, and own all that hold the Necessary Truths in Godliness and Charity, you will please both God, and most good men. And if you hold your per∣sonall Communion with those that are of your own judgement in lesser differences, this will not lose you the affections of the godly (though of a few factious persons it may) as long as you are a tender Father to them all, though you Communicate but with some. The Godly Emperours that supprest the Arrians and many Heresies, maintained the Novatians in the Liber∣ty of their Churches, and were beloved both by the Novatians and the Orohodox. But if you cou be the happy instrument of taking away the Divisions of the Godly, that there might be no such thing as Parties or Separations known among them (though diversity of opinions there will be) (and if you could give all the Ministers of the Nation a pattern of such union of the tolerable dissenting parties in your own Pastors, with whom you shall Communicate) this would be the way to lift you highest in the Esteem and Love of all your people, and make them see that you were appointed of God to be a Healer and Restorer; and to glory in you, and bless God for you as the instrument of our chiefest peace. And O what a precedent and preparative it would be, for the Healing of all the Protestant Chur∣ches through the world! And certainly your Highness hath a fair opportunity for this happy work▪ You enter in a season when we are tired with contention, and sen∣sible of our loss and danger, and tenderer then former∣ly of one another, and the most angry parties are much asswaged, and there is not so much reproach and bitter∣ness

among the Godly, as lately there hath been. A Spirit of Peace and Healing is lately risen in the hearts of many thousands in the Land, and Ministers that dif∣fered, do lovingly associate, and most do feel the smart of our Divisions, and are so prepared for a perfecter closure, that they wait but for some Leading hand. I am certain that there are Healing Principles before us, and a temperament is obvious to judicious charitable men, upon which we might accord. And, though some are too rough to lie in any building, yet moderate men are to be found of every party, that deserveth your en∣couragement, whom you may use as a precedent to the rest, and instruments to promote this work. It is you that have those great advantages that can facilitate that which to others were impossible: and from you it is ex∣pected. In this Book, and one of Confirmation, which I lately published, I confidently affirm, is contained much of that Reforming, Reconciling Truth which must heal us if ever we be healed. And though the stu∣dy of such matters require much time, yet seeing God commandeth Princes that the Book of his Law depart not out of their mouthes, but that they meditate in it day and night, that they may do according to it, Iosh. 1.8. I may suppose that they will be willing also to meditate on such Books as help them to understand it. I should have been as ready as another to censure such an address as this, as guilty of presumptuous boldness, but that I con∣sider what is the work of my Calling, and what it is to be faithfull to the Eternall God, and am conscious of fidelity to your Highness in my boldness, and know that these are necessary Truths, and that to the Coun∣sellors of Peace is joy, Prov. 12.20. and have no interest in this world that I regard, in comparison of the Churches happiness. My earnest Prayers for your

Highness shall be, that your own soul being first sub∣jected and devoted wholly unto God, you may Rule us as one that is Ruled by him, and never know any Inte∣rest but his, and that which is subservient to him, and may escape that stumbling stone, on which the Princes of the earth do commonly dash themselves in pieces, even by espousing an Interest contrary to Christs, and so growing jealous of his holy waies, and falling out with them: and that God would endue your Highness with that heavenly Wisdom, that is first Pure, and then Peaceable, Jam. 3.17. and you may escape the flatter∣ing suggestions of the Wisdom of the flesh, and serious Piety may be the first part of your Policy, that so the Eternall God may be engaged in the Protection of your Dominions and You: That you may alwaies remem∣ber, that you are Christs and your Peoples, and not your Own: and that the diligent promoting of GOD∣LYNESS and CONCORD may be the stu∣dy and resolved work of your Life. This is the way, and only this, (let flesh and blood say what it will) to make you truly Great and Happy. God is the Center and Common Interest of all his servants. Keep close to him, and they will all keep close to you. There is no other Common Interest, nor any thing that the Godly do so highly value. If they see that it is indeed for God, they can bear any thing, or do any thing; for they are wholly devoted to him alone. The more of God ap∣peareth on you, and the more you promote his Interest in the world, the highlyer will you be advanced, and the dearer will you be to all that Love him. And even with the ungodly multitude, that Piety is honoured in Prin∣ces, that is despised in their neighbours; and the hand of God is plainly demonstrated in their surviving Ho∣nour; the names of Pious Princes being Great, when

the Greatest leave a name that is vile, even in the mouthes of common worldly men, who are ready to keep a Holy-day for a Saint when he is dead, though they hate or will not imitate the living. Your Zeal for God will kindle in your subjects a Zeal for you. The moe your Life and Government is Divine, the more Divine will you appear, and therefore the more Ami∣able and Honourable to the Good, and Reverend to the evil. Parliaments will Love and Honour you, and ab∣hor the motions that tend to a division, or your just dis∣pleasure. Ministers will heartily Pray for you, and Praise the Lord for his mercies by you, and teach all the people to Love, and Honour, and Obey you. The people will rejoyce in you; and you will be Loved or Feared of all: Such happiness attendeth serious Piety, when impiety, selfishness, and neglect of Christ is the shame and ruine of Prince and People. I crave your Highness pardon of this boldness, and your favourable acceptance of the tendered service of

