



My Honoured Lord,
AFter so many Years Labours in explaining and inculcating the Christian Religion, I doubt the true Notion of it is still unknown (I am sure the Power of it is) to the common sort
 of Christians: Some confine it to this Party, and others to that; and many place it in a Theory of Doctrines never reduc'd into practice, unless it be in starcht Hypocrisie, in affected Tones, extemporary Effusions, enthusiastick In∣spirations, loud Prayers, and long Preach∣ings; and the running after such Men, and having their Persons in Admiration, is that which these Men take to be Religion. And most make such a noise about Reli∣gion, which is the Means, that they have no regard to that which is the End. Mean while there is one thing agreed to by all, of what Sect or Faction soever, as necessary, though most of all neglected, and that is Morality. And though this Word is vulgarly taken to signifie nothing but a kind of Heathen Honesty; yet I shall not fear to say, That it is the Essential Part of that which we call Religion, and the End of all our Writings and Disputes
 about it. For the Christian acceptation of the Word Morality is nothing else, but the Conformity of our Manners to the Rules of Jesus, and living as Christians are taught to do by the Principles of their Religion. And this respects a Threefold Object, God, our Neighbour, and our Selves. To God we owe Devotion, and the highest Fear, Love, &c. To Man an universal Love and Charity: and to our Selves Temperance and Sobriety. And this was the Summ of Practical Religion in the Old Testament (as appears by Mi∣cah 6. 8.) and in the New, as St. Paul will inform us, Tit. 2. 12. These were the Duties taught by God to the Gen∣tiles under the Law of Nature, and to the Jews under the Mosaick Dispensation; and afterwards refin'd, exalted, and spi∣ritualized by our Blessed Lord, and im∣posed upon his Disciples in all Ages under the Christian. These are absolutely neces∣sary
 for every Christian Man; and what∣soever Allowances will be granted to our Weakness and Blindness, in the other World (which will be Answerable to God's infinite Goodness); yet I am sure, there will be none for our impenitent Immoralities.
This may plead my Excuse for making Morality my subject, and then for that par∣ticular part of it which consists in governing a Man's self, I need premise nothing to what you will find in the following Papers; but that it is the Instrument of all the rest, without which they cannot be exerci∣sed, and which therefore ought to be first learned. It virtually, at least, contains all, or most Morality in it; and, if it were well practised, in all its Parts and Branches, it would soon abate the Spirit of Pride, Bitterness, and Malice which rages in the World; and teach Men, Love, Kindness, Sweetness of Conversation, Meekness, and Humility.
 It would make Men happy in themselves, and happy in one another.
Whilst others therefore (My Lord) have been fiercely disputing and wrang∣ling about the Government of the Nation, the Humble Author hereof, sitting un∣der Your Shadow in peace, thought it his greater Concern to turn his Thoughts inward, and study the Government of of himself; whose Meditations, from a very small beginning, sent to his Friend, have extended themselves to the Di∣mensions You here find them in; and, wrapt up in these Papers, are laid at Your Lordship's Feet, not so much to inform your Understanding, as to beg Your Pro∣tection.
My Lord, the Authour is sensible, and the World must confess, That You want not these Instructions. God hath given You and Your vertuous and happy Consort (the true Partner of Your Joys and Griefs) the victory
 over Your Passions and Appetites; and having exercised You Both in an unheard of Affliction, hath now return'd in Mercy, and hath more than built up Your Breaches. All which hath (I doubt not) taught You to look upward to God in all his Dispensa∣tions, to look inward and govern Your Selves, and to look downward and de∣spise the World, keeping Your Self un∣spotted from its Vices.
Though therefore these Papers should be of no use to You, yet if You shall honour them so far as to place them in Your Libra∣ry among the Learned, and shall commend them to the Perusal of my Young Lord, and the rest of Your Children when they come to Years of discretion, and are fit to entertain such Thoughts as these, the Authour shall have his End in this Dedi∣cation.

May Your Lordship's Issue be numerous, and grow up like Olive-Plants round a∣bout Your Table: May They be Good as well as Great, and increase in Vertue and Piety so fast, that They may anticipate these Counsels, and render all the follow∣ing Arguments useless. Which is the dai∣ly Prayer of,
My Noble Lord,
Edlesb. Jan. 12. 1690/1.

