



Madam,
AMongst the many Spiritual mercies by which within these fifty years last past, England hath been exalted to heaven (as our Saviour said of Capernaum) the plenty of good Books hath not been the least, so as there is hardly any point in Divinity, which hath not been judiciously handled, both dogmatically, polemically, and practically, and discourses upon it published in our own Tongue. The things hid in times of Popery, yea and for many years in the be∣ginning of our Reformation, have been made known; the things co∣vered have been revealed; what was at first spoken in darkness, hath been told in the light, preached upon the house tops, and so published, that all those who would might read, and understand. Certainly no Nation under Heaven (of which we have any record) was ever blessed with the Means of Grace to that degree; none ever had more judicious Interpretations of the Word of God, nor more serious and faithful Applications of it to the Consciences of men and women; so as if either the Doctrine or Duty of the Gospel be yet hid to any, it is much to be feared that it is to such only who shall perish. But of all good Books we have been exalted in none more than those which have bin wrote on practical Subjects, Books of all others to be most highly valued, as more immediately serving the great end of man, in shewing him the way of Salvation, directing his coming to Christ, and walking with him, of which we have had such plen∣ty, as indeed there would be no more need of writing on such Subjects, if the Vanity of our Natures did not more incline us to a discourse upon the same Argument newly wrote, than to what hath been written as well some years since, by which means, the multiplying of good Books doth not a little contribute to the much reading of good Books, and that I am sure contributes much both to knowledge and practice (the two great ends that every Preacher ought to aim at;) so as I cannot be of their mind who would have no more written of this nature, because so much hath been alrea∣dy wrote, any more than I can be of theirs, who think there is now no such need of Preaching, because formerly there hath been so much. So long as there are any Souls in the World, who know

not Christ, and live not up to the Rules of his Gospel, there will be need both of the one and of the other; nay, were there none such, there would be need of it, to keep up the Grace of God bestowed upon men in its warm exercise. Nor me thinks should there be one Preacher of the Gospel who should not publish the glad tidings of it, and leave some Record to the Ages to come, of his faithfulness in that work. The Riches of Divine Grace can never be too much pub∣lished, we can never enough declare his love, who for our sakes be∣came poor, that we through his poverty might be made rich. Such like thoughts as these, Madam, have brought these Discourses into a more publick light: They were composed many years since, soon after my entrance into the publick Ministry. I am willing they should be a Testimony to the world, what Doctrine I then Preach∣ed, and see no cause yet to be ashamed of, and what scope or design I have alwaies propounded to my self: The Gospel of the Kingdom; Christ; The faithsul saying, worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jes came into the world to save sinners, 1. Tim. 1. 15. The Apostle Doctrine, Acts, 4. 12. That there is no Salvation in any other then in Christ, for there is no other name under Heaven given amongst men whereby we must be saved, were the great things, I took my self concerned as a Preacher to publish to the world. Together with what our Saviour hath taught us, That he who believeth him i not condemned: But he that believeth not is condemned already—shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him, Joh. 3. 18. 36, and that Faith without works is dead. These were the grea things I had in my eye, to open, explain, and apply to people. My apprehension that I saw much of these things revealed in the Song of Solomon (though clouded under Metaphorical expressions) was that which led me to the study of that difficult portion of holy Writ; than which undoubtedly there is no portion of the Old Testament more Evangelical, according to the common Hypothesis agreed by the most valuable Divines in all Ages, viz. That it con∣tains a Dialogue between Christ and his Church, or particular believing Souls in it. If any think I might have chosen plainer Texts from which to discourse these things, I freely yield it as to many of them. But shall this excellent Book, alwaies acknowledged a sacred portion of holy Writ, by the wisest man upon earth stiled the Song os Songs (that is, the most excellent Song) lie by us as the Vision of a Book that is sealed, or be bound up in our Bibles for nothing? Or can there be any work more worthy of a Divine, than to at∣tempt

the clearing of so incomparable a piece of Divine Revela∣tion from that darkness which it pleased God to cloath it with in a time, when the most which he spake concerning Christ, was in Types  Prophecies, or Metaphors. Time, together with the Sermons of hrist and his Apostles, have expounded the Types and Prophecies of Christ. Is it not a work worthy of us to explain the Metaphors, that we might have a Christ wholly unveiled? There's no great fear of any dangerous erring in the case, if he that explaineth taketh care, that his Explication agreeth with plainer Revelations. Madam, I think I may further say, that there is no portion of holy Writ so copiously as this, expressing the infinite love, and transcendent ex∣cellencies of the Lord Jesus Christ. None that more copiously in∣structs us, what he will be to us, or what we should be toward him, and consequently none more worthy of the pains of any who desires to Preach Christ. My Meditations upon the second Chap∣r composed in my maturer years, were published some years nce: Those upon this Chapter have (being done in my younger time) staid, till I could get some leisure to peruse them my self, and correct some things in the stile, especially (our juvenile fan∣cies, seldom pleasing us in our maturer years.) You will, I hope, Madam, pardon my Dedication of them to your Ladyship: Your lf knows how great Obligations you have laid upon me: I can∣not answer them: These are all the Requitals we can make our Friends for their kindnesses. Silver and gold I have none, but what I have I humbly present your Ladyship with; nor shall I have been wholly unserviceable to your Ladyship in your highest concerns, if any thing in these Discourses shall help further to inflame your Soul with love to him who is the chiefest of ten thousand, and con∣tribute to the sending of your Soul to Heaven in the admiration of your Beloved, where you shall see him as he is, whom these Dis∣courses will but shew you as in a glass darkly. Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
April 3. 1683.







