



My LORD,
IT is not long since, that History seem'd a Province so peculiar to the Greeks and Romans, that the Actions of any other Part of this Globe, were look'd upon as unworthy the Recording: as if Homer and Plutarch's Heroes were only fit to be produc'd, and that it were not only Barbarous, but Impious to offer at measuring them with the Mo∣derns. But we are, at length, made sensible, that all Regions and Ages af∣ford Valour, Ability, and Politeness. We are grown weary of talking ever

of Alexander and Caesar, and, dayly, discover New Conquerour as much to be Valued, and, possibly, to all intents their Equalls.
In this File we may place the late Mon∣sieur de Turenne, whose Life I do not a little glory in the Occasion of laying at Your Graces feet. A more than ordinary Analogy of Circumstances Authorizes this Dedication. The Viscount's Parti∣zans boast him to have Barrier'd France more than once, from Inundations of its formidable, as well as Numerous Ene∣mies. Your Grace's Illustrious Father may well be stil'd the Restorer of Eng∣land, in bringing back the Defender of its Faith, and re-establishing him upon the Throne of his Ancestors; and this is what does, unquestionably, give him the Preheminence o'er that so very Eminent French Captain. But as the Glory of this Personages Life, rather requires my Shadowing the Piece, I may well be tax'd with a Design of lessening

his Merit, by producing him into a greater Light: For tho' the Viscount had the Superiority of Conduct over most of the other Generals of his time, yet must we needs o that all his consummated Pru∣dence and Experience in the business of Bonn receiv'd a foil from Montecuculi's finess; whereas the Lord General of England thro' all Disadvantages and Difficulties, gloriously and untarnish'd, carry'd the Honour of that Character to the last.
Wherefore, Sir, a Passion for the Credit of my Subject, withholds my hand from push∣ing on the Parallel. Nevertheless, I have urg'd sufficient to Entitle this Piece fit to challenge your Princely Patronage. Be∣sides as your own Constant Magnificence and Magnanimity, on all Occasions in the Service of the Crown, Vigilance, Bravery & Successfull Conduct speak you in every thing the Heir of your Fathers Virtues, so do they render so great an affinity between Yours and the Viscounts Life, that tho'

the Laters long Experience may Weigh down, a little, on the one hand; your un∣spotted Loyalty does again, more than Ballance it on the other, and stamps Merit on this Oblation and renders it a Duty.
And here My Lord, I might value my self upon resisting the Temptation of improving the Pompous matter I have be∣fore me into a Panegyrique. A thing, indeed, unnecessary, since the World is satisfy'd your Grace has with Devotion made Your Fathers Great Actions the Model of Your Own, which is suffici∣ent to Chronicle you to all Eternity in the first Ranck of the Illustrious Men and Princes of this Age and Nation, and to make me proud of the passion I had to Subscribe my self,

