


WHat I had to say unto you, I expressed my self at large, in that which I now present you, with some fillings, which the time then per∣mitted not to tender: I shall now onely adde a word of excuse, and caution. Excuse I must, Because all that speak to you do so; my self much rather; Because hearing of this service, but some ten dayes before the Fast, in the midst of sorrow for the losse of an onely parent; I could not with that freedom of spirit, as I should, attend this businesse. But your pietie hath I hope herein supplyed my deficiency, in receiving the matter with all readinesse of minde; leaving the manner of handling to those weak stomacks that cannot savour wholesome food, without a great deal of curiosity in the dressing, Care, and Cleanlynesse, and Concoction we commend: The work of the Lord is not to be done negligently; Too much diligence we de∣cline; for that argues suspition, either of the food, or of the guest. We would have your faith and godly affection, stand, not in the wisedom of words, but in the power of God. I must also caution, Touching those words in the entrance of my discourse, [In a setled Church, the Ministry is to be puclikely admitted to that imployment.] I would not have it understood as an approbation either of any unlawfull office, or undue ordination in any particular Church; but in gene∣rall of all setled Churches. And that first in respect of order, That every man be not at his own disposing, but abide in that calling, whereunto God by the ordinance of man shall designe im. 2. Of advantage to his Ministry; that he may have

more boldnesse with them, who have acknowledged him as ap∣pointed to that imployment. Which call (as I conceive) lies chiefly in these particulars. 1. The inward ability, and upright intention of the heart, to do Christ service in that imployment. 2. In the publike approbation of such abilities after tryall had, by the Church, both Ministry and people of God, that are indeed able to discern. 3. A speciall call by some particular people to be their officer in that kinde (or an after approbation from them) or else a more generall commission from the Church, to a more universall imployment that way; such as was the sending of Paul and Barnabas, by the Church of Antioch Act. 13.. All which is to be understood especially of the administration of the Sacraments and discipline: For, as for preaching, it is a more common work; which yet no man is to do to the scandall of the Church wherein he lives, nor ordinarily without calling there∣unto, if it be done in a publike way. Which calling (as other Church affairs,) that we may have more agreeable to prima∣tive purity; we implore your assistance; as you can not effectually obtain the vigour of yours, without our service. Magistracy and Ministry, though they be not immediate re∣latives, yet do se mutuo ponere & tollere. So, as you are Gods hands to us; shall we labour to be his mouth to you, and for youIsai. 45.17.. To you; that no Councell devised against you, shall stand, so long as you make the advancing of This man, the Lord Christ, your aym: No weapon framed against you shall prosper Isai. 9.6.. And for you; That having such promises, you faint not, but proceed to the finishing of the work with power: and be like your Master, the great and wonderfull Councellor and Prince of peace Isai. 9.6., who when he begins, does use also to make an end Isai. 66.9.: That you may not be weary of weldoing, for in due time you shall reap if you faint not Gal. 6.9..

