


Christian Reader,
IF thou weighest things in the Ballance
of right Reason, thou can'st not but see,
That Moses being the first Man by whose
Ministry Almighty God thought fit to
give a Body of Laws unto a whole Nation,
and to as many of the World besides, as
should join in communion with that Nation;
it was necessary God should enable him to
make it evidently appear unto all rational
Men, that he was sent and authorized by
God to give Laws unto that Nation: and if
thou read'st the Books of Moses, and what
thou wilt find in the following Discourse con∣cerning
him and them, thou can'st not but
likewise see, that the infinitely Wise and
Powerful God did in effect enable him evi∣dently
and certainly to prove his Mission and
Commission to be from Heaven. For through
God's extraordinary assistance he gave the
highest demonstrations of his being Autho∣rized
from above, that can in reason be de∣sired
of any that speaks or writes unto Men
in the name of God; his works and writings
hear the manifest signatures of God's Wisdom,
Power and Goodness; his works were such as
could never have been done without the assi∣stance

of an invisible Power, far above any
thing that falls under the perceptions of
Sense; and it is most evident to Reason, That
that invisible Power could be no other, than
the infinitely powerful, wise and good God,
who made, preserves and governs the World,
and all things therein. For it could not pos∣sibly
be any Evil Spirit.
First, Because Moses in his contest with
the Magicians of Aegypt, did at the very
first Encounter, far out-do them, and the E∣vil
Spirit by whose assistance they wrought
their wonders, as evidently appears by Aa∣ron's
Rods swallowing up their Rods, (Exod.
7. 12.) and by their not being able to re∣move
the Frogs again from off the Land of
Aegypt: and therefore Pharaoh was forced
to call for Moses and Aaron, and desire
them to intreat the Lord to take away the
Frogs from him and his people (Exod. 8.
8.) and at last he forced them to confess
t they were overcome; for when they
ld not turn the Dust of Aegypt into Lice,
 Moses and Aaron had done, they then
ved out, and said unto Pharaoh, [This is
the finger of God, Exod. 8. 18, 19.] they
onfessed that it was the power of God which
nabled Moses and Aaron to turn the Dust
into Lice, and which hindered them from do∣ing
the like.

Secondly, It could not possibly be any Evil
Spirit, because Moses's Miracles were wrought
for the highest, best and excellentest ends, to
wit, for the glory of God, and for the good
of his People; they were wrought to con∣vince
both Pharaoh and Israel, That the
Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
who made, and governs the World, is the
only true God, who is above all to be Feared
and Reverenced, Adored and Worshipped,
Loved and Obeyed, Pleased and Glorified;
and that Moses was his Authorized Messen∣ger
to be believed and obeyed for his sake, in
all that he said, and commanded in his name:
They were wrought also, both to cause Pha∣raoh
to let go the Israelites, and likewise to
make the Israelites willing to leave Aegypt,
and to go with Moses, and take possession of
the Land of Canaan, which the Lord God
had long before promised unto their Fathers,
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.Exod. 5. 1, 2, 3. & 7. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. & 3. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. & 4. from 1, to 9. & 6. from 1, to 8. Deut. 4. 9, to 24.
Thirdly, It could not possibly be any Evil
Spirit, because Moses's Miracles were wrought
to the prejudice of the Devil's interest in
the World, and for the destroying of the De∣vil's
Kingdom, by rooting out Idolatry from
among God's People, and driving Idolaters

out of Canaan; and for the setting up of
the Kingdom of God visibly upon Earth.Exod. 20. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, &c. ibid. v. 20, 22, 23. & 23. 13. Deut. 4. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. & 7. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. & 12. 29, 30, 31, 32. & 18. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Deut. 4. 32, to 41. Exod. 20. 24, latter part of the Verse. Deut. 4. 7.
Fourthly, It could not possibly be any Evil
Spirit, because the Evil Spirit is the great
Enemy of Mankind, and of all humane So∣ciety
rightly constituted; whereas Moses's
Miracles were wrought for the confirmation
of a Doctrine, which is manifestly for the
good of Mankind, of individual Men, and of
all Societies of Men, Deut. 4. 6, 8.
This wile clearly appear unto any rational
Man that shall duly consider these following
Laws of Moses, Concerning Mens Loving
their Neighbours as themselves, and not Co∣veting
any thing belonging to them.Exod. 20. 17. Lev. 19. 17, 18.
Concerning the City's of Refuge appointed
for such Persons, as should happen to kill a
Man unwittingly.Exod. 21. 13. Deut. 19.
Concerning the Redemption of Lands.Levit. 25. 23, &c.
Concerning Goodness, Lenity and Equity
to Servants.Exod. 21. 1, 2, &c. Deut. 15. 12, to 19. & 24. 14, 15.
Mercifulness to the Poor.Deut. 15. 6, to 12. Exod. 22, 25, 26, 27.

Kindness to Straugers.Exod. 22. 21. Levit. 19. 33. 34.
Justice and Equity to the Widows and Fa∣therless.Exod. 22. 22, 23, 24.
Reverence and Obedience to Superiors.Exod. 20. 12. & 22. 28. Deut. 17. 11.
And concerning the Duties of Superiors
towards their Inferiors and Subjects.Deut. 1. 16, 17. & 17. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. & 25. 1.
But not to insist upon these and many o∣ther
excellent Laws of Moses, which are
manifestly for the good of Mankind, and both
evidence themselves to have been given unto
Moses and Israel by an infinitely good God;
and also Moses's Miracles wrought in confir∣mation
of them, to have been from the same
cause; there is one thing which I cannot but
touch upon, to wit, That whereas other Law∣givers
have set up, some a Monarchy, some
an Aristocracy, and others a Democracy, Mo∣ses
was the first that Established a visible
Theocracy over the Israelites, under which
form of Government, all things were to be
managed by the counsel and direction of the
infinitely wise God; the People of Israel, as
a Kindom of Priests, and a Holy Nation,
were to refer all their matters unto God, and
to ask advice and direction of him by ƲRIM
and THƲMMIM, in reference to Peace and

War, and all things of any considerable im∣portance,
or difficulty, (Exod. 19. 5, 6. & 20.
24, the latter part, Exod. 28. 30. Deut. 10.
14, 15, 16, 17. & 12. 11, 12, Levit. 26. 11,
12. &c.)
These things put together (if no more
could be said) seem abundantly sufficient to
prove that Moses was Authorized by God to
give Laws unto the Israelites; for no Man
could have wrought such Miracles so circum∣stantiated,
except God had been with him:
and such is the weakness of Man's Ʋnder∣standing,
that he could never of his own head
have invented such a Law, and such a way
of Government. And if Moses's Miracles
and Law could not possibly be of any Evil
Spirit, nor of Man, they must needs have
been of a Good Spirit, and that Good Spirit
could be no other but God: for though God
used the Ministry of Good and Holy Angels
in giving forth the Law, yet they could not
possibly be the Authors of it; and if any of
them had ever pretended unto that Honour,
he would by so doing have degenerated into
a proud, arrogant and lying Devil.
God himself then was the alone Author of
Moses his Law, and the Holy Angels with Mo∣ses,
were but Instruments and Ministers, by
whom God gave it unto Israel; and indeed

there is nothing in it, but what well becomes
God to be the Author of; there is nothing in it
that doth any way contradict the perfections of
his Nature, or destroy the natural notions of
Truth and Falshood, Good and Evil which
he hath implanted in the mind of Man: nay
many of Moses's Laws are evidently agree∣able
unto, and Representative of the trans∣cendent
excellencies of the Divine, and per∣fective
of the humane Nature: and even
those of them which are of a most adiapheros
indifferent nature in themselves, and derive
all their morality from the will and pleasure
of God, did certainly by Gods appointment
and blessing very much promote the happiness
of his People, (Deut. 10. 12, 13. & 11. 12,
to 16. Levit. 26. 3, to 13. Deut. 32. 16, 17.)
As to what some Atheists Object from
Exod. 12. 35, 36. That Moses taught the Is∣raelites
to cheat the Aegyptians of their
Jewels, under pretence of borrowing them,
and that God himself is brought in as counte∣nancing
the Cheat; which seems to be plain∣ly
contrary, both to the perfections of God,
and right Reason of Man.
I Answer, It is false that is Objected, for
there was really no borrowing and lending in
the case, but asking and receiving, and car∣rying
away what God had inclined the hearts

of the Aegyptians freely to give: and so
there could be no cheat under pretence of
borrowing. This Answer is grounded upon
the true import of the Hebrew Word (Shaal)
which signifies (to ask,) and accordingly the
place Objected is rendred by Munster, and
the Tigurin; in English thus, [The Chil∣dren
of Israel asked of the Aegyptians,
Jewels,—and the Lord gave the People
favor in the sight of the Aegyptians, so that
they gave them such thiugs as they asked,
and they carryed them away from the Aegyp∣tians;]
the Aegyptians apprehended them∣selves
to be all dead Men, if the Israelites
stayed in Aegypt any longer, and therefore
were willing to give them any thing they
bad, on condition that they would be pre∣sently
gone, Vers. 33.
And thus things were ordered by the wise
Providence of God, that the Children of Is∣rael
might be rewarded for the great Ser∣vice
they had done unto the Aegyptians.
Moreover, It is very observable that some
of Moses's Laws were such, that it is impos∣sible
to conceive that any Men in their Wits,
would either have given such Laws unto o∣thers,
or have themselves received and sub∣mitted
to them; unless they had been sure
that God was the Author of them, and that

he would take care to prevent the great in∣conveniences
that might arise from the ob∣servance
of them. I Instance in Two,
First, The Law for the Seventh Year Sab∣bath,
(Exod. 23. 10, 11, & Levit. 25. 4, 5.)
The Command not to Plow nor Sow every Se∣venth
Year, was of such consequence, and
might have produced so ill effects, that Mo∣ses
would never have attempted to bring the
Israelites under such a Law, nor would they
have been such fools as to have received it,
and submitted to it, unless he and they had
been both sure, that God had Authorized
him to give them that Law, and that God
had undertaken to secure them from the
great inconvenience that might arise from
their Observance of it; for if they had not
been sure that God had by promise engaged
his Providence to Bless them with extraordi∣nary
great abundance of Cornes on the Sixth
Year, they could not but foresee that there
would have been a Scarcity and Famine on
the Seventh Year, especially when the Year of
Jubile, which was every Fiftieth Year, suc∣ceeded
the Seventh Year Sabbath; for in
that case the Law forbade them either to
Plow or Sow for Two whole Years together,
(Levit. 25. 8, to 12.) upon which they could
not but foresee that a Famine would certainly

follow, unless God had undertaken by an ex∣traordinary
Providence to prevent it. There∣fore
Moses must have been sure of this, o∣therwise
he would never have attempted the
giving them such a Law; and he must have
made the People sure of it also, otherwise
he could not but foresee that they would ne∣ver
have been so simple as to receive and
submit unto such a Law, as would expose
them to the danger of a Famine every Se∣venth
Year, and in the revolution of Fifty
Years, would unavoidably bring a Famine
upon them. We read in the 25th of Levi∣ticus
where this Law is Recorded, That God
foreseeing the People would certainly move
this Objection against it, he prevented them,
and both moved and answered the Objection
himself, Vers. 20, 21. [If ye shall say,
What shall we eat the Seventh Year? be∣hold,
we shall not Sow, nor gather in our
Increase. Then I will command my Bles∣sing
upon you in the Sixth Year, and it
shall bring forth Fruit for Three Years,
&c.] Here they had God's word of Promise,
Sealed with the Broad-Seal of Heaven, Mo∣ses's
Miracnlous Works for the ground of
their assurance, that God's extraordinary
Providence would secure them from Famine.
And it was upon this so well grounded as∣surance,

that they received and submitted to
that Law. And God never failed them in
this, but always fnlfilled with his hand what
he had spoken with his mouth; so that they
were never forced to travel into other Coun∣tries
to buy Corn for the supply of their ne∣cessities,
in those Sabbatical Years.
The other Law I instance in, is, that
which obliged all the Males of Israel Thrice
a Year to appear before the Lord, at the
place where the Ark of God should be,
(Exod. 23. 17. & 34. 23. Deut. 16. 16.)
this Law was given and written by Moses
for the Generations to come, and he could
not but foresee that the People would be rea∣dy
to Object against it, That if after they
were possessed of the Land of Canaan, all
their Males should Thrice every Year leave
their several Houses and Countries, and
meet at one place, as at Jerusalem, or at
any other place where the Ark of God should
happen to be; their Land would be in dan∣ger
of being frequently invaded, spoiled and
wasted by the malitious and covetous Hea∣thens
that lived round about them, and that
therefore it was most unreasonable to desire
them to be Governed by such a Law: This
Objection, I say, Moses could not but fore∣see,
and therefore if he had not been cer∣tain

that it was God's will and pleasure that
he should give them such a Law, he would
never have done it of his own head; and
likewise if they had not been certain that
Moses was really Authorized and Commissi∣oned
by God to give them such a Law, they
would never have received it, and submitted
unto the observance of it, to the visible ha∣zarding
the loss of all that they had in the
World. This God considered to be rational,
and therefore for their security he gave them
his promise by Moses, and by Moses's Mira∣cles
confirmed his Promise, That no Man
should DESIRE their Land, when they
went up to appear before the Lord their God,
Thrice in the Year, (Exod. 34. 24,) as if
God had said, Be not afraid least the Hea∣then
break in upon you, and Burn your Ci∣ties,
and lay waste your Countrie, whilst all
your Males are from home, attending npon
me at the place of my Publick Worship, for
when you are about my Work, I will not on∣ly
be with you abroad, but with your Wives
and Children likewise at home; and I will
take such care of you and yours, and so se∣cure
all your Concerns, that your envious
and Covetous Neighbours and Enemies shall
not so much as desire your Land, much less
shall they be able to lay it waste and desolate

with Fire and Sword, as you may be apt to fear.
It was by this promise, and the Miracles wrought
by Moses, that both Moses and the People were as∣sured
that this Law was of God, and that God's
special Providence would protect his People, and se∣cure
all their concerns, when they were doing the will
of God according to this Law; and without this
assurance if Moses had gone about to impose upon
them in a matter of such dangerous consequence, they
would certainly have refused to obey him.
By these Two Instances it manifestly appears, that
Moses both knew in himself, and evidently proved
unto Israel, that he was Commissioned by God to
give Laws unto them: for if it had been otherwise,
he would neither have attempted to give them such
Laws, nor would they have ever received them
and submitted to them. To draw to an end; Let it
be considered that Moses Miracles tended all to the
Glory of God the Author of Nature, and to the
advanccment of his Kingdom in the World, as he
is the Author of Grace; and his Writings give us
most high, glorious and excellent, and also most
lovely and desirable Idea's and Notions of God and
his Perfections. Witness God's name, [I AM
THAT I AM, and I AM, Exod. 3. 14.] which
signifies that he is the first and most perfect Beeing,
that gives Beeing to all other things, and consequent∣ly
implies his eternal and necessary Existence from
everlasting and to everlasting.
And his name, [THE LORD, THE LORD
GOD MERCIFUL and GRACIOUS, &c. Exod.
34. 6, 7.] witness also that description of him,
Exod. 15. 11. [WHO is like unto thee, O

LORD,—GLORIOUS IN HOLINESS FEAR∣FUL
IN PRAISES, DOING WONDERS,]
and that other description of him, (Deut. 32. 3,
4. I will publish the name of the Lord: ascribe
ye greatness unto our God, &c.) And what is
written of him in Deut. 4. 35, to 40. & 10. 14, to 19.
These most sublime and excellent Notions of God
and his Perfections, with which Moses's Writings
do furnish us, are proper and fit to raise in us a most
high esteem and reverence of God, to make us admire
and adore him, to take us off from the inordinate
love of our selves, and of all other Creatures, as
mean and vile, as shadows and nothing; and to
draw out our hearts and affections wholly unto him,
to make us love him, and from a principle of Love,
careful to please him, and fearful to offend him,
(Deut. 6. 4, 5, 13, 14, 15. & 10. 12, to 21.)
in fine, to make us hope in him, expect all needful
good things from him, and above all things desire
to be united unto him, as the most glorious, excellent
and blessed Beeing, (which was, and is, and is to
come, of whom, through whom, and to whom, are
all things,) that we may be most happy in union
with him, and in the enjoyment of his Love and
Favor for evermore. I might here speak of that
account which Moses gives of the Creation of the
World, and especially of Mankind; of the Disobe∣dience
and Apostacy of Mankind, and of the Mi∣series
that came upon the World by reason thereof:
And of the restoring of Man to the favor of God
again by the Mediation of the Messias, who was
promised and Prophesied of, first under the name and
notion of the Seed of the Woman, that was to

bruise the Serpents Head, (Gen. 3. 15.) then of
the Seed of Abraham by Isaac, in which Seed all
the Nations of the Earth were to be Blesied, (Gen.
22. 18. & 26. 4.) and afterwards, of the Seed
of Jacob by Judah, and stiled SHILOH, unto
whom the gathering of the People was to be, (Gen.
28. 14. compared with Gen. 49. 10. & Numb.
24. 16, 17, 19.) and lastly, under the name and
notion of a Prophet like nnto Moses, and who by
consequence was to be a Lawgiver and Mediator,
(Deut. 18. 18, 19.)
I might shew the Reader that Moses's Writings
set forth God as placable and reconcileahle, (Gen. 3.
15. & 4. 7.) as pleased and reconciled (Gen.
4. 4. & 8. 20, 21.) and as pleased and recon∣ciled
by Faith, (Gen. 15. 6.)
I might demonstrate, that the account which
Moses gives of these things, is highly agreeable to
right reason and experience, and that it is most com∣fortable
and satisfactory to the mind of Man: But
all this cannot he done in the compass of a short
Epistle.
The Reader may expect that I should at least say
something in behalf of the Two following Discour∣ses;
but if he do, he will be disappointed: for
having said enough in commendation of the First
Disconrse in the beginning of the Second, I will say
no more of either, but leave both to speak for them∣selves.
Only I must advertise the Reader, That the
Translation varies from the Original in some Two or
Three things, and this is the reason of the variation;
I found that there were several palpable mistakes in
the French Discourse, and I am resolved through

God's Grace to follow no Man in known mistakes:
therefore I mended them. As where the Author
says, That the broad Plates for covering the Altar,
made of the Censers of Corah and his Company,
were Plates of Gold; I say, as the truth is, that
they were Plates of Brass, (Numb. 16. 39.)
And again, where the Author says, That Moses
Condemned Thirty or Forty Thousand Men, and
commanded them all to be presently Executed: I
say, that he did so by several Thousands, which is
true, for the number of the Slain was about Three
Thousand, (Exod. 32. 28.) but our Learned Au∣thor
was certainly mistaken, for his reckoning nei∣ther
agrees exactly with the Vulgar Translation, nor
yet with the Hebrew Verity. Christian Reader, I
will detain thee no longer from the perusal of the
Discourses themselves, and that the use of them may
he blessed to thee for thy Souls good, is and shall be
the earnest desire of

