



Right Honourable,
BY a Note under your own hand, I was ap∣pointed to preach at Paul's Church on the seventeenth of November. The seven∣teenth of November is a day of so high ac∣count with me, that I durst not make any ex∣cuse, though otherwise in way of excuse, I might have pleaded my age, my weaknesse, and multitude of other imployments: but the seventeenth of November, be∣ing such a day as is set out to be in the following Sermon, ought to be had in perpetuall remembrance. It may be that all have not that day in so high account as I have, and that if another had performed that duty, he would have over-slipt it, with∣out any mention made thereof. Length of time makes memo∣rable matters to be forgotten; and it is now above fourscore and six yeares since that seventeenth of November. There∣in England first received such a blessing as never ought to slip out of the heart of an English man. That seventeenth of November was the day when unparallel'd Queene Eliza∣beth

first came to the Crowne. Thorough Gods blessing, I spent eight and twenty yeares of my dayes under her raigne; and I have oft blessed God that I was borne, and so long brought up in that blessed time. I have been called in my younger yeares to performe publike Scholasticall duties on a seventeenth of November, and me thought, I never performed any more cheerfully. The very subject matter put life and spirit into me. Since I was called to the ministeriall Function, I have many yeares on the seventeenth of November made the best re∣membrance that I could of that dayes blessing. Being by you called to the most publike place of London, I could not, I durst not passe over the mention of that blessing. I did the more willingly publish it to the view of all sorts, that I may provoke others to be more mindfull of that day. And to your Honour in speciall, I dedicate these my poore labours, because you were the first mover thereunto. And now, my good Lord, having this occasion in publike to speake to you, give me leave, I beseech you, to stirre up your honourable mind unto such faithfull cour∣ses, as, to the joy and benefit of many, you tooke, when you were Alderman of Farrington within. I have been now thirty seven yeares (to the praise of Gods good Providence and mercy I speake it) a Minister of Gods Word in a Precinct within that Ward: in which time, there have been sundry severall Al∣dermen. But (to your praise, but not to the dispraise of any of the rest, I doe here publikely attest it) I never observed any more carefull of the good of their charge, more inquisitive af∣ter the same, more industrious in searching out disorders to re∣dresse them, more pitifull over the poore, more sollicitous about such as were infected with the sicknesse, and that which sets the crowne upon all, more pious in preventing all manner of pro∣fanenesse on the Lords Dayes, and procuring people (so farre as in you lay) to observe the holy Ordinances thereof.
Right honourable, the Lord hath now advanced you to a higher place, given you a larger jurisdiction, and put more power into your hand. You have now ten Talents in compari∣son of the five that you had before. Know that God now expecteth of you an improvement of all those ten Talents; An∣swerably more care, more industry, more diligence, more pru∣dence, if more can be shewed, is requisite: Above all, let your conscionable care be yet more manifested about the Lords Day; and herein I beseech you,Sir Thomas Middleton. Sir Thomas Hes. give me leave to set before you the prudent and pious course which two Lord Majors of fa∣mous memory, in the yeares 1613 and 1614 took thereabouts, which was this, They made choice of conscionable persons, who with an holy zeale were set against all profanenesse of that Day, and put on to redresse all manner abuses thereof: such they chose, and to such they gave power and authority to apprehend and bring before them all delinquents in that kind, whom, for the greater terrour unto others, they severely punished. Conscience will more put on pious persons to a thorough redressing of dis∣orders, then hire or reward. It is the due execution of Law that puts life thereinto, and makes it the more effectuall: and inward Principles will work men unto a due execution more then out∣ward motives. Goe on in promoting Gods honour, and he will promote yours. For he that said, will performe what he hath said, Them that honour me, I will honour. That you may doe the one, and God the other, it is the hearty prayer of

