



BEing unjustly forced from that Cure,
whereunto God had called me, as the
most of my▪ Profession are, that will not
turne Mountebancks and poyson the Peo∣ple)
and not suffered▪ upon His Majesties
gracious Exchange, (after seaventeene months impri∣sonment
in London, without any cause shewen in all
that time) either to returne to that Care or to practise any
where else with safety (though licensed for all parts of
this Kingdome) I was necessitated to repair to this City
made happy in the midst of miseries by your Vigilancy
& Gods blessing thereupon. I had not beene long here,
but I saw and partooke (praysed be the Lord for it) of
one of the greatest mercies (let others value it as they
please) that ever this City was blessed with: A vast, and
in their owne opinion, an invincible Army surrounded

us,2 King 18. and 19. as sometimes the Assyrians did Jerusalem: Their
Tartaris, their Rabsarises and their Rabsakehs opened
their mouths wide both against our religious Hezekiah,
and against all his loyall Subjects then attending his sa∣cred
Person, thinking (as their own bloudy Pamphlets
did intimate) instantly to have devoured them all.
And without doubt, If the Lord himselfe had not been on
our side.Psal. 124. If the Lord himselfe had not beene on our side, when
those men thus rose up against us, they had swallowed us up
quick when they were so wrathfully displeased at us: But bles∣sed
be the Lord, he did not give us up as a prey unto their teeth;
but put his hooke in their nose,2 Kings 19▪ 28. and his bridle in their lips,
and turned them back by the way, not by which they came,
but by which they became the object of their Sove∣raign's
tender mercy and compassionate pitty, whom
they then pursued with their Rebellious malice and
mercilesse cruelty. This unspeakable mercy of God to
this City, or rather to this whole Nation, was attended
upon (whether for our unthankfullnesse, or for our o∣ther
sinnes, or for both! with that formidable judge∣ment
of Plague. Upon the increasing and spreading
whereof, observing, that your Honours, in your extra∣ordinary
care of this place, had commanded certaine
Physicall directions in time of Plague to be published, I
was encouraged to beleeve, that Hyper-physicall directi∣ons
for such a time could not want your patronage,
And therefore finding none other of my calling,
though farre more able, to have prevented me, I pre∣sumed
to present you with these: Knowing withall,
that without your helpe and assistance, both Physicall
and Hyper-physicall prescripts, how excellent soever, will
be but of little benefit or profit to the most of men; all

men being naturally prone to reject, at least to neglect
that advise which would do them most good: and un∣lesse
the Magistrates make them know that they beare not
the sword in vaine, but will proceed to severe correction
where wholsome instructions are despised, the Divine
and Physitian both may prescribe till they are weary,
and all to no purpose.Numb. 16▪ 46. We reade of an Aaron needing
a calling upon from Moses to do what belonged to
him in the time of a Plague.Numb, 25. 8. But as the Plague may be
(and, for ought any man knowes to the contrary, this
Plague may be such) the Magistrates actuall exercising
their power in the execution of justice upon some pro∣voking
Offenders may be so necessarily required, that
the raging contagion will not cease without it. This
I am confident of, and not without good grounds:
That would your Honours be pleased but to revive the
execution of some of your owne Lawes against that
one horrid crying sinne of swearing and blaspheming
Gods name, which so raignes in our streets and houses,
the Plague of God would not rage so much in them, as
now it doth.Exod. 20. 7. The Lord (saith the Commandement)
will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his name in vaine
'Tis swearing (saith one of the Prophets) that brings
the flying rowle of the curse into mens houses,Zach. 5. v. 3, 4. and makes
it to remaine there, till it have consumed both them and
the very timber and stones thereof. And 'tis for swearing
amongst other foule crimes (saith another Prophet)
that the Land mournes.Hose 2 4, v. 2, 3. As therefore ye tender particu∣lar
mens persons, that have jeoparded their lives, for
you, as ye regard the welfare of this City, wherein God
hath preserved you, and as ye love this whole Land,
wherein God hath highly honoured you, suffer not the

sacred Name of that gracious and glorious God, who
hath wrought these and other infinite mercies for you,
to be dishonoured and profaned so as it is by cursed
Oathes and blasphemous Cursings. Let some sharpe
mulcts against Cursing and Swearing be duly inflicted
and required, that if the dread of that Name do not ter∣rifie
men from so abusing it, yet the feare of that Power
wherewith God hath intrusted you, and their owne
just punishment for disregarding both, may make them
affraid to use that Name in vaine, which you have found
by so often experiment not to be in vaine to those that
honour and rely upon it: so shall your names be preci∣ous
in Gods account, your freinds and servants that
fly hither for succour be solaced and confirmed in
their expectation thereof, your enemies mouthes be
stopped in one of their lowdest clamours, and all both
freinds and foes, that visit this City, be constrained to
acknowledge, that the streets and ordinary places of
concourse, under your Government are sweeter and
better kept, then the Churches and Pulpits under the
Rebells Tyranny. Pardon me (I humbly beseech you)
for Pleading thus earnestly in this cause. The King's,
your Honours, and this whole Kingdomes hopes of deli∣verance
from those sore judgements, under which they
still groane, (as well as those miraculous deliverances
that have beene vouchsafed us) depend wholly upon
that great Name. And therefore if not my zeale to
Gods glory, yet my loyalty to my Soveraigne, my duty
to your Honours, and my love to my Nation, may ex∣cuse
my boldnesse in minding you of a speedy vindi∣cation
of the honour of that Name. I know there are
many other crimes amongst us, that cry alowde for

your more then ordinary care and diligence, zeale and
courage,Hom. 3. ad pop Antioch. in chastening and correcting the daring a∣ctors
of them: but (as Chrysostome once-spake) I con∣ceive
this to be the best way of correction,. to beginne first
with one part of the Law, and see that that be observed, and
then to go on to the rest. And with what part should ye
begin first, if not with that, which is most transgressed,
and (if it be rightly considered) easiest to be amended:
Ʋp, then in the name of God, and sanctify the People by
purging out from them this spreading sinne of cursing
and swearing;Joshus. 7. v. 13 and proove the Lord whether he will not,Malach. 3. 10.
upon your banishing the Plague of God, and other rash
curses and oathes out of mens mouthes, banish that Judg∣ment
of the Plague it selfe and other Judgements from
this City; The forementioned Father was bold to in∣gage
his word & credit to the Citizens of Antioch, that
upon their abstaining from swearing God would free
them from that great Calamitie which was then upon
them., &c. I dare not undertake so farre; but it were well if
you would please to make tryall, whether God would
do so much, or not. This you may be assured of, for
you have Gods owne word and promise for it, whe∣ther
the Plague shall thereupon be removed from o∣thers
dwellings or not,Hom 3. ad Pop. Antioch. That love of yours to his name
shall keepe you and your owne dwellings safe.Psal. 69. 36. & Psal. 91. As for
your Honours observing these Directions your selves, it
were too presumptuous a thought in me to expect, that
any advise of mine should be hearkened unto by you
who have so many learned and renowned Doctors to
consult upon all occasions: yet where you find that I
speake home to the purpose and God himselfe speakes
the same, though not for my sake, yet for his, daigne

it the hearing, I and the following too, if you love your
owne safety. Howsoever if you shall but tolerate
and approve these Directions so farre, that others under
your present charge, who cannot, many of them have
accesse to those that are more learned and better able
to counsell them, or rather are affraid or ashamed to
appeare to such, how willing or ready soever to re∣ceive
them, may by that your toleration and approba∣tion
(the Reverend Doctors not dissenting be fully satis∣fied,
that there is nothing herein prescribed, but what
is good and wholesome, and will, through Gods bles∣sing,
conduce much to their health and preservation,
this will be ample honour and encouragement to

