



SIR,
'TIS likely you will no less wonder at this unexpected sally of my pen; than at my having prefixt your name to a small Trifle, that owns no Author. Of the former, you will receive an account in the Pre∣face. And the latter, if the conside∣rations following are not of weight, to attone for; I know you have good∣ness enough to pardon, what I have not reason sufficient to excuse, or vin∣dicate. Well meaning intentions are Apology enough, where candour, and ingenuity are the Judges. I was not induced then to this Address,

because, I thought, I could oblige you; Worth describes it self in the fairest Character. But reflecting upon that de∣light and satisfaction, that I have re∣ceived in discoursing with you on such matters; and knowing that your Noble Genius is gratisied by such kind of spe∣culations; I thought, I could not make more suitable payment for my content, or better acknowledge the favour I re∣ceive in your acquaintance, then by presenting you a Discourse about Prae-existence; and giving you a peculiar interest in it, as you have in its Au∣thor. Not that I would suggest, that you are a favourer of any strange opini∣ons, or hold any thing in this particu∣lar, or any other, that is sit to be dis∣countenanc'd. But I know you love to be dealing in high and generous Theories, even where your self are a dissenter, Nor is it the least evidence of the great∣ness and Heroick Nobleness of your Spirit; that amidst the slowing aboun∣dance

of the World's Blessings, with which you are encircled, you can yet Dedicate your self to your beloved Con∣templations, and look upon the Fur∣niture and accomplishments of the mind, as better riches, than the larg∣est doals of fortune, and the Wealth and Revenues of an ample inheritance. Andmethinks, while most others at the best, do but use the Donatives of Pro∣vidence, you enjoy them. And, by a Nobler kind of Chymistry, extract from them a pleasure, that is not to be met with in all the trivial sports of empty Gallantry. To be reveiwing the Recesses of Nature, and the Beau∣teous inside of the Ʋniverse, is a more Manly, yea Angelick felicity, than the highest gratifications of the senses; an happiness, that is common to the Youthful Epicure, with his Hounds and Horses; yea, your ends are more August and generous, then to terminate in the private pleasure you take, even in those

Philosophical Researches; For you are Meditating a more general good in those careful and profound inquiries you are making into Animals, and o∣ther concerning affairs of nature, which I hope, one day the World will be ad∣vantag'd by. But I must not ingage in an Encomium, in which I cannot be just, but I must be troublesome. For your modesty is no more able to bear it, then my Pen can reach. Wherefore I shall dismiss your eyes from this tiresome Attendance; and only beg, that you would assure your self that no Man is more your Servant, then

