




THe Sun almost an Annual Race has ran,
Since the Decease of this Prodigious Man:
So long ago, (and such the Nation gave)
These Faithful Tears were wept upon his Grave.
They who can see when Nature sways in Chief,
Will find 'em shed in an Extream of Grief:
Without her aid, in vain we strive by Art,
To Limn a weeping Eye and bleeding Heart.
In Private writ, in Private to the Plains,
I thought to have confin'd these Rural Strains,
An Ev'ning Concert for the Mourning Swains;
When on their Oaten Reeds His Name they'd raise,
All Tun'd to their departed Patron's Praise.
But call'd from thence in Publick to appear,
(My self by being Worthless, fenc'd from Fear)
I fly to YOU with this Illustrious Name,
To stand between Detraction and his Fame.
With Merit, Envy ever did commence.
And Vice is still suppressing Excellence;
Like feeble Eyes, that shun the Glaring Light,
'Twou'd cover what it cannot bear in Night.


Your nearness to the HERO in His Blood,
And the yet nearer Tye of being Good;
Your joint Endeavours, and Your joint Success,
In lab'ring for Your Country's Happiness;
Your Mutual Friendship, with such Concord knit,
That Love ne'er made so dear a Union yet;
All these Regards, make's this Address your Due:
It can, My Lord, belong to none but YOU,
The Honour of this Celebrated Name;
Return'd, in some degree, from whence it came,
Guide of his Life, and Guardian of his Fame.


Justly the Lines may safely seek, where late
'Tis found by an affrighted tott'ring State:
When to the Verge of Anarchy it drew,
Hurri'd along, and all her Fears in view,
She sighing, cast her Eyes for Aid, on YOU;
YOU who so oft (when wander'd from the way,
And lost in Night) have led us to the Day.



Loud was the Storm; and now, advancing nigh,
There seem'd no hope of help from Policy.
Here Bigottry like Scylla threat'ning stood,
Horrid with Wrecks, and painted o'er with Blood.
There, like Charibdis, Tyranny appear'd,
Fearful to sight, and Hideous to be heard!
And yet between 'em lay the happy Coast,
Which either we must Make, or all be lost.
Here 'twas (and greatlier ne'er employ'd before)
Your Counsels did our Peace and Pow'r restore,
When they had took their leave, to come no more.


Where does the wond'rous Penetration lie?
Or is all Nature opn'd to Your Eye?
That thus YOU forward look among the Fates,
And seem a Second Providence to States?
For ever on Your Country's good Intent,
YOU Foreign Ills divert, and Home prevent.
No more an Empty Title to the Main
Our Squadrons boast; by Your Advice they Reign.
Europe and Africa Triumphant saw
Our Navy Ride, and give the Ocean Law;
While those who thought t' Invade us now retire,
And leave their Shoars to Spoil and Hostile Fire.



If the Physician oft divert our Fate,
By feeling how the Blood does Circulate,
What may HE do that know's the Pulse of State?
Be Fevour, Faintness, Frenzy, the Disease,
Or if a Lethargy the Vitals seize;
Be it Luxurious Peace, or Lawless Might,
Or Legislative Rage for Ravish'd Right;
Be it a less'ning Fame, or less'ning Trade,
The Neighb'ring Strength increas'd, or ours decay'd,
The Remedy is certain you advise;
And we are ne'er so Low, but then we Rise.


And yet in spight of this unweary'd Care,
Among us there a sort of Monsters are,
Whose Tongues like Jews, wou'd not their Saviour spare
But y'are Secure, and all their Malice vain;
Such Vertue is too rich a Dye to stain.


As when a Nymph breaths on a Crystal-Glass,
The Damps a while obscure her Beauteous Face;
A Dimness on the fair Reflection lie's,
And sits between her Image and her Eyes:
But soon the self-assisted Mirror's clear,
The Envious Shades dissolve into the Air,
And all her former lovely Lineaments appear.
So what e'er Spight with black'ning Breath can say,
The Lustre of your Worth does purge away,
Breaks through the sullen Gloom, and settles Day.


But while (alas!) the too advent'rous Muse
Ambitiously her Noble Flight pursues;
She finds the Weight above her Pow'r to raise,
And sinks beneath the Pressure of Your Praise.
A Life like Yours, a History does claim
An ample Fabrick that may hold Your Fame;
Where an Immortal Pillar shou'd be Grav'd,
The Prince's y'ave oblig'd, and Kingdom's sav'd.


And Lo!—(for what can veil the Muse's Eyes)
I see, methinks, a fam'd Historian rise,
Impartial, Great, Elab'rate, Learn'd and Wise;
One on whose Works the Graces all shall smile;
So just a Subject claims the justest Stile.
No other but the best of Pens shou'd show
The Future Ages what the Present owe.



To LEEDS, and (O too early from us torn!)
That other God-like Man, whose Loss we Mourn:
Your Glory will not less Illustrious shine,
To have His Name Immortal made with Thine.
He shall to the succeeding Times display
How You both stood, when hopeless of the Day,
Rescuing th' Rights that others did betray:
The Slaves that for Precarious Pow'r and Place,
To French Designs subject the British Race,
Born to be FREE, and ne'er to be o'ercome,
But when by a brib'd S—n——te Sold at Home.

