



Right Honourable,
THe sedulitie of that Apo∣statick Church of Rome, who like these Locusts Revel. 9. swarme everie

wher in our Countrey, and neigh∣bour Nation, like Pharisees of old to make proselyts to themselves, and misleade simple soules, should move the Ministers of Christ, and Sions Watch-men, to be ashamed to be lesse diligent in a better cause and for a better Master. These are dispersing their popish Pamphlets, and everie where, and everie way, sowing secretlie and subdolouslie their pople and Tares in the Lords Field to seduce, And should not wee then be much more sedulos and solicitous every way, by word and write to discover their fraud, to arme against Errour, and labour to reduce. The conscience of which dutie for my part, hath moved me to answere a late Pamphlet, called. The Touch-stone of the reformed Go∣spell. Which is in everie Papists hands, and almost whereof they

vainly brag as being unanswerable. which answer I have framed with as great brevitie & perspicuitie as I could, and the better to stop the adversaries mouthes, & detect their Wresting of Scripture (as PETER speaketh 2. Pet. 3. 16.) to their owne destruction, I have answered such scripturall places as hee obje∣cteth against us, either by the ex∣position of Fathers for most part, orelse of their own Doctours, Nei∣ther of which without impudence they can reject, and so cannot al∣leadge (as he doeth in his Preface) That wee chop and change the Text of Scripture by some interpretation or o∣ther of our owne.
These paines then which I have beene pressed by sundry Reverend Brethren and others, for the pub∣lick good to put to the Press, I haue (Right Honourable) Dedicate

to you, as a Testimonie of my in∣teere affection both to your selves personally, whose kindnesse and courtesie to my self I have ever at all occasions found, as also to that Place wherein you governe, in re∣gard of my relation therto, which moved me, as I did Dedicate the first Fruits of my Studies in my youth long agoe to the Magistra∣cie and Councill of Aberdene, the place of my owne Birth and bree∣ding; so now to Dedicate the lat∣ter and ryper Fruits of my old Age to the Magistracie and Councill of the Birth-place and breeding of my deceased Father of Godlie Me∣morie. For whose care of my E∣ducation in Letters, as I did owe him all filiall dutie and gratitude while he lived, so do I still in Re∣membrance of him carry all affe∣ctionat respect to that place where

he had his first being and upbring∣ing, and whose prosperitie I shall ever heartlie wish, and that the Lord who hath showne it hard things that it might have said, call me Marah, may so sanctifie to it that sad visitation, and prosper that Place hereafter, that it may bee Naomi, or as the Prophet speakes (Isai. 61. 3.) He may give it Beau∣tie for Ashes, the oyle of ioy for mour∣ning, and the garment of prayse for the spirit of heaviness. Which shal be the heartie prayer of

