



SIR,
THere are a sort of Spleenatic, Ill na∣turd Gentlemen in the World, who are so very Critical upon Dedicati∣ons, that if they find the Author touch∣ing never so lightly on the just Praise of his Pa∣tron, they presently condemn him of Flattery, as if 'twere impossible that any Man of THIS Age cou'd deserve a good Word. Among this number, I am sorry to find the Ingenious Sir George Mackenzie in his Epistle to Mr. Boyle, because I am confident if he had consulted Reason (the sub∣ject of his Book) he must at least have mollify'd the severity of his Opinion, as I hope will appear from what I have here to say. This great Name

has serv'd many of the smaller Critics, who build their Judgment, and Reputation on Authority, as a safe Retreat against the Onsets of Reason, with which the Majority of them are at mortal odds. These Misanthropes are arriv'd to that ex∣tremity now, that they will not give a Man leave to discover his own private Knowledg of an other, if to his Advantage, under the unpleasant Penal∣ty of being receiv'd as a servile, nauseous Sy∣cophant.
This Hazard, Sir, I must run, if I will de∣clare in Public what I know of those excellent Ac∣complishments, which render you so dear to all that are acquainted wih you. Your WIT, and your Courage are things not to be mention'd, much less your GENEROSITY, that being a Vertue that never resides alone. There are some Vertues that are Solitary, and like Hermits dwell in Deserts, over-run with the Wilds of every vicious Deformity in Nature: But GENE∣ROSITY is the King of Vertues, and never goes unattended, which makes me sometimes fancy, 'tis the Result of all other Vertues, when they meet together; The Harmony, which proceeds from the Active Agreement of all the rest. This I am sure,—'tis the noblest Emotion of the Soul, and that which gives the most finishing, and visible Stroaks to the

Image of our Maker. Therefore these morose Gentlemen would never forgive me, if I should tell the World, that you are Generous almost to a Fault (if 'twere possible that could be criminal in Man, for which alone all the World does, and ever has worship'd a Deity) tho' I know it to be true to the utmost Extent; because that will make the considering part of Mankind conclude you adorn'd with all other Vertues, inseparable Com∣panions of this. They will never consider the Reasons I have to aver this, viz. my own Know∣ledg, and the Experience of several others And tho' I urge, that I have found you Generous be∣yond the extravagance of Hopes, when the Bonds of Nature, the Laws of Humanity, and of God himself, could not obtain the least regard from those, who had not a little Reputation in the World for better Principles: Yet will they cry out I am a FLATTERER, if I express my Gratitude to you in Print. Strange effects of a profligate Age, when ill Nature and profess'd Scandal, dress'd in a Politer sort of Bilingsgate, shall be sufficient to establish a Man's Fame (spite of all the most monstrous absurdities of the con∣texture) as a Wit: And the most deserv'd Praise enough to stigmatize the Writer with inde∣leble Infamy. For if any Bold Man dare ce∣lebrate the Vertues of any one, they gaze upon

him, and shake their Heads as if it were an im∣pudent Imposture, or at best a Prodigy as incredi∣ble as a circular Rainbow, or any other unusual Phaenomenon, that there should be any thing Ver∣tuous and Brave in OUR Age.
Not that I am so very fond of this Opinion, that Vertues are in being at this time, and in the Practice of Men, as to take every appearance for a Reality. Nor do I admit a great many that pass for mighty Lovers of Vertue, into that number; in particular, none of those, that are fam'd for a noisy Zeal in the controverted Points of Religion, which prompts an inconsidering Generation to cut one another's Throats, because they can't agree in what themselves allow uncer∣tain. Nor those, who with a Precise Behaviour, make an Ostentatious Shew of being the most in∣timate Friends of God Almighty in Public, but shake Hands with the Devil in a corner with no little Ardor. Nor shall I grace with the noble Title of VERTVE, those sorts of Religious Charities, that have not the Equitable good of Mankind for their end, but only vain Glory in particular Reputation. I could name some, that are very forward in contributing largely to the Building any public Structure, which may commend their Names to Posterity, as well as to the present time, but are inexorable to the nearest

Relations who seek for a private Assistance, tho' a Trifle would save a whole Family. That which affects the view of the World, is the Child of Pride, and is not at all to be valu'd by any consi∣dering Man; the other is the Off-spring of Ver∣tue, having nothing but the good of another for its end, and yet it obtains generally a more last∣ing Fame, and especially if it meet with Ability and Gratitude to commend it to Posterity, in a nobler way, than in dead Piles of Building.
Tho' I deny all this to be Vertue, yet I can ne∣ver be of their Mind, who exclude it intirely from Human Race, since I am sensible 'tis to be found in a great many at this day, particularly in your self. I am therefore of a much contrary Opinion, to those Man-haters I have mention'd those Devotes to Satyr (as they call it) for I have always thought it a far nobler Task to be conversant with the Vertues of Mankind, than with the Vices; and if Fiction must be made use of (as 'tis every day by our Prose-Satyrists) I am sure 'tis more reasonable to admire an Angel of our own forming, than to combat a Devil of ones own conjuring up; one gives us a greater, and juster Idea of the noblest of God's Works, the other flyes in the face of Providence, and wou'd render that Being ridiculous, and contemptible, that was made by the Power and Wisdom of

INFINITY, and which God seems more than once to take no small Pleasure in.
The greatest Patrons of Satyr, I am sure, can∣not prove that it answers the End, they pretend, 'twas design'd for, viz. the Reformation of Vice, especially that Satyr, which names Men, and tends to a personal abuse. For instead of Reforming Vice it only gratifies the ill-nature of most, and that Criminal delight they have in hearing an o∣ther abus'd, without any influence on the Manners of those it aims to Correct; unless it be to return the Author's with a Satyr of dry Bastinade. The Minds of all men have something, that is with more Modesty conceal'd, than expos'd to view, as well as the Body; which Satyr is continual∣ly setting before the Eyes of the World; whilst Panegyric draws a decent Veil over it. Pa∣negyric paints Vertue, in its most taking Co∣lours, and shews the more Beautiful parts of Man∣kind, whilst Satyr is continually raking in the Au∣gean Stable of its Follies, and Vices. Panegyric gives a Noble, and taking prospect of Virtue, stir∣ring up Emulation, in others, and a Caution in him that is Prais'd, not to be guilty of any thing contrary to the character the World has of him, that he may be thought really to deserve it. Nor can I ever believe, but that Virgils Aeneids have contributed more to the Progress of Vertue, than

Horace's Satyrs: The first forming Noble images in the Mind, making it in Love with Honor, the last, at best exposing but the deformity of some Vice, or folly, which when we avoid we ramble so in the dark by their directions, that we can never find out Vertue, and so may well fall into the contrary ex∣tream; Satyr only giving negative definitions of Virtue, like Mr. Cowlys of Wit: But in Epic posie and Panegyric all goes in the clear, and e∣vident affirmative, presenting so exact a portrai∣ture of Vertue, that you can't mistake, or not know it at first sight.
But that which is most of all, Panegyric has the effectual force Satyr pretends to, in chacing away Vice and Folly, by discovering the Proper∣ties, and Beauties of their contraries; and if it be plac'd on an undeserving Subject, it carries as se∣vere a Sting: For who is it that reads those Ver∣ses of Lucan upon Nero, but thinks them a severe Satyr, tho they bear the Face of Praise—for having reckond up the Mischiefs of Civil War, he cries out—
Quod si non aliam venturo fata Neroni
Invenere viam, magno{que} aeterna parantur
Regna deis, coelum{que} suo servire Tonanti
Non nisi saevorum potuit post bella Gigantum:
Jam nihil o superi querimur, scelera ipsa, nefas{que}
Hac mercede placent, &c—
'Twould be to tedious too quote the rest.
This I am sure was the safest way of abusing that Prince. An extravagant Praise of one, that merits nothing, is the most effectual of Satyrs. Pa∣negyric is like a Lawful, and Mild Prince, that wins obedience by Love: Whilst Satyr like a Tyrant would force it by threats and servile fear; the first is the Noblest, as well as the surest way. The Custom of the Lacedemonians of making their Slaves drunk, to represent to their Youth the Folly and Odiousness of that Vice, as it was proportion'd to the grossness of their Genius so it seems to have a likeness to Satyr, which pretends to put Vice out of Countenance, by exposing it, which it generally does in such terms, that it only pleases the vitiated Appetites of some with the lively descriptions of what they delight in. But Panegyric, like the Wiser State of Athens, gives us Examples, and descriptions of Vertue, justly imagining, that, where those Attractives, are no man can be drawn from Beauty to Deformity. 'Twoud be too tedi∣ous to run this consideration of the Preheminence of Panegyrick to Satyr any farther, having said enough already (I hope) to satisfie any sensible man of the truth of what I assert.
Having thus vindicated Panegyric from the Odium it lies under, and plac'd it in its due rank, nothing could hinder me from attempting one on you, Sir, who so e'ry way deserve it, but my Inabili∣ties, which perswade me to say nothing of that Ex∣cellence I value, since I am Conscious that I can∣not say enough, nor perform that Task with the Wit and Eloquence it requires.
As to the Book Sir, I present you with▪ I am extreamly satisfy'd to know, that it is a Present worth your acceptance; for I may say that there has scarce been a Collection which visited the World, with fewer trifling Verses in it. I except my own, which I had the more encouragement to print now, since I had so good an opportunity of making so large an Attonement, with the Wit of others for my own Dulness, and that I hope will chiefly ex∣cuse them to you, as well as convince the World of the real Value I have for you, when it sees me prefix your Name to no Vulgar Book, of my own Composing, but to one that ows its excellence to the generous contribution of my Friends of undoubted Wit. Statius in his Epistle dedicatory to Stella, seems to put his Sylvae in balance with his The∣baidos, for their being the productions of a suddain Heat, or Inspiration, the same is applicable to these; All, or most of them being writ when the Soul was in tune, and not by a Mercenary End, forc'd upon

a task, it was not at all dispos'd to. Besides which, they have most had the advantage of good Iudg∣ments to prune the Luxuriancy of a flowing Fancy, which Statius would not give himself the trouble of. This Book I may therefore say (without any self-esteem) will (if any thing in Poetry have perpe∣tuity) convey your Name to posterity, and with it the Testimony—how great a value I put upon your Worth, and how much I am Sir, without re∣serve,

