



IT cannot be unknown to any, except such
as are ignorant of Satans devices, and
altogether strangers to the Histories
of former times, that when▪ the Church
commeth out of Idolatry, and out of bit∣ter
servitude and grievous pressures of conscience, all her
storms are not over her head, but she begins to be as∣saulted
and afflicted more then before with heresies,
schismes, and home-bred disturbances. Which through
the manifold wisdome and over-ruling dispensation of
God, who worketh all things according to the counsel of
his will, is Englands lot this day, that this may be to
those in whom the Lord hath no pleasure, a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offence, that they may
goe and fall backward, and be broken; & sna∣red,
and taken: that others, who are approved,
may be made manifest; yea, that many may be
purified, and tried, and made white; and that in
the issue God may have the greater glory in making a
soveraign remedy out of poysonfull Ingredients, and his

people may say, blessed be the Lord God of Israel
who only doth wondrous things.
But now will the Sectaries be contented (as Christs
witnesses in former times were) to be examined and
judged according to the word of God, and if they be
found to be what they are accused to be, then to suffer
accordingly? Nay, if so, they fear they shall run too
great a hazard. Therefore they cry out for toleration
and liberty of conscience, hereby going about not only
themselves to fish in troubled waters, but to improve at
once the manifold advantages of sympathising with the
principles of the most part of men amongst us; for as it
is a common plea and bond of union among all hereticks
and sectaries, how many soever their divisions and sub∣divisions
be among themselves;See the Review of the Cove∣nant. yea, they give (in this)
the right hand of fellowship to the Prelaticall▪ and ma∣lignant
party, for they also put in for liberty of consci∣ence:
and as carnall and prophane men desire nothing
more then that they may not be compelled to any religi∣ous
duty, but permitted to doe what seem good in their
own eies. So liberty of conscience is a sweet and taking
word among the lesse discerning sort of godly people,
newly come out of the house of bondage, out of the popish
and Prelaticall tyranny; I say the lesse discerning sort,
because those of the godly who have their senses exerci∣sed
to discern good and evill, know that liberty of here∣sie

and schisme is no part of the liberty of conscience
which Christ hath purchased to us at so dear a rate.
But is there no golden hook and taking bait for the
Magistrate? yes sure; for his part he is told that he may
punish any breach of peace or civill justice, or a trespasse
against the State and against civill authority, but
yet not put forth his power against any man for heresie
or schisme, being matters of religion and of conscience.
As if both Polititians and Divines had been in a great
error when they said that the end and use of Magistra∣cy
is to make bonum hominem, as well as bonum
civem, a good man as well as a good commonwealths
man. Shall I adde further, that all who wish well to
the publike from principles either of religion or policy,
want not here their own tentations, perswading to a to∣leration
of sectaries, in regard of the necessity of an u∣nion
against the common adversary, and the great ha∣zard,
if not certain ruine, of the cause, by our own rup∣tures?
Vnder these fair colours and handsome pretexts doe
sectaries infuse their poyson, I mean their pernicious,
God-provoking, Truth-defacing, Church ruinating, &
State-shaking toleration. The plain english of the que∣stion
is this: whether the Christian Magistrate be kee∣per
of both Tables: whether he ought to suppresse his
own enemies, but not Gods enemies, and preserve his

own ordinances, but not Christs Ordinances frō violation.
Whether the troublers of Israel may be troubled. Whe∣ther
the wilde boars and beasts of the forest must have
leave to break down the hedges of the Lords vineyard;
and whether ravening wolves in sheeps clothing must be
permitted to converse freely in the flock of Christ.
Whether after the black Devil of Idolatry and tyranny
is trod under our feet, a white Devill of heresie and
schisme, under the name of tender consciences, must be
admitted to walk up and down among us. Whether not
only pious and peaceable men, (whom I shall never con∣sent
to persecute) but those also who are as a pestilence▪ or
a Gangrene in the body of Christ, men of corrupt minds
and turbulent spirits, who draw factions after them,
make a breach and rent in Israel, resist the truth and
reformation of religion, spread abroad all the ways they
can their pernicious errors, and by no other means can
be reduced; whether those also ought to be spared and
let alone. I have endeavoured in this following discourse
to vindicate the lawfull, yea necessary use of the coer∣cive
power of the Christian Magistrate in suppressing
and punishing hereticks and sectaries, according as the
degree of their offence and of the Churches danger shal
require: Which when I had done, there came to my
hands a book called The storming of Antichrist.
Indeed, The recruting of Antichrist, and the

storming of Zion, (if so be that I may anabaptize
an Anabaptists book) Take one passage for instance,
pa. 25. And for Papists, saith he, though they are
least to be borne of all others, because of the
uncertainty of their keeping faith with Here∣ticks,
as they call us, and because they may be
absolved of securements that can arise from
the just solemn oaths, and because of their cru∣elty
against the Protestants in divers Countries
where they get the upper hand, and because
they are profest Idolaters, yet may they be born
with (as I suppose with submission to better
judgments) in Protestant government, in point
of religion, because we have no command to
root out any for conscience, &c. Why then? is
this to storm Antichrist? or is it not rather a storming of
this party, in the prevailing whereof God will have
far more glory then in the prevailing of the
Popish and Prelaticall party, as himself speaketh,
pa. 34. And if he will storm, sure some of his Ladders
are too short. If any one rail against Christ (saith
he, p. 23.) or deny the Scriptures to be his word,
or affirm the Epistles to be only letters written
to particular Churches, and no rule for us, and
so unsettle our faith, this I take may be punish∣ed
by the Magistrate, because all or most Na∣tions

in the world doe it. That all the Nations▪ in
the world doe punish for these things, I am yet to learn:
and those that doe, doe they not also punish men for o∣ther
ways of unsetling the grounds of faith besides these?
The declining of some of the Epistles as being letters
written upon particular occasions, and no rule for us,
is an error which hath been pretended to be no lesse con∣scientious
then those errors which now he will have in∣dulged.
Lastly, if he would needs storm, why would
be not make some new breach? I find no materiall ar∣guments
in him for liberty of conscience, but what I
found before in the bloudy Tenent, the compas∣sionate
Samaritane, and M. S. to A. S. so that my
ensuing answers to them shall serve his turn. And
now Reader buy the truth, and sell it not. Search
for knowledge as for hid treasures. If thou readest
with a unprejudiced mind, I dare promise thee through
Gods blessing a satisfied mind.
