



AN honest Sermon, I acknowledge (as an ancient Writer observes) hath much of the miracle in it, though but a few baley loaves, yet may it feed many thousands: It may be our Saviour (more then once) closed his Sermons with such miracles, as so many emblemes of this multi∣plying bread of life. However, it seems your care is (as that of his) that the broken meat be gathered up too, that none be lost, whereby others might be afterwards fed too. But for this (rather pulse then) bread here againe presented you, it hath little or nothing to commend it to publike use, more then (toge∣ther with your Order) the solemnity of the Office you were pla∣sed to put upon it. That first great Fifth of November hath been so fruitfull to you ever since,Qui non est gratus datis, non est dig∣nus dandis. and multiplyed into so many more, (I meane dayes of deliverance) that forgetfulnesse could not but prove a forfeiture: thankfulnesse is the best tenure, gives the surest title to new mercies: if hope be (as the Apostle speaks) the best Anchor, gratitude (questionlesse) is the strongest Cable to fasten it by; you must expect still to stand in need of more deliverances: the same brood of enemies that then durst venture but on an undermining, dare now attempt an open bat∣tery. Nor are they without their Pioners too, still at worke, and now busier then ever, in digging vaults, such as may reach from Oxford, Rome, Hell, to Westminster, and there to blow up (if possible) the better Foundations of your Houses, their Liberties and Priviledges. Things of a morall nature,
 their very essence lies in their ends,Finis habet rationem formae in mo∣ralibus. Proprieta∣tum remotio est naturae negatio. which if they fall short of, they fall to worse then nothing: their qualifications e not onely the ornaments, but the props of their existence, their being such, or such, is many times of more concernment then their being or not being: Parliaments are of this nature, they are essentiated, centred, and secured in their beings by their being such as they should be, .i. free. In Davids time Gods enemies found no way so ready to destroy Gods Law, as to imagine mischiefe as a law against it: could your enemies but once ima∣gine their mischiefe into a law, give it a Parliamentary san∣ction, and destroy your Priviledges cum privilegio, they would not need any more to spend their powder in blowing up the walls of your Houses, it would much better serve their turne, at the doores to catch, and awe, and watch your Votes into a lamenesse and servility, and (with Issachar) a willingnesse, out of the love of rest, to bow the shoulder to beare and become a ser∣vant to tribute. This Sampson (his haire once off, and his eyes out) would serve excellently to grinde in a Court-Horse-ill: Parliaments (like Diamonds) are not so easily broken with ham∣mers or swords either, as they are cut to peeces with their owne dust, when once they should be ground thereinto by tyrannie. But I presume not (as the manner is) to present you with an Epistle of advice, when you call but for the Sermon, or to presse you with pragmatick considerations and rules for peace or justice, as if you had forgotten the businesse you were met about: I would not give you cause to say (with him in the Epigrammatist) —Quod pe∣to,Martial. da mihi, non peto consilium: I onely pray that you my keep many Fifths of November, to the joy (amongst the rest) of

