



Worthy Friends,
IT is a full Decade of yeers since I first was called by Divine Providence to begin the work of my Ministry among you: and it is not yet half so many months, since in humane probability both my Ministry and life seemed to be at an end: But the wise and gracious God (in whose hands all our times are) hath mercifully lengthned my dayes (blessed be his name) for the greater good of my own,Psal. 31.15. and (I hope) of your souls.
These Sermons which upon this comfortable occasion I lately preached, were by some of you desired to be made more publique, which I have fulfilled, so much the more willingly, that I might testifie before the world, first, my infinite obligation to Almighty God for so remarkeable a deliverance; and withall my manyfold engagements to a great part of you for your affectionate love, and multiply∣ed courtesies.
And now (my Dearely Beloved, and longed for in the Lord) give me leave (having this opportunity) to acquaint you with my serious thoughts and earnest de∣sires, and I trust through Gods grace that the transcript of them before your eyes, will helpe to make a deeper im∣pression of them upon your hearts.
And first, I thanke my God through Jesus Christ for your stedfastnesse in the faith, and your mutuall amity, whereby you become exemplary to many parishes in this wavering and contentious age. Oh that not onely you,

but all the people of this Land were alike minded, one towards another according to Christ Jesus.Rom. 15.5.
Next, let me in the bowels of our common Saviour beseech you,2 Tim. 4 1. and if this will not prevaile, charge you before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall Judge the quicke and the dead at his appearing and his King∣dome; that as you drinke in the heavenly raine which commeth oft upon you, so you endeavour to bring forth herbes meet for the great husbandman who dresseth you. I beare you record (and that without flattery) you are at∣tentive hearers,Heb. 6.7. oh that you may be all forward doers of the word.Jam. 1.22.
There are some amongst you whose love towards me hath been, not onely in tongue and in word but in deed, and that in a more than ordinary measure.1 Joh. 3.18. But yet, let me freely tell you. There is nothing (if I know my owne heart) would so rejoyce me as to see the fruit of my weake labours, in the holinesse of your lives. Beleeve it, this is the greatest Kindnesse a people can show to their Mi∣nister, since whereas by a liberall contribution they adde to his comfortable subsistence upon earth, by a religious conversation, they increase his eternall reward in hea∣ven.
And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace which is able to build you up,Act. 20.32. and to give you an inheritance among them which are sanctified,Rom. 15.30. humbly intreating you to strive together with me in your prayers to God both for me and your selves, that I may so preach and live, you may so heare and doe, as that we may behold each other, and all of us our Re∣deemer with joy in the last day. So prayeth

