


SIR,
UPon the Discourse that passed not long since betwixt you and me, concerning the pre∣sent Differences amongst us in this Nation, and the Difficulties you then pressed me with, about the Nature and Reasons of Schism, and the Side which the Sin of it would lie upon; I began to consider of it, and forthwith resolved to see what I could meet with of that Subject amongst that Party you so boldly charge with it, especially before their ex∣clusion, when they might be supposed to speak im∣partially. And amongst the rest, having procured of a Friend the Notes of a Sermon long since preached by Mr. Jenkin, I diligently read it over, and thought it a Discourse very well calculated to bring this matter to an issue betwixt us: for which end, having compared it with and corrected it by what he afterward printed upon that Text, I did resolve to send it to you. This, I confess, I the rather pitched upon, as he is yet alive, and is able to justifie it; and because you also urged me with some Objections offered in particular against him, and his proceedings in the case, and did af∣firm,

That he, with the rest of his Brethren, durst not now own what they had formerly preached, or preach what they formerly did about Separation, lest they should revive what they hope is by this time forgotten, and disquiet the Ashes of the old Nonconformists, whose Followers they profess to be, but herein, as you said, widely differ from.
I must confess my self not to have been a little disturbed at those Passages that you produced out of some of them, and could not but transcribe that from Mr. Calamy, in his Apologie against an unjust Invective, pag. 10. viz. What will Mr. Burton say to old Mr. Dod, Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Ball, Mr. Rath∣band, &c? Did not these Reverend Ministers see the Pattern of Gods House? And yet it is well known, that they wrote many Books against those that refused Communion with our Churches (he means the Epi∣scopal), and were their greatest Enemies. And I can∣not forget another you shewed me out of the Vin∣dication of the Presbyterial Government, pag. 135. published by the Provincial Assembly of London, 1650. (of whom you told me Mr. Jenkin was one) viz. There were many godly and learned Nonconformists of this last Age, that were persuaded in their Consci∣ences, that they could not hold Communion with the Church of England, in receiving the Sacrament kneeling, without sin; yet did they not separate from

her. Indeed, in that particular Act they withdrew; but yet so, as that they held Communion with her in the rest; being far from a negative, much more from a positive Separation. Nay, some of them, even when our Churches were full of sinful Mixtures, with great Zeal and Learning defended them so far, as to write against those that did separate from them.
I do acknowledge, that I am not able to recon∣cile all things of this nature, and that it is very hard to shew where the difference lies betwixt now and then, and to find out what the People have to scare them from Communion with the Church of England now, that they had not in those Times; and why what Mr. Cartwright, Mr. Dod, &c. wrote then in defence of it, will not still so far hold good. But I hope you easily conceive, that the Case is not the same with the Ministers as the People. For the Peo∣ple, it is confessed, and you gave me an undeniable Proof of the general Belief of the present Noncon∣formists in this matter, viz. That when by the late Act of Parliament every one that was in any Office of Trust was required to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper according to the usage of the Church of England, they that amongst them were concerned, were generally advised to it by their own Pastors, and few, if any, were found to re∣fuse it; which doubtless they would have done, if

either they or their Pastors had thought that they had sinned in so doing; and their own Interest, or the capacity they might be in of doing better Services in their Places, than out of them, would not have made it lawful, if it had not been thought lawful in it self.
And therefore I do very readily grant this. But withal I hope you do perceive, that there is a great difference betwixt the People and their Ministers, betwixt the Peoples Communicating with, and the Ministers Officiating in the Church: for the Mini∣sters are in order to this required to renounce the Covenant, and to assent and consent to the use of the Liturgie. And therefore, though the People may now Communicate upon the same terms that the People did before the Wars (when Separation from the Church of England was proved to be Schism by the great Nonconformists of those Times, as is abovesaid), and the Ministers may now Com∣municate upon the same terms as the People, yet they cannot do it as Ministers; and what reason is there that they should degrade themselves, who are (as Mr. Jenkin saith, on Jude, pag. 21.) Church-Officers betrusted with the ordering of the Church, and for opening the Doors of the Churches Communion, by the Keys of Doctrine and Discipline; and be no more than private Christians, that have no power

in these matters, as he there observes? Is this no∣thing, to be, from Rulers of the Flock, turned down amongst the common Herd; and from being keep∣ers of the Keys, to be brought under the power of them?
But supposing that they could thus far conde∣scend, yet do you make nothing of the Apostles ne∣cessity, and woe is me? or think you it fit, after so sacred a Character as that of Ordination, that they can clear themselves if they neglect it? Consider what is written in a Book called Sacrilegious De∣sertion of the Holy Ministry rebuked, pag. 30. viz. Is a Vow and Dedication to preach the Gospel, no reason to preach it elsewhere, when it's forbidden in your Assemblies? Is the alienation of Consecrated Persons no Sacrilege? You told me indeed, That supposing they were under the like necessity (which you said they were not), yet, that as St. Paul's necessity did not, so neither did theirs confine them to any par∣ticular Place, Time, or Number; that Preaching was not more so, when it was to many, than to few, in publick than in private, in London than the Countrey; and that as the Law did permit them to preach to Five besides their own Family, so it did not forbid them private Conference elsewhere; a way that the Nonconformists do so much recom∣mend, that one of them, in his Advice to the rest,

saith of it, That Publick hearing without Personal conference, seldom bringeth men to understand well what you say, (Sacrileg. Disert. pag. 93.) And there∣fore that you conceived not how St. Paul's Wo, or their Ordination, did oblige them to flock up to the Capital City, or to betake themselves to the chiefest Towns, and to draw great numbers toge∣ther; no more than it did before Bartholomew in 62, to follow the same course.
But, Sir, I will onely ask you, whether you think it not better to preach to many, than to few; and in publick, than in corners; and in Towns, than Villages; and in London, than the Country? In Villages People will jog on in their old way, they have neither much curiosity nor leisure; or whatever is there taught or learned, spreads no further: But you know, teach London, and you teach the whole Nation; thence the Light before the Wars shone forth into all parts; and after when Heresies were hatched and nourished up under her wings, from her they spread all the Kingdom over, as is observed by the Provincial Assembly of London, in their Vindication, pag, 119. and the same way doubtless is still to be observed, if any good is to be done. And it is the same as to the Places of eminency in the Country. And therefore whate∣ver becomes of the remote Parts, and the little

Places, great care is here to be taken, that the Souls in Cities and Corporations be not deserted, as the Author of Sacrilegious Desertion doth hint, p. 69. and better leave those to shift for themselves, than to leave these unsupplied. Which gives a very good account, why they flock so much from the Country to the Town. And if you still persist to demand, why it was not thought so before 62? the Answer is ready; for then London was their own, and the Pulpits were safe, when kept by those that were of their own Persuasion: But the case being now otherwise, if they should retire, and not keep up a distinct Party, the City would be another thing, and the whole Nation be in danger of Infection. And then what would become of them and their Families? For there are not very many of them that were bred up to the under∣standing of Trade, or keeping Books of Account, and that can shift for themselves as other Men; and if put by that way of Livelihood, where must they seek for it? As there cannot be a walking, with∣out a moving (as Mr. Jenkin judiciously observes on Jude, pag. 447.); so there cannot be an eating without Food: and how Food is to be had on their part, without Preaching, is not easie to ima∣gine.
Do you think, if they had betaken themselves

to instruct their Flocks, that they left, by private Conference (as the Author of the Address to the Nonconformists propounds, pag. 199.), that those who now support them in point of Livelihood in the way they are in, would do the same in the other way, as that Author conjectures? Nay, if they were left to the mercy of the Act of Parliament, which allows Five beside their own Family, and did govern themselves by it, can you think that would turn to any account?
Alas, Sir, you know Charity is grown cold in these times; and if they put all upon that issue, we may say, God help them, for it may be feared the People will not. We know, Sir, and you can∣not be ignorant of it, that it's a Publick way, and the being followed and admired by Multitudes, when the Members have the reputation of being joyned to a numerous and wealthy Congregation, and where Trade may be promoted, that opens the Purses, and, shall I say, engages the Hearts of not a few; and therefore if you will not allow them to preach in this way, you must not allow them to live and eat as other Folk.
Methinks your own experience should open your eyes, and let you see what difference is made be∣twixt him that labours in the Word, and him that doth not; betwixt him that preacheth at such con∣venient

Seasons, that he may resort to the Publick Worship, and is willing to shew, that he and the Church of England in effect are one; and him that preacheth in opposition to it, at the same time with the Publick, and thereby proclaimeth, that he and the Church are two. Alas, Sir, the City-Mouse did not more excel the Country, than one here doth the other, in the Provisions of his Table, and the Munificence of his Benefactors. The one lives by Preaching, and lives plentifully; the other lives by his Learning, in the sense of the Scholar that sold his Books to maintain himself with, as some of them whom I know you love and reverence are reported to do; and others forced to be beholden to Conformists, that have made private Collections for them. These are they that the Author of Sa∣crilegious Desertion, pag. 111. is to be understood of, when he saith, That the French Impression of the Councils is too dear for the Purse of a Nonconform∣able Minister. And besides, Sir, is it nothing, think you, for a Man to walk disconsolately through the Streets, hardly taken notice of, and his Worth and Learning covered by his Cloak and Modesty; and another in the mean time sailing along, perhaps with two or three Attendants, and ever and anon one or other stepping forth to salute him with a low∣ly Reverence? And is not this another material

difference betwixt him that preacheth, and him that preacheth not; betwixt him that preacheth in the one way, and him that preacheth in the other before spoken of? Nay, is it not come to this, that those they call moderate yielding men are scarcely endured, but even their Reputations are clancularly struck at by their Brethren; insomuch that they are fain to carry it with more wariness, and comply more than otherwise they would, that they may not be the Marks of their Reproches? Hence, I believe, it was, that after the Book enti∣tuled The Cure of Church-Divisions had exasperated the Party, Anno 1670. the Author, to lick himself a little whole in their esteem, made some amends for his transgression, in his thundring Book of Sa∣crilegious Desertion, in the Year 1672. And I guess, that it is for the same reason, that when he pub∣lickly professed, That the notorious necessity of the People, who were more than the Parish-Church could hold, moved him to preach at the same hours with the Publick; and that he met not under any colour and pretence of any Religious Exercise in other manner than according to the Liturgie, and the Practice of the Church of England; and were he able, that he would accordingly read himself: yet that he never had that read; and since his disposal of that Place, doth preach occasionally in the Meeting-places of the

City, at the same hours, where there is none of that necessity before pleaded by him, and where the Churches generally rather want Auditors, than Au∣ditors Churches. And so much are they under the awe of this, that you know, when Dr. Manton him∣self was asked why he used not the Lords Prayer, he replied, That he omitted it, not that he thought it unlawful, but lest by the use of it he should give offence to some of his Brethren, and his own Peo∣ple. So that you see, Sir, to what a pass things are brought, and that it is as necessary for them thus to do, as it is to retain the esteem of their Party; and as necessary to retain that esteem, as it is to have a Livelihood where it is wanted, or to be accounted Godly and Religious. Now, Sir, I know not how you may like this, to suffer disre∣spect, and want, and discouragement; but if you do, I'le assure you that I know but few that are of your mind. For is not Respect to be valued before Contempt; providing for a Mans House, before neglecting it; and especially, when this is consistent with, and obtained in the Service of God?
And now I am fallen upon the thing that I per∣ceive you would bring me to, when you charge them upon Mr. Jenkin's Principles, who saith, that admiration of mens persons, and self-conceit, self-seek∣ing, and pride, are the most general Causes of

Schism, as I see that he doth, pag. 26, 27, 28. of this Sermon. Causes, you said, as evident among them, as their Schism it self, and by which, with no little art, they bolster it up. Thus they take to them∣selves the Title of the Servants of God, and give to the People that of the godly and the gracious; and for their encouragement, magnifie their Num∣bers, and which they take all occasions to represent. As, a Nonconformist can no sooner die, but it shall be spread through all the Congregations, who are told by their Ministers the Lords-day before his In∣terment, that such a one is lately dead, and to be buried at such a time, from such a place, where he desires them to be, and to shew their Respects by attending his Corps to its Funeral. In order to which, his Praises are sounded from the Pulpit, and he Sainted by some little Poet, and his Sayings, that have either been ordinarily used by him in Di∣scourse, or frequently dropped from him in the Pulpit, are collected; and then Sermon, Poem, and Sayings vented amongst the Multitudes crowding from all Quarters of the Town, and that are as proud to carry one of them home, as the poor Zea∣lots in the Church of Rome are to get any Rag that hath but touched the Reliques of their Saint in a solemn Procession. After which rehearsal, you bid me consider, how this would look if done in the Church of England.

But, Sir, this is a course that seems to me not at all unreasonable, in their circumstances; it being very necessary, that they should, above all things, get the Peoples esteem, and very fit that the People should testifie their esteem of them; and why not in this way of Attendance on them? For, First, It's a comfort to the Church under the loss of their Pastor, to see him respected when dead, as he was when alive. Secondly, By burying their Pastor with honour, and putting themselves into Mourning, and engaging others to follow him to his Burial, they do shew the respect that they had to him in a day of Persecution and Distress, when despised by others; and that they continued constant to him to the death. Thirdly, It's good to shew the World that they are not so despicable for Quality or Number, as is pretended. And are not these Rea∣sons sufficient to justifie their Practice in this case, and to shew, how it would not so well become you in your Church, as it doth them in theirs?
But, I perceive, this that I said last of all stuck most in your stomach, as you judged it a kind of an open Challenge and Defiance to Authority; and you thought that you had me at a great ad∣vantage, when you so readily brought Chapter and Page upon me from Mr. Jenkin on Jude, pag. 623. viz. That miserable is that Commonwealth whose Man∣ners

have brought their Laws under their power. For you considered not, that this is spoken of Irreligious Persons, and Civil Affairs; but in the Matters of Religion, I hope, you know better, and that the more contemptible the Laws about those things are made, and the weaker the Authority is to put them into execution, the safer they themselves be whom the Laws are designed against. And besides, do you think, that Men ought not to make as publick a Profession of their Religion as with security they can; and to let the Power understand, how much it would be for their Safety and Interest to come over to the strongest Side? And is it not far better for Authority to depend upon Religion, than Reli∣gion upon Authority? Where have you lived all this while, that are yet to learn in so necessary a Point of Casuistical Divinity?
As for Mr. Jenkin himself, when you said, that he made very bold with the Reputation of others, and took as great a liberty to revile, as to commend; and did produce him against himself, on Jude, pag. 184. viz. That it is Seducers policy to asperse the Mi∣nisters, to cause a dislike of their Ministry: and again, pag. 394. That the great endeavour of Seducers is, to be magnified, or rather omnified, to have all others de∣based and nullified: I must confess that I have no∣thing to say: and that what you pointed me to in

the same Book, pag. 521. ake away this sinful censu∣ring from many Professors, and there will nothing re∣main to shew them Religious; whereas a just man is severe onely to himself, holds still true. It is a great fault in them, and what, if he hath miscarried in, as I hope he hath repented of, so by his silence upon that gentle Reproof given him in The Vindi∣cation of the Conforming Clergie, doth seem to own. I must acknowledge, that my own Temper, as well as my Religion, hath so much endeared me to that most excellent Description of Charity, 1 Cor. 13. Charity envieth not; Charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, doth not behave it self unseemly, &c. beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, &c. that were all other things in the Church of England as agreeable to me, as the Temper of it, it would mightily reconcile me to it. We find no Martins, no Centuries, no Gangraena's, no Glo∣cester-Coblers, no Stories or uncertain Reports, pick∣ed up, and maliciously improved, by which the Re∣putations of their Adversaries are invaded, and exposed to the World; notwithstanding the Pro∣vocations they have received, and the abundant matter that hath been formerly and of late afford∣ed for such an History. And there is nothing hath made me more out of love with my old Friend Mr. J. than a certain proneness that he hath disco∣vered,

to make Invectives against others, and to attend in the mean time so little to himself, as to give occasion to others (if they would take it) to make them against him. But I hope, how little so∣ever he respected what in another case he once said, in his Sermon of the Saints Worth, pag. 11. viz. If a man takes the Picture of another, he will not take it of his Back-side, Leg, or Hand, or the like; but of his Face, his beautifullest Part: yet that you and others will observe it, that the World be no more troubled with such Narratives as can serve to no good End, but will effectually promote a bad; which is to expose Religion, and make it mean and contemptible.
For my part, I could heartily wish, that all Dif∣ferences about little things were laid aside; it be∣ing (as he observes, pag. 252. on Jude) very un∣suitable, that a greater Fire should be employed in roasting of an Egg, than an Ox; and to be more con∣tentious for Bubbles, than Blessedness. As for great∣er Differences, I could as heartily wish they were composed, that the Love of God did more encrease, and that would be the encrease of Ʋnity. For what he saith, Vol. 2. on Jude, pag. 630. is very true; The preserving of our Love to God is an excellent pre∣servative against Sectaries and false Teachers. He who loves God, will fear to break the Ʋnity and Peace of the Church.

I cannot conclude better. As for the great Case, I refer you to the Sermon it self, by which, me∣thinks, I could stand and fall; as being confident, that either that will justifie Mr. Jenkin, or that he will be able to justifie that; and so shall be impa∣tient, till you give your Opinion of it to,
SIR, 
