




SIR,
THis whole undertaking was vowed to your
great name, and this peece of it in writing
presented to your Noble hands, before the
Lord, and the State had placed you in that
high Station in which you now stand: And as I can∣not
but applaud the happy Prognostick of mine
own thoughts, which found out such a Patron for
The Harmony of the Evangelists, as the high Court of
heaven, and of England have since called out to bee
the Patron of the Gospel it selfe: So can I not but
bewaile the unhappy condition of mine own dis∣abilities;
which can neither present any thing bet∣ter,
then what I now publish, to so great a person:

nor yet could publish any whit sooner, that which I
then presented, though it had been better. Your
Excellencies candor will helpe to excuse both the
one failing and the other, [give me leave to presage
it] since I know such noblenesse as yours, accepteth
according to what a man hath, and expecteth not
according to what hee hath not. Mine addresse
in this kinde unto your Self, I shall not go about to
excuse, but must rather justifie, and though it bee
exceeding bold, yet to mee it seems exceeding rea∣sonable.
For to whom should a Staffordshire student
devote his studies, but to the glory of Staffordshire?
and whither should a Treatise upon the Gospels re∣fuge
for patronage, but to the great Patron of the
Gospel? I know mine own unsufficiency for such a
work, and am conscious to my self of my many fai∣lings
in the managing of it, yet could I not but un∣dertake
it, in hope of some profit to the Reader;
nor could I but addresse it to such a Patron, in hope
of some intertainment with your Excellency.
The Harmony of the Evangelists in our English
tongue is rare to find, especially with that proofe of
the order of the story, and that illustration of the
Text and Language, that a thing of that nature
doth require, & that it hath found in other tongues.
Mine own heart did tell mee, that I of all others
was most unfit and unable for such an undertaking
in regard of want of parts, means, and opportunity;
yet could I not desist from such an attempt, but

must needs try what I could do in this kind, partly
that I might bring something toward the building
of the Tabernacle, though it were never so small,
and chiefely that I might stir up some pen of a grea∣ter
ability, to set to a work of so brave import.
An assay and tryall of some of my progresse in
such an undertaking, I doe here most humbly lay
at your Excellencies feet, and that not onely as an
Oblation tendered to your noblenesse this once,
but also as an earnest of a future tribute of this
kind, till the whole work bee finished, and the Har∣mony
compleated, if God vouchsafe health, strength,
and opportunity, and your Excellency acceptance,
countenance, and incouragement: There is nothing
in the workman, or the workmanship, that can
ground any hope for any such thing, from you, but
there is enough in your own known worth, good∣nesse,
and noble disposition, to make me confident,
that you will not onely not reject the work, but
that you will also accept the workman for the
workes sake, because the subject of it is the Evan∣gelists.
It is now become your honourable profes∣sion
to bee the Champion of the Gospel, and the Lord
hath installed you in an Order, of which, to a Con∣stantine,
a Sweden, and an Essex, I know not what Hi∣stories
can adde a fourth, that hath been the Evan∣gelicall
Knight, or the Knight of the Gospel. How
you have honoured this your Order, by your great
atchievements, and how the great trust reposed in

you, hath met with as great trustinesse, it is the hap∣pinesse
of the Nation to have tryed, and to remem∣ber,
and it cannot but bee the rejoycing and com∣fort
of your poore suppliant to thinke of, and to
consider: For to have to deale with so constant
worthinesse, noblenesse, and candor, with so great
piety, zeale, religiousnes, and honour, with so much
accomplishment, excellency, and splendor, cannot
but promise a comfortable accesse, a cheerfull en∣tertainment,
and a desired issue. I have no more to
say [for short speech best agreeth with your great
imployments] but only this, to beg of your Excel∣lency,
that among the serious cares and thoughts of
your noble heart, you would remember our poore
wrong'd Staffordshire for good: and labour her deli∣very,
not only from her open enemies, but also from
her seeming friends which do worse devour her.
And to the Throne of grace it must bee my con∣tinuall
suite and petition, that the Lord would
Crown all your great ingagements with happy suc∣cesse,
make you stil a blessing, and rejoycing to the
English Nation, preserve your Person, increase your
Honour, support your Heart, direct your steps, immor∣talize
your name here, and lade your Excellency with
the most excellent weight of glory hereafter. So
ever prayeth, and so ever must pray,

From my Study in Little
Britain, Sep. 30. 1644.
