



May it please your Grace,
ALthough (as Solomon says) Every thing is beautiful in his season; and there was a time when a Cup of cold Water was an ac∣ceptable Present to an Emperour: yet should I not have presumed to offer so mean a Present to so Great a Per∣son, as a little Water in a homely Ves∣sel, taken up in haste and disorder, (as
men are wont to do when the Neigh∣bourhood is on fire) had it not been that the Fire-brands which I endea∣vour to extinguish, have not onely been scattered up and down among combustible matter through the Nati∣on, but that the Boutefeus have been so desperately bold, as to throw some of their Fire-balls into the August As∣sembly of his Majesties most Honourable Privy-Council. Such was the Barba∣rous Celeusma, the Answers to Dr. Stillingfleet, &c. and now a Traiterous Preface and Postscript dedicated by one Tho. Hunt to the Right Honourable John Earl of Radnor, &c. Lord Presi∣dent of his Majesties most Honourable Privy-Council.
I am well assured, that that Judi∣cious and Noble Lord hath either so contemned those seditious and treason∣able Libels, as not to vouchsafe them the Reading; or if he hath read them,
that they kindled a just indignation in his loyal breast, and condemned them to the fire, as designed to set the Na∣tion in a flame. The Author tells us truly, that the reason of his Dedication was to create a Prejudice: and the thing is self-evident, that the greatest Adversaries which that Noble Lord hath (if at least he hath any: for I know he can have none, but among the factious and seditious Rabble that are acted by such Seducers) could not have offered a greater Affront to a Person of his known Wisdom and Inte∣grity, than such a Dedication amounts unto; and therefore I doubt not but those fiery Darts which that Author hath shot against so firm a Fortress of Religion and Loyalty, will recoil on his own head.
If men of such fiery tempers have presumed of favour from so Great Persons, I cannot but hope for your
Graces pardon, who have endeavoured, though in a hasty and rude manner, to extinguish those Wilde-fires which they have kindled: for God onely knows how great a matter a little such fire, blown (as it is) with popular breath, may kindle, if not timely preven∣ted.
The Devil was wont to carry on his designes formerly as an Angel of Light; and then the deluded Instru∣ments deserved some pity: But now that he appears in his proper Colours, a Noon-day-Devil, breathing our flames of fire and a horrible stench, none but such as are by his Sorceries and Witch∣crafs become his covenanted Servants, would seek to bring others under the same sins and condemnation with themselves, as being already self-con∣demned, and having sinned away all hopes of mercy from God or man.

All those Coals of Sedition and Re∣bellion which were raked up under the Ashes of this ruined Nation, and which we might in reason hope, had been quite extinguished by the enjoyment of Peace and Truth, Prosperity and Plen∣ty, for twenty years together, have been secretly fomented, and are now publickly scattered, to cause a New Con∣flagration.
I humbly beg your Graces patience to mind the present Age, how ready they are to be led over the same Preci∣pices, by the same Impostures, and by some of the same men by whom the former Age was ruined: onely, they were led on by degrees, and coloura∣ble pretences; the Snare was not spread in their sight, as it is now in ours, who are perswaded with open eyes, and a dreadful prospect of Rebellion and Dam∣nation before us, to cast our selves head∣long into them both.

It was after a long Progress and un∣happy success of the former War, that John Goodwin (and others) publi∣shed his Evangelium Armatum, his new Gospel-liberty, affirming, That the law∣fulness of Resistance is now discovered to Gods Church, as the necessary means to ruine Antichrist: for the Kings of the Earth (saith he) will never be perswaded to effect this great and holy work, and therefore the People must. He in the 30, 31, 32 pages of his Anti-Cavalierism, among many other Passa∣ges, hath these words, which every Christian that reads them must abhor.
Amongst many other Truths which were of necessity to be laid a∣sleep, for the passing of this Beast (Antichrist) unto his great power and authority, and for the maintai∣ning and safe guarding of him in the possession thereof, this is one of spe∣cial
consideration, That Christians may lawfully in a lawful way stand up to defend themselves, in case they be able, against any unlawful As∣saults, by what Assailants, or by what pretended Authority soever made upon them: for had this Opinion been timeously enough, and sub∣stantially taught in the Church, it would certainly have caused an A∣bortion in Antichrists birth, and so have disappointed the Devil of his first-born, had not the Spirits, and Judgments, and Consciences of men been as it were cowed and marvel∣lously embased and kept under, and so prepared for Antichrists Lure, by Doctrines and Tenets excessively ad∣vancing the power of Superiours o∣ver Inferiours, and binding Iron yokes and heavie burdens on those that were in subjection; doubtless they would never have bowed down their backs so low, as to let such a
Be rule over them; they would ne have resigned up their Judge∣ments and Consciences into the hands of such a Spiritual Tyrant as he. So that you see there was a special necessity, for the letting of Antichrist into the world; yea and for the continuance of him in his Throne, that no such Opinion as this which we speak of, whether truth or untruth, should be taught and believed; I mean, which vin∣dicateth and maintaineth the just Rights, and Liberties, and Priviledges of those that live under authority and subjection to others. Whereas now on the contrary, that time of Gods preordination and purpose for the downfal of Antichrist drawing neer, there is a kind of necessity that those truths, which have slept for many years, should now be awakened; and particularly, That God should re∣veal and discover unto his faithful
Ministers and other his servants, the just bounds and limits of Authority and Power, and consequently the just and full extent of the lawful Liberties of those that live in subjection. —E∣vident it is, that they are the Commo∣nalty of Christians, I mean Christians of ordinary Rank and Quality, that shall be most active, and have the principal hand in executing the Judg∣ments of God upon the Whore. Con∣sider that place, Rev. 18.4, 5, 6. Now that this service shall be per∣formed unto God by them, (Chri∣stians I mean of under Rank and Quality) contrary to the will, de∣sires, or commands of those Kings and Princes under whom they live, it appears by that which immediately followeth, v. 9. And whereas the Text saith expresly that the ten Kings shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and eat her flesh, and burn her with fire; for God hath
put it in their hearts to fulfil his will, and to agree and give their Kingdom unto the Beast until the Words of God shall be fulfilled: To prevent this Ob∣jection, because God in his good time will arm the Kings to fight joyntly the Lords battel against the Beast; he thus interprets that place; I con∣ceive (saith he) this is not meant of the persons of Kings, but of their States and Kingdoms, (i. e.) of the generality of the people under them, p. 32. As if the meaning of— The Kings shall hate the Beast, were, The People shall hate their Kings, and rebel against them, in order to the de∣struction of Antichrist.
Nothing is more evident, than that this Doctrine which he would pro∣mote for the pulling down of Anti∣christ, was that by which Antichrist was advanced to that sublimity of Pow∣er which he now hath, and by which
he is still supported in it; unless they will deny the Pope to be Antichrist: for this Resistance of lawful Authority is still practised and defended by that Church. And how can they blame that Church, who teach and practise the same things? If ever the Pope be pulled down by the Doctrine and Pra∣ctice of Resistance of lawful Prin∣ces, it will be to set up Another in his room.
Now that the Doctrine which was taught by this wretched man and John Milton, the onely two persons that publickly defended the Parricide com∣mitted on that incomparable King, when he was cast out of his Throne, and an Ʋsurper placed in it, is the same which is now revived by these two Authors whom I have under con∣sideration; I submit to your Graces judgment, and the Consciences of all impartial Readers. And to what a
prodigious height of Impiety are they come, who in such times of Peace, un∣der a most gracious and religious Prince, and after such experiences of the mi∣serable effects of them, shall openly plead for the same Antiscriptural and Antichristian Doctrines and Practices, by which these men endeavour at one leap, (as the Devil did the herd of Swine) to plunge the Multitude over head and ears in Rebellion and Confu∣sion! And yet to court the People, Mr. Hunt tells them in the close of his Preface, That Loyalty, Religion, and the Prosperity and Peace of his Country, have entirely conducted his thoughts and guided his hand in this Work, (whereas if he were not the same person, yet he useth the same Arguments as an anonymous Author did in a Tract concerning Mixt and Limited Monarchy): That he hath affirmed nothing but what is publick∣ly known for truth: That Justice it
self will acquit him from having done any thing amiss: That he hath encir∣cled himself (in his own considera∣tions) as in a brazen wall (when it is but a brazen face). And as for the fears of Rage and Injustice, they shall never affect him: but I fear the hand∣writing of the Laws, and the sentence of Justice may one day shake his con∣fidence.
I joyn Issues with him in his Appeal concerning his Writings, and the Re∣ply now made to them: and though he have provoked me to say something that may balance the Reputation of Religion and Loyalty, &c. which he as∣sumes to himself, I shall onely say, That I am one who have served in the Ministry of the Established Reli∣gion for forty years together; I have kept my Station, and defended my Post against all Assaults: I have seen those deplorable times, wherein it was coun∣ted
a daring thing to assert the use of the Lords Prayer in the Publick As∣semblies, against the Blasphemies of J. O. I have withstood the attempts of Mr. Baxter, Humfries, Lob, and others, for the disturbance of our publick Peace. And though by age and other infirmities I might claim the priviledge of a Miles Emeritus, yet have I enga∣ged once more against these two Incen∣diaries; and having the same cause of Religion and Loyalty to defend, I can∣not doubt of success against such Ag∣gressors, of whom your Grace will find a far different Character from that which they give of themselves: for,
These two Authors, like Simeon and Levi, are so confederate, that they strive who shall exceed the other in doing mischief. The one undermines the foundation of the Church in her Ministry: The other, that of the
State in the Royal Authority. Again, The one plays with the Crown, as if it were a Tennis-ball: The other de∣rides the Doctrine of the Cross, com∣paring it with that of the Great Turks Bow-string. The one encourageth Resistance, and very modestly insinu∣ates a Reward due to such as shall kill those (be they Princes or others) who oppose the Religion which they ap∣prove of: The other more confidently asserts the excluding (not of a single Monarch, but) even Monarchy it self, though it be in the glorious Family of the STƲARTS, as he Ironically calls them. Yet so great is the Re∣volt of our People both from God and the King, that these two (like Jero∣boam's Calves which he set up as well to alter the established Worship, as to translate the Kingdom from the Fami∣ly of David) are worshipped by the Rabble from Dan to Beersheba.

And now I beseech your Grace not to be offended with this Confident Ad∣dress of an obscure Person, who after various tossings, having through the great mercy of God escaped Ship∣wreck in that great Hurricane wherein many thousands more worthy persons perished, is still imbarked in that an∣cient Vessel wherein he hopes to end his days in peace; nothing doubting, but that God, who stilled the raging of that Sea, and the madness of that Peo∣ple, will also lead us without any harm through those Fires which so many busie-bodies are now kindling against us; and that he will preserve us even in the flames; at which though we be affrighted, as Moses was at the burning Bush, yet we shall not be consumed by them: Especially while we have such a CAESAR, who all his life-time hath been a Favourite of Heaven; being born, preserved, restored, gui∣ded,
and supported by a Chain of Mi∣racles: And such a principal Member of that Church of Christ embarked with us, against which the gates of Hell shall never prevail; and having also such a pious and experienced Pilot as your Grace, who hath both his Eyes and his Heart to Heaven for his own direction, and both his hands to the Helm, for the conduct of the People committed to his Charge.
There remains nothing to the per∣fecting our Establishment, but the ca∣sting out those Jonahs which lie a∣sleep in the bottom of the Ship; I mean our sins, which have caused the wrath of God to kindle those fires in the midst of us, which may justly make us as desolate as Sodom or Gomorrha. That with penitent Tears, fervent and unanimous Prayers, seasonable and se∣rious reformation of our Lives, we would deprecate Gods displeasure,
and that yet he would make us of one heart and mind in considering and do∣ing the things that belong to our peace, before they are hid from our eyes: That in these things I may do some accep∣table service to the Church of Christ on Earth, and with it have my Re∣ward in Heaven, is the hearty Prayers and great Ambition of


