



SIR,
EVER since I had the honour to make one in the number of your Vast Acquaintance, I have had an extream ambi∣ion to publish to the world my happiness of it, in pay∣ing you my grateful acknow∣ledgments for so high a fa∣vour:
and indeed I should have done it sooner, had  found any thing that deser∣ved so great a name a yours to be prefixed to it;  name that is equally re∣ver'd and lov'd by all de¦grees of men who know it even by the lowest, who ge¦nerally are prone to defac the Scutcheon, and sullie th fame of such as are abov them.
I KNOW not wha Judgment you will pass up¦on me for the unbecomin libertie I take to desire you
Patronage and Protection for this small Treatise; but I am sure, the deceased Au∣hor (were he capable of eturning) would think it an unpardonable Injury done to his Memory, if I ad not made choice of a person of your great Lear∣ning and Abilities to be the Defender of it.
BE pleased then, SIR, o give it a kinde reception, nce I present you with a Subject which is so much your Darling, and so con∣orming to your own parti∣cular
temper, Praeferens (a the learned Doctor says of you) honestan quietem,L. D. M. in Jugulo causae, Ep. 19. f. 76. studia que literarum i seducto, vitae a∣ctuosae sed habitae inter cel¦sissimas regni dignitates & munera, quò te tua virtu proveheret. A Subjec which you sufficiently knew the advantages of, and therefore made your timely retreat from the thronging varieties of troublesom business, that you might th more freely enjoy the subli∣mer
felicities of undistur∣bed and pleasant solitude. In societate & frequentia animum undique arietari ad varia negotia: & dum partem nostri temporis, quod solidum Deo debe∣tur, amicus, sodalis, procu∣rator, uxor, liberi fibi quisque rapit, tempus vitae nostrae quasi in frusta con∣cidi, & Deo subtrahi.
AND certainly (as the most Ingeni∣ous Mr.In his Essay of Solitude, fol. 91. Abra∣ham Cowley re∣marques) the
meaning of that Sentence, Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus, spoken by the excellent Scipio, was, That he found more satis∣faction to his minde, and more improvement of it by solitude, than by com∣pany; or else he would never, after he had made Rome Mistress of almost the whole world, have retired himself from it by a volun∣tary exile, and at a private house in the middle of a Wood neer Linternum, passed the remainder of his
glorious life no less glori∣ously.
ARISTOTLE positively concludes, that the love of a solitarie and private life, in a man of Letters and Cogitation, proceeds from an heroical vertue, which raises him above the level of ordinary mankind, to place him in some kind of equality with the Gods themselves; whilst the o∣thers, that are run down with the torrent of publick affairs, (whatever their conditions and eminencies
may be) are but as golden Slaves and Vassals to them: they are constantly employed in the vexatious drudgeries of Humane state, when those are in a continual serenitie and peacefulness of mind, under the more refin'd and exalted Contemplations.
VIRGIL very well un∣derstood what he did, when he desired but to have two Wishes granted him, that so he might be compleatly happie as to this world; and the first was, to be a good
Philosopher; the second, a good Husband-man: the one obliging him to retire from the Citie; the other, to become a Recluse to the world; to have the large Campagne of Heaven for his mind to walk in, and all the works of Nature to con∣sider on, without being ju∣stled on the one hand by the buzzing disturbances of the ambitious flattering Court, or on the other, by the noisie hummings of the gid∣die Multitude: Philosophi debent aversari aulas Re∣gum,Marsil.ficinus
quia ibi nec veritas, nec tranquillitas, sed simulatio, says my Au∣thor of the former; and which methinks Juvenal does very elegantly express to us in his Quid Romae faciam?Sat. 3. men∣tiri nescio: For the wise mans tongue is always, and cannot but be, the Interpre∣ter of his heart. And as for the latter, Seneca says, Inimica est multorum con∣versatio, nemo aliquod no∣bis vitium non commendat, aut imprimit.Epist. 70. We
shall not be able to commu∣nicate with them in any ci∣vil complaisance, but we must commend their Vices, and so bring wounds and blemishes on our own Inno∣cence: but when we are under the glorious liberty of a shadie solitude, we are in an incapacitie then of fee∣ling the strong appulses of defiling vice, meeting there with no temptations from gaudy Honour to dazle our eyes, and steal our best part from us.

SIR, this is a Subject so agreeable to dilate upon, that I should not be wearie, if I were voluminous in it; but I must not, to please my self, forget that deference I owe to you; nor must I be unmindful that I am now on the Author's behalf an humble suppliant for your kindness and favour, and therefore it does not become me to be tedious: I shall onely say this, That the world is so sensible of your great Learning and Judge∣ment, that it will not dare
to disprove of any thing which you shall seem to give countenance to, and like.
AND as your value and esteem of it will much advance its Credit and Re∣putation in our Language, (which in some respect I cannot greatly doubt you will deny me, it having had the general approbation of the Learned who have read it, for the most insinuating piece of its kind) so your easie readiness to forgive
the presumption of this bold Address, will be a forcible obligation upon me to be all my life,

