



MY LORD,
I Had some thoughts to forbear in this kind any far∣ther Publication: but though my Reasons were strong enough for my self, they were not able to conquer others; who (for all I could say) expect my Promise to give them yet more of my Composi∣tions. I confess I have no fear of being exhausted: but though I am not tired, it became me to doubt I might tire others; whereof since I find there is less danger, I shall thankfully comply with the Publick Desire. And I wish those, who so warmly pretend the Common Benefit, would tread the same path, and not take upon them to mend the World, till they have some Call to it. This my Profession (as well as others) may fairly complain of; for none judge so sowerly on us and our labours, as they who were never born to be Musicians. For my own part, I send not these abroad to get a Name; Were that my Designe, I have other Compositions, fitter for such as are Masters in our Art, when the Season calls for them. My poor Talent never lay in a Napkin; nor make I any precarious use of this Publication; they were first begotten to gratifie my friends, and are now as freely con∣ferr'd upon Strangers. But were all this otherwise, my chief and main Design would go on, which is a Thirst I have to tell the World how absolute a Votary I am to your Lordship. And were I a perfect stranger to your favours, I could do no less, since your excellent Un∣derstanding and great affection to this, as well as all other Arts and Sciences, would claim it from mee. Therefore I intended to offer unto your Lordship some of your own Conce∣ptions tun'd by my Notes: as also some others written by that rare Gentleman Mr. Henry Hare, your Lordship's most hopefull Son, who eminently expresses both your Lordship and your Brother Mr. Nicholas Hare, whose Memory is still precious among all ingenuous Souls. But those I preserve for a fairer opportunity, and in this Book present you with Others Poetry, especially of Doctor Hughes, who was Author of all these Single Ayres, and of many others, stoln into the Press without my Consent as well as his. Such as they are I humbly bring them before your Lordship, as a small but Gratefull Testimony of
(MY LORD)

