



IN my juvenile Years, when I had the Honour of being your School-fellow, you not only encourag'd my Fancy, but gave me such Instructions, as I may boldly say, rais'd me to this Height of Presumption; and although I dare not reckon my self amongst the Number of those who daily Rival each other for their Indear'd Mrs. Laureat, yet I durst presume in the defence of my Country In∣nocence, to put in for a small share of that Great Glory, especially since usher'd into th' World under your Noble Patronage. That she will meet in this lewd Age with a thousand Inconveniencies, and severe Censures, some of which may, perhaps, blast her Virgin Purity; yet being under your Protection, I make no doubt, will arm her so against th' Assaults of Malice, that she need no more fear the Envy of a Pri∣vate Censurer, than on the Stage she did the Honour of her Royal Auditors.
It was a happiness I did not hope for to have her Cause try'd by Ma∣jesty and Goodness; but since you still were happy in all your Under∣takings, I made no doubt (you Applauding th' effect of a few lazy hours) but Fortune would save me from that severe Damnation, the Critick's Noise and Nonsense: Though Arrogance, and Impudence, are an Author's chief dependency, yet Modesty and Bashfulness shall pro∣claim how much I fear the Rigor of this Censorious Age.
Sir, I am sensible, I come far short, both of Merit and those Com∣mendations, you were pleas'd to bestow upon me, since this trifling piece, I'm sure can merit neither; How-ere it must needs be much to my satisfaction to have acquir'd the honour of your love and liking, and as this is the first I ever ventur'd to undertake, I hope it will not be the last you will do me the honour to Protect.
Self-Love in Poetry is much like Self-Affection in a Woman, who shall communicate with her Glass a whole day together, and never find (though she be most deform'd) the least Object that may proclaim her Odious.
After I had begun this Piece, and had finished the two first Acts, I was doubtful whether I shou'd make any farther progression, till by for∣tune,
you came in and gave me such good Encouragement, I flew to make an End: Which makes me say with Homer:
Inspir'd with Friendship, and your good Advice,
I strove to please the Age, though nere so nice.
And that's the hardest Task a man can undertake, especially in this Age, where Wit consists only in gawdy Cloaths, monstrous French Dances, and dam'd dull Machines. A Play cannot be made without a Painter, nor expect Applause unless your gentile French-man teaches their Feet more Nonsense, than their Tongues that day can utter; those are the Toys now Please.
But for you, who understand the very soul of Plays, and can by the Person guess at his Works, were pleas'd to like this Antient way of Writing, and though I have not those taking Graces which the World admires, yet you were pleas'd to like my Country Innocence, in its home∣ly dress, as well as those fine Plays compos'd of Noise and Ornament.
Sir, I keep you by my Impertinence from your more serious Studies, and from that which you may better like than these rude Lines. Yet I hope as you have hitherto incourag'd me, you will not now condemn him who writ more to please you than himself, hoping by that means to In∣gratiate my self more into your favour than ever, and without offence, presume to write my self,
Sir, 
