



THe great Honour Your Excellency was pleased
to shew Our Society in accepting Our Congratu∣lation
at Your happy Arrival and Settlement in the Go∣vernment
of this Kingdom, and in giving us Your In∣couragement
in prosecuting our Philosophical Designs,

does necessarily require from us all possible Returns of
Gratitude. And though what I now Present Your
Excellency may seem unfit to begin withal, yet I could
not omit this opportunity of expressing to Your Lord∣ship
the deep sense I have of Your Favours to us, and
to Philosophy. And certainly, my Lord, True Phi∣losophy
does highly deserve Encouragement from the
Wise, the Great, and Powerful; the most Learned
Universities have at all times made Natural Philo∣sophy
and Mathematicks a great Branch of their
Literature, and we see how universaly Academick
Knowledge has been approved of by the great En∣couragement
and large Priviledges the Schools have
received from our Wisest Princes, and by the general
agreement of the most sober and considerate men, in
sending their Youth to receive their Education there∣in.
This shews how universaly Philosophick Learn∣ing
has been approved; and the only Question that can
be raised at present is, Whether the Natural Philo∣sophy
formerly professed in the Schools, or that which
is at present prosecuted by the Societies lately Institu∣ted
in several the most noted parts of Europe, be the
True Philosophy, or method of Investigating Na∣ture.
But surely this will be no longer a doubt, when
we consider how unsatisfactory were the ancient No∣tions
of Philosophy, which then consisted rather in
Disputes, and Verbose empty Stuff, than in any Cu∣rious
Discovery of Natures Actions. If a man could
prove Pro and Con, whatever was proposed, and main∣tain

this Dispute for two or three hours by vain Di∣stinctions
and idle Evasions, he presently gain'd the
Name of a Philosopher, tho all the while he had no
manner of Notions in his Brain answerable to those
senseless words he threw out. I would fain know, what
Notion any man has of Light upon pronouncing the
definition of it, Actus Perspicui quatenus Perspi∣cuum,
does he hereby in the least understand any of the
properties of Light, or how 'tis affected by Refracti∣on
or Reflection? or does this Definition lead him
to improve Light for the advancement and help of our
senses, or other advantage of mankind? And now,
my Lord, if this kind of Philosophy which formerly
fill'd our Schools were look'd upon as deserving the Fa∣vour
of the Great, how much more shall the present
useful Enquiries of the Ingenious deserve Incou∣ragement?
But that this may be made a little more
evident (though I am perswaded 'tis sufficiently manifest
already to Your Excellencys Discerning Judgment) I
shall crave leave to be more particular in this matter;
And I shall begin with one of the most Considerable and
Ʋniversal Concerns of Mans Life, I mean Naviga∣tion,
wherein the Philosophy of the Moderns has
been very much Exercised; The Magnet by its Ca∣prichious
Variations is at present in several parts of
the World rendred almost useless; but diligent search is
daily made after its Vagarys, that we may not be depri∣ved
of the unspeakable benefit of one of the most surpri∣sing
Phenomenas in Nature. Certainly men might

have Disputed from Age to Age of Sympathy, Anti∣pathy,
and the Occult Qualities of the Loadstone,
before they should ever arrive to the Knowledge or Re∣ctification
of one of these Exorbitances, which dili∣gent
Experimental Philosophy presently discovers,
and further Experiments may hope to Rectify. In re∣lation
likewise no Navigation are all the Enquiries into
the Theory of the Tides, and the Moons motion, all
the Endeavours for the Longitude, and the Diligence
used to Rectify Astronomy. The Philosophy of Hy∣draulicks
and Hydrostaticks tends to the great E∣molument
and Pleasure of Mankind, no place being
habitable without Water, and Curious Fountains adorn
the Gardens and Houses of the Greatest Princes. Agri∣culture,
and the Philosophy relating to Earth and
Vegitation, is of universal extent over the face of the
World; and how mightily it has been lately prosecuted,
is evident from the Incomparable Works of Mr. Evelyn
and others. By the Doctrine of Light, and the Pro∣perties
thereof, our most Noble Sense has been Improved
to an Acuteness some thousands of degrees beyond its na∣tural
Abilities; and the Telescope and Microscope
discover to us new Worlds and Animals, extending
the Creation farther than 'twas possible for the Ancients
to imagine. There is no state of Life that is not con∣cern'd
in Meteorology, or the Philosophy of the
Weather. And all that have heard of the late contri∣ved
Baroscopes, Hygroscopes, Thermoters, &c.
may plainly perceive what Endeavours have been made
towards it, and their success.

I might proceed on, and fill a Volume with Instances to
Your Excellency of the usefulness of an Active Ex∣perimental
Philosophy; but I stop my hand, and shall
only declare in short, that from this alone we are to expect
advancements in the most important concerns of humane
life; the Virtues of Animals, Plants and Minerals
for the health of mans Body, Architecture Civil and
Military for the pleasure and security of his life; all kind
of Machines and Movements for the increase and due
application of his strength, proceed from this kind of Phi∣losophy,
which consists in Actions, not in Words, and
prosecutes and sometimes Improves Nature by the same
steps that she her self acts by. And indeed, my Lord,
if we consider Nature as an Active Principle, we must
needs acknowledge that she is to be prosecuted by Action,
and not by Verbose Disputes; There is nothing that
the mind of man will not find something to say for or a∣gainst
all day long; and therefore of the School-Disputes
there is no end; but Experiment is matter of Fact, and
strikes the Senses so forcibly, that there is no opposing it.
Who is it that will now question the force of Gun-pow∣der,
or whether the Mercury rise and fall in the Ba∣roscope
at fair or foul Weather?
'Tis therefore this Philosophy (may it please
Your Excellency) that deserves Favour and In∣couragement
from the Powerful and Wise; and as
God has made all things in number, measure, and
weight, that Learning which teaches us the affections

of number and measure, as being the Foundation on
which true Philosophy is to be superstructed, is chiefly
to be respected. There is no part of Philosophy where∣in
the Mathematicks are not deeply ingredient, and on
them depend the Arts of War as the Delights of
Peace, and even Sacred Theology it self is in a great
measure beholding hereto for its help, if we consider how
far the Chronology of the Holy Scriptures is help'd
out by Astronomy, and the Doctrine of Eclipses.
And as I have presumed to detain Your Excellency
thus long, in declaring how true Philosophy deserves
Your Protection, so give me leave to add one word more
in declaring how Your Excellency deserves the Tu∣telage
of true Philosophy. Your Illustrious Father,
of Happy Memory, was no unactive Speculative Philo∣sopher,
but was zealous and forward in promoting the
Noble Design of the Royal Society, as appears to his
immortal Praise in their Incomparable History, and
by their Electing him, and his willing Complyance to be
their Protector. Neither did he only countenance Phi∣losophy
by his Authority and Favour, but actually
drew the Sword in its defence against the great Sea Mon∣ster
that would have destroy'd the Virgin; as is mani∣fest
from his Learned and Ingenious Treatise against
the Leviathan. All the World that know Your Lord∣ship,
must acknowledge that this and other his extraor∣dinary
Virtues are entail'd on Your Excellency, who
has not buried the Talent in a Napkin, but improved

it to an high degree. Your Excellency has Honoured
the Royal Society by being one of their Number, and
their last years Council was compleated by Your be∣ing
one of them. So that upon all occasions Your Ex∣cellency
has shewn Your Self a zealous Patron of
Learning and Ingenuity; and though I dare not on
either score challenge Your Excellency's Protection
of what I here present You, for I am afraid to trust my
own Judgment in my own Concern; yet I will presume to
implore Your Favour towards it as 'tis new, and not
disliked by some Ingenious Men to whom I have shewn
it. Whether it may deserve Your Excellency's Coun∣tenance
for its Ʋse and Advantage, I leave to Your own
discerning Thought, after Your Lordship is pleased to
consider what I offer in the First and Second Chapters.
However, this I will venture to assert before-hand, that
as Clocks or Time-keepers by Wheels and Weights
have been an ancient Invention, (if we believe Severinus
Boethius to be the first Author of them, 'tis above 1100
years ago) yet in these later days they have received a
most high advancement (to the immortal glory of Mnsr.
Hugens) by the addition of a plain and simple Swag or
Pendulum; since the days of Hezekiah, wherein we
first find Dials mentioned, I have not heard of a more plain
and easy addition for the advancement of Dials, and in∣larging
and ascertaining their Ʋse, than what I here pro∣pose.
And though I shall not be so vain, as to expect its
sudden propagation, or any great Glory from the Contri∣vance;

yet if I can be so happy as thereby to Divert and
Please Your Excellency, and in some measure to pur∣chase
Your Favour, 'tis the highest Ambition of

Dublin, April
17. 1686.
