



SIR,
IN reading your Book of that Title, I readily perceived your Design, intimated in your Preface, to be therein most indu∣striously and piously pursued: So that you have, with full Evidence of Scripture and Reason, shewed, against the ma∣nifold obscure and tedious Systems, that the Fundamentals of Chri∣stian Faith, necessary to constitute a Man a true Member of Christ's Church, are all comprehended or implied in this plain Proposition, That Jesus is the Messiah: Whereby you have happily provided for the Quiet and Satisfaction of the Minds of the honest Multi∣tude or Bulk of Mankind, floating in Doubts and Fears, because either they cannot understand, or can find no clear Evidence in Holy Scripture, of those intricate Points requir'd to be explicitly believ'd upon pain of eternal Damnation. You have also argued clearly the Reasonableness and Ʋsefulness of the Christian Revelation a∣gainst Atheists and Deists. These things consider'd, 'twas no mar∣vel, that the Systematical Men, who gain both their Honour and Profit by the Obscurity and Multitude of their Fundamental Arti∣cles, should raise an Outcry against you, like that of the Ephesians magnifying their DIANA. They have more cause for it than Deme∣trius had. But that they should traduce your Work as tending to Athe∣ism or Deism, is as strange from Reason, as many of their Articles are from Scripture. And that Mr. Edwards has done it, and forc'd it in among his Tendencies to Atheism, is, I think, to be imputed to the Co-incidence of your Book's being publish'd, and striking strongly upon his inventive Faculty, just when it was in hot pursuit of the Causes of Atheism, rather than to any the least Colour or In∣clination

that way, which Mr. Edwards can spy in it in his cool Thoughts: For I am much perswaded on the contrary, that there is no Atheist or Deist in England, but, if he were ask'd the Questi∣on, would tell Mr. Edwards, that their obscure and contradictious Fundamentals were one Cause or Inducement to his casting off and disbelief of Christianity.
In this Mind I have undertaken to vindicate your Doctrine from the Exceptions of Mr. Edwards against it. But whether I have done it as it ought to have been done, I cannot be a competent Judg. If I have mistaken your Sense, or us'd weak Reasonings in your Defence, I crave your Pardon: But my Design in this Writing was not to please you, (whom I know not) nor any Man what∣soever, but only to honour the One God, and vindicate his most useful Truths. I am,
SIR,

