



MAny there are (Courte∣ous Reader,) which have and doe daily ob∣serve, to their due com∣mendation, in the voyages they un∣dertake, things worthy the eternall register of fame: and some have not beene wanting in all ages which in the words of that learned man (Gaspar Waserus) non tantum transcur∣rendo, corpora hominum aspici∣unt, sed etiam animos, atquere∣rum

momenta, non margines, aut super fines introspiciunt: But few or none, which have prescribed the exact and profitable limits, which ought to direct this laudable purpose. And therefore I have observed it to be a custome (perhaps, where it is well sorted, not unprofitable) among those which send forth their sons, pupils, or kinsemen to travell, to e∣lect some discreet, and well experi∣enc't Companion, which may more safely waft them to their owne homes backe againe, through many tempests, that continually use to as∣sault those which Iourny from their homes. But these doe not alwayes ful∣fill the intentions of the Directors, or rather imployers; because fre∣quently

most men belye or overweene their own sufficiencie: and (which is worse) usually overshadow, by their cunning demeanour, at or before their election, their ownē vices.
I have therefore thought it, in my opinion, alwaies a profitable worke; if any (which bath ability for directi∣ons of this quality) studious, and so∣ber man, would, collect, to necessary and pertinent heades, such monitions cautions, and observations, which might be easily found out: whereby the hot spirits of some novices may be wholesomely restrained and faithfully instructed. For these dumbe counsel∣lors, are commonly most trusty, and carry with them in their prudent di∣rections, collected from both reading

and experience more solid profit: then those which eyther readily spend their Iudgements without meditation, or at leastwise have no other but transitory and superficiall knowledge. Finding therefore none that hath in our vul∣gar language (to my remembrance) undertaken this profitable essay; I have adventured to make publique a small treatise of direction how to tra∣vell profitably, and safely into for∣raigne Countries; which in another i∣diome I had some 4 yeares since ad∣dressed, to a neere and deere travellor of my acquaintance. The originall shall hereafter appeare, (although not so fully furnished) if this impoli∣shed translation, with the not altoge∣ther unnecessary additions may passe

without the censure of the criticall, and with the allowance of the Courte∣ous reader. I well know the presses groane with the weight of pamphlets and (since this most happy invention) innumerable bookes of all sortes lye moulding in most private studies, and libraries, fearing the wormes, and desiring their readers. Nay many iudicious volumes of former, and mo∣derne times doe now cum blattis et tincis rixari; whilst many more idle vanities or raging follyes doe busymens minds upon worse imploi∣ments. Sed (in the phrase of Baudi∣us) quae est ista profusio tempo∣ris in hac vitae brevitate, tanta{que} copia rerum scitu dignissima∣rum, tempus tanquam rem va∣cuam

aut noxiam super vacuis impendere? nec supervacuis tan∣tum sed noxiis, vtquae dulcedine quadam sui, praeclarissima quae∣{que} ingenia alliciant ad se, & avo∣cent a melioribus? expertus lo∣quor, nec quisquam tibi mihi ve verba dederit, ut in plurimorum nugis, magnum aliquod aut se∣cretum bonum inesse suspice∣mur. I have therefore provided a re∣medy in this little treatise to mitigate this disease, for my selfe and others (if they will as many doe,) have any confidence of an unknown physitian. Heere also the patient may trust without danger; and knowing once the quality of the potion, take as little as it pleaseth him selfe. For the need∣lesse

(which some perhaps, male volent esteemers of other mens endeavours, may object) subject of this booke; I will answer with a learned Philolo∣ger: Stultum est, certe serum nimis jam demum incipere misereri chartarum, quae tam diù, tam miserè, sine omni gratia perie∣runt, & pereunt quotidie. Be∣sides, Scribimus indocti docti{que} And there is not (if we beleeve Pliny) any booke out of which the laborious, and candid reader, may not collect some profit. How ever I have made it publique for to serve my owne turne; who have now one, I may not repent to leave this unto, as a legacy, or direction. But I would be willing to benefit more, and a∣mongst

the rest my courteous, and be∣nevolent reader otherwise.
Optarem ut placeam, sin minus ut taceam
From my house. At Warneford.

3. Feb. 1642.
