



WHen false Witness was brought against our Blessed Saviour, he held his Peace, and when he was accus'd, return'd no Answer, being fully perswaded, that the Tenor of his Life and Conversation among the Jews, was the best Apology that cou'd possibly be made in his Behalf. But you, Virtu∣ous Ambrosius, were pleas'd to desire me, for Reasons best known to your self, to vindicate the Christians from those foul Aspersions, which Celsus has publickly

cast upon 'em, as if a Confutation of him were not legible in the Things themselves, and what he offers might not be deservedly rejected, as wanting ev'n the Appearance of Truth to recommend it to the World. To shew that our Saviour held his Peace when false Witness was brought against him, I need only at present, produce the Testimony of St. Matthew, which is con∣firm'd by what St. Mark the Evangelist relates. St. Matthew has these Words, Now the Chief Priests, and Elders, Mat. 26. v. 59. and all the Council sought false Wit∣ness against Jesus, to put him to Death, but found none. Yea, though many false Witnesses came; yet found they none. At last came two false Wit∣nesses, and said, this Fellow said, I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in three Days. And the High-Priest arose, and said to him, answerest thou nothing? What is it which these witness against thee? But Jesus held his Peace. We read in another Place of the same Evangelist, that our Saviour return'd no Answer to the Persons who accus'd him. And Je∣sus Mat. 27. v. 11. stood before the Governor, and the Governor ask'd him, saying, art thou the King of the Jews? And Je∣sus said unto him; thou say'st. And when he was accus'd of the Chief Priests and Elders, he answered no∣thing.

Then says Pilate unto him, hearest thou not how many Things these witness against thee? And he answer'd him never a Word, insomuch that the Governor marvell'd greatly. And indeed it cou'd n't but be admir'd by Persons who were least capable of Re∣flection, that when he had so fair an Op∣portunity to free himself from the heavy Charge that was brought against him, to enumerate, or at least, modestly insinuate his shining Characters, and to commend the higher Powers, as being ordam'd of God, and by these innocent and po∣litick Methods to procure the Judge's Favour, I say, that when he had so fair an Opportunity to do all this, he shou'd be so far from embracing it, as to look upon his most violent Accusers with a truly-generous Disdain.
That the Judge seem'd willing to ac∣quit him, had he made his Apology, is plain from the following Words, Whom Mat. 27. v. 17. will ye that I release unto you? Barab∣bas, or Jesus who is call'd Christ? And those Words, He knew that for Envy Ibid. 18. he had deliver'd him. So that the holy and spotless Jesus was scarce ever free from unjust and severe Accusations, as long as the perverse Dispositions of Men, whose Minds were corrupt, and whose Lives were often stain'd with the most gross Enormities, did remain the same

as they have been in all the Ages of the World.
And ev'n now he holds his Peace, and makes no verbal Answer, but the un∣blemish'd Lives of his sincere Followers are his most chearful and most success∣ful Advocates, and have so loud a Voice that they drown the Clamours of his most bigotted and most zealous Adversaries. I will, therefore, be so bold as to say, that by Publishing this Apology, I shall seem to lessen the Force of those powerful Ar∣guments in Defence of the Christian Re∣ligion, which are drawn from the holy Lives of its pious Votaries, and are plain Appeals ev'n to Sense and common Ob∣servation. But that I might not seem backward in obeying the Commands you have laid upon me, I have endeavour'd, according to my present Abilities, to give a full, or at least, a sufficient Answer to all the material Objections which Celsus has brought against us, which, in your Opinion, my Dear and Respected Ambro∣sius, do strike at the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, but, I verily be∣lieve, will never shock the Faith of one, who by the Grace of God does live in the Profession of it with some measure of Sin∣cerity. And God forbid that any of us shou'd have so embrac'd the Gospel (which is so lively a Declaration of his Love to perishing Sinners thro' the Merits of our

Blessed and All-sufficient Redeemer) as to be in Danger of receiving any bad Impressions from Celsus's Discourse, or the Writings of any other Ingenious and Learned Person, who holds the same Wicked Principles.
For St. Paul reckoning up those things, which are apt to separate Mankind from the Love of Christ (all which his Love to 'em did, and will at last effectually, and most gloriously overcome) don't say that erroneous Discourses shou'd be any, much less a principal Cause of this un∣happy Separation. Observe first he says, Who shall separate us from the Love Rom. 8. v. 25. of God? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or Naked∣ness, or Peril, or Sword? (As it is written, for thy sake we are kill'd all the Day long, we are accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter,) Nay, in all these Things we are more than Con∣querors thro' him that loved us. Then reckoning up another Set of Things, which usually shock Mens Faith and Virtue, he says, I am perswaded, that neither Ibid 38. Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Prin∣cipalities, nor Powers, nor Things pre∣sent, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Je∣sus our Lord. And there is just Ground

ev'n for us, who fall vastly short of the extraordinary Attainments of that great Apostle of the Gentiles, to say, Who shall separate us from the Love of God? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Per∣secution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? But the Apostle who thought this too mean a Boast, for those who had arriv'd to so remarkable a Pitch of Virtue, as that to which he had at∣tain'd, professes, That in all these Things he was more than a Conqueror; which Words have a peculiar Weight and Emphasis. And therefore, when he and the rest of his Noble Class come to make their Boast, they proceed to the second Set of Things, which are here enumerated, and can say with a holy Triumph, That neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
So that I confess, I have no great Opi∣nion of that Man's Christianity, whose Faith is in the least liable to be shock'd, either by this Book of Celsus, or the Writings of any other Person of the same unhappy Stamp. For really I'm at a Loss to know in what Class of Christians I shou'd rank that Man, who is not

Proof against all the bitter but unjust Reproaches, with which Celsus has loaded the Followers of our Blessed Lord. But because the common Sort of People are in no small Danger (as you imagine, my Dear Ambrosius) of turning Apo∣states from the Faith, since perhaps they may be shock'd by what Celsus has of∣fer'd against the well-grounded Princi∣ples of our holy Religion; and I hope will be no less confirm'd in their Judg∣ments, by what I shall seasonably produce in its Defence, provided I am able to confute his Errors, I resolv'd to obey your most just Command, and to return an Answer to the Book you were pleas'd to send me, the very Title of which, viz. A True Relation, will hardly pass for such with them, who are no great Profi∣cients ev'n in the Philosophy of the Heathens.
St. Paul knowing there were many Things in the Greek Philosophy that were not in themselves contemptible, but had by Accident a malignant Influence on the Minds of Common People, repre∣senting Error under the plausible Ap∣pearance of solid and most important Truth, has these very Words, Beware Colos. 2. v. 8. lest any Man spoil you through Philo∣sophy, and vain Deceit, after the Tra∣dition of Men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ. But

this is more than I think, any judicious Person will allow the Book which I am just going to answer. For the Apostle calls the fore-mentioned Things by the Name of Vain Deceit, perhaps in Contra-Distinction to a certain Kind of Deceit which is not vain, but innocent and useful, which the Prophet Jeremiah con∣sidering, made bold to apply the follow∣ing Words to the Great God himself; O Lord, thou hast deceived me, and Jer. 20. v. 7. I was deceiv'd; thou art stronger than I, and hast prevail'd. But, in my Opi∣nion, what Celsus publish'd do's want ev'n that plausible Appearance, to render it worthy to be call'd deceitful, which is to be found in the Writings of those eminently-learned Persons, who were the Heads of the various Sects of Philoso∣phers among the Pagans. And as in Geo∣metry, 'tisn't sufficient that what is of∣for'd for a Demonstration, be in it self false and dangerous, but it must have some Colour of Truth, or it can never deceive, and engage ev'n the most faint Endeavours of one, who wou'd improve in that entertaining and useful Science: So those Discourses, which deserve the Cha∣racter of Vain Deceit, must have some Affinity with those rational Arguments, that are frequently made Ʋse of by the Heads of the several Sects of Philoso∣phers.

When I had proceeded in my Answer to Celsus, as far as the Place where he per∣sonates the Jew discoursing with our Blessed Saviour, I thought, 'twou'd be proper to put this Preface before my Book, that so any One into whose Hands it may accidentally fall, may plainly see, that I didn't principally intend it for those Chri∣stians, who are fully satisfy'd in their Judgment, but either for them who are entire Strangers to the Excellency of the Christian Religion, or for them who are weak in the Faith, as the Apostle calls 'em. Him that is weak in the Faith Rom. 14. v. 1. receive.
I must add one Thing here; and that is this, that I have a diff'rent Design in answering Celsus in the gross, from what I had in Answering the Beginning of his Book. For at first, I design'd no more than to mention some of the Principal Heads, and content my self with a meer Compendium, But after mature Deli∣beration, I thought, twou'd be much more proper, to gather my Discourse, as it were, into a perfect System or Body. Then I was satisfy'd from the reason of the Thing, that I shou'd be at a needless Expence both of Time and Pains, and contented my self with what I had writ, against the Beginning of the Book, which Celsus publish'd.

But in the remaining Part of my Apo∣logy, which (if I may modestly say it of my own Performance) is much more elaborate, I determin'd to bend all my Forces against him, and to return a full Answer to eve∣ry Thing that seem'd to be material, and ev'n to some of his most trifling Objections. I must, therefore, desire my Reader to discover a more than ord'nary Candor in passing his Judgment on what I have done, especially on that Part of my Apology, which immediately follows this Epistle. And if the other Parts shou'd have no better Effect upon him, I hope, he will there also be extreamly fa∣vourable in the Sentence, which he may pass upon me.
And, if you, Virtuous Ambrosius, de∣sire a more compleat Answer to Celsus, than that which I shall give him at pre∣sent, I must refer you to them, who have a far greater Share of Judgment, than that to which I lay my most humble Claim, and are better qualify'd for the due and honourable Management of so difficult a Province. However that Per∣son seems to me, to be in a safer and much more desirable Condition, who having met with Celsus's Performance, and being furnish'd by his own Experience with a warm and effectual Apology for that excellent Religion which he professes, and endeavours to practice to the utmost

of his Power, is so well-guarded by the Spirit of God, who dwells in the Heart of every sincere Follower of the Blessed JESUS, that he can look with a holy Contempt on the false Representations, and most pusible Arguments of the most Celebrated Hereticks that did ever appear in the World.

