



THe Records of Holy Scripture, whether they con∣cerne
the Actions of GOD or Men, are not onely
Stories of things done in that Age, but Prophe∣sies
also of future events in succeeding Generati∣ons.
This GOD hath been pleased to exempli∣fie
particularly in that Word, which divers weekes agoe on a
Solemne Day appointed for extraordinary Humiliation He
sent to be preached in your Eares. While some bodily Indis∣positions
hindred me from a speedy obeying the Call of tendring
it also to your hands and eyes: It seemed good to Him, (who
doth all things wisely and faithfully,) to give Instances of
His fulfilling both parts of it; affording some answers of
Grace, and expressions of Pardon and favour in Wales and
the parts thereabouts; and yet withall taking some Ven∣geance
upon our untowardnesses, by the sad blow given us in
the West. I hope that as we shall all learne by it, even more and
more, that1 Sam. 3. 19. GOD lets none of His Words fall to the
ground, but whatsoever He speakes to us hath its effect upon

us, andZech. 1. 6. takes hold of us, even whether we take hold of it or
no: So we will beleeve also, that the effect of it will never be
spent as long as we live, or any of mankind, in as much as all
the Word of GOD lives and abides for ever, as both theIsai. 40 8. Prophet and1 Pet. 1. 23. 25. Apostle tell us. And this Beliefe will both make
all the Word profitable to us, and make us Happy by the Word:
The Promises and Expressions of Grace in the Word ne∣ver
doing us good, never being fulfilled to us compleatly,
but by our beleeving them: And the Threatnings or Ex∣pressions
of Severity never endangering us, never being ful∣filled
at all upon us, but when we beleeve them not. We
have all need to Pray,Luke 17. 5. LORD Encrease our Faith! even in
relation to Terrifying Truths, as well as to Comforting. And
though Faith most commonly comes by Hearing, yet unquestio∣nable
Experience telling us, that it is partly encreased by Rea∣ding
also, (specially of what was once attentively heard) I can∣not
doubt, but this Paper-remembrance of matters of so grand
Importance, will be blessed by GOD, as to some others into whose
hands it shall come, so specially to your selves, according to Your
Leasure for making use of it, unto your Furtherance and Joy
of Faith. Which that it may be continually augmented in You,
who have so great businesses to goe through, and so great Adver∣saries
to encounter, and all Calling for Faith in the strength and
Glorie of it, through Iesus Christ the Author and Finisher of
our Faith, is and shall be the earnest Desire and Prayer of Him,
who is for IESVS sake

