



MY LORD,
IT is the Institution of God and Na∣ture, that all things (by a divine and natural right) should terminate in their Original, and revert to the Spring from which they issue: Hence St. Paul (the Acts 22. 21. Rom. 11. 13. c. 15, 16. 2 Tim. 1. 11. Apostle of the Gentiles, and of our See Tom. 1. Book 2. ch. 1. p. 3, 5. British Isle,) resolves; that as Rom. 11. 36. Col. 1. 16. all things in hea∣ven and earth, visible and invisible, whether Thrones Dominions, Principalities, Powers, or other Crea∣tures, were and are created By; so likewise TO and FOR GOD, their Rev. 1. 8. ALPHA and OMEGA. Yea King Solomon long before him, not only concluded in point of Divinity, Prov. 16 4. See Isay 43. 21. The Lord hath made all things FOR HIMSELF; but thus de∣monstrates it by natural experimental Philosophy, Eccles. 1. 7. All rivers run into the Sea; unto the place from

whence the Rivers come, THITHER THEY RETURN AGAIN.
This Contemplation hath excited, yea obliged me (in point of Right, and Equity) not only to return, but dedicate this Large Chronological Vindication, and Historical Demonstration, to Your Lordship, from whose unexpected Voluntary Motion, and Subsequent En∣couragements, (to collect, publish it for the Honour of our Kings, Nation, Church, Kingdome, and benefit of Posterity) it received its Original Concepti∣on, Augmentation, Production, at vacant hours (bor∣rowed for the most part from my natural rest and repasts) without the least neglect of my other distra∣cting publick Imployments. Which may justly ex∣cuse all Defects of Ornament, Method, Stile, Sub∣stance, any Curious Eyes shall discover therein; or in my yet uncompleated Preceding or Succeeding Tomes of the same heroick subject; not hitherto at large, historically discussed by any Antiquary, or Historian I have seen.
I have prefaced this Tome (brought forth into the VVorld, like Gen. 38. 29. Pharez, before its elder brother) with a brief, necessary Introduction, to supply the want of my Larger Introduction comprised in the First Book of the First Tome, not yet compleated, over-large to be annexed to this, as I at first designed: Where∣in I have Page 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. truly stated that antient Soveraign Ecclesi∣astical Jurisdiction claimed, exercised (as there was oc∣casion) by our British, Roman, Saxon, Danish, Nor∣man, English Kings, which I have historically vindi∣cated in Fact, and Right, in this and my other inten∣ded Tomes. Whereunto I have subjoyned a short Synopsis of Page 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Roman Popes and their Parasites impu∣dent

Claims, to a Ʋniversal Antimonarchical, if not 2 Thes. 2. 3. 4. Bishop Abbot, Dr. Squire, Dr. Beard, o∣thers in their Books of Antichrist. Antichristian Soveraign Monarchy over all Churches, Empires, Kingdomes, Nations, Emperors, Kings, Pre∣lates, Priests, persons throughout the world, as well in Temporals as Spirituals, under their own forged Ti∣tles, of Christs Ʋniversal Vicars, His, and St. Peters Successors; which Supremacy they have for sundry ages See Philip de Mornay Hist. Papatus attempted to exercise and enlarge upon all ad∣vantages, by scandalous Bulls, Excommunications, In∣terdicts, Treasons, Rebellions, Absolutions of Subjects from their Oathes, Allegeance; deposals of Christian Emperors, Kings: wresting their Crownes, Regal Authority and Kingdomes out of their hands, by force, and fraud, to the grand disturbance of all Chri∣stian Realms, to which they have Page 9. 291. forged Titles.
The Page 10, &c. 65, 67, 68. sandy foundations of this their pretended Pa∣pal Monarchy, I have utterly subverted in a new way, by the avowed practises of their own Popes, Church, and Articles of their Romish Faith; concerning the Page 16, to 64. Vniversal Empire, yea Page 16, 23, 26, 38, 39, 53, 55, 56. Deification of the Virgin Mary: whom they have not only Page 20, 21, 22. seated Soul and body in the very Throne of the sacred Trinity in heaven, but elevated Page 24, 25, 54, 55. above God the Father, and Christ her Sonne, intituling her to all their Page 27. 53. Soveraign Power over all creatures in heaven, earth hell: to all their Page 25, 40, 42, 43, 48, 49, 54. Divine Attributes, Titles, Offices, Worship; Page 28, 29, 39, 40, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55. invoking, adoring her in their publike, private authorized Devo∣tions more then them; yea ascribing to her a Page 21, 22, 27, 28, 39, 40, 49, 53, 55. com∣manding power over them in heaven it self. And by their Doctrine of Page 66, 67, 68. Transubstantiation, or Christs real presence, both in his human body, soul, Deity, in every consecrated Host, adoring it as God, Christ himself; se∣conded with their Legends of his frequent Page 68, to 74. corpo∣real

real visible apparitions on earth: which infallibly overturn the foundations whereon they build St. Pe∣ters and their own Supremacy. Upon which occa∣sion I have briefly, and I hope irrefragably refuted by new Topicks, (not hitherto used, or not fully pres∣sed by Protestant Divines) their Page 56, 57, to 64. idolatrous Invocati∣ons, Adorations of the Virgin Mary and other Saints, wherein they not only imitate, but farr exceed the antient Page 56, 57, 58. Idolatry, Heresie of Pagans, & the Page 58, to 63. Collyridian hereticks: Together with their pretended Page 75, to the end of 80. Doctrine, Miracle of Transubstantiation; (the Great Dianaes of the Pontificians now most insisted on) to reduce them from their Romish Page 55, 56. Idolatry, Superstition, Errors, and keep unstable Protestants from apostatizing to them in this and succeeding ages, by the seducements of their superabounding active Emissaries.
This Tome (as those intended to succeed it) prin∣cipally consists of memorable Records (preserved in the Tower of London) not formerly published: intermixed with observable Historical passages (perti∣nent to my Theam) taken for the most part out of our best antientest Historians of the Roman Religion, writing in, or nearest the reigns of K. John and Henry the 3d, which I have printed at large in their proper Dialects, as most authentick, the better to communicate them to forreign Nations, and prevent all Cavills of Pontifician or other Criticks against their translations: with some usefull Observations on, & Deductions from them, for the Readers information, or Romanists re∣futation, if not conviction; all which I hope are so ge∣nuine, solid, impartial, that no carping Zoilus, nor Ad∣vocate for Popes or the Court of Rome, shall be justly able to quarrell with, much lesse to refute or contra∣dict them.
All the Records herein transcribed, were perused with my own eyes, and carefully examined, re-exami∣ned by the Originals: which are of so venerable, ir∣refragable authority, (being carefully enrolled in the respective years they bear date, by sworn Clerks, with∣out any rasure, alteration, diminution, and so remaining till this present) that no person by our Common Lawes, (21 E. 3. f. 40. 21 H 6. f. 20. Brook A∣verrment 14.) may, or ought to averr against them. By their Ver∣dict I have here not only corrected some mistakes, ra∣tified, illustrated sundry obscure, dubious passages in our Historians, Chronologers; and King Johns printed Char∣ter, but also supplyed many observable defects, omit∣ted, or pretermitted Bulls, Letters, Patents, Writs, Records, Transactions relating to the Ecclesiastical Supremacy of our Kings, the Church-affairs, Archbi∣shops, Bishops, Clergy, Lawes, Customs, Spiritual, Tem∣poral Courts, Jurisdictions, proceedings in England, and Ireland, not extant in, nor remembred by any Histories or Law-books whatsoever; not unworthy the knowledge, if not of his Sacred Majesty, yet of the greatest, learnedest Counsellers, Officers of State, Prelates, Divines, Judges, Professors of the Common, or Canon Lawes, the studious Nobility, Gentry, (whe∣ther Protestants, or Pontificians) of both these King∣doms, from whose publike, if not private view, they have hitherto been concealed.
If these my crude Historical Collections (which I had neither sufficient time, nor leisure to digest, polish ac∣cording to the dignity of the subject matter) shall through the Almighties blessing on, and Your Lord∣ships favourable Acceptation of them, produce any Glory to God, any honour, advantage to our Reformed Protestant Religion, Churches, Realms; any satisfactory

Vindication of His Majesties, or His Royal Predeces∣sors Soveraign Ecclesiastical, Civil just, antient Rights, Prerogatives, against the injurious claimes, preten∣ces of Ʋsurping Romish Popes, or Prelates; any re∣formation of revived old Ecclesiastical Ʋsurpations, Excommunications, Vexations, Corruptions, Exacti∣ons, Extravagances, redressed, suppressed by these and our other Kings Writs, Prohibitions, even in times of Popery; any conviction, conversion, reduction of seduced Pontificians, or Romish Proselytes to due obedi∣ence to his Majesty, and the bosom of our Church, by discovering to them the manifold unchristian, if not An∣tichristian Practises, Corruptions, Vices, Frauds, Errors, Exorbitances of Popes, (the Visible Heads,) & Popish Cardinals, Legates, Nuncioes, Prelates, the chief pil∣lars, hinges of the Roman Church; and the manifold just occasions given by them to our Kings, Kingdoms, to renounce all dependance on, all communion with them; Or, if they shall contribute any increase of knowledge, or other benefit, to the honourable Profes∣sion and Professors of the Law, whereof Your Lord∣ship under his Majesty is, (and long may you still con∣tinue in all splendor and felicity to be) the most eminent Patron, as well as Member, (all which particulars were the chief ends aimed at in this Ʋndertaking) I shall then repute my extraordinary expense, paines therein, sufficiently remunerated; and be thereby encouraged, with greater vigor and all possible expedition, through Gods gracious assistance, to compleat the anteceding and succeeding Tomes of this Chronological Vindication. Which, if God shall vouchsafe me life, health, oportuni∣ty to finish; I hope I may crave leave, to sue forth my Quietus est, from any future labours of this nature; be∣cause

it will then be high time for me only to prepare for another world, & conclude with ()Phile∣mon 9. Paul, the aged, ()2 Tim. 4; 6, 7, 8;) I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my de∣parture is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have fi∣nished my course, I have kept the faith; Hence forth there is layd up for me a Crown of righteousnesse, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also who love his appea∣ring.
Which Crown of Righteousness, that this Soveraign ()1 Tim. 6. 15. Rev. 17. 14. c. 29. 16.) Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, may most graciously bestow upon Your Lordship in Heaven, after You have long served, honoured both HIM, His MAJESTY, His Realms, Churches in your ()Acts 13. 36.) Generation upon earth, shall be the daily prayer of

From my Study in Licolns Inne, May 29. 1665. the most joy∣full day, Festival of his Maje∣sties Birth and Restitution to his Royal Throne at Whitehall.
