



To the Right Honourable Arthur Earl of Anglesey, one of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Counsil, and Treasurer of His Navy Royal; the Honourable Sir Harbottle Grim∣ston Baronet, Master of the Rolls; Sir Matthew Hale Knight, Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer; Sir Ed∣ward Atkins Knight, one of the Barons of that Court; Sir Wadham Windham Knight, one of His Majesties Justices of the Kings Bench; Sir Richard Rainsford Knight, a Ba∣ron of the Court of Exchequer; The Right Worshipfull Sir Robert Atkins, Knight of the Bath, Sollicitor General to the Queens Majesty; and the rest of the Worshipfull Rea∣ders of the Honourable Society of LINCOLNS-INNE; his ever-Honoured kind Friends, and Fellow-Readers of that SOCIETY.
MY common relation to You all in gene∣ral, as the eminentest Members of the Famous Society of LINCOLNS∣INNE, (a fruitfull Mother for sun∣dry ages, of many able, learned, reve∣rend, renowned Privy Counsellors, State-Officers, Judges, Justices, Barons in all Courts of Law, or Equity, both in England and Ireland, as well as of Eminent Serjeants, Readers, Barresters and Students of the Lawes of England;) and my particular Obligations to each of You as my highly honoured cordial Friends; have engaged me (in point of duty and gratitude)

to dedicate to Your Eminencies, this THIRD TOME, of An Exact Chronological Vindication, & Historical Demonstration of the SUPREME ECCLESIASTICAL JURISDICTI∣ON of our British, Roman, Saxon, Danish, Norman, Eng∣lish KINGS, In, and Over all Matters, Causes, Persons Spi∣ritual as well as Temporal, throughout their Realms and Domi∣nions: More particularly, during the Reigns of KING JOHN, and HENRY the THIRD, (by way of Appendix to my Second Tome:) but principally of our glorious KING EDWARD the FIRST (the chief Subject matter of this Volume;) and emboldened me to publish it to the World, under the shelter of Your Venerable Names and Patronage.
And so much the rather was I induced thereunto, be∣cause this Volume consists for the most part of such Records, Writs, Prohibitions, Bulls, Patonts, Epistles, Procurations, Negotiations during their reigns, not formerly published, (il∣lustrated with some few Historical passages) as are proper for your respective Conusances, Professions; which, in my hum∣ble opinion, will much conduce to assist and inable You in the faithfull discharge of those high, honourable, publike Places of Trust or Judicature, to which most of You are already, and the residue of You may hereafter be deservedly advan∣ced, through His Majesties royal Favour, by Your vigilant strenuous Defence of THE KINGS SUPREME ECCLE∣SIASTICAL AUTHORITY, and of See 1 Eliz. cap. 1. all Iurisdictions, Pri∣viledges, Preeminences, Rights, Prerogatives annexed to his IMPERIAL CROWN, or Courts of Law; & the maintenance of all just Liberties of the consciences, persons, estates of His loyal Subjects, against the illegal exorbitant disloyal Claims, Inno∣vations, Vsurpations, Extortions, Vexations, Impositions, Cen∣sures, Practises, Conspiracies or Designs of the Popes, See, Court of Rome, or other Ecclesiastical domestick Prelates, Per∣sons, Courts, or their subordinate Officers, to eclipse, diminish, invade, undermine, or subvert all or any of them in the least de∣gree: by furnishing You with great plenty, variety of notable ancient Presidents, Writs, Prohibitions, Judgements, Edicts, and Legal proceedings of all sorts, even in the heighth of Po∣pery and Prelacy, to restrain, countermine their disloyal Ʋsur∣pations, extravagancies, oppressions, excesses, tending either to the prejudice of the Kings or peoples Rights. All which (if I

mistake not) will adde much light, lustre, and some conside∣rable Supplements to our ancient Treatises of the Common Law, the broken Cases in Fitzherberts Abridgement, and proceed∣ings in our Courts of Justice; yea, to the History of our Church, State affairs, the Treaties, Negotiations between our Kings, the Bishops, Cardinals, Legates, Court of Rome, and forraign Princes, during the reigns of the premised Kings, conteined in sundry of their respective Epistles, Procurati∣ons, Bulls, Appeals, Instructions, Commissions, Patents, and Memorials (not extant in our printed Historians) which I discovered in the White Tower Chappel, and elsewhere, in our over-much neglected Records; many of which I rescued as well from putrefaction as oblivion, and here most hum∣bly present to Your most judicious perusal.
It was my primitive intention, yea hope, to have complea∣ted and published this Tome long since; but the late raging Pestilence within the City and Suburbs of London (occasioned by the outragious 1 Kings 8 37, 38. Plague of Sinne in our own hearts, lives) which Isay 14. 23. swept away with the besom of destruction more thousands of people than any Plague therein in former ages, inforcing me to retire from the Records for divers Moneths; and the dreadfull consuming fire succeeding it, Jer. 17. 27. c. 50. 32. Lam. 4. 10. Ezech. 20. 48. kindled and enraged by the superabounding of all kinds of Ezech. 16. 46, to 51. Jude 7. Amos 4. 11. Sodomitical sinnes and flames of lust, therein committed) which within few dayes space turned the greatest part of that Great, Rich, Famous City into Isay 17. 1. c. 25. 2. desolate heaps of ashes, rubbish, and consumed my Printers House, with all his Printing-Presses, yea, most of his Cases, Letters, and of the printed Copies of my First and Second, with 40. printed Sheets of this Third Tome, therein, to my great loss; together with my dai∣ly long attendance in several Sessions of Parliament, besides o∣ther diversions since, and my want of convenient Lodgings in the Tower near the Records; so much obstructed, retarded my progress therein, and perusal, sorting, digesting into order all the Records and Monuments in these 3. Kings reigns per∣tinent to my Theame, that I could not possibly-compleat it sooner; and may justly excuse its long expected publica∣tion, together with all defects of ornament, method, and the Supplemental Appendixes, or Insertions in improper places of this Tome, of some Records casually omitted in their Chro∣nological series.

If any of Your Honours, Worships, or other curious Peru∣sers thereof, shall chance to blame or censure me (as I fear they will) as guilty of several superfluities, or redundancies which might have been well omitted, especially in these par∣ticulars:
1. For the multitude of Prohibitions, Suits, Informations or Attachments on them for things, causes of the self-same kinde, or Nature.
2ly. For the superfluity of Patents, Procurations of the same to Persons employed to Rome, France, or in the Collections of Dismes, and the like.
3ly. For the Repetitions of Licenses to elect Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots in England and Ireland, and Patents to con∣firm, consecrate, restore their Temporalties when elected, or confirmed by our Kings.
4ly. For the excessive multiplicity of the Here, p. 587, to 603. 662, to 685, 699, to 722. Names of Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Deans, Chapters, Parsons, Prebends, Vicars, Prebendaries, Religious Houses, Parishes, and their re∣spective Chappels, put out of King Edward the first his pro∣tection for refusing to grant him an Ayde, without the Popes pre∣cedent assent thereto, for defence of the Church and Realm; who afterwards were enforced to make fines to, and compositions with him; whereupon they procured both general and particular Pro∣tections from him, at dearer rates then their denyed Ayde amoun∣ted to. And of the Here, p. 504, to 519, 550, 584, 653, to 666. 1051, 1052. Names of those Bishops, Abbots, Pri∣ors, Earls, Barons, Knights, Clergy-men and Laymen of Scot∣land, who made solemn, reiterated Oathes, Obligations, Deeds under their hands, seals, before special Commissioners, of their fidelity, obedience, and allegiance to King Edward the 1. and yet soon after most perfidiously violated them, by confederating with the French, and rebelling and taking arms against him.
To the 1. of these I answer: That this store can be no sore, nor blameworthy redundancy in me, since usual in all our Year∣books, Reports, especially in See Sta∣thams, Fitz∣herberts, Brooks, Ashes, Hughes, and Serjeant Rolls their Abridg∣ments, Tables, & Serjeant Moores and Judge Crookes Reports. Abridgements of the Law, ancient or modern; reporting several Prohibitions, Cases, Suits between different persons, in divers Terms, Years, Kings reigns of the self-same kinde, form, without any blame or cen∣sure, as I have here done; on purpose to evidence the suc∣cessive restless Ʋsurpations, Innovations, Encroachments of Popes, Popish Prelates, Ecclesiastical Courts, Judges, Persons from year to year, upon these Kings Crowns, Rights, Pre∣rogatives,

Courts of Law, and the peoples liberties; with their own Royal, and their Counsils, Judges care, diligence to restrain, prohibit, punish them; Which being the principal Subject-matter of this and my former Tomes; my omission of any of them as superfluous, might justly be censured not ly for folly, but treachery in me both to the King, Subjects, and the Cause I plead.
To the 2. I return the self-same answer, with this additi∣on; II. that different Patents, Procurations, Commissions to the same or diverse persons, upon the same, like, or different occasions, at divers times, under several or the same Kings, though running in the same or not much different general forms, must necessarily be recited, as well in my Collecti∣ons as in the Records themselves; else the Negotiations, Trea∣ties, Things, to which they relate, would become altogether defective, maimed, unintelligible, of little use, and give no sa∣tisfaction to any Judicious Readers.
The 3d. will easily be justified by the precedent answers to III. the two former, with this further reason; that the vacations, elections, confirmations, successions of our English and Irish Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, our Kings Prerogative in, over them from time to time; the Clergies irregularities, usurpations, abuses in them, to the prejudice of our Kings Crowns, Dignities, Prerogatives; with their Royal Reprehensions oppositions, preventions, punishments, or pardons of them, out of meer grace, not right; and the Ecclesiastical History, affairs, of the Churches of England and Ireland could not possibly have been faithfully or fully related, nor well understood, without the frequent recitals of their several successive Licen∣ses, Elections, Confirmations, Patents of restitution and the like, essential to my Historical Demonstration.
For the 4th. (which seems most liable to exception:) I IV. answer, 1. That the Names of all those persons, places, be∣ing particularly enrolled, recorded with special care, by King Edwards express command, into the Original Records themselves, for a lasting monument, evidence to Posterity of his Soveraign Right, Dominion, Jurisdiction, and Authority over the Clergy of England, and the Church, Prelates, Clergy, Nobility, Commonalty, Realm of Scotland, and of their submis∣sion, subjections, Oaths, Covenants and Allegiance made unto him in a most solemn publike manner, upon the premised ex∣traordinary

occasions; I could not deem it a superflui∣ty, but my necessary bounden duty, upon the same accounts carefully to insert them all at large into their Transcripts; which I likewise did upon 4. other Considerations: 1. To gratifie our English and Scotish Heraulds, and others delight∣ing in Pedegrees, who may make good use of these Names of the Prelates, Nobility, Knights, Gentry, Clergy of England and Scotland, and the places of their residence, upon several oc∣casions. 2ly. To evidence what places had Religious Hou∣ses, Parish-Churches, Chappelries in that age; and what rates, compositions they then payd to the King; which will easi∣ly shew to all concerned, what alterations have since been made in any of them. 3ly. To manifest the general Con∣federacy of the English Prelates, Clergy, in opposing the Aydes demanded of them by King Edward, without the Popes pre∣cedent license: and their general and particular subsequent late repentances for it. 4ly. To evidence the universal de∣testable perjury, treachery of the Scotish Nobility, Nation, but especially of their Prelates and Clergy, in violating their re∣iterated solemn Oathes and Obligations to King Edward, by their confederacy with the French, and rebellions, wars against him, not without the Popes clandestine instigation, and a∣betment.
Having cleared these exceptions, I hope to all ingenuous Readers satisfaction, I must crave leave to inform Your Ho∣nours and Worships, that since my Compleating of this Vo∣lume (upon other publike accounts, especially that of Queen∣gold) I have perused most of the Great Rolls and Records of King Henry the 1, 2. King John, Henry the 3d. and Ed∣ward the 1. (besides other Kings reigns) in the Pipe, Kings, Lord Treasurers Remembrancers, and the Clerk of the Pleas re∣spective Offices, and other Treasuries of Records in the Ex∣chequer Court at Westminster, wherein I found sundry Tran∣scripts of several Popes Bulls, relating to the Impositions, Grants of Dismes and Aydes on, or by the Clergy of Eng∣land or Ireland for our premised Kings themselves, or preten∣ded relief of the Holy Land, or to confirm some Priviledges, Exemptions, granted by them and our Kings to Religious Orders or Monasteries, recorded or pleaded at large in that Court, the Originals whereof, for the most part, are extant in the Tower, or their transcripts enrolled in the dorses of

the Clause, Patent, or other Rolls: which having published in this and the preceding Tomes, I shall not here repeat. Yet observing in the Great Rolls in the Pipe-Office in the 29, 30, 32, 33, & 34 years of King Henry the Second, (soon after the murder of that obstinate, perfidious Antimonarchical See Tom. 1. p. 602, to 631. Arch-Rebel, as well as Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Bec∣ket, canonized for a most glorious Saint and Martyr for his oppositions against the antient Soveraign Ecclesiastical Rights and Prerogatives of this Victorious King over all Ecclesiastical persons, Causes, within this Realm, and other his Dominions; which encouraged his successors and other English Popish Pre∣lates to usurp a new Monopoly of holding Plea and determin∣ing the right of Temporal Causes, Lay-fees, Advowsons, in their Ecclesiastical Courts, as well as of Spiritual matters) and discovering several Fines imposed by his Judges on sun∣dry persons estreated into the Exchequer, and processe there∣upon issued to levy them, for prosecuting, or holding such Pleas in their Courts, and Consistories, against his Crown, Dignity, and Prohibitions; being the ancientest Records of this kinde now extant, not formerly taken notice of by any Lawbooks or Historians, I thought fit here to present Your Honours with them as Rarities, rather then to smother or pretermit them, though not so proper for this Tome, which they precede in time.
In Officio Pipae in Scac∣cario. In Rotulo Magno Anno 29 Regis Henrici 2. Rot. 2. dorso. under the Title, De Placitis Curiae. Richardus de Basinges redd. Comp. de 1. marc. quia placitavit in Curia Christianitatis de laico feodo. In thesauro liberavit, et quietus est.
In Rotulo Magno Anno 30 H. 2. Norhantonscire; under the Title, De Placitis Ranulphi de Glanvil, &c. et sociorum ejus. Adam de Hanvilla redd. Comp. dimid. marc. pro placito de laico feodo in Capitulo.
Ibidem. Norff. & Sussolkscire. Simon de Medelwolde debet x. marc. quia placitavit in Curia Christianitatis de laico feodo. Sed mor∣tuus est.
Ibidem. Ewyerescire; De Placitis Curiae: Episcopus Dunolmen∣sis debet D. marc. (a great, yet reasonable fine in that age, because a great rich Bishop, for this grand offence against his Oath and loyalty to his Sove∣raign) quia tenuit placitum de Advocatione cuiusdam Ecclesiae in Curia Christianitatis: (For the levying of which fine of 500 marks I find processe issued and reiterated against him in the Great Rolls of Ann. 32 H. 2. rot. 7. & An. 33 H. 2. rot. 7.
Ibidem. Wyrecestrescire; under the Title of Nova placita per Gilber∣tum Pipard, &c. et socios suos. Prior de Wirecestre redd. Comp. de x. mar∣quia tenuit placitum de laico feodo in Curia Christianitatis.
In Rotulo Magno Anno 32 H. 2. rot. 3. dorso. Titulo De placitis

Curiae. Willielmus Scure redd. Comp. de v s. iv d. quia placitavit in Capitulo de laico feodo.
In Rot. Magno Anno 34 H. 2. (the last Roll in his reign) Berercscire; Willielmus Scure debet xvi d. quia placitavit in Capitulo de laico feodo.
Ibidem Rot. 7. dorso. Johannis Bud redd. Comp. de x. marc. quia¦traxit placitum ad Christianitatem de laico feodo. In thesauro li∣beravit, et quietus est.
By these and other like presidents in this eminent Kings reign, we may discern his own, and his Judges, Officers, Courts of Justice care, vigilancy to restrain and prevent not only by Writs of Prohibition (extant in De Con∣suetud inibus & Legibus Ang∣liae, l. 12. cap. 21, 22. Glanvil) but likewise by Fines and pecuniary mulcts, to punish the then springing, encreasing Innovations, encroachments of his ambi∣tious, avaritious, usurping Bishops, their Courts, and Officers, upon his Royal Crown and Temporal Courts, in prosecuting and holding Pleas of Lay-fees, Advowsons, and other secular matters, whereof they had no legal conusance, against their Oathes and Allegiance to Him; whereof there are multi∣tudes of like presidents in all our next succeeding Kings reigns in the Pipe Rolls, which I pretermit; because the Prohibiti∣ons, Attachments, Suits for prosecuting such Pleas collected in this Tome, will abundantly evidence the verity thereof.
Besides, I took notice of this memorable Clause concerning Intestates goods, in Rotulo Magno Anno 18 Regis Henrici 2. Rot. 9. dorso, under the Title of Abbatia de Bello (in Sus∣sex) Petrus de Bello redd. Comp. (to the King) de xxxiiij. lib. & xiiii sol. de Catallis Pelokini Ballivi de Abbatia, qui obiit Intestatus. In thesauro liberavit, & quietus est. Which verifies this assertion of Lib. 7. cap. 36. Ranulphus de Glanvilla, (Chief Justice under this King) in his Tractatus de Legibus & Consuetudini∣bus ANGLIAE, compiled by him in that age, for Law; Cum quis vero Intestatus decesserit, omnia Catalla sua sui Do∣mini esse intelliguntur: si vero plures habuerit Dominos, quili∣bet eorum Catalla sua recuperabit quae in feodo suo reperiet, &c. towards the satisfaction of all Heriots, Debts and Duties owing to them or others by the Intestate; which being ful∣ly discharged, the King and Lords (not the Bishop, Ordina∣ry, much less his Vicar or Official) were to divide the residue of the Intestates goods amongst his Wife and Children if he had any, by the See here, p. 18, 19, 141, 142, 332. Lawes of King Knute, Edward the Con∣fessor,

William the Conqueror, and King Henry the 1. his Charter, & secundum consuetudinem terrae meae; as Lib. 12. cap. 20. Glan∣vill, the Writs de rationabilibus divisis grounded thereon, and the Statute of Magna Charta, c. 18. intimate, and Lib. 3. cap. 26. Bracton, with Lib. 2. c. 57. Fleta expresly affirm, (yet others deny) even in the cases of Lay-men: But in the cases of Bishops, Abbots, and Clergymen, (prohibited to marry by Councils, Canons, and Popes Decretals in that age) if they died intestate, all their goods, chattels, monyes, of right accrued to the King by his prerogative, who thereupon usually seised and converted them to his proper use; whereof we have a memorable president in the case of Mat. West. Flores Hist. An. 1189. p. 62. Mat. Paris, p. 147. Geoffry Rydell Bishop of Ely; who dying intestate on the 12. of the Kalends of September Anno 1289. (between the death of King Henry the 2. and 4. dayes be∣fore the Coronation of King Richard the 1. his Sonne;) thereupon, quia Episcopatus intestatus decessit, eius bona con∣fiscata sunt universa, to King Richard the first, as Historiae Anglicanae Scriptores, col. 647. Radul∣phus de Diceto stories; or as Historiae Angliae, p. 147. Mat. Paris relates, Eodem tempore Gaufridus Elyensis Episcopus Intestatus decessit, unde de reliquiis suis confiscata sunt tria millia marcarum argenti, cum¦ducentis marcis auri. Superlectilis sui numerus tàm in auro, quàm in argento, tàm in equis quàm in vestibus preciosis, tàm in bladis quàm in instauramentis in immensum excrevit. All which King Richard the 1. converted to his proper use, by his Prerogative Royal in such cases, as Radulfus de Diceto, Matthew Paris, Catalogue of Bishops, p. 262. Godwin, and others observe; notwith∣standing the Usurper King Here, p. 18. & Tom. 1. p. 491, 492. Stephens Charter to the Bishops, and Clergy, whom they perfidiously Crowned against their See Tom. 1. p. 489, to . 501, to 508, &c. Oaths to Queen Maude, (purposely to enlarge their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over intestate Ecclesiastical Persons Chattels, and their own goods, chattels, with other particulars) by disin∣heriting their lawfull Soveraign, for which most of them soundly smarted, their Castles, Treasures being seised, and their persons imprisoned by him, notwithstanding their Ro∣chets, Canons, and his own new Charter to them.
Upon this occasion, and our Bishops, Canonists former and late claims of an ancient unquestionable legal right, Jurisdiction vested in them, to distribute all Laymens goods, chattels, dying intestate, to pious or other uses for the salvation of their souls; I thought fit to take special Tom. 2. p. 356. Here, p. 18, 19, 20. Notice in this Tome, what new clauses our seditious trayterous Archbishop Stephen Langet on

and his Confederates cunningly thrust into King Johns Great Charter of Liberties, not extant in King Henry the firsts Char∣ter, which they at first pretended he should only ratifie. Which enlarged Charter, as it was within 2. years after quite nulled, by the Pope at King Johns request, and so gave the Bishops no legal power at all over intestate Freemens goods; so at the reviving thereof by King Henry the 3d. in the 9th year of his reign, the Clause concerning the distribution of the Intestates Goods, by his kinred, parents, or friends, PER VISUM ECCLESIAE; (from whence Lib. 2. c. 26. & lib. 2. c. 57. Tom. 2. p. 356. Here, p. 18, 19, 20. Bracton and Fleta in∣ferred, ad ECCLESIAM & ad amicos pertinebit executio bonorum) thrust in by the Bishops, who interpreted the Church to be only the Bishop, was quite expunged out of his Great Charter, and all others, since confirmed by near 50. Parlia∣ments. Whereupon the Bishops, to support their new en∣croached Jurisdiction over Intestates goods and chattels by co∣lour of this expunged Clause, which King Henry and his Counsil strenuously opposed, and would never assent to, after many reiterated supplications, set on foot a meer ima∣ginary Ordinance, which they reported to be made by the Prelates, with the consent of the King and his Barons, and inserted into See here, p. 18, 19, 20. Otthobons Constitutions Anno 52 H. 3. and after that into John Stratfords, Anno 1342. but when, where, or by what Prelates, King and Barons that Ordi∣nance was made, they neither then expressed, nor positively affirmed, nor can yet resolve. Yet by colour of this Or∣dinance, See Tom. 2. p. 890, 891, 899, 909 910. Here, p. 20, 21. Pat. 45 H. 3. pars 1. m. 8. Pat. 46 H. 3. m. 17, 19. Jo∣han de Aton Constit. Legi∣timae, f. 138. Gul. Linde∣wode Provin∣ciale, . 3. f. 199. & l. 5. f. 224, to 227. Spelmanni Concil. Tom. 2. p. 313, 585, 586. Archbishop Boniface with his Suffragans made sundry Antimonarchical Constitutions in the Council of Lamb∣heth Anno 1257. (41 H. 3. most contemptuously called and held by them against the Kings expresse Writs of Prohibition issued to them,) and among others, de∣nounced a solemn Excommunication against all those Lords (not excepting the King & his Officers) who should hinder Ordina∣ries distributions of Laymens goods to pious uses, as violaters of the Churches Liberties; Which Constitutions were no sooner known, but they were publikely appealed, complained against by the King in his own and the Kingdomes name and behalf, to two several Popes, as most illegally made, to the prejudice and grievance of his Crown, Royal Dignity, and against the Li∣berties and Customes of his Realm of England: for which and other contempts, this Archbishop was enforced to flye

the Realm, to avoyd the Kings, Nobles, peoples displea∣sures, and dyed in exile; whereupon his Constitutions were totally rejected as Nullities, and never put in execution for 85. years space. But then his successor John Stratford Arch∣bishop of Canterbury (as ungratefull perfidious a Traytor to King Edward the 3. as Boniface was to King Henry the 3d.) in a Convocation of the Clergy held at London Anno 1342. in high contempt of the Kings Soveraign Authority, (from which he Antiq. Eceles Brit. p. 245. alleged he was totally exempted, unaccountable to, and not to be judged by him for any crimes objected against him) revived and enlarged the exploded Constitutions of Boniface, with sundry Additional Articles and new Clauses of Excom∣munications, by his own usurped Pontifical power, to the manifest derogation of the Rights and Prerogatives of the Kings Crown and Dignity, which he thereby endeavoured to wrest from him: And then like an absolute Legislator and Pope of our other World, commanded them to be pub∣lished and inviolably observed throughout his Province in future times, in this imperious stile; Provincia∣lis Gul. Linde∣wode lib. 1. de Consuetudine f. 13, 14. who makes a large glosse thereon; Jodacus Ba∣dius Constit. Provinciales, f. 137. b. Spel∣manni Concil. Tom. 2. p. 591. Hujus autem Con∣cilii Constitutiones, & provisa remedia praecipimus in nostra Cantuariensi provincia, futuris temporibus inviolabilitex obser∣vari. Mandantes Coepiscopis et Suffraganeis universis, ut ip∣sas Constitutiones per se et alios, ut jus exigit, publicent et faci∣ent publicari, ac in publicam notitiam deduci; together with the old General Sentence of Excommunication, having sun∣dry new Clauses of his own added thereunto: Hereupon King Edw. the 3. by two several Royal Writs, or Letters (made with advise of his Counsil, and ordered to be published at Canter∣bury and other places to all his Subjects,) strictly prohi∣bited the publication or execution of these Excommunica∣tions or Constitutions; therein at large relating this Arch∣bishops ingratitude, treachery, insolency, affronts, slanders of him, his Counsil, and Officers, and rendered this Cha∣racter of him, them, and his designes in publishing them. Stephanus Byrkington, & Archbp Parker out of him, Antiquitates Ecclesiae Bri∣tannicae, p. 241 242, 244. See Tho. Walsing∣ham, Histor. Angliae, p. 236, to 231. Da∣niels History, p. 228, to 230. Idem Archiepiscopus quam regalis benignitas beneficiis & honoribus magnificis ampliavit, &c. subito in virum onero∣sum & gravem crudeliter est conversus, & beneficiis acceptis ingratus, fremens arrogantia benefactorem persequitur, & il∣lam nobis retributionem impendit, quem vulgariter proverbium dicit; Mus in pera; Serpens in gremio; Ignis in sinu; suis consueverunt hospitibus exhibere, &c. Opem tamen nostram &

innocentiam, & Consiliariorum & Officialium nostrorum regalem persequentium fidelitatem & diligentiam convitiis lacerat, publi∣ce praedicando, &c. Et callidis inventionibus et reprobis consi∣liis, quasdam Excommunicationis sententias in Libertatis Eccle∣siasticae et Magnae Chartae violatores in genere dudum latas, ad sugillandum opinionem Regiam, et praefatos Ministros Regios defamandos, et seditionem in populo nobis commisso PRODITO∣RIE suscitandum, et devotionem Comitum, Procerum et Mag∣natum regni nostri Majestati Regiae subtrahendum; specificatis nonnullis Articulis, propter et contra solitum modum IN CON∣CILIO PROVINCIALI TRADITUM, mandavit per stias lite∣ras publicari. Ibidem, p. 254, 255. Quinimo cum ipse et alii Praelati Regni, qui de nobis Ecclesiarum suarum temporalia recipiunt, ex debito fi∣delitatis juratae, fidem, honorem, et reverentiam deberent exhibe∣re; ipse solus pro fide perfidiam, pro honore contumeliam, et con∣temptum pro reverentia reddere non veretur; Unde etsi parati si∣mus et semper fuerimus Patres spirituales ut convenit revereri, EORUM TAMEN OFFENSAS, QUAS IN NOSTRI ET REGNI NOSTRI PERICULUM REDUNDARE CONSPICIMUS, NON DEBEMUS CONNIVENTI∣BUS OCULIS PRAETERIRE, &c. Et quia de conser∣vatione Iurium et Praerogativarum nostrarum Regalium, quae Progenitorum nostrorum Regum Anglia digne recolenda prioritas magnifice defensavit, sumus ut debemus summe solliciti; ac idem Archiepiscopus ad concitandum contra Nos Clerum et populum, et ad impediendum expeditionem guerrae nostrae quam per ejus con∣silium principaliter assumpsimus, quasdam denunciationes et pub∣licationes sententiarum excommunicationum ac monitiones inju∣riosas, AC JURI CORONAE ET REGIAE DIGNI∣TATIS NOSTRAE PRAEJUDICIALES, CUM PER EAS NITITUR IN MULTIS ARTICULIS A NOBIS AUFERRE JURISDICTIONEM NOBIS NOTORIE COMPETENTEM, CUJUS CUM SUMUS REX IN∣VICTUS (misprinted for INUNCTUS, as I conceive) CAPACES ESSE DINOSCIMUR; ET QUAE NOS¦ET PROGENITORES NOSTRI, scientibus et toleran∣tibus Summis Pontificibus, Praelatis et Clera regni nostri USI SUMUS PACIFICE AB ANTIQUO, fecit, et per alios fieri et publicari mandavit, IN MAJESTATIS NO∣STRAE LAESIONEM, ET JURIUM ET PRAERO∣GATIVARUM

NOSTRARUM REGALIUM DE∣ROGATIONEM MANIFESTAM; Vobis districte et sub incumbenti periculo PROHIBEMUS, ne publicationes, denuncia∣tiones, seu monitiones hujusmodi indebitas, ET JURIBUS AC PRAEROGATIVIS NOSTRIS REGIIS DERO∣GATORIAS ET PRAEJUDICIALES, vel alia per quae fideles nostri contra nos suscitari, vel expeditionem guerrae nostrae in subversionem nostri et fidelium nstrorum possint; quod absit aliqualiter impediri, AD MANDATUM IPSIUS AR∣CHIEPISCOPI vel alterius cujuscunque, quomodolibet per vos vel alios faciatis, vel quantum in vobis est ab aliis fieri permit∣tatis. Et si quid per vos in hac parte attemptatum fuerit CE∣LERITER REVOCETIS. T. meipso apud Turrim London 31 die Martii, Anno, &c.
Hereupon those Antimonarchical Excommunications and Constitutions of Archbishop Boniface revived by him, toge∣ther with his own, thus publikely censured, revoked by the King and his Counsil, were totally neglected, and not put in execution by our succeeding Archbishops, Bishops, or Eccle∣siastical Judges for 80. years space or more, as William Lindewode himself thus acknowledgeth in his Preface to Henry Chichely Archbishop of Canterbury, praefixed to his Antwerpiae, 1525. Provinciale; Consideravi equidem, quod quamquam Constitu∣tiones ipsae ex interioribus medullis Scripturarum, & sacro∣rum Canonum, indubitatisque tam Theologorum, quam Iuris Canonici et Civilis autenticorum Doctorum sententiis ad uti∣litatem Provinciae Cantuar. subditorum extractae: A compluribus (tamen) dictae Provinciae tam Patribus aliisque Praelatis et Iu∣dicibus, quam ipsorum subditis neglectui quodammodo habean∣tur, adeo quod temporibus his perpauci sunt qui ipsorum obser∣vationi, ut ratio exiget, invigilent. Whereupon this great Do∣ctor of the Canon and Civil Law, (being then Official to the Archbishop of Canterbury, to bring these neglected Canons into credit, use, to enlarge the Jurisdiction of our Ecclesiasti∣cal Courts and Prelates) in the year 1423. at Bois St. Vin∣cents in France, collected these two, and our other Archbi∣shops Provincial Constitutions into one Body (as In eadem Praefatione. him∣self thus relates) resecatis superfluis & quibusdam ex eis ab∣breviatis correcte in unum Opus collegi, & sub congruenti∣bus Titulis ad instar libri Decretalium seriosius collocavi.

Anno tunc sequenti eadem Statuta glossare proposui; which ha∣ving accordingly glossed and accomplished about the 3d year of King Henry the 6. he dedicated his Provinciale to this Archbishop, tanquam verae juris lucernam in Ecclesia Angli∣cana radiantem: which was afterwards printed Antwerpiae, summa cura & diligentia Christopheri Endovien. Anno salu∣tis nostrae 1525. 20 die Decembris; Venales habentur Lon∣don, in Cimiterio Sancti Pauli, apud Franciscum Bryckman: By this his Provinciale and large Glosses on these Constitutions they began by degrees to be put in practise by our Bishops and Canonists, as binding Ecclesiastical Lawes and Canons, to which all Clergymen and Laymen must submit, enforcing obedience to them by their Ecclesiastical Courts and Cen∣sures. To further which design thus begun by Lindewode, and reinforce these exploded Antimonarchical Constituti∣ons, Jodocus Badius Ascensius, and Johannes Chappuys (two great Doctors of the Canon and Civil Law) An. 1504, col∣lected, corrected, abridged, and printed the Legatinc Consti∣tutions of Otho & Othobon the Popes Legates, made in England in two Councils held under them at London in the reign of King Henry the 3d, An. 1236. & 1248. with Johannes de Athon or Acton his Glosse upon them (a Doctor of the Civil and Canon Law flourishing in the reign of King Edward the 1. as Scriptorum Brit. Centur. 4. cap. 66. (d) ibidem, f. 155. b Johannes Balaeus conjectures, though perchance of pu∣nier times) together with the Constitutiones Provinciales of sundry other Archbishops of Canterbury, (d) printed there together: Solertissima accuratione atque Arte Magistri Wulf∣gangi Hopilii, impensis ejusdem, & probissimi Bibliopole Jo∣annis Confluentini, in inclyta Parisiorum Academia. Ad lau∣dëm & gloriam Optimi Maximi Domini nostri Jesu Christi, ejusque pientissimae Matris, (ranged in equipage with him) & totius coelestis Curiae, necnon AD CONSERVATIONEM LIBERTATIS ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE, et ad salutem atque eruditionem totius Cleri, omniumque Christi fidelium in∣clitissimi Anglorum regni, Anno Domini 1504. ad Idus Sep∣tembris, (full 21. years before Lindewodes Provinciale was printed, and not long after Printing was first invented) dedi∣cating them to William Warham, then Archbishop of Canter∣bury, ut Archiepiscoporum Cantuariensium statuta, ad excel∣lentissimum Archipraesulem redirent. Which illegal, oppug∣ned, Antimonarchical, exploded, nulled Constitutions of

Archbishop Boniface and John Stratford, with those of the Council of Reading under John Peckham Archbishop of Can∣terbury, Anno 7 E. 1. (for which he was convented before the King and Parliament, and inforced to make a publike See Here, p. 230, 235, 236. Claus. 7 E. 1. 1. dor∣so. Revocatio∣nes Provisio∣num Concilii Rading. revocation of several Clauses and provisions contained in his General Sentence of Excommunication therein made, as derogatory and prejudicial to the Kings Crown, Dignity, and Prerogative) being the Principal parts of Lyndwodes Pro∣vinciale, and our Canon Lawes introduced by him, began to be cryed up and put in execution by the Bishops and their Ecclesiastical Officers, to the great prejudice and dis∣honor of the King, and oppression of his Subjects; For ef∣fectual redress wherof, King Henry the 8. and his Parliament in the 25 year of his reign, upon complaint, That divers Constitutions, Ordinances, and Canons Provincial or Synodal had heretofore bene enacted, thought not only to be much prejudici∣al to the Kings Prerogative Royal, and repugnant to the Lawes and Statutes of this Realm, but overmuch onerous to his Sub∣jects; which the Clergie of England therein not only acknowledged to be true, but also most humbly besought his Highnesse, that the said Canons and Constitutions might be committed to the exami∣nation and judgement of his Highness, and of xxxii. persons of the Kings Subjects, to be chosen and appointed by the KINGS MAIESTY; whereof xvi. to be of the Vpper and Nether House of Parliament of the TEMPORALTY, and other xvi. to be of the CLERGY of this Realm. And all the said xxxii. persons to be chosen and appointed by the KINGS MAIESTY. And that such of the said Constitutions and Canons as the Kings High∣nesse, and the said xxxii. or the more part of them, shall deem and adjudge worthy to be continued, kept, and obeyed, shall be from thenceforth kept, obeyed, and executed within this Realm; so that the Kings most Royal assent, under his Great Seal, be first had to the same▪ And the residue of the said Canons, Constitutions, and Ordinances Provincial, which the Kings Highness, and the said xxxii. persons, or the more part of them, shall not approve, or deem, and judge worthy to be abolite, abrogate, and made frustrate, shall be abolite, void, and of none effect, (as in truth they were from their beginning, being made not only without, but against the Kings Royal assent and authority, and not ratified by our Parliaments) and never be put in execution within this

Realm. It was thereupon accordingly declared and enacted by the successive Statutes of 25 H. 8. c. 19. 27 H. 8. c. 17. 31 H. 8. c. 16. 37 H. 8. c. 17. & 3, & 4 Edw. 6. c. 11. Which also provided and enacted, that these Acts shall not extend, or be intepreted, to give any authority to the said two and thirty persons, or to the more number of them, or to the Kings Highness, for to compile, stablish, or set forth any Ecclesiastical Law, repug∣nant or contrary to any Common Law, or Statute of this Realm, or the Kings Prerogative. Yet notwithstanding, these their Canons and Constitutions, though thus contemptuously made, published, complained against, yea censured, exploded by our Kings, and Parliaments from time to time, with Lynde∣wodes and Atons Glosses on them, are still obtruded on us, and magnified, justified, asserted, executed by our Bishops, Clergy, their Ecclesiastical Courts, Officers, and Doctors of the Canon Law, as the legitimate, irrefragable Ecclesiastical Lawes both of the Church, King and Kingdom of England, not only to justifie their distributions of Intestates goods, a∣gainst the expresse Practise of our Lu. 12. 13, 14. 2 Tim. 2. 4. Saviour Jesus Christ, and St. Pauls Doctrine, if we believe De Consi∣fideratione ad Eugenium Pa∣pam, l. 1. See here, p. 138, 139. St. Bernard, (of which goods they were such ill Stewards and dispensers from the very beginning, that not only Lib. 2. c. 26. Bracton and Lib. 2. c. 57. Fleta write, but Spelmanni Concil. Tom. 2. p. 586. Archbishop Stratford himself acknowledgeth in his Constitutions, that they unduly usurping them in the name of the Church, yet NULLAM VEL SALTEM INDEBI∣TAM facientes distributionem, converted them to their own uses, to the defrauding of their Creditors, Wives, Children, kinred; and I fear they have not been much better Stewards See Sir John Bennets Im∣peachment & Censure in Parliament, Anno 1621. since;) But likewise to countenance their holding all their Ecclesiastical Courts, Visitations, and issuing out all their Citati∣ons, Processe, Probate of Wills, Letters of Administrations, Cen∣sures, in & under their own Names, Rights, Stiles, Seals, as in times of the Popes Ʋsurpations, not the Kings, (whose See 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. 1 Eliz. c. 1. 37 H. 8. c. 17. Mat. 22. 20, 21. I∣mage, superscription, stile they ought to bear, as well as his Coyn, Common Law Courts & Process, or else they are none of his) and to warrant all the extravagant vexatious Excommunications, Visitation Oathes, Articles, Proceedings, Extortions, lately revi∣ved since His Majesties most happy Restauration, and the Statute of 13 Caroli II. chap. 12. to the derogation of His Majesties Soveraign Ecclesiastical Authority, and great grievance, oppression, vexation of his loyal Subjects; For re∣dresse

whereof I thought it necessary to inform both our Pre∣lates, Canonists, but especially the Professors of the Common Law, how these Canons, Constitutions were originally made, opposed, exploded, yet since by degrees revived, and put in execution, notwithstanding our Kings, Nobles, Parlia∣ments Appeals, Oppositions, Complaints, and Acts against them, wherewith few of them are acquainted.
And here I cannot but observe, That Sir Edward Cooke, as he hath in his 2 Institutes p. 599, 600, 601. Commentary upon Articuli Cleri, taken special Notice of Archbishop Boniface and his Suffragans forementioned Constitutions, as made directly against the Lawes and Statutes of the Realm, and the Kings Royal Crown, Dignity, which occasioned much difference between the Common and Ecclesiastical Law, Judges, Courts: So he likewise addes, That this Archbishop and his Clergy in a Parliament holden in the 51. year of H. 3. (which was their ultimum refugium, yet the right way) exhibited many Articles as grievances, called Articuli Cleri; which either by accident or industry are not to be found, yet some of their answers are extant; which he there recites, Ex fragmento Rotuli Parliamenti Anno 51 H. 3. as his Margin affirms, without any directions where to finde it. But under his correction, I conceive he is much mistaken therein. For first, The Articles of Archbishop Boniface and his Clergy, were drawn and exhibited by them to King Hen∣ry the 3. and his Counsil, not Anno 51. but 41. of his reign, when these his Constitutions were made in pursuance of them, against the Kings Prohibitions. 2ly. These Articles are mentioned by Page 920, 921, 922. Matthew Paris in his History, and since printed in his Page 199. to 204. Additamenta; and in my Page 891, to 898. Second Tome, being 50. in number. 3ly. King Henry the 3d and his Counsil refused to give any answer at all to them, or any of them, upon their reiterated requests, but absolutely re∣jected them, as the Archbishop and Clergy premise in their See Tome 2. p. 899, 200. & Here, p. 20. Proeme to their Ecclesiastical Constitutions then made; nei∣ther doth Mat. Paris make mention of any answers to them, as no doubt he would have done, had there been any given. 4ly. There is no such Fragment of any Parliament or other Roll An. 51 H. 3. now extant in the Tower or elsewhere that I can find, nor any Parliament held that year, but two in Ann. 52 & 53 H. 3. wherein the Statutes of Marle∣bridge, and Dictum de Kenilworth were made. 5ly. Not

one of our Historians or Antiquaries make mention of any such Articles of the Clergy in An. 51 H. 3. 6ly. The Answers he prints are unsutable to those Articles in Matth. Paris Anno 41. both in their number, and matter, as all may clearly dis∣cern by comparing them. 7ly. Othobons Constitutions (made in a Council at London An. 52, or 53 H. 3. not 42. as Spelman. Concil. p. 263. Sir Henry Spelmans Edition, and John de Atons too mistake, as Mat. Paris his Continua∣tor, p. 973. Matthew Paris, Mat. West. An. 1268. p.  388. Holin∣shed, & others. Matthew Westminster, Antiquita∣tes Eccles. Brit. p. 190. Mat∣thew Parker, and others, with the Clause and Patent Rolls of 49 & 50 H. 3. assure us, he arriving not, nor acting as a Legate till then within this Realm) make no mention of them. Upon all which considerations, I cannot but repute these an∣swer, he hath printed to be Apocryphal.
But his most unpardonable Oversight and Mistake, is this; That in his very Proeme to his Second Institutes on Magna Charta, he asserts, that the Writ of Proclamation issu∣ed by King Henry the 3d. 11 Decembris in the 19th year of his reign to the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, to prohibit all Schooles and Lectures of the Canon Lawes and Popes De∣cretals, (as King Stephen had done before him) then new∣ly polished, abridged by Raymundus, at Pope Gregory the 9th. his request; qui eas soleniter et autentice per totius mundi la∣titudinem LEGI PRAECEPIT & DIVULGARI, et ad multorum perniciem publicavit; as Histor. Angliae, f. 403. Matthew Paris, In Vita Gregor. 9. Platina, De Ro∣manorum Pontifieum Actis, p. 302. Balaeus, and Crespin, Bucholcerus, & Fasciculus Temporum, An. 1230. others relate; Vetuitque Ius Ci∣vile legi Lutetiae, et aliis in locis vicinis: as Chrono∣graph. l. 4. p. 641. & Marc. de Vulson, De la Puissance du Pape, l. 1. c. 18. p. 56. as Hono∣rius the 3d. did before him. Gilbertus Genebrardus a Parisian Divine observes, by these new Decre∣tals, to which all other Lawes must give place, that they alone might rule the World; whereupon King Henry issu∣issued this Writ to prohibit them to be read upon, publish∣ed, or put in execution; as being most derogatory to his Royal Prerogative, Lawes, Courts, and Subjects liberties, to be meant and intended only, of Schooles of the Common Law, and Readings upon the two Great Charters of Liberties and the Forest, which he had formerly ratified, and sworn to observe. Which grand misprision of his as I have Page 86, 87, 88. here refuted at large, by pregnant evidences; so the very season wherein it was issued, soon after his removal of his ill Great Officers, Counsellors, Chief Justicer, and putting honest, faithfull ones in their places, upon his comming to himself, sight of his former miscarriages, and reconciliation to his faith∣full

native Lords and Subjects, formerly rejected, persecu∣ted by him; with his confirmation of these Charters un∣der his Great Seal in the Parliament of Merton within few moneths after, as himself observes, and the excellent Laws therein made by him for the common benefit of his Subjects, Nobles, Realm; attested by Historiae Angliae, 390, 391. Matthew Paris, Flores Histor. p. 140. Mat∣thew Westminster, other Holin∣shed, Speed, Daniel, Mr. Dugdale his Chronica Se∣ries, p. 10. Historians, and by the Clause and Patent Rolls of the 18, 19, & 20th. years of his reign, will so irrefragably refute it, that I hope no Common Law∣yers will from henceforth be seduced to believe it upon his Ipse scripsit, nor any Canonists or Civilians reap advantage by this his egregious Error; nor yet by his asserting Circum∣specte agatis (a meer contrivance of the Bishops to enlarge their Jurisdictions) to be a Statute made, or Writ enacted in the Parliament of 13 E. 1. which I have Page 336, to 342. 1270, 1271. here like∣wise evidenced to be an apparent untruth.
How farre Popes, Bishops, and their Canon Law Doctors have by their own Canons, Constitutions, and Glosses on them enlarged their Jurisdiction even to the nulling, altering of the Testaments and Legacies of deceased Persons to pious uses, contrary to their express wills, those who please may read at leisure in the large folio Volume of Augustinus Barbosa, a grand Doctor of the Canon Law, & Episcopus Eu∣gentinus, De Officio et Potestate Episcopi, (dedicated to the Virgin Mary) licensed, printed at Rome, and newly reprin∣ted Lugduni 1665. Pars 3. Alleg. 80 & 81. & Alleg. 50. nu. 41. & Johannes Bertachinus de Episcopis, lib. 4. Quaest. 4. with sundry other Canonists quoted by them.
In what particulars they have advanced Themselves, their Pontifical Mitres, Lawes, above the Imperial Crowns of all Christian Emperors, Kings, and their municipal Lawes, I have Tom. 1. Epistle Dedi∣catory, & Tom. 2. p. 5, to 10. elsewhere evidenced, and shall here demonstrate only in four other Instances worthy special observation.
First, they advance not only every Pope, but Bishop, farre above all Christian Emperors and Kings in the manner of their Ʋnctions and Consecrations: For whereas the Kings of Israel, when anointed to be Kings, had a Viol of Oyl, by Gods appointment, powred out upon their 1 Sam 10. 1, 2. Kings, 9, 6. Psal. 23. 5. & 1 Chron. 1. 39. 45. 2 Kings 11. 12. Mat. 26. 7. Mar. 14. 3. HEADS, as it was upon the Exod. 29. 7. c. 30. 30. c. 40. 15. 13. 15, 16, 17. Ps. 133. 2. High Priests Head, and were annoynted with the same Oyle that the High Priests were, as See Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, part 1. c. 8. sect. 1. p. 144, 152. most affirm; to evidence to all, that they were thereby made the 1 Sam. 15. 17. Judg. 11. 8. 11. 2 Chron. 9. 8. Ordo Romanus, Bibl. Patrum, Tom. 8. p. 466. 467. chief

HEADS of all Gods people committed to their government, and Gods own VICARS upon Earth, sitting upon HIS THRONE, to be KINGS for the Lord their God: Which practise of anoynting the Heads of Christian Emperors & Kings at their Coronations, was anciently used both in the Eastern and Western Empires; Mr. Sel∣dens Titles of Honor, part 1. ch, 8. sect, 1. p. 147. Lan∣dulphus Sagax Histor. l. 23. Pope Leo the 3d. himself anoyn∣ting Charles the Great with Oyle from HEAD to foot af∣ter the custom of the Jewes, and likewise in the Coronation of our British and Saxon Kings before the Conquest, as this Prayer used at their Coronations in the ancient Ceremoniale made in the Saxons time assure us; Seldens ib. p. 144, 151, 152, 153, 155, 156. Christe perunge tu∣um REGEM in regimen, &c. Tua sacratissima unctio super CAPƲT ejus defluat, atque ad interiora descendat, atque cor∣dis illius intima penetrat, &c. In Nomine Patris, & Filii, & Spiritus Sancti, prosit tibi haec unctio Dlei in Honorem et Consecrationem aeternam in secula seculorum, Amen. Which Custome hath continued ever since; all our Kings at their inaugurations (notwithstanding Popes Constitutions and Ce∣remonials to the contrary, to which they would not submit) having their HEADS anoynted; as our Histories relate, and all the See the se∣cond Part of My Signal Loyalty & De∣votion of pious Christians to∣wards their Kings, p. 158, 207, 227, 243, 252, 279, 281, 282. Ceremonials of their Coronations thus expresly injoyn in the Rubricks, UNGATUR CAPITE: with Oyl and Crisme, as well as on his hands, breast, back, shoulders; and then using this Prayer. Deus Dei Filius Jesu Christe Dominus noster, qui a Patre Oleo exultationis unctus est prae particibus suis, ipse per praesentem sacri unguinis infusionem Spiritus Pa∣racliti, SUPER CAPUT TUUM infundat benedictionem, eandemque usque d interiora cordis tui penetrare faciat, &c. Which even our Antimonarchical Arch-Traytor Thomas Becket thus acknowledged in his Epistle to King Henry the 2. An. 1166. Mat. Pa∣ris Hist. Angl. p. 101. Inunguntur REGES IN CAPITE, etiam Pectore et Brachiis, quod significat gloriam, sanctitatem, et forti∣tudinem: And Summae, l. 1. De sacra Unctione, sect. 8. f. 61. b. Cardinal Hostiensis also not long after in these termes; Sed et Consuetudo antiqua circa hoc observa∣tur; nam supradictorum REGUM FRANCIAE & ANGLIAE CAPITA INUNGUNTUR: And although De Officio & Potestate Episcopi, pars 2. Alleg. 31. p. 364. nu. 8. Augusti∣nus Barbosa affirms; Sicut Christus, id est Unctus, appella∣tur Dominus noster Jesus; ita REGES inunguntur, conse∣crantur, & coronantur, ut intelligant se A CHRISTO UNC∣TO (not from the Pope) potestatem habere, et in eo regnare. Yet notwithstanding, See Tom. 2. p. 259, 260, 264, to 293, 539. Pope Innocent the 3d. (who de∣prived

King John of his Crown, to wrest a surrender of it to himself; and excommunicated, deposed the Emperor Otho by Treason, Rebellion, then set up, crowned Frederick the 2. in his stead:) not only to perpetuate the antichristian absolute Soveraignty of himself and his successors over all Christian Emperors and Kings, as the only Heads of the Uni∣versal Church, but also to deprive them of their Headship, So∣veraignty over the Churches, Prelates within their own Do∣minions, & advance every of their Bishops paramount them; translated their Unctions from the Head to the Arm or Shoul∣ders, and that only with Oyle, not Crisme, upon this account, Extrav. de Sacra Unctio∣ne, sect. Unde, & Selden, p. 155. That after such time as our Savior was anointed with the oyl of gladness above his fellows, qui secundum Apostolum est CA∣PUT ECCLESIAE, (therefore not the Pope) Principis unctio a CAPITE ad brachium est translata, UT PRINCEPS EXTUNC NON UNGATUR IN CAPITE, sed in brachio, sive humero, vel armo, in quibus Principatus congrue designatur, juxta illud quod legitur, (Isay 9. 6.) Factus est Principatus super humerum ejus. Whereupon the Pontificale Romanum Clementis 8. Antwerpiae 1627. p. 17. Caeremoniale, Sacr. l. 1. sect. 1. c. 3. & cap. 1. Roman Ceremonials and Pontificals since compiled, prescribe, that Emperors and Kings shall be anoynted only on the Arm, Shoulders, not the Head, but Popes and Bishops only on the Head: when as the ancient Printed in Bibl. Patrum, Coloniae Agr. 1628. Tom. 8. p. 466, 467. Ordo Romanus, ad Regem benedicendum, compi∣led about 800 years after Christ, (as Jodocus Coccius and others assert) and used till this Pope Innocents time, ex∣presly prescribes; Dominus Metropolitanus ungat de Oleo sanctificato CAPUT, Pectus & Scapulas, ambasque com∣pages brachiorum ipsius, ita dicendo, Ungo te in REGEM, de Oleo sanctificato, &c. And their very New Ceremonials and Portificals still retain the forementioned Prayer after their anoynting in the armes, as they used when their heads were anoynted: The reasons of which alterations, worthy observa∣tion, they thus render to us. Restaurus Castaldus, de Imperatore, qu. 19. nu. 3. August. Bar∣bosa, de Offic. & Potestate Episcopi, pars 2. Alleg. 31. nu. 12. & pas 1. Tit. 1. c. 5. nu. 10. p. 31. Solus Pontifex Chrismate in CAPITE ungitur, ex balsamo et oleo confecto, mystica ratione; sed Im∣peratores et Reges tantum oleo in brachio exorcizato in modum Crucis inunguntur; ut ostendatur quanta sit differentia inter auc∣toritatem Pontificis et Principis potestatem. Vngitur primo in Capite Episcopus qui consecratur, ut auctoritas et dignitas ejus declararetur, eum scilicet esse CAPUT ET PRINCIPEM ECCLESIAE SUAE, (not the Emperor, or King) et ut ostendatur eum esse VICARIUM CHRISTI, ejus{que} dignitatem et

auctoritatem gerere qui est super omnia, et quem constituit Deus CAPUT (therefore not the Pope) SUPER OMNEM ECCLESIAM. Ideo Reges non JAM in CAPITE, (as antiently) sed in humero unguntur: Primum, ut is proprius honor sit illius, quem Deus constituit excelsum super omnes Reges Terrae, et quem oleo laetitiae excellentius, & angustius unxit prae consortibus suis. (For which reason, if meant of Christ himself, not any Pope or Bishop, as the Psal. 45. 7. Heb. 1. 8. Mat. 26. 7. Isay 61. 1. Lu. 4. 18. Acts 10. 38. Lu. 14. 3. Scripture resolves, neither Popes nor Bishops should be anoynted on the head, being an honor proper only to Christ himself:) Deinde, ut ostendatur, quod primo ante omnes Reges et Principes persona Capitis Pontificali Officio repraesentetur. Vngitur tamen et REX in humero, ut neque ipse plane exclu∣datur a repraesentatione ejusdem Capitis; nam et hujus principa∣tus, (ut dicit Isa. 9. 6.) fuit super humerum ejus; et ut sciat se esse ministrum ad portandam Crucem (when as the Text is Gladium) JESU CHRISTI, ad laudem bonorum, vindictam autem malorum, Rom. 13. 4. Yet as if this diversity in their Unctions were not sufficient, to advance the Pontifical above the Regal Autho∣rity, the Pope at his enstallment, by pretext of our famous Christian Emperor Constantines Donation of his Imperial Crown to Pope Silvester, (which many of their Parasites as∣sert to be genuine, and amongst others, De Officio & Potestate Episcopi, pars 1. Tit. 9. nu. 2. p. 138, 139, 140. Augustinus Bar∣bosa, Recogni∣tiones, ad Edit. Alphonsi Cra∣covii de Vitis Pontif. Roman. Romae 1630. p. 20, 21. Andraeas Victorellus, with sundry other Canonists quoted by them, though Laurentius Valla, with farre more Pontificians reject it, as a palpable forgery upon unanswe∣rable reasons, as well as Protestants, branded as Palea even by Gratian himself, Dist. 96. as I have Tom. 1. p. 56, to 60. & 102, 103, 104. See Marc de Vulson, De la Puissance du Pape, l. 3. c. 14. elsewhere evi∣denced,) Gratian Dist. 10, 21, & 22. & 96. Si Imperator. Ho∣stienfis Summa lib. 1. De Sa∣cra Unctis, f. 49. b. August. Barbosa, De Offic. & Pot. Episcopi pars 1. Tit. 3. c. 11. p. 140. nu. 88, 89, 90. &c. 2. p. 331. nu. 18. with sundry o∣thers there quoted by him. in signum Imperii utitur CORONA IMPERIALI, et in signum Pontificis utitur MITRA. Sed Mitra semper utitur & ubique, Corona autem non semper, quia Pontificis authoritas est prior et dignior, et diffusior Imperiali potestate; Et utrum{que} gladium habet; unde et Reges et Imperatores deponit; immo non solum Imperium et Regnum constituat, sed et transfert; as being Rex Regum et Do∣minus Dominorum quantum ad potestatem; though Servus ser∣vorum Dei quantum ad humilitatem, as they distinguish.
2ly. Popes and the Doctors of their Canon Lawes assert; That Gratian Distinctio 22. cap. Omnes, & all Canonists in their Glosses thereon. Omnes, sive Patriarchae cujuscunque apicem, sive Metropoliorum primatus, aut Episcoporum cathedras, vel Ec∣clesiarum, sive cujuscunque Ordinis dignitatem instituit Roma∣na Ecclesia. Illam vero solus ipse fundavit, & supra petram

fidei mox nascentis erexit, qui beato Petro aeternae vitae clavigero terreni simul et caelestis Imperii jura commisit. That Augustin. Barbosa, De Officio & Pot. Episcopi, pars 1. Tit. 1. c. 3. p. 12. nu. 2, 6, 7. & nu. 29. 31 32. &c. 4. nu. 6. totum jus eligendi et creandi Episcopos ad Romanum Pontificem perti∣net tanquam ad Successorem Petri, cui data a Christo Domino summa potestas in totam Ecclesiam; whence they inferre, Gratian. Caus. 2. qu. 4, 6, 7. Caus. 3. qu. 6, 8. Caus. 11. qu. 1. Caus. 16. qu. 1. Gra∣tian Distinct. 22. Innocenti∣us 3. c. 1, 2. De Transla∣tione Episcopi: & ad cap. Cum Oim. Dr. Mar∣ta de Jurisdic∣tione, pars 3. c. 21. n. 15. 16, 17. pars 2. c. 34. n. 28. Marc. de Vulson, De'la Puissance du Pape, l. 1. c. 10. to the end of c. 18. & the Popes Cano∣nists, & others there cited y him. And here Tom. 1. p. 379, to 40. 486, 498. That the Pope hath the sole power of erecting, dividing, uniting, transferring from place to place, suppressing, depriving, restoring all Archbishopricks, Bishopricks, Monasteries, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Ecclesiastical Dignities, Offices, Benefices, Priests, Officers, Incumbents, at his pleasure; and to indulge what privi∣ledges or exemptions he please to any of them, both from all Regal and Episcopal Jurisdiction and Censures: And, to pro∣hibit Emperors, Kings, or any other Laymen to give Investi∣tures of Bishopricks or other Ecclesiastical dignities, under pain of Excommunication both of the givers and receivers of such In∣vestitures; That Christian Emperors, Kings, Lay-men have no right to elect, promote any Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bi∣shops, Abbots, Priors, Prebends, or Clerks to any Bishopricks, Monasteries, Prebendaries, Benefices, or Church-dignities, where∣of they have the Patronage by right of their foundations, or en∣dowments of them with Temporalties, Priviledges, or other∣wise, but only by the grace and donations of Popes, for certain politick reasons of State, who may resume them at their plea∣sures, if they shall judge they abuse their power therein.
3ly. From thence they inferre, and magisterially re∣solve, that, Aug. Bar∣bosa, Ibidem. & the Cano∣nists on Gra∣tian distinct. 22. Semper et in omni tempore Provisio beneficio∣rum et Ecclestarum, etiamsi Cathedrales, Metropoliticae, vel Patriarchae sint, ad Summum Pontificem de jure perti∣nuit, et usque in hunc diem pertinet, Aug. Bar∣bosa Ibid. pars 3. Alleg. 126. p. 384. nu. 81, 82. & p. 589. i nullum tempus praefixum est ad conferenda beneficia, quia non habet superiorem qui ejus negligentiam posset supplere. And hence they assert his Papal Right and Jurisdiction to dispose of all Episcopal, Ecclesiastical Dignities, Monasteries, Benefices whatsoever, both before & after their vacancies to whomsoever he plea∣seth by his Provisions, notwithstanding his own grants to the contrary; and that in all sorts of cases imaginary: of which I shall render you this account in such particulars wherein they most frequently granted their Provisions to Archbi∣shopricks, Bishopricks, Monasteries, Prebendaries, Benefices in England and Ireland, during the reigns of our 3. premised Kings, as well as in other forreign kingdomes, (grounded

upon their own Apocryphal Papal Epistles, Canons, and De∣crees,) as they and their Canonists thus generally, and more particularly resolve; Augusti∣nus Barbosa De Officio & Potestate E∣piscopi, Pars 3. Allegatio 58. p. 150. sect. 3. to 13. Dr. Mar∣ta de Jurisdic∣tione, pars 3. c. 21. n. 15, 16, 17. Melchi∣or Lottorius de Re Beneficia∣ria, lib. 2. qu. 15, 16. Summus Pontifex in beneficialibus li∣beram et plenissimam habet potestatem. Beneficia omnia respectu S. Pontificis sunt manualia, et in eis uti potest plenariam potesta∣tem, ac Clericum suo beneficio sine causa a Clerico data, sed ex¦causa majoris boni Ecclesiae universalis, privare. Et licet potesta∣tem in Episcopos transtulerit, ut quilibet in sua Dioecesi beneficia ibidem consistentia conferre posset, penes ipsum major remansit, adeo quod impossibile sit Papae suae derogare sententiae, seu ita pri∣vilegium alicui concedere, ut non possit absolute per ipsum revoca∣ri, cum in hoc non cadat quaestio potestatis, sed voluntatis tan∣tum; et sic potestati Episcoporum a se concessae derogare, sibique collationes reservare potest; et per consequens de omnibus benefi∣ciis, et in omnibus mensibus providere, et libere disponere valet: in quo ideo non detrahit alieno juri, sed proprio utitur, nec inde modo aliquo ordo Ecclesiasticus turbatur. Quod Summus Pon∣tifex beneficia dissita per totum orbem in quibusvis dioecesibus ac provinciis quadruplici jure providere potest. Primò concursus, quatenus tanquam Episcopus universalis concurrit cum caeteris inferioribus collatoribus. Secundo jure devoluto, quia videlicet ex causa aliqua jus conferendi de inferioribus collocatoribus ad ip∣sum facta sit devolutio. Tertio jure praeventionis, cum videlicet praeveniendo vacationem beneficii mandat ea succedente certae per∣sonae conferri, eciam ipse ex tunc confert. Quarto jure reservatio∣nis. Quinto denique simplici via juris. Unde etiam in mensibus quos Papa Ordinario concessit de novo, non abdicavit totaliter a se potestatem conferendi, ita ut si ipse praeveniat; valeat ejus col∣latio. More particularly they assert, August. Barbosa, De Offic. & Pote∣state Episcopi, pars 3. All. 58. sect. 19, to 35. with others here quoted. In primis reser∣vantur de jure dispositioni Romana Pontificis, omnia beneficia va∣cantia apud sedem Apostolicam, seu in Curia: in tantum, quod si Ordinarius provideat de beneficio quod vacavit in Curia, provi∣sus non habebit titulum coloratum. Et illud beneficium dicitur vacare apud sedem Apostolicam, ut sit reservatum, quod vacavit in locis vicinis ipsius Sedis Apostolicae, et Romana Curiae, quod prope eam intra duas dietas legales. Beneficia etiam apud sedem seu in Curia vocare dicuntur non solum per obitum in illa, quia beneficium illius qui est mortuus in Curia, dicitur reservatum,

sed etiam per resignationem factam in manibus Papae, quam con∣stat vere et legaliter dici resignationem in Curia, etiamsi median∣te procuratore alibi constituto. Yea, resignantes beneficia in Curia Romana permutationis causa, si moriantur extra Curiam ambo, vel unus illorum ante permutationem completam, vacare ea beneficia in Curia tenent, quia non habetur ratio temporis in quo mortui sunt Clerici, sed ejus in quo resignarunt, quia tunc beneficia vacasse intelliguntur. August. Barbosa Ibi∣dem, sect. 24. & 32. Sic etiam in Curia beneficia vacare dicuntur, quando ibi privatio, aut alii vacationis modi in∣ducuntur. Ubi privatio inducitur a jure, seu ex decreto propter actum positivum; per sententiam privationis latam in Curia con∣tra se defendentem, verum contumacem, qui de jure habetur pro¦praesenti. Secundo, Reservatione beneficia dispositioni Romani Pontif. pertinent per solam appositionem suae manus, quamvis inutiliter factam; ita quod si Papa providet alicui, vel provideri mandat de aliquo beneficio, si provisio fuerit nulla, utpote facta inhabili vel incapaci, aut propter subreptionem, vel alium defectum, benefici∣um remanet Papae affectum, et in illo Ordinarius non potest se in∣tromittere. Tertio, Reservantur dispositioni Summi Pontificis beneficia vacantia sede Episcopali vacante, (either by death, or translations to other Sees) cujuscunque speciei et qualitatis sint. To which Augustinus Barbosa and others quoted by him, adde at least 18 Heads of Reservations more, by which Popes have right to preferr persons by their Provisions to all sorts of Ecclesiastical dignities, benefices, and preferments, by their own Constitutions and Canons; so as none could escape their clutch∣es, which those who please may there peruse at leisure.
That which encouraged Popes to these Extravagant U∣surpations in their Provisions to, and Reservations of all Ec∣clesiastical Dignities and benefices, was the good successe and victory they had gained in the Controversies between them the Emperors of Germany, and our King Henry the 1. (af∣ter above 30. years hot and bloody contests) in the Case of Investitures of Bishops and Abbots per Annulum & Baculum; whereof I shall render you this brief account. See Fox Acts & Monuments Edit. ult. Vol. 1. p. 386, 387, 388. The Roman Emperors both claimed and exercised this Soveraign Prero∣gative, that no Pope, Patriarch, Archbishop, or Bishop should be elected, confirmed, or consecrated within their Empire, but by their precedent special license, subsequent Confirmation and Investiture; for the better preservation whereof, after the

translation of their Courts & residence from Rome to Constan∣tinople, the Bishops of Rome by their order, used to send Certi∣ficate of their elections to the Emperor to his royal City, and to give a certain sum of money to him before they were consecra∣ted. This Pope Vitalian did An. 665. Gratian Distinct. 63. cap. Agatho. Blondus, l. 4. Dec. 1. Cent. Ma gd. 7. c. 7. col. 235. c. 10. col. 285. Ana∣statius in vita Agath. secundum antiquam consuetudinem: which summe o money Constantinus Pogona∣tus in the time of Pope Agatho about the year 680. released, but still reserved the former priviledge of confirming Popes before they were consecrated (as well as of questioning, im∣prisoning, banishing, yea deposing them, which some Em∣perors did) as Gratian himself, Bartholomaeus Brixiensis, John Thierry, in their Glosses on him, Blondus, and others attest. Upon the translation of the Empire from the Ger∣mans to the French by Charles the Great himself (by his own sword and the Romans concurrent assent, as Defensor. Pacis, pars 2. c. 17. 24, 25. Marsi∣lius Patavinus, and Otto Fri∣fingensis, l. 5. c. 31, 32. Dr. Crakenthorp, Defence of Constantine, c. 14. p. 322. to 344. others prove at large, not by the Popes Authority,) Sigeberti Chron. & Mat. Westm. An. 773. Po∣lychron. lib. 5. c. 26. An∣tonini Chron. Tit. 14. c. 1. sect. 6. Aven∣tinus Annal. Boiorum, l. 4. Platina, Barns, Balaeus, others in Adriano 1. Cent. Magd. 8. c. 7. 9. col. 511, 572. Pope Adrian the 1. An. 773. (before Charles was crowned Emperor, in a Ʋniversal Synod at Rome of 153. religious Bishops and Abbots, Dedit ei jus eligendi Pontisicem, et ordinandi Apostolicam sedem, dignitatem quoque Principatus; insuper Archiepiscopos et Episcopos per singulas pro∣vincias AB EO INVESTITURAM ACCIPERE definivit; et ut nisi A REGE laudetur et INVESTIATUR EPISCOPUS, a nemine consecretur. Omnesque huic Decreto rebelles anathe∣matizavit, et nisi resipiscerent bona eorum publicari. Which Priviledge Gratian Distinct. 63. cap. Vota. Pope Leo the 3d. confirmed to this Emperor Charles, at his Coronation, and Pope Leo the 8. to the Emperor Otho the 1. in another Council Anno 963. as Printed in Flacius Illyri∣cus his Catal. Testium Veri∣tatis Appendix. f. 54. and in Goldastus. Waltramus Bishop of Naumburg in his Excellent Trea∣tise against Pope Hildebrand, De Episcoporum Investitutis per Imp. asserts; (wherein he affirms, that this priviledge of Investitures was used by the Kings of England, Scotland, Spain, Hungary, and of other Realms,) with Gratian himself and sundry others (wherin these their confirmations are recor∣ded at large) acknowledge. This Priviledge was enjoyed by, and continued sacred, inviolable in Emperors and Kings for above 200 years, as Waltramus, Chron. Tit. 1. c. 3. sect. 21. f. 123. Tit. 17. c. 1. f. 177. Antoninus, Annal. Boiorum lib. 5. Johan∣nes Aventinus, and others prove at large; till that Anti∣christian firebrand Pope Gregory the 7. in a Council at Rome in the year 1076. (to wrest this Right of Investitures from

the Emperor Henry the 4. and his successors, and all other Christian Kings and Laymen) decreed; Chron. Antonini, Tit. 16. c. 1. Tit. 17. c. 1. Ga∣tian caus. 16. qu. 7. & Di∣stinct. 33 Cen∣tur. Magd. 12. c. 7. col. 374, 485. Fox Acts and Mon. Tol. 1. Benno Car∣dinalis in vita Hildebrandi. Si quis dein∣ceps Episcopatum vel Abbatiam de manu alicujus laicae personae susceperit, nullatenus inter Episcopos vel Abbates habeatur, nec¦ulla ei ut Episcopo vel Abbati audientia concedatur. Insuper, ei gratiam B. Petri et Ecclesiae introitum interdicimus, suspendimus, quousque locum quam sub crimine tam inobedientiae quam ambi∣tionis, ex quo idololatria caepit, resipiscendo non deserit. Simi∣liter et de inferioribus dignitatibus constituimus. Item, Si quis Nota. Imperatorum, Regum, Ducum, Marchionum, Comitum, vel quaelibet summorum potestatum aut personarum Investituram Epis∣copatuum, vel alicujus Ecclesiasticae dignitatis dare praesumpserit, ejusdem sententiae vinculo se esse obstrictum sciat. And because the Emperor Henry the 4. would not hereupon quit this right of Investitures, he solemnly excommunicated him: upon which Henry in a Abbas Uspergensis, Chron. Anno 1076. p. 221. Marianus Sco∣tus, l. 3. An. 1077. p. 436. Martini Polo∣ni Supput. p. 184. Aventinus Annal. Boior. l. 5. p. 453. Paulus Beuri∣reedensis in vi∣ta Greg. 7. p. 83 Centur. Magd. cap. 8. col. 424, 425. Fox Acts & Monuments Vol. 1. p. 336, &c. Council at Worms degraded him from his Papacy, as an Intruder, Thief, Wolf, Tyrant, and no Pastor or Pope; He by way of revenge See Cus∣pinian, Ano∣nymus, Grim∣ston, Abbas Uspergensis, & others in the lives of H. 4. 5. & Rodulfus; Aventinus An∣nal. Boiorum, l. 5. & Platina, Onuphrius, Balaeus, Barns, Centur. Magd. Volateranus, Fasciculus Temporum, Hermannus Schedel, Baro∣nius, & others in the lives of these Popes; Crantzius Saxoniae, l. 5. c. 24, &c. absolved all his Subjects from their allegiance, and raised his Prelates, Nobles, set up Ro∣dulphus, and at last his own Son Henry against him, who by force of arms after many battels, crowned his Son Emperor in his stead, forcibly deprived him of his Empire, imprisoned him, (be∣ing likewise excommunicated for the same cause by Pope Cle∣ment 3. Victor 3. and Ʋrban 2. who confirmed Hildebrands, and made new Canons and Constitutions against Investi∣tures in several Councils) and after his death he had his Corps digged out of his grave, and kept uninterred for 5. years space upon this quarrel. Which yet his Son Henry revived: who comming to Rome to be crowned there by Platina, Stella, Balaeus, Barns, Laertius Cherubinus, Ciaconius & others in Sylvester  Abbas Uspergenfis, Annis 1111, 1112. Pope Pas∣chal the 2. Anno 1111. intreated him to confirm all the Bi∣shops he had invested, and this right of Investitures, which the Emperors had enjoyed above 300 years: which he refusing to do, against Pope Hildebrands and his 3. successors decrees a∣gainst Investitures, he commanded his Soldiers forthwith to ap∣prehend and imprison the Pope & his Cardinals in the Mount of St. Sylvester, untill they should all restore and confirm to him by their Deeds, investiendi Ius Carolo Magno datum; and crown him Emperor; which at last they yielded to do; this Pope

by his Charter by himself, and 25 Cardinals by another, (re∣corded in the Simeon Dunelmensis de Rebus Ge∣slis Angl. col. 232, to 237. Radulphus de Diceto, Abbr. Chron. col. 502 Hen. de Knygh∣ton de Event. Angliae, l. 2. c. 7 col. 2372. Otto Frisingensis Chron. l. 7. c. 14 Abbas Usperg. Chr. An. 1111, 1112. Aven∣tinus Annal. Boiorum, l. 6. Centur. Magd. 12. c. 9. marginal Authors,) restoring and ratify∣ing this Priviledge to him and his successors, which they likewise confirmed by a most solemn Oath: But the Empe∣ror was no sooner crowned, and departed from Rome, but this Pope with a few Cardinals and Bishops in a Council there summoned by him, most perfidiously nulled and revoked these their Charters, and this Priviledge of Investitures, stiling it Pra∣vilegium, non Privilegium, excommunicating this Emperor therein, and raising such Rebellions against him, that at last, Aventinus Annal. Boio∣rum, l. 6. p. 480, to 491. Appen∣dix Catalogo Testium Veri∣tatis, p. 53. Ab∣bas Uspergens. Chron. Ann. 116, 117, 1122 p. 267. Otto Frisingensis l. 2 c. 16. Albertus Crantzius Sa∣xoniae, l. 5. c. 41 42. Simeon Dunelmensis Hist. col. 244, 245. Henr. de Knyghton de Event. Angliae, l. 2. c. 8. col. 2377. Centur. Magd. 12. c. 9. col. 1002, 1008. Fox Acts & Mon. Vol. 1. p. 256. after 33. years bloody wars and contests between his father and him, and several Popes, to purchase his peace and absolution, he was enforced to quit and release this ancient Right by a Deed under his seal to Pope Calixtus the 2. Anno 1127. maximo et adhuc. punquam deleto Germaniae et Imperii totius dede∣core. Atque ut notissima esset victoria et Caesaris probrum, Papae Legati eas literas in loco campestri spaciosissimo prope Rhenum cla∣ra voce proclamant et denunciant. Ea diplomata ubi ad Romam delata sunt incredibilem excitaverunt laetitiam et tripudium. Ut autem triumphus ille de manubiis Caesari ereptis communior et illustrior esset, Sanctissimus Papa Caesar Calixtus 2. eas literas de extorta resignatione et renunciatione Iuris Caesarii de Investi∣tura Episcoporum, in Ecclesia Lateranensi publice suspendi jussit, omnibus ut risum et insultationem, more scilicet vere Apostolico, moveret: Just 12. years after Pope Paschal had extorted it from our King Henry the 2. Anno 1108. by the treachery, obstinacy, and rebellion of Anselme Archbishop of Canterbù∣ry, after many years contests, as I have See Tome 1. p. 352, 353, 400, to 429, 486. elsewhere evi∣denced; Yet notwithstanding this forced renunciation of this Priviledge by the Emperor Henry the 5th his Deed, Lotharius the Emperor demanded the restitution of this right of Investitures from Pope Innocent the 2. (whom he restored to the Papacy, when expelled from Rome by Anacletus his Competitor;) Willelm. Malmesburi∣ensis de Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 3 p. 84. Bernar∣di Epist. 164. & Serm. in Coena Domi∣ni de Baptismo, f. 32. See Tome 1. p 486. Investitures then springing up in all places like Hydraes heads, notwithstanding all Popes or Councils successive decrees, fulminations, and above 50 years contests against them; till St. Bernard by his mediation with Lotha∣rius and the French King composed this ancient difference by an amicable accord between the Pope, Emperor and them, ingaging the Emperor, French King, and other Chri∣stian

Princes in a Warre against the Saracens, the better to divert them from resuming this their ancient Priviledge, that so Popes alone (under a pretext of preventing Simony in Lay-men) might ingrosse the sale of all Bishopricks, Church-Dignities, Benefices into their own hands alone, and make all Bishops, Clerks become their devoted sworn servants, on whom all their preferments depended.
What strenuous oppositions King John, and Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury made against Pope Innocent the 3. his Provisions, when first set on foot within his Dominions, you may read in my Page 234, to 238. second Tome in the case of Gilar∣dus, on whom he conferred the Bishoprick of St. Davids by his Provision, who yet was enforced to quit it. To which I shall here annex his memorable Patents prohibiting both the ayding and consecrating of Sylvester (this Popes Archdea∣con) to the Bishoprick of August Bar∣bosa, De Offic. & Pot. Episco∣pi, p. 51. Sajis (Sagiensis) in Normandy, un∣der the Archbishoprick of Rhoan about the same time, there casually omitted.
REX, &c. Omnibus Clericis per Episcopatum Sagiensem constitutis, &c. Pat. 4 Johan. Regis, m. 11. Datum est nobis intelligi, quod vos in pecunia et aliis succuritis Silvestro Archid. Sagiensi, qui contra Nos et dignitatem nostram in Episcopatu Sagiensi nititur promoveri. Ʋnde vobis mandamus, quod¦de auxilio ei conferendo vel in pecunia vel alio modo desistatis, quod¦nisi feceritis omittere non poterimus, quin de vobis faciemus sicut de illis qui contra Nos et dignitatem nostram operantur. Teste meipso apud Argent. 12 die Aug.
REX, &c. W. Dei gratia Rothomag. Archiepiscopo, &c. Audivimus, Pat. ibid. m. 16. quod Dominus Papa in Silvestrum Archid. suam contulit vo∣luntatem, quod Iuri scripto et nostrae pariter contrarium existit dignitati, si exinde non fuerimus requisiti. Et praeterea cum sit notorium, illum super crimine adulterii publica laborare infamia, quod coram vobis, vel ubi fuerit necesse sufficienter ostendetur; unde appellavimus et adhuc appellamus, rogantes, ne contra jus¦et dignitatem nostram, necnon et in dedecus Ecclesiae Sagiensis, immo tocius Ecclesiae Dei, munus ei consecrationis impendatis. Teste meipso apud Cenom. 13. die Augusti.
Sub eadem forma scribitur Ph. Senon. Archiepisco de eodem Silvestro.
To which I shall subjoyn this Patent, evidencing his Ec∣clesiastical Soveraignty and Justice, in the equal distribution of the Rents of the Church at Poictiers, which some Non-re∣sident Canons had engrossed, to those who did their duties in

it, by his own Royal Authority, without the Pope, who alone claimed this as his Papal Prerogative.
REX. &c. Senescall. Pict. et Senesc. Andeg. Datun est nobis intelligi, Pat. 4 Johan. Regis, m. 9. quod quidam Canonici Ecclesiae beati Hilarii Pict. tenent ad¦firmam redditus ejusdem Ecclesiae; ita quod alii Canonici qui as∣sidue ibi Deo deserviunt inde patum aut nichil percipiant. Et quia hoc nolumus sustinere, Vobis mandamus, quod sine dilatione omnia bona praedictae Ecclesiae quae sunt per ballivam vestram in commune redigi faciatis; Ita quod bona illa per legales portio∣nes singulis Canonicis per eosdem Canonicos, sicut fieri debet dividantur.
What other oppositions were made against Papal Provisi∣ons by our King John, Henry the 3d and Edward the 1. the Records in the Second, and Index to this Third Tome will in∣form you.
4ly. Whereas Here, p. 684, &c. Pope Boniface the 8th. prohibited by his Constitutions, any Subsidy to be granted to King Edward the 1. or any other King, by Bishops or any Ecclesiastical persons for defence of the Church or Realm, without his and his Successors previous assents thereto, and their concurring consents, under pain of Excommunication; yet Popes, Bishops, and Canonists averre, That every Bishop, Archbishop, Patri∣arch, Cardinal, Pope, and Popes Legate, may both by Law and right demand & exact charitable Subsidies from their Cler∣gy, Churches under them, without the previous consent of their Kings, upon several occasions; which they thus express. Barthol∣maeus Bellen∣cinus Tractat. de Charitati∣vis Subsidiis throughout. Augustinus Barbosa, De Officio & Po∣testate Episco∣pi, Pars 3. Alleg. 87. Episcopus Charitativum subsiduum quando & à qui bus exigere potest, sect 1. to 56, with sundry others there cited by them. Episcopi, Archiepiscopi, Primates seu Patriarchae, in Civi∣tatibus et Diocaesibus suis, possunt data manifesta et rationabili causa, jure exigere charitativum subsidium, et subditos Clericos et Ecclesias compellere ad tale subsidium solvendum; And that, in causa quae spectat ad dignitatem et honorem Ecclesiae; Pro sua consecratione; pro solutione debitorum in Ecclesiae utilitatem contractorum; cum magnas fecer it expensas in negotiis totius Diocaesis communibus pertractandis; pro fabrica suae Ecclesiae, vel alia re continente illius publicam utilitatem, vel conservatio∣nem. Si iter sit facturus ad Papam, vel Imperatorem, vel Re∣gem ob Ecclesiae suae utilitatem; Si visitaturus sit limina Aposto∣lorum; si velit ire ad Concilium provinciale; si impensas necessarias et alicujus momenti feceric in adventu Imperatoris, Regis, Prin∣cipis vel Legati; And that quoties rationabilis causa subsit non

solum semel, sed etiam pluribus vicibus possunt charitativum subsidi∣um exigere, and also ex urgenti causa ultra taxam solitam. Yea Cardinales, cum in Ecclesiis suorum titulorum habent Juris∣dictionem; may do the like. As for the Pope, Barchol∣maeus Bellen∣cinus Tractat▪ de Charitati∣vo Subsidio, qu. 1. nu. 1. qu. 58. nu. 3. qu. 9, & 12. Augustinus Barbosa, De Officio & Po∣testate , Pa . Alleg 8. sect.  with other ∣nonists qted by them; & Mac.  Vulson,  Puissance d Pape, l. 1. c. 15. De Romano Pontifice dubitari non potest quin hoc subsidium possit exigere ab omnibus Clericis et Ecclesiis; tum quia liberam habet administrationem omnium beneficiorum, tum quia est Dominus et Ordinarius cunctorum, Episcopus universalis Ecclesiae, et Ordi∣narius Ordinariorum. Hinc generalis exemptio non censetur exi∣mere a subsidio per Papam imposito; nisi qui speciali privilegio, ab hujusmodi onere nominatim eximeretur, quod non est praesumen∣dum, quippe quod illud concedi non consuevit. And that Lega∣tus Papae cui commissum est plenae legationis officium in sua pro∣vincia, cum omnia libere et immedite possit quae quilibet Ordina∣rius jure vel consuetudine potest, habet jus exigendi hujusmodi sub∣sidium in Ecclesiis provinciae sibi delegatae. Upon which grounds, Popes, Cardinals, Popes Legates, Nuncioes, and o∣ther Romish Harpyes imposed, exacted many Dismes, Subsi∣dies, Procurations, and other excessive Payments of divers kindes from our English and Irish Prelates, Clergy, and our Archbishops, Bishops, from the inferiour Clergy during the premised Kings reigns, to their great oppression; which they frequently opposed, complained against, and our Kings there∣upon prohibited by their Writs, Lawes here re-cited.
I might adde to these the Soveraign power Popes claim not only over all Christian Kings, Princes, but all Lay-mens persons, estates, and reputations, Gratian Caus. 15. qu. 6. Caus. 16. qu. 7. Caus. 23. qu. 5. Mar de Vul∣son, De la Pu∣issance de la Pape, l. 1. c. 1. 16, 18. Aug. Barbosa, De Officio & Pot. Episcopi, pars 1. Tit. 3. c. 2. Dr. Maita▪ de Jurisdic∣tione, pars 4. Casus 4. to c. 53. & the Popes, Authors quoted by them. as to condemn, or declare them hereticks, or infamous persons, uncapable to enjoy, inherit, conferr lands, goods, offices, Legacies, to make Testaments, or prosecute suits in any Courts to recover their rights; to suspend them from their temporal offices, or restore them when suspend∣ed, deprived by their Princes, and their fames, when deemed in∣famous; yea to abrogate their temporal Lawes, Statutes, Cu∣stoms: to exempt children from the power of their parents, and Subjects from their obedience, oathes, services to their Lords, and Soveraigns: to make and declare Bastards to be legitimate, and lawfull children illegitimate, as especially to Crownes, so to all temporal goods and inheritances; To interdict their Realms, Cities, Lands, Rents, and all communion with them; yea to imprison, kill, burn them as hereticks, infidels, blasphemers a∣gainst

the Holy Ghost, and accurse, damn them to all eternity, for opposing or denying this their transcendent power. Yea they assert this for Catholick Apostolike Law and Doctrine; Gratian, causa 23. qu. 5. cap. Omni∣um & Excom∣municatum, f. 460. in my Edition, Pari∣siis, 1531. Non sunt homicidae qui adversus excommunicatos zelo Ca∣tholicae matris Ecclesiae accensi excommunicatos interficiunt; as Pope Ʋrban the 2d. and Gratian positively determine: And Pope Nicholas the 2d. in his Letter to the French Ar∣my imployed against the Waldenses, superaddes thereto; Omnium vestrum nosse volumus charitatem, quisquis in hoc belli certamine fideliter mortuus fuerit (though otherwise ne∣ver so flagitious a person) regna illi caelestia minime negabuntur.
These, with many other Assertions of like nature, you may read at large in Gratian, Pope Innocent 3. Corpus Juris Ca∣nonici; the Extravagants, Astexanus, Astensis, Dr. Marta, Augustinus Barbosa, Augustinus Triumphus, Alex. Carerius, Restaurus Castaldus, Petrus Ancharanus, Sylvestre, Baptista Tro∣vomala, Angelus de Clavasio; Franciscus Zerula, Bartholomae∣us Brixiensis, Cardinal Hostiensis, Antonius Corsetus, with sundry other Popes and Doctors of the Canon Law, quoted by them; by whose Codes, Books, Glosses, Lectures, the Popes and Prelates Soveraignties, Usurpations over all Christian Empe∣rors, Kings, Princes, Nobles, Laymens Crowns, kingdoms, per∣sons, consciences, estates, Lawes, Liberties, have been principal∣ly asserted, advanced, supported, and continued in the world.
By what Popes, persons, means, arts, and for what ends the Canon Law was first compiled into a Code or Body, pub∣lished, taught, studied, propagated, read on, professed, exe∣cuted, and the Doctors, Students, Professors of it encoura∣ged, multiplyed, maintained in Universities, and advanced to the Highest Offices, Dignities, Preferments in the Church, as well as in Ecclesiastical Courts, and entrusted with the vigorous execution of them under Popes, Archbi∣shops, Bishops, as their Vicars-Generals, Chancellors, Commis∣saries, Surrogates, Officials, Delegates, and what bad effects it produced, to the great prejudice and injury of all Chri∣stian Kings, Subjects, Realms, (to avoyd all suspition of pre∣judice or partiality in my self;) I shall crave leave to inform you in the words of a most learned French Civilian, Marc de Vulson (an Advocate in the Court of Paris, afterwards a Coun∣sellor of the French King in the Court of Parliament of Dau∣phine, (x) A Geneve, 1635. p. 200, to 204. a person beyond exception) in his Book, De la Pu∣issance

du Pape, & des Libertez de l'Eglise Gallicane, lib. 3. c. 17. de Decret de Gratian, et du Corps du Droict Canon; wherein, after a brief Account of the time and manner of the Emperor Justinians compiling his Code and Body of the Imperial Lawes, and their disusage for near 600 years both in Italy, France, Germany, and the Western Empire, till about the year 1118. when the Emperor Lothaire the 2. at the instiga∣tion and sollicitation of Irnerius, who then newly found them, ordered that they should be read in Schools, and the Judges to judge according to the Roman Civil Laws, to the great con∣tentment of the learned Doctors and Studens thereof: there∣upon informs us; that in imitation of the Emp. Justinian; Ibid. p. 201, 201. Les Papes, qui desja avoyent beaucop empietie sur la Iurisdicti∣on et authorite des Empereurs et Rois, recognoissans que par le re∣stablissement de ces belles loix, leur dessein seroit grandement empesche, qui estoit de serendre Souverains, aussibien au temporel comme au spiri∣tuel: et de former un Estat et Souverainete, dans l'Estat et Empire des Rois, Princes et Monarques, estimerent qu'il faloit a l envi et imita∣tion du dit Justinian, dresser un Corps et Code de leurs Loix et Con∣stitutions, le faire lire et interpreter es Escholes et Vniversitez, et donner ordre que touts les affaires se jugeassent par ycelles, si faire se pouvoit. A ces fins fut compile par Gratian le grand Decret. qui fut publie et authorise par le Pape Eugene 3. l'an 1151. et ainsi vingt ans apres que le Corps du droict de Justinian fut restabli en Italie et Al∣magne par Lothaire. Et pour le faire tant plus facilement receivoir, ledit livre et volume de Gratian ne fut pas seulement compose des Ordonances des Nota. Papes, come le Code de Justinian des Constitutions des Empereurs, mais aussi de quelques passages de l'Escriture Saincte: de plusieurs sentences des an∣ciens Peres: de quelques loix prinses desdites Digestes es Code de Justinian, et autres urais et bons autheurs. Vray est que les uns sont tronquez, les autres alleguez a contre-sens, les autres falsifiez ouvertement: Et sur tout, le dit livre est rempli d'un tresgrand et quasi infini nom∣bre de passages tirez des escrits faux et supposez, dont a este parle Lib. 3. c. 12, 13, 14. cy devant: comme sont les Canons dits des Apostres; les Epi∣stres attribuees aux primiers Evesques de Rome, qui y sont quasi entierement transcrites, (tant avoit-il peur d y failler,) du Concile te∣nu a Rome sous Sylvestre: de l'acte ou instrument de la pretendue donation de Constantin: des Capitulaires attribuez a Charlemagne et autres.
Pour interpreter ces Loix et Canons, Gratian mesme compilateur d'iceux fut incontinent envoye a Paris, et par ce moyen le Droict Canon fut plustost receu en France, que le droict de Justinian, ainsi qu'a tresbien remarque Monsieur de l'Estrang President en Cour de Parlement de Tolouse en son Arrest 8. Et au livre 6. ch. 9. de son Histoire de Gaules, Et pour le mieux authoriser, Celestin 3. (qui siegea l' an 1191.) osa or∣donner, qu'a Paris les causes pecuniaires des Clercs seront decidees par le droict Canon C. quod Clericis extra de foro comp. Et Honorius 3. inviron l'an 1210. fut si hardi de See Tom. 2. p. 8. Dr. Marta de Jurisdictio∣ne, pars 4. Casus 50 & 60. defendre, sous peine d'excom∣munication,

de lire et ovir le Droict Civil a Paris, a fin que tant mieux on s'addonne a son Droict Canon (qu'il appelle les Saincts cayers) (sacram paginam) c. super specula, extra. de previleg. et excess. privi∣leg. comme si ceta etoit quelque beau privilege, de e mettre en la place du Roy, et d'enterprender de faire les loix en son Royaume, et de defendre la lecture du Droict Civil. Et Alexandre 3. sous pre∣texte de corriger les abus, s'ingere de bailler des loix a l' Vniversite de Paris, et defend au Chancellier, ou Recteur d'icelle, d'exiger au∣cune chose pour la licence et permission d'y enseigner les sciences, c. quanto de Magistris. Et Innocent 3. fit aussi certaine ordonnance, Que sous peine d'excommunication, aucun ne prinst a louage le logis loue par un autre: ce qui n'appartient qu'au Roy. Par la recep∣tion de ce corps Canon es Vniversites de France, fut faite une si grande bresche a nos Esglises Francoises, que les Papes et leurs Nota. armees y sont entrees a cheval. Et de la en avant, ils ont a leur plaisir erige des Escholes et Vniversitez France, ce qu'ils n'avoy∣ent ose enterprendre au paravant: Ont The like they did in our Universities of Oxford and Cambridge in England; and in the Univer∣sities in Italy, Germany, Spain, and advanced the Greatest Doctors of the Canon Law as their best Ad∣vocates, asser∣tors of their u∣surped Ecclesi∣astical & Secu∣lar Monarchy, to the greatest offices and pre∣ferments. See 37 H. 8. c. 17. donne des privileges a celles qui avoyent este establiss par nos Roys, et aux membres d'i∣celles: Ont establi leurs Doctorats, et prescrit la form et les ce∣remonies de leur establissement: Ont institue, et establi esdites V∣niversites des Iuges conservateurs de leurs privileges, se sont fait prester serment: Ont donne ordre que tous les supposts et membres desdites Vniversites et Colleges, du moins les principaur, fussent Clercs non maries: Que les principales charges, et benefices Ec∣clesiastiques fussent affectes aux Docteurs, ou licenties en Dro'ct Canon, ou en la Theologie de Pierre Lombard, et non a autres: Que les Escholiers estudians ausdites Vniversites, fussent exempts de la Iurisdiction civile: Que sans la lirense, et expresse permission du Siege Romain, aucun de 'Vniversite de Paris ne pust estre ex∣communie, ou interdit pur quelque cause et suject que ce fust: Que les Escholiers de l'Vniversite de Paris, soyent exempts de touts sortes de peages; Que les Docteurs de Paris puissent lire et enseig∣ner par tout le monde. Incontinent un nonibre infini de personnes s'addonna a la profession du Droict et science Canonique, puisque le profit et l'honneur estoit evident et certein. Plusieurs tasche∣rent a l'envi de commenter, gloser, et apostiler ledit Decret, et d' extoller la dignite et puissance du Pape. Par ce moyen le Pape Nota. s'acquit une grande arme de creatures et suject au milieu de la France: et sans frais et despens forma un puissant Estat dans les Estats du Roy. Et le tout sous le beau manteau de conscience, religion, et spiritualite; au veu et sceu de nos Roys, et de leurs principaux Officers et de tout les Whose ow∣er & urisdicti∣on they assert∣ed, enlar∣ged, as well as the Popes. Prelats de France, qui demeure∣rent muets en cest endroit. Bien est vray, que les Decretales des Papes depuis le dit Eugene 3. ayans este publiees separement, et sans meslange d'a∣cune bone piece, premierement par Upon which occasion our King Henry the 3d. publi∣shed his pre-mised Procla∣mation against them. Gregoire 9. environ l'an 1230. & con∣sequement par Boniface 8. Clement 5. et Jean 22. la laider d'icelles en fit considerer l'importance, et au Roy et a sa Cour de Parlement de Paris, aux Prelats de France et a l'Vniversite: et fut cause de l'op∣position et impeschement donne a la reception desdites Decretales.
Mais ce fut bien tard, et apres la bataille gaigneé. Et ceux la ce trompent, qui estiment que seulement des lors les Decrets prin∣drent

des ailes. Car les Decretales des quatre vingts quatorze Papes precedents, vrayes ou supposees qui ont este inserees audit Decret de Gratian, contiennent en substance les mesmes choses que les dernieres, qui ne font que mieux exprimer et mettre en practique les Doctrines et maximes des premieres, que se reduisent a ceci; Que le Pape est Lieutenant de Jesus Christ, et a tout pouvoir tant au temporel qu'au spirituel: Est juge de tout le monde, et ne puit estre juge par aucune creature. See his lib. 1. c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Que ses Constitutions et De∣cretales doivent ere inviolablement observees par tous: Que ce∣luy qui mesprise ou enfreint fes mandements, ou diminueses privileges et son authorite, ou n'est d'accord avec luy, commet crime d'heresie et d'infidrlite, blaspheme contre le Sainct Esprit, est anatheme et damne. Et auffi nos Roys ont permis par mes∣garde et tolerance, que l'esdites Decretales ayent este leues et in∣terpretees es Universites, et que la jeunesse Fraincose fust imbibee de ceste doctrine. Et neantmoins ces oppositions, quoy que tardives, ser∣virent a empescher, que la liberte des Esglises de Gaule ne fust intire∣ment esteinte, comme ser a dit cy apres.
By which memorable Discourse of De Vulson, and the apparent frauds of Popes, Gratian, and other Canonists, in leaving out of their Codes and Collections of Councils all Ca∣nons made in the general, famous, ancient Councils of Ephe∣sus, Laodicea, Constantinople, Chalcedon, and those they falsly attribute to the Apostles, which contradict the Popes Suprema∣cy, and inserting spurious Canons, Councils, Synods, Decretal Epistles of antient Popes into them, which only advanced their Papal and Episcopal Hierarchy and Jurisdictions, in, over all Temporal and Spiritual persons, causes, (which De la Pu∣issance du Pape, l. 3. c. 2. to 18. See Ptius de Mar∣ca, De Con∣cordia Sacer∣dotii & Impe∣rii, lib. 7. c. 20. n. 1, to 8. c. 25. n. 1. 3. lib. 3. c. 5. n. 11. he and others at large demonstrate;) we may clearly discern, both the reasons, providence, prudence, justice of our King Stephen and Henry the 3d, in prohibiting, crushing the Books, Readings; Schooles, Profession of the Canon Laws and Decretals in the University of Oxford, and in London, when first introduced in∣to our Realm, like so many Isa. 14. 29. c. 59. 5. Cockatrice eggs, which would soon prove fiery flying serpents, yea vipers to them, their sub∣jects, Realms; of King Henry the 3. and Edward the first their Prohibitions, Appeals, Protests against the Constitutions of Archbishop Boniface, Peokham, Stratford, with the foreci∣ted Statutes of King Henry the 8. Edward the 6. and their Parliaments, made against them and the Canon Law; and what little reason our Kings, Parliaments, Nobles, or Commons have, to countenance or support these Canon Lawes and Con∣stitutions, or the study, profession, use, or execution of them within their Dominions; against which not only two emi∣nent

Martyrs, to wit, Mr. William Tyndall, and In his O∣bedience of a Christian man London 1573. Cum privilegio. p. 114, 115. Sir John Borthwicke, together with William Wraughton in his Hunting and Rescuing of the Romish Fox, (the Pope and his Pre∣lates) dedicated to King Henry the 8. the Author of a ju∣dicious Treatise, expressing the Causes of the Divisions between Fox Acts & Mon. Edit. ult. Vol. 2. p. 610. the Spiritualty and the Temporalty, printed cum privilegio in Henry the 8. his reign, ch. 3, 4, 5, to 16. with others in that age have made many large Discourses, setting forth their dangers, mischiefs, together with their Nullity; but even our famous learned King Henry the 2. long before them, most strenuously opposed and suppressed. For, Tom. 4. Spicilegii. Lucas Da∣cherius (a modern Benedictine Monk) and Admonitio de Editione 11 Sect. l. 3. c. 13. Sect. 9. Petri de Marca Ar∣chiep. Parisi∣ensis, De Con∣cordia Sacer∣dotii & Impe∣rii, Paris. 1663 Cum Privilegio, p. 198, 199. Stephanus Balluzius, a learned Reverend Canon and Canonist of Rhemes, relate; that this our Noble, prudent, learned King Henry then Duke of Normandy, was so highly displeased with Hugo Archbishop of Rhoan for putting the Canon Law and new Canons made and confirmed by Pope Innocent the 2d. in the Council of Rhemes in execution, (without his Royal assent, and the States of Normandy) by exacting profession and obedi∣ence from the Abbots of Normandy, contra consuetudinem, (a punctilio in respect of other incroachments upon his Regality of an higher nature, by Becket and our Prelates) and for his justification therof, vetustis Canonibus, qui volunt Abba∣tes esse in potestate Episcoporum, et Decreto Concilii Rhemensis paulo ante celebrati; ut vel OB HOC IPSUM ad Innocen∣tium scribens, MINATUS EST APERTE DIVORTI∣UM AB APOSTOLICA SEDE, NISI PRAESUMPTIO ILLIUS ARCHIEPISCOPI REPRIMERETUR: which so terrified this Pope, that he thereupon writ thus to the Archbishop; Quod profectò, quamvis justum fuerit, et a no∣bis in Coneilio Rhemensi mandatum; pro ejus (tamen) caritate aliquando condescendere debemus, & pro tempore, ipsius vo∣luntati assensum praebere. Besides, this our learned prudent King, Mat. Pa∣ris Hist. Angl. p. 96, 97. Ger∣vasii Chron. col. 1386, 1387 Gul. Neubri∣gensis Rerum Angl. l. 2. c. 6. & Here Tom. 1. p. 609, to 617. propter dissentiones et discordias saepius emergentes in∣ter Clerum et Iusticiarios Domini Regis et Magnates Regni, occasioned by these Canon Lawes, made sundry Edicts ex∣presly against the Popes, Councils, Prelates Canons and Con∣stitutions exempting Clerks from Secular Jurisdiction and pu∣nishments by Temporal Judges for Murders, Robberies, Rapes, and other Offences; Concerning the elections, homa∣ges and fealty of Bishops, the vacancies of Bishopricks, Ex∣communications,

Appeals, Citations, and accusations of Lay∣men before Bishops, of Pleas of Advowsons and other cau∣ses not belonging to their Jurisdiction; Which Lawes and Avitae Consuetudines regni, specified in 16. Articles drawn up in the forecited Council of Clarendon, Mat. Pa∣ris Hist. Angl. p. 97. Mar. Parker, Antiq. Eccles. Brit p. 122, 123. See Tom. 1. p. 616. &c. Archiepiscopi, E∣piscopi, Abbates, Priores, Clerus, cum Comitibus et Baronibus ac Proceribus cunctis (by his Royal command) juraverunt, et fir∣miter in verbo veritatis promiserunt viva voce tenendas et obser∣vandas, Domino Regi et haeredibus suis, bona fide et absque ma∣lo ingenio inperpetuum. His itaque gestis, potestas laica in res et personas ecclesiastieas, omnia pro libitu, (as Mat. Paris complains) ECCLESIASTICO JURE CONTEMPTO, usurpabat; tacenti∣bus, aut vix murmutantibus Episcopis, potius quam resistentibus; except only that Trayterous Archbishop Thomas Becket, whose goods, temporalties the King seised, and banished him the Realm for opposing them, against his Oath; which brought him to a tragical death.
What great Cause he and our premised Kings had thus to oppose, suppress the Canons and Constitutions of Popes, yea of their own Prelates in their Councils and Synods, will further appear by these remarkable Clauses in the most inso∣lent Epistle of John Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury, Ann. 9 E. 1. who then making sundry Constitutions in a Provinci∣al Council, prejudicial to the Kings Crown and Dignity, against Pat. 8 E . m. 10. & Pat. 9 E. 1. m. 6. intus. Here, p. 252. two successive Writs of Prohibition to him and his Suffragans; for which King Edward the 1. was highly in∣censed against them, the Archbishop thereupon thus justified them by these Antimonarchical Topicks, among others; Spelmanni Concil. Tom. 2. p. 341. & Here, p. 264, 265. Quia igitur ab antiquo tempore inter Reges et Magnates Angliae ex parte una; et Archiepiscopos et Episcopos, ac Clerum ejusdem Regni ex altera, duravit amara dissentio, pro oppressione Ecclesiae, contra Decreta Summorum Pontificum, contra Sta∣tuta Conciliorum, contra Sanctiones orthodoxorum Patrum, in quibus tribus summa authoritas, summa veritas, summa sanctitas existit. Supplicamus Regiae Majestati, &c. (instead of submit∣ting himself and his Constitutions to the King and his Laws, as he ought;) to submit himself, his Crown, Lawes, to the Canons, Lawes, and Constitutions then made by him and his Suffragans in the Council of Lambheth; because there was no other means but this, to put a period to the contests be∣tween them, concerning the Churches pretended Liberties,

nisi vos sublimitatem vestram praedictis tribus, scilicet Decretis Ponti∣ficum, Statutis Conciliorum, & Sanctionibus orthodoxorum Patrum (as curtai∣led, mis-cited, mis-applyed by Popes, Prelates, and Gratian) jurta Domini beneplacitum, cum Catholicis Imperatoribus dig∣nemini inclinare: Ex hiis enim tribus SUNT CANONES AG∣GREGATI, et Iura Coronae vestrae Christi Coronae subponenda▪ cujus sunt Diadema ac sponsae suae monilia, Nota. universae Ecclesiasticae Libertates. Decretis autem Summorum Pontificum, auctorita∣tem dedit summus omnium Imperator, &c. Ergo, nulla obstante consuetudine obediendum est Canonicis Ierarchice impositis; hoc est, sacris arbitriis Praelatorum. &c. Gratian Distinct. 22. & Causa 15. qu. 1 Marc de Vul∣son, De la Pa∣issance du Pape, l. 1. c. 4. Idem est ergo Sanctorum Patrum definitionibus resistere (published in their Canons and Consti∣tutions) quod Spiritus Sancti oraculis adversari. Haec atten. dentes Imperatores Catholici LEGES SUAS OMNES SA∣CRIS CANONIBUS SUBDIDERUNT, NE SCISMA∣TICI, VEL HAERETICI PUTERENTUR. A right Pa∣pal and Archiepiscopal Resolution, directly contradictory to Rom. 13. 1, to 7. Tit. 3. 1. St. Pauls and 1 Pet. . 12, 13. St. Peters Doctrine and Practise.
I shall therefore cloze up this large Discourse concerning the danger, mischiefs of, & publike oppositions against Popes, Prelates Decretals, Canons, Constitutions, and the Canon Laws both in England and elswhere, by evidencing their Nullity, in∣validity to oblige either Kings or Subjects, especially Laymen, unless specially approved, received, ratified by them, their Nobles and people by See Here, Tom. 1. p. 411, 429. common consent in Parliament; with the Resolution of learned Tract. de vita Spir. c. 4. John Gerson Chancellor of Paris, yea of Lib. 2. Var. Resolut. c. 16. n. 6. Didacus Covarruvias, In Summa c. 23. n. 41. Navarrus, De Libert. Christiana, l. 1. c. 9. doc. 2. Driedo, Verbo Lex, nu. 11. Armilla, Lib. 4. Dist. 15. qu. 4. Johannes Major, and Pe∣trus de Marca, late Archbishop of Paris, in his excellent ela∣borate learned Volume, Lib. 2. c. 16. n. 5. p. 126. & l. 7. c. 28. n. 3. p. 292, 293. De Concordia Sacerdotii & Imperii, sen Libertatibus Ecclesiae Gallicanae, revised, enlar∣ged by Stephanus Baluzius, printed Parisiis 1663. cum pri∣vilegio Regis; (who quotes all these Doctors, and asserts their joynt Resolutions herein in these positive termes,) Certum est Legem nullam vim obtinere, si ab initio recepta non fuerit a subditis (especially a Regibus) Nam et maxime praesu∣mendum est eam legem quae a Republica non recipitur, minime ea convenire. Huic conditioni magis videtur obnoxia Lex Ecclesiasti∣ca quam civilis, duplici ratione. Prima est, quia potestas Ecclesia∣stica conceptis verbis data est, 2 Cor. 13. 10. in aedificationem, non autem in de∣structionem;

ut testatur Apostolus; unde sequitur, nihil obtrudendum esse fidelibus quod eos offendere aliquo pacto posset: atque ideo legem Ecclesiasticam minus commodam pro non scripta esse habendam. Secunda vero ratio haec est, quia Christus ipse discrimen utrius∣que potestatis in praeceptis dandis, auctoritate sua constituit; Mat. 20. 25. Lu. 22. 25. Reges gentium dominantur eorum; Vos autem non sic, &c. Et ipse Petrus, Non dominantes in Clero, sed forma facti gregis, Ita ut ve∣rus Dominatus sit penes Reges, non autem penes Sacerdotes. Ve∣hementer est De Con∣sideratione, l. 2. cap. 6. Bernardus, & fere totus in eo, ut hanc sen∣tentiam Eugenio Pontifici persuadeat, Planum est, Apostolis in∣terdicitur Dominatio, indicitur Ministratio.
Upon which grounds this learned Archbishop Marca (though a great asserter of the Popes, Canons, Prelats Autho∣rity in other particulars) proves at large in See also his lib. . 2. to 10. And lib. 4. cap. 8. to 21. in several par∣ticulars. his 7 & 8 Books, De Concordia Sacerdotii & Imperii; That the Kings of France, England, Spaine, and Emperors of Germany, did most justly reserve and retain to themselves the Soveraign power in elc∣ctions, approbations, confirmations, investitures and institnti∣ons of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Deans, Prebends, and other Ecclesiastical dignities, and justly receive the fruits, profits of Bishopricks, Monasteries, and present to the Pre∣bendaries annexed to them during their vacancies by death, or translations; yea, seise the goods of Bishops, Abbots, and others dying intestate, to their proper use; as belonging to them by the ancient Lawes, Custom of See Here, Tom. 1. p. 615. Marca ibid. l. 8. c. 18, 19. p. 343, to 351. &c. 23, 24, 25, 26. & Pierre de Pithou, Ds Libertez de L'esglise Gal∣licane, p. 598, 1262. Here, p. 19. France, Normandy, and England, though inhibited, condemned under severe Ec∣clesiastical Censures, by sundry Canons, Constitutions of Popes, Bishops, Synods, as Sacriledge, unlesse in the Cases of such particular Churches, Monasteries, as are exempted from such seisures of their Temporalties and profits by Kings, their Founders, or Patrons special Charters, out of meer grace, not right; yea he proves in his first Book and Chapters by sundry presidents, and particularly complains in his Prefixed to his Books, De Concordia Sa∣cerdotii & Im∣perii. Dedicatory Epistle to the late Grand Statesman, Cardinal Duke of Riche∣lieu, Quod frequentes & paene quotidianae in actu rerum positis occurrunt contentiones, quae secundum varias causarum figuras ob dignitatem laesam, vel diminutam auctoritatem accenduntur, et Christianae Reipublicae Principes inter se committunt; & ambae illae Potestates (ECCLESIASTICA ET RECIA) quae amico foedere conjungi debuerant, in dedecus Christiani nominis ali∣quando divellantur ab invicem, hominum vitio; and that prin∣cipally

by executing of Popes, Prelates Canons, and Canon Laws, not publikely confirmed by the concurrent Authority of Christian Kings, Parliaments, Realms, but obtruded on them against their wills. Which differences, Schisms, Mis∣chiefs, can be neither totally nor finally composed, nor pre∣vented, so long as such Canons, Constitutions, Decrees shall have any force, countenance, continuance, and be rigorously executed in Ecclesiastical Courts, by Judges, Delegates, Of∣ficials, Canonists, only in Popes, or Bishops own Names, rights, stiles, under their own seals alone, as 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. & 2. Phil. & Mar. c. 8. independent on the Crown.
For the clearer demonstration whereof in our own King∣dom, I have with no small pains and diligence, collected out of all the whole or decayed files, and confused heaps of broken, scattered Original Writs, and the Plea-Rolls, Patent, Clause and other Rolls in the White Tower Chappel or else∣where, all Writs of Prohibitions issued out, and Attach∣ments, Suits at our Kings or their grieved Subjects prosecu∣tions, brought for contempts of them, yet extant, during the reigns of the 3. premised Kings, either against Popes Nunci∣oes, Collectors, Delegates, or our Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Officials, Ecclesiastical Judges, or other per∣sons, upon several occasions; but more especially for hold∣ing, prosecuting suits belonging to these Kings Temporal Courts, and vexing their Subjects by illegal Excommunica∣tions, and Writs de Excommunicato capiendo grounded on them, on purpose to discourage, or disable them, and de∣terr all others from suing for Prohibitions to restrain their Extravagant Usurpations, in high contempt, and to the grand prejudice of the Kings Crown, Dignity, Courts, and Royal Authority; that so they might by degrees ingrosse all temporal suits, causes into their own Courts, and tram∣ple all Secular Powers, Courts, Subjects, Laws, Liberties un∣der their feet without controll; whereof I found such mul∣titudes, yet remaining, besides those quite putrified, torn, lost or perished, as may not only satiate but surfet their Rea∣ders: the most whereof I have abbreviated, and inserted into this Tome, as for the vindication of these Kings Ecclesiastical Soveraignty; and evidencing the inconsistency of these Canon Lawes and Constitutions with it, or the Kingdoms, Subjects peace and felicity; so for these two following reasons.

First; To justify the practise of our late and present Judges in granting Prohibitions to Ecclesiastical Persons, Courts, to restrain their usurpations, and extravagances of all kindes, according to their Oathes, dutyes, against the See Cooks 2 Institutes, p. 599, to 619. & The Judges Treatise and Collections of Prohibitions upon Archbi∣shop Bancrofts Complaint, 3 & 7 Jacobi. fre∣quent clamors, and unjust complaints of our Archbishops, Bi∣shops, Canonists, and others to our Kings and their Coun∣sil, as well since the Reformation of Religion as before; be∣ing warranted by such multitudes of Presidents from year to year even in times of Popery, when Popes and Prelates were most predominant: which will make a considerable Ad∣dition to the Presidents of Prohibitions in punier times, for∣merly collected by the Judges for their own defence.
Secondly, To evidence the manifold uncessant grievan∣ces, oppressions, vexations of the Subjects of this Realm in former ages, by reason of these diversities of Laws, Jurisdicti∣ons, Courts, especially since the Ecclesiastical depend not on the King, Parliament, or Common Lawes of England, and are not executed by special Commissions from the King, limiting their Jurisdictions, Proceedings, See 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. 37 H. 8 c. 17. by a deri∣vative power from, by, and under him, nor in his Name, Right, Stile, Seal alone, like other Courts, and Processe; Nor yet by our Bishops and Ordinaries themselves, who ought perso∣nally to execute their Ecclesiastical Judicatures and Juris∣diction (especially if appropriated by divine right to their Episcopal office, as many of them pretend;) who cannot delegate their Judicial authority to any subordinate Offi∣cers, no more then the Kings Judges, or Justices of Peace, and ought to judge in proper person, not by Proxy; or else totally to disclaim their Judicial authority, if they want leisure or skill to execute it; and not to sell, rent, or farm it out upon account to indigent, covetous Chancellors, Vicars, Commissaries, Officials, Surrogates who will give most for it, or to their kinred or nearest allyes; since these Tota Offi∣cialis intentio est, ut ad opus Episcopi suz, jurisdiction is commissas mi∣serimas oves, quasi vice illius tndeat, emun∣gat, excoriat. lsti enim Epis∣coporum sunt sanguisugae, &c. & exe∣crandis acqui∣sitionibus ni∣hil sibi praeter peccati sordem & faeculentiam retinentes. Isti quasi sub um∣bra Episcopi, & obtentu ju∣stitiae palliatae subditos oppri∣munt, Ecclesi▪ gravant, &c. Pet. Blesensis Epist. 25. See Here, Tom. 2. p. 949▪ 950. Offi∣cials, Surrogates in all ages, to fill their purses, and make hay whiles the Sun shines, have most grievously vexed, fleeced, fleyed the people committed to their Episcopal care, by Citati∣ons, Interdicts, Ex officio, and other illegal Oathes, Articles, proceedings, Excommunications, imprisonments upon Writs de Excommunicato capiendo, for pretended offences, defa∣mations of heresie, incontinency, perjury, or other crimes, upon fames, or accusations raised by themselves or their crea∣tures,

or for trivial matters, contempts, non-payment of illega fees, or suing out Prohibitions to relieve themselves by due course of Law, against their holding pleas of causes not be∣longing to them; whereby they have not only been banded up and down from Court to Court, place to place, like Tennis Balls, but even grownd to powder, like corn between two Milstones, to their extraordinary oppression, impoverishing, and discon∣tent. Yea, the charges, delayes, difficulties in suing out Pro∣hibitions for their just relief (especially when Bishops become predominant State-Officers) have been so great, that they have oft-times proved as bad, nay worse then the maladies they should redresse; so that thousands have rather chosen to submit to their Usurpations, extravagant exactions, cen∣sures, and to purchase absolutions from their excommunica∣tions, vexations, sequestrations upon any terms, at dearest rates, or to languish, perish under them, then to seek redress against, and strenuously to oppose them.
If these my Collections through Gods blessing on, and Your honorable Protection of them, shall prove instrumen∣tal to redress these publike abuses and usurpations, upon the Crown, Laws, & peoples Liberties; to settle a future constant harmony between the Crown and Miter, the Laity and Clergy, to the Glory of God, the Safety and advancement of the Pro∣testant Religion; that so we may all from henceforth Ephes. 4. 3. en∣deavour to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, 1 Thes. 3. 12. increase and abound in love one towards another; 1 Pet. 1. 22. c. 3. 8. love one another with a pure heart fervently; and not Gal. 5. 15▪ bite, de∣vour one another any longer, lest we be consumed one of another, and become a prey to our common Romish adversaries, now swarming every where amongst us, (fomenting our Di∣visions, Schisms, animosities against, and usurpations upon each other;) I shall bless God for such a happy success there∣of; and endeavour (through his Divine assistance) with all convenient expedition to compleat, publish my intended succeeding Tomes of this Heroick Subject.
In the mean time, I most humbly crave Your candid Ac∣ceptation and Protection of this Volume, and the continuance of Your former cordial affections to,
From my Study in Linclnes Inne, July 25. 1668.

