



MADAM,
AFter many Addresses, Your Great CYRUS comes to take his leave. His Story runs full of such hazardous Attempts, as bad us expect this Last Volume would prove his Tragedy. But Your HONOUR knows how the Ancients differ about the Death of CYRUS. And those who refuse Him for the Lover of MANDANA, may equally deny MAN∣DANA to be his Mother, since That Name (as well as CY∣RUS) belong'd to more than one. Our Author hath not shew'd more strength of Brain in the admirable Turnes and Mazes of this Work (which makes it reputed second to none) than He hath at last in tying all up; wherein yet Hee swerves not from the Au∣thority of two of the best Greek Historians. Did Annalists and Chroniclers draw up Battails with that accurate skill this Author does here, History would prove lesse tedious, more usefull, and freer from Contradictions. But our Author is a Souldier, and spent (one would think) all his Thoughts on Seidges and Battailes, till we read his Letters and Sceanes of Love, and then we admire how (to both those former) he is able to afford us such Politick Discourses. There are (men of no vulgar Genius, and such as are no Strangers to the Author) can lend a Clavis to most of this Story; can tell where 'tis Personall, and where Morall: they know what Prince the Author mean's by CYRUS fighting in midd'st of a Wood (set on fire round about him) where after conquest of his Enemies he must assault that Element: And while He and the King of Assyria are duelling for MANDANA, She (the great Booty) is taken from them both by a perfidious person to whom she was entrusted; where MANDANA is no Woman, but the Empire it self, and so (I am told) the Word signifies in the lan∣guage of that Country. But without any Key, an ordinary Eye may

behold in TOMYRIS the bottomless Wrath of a revengefull Princess; what mischief that Sex can do in a Kingdom when tempted by Power, almost (if Presidents had not taught us otherwise) as destructive as a Man. But herein Your LADISHIP will par∣don the Author as one born and living under the Salique Law. Yet nothing is more legible in his Chieftains and Commanders, than that the lust after Thrones and Scepters is as boyling mad as Fond Love, and infinitely more fatall, since the violence of Lovers strikes but at a couple, when the Thirst after a Crown drinks the blood of Millions, who all must be slaughter'd for that person who aspires to it. Our Au∣thor was so watchfull over his CYRUS and MANDANA, that neither have their Lapses, save in some Doubt (Jealousie I can∣not call it) of their mutual Affections, which yet was begotten on ra∣tional grounds, and such overflowings are tolerable in Love, though in no other Passion. How He hath embelish'd his Queens and Princesses with distinct Graces, your LADISHIP is best able to pronounce: For the Author (with all his Art and Abilities) cannot feign more Virtues than Your HONOUR is possess'd of; and might safely use no other Compellations for those eminent Personages he strives to magnifie, than the Names of Your several Virtues. And this (MADAM) is the great Inducement made me humbly offer these Volumes to Your LADISHIP; for if they have ought that is Excellent and Transcendent, they are yours in Justice, and may finde their Exemplars at all capacities: For whose accomplishment in all De∣grees of Happiness, for your most Learned and Noble LORD, and that Confluence of Hopes in that matchless young LADY, You have the constant Devotions of
(MADAM) 
