



SIR,
THo the Stars are plac'd at so great a distance
from us, yet we behold their Light; and
those that shine most bright are most ad∣mir'd.
So Merit and Virtue dart their Influence
from afar: You seem one of the first Magnitude.
Shrewsbury is the Orb in which you are fixt; yet
tho your Person is circumscrib'd there, your Vir∣tues
are diffusive thro all Counties: There they en∣joy
your Person, and here we admire your Virtues.
Fame represents you to us so qualify'd with all the
Ornaments▪ of a Gentleman, that you seem a new
addition of Honour to your Family, and rather give
Credit to the Name, than receive a Lustre from it:
And yet it is so Ancient, that when William the
Conqueror came into England, one of his Nobles
Marry'd a Ravenscroft: He Marry'd, 'tis said, (Ex
perantiquissima Ravenscroftorum Familia) out of the
most, or very ancient Family of the Ravenscroft's.
From thence, Sir, you are descended. I boast the
same; but wish I cou'd boast the same Virtues too,
that make you Eminent, and a Glory to the Name,
your prudent government of your self your Gene∣rosity,

your Bounty, your Affability, and above all,
your Principles of Honour and Loyalty. Interest
sways you not, nor gives a Byas to your Actions:
They all aim at Virtue, and there you nobly win
the Game. Distress makes you not slight your Friend
nor swerve from being Just.
But while I am speaking truth of you, I may seem
to flatter my self, that bear your Name; therefore
I will not proceed to enumerate your Praises, lest it
should be thought I arrogate to my self.
This humble piece, which I dedicate to you, is
the most trivial of any that have past my hands:
Yet it has stood the Test of the Stage, with great
success: But now it launches into the world in Print,
it wants the support of some eminent person to pro∣tect
it. Therefore, Sir, I prefix your name, to be
its Refuge and Defence. If your Cand our will par∣don
its faults and imperfections, the world will
then by your example favourably receive and che∣rish
it, if not for its own merits, at least for yours,
which command all Tongues to praise you, and all,
Hearts to Love you. With this, I dedicate and de∣vote
my self to your Friendship and Service, hoping
that a future Intimacy and farther Acquaintance,
may establish me in your favour, and give me bet∣ter
opportunities to show how much, and how en∣tirely▪
I esteem a person of your Worth and Cha∣racter.
SIR,

