



Right Honourable,
BEing invited to preach before you, and the Chif Assembly of this great City, I thought it would not be an unseasona∣ble Argument to encourage Citizens, (whose labours and employments, have a special aspect unto Gain, (to look after the Works of God, and the interests of their pre∣cious Souls, upon the account of that 2 John v. 8. full, and Psal. 19.11 great, and Prov. 11.18 sure reward, which ever attendeth heavenly negotiations. We read in the Scriptures of an Heb. 13.14 unabi∣ding City, and a Heb. 11.10 City which hath foundations; of Prov. 23.5 winged riches, which flie away; and Prov. 8.18. of durable riches which stay by us: Of the Scheme, the Pa∣geant, the 1 Cor. 7.31 fashion of this world, which passeth over, and of a 2 Cor. 4.17 1 Pet. 1.4. massie, and eternal glory, which never fadeth away: Of comforts which we Psal. 49.17 leave behinde us, and put off when we lie down to sleep, and of a John 14.16 Com∣forter which abideth with us, and Rev. 14.13 works which follow us, and are transportable into another Countrey. Inasmuch therefore as the Apostle telleth us, that we

are Eph. 2.19 , fellow Citizens with the Saints, and that we have Phil. 3.20. , a traffique and negotiation in Heaven, and in as much as when we go from hence, the earth, and all the contents thereof, will Eccles. 1.4 stay behinde us, and nothing will go along with the soul into another VVorld, but those graces which did here enrich it: I have in this plaine Sermon, endeavoured to perswade my selfe and mine hearers, to be wise Merchants for an abiding City, and above all the interests in the world, to look after those two most precious jewels, without which the possession of the whole VVorld would be but specious beggery, our souls, and our Saviour. And because this is a Doctrine, most generally confessed, and yet too too generally neglected: (even good men oftentimes suffering Martha's many things to divert their thoughts from Maries one necessary thing:) I have the more readily obeyed the Order of your honourable Court, in publishing this Sermon: Though there be nothing but the wholsomnesse of the Doctrine it self to commend it to the view of this curious Age: Wherein, if mens fancies be not gratified with the dresse, and garnish, as well as their con∣sciences, nourished with the substance of sound Doctrine: If there be not either Elegancy of Stile, or New and Polite Notions, to commend old Truths to our more quaint and de∣licate palates, we are apter many times to censure the man∣ner, then to value the matter which is set before us. As it is, I offer it to your favourable acceptance, and humbly commend you, and all your weighty affaires to the special blessing of the Lord,

