



IF Tamerlan the Great were this day alive, he would doubtless ap∣prove of this most worthy Choice that I have here made of your Graces Noble Person and Name, to place at the Frontispiece of this exact Narra∣tive of his Life and Conquests.
He was a Soveraign Prince, of an Heroick Spirit, of an undaunted Cou∣rage,

and of an admirable Conduct in War. He was call'd betimes to make use of these great Virtues at the Head of an Army, where Providence always Crowned his Actions with Suc∣cess. At first he rose out of a small Province of Asia, but in a few years, he spread the Glory of his Name and Victories, all over that part of the World. He was a Prince so exact in the Execution of Justice, and of so singular a Piety and Goodness, that the Christian Profession, as well as his own Religion, flourished all over his Dominions under his Protection, And his greatest Enemies thought them∣selves happy at last, to have been Con∣quer'd, and to be Govern'd by a Ta∣merlan.
The whole Nation, Great Sir, if not the whole World, sees your Graces Noble Soul enrich'd with the same ex∣traordinary Virtues, and divine Qua∣lities.

Providence hath also led you out betimes, and caused you to march after Tamerlan, in the same Paths of Honour. The safety of Europe hath called your Grace into the Field, to shew your Valour and Conduct, to give Laws to unruly Enemies, and set Bounds to the unjust Greatness of am∣bitious Neighbours.
Your Graces noble Mind, your Cou∣rage, your Fame, and Victories, ap∣pear to us as glorious in this Nor∣thern World, under our Monarch of Great-Britain, as Tamerlan's ever did, either under the King of Parthia his Father, or the Grand Cham of Tartary his Ʋncle. And your Gra∣ces sincere Devotion for our Protestant Religion, your mild and courteous Be∣haviour, your great Affection and daily Services for the English Nati∣on, have render'd your Name Sacred every where in City and Country, and

caused us all to look upon you as a second Tamerlan.
Did Providence put into your Hands the same Power, Opportunities, and Authority, we should doubtless see, through your Graces Wisdom and Cou∣rage, the English Name render'd as famous all over Europe, and as dread∣ful to our proud and insulting Neigh∣bours, as ever the Parthian was to the Moscovites, the Turks, the Mam∣meluks, and other Barbarians, forced to submit to the Empire of Tamerlan the Great.
This notable Resemblance, together with your Graces Affability, Mildness, and most sweet Disposition, hath encou∣rag'd me to this Presumption, for which the greatness of my respects, the Excellency of the History, and the Nobility of the Subject will, I hope, mediate for, and obtain a pardon from your Graces goodness.
If I may be so happy in this Address to give your Grace some little satis∣faction, and delight you in the reading of the brave Exploits of this Heroe, as Alexander was in the perusal of the War-like Actions of Achilles, and cause your Grace to cast an Eye of Fa∣vour upon this small Treatise, and its mean Author, I shall attain to the chief End aimed at by this Dedicati∣on. God preserve your Grace for the good of this Nation, and give me leave to be in word and deed, with all humility and submission,
Great Sir,

