



SIR,
THis Treatise, upon the first Publica∣tion, was Dedicated to your late Father, and not without good rea∣son; for, all the Motives that could enter into a Dedication of that na∣ture, did oblige me to it. First, as he was a most eminent Patron of Musick, and Musitians. Secondly, as he was not only a Lover of Mu∣sick, but also a great Performer in it. Thirdly, as the said Treatise had its Conception, Birth, and Accomplishment under His Roof, in your Minority. Lastly, as he was my peculiar Patron; affording me a cheerful Maintenance, when the Iniquity of the Times had reduced me (with many others in that common calamity) to a condition of needing it.
That Impression being spent, and another importun'd, this Second comes now in order to kiss Your Hands, and desire Your Patronage, as Immediate Heir and Successor to your Father; not only to his Estate, but likewise to his Dignity, Worth and Virtue. And in This Dedication I have some Ad∣vantages which I had not in the Former. One is, that you were the chief occasion of this Book; and therefore, if there be any thing of worth in it, the World may thank You for it: For, it was contriv'd and carried on for Your Instruction in Musick, at such vacant hours as you were not imploy'd in Studies of more concernment: And, as it was made for You, so it has made You (by your ingenuity) not only the greatest Artist, but also the ablest Judge of it, that (I think) is this day in Europe; (I mean) of a Gentleman, and no Professor of the Science. And this opinion of mine I find confirmed by a Paper of Verses printed at Rome, when you
travell'd those Parts, which were occasion'd by your rare Expressions on the Viol at a Musick-meeting; in which were present not only divers Grandees of that Court and City, with some Ambassadors of Foreign States; but also the Great Musitians of Rome, who are esteem'd Superlative; all admiring your Knowledge in Musick, and your Excel∣lency upon that Instrument. That I might give Your self, our Nation, and the Author of those Verses the Right which is due to each, I have presumed to Reprint them on the fol∣lowing Page, as well for a Justification of what I have said, as also for an Encouragement to those who shall make use of the same Instructions which guided you on to that Perfection. I am loth to detain you too long, yet one thing I must acquaint you with, which is, That our Division-Viol Sounds better now in Latin than it formerly did in English; the Gen∣tleman that hath improv'd it is your kind Acquaintance, my ever honoured Friend (and sometime Scholar in Musick) Mr. William Marsh, that it might be understood in Foreign Parts; and I have caused its Native Language to be joyned therewith, to make it useful at Home as well as Abroad. This is all I have to say, more than what I suppose you already know; which is, that I am
SIR,

