



My Lord,
I HOPE it will not be thought unseasonable to make an Address of this nature to Your Lordship in the Begin∣ning of Term, since the great Cause at present in Your Court (as one of late pleasantly said) is thaet between the King and the Pope, between our Church and the Church of Rome. And

while so many Witnesses are daily sworn of the Kings and the Churches side; it may not be improper to lay open to Your Lordship the Nature and Merits of the Cause.
A Cause, My Lord, which was at first set on Foot by Ambition, carried on by Faction, and must therefore be maintained by the like means; but can never hope to prevail among us again, till subjection to a Forreign Power can be thought our Interest, and to part at once with Reason and Religion be esteemed our Honour. It is a Cause much of the nature of some others depending before Your Lord∣ship, more vexatious than difficult; and managed by such Advocates who be∣ing retained in the Cause, though they have nothing material to say for it, yet are ashamed to be silent. Who are alwayes disputing about an end of Controversies, but at the same time do their utmost to increase and

perpetuate them; and are ready to foment our differences that they may make use of them to their own ad∣vantage.
While we have such restless Ad∣versaries to deal with, part of our dan∣ger lyes in being too secure of the Goodness of our Cause: and methinks there can be little satisfaction in lying still or quarrelling with each other, when we know our common enemies to be at work undermining of us. But whatever repose others enjoy, my Adversaries seem to deal with me, as some do with those whom they su∣spect of Witchcraft; they think by pinching me so often, and keeping me from taking rest, to make me say at last as they would have me. But the comfort is, as long as I am secure of my senses, I am of my Religion against theirs: if I once lose them or my un∣derstanding, I know not whether it may be my fortune to be carried to

Rome, or some more convenient place. And in my opinion they deal with those under their care, as if they believed them not to be in their right senses, for they keep them alwayes in the dark, and think nothing more dangerous than to let in light upon them. Wherein I cannot deny, but considering the nature of their Cause, they take the most effectual course to maintain it; for it not being capable of enduring a severe tryal, nothing can preserve its reputation, but Igno∣rance and Credulity: which are there∣fore in so great esteem among them, that if it were a Custome to Canonize Things as well as Persons, we might find those sacred names in their Lita∣nies; and addresses as solemn made to them, as ever were to Faith and Vertue among the elder and wiser Romans.
I need not go far, for an Instance of their design to advance, even in

this Inquisitive Age, the Honour of these two great Pillars of their Church: For if your Lordship shall be pleased to cast Your eye on the following Discourse, especially that part which concerns the Miracles of the Roman Church, You will find fufficient evidence of it almost in every Page. When I first engaged in this Contro∣versie I could hardly believe what I now see, that they would ever have brought it to this issue with me, viz. That they would renounce all claim to In∣fallibility, if they did not produce as great Miracles wrought in their Church to attest it, as ever were wrought by Christ or his Apostles. The boldness of which as∣sertion, and the pernicious influence of it upon Christianity it self, hath made me take the more pains in the examination of it. Which I have done with so much care in consult∣ing their own approved Authors, that I hope at last they will grow ashamed

of that groundless calumny, that I do not deal fairly in the citing of them. A calumny so void of proof, that I could desire no better argu∣ment of a baffled Cause, than such impertinent Clamours. But if im∣pudent sayings will serve their turn, they need never fear what can be written against them. Do they in∣deed think me a man so void of com∣mon sense, as to expose my self so easily to the contempt of every one that will but take pains to compare my citations? Have I the Books only in my own keeping? or are they so rare that they cannot get a sight of them? How then come they to know them to be false quoted? But alas! they are men of business, and have not leisure to search out and compare Books, and therefore the shortest way is to say, that without doubt they are all false. Their numbers certainly are not so small, nor their business so

great, but they might have spared some to have undertaken this task particularly, if I had been faulty: and in my mind it had been of some con∣sequence to have freed their Church from those heavy imputations of Fa∣naticism, and destroying the necessity of a good life, from the Testimony of their own Authors. But if these could not move them, I desire them not to spare me in this present subject of Miracles, wherein I profess to relye on the Te∣stimony of their own Writers; if they shew me any wilful mistakes therein, I will endeavour to give them publick satisfaction.
Were I not well assured, My Lord, of the Strength of my Evidence, as well as of the Goodness of my Cause, I should never have appeared in it before a Person of so sharp and piercing a Judgement as Your Lordship. But I have the rather presumed to offer this Discourse into Your Lordships hands,

and to send it abroad under the Pro∣tection of Your Name, not only thereby to acknowledge the particu∣lar Favours I have received from Your Lordship; but to thank You on a more publick Account, I mean for Your late generous owning the Cause of our Religion and Church in so Criti∣cal a time; which not only gives a present Lustre to Your Name, but will preserve it with Honour to Po∣sterity. I am,
My Lord,

