



SIR,
I AM ingag'd in the defence of a Great Truth, and I would willingly find a shroud to cover my self from danger and calumny; and although the cause both is and ought to be defended by Kings, yet my person must not go thither to Sanctuary, unless it be to pay my devotion, and I have now no other left for my defence, I am robb'd of that which once did bless me, and indeed still does, (but in another manner) and I hope will do more; but those distillations of celestial dews are conveyed in Channels not pervious to an eye of sense, and now adays we seldom look with other, be the object never so beauteous or alluring. You may then think, Sir, I am forc'd upon You; may that beg my par∣don and excuse: but I should do an injury to Your Nobleness, if I should only make You a refuge for my need, (pardon this truth) you are also of the fairest choice, not only for Your love of Learning, (for although that be eminent in You, yet it is not your eminence) but for your duty to H. Church, for Your loyalty to his sacred Majesty. These did prompt me with the greatest confidence to hope for Your fair incouragement, and assistance in my pleadings for Episcopa∣cy, in which cause Religion, and Majesty, the King, and the Church are interested as parties of mutual concernment.
There was an odde observation made long ago, and registred in the Law to make it authentick, Laici sunt infensi Clericis. Now the Clergie pray, but fight not, and therefore if not specially pro∣tected by the King contra Ecclesiam Malignantium, they are made obnoxious to all the contumelies, and injuries, which an envi∣ous multitude will inflict upon them. It was observ'd enough in King Edgars time, Quamvis decreta Pontificum,In Charta Ed∣gar. Regis A. D. 485. apud Hen. Spelman. & verba Sacerdotum inconvulsis ligaminibus velut fundamenta mon∣tiurn fixa sunt, tamen plerumque tempestatibus, & turbini∣bus saecularium rerum Religio S. Matris Ecclesiae maculis re∣proborum dissipatur, ac rumpitur. Idcirco Decrevimus

Nos, &c. There was a sad example of it in K. John's time. For when he threw the Clergie from his Protection, it is incredible what injuries, what affronts, what robberies, yea what murders were committed upon the Bishops and Priests of H. Church, whom nei∣ther the Sacredness of their persons, nor the Laws of God, nor the terrors of Conscience, nor fears of Hell, nor Church-censures, nor the laws of Hospitality could protect from Scorn, from blows, from slaughter. Now there being so near a tye as the necessity of their own preservation in the midst of so apparent danger, it will tye the Bishops hearts, and hands to the King faster than all the tyes of Lay-Allegiance, (all the Political tyes I mean,) all that are not precisely religious, and obligations in the Court of Conscience.
2. But the interest of the Bishops is conjunct with the prosperity of the King, besides the interest of their own security; by the obli∣gation of secular advantages. For they who have their livelihood from the King, and are in expectance of their fortune from him, are more likely to pay a tribute of exacter duty, than others, whose for∣tunes are not in such immediate dependency on his Majesty. Aene∣as Sylvius once gave a merry reason why Clerks advanced the Pope above a Council, viz. because the Pope gave spiritual promotions, but the Councils gave none. It is but the common expectation of gra∣titude, that a Patron Paramount shall be more assisted by his Be∣neficiaries in cases of necessity, than by those, who receive nothing from him but the common influences of Government.
3. But the Bishops duty to the King derives it self from a high∣er fountain. For it is one of the main excellencies in Christianity, that it advances the State, and well-being of Monarchies and bo∣dies Politick. Now then the Fathers of Religion are the Reve∣rend Bishops, whose peculiar office it is to promote the interests of Christianity, are by the nature and essential requisites of their office bound to promote the Honour and Dignity of Kings, whom Christi∣anity would have so much honour'd, as to establish the just subordi∣nation of people to their Prince, upon better principles than ever, no less than their precise duty to God, and the hopes of a blissful im∣mortality. Here then is utile, honestum, and necessarium, to tye Bishops in duty to Kings, and a threefold Cord is not easily broken.
In pursuance of these obligations Episcopacy pays three returns of tribute to Monarchy.
1. The first is the Duty of their people. For they being by God himself set over souls, judges of the most secret recesses of our Consciences, and the venerable Priests under them, have more pow∣er to keep men in their dutious subordination to the Prince, than there is in any secular power, by how much more forcible the impres∣sions of the Conscience are than all the external violence in the world. And this power they have fairly put into act, for there was never any Protestant Bishop yet in Rebellion, unless he turned recreant to his Order, and it is the honour of the Church of England, that all her Children and obedient people are full of indignation against Re∣bels, be they of any interest or party whatsoever. For here (and for it we thank God and good Princes) Episcopacy hath been pre∣served in fair priviledges and honour, and God hath blest and ho∣nour'd Episcopacy with the conjunction of a loyal people. As if be∣cause in the law of Nature the Kingdom and Priesthood were joyn∣ed in one person, it were natural and consonant to the first justice, that Kings should defend the rites of the Church, and the Church advance the honour of Kings. And when I consider that the first Bishop that was exauctorated was a Prince too, Prince and Bi∣shop of Geneva, methinks it was an ill Omen, that the cause of the Prince and the Bishop should be in Conjunction ever after.
2. A second return that Episcopacy makes to Royalty is that which is the Duty of all Christians, the paying tributes and impositi∣ons. And though all the Kings Liege people do it, yet the issues of their duty and liberality are mightily disproportionate, if we consider their unequal Number and Revenues. And if Clergie-subsidies be estimated according to the smallness of their revenue and paucity of persons, it will not be half so short of the number and weight of Crowns from Lay Dispensation, as it does far exceed in the propor∣tion of the Donative.
3. But the assistance that the Kings of England had in their Councils and affairs of greatest difficulty, from the great ability of Bishops and other the Ministers of the Church, I desire to repre∣sent in the words of K. Alvred to Walfsigeus the Bishop, in an Epistle where he deplores the misery of his own age, by comparing it with the former times, when the Bishops were learned, and exer∣cised in publick Councils. Foelicia tum tempora fuerunt inter omnes Angliae populos; Reges Deo, & scriptae ejus volun∣tati

obsecundârunt in suâ pace, & bellicis expeditionibus, at∣que regimine domestico domi se semper tutati fuerint, atque etiam foris nobilitatem suam dilataverint. The reason was, as he insinuates before, Sapientes extiterunt in Anglica gente de spirituali gradu, &c. The Bishops were able by their great learning and wisdom to give assistance to the Kings affairs. And they have prosper'd in it; for the most glorious issues of Divine Be∣nison upon this Kingdom were conveyed to us by Bishops hands, I mean the Vnion of the houses of York and Lancaster, by the Coun∣sels of John Speeds Hist. l. 9. c. 19. . 23. p. 716. Bishop Morton, and of England and Scotland by the treaty of I. c. 10. n. 64. p. 747. Bishop Fox, to which if we add two other in Materia religionis, I mean the conversion of the Kingdom from Paganism, by St. Augustin Arch-bishop of Canterbury; and the reforma∣tion begun and promoted by Bishops, I think we cannot call to mind four blessings equal to these in any Age or Kingdom, in all which God was pleased by the mediation of Bishops, as he useth to do, to bless the people. And this may not only be expected in reason, but in good Divinity, for amongst the gifts of the spirit which God hath given to his Church, are reckoned Doctors, Teachers, and 1 Cor. 12.28. helps in government. To which may be added this advantage, that the services of Church-men are rewardable upon the Churches stock; no need to disimprove the Royal Banks to pay thanks to Bishops.
But, Sir, I grow troublesome. Let this discourse have what ends it can; the use I make of it, is but to pretend reason for my boldness, and to entitle You to my Book: For I am confident you will own any thing that is but a friends friend to a cause of Loyalty. I have nothing else to plead for your acceptance, but the confidence of your Goodness, and that I am a person capable of your pardon, and of a fair interpretation of my address to you, by being,
SIR,

