



May it please your Grace,
IT is not any Confidence that I have dexterously performed this Charge, that gives me the boldness to present it to Your Grace. I have done it as well as I could; and for the rest, my Obedience will bear me out: For I took not this task upon my self, but was intreated to it by them who have power to Command me. But yet it is very necessary that it should be addressed to Your Grace, who are, as Sozomen said of Theo∣dosius, Certaminum Magister, & orationum Judex consti∣tutus: You are appointed the great Master of our arguings, and are most fit to be the Judge of our Discourses, especially when they do relate and pretend to publick Influence and Advantages to the Church. We all are witnesses of Your Zeal to promote true Reli∣gion, and every day find You to be a great Patron to this very poor Church, which groans under the Calamities and permanent Effects of a War acted by Intervals for above Four Hundred years; such which the intermedial Sun-shines of Peace could but very weakly

repair. Our Churches are still demolished, much of the Revenues irrecoverably swallowed by Sacriledge, and digested by an unavoid∣able impunity; Religion infinitely divided, and parted into formi∣dable Sects; the People extremely Ignorant, and Wilful by inheri∣tance; superstitiously Irreligious, and uncapable of Reproof. And amidst these and very many more inconveniences, it was greatly ne∣cessary that God should send us such a KING, and he send us such a Vice-Roy, who weds the Interests of Religion, and joyns them to his heart.
For we do not look upon Your Grace only as a Favourer of the Churche's Temporal Interest, though even for that the Souls of the relieved Clergie do daily bless You: neither are You our Patron only as the Cretans were to Homer, or the Alenadae to Simonides, Philip to Theopompus, or Severus to Oppianus; but as Constantine and Theodosius were to Christians; that is, desi∣rous that true Religion should be promoted, that the Interest of Souls should be advanced, that Truth should flourish, and wise Principles should be entertain'd, as the best Cure against those Evils which this Nation hath too often brought upon themselves. In order to which excellent purposes it is hoped, that the reduction of the Holy Rite of Confirmation into use and Holy practice may contribute some very great moments. For besides that the great Vsefulness of this Mi∣nistery will greatly endear the Episcopal Order, to which (that I may use S. Hierom's words) if there be not attributed a more than common Power and Authority, there will be as many Schisms as Priests; it will also be a means of endearing the Persons of the Prelates to their Flocks, when the People shall be convin∣ced that there is, or may be, if they please, a perpetual entercourse of Blessings and Love between them; when God by their Holy hands refuses not to give to the People the earnest of an eternal inhe∣ritance, when by them he blesses; and that the grace of our Lord Jesus, and the Love of God, and the Communication of his Spirit, is conveyed to all persons capable of the Grace, by the Con∣duct, and on the hands and Prayers of their Bishops.
And indeed not only very many single Persons, but even the whole Church of Ireland hath need of Confirmation. We have most of us contended for false Religions and un-Christian Propositions: and now that by God's Mercy and the Prosperity and Piety of his Sacred Majesty the Church is broken from her Cloud, and many are reduc'd to the true Religion and righteous worship of

God, we cannot but call to mind, how the Holy Fathers of the Pri∣mitive Church often have declar'd themselves in Councils, and by a perpetual Discipline, that such persons who are return'd from Sects and Heresies into the Bosom of the Church should not be re-baptiz'd, but that the Bishops should Impose hands on them in Confirmation. It is true, that this was design'd to supply the defect of those Schis∣matical Conventicles, who did not use this Holy Rite: For this Rite of Confirmation hath had the fate to be oppos'd only by the Schismatical and Puritan Parties of old, the Novatians or Ca∣thari, and the Donatists; and of late by the Jesuits, and new Cathari, the Puritans and Presbyterians; the same evil Spi∣rit of Contradiction keeping its course in the same chanel▪ and de∣scending regularly amongst men of the same Principles. But therefore in the restitution of a man, or company of men, or a Church, the Holy Primitives, in the Council of C P. Laodi∣cea and Orange, thought that to Confirm such persons was the most agreeable Discipline; not only because such persons did not in their little and dark Assemblies use this Rite, but because they always greatly wanted it. For it is a sure Rule in our Religion, and is of an eternal truth, that they who keep not the Unity of the Church, have not the Spirit of God; and therefore it is most fit should receive the ministery of the Spirit, when they return to the bosom of the Church, that so indeed they may keep the Uni∣ty of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. And therefore Asteri∣us Bishop of Amasia compares Confirmation to the Ring with which the Father of the Prodigal adorn'd his returning Son; Datur nempe prodigo post stolam & annulus, nempe Symbolum in∣telligibilis signaculi Spiritûs. And as the Spirit of God, the Holy Dove, extended his mighty wings over the Creation, and hatch'd the new-born World, from its seminal powers, to Light and Opera∣tion, and Life and Motion; so in the Regeneration of the Souls of Men, he gives a new Being, and Heat and Life, Procedure and Perfection, Wisdom and Strength: and because that this was ministred by the Bishops hands in Confirmation, was so firmly believ'd by all the Primitive Church, therefore it became a Law, and an Vniversal practice in all those Ages, in which men desir'd to be sav'd by all means. The La∣tin Church and the Greek always did use it, and the Blessings of it, which they believ'd consequent to it, they expressed in a holy Pray∣er, which in the Greek Euchologion they have very anciently and

constantly used. . Thou, O Lord, the most compassio∣nate and great King of all, graciously impart to this person the seal of the gift of thy Holy, Almighty, and ado∣rable Spirit. For, as an ancient Greek said truly and wisely, . The Father is reconcil'd, and the Son is the Reconciler; but to them who are by Baptism and Repentance made friends of God, the Holy Spirit is collated as a gift. They well knew what they received in this Ministration, and therefore wisely laid hold of it, and would not let it go.
This was anciently ministred by Apostles, and ever after by the Bishops, and religiously receiv'd by Kings and greatest Princes; and I have read that S. Sylvester confirm'd Constantine the Em∣peror: and when they made their children servants of the Holy Je∣sus, and Souldiers under his banner, and Bonds-men of his Institu∣tion, then they sent them to the Bishop to be Confirm'd; who did it sometimes by such Ceremonies, that the solemnity of the Ministery might with greatest Religion addict them to the service of their Great Lord. We read in Adrovaldus, that Charles Martel, entring into a League with Bishop Luitprandus,De Miraculis S. Benedict. l. 1. c. 1.14. sent his Son Pepin to him, ut, more Christianorum fidelium, capillum ejus pri∣mus attonderet, ac Pater illi Spiritualis existeret, that he might, after the manner of Christians, first cut his hair, (in to∣ken of service to Christ) and [in confirming him] he should be his Spiritual Father. And something like this we find concerning William Earl of Warren and Surrey, who when he had Dedi∣cated the Church of S. Pancratius and the Priory of Lewes, re∣ceiv'd Confirmation, and gave seizure per capillos capitis mei (says he in the Charter) & fratris mei Radulphi de Warrena, quos abscidit cum cultello de capitibus nostris Henricus Epi∣scopus Wintoniensis; by the hairs of my head and of my Bro∣ther's, which Henry Bishop of Winchester cut off before the Al∣tar: meaning (according to the ancient Custom) in Confirmation, when they by that Solemnity addicted themselves to the free Servitude of the Lord Jesus. The Ceremony is obsolete and chang'd, but the Mystery can never. And indeed that is one of the advantages in which we can rejoyce concerning the ministration of this Rite in the Church of England and Ireland; That whereas it was sometimes clouded, sometimes hindred, and sometimes hurt, by the appendage of needless and useless Ceremonies; it is now reduc'd to the Primi∣tive and first Simplicity amongst us, and the excrescencies us'd in the

Church of Rome are wholly par'd away, and by holy Prayers and the Apostolical Ceremony of Imposition of the Bishops hands it is worthily and zealously administred. The Latins us'd to send Chrism to the Greeks, when they had usurped some jurisdiction over them, and the Pope's Chaplains went with a quantity of it to CP. where the Russians usually met them for it; for that was then the Ceremony of this Ministration: But when the Latins demanded fourscore pounds of Gold besides other gifts, they went away, and chang'd their Custom, rather than pay an unlawful and ungodly Tribute. Non quaerimus vestra, sed vos; We require no∣thing but leave to impart God's blessings with pure Intentions and a Spiritual Ministery. And as the Bishops of our Churches re∣ceive nothing from the People for the Ministration of this Rite, so they desire nothing but Love and just Obedience in Spiritual and Ecclesiastical duties; and we offer our Flocks Spiritual things without mixture of Temporal advantages from them; we minister the Rituals of the Gospel without the Inventions of Men, Religion without Superstition, and only desire to be believ'd in such things, which we prove from Scripture expounded by the Catholick Practice of the Church of God.
Concerning the Subject of this Discourse, the Rite of Confir∣mation, it were easie to recount many great and glorious expressi∣ons which we find in the Sermons of the Holy Fathers of the Primi∣tive Ages: so certain it is, that in this thing we ought to be zea∣lous, as being desirous to perswade our People to give us leave to do them great good. But the following Pages will do it, I hope, com∣petently: only we shall remark, that when they had gotten a cu∣stom anciently, that in cases of necessity they did permit Deacons and Lay-men sometimes to Baptize, yet they never did confide in it much; but with much caution and curiosity commanded that such persons should, when that Necessity was over, be carried to the Bishop to be Confirm'd, so to supply all precedent defects relating to the past imperfect ministery, and future necessity and danger; as appears in the Council of Eliberis. And the Ancients had so great estimate and veneration to this Holy Rite, that as in Heraldry they distinguish the same thing by several names, when they relate to Persons of greater Eminency, and they blazon the Arms of the Gentry by Metals, of the Nobility by precious Stones, but of Kings and Princes by Planets: so when they would signifie the Vnction which was us'd in Confirmation, they gave it a special word,

and of more distinction and remark; and therefore the Oil us'd in Baptism they call'd , but that of Confirmation was ▪ and they who spake properly kept this difference of words, until by incaution and ignorant carelesness the names fell into confusion, and the thing into disuse and dis-respect. But it is no small addition to the Honour of this Ministration, that some wise and good men have piously believed, that when Baptiz'd Christians are Confirm'd, and solemnly bless'd by the Bishop, that then it is that a special An∣gel-Guardian is appointed to keep their Souls from the assaults of the Spirits of darkness. Concerning which, though I shall not in∣terpose mine own opinion, yet this I say, that the Piety of that sup∣position is not disagreeable to the intention of this Rite: for since by this the Holy Spirit of God (the Father of Spirits) is given, it is not unreasonably thought by them, that the other good Spirits of God, the Angels who are ministring Spirits, sent forth to mini∣ster to the good of them that shall be Heirs of Salvation, should pay their kind offices in subordination to their Prince and Fountain; that the first in every kind might be the measure of all the rest. But there are greater and stranger things than this that God does for the Souls of his Servants, and for the honour of the Ministeries which himself hath appointed.
We shall only add that this was ancient, and long before Popery entred into the World, and that this Rite hath been more abus'd by Popery than by any thing: and to this day the Bigots of the Ro∣man Church are the greatest Enemies to it; and from them the Pres∣byterians. But besides that the Church of England and Ireland does religiously retain it, and hath appointed a solemn Officer for the Ministery; the Lutheran and Bohemian Churches do observe it carefully, and it is recommended and establish'd in the Harmony of the Protestant Confessions.
And now, may it please Your Grace to give me leave to implore Your Aid and Countenance for the propagating this so religious and useful a Ministery, which, as it is a peculiar of the Bishop's Office, is also a great enlarger of God's Gifts to the People. It is a great instrument of Vnion of hearts, and will prove an effective Deletery to Schism, and an endearment to the other parts of Religion: it is the consummation of Baptism, and a preparation to the Lord's Sup∣per: it is the Vertue from on high, and the solemnity of our Spiritu∣al Adoption. But there will be no need to use many arguments to enflame your Zeal in this affair, when Your Grace shall find, that

to promote it will be a great Service to God; for this alone will con∣clude Your Grace, who are so ready, by Laws and Executions, by word and by Example, to promote the Religion of Christ, as it is taught in these Churches. I am not confident enough to desire Your Grace, for the reading this Discourse, to lay aside any one hour of Your greater Employments, which consume so much of Your Days and Nights: But I say that the Subject is greatly worthy of con∣sideration. Nihil enim inter manus habui, cui majorem sol∣licitudinem praestare deberem. And for the Book it self, I can only say what Secundus did to the wise Lupercus, Quoties ad fastidium legentium deliciásque respicio, intelligo nobis commendationem ex ipsa mediocritate libri petendam: I can commend it because it is little, and so not very troublesome. And if it could have been written according to the worthiness of the Thing treated in it, it would deserve so great a Patronage: but because it is not, it will therefore greatly need it; but it can hope for it on no other account, but because it is laid at the feet of a Princely Per∣son, who is Great and Good, and one who not only is bound by Du∣ty, but by Choice hath obliged Himself to do advantages to any wor∣thy Instrument of Religion. But I have detain'd Your Grace so long in my Address, that Your Pardon will be all the Favour which ought to be hop'd for by

