



MY LORD,
IT is an Apocryphal saying, but yet a true one, Truth is greatest of all: those who have others in Subjection unto them, are them∣selves to become Subject to it. We yeeld up our outward man to men, and they can command no more, but Truth commands our inwards.
This glorious Truth dwels not in the wisdom of the wise, nor in the godliness of the godly, nor in any creature-impulsions, though ever so forcble, which have no rule but their own; but in the blessed word alone; where truth hath pitched its Tabernacle; and the way to be acquainted with it, is through the help of the Spirit of Truth, unsealing the Book, opening our understandings to understand the Scriptures.
The knowledge of this Truth, The great Revealer of secrets hath thought good to impart to his people, not all at once, but by degrees: and so the several ages of the Church have had their several manifestations of truth; a peece of truth coming forth in one age, a peece more in the age following, a peece more in the age following that: God thus by degrees enlightning his people, as they are able to bear it; who, should the Sun rise upon them all at once, would be dazled, not enlightned.
As the workings of the mystery of iniquity on the one
hand, or Gods, dispensations of providence on the other, have risen higher in any age, so have also Gods dispensa∣tions of truth, to the end, his in every age might from principles of truth, be led up to renounce the one, and own) and imbrace the other.
Hence, those things which later ages look upon as low and poor things, not worth contending for, were great things in former ages, because the Truths of that age: And contrariwise, those things which former ages could not have born with, had they been revealed, may be the necessary discoveries of ages since, because the Truths of these times,
Hence likewise it is a marifest with holding the truth in unrighteousness, and a declaration to the world of a compliance with Antichrist, to confine, either by penal Laws, threats, or practices, the people of God in this age, to the Truth or Truths of the former age. Yea those that love the Truth ought not to suffer themselves fr love or fear of men in this case to be confined. Had the people of God in the age before us contented themselves to have preached the precious truths of Christs Priestly Office, and out of obedience to the Wills and Commands of the then Ruling Powers surceased any farther enquiry, how had the blessed Truths of Christ, as King in his Chur∣ches, been discovered? If Christ hath yet farther and higher Truths to make known, and the dispensers of truth shall suffer Bonds to be laid upon them, how shall the will of God at this day in the revelation of truth be perfor∣med?
The wisdom of a Christian man who would serve God in his Generation is to enquire into the particular Truth of the age he lives in; for it is a thing much more accep∣table to a Friend, when he hah some great design in hand, to serve him in that, than to serve him in another thing; but he that neither knows his friends mind, nor his design, cannot serve him in it.

The Truth of the age, although the matter of it is to, be looked for in the Word, and no new thing contrary thereunto to be admitted, (the word without any addi∣tions being compleat in all knowledge, able to make the man of God perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works; and if there appear to us to be a defect in this thing or that, the defect is in our understandings, not in the word) yet in regard the word hath no where told us that the revelation of this truth, belongs to this age, the revelation of that, to that; We are therefore by some other Rules to make up a judgement, which amongst the manifold truths of the word, is the Truth of the age we live in. Now among many I could name, those which I judge the safest are,
1 An observation of the time, and a comparing there∣with the Prophecies relating to that time.
2 The dispensations of the age, Gods truth, and his workings going together.
3 The general opposition that is made by men of the world, carnal Professors, yea Saints themselves (so far as they have espoused a sinful or worldly interest) against this or that truth: for it is a thing of universal observation, that the most opposed truth in any age, hath ever been the truth of that age.
Neglect of looking into this Truth of the Generation, is that fatal Rock upon which many worthy Instruments in all ages have split themselves; and should search be made after instances of this kind, the names of not a few might be produced, who did run well at first, and were lights and helps to others; yet after all, have concluded, like the bright Sun setting in a cloud.
That the great truth of Christs Kingdom over the world, judging the Beast, &c. is the truth of this Gene∣ration, is so manifestly clear, (the former Rules, with o∣thers of a like nature being seriously considered) as that it
would be but an adding light to the Sun, here to give de∣monstration of it.
It being so; I shall take the boldness (craving leave a while not to know your power or greatness, nor any pri∣vate or personal engagements, (which yet I remember with thankfulness) having begged it of the Lord, and it is still my request, that neither fear nor favor might make me unfaithful in the dispensation of truth according to my talent) to be plain with your Highness, not in mine own behalf, nor in the behalf of any party at this day in Eng∣land, whom to gratifie in a case of this nature, is a thing my soul desires to abhor, for he that pleaseth men, cannot be the servant of Christ; but in the behalf of that cause, which my heart is inwardly perswaded is Jesus Christs, to whom I could not be faithful, should I now be silent; ha∣ving this hope, that that heart which once had in it such a flame of love to the cause of Christ, and was so zealous of the work of God in the world, and against the Beast, as that thereby many were provoked, cannot but yet have some sparks of this holy fire alive in it; and that there is yet in your Highness an ear to hear what the Holy Spirit saith in the word, if so be the sound be certain and distinct, tho but a Child blow the Trumpet Or if not, yet that herein I shall discharge a du∣ty, in my own apprehension incumbent upon me, and e∣very of Gods people, so far as they have light, namely, to inform your Highness what Christ at this day expects from you, according to which he will account with you: and if what is written be truth it is you duty to hear it; yea, where is but an appearance of truth, if you shall without diligent trial either neglect or reject it, though the grounds upon which you may perhaps so do, may serve to answer Conscience a while, yet will they not answer the Lord another day; who will account with you, not as with others, but according to that Talent of light you have
had, and is held forth unto you; the professions you have made before many of his people, and the opportunities you have. And therefore, my Lord, as it is now no time for those, who either love the Lord Jesus, or your Highness, to flatter you, or speak their fears mincingly; So let me here say, what not long fince I told your Highness in a more private way, That I do verily beleeve the thing is already manifest to the Lord, and the day is not far off, in which it shall be to your Highness also, who are your most faithful Friends, whether those that now hang up their Harps, (though they may be but as one Micaiah to 400 false Prophets) or those that are singing their Songs, of which latter sort (I mean, for the greater part of them) I may for the truth of the thing, I am sure, without of∣fence say, in the Apostles phrase, onely adding a word. They (who never yet loved you truly, now) zealously af∣fect you, but not well, yea they would exclude you that you might affect them, and serve their designs. I would to God I could speak otherwise, and that private cryes might have prevented this publick bearing witness, which though I had no other motive, yet ingenuity, did I not consider that when it tends to hinder in the Lords work, it is no longer a vertue, but a vice to be mortified, would have disswaded me from. The love of the meanest Saint is precious to me, the favor of your Highness much more; but in these divided times, offering many temp∣tations of this nature, I have often remembred the case as it stood betwixt Christ and Peter, Math. 16.21, 22, 23. who, when Peter by his love and affection would have put him by his Fathers work, Christ grew offended even at Peters love, and did abandon it.
My Lord, if ever the Mystery of Iniquity wrought spiritually, it doth at this day; And no wonder, for a fear and dread of the Witnesses is fallen upon the Beast, whose blow that he may escape, he would now (if that will do
it) enter into a high form of Saintship; and indeed who looks for Antichrist (take him either as he is the whole Body, or as he is this o that part) in his last state in any other Garbe, than the form of a gloribus aint, though he may have read the Book of the Revelations, yet is he still to learn the Mystery of the Beast there revea∣led. Now is the man of sin struggling for his Kingdom, which he will uphold as long as he can; but though the Dragon, Beast, and False Prophet joyn heads and hands together, yet shall they not bee able to keep it up long, no, not half so many years, as some dream of Ages; for God hath numbered Babylons Kingdom, and in a manner finished it; the Beast and the Whores or the Beast and the False Prophet, are already weighed in the Ballances, and found wanting; the Kingdom shall (as most certainly, so) suddenly be divided, broken, and given to another.
And as a clear evdence hereof, we have the signs of the times grounded upon the wod, which Christ did refer the Generation of the Pharisees and Sadduces to, when they would know of him a sign, Matth. 16.3. O yee Hypo∣crites, can yee not discern the signs of the times? What signs of the times had they? Answ. Two evident signs founded upon Scripture. 1. The departure of the Scep∣ter from Judah, in Herods then swaying it, who was an Idumean. 2. The expirations of Daniels seventy weeks, the limited time of the Messiahs appearance; By either of these they might have concluded that truth they opposed, and received him for their Messiah, whom they rejected: but this they did not, but must have farther sign yet, for which cause Christ calls them Hypocrites, a wick∣ed and an adulterous Generation.
My Lord, Let me here say, The Lord in his Word hath left signs of this time. I am now speaking of, no less clear and demonstrative than were the signs of tha;
and although I am of all the most unworthy to be acquain∣ted with them, or any thing of the mind of the Lord, yet is it my perswasion, that some of them are discovered in the following discourse; and he that shall without preju∣dice read what in the close is written of the time, and com∣pare it with the things themselves specified throughout the Book, may possibly be of my mind, at least not censure me for thinking so. And if now (My Lord) as persons wil∣ling to be blinded, we shall shut our eyes to those signs of the times God hath left us in the word and ask for o∣ther signs to know his work by, and when we are called to do it, it is an evident token, even from our Saviors own words, of an Adulterous and Apostatizing gene∣ration; I had almost said, and if I had, his words would have born me out, of an hypocritical heart.
My Lord, Let me not be made an offender for this plain dealing; if I am, so long as the Lord shall keep my feet in the way of my duty, it shall not trouble me, and I have hope that in this I have had his merciful guidance, and have not as yet stepped out of that way: For if in the day when Christ is going up to his Kingdom, the stones would not hold their peace, should not the Children cry Hosanna, then surely it is a duty very incumbent upon the Saints at this day (there being nothing more obvious than that Christ is well onwards upon his march to his King∣dom) not to be silent, but although they may be rebuked, yea, dealt worse by, for so doing, yet to follow their King with acclamations, which is all that such poor creatures as we are can do for him. Nay, if it be a duty to expect from God returns of our prayers, then it is also a duty to have inspection even into publick affairs so far as the managing of these may have a tendency to the furtherance or hinde∣rance of those good things, which we hope we have been graciously holpen by the Lord, and also had some favorable smiles of his acceptance in seeking his face for. Nay, if it be a
duty to observe and follow God in the way of his visible dispensations; or on the contrary, a sin to be of a sluggish temper, not regarding the works of the Lord, nor consi∣dering the operation of his hands, then of necessity must there be a reflection upon the publick actings of instru∣ments, either in a way of owning or disowning, without which no observation can be made of Gods dispensations, or our duty in this respect. Nay lastly; If it be a duty to mourn for the sins of Rulers, to mourn when Christs cause lies bleeding, then certainly it cannot be evill to have in∣spection into the one, and the other.
And notwithstanding it is a more precious thing in a Chri∣stian to be found watching in his own heart and ways, than to be prying into the waies and actings of others, for which cause so far as this is neglected, the common ac∣cusation laid to the charge of those who contend for the Kingdom of Christ without, as if they did neglect the Kingdom of Christ within, is a thing most just: Yet let it withall be considered, that the doing of the one, layes no necessity upon a man of a neglect of the other; for if there be but any thing of truth in that opinion, it will be hard to say, God hath laid a necessity upon us to neglect our hearts, whilst (which yet is a thing he wills us to do) we are seeking after his truth: And if through that cor∣ruption that is within, any man should so do, doth not this evill attend him, as well in other studies as this? by consequence therefore from this principle, no truth must be inquired into. But I have observed in this day a close design of the Devil, driven on under this vizard, and no wonder, for Satan himself is now transformed into an An∣gel of light; and I can the better speak it, having felt, when time was, this temptation, and thereby learned these who Lessons.
1 To discern somewhat of the depths of Satan, viz. That he perceiving the work that God is about to do in
the world, and knowing full well how acceptable a thing i is to God (as well as advantagious to the work it self) to have his Children following him in his great designs; and how provoking the thing will be if by any sleight he can but make them like Peter, cross the Lord in his way, and thwart God in his work; (God (as a man in like case would do) resenting one error of this nature worse than forty of another kind) and knowing also that to say to them in plain language, neglect this, or oppose that, without some very specious and glorious pretence, would be no boot; he therefore now comes forth as the most glorious Saint that ever came into the world, and tels them, that they must look to their own hearts, for this is a blessed thing; and therefore they must beware of such and such things, for if they once meddle with them, then farewel their hearts; and to set a better face upon the business, whilst he disswades these, he sets on work some that are marked in their fore-heads for his children, giddily and furiously to broach, and set on foot those very things and designs, he disswades the other from, and then saith he, now see whe∣ther this generation of men go, and where you had been had you followed them.
2 I have learned likewise to discern somewhat of the depths of the heart, which would exercise the highest pride, under a pretext of great holiness and humility: for it being indeed a most blessed thing to attend to inward purity and mortification, wherein lies the glory of a Chri∣stian, now saith the heart, how strangely do such and such contend for this outward thing and the other? well, I will follow none of them, but I will attend to the mortification of the inward man, I am sure in that I shall be right. Now with this conceit the man goeth on secretly, blessing, and lift∣ing up himself, and he turns him and looks him round, and loe all are out of the way but he. Pride, as it quickly grows upon such a root, so is it more abominable to God,
by how much it is more spiritual, then that which may yee discover it self more outwardly. Yet let me say thus doth the Devil, and mans heart at this day marvellously deceive many precious Saints in this thing, who are apt to think, that they cannot mind these things and as they should study and look to their hearts too. Whereas indeed, it argues a Childish temper in a man, to think that he cannot learn the things of his heart, or keep the same up for God, any longer then it is exercised in those truths which more im∣mediately concern the heart and life, and have their foun∣dation in Christian experience; as if those truths which lie out of the reach of my experience as a Christian, and more imediately concern Gods Cause and Glory without, had not in them as natural a tendency to give a soul a sight of God, and as great an efficacy to cause the heart to cleave to God, and walk humbly with him, as truths that lye within the rach of my experience. Nay, I will here be bold to say, that that soul who faithfully followeth God in those things wherein his glory is more immediately concerned, shall learn more of his heart as it were by the by, and have the same better ordered, then shall that man, who neglecting this, makes that his continual study; for it is not by our poring that we come to know our hearts, nor by our strug∣gling to mend them, so much, as indeed by laying them in that path, where Christ in this or that day more common∣ly goes, and waiting there to receive life and strength from him.
And farther (My Lord) as for contenting themselves with their own liberty, (which is the great thing objected to us, our injoyment whereof as yet, is indeed a mercy beyond what the people of God far more deserving in former ages have had) the people of God could at this day do it, were it not but that the sufferings of Christs cause (their prayers having been long going forth, and their hopes raised) are now more unto them than
any sufferings of their own. And as Daniel first, and Nehemiah afterwards, though they for their own parti∣culars were well in the Court of the King of Persia, yet could not be well because it went not well with Gods cause at that day; so notwithstanding Gods people have their lierty, and in that respect, as to their particulars are well, yet if they see the work of the time at a stand, let it not be grievous, or be imputed to discontent, in case they mourn as did Daniel look sad, as did Nehemiah, groan and complain they are sick. And sometimes I have thought, that when Daniel did mourn and afflict himself before God the second time, three full weeks, Chap. 10.2. upon the account that the work of God in that age was put to a stand, by the power (as is by good men judged) of Camby∣ses, Cyrus Son, reigning while his Father was abroad in the wars, that had Cambyses been a good man, or a man like∣ly to have been prevailed with, Daniel undoubtedty would (as did the Prophets before him, frequently to the good Kings of Israel) have made other applications in that case, (and accounted the doing thereof his duty) than barely to the Lord alone. Nay, it is a mercy to Gover∣nours themselves to have applications in things of this na∣ture made unto them; for, Woe be to those Governors, to whom Gods people fearing, or being without hopes in making address, when they soesee sufferings coming up∣on his cause, retire themselves and spread the affliction of their souls before the Lord alone.
Yet let me also say, it is a thing most certain, and that which is a prejudice to the very cause in the hearts of many, and ought to be matter of grief to all, that Saints in most places at this day, whilst they are crying that their Fa∣thers work might go on, do act too much like men, and shew too much of their own spirits; yea, are very consused as to the making out the things themselves would have; and moreover, have many falling into their party, that injure the
very cause they stand up in: But I earnestly wish it might be considered, that although the child when it cries, cannot alwayes give a rational account of the cause of its so doing, yea possibly may oftentimes discover much peevishness and passion in crying, yet doth it not ever cry without a cause; and the wisdome of the Father is not so intent upon the weaknesses of the child in crying, as to find out the cause why it cries.
And farther, should not many and great weaknesses appear in those who stand up for Christs Kingdome, how should his Kingdome come without observation? no grea∣ter observation than of holiness, if so be the appearance of that in them were to be eminently visible. John came with much outward Holinesse, and hee came with great observation. Yea whether when the strife rose first betwixt the Brethren of the Presbyterian and Congre∣gational way in England, did not many who yet had truth, and Christ did afterwards own before the world, strive in many things like foolish peevish Children? and whether in the times of the Apostles, throughout the Primi∣tive ages, and almost ever since, have not the croud of errors alwayes run into that side where truth hath been? the rea∣son is, because the grand enemies design is to sow his tares in his enemies filed, his own, where as yet his title is not questioned, nor shaken, he will not meddle with.
These things therefore (with others of a like nature) are not to be made definitive Conclusions as to a cause, which oftentimes God permits for the trial of Rulers pa∣tience, his peoples faith, and the carrying on of his own cause in a cloud, which is the way he goes in, in most of his works of wonder. Governors because of these miscar∣riages may inflict civil penalties if they will, yet let it bee considered, that the great King is now coming to his Throne, and there is not a Ruler in the world, but hath his standing only protempore, to whom as all must give an account, so
must they shortly surrender their Crowns, or they shall be taken from them; and if any of the subjects of this mighty King, whilst they see their King upon his march, and are followed with hourly intelligence that he is neer, and such and such things must be done in order to his en∣tertainment, by speaking some words for their King, that things may be in a readiness, and by giving abroad what intelligence they have to that end, shall offend, and suffer any thing for it, let it be remembred, that when the righ∣teous King is sate upon his Throne, these things will not be husht up, but it shall then be known, whether such as shall so do, exceeded their Commission, or not, did their own, or the Lord Christs will.
My Lord, That through multitude of words, I may neither tire your patience, nor incur the censure of being one that loves to hear himself speak, I shall wave some things, which otherwise I would yet have added, and draw to a Conclusion, only leaving with your Highness three or four plain, sober, and in my opinion necessary words.
1 Let your Highness oft remember, and set before you the example of that good man Asa, who though he were a man of much zeal for God, and his Worship, de∣stroying the Altars of the strange gods, and the High pla∣ces, breaking down the Images, cutting down the Groves, &c. a man of a tender conscience, therefore re∣moved his Mother from being Queen, because she made an Idol in a Grove; a man of much faith in the field, by which faith of his, he vanquished the huge host of Zerah the Ethiopian; yet having made one eminent turn from God (as one turn from God makes way for another) he is afterwards in a rage at reproof, and casts the Prophet into prison that reproved him, and at the very same time op∣presseth the people of the LAND; and after all (what will Sin bring even a good man to?) When Gods hand is upon him for this, he seems as a man stubborn, and seeks not to
the Lord, but to the Physicians; which that it may never be your Highness case, is my prayer.
2 Let your hand be no way lifted up against any of the Saints in this Nation It was a good Position laid down by Dr. Goodwin (in a Sermon preached upon Psal. 105 14, 15. before the Parliament that was, at the time when the Brethren of the Presbyterian way had the turning of the Wheel) and as well proved, viz. That the dealing well or ill with the Saints, is, and hath ever been, the great interest of States and Kingdoms, that on which their wel∣fare, or ruine depends. All Sodome made not the hands of those four Kings Abraham routed, Gen. 14. so weak, as their fingring one Lot.
3 Pursue not too hotly every righteous principle. It is an Observation of Dr. Owens, worthy never to be for∣gotten (preached (when time was) in a Sermon of his up∣on Ezek. 17.24. to the aforesaid powers) concerning prin∣ciples that men take up, his words are these page 21.22. The most tremendous judgement of God in this world is the hardning the hearts of men. Now, saith he, first, Look on Pharaoh, of whom it is most signally spoken, that God hardned his heart: How did the Lord accomplish this? Pharaoh settles himself upon as righteous principles as ever any of the Sons of men could do: One is, that it be∣longs to the chief Ruler of a Nation to see to the profit and glory of that Nation. What more righteous principle is there in the world? Hence he concludes, that if i be in∣cumbent on him to see that the Realm receive no detri∣ment, he must not let the people go by whom they re∣ceived so many great advantages: God confirms his heart in these principles, which are good in themselves but (saith the Doctor) abominable when taken up against the mind and providence of God; Hence he, and his, perished in their principles, acting against the appearance of God. Secondly, It is also said of Sihon the King of the Amo∣rites,
that his heart was hardned, that he would not let the people go through his Land. How I pray? even by ad∣hering to that wise principle. That it is not meet to let a potent Enemy into the bowels of a people; and this made way for his ruine: Thus (saith he) it is with many; they fix on principles, good in general, and in their season. Old bounds must not be broken up; Order must not be di∣sturbed: Let God appear never so eminently, so mightily, they will keep to their principle, what is this, but judicial hardness? And this is one reason why the actings of God in such a day as this, are so unsuited to the expectations of men; they square his works to the interests and principles, which it will not answer. Hitherto Dr. Owen.
4 Take heed of that ungodly principle sprung up of late (the contrary to which some call a State-Herene, though I am sure the principle is a Scripture-Herefie) viz. That godliness in a Magistrate or Civil Officer, is but a se∣condary qualification; natural accomplishments and en∣dowments being the primary, for which therefore a man is to be intrusted with this power, rather than the other. I cannot but wonder how any who profess the Name of Christ, much more who profess themselves to have been faithful to his cause, should together therewith profess such an unchrist an, yea Machiavilian principle, which,
First, Lies point-blank against the promises made to the last dayes, which assure, 1 That God will restore his peoples Judges as at the first, Isa. 1.26. But were Judges at the first, Moses, Joshua, &c. such? 2 That their Go∣vernors should be of themselves, Jer. 30.21. But may we call such of themselves?
Secondly, Leaves out (as of little worth comparatively) the main qualifications of that divine pattern, by which the first Rulers that ever were so made by men amongsh Gods own people were made, Exod. 18.21.
Thirdly, Makes null that Divine Maxime, 2 Sam.
23.3. He that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God; for how can such rule in the fear of God, who have no fear of God before their eyes? which is one character of every natural man, Rom. 3.18.
Fourthly, Layes an unavoidable necessity of a conti∣nued judgement upon a people: For if it be a judge∣ment to have Rulers that know not God, because such make the people to erre, Isa. 3.12. chap. 9.16. then if such for their natural endowments are to be chosen, of ne∣cessity must a judgement lye upon that people, over, or amongst whom they are set.
Fifthly, Opens a door to all persecution, by putting the Civil Sword into the hands of the Seed of the Serpent (for better cannot be said of a meer moral man) which from the beginning hath had a natural enmity to the Seed of the Woman. My Lord, Bear with the boldness of it, if I say, That in case your Highness be found steering your course, and laying out your power by this crooked rule, know assuredly, that Christ will suddenly take (though how I know not) your power from you, and give it to one that shall lay it out otherwise.
I shall not multiply many more words, save to add, that in case any expression, either in this, or the following Dis∣course, savour of the spirit of man (which my self allows not, have kept a watch against, yet may be guilty of) I do in that humbly crave your Highness pardon; but as for the matter and substance of those things I have written, I ask none, my Conscience bearing me witness that I have afferted nothing, but what according to my present per∣swasions (not grounded upon this or that particular Text (which is a deceiving way) but by comparing the whole of Prophecies together) is the truth of Christ, yea the truth of the time; though yet (through mercy) I have drunk in no such conceit of my own knowledge, as though it were more than in part; not do I impose upon your
Highness conscience, or the consciences of any, a belief of my principles, any farther then Scripture and right reason doth approve them; yet would have none on the other side condemn them (as this age is apt to do) upon the account of this, or that single Text, till he hath compared the whole of Prophecies together, in doing which, he may perhaps see my reason of stating things as I have done, which upon every occasion I could not bring forth, and therewith a full answer to his own doubt. And farther, I have not in this work knowingly stretched any one Text, beyond what I have judged its due bounds, or forced an interpretation to reach any Party a blow: Nor have I on the other side with-held any peece of the truth (so judged by me) lying in any Text; nor minced any Interpretation to spare any party a blow: As I would be loath to strike any my self, for my blows can do me no good, and them little hurt; so would I not have a hand in keeping off that blow that truth will strike, whosoever it fall upon.
And although a Discourse of this nature would bet∣ter have become a graver Pen than mine, and possibly from such a one been sooner hearkned to (pride, rash∣ness, and headiness, having been the coutinual accu∣sation laid against young men, and not alwayes ground∣less) yet seeing the Aged silent, and perceiving through the light the Lord of his grace hath larely given me to see, by a cleer opening sundry Prophecies, which not long since were mysteries to me, the cause of Christ in sore travel, either through an ignorance of what Gods De∣signs are at this day, or somewhat worse in those that should manage it; I conceived my self (though others might better do it, yet at this time) called to speak, and to speak plainly. Elihu, though a young man, went, and that with success, over the head of such a temptation, in a less case. That a like success and
blessing from above may accompany this, is his Prayer who is,

