



MY LORD,
IN this great Storm which hath dasht the Vessel of the Church all in pieces I have been cast upon the Coast of Wales, and in a little Boat thought to have enjoyed that rest and quietness which in England in a greater I could not hope for. Here I cast Anchor, and thinking to ride safely, the Storm followed me with so impetuous violence, that it broke a Cable, and I lost my Anchor: And here again I was exposed to the mercy of the Sea, and the gentleness of an Element that could neither distinguish things nor persons. And but that he who stilleth the raging of the Sea, and the noise of his Waves, and the madness of his people, had provided a Plank for me, I had been lost to all the opportunities of content or study. But I know not whether I have been more preserved by the courtesies of my friends, or the gentleness and mer∣cies of a noble Enemy: . And now since I have come ashore I have been gathering a few sticks to warm me, a few books to entertain my thoughts, and divert them from the perpetuall Meditation of my private Troubles and the publick Dyscrasy: but those which I could obtain were so few and so impertinent, and unusefull to any great purposes, that I began to be sad upon a new stock, and full of apprehension that I should live unprofitably, and die obscurely, and be forgotten, and my bones thrown into some common char∣nell-house, without any name or note to distinguish me from those who onely ser∣ved their Generation by filling the number of Citizens, and who could pretend to no thanks or reward from the Publick beyond jus trium liberorum. While I was troubled with these thoughts, and busie to find an opportunity of do∣ing some good in my small proportion, still the cares of the publick did so intervene, that it was as impossible to separate my design from relating to the present, as to exempt myself from the participation of the common calamity; still half my thoughts was (in despite of all my diversions and arts of avocation) fixt upon and mingled with the present concernments; so that besides them I could not go. Now because the great Question is concerning Religion, and in that also my Scene lies, I resolved here to fix my considerations; especially when I observed the ways of promoting the several Opinions which now are busie to be such, as besides that they were most troublesome to me, and such as I could by no means be friends withall, they were also such as to my understanding did the most apparently disserve their ends whose design in advancing their own Opinions was pretended for Religion. For as contrary as cruelty is to mer∣cy, as tyranny to charity, so is war and bloudshed to the meekness and gentle∣ness of Christian Religion. And however that there are some exterminating spirits who think God to delight in humane sacrifices, as if that Oracle—  had come from the Father of Spirits: yet if they were capable of cool and tame Homilies, or would hear men of other opinions

give a quiet account without invincible resolutions never to alter their perswa∣sions, I am very much perswaded it would not be very hard to dispute such men into mercies and compliances and Tolerations mutuall, such, I say, who are zealous for Jesus Christ, then whose Doctrine never was any thing more mer∣cifull and humane, whose lessons were softer then Nard or the juice of the Candian Olive. Vpon the first apprehension, I design'd a Discourse to this pur∣pose with as much greediness as if I had thought it possible with my Arguments to have perswaded the rough and hard-handed Souldiers to have disbanded presently: For I had often thought of the Prophecy that in the Gospell our Swords should be turned into plow-shares, and our Spears into pruning-hooks; I knew that no tittle spoken by God's Spirit could return unperform'd and ineffectual, and I was certain that such was the excellency of Christ's Doctrine, that if men could obey it, Christians should never war one against another. In the mean time I considered not that it was praedictio consilii, non eventûs, till I saw what men were now doing, and ever had done since the heats and primitive fervours did cool, and the love of interests swell'd higher then the love of Christianity: but then on the other side I began to fear that whatever I could say would be as ineffectual as it could be reasonable. For if those excellent words which our Blessed Master spake could not charm the tumult of our spirits, I had little reason to hope that one of the meanest and most ignorant of his servants could advance the end of that which he calls his great, and his old, and his new Commandment, so well as the excellency of his own Spirit and discourses could. And yet since he who knew every event of things, and the success and efficacy of every Doctrine, and that very much of it to most men, and all of it to some men, would be ineffectuall, yet was pleased to consign our duty, that it might be a direction to them that would, and a con∣viction and a Testimony against them that would not obey; I thought it might not misbecome my duty and endeavours to plead for peace and charity, and for∣giveness and permissions mutuall: although I had reason to believe that such is the iniquity of men, and they so indisposed to receive such impresses, that I had as good plow the Sands, or till the Air, as perswade such Doctrines which de∣stroy mens interests, and serve no end but the great end of a happy eternity, and what is in order to it. But because the events of things are in God's disposition, and I knew them not, and because if I had known my good purposes would be totally ineffectuall as to others, yet my own designation and purposes would be of advantage to myself, who might from God's mercy expect the retribution which he is pleased to promise to all pious intendments; I resolved to encounter with all Objections, and to doe something to which I should be determined by the con∣sideration of the present Distemperatures and necessities, by my own thoughts, by the Questions and Scruples, the Sects and names, the interests and animo∣sities which at this day and for some years past have exercised and disquieted Christendom.
Thus far I discours'd myself into imployment, and having come thus far I knew not how to get farther; for I had heard of a great experience, how diffi∣cult it was to make Brick without Straw▪ and here I had even seen my design blasted in the bud, and I despaired in the Calends of doing what I purposed in the Ides before. For I had no Books of my own here, nor any in the voicinage; and but that I remembred the result of some of those excellent Discourses I had heard your Lordship make when I was so happy as in private to gather up what your

temperance and modesty forbids to be publick, I had come in praelia inermis, and like enough might have far'd accordingly. I had this onely advantage besides, that I have chosen a subject in which, if my own reason does not abuse me, I needed no other books or aids then what a man carries with him on horse∣back, I mean, the common principles of Christianity, and those  which men use in the transactions of the ordinary occurrences of civil society: and upon the strength of them and some other collateral assistances I have run through it utcunque, and the sum of the following Discourses is nothing but the sense of these words of Scripture, That since we know in part,1 Cor. 13. and pro∣phesie in part, and that now we see through a glass darkly, we should not despise or contemn persons not so knowing as ourselves,Rom. 14. but him that is weak in the faith we should receive, but not to doubtfull disputations; therefore certainly to charity, and not to vexations, not to those which are the idle effects of impertinent wranglings. And provided they keep close to the foundation, which is Faith and Obedience, let them build upon this foundation matter more or less precious, yet if the foundation be intire, they shall be saved with or without loss. And since we profess ourselves servants of so meek a Master, and Disciples of so charitable an Institute,Ephes. 4.2, 3. Let us walk worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffer∣ing, forbearing one another in love; for this is the best endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit, when it is fast tied in the bond of peace. And although it be a duty of Christianity, that we all speak the same thing,1 Cor. 1.10. that there be no divisions among us, but that we be perfectly joyned together in the same mind, and in the same judgement; yet this unity is to be estimated according to the unity of Faith, in things necessary, in matters of Creed, and Articles fundamental: for as for other things, it is more to be wished then to be hoped for. There are some doubtfull Disputations, and in such the Scribe,Rom. 14. the Wise, the Disputer of this world, are most commonly very far from certainty, and many times from truth. There are diversity of perswasions in matters adiapho∣rous, as meats and drinks, and holy days, &c. and both parties, the affirmative and the negative, affirm and deny with innocence enough; for the observer and he that observes not intend both to God; and God is our common Master, we are all fellow-servants, and not the judge of each other in matters of conscience or doubtfull Disputation; and every man that hath faith must have it to him∣self before God, but no man must either in such matters judge his brother or set him at nought: but let us follow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edifie another. And the way to doe that is not by knowledge, but by charity; for knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth.1 Cor. 8.1. And since there is not in every man the same knowledge,Vers. 7. but the consciences of some are weak;1 Cor. 10.29. as my liberty must not be judged of another man's weak conscience, so must not I please myself so much in my right opinion, but I must also take order that his weak conscience be not offended or despised: for no man must seek his own, but every man another's wealth.Ibid. v. 33. And although we must contend earnestly for the Faith, yet above all things we must put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness. And therefore this contention must be with arms fit for the Christian warfare, the sword of the Spirit,Colos. 3.14 and the shield of Faith, and preparation of the Gospel of peace in stead of shoes, and a hel∣met of salvation; but not with other arms: for a Church-man must not be , a striker; for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but spiritual,

and the persons that use them ought to be gentle, and easie to be intreated; and we must give an account of our faith to them that ask us with meekness and humility, for so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. These and thousands more to the same purpose are the Doctrines of Christianity, whose sense and intendment I have prosecuted in the following Discourse, being very much displeased that so many Opinions and new Doctrines are commenc'd among us; but more troubled that every man that hath an Opinion thinks his own and other mens Salvation is concern'd in its maintenance; but most of all, that men should be persecuted and afflicted for disagreeing in such Opinions which they cannot with sufficient grounds obtrude upon others necessarily, because they cannot propound them infallibly, and because they have no warrant from Scripture so to doe. For if I shall tie other men to believe my Opinion, because I think I have a place of Scrip∣ture which seems to warrant it to my understanding, why may not he serve up another dish to me in the same dress, and exact the same task of me to believe the contradictory? And then, since all the Hereticks in the world have offered to prove their Articles by the same means by which true Believers propound theirs, it is necessary that some separation, either of Doctrine or of persons, be clearly made, and that all pretences may not be admitted, nor any just Allegations be rejected; and yet that in some other Questions, whether they be truly or falsly pretended, if not evidently or demonstratively, there may be considerations had to the persons of men and to the Laws of charity, more then to the trium∣phing in any Opinion or Doctrine not simply necessary. Now because some Do∣ctrines are clearly not necessary, and some are absolutely necessary, why may not the first separation be made upon this difference, and Articles necessary be onely urged as necessary, and the rest left to men indifferently, as they were by the Scripture indeterminately? And it were well if men would as much consider themselves as the Doctrines, and think that they may as well be deceived by their own weakness, as perswaded by the Arguments of a Doctrine which other men as wise call inevident. For it is a hard case that we should think all Papists and Anabaptists and Sacramentaries to be fools and wicked persons; certainly among all these Sects there are very many wise men and good men, as well as erring. And although some zeals are so hot, and their eyes so inflamed with their ardours, that they do not think their Adversaries look like other men; yet certainly we find by the results of their discourses, and the trans∣actions of their affairs of civil society, that they are men that speak and make Syllogisms, and use Reason, and reade Scripture: and although they do no more understand all of it then we do; yet they endeavour to understand as much as concerns them, even all that they can, even all that concerns repentance from dead works, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore methinks this also should be another consideration distinguishing the persons: for if the persons be Christians in their lives, and Christians in their profession, if they acknowledge the Eternall Son of God for their Master and their Lord, and live in all relations as becomes persons making such professions, why then should I hate such persons whom God loves, and who love God, who are partakers of Christ, and Christ hath a title to them, who dwell in Christ, and Christ in them, because their understandings have not been brought up like mine, have not had the same Masters, they have not met with the same books, nor the same com∣pany, or have not the same interest, or are not so wise, or else are wiser, that is, (for some reason or other which I neither do understand nor ought to blame,)

have not the same Opinions that I have, and do not determine their School-Questions to the sense of my Sect or interest?
But now I know before-hand, that those men who will endure none but their own Sect will make all manner of attempts against these purposes of charity and compliance, and say I or doe I what I can, will tell all their Pro∣selytes that I preach indifferency of Religion, that I say it is no matter how we believe, nor what they profess, but that they may comply with all Sects, and doe violence to their own Consciences, that they may be saved in all Religions, and so make way for a colluvies of Heresies, and by consequence destroy all Religion. Nay, they will say worse then all this; and, but that I am not used to their phrases and forms of declamation, I am perswaded I might represent fine Tra∣gedies before-hand. And this will be such an Objection, that although I am most confident I shall make it apparent to be as false and scandalous as the Objectors themselves are zealous and impatient; yet besides that, I believe the Objection will come where my Answers will not come, or not be understood, I am also confident that, in defiance and incuriousness of all that I shall say, some men will persist pertinaciously in the accusation, and deny my conclusion in de∣spite of me. Well, but however I will try.
And first I answer, that whatsoever is against the foundation of Faith, or contrary to good life and the laws of obedience, or destructive to humane soci∣ety, and the publick and just interests of bodies politick, is out of the limits of my Question, and does not pretend to compliance or Toleration: So that I allow no indifferency, nor any countenance to those Religions whose principles destroy Government, nor to those Religions (if there be any such) that teach ill life, nor do I think that any thing will now excuse from belief of a fundamental Article, except stupidity or sottishness and natural inability. This alone is sufficient answer to this vanity, but I have much more to say.
Secondly, The intendment of my Discourse is, that permissions should be in Questions speculative, indeterminable, curious and unnecessary; and that men would not make more necessities then God made, which indeed are not many. The fault I find and seek to remedy is, that men are so dogmaticall and reso∣lute in their Opinions, and impatient of others disagreeings in those things wherein is no sufficient means of union and determination; but that men should let Opinions and Problems keep their own forms, and not be obtruded as Axioms, nor Questions in the vast collection of the systeme of Divinity be adop∣ted into the family of Faith. And I think I have reason to desire this.
Thirdly, It is hard to say that he who would not have men put to death, or punished corporally, for such things for which no humane Authority is sufficient either for cognizance or determination, or competent for infliction, that he per∣swades to an indifferency, when he refers to another Judicatory which is com∣petent, sufficient, infallible, just, and highly severe. No man or company of men can judge or punish our thoughts or secret purposes whilest they so remain: and yet it will be unequal to say, that he who owns this Doctrine preaches it lawfull to men for to think or purpose what they will. And so it is in matters of doubtfull disputation, (such as are the distinguishing Articles of most of the Sects of Christendome;) so it is in matters intellectual, (which are not cognoscible by a secular power,) in matters spiritual, (which are to be discerned by spiritual Authority, which cannot make corporal inflictions,) and in Questions inde∣terminate, (which are doubtfully propounded or obscurely, and therefore

may be in utramque partem disputed or believed:) for God alone must be Judge of these matters, who alone is Master of our Souls, and hath a dominion over humane Vnderstanding. And he that says this does not say that indiffer∣ency is perswaded, because God alone is judge of erring persons.
Fourthly, No part of this Discourse teaches or encourages variety of Sects and contradiction in Opinions, but supposes them already in being: and there∣fore since there are, and ever were, and ever will be, variety of Opinions, be∣cause there is variety of humane understandings, and uncertainty in things, no man should be too forward in determining all Questions, nor so forward in prescribing to others, nor invade that liberty which God hath left to us intire by propounding many things obscurely, and by exempting our souls and under∣standings from all power externally compulsory. So that the restraint is laid upon mens tyranny, but no licence given to mens Opinions; they are not consi∣dered in any of the Conclusions, but in the Premisses onely as an Argument to exhort to charity. So that if I perswade a licence of discrediting any thing which God hath commanded us to believe, and allow a liberty where God hath not allowed it, let it be shewn, and let the Objection press as hard as it can: but to say that men are too forward in condemning where God hath declared no sentence, nor prescribed any Rule, is to disswade from tyranny, not to encou∣rage licentiousness; is to take away a licence of judging, not to give a licence of dogmatizing what every one please, or as may best serve his turn. And for the other part of the Objection;
Fifthly, This Discourse is so far from giving leave to men to profess any thing, though they believe the contrary, that it takes order that no man shall be put to it: for I earnestly contend that another man's Opinion shall be no rule to mine, and that my Opinion shall be no snare and prejudice to myself, that men use one another so charitably and so gently, that no errour or violence tempt men to Hypocrisie; this very thing being one of the Arguments I use to perswade permissions, lest compulsion introduce Hypocrisie, and make sincerity trouble∣some and unsafe.
Sixthly, If men would not call all Opinions by the name of Religion, and su∣perstructures by the name of fundamental Articles, and all fancies by the glori∣ous appellative of Faith, this Objection would have no pretence or footing: so that it is the disease of the men, not any cause that is ministred by such precepts of charity, that makes them perpetually clamorous. And it would be hard to say that such Physicians are incurious of their Patients, and neglectfull of their health, who speak against the unreasonableness of such Empiricks that would cut off a man's head if they see but a Wart upon his cheek, or a dimple upon his chin, or any lines in his face to distinguish him from another man: the case is altogether the same, and we may as well decree a Wart to be mortal as a various Opinion in re alioqui non necessaria to be capital and damnable.
For I consider that there are but few Doctrines of Christianity that were or∣dered to be preached to all the world, to every single person, and made a necessa∣ry Article of his explicite belief: Other Doctrines which are all of them not simply necessary, are either such as are not clearly revealed, or such as are. If they be clearly revealed, and that I know so too, or may, but for my own fault, I am not to be excused: but for this I am to be left to God's judgement, unless my fault be externally such as to be cognoscible and punishable in humane Judi∣catory. But then, if it be not so revealed but that wise men and good men differ

in their opinions, it is a clear case it is not inter dogmata necessaria simplici∣ter, and then it is certain I may therefore safely disbelieve it, because I may be safely ignorant of it. For if I may with innocence be ignorant, then to know it or believe it is not simply obligatory: ignorance is absolutely inconsistent with such an obligation, because it is destructive and a plain negative to its performance: and if I doe my honest endeavour to understand it, and yet do not attain it, it is certain that it is not obligatory to me so much as by accident; for no obligation can press the person of a man if it be impossible, no man is bound to doe more then his best, no man is bound to have an excellent understanding, or to be infallible, or to be wiser then he can, for these are things that are not in his choice, and therefore not a matter of a Law, nor subject to reward and punishment. So that where ignorance of the Article is not a sin, there dis∣believing it in the right sense, or believing it in the wrong, is not a breach of any duty essentially or accidentally necessary, neither in the thing itself nor to the person; that is, he is neither bound to the Article, nor to any endeavours or antecedent acts of volition and choice: and that man who may safely be ig∣norant of the Proposition is not tied at all to search it out; and if not at all to search it, then certainly not to find it. All the obligation we are capable of is, not to be malicious or voluntarily criminal in any kind: and then if by acci∣dent we find out a Truth, we are obliged to believe it; and so will every wise or good man doe; indeed he cannot doe otherwise. But if he disbelieves an Article without malice, or design, or involuntarily, or unknowingly, it is a contradiction to say it is a sin to him who might totally have been ignorant of it: for that he believes it in the wrong sense, it is his ignorance; and it is impossible that where he hath heartily endeavoured to find out a Truth, that this endeavour should make him guilty of a sin, which would never have been laid to his charge if he had taken no pains at all. His ignorance in this case is not a fault at all; possibly it might, if there had been no endeavour to have cur'd it.
So that there is wholly a mistake in this Proposition. For true it is, there are some Propositions which if a man never hear of they will not be required of him; and they who cannot reade might safely be ignorant that Melchisedeck was King of Salem: but he who reads it in the Scripture may not safely contra∣dict it, although before that knowledge did arrive to him he might safely have been ignorant of it. But this, although it be true, is not pertinent to our Question: For in sensu diviso this is true, that which at one time a man may be ignorant of at some other time he may not disbelieve; but in sensu con∣juncto it is false; for at what and in what circumstance soever it is no sin to be ignorant, at that time and in that conjuncture it is no sin to disbelieve. And such is the nature of all Questions disputable, which are therefore not required of us to be believed in any one particular sense, because the nature of the thing is such as not to be necessary to be known at all simply and absolutely, and such is the ambiguity and cloud of its face and representment as not to be necessary so much as by accident, and therefore not to the particular sense of any one person.
And yet such is the iniquity of men, that they suck in Opinions as wild Asses do the wind, without distinguishing the wholsome from the corrupted air; and then live upon it at a venture: and when all their confidence is built upon zeal and mistake, yet therefore because they are zealous and mistaken, they are impatient of contradiction.
But besides that against this I have laid prejudice enough from the dictates of Holy Scripture, it is observable that this with its appendant degrees, I mean restraint of Prophesying, imposing upon other mens understanding, being masters of their Consciences, and lording it over their Faith, came in with the reti∣nue and train of Antichrist, that is, they came as other abuses and corruptions of the Church did, by reason of the iniquity of times, and the cooling of the first heats of Christianity, and the encrease of interest, and the abatements of Christian simplicity, when the Churche's fortune grew better, and her Sons grew worse, and some of her Fathers worst of all. For in the first three hundred years there was no sign of persecuting any man for his Opinion, though at that time there were very horrid Opinions commenced, and such which were exem∣plary and parallel enough to determine this Question: for they then were assaulted by new Sects which destroyed the common principles of nature, of Christianity, of innocence and publick society: and they who used all the means Christian and Spiritual for their disimprovement and conviction, thought not of using corporal force, otherwise then by blaming such proceedings. And there∣fore I do not onely urge their not doing it as an Argument of the unlawfulness of such proceeding, but their defying it and speaking against such practices, as unreasonable and destructive of Christianity. For so Tertullian is express, Humani juris & naturalis potestatis,Ad Scapul. unicuique quod putaverit colere; sed nec religionis est cogere religionem, quae suscipi debet sponte, non vi. The same is the Doctrine of S. Cyprian, Lactantius, S. Hilary, Minutius Felix, Sulpitius Severus, S. Chrysostome, S. Hierom, S. Austin, Damascen, Theo∣phylact, Socrates Scholasticus, and S. Bernard, as they are severally referred to and urged upon occasion in the following Discourse.
To which I adde, that all wise Princes, till they were overborn with faction, or solicited by peevish persons, gave Toleration to differing Sects whose Opini∣ons did not disturb the publick interest. But at first there were some hereticall persons that were also impatient of an Adversary, and they were the men who at first entreated the Emperours to persecute the Catholicks: but till four hun∣dred years after Christ no Catholick persons, or very few, did provoke the Secular arm or implore its aid against the Hereticks, save onely that Arius behaved himself so seditiously and tumultuarily, that the Nicene Fathers procured a temporary Decree for his relegation; but it was soon taken off, and God left to be his Judge; who indeed did it to some purpose when he was trust∣ed with it, and the matter wholly left to him.
But as the Ages grew worse, so men grew more cruel and unchristian, and in the Greek Church Atticus, and Nestorius of Constantinople, Theodosius of Synada, and some few others who had forgotten the mercies of their great Master and their own duty, grew implacable and furious and impatient of contradiction. It was a bold and an arrogant speech which Nestorius made in his Sermon before Theodosius the younger, Da mihi, O Imperator, terram ab haereticis repurgatam, & ego tibi vicissim coelum dabo: Disperde mecum haereticos, & ego tecum disperdam Persas. It was as groundless and unwar∣rantable as it was bloudy and inhumane.
And we see the contrary events prove truer then this groundless and un∣learned promise: for Theodosius and Valentinian were prosperous Princes, and have to all Ages a precious memory, and the reputation of a great piety; but they were so far from doing what Nestorius had suggested, that they restrai∣ned

him from his violence and immanity; and Theodosius did highly com∣mend the good Bishop Proclus for his sweetness of deportment towards erring persons, far above the cruelty of his Predecessor Atticus. And the experience which Christendom hath had in this last Age is Argument enough, that Tole∣ration of differing Opinions is so far from disturbing the publick peace, or de∣stroying the interest of Princes and Commonwealths, that it does advantage to the publick, it secures peace, because there is not so much as the pretence of Reli∣gion left to such persons to contend for it, being already indulged to them. When France fought against the Huguenots, the spilling of her own bloud was argument enough of the imprudence of that way of promoting Religion; but since she hath given permission to them, the world is witness how prosperous she hath been ever since. But the great instance is in the differing temper, Govern∣ment and success which Margaret of Parma and the Duke of Alva had. The cle∣mency of the first had almost extinguished the flame: but when she was removed, D' Alva succeeded, and managed the matter of Religion with fire and sword; he made the flame so great, that his Religion and his Prince too have both been almost quite turned out of the Countrey. Pelli è medio sapientiam, quoties vires agitur, said Ennius: and therefore the best of men and the most glorious of Princes were alwaies ready to give Toleration, but never to make executions for matters disputable. Eusebius in his second Book of the life of Constantine reports these words of the Emperour, Parem cum fidelibus ii qui errant pacis & quietis fruitionem gaudentes accipiant: Ipsa siquidem communica∣tionis & societatis restitutio ad rectam etiam veritatis viam perducere potest. Nemo cuiquam molestus sit, quisque quod animo destinat hoc etiam faciat.
And indeed there is great reason for Princes to give Toleration to disagree∣ing persons whose Opinions by fair means cannot be altered. For if the persons be confident, they will serve God according to their perswasions; and if they be publickly prohibited, they will privately convene: and then all thse incon∣veniences and mischiefs which are Arguments against the permission of Conven∣ticles are Arguments for the publick permissions of differing Religions, because the denying of the publick worship will certainly produce private Conventicles, against which all wise Princes and Commonwealths have upon great reasons made Edicts and severe Sanctions. Quicquid enim agitur absente Rege, in caput ejus plerumque redundat, say the Politicks. For the face of a man is as the face of a Lion, and scatters all base machinations, which breath not but in the dark. It is a proverbial saying, quôd nimia familiaritas servorum est con∣spiratio adversùs Dominum: and they who for their security run into grots and cellars and retirements, think that, they being upon the defensive, those Princes and those Laws that drive them to it are their enemies, and therefore they can∣not be secure, unless the power of the one and the obligation of the other be les∣sened and rescinded; and then the being restrained and made miserable endears the discontented persons mutually, and makes more hearty and dangerous Con∣federations. King James of blessed memory, in his Letters to the States of the Vnited Provinces, dated 6. March 1613. thus wrote,—Magis autem è re fore si sopiantur authoritate publicâ, ità ut prohibeatis Ministros vestros nè eas disputationes in suggestum aut ad plebem ferant, ac districtè imperetis ut pacem colant se invicem tolerando in ista opinionum ac sententiarum discrepantia —Eóque justiùs videmur vobis hoc ipsum suadere debere,

quòd neutram comperimus adeò deviam ut non possint & cum fidei Christi∣anae veritate & cum animarum salute consistere, &c. The like counsel in the divisions of Germany at the first Reformation was thought reasonable by the Emperour Ferdinand, and his excellent Son Maximilian. For they had observed that violence did exasperate, was unblessed, unsuccessfull and unreasonable; and therefore they made Decrees of Toleration, and appointed tempers and ex∣pedients to be drawn up by discreet persons, and George Cassander was design'd to this great work, and did something towards it. And Emanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy, repenting of his war undertaken for Religion against the Pe∣demontans, promised them Toleration, and was as good as his word. As much is done by the Nobility of Polonia. So that the best Princes and the best Bi∣shops gave Toleration and Impunities: but it is known that the first Persecu∣tions of disagreeing persons were by the Arians, by the Circumcellians and Do∣natists; and from them they of the Church took examples, who in small num∣bers did sometime perswade it, sometime practise it. And among the Greeks it became a publick and authorized practice, till the Question of Images grew hot and high: for then the Worshippers of Images having taken their ex∣ample from the Empress Irene, who put her son's eyes out for making an Edict against Images, began to be as cruel as they were deceived; especially being encouraged by the Popes of Rome, who then blew the coals to some purpose.
And that I may upon this occasion give account of this affair in the Church of Rome, it is remarkable, that till the time of Justinian the Emperour, A.D. 525. the Catholicks and Novatians had Churches indifferently permitted even in Rome itself; but the Bishops of Rome, whose interest was much concerned in it, spoke much against it, and laboured the eradication of the Novatians, and at last, when they got power into their hands, they served them according∣ly: but it is observed by Socrates, that when the first Persecution was made against them at Rome by Pope Innocent I. at the same instant the Goths in∣vaded Italy, and became Lords of all; it being just in God to bring a Per∣secution upon them for true belief, who with an incompetent Authority and insufficient grounds do persecute an errour less material in persons agreeing with them in the profession of the same common Faith. And I have heard it observed as a blessing upon S. Austin, (who was so mercifull to erring persons, as the greatest part of his life in all senses, even when he had twice changed his minde, yet to tolerate them, and never to endure they should be given over to the Secular power to be killed) that the very night the Vandals set down be∣fore his City of Hippo to besiege it he died and went to God, being (as a re∣ward of his mercifull Doctrine) taken from the miseries to come. And yet that very thing was also a particular issue of the Divine Providence upon that City, who not long before had altered their profession into truth by force, and now were falling into their power who afterward by a greater force turned them to be Arians.
But in the Church of Rome the Popes were the first Preachers of force and violence in matters of Opinion, and that so zealously, that Pope Vigilius suf∣fered himself to be imprisoned and handled roughly by the Emperour Justinian, rather then he would consent to the restitution and peace of certain disagreeing persons. But as yet it came not so far as Death. The first that preached that Doctrine was Dominick, the Founder of the Begging Orders of Friers, the

Friers Preachers; in memory of which the Inquisition is intrusted onely to the Friers of his Order. And if there be any force in Dreams, or truth in Legends, (as there is not much in either,) this very thing might be signified by his Mother's dream, who the night before Dominick was born dreamed she was brought to bed of a huge Dog with a fire-brand in his mouth. Sure enough, however his Disciples expound the dream, it was a better sign that he should prove a rabid, furious Incendiary then any thing else: whatever he might be in the other parts of his life, in his Doctrine he was not much better; as appears in his deportment toward the Albigenses, against whom he so preach∣ed, adeo quidem ut centum haereticorum millia ab octo millibus Catholico∣rum fusa & interfecta fuisse perhibeantur, saith one of him; and of those who were taken 180 were burnt to death,B. Bruno Beren∣garines è sua doeeh expulit, non morti au supplicis corpo∣ralibus tradidit. because they would not abjure their Doctrine. This was the first example of putting erring persons to death that I find in the Roman Church. For about 170 years before Berengarius fell in∣to opinion concerning the blessed Sacrament which they called Heresie, and re∣canted, and relapsed, and recanted again, and fell again two or three times, saith Gerson, writing against Romant of the Rose, and yet he died sicca morte, his own natural death, and with hope of Heaven, and yet Hildebrand was once his Judge: which shews that at that time Rome was not come to so great heights of bloudshed. In England, although the Pope had as great power here as any-where, yet there were no executions for matter of Opinion known till the time of Henry the fourth, who (because he usurped the Crown) was willing by all means to endear the Clergy by destroying their enemies, that so he might be sure of them to all his purposes. And indeed it may become them well enough who are wiser in their generations then the children of light, it may possibly serve the policies of evil persons, but never the pure and chast dsigns of Christianity, which admits no bloud but Christ's, and the imitating bloud of Martyrs, but knows nothing how to serve her ends by persecuting any of her erring Children.
By this time I hope it will not be thought reasonable to say, he that teaches mercy to erring persons teaches indifferency in Religion; unless so many Fa∣thers, and so many Churches, and the best of Emperours, and all the world (till they were abused by Tyranny, Popery and Faction) did teach indifferency. For I have shewn that Christianity does not punish corporally persons erring spiritually, but indeed Popery does: the Donatists, and Circumcellians, and Arrians, and the Itaciani, they of old did: in the middle Ages the patrons of Images did, and the Papists at this day doe, and have done ever since they were taught it by their St. Dominick.
Seventhly, And yet after all this, I have something more to exempt my self from the clamour of this Objection. For let all Errours be as much and as zealously suppressed as may be, (the Doctrine of the following Discourse contradicts not that) but let it be done by such means as are proper instruments of their sup∣pression, by Preaching and Disputation, (so that neither of them breed distur∣bance) by charity and sweetness, by holiness of life, assiduity of exhortation, by the word of God and prayer.
For these ways are most natural, most prudent, most peaceable and effectual. Onely let not men be hasty in calling every dislik'd Opinion by the name of Here∣sie; and when they have resolved that they will call it so, let them use the er∣ring person like a brother, not beat him like a dog, or convince him with a gibbet, or vex him out of his understanding and perswasions.
And now if men will still say I perswade to indifferency, there is no help for me, for I have given reasons against it; I must bear it as well as I can; I am not yet without remedy, as they are; for patience will help me, and reason will not cure them, let them take their course, and I'le take mine.
Only I will take leave to consider this (and they would do well to do so too) that unless Faith be kept within its own latitude, and not call'd out to patro∣cinate every less necessary Opinion, and the interest of every Sect or peevish person; and if damnation be pronounced against Christians believing the Creed, and living good lives, because they are deceived, or are said to be de∣ceived, in some Opinions less necessary; there is no way in the world to satisfie unlearned persons in the choice of their Religion, or to appease the unquiet∣ness of a scrupulous Conscience. For suppose an honest Citizen, whose imploy∣ment and parts will not enable him to judge the disputes and arguings of great Clerks, sees Factions commenced and managed with much bitterness by persons who might on either hand be fit enough to guide him; when if he follows either, he is disquieted and pronounced damned by the other, (who also, if he be the most unreasonable in his Opinion, will perhaps be more furious in his sentence) what shall this man do? where shall he rest the soal of his foot? Vpon the Doctrine of the Church where he lives? Well, but that he hears declaimed against perpetually, and other Churches claim highly and pretend fairly for truth, and condemn his Church. If I tell him that he must live a good life, and believe the Creed, and not trouble himself with their disputes, or interest himself in Sects and Factions, I speak reason; because no Law of God ties him to believe more then what is of essential necessity, and whatsoever he shall come to know to be revealed by God: Now if he believes his Creed, he believes all that is necessary to all, or of it self; and if he do his moral endeavour beside, he can do no more toward finding out all the rest, and then he is secured. But then, if this will secure him, why do men press farther, and pretend every Opi∣nion as necessary, and that in so high a degree, that if they all said true, or any two indeed of them, in 500 Sects which are in the world, (and for ought I know there may be 5000) it is 500 to one but that every man is damned; for every Sect damns all but itself, and that is damn'd of 499, and it is excellent fortune then if that escape. And there is the same reason in every one of them, that is, it is extreme unreasonableness in all of them to pronounce damnation against such persons against whom clearly and dogmatically Holy Scripture hath not. In odiosis quod minimum est sequimur, in favoribus quod est maximum, saith the Law; and therefore we should say any thing, or make any excuse that is in any degree reasonable, rather then condemn all the world to Hell; especially if we consider these two things, that we ourselves are as apt to be deceived as any are; and that they who are deceived, when they used their moral industry that they might not be deceived, if they perish for this, they perish for what they could not help.
But however, if the best security in the World be not in neglecting all Sects and subdivisions of men, and fixing ourselves on points necessary and plain, and on honest and pious endeavours according to our several capacities and opportunities for all the rest, if I say, all this be not through the mercies of God the best security to all unlearned persons, and learned too, where shall we fix? where shall we either have peace or security? If you bid me follow your Doctrine, you must tell me why; and perhaps when you have, I am

not able to judge; or if I be as able as other people are, yet when I have judged I may be deceived too, and so may you, or any man else you bid me follow; so that I am not whit the nearer truth or peace.
And then if we look abroad, and consider how there is scarce any Church but is highly charg'd by many adversaries in many things, possibly we may see a reason to charge every one of them in some things; and what shall we doe then? The Church of Rome hath spots enough, and all the world is inquisitive enough to find out more, and to represent these to her greatest disadvantage. The Greek Churches denies the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son: If that be false Doctrine, she is highly to blame; if it be not, then all the Western Churches are to blame for saying the contrary. And there is no Church that is in prosperity but alters her Doctrine every Age, either by bringing in new Do∣ctrines, or by contradicting her old; which shews that none are satisfied with themselves, or with their own Confessions. And since all Churches believe themselves fallible, that only excepted which all other Churches say is most of all deceived, it were strange if in so many Articles which make up their several bodies of Confessions they had not mistaken every one of them in some thing or other. The Lutheran Churches maintain Consubstantiation, the Zuinglians are Sacramentaries, the Calvinists are fierce in the matters of absolute Prede∣termination, and all these reject Episcopacy; which the Primitive Church would have made no doubt to have called Heresie. The Socinians profess a portentous number of strange Opinions; they deny the Holy Trinity, and the Satisfaction of our Blessed Saviour. The Anabaptists laugh at Paedo-baptism: the Ethiopian Churches are Nestorian. Where then shall we fix our confi∣dence, or joyn Communion? To pitch upon any one of these is to throw the Dice, if Salvation be to be had onely in one of them, and that every errour that by chance hath made a Sect, and is distinguished by a name, be dam∣nable.
If this consideration does not deceive me, we have no other help in the midst of these distractions and dis-unions, but all of us to be united in that common term, which as it does constitute the Church in its being such, so it is the Me∣dium of the Communion of Saints; and that is the Creed of the Apostles, and in all other things an honest endeavour to find out Clem. Alex. stromat. 1. ait Philosophiam liberam esse prae∣stantissimam, quae scil. versa∣tur in perspica∣citer seligendis dogmatis omni∣um Sectarum. Polamo Alex∣drimus philoso∣phatus est, ut ait Laertius in Proaemio, unde cognominatus est, , scil. . what Truths we can, and a charitable and and mutual permission to others that disagree from us and our Opinions. I am sure this may satisfie us, for it will secure us; but I know not any thing else that will: and no man can be reasonably prswaded or satis∣fied in any else, unless he throws himself upon chance, or absolute predestination, or his own confidence; in every one of which it is two to one at least but he may miscarry.
Thus far I thought I had reason on my side, and I suppose I have made it good upon its proper grounds in the pages following. But then if the result be, that men must be permitted in their Opinions, and that Christians must not persecute Christians; I have also as much reason to reprove all those oblique Arts which are not direct Persecutions of mens persons, but they are indirect proceedings, ungentle and unchristian, servants of faction and interest, provocations to zeal and animosities, and destructive of learning and ingenuity. And these are, suppressing all the monuments of their Adversaries, forcing them to recant, and burning their Books.
For it is a strange industry and an importune diligence that was used by our

fore-fathers; of all those Heresies which gave them battel and imployment we have absolutely no Record or Monument, but what themselves who are adver∣saries have transmitted to us; and we know that Adversaries, especially such who observed all opportunities to discredit both the persons and Doctrines of the Enemy, are not alwaies the best records or witnesses of such transactions. We see it now in this very Age, in the present Distemperatures, that parties are no good Registers of the actions of the adverse side: And if we cannot be con∣fident of the truth of a story now, now I say that it is possible for any man, and likely that the interessed adversary will discover the imposture, it is far more unlikely that after-Ages should know any other truth but such as serves the ends of the representers. I am sure such things were never taught us by Christ and his Apostles: and if we were sure that our selves spoke truth, or that truth were able to justifie herself, it were better if, to preserve a Doctrine, we did not destroy a Commandment, and out of zeal pretending to Christian Religion lose the glories and rewards of ingenuity and Christian simplicity.
Of the same consideration is mending of Authors, not to their own mind, but to ours, that is, to mend them so as to spoil them; forbidding the publication of Books in which there is nothing impious or against the publick interest, leaving out clauses in Translations, disgracing mens persons, charging disavowed Doctrines upon men, and the persons of the men with the consequents of their Doctrine, which they deny either to be true or to be consequent, false reporting of Disputations and Conferences, burning Books by the hand of the hang-man, and all such Arts, which shew that we either distrust God for the mainte∣nance of his truth, or that we distrust the cause, or distrust our selves and our abilities. I will say no more of these, but only concerning the last I shall tran∣scribe a passage out of Tacitus in the life of Julius Agricola, who gives this ac∣count of it: Veniam non petissem nisi incursaturus tam saeva & infesta vir∣tutibus tempora. Legimus, cùm Aruleno Rustico Paetus Thrasea, Herennio Senecioni Priscus Helvidius laudati essent, capitale fuisse, neque in ipsos modo authores, sed in libros quoque eorum, saevitum, delegato Triumviris ministerio ut monumenta clarissimorum ingeniorum in comitio ac foro urerentur: scil. illo igne vocem populi Rom. & libertatem Senatus & con∣scientiam generis humani aboleri arbitrabantur, expulsis insuper sapientiae professoribus, atque omni bona arte in exilium acta, ne quid usquam ho∣nestum occurreret. It is but an illiterate policy to think that such indirect and uningenuous proceedings can among wise and free men disgrace the Au∣thors, and disrepute their Discourses. And I have seen that the price hath been trebled upon a forbidden or a condemn'd Book; and some men in policy have got a prohibition, that their impression might be the more certainly ven∣dible, and the Author himself thought considerable.
The best way is to leave tricks and devices, and to fall upon that way which the best Ages of the Church did use. With the strength of Argument, and Allegations of Scripture, and modesty of deportment, and meekness and chari∣ty to the persons of men, they converted misbelievers, stopped the mouths of Adversaries, asserted Truth, and discountenanced errour; and those other stratagems and Arts of support and maintenance to Doctrines, were the issues of Heretical brains. The old Catholicks had nothing to secure themselves but the  of truth and plain dealing.

Fidem minutis dissecant ambagibus,
Ut quisque lingua est nequior.
Solvunt ligantque quaestionum vincula
Per syllogismos plectiles.
Vae captiosis Sycophantarum strophis,
Vae versipelli astutiae.
Nodos tenaces recta rumpit regula
Infesta discertantibus:
Idcirco mundi stulta deligit Deus,
Ut concidant Sophistica.
And, to my understanding, it is a plain art and design of the Devil, to make us so in love with our own Opinions as to call them Faith and Religion, that we may be proud in our understanding: and besides that by our zeal in our Opinions, we grow cool in our piety and practical duties; he also by this ear∣nest contention does directly destroy good life, by engagement of Zealots to do any thing rather then be overcome and lose their beloved Propositions. But I would fain know, why is not any vitious habit as bad or worse then a false Opinion? Why are we so zealous against those we call Hereticks, and yet great friends with drunkards, fornicatours, and swearers, and intemperate and idle persons? Is it because we are commanded by the Apostle to reject a Heretick after two admonitions, and not bid such a one God speed? It is good reason why we should be zealous against such persons, provided we mistake them not. For those of whom these Apostles speak, are such as deny Christ to be come in the flesh, such as deny an Article of Creed; and in such odious things it is not safe nor charitable to extend the Gravamen and punishment beyond the instances the Apostles make, or their exact parallels. But then also it would be remembred that the Apostles speak as fiercely against communion with Fornicatours, and all disorders practical, as against communion with Hereticks: If any man that is called a brother be a Fornicatour, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one no not to eat. I am certain that a drunkard is as contrary to God, and lives as contra∣ry to the Laws of Christianity, as an Heretick; and I am also sure that I know what drunkenness is: but I am not sure that such an Opinion is Heresie; nei∣ther would other men be so sure as they think for, if they did consider it aright, and observe the infinite deceptions, and causes of deceptions, in wise men, and in most things, and in all doubtful Questions, and that they did not mistake confidence for certainty.
But indeed I could not but smile at those jolly Friers; two Franciscans of∣fered themselves to the fire to prove Savonarola to be a Heretick;Commin. l. . c. 19. but a cer∣tain Jacobine offered himself to the fire to prove that Savonarola had true Re∣velations, and was no Heretick: in the mean time Savonarola preacht, but made no such confident offer, nor durst he venture at that new kind of fire Ordeal. And put case all four had past through the fire, and died in the flames, what would that have proved? Had he been a Heretick or no Heretick, the more or less, for the confidence of these zealous Ideots? If we mark it, a great many Arguments whereon many Sects rely, are no better probation then this comes to. Confidence is the first, and the second, and the third part of a very great many of their propositions.
But now if men would a little turn the Tables, and be as zealous for a good

life and all the strictest precepts of Christianity, (which is a Religion the most holy, the most reasonable, and the most consummate that ever was taught to man) as they are for such Propositions in which neither the life nor the orna∣ment of Christianity is concerned, we should find that, as a consequent of this piety, men would be as carefull as they could to find out all Truths, and the sence of all Revelations which may concern their duty; and where men were miserable and could not, yet others that lived good lives too would also be so charitable, as not to adde affliction to this misery: and both of them are parts of good life. To be compassionate, and to help to bear one another's bur∣thens, not to destroy the weak, but to entertain him meekly, that's a precept of charity; and to edeavour to find out the whole will of God, that also is a part of the obedience, the choice and the excellency of Faith: and he lives not a good life that does not doe both these.
But men think they have more reason to be zealous against Heresie then a∣gainst a vice in manners, because Heresie is infectious and dangerous, and the principle of much evil. Indeed if by an Heresie we mean that which is against an Article of Creed, and breaks part of the Covenant made between God and man by the mediation of Jesus Christ, I grant it to be a very grievous crime, a calling God's veracity into question, and a destruction also of good life, because upon the Articles of Creed obedience is built, and it lives or dies, as the effect does by its proper cause, for Faith is the moral cause of obedience. But then Heresie, that is such as this, is also a vice, and the person criminal, and so the sin is to be esteemed in its degrees of malignity; and let men be as zealous against it as they can, and employ the whole Arsenal of the spiritual armour against it: such as this is worse then adultery or murther, inasmuch as the Soul is more noble then the Body, and a false Doctrine is of greater dissemination and extent then a single act of violence or impurity. Adultery or murther is a duel; but Heresie (tru∣ly and indeed such) is an unlawful war, it slays thousands. The losing of Faith, is like digging down a foundation; all the superstructures of hope and patience and charity fall with it. And besides this, Heresie of all crimes is the most inexcusable, and of least temptation: for true Faith is most commonly kept with the least trouble of any grace in the world; and Heresie of itself hath not one∣ly no pleasure in it, but is a very punishment: because Faith, as it opposes here∣tical or false Opinions, and distinguishes from charity, consists in mere acts of believing; which, because they are of true Propositions, are natural and pro∣portionable to the understanding, and more honourable then false. But then concerning those things which men now a-days call Heresie, they cannot be so formidable as they are represented; and if we consider that drunkenness is cer∣tainly a damnable sin, and that there are more drunkards then Hereticks, and that drunkenness is parent of a thousand vices, it may better be said of this vice then of most of those opinions which we call Heresies, it is infectious and dangerous, and the principle of much evil, and therefore as fit an object for a pious zeal to contest against, as is any of those Opinions which trouble mens ease or reputation, for that is the greatest of their malignity.
But if we consider that Sects are made and Opinions are called Heresies up∣on interest, and the grounds of emolument, we shall see that a good life would cure much of this mischief. For First, the Church of Rome, which is the great Dictatrix of dogmatical Resolutions, and the declarer of Heresie, and calls Heretick more then all the world besides, hath made that the rule of Here∣sie

which is the conservatory of interest and the ends of men. For to recede from the Doctrine of the Church, with them makes Heresie; that is, to disrepute their Authority, and not to obey them, not to be their subjects, not to give them the empire of our Conscience, is the great  of Heresie.
So that with them Heresie is to be esteemed clearly by humane ends, not by Divine Rules; that is formal Heresie which does materially disserve them. And it would make a suspicious man a little inquisitive into their particular Doctrines, and when he finds that Indulgences, and Jubilees, and Purgato∣ries, and Masses, and Offices for the dead, are very profitable; that the Doctrine of Primacy, of Infallibility, of Superiority over Councils, of indirect power in temporals, are great instruments of secular honour; he would be apt enough to think that if the Church of Rome would learn to lay her honour at the feet of the Crucifix, and despise the world, and prefer Jerusalem before Rome, and Heaven above the Lateran, that these Opinions would not have in them any native strength to support them against the perpetual assaults of their Adver∣saries, that speak so much reason and Scripture against them. I have instanced in the Roman Religion, but I wish it may be considered also how far mens doctrines in other Sects serve mens temporal ends, so far that it would not be unreasona∣ble or unnecessary to attempt to cure some of their distemperatures or misper∣swasions by the salutary precepts of sanctitie and holy life. Sure enough, if it did not more concern their reputation, and their lasting interest to be counted true believers rather then good livers, they would rather endeavour to live well, then to be accounted of a right Opinion in things beside the Creed.
For my own particular, I cannot but expect that God in his Justice should enlarge the bounds of the Turkish Empire, or some other way punish Christians, by reason of their pertinacious disputing about things unnecessary, undetermina∣ble and unprofitable, and for their hating and persecuting their brethen, which should be as dear to them as their own lives, for not consenting to one another's follies and senseless vanities. How many volumes have been writ about Angels, about immaculate Conception, about Original sin, when that all that is solid Reason or clear Revelation, in all these three Articles, may be reasonably enough comprised in fourty lines? And in these trifles and impertinencies men are curiously busie, while they neglect those glorious precepts of Christianity and holy life, which are the glories of our Religion, and would enable us to a happy eternity.
My Lord, Thus far my thoughts have carried me, and then I thought I had reason to go further, and to examine the proper grounds upon which these per∣swasions might rely and stand firm, in case any body should contest against them. For possibly men may be angry at me and my design: for I do all them great displeasure who think no end is then well served when their interest is disserved; and but that I have writ so untowardly and heavily that I am not worth a con∣futation, possibly some or other might be writing against me. But then I must tell them I am prepared of an answer beforehand: For I think I have spoken reason in my Book, and examined it with all the severity I have; and if after all this I be deceived, this confirms me in my first opinion, and becomes a new Argument to me that I have spoken reason; for it furnishes me with a new in∣stance that it is necessary there should be a mutual compliance and Toleration, because even then when a man thinks he hath most reason to be confident, he may easily be deceived.
For I am sure I have no other design but the prosecution and advantage of Truth, and I may truely use the words of Gregory Nazianzen, Non studemus paci in detrimentum verae doctrinae,—ut facilitatis & mansuetudinis famam colligamus: but I have writ this because I thought it was necessary, and season∣able, and charitable, and agreeable to the great precepts and design of Chri∣stianity, consonant to the practice of the Apostles and of the best Ages of the Church, most agreeable to Scripture and Reason, to Revelation and the nature of the thing; and it is such a Doctrine, that, if there be variety in humane affairs, if the event of things be not setled in a durable consistence, but is changeable, every one of us all may have need of it. I shall onely therefore de∣sire that they who will reade it may come to the reading it with as much simpli∣city of purposes and unmixed desires of truth as I did to the writing it, and that no man trouble himself with me or my discourse that thinks beforehand that his Opinion cannot be reasonably altered. If he thinks me to be mistaken before he tries, let him also think that he may be mistaken too, and that he who judges before he hears, is mistaken though he gives a right sentence.
Aristoph. in Pluto.,
Was good counsel. But at a venture, I shall leave this sentence of Solo∣mon to his consideration, A wise man feareth, and departeth from evil; but a fool rageth and is confident.  is a trick of boys and bold young fellows, says Aristotle; but they who either know themselves, or things, or persons, . Peradventure yea, peradventure no, is very often the wisest determination of a Question. For there are ,2 Tim. 2. (as the Apostle notes) foolish and unlearned Questions; and it were better to stop the current of such fopperies by silence, then by disputing them convey them to posterity. And many things there are of more profit, which yet are of no more certainty; and therefore boldness of assertion (except it be in matters of Faith and clearest Revelation) is an Argument of the vanity of the man, never of the truth of the Proposition: for to such matters the saying of Xenophanes in Varro is pertinent and applicable, Hominis est haec opinari, Dei scire; God only knows them, and we conjecture.
.
And although I be as desirous to know what I should, and what I should not, as any of my brethren the sons of Adam; yet I find that the more I search the farther I am from being satisfied, and make but few discoveries, save of my own ignorance: and therefore I am desirous to follow the example of a very wise personage, Julius Agricola, of whom Tacitus gave this testimony, Reti∣nuítque (quod est difficillimum) ex scientia modum: or, that I may take my precedent from within the pale of the Church, it was the saying of S. Austin, Mallem quidem eorum quae à me quaesivisti habere scientiam quam ignoran∣tiam; sed quia id nondum potui, magis eligo cautam ignorantiam confi∣teri, quam falsam scientiam profiteri. And these words do very much express my sense. But if there be any man so confident as Luther sometime was, who said that he could expound all Scripture; or so vain as Eckius, who in his Chrysopassus ventur'd upon the highest and most mysterious Question of Pre∣destination, ut in ea juveniles possit calores exercere; such persons as these, or any that is furious in his opinion, will scorn me and my Discourse; but I

shall not be much mov'd at it, onely I shall wish that I had as much knowledge as they think me to want, and they as much as they believe themselves to have. In the mean time modesty were better for us both, and indeed for all men. For when men indeed are knowing, amongst other things they are able to separate certainties from uncertainties: If they be not knowing, it is pitty that their ignorance should be triumphant, or discompose the publick peace or private confi∣dence.
And now (my Lord) that I have inscrib'd this Book to your Lordship, al∣though it be a design of doing honour to myself, that I have mark'd it with so honour'd and beloved a Name, might possibly need as much excuse as it does pardon, but that your Lordship knows your own: for out of your Mines I have digg'd the Mineral; onely I have stampt it with my own image, as you may per∣ceive by the deformities which are in it. But your great Name in letters will adde so much value to it, as to make it obtain its pardon amongst all them that know how to value you, and all your relatives and dependants by the proportion of relation. For others I shall be incurious, because the number of them that honour you is the same with them that honour Learning and Piety, and they are the best Theatre and the best Judges; amongst which the world must needs take notice of my ambition, to be ascribed by my publick pretence to be what I am in all heartiness of devotion, and for all the reason of the world,
My Honoured Lord,

