



Right Reverend Father,
I Am against my Resolution and proper disposi∣tion by the over-ruling power of the Divine Providence which wisely disposes all things, accidentally engaged in the Question of Tran∣substantiation, which hath already so many times passed by the Fire and under the Saw of Contention: that it might seem, nothing could remain which had not been already con∣sidered, and sifted to the bran. I had been by chance ingaged in a conference with a person of another perswasion, the man not un∣learned nor unwary, but much more confident than I perceived the strength of his argument could warrant; and yet he had some few of the best which their Schools did furnish out and ordinarily mini∣ster to their , their Emissaries and Ministers of temp∣tation to our people. I then began to consider whether there were not much more in the secret of the Question which might not have per∣swaded him more fiercely than I could then see cause for, or others at least, from whom upon the strength of education he might have derived his confidence; and searching into all the secrets of it, I found infinite reason to reprove the boldness of those men, who in the sum of affairs and upon examination will be found to think men damned, if they will not speak non-sence, and disbelieve their eyes and ears, and defie their own reason, and recede from Antiquity, and believe them in whatsoever they dream, or list to obtrude upon the world who hath been too long credulous, or it could never have suffered such a proposition to be believed by so many men against all the demonstration in the world. And certainly it is no small matter of wonder, that those men of the Roman Church should pretend Learning, and yet rest their new Articles of Faith upon propositi∣ons against all Learning; that they should ingage their Scholars to read and believe Aristotle, and yet destroy his Philosophy, and

reason by their Article; that they should think all the world fools but themselves, and yet talk and preach such things which if men had spoken before this new device arose, they would have been thought mad. But if these men had by chance or interest fallen upon the other Opinion which we maintain against them, they would have fil∣led the World with Declamations against the impossible Propositions and the  of their Adversaries; They would have called us Dunces, Idiots, men without souls, without Philosophy, without Sense, without Reason, without Logick, destroyers of the very first notions of mankind. But now that they are ingaged upon the impossible side, they proceed with a prodigious boldness, and seem to wonder that mankind does not receive from them all their first prin∣ciples, and credit the wildness and new notions of their Cataphy∣sicks (for Metaphysicks it is not.) Their Affirmatives and Ne∣gatives are neither natural, nor above, nor besides nature, but against it in those first principles which are primely credible. For that I may use S. Austin's words: Nemo enim huic evidentiae contradicet, nisi quem plus defensare delectat quod sentit, quàm quid senti∣endum sit invenire. But I see it is possible for a man to believe any thing that he hath a mind to; and this to me seems to have been permitted to reprove the vanity of mans imagination, and the confi∣dence of opinion, to make us humble, apt to learn, inquisitive, and charitable: for if it be possible for so great a company of men of all sorts and capacities to believe such impossible things, and to wonder that others do not eandem insaniam insanire, it will con∣cern the wisest man alive to be inquisitive in the Articles of his first perswasion, to be diligent in his search, modest in his sentences, to prejudge no man, to reprove the Adversaries with meekness, and a spirit conscious of humane weakness and aptness to be abused. But if we remember that Pere Coton Confessor to Henry the fourth of France was wont to say, that he could do any thing when he had his God in his hand, and his King at his feet, mean∣ing him at confession, and the other in effigie of the Crucifix or in the Host, we may well perceive that they are not such fools but they will consider the advantages that come to their persons and cal∣ling, if they can be supposed to make, with pronouncing four words, bread to become God. Vpon the reputation of this great thing the Priests were exempt from secular Jurisdiction and violence; in the Council in Dalmatia held by the Legats of Pope Innocent the third, A. D. 1199. Can. 5. upon this account Pope Urban

the second in a Council which he held at Rome (1097) against the Emperour Henry the fourth, took from secular Princes the investiture of Benefices, and advanced the Clergy above Kings, because their hands create God their Creator, as Simeon Du∣nelmensis reports, Lib. 2. Chron. apud Vigner. Hist: Eccles. And the same horrible words are used in the famous Book called Stella Clericorum: Where the Priest is called the creator of his Creator: and thence also infers his priviledge and immunity from being condemned. I will not with any envy and reproach ob∣ject to them that saying of a Bohemian Priest, against which John Hus wrote a book on purpose, That before the Priest said his first Mass he was but the Son of God, but afterward he was the Father of God, and the Creator of his body: It was a rude kind of blasphemy, but not much more than that which their severest men do say, and were never corrected by their expurgatory indi∣ces, and is to be seen in Biel on Canon of the Mass, Lection. 4. and Perè dè Bessè in his Royal Priesthood, l. 1. c. 3. where the Priest upon the stock of his power is advanced above Angels, and the blessed Virgin her self; which is the biggest expression which they can devise, unless they advance him above God himself. The conse∣quent of this is a double honour, that is, an honour and mainte∣nance in such a manner as may serve the design of ambition, and fill the belly of covetousness.
This was enough to make them willing to introduce it, and (as to them) the wonder ceases, but it is strange the World could receive it; For though men might be willing to believe a thing that would make for their profit and reputation, yet that they should entertain it to their prejudice, as the other part must do, that at so great a price, and with so great a diminution of their rights, they should suffer themselves to be cousened of their reason, is the stranger thing of the two. But to this also there were many concurrent causes; For, 1. This Doctrine entred upon the world in the most barbarous, most ignorant, and most vitious ages of the world; for we know when it be∣gan, by what steps and progressions it prevailed, and by what instru∣ments. It began in the ninth age, and in the tenth was suckled with little arguments and imperfect pleadings, in the eleventh it grew up with illusions and pretence of miracles, and was christened and con∣firmed in the twelfth, and afterwards lived upon blood, and craft, and violence; But when it was disputed by Pascasius Ratbert the Dea∣con in the ninth Century, the first collateral device by which they at∣tempted

to set up their fancy was to devise Miracles, which we find done accordingly in the same Pascasius telling a tale of Plegilus see∣ing upon the Altar a Babe like that which was pictured in the arms of Simeon: In Joannes Diaconus telling a story of something in the dayes of S. Gregory the Great, but never told by any before him, viz. in the year 873. that is 270. years after the death of S. Grego∣ry; and extracted from the Archives of Rome or Italy out of England, where it seems they could better tell what so long before done at Rome, by Damianus in the year 1060. who tells two more; by Guitmond writing against Berengarius out of the Vitae P. P. by Lanfranck, who served his end upon the report of strange Appa∣ritions, and from him Alexander of Hales also tells a pretty tale. For they then observed that the common people did not only then be∣lieve all reports of miracles, but desired them passionately, and with them would swallow any thing; But how vainly and falsly the world was then abused, we need no greater witness than the learned Bishop of the Canaries, Melchior Canus. And yet even one of these Au∣thors, though possible apt enough to credit or report any such fine de∣vice, for the promotion of his new opinion, yet it is vehemently suspect∣ed, that even the tale which was reported out of Pascasius, was a long time after his death thrust in by some Monk in a place to which it relates not, and which without that tale would be more united and more coherent: and yet if this and the other miracles pretended, had not been illusions or directly fabulous, it had made very much against the present Doctrine of the Roman Church, for they re∣present the body in such manner as by their explications it is not, and it cannot be: they represent it broken, a finger, or a piece of flesh, or bloody, or bleeding, or in the form of an Infant; and then when it is in the species of bread; for if as they say Christ's body is pre∣sent no longer than the form of bread remained, how can it be Christ's body in the miracle, when the species being gone it is no longer a Sa∣crament? But the dull inventers of miracles in those ages consider∣ed nothing of this; the Article it self was then gross and rude, and so were the Instruments of probation. I noted this, not only to shew at what door so incredible a perswasion entered, but that the zeal of prevailing in it hath so blinded the refiners of it in this age, that they still urge these miracles for proof, when if they do any thing at all, they reprove the present Doctrine.
But besides this device, they inticed the people forward by institu∣tion of the solemn Feast of Corpus Christi day, entertain'd their

fancies by solemn and pompous Processions, and rewarded their wor∣shippings and attendances on the blessed Sacrament with Indulgences granted by Pope Urban the fourth, inserted in the Clementines and enlarged by John the 22d. and Martin the fifth, and for their worshipping of the consecrated water they had authentick prece∣dents, even the example of Bonaventure's Lamb, Saint Francis his Mule, S. Anthony of Padoa's Ass; and if these things were not enough to perswade the People to all this matter, they must needs have weak hearts and hard heads; and because they met with Op∣ponents at all hands, they proceeded to a more vigorous way of argu∣ing: they armed legions against their adversaries, they confuted at one time in the Town of Beziers 60000 persons, and in one battel disputed so prosperously and acutely, that they kill'd about 10000 men that were Sacramentaries: and this Bellarmine gives us an instance of the marks of his Church; this way of arguing was used in almost all the Countries of Christendom, till by Crusado's mas∣sacres and battels, burnings and the constant Carnificia, and butchery of the Inquisition, which is the main prop of the Papacy, and does more than Tu es Petrus, they prevail'd far and near; and men durst not oppose the evidence whereby they fought. And now the wonder is out, it is not strange that the Article hath been so readily entertained. But in the Greek Church it could not prevail, as appears not only in Cyril's book of late, dogmatically affirming the Article in our sence, but in the Answer of Cardinal Humbert to Nicetas, who maintained the receiving the holy Sacrament does break the fast, which it could not do if it were not, what it seems, bread and wine, as well as what we believe it to be, the body and blood of Christ.
And now in prosecution of their strange improbable success they proceed to perswade all people that they are fools, and do not know the measures of sence, nor understand the words of Scripture, nor can tell when any of the Fathers speak affirmatively or negatively; and after many attempts made by diverse unprosperously enough (as the thing did constrain and urge them) a great Wit, Cardinal Perron, hath undertaken the Question, and hath spun his thread so fine, and twisted it so intricately, and adorned it so sprucely with language and sophisms, that although he cannot resist the evidence of truth, yet he is too subtle for most mens discerning; and though he hath been contested by potent adversaries, and wise men, in a better cause than his own, yet he will alwayes make his Reader believe that he prevails;

which puts me in mind of what Thucydides told Archidamus the King of Sparta, asking him whether he or Pericles were the better wrastler? he told him that when he threw Pericles on his back he would with fine words perswade the people that he was not down at all, and so he got the better. So does he; and is to all considering men a great argument of the danger that Articles of Religion are in, and consequently mens perswasions, and final interest, when they fall into the hands of a witty man and a Sophister, and one who is re∣solved to prevail by all means. But truth is stronger than wit, and can endure when the other cannot, and I hope it will appear so in this Question, which although it is managed by weak hands, that is, by mine, yet to all impartial persons it must be certain and prevailing upon the stock of its own sincerity and derivation from God.
And now (R. R.) though this Question hath so often been disputed and some things so often said, yet I was willing to bring it once more upon the stage, hoping to add some clearness to it, by fitting it with a good instrument, and clear conveyance, and representment, by saying something new, and very many which are not generally known, and less generally noted; and I thought there was a present necessity of it, because the Emissaries of the Church of Rome are busie now to disturb the peace of consciences by troubling the perse∣cuted, and ejecting scruples into the infortunate, who suspect every thing, and being weary of all, are most ready to change from the pre∣sent. They have got a trick to ask, where is our Church now! What is become of your Articles of your Religion? We cannot an∣swer them as they can be answered; for nothing satisfies them, but being prosperous, and that we cannot pretend to, but upon the accounts of the Cross, and so we may indeed rejoyce and be exceeding glad, because we hope that great is our reward in Heaven. But al∣though they are pleased to use an Argument that like Jonas Gourd or Sparagus is in season only at some times, yet we according to the nature of Truth, inquire after the truth of their Religion upon the account of proper and Theological Objections; Our Church may be a beloved Church and dear to God though she be persecuted, when theirs is in an evil condition by obtruding upon the Christian world Articles of Religion, against all that which ought to be the instruments of credibility and perswasion, by distorting and abusing the Sacraments, by making error to be an art, and that a man must be witty to make himself capable of being abused, by out-facing

all sence and reason, by damning their brethren for not making their understanding servile and sottish, by burning them they can get, and cursing them that they cannot get, by doing so much violence to their own reasons, and forcing themselves to believe that no man ever spake against their new device, by making a prodigious error to be necessary to salvation, as if they were Lords of the Faith of Chri∣stendom.
But these men are grown to that strange triumphal gaety, upon their joy that the Church of England as they think is destroyed, that they tread upon her grave which themselves have digged for her who lives and pities them; and they wonder that any man should speak in her behalf, and suppose men do it out of spight and indigna∣tion, and call the duty of her sons, who are by persecution made more confident, pious, and zealous in defending those truths for which she suffers on all hands, by the name of anger, and suspect it of malicious, vile purposes. I wonder'd when I saw something of this folly in one that was her son once, but is run away from her sor∣row, and disinherited himself because she was not able to give him a temporal portion, and thinks he hath found out reasons enough to depart from the miserable. I will not trouble him, or so much as name him, because if his words are as noted as they are publick, every good man will scorn them, if they be private, I am not wil∣ling to publish his shame, but leave him to consideration and repen∣tance; But for our dear afflicted Mother, she is under the porti∣on of a child, in the state of discipline, her government indeed hin∣dered, but her Worshippings the same, the Articles as true, and those of the Church of Rome as false as ever, of which I hope the following book will be one great instance. But I wish that all temp∣ted persons would consider the illogical deductions by which these men would impose upon their consciences; If the Church of England be destroyed, then Transubstantiation is true; which indeed had con∣cluded well if that Article had only pretended false, because the Church of England was prosperous. But put the case the Turk should invade Italy, and set up the Alcoran in S. Peters Church, would it be endured that we should conclude, that Rome was Anti∣christian, because her temporal glory is defaced? The Apostle in this case argued otherwise. The Church of the Jews was cut off for their sins; be not high-minded ô ye Gentiles, but fear lest he also cut thee off; it was counsel given to the Romans. But though (blessed be God) our afflictions are great, yet we can, and do onjoy the

same religion as the good Christians in the first three hundred years did theirs; we can serve God in our houses, and sometimes in Churches; and our faith which was not built upon temporal founda∣tions, cannot be shaken by the convulsions of war and the changes of State. But they who make our afflictions an objection against us, unless they have a promise that they shall never be afflicted, might do well to remember, that if they ever fall into trouble, they have nothing left to represent or make their condition tolerable; for by pretending, Religion is destroyed when it is persecuted, they take away all that which can support their own Spirits and sweeten perse∣cution: However, let our Church be where it pleases God it shall, it is certain that Transubstantiation is an evil Doctrine, false and dangerous; and I know not any Church in Christendom which hath any Article more impossible or apt to render the Communion dan∣gerous, than this in the Church of Rome: and since they com∣mand us to believe all, or will accept none, I hope the just re∣proof of this one will establish the minds of those who can be tempted to communicate with them in others. I have now given an account of the reasons of my present engagement; and though it may be enquired also why I presented it to You, I fear I shall not give so perfect an account of it; because those excellent reasons which in∣vited me to this signification of my gratitude, are such which al∣though they ought to be made publick, yet I know not whether your humility will permit it: for you had rather oblige others than be noted by them. Your Predecessor in the See of Rochester, who was almost a Cardinal when he was almost dead, did publickly in those evil times appear against the truth defended in this Book, and yet he was more moderate and better tempered than the rest: but because God hath put the truth into the hearts and mouths of his successors, it is not improper that to you should be offered the opportunities of owning that which is the belief and honour of that See, since the Religion was reformed. But lest it be thought that this is an excuse, rather than a reason of my address to you, I must crave pardon of your humility, and serve the end of glorificati∣on of God in it, by acknowledging publickly that you have assisted my condition by the emanations of that grace which is the Crown of Martyrdom: expending the remains of your lessened for∣tunes, and increasing charity upon your Brethren who are dear to you, not only by the band of the same Ministery, but the fel∣lowship of the same sufferings. But indeed the cause in which

these papers are ingaged, is such that it ought to be owned by them that can best defend it; and since the defence is not with secular arts and aids, but by Spiritual; the diminution of your outward cir∣cumstances cannot render you a person unfit to patronize this Book, because where I fail, your wisdom, learning, and experience can supply: and therefore if you will pardon my drawing your name from the privacy of your retirement into a publick view, you will singularly oblige and increase those favours by which you have already endeared the thankfulness and service of,
R. R.

