


MY Lord and Gentlemen, I have here by way of Pre∣paration laid open to your view, those Vlcers which you have undertaken to cure, viz. The 2 Factions in Parlia∣ment, Authors of Schismes and Divisions in the two Houses, from whence they are derived to the whole Kingdome, to the obstructing of justice, and of the establishment of our Laws, Rights, Liberties and Peace; the enslaving of the Parliament it self, and the dilapidating of the Publick Treasure: whereby the whole Kingdom may be enfranchised, secured, and united; and the King and his Posterity setled in His due Rights; which is the sum of all your undertakings in your many reitera∣ted Papers. I confess a Herculean labour, and far beyond his clensing of the Augaean Stable; That was performed by an Arm of flesh, this cannot be effected without an extra∣ordinary calling (for ordinary calling thereto you have none, and God seldome blesseth a man out of his calling) and though an heroick heat and zeal may go far, yet it will tire many miles on this side the work, unless it be blown and inspired with divine breath. And as Alchymists say of the Philosophers Stone, so I of this work (which is the Philosophers Stone in our English Politicks) it cannot be effected but by a man of won∣derfull and unspotted Integrity and Innocency; free from all Fraud, Self-seeking, and Partiality. In order to this great work you have already begun to sift and winnow the House of commons, by charging 11 Presbyterian Grandees; who if they be proved guilty, must needs have their counterpanes equally faulty, even to a syllable; in the opposite Junto of Independents; for when two factions shall conspire to toss & keep up the golden ball of Government, Profit & Prefer∣ment
 between them, neither can be innocent; unless there∣fore you apply your corrosive to one Vlcer as well as the other, you will never work a compleat cure, nor will be free from scandal and appearance of faction or design (that I may use your own words) to weaken onely one party (under the notion of unjust or oppressive) that you may advance a∣nother more than your own.Represen∣tation p. 6. sect. 2. Besides, it is observed that you speak but coldly to have the publick accounts of the Kingdom Stated; putting it off with a wish only, as if you did secret∣ly fear, what the Presbyterians openly say, That the Inde∣pendents are guilty of more Millions than their party: your own words are,p. 14. sect. 7. We could wish the Kingdom might both be righted & publickly satisfied in point of Accounts for the vast sums that have been Leavied; as also for many other things, &c. But we are loath to press any thing that may lengthen dispute. Are so many Millions to be cursorily passed over without dis∣pute? were they not the blood and tears of the exhausted people, and the milk of their Babes; are they not like Achan's wedge amongst us? would it not much ease the people of burthens, and go far in the payment of Souldiers and publick debts, to have both the Kings and the Parli∣aments sponges (of what party and profession soever) squee∣zed into the common Treasury whensoever the Common-wealth settles? Review this clause well, and as the Parliament hath altered some Votes for you, so do you alter this clause for the people, who long not only to see the Kingdom, but also our new-made Gentlemen in statu quo prius. Gentlemen, you that will give Counsel will take it without offence, against him that dares lay as good claim to justice and honesty as your selves.

