



Royal Sir,
YOU have Drunk deep in the Cup of Affliction, and we have all Pledged you; it is wholsome, though bitter; but let us pray to God to remove this Cup in time, for the dregs and lees are poy∣son. You have learned by over-winding the strings of Authority, how to tune the People of this Monarchy, without breaking their Patience hereafter. Most Princes desire unlimited power, which is a Sail too great for any Vessel of Mor∣tality to bear; though it be never so well Ballasted with Justice, Wisdome, Moderation, and Piety, yet one flarb or other will endanger the over-setting it. Those Commonwealths are most stable and pleasing where the State is so mixed that every man (according to his degree and capacity) hath some interest therein to content him. The KING, Sovereign Command and Power; The Nobility and Gentry, a derivative Authority and Magistracy; and all enjoy their Laws, Liberties, and Properties. God hath cursed him that removeth the Bound-marks of his neighbour: this is a com∣prehensive curse, Kings enlarging their Prerogatives beyond their limits, are not excepted from it. You may be pleas'd to take heed therefore of two sorts of men, most likely to mis-lead you in this point, Ambitious Lawyers, who teach the Law to speak, not what the Legislators meant, but what you shall seem to desire: To avoyd this snare, suffer your Parliament to nominate 3. men for every Judges place, out of which you may please to choose one, as in pricking of Sheriffs. For it is the people that are ob∣noxious to their wickedness, you are above the reach of their malice. The second sort is Parasitical Divines: These Ear-wigs are alwayes hovering in Princes Courts, hanging in their ears.
 They take upon them to make Princes beholding to their vio∣lent wresting of the Text, to bestow upon them whatever Prero∣gative the Kings of Juda or Israel used or usurped; as if the ju∣dicials of Moses were appointed by God for all Common-wealths, all Kings: as a good Bishoprick or Living is fit for eve∣ry Priest that can catch it. These men having their best hopes of preferment from Princes, make Divinity to be but Organon Po∣liticum, an instrument of Government; and harden the hearts of Princes, Pharaoh-like: Kings delight to be tickled by such venera∣ble, warrantable flattery. Sir, you have more means to prefer them than other men, therefore they apply themselves more to you than other men do. Tu facis hunc Dominum, te facit ille Deum. The King makes the poor Priest a Lord, and rather than he will be behind with the King in courtesie, he will flatter him above the condition of a Mortal, and make him a God Royal. Sir, permit me to give you this Antidote against this poyson; let an Act be past, That all such Divines, as either by Preaching, Writing, or discoursing, shall advance your Prerogative and Power above the known Laws and Liberties of the Land, forfeit all his Ecclesiastical preferments ipso facto, and be incapable ever after, and for ever ba∣nished your Court. But above all learn to trust in your Judgment: Plus aliis de te quàm tu tibi credere noli: God hath enabled you to remember things past, to observe things present, and by compa∣ring them together to conjecture things to come; which are the three parts of Wisdom that will much honor and advantage you. God keep your Majesty; so prayes

