



HAuing brought vnto your Grace the Sheafe Leuit. 13. of my first Fruits to bee waued before the Lord, I am bold now also to offer (not after 7. but aboue 77. weekes) these waue loaues for my haruest, that both may bee hallowed by the same Priestly hand: in which respect your Graces Name which first honored my Pilgrimage, hath the last place in these Pilgrime-Volumes, that my All might be blessed by your gra∣cious embracing (the Alpha and Omega of my Dedications) and might bee by your Fatherly benediction commended to vul∣gar vse. The sutablenesse of the former worke to your Graces Place and recreations, caused the former presumption: but now the Author, by frequent Dedications knowne and graciously ac∣knowledged Yours (how vnprofitable a seruant soeuer) is guiltie not of single boldnesse; beautifying the Frontispice with His Highnesse Name vnto your Graces entertainment (especially

in this time so many wayes Festiull) that your Graces Name and entertainment might so much more Entitle and Endeare the same to His Highnesse. The authorising of Books in iustest order belongeth to your Grace, as doth the Author also: whose mistie conceits of ignorance, or smokie vapours of ambition; suf∣fering the exhaling rayes of Princely heat and Highnesse, hope in the Middle Region of your Gracious and vertuous mode∣ration to be so mildly attempered, that they shall neither fall short in vanishing dewes, nor be reiected after a short blaze as falling Starres, nor transcend into combustious Comets, nor fall downe in furious Stormes, but gently descend as fresh and fruitfull Showers on the thirstie Candid Readers. Pardon farre-fetched similitudes to a Historie of farre-fetched rarities, and the Ele∣ments of the world borrowed to patronise our world of literate Elements, not being (as the commendable labours of Others) a Booke of Voyages and Trauels in the world, but the World hi∣storised in a world of Voyages and Trauels. Wherein our Ship hath beene longer in her Circum-Nauigation then any of the World-Compassers here related; often in danger to be ouerset, whiles the Authors impotent and impatient Genius filled all her sailes to the Top and Top-gallant beyond the proportion of her balast; whereby some leakes of vnwitting errors, happening in so new a course thorow so various Seas, implore your Graces in∣dulgence to the Ship and Pilot. Sir Francis Drake a Mini∣sters sonne, after a happy inuironing of the Globe, feasted Queene Elisabeth aboord his Argo, and then laid her vp at Deptford, deuoting her Carkasse to Time, Her (or rather his) exploits to Fame and Eternitie. An English Minister, begin∣neth and endeth his more then Circling Nauigation with the glorious Name of His Maiestie, in poore, but his best entertain∣ment, and returning thus manned and freighted, humbly sueth to bee laid vp in the Liberties and Libraries of Saint Iames, Yorke-house, Westminster, and Lambith. Here also the Pilot further petitioneth, that his Body being more leakie then his Ship, your Grace (to whom principally the promise was made) will accept this Part of payment in satisfaction of the

whole debt of his Europaean Peregrination and Christian Visi∣tations. But a long Epistle were injurie to your Graces more necèssarie imployments for the Church and State: My selfe am the Epistle, this Worke the Seale, this Epi∣stle but the Superscription, these Pilgrimes all humble Sutors for your Gracious fauour to the worst of

