



Right Reuerend and Honourable:
THese PILGRIMS deliuering a Historie of the World in their owne Trauels by Sea and Land, not onely needed authoritie from the Ad∣miraltie, but fearing suspition of Riot with∣out warrantable assemblie, become humble Sutors for your Lordships fauour. So shall they in the approbation of both (to apply by a warrant of Ego dixi, dij estis, the Patriarchs mysticall Dreame to our Historicall purpose) finde a Scala Coeli to ascend from the ground where they are prostrate Petitioners, to the Princes Highnesse,Gen. 28.12▪ whence authorised they may againe descend and become the Commons of Common Readers. Order requires a Medium betwixt Princely Height and his Lowli∣nesse, whose function is also tearmed Holy Orders, as further tying him to that equall inequalitie; wherein hee beseecheth your Lordship as by speciall Office and in Proprietie to owne that which hee hath

presumed to offer to the Prince in Capite, Quemadmodum sub opti∣mo rege omnia Rex imperio possidet, Domini dominio. Ad reges protestas pertinet,Senc. Benef. l. 7. cap. 4.5. ad singulos proprietas.
Many are the reasons which moued the Author to obtrude his PIL∣GRIMS on your Lordship; because he is deeply obliged Yours for∣mer fauours, euen then when you were initiated in the Mysteries of Honour (learning by seruice to Command) in the Discipline of that Honorable Worthy, Lord Chancellor EGERTON! because some con∣ceptions of this Worke were in your Honourable Iurisdiction of West∣minster, whither lest some traduce Trauellers for Vagrants, they returne in hope of Sanctuarie, not so much trusting to the ancient Liberties, as to your Lordships liberall respect to literate endeauours: because these Trauellers aduenturing the world, seeke like Iacob at his going and returne, a Reuerend Fathers Blessing and Confirmation. The Au∣thor likewise being called on for his promised Europe,Gen. 28. & 32.20, submits him∣selfe to your Lordships Order, heere tendring of that debt, what hee is able, in readie payment. The worke it selfe also being a Librarie in this kind, presents, it selfe to your Honour, the Founder of two famous Libraries; one in Westminster, (where the Stones & renued Fabrikes speake your Magnificence) the other in that famous Nurserie of Arts and Vertue Saint IOHNS Colledge in Cambridge, which sometime knew you a hopefull Sonne, but now acknowledgeth your Lordship a happie Father, where also the Author first conceiued with this Trauelling Geni∣us, whereof (without trauelling) he hath trauelled euer since. Learning, the Aduancer of your Honour, hath secured her welwillers not to bee reiected in whatsoeuer indeauours (Scribimus indocti, docti{que}) to aduance Learning. The greatnesse of Nature to goodnesse of Nature, varietie of Estates to a prime Pillar of State, the Historie of Religions to a Reli∣gious Prelate, of Antiquities to an Antiquarie, cannot bee altogether vnwelcome; that I mention not the dependance of London Ministers Liuings (fined by the Times iniquitie) on your Lordships equall Sen∣tence. These Causes haue moued; One hath inforced; these PIL∣GRIMES are your Seruants, fitly so called à Seruando, saued by your Lordships hand when they were giuing vp the ghost, despairing through a fatall stroke of euer seeing light.Aug. de C.D. li. 19. cap. 5.
Most humbly therefore, sue vnto your Honour, these PILGRIMES for acknowledgement, esteeming your Lordships Name in fore-front a cognisance of blest Libertie and best Seruice; Now when Ianus sends many with gratefull emulations to present their acclamations of a New Yeere, presenting (a wordie rather then worthy Present) a World, yea, a New world, in great part one Age younger to mens knowledge then America, sometimes stiled by that Name. I had written others Causes of my addresse to your Honour, but dare not proceed to interrupt O∣thers more weightie. In all humble earnestnesse beseecheth, now in this Festiuall time, the Author with his PILGRIMES to finde Hospi∣tall

entertainment, not at your Honours table, where Great affaires of Church and State are feasted (except some recreation some times per∣mit) but with Schollers and Gentlemen in the Hall, which will wel∣come such Guests as your Lordship shall Countenance. So shall you encourage euer to pray for the increase of your Lordships happinesse in the Happie Seruice of his MAIESTIE,

