








Gracious Beleevers,
KNowing you to bee the on∣ly heires of those rich and precious promises, which it hath pleased our gracious Fa∣ther freely to give unto his freely beloved Chil∣dren:
I have presumed without your knowledge, to bequeath unto you a fatherless childe brought forth into the world with out the parēts knowledg, hoping you will not be unwilling to let it passe under your favourable protection. For the sub∣ject matter of it, it is ve∣ry beautifull, and of such use, as no child of God can passe to Heaven without it, and in that regard, it shalbe no shame unto you
whom the Lord hath ho∣noured with the grace of beleeving, to accept of this small treatise from one that desires your pro∣spering in your soules & bodies. There is no ble∣mish in this that I dedi∣cate unto you, but such as came by the hands of the unskilfull bringer forth of it, which onely minded their own good in it. And weighing daily the beau∣ty of it, and the sweet re∣freshing strength which
flowed from it, for the o∣vercomming of those three deadly enemies, the Devil, Sinne, and the World, they desired that God would bee pleased to move the mindes of some of his most skilful work∣men, to put to their hands to frame a more perfect worke upon so perfect a subject, and to give a more comely forme, to this so beautifull a sub∣ject, and till then they in∣tended to smother in
their bosomes the beauty of this, rather then to bring it forth with the blemishes of their unskil∣fulnesse. But the good that may bee gain∣ed by it being unut∣terable, I hope grace in the hearts of Gods people will cause them, like the Bee, sucke out the sweet and nourishing vertue of these fragrant flowers, that growe here & there in the garden of Gods word, and not with dis∣content
to cast away this pleasant posie, gathered out of the celestiall Eden of the sacred Scriptures, because an unskilfull hand, and indeed unwor∣thie, hath bound them up together, not so orderly as might please the curious eye of man, no nor their owne, neither was it their ayme so to doe. If any gaine any good by it, the gatherer of these sweet flowers together, neither deserves nor de∣sires
thankes, for they in∣tended it to none but to themselves, and some pri∣vate friends, whose im∣portunitie wrung some copies from thē, & now without their consent have published it. And now since it is published and cannot bee stopped, the Lord cause it to work in all his, according to that which he hath given the promises for to work in the hearts of his peo∣ple, even to make them
partakers of the divine nature. 2. Pet. 1.4. and as a meanes to make thē to take everie day a lit∣tle posie from the rest, one of the promises ga∣thered together, & apply it to thy self, see how thou standest in need of it, and every word in it, & then apply it to thy selfe by faith, & let it stirre thee up to goe to God in pray∣er for the accomplishmēt of them unto thee, then wait in the diligent use
of all meanes for the gai∣ning of them, & you shal finde God not onely ma∣king you heires of pro∣mises, but you shalbe com∣fortable possessours of those many good things which God hath promi∣sed to beleevers. The more you meditate and the oftner you pray up∣on them, the more good will you see in them, and finde flow from them. I say no more, but I doubt not, but your experien∣ces
of good by these pro∣mises wil be more then I can make known unto you I desire the God of mer∣cies, our louing father, in our Lord Iesus Christ, in whom all the promises are Yea and Amen, to make you daily finde ex∣perimentally, the truth of al his gracious promises.
