


SIR,
I Present you here with that whereat you could not bee present, your dea∣rest Mothers Fu∣nerall. A labour which I could wil∣lingly haue spared, if God had beene so pleased. But seeing the great Disposer hath
 otherwise decreed, I gladly publish what I sorrowfully preached. Neyther will I vse that triuiall Apologie for this publication, The importunitie of friends. I confesse mine ambition to divulge my obseruance of that House to which I owe my best endeuours, that the World may see that my worthy Patron hath conferred his free fauors on him who is therefore not altogether vnworthy, because not vnthankfull. What his religious eare receiued with some comfort, I here offer to your iudi∣cious eye; that as you are interessed in the same sorrowes, so you may bee partaker of the same Comforts. Poore, I confesse, are these of mine to those rich ones which the rare Gifts of Nature and Grace affoord to your selfe; yet herein I would haue you sym∣bolize with the Great Ones of this World,Quamuis possideant vr∣bes & regna Tyranni, Iugera pauca tamen, si dabis, accipient. Pam∣phil. Saxus. Lament. 3.1. Who although they possesse whole Cities and Kingdomes, will yet accept an offer of a few Acres.
You may well take vp the complaint of the Patheticall Prophet, I am the man that haue seene affliction; A great affliction first in being depriued of a most louing, holy, help∣full Wife; whose Learning rare in that sexe,
 whose Ʋertues rarer in this Age, whose Reli∣gion, the rarest ornament of all the rest, could not chuse but leuell the sorrow of losing her with the former comfort of enioying her. This Crosse is now seconded with the losse of a deare Mother, and such a Mother as was worthy that Sonne, who was worthy such a Wife. With the Prophets complaint, I doubt not but you also take vp his Comfort,Lament. 3.27. It is good for a man that he beare the yoke in his youth. And as Saint Hierome saith that the zealousOrbitatis magnitudo re∣ligionis occa∣sio fuit; Nebri∣dium suum sic quaerit absen∣tem vt in Christo prae∣sentem noue∣rit. Hieron. ad Saluin. tom. 1. Sal∣uina did by her deare Nebridius, whom shee lost in her youth, so I hope you doe by your deare Saluina and deare Mother, turne the greatnesse of Orbitie into a greater occasi∣on of Pietie, so grieuing for their absence from you, as reioycing that they are present with Christ.
I haue fairely gayned by this Publication, if hereby you take notice of my thankefulnesse to your selfe, the world of my seruiceablenesse to my Patron If God shall conferre a far∣ther blessing (as commonly hee doth in all good attempts) that as some receiued com∣fort in hearing, so many may bee edified by reading these my weake Endeauours:
 this I shall esteeme my happinesse. In this hope, bequeathing the successe to him who is able to doe aboue all that wee can doe or thinke, your selfe to his chiefest blessing, my best affections to your worthy selfe, remayneth

