


THE sacrifice of my Devo∣tions in the Dedication of these Labours (excellent PRINCE) had gone a more humble way of Ambition, than through the hands of Kings and Princes, could I afterwards have justi∣fied such humiliations. But the Tenure of this work is a Title-Royall, which no laps of time nor alteration of language can reverse. In the Ori∣ginall entitled to a King; so continued in the Translation, and so in a direct line descends upon Your Highnesse, as a part of a Royall Patrimo∣ny, which I durst not alienate by a lower inscripti∣on. The Author is Sir Francis Bacon, a name well known in the European world; a learned man, hap∣pily the learned'st, that ever lived, since the decay
 of the Grecian and Romane Empires; when learn∣ing was at a high pitch; and Which rise and fell with those Monarchies; for Scepters and Sciences have the same revolutions, the same periods. In the vast spaces of time between those and these last Ages, Philosophy hath bin, as it were in a slumber, for many centuries of years. For after the Chri∣stian faith grew up, the most writers betook them∣selves to Theology, and some mistaking the right limits of Faith and Reason, fell fowle upon Aristotle and other Philosophers, as Pa∣triarches of Eresy, which were the Patrons of Reason. Somewhat awaked from this slumber she was, by the Arabian writers, the Schoole-Do∣ctors and Spanish Interpreters; made more active by the Chimique Philosophers, but never perfectly recovered untill the daies of this Author, who is the first that ever joynd Rationall & Experimentall Philosophy in a regular correspondence; which before was either a subtlety of words, or a confusi∣on of matter. He after he had survaied all the Re∣cords of Antiquity, after the volumnes of men, be∣took himselfe to the study of the volumne of the world; and having conquerd what ever books pos∣sest (his spacious spirit not thus bounded) set upon the Kingdome of Nature, and carri∣ed
 that victory very farre; and which was more than those victories, himselfe being mortall, left such lawes behind him, as may suffice to subdue the rest, if Princes encourage men, and men be not wanting to themselves. This attempt of his was favour'd by the starres of his Nativity. For it was his felicity to live in the times of two Great Pa∣trons of Learning, K. IAMES Your Highnesse Grandfather of blessed memory, and Your Royall Father now Raigning; and it was their glory that he lived in their times; and will be the eternall ho∣nour of this Nation, that the Greatest Kings and the Greatest Philosopher met togither in one age, in one Iland. By the favour of his Prince, who well knew the valew of Learning and Learned men, he was raised to the highest dignities in the Civile state; and by his own happie Genius, to the highest degree in the state of learning; which was the greater wonder of the two; being such incom∣patible perfections, and divided, enough to fill up the sphere of the greatest abilities alive. Yet with great applause he acted both these high parts, of the greatest Scholler and the greatest States-man of his time: and so quit himselfe in both, as one and the same Person, in title and merit, became Lord Keeper of the Great seale of England, and of the
 Great Seale of Nature both at once, which is a mystery beyond the comprehension of his own times, and a miracle requires a great measure of faith in Posterity, to believe it. This is the Au∣thor I here present unto Your Highnesse, this his worke, which by the powerfull influence of Your favour shall prosper, and, it may be, be quickned to the regeneration of another Phoenix out of his ashes, to adorne your World: for it is only the be∣nigne aspect & irradiation of Princes, that inspires the Globe of learning, and makes Arts, and sciences grow up and florish. Heaven blesse Your High∣nesse with blessings on the right hand and on the left, and make You Heire of all the virtues of your Royall Progenitors, that the Honour of Princes begun in them, may be continued in Your person; and that a future age may be so blessed in You, as the present is in Your Royall Father, the Glory of Kings and their Admiration.

