



HOPEFVLL SIR,
THis weake Worke was intended your worthy Father now deceased, unto whom so many bonds of alliance, of dependance, of ancient ac∣quaintance, and of continued beneficence so straitly tied, so deeply engaged mee; and whom therefore next after mine Honourable Patron, and that Worshipfull Societie, wherein I spent so much time, and whereof I remaine yet an unworthy and unprofitable member, I could not in this kinde over-slip without some just note of ingratitude. But since it hath pleased God unexpectedly (to our great losse and griefe, though, no doubt, his. Philip. 1.23. farre greater gaine) to remove him hence, and to receive him thither where he now resteth, as without need, so beyond reach of these Offices, I know none that may better lay claime to it than your selfe, who are to rise up in his roome, and to stand in his stead, as First∣borne in that Familie, whereof hee lately was Head. I shall not need to adde, what inducements and encouragements I might further receive to addresse these my poore endevours that way,
 from those pregnant prints as well of pietie as other good parts evidently discovering themselves in your owne person, observed by others as well as my selfe, and the rather observed, because so rare ordinarily in others of your yeares, and of your ranke. The consideration whereof, as, Menand. it ministred much comfort to your worthy Father before his decease, esteeming it no small Honour unto him that God had graced him with a Sonne of such parts and hopes in the judgement and by the testimonie of so many as well judicious observers as unpartiall reporters: so it helpeth not a little to mitigate the great griefe of all his and your friends not without great cause conceived for the losse (if they may be termed lost, that God findeth to their eternall weale and welfare) of one whom they so highly ever prized, and now so deserved∣ly desire; and ministreth good ground of hope, that you will fur∣ther in due time, (as he said sometime of Constantines Sonnes). Euseb. in vita Constant. wholly put on your worthy Parents, so. Ibid. exactly resem∣bling them in their vertuous parts, and treading so precisely in their religious steps, that both they may seeme to survive in you, and you be knowne thereby to have come of them. And this the rather it standeth you upon to contend and strive unto, considering (as I doubt not but you doe) that as it is a double. Eurip. Herad Et idem Helen. . Dos est magna paren∣tum virtus. Hor carm. lib. 3. ode 24. . Eurip. Hipp. grace for a good man to be well descended, while both his parentage is a grace to him, and hee likewise a grace to it: So it is; &c. Plut. de aud. poet. Itane tan∣dem majores famam tradiderunt tibi tui, ut virtute eorum an∣teparta per flagitium perderes? Plant. tri∣num. Teterrimis igna∣viae aut nequitiae sor∣dibus imbuta, portenta nobilia. Val. Max. lib. 3. c. 5. Qui acceptam à majoribus lucem in tenebras convertant. Ibid. c 4. a foule disgrace and a double staine for one so descended to degenerate from the good courses, or come short of the good parts of those he came of, and so to prove either a blot or a blemish to them that might o∣therwise have beene a grace and an honour to him, but shall now helpe rather to condemne him than to acquite or excuse him. It was the speech of one for a naturall man notably qualified, though but meanly bred, to a dissolute person well borne, upbraiding him with his birth,Ego primus illustravi domum meam; tu dedecorasti tuam. Cicero post Iphicratem. I am a grace to my stock, thou a blot to thy linage: as another not unlike him in the like case,. Socrates. My stock is some staine to mee, but thou art a staine to thy stock. And indeed as it wereMalo pater tibi sit Thersites, dum∣modo tu sis Aeacidae similis;— Quam te Thersitae fimilem producat Achilles. Iuvenal. satyr. 8. better for a man to come of a Thersites so he prove like Achilles, than to come of an Achil∣les if he prove like Thersites: So it had beene lesse evill for Manasses to have descended immediatly from an Achaz or an
 Achab, than descending (as he did) immediatly from an Eze∣chias to prove in conditions and course of life a second Achaz or an other Achab. This consideration may well be a strong engage∣ment to godlinesse, where but either parent onely hath beene reli∣gious. For if1 Cor. 7.14. either partie beleeving, though the other be an infidell, be of force sufficient to bring the Children bred betweene them within compasse of Gods Covenant: surely the godlinesse of either, though the other were prophane, must needs be no small ti∣all to oblige their issue the more straitly to that course, which they stood bound to have taken, though their parents had beene both of them utterly irreligious. But in this kinde hath God to you beene more abundantly gratious, in blessing and honouring you on both sides with two such worthie Parents, whose memorie as it is and will ever be deservedly honoured with all those that here knew them; so it is justly expected that it be revived in you es∣pecially, and the residue of their issue, as. Eu∣ripid. Meleagr. ; Sophocl. Antigon. in a lively monument, and one better than of marble or brasse, not of their earthly and worldly, but of their spirituall and worthiest parts. Yea, as1 King. 1.37. Davids Courtiers sometime wished, that his sonne Salomon might in state and honour not succeed onely, but exceed David his father: so the like may well in some regards be expected at your hands, in well-doing and piety not to parallel onely, but to surpasse him you sprang from. For, to omit that God hath fur∣nished you with some abilities of learning that hee had not, that he hath called you sooner and entred you earlier, you have the more day before you: Your worthy Father hath broken the ice to you, he hath laid you to your hand a good foundation of religious courses in that Familie that you are to be Head unto hereafter; hee hath setled neere you and obliged unto youMr. T. Baily some∣time Fellow of Maud∣lins in Oxford. a man of singu∣lar parts, who as he was sometime your Tutor and Governour, so will not cease now to be a Counsellor and Coadjutor unto you, by whose advice and assistance you may have plentifull meanes of furtherance in that godly course that by Gods gratious good∣nesse you have already made entrance into. Sir, you see what a taske is exacted of you, what a necessitie of well-doing and of proceeding in good courses is every way imposed upon you. Let all laid together prevaile with you to make you as the more carefull to affect and embrace all good meanes of helpe and furtherance therein; so the more forward and diligent from time to time in∣stantly and incessantly to crave further grace at his hands, by
 whose strength wee all stand; who as hee hath begun this his gratious worke in you, so is alone able to finish it (and I doubt not but hee will so doe) to his owne glory in you, and your eter∣nall glory with him. And to this purpose may this loose discourse afford you any the least helpe, I shall esteeme it a sufficient re∣compence of my labour in the publishing of it, what ever the issue be otherwise: If any other beside shall reape benefit thereby, I desire but that God may have the praise of it, and my selfe one∣ly their prayers. Howsoever it prove, it shall remaine a testi∣monie of the sincere love and respect that hee beareth and oweth to you and the house you come of, who both is and shall by Gods grace alwayes continue,

