



RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL;
BEing requested lately by my kinde Friends, the Wardens of the Worshipfull Companie of Skinners, to assist them in their Visitation of the free Schoole at Tunbridge, founded long since by that worthy Knight, of blessed memorie, Sir Andrew Judde, your Grand∣father, and committed to the charge and over-sight of that well-deserving Society; I made choice of such a portion of Scripture there to treat of, as seemed not altogether unfitting an occasion of that kinde. After the handling whereof, being then presently solicited by some, and since further importuned by others, to make these my weake labours more publike, as not unlikely (so they deemed) to doe some further good; I was at length drawne, re∣garding more their opinion, than mine owne conceipt thereof, as well knowing it to be but a tumultuary worke, amids many di∣stractions hastily peeced together; and to give them satisfaction therein, that seemed so desirous of it; to let it goe abroad, and make triall what benefit either Teacher, or Scholer, or other might make of it. This resolved on, I began to bethinke my selfe, observing the usuall manner of the times, whom I should make choice of for the patronizing of it. In all respects none seemed so fit as your selfe, whom I have therefore made bold to addresse it unto. The Schoole was first erected and endowed by your Wor∣ships Ancestor. And you have worthily built upon his foundati∣on, and added liberally to his gift. So that through your munifi∣cence it is very likely to flourish, and not to come behind some of those that be of chiefe note. Your bounty herein, and in other workes of the like nature, is the rather to be regarded, for that you doe not (as the manner is of the most, unwilling to part with ought, till they must needs leave all;) defer wholly your well-doing to your deaths-bed, or your dying day; but bend your selfe
 thereunto, while you may yet surviving your owne donation, your selfe see things setled in a due course, and receive comfort by view of the fruit and benefit that may thereby redound both to Church and Common-weale. And certainly, to omit, thatBeneficium nisi à vo∣lente non datur. Sen. de ben. l. 5. c. 19. Benefi∣cium est quod qui de∣dit, cum posset & non dare. Ibid. l. 3. c. 19. the good that men doe in their life time is a surer note of true bounty, than that they doe at their decease; asLegatur Ambr. ex∣hort. ad poenit. & Au∣gust. homil. 41. there is greater evidence of sincere repentance, in the abandoning of vice, while men have liberty and abilitie to continue the practice of it, than in leaving of sinne then, when sinne it selfe leaveth them, and they can no longer follow it: Howsoever the benefit to others may be equall in either, to the Donor himselfe in the former is the comfort far greater. Good done at our end is like a Lanterne borne after us, that directeth them that come after us, but affordeth us little light; whereas the good done in our life time is like a light borne before us, that bothBeneficium dando ac∣cepit, qui digno dedit. P. Syrus. benefiteth them and us also alike, imparting light equally unto either. Yea, of such beneficence I may well say more: it benefiteth the giver in divers respects much more than the taker; it is far greater pleasure to the bestower, than it is to the receiver.Act. 20.35. It is a more blessed thing, saith our Saviour, to give than to take. Yea. Epicu∣rus. . Plut. de philosopb. apud duces disser. Non honestius tantum, sed & jucundius est benefi∣cium dare quàm acci∣pere. &c. Itaque Sen. de ben. l. 1. c. 1. Malim non recipere beneficia, quàm non dare. to give than to take, saith the Heathen-man, it is the pleasanter of the twaine: to bestow a benefit upon another, than to receive a benefit from another, it is more delightsome to any man of a free and ingenuous disposition. So that, to passe by the religious consideration of the rich and royall reward and recompence of well-doing from God and with God, which may be alike unto either; the very light of Nature sheweth, that in true Beneficence there is more pleasure and con∣tentment, and consequently more comfort and benefit even for the present, to the giver than to the taker: that which is a great part of it, wanting unto those, that defer their well-doing, though they do never so well then, till their decease. You, worthy Sir, doe otherwise, and long may you live so to doe, to the increase of your joy and comfort here, and the furtherance of your account and rec∣koning else-where. With which wish I seale all up, that I be not over-tedious and troublesome to your Worship, amids your other manifold more serious and weightie affaires; and requesting one∣ly your favourable acceptance of this sory trifle, rest,

