




Right Worshipfull:
SInce it is in mans life,Seneca. as it is in an Enterlude, that it skils not how long, but how well it be acted, and that the word of truth giues out this for a truth,Eccl. 7.10. the end of a thing is better then the beginning; it concernes all men to striue to make good that which they cannot make long, and hauing begunne well, to
 perseuere so doing, lest they leese the things that they haue wrought,2 Iohn. v. 8 Heb. 3.14. if they keepe not sure vnto the end, the beginning, where∣with they are vpholden. Surely, the num∣ber of our yeeres is knowen to GOD alone, our dayes are in his hand; this only remaines vnto vs, while wee are in this world, to keepe our selues vnspotted of the world,Psa. 119.1 Iob. 17.9. immaculati in viâ, vpright & vndefiled in the way, holding on our way with the righteous, and with the pure of hands, increasing our strength. Which that we should not doe, the old enemie of man∣kinde, full of all subtiltie and malice, doth by all meanes labour still to hinder; who, though he be very busie with vs to auert vs from the good, and to make vs forsake our owne mercies in the whole course of our liues, yet he doth especially insidiari calcaneo, trip at the heele, lay wait at the end, to make vs then let goe the holde that we haue, and the hope of assurance, if  cannot before hand make vs to deny the faith, and make shipwracke of good conscience:Eph. 6.13. whom that we may not onely know how to resist, but also resisting to o∣uercome in the euill day, and finishing all things to stand fast, whose fiery darts that wee may quench, this little Booke
 giues vs both the shield of faith, and o∣ther spirituall armour, in which kinde though I haue read and seene others writ∣ten, yet neuer did I peruse any done so full and so feelingly, so succinct in the ful∣nesse, and in so good order and method. This when I had first turned into our En∣glish, being thereunto requested: in the next place, when I thought to whom I might best offer it, your Worthinesse (most religious Knight and Lady) came into my minde, persons as in your ranke and place eminent, so much more eminent in your vertues, who in the example of your zeale in Religion, and loue of the truth, your pietie and charitie, your meekenesse and affabilitie are a patterne vnto others, and doe in the integritie of your liues, be∣ing full of good workes,Lib. de conuer. a seculo, ad Theo. Sen. multum militare acquisitionibus Christi, as saith Ful∣gentius, Purchase much for Christ, and purchase to your selues in the world, with the testimony of a good conscience, that feasts your soules continually, the sweet sa∣uour of a good name;Pro. 15.15 which two things are better vnto you then all riches. Wee that are of your neighbourhood know and see the care that you haue of religious duties, and the workes of charitie which
 you doe; your lowlinesse in your wealth and Honour, and other your remarkeable vertues: It remaines onely, that you that haue so well begunne, and hitherto so well continued, doe now striue to perseuere vn∣to the end, that you may receiue a full reward, that you may crowne the good that hath gone before in you with a good con∣clusion, and that ouercomming the diffi∣culties that are yet behinde, you may at last bring your ship to the Hauen where you would be: Which that you may the better doe, you shall finde no small helpe and furtherance in this smal Booke, which euery where breathing Consolations, will arme your soules against all Temptations, and against the time of your dissolution come so compose your soules to Death, that you shall sleepe sweetly in the Lord, in the peace of a good Conscience, in sure and certaine hope of eternall life: vnto which the Lord of his mercy giue you an entry with all Saints, through his Sonne Christ Iesus, our Lord and Sauiour. AMEN.

