



I Nothing doubt (right honourable) but that it will seeme great rashnes vnto some, and no smal folly, to offer and pre∣sent so simple and slen∣der a booke as this is, vnto your Lord∣ship: for what doth it seeme to bring with it worthie the person of a Noble man? There is no pompe in the manner of speech, for it is rude and country like: the matter it selfe is not handled as a dis∣putation betweene deepe diuines, but af∣ter the manner of plough men and car∣tars:

a great absurditie therefore appea∣reth in this, that an honourable person of great dignitie should be called for, as it were to stand by and hear such speak. Good cause there is therfore that I shold render som reason of this my boldenes, which I will willingly doe, to vse that which the heathen Poet saith:
Si canimus syluas, syluae sunt consule dignae.
Will not suffice: for although respe∣cting the things which I handle, because they belong to the trees that are planted in the Lords Orchard, they doe as farre excel the woods and groues, as the vine doth the bramble bush, yet neuerthelesse he hath so richly decked his base & beg∣gerly matter, hee hath so clothed it in silkes from top to toe, and hath hanged so many iewels vpon it: that it shal finde entertainement, and be thought meete for the courts of princes, where as mine being very porely clad, wil be reiected. I wil expresse therefore a better reason of my doing, which is this. As those which haue corne fieldes, think it not a

thing vnmecte to be told by their seruāts of thistles & weedes, which would hin∣der & mar the corn, if they prouide not to haue them plucked vp: euē so I know that it is not an vnworthy thing to shew vnto those which are of highe calling, the hurtful & dangerous weedes which would ouergrow and choke the heauē∣ly seed of the gospel, sowen in the Lords field. When as our church therefore & common wealth, being the Lords hus∣bandrie, is ouergrowne with weedes & almost laide waste, I see no cause where∣fore I may iustly be blamed, for giuing notice thereof in sōe part vnto your ho∣nour. Seeing their principall causes and sountaines frō whēce corruptiōs flow are to be taken away and dryed vp by those whō God hath placed in the high∣est roomes. Among which the want of a sincere ministerie of the woorde is the greatest through absence of which, there is a flood of ignorance and darknes, o∣uerflowing the most part of the land: the feare of God is banished from the grea∣test

parte: the woonderfull heapes and piles of sinne, which should bee washed and cleansed away by the word, do vn∣doubtedly with one voice cry alowd in the eares of the Lord, for vengeance vp∣on the whole realme. The papistes can∣not be conuerted, but hardened & tur∣ned out of the way, there is so foule dis∣order, and so many stumbling blockes cast in the way. The Diuell hath elbowe roome to spread abroad, to plant & wa∣ter all kinde of errours, so fewe there be to withstand him. But to come to that particular which I hādle in this treatise: there are the most in number, who ha∣uing Poperie taken from them and not taught throughly and sufficiently in the Gospel, doe stand as men indifferent, so that they may quietly inioye the world, they care not what religion come: they are like naked men fitte and readie for any coate almost that may bee put vp∣on them. The life of these is exceeding prophane they haue hardened thēselues in their sinnes, by reason which they ga∣ther

partly out of their owne braine, & partly out of some sayings in the word, by which they cloke & defēd their own corrupt wayes. I haue therefore gathe∣red the most commō principles of their faith and religion, by which they arme themselues, against true repentance, and right vnderstanding: I haue not noted all, neither haue I medled with those se∣uerall grosse absurdities, whiche eache hath proper to himself, for that should be infinite. I trust your Lordeship will rightly construe my good meaning, and take in good worth this simple treatise: pitying the case of the poore church of Christ, which is so ful of greeuous sick∣nesses and sores, that vnlesse she be relee∣ued and cured, she wil scarce be able to continue life. She cannot but most hum¦bly craue his dutie at the hands of those which are neere about her deare Nurse: From whom she hath nowe long time receiued wonderfull protection and de∣fence against aduersaries: that they make knowne her state, and labour the reco∣very

& retaining of her health. Because it doth stand not only with their eternal glorye in the worlde to come, but also with their honourable estate in this life. Which cannot be established to florish in continuance, vnlesse the Lorde God haue his thrōe so erected in the middest of her that she may florishe. For where he is dishonored and dispised of those whom shee nourisheth in her bosome, her case is daungerous, for it is against al wise pollicie to make him an aduer∣sarie, who hath all power, & of himselfe is able to roote out and destroy mighty kingdomes: so that if she keep in fauour & league with him, there is no feare of any other.
This Lord of Lordes, and most migh∣ty king increase abundātly in yee al hea∣uenly & spirituall graces, with increase of honour in this world, to his glory &c your eternal comforte Amen.

