


To the right Honorable and his ve∣ry good Lord, Thomas Earle of Sussex, Vicount Fitzwater, and Lord Egremont, and Burnell, Knight of the most Honorable order of the Garter, Captaine of all the Queenes Ma. Gentlemen Pencioners, & Gentlemen at armes: Chiefe Iustice & Iustice in Oyer of all her Ma. Forrests, Parkes, Chases, & warrens by South Trent: and L. Cham∣berlaine to her Highnesse, grace & peace in our Sauiour Christ.
MAny in these dayes, with great lear∣ning, haue encountred the Papists, & strongly confuted their errours: It may be maruelled therefore, what should make me so bold as to attempt any such matter, after so great clearkes, being farre vnable to come nigh that which they haue attayned. I answere in mine owne defence, that my trauell is not to this ende, as though I would make pretence of equall learning with those: but rather to put the stone and sling into the hands of litle Dauid, to conquer great Goliah withall, when as he is not able to weld the weighty armour of Saul. The battell is hot & fierce euery where, betweene Israell & the vncircumcised Philistines. Great armor & weapons are prepared for the souldiers wherewith to arme and defend themselues: yet for the most part, not such as do fit young Dauid. For whereas sundry men of fame haue shewed deepe skill, in setting foorth their bookes to confute the Papists, full of learning out of the ancient Doctors, Councels, Hystoriographers and o∣thers: it doth not so well serue the turne of the simple vnlearned man, neither can he defend himselfe there∣with, because it is beyond his reach. This is the thing which hath moued me to write somewhat of these
 matters: applying my selfe to the capacitie of the vn∣learned, dealing onely out of the word of God, which lyeth open vnto them as their Armorie. This also hath caused me to deale in those points which do most commonly trouble them, omitting the great points in controuersie: perswaded that I performe a duty there∣in. For like as when an house is on fire, the weake which is not able to throw a bucket of water to the top of the roofe, may yet by no meanes be excused, if he stand and looke on: because he may do somewhat in the lower parts of the walles: Euen so I thinke my selfe not dis∣charged, for this, that I am not of ability for to set foorth any thing, which may reach so high as to encounter with the principall aduersaries, and to further the learned: seeing I may profit the simpler sort, for whose sakes, and in respect of whom, I haue taken this trauel. I present this simple and poore treatise vnto your honor, not as though I did esteeme it worthy to beare the name and title of so noble, so honorable, and so great a personage, and of so high estate. But onely (hauing no other way or meane) to signifie and shew forth a thankfull mind, for that great ayde and honourable assistance which I haue receiued from your Lordship, in the furtherance and mainte∣nance of the Gospell. It hath pleased the God of hea∣uen, the Lord of the whole earth, to appoint me being very weake to build in the desolate places, and to spreade the light of his glorious Gospell, euen there, where it appeareth by the abundance of iniquity that of long time Satan hath had his throne. How vnwilling he is to be displaced, and to giue ouer the roome vnto Christ, may euidently appeare, euen by this, that he stir∣reth vp his warriers, which like wild Bores would roote vp all that may be planted, which with malicious in∣tent, and subtill craft, conspire what mischiefe soeuer they can, thrusting forth their bold instrument, which with an iron face, is so hardy that he dare attempt any thing; which could no way be danted in his venturous
 attempts, nor their furie qualified, vntill such time as he was fallen into the hands of your honour, to come to his account for his manifold misdemeanours, and to re∣ceiue some wages for his trauell. I trust therefore your honour will thinke the best of this my boldnesse, consi∣dering it is what I am able. If I could in more ample manner testifie my good will, & in any sort to be thank∣full, agreeable vnto that which of duty I owe for your great kindnesse, then would I be glad. But I leaue the full recompence vnto him who is able indeede to reward whatsoeuer is done for his name sake, & for the defence of his Gospell, and succour of his litle flocke, which is alwayes compassed about with so many enemies, that they are able to deuour and eat it vp, and yet their bel∣lies no whit the fuller. Some do wonder how it should come to passe, that among vs there should be so many, which being borne since the Gospell was restored in this land, are so zealously addicted vnto Popery, which they neuer did know: and so vtter enemies vnto the Gos∣pell, which they heare: but if they weigh the causes of this deadly mischiefe, they will cease wondring at that, and rather wonder, that there be no more. For how can it be, so long as there be so many abuses in the ministery, but that many shal stumble and loth the Gos∣pell: for from thence, as it is manifest, the chiefe cause of this euill doth spring. True it is, that our ministery, doth fight against them, but yet in such sort, that it doth greatly increase them, seeming and pretending to tread vpon those cockatrice egges, for to breake them, and so to destroy vtterly the viperous generation, when as indeed, they sit vpon them, and so hatch the broodes of this euill kind, and bring them forth in great plentie. For behold a number cry out against Popery, and proclaime vtter defiance in speech, but their do∣ings are such, that for euery one which they conuert to the Gospell, they cause an hundred to reuolt, to be hardned in their errours, or fall into flat Atheisme:
 while many cōtrary to the profession which they made when they entred, setting aside the care of soules, not e∣steeming, nor regarding what become of them, studie most how to clime high, & to satisfie their ambitious de∣sire of honor: raking together liuings, couetously & gree∣dily: not caring who feede the flocke, so they may come by the fleece. Moreouer, the doore hath bene opened al∣so to let into the Church, a rowte and swarme of such as are more like the priests of Ieroboam then ministers of the Gospell, not onely vnlearned Idols, which haue mouthes and speake not, which being weary of their oc∣cupations and couet to liue easily, & to that end are en∣tred, but also riotous dicers, gamsters, quaffers, quarrel∣lers, adulterers and such like. If the matter were secret, I should do amisse to make it manifest, but when as it is open in the sight & view of all men, who can complaine iustly, when it is spoken of? The Lord put into the hart of our gouernours to redresse it. The same Lord heape his graces vpon your Lordship, with increase of honor in his world, and euerlasting life in the world to come Amen.

