



RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, I stood obliged to the Stock you both sprang from, before I was able to apprehend what such obligation meant. Your worthy Mother was one of those that presented me to the sacred Laver, and that undertooke there in my be∣halfe. Shee answered there for me, Priusquam respondere possem: uti Iunius ver∣tit. Psalm. 119.67. when I could not answer for my selfe; and did further also then seale up her free affe∣ction to me with a reall testimonie of her Love. Neither did her kindnesse towards me then and there expire; but as it was oft renewed in her life time, when occasion thereof was offered, so it ceased not untill her selfe deceased. Shee performed one of the first religious Offices for mee soone after my birth: and it was one of her last Pious works to remember me, among others whom she had performed the like Office for, at the time of her decease. Some monument of my thankfull acknow∣ledgement
 hereof being desirous to have extant, whom should I addresse it unto rather than your selves; the only two Prin∣cipals now left of that Family? Being therefore moved to make publike two of my weake Discourses, containing the ex∣plication of two portions of Scripture, of some neare relation the one to the other; the one of them relating a memorable ex∣ample of the performance of that that is promised in the other, to wit, of Gods blessing of those with temporall things, that are carefull to looke after the spirituall: This of the twaine I chose the rather to present your WorshipsThe Worshipfull Companie of Ha∣berdashers. with∣all; partly, because at the motion of the one of you, being then Head of that worthy Societie, which I acknowledge my selfe also a debtour unto, it was by word of mouth at first delive∣red; and partly also, that it may helpe (for the best also, evenGenes. 35.1. Jacob himselfe, in this kinde need helps) to egge you on, whom God hath blessed with so large a portion of his bountie, unto those religious offices, that by occasion of Jacobs exam∣ple, men of your rancke are therein encited unto, whether risen from meane estate, as with him here it had beene, or from the first largely and liberally endowed, as your selves. The Worke indeed is growne much larger, than at first was delivered, by reason that a Question betweene us and the Romanists, con∣cerning Mans merit, is therein now discussed, which was then but touched upon and pointed at onely; neither the streights of time admitting over-long discourse then, nor such matter of controversie so well befitting the occasion that then was. The rest, without any materiall alteration or addition, is the same for substance that then it was. Which recommending en∣tirely, as now it is, to your Worships, together with my Love and Christian service to you both, and mine heartie Prayers to God for the well-fare, spirituall especially, of you and yours, with the rest of the Branches of that Family, wheresoever now transplanted, I take leave of you for the present, and rest

