


IF any man (Reuerend and most famous men, my Masters Friends & Brethren in Christ to be had in singular honour) would accommodate that same Platonicall definition of Philosophie, that it is a Meditation of death, to the true Theosophie of Christians, hee may doe it,
 as I thinke, with the good leaue of the truth, seeing as it were the beginning and end thereof, doth consist in the Meditation of death. Now I vnderstand vnder the name of death, both the death of Christ, and our death also. The death of Christ and his Passion, is the waight of the Christian name,1 Cor. 2.2. thence the Apostle did iudge, that hee knew no other thing among the Corinthians, then Christ crucified and dead. By the death of Christ was made an expiation of our sinnes, a destruction of the power of Satan, a confirmation of the new couenant, and an easing of the terrours, which are wont to be present in our death: therfore the Meditation of the death of Christ ought neuer to depart from our memorie. Neither let vs any time of our life forget our owne death, that as Death expects vs euery day, so wee may also expect that againe each day.Hieron. E∣pist ad Pauli. He which remembers daily that hee shall die, he doth easily contemne all earthly things, he prepares himselfe by true and earnest con∣uersion to a blessed death: he giues his minde to sincere pietie: he doth patiently endure all manner of aduersitie, and is set on fire euen from the heart, with an ardent desire of eter∣nall life.Psa. 90.12. Teach vs, O Lord, prayes Moses, to number our dayes, that wee may apply our hearts vnto wisedome: therefore a great part of Christian wisedome consists in the perpe∣tuall Meditation of death. That must a long time be learned, which that it may once right∣ly be done, stands vpon our eternall saluation. It is appointed for all men once to dye: but to dye godlily, to dye in Christ, to dye blessed∣ly befalls not all men; therefore our minde
 must be prepared to that blessed good disposi∣tion of dying, yea it must be garded with the shield of the Word and Prayers. For if at any, surely in that last time of our life, the enemie that hath a thousand wiles, doth lay a snare for our saluation, and endeauours with all his strength to wrest the possession thereof from vs, whether some of the auncients doe apply it, that the infernall Serpent is said especially to bite the heele, for he knowes very well, I say he knowes, that all the matter is in safety if that last conflict be valiantly ouercome of vs: on the other side that it will be ioyned with our euerlasting reproach and losse, if the other parts of our life, as it were of a Comedie, be∣ing well acted, wee behaue our selues not so comelily & valiantly in this last Catastrophe. Hence come those diuers tentations, with which as it were with Rammes, he assaults our hearts in diseases, and in the agonie of death: hence come those fierie Darts, which he casts against vs with all his strength: hence comes that horrour and anguish, which wee feele when wee are set before the gates of Death. Blessed is hee, which shall heere ouercome, blessed is he which shall be faithfull to death,Apoc. 2.3. hee shall be made partaker of all those good things which are promised to the stout Soul∣diers of Christ in the Reuelation.
What is our life? t'is Death we doe deface,
Our age by dying, life and death doe pace
Hand ioyn'd in hand. But Christ the Captaine is,
And gate of life; our death is slaine by his.
He that doth firmely trust in him shall bee
From wound of death eternall safe and free.

But this our hope with diuers stormes is tost,
When in Deaths agonie we are neere lost.
To ouercome these stormes will most auaile vs,
Least life in lifes first entry chance to faile vs.
Wherefore whereas I haue endeauoured by such an explication of the Historie of the Passion and death of Christ as I could make, which I did set forth of late, to instill into god∣ly mindes the Meditation of the death of Christ, I haue thought that I shall do a worke worth the labour, if I propose vnto them also the Meditation of our death. To which end I haue written this Manuell of Consolations to be opposed to the terrours of death, and ten∣tations in the agonie of death, for mine owne priuate vse onely, for I carrie about a sickly bo∣die, a weake vessell. Moreouer, Death now of late hath made a very lamentable slaughter in my house, and there are some causes for which it is feared, that I shall not liue long; There∣fore I would prepare and arme my minde be∣times to this last battell; and hemmed in as I am with so many domestique euils, I bestowed some dayes on the godly Meditation of this Booke, which Meditations of mine, such as they are, seeing (perhaps) they may also be profitable to others, I haue not gaine-sayed that they should be made common: But this I would haue men admonished in the very en∣trance of this writing, that I haue not written these things to secure impenitent and hard hearts, but to the contrite, broken, and weake consciences. Exhortations to true pietie haue another place; this whole labour is imployed in consolations to be opposed to death, and
 temptations in death. Whosoeuer therefore de∣sires to receiue this oyle of Consolations, let him bring the vessell of a contrite heart. For what is consolation vnto him, which is not yet contrite, broken, or made sad? But to you men very Reuerend and most famous, Ma∣sters, Friends, and Brethren in Christ, singu∣larly beloued, I would entitle this Manuell, that there might be extant a publique testi∣monie of that most straight friendship and brotherhood which hitherto we haue obserued betweene our selues one to another: seeing that of all, and amongst all, I esteeme you dea∣rest in this world, as of whose pietie, curtesie, faithfulnesse, and other many vertues I haue had plentifull experience in our fiue yeeres con∣uersation. You also carrie about you a sickly body, neither can it chuse but that the memory of Death should daily come into your minds. Therefore I doe not doubt, although your faith doth not want those props which I haue gathered together in this little Booke for mine owne, and other mens vse; yet that the reading thereof will not be vnpleasant vnto you. Especially seeing whatsoeuer is in it, it doth proceede from a friendly & well-affected minde. The Lord Iesus with his grace, and with his spirit euery way blesse vs, and the la∣bours of our Ministerie. Giuen at Coburg the Kalends of May. Anno. 1611.

