



DEare Sister, you knowe this
World is not your home, but
a Pilgrimage, and a place
wherein God trieth his chil∣dren:
And I doubt not, but
you haue learned, howe to make right vse
and profit of the Lord his merciful chastise∣ments:
For, the Lord vseth many waies and
meanes for the triall of his. I knowe, You
haue heard of the patience of IOB, (as
saith the Apostle IAMES) and you haue seene
in the end, how that God is merciful, patient
and long suffering: euen so say I vnto you,
that you shall receiue accordingly, if so be
you be patient: that is, if you feare God, set

his vvord before your eies, and serue him
thereafter: and if hee lay his crosse on you,
beare it with patience, the which you shall
do, when you considder it, not according
to the present sense, but according to the
end. Heb. 12. And I doubt not, but you
are of the number of them, which are daily
dying to themselues, and this sinfull world:
Ye are one of them that lookes for a citie,
whose builder and maker is God:Heb. 13. 14 Ye are
one of them that knowes your selfe and your
being,Genes. 15. 13. 14. to be in this earth, but as a Pilgrime
and stranger: for heere yee haue no byding
place: Yee are one of them which haue made
a Covenant with God,Deut. 29. 14. 15. to forsake your
selfe, and this sinfull World: Yee are one of
them,Mal. 3. 16. vvho say, Nay, The Lord hath all
things written in his memoriall book,
for such as feare him & remember his
Name: Yee are one of them, vvhich haue
their Loynes girded about,Luk. 52. 35 and their
lights burning in their hands: Like vn∣to
servants that wayte vpon their Lordes
comming: Yea, and I am certainlie perswa∣ded,
that you (and your godly Brethren and

Sister,) are of the number of them, vvho
haue the Lord for their portion,Deut. 32.  which
haue their hope in heaven,Col. 1. 27. vvhose leader
is Christ Iesus the sonne of God, and gover∣nour
of Heaven and Earth, vnto him is
given all power,Mat. 28. 18. he is God almightie with
the Father and the holy Ghost, praise vvor∣thie
for euermore.
Now (deare sister) I partly knowing the
present estate of your troubled & perplexed
minde, in regard of the want of your grea∣test
outwarde comfort, I thoght it good, to
present you with this sweet Sermon (made
by that godly-learned & zealous Pastor of
Christs Church, M. RICHARD GREEN∣HAM)
which by Gods providence came vn∣to
my handes; containing a comfort for a
troubled conscience, he being throgh the
mercy of God, a man greatly exercised there∣with,
and therfore taught the same through
his owne experience: hoping, through the
working of Gods holy spirit, it shal also mini∣ster
comfort vnto your trobled mind. Ther∣fore
(my dear sister) to conclude, I beseech you
to be instāt with our merciful God, by harty

praier, for the spirit of wisdome, knowledge,
humblenes, meeknes, sobriety & repentance,
which euen the best of Gods Children haue
great neede of, because our sins continuallie
prouokes the Lord our God to be angrie with
vs: but let vs beare his fatherly corrections,
& acknowledge our faults with bitter tears,
and sorrowfull sighes: not doubting, but so
hee will be mercifull vnto vs in Christ: To
whome with the Father and the holy spirit,
be all glory, honour, praise, and everlasting
thanks, for euermore. Amen.

