



RIght Noble, my verie especiall good Lord, I present nowe vnto your Lordship, this historicall Essay, in print, which I offered before in wri∣ting, eyther because I am vrged to this dutie by your most honoura∣ble munificence toward me, or be∣cause I cannot prouide my other exercises written of greater and grauer matters. Yet I take the defence of mediocritie for a matter of some weight, both in this historie of Brute, which is made litigious, and in any other position of much lesse importance, euen of haire it selfe; insomuch as mediocritie cannot be disa∣lowed.
It is manifest, that some haue written more of Brute then behoued them, but some haue behaued themselues vnkindly against Brutans, and done lesse for them, then they should.
They are on both partes, too learned for me, I am not worthy to be their moderator, in this question of Brute: howbeit, as they haue freely deliuered their opinions with out any stop, so would I shew the good will I beare to the one part, without any hatred to the other. God forbid,

that diuersitie of studies, should bring forth a diuorce∣ment of heartes among neighbours and friendes: it were better no bookes at all were written, then to a breake the bond of vnitie, and loosen the yoke of obedience by them, seeing wee may liue better without them, men without these.
I hope, I am cleane from any abuse in this present trea∣tise, I will euer honour strangers, for their good qualities of learning and life: but I must not hold my hand and pen still, when I see them too busie, in tossing our histories and actes, at their owne pleasure, which appertaine not vnto them: they cannot stay mee from my studie, more then I kept them from this practise. I fauour the historie of Brute, without regard of their disfauour, as they dislike it, without respect of other mens liking. I cannot in loyaltie defend euery Brute, but I may without any breach of du∣tie, defend this great Brute of Brutanie.
Wherefore I most humbly beseech your most excel∣lent good Lordship, to accept of this mightie Captaines present defence, euen as your worthy honour, vseth to al∣lowe the reasonable sutes of approued men, which are like to do God good seruice, and this kingdome.
Thus trusting to your Lordships magnificent, & sweete fauour heerein, I most heartily commend your true re∣nowmed honour, to the blessed estate of immortalitie.

