



IT hath often fallen out (most Reuerend my very good Lord) that small things haue beene offered informer ages to mightie and noble Potentates. But then though small

in quātity, yet haue they either bene such matters as like Pearles haue in a little roome contained greate worth, or els they haue beene such as in case of necessitie haue suppli∣ed a want, or stode in some good steade to those great Personages to whom they haue beene deliuered and presented. The treatise of Isocra∣tes  sent to king Nicocles was shorte and compendious. The water, which Plutarch doth report to haue beene taken vp with the palme of a poore mans hand and with a cheerefull countenance ex∣hibited to King Artaxerxes, was but of very small quantitie, yet was the one very precious, eloquent and full of well compacted instructions,

and the other very needfull & cō∣modious to remooue or ease some pre∣sent distresse and extremitie. But this my discourse being penned as it was vttered in rude and homely manner, and containing also no∣thing but that which is so farre and so many degrees better knowne to your Grace than I am any way able to expresse and make manifest: I should in no case aduenture to pre∣sent it vnto your Grace, but that I haue had heretofore so often and so plentifull experience of your Graces exceeding clemencie, that not only it hath often accepted great and ex∣quisite volumes written by them who haue had a calmer quietnesse for their studies, and haue beene

that way of farre more fit sufficien∣cie, but also hath sometimes fauo∣rably receiued such poore tokens of my humble and deutifull affections as my troublesome estate of sustenāce and slender talent of knowledge haue bene able to addresse & afford.
In the Preface of my Sermon next following, which was first printed (because indeede I ment not at this time to haue set forth any more) I haue signified that when I consen∣ted to the publishing thereof, my purpose was, before it & in the same volume to haue prefixed one other Sermon made some eight years since vpō the beginning of the first psalme. But seeing that both there are now no more copies of that Sermon to be

had amongst the Stationers & that also I perceiue there haue bene a cō∣uenient & sufficient nūber of them alreadie printed & dispersed, I haue thought it not amisse in lieu & steed therof to adde this short speach had at Tanridge the first of Feb. last past vpon a portion of the first lesson appointed for the Sabbath. In which as certain learned Iustices of Surrey (who in heart honor your Grace) M. Bostock & M. Sander my very good friends with other vertuous & religious gentilmen thē assēbled, had bin worthy to haue had more exact matter thē my voice eyther did or could at that time deliuer: somuch more now your Grace shoulde haue had, if any way my penne had bin of

power to prepaire it. This Sermon describing (as it doth) the originall cause of both those enormities which are condemned in the treatises fol∣lowing, and hauing bene (as it was) in time first made and vttered, doth therefore now iustly chalenge to possesse here in order the first and principall place.
And being by the Printer vni∣ted with the rest into one little dis∣course as to frame thereby some slē∣der gift to beginne the new yeare withall, I doe here most humbly pre∣sent it vnto your Grace, hoping that the greatnesse of my sincere and deutifull desires shall not be measu∣red by the smalnesse of my gift, and praying that J may remaine still

continued in the good fauour of your Grace, to whom god the disposer of all times grant, that this and ma∣ny other good yeares may be most healthfull & prosperous to the ioy of vs all, who do hartilie desire the long peace of the Church and to your eternal & most Honorable renowne. From Tanridge this se∣cond of Ianuarie. 1598.

