



IF THE DANGERS AND perils of S. Paules time, dearely beloued, ministred and gaue oc∣casion vnto him, for to feare of the losse of such people as then were conuerted vnto the knowledge and vnder∣standing of Gods holy word, least by negligence or corrupt doctrine of the Bishops and pastours, they might be seduced and brought into errous doubtlesse the daungers of this our time, that be not onely to be feared, least such as knowe the truth, be by errour seduced and brought from the truth, or els by continuance in vngodly life, con∣tinue in the truth in vaine: But also that the most part of people be yet ignoraunt and not conuer∣ted vnto the truth, should minister and giue occa∣sion
vnto vs a great deale more to bee vigilant and circumspect: not onely to keepe those in truth, to whom God hath reuealed it: But also to winne and conuert with all prayer, diligence, pre∣ching, and other instruction, such as yet be igno∣rant and out of the way, vnto the truth and know¦ledge of Gods word. And so much the rather be∣cause we see by experience, and also feele it in our selues, that the iust God is offended and angrie with our sinnes, and will not be contented vvith these troubles, miseries and crosses, that already he layeth vpon vs, but doth doubtlesse prepare & make ready many more and more greenous. Our office therefore is to be diligent and circumspect for the people of God, and now the hand of God being stretched foorth, to admonishe the flocke committed vnto our charges in time, least they dye, and their bloud required at our handes. Cer∣taine I am, that our sinnes bee the onely cause, wherfore this most iust God is offended, and cer∣taine we bee, that the onely waye and meanes to please and quiet him againe, is to leaue & washe away our sinnes. VVhat the sinnes of the people be vvhere vvithall God is thus offended, you that haue the ouersight of them, knovv or yee ought to know. I meane not to descend particularly to any sinne, least peraduenture I might seeme to be timereous and ouer hardy, to iudge more then I perfectly know: or els in naming suche sinnes, as manye good simple people haue not hearde of, might rather learne to augment the euill they know, then to learne the good they know not. It is the duety of euery good pastour and curate, di∣ligently
to search and knovv what vertue is most meet to be commended, and vvhat vice most to be reprehended in the Church that he serueth. I vvill leaue therefore the vnknovven euils vnto metro the sheepheard of euery parishe, requiring him to marke the sinnes of the people after, and by the estimation of Gods worde, and thereby to pender the condition of his people least that he cause them and do the same him selfe, swallow a Camell, and be chooked vvith a flee: leape ouer a blocke, and stumble at a straw. Before all things, see that the people know their commandements, and the vvorkes thereof, apertaining vnto God, in the first table, that they honour no vvrong not false God, nor yet the true God, a vvrong vvay: but as he hath commaunded him selfe, in the olde Testament, and the nevv. And also that they auoyde all suche sinnes, faultes, and dis∣obedience, as bee contrary to the commaunde∣mentes of God, in the second table. And for a helpe vnto you, and also to the people in this be∣halfe, I haue set forth here the 13. Chapter of S. Paule to the Romaines, vvhich intreateth of all the second table, and duetie of a Christian man, hovv he should vse him selfe vvith, and tovvardes all sorts of people. Most heartily praying you, and also in Gods name, and the kings maiesties name commaund you, that as many as serueth any cure vvithin this Diocesse, that can not for lacke of learning or exercise, teach or preach him selfe to the people the like doctrine, that they doe euery day, reade vnto the people this 13. Chapter, as I haue here set it forth: that the people may learne
to knovve, loue, and feare the better the Kinges maiestie, and other such Maiestrates as be by him appointed ouer the people. And all such as God hath giuen grace of preaching vnto, in their Ser∣mons, shall oftentimes inculcate and persvvade this argument and rule of obedience vnto the people. And the cause vvhy, I haue vvritten in this chapter, more then an other, and thinke it ve∣ry expediēt to be now taught vnto the people, is the great & dangerous offences and sinnes of the richer sort of people, and also of the poore, both in this shier, and also other the kings maiesties, in this realme. And certaine I am that both of them shall dye eternally, if they amend not. VVhere∣fore to deliuer my soule I giue such as bee com∣mended by God and chokines maiestie vnto my charge, vvarning of the iudgement and damnati∣on to come before. The rich man so incrocheth, gathereth togeather, and obtayneth so much in∣to his ovvne handes, that he alone possesseth the earth, liueth thereby, and his poore neighbours ready to dye for lacke, so that hee is brought into Tantalus paine, meat and drinke, cattell and corn inough of euery side of him, yet shall rather dye for laeke then that vnsatiable and neuer conten∣ted, couetous persons will price their goods so as poore men, their wiues and their children may be able to bye reasonable penyworthes of Gods a∣boundant plenty, and riches that he bringeth out of the earth. These men except they repent, can∣not bee saued, nor be partakers of the merites of Christes passion. For God vvould the rich to giue vnto the poore, but our men that care neither for
God nor the Kings lavves, vvill neither giue nor sell what soeuer necessitie do require. If they wold not care for Gods word, yet should they haue re∣spect to nature and to their countrie, though the poore man be not a rich man, yet is he a Christi∣an, and thy country man, of whome nature and countryship requireth thee to haue compassion. The poore man partly prouoked by necessitie & need, and partly of vnchristian hatred & disdaine he hath at his neighbours wealth and prosperitie, conspireth, worketh, prouoketh, and desireth by all meanes to oppresse and rob his richer neigh∣bour, and will by force, strength, treason; sedition, commotion, assemblance, and gathering togea∣ther of such as he is him selfe, against Gods lawes, Gods ordinances, Magistrates, and superiour po∣wers, take away and vsurpe euery mans goods, he careth not how. Not remembring the iudgment and terrible damnation of God, for his so doing, and that it is his bounden duty to suffer and beare such needes and necessities, as God layeth vppon vs for our sinnes And that vpon paine of hell fire▪ no man shoulde reuenge his ovvne wronges, but commend him selfe to God, who can and vvill heare the prayers of the poore in their troubles and needes. And that they should offer their sup∣plications to the kinges maiestie, and to such o∣ther as be appointed for the redresse of such op∣pression and wronges: and not to take weapons, armour and force against God and his ordinan∣ces. In case the Kings maiestie and the rest apoin∣ted to see poore mens causes redressed, will not hearken to their clamour, doubtlesse the ire and
vengeance of God will punish them, and so much the rather, if the people quietly and obediently commend their causes vnto him, the which it they do not, they perish eternally. For there is no trai∣tour nor seditious man can be saued, but obediēt and quiet men shall inherite the kingdome of heauen, and such as suffer wrong, and not such as do wrong, or intend to reuenge by strength, their owne wrongs. Therefore to keepe the people of this Diocesse from the displeasure of God and their King, and my selfe from euerlasting damna∣tion. I require you most diligently to teach them this chapter euery weeke, one part of it, the Sater∣day at euensong: the other, the Sunday at the morning prayer, and the third part, the Sonday at euensong. Thus fare ye all wel, and God giue vs grace al, well to discharge our offices commended vnto vs.

