



MAdam, if I should vn∣dertake a discourse of the worth and excellen∣cie of Prayer, it vvould be much harder for mee to keepe measure, then to bee furnished vvith matter. How it is com∣maunded by God, and commen∣ded by the frequent practise of all the faithful, there is no man rea∣ding the Scripture can bee igno∣rant: and what svveetnesse it brings to the Soule and Consci∣ence, by hauing such a continuall

entercourse & communion with the Lord, I hope your Ladyship can witnesse from your owne ex∣perience. This is all I will say on the behalfe of Prayer, that as it is one of Gods titles of Honour to be stiled, The hearer of Prayers (Psal 65.2.) so to call vpon the Name of the Lord is put for the whole duety and as it vvere the life and substance of a Christian. (1. Cor. 1.2. 2. Ti. 2.19.). Pray∣er is that vvhich seasoneth all other seruices which we offer vn∣to God, it is an argument of a mans effectual profiting by other exercises of godliness, it is a thing vvhich the persecuters of the Saints, vvhen they violently cause all publike acts of worship∣ping

God to be intermitted, can∣not abbridge vntil life it selfe be extinguished. Much talking there is of Prayer in the world: but if, setting aside mens lip-de∣uotiō, enquiry be made into them, what apprehension they haue of their owne wants, what conceit of the Maiestie and presence of God, what knowledge and vnder∣standing of his promises, vvhat care (when they come to pray) to watch ouer their own straggling thoughts, and to tye their hearts to that business of deuotion, vve shall find such an vniuersal scar∣citie of these things, that it may bee safely affirmed, that albeit there be many kneelers and spea∣kers, and repeaters of words, yet

there are fewe true petitioners vnto God. Now among those fevve which make conscience to performe this duty as they ought, I haue obserued a great defect: namely, that for want of exerci∣sed vvits, of knovvledge in the Scriptures, and especially of ex∣periēce in the power of godliness, and of a liuely sense and distinct conceiuing of their own personall necessities, they are not able to bee their ovvne messengers, nor to doe their owne errand, in pre∣senting the sacrifice of Prayer before the Lord. They vvould pray vvith their families, but they know not hovv; they haue a vvillingness vpon other occa∣sions to become suters vnto God

but they cānot deuise which way to begin. To helpe these, I haue lately taken a little paynes: not vvith an intent to bind their de∣uotions to my words, (for vvho am I, that I should take vpon mee to limit the motions of another mans heart, to a forme of my de∣uising?) neither yet to cherish any in this their insufficiency to deliuer their owne apprehensions and particular cases vnto God: but that by seeing the order and course of Prayer, and by ac∣quainting themselues with words and formes of speach agreeing to the nature of such an ex∣ercise, they may at last, like little children, vvho by cree∣ping, & by the leading of others,

learne to go, be able to performe this holy duety with cōtentment to themselues, and with comfort also to others vppon occasion. Hauing ended this little labour, I emboldened my selfe to offer it to your Ladyship: not so much for your owne neede (who I hope are able with Hannah, out of the abundance of inward feeling, to poure out your Soule be∣fore the Lorde, 1. Sam. 1.15.16) but as a pledge of my loue, and as a witnesse of my thanke∣fulnesse vnto God for his graces in you. And so leauing this Manuel with you, as a memo∣riall of that respect which your Ladyship may many wayes chal∣lenge from mee, I pray God in

Christ to keepe you by his mighty Power through fayth, vnto Sal∣uation.
Modbury, the 10. of October. 1608.

