



Sir.
I NEVER wish'd my selfe great or rich, or if I did for a time enter∣taine such a thought, it was
 only then when I was musing how to be thank∣full. Ingratitude I hate, and want ability for am∣ple, and due performances; wherfore I held it better to pre∣sent a little of whatsoever came to hand,
 then (like chur∣lish Nabal) to give nothing at all.
Here is no ban∣quet royal abun∣dance of daintie dishes as though you were at home,Dapes dapsi∣es.Pura & sine anima∣libus esca. but a dish of Herbs (fit for the use of man) right Pilgrimes
 fare a bit and a∣way: I dare not brag it savory for your taste, (as fit for your graver judge∣ment) this bles∣sing therefore which your Servant hath brought unto you let it be gi∣ven I pray you
 unto the young ones,1 Sam. 15.27 that walke at your feete.
I was once min∣ded (like the cru∣el parēt) to have slain the issue of my braine frō the birth:(Medea) or (like an Idolatrous Israe∣lite) have made it passe through the fier, till cal∣ling
 to minde that saying of Plinie,The dregs cannot lie so thicke in it, but a man. may ther∣out drawe som cleare liquor. There is no book so bad, but may affourd some good; I resolved to preserve that which was ap∣poynted to dye, and with it in the throng to presse into the World.
What enter∣tainment
 it is like to find with most, I have a shrewd aime, & therefore send it to your prote∣ction for shelter against a storme.
For my pro∣ceeding by way of application, that which is to o∣thers an exhorta∣tion,
 is to you an pprobation,Qui mone ut facias quo diam facis ipse, monendo & acōmendatiō; for Ad bene facien∣dum incitator est benefacientis en∣comiastes,Laudat et hortatu comprobat acta suo. perswa∣sion to doe well is the weldoers encomium. More I would make mention of, were it but to
 commend your exam∣ple to posterity, but I know your modesty will rather dislike, then allow of such prayse And therefore I leave your owne works to prayse you in the Gates, wishing all the blessings from above & beneath to light up∣on your head,Psal. 133. and 128. yea like Aarons precious oynt∣ment let them runne downe to the beard, & border of your gar∣ments;
 to the fruitfull vine on the side of your house, and the Olive Plants round about your Table.
This hath bin, & shal be the prayer of him, who desires nothing more in this life, thē that hee may bee thought worthy to be your ser∣vant in Christ Iesus.

From my poore Vicarage of Shackerstone in Leicestershire
No∣vember 7. 1637
