



GENTLEMEN
THE generall approbation of this match∣lesse history, so much sought after by such as vnderstand it, and not well vnder∣stood by such as are best able to spend their iudgment of it, souldiers, and professours of the Art military, who, for the most part, are vnskilfull in the latin tongue, the language in which first this history came to light; was a motiue to me to present you with it in English, as a thing proper to you, in respect of the subiect, and due to you, from me, in respect of my profession. And, houbeit I haue ben halfe perswaded by diuers of my freinds, that it will be a present ill accepted, as well for the authors sake who first compiled it in latin, as for the subiect of the history it selfe, which treateth of an action, to which most of you professe to be enemyes in affection, and many of you did actually thew it in your persons; yet when I reflect that you are Gentlemen and souldiers, and consequently men as gene∣rous in your affections, as your actions, louing worth for
worths sake, wheresoeuer it appeareth, I resolued to stop my eares to the suggestions of my freinds, and aduenture to present you with this history in English, which in the Latin tongue hath gained so generall an applause. I confesse it is like to suffer, and loose of its first lustre, by putting on this vnfashioned out-landish garment, the rather, bycause it is fallen into the hands of a VVorkeman, whose profession is to manage the Pike, not the pen: but when, after two yea∣res, I perceaued no better pen would vndertake it, and that all presses were dayly filled with vnworthy pamphlets, whilst this excellent history, which (as I am tould) hath trauelled Italy, France and Spaine, had not yet, nor was not like, to passe into our Hand, I thought it better to wrong the history, by cloathing it out of fashion, then iniury our whole nation, by keeping from them such a history: and of our nation I found none fitter to patronize such a subiect, nor so able to iudge of the worth of it, as your selues. To you therfore, Gentle∣men, I wholy dedicate this translation, wishing no other Reader, then men of your profession, who are only capable of making profit of it. Other men may peraduenture read it to pick a quarrell with the Author, whom, though they cannot conuince of any falshood in his history, yet bycause he is a stranger to their nation and Religion, his phrase and deli∣uery of circumstances, will distast their pallat. Others may chance to stumble at the stile of the translatour, bycause it is rough, and not so pollished as a pen-man might haue made it, not reflecting that he is to tye him selfe to the conceit and phrase of the Author. Others againe may blame the petty faults in printing, without consideration that it was printed by a stranger. But you, whose thoughts are fixed vppon honorable obiects, and professe to admire great actions, euen in your greatest aduersaryes, soare higher then to meet with any of these obstacles, which take the eyes of shal∣low Readers, not the vnderstandings of iudicious. Take you
then this admirable history to your protection, and giue it that esteeme your iudgments find it worthy of, that it may be your Square to direct you, and incitement to you to drawe you on, to the like, and greater atchiuements of honour. From my lodging this 24. of Iuly 1627.

