


DEMOCRITVS the most auncient Philoso∣pher of Abdera, Reader to the prince of Phisicyons Hippocrates, (right hono∣rable Earle) most learnedly in his Epistle De natura hu∣mana, to the same Hippo∣crates recounteth hovv ne∣cessary it is for all men to knovv the arte of Phisike: bicause it is not onelie an vnderstanding most honorable and profitable to lyfe, but al∣so for that of all other it most manifestely setteth forth to the sences, the vvisedome, povver prouidence, and vnmeasu∣rable bountie of our almightie creatour, of vvhich to be ig∣norant it is greate impietie, as Galen testifieth in his thyrd booke De vsu partium.
Hieronymus Montuus therefore in his epistle to Ana∣sceue morborum, dedicated to Henry the last French Kinge to whom hee was not onely cheefe Phisicion, but also one of his priuie counsaill, affirmeth that of all sortes, Phisike is to bee embraced, and of them cheefely which are endued with honorable dignities, and waightie affaires of the common

wealth. For, as wysedome (sister to Phisicke) dooth deliuer the mynde from euill affectes, and maketh vs to liue for euer in perpetuall ioye with aungelles: So Phisike maintayneth health, and expelleth sicknesses from the body, makinge vs liue a longe and lustie lyfe, as Galen in his workes▪ De sanitate tuenda, most reasonablie teacheth.
Furthermore, vnderstanding, Science, and al actiuities, by health are encreased, as by sicknesse the contrary of necessi∣tie ensueth, wherof (my good Lord) it behoueth all men too haue a due consideration, which be louers of vertue and ho∣nestie, and for their sakes loue things that be best. For when the state of the body is sicklie affected, the partes not doinge their offices, the mynd it self although it be a particle diuine hath no chearfulnes pleasure or delight in the meditacion of vertue eyther deuine or morall. Seeing that sicknesse darke∣neth the mynde dulleth the sences, and depriueth, demini∣sheth, or depraueth the partes accidētaly of their operations.
VVherefore (Noble and prudent Earle) not sparing any paine, nor fearing the reprochefull wordes of the enuiouse Momus, and his capciouse rable, setting aparte all colours of Rhetorique for the auoyding of prolixitie, and bicause, Ve∣ritatis oratio simplex, I haue published an Ayde, moste pro∣fitable for all them that neede it, and that suche an ayde, as god hath blessed our coūtrie with, cōparable to any elswher, if in euery respect throughly it bee considered. Seeing that amonge all the most maruaylouse workes of nature, there is none more wonderfull, none more excellent, none more a∣uayleable to the helpe of the disseased, and amendmente of the enfeebled partes of man, then the Bathes naturall of the Cittie of Bath, if they be rightly vsed, orderly obserued, and as need requireth, frequented (the efficient cause of this oure enterprise) as here in may appeare, as well by the authoritie of the most sage Philosophers, most renowmed Phisicyons, and most auncient Historiographers, as by reason it selfe ap∣proued by arte, confirmed by vse, and dayly tried there by

practise for these 2460. yeares, or thereabout. And for that the founder Blaeydin Doyeth, or Bladud the wyse and elo∣quent Philosopher .xi. yeares student in Athenes, a Brittayn the ix. King of this Monarch after Brute, was the firste that vttered the vertue of the water, and that erected the Cittie (whose Genealogie we haue rightly ascended to Adam and may lineally be descended to your Honour, and many other of the race of the most worthie Nobles of this lande, howe soeuer the iniuries of tymes haue altered and obscured the same. So likewyse of dutie to your Honour erde of the same graine, I dedicate these my willinge labours of the South Bathes of England, entytuled Bathes Ayde, cōtayning fower bookes in one volume (as I haue my treatise of the North Bathes, to the Noble and puissant Earle of Salope.) The first of these bookes probablie proueth, the discent of Bladud, antiquitie of the Brittaines, the certaintie of the monuments, the sicknesses the bathes helpe, the accidents they take away, wherof they proceede. &c. The second sheweth the diuersi∣tie of opinions concerning the cause of these and such lyke waters, how and wherein the Phisicions and Philosophers resulte, what minerals bee in them, of what qualities they be, by which they worke their effectes. The thyrd expresseth thinges naturall, not naturall, thinges annxed to nature, and things against nature, withall the signes shewers of the state of the sicke and whole, through the which the better consul∣tacion may be had, not onely whether these bathes will helpe or not, but also the Chyrurgians, Students in Physike, and al other capable of reason, may fynde a most apte trade of vn∣derstanding comprehended in few wordes. &c. The fourth and last declareth Aporismes, and brief rules how, in, and at the Bathes, they shall vse them selues, what meates, what drinkes, what cordiall confortatiues, with moste excellent purgations, clisters, suppositoures, &c. meete for euery com∣plection, and purging humoures abounding, with all other

remedies, against such accidentes as growe by reason of hote bathes, and to what infirmitie euery of the bathes serue beste seuerally &c. Hoping that your Honour, of your Noble nature will accept in good part my willing endeuoure, al∣though in desarte it be farre vnwoorthy the credite or pre∣ferment, that Anthonius yeelded to Apianus, for his booke written of the properties of Fishes: or that Adrianus did to Arianus for his booke of the Gestes of Alexander: or that Alexander Magnus did to Aristot. for his worke, De anima∣libus. Howbeit in desire to profyte the vniuersall people of God, I truste nothing inferiour, assuring your Honour, as tyme and leysure will permit, to present your Noble boun∣tie with greater workes hereafter, for that your honorable disposition euidently appeareth as well most readie towardes the furtherance of all vertuous attemptes, as the aduaunce∣ment of the common commoditie of your Countrey: wher∣in you plainly expresse a perfit effect of very Nobilitie: the continuance wherof (as I nothing doubt) so I humblye be∣seeche the almightie to endue your good Lordship, and the right honorable Lady Kateryne, your noble and moste vertuouse vvife, with Galens health, Nestors yeares, Craesus welth, and Augustus hapines.

