


Reverend Brethren:
I Bring forth my papers among you,Quasi & latere simul & legi vellem, educo. Cunaeus. as one that scarce knowes, whether it be best to hide them, or reveale them. But, see∣ing now, that no other Nay would stop the mouth of necessity,Durum telum, necessitas. but the Printing of them, I am bold to desire a part of Patro∣nage from you (too) for my Impe. All is little enough to shrowd it from the wea∣ther, as the winde now sits. Therefore bee good to it, I pray you. Twas a quicke birth, God knowes; and, it may die, like an abor∣tive, in its nativity, for ought I perceive, if it misse the almes of your approbation. Nor, is my request without reason, if you consi∣der the nature of my subject; whose nobility entreats not onely the courtesie, but commands the debt of your acceptance.
For first it concernes you much: tis the Truth; and tis your profession to stand for it. Its owne worth, not my comment, may move you to it. My dull oratory hath too low areach to handle the height of it: yet my poore straine (what ever it be herein) though hasty, yet tis liberall, and free-borne; which calls me, Parent; and you, Patrons.
Secondly, Tis the honour of your spirituall valour to buckle for the Truth: you have the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God: you are tough, and approved Souldiers in the Schoole of Christ; (I speake not to the silent Cattell in the Ministery.) Sit ye downe then, in the Charets of Ammi-nadib, and plead for my yong∣ling, that can scarce speake for it selfe. Let the care of its credit, or pitty of its weaknesse, perswade you to patronize it.
Nay further, ye are bound by the lawes of Piety, Charity, and Nature, (too,) unlesse you deeme me one of Levies illegitimates, to astipulate to my request. For, in Natures Schoole, strike the
dog, and (with an inherent proclivity) he runnes to his master: wound the Souldier, and be hastens to the army: the Antiperista∣sis of the cold sends the heat backe againe into the fire: yea,Vnumquod{que} magis inclinatur adid, cuius est. every thing (by a natur all inclination) hath respect unto that, whereunto it chiefly belongs. Now, the Church is my center, and receptacle; you, the Guardians: whither then, should I flye for shelter, but to you? if any refuse me this curtesie, tis either for envy, or else for enmitie.
But alas, we are not cleane, in Levies Tribe, from Critickes, whose best learning consists in censuring others; whose best skill is to shew their owne folly. And indeed, tis no wonder, to see some Ba∣stard Curs, when they dare not bite, dare barke: some cowardly Braggadochioes, when they dare not fight, dare cracke of their manhood: and tis no injury, to say, There are some Ideaes of wise∣dome, who, when they dare not write, dare carpe; and happely prove themselves as liber all of their ignorance, as of their words.
But I leave such unto the further doome of my silent censure: nor let them thinke, that my purpose was ever bent to grace them with the dedication of my lines. Therefore to you, my Brethren, (whose grave discretion & Christian love have taught you to cover an er∣ror,) to you I turne my selfe againe: And if, in this Pamphlet, my phrase shall seeme too clownish, (for such was the adversaries com∣ment upon the delivery) pardon it, and say, I live among my fel∣lowes, and have not, as yet, learned any better eloquence, then (with the home bred Souldier) to call a Spade, a Spade. Besides, some of you know, that Physick is a part of my profession, and practice:Ex spuma dra∣corum veneneta fit Bezoardicum. and therein of strong poison, I make an wholesome medicine: why may not then some Balme of Gilead (by a divine confection) be extra∣cted out of an harsh phrase; which (simply taken) may breed an of∣fence. But your judgments I know are apprehensive; I need not in∣forme. Your affections, I trust, friendlike; I need no further per∣swade. Frustrate not then my expectation of your acceptance here∣of: so you may haply milke from me some sweeter streames of my more maturate studies: and in the meane while, (yea ever) you shall find me obliged by this truth,
From my house in Eckington this 12 of Decemb. 1626.

