


Christian friends,
I Bring you here onely an Herbe of your for∣mer tasting, by presenting (now) unto your eyes, what heretofore I preached to your eares: and it is of your owne garden (too;) for you are Lords of my Ministeriall services: yea you may say unto mee as sometimes Paul did unto Phile∣mon;. Epist. Pauli ad Phi∣lem, vers. 19. Thou owest thy very selfe unto us. Well then; take my notes unto you: labour to make them usefull unto your soules; Buy this Truth with your dili∣gence; Sell it not with your sleighty regard of it: If you have hated it, learne now to love it; if you love it, love it still; maintaine it; stand for it; make much of it; so shall you know that the Lord will doe you good (not so much, because you haveIudg. 17.13. a Levite to your Priest, as) because you have the Truth dwelling in you. But why stand I here to move your affections, when (hap∣pily) your understandings are not altogether so rightly
informed in the Text as they ought? Now indeed tis fit that the Talmud. beginnings of things should bee diligently looked unto. And it is a good rule for a Scholler oftenPliny Sec. Epist. 6. lib. 3. to looke backe upon the Title of his owne workes. You may (indeed) make a doubt, whether I haue rightly interpreted this Text, or not: whether the Apostle de∣mands, [Am I therefore become your enemy, &c?] to free himselfe from the aspersion of Enmity, or to up∣braid the Galatians with it; I say, to upbraid them with it: which position, I bind with these arguments.
First,1. Galatorum inobedientia. the Apostle takes them up sharply for theirGal. 3.1. dis∣obedience unto the truth; (which is the usuall companion of Emnity.) Chap. 3. vers. 1. as also chap 5. v. 7. which makes a probability that hee upbraids them here of En∣mity against him.
Secondly,2. Epanorthosis Apostolica. I argue from the Apostles sudden correcti∣on of himselfe in this present text: Before he blazoned forth their Encomiasticke praises: now he sings a Pali∣node, Am I therefore become your enemy, &c.? Be∣fore, they would have plucked out their owne eyes for him, &c. Now, they seeme to hate him. Therefore I conjecture hee upbraids them in these words, Am I therefore become your enemy, &c.?
Thirdly,3. Orthodoxorū Consensus. I gurge the consent of orthodoxall Writers upon this place; asHaet est con∣ditio veritatis, ut semper inimi∣citie persequax∣tur. Hier. in hunc versime. Hierome,Tàm expro∣brandicausá, quàm admonendi, &c. Calvin. Calvin,Ju vers. 17. Beza, andCum voserga me praesen∣tem tm alacres ostenderitis, tanto{que} amore me complexi fueritis, non debebatis menunc pro inimice habere. Pisc. in hunc locum. Piscator: and also Bezaes Glosse upon the 17 verse, They zelously affect you, &c. that they might trans∣port all your love from me upon themselves. Therefore it seemes unto me that the Apostle (now finding them to
halt in their love to him-wards) upbraids them with an Am I therefore become your enemy, &c?
But, if I have erred herein, pardon my haste: I little thought to print it, when I pend it: and (I know) you will witnesse with me, that I have not much mended the coat of the delivery. Blesse it then with your Christian approbation, and you shall incourage me hereafter (the rather) to plead for the Truth. Now, with my prayers to Almighty God for the increase of grace in your hearts, I leave you for this time, and will rest

