


TO THE RIGHT VVORSHIPFVLL, Sir Francis Barrington, Knight, Baronet; Sr Thomas Eliot; Sr Nathaniell Barnardiston; Mr Roger Thornton, Esquire: the Author wisheth all blessings in this world, all blisse in the other, according to Gods good will, and pleasure.
OFCreator om∣nium Deus, inter caetera, & super cae∣tera quae cre∣auit, RA∣TIONA∣LEM dig∣natus est illu∣strare natu∣ram. Hug. Vict. de Ani. l. 2. c. 31. Tom. 2. 109. all the things, which the Lord hath made in this Great World, MAN (Right VVor∣shipfull) is the most noble: for whose sake other creatures werePropter quem, (viz. hominem) mundum ipsum, & vni∣versa, quaecun{que} sunt, Deus fecit. Lactan. de Diuin. raem. l. 7. c. 4. p. 214. crea∣ted; to whose feete the things below are

Psal. 8.6. Rursum cae∣teras res ani∣mantes, ho∣minis causà esse factas, ex eo clarum est quòd homini seruiunt. La∣ctan. de Diu. Praem. l. 7. c. 14. subiected. Of all the essentials, which MAN (the little world) doth consist of, the SOVLE is the most excellentHabet ani∣ma quandam propriam na∣turam, omni∣bus his, mun∣danae molis e∣lementis ex∣cellentiorem. Hug. Vict. de Anim. l. 2. c. 12.: it isGen. 2.7. infused by God,Insufflauit enim, dictum est ad expri∣mendam ope∣ris dignitatē, vt agnosceretur aliquod eximium, quod eius ore prolatum est. Cassiod. de Anim. pag. 313. which notes out the dignitie of it: itAnimus est substantia quaedam rationis particeps, regendo corpori accommodata. Hugo. Vict. de Anim. l. 1. c. 1. Tom. 2. fol. 95. hath command of the bodie, which notes out the authoritie of it: it is a worke (as. Macar. Hom. 46. p. 507. One calles it) both Great, Divine, and Admirable. Of all the powers in the soule, none is comparable to the REASON. Of all the branches in the reasonable part, none is equall to the MINDE, none excels the. id est. Ne leuitr IN∣TELLECTIVAM animae substantiam perpendas, dilecte. Id. Hom. 26. p. 326. Vnderstanding. Of all the vertues in the minde, WISEDOME giues the greatest light, Wise∣dome swaies with chiefest might. Oh the breadth that Wisedome spanneth; Oh the length that Wisedome reacheth; Oh the height that Wisedome climeth; Oh the depth that Wisedome gageth, when once it comes into a Soule, cleered by Gods spirit, in some good measure, from those duskish cloudes of Ignorance, and Error, with which before it
 was obscured Id. Hom. 46. Without this, how can men discerne of things that differPhil. 1.10? How can they see what is good, and what is euill, and so exercise the power of their reason in ensu∣ing the one, in eschewing the otherIdcircò da¦ta est homin sapientia, v cognitâ bono∣rum malorū∣{que} naturâ, & in appetendis bonis, & ma∣lis declinan∣dis, vim suae rationis ex erceat. Lact. de Diu. Pra l. 7. c. 4.? When dan∣gers are imminent, and comming against vs, Wisedome foresees them, forecasteth against them: When troubles are incumbent, and lying vpon vs, it doth either remoue them, orInter omnes rerum perturbatissimarū, intemperies, nos certos, tectos{que} conseruat. Serran. in Eccles. c. 7. p. 388. preserue vs in them. In a word, What walls are to Cities, what skinnes are to beastes, scales to fishes, feathers to birds, and shells to some creeping, and ba∣ser creatures; the same is Wisedome to (Nam caeteris animalibus quia sapientia non data est; & munita indumentis naturalibus, & armata sunt: homini autem pro his omnibu uod erat praeipuum, rationem solam dedit; Ita{que} nudum, for∣mauit, & , vt eum sapientiâ, & muntret, & tegeret. Lactan. de Diu. Praem. l. 7. c. 41. . that na∣ked-borne creature) MAN, euen a couering, aEccles. 7.12. de∣fence: yea, Wisedome (saith Salomon) strengtheneth the wise, more then ten mightie men which are in the CitieIb. v. 19.. This excellencie, this efficacie of Wisedome, I vndertake to lay open (so farre as the Text giues leaue, and the times require) in the en∣suing Discourse. In the which (as the Searcher of all hearts knowes) next to his owne glo∣ry, I seeke the good of two sorts; of prudent Christians, of improuident persons. The one I would
 not haue despayre, although the times frowne: the other, I would not haue secure, because the times frowne. The one hauing wisedome, doe I advise to vse it; that they may foresee the plague, and hide themselues: The other wanting wisedome, doe I perswade to seeke it; least like fooles they passe on, and be punished. Now, if either of these persons (through Gods bles∣sing) reape that good, which I entend, by these endeuours; I doe not doubt, but (be∣sides their prayses in the first place returned to God for that blessing) they will send vp some prayers for Your VVorships well-fare, for suffering your Names to stand in the forefront of this Treatise, as a Countenance to the Mat∣ter; although scarce knowne to one of you, and well-deseruing of none of you, be the Author. My boldnesse is much, I freely confesse it; yea, ouer-much, I craue pardon for it. Al∣though I haue ioyned so many of you toge∣ther (because I hope you are vnited in the same bond of Religion) when each of your Names, is worthy to countenance some grea∣ter, some better Worke, then this is, or any else, that my slender abilitie can afford; yet I be∣seech you, let the intimation o y desires,
 to be thankefull to most of you, as I haue great reason, to oblige my selfe to all of you, for this your Protection, plead excuse for my boldnes.1 Thes. 5.23. Now the very God of peace sanctifie you throughout, and preserue your whole spirits, soule, and bodie, blame∣lesse, vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. A Petitioner for which, to the throne of grace, is he, who is

