



Right Worshipfull:
IT were as great an injury to Custome, to write, and not to dedicate, as tis to your love, to receive a courtesie, and not study a requitall. Now, tis the happy lot of a Scholler, to play the Surgeon, and partly at one clap (with a paper-plaister) cure both griefes. I confesse, I am indebted to them both; and, in both, to you. If then, I seeme to presume, either blame Custome, or your Love. Common sense sent me to Custome; Custome, to your Love; and both challenged from me the debt of this presumption. Receive then these few rude lines, as your due, in part of payment. Ho∣nour them with your acceptance, as sometimes you have graced mine Auditory with your presence. I have perceived your love unto the truth; I have
found you a friend unto it: whither then should I send the truth but toTalmud: Cholin, 62.1. such a Patron? Every thing (by some native inclination) hastens to that, where∣by it gaines. The Dog knowes his grasse; the Hart, his Dittany; the Pigeon, her Lawrell; and the Swallow her Celidon: neither is the Truth ignorant of her well-wishers, or insensible of her Physitians. There∣fore, I trust, however it goes forth from me in weak∣nesse, and disgrace; it will returne (like her selfe) in strength, and honour. But, if you knew all, you would say, it were too young to make a Martyr, and indeed the Presse befits not its infancy. It was but conceived in the morning; and brought forth ere night; it be∣gan to. Thucid. hb. 1. twatle on the morrow; and (being a little sawcy with the sonnes of Belial) met with a checke, and almost dared unto martyrdome, before it could get home to my study. So, it was neither my pre∣fumption, nor foole-hardinesse, that sent it to the Printing-house, (if any shall so thinke, he will offer injury to my simplicity) nor was it (simply) that usuall argument of Apology (the Importunity of friends) but the audacious malipertness of the Adversaries of Truth, that drew it, as it were, perforce, out of mine hands. Let it therefore find the burrow of your pa∣tronage, and you shall encourage me hereafter unto more deliberate exercises. What now remaines, in the meane time, but mine humble praiers to God for you?Nezian. (:) for I have no more. There∣fore, the Lord God Almighty (who is the ancient of daies, and the God of Truth, keepe you in the Truth, and blesse both you, and yours, with peace, and length of daies; that you may stand for the peace,
(and maintaine the strength) of Truth here; and af∣terwards be crowned (like the Truth) with immor∣tall Ioyes. So I rest
From my house in Eckington this 12 of December. 1626.

