



THis Booke faire written (in gifte) lately sent vn∣to mee, doo J fayre prin∣ted (by dedication) now sende and commend vnto you.
I knowe not (in respect of the place) vnto whom I may more fitly thus send it then vnto you, that are eyther bred & wel brought vp here, or by the good∣nesse of God and your own good proui∣sion, are well setled here: and here lawfullye possesse, or are neere vnto sundrie of those things, that this booke specially speaketh of: and thus, as of your selfes, doe you see what they are now, and thus as of this booke, may you knowe why they were, and by whome they were, and what they were long agone.
I knowe not (in respect of the per∣sons,)
 vnto whō I may more fitly thus send it, then vnto you: with whome, I haue ben best and longest acquainted: from whō (by points of singular cour∣tesie) I haue been many wayes muche pleasured: Toward whom, for the ge∣nerall coniunction and association of your minds, and your selfes in good a∣mitie and familiaritie, one toward an other: and all, in good zeale towarde the aduancement of Christian religiō: and for the indifferent and discrete course ye keepe in handling and com∣pounding such controuersies, as many times fall (and thereby in nourishing peace, a Iewel most precious) betwene your honest and tractable neighbours, (things vnto almightie God, very ac∣ceptable: vnto her Maiestie, very grat¦full: vnto your countrie, very fruitful: vnto your selfes, very commendable:) Towarde whom, I say, for these causes
 which, as a member of this Coūtie with others I see ioyfully and generally: and for the two first causes which deriued frō you, light vpon me self particular∣ly, I haue ben, and am, and must be ve∣ry louingelye affected.
I know not how I may more fitly and effectually commend it thē to say, that it is in substance, an hystorie: treating of the partes (and actions of greatest weight a good time together, done by the most famous persons) of one speci∣all Countrie: fet frō great antiquitie, which many men are much delighted with: out of sundry bookes with great studie collected, painfully: by this au∣thoure in the matter set out, truely: with good words wel placed, eloquent∣ly. In commendation of this booke, vpon a fit occasion, the like in a man∣ner,Alexander Neuil, Norwicus. is in Latine lately written by a Gentleman of our Countrie, knowne
 to be very honest, and, I thinke, very well learned: and so vnder the au∣thoritie of his good iudgement, may I (without blame) the more boldly cō∣mend it vnto you.
What vtilitie foloweth the studie of Hystories, many of them haue well declared that haue published hysto∣ries writtē by theim selfes, or haue set out Hystories written by others. And therefore already sufficiently done, I neede not (vnlearned mee selfe, I can not) therein say muche. And yet thus much I may breefely say, and fit for the thing I haue in hande (me thinketh) I muste needes say, that (the sacred word of Almightie God alwayes excepted) there is nothing ei∣ther for our instruction more profita∣ble, or to our mindes more delectable, or within the compasse of common vn∣derstanding more easie or facile, then
 the studie of hystories: nor that studie for none estate more meete, thē for the estate of Gentlemen: nor for the Gen∣tlemen of Englande, no Hystorie so meete, as the Hystorie of England. For, the dexteritie that men haue ey∣ther in prouiding for theimselfes, or in comforting their freendes (two very good things) or in seruing their King and Countrie (of all outward things, the best thing) doth rest cheefly vpon their awne & other folks experience: which I may assuredly accompt (for,Sir Tho∣mas Moore Knight, in the hysto∣rie of King Richard the thirde. in an hystorie, in our tong as wel written as any thing euer was, or I thinke euer shalbe, great experience deriued frō a proofe of two such things, as prospe∣ritie and aduersitie be, vpon a fit occa∣siō vnder the person of a very wisemā, is rightly accoūted) to be the very mo∣ther and maistres of wisdome. Now that that a number of folkes doth ge∣nerally,
 is much more then that, that any one of vs can do specially, and so by other folks experiēce, are we taught largely: and that, that other folkes for their King, their coūtrie, theimselfes, their friends, like good men do vertu∣ously, ought to prouoke vs with good de¦uotion inwardly to loue theim: & with good words openly much to commende theim, and in their vertuous actions, rightly to folow theim. And that, that other folkes against their King, their countrie, their friends (and so against theim selfes) like foolish men do igno∣rantly, or like leude men do wickedly, ought to moue vs first (as our neigh∣bours) Christianly to bewaile theim: and thē (as by presidents of peril pro∣cured through their awne follies and faults) dutifully and wisely to beware by thm. And so by these mens experi∣ence (which like the burnt childe, that
 then too late the fire dreadthe) with much repentaunce they bye deerely) are we taught and brought out of dā∣ger to settle our selues, as it were, in a seate of suretie. Thus you see what ex∣perience doth, and thus you see where other folkes experience is to be had: which, for the good estate of England (resting chiefly vpon the good iudge∣ment and seruice of the Gentlemen of England) is as J thinke, most proper∣ly fet from the Hystorie of England. And this for this purpose, I say bothe vnto you my country men the Gentle∣men of this Countie (a portion of the Realme) specially, and to al the Gen∣tlemen of the whole Realme beside, generally.
There resteth that for this booke (whiche I doe vpon these respectes thus send, and with these reasons thus commende vnto you) we shoulde vnto
 the Authour William Lambard, yeelde oure verye hartie and perpe∣tuall thankes: as oure Country man in our wordes and deedes louingly vse him: as a man learned, duely e∣steeme him:Mathewe Parker Archebi∣shop of Canterbu∣ry in his Preface to the Booke de rebus ge¦stis Aelfre∣di Regis. (for a late very well lear∣ned and reuerend father hath publi∣quely and rightly so reputed him) as a Gentleman religious and very ho∣nest, make righte accompt of him: whiche, for my parte, I thinke meete to do, and meane to do: and for your partes, I desire heartely you should do, and I hope assuredly you will do. And if by you he might (and woulde) be moued at his good leysure, to doe as muche for all the rest of the Counties of this Realme generally, as he hathe done for this Countie specially (toward whiche J knowe, by great paine and good cost, he hath alredy vnder the ti∣tle of a Topographical dictionarie
 gathered together greate store of very good matter) himselfe (the Authour of it) were worthy of good reward, & singular commendation for it. You (the motioners) in the reading, shall receiue great pleasure by it: the rest of the Gentlemē of this Realme, that of themselfes see what things in their awne coūtries are of gretest fame now, & by that boke shal know, what those things and other things were long a∣gone, must needes with great delight receiue it: and surely, being as he is vnto mee, a very deere freende, for myne awne parte, J meane also (God willing) vpon some fit occasion, with my request to further it. The xvj. of Aprill. 1576. Your Countrey man and very louing friende.

