


THat which hath giuen me occasion, Madame, to write this Treatise of the Resur∣rection, in the which con∣sisteth all the hope of our saluation, is to warrant the faithfull a∣gainst the impiety of those, who desiring neuer to giue accounts of their workes, or∣dinarily scoffing at this doctrine, and say with those that were in the time of the Prophets:Isa. 21. & 16. Let vs eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall die.Wisd. 2. Which is cause that they not onely abandon themselues to all

impiety, perswading themselues, that af∣ter this life there is neither pleasure nor sorrow, but also doe stirre vp others to doe the like, perswading them that the Lord doth so abide in heauen, enioying of his happinesse, that he cares not for the go∣uernement of men, of whom there shall be no more mention after death then of o∣ther creatures. Which heresie taking a∣way all hope of euerlasting happinesse, doth also take away from those that follow it the courage to liue wel & holily for in all acti∣ons (as saith Chrysostome) whether cor∣porall or spirituall,Mat. 22. Hom. 41. that which causeth to doe, is the hope of the prise to come; for he that tilleth, tilleth to reap, he that fighteth fighteth for victory. Seeing then that it is so difficult in this life, to keepe holi∣nesse and iustice, who is he that would take it in good part to fight daily against him∣selfe, if he had not some regard to the hope of the resurrection? wherefore who so ta∣keth away this hope, taketh with it all the reuerence due to piety and iustice.
Now so it is Madam, that hauing seene





the booke, which is dedicated vnto you, of the preparation of death, and hauing kno∣wen the pleasure that you take in the rea∣ding thereof, for the singular deuotion which you haue to the heauenly countrey, where through Iesus Christ our common hope, you looke for your perfect and soue∣raigne beatitude: I haue perswaded my selfe, that for to increase in you this holy desire, it would not be to ill purpose that I did offer vnto you this my little Treatise, yet the better to mitigate the horror that we haue all naturally of the separation of the soule from the bodie, knowing that there is no doctrine that can cause vs to seeke for heauen with a better heart, and to despise the world then this, and that all the reasons that may bee alleadged for to prepare vs to goe willingly out of this mi∣serable age, are of very little power if they be not grounded vpon this Article of faith: as also hee that is well perswaded cannot but must desire, with the Apostle, to be out of this world,Phil. 2. for to be with Iesus Christ his Sauiour.
Wherefore, knowing the singular graces which God bestowes vppon you, in ratifying his dilection vnto you, and gi∣uing vnto you a full resolution of your sal∣uation in his Sonne, by a liuely faith, shining in you by the most ardent desire that you haue to perseuere in his seruice in the middest of his Church: I present vnto you this my little labour, in the which you shall finde a liuely Image, and true and certaine description of that euer∣lasting happines, vnto the which God cal∣leth you, & for the which you haue learned to despise the vanity of the world, and to settle your hart altogether vpon the inesti∣mable treasures of the kingdom of heauen. It is true that in describing the felicity to come of the iust, and the euerlasting con∣demnation of the vniust, I haue taken the similitudes and comparisons which the scripture vseth, not only when it speaketh of the future felicity and beatitude of the elect, and condemnation of the reprobate; but euen those which it vseth to specifie the prosperity which God giueth his in this

world, and the punishment wherewith he threatneth and punisheth the wicked euen in this life. But I haue done that, because that according to my opinion, the felicity of the one, and the ill hap of the others, which are incomprehensible vnto vs in this life, are more liuely represented vnto vs, by such holy circumlocutions or ex∣amples.
Now Madam, I humbly beseech your excellency, to receiue this little present, with as good will as it is presented vnto you, by him who all his life, shall be your ob∣liged seruant. And so Madam, after I haue commended my selfe very humbly vnto your excellencies good graces: I will beseech our eternall God, Madam, that in giuing you and all yours, health, long and happy life, he will augment vnto you from day to day, the gifts and graces of his spi∣rit, that you may better and better serue to the aduancement of his glory, and to the edification of his people. So be it.
