



MOst worthy Ladie, appa∣rent it is, that the Fa∣ther of mercie hath in∣riched you with that,
1. Pet. 1.7. which is more precious then the best tried gold; with that Faith,
2. Pet. 1.5. which is attended on with the lustre of Vertue, the grace of Knowledge, the go∣uernment of Temperance, the ornament of a meeke and quiet Spirit, the support of Patience, the splendour of Humilitie, the gaine of Godlinesse, the bond of Bro∣therly
kindnesse, and the glorie of Loue. And albeit the most righteous Lord hath darkened your comfort in the weakest, yet hath hee most brightly lighted it with a manifold shine in the greatest: Here there shineth remembrance of the Crea∣tor in youth; in youth, learning to know Time, and Reason; discretion to answer the enemies in the gate; wisedome to pre∣ferre and chuse that, whose price is farre aboue the Rubies; satisfaction to your Honor, and hope of wished glorie to your most Noble house, and generous race. O, the lines are falne to your Honour in most pleasant places, so that you are able to say to the profane wonderers, and to all your Peeres, Maruell not that I am zealous of reading, hearing, and meditation; maruell not that I loue not this world, nor the euils thereof, the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life; maruell not that I studie to haue my conuersation
in heauen; or that I call so often for the exercises of Prayer, Preaching, and Thankesgiuing; for God hath done so great things for my soule, as I can ne∣uer be thankefull enough.
O most Christian Countesse; two things I haue often thought vpon: the one, how I might satisfie the continuall request of di∣uers Christian friends, by some fruits of my vnpolished labours: the other, how I might testifie to the world, my most respectiue du∣tie to your Honour: now at length for the satisfaction of the one, and testification of the other, I haue presumed to tender that, which alwayes hitherto I trembled to of∣fer, because of my weaknes; fearing the car∣ping of some Momus, for bringing no no∣uelty amidst so much variety: or some Mo∣ses should blame me, for bringing any more amidst so much sacietie. Yet considering, that since the time of Reformation is come, the Temple of the Lord is in more places
then Ierusalem, and of such spacious ca∣pacity, as though knowledge abound there∣in as the Sea; yet there is place still emptie to receiue it. And now the Builders are not so many, and the fit stuffe is not so much, but that there is a renewed charge, that towards the Lords Worke euerie one bring what hee can, that as hee hath recei∣ued the gift, hee should minister the same to other, as good Stewards of the manifold graces and gifts of God.
Therefore, some little of that spirituall blessing, which his holy Spirit hath com∣municate to mee, his vnworthy instru∣ment in meditation, according to the ne∣cessitie laid vpon mee, I haue vttered, and ministred to others in preaching, and here doe present, as to all my fellow-members, and Christian friends euery where: but first, and chiefly to your most Honourable and vertuous selfe, in writing. The sub∣iect and ground of my labour, is the sixtie
sixe Psalme, a Psalme of Diuine praise, made by the sweet Psalmist of Israel, vp∣on the deliuerance of Gods people out of many sore calamities, and of himselfe out of the bloudie hands of his persecuting e∣nemies. I wish it to all, because all haue more then much need to bee awaked, to this dutie of praising God in this time of securitie: but I dedicate it onely to your Honour, as to the prime moouer of this my present indeuour.
For, when I had neither a purpose to any such Treatise, nor thought of this most worthy Psalme: then did your Ho∣nour, whose affections are euer set on hea∣uenly things, name this Song and Psalme vnto mee, commend it to my meditati∣on, request mee to intreat of it, helpe my labours with your prayers, and ioyfully heard what the Lord spake by mee out of it. Therefore, I beseech your Honour, take this my Dedication, as a true token
of my most gratefull affection to your most Noble selfe, another Marie in chusing the better part: as a testimony of my longing to adde something to the cure of the la∣mentable neglect of holy duties: and as a witnesse of my desire to further this seruice, to Gods praise▪ and glorie. Euen so bee it, euen so bee it, Amen.

