



Worshipfull Syr.
YOur loue hath ouerawed me much in this busines wherein it hath pleased God and you to put me, and for be∣cause your place, and praise, is in the Gos∣pell, I durst not consult with flsh and blood, but haue as you may see, most wil∣lingly obeyed the heauenly call.
The Sermon being ended at Lancaster in Lent Assises last, where I was enioyned

by authoritie to preach to the priso∣ners then condemned to die, it was your desire to have a copie in priuate of that which was then deliuered in publique, at what time I truely tolde you, my Notes were scattered and vn∣disgested, rather carried in my heart, then in my hand, yet (would God assi∣sting me) in conuenient time binde them together ere they were too farre fallen out of my minde and memorie, which I haue here done accordingly, and sent them to your worship, as a constat of my vnfained loue, yet with this Cau∣tion, you neuer thinke what was then deliuered by voyce, can be carried so powerfully in papers, as it was in speech.
The words contained in the two ta∣bles which God gaue to Moses, from the holy Mount, were first spoken by the mouth of God, ere they were writ∣ten by the finger of God, and then car∣ried into the valley to be heard and kept of all the people. So may I likewise say of the Gospell, Voyces and Prophesies

went of the blood of Christ, ere euer it dropt out of his veines. But if gra∣tious words had not fallen from the mouth of Christ, Christians had ne∣uer conceiued either the power or vertue of his death. For as there is a blood of redemption, so there is a word of re∣consiliation, and surely where the word teacheth not, there the blood droppeth not: you are religiously wise to conceiue whereat I ayme. To wit, that reading, preaching, and practizing of pietie, may all goe together, like Saul and Io∣nathan, of whom it is said, that they were louely in their liues, and at their deaths were not diui∣ded.
Learned you are in your owne lawes, and therefore knowe better then I can tell, that though the body of your lawes lie in your bookes, yet the soule thereof is in your mootes and pleadings, as also that the barre and bench doe more powerfully end, and profitably de∣termine our causes, then the bookes in your chambers can doe: I speake in

no desperagement, either of your bookes, or our Bibles, which in themselues are learned, sacred and holy, but to intimate to all the world, that if you pleade not, and we preach not, neither states can long stand, nor soules can be ordinarily saued. For though holy bookes be holy Oracles, and registers of Gods truth, Malachi. 2. v. 7.Yet must the Priests lippes preserue knowledge, and the peo∣ple must seeke the lawe at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts.
Good Sir, take what I haue written, in lieu of my loue, may it pleasure you and benefit Soules, either liuing in this world, or dying to a better, it is all I wish in my heart, it is all I begge in my prayer, and what is in my power or Element to doe, it shall be alwaies yours, my penne is yours, my paines are yours, my selfe am yours, to be commaunded in him, who commandeth all, with my daily prayer to God, for you and yours, euer to be kept vnder his holy and helping hand of prouidence and pro∣tection.

And so I cease your further trouble, but neuer leaue to loue and honour you, as I am much bounden,
Standish this seuenteenth day of Aprill. 1613.

