



Right honourable,
IF (as the Psalmist saith) The Lord
hath so doone his maruellous
workes that they ought to be had
in rememberance, and are much
sought out of all such as feare him:
pardon me in your honourable patience,
while I presse with passion such prodi∣gies,
as haue fallen out of old in former
times, and now of late in these moderne
daies of danger wherein we liue. All har∣bingers
of Gods Irefull wrath and in∣dignation

for mans transgression; And
yet I know not how, (which is a wonder
of wonders) signes from heauen, are not
respected, sinnes on earth are not repen∣ted
for. We can discerne the face of the
skie, like the Iewes in the Gospell taxed
by our Sauiour, and thereby we dare prog∣nosticate
of the effects of faire or foule
weather to come, but we cannot discerne,
either by signes from heauen, or prodi∣gies
on earth, how the Lord is rison out
of his place, and threatneth our destructi∣on
if we repent not.
The meditations hereof, I am bold to
put vnder the shelter of your honours
protection, and pray they may passe your
iuditious eye, in sort as they are tendered,
that is, from the dutie and seruice I owe
in many rspects, being otherwise vnable
to answere the same, but in such passages,
of prayer and religious exercises as fall
within the compasse of my profession. And
surely such passages are best suted to your
selfe, whom religion hath made honoura∣ble,
and worthy those great and waightie
imployments you haue vndergone abroad
in forraigne parts, and at home within

the kingdome, vnder two religious Prin∣ces.
Besides, spare me to seeke protection at
your honours hands, in regard of the place
you beare with vs, vnder God and the
king, our worthy Chancellor, the sterne of
which gouernment you haue moderated
for many yeares, with such iustice, mixed
with mercy, as I dare appeale to your cle∣mencie
and milde censure, in any thing I
haue here tendered.
And for the latter Sermon, which is
the Perfume of prayer, (the Arrow of
our deliuerance in the daies of danger)
I trust it shall not be offensiue, if I make
it proper to the Elect Lady, your religi∣ous
wife and consort, whose practise of
much pietie, with prayers and teares
(Church-weapons,) haue beene, are and
will be a blessing to your house, and an or∣nament
to the Church of God, whilst
Anna-like, she frequents the Temple &
house of God, treading vpon that holy
ground, with no lesse due, then true de∣uotion.
And now the Lord Iesus, as he hath
matched you together in grace, and giuen

you much honour, with length of daies,
espouse you to himselfe in the kingdome
of glorie, that you may come to the feast,
and mariage of the Lambe, crowned with
glorie, and clad with immortalitie, en∣signes
of a better world, whither Christ
is gone before and hath traced you the
way to follow after: which because you
haue faithfully done, he will come and
fetch you to himselfe in a time accepted,
that where he is there may ye also be. A∣gainst
which day and blessed houre, the
Lord God of heauen prepare you, with
your oyle and your lamps light, that ye
may meete him in the cloudes, and so be
caught vp to raigne with him for euer∣more.
Amen. Amen.

