



Madam,
EArth is a mixture of Heaven and Hell: Jn heaven is all happinesse, and no misery: in Hell, is all misery, and no happinesse: Jn earth, both happinesse, and misery, The grave is the common Rest from both. Jf our happinesse had no mi∣sery to sharpen it, wee should expect no o∣ther Heaven; if our misery had no happi∣nesse to sweeten it, we should feare no o∣ther
Hell. But God hath delt us both, that in adversity, wee may hope better, and in Prosperity, feare worse. Not ma∣ny Ladies in this Land, could shew a fairer Inventory of Gods favour than your selfe; either as single, in your owne person; or as multiplied, in your children; yet could not all this raise you a perfect happinesse, here. All earthly happinesse is like earth, alterable; alwayes meeting with an alterable subject; in so much, that if it could abide with us, wee could not stay with it: We must shake hands and part. Madame, our lives are but Lampes, to light us in this darke Vale, to finde that Jewell wee lost in Paradise, If wee had never lost that jewell, we had never left that Paradise: These your two daugh∣ters found it in their Saviours birth, and
were strait invited to the feast of his Cir∣cumcision, and shall wee be sad? Drest in those jewels, they were called to the Lambs Marriage, and shall we mourne? They chang'd an earthly Hadradrim∣mon for a heavenly Ierusalem, and shall wee lament? Madam, I know Flesh and Blood (which is made of no∣thing but a little dust tempered with a few teares) would repine at this. But your Ladiship is instructed in a better Schoole, and hath attain'd to a higher Forme than Sense. 'Tis true, Naturall affection hath much to plead against the extreames of Stoicisme: but Religion hath more to plead against the excesse of Naturall affection. Rough Stoicisme denies all sorrow: Soft affection excluds all comfort; Religion moderates, and
with the surplusage of Natures teares, mollifies the Stoicks heart. Madam, I beseech Almighty God to comfort you in all your griefes, and direct them to their right Object; So shall your sadnesse be momentary, and your joyes eternall, Ac∣cording to the Wishes of

