



CHristian is my name, and Ca∣tholique is my Sirname:
the one I chal∣lenge from my Bap∣tisme in Christs Church; the
other from my pro∣fession  of All sauing Truth in Gods Word. If you
question this my right or claime, I will produce my Euidence out of ancient
and vn∣doubted Records, and ioyne Issue with you vpon the marks of
your owne Church;Antiquitie. Vniuersali∣tie.
Succession. and if I prooue not the Faith which I professe to
bee Ancient, and Catholike, I will neither refuse the name, nor punishment
due to Heresie.
As touching the Vi∣sibilitie of our Church,  I haue
answered your Iesuites Challenge by the Title of Via Tuta, the
Safe Way: wherein I haue appealed to the best learned of your owne side,
both for the Antiquitie of our Reli∣gion, and the Noueltie of your owne. If you
require further satisfa∣ction in this point, read & peruse the
Articles of our Church, & tell me, without a preiudicate opinion,
if our Church was not Ancient & Vi∣sible long before Luthers
 dayes. Our 22. Bookes of Canonicall Scripture, were they
not publi∣shed and receiued in all ages before Luther? Our three
Creeds,The Apostles, Nicene, Athanatius
Creed. were they not anciently beleeued, and generally receiued in the
Church before Luther? Our Liturgie, and Book of Common
Prayer, was it not the same for substāce which was taught and
profes∣sed in the bosome of the Romane Church be∣fore Luther?
Our two Sacraments of Baptisme  and the Lords
Supper, were they not institu∣ted by Christ; were they not
published and re∣ceiued in all ages before Luther? These are the
Foundations of our Church, and all these in despight of malice it selfe,
must bee acknow∣ledged by our aduersa∣ries, that they are taught by vs, and
were vniuer∣sally receiued long be∣fore Luthers dayes. And as
touching the particu∣lar tenets of our Church (opposite to your
Trent  Creed,) our spirituall receiuing of Christ by
faith (onely,) whereby wee are made truely and really partakers of
Christs body crucified, is agreeable to all Christi∣an
Confessions, and taught by all antiquitie before Luther. Our
pub∣lique Communion of Priest with people, had Antiquitie and
Vniuer∣salitie in the best and first ages,Bel. de
Mis∣sa. lib. 2. ca. 9 & 10. by Bellarmines confession
long before Luther. Our Prayer and Seruice in a knowne 
tongue, was publique∣ly deliuered, and anci∣ently taught (by
Bellar∣mines confession) long before Luther.Bell de ver¦bo Dei lib. 2. cap. 16. Our Communion in both
kinds, was instituted by Christ, and continu∣ed in the Primitiue Churches
(by Bellar∣mines confession) long before Luther.Idem
de Euch. lib. 4 cap. 24. Nay more, the Psalmes of Dauid,
which vvee sing, (and some of you blas∣phemously tearme
Ge∣neua Iigges) were in an∣cient vse amongst the 
common people long before Luther. In Beth∣lem, where Christ
vvas borne, turne whither thou wilt (saith Hierome) the
Husbandman holding his Plough,Hier. in 1. Epist 17.
ad Marcel. continually singeth Alleluia: the Mower when hee
sweateth (and is wea∣rie) refresheth himselfe with Psalmes:
the Gar∣diner, as hee dresseth his Vine with his hooke, hath some piece
of Dauid in his mouth. These (I say) are the chiefe
principles of our Religion: these vvee holde vnder the  Charter
of the great King; and all these by the testimonies of our aduersaries
themselues, were publikely known, and generally practi∣sed long before
Luthers dayes. Doe you looke for an outvvard Forme of a glorious and
Visi∣ble Church in obscure ages? Doe you looke for A Citie vpon a
Hill in the darke night of errour and ignorance? I appeale to your ovvn
consciences; to vvhat purpose were the pro∣phecies  of Christ
and his Apostles, that the Church should flie into the wildernesse,
and lie hid there? that Faith should not bee found on the
earth: that the time will come, when they will not suffer wholsome
doctrine, but shal be giuen to (Legends &) fables? that
some should giue heed to the spirit of er∣rour, and doctrine of
De∣uills? that after a thou∣sand yeeres Sathan should be let
loose, and deceiue the foure quarters of the earth? were all these
things  foretold, that it might bee fulfilled what was spoken,
& are the thou∣sand yeeres long since expired, and yet shall vve
thinke that none of these prophesies are ac∣complished?
Admit the man of Sinne bee not reuealed, yet the Mysterie of
iniqui∣tie began to vvorke in the Apostles time; and the Euangelist
tells vs, the tares vvhich the thiefe fovved in the night, had almost
choa∣ked the good corne; and  lest there might be some
expectation of a great multitude, which shold assume the Title of an
eminent and glorious Church, our Sauiour himselfe by way of pre∣uention, cals
his Church by the name of A little flocke,Luke. 12.32 as if a small num∣ber were the ancient
Character of the true Church. The malignāt Church hath many he∣retikes and
hypocrites, which indeed make a great noyse for a visible Church, when
as those  wicked persons (saith Au∣sten) although
they seeme to bee in the Church,August. de Bapt.
lib. 6. cap. 3. yet they appertaine not to the true Church.
That many are called, is the Church vi∣sible: that few are
cho∣sen, is the Church inui∣sible. Neither doe vvee hereby make two
chur∣ches, when we consider this Church after a two fold maner.Bellar. de Eccles. li. 3. cap. 15. In the Church
something is beleeued, some thing is seene; we see that company of men
which is the Church, but that this cōpany is the true Church,  we
do not see it, but beleeue it: this is Bellarmines
confession, this is ours. Againe, looke back, and take a briefe Suruey of the
Church in seuerall ages. It began with two in Paradise; there remai∣ned in
the flood but eight persons, & in that number there vvas an accursed
Cham. In So∣dome not ten persons, nay scarce three
righte∣ous to be found; there was but one Ioshua and Caleb,
of many thou∣sands that entred the  land of Canaan: In
the fiery trial, but three chil∣dren, at the comming of Christ,
there was Simeon and Anna, Ioseph, and Mary,
Zacharie, and Eli∣zabeth, and not many more knowne to bee
sincere professours of Gods Trueth, in the Church of
Hierusalem. In the Colledge of the Apostles, there were
but twelue, and one was the sonne of perdition. In the time of
persecution for three hundred yeres af∣ter Christ, Eusebius tels
 vs,Euseb lib. 8 cap 2. the Church
was ouer∣whelmed to the ground, and the Pastors of the Chur∣ches hid
themselues heere & there. In the ages fol∣lowing for 300 yeeres
more, the Arrian heresie so infected the Church, that the
ship of the Church was almost sunke,Hieron. ad
Lucif. saith Hierome.) If therfore in the first and best
ages the Church was much darkned and obscured, what splendor and
visi∣bility should we expect in these latter dayes, wherein the deuill is
let  loose, seeking to deceiue if it were possible the
very E∣lect themselues.
Let it suffice, as God himselfe first planted his church in
Eden with two; so he hath watred it in the Garden of his
Spouse, with the increase of many, best knowne vnto himselfe,
and hath promised a continuall preseruation of it, where two or three
are gathered together in his Name; and according to this Rule, (which our
aduersaries cannot deny) vve haue  at this day, a Church in
Spaine, in Italie, in the East and West
Indies, in euery place where the Inquisition reigneth, al∣though the
outward face of the Church doe not visibly appeare.
Your Church of Rome is too too visible in this
Kingdome, although you haue not toleration of publike Exercise, nor is your
Idol of the Masse set vp in the Temple, (which our good God, and
gracious King for∣bid) I speake not this in  any sort to
decline the visibility of our Church; for the Church is like the
Moone, which hath often waxings & way∣nings, and vvee know the
Moone at full, and and the Moone at the waine, is one and the same Moone,
although not alike conspicuous It was a Quaere in the dayes of
Salomon, Who can finde a vertuous wo∣man?August. de
Tempore. Serm 217. but (saith Austen) in that hee said, who
can find her, shewed the diffi∣cultie, not the impossibitie 
of finding her: and this woman was the Church. He that made that
que∣stion, was the wisest a∣mong men; and he that expoūded his meaning,
knew well how to di∣stinguish the right wo∣man from the counter∣fet; yet
both agree in this, that the true Church was not easie to be
dis∣cerned Saint Iohn tels vs, this woman tooke her flight into
the wildernesse, and there shee was fed. If the Apostle had
fore∣told the place as well as  her flight, happily shee had
beene pursued and found of many; but the place vvas a desart, ob∣scure
and vnfrequented, and therfore known to few; and for certain she was found of
some, for otherwise shee had not bin fed. In vaine (I must
confesse) had Christ cō∣maunded vs to tell the Church,
if there had been no Church to heare, and his precept had bin
need∣lesse to bid vs heare the Church, if there had been no Church
to speak; yet  hee that warned vs to heare the Church,
forwar∣ned vs, that after his de∣parture Grieuous wolues would enter into
the church and speak peruerse things.Acts
20.29. He that taught his Dis∣ciples to obserue to doe according to
all the Scribes and Pharisies should teach thē, enters this caue at
against their false glosses:Math. 23.3
Beware of the leauen of the Pharisies. He that said, Blindnes
in part was hapned to Israel, told vs also, that the Church of Rome,
if she  did not continue in her goodnes,Rom. 11.22 shee should also be cut off. And
it is obser∣vable, the same Church of Ierusalem, which the
Prophet Dauid called the Citie of God,Psal. 48.19. was ter∣med an Harlot by the
Prophet Isay in his time; and that Temple which
Solomon termed a House of Prayer in his dayes,1 Kin. 8.20. was afterward by Christ called
a den of theeues,Math. 21.14 the one
shewed what the Church was, the other how it was altered, yet both agree,
they were  one & the same church.
The Christian church was neuer brought to a lower ebbe, then was
the Iewish Synagogue at the coming of Christ, & yet a man at
that time might haue seen Simeon and Zachary, Ioseph and
Mary, Anna & Elizabeth, the true seruāts of
Christ standing together with the Sadduces in the same
Temple, which might wel be accounted as the house of Saints, in re∣gard of
the one; so a den of theeues in respect of  the other. If
therefore wee haue corrected the errours of the Romane church (as
Christ whipt the theeues and money changers out of the Tē∣ple) we
doe not hereby make a new Church, but renew that house of Prayer, and
restore it to the ancient and true ser∣uice of Christ. If we had
left our Mother, when we first found her sick, shee might haue iustly
taxed vs of disobediēce, and want of dutie to∣wards her; but when 
 the Priest saw her, and passed by, when the
Le∣uite looked on her, and forsook her, Luther and
Caluin perform'd the of∣fice of the good Samari∣tan, they
came neere vn∣to her, and saw her, and tooke care to cure her wounded
soule; and frō that time her children became Physicians, to heale, not
parents to be∣get a new Church. To heale a sore, to purge a sick and
diseased body, is not to make a new body, but to renew it, 
and restore it to his for∣mer health: let me giue you but one familiar
example of your owne in this latter age. Saint Francis established
the Order of Frāciscans, and they according to the meaning of their
first Founders, did for a long time follow the Institu∣tion of their
first Orders: afterwards, when cer∣taine errors and corrup∣tions had
crept in amōg them, they separated themselues frō the rest, and were
called the Re∣collects.  Vpon this occa∣sion a suit
was cōmen∣ced, to decide whether the Recollects, or the o∣ther
Franciscans did ad∣here to the true orders of S. Frācis.
After exami∣nation, & deliberation had, the Recollects were found
to adhere to the ancient Institutions of their Order, and there∣vpon
Iudgement was published on their be∣halfe, and they were af∣terwards called
the Re∣formed Franciscans. Such is the state of the Refor∣med 
 Churches at this day; the true Church was first
planted and establi∣shed by Christ and his Apostles; continued sound
in Head & mem∣bers for many ages: af∣terwards whē error and
superstition had crept in, and gotten the vpper hand, there were certain
Recollects, which com∣plained of the corrupti∣ons and errours, which
had sprūg vp in the Ro∣man church; wherupon after mature deliberati∣on had
of the true do∣ctrine  of Christ and his Apostles, publication
was made in the behalf of the Recollects, that they were found to
ad∣here to the ancient In∣stitutions of Christ and his Apostles, and from
and after that time they were called the Refor∣med Churches.
Will you bring a Quo Warranto, and examine for what
cause, and by what authority the Pro∣testants haue reformed the errours of
your Church? I will tell you  in briefe. If for no other cause,
yet for this alone, because you are taught to eate your God,Mariana. and kill your King, they might iustly
seeke a reformati∣on in doctrine and ma∣ners: but the trueth is,1. Iohn 4.1. there were false Prophets gone out into
the world; and for that cause Christ gaue his commission to try
the spirits, whether they were of God; and accor∣dingly they proceeded
to examination of the doctrine of the Scrip∣tures, by Fathers, & coū∣cels,
 and after publica∣tion of witnesses, they receiued vvarranty
frō the anciēt Bish. of Rome, and your owne famous Councell of
Trent, the one commending that doctrine to the Christi∣ans of their
daies, which we now profess; the o∣ther commanding a re∣formation (in the
Romā church) of such errours in faith & maners as we condemne.
I will giue you instances in both.
Your worship of Ima∣ges, (which you receiue 
 as an article of faith) for feare of Idolatry we haue
reformed, if you require warranty from the Ro∣mane Church,
Gregory Bishop of Rome pro∣claimes it to the
Christi∣ans of his time:Greg lib. 9. Epist
9. Let the children of the Church bee called together & taught
by the testimonies of holy scrip∣tures, that nothing made with hands may
bee wor∣shipped. Your doctrine of Transubstantiation, which you haue
decreed for an Article of Faith, we haue reformed; if  you expect
warrantie from the Roman church, Gelasius Bish. of
Rome published and professed our doctrine flat cōtrary to the
faith of Transubst In the Sacrament is cele∣brated an image,Gelas cont. Eutych. & Nestor. or resem∣blance
of the body & bloud of Christ, and there ceaseth not to be the
substance and nature of bread and wine. Your halfe Cōmunion
we haue reformed; if you require warranty from the Roman Church,
Iu∣lius Bish. of Rome, spea∣king of the deliuering 
 to the people, a sop dipt in vvine, for the vvhole Communion,
tels vs:De Conse∣crat. Dist. cum omne. In
Christs institution there is recited the deliuering of the bread by it
selfe, & the cup by it selfe, lest inordinate and peruerse deuices
wea∣ken the soundnesse of our faith. These are funda∣mental
points, & agree∣able to the tenets of our Church, and are warrā∣ted to vs
by the ancient Bishops of Rome them∣selues; and if the Popes
doctrine be infallible in points of faith, (which  you teach and
professe) without doubt they may bee sufficient war∣ranties for you to
allow this Reformation.
I wil come neerer vn∣to you, & descend from the ancient
Bishops of Rome, to your late Coū∣cell of Trent, which
in∣tended & wished a Re∣formation in faith and manners, euen of those
things wch we haue re∣formed: your Prayer & Seruice in an vnknowne
tongue, we haue restored to the vnderstanding of  the
hearer; if you expect warrantie from your ovvne Church, your Councell of
Trent, (al∣though they reformed not this doctrine) yet for the better
satisfactiō and instruction of the ignorant, lest (say they)
the sheepe of Christ should thirst,Conc.
Trid. Sess. 22. c. 8. & the children craue bread, and none
should bee ready to giue it them, it was decreed, that the Priests &
Pastors should frequently expound, and declare the mysterie (of that
vn∣knowne Seruice to the  people.) Your supersti∣tious
ceremonies of ma∣ny lights and candles, and your certaine num∣ber of
Masses, vve haue reformed. If you expect warranty frō your own
Church,Quarundā verò Missa∣rū et Can∣delarū
cer∣tū numerū qui magis à superstitio∣so cultu quā à
verā Reli∣gione inuē∣tus est, om∣ninò ab Ec∣clesia remo∣ueant.
I∣dem cap. 9. your Councell of Trent confesseth,
They were first inuented rather out of superstitious deuoti∣on, then
true religion; and therfore say they, let thē be altogether
remooued frō the Church. Your Indul∣gences, (which are made an
article of Faith) we haue reformed; if you  expect warranty from
your ovvn Church, you may answere with the Fathers of the Trent
Coūcell:Quastorum abusus vt corū emen∣dationi spes
nulla relicta videatur, &c. The Popes Offi∣cers in collecting
money for Indulgences, gaue a scan∣dall to all faithfull Christi∣ans, which
might seeme to be without hope of Refor∣mation; and therfore we haue
reformed thē.Ab Ecclesiis verò Musi∣cas eas, vbi
siue organo, siue cantus lascivū, aut impurum aliquid
mis¦cetur— Your lasciuious & wanton songs which are
mingled with your Church Musicke, vve haue reformed; if you expect
warrantie from your own church, your  owne Coūcel complai∣ned of
it, and wished it might be reformed, and they giue the reason for it:Vt Domus Dei verè domus ora∣tionis esse videatur.
Idem ibid. That the House of God may appeare to bee the
house of prayer. Your Su∣perstition, your Idolatrie,
your Couetousness, which you confesse to haue crept into the
Masse, by the error of time, and wic∣kednesse of men, vve haue
reformed; if you require warrantie from your own church,Ordinarii locorū Epis∣copi ea om∣nia prohibe∣re atque è
medio tolle∣re sedulò curent ac teneantur, quae vel a∣uaritia
i∣dolorū ser∣uitus, vel superstitio induxit. Idē Can.
9. your Coū∣cell decreed, That the Ordinary should bee very 
 carefull to remoue all those things, which either
coue∣tousnes, or worship of idols, or superstition had brought in.
Lastly, your priuate Masse we haue refor∣med, and restored to
the Communion of Priest and people; if you expect warrantie from
your own Church, Anacletus, and Calixtus, (both Bi∣shops of
Rome) decreed; that after Consecration all present should
cōmunicate,Dist 1. E∣piscopus &. 2.
Peracta. or else bee thrust out of the Church. And your
late Councell of Trent, al∣though  they reformed not this
doctrine, yet Optaret quidē sacrosancta Synodus; The Coūcell could
wish, that the people might cōmunicat with the Priest; and there they
giue the reason for it: Because it would be more fruitful and more
profitable.Sess. 22. c. 6.
If therefore we haue changed your Sacrifice into a Sacrament; your
carnal and grosse eating of Christ, into a spiritu∣all receiuing by
faith; your half Communion into the whole Sacra∣ment  of the body
and blood of Christ; your priuate Masse, into the publike
communion of Priest and people: your adoration of Images, in∣to the true
worship of God in spirit and truth; your prayer and seruice in an vnknown
tongue, into the vulgar lāguage to be vnderstood of the cōmō people; your
lasci∣uious & wanton songs, into Dauids Psalmes: we haue don
nothing here∣in, but what the Apo∣stles, what the holy Fa∣thers,  what the ancient Bish. of Rome taught in the first & best
ages, and what your grand Coū∣cell of Trent intended, and wished to
be refor∣med in this latter age. Nay more, since your Councell hath made
se∣uerall Decrees for Refor∣mation;The
Coun∣cel of Trent began An 1545 and ended Ann. 1563. Bell. Chro. pa. 121.
123. since they can neither plead vvant of Authority, nor vvant of
time, during the liues of ight Popes, and eighteen yeres continuance, why they
did not proceed, & put in execution those  Decrees.
I hope wee shal deserue the greater thāks from your Popes and Cardinalls,
for re∣ctifying those abuses which they themselues condemned, and from
their owne Decrees and faire pretēces, may iust∣ly arrogate to our
selues that honorable Title of Reformed Churches.
Giue me leaue there∣fore by way of counter-challenge to your
Iesuit, to vse the words of so∣bernes & truth: Where was
your Church & Trent  doctrine before Luther? for I call
God and his heauenly Angels to wit∣nes, that notwithstan∣ding you obtrude the
invisibility of our church as a stumbling blocke to the ignorant,
not∣withstāding your great brags of an outward face of an eminent, and
glorious Romane Church; yet your Trent faith and doctrine vvas far
frō the knovvledge of Christ & his Apostles: nay more, if any
Iesuite, or all the Iesuites aliue,  can proue your Roman
Faith had Antiquity, Vni∣uersalitie, and Succession, in
al ages, and that your Trent Articles were plain∣ly, commonly and
con∣tinually taught, & recei∣ued de Fide, as Articles of Faith,
before Luther, let all the Anathema's in your Trent
Councel fall vpon my head. And as touching the great noise and rumors of your
Ca∣tholike Church, if you wil consider and vveigh it vvith wisdom
and mo¦deration, you shall find,  it wholly depends vpon tvvo
doubtfull and vn∣certain cōclusions (viz.) The Infallibilitie of the
Pope, and the Intention of the Priest. These are but tvvo
slender threds to vphold the Vniuersall faith of all Christians; and
therfore blame not vs, if such things seeme harsh and vntunable in our
eares, that many millions of soules shold depend vpon the
Infalli∣bility of one man; & that man by your own sup∣posall,
may draw vvith  him innumerable soules to hell. That man vvho
hath the name and na∣ture of Antichrist in his person; in the one as
he is against Christ and his doctrine; in the other as he claimes to be
Christs Vicar, & sit in his stead, (for the very
name of An∣tichrist imports both.Anti-Christ signifies, Against Christ, and to be
in the place of Christ.) That man vpon vvhose forehead, (by the
testi∣monies of learned Au∣thors) the vvord Myste∣rie,Dr. Iames in his Epist. Dedicatory of the Cor∣ruption
of the Fathers &c. the very mark of the Beast was
sometimes writtē. That man who  is pointed at by the
A∣postle,. to be that
Anti∣christ, by his habitation seated vpon seuen
hills.Reuel. 17. That man, who hath the
character of the man of sin,2. Thess.
2.4 which aduāceth him∣selfe aboue all that are cal∣led
Gods;I haue said you are Gods Psal. 82.6.
(viz) the Kings and Princes of the earth. That man, who hath
published the doctrine of Deuils,1. Tim 4.
by forbidding of meats, and Marriage vnto Priestes. Lastly, that
man whose Infallibility,Conc. Flor. in Decret.
Eugenij. whose Succession, whose Orders, whose
Baptisme,  and Christianitie it selfe,
depends vpon the Inten∣tion of a silly Priest,Bell de Iu∣stif. li 3..8. of whose Intention none can be assured by
your owne confessions.
It is not the great soūd of a visible Church that must
outface the truth; (for the emptiest vessels make the greatest soūd)
neither is it the name of Catholike, (which you wholly appropriate to your
selues) sufficient to proue your Church Ca∣tholike: nay more, your
pretences of Scriptures,  of Traditions, of
Fathers, of Councels, of an Infalli∣ble Church, are
but figge-leaues, to couer the na∣kednesse of your nevv borne faith: for it
shall appeare, (by this small Treatise) that your chie∣fest
scriptures, on which you build your Trent doctrine, are
Apocryphal; your Traditions, which you haue equalled to the
Scriptures, are Apo∣staticall: your Fathers, which you assume
for Interpreters of the Scrip∣tures, are spurious and 
counterfet: your Coun∣cels, which depend vpō the Infallibilitie of
the Popes iudgment, are er∣ronious & doubtful; and your pretēded
Catholike Church, which is made the onely rule of Faith, is neither a
whole, nor yet a sound member of the Catholike and Vni∣uersall Body. This
way therefore which you take, is a cloke & colour to darken truth, by
out∣ward shewes, and spe∣cious pretences, and therefore Via Deuia,
a  vvandring and By-way.
Neither is it your bit∣ternesse and inuectiues against a
Lay man, shall make me silent in Gods cause; for I say with
Mo∣ses,Num. 12.29 Would God al the
Lords people could prophecie: and I hope there will neuer be wanting a
Mildab, & a Medab, to assist Moses and
Aaron, that may bee able to vindicate Gods Honor and
Truth, & ease our painful Pastors and Ministers, which
most laboriously performe the work of an Euangelist, and 
 conuert soules by prea∣ching, which yours per∣uert by
Controuersies of Disputations: I hope, I say, there wilbe
alwaies some, who wil publish to the shame of your Romish
Pastors, the pal∣pable ignorance of the Laitie, who with an implicite faith,
& inuol∣ued obedience, resigne vp their sight and senses to blind
guides. Let the Trueth of God and his Church flourish, & no rayling
accusation of an Aduersary shall deterre  mee from my
seruice to his cause. In the meane time I will appeale to your own
consciences, whether it bee Catho∣like doctrine, or sauour of Christian
Charitie, wch your Iesuites teach, (viz.Haereticos non magis audiendos esse etiamsi vera et
sa∣cris literis cōsentanea dicant aut doceant quā Diobolum. Mald. in
Math. 16.6) That the Reformed Churches are no more to be heard,
then the deuill him∣selfe, although they speake trueth, and agreeable to
the Scriptures; nay more, I speak it with shame and griefe,Discept.
Tol. Sect. 2. the
Pope at this day allowes the Talmud of the Iewes, and yet  prohibites the Books of Protestants.
Giue mee leaue there∣fore to speake to you, as somtime S.
Austen spake to the Donatists:Aug.
contr. Petl lib. 3. cap.
59. If you will be wise, & vnderstand the trueth, it is
well; if o∣therwise, it shall not grieue mee, that I haue taken this paines
for you for though your hearts returne not to the peace of the Church, yet my
peace shall returne to mee in the Church. The cause is Gods, the
la∣bour is mine; if you wil reade it impartially, and  can shew
me any error clearely, faithfully, and moderately, I wil make a work of
Retractations, and professe openly with righteous
Iob:Iob 31.35, 36. O that mine
aduersary would write a Booke against mee, I would take it vpon my
shoulder, and bind it as a Crowne vnto me.

