



IT is a straight charge, which that mai∣ster
giueth to his seruants in deliuering
to them his money, ,
Negotiamini donec veniam, The
consideration whereof as it hath set all
Gods seruants formerly on worke, in
their times to turne & put forth their
talents, that they might giue account with gain: so the great
vantage that they haue already gotten, cannot excuse after
seruants, in after times from this spirituall traffique: what
though their receipts be lesse? yet they carefully imploy what
they haue▪ that their maister also may receiue of them an an∣swerable
increase.
And this is the cause, why we in like sort, in conscience of
this charge, at this time put our one talent into the banke,
which we haue heeretofore (for the most part) imployed in
our priuate Ministery; and would now with the fishers, when
fishes waxe scant at the shore, launch a little further into the
deepe; and with the Marchants, thriuing a little at home, ad∣uenture
further abroad, to try in other coasts how wee can
make our markets. In this our present trauell, wee haue fol∣lowed
the manner of such Traders, making proofe with
these new wares, what hope there will be of venting abroad

more of the same kind, which we are very ready to doe, and
that with speed, if we may know them for the profit saleable;
but if otherwise, as we may saue further labor in this course,
so our losse shall not be much by so little: yea heereby we shall
gaine somewhat to our selues, euen a comfortable answere to
make at that day of account, that whatsoeuer our successe is,
yet such haue our endeuours beene, heereby to doe the best
good we can to the Church of God, and with the conscience
of this wee haue hardened our foreheads against the many
censures of men, and set it as a brazen wall against them;
choosing rather to be accounted of such, foolish, vaineglori∣ous,
affecting bookishnes, or any thing else, as pleaseth them
in their salt humour to vtter, then that not doing the good
wee might, our owne consciences should condemne vs, yea,
God himselfe, for euill and vnprofitable seruants.
Now we haue entred vpon the book of the Psalms, drawn
on hitherto by the great variety of documents and instructi∣ons,
sutable to all estates of men most plentifully contained
heerein, so that wee may boldly say, there is no condition of a∣ny
in prosperity or aduersity, peace or warres, health or sick∣nes,
inward or outward distresse, with many particular ca∣ses
in all these kinds, but he shall finde some Psalmes, which he
may thinke almost to haue beene composed vpon his owne oc∣casion,
wherin he may praise God, pray vnto him, complaine
and open his particular griefes.
And for direction heerein, wee referre thee to the diuers
Prefaces both of ancient and late writers, chiefly of Athana∣sius,
Basil the great, Augustine and some others, who haue
commended this booke vnto vs, as a storehouse of instructi∣on,
and as an Apothecaries shop richly furnished with all va∣riety
of spirituall medicines, by which we may haue remedy a∣gainst
all and euery our seuerall diseases and infirmities. And
surely, as when Saul was troubled with an euill spirit, by ad∣uise

of his seruants, he sought out one that might play on the
Harpe, and they found Dauid the sonne of Ishai, who plaied
with his hand, and Saul was refreshed, and had ease, the e∣uill
spirit departing from him: so hath God giuen vnto his
Church the same Dauid still, euen the sweet singer of Israel,
to modulate, as on his harpe, these heauenly ditties, wherunto
if we resort, to heare, read, sing and meditate therein, our
restlesse perturbations, inordinate affections and passions
whatsoeuer; which as so many euill spirits doe vexe vs many
times, shall thus depart from vs, and wee shall bee cased and
refreshed thereby.
If any say now to vs, that very many haue most profitably
spent their trauell heerein, making expositions, annotations,
glosses, paraphrases, enarrations, yea iust and compleat com∣ments
already, in which respect what vse therefore is there of
further labours, heereby rather to ouerloaden the studious,
than to profit them? We answer, that most true it is, not only
for this booke, but all parts almost of holy writ, God (his name
be blessed) hath stirred vp the harts of many his seruants, to
bestow their strength, time, learning and meanes, not onely
to profit the present ages wherein they liued, but by their wri∣tings
also, like carefull Fathers to prouide for posterity. Con∣cerning
all which,Epist. lib. 8. epi. 65. as Seneca to his Lucilius, veneror in∣uenta
sapientiae, Inuentores{que} adire tanquam multo∣rum
haereditatem juuat: so doe wee honour their wise in∣uentions,
and industrious paines, and praise God for it, that
others hauing laboured we are entred into their labours: sed
nobis ista acquisita, nobis laborata sunt. This is no
thanks to vs, who haue these as an inheritance already proui∣ded
and gotten to our hands. Agamus igitur (saith the
same Author) bonum patrem familias, faciamus am∣pliora
quae accepimus, major ista haereditas à nobis ad
posteros transcat. Wee shall not proue our selues good hus∣bands,

if hauing such a rich patrimony left vnto vs, we spend
onely on the stocke, and seeke not to leaue it somewhat aug∣mented
to our posterity after vs. May we not say as it there
followeth: Multum adhuc restat operis, multá{que} resta∣bit,
nec vlli nato post mille secula praecludetur occasio
aliquid adijciendi? There is yet a great deale of this spiri∣tuall
worke vnperfected, and so will be left by vs to after-ge∣nerations,
neither is it the current of a thousand yeares
(should the world so long endure) which shall preuent the
last man of all occasions to bring something to the perfecting
heereof. Or be it that all things are already found out of the
ancient, in such compleat manner, that they can admit no
additament, hoc tamen semper novum erit, vsus, et
Inuentorum ab alijs scientia et dispositio: this shall al∣waies
be new and helpfull in all ages, euen the vse, methodi∣call
disposition, & fit application thereof to the present times.
And this is that which we haue specially endeuoured vn∣to
in this businesse: not so much to trye what wee could say
more, as out of that small treasury that God hath put into our
earthen vessels, to propose what we haue, whether old or new,
in that method and forme, which may be best & most handy
to the readers vse. For this purpose, to the Argument, the vse
of the Psalme, and the resolution thereof prefixed in a table,
we haue subioyned a Paraphrase with the text, and quotati∣on
of other Scriptures seruing for the explanation thereof,
noted in the margines: wherein so neere as we could, we haue
endeuoured to expresse the meaning of the holy ghost, with
his owne more plaine phrases and speeches in other places; not
so much studying to find out pleasant words, as an vpright
writing,Eccles. 12. 10. euen the words of truth. Also to the explanation
of the words, are annexed the obseruation of doctrines with
the seuerall vses, that any one may see from what fountaine
they flow, and how thence deriued, And these are briefly set

downe without any further enlargement, more then the quo∣tations
of proofes, out of the holy Scriptures, and that to auoid
tediousnesse,Pinedae praefat. in Io. ca. 8. sect▪ 8. because as one saith, Ingenia non desiderant
repletionem veluti vasa, sed accendi volunt seu mate∣ria,
quo vis inueniendi simul cum appetentia verita∣tis
incitetur. Mens wits do not craue repletion, as vessels,
but rather a fit matter to set on worke their owne inuention,
and to kindle in them a desire of further searching after the
trueth.
Now for these three first Psalmes,Psal. 119. 130. of them it may be said,
as Dauid elswhere speaketh of Gods word, that the entrance
into the same sheweth light, so these the very entrance to this
booke,Aug. tract. 1. in Psal. 68. light and comfort. For whereas Adam dum rape∣ret
diuinitatem, perdidit foelicitatem, while hee proudly
did catch after deity, to be like God in the knowledge of good
and euill, lost that felicity wherein he was made: so heere are
we directed the meanes, how we may recouer the same againe,
and this is, rapere sanctitatem vt inueniā foelicitatē, euen
earnestly to seeke to be like God in holinesse,2. Pet. 1. 4. and to be parta∣kers
of the diuine nature, by flying the corruption that is in
the world through lust, so shall we indeed find true happines.
And further, lest the opposition against Christ & his king∣dome,
and the many enemies that we shall here meet withall,
should either suddenly moue vs from all stedfastnes, or draw
vs away with the error of the wicked, we may in the second
Psalme see Christs kingdome by Gods will and power esta∣blished,
and the enemies confounded; and also in the third,
behold the Lords taking part with his; and making theirs his
owne quarrell, maintaining his Church against their hosti∣lity,
defending his seruants against their violence, and in the
middest of dangers compassing them with deliuerances, that
so with confidence,Deut. 33. 29. and tranquilly of minde, they can repose
themselues vpon his aid, who is the shield of their helpe, and

the sword of their glory, subduing their enemies. To these
therefore doe we send thee; to finde heere blessednesse against
thy miseries, to seeke safeguard against thine aduersaries, to
gather comfort against thy sorrowes, and to lay thee as it were
asleepe in godly security against all terrors and feares.
And briefly for all the rest,Aug. confes. lib. 8. ca. 1. as Augustine resorted to
Simplicianus desiring him, vt proferret sibi conferenti
secum aestus suos, quis esset aptus modus ad ambulan∣dum
in via Domini; so do you much more resort hither to
this booke: by these impart vnto God thy troubles, thine an∣guishes
and boyling affections: by these hee will reioyce thy
soule: put thy hand in frame, say to thy-passions as Christ
did to the sea,Mark. 4. 39. , cease and bee still, and there will
bee tranquillitas magna, a great calme. For the Lords
grace shall be with thee,Psal▪ 32. 8. and 43. 3. hee will instruct and teach thee the
way that thou shalt goe, he will guide thee with his eye, and
he will send forth his light and his truth, that hee may lead
thee and bring thee into his holy mountaine, and to his Ta∣bernacle.
As wee hope, so the Lord guide our hearts
to the honouring of his name, to the
loue of him, and the waiting
for of Iesus Christ,
Amen.
