



Honourable and chiefe Fathers,
WHEN the Gentiles besought, that those words of Exhortation, which Paul had spoken on a Sab∣bath day, in the Synagogue of the Iewes, at Antiochia in Pisidia, might bee also Preached to them the next SabbathAct. 13.41.42, that voyce of the people of God (in whom Christ Iesus was now beginning to bee for∣med) seemed to him and Barnabas, to be (as it was indeed) the voyce of God himselfe; and they gathe∣red assuredly thereby (as Paul else-where, by the vi∣sion of the man of Macedonia appearing to him, and praying him to come and helpe themActes 16.10. that the Lord had called them to Preach the Gospell to the
Gentiles also, and that they  to them. In like sort hauing according to my to take measure, and in much infirmity of the flesh, Preached by voyce, this silly Sermon at an Assises, where your Honours were present and President: The frequent motions, and vehement perswasions of many, both of my brethren in the worke of the Ministery, and of the houshold of faith, are to me a sufficient war∣rant, yea a diuine Calling, to Preach it againe by Writing, and thereby to helpe forward the building of the Body of Christ. For Ambo praedicant, hic quidem scripto ille voceClemens Alex∣andrinus lib. 1. Stromat., both of them Preach, one by Writing, the other by Voyce: And againe there, praedicandi scientia, &c. the skill of Preaching helpeth either way, whether it worke by the hand, or by the tongue.
Since then I haue resolued, not to let it perish in the Aire, and Houre, wherein it was vttered, but to giue it a little longer life by the Presse, and to thrust it abroad naked and vnfeathered, as it is, into the world; it being imboldened in the generall, by the vndoubted soundnesse in Religion, feruent zeale to the truth, resolute detestation of Popery, and graci∣ous respect both of the causes and persons of Mini∣sters in this vnhappy age, wherein the Tribe of Leui is so little respected: and in speciall, by your diligent attention when it was spoken, and fauou∣rable approbation afterwards, presumeth to presse once againe into your presence, and become a Peti∣tioner in formâ pauperis, for your honourable pro∣tection. And because it would not seeme, sine rati∣one
one  the Realme, to plead for it selfe,  in this case, that, seeing it was first prameditated and vttered espe∣cially to you, and for you (as being the highest Schol∣lers in that Forme, whereof it was bold in the Lord to be an Instructor) it should be protected by you, be∣ing yours in the first publication by speaking, it should not be made any others in the second, and more solemne diuulgation by writing. In the soundnesse of which plea it is so confident, that it assureth it selfe, that if a Iury were called in the cause, it would bring in a verdict for it. Now although it speak not with authorityMath. 7.29., in such sort as neuer any man spakeIohn 7.46., (that is the glory of a Maister, and cannot be giuen to the seruant) nay, although comming from him that is minimus Apostolorum, the least of the Apo∣stles, it be not with Apollos, eloquent, mighty in the Scriptures, feruent in the SpiritAct. 18.25., with Iames and Iohn, a Boanerges, a son of ThunderMar. 3.16.17, to terrifie the aduersaries, and to cast down strong Holds, with Barnabas a son of consolationActes 2.36., to minister a word to the afflicted in due season, nor can with the Wise Men, present great gifts to ChristMath. 2.11., with Paul speak wisedome amongst the perfect1. Cor. 2.6: but rather with Mo∣ses is of a slow tongue and speechExod. 4.10., with Ieremy, vnable to speakIer. 1.6. in the Language of Canaan, through ignorance of heauenly things, with Paul, not onely rude in speech2. Cor. 11.6., (as hee in a modest perswasion and profession, acknowledgeth himselfe) but also in know∣ledge; with Zachaeus, scarcely of stature to see Ie∣sus
 Mary, must lay him in a Maunger for want of better roomeLuke 2.7.; yet it resteth in hope that the earthly Gods before whom it standeth, will bee followers of the most High God possessor of heauen and earth, be mer∣cifull as hee is mercifull, in accepting according to that a man hath, and not according to that a man hath not2. Cor. 8.12.. Which acceptation, if it may finde, like a bold beggar, that is gnauiter impudens, lu∣stily impudent, it hath one suite more to tender vnto your Lordships, which is this; It is totus in hoc, spendeth its best strength and meditations to giue vnto Caesar, the things that are Caesars, to shew and set out, both the dignity and duty of Caesar, and of them that are sent of him: And it hum∣bly beseecheth your Honours, in visceribus Iesu Christi, in the bowels of Iesus Christ, for a retalia∣tion, euen to giue vnto God those things that are Gods. Now Saint Austin expounding those words saith, Caesari census, Decimae DeoAugust. Tom. 10. Homil. 48., Tribute to Caesar, Tithes to GOD. And the suites of Churchmen before the Tribunals, are as crying voyces, to tell you how Gods Coine is not onely clip∣ped round by iniurious Prescriptions and Customes, (of which wee may iustly say, Ecclesiae Dei non debent habere talem consuerudinem, the Chur∣ches of God should haue no such custome) but also false stamped by the counterfeiting Mint of Im∣propriations, and giuen from him, and them, to whom hee hath giuen it, the sonnes of Leui, to such Tobiahs as from the beginning had no right
to bee chambered in the Courts of the house of GodNeh. 13.5.: And the tooth of this sacriledge hath bitten so deepe, that wee are worse dealt withall in the diuision of Church goods, then the false mother would haue done in diuiding of the child betweene her and the true mother1. King. 3.26.; for shee would haue beene content with one halfe for her pretended right: but our Impro∣priators being insatiable as the graue, haue deuou∣red like the Caterpillars of Egypt, euery greene thingExod, 10.15., and like Saul, haue gotten to themselues the best of the Sheepe, and of the Oxen, and of the Fatlings, and of the Lambes, and all whatsoeuer is good1. Sam. 15.9., and haue left vnto vs nothing but that which is torne and lame, and sicke, not worth the taking vp in the streetesMal. 1.13., and as in the shaking of an Oliue Tree, two or three berries in the top of the vppermost boughesEsay 17.6.. Yea in many places is to bee found nothing so good allowance, as Michaes wa∣ges to the Leuite, that should bee a Father and Priest to him, ten shekels of siluer, double apparell, and victualsIudg. 17.10.; nothing so much of our owne, as the Shunamite, out of her liberality, prouided for the Prophet Elisha, a Chamber, a Bed, a Table, a Stoole, and a Candlesticke2. King. 4.10.. Thus hath the Church fallen into the hands of ill aduised Phytisians, who by let∣ting her bloud, as though shee had beene too pletho∣ricke and full, haue brought her into the other ex∣treme, euen into a Consumption. Howbeit this euill, though pernicious, is not so deadly, but that a Kings touch might cure it, and good Nehemiahs vnder him, might restituere in quem nos collocauit
Deus, locum,  originall right, might both contend and  the tithes should bee paid to the proper owners, and not to the im∣proper AlienatorsNehem. 13.: There is Balme enough in Gi∣lead yet, to cure this diseaseIer. 8.22.; And for our part, wee are not like to Babylon that would not bee hea∣led when it mightIer. 51.9., wee would bee healed if wee might; And Prima pars sanitatis est, velle sanari, saith Seneca, it is the first point in healing, to bee willing to bee healed. Do then (Honourable Iud∣ges) your seruice to Sion, if not in taking away these yoakes from her shoulders presently, yet, at least in making her burthen as light as may bee, and stopping the streame of these violent Customes, till God arise to haue mercy vpon her, and to restore her as at the first: And with good NehemiahNehem. 2.3., vse that authority and grace, which the good hand of our God being vpon you, hath giuen you with our Artaxerxes, to procure and obtaine, letters and de∣crees, for the repairing of the ruines of the house of God: And assuredly, that God, before whom a cup of cold water, giuen to a Prophet, in the name of a Prophet, shall not passe vnregarded, or vnrewar∣ded; will not wipe out the good deeds that you do for the house of God, and the offices thereofNeh. 13.14., but remember you for your good, send you helpe out of his Sanctuary, blesse you out of Sion, and visite you with the felicity of his chosen. But a indicious Fa∣ther hath said, Negotiosissimum in republicâ virum non debemus — occupare proaemioAugust. Epist. 54., wee ought not to hold men of greatest imployments
in the common-wealth with too long prefaces. I end therefore humbly crauing pardon of your Honours for my boldnesse, and heartily praying the father of lights, from whom euery good gift commeth, to giue his iudgements and his righteousnesse vnto you, that you may so iudge his people with righteousnesse, and his poore with iudgement, that after you haue serued the will of God in iudging these small and inferiour things, you may sit with Christ in his throne, to iudge the wicked world, and the euill Angels, in that day wherein all must appeare before his tribunall, to re∣ceiue according to that which they haue done.

