








NOBLE SIR,
VErtue which was to others an Autumne, late ripe fruite, budded to the Caesars in their spring time, Caesaribus virtus contigit me diem, saith Ovid.
Dame vertue did their portion frankly pay
unto the Cesars, long before their day.
And Honour the shadow following this great body of vertue, which to most is a winter-fut scarce over ripening, is to you a Primrose, springing up in the Prime of the dayes, Gloria Pophamo contigit ante diem.
Honour which towards others keepes such state
On Popham early did beginne to waite.

You are as honourable in the hearts, affections and tongues of all that know you in these parts, as if all the titles and complements of Honour which in a state are conferred upon eminent Persons, had beene already heaped upon you. And although (as the Prince of Philosophers long since pronounced) honorest in honorante magis quàm in honorato, honour be rather in him that honou∣reth then in him that is honoured, yet this Honour in you will be as indeleble a Character, as that which accrueth by bloud, is accounted by the Men of Law. For as amongst the old Romanes there was no way to the Temple of Ho∣nour but through the Temple of Vertue, so you have gone the high way to this Honour, by those vertues that are of a Magneticall vertue to draw to them the hearts and re∣spects of men;Si vis benè au∣dire, discito benè loqui, & cum benè lo∣qui didiceris, rectè etiam fa∣cere conator, Hoc enim modo bonam famam acqui∣res. Epicttus. your Humanity, Humility, and Hospitality If thou wilt have a good name, learne to speake fairely and when thou hast learned that, indevour to do well also; For hy this meanes thou shalt get a good report, said Epictetus, or as Plutarch in his Apophthegmes ex∣presseth it more roundly, the way to a good fame is, Si dices optima, facies pulcherrima, by sweete language and faire deeds. Your Humanity is such, that even for that you are as Titus the Romane Emperour was called in his time deliciae humani generis, the darling of man∣kinde, and that which Plutarke said of Alcibiades,Plut. in Alci∣biade is appliable to you, he was so sweete and pleasant in his dai∣ly conversing that even to them which did either fear cr∣envy him,Si quis cogitat constituere magnam fa∣bricam celsi∣tudinis, is prins de fundamen∣to humilitatis cogitet. his presence and aspect was pleasant & ioyfull And for Humility, you have ever bin so lowly in your owne eyes, that for it you have bin highly honoured in the eyes of other men. For, if any man thinke to erect the great fabricke of dignity, let him first thinke upon the foundation of humility. Dignity delighteth all men but
humility is the step to it.Omnes dele∣ctat celsitudo, sed humilitas gra-dus est. Quid tendis ordem ultra te? Cadere vis non ascendere A gradu in∣cipe & ascen∣disti: Aug. de verb. Dom. Why dost thou lift thy foote be∣yond thy selfe? that's the way to fall downe, not to clime up, begin at the step, and thou hast already climed up. And for Hospitality you have ever bin so mind full to intertain neighbours and strangers, that few great Houses in our parts can contend or compare for free, frequent and mag∣nificent intertainement with your Litle-coateThe name of his Mansion house. that though you have not had the happinesse with Abraham and Lot to entertaine Angells in the shape of men,Heb. 13.2. yet it hath bin your happinesse and goodnesse too, frequently to entertaine the men that are the Angels of the Churches, and of late our reverend Diocesan, the , the prin∣cipall Angel of the Churches within his Diocese. And your Hospitality hath bin so seasoned with Affability, that as bis dat, qui citò dat, he giveth doubly that gi∣veth speedily, so bis dat, qui tam alacriter dat, he enter∣taineth doubly, that entertaineth so cheerefully, it is the highest commendation of entertainment in the Poet, that super omnia vultus accessere boni, above all there were added kinde countenances, and the counsaile of the wise man, In all thy gifts shew a cheerefull counte∣nance,Ecclus. 35 9.
Howbeit it is not the Contemplation of these faire graces in you (quid enim sunt bona nostra, nisi dona dei? what are our good deeds, but Gods good graces in us?) that onely animateth me to present and Dedicate this piece of my labours to you. (For as Varus said to Au∣gustus Caesar, Quiapud te non audent dicere, igno∣rant humanitatem tuam, they that dare not speake in thy presence, are ignorant of thine humanity) nor yet the relation of that long acquaintance that I have had with your selfe and your best friends, but also and much more the just conformity and correspondence of the Person in∣treated
of in these Sermons with your selfe and your fa∣mily, that so I may say with the Kingly Preacher, there is no new thing done under the SunEccl. 1.9. and that which hath bin is nowEccl. 3.15 and againe that with the men of Berea, you are every way as  as noble in receiving Gods word with all diligence of minde and searching the ScripturesAct. 17.11. and other Heroicall and Christian vertues as even Cornelius was. For, He for his civill state, was a Centurion or Captaine of an hundred at Cesarea, farre out of his owne Countrey of Italy, you have the honour in your own Countrey to be more then a Centurion a Deputy Lievetenant in this Country for Military Discipline and a Colonell of diverse bands. He was a servant to the Roman Cesar Tiberius (who by jst computation then reigned, a wise and politike Prince, but withall crafty, cruell, perfidious, & Lascivious, you are Domesticall ser∣vant to our Soveraigne, who is alterius orhis Caesar, the Cesar of this other Britaine world (as Pope Vban called Anselme our Archbishop alterius or bis Papam) and who equalleth the best that were of that ranke, or his politicall and morall vertues of wisedome temperance fortitude, clemency and moderate government, but farre exceedeth them in Religion Piety knowledge and service of the true God, and assured hope of a Crowne that is ,1 Pet. 1.4. undefiled, like the stone Amian∣tus and unfading like the flower Amarantus Againe for Religion, He was a devout man, and one that feared God, you are therein a true Israelite without guile, a con∣stant Professour of the Orthodoxe faith and Religion pro∣fessed in this Church, because it is in your conscience Gods truth, and the right way of serving him, and not for any temporising respects of swimming with the streame, nor for any feare or favour of men. He feared God with all his
family, It hath ever bin your Fathers and your own reso∣lution and course with that brave leader of Israel Ioshua to serve God with your whole houshouldIos. 24.15. as thinking with the Emperour Constantius of his servants, that they could not keepe their faith inviolate towards him, that were perfidious to Almighty GodEuseb de vita Constan. li. 1. ca. 11. and to see that they be present at the set times of prayer, yea to compell them to come on the solemne dayes and times into Gods house that it may be full; He, if he had any wife in that houshold to oversee their wayes, could not be happier in her, then you are in your loving and religious Consort, who so sympathizeth with you, that whither you goe, she will go, where you lodge she will lodge, your people are her people, and (which is best of all) your God is her God, and that nothing but death can part you & her, as Ruth saith to NaomiRuth 1.16. He gave much almes to the people round a∣bout him, you not only like Abraham and Lot entertaine yea invite and entreat into your house your neighbours, friends and strangers, but also daily at your gates breake your bread, and open your almes basket to the poore of the Parishes round adjoyning, and refresh their hungry bow∣elles. The Lord grant unto you that you may finde mercy of the Lord in that day. He with his pitty and charity to∣wards men joyned piety towards God praying to God con∣tinually, and you do not onely serve God in righteousnesse and mercifulnesse towards men, but also in holinesse to∣wards him & invocation of his name, you have a Church in your house, and an Oratory to serve God in, and you have your stata tempòra set times, which upon none oc∣casion you omitte or intermitte. And I have this confi∣dence in you, that you have also your secret times of en∣tring into your Closet, and praying to your Father in secretMat. 6. of communing with your owne heart upon your bedde
and in private retirednesse.Psal. 4. Now then macte virtute good lucke have thou with thine honour, ride on still like a good plant in the house of the Lord, flourish still in the Courts of our God, bring forth still these fruits (amongst your other fruits of Christianity, both in your mature and old agePsal. 92.14 be stedfast & unmooveable alwayes abounding in these workes of the Lord,1 Cor. 15. as you beleeve against all the enemies of grace, that the seed of grace sowne in the good ground bringeth forth fruit with patience and per∣severance,Luk. 8.15. (the originall word  importeth both) and that the Lord who is faithfull, will stablish his chil∣dren in every good word and worke2 Thes. 3.3. and 2 17. and confirme them unto the end1 Cor. 1.8
And that God who hath begun his good worke in you, wil finish it until the day of Christ, & as he doth make you perfect, stablish, strengthen and settle you in every good worke, so your reward shall be great in Heaven with him, he will abundantly recompence his owne gifts and good works in you, and crowne them with that crowne of righ∣teousnesse, which is laid up for all them that love the ap∣pearing of Iesus Christ, in which blessed company that you may ever be found shall be the servent prayers of
 From my Rectory at Ludgershall in the County of Wilts the 30. March 1634.
