



AMongst the many reasons (Worshipful Syr',) which haue perswaded mee that Poperie cannot bee the true religiō, this is not the lest: the in∣sufficiency of their doctrin of faith & repētance: which two things though they be the chiefe & principal points

in Religion, and so necessarie that he, who doth not, both knowe, and pra∣ctise them aright, can neuer be saued yet I dare auouch, that the faith and Canitius in Cate∣chisme. Costerus in Enchiridio. repentance of the Romish Church, as they are taught by many of the best approued Papists, are no better then such a faith, and such a repen∣tance as an hypocrite, and a very re∣probate may attaine vnto: Indeed, to insist vpon repentance onely (they make many faire florishes, they call it penance, they make it a sacrament, & say it is a boord that saues a man after shipwrack, and write great volumnes of it, and of confession, and of Cases of Corradus. Nauarrus. Loper Sai∣rus. Hallus. Graffius, & many o∣ther. conscience, (as you good Syr in your owne reading know better then I) & yet alas, when all is done, it is but a shadow of repentance; and indeede how can they teach aright the doc∣trine of repentance: which erre so fowly in setting downe the iustice of God, and the vilenes of sin, which 2.

points a man must know, else he will neuer repent: but Poperie miscon∣ceiuing the iustice of God, teaching it not to bee infinite in as much as it needes not an infinite satisfaction, & misconceiuing the nature of sin, tea∣ching euery sin not to bee damnable,  to offend Gods Infinite iustice, ring (I say) in these 2. how is it pos∣sible they should conceiue aright the nature of repentance? by which a man seeing his sins, their foulenesse their punishment, and his own mise∣ry by them, confesseth them, bewails them, fearing Gods iustice, flyeth frō it, and craues forgiuenesse of his mer∣cie, and lastly purposeth, & indeuou∣reth to leaue them all, and to leade a newe life. The serious consideration hereof, hath often made me wonder, why many Popish treatises being in some sort exhortations to repentance should be so accounted of, as they are by some: for though I confesse there

are in some of them, good and hole∣some meditations, and many motiues to mortification, and good life, yet would I gladly learne of any man but this one thing, how those exhortati∣ons can be pithie, or powerful, sound or any way sufficient to moue a man to repentance, when as, not those bookes, nor all Poperie is able to teach a man sufficiently what true re∣pentance is.
If any man reply: I will therefore learne the doctrine out of the Protes∣tants bookes, and vse the Papists for exhortation onely: I then answere, is it not a more compendious, and conuenient, and a lesse scandalous course, to seeke exhortations out of such writers, as do teach the doctrine aright? nay I doubt how it is possible to finde a powerfull exhortation to repentance in any Papist, who erres in the Doctrine: the reason is mani∣fest, because Doctrine is the ground

of exhortation: and if the doctrine be vnsound, how can the exhortati∣on, be any better. Let vs therefore leaue these muddic puddles, and fet our water at the fountaine: the water of life, at the fountaine of life, I mean the doctrine of faith, and repentance at the written word of God, and at such mens writings as are grounded therevpon, and agreeable thereunto. Deering Grenham. Bradford. and many other.
Now, amongst those many instru∣ments of God, who haue laboured with profit in this great point of Re∣ligion: namely repentance, drawing their doctrine out of the two brests, of the 2. Testaments of Gods booke, I may well say, (to say no more,) that this man of God Maister Perkins, de∣serues to haue his place: whose la∣bours, whilst he liued, and his yet li∣uing labours, what they deserue, I had rather others should proclame, then I once name: who professe my selfe to bee one of those many, who

may truely say, that by the grace of God & his good meanes principally, I am that I am: But leaning him in that glorious mansion, which Christ the Lord of the Haruest hath prepa∣red for him: and now giuen him. I returne to my selfe, and doe humbly praise the Lord of heauen, who gaue mee my time in the Vniuersitie, in those happie dayes, wherein (beside many other worthy men of God, whereof some are falne asleepe, and some remaine aliue vnto this day) this holy man did spend him self like a Candle to giue light vnto others:
The scope of all his godly ende∣uours was to teach Christ Iesus, and him crucified, and much laboured to moue all men to repentance, that as our knowledge hath made Popery ashamed of their ignorance: so our holy liues might honour our holy profession. And as repentance was one of the principal ends, both of his

continuall preaching and writing: soespecially and purposely hath hee twise dealt in that Argument.
First, in his Treatise of Repentance: published 1592. wherein briefly (as his manner was) but soundly, pithily, and feelingly, hee layeth downe the true doctrine, and the very nature of repentance: and after the positiue doctrine, hee toucheth some of the principall controuersies and difficul∣ties in that doctrine, but afterwards thinking with himselfe, that hee had not seriously and forcibly enough, vrged so great & necessarie a Lesson as Repentance is, therefore shortly after, being desired and called to the duty of preaching, in that great, & ge∣neral assembly at Sturbridge-Faire, he thought it a fit time: for this necessary and generall exhortation to Repen∣tance: to the intent, that as wee were taught the doctrine of Repentance, in the former treatise: so in these ser∣mons

we might bee stirred vp to the practise of it. And certainly, (Good Sir:) I iudge there could haue beene no matter, more fit for that assembly then an exhortation to repentance, for as the audience was great and ge∣neral, of all sorts, sexes, ages and cal∣lings of men, and assembled out of many corners of this kingdom so, is this doctrine generall for all: some doctrines are for Parents, some for children, some for schollers, some for tradse-men, some for men, some for women, but repentance is for all: without which, it may bee said of all, and euery one of age, not one excep∣ted: No Repentance, no saluation
These Sermons being in my hands, and not deliuered to mee from hand to hand, but taken with this hand of mine, from his owne mouth, were thought worthy for the excellencie, & fit for the generallity of the matter, to be offered to the publique veiwe:

I haue also other workes of his in my hands: of which (being many,) I con∣fesse my selfe, to be but the keeper for the time, taking my selfe bounde to keepe them safely, to the benefite of Gods Church, of whose treasure vp∣on earth I make no questiō, but they are a part: and I hartily desire you (my godly friends) & all other faith∣full Christians to solicite the Lord in prayer for me, that I may faithfully discharge my self of that great charge which in this respect lyeth vpon me: and that his grace and blessing may be on mee, and all others, who are to be imployed in this seruice, wherein (had the Lord so pleased) wee could heartily haue wished neuer to haue bin imployed: but that his life might haue eased vs of the labour: and that as I begin with this, so I, or some o∣ther better able (which I rather de∣sire) may goe forward, vndertaking the weight of this great burthen, and

not faint, till he haue made a faithfull account to the Church of God, of all these Iewels deliuered to our trust.
And now these first fruites of my labours, in another mans vineyard, as also all that hereafter doe or may follow, I humbly consecrate to the blessed Spouse of Christ Iesus, the holy Church of God on earth, and name∣ly to the Church of England, our be∣loued mother, who may reioyce, that she was the mother of such a sonne, who in few yeares did so much good to the publique cause of religiō, as the wickednesse of many yeares shall not Maister Perkings, but forty yeares old at his death. be able to weare out. But first of all, and especially, I present the same vn∣to you (my very worsh▪ and Christi∣an friends) who (I must needes say) are very worthy of it in many re∣spects.
1 For the matter it selfe, which is repentance, my selfe being able to testifie, that you are not heares.

but doers, ripe in knowledge, & rife in the practise of repentance, inso∣much as I dare from the testimonie of my conscience, and in the word of a minister pronounce of you, that as you haue heard and knowne this Doctrine of repentance, so blessed are you, for you doe it.
And 2. for him, who was the au∣thor hereof (whose mouth spake it from the feeling of his soule, & whose soule is now bound vp in the bundle of life:) I know and cannot in good conscience cōceale the great delight, you haue alwaies had in the reading of his bookes, the reuerend opinion, you had of him liuing, and how hea∣uily and passionately, you tooke his death, and departure: therefore to cheare you vp in want of him, I send you here this little booke, his owne childe, begotten in his life time, but borne after his death: obserue it well and you shall find it, not vnlike the

father, yea, you shall discerne in it the fathers spirit, and it doubts not, but to find entertainement with them, of whom the father was so well respec∣ted.
And for my selfe, I spare to rehearse what interest you haue in me, & al my labours, it is no more then you wor∣thily deserue, and shall haue in me for euer: you are the fairest flowers in this garden, which in this place I af∣ter others haue planted for the Lord (or rather God by vs): And two prin∣cipall pearles in that caowne, which I hope for, at the last day from the Lord my God, whose worde at my mouth you haue receiued with much reuerence, and with such profit, as if I had the like successe of my labours in others, I should then neuer haue cause to say, with the Prophet, I haue laboured in vain, & spent my strength in vaine, but my iudgement is with the Lord. & my work with my God.

And if I knewe you not, to be such as take more delight in doing well, then in hearing of it, I would proue at large, what I haue spoken of you: yet giue me leaue to say that, which with∣out open wrong, I may not conceile, that beside your rare knowledge, and godly zeale to religion, and other duties of the first table to God him∣selfe: your charity & pitty to the nee∣dy distressed Christians, at home and abroad: your mercifull dealing with them, who are in your power; your beneuolence to learning, and name∣ly to some in the Vniuersitie; doe all proclaime to the world those your due praise: which I (well knowing your modesties) do spare once to name: neither, would I haue said thus much, were it not for this cold and barren age, wherein wee liue, that so, when our preaching cannot moue, yet your godly examples might stirre vp. Pardon me therefore I pray you,

and think it no wrong to you, which is a benefit to Gods Church: But goe forward in the strength of the Lord your God, & hold on in that happie Psal. 11. 16 Apoc. 2. 10 1. Thes. 5. 24. course you haue begun, bee faithfull vnto the end, the Lord will giue you the Crowne of life, faithfull is hee, which hath promised, who will also doe it: proceed (good Sir) to honour learning in your selfe and others, and religion especially, which is the prin∣cipall learning; and proceed both of you, to practise religion in your own persons; and in your family: hold on to shine before your family, and a∣mongst the people, where you dwell, in zeale and holinesse: hold on here∣by, still to shame popery, to stop your enemies mouthes, and to honour that holy religiō, which you professe, to gaine comfort of good conscience to your selues, & assurance of eternall reward: and lastly, to encourage me in those painefull duties which lye

vpon me: for I openly professe that your religious zeale and loue of the truth, with māy other good helps, are principal incouragements in my mi∣nistry, & especial motiues vnto me, to vndertake the charge of publicatiō, of so many of the workes of this holy man deceased, as may not in better maner be done by others. But I keep you too long from this holy exhorta∣tion following, I therefore send you to it, & it to you, and from you to the Church of God, for I dare not make it to bee priuately yours and mine, wherein the whole Church hath in∣terest, as well as we: It was preached in the field, but it is worthy to be ad∣mitted into our hearts: I found it in the open field, but vpon diligēt view, finding it to bee Gods corne, and a parcel of his holy and immortal seed, therefore I brought it home, as good corne deserues: And as it is Gods corne, so in you I desire all holy chri∣stians to lay it vp in Gods garners,

that is in their hearts and soules.
And thus committing this little volume to your reading, the matter to your practise: you and yours, to the blessed fauour of that God, whom you serue: and my selfe and my ende∣uours. to your hartie loue, and holie praiers. I take leaue: From mie studie. August. 7. 1604.


