



RIght Worshipfull, giue mee leaue to put you both in one Epistle, whō one seruice, one place, one profession, one order, and one Religion haue so neerely combined: As you are Brethren many waies, and especially in the professi∣on & practise of one Religion: to vouch∣safe to be ioynt Patrons of this little after-birth, this faetus posthumus, of that worthy man Ma. Perkins, now deceased. I send you heere one of the shortest, and one of the sweetest of his Treatises: had it bene as well brought foorth by me, as it was begot by him it had beene a child not vnworthy of so great a father: but seeing it is now as a fatherles child, be you the Tutors to this Orphane, at whose hands Orphanes and Wards haue euer bene well vsed. The fa∣ther

whilst he liued was a shining light in this our Church, and beeing dead, is a shi∣ning starre in heauen, for he turned manie to righteousnesse, and his doctrine wil shine Dan. 12. 3. in Christian Churches whilst the Sunne shineth vpon the earth. The subject of this Treatise is the Ministerie, whereof are layde downe the duties and dignities. And well dooth he couple these two together: for some can challenge the dignities of the Ministerie, and cunningly cast the duties from their shoulders: others performe the duties, but are kept from the dignities duly belonging to that calling: but as hee that will doe the duties, may iustly challenge the dignities, so he that will expect the dig∣nities, must doe the duties of a Minister: therefore in this building, these two beames are in great wisedome well set together by this wise Maister builder, and so closely coupled, as the idle or ambitious man cannot looke at the dignities, but hee must withal behold the duties, nor the painful & laborious man see his dutie, but withal sha see the dignitie thereto belonging.
And surely (Right Worshipfull) none might better haue written of this subiect then he: for who may more worthily de∣scribe

the dignities of the Ministerie, then he, who neither by doctrine nor conuer∣sation, was euer the least disgrace vnto his Ministerie? or who may better challenge the honour of his calling, then he who was euer an honour to his calling; And who might better teach the duties of the Mini∣sterie, then hee who so discharged them, as Enie it selfe cannot iustly reproue, and the enemies thēselues cannot but Answere to Perkins his refor∣med Catho∣like, by B. a Priest. com∣mend? and who may better teach them to others, then he that carefully practised thē in his owne person: And as none could be a fitter Author of this discourse then hee, so not many fiter Patrons then your selues: not many in your profession better schollers, nor any that better loue schollers then your selues: & you are some of those few in this wicked age, who willingly yeld all dignities and due reuerence to such Mi∣nisters as you see willingly to discharge the duties of good Ministers. Well would it be with the Ministerie of England, (and the better with it, the better with Eng∣land) if all as great as you, were as good friends to it as you. And if the Papists ex∣cept, and say how can this be, for that you haue beene persecuters of their Priests, let

me answere once for you, who often an∣swere for many distressed men: they per∣secute you with slander, that say you per∣secuted thē, (but be content to beare your part in popish slanders, with our Prince and state, our Counsellers & Cleargy, our Parliaments and Lawes, for none of these haue escaped these viperous tongues) for though you haue executed the Lawes vpon some of them in your seuerall places, yet not with sharpenesse nor seueritie but with mercifull iustice▪ and that also not as they were Priests, but Plotters, Practisers, sub∣uerters, and seducers: and as they were Priests, you sought their reformation, not their ruine. And if they, who can hardly discharge themselues from beeing Priests of Baal, haue had but iustice, and that also tempered with mercy, it shewes how good regard you haue, and howe much you e∣steeme all good and faithfull Ministers, which are God Interpreters. In a word, if all our Ministers were such as this Treatise describeth, or came but as neere it as the Author hereof did, and if all our great ones did vse and esteeme good ministers as you do, we should then soone pull the Ministe∣rie frō vnder that foote of contempt, with

which this prophane age doth daily tread vpon it. The Church of Rome, who are farre wiser in their kinde then the children of light, haue taken other & strange courses to magnifie the Cleargie. They teach, that the state Ecclesiasticall, is so far more excel∣lent then the Ciuile, as the Sunne is then the Moone, & that not in spirituall onely, (for that we deny not) but in temporall power, pompe, and estate: and that therefore the Chiefe of their Clergie, is as farre aboue the mightiest Emperour, as the Sunne is aboue the Moone; and as the Moone borroweth her light from the Sunne, so doth the Empe∣rour is state and power from the Pope.
They teach, that the Cleargie is a state so distinct, & so absolute of it selfe, as it hath not to do with the Ciuile stat, yea they ex∣empt their Cleargie, from beeing any way subiect to the temporall Magistrate. And though their crimes, be neuer so many or monstrous, yet the Prince, or ciuill au∣thoritie, hath nothing to do to take notice thereof, much lesse to punish them: and herevpon great volumes are written, and many Acts and decrees are made in their Cannon Lawe, De exemptione Clericorum. They extoll their Cleargy aboue the Tem∣poraltie,

allowing the Priests both Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, but leauing the Laitie bread alone. They make them in their masse, mediators betwixt Christ & God the Father, & Creators of their Cre∣ator and Redeemer, when and as often as themselues list. And finally, they send for the most part, all their Clergie immediatly to heauen without let, wheras all the Tem∣poraltie (except Martyrs) must passe by Purgatorie. Here are great buildings, but on a sandy foundation, goodly Castles, but built in the ayre; if these deuises were of God, they would certainly stand, but their long tottering threatens a suddaine fall.
Contrariwise, our Church, or rather the corruption of our Church, by auoyding this Scilla, haue falne into Charibdis, by auoy∣ding one extremitie, haue falne into the other, by taking too much dignitie and au∣thority frō our Ministerie, & by laying too much pouerty, contempt, & basenesse vp∣pon it. It were a worke worth the labour of the wisest heads, to put downe the true meane betwixt both extreames, & worth the labour of our Noble King, to take or∣der that that meane be kept, without ri∣sing to the right hand, or falling to the left.

This short Treatse may hap to giue some light & directions therein, or at least may encourage & stir vp their hearts in whose hands it is to doe it: Vnder your woorthy names would I haue it see the world, not so much for that I am bound to you both in many priuate and particular respects, (though that be much) as for that know you both to be o so right and reformed a iudgement in this case, as you would haue none Ministers but of sufficient gifts, and vnblameable liues, nor those Ministers put to their Pensions, or vncertaine sala∣iles, but to haue certaine & sufficient main∣tenance proportionable to their charge, and beseeming the honour of a Christian Church: God continue you still in that minde, and make many more of the same with you, so should we haue as florishing a Church as any Christendome hath seene. Goe forward in that, and other your religious resolutions, it is the true way to honour, both heere and in a better world: stand firmly for the truth, and boldly a∣gainst the Popish enemies thereof, as hi∣therto you haue done: Religion had ne∣uer more cause to thanke you, and all that doe so, then now it hath, for her enemies

were neuer so insolent since they were our enemies: but if you and others holde on, as in your seuerall places you haue wel be∣gun, and others take the like course, there is hope their insolencies will bee easily (if timely) repressed, and themselues neerest the fall, when they imagine they are in the full. The Lorde blesse and assist you in your painfull places, and make you on earth Instruments of his glorie, to the good of his Church, so shall you bee ves∣sels of glory in the kingdome of Heauen: And thus commending this little treatise to your reading, and my selfe to your fa∣uour, I take leaue, and wil euer rest, 1605.

