


RIght worshipfull, it is sayd in other Nati∣ons, and written in some of their bookes, that there are three disgraces of the En∣glish Nation: The Ignorance, or (that I may so call it) the vnlearned of our Gētrie & Nobili∣tie, the beggery of our poore, & the Basenes of the bodie of our Ministerie, The first blot, our Nobilitie and Gentrie haue well wiped off, since the first daies of our blessed Queen Elizabeth, partly by studie at home, partlie by trauell a∣broade, and I hope they will do it more & more: The second hath beene well lessened by good lawes of late, and would hee more, if the Exe∣cution were as good as our lawes be, & it were much honour to our Nation, and more to our

Religion, if it were quite taken away: for hee that tells vs there shall bee poore euer with vs, saith also, there shall not bee a begger amongst Mat. 26. 11. vs; If there were no poore, what should become Deut. 15. of Charitie? for it is Charitie, to relieue Po∣uertie, not to maintaine Beggerie: Pouerty may bee a Crosse, but it is no Curse: but Beg∣gerie is a fearefull curse, threatened on the enemies of God▪ and Dauid saith not, hee ne∣uer saw a righteous mans child poore, but that Psalm. 109. 10. hee neuer saw him begge his bread. The daily cries in our streetes, crie for yet further refor∣mation Psal. 37. 35. heereof, that the impotent poore may bee sufficiently prouided for, that he neede not, and the Sturdie begger complied to worke, that hee may not be suffered to begge. Happy you, or whosoeuer can haue a hand in effecting this blessed worke, wee who can doe little else, shall pray for it, and for them that labour in it. But now for the third, I feare none but the ve∣rie hand of God, can wipe out that staine from our Church: The basenesse of the generall body of our Ministerie, whence is it, but either from the vnworthinesse, or Pouertie thereof: and the vnworthinesse, whence is it, but from the Pouertie, and base maintenance of our Mi∣nistry, which was once robbed by the Abbies, and after by some in our owne State, which was then Popish, and Poperie that stands so much

vpon Non dimittitur peccatum nisi restitu∣atur ablatum, yet for all that, would not re∣store vnto the Church her tenthes againe. But as popish Abbies stole them, so a popish State kept them, and to their shame some of the good Professors of our Religion haue of late restored such as were in their hands, and there is hope that all our Professors, (vnlesse they care not to bee accounted hypocrus) will make some conscionable restitution We doe not craue that they would with Zacheus restore foure-fold (though it is apparant, that the Luke 19. &c. tenthes were got from vs in old time, by most false and forged Cauillations) we onely craue our owne, we would aske no more, nor willing∣ly take lesse: for our whole duetie is still re∣quired: then why should not our whole due be payd? And yet that the world may learne of vs contentednesse, as well by our practise as our doctrine, we would for the present take in good part, & rest contented with a part of our owne: And some competent portions out of the Im∣propriations, (proportioned to the quantitie of the charge imposed, and the giftes and paines required) would for a time be a reaso∣nable satisfaction in our Ministerie, vntil our state found it self, either better enabled or more straightly tied in Conscience to full restitution.

But as I said, this is a worke of God himselfe, for if a man could doe it so many Parliaments would not haue slipt it, but some of them would haue eternized it selfe, with this honourable name to all posterities. The Parliament that restored Impropriations, but til that, or some other course (as good) bee taken▪ it is both vn∣seasonable and vnreasonable to complaine of the Ignorant, or to craue a learned Ministe∣rie. For shal the Oxes mouth be mousled, 1. Corinth. 9. 7. 9. 14. which treads out the corne, or shall a man goe to warre at his owne cost? and hath not God ordained (marke, it is his Ordinance) that those which teach the Gospel, shall liue of the Gospel? But alas, how shal the Mini∣sterie of England liue of the Gospel, when my small experience can shew that in one Corner of one Countie of this Kingdom, wherin there are some 105. parishes, or parochial Chappels, The East-Riding of the Coun∣ty of Yorke. almost a 100. of them, (if not a full 100.) are Impropriate: and amongst them I can shewe the most parishes haue but 10 pound or there∣abouts some 8. li some 6. li. some . li some foure pounds, some not 4. pounds yearly liuing for the Minister and those impropriations worth some 300. li many 200. li. almost all 100 li. per an yea there is one worth 400 pound per an: where there were but 8 li. left for the Mini∣ster,

vntill of late with much adoe, 10. pound more was obtained for a Preacher, and so there is out of 400, 8. pound shared for a Minister, and 10. pound caried for a Preacher, in that parish where there are 2000. Commu∣nicans. Of all the rest the Crowne hath some 100 pound rent, or not so much, & the remain∣der of 180. pound being a rich liuing, for a wor∣thy learned Minister, a competent liuing for 2. and more then some 7 painful & able mini∣sters haue) I know not what becomes of it, vn∣lesse it go to the feeding of Kits & Cormorats. Are not these goodly liuings for learned men? and may not wee expect a learned ministerie, where there is such maintenance? & I hartily with that other countries, be not able to showe the like Presidents. I haue the rather made re∣lation hereof, that our high Court of Parlia∣ment, may see how great cause they haue, to go forward with that motion already by the made, for the establishing of a learned Ministerie. But if they bring it not to passe, what then re∣maineth, but to hope that the great God of heauen, will put into the heart of the God on earth our noble king (into whose hands he hath put the sword of soueraigne authoritie) an irre∣oable and unresistable resolution to execute his supreme power, for the reformation of this

euill, which as Maister Perkins saith in this treatise) may well be called the Kings euill, for it will hardly be healed, but by the will & po∣wer of a king. In the meane time this. Trea∣tise of that worthy man, may be a motiue to our zealous professors, who haue any impropria∣tions in their owne hands, to excite and prouoke them to a conscionable restitution, in whole or in part, as their estate may beare, or their, conscience shall mooue them. For heerein are layd downs and mixed together, both the du∣ties to be done by faithfull Ministers, and the Dignities due vnto them for their duties: and so seeing the dignities of that calling to bee most honourable, and the duties so chargeable, it cannot but grieue their christian harts to see the maintenance so miserable.
This Treatise I first of all send to you, & vn∣der your names to the world, & to you first, for as I am sure you loued the Author, and honoured those excellent gifts of God in him, so you cānot but accept this after birth of his (as a fatherles child for the fathers sake. And for my self, to cō∣ceale al personal & priuat respects, in the name of many thousands in the Northeren coun∣tries, I praise God, for the good done in those parts, by your painful courses, & religious care, not doubting, but if your selues, or the like

bee imployed there, to asist our honourable and Religie us Lord President that the multitude of Popish Priestes there lurking, will bee dayly lessened, the number of preachers augmen∣ted, Poperie put downe, and the Gospell maintained more and more. Which blessing GOD graunt to that and all other Coun∣teries of this Kingdome, for his mercies sake: and giue vnto you, & all others in your place, the spirit of courage and constancie, in these de∣clining dayes, that being faithfull in your great charges, vnto the end, you may receiue the Crowne of life: for which he hartily prayeth, who will euer rest,

