



Right Worshipfull,
I Should maruell to see any once pro∣fessing the truth, to turne from the light vnto darkenes, from the true Worship and Religion of Christ, to the superstition and idolatrie of Antichrist, but that I read, that our first Parents beleeued Satan before God; that men loue darke∣nesse more then the light, and that fornot louing the truth, and delighting in vnrighteousnesse, God giueth such ouer to beleeue lyes, that they may bee damned. Could it else otherwise be, that so many in this so cleare light of Gods Gospel, should fall away? What haue our aduersaries now more to pleade for their cause, then heretofore they haue had? What can they now say, which is not alreadie

fully answered by our learned men? They put out indeed new bookes, new in regard of the writing and printing; but the reasons one and the same in older written and printed bookes: this is in shew a putting of more strength, to vphold their rui∣nous building, but not in substance: yet thus they beguile the simple and vnstable-minded. By many waies they seeke to de∣ceiue, and beguile people, but especially by accusing our Religi∣on of falshood and nouelty, and affirming theirs to bee the true and most ancient faith: in both which they speake very vn∣truely. For touching this their present Religion (as it differeth from ours, and as it is Popery) it is but a new vpstart Religion, a patcherie of Iudaisme, Paganisme and Heresie; a Religion deuised by men, and not hauing God for the Author: How farre our Religion is from falshood and noueltie, I haue here indeuoured to shew, answering to that question so often pro∣pounded, Where it was before Luthers time?
If any of our aduersaries, or all of them together, dare to goe plainely to worke, (for hitherto they haue not) and first set downe ours and their accord, wherein, and how farre we and they in euery thing doe agree, to cut off hereby all needlesse strife and contentions. Secondly, then truely and faithfully without equiuocall termes, to deliuer their distinct differences from vs, that so euery one may rightly discerne, whereabout we do contend, and what indeede their now present Religion is, which we call Popery, bing seuered from our common agree∣ment. Thirdly, to bring these their differences to the due triall of Scriptures, the common principles of Christianitie, and the true writings of the ancient Fathers in the first Ages; then will it clearely appeare to euery one of indifferent iudgement, whe∣ther ours or theirs be the true Religion, and whether ours or theirs be the false Church.
In the meane space, till they proceede thus vprightly and sincerely, I hope, no Protestant in earnest, will be insnared

and catched by their deceites. Let such as in the plentifull meanes of knowledge wilfully liue in ignorance, or hauing knowledge, liue lewdly, without feare of God, loue of truth, and power of Religion, be the prey for craftie Foxes: for these be the fittest subiects for them to worke vpon; and these only pre∣uaile they with, receiuing a iust punishment for their contempt of sauing knowledge, or for their consciencelesse liuing contra∣ry to their knowledge. For there is no man of right vnder∣standing, and that makes conscience of his waies, louing the truth, walking humbly before his God, being acquainted with Gods Word, and praying for Gods direction, that God either will giue ouer, or that can in reason submit vnto this false An∣tichristian Church, if he doe but seriously consider of such things, as will worke, if not an absolute condemnation, yet a most iust suspition of her to be naught; as first, the vilifying of holy Scriptures, locking them vp from the common people, as if Gods Word were infectious. Secondly, her thrusting vpon the people her feigned traditions, all besides, and many of them against Scripture. Thirdly, the absurd and vnreasonablenesse of their Latine Seruice, which the people vnderstand not. Fourthly, their idolatrous praying to Saints, worshipping stockes and stones, and reliques of the dead. Fifthly, their grosse conceit of Christs corporall presence in the Sacrament. Sixthly, the feigned miracles, and notable coozenages therin, found out here, and in other Countries; the boasting of them a farre off, but not able to worke the like among vs. Seuenthly, the shamelesse & grosse belying of our doctrine, and slandring the liues of our learned men, as Luther, Caluin, Beza, and others. Eighthly, the citing in defence of their Religion, coun∣terfeit Authors, so knowne to be, and so condemned to be by the learned on their owne side. Ninthly, the not permitting freely our bookes among them, as wee doe theirs among vs. Tenthly, the tying of the people to the Priests lippes, and not

permitting them to trie their doctrine, as we doe. The vniust curses, dissembling practices, and mercilesse cruelties vsed to vphold their Religion, swearing & for swearing, by equiuoca∣tions, ment all reseruations, and Popes dispensations, massa∣cres, and powder-plots, and bloodie persecutions. Twelfthly, The auoyding of a free generall Councell, to heare and deter∣mine our differences. Who is he that shall consider of these things with iudgement, but will suspect this Romish Church to be none of Christs Church, if withal he adde hereto the con∣sideration of the differences betweene the wisedome below (by which that seate is guided) which is earthly, naturall, sensu∣all, & deuilish, and the wisdom from aboue (by which Christs Church is guided) which is pure, peaceable, gentle, easie to be intreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisie, as Saint Iames writeth?
I doubt not but that you haue already considered of these premisses, and that you are resolued, that this is the true. Reli∣gion, and the good way, wherein you walke, euen the ancient, Catholike and Apostolike veritie, grounded vpon Scripture, and the principles of Christianitie, taught by the holy Fathers and Doctors of the Church, and confirmed by the blood of blessed Martyrs. My desire is, that God would continue your loue, with encrease of zeale towards the same more and more. To this purpose are these my endeuors, which I present vnto you, praying your fauourable acceptance of my good meaning, and hearty wel-wishes, and worthie respect vnto your selues, and to all that wish well to Sion, and pray for the peace of Ierusalem: God let them, and you with yours, to pros∣per which loue it. Amen.

Batcombe,
Sept. 26.
