



RIght Worshipfull, it is inspired to man by grace, to fetch the com∣passe of this life within the reach of a spanne,Psal. 39 and it is suggested to him by nature to spin out his web in many daies, though it bee with manie dangers. Howbeit if the wings of pride did not transport vs to the height of worldlinesse, and the weight of opinion did not beguile vs in the taste of happinesse, we might discerne in varietie of delights but superfluitie of desires,Eccl. 2 in increase of riches but excesse of sorrowes, in length of yeeres but strength of cares, and in the choisest footing that we take, but a changeable fleeting of our estate. For if our affections might alwaies feed on Manna, we would loath it;Num. 1 if our inheritance did stretch to the plaines of Iordan, wee would enlarge it; and if our preheminence
 to heauen, yet would we raise vp our heads higher. These were the itching humors of Euah lineally descended to vs, who thought not Paradise spacious e∣nough for her habitation, nor the dainties of Eden sweet enough for her taste, nor that presence of God good e∣nough for her companie. But where the superscription of Holinesse to the Lord is engrauen on the head, and the perswasion of godlinesse to be gaine is engrafted in the heart, there the lust of the world, and the dust of the world shal be shuffled together as paires and pearles of e∣quall account and continuance. For let the glorie of a Christian be neuer so eminent, it is not greater then Sa∣lomons; nor yet
Salomons so great as the Lillies: let the arme of the wicked be neuer so mightie, it is not stronger then Pharaohs; and yet Pharaohs inferior to the course of waters: let the power of his command be neuer so abso∣lute, it is not larger then
Nabuchadnezzars, & yet stifned in pride, he was streightned for 7. years within the walks of wild asses; yea let the apparell he puts on be neuer so royall, the place where he sits neuer so iudiciall, the phrase of his speech neuer so plausible, and the praise of his voice neuer so popular, yet can he not be lifted vp aboue Herod, nor
Herod by these defended from the wormes. Whether then we peruse the steps of the Saints, or the state of vnrepentant sinners, wee see their liues equally bound vp with the cords of corruption, though vnequal∣ly matched in the ioy at their separation; the one falling away like a flower transplanted to a better soile: the other rushing vpon the rocke of Gods wrath, either shameful∣ly deiected with the terror of iudgement while they liue, or else fearefully entangled with the sense of torme when they die. It is not therefore amisse, since an enter∣lude is as it were appointed to be plaied on this earth, 


wee abound, couetousnesse creepeth in so closely, as it grudgeth the comfort of society; if we be scanted, impa∣tiency breaketh out so fiercely, as it despiseth the law of propertie; if we be prouoked, wrath roareth out so bitter∣lie for reuenge, as it is no manhood to sheath vp iniuries; if we bee pleased, flatterie followeth on so shamefully for reward, as it is no masterie to obtaine victories; if we be weake, we blame the worke of nature, that we were not made of a firmer mettall; if we be strong,Iob 6.12. we blaze the art of nature as if wee were steele, that could not turne the edge; if we be sicke,2. Chr. 16.12. we plant our faith in the Physitian to cure vs, yet being sound wee shake off temperance that might preserue vs;Iob 32.4. when our leaues bee greene and our wits fresh, because wee want the reuerence of the aged, we crie that hoary haires might quickly couer vs; and be∣ing arriued at age the doore of death, wee wish that slip∣per youth might againe beguile vs: euer peruerting the times and preuenting the meanes that God hath prefi∣xed, and wearying and wasting our selues soonest in pos∣sessing that we would enioy longest. For though it be the pleasure of the Almightie, that wee should cherish this lampe of life, yet ought wee not to consume the oyle in prizing our delights at too high a rate,Iames
4.3. nor in spending on our lusts in too large a measure. And though like warie shipmen wee prouide for this crazie barke, which is the bodie,Mat. 6.25. yet must wee not permit immoderate care like a mercilesse canker to eate through our bones. But the way to ballance our selues euen, and not to stray beyond our tether, is to captiuate our thoughts thus farre, as to rec∣ken the world but as a cradle, wherein we are rocked, till we aspire to some age and growth in Christ: our desires but as dreames wherewith we are deluded, till we attaine to some taste of Gods loue in Christ: this life but as a race
wherein we are wearied and perplexed till wee can reco∣uer some sight of Christ; and this body but as a prison, wherein our soules lie shakled vnder the hope of being blessed in the death of Christ. To which affection and perfection wee shall then ascend, when being taught by his word which is truth, and led by his spirit which is life, we can shake off selfe-will that runneth on so fast to de∣struction, and sway downe selfe-loue that swelleth vp so high to presumption, and can walke in humilitie as in the sight of God, contenting our selues with the portion assigned vs as his gift; and with the affliction sent vs as his triall, crucifying the flesh as an enemy to the quick∣ning of the soule, and trampling on this earth as an in∣snarer of our feete in vanitie, weighing sickenesse but as the fore-runner of sleepe, and welcoming death but as the sickle of the Lords haruest; beholding the graue as the faithfull treasury of our bodies, and looking vp to heauen as the vndoubted Paradise of our soules. Now there being but two impediments to this perswasion and tranquillitie of spirit, 9.35. either the corruption that re∣steth within vs, or the sorrowes brought vpon vs while we breath heere: the first cleauing and clasping so close a∣bout our loynes (sinne being like a leprosie that hath couered the skinne) as wee seeme to stand but on one foote from slipping into hell: the other striking so deepe into the ioyes of this life, that feeling as it were a quoti∣dian ague of discomforts hanging vpon vs, we can hard∣ly weane our thoughts from listening to the knell of iudgement founding in our eares; it is fit we prouide for our inward peace, there being no outward balme able to asswage a raging conscience, nor no externall Physicke of force to relieue a distressed soule. We may not there∣fore iudge our selues safest, when wee are freest from the
buffetings of Satan: for bearing in our bodies a diuided kingdom between the flesh & the spirit, represented vnto vs in the wrestling of Rebeccahs twins within her wombe;Gen. 25.22. if we haue peace with God, we shall haue warre with the dragon; & hauing forsaken Egypt, & in the way to Cana∣an,Reu. 12.9. Exod. 14.9.10. we shal haue
Pharaoh & his captaines flie like grashop∣pers to feed vpon vs: yea the liberty we haue in Christ, the corruption of our hearts will labour to inuert to voluptu∣ousnes: the sweetnes we taste in his word,Gal. 5.13. the vanity of our minds will endeuor to ouercast with drowsines:Act. 20.9. the faith which we ground on his promises,Gen. 3.4. the subtilty of the ser∣pent will seeke to vndermine by doubtfulnes: the consci∣ence we make to offend, the lusts of our flesh will contend for to couer with hypocrisy: the detestatiō we haue of sin, the concupiscence of our eies wil striue to out-reach with profanenesse: & the interest we haue to heauen, the pride of our liues will perswade vs to exchange for trifles.Gen. 25.30 With which temptations we may not be dismaied, for where the siege is layd, there is watchfulnesse to withstand; but where no feare of the enemy is, there the weapon rusteth: and feeling a continuance of this contention between the law of the flesh and the spirit of life, wee may bee assured that the seed of grace giuen vs from aboue, which first drew vs into fight with our vncleannesse, is well growen, and that imputing the first thought of our peace to the loue of God,Iohn 3.16. the full accomplishment of it to the death of Christ, and the alone messenger and perswader of it to the holy Ghost; and knitting the whole power of the worke, the mercy in our preseruation, & the glory in our victorie to the arme and action of the almighty, we shall haue our corruptions as it were closed in our hands, and the pride of our resistance so abated in our liues, as sinne shall but droupingly be seene in vs, and mortality that cannot bee
priuiledged with perfection, shall yet be beautified with sanctification, in such measure as we shall walke heere but as dispatcht from heauen on our Lords message, to giue the sonnes of men a paterne of good life, & to forewarne them of their woes, 7.
 28.20. by bounding our desires within Iacobs compas, the presence of the Lord to guide vs that we doe not stray, his prouidence to feed vs that we do not starue, and his bounty to cloth vs that we do not perish. On the otherside, so tender are our thoughts, and so iealous our meditations of the loue of God,Io 6.4. as we are stricken with a trembling distrust, to haue lost the starre of our direction and comfort in Christ, when wee see our selues exposed to the shame of the world, and the winds still to beate on our rudders, where the wicked saile away proudly in a set calme; our houses to be inclosed with snares, when theirs are peaceable without feare; and our liues to be bound vp in sorow,Iob
21.24. when their brests (as Iob speaketh) are full of milke, and their bones of marrow. And when the appre∣hension of this feare hath taken such hold of our flesh, as we thinke our selues smitten in displeasure, and the tree of our hope to bee torne downe in wrath, wee then wrastle with sinne as if the steps of our strength were restrained, and looke vpon death as the Iailer, that commits vs to the graue as a dungeon. Hobeit euen in this doth the Lord reach forth a most approued cordiall to remoue the faint∣nesse of our hearts; for hauing accesse into his sanctuary through the vnion & communion we haue with Christ, the vncleanues of our birth being wiped away in the san∣ctification of his nature, our transgression remoued in his innocency, our rebellion discharged in his obedience, and the vtmost farthing paid in his sufferings; and hauing the image of God we lost in Adam not renewed onely, but a fairer and deeper stamp thereof engrauen and set vpon vs,
it being not now in our power to listen any more to the counsel of the flesh, Christ bearing our names before him as his brest-plate, and our bodies with him as members whereof he is head; and hauing this written in the tables of our heart by the finger of no forgerer, but of that com∣forter was sent from heauen, and testified by ourselues in the pietie of our religion and purity of conuersation, set∣ting saluation before vs as a binding benefite, euen to the losse of our souls to venture for the Lords glory:Rom. 8.33. we may in a Christian resolution giue challenge at the gates of hell, that nothing can be charged vpon vs as a debt, and therefore nothing can light vpon vs as a punishment. Wherefore if the Lord doe cast his cloudy countenance vpon vs, it is that we should watch against the weaknesse of the flesh,Mat. 16.41. which is then readiest to sleepe when tempta∣tion is nearest: and yet if the streame of temptation cary vs into some sin, & from thence we slip into some shame, in his compassion he cureth vs, and yet in kindnesse doth correct vs. If he mingle our bread with care, and lodge vs in the bed of darknes & discomfort, it is to weane vs from the flesh pots of Egypt, and to aduance vs in the way to Canaan; yet being driuen to any strait or exigent in this wildernes, rather then we shall want it shall raine Manna,Exod. 26.4. & 27.6. & rather then we shall thirst the rocke shal yeeld vs water: yea though the wicked be like the bramble, who in confi∣dence of their shadow dare chalenge to be kings ouer the trees of the forrest, and our selues like sheepe,Iudg. 9.15. who in sim∣plicity grazing vpon the mountaines, are either fleeced of the shearer when we are growne in wooll, or snatched vp by the butcher when we are growen in flesh: yet when death hath made vs both euen with the earth, the graue shal be to vs a fold till our shepheard come, and to them a shambles till the destroier of their soules shall haue recei∣ued
an endles commission to torment them. What cause then haue we to shut our gates against the gasps of death, or like trembling leaues to entertaine the gale or blast of sicknes, which doth but prune our fethers, the more easily to flie toward our abiding citie? For if neither the weight of corruption, though it sorely presse vs, nor the violence of affliction, though it soundly beat vs, can separat vs from the loue of God,Iob 5.23. nor the league with his creatures; nay if this masse of sin, and storme of sorrow we sustaine, be the most sensible motiues to draw vs vnder Christs couering; and liuing heere as sinning faints though sanctified, and as crucified saints though beloued, we haue yet but our ioies eclipsed,2. Cor. 13.1. and that beauty of blessednesse set foorth vnto vs in a counterfet, which shall clearely heereafter be disco∣uered; into what profound vanity are we falne if we wold still be hedged in and inthralled in this vale of misery and mortality, and not desire to ascend on that ladder which Iacob knew to bee the gate of heauen,Gen. 28.17. the skirts whereof but seene and felt of the Apostles, did leaue them in such a slumber of delight, as they onely vanted in the crosse of Christ,Act. 4.24. which was their preseruatiue against the feare and infection of being folded vp with the wormes, and their spur and preparatiue to set the houses of their harts in or∣der before they descended to the dust.
Most comfortable perswasions & instructions tending to this purpose, shall be found dispersed and sprinkled in this treatise following; into which, who so shall walke for religious recreation, if he cannot furnish himselfe with Io∣sephs store to serue Egypt and other countries,Gen. 42.6. 1. King.
17.15. yet can be not faile of the widowes store, that had to feed her selfe & Eliah. For from hence may be obserued, that the foolish∣nes of the Gospell doth prescribe the best directions to a blessed end;1. Cor. 1.27. that the pouerty of a Christian doth forerun
the riches which he hath in heauen; that the loue of the world is an exemption from the life of God,Mat. 5.3. Iames 4.4. Luk. 16.13. Iob 5.17. and that the Lords correction is but loue: and on the contrary shall be discerned, that the eloquence of the flesh is like the cry of the Lapwing, that traineth vs furthest from that we seeke; that the pompe of the earth is like a blazing starre, that dreadeth the minde by presaging ruine; that the tempta∣tions to pleasure are like canded wormewood, that cozen the tast, and kill the stomacke; and that the schedule of our daies being summed vp, is like a large debt set downe in golden letters.
These things to a moderate and mortified minde, sea∣soned with the feare, and seated in the fauour of God, cannot but bee welcome, though with the couetous and carnall man, that hath his desires like the Mole, scraping in the earth, they shall fare as Christ did among the Ca∣darens,Marke 5.17. who was intreated to depart from them, when he was but comming neare them. Howbeit in these des∣perate diseased times, wherein wee are all so vniuersallie drunke with our owne conceits, as we despise to be refor∣med by the word of grace (some yoking religion with po∣licy, as if they were grapes of the same vintage: some tram∣pling downe religion with profanenesse, as if she wore a weed that ouergrew the corne; some disguising religion with hypocrisie, as if she were a garment of diuers colors: some poysoning religion with Popery, as if the immor∣tall seed of God could bee leauened with the traditions of men: and few laying religion to the heart, which sim∣ply embraced and sincerely followed, would and ought to be the square and leuell of our liues,) it is good we get as many buttresses as we can to vphold the building, and raise as many bulwarkes as we can to beat backe the shot, that Satan shewing himselfe more sharpe witted, and if
it may be more spitefully minded then before, in laying new kinds of allurements to surprize our faith and subuert our hope, that we should not so much as grope after our life which is hid in Christ: we may (if it be possible) with fresh and new supply of skill and cunning vnwind our selues out of his enuenimed snares, and hold fast our pro∣fession, which is a schole of chastisement for a time, that in our peace at the last we may be partakers of the Lords holinesse.Heb. 12.10.

ue therefore presumed, though vnable of my selfe to carie the least sticke to the altar, and vnworthy of all others (since lowest of the forme) to offer either diet or direction to any, that hath touched but the hemme of Christ: yet being taught a receipt, which carefully ap∣plied will purifie the head from profane humors, streng∣then the heart against vaine terrors, and cleanse the con∣science from that accursed guile of spirit,Psal.
32.2.3 whereby wee haue learned to lessen sinne, I haue presumed no longer to suppresse the quintessence of his skill from whence it came, but shadowed with your allowance to send it foorth, not so full and hearty a medicine (I confesse) as it might haue beene from the immediate hand of him that made it. The man ye knew, and this iron and irefull age that frowneth most on them that are freest from profane∣nesse, could not but approue him to bee zealous of the truth of God, painfull in his calling, faithfull in his mes∣sage, powerfull in his speech, carefull of the flocke of Christ, peaceable and blamelesse in his life, and comfor∣table and constant in his death. So as if there appeare any skarre or blemish in the worke, it came by passing tho∣row my fingers, that carried my pen too slowly, and at∣tended the voice too slightly. Howbeit, putting on the armour of proofe and experience of your fauors, toward
whom chiefly I haue set my byas, that ye will be pleased to be no seuere examiners, but mild perusers of these pa∣pers, and that affection may somewhat mediate with your iudgements, to censure not as ye see, but as I meane; I haue aduentured the hazard to be reproued of others, vp∣on assured confidence to bee accepted of you. And though many may happely balke the alley, and not lend their eye to behold the iarres betweene the flesh and the spirit, vpon opinion that my selfe haue leaped beyond my last, in striuing to bring this boat to land, which the owner neuer meant should see the shore: yet when I considered the word of God to be like the raine,Heb. 6.7. Mark. 11.13. and the hearts of men like the earth, that if the tree answer not her fruite, her leaues will not protect her from the fire: that he shall come short in his account of faith,Rom. 10.14. that maketh no conscience of hearing; and that if the voice of the Preacher perish in the ayre or in the eare, it shall quicken againe to question with vs for our negligence; I was not ashamed to humble my selfe to others view, that by the mercy seene on me, who haue beene thus farre led into the secrets of God,Exod. 19.13. they may be likewise encouraged to presse within the border of the mount, when the horne of saluation shall be blowen.
For it is a miserie and madnesse to imagine the labour of a Christian to be mued vp within the wales of the mi∣nisterie, or that men are so straitned in their vocations, as that they may not looke aside to a sermon: or that because the theese was saued on the gallowes,Luk. 23.43. therefore heauen may bee wonne with a wet finger: or that since the workers for an houre,Mat.
20.9. had the penny with them that bore the paine and heate of the day: therefore it shall suf∣fice to come as Nicodemus did to Christ by night.Ioh. 3.2. Nay, we must know, that as the promise of mercie is equall to
all, so the prayer and practise for mercie must be the same in all; that we are no longer within the compasse of the Lords protection,Psal. 91 11. then wee walke in feare within the bounds of his direction; that if religion be not the com∣mander in our callings, scarcitie or discontent will bee as mothes in our blessings; and that if presumption misleade vs to pledge only a pang of deuotion for a sacrifice when the pleasure of our daies be past, iudgement shall but re∣quite vs, if either death do strangle vs before we speake, or the wrath of God rebound vpon vs when wee haue wept our fill. For it standeth not with the Lords honour to be shaken off so oft when he would lodge with vs,Ier. 32.33. nor with our duties to runne away so fast, when wee should turne to him: but that at length iustice must arise to preserue the maiestie of his mercy, so much abased, and so long abused, which we haue sensibly felt, the stripes being yet seene in our streets, and may feare heereafter to bee more fierce,2. Sam. 24.14. by how much the sword of the enemie sharpened to destruction, doth exceed the correcting hand of God tempered with compassion.
The Lord graunt this short setting of his face against vs, may haste vs to haue peace with him, that hath the ends of the world subiect to his power, and the plagues of the world restrainable at his will: so shall wee bee preserued from the venime, and ransomed from the violence of them that seeke our soules, and either still praise him in the land of the liuing,Psal. 56.13. or eternally dwell with him in the habitation of his Saints: which God grant may bee your portions, and the inheritance of your posterity. Amen.

