



RIGHT Honorable, and right Wor∣shipfull, to you all, and to euery one of you, am I bold to present and de∣dicate this my treatise of the dignity of Gods children, not so much sea∣ring the same to be offensiue to any of you, either by the meannesse & ob∣scurity of my person, or by the plaine and homely man∣ner of writing thereof, as hoping it will be acceptable to you all, for the argument and subiect matter therein handled. For to whom more fitly appertaineth the dedi∣cation of a treatise of the dignitie of the sonnes of the Psal. 29. 1. Almighty in heauen, then to those who are called the sonnes of the mighty in earth?
Although also it behooueth all, well to consider and to make good vse of the whole treatise, yet the same es∣pecially belongeth to all that are of highest honor and dignity in the world. For to whomsoeuer much is giuen, of Luk. 12. 48. him shall be much required. And the more eminent that a∣ny are in place, the more excellent ought the same to shew themselues in grace.
Our dread Soueraigne writing to his most princely
 Sonne, by many golden sentences teacheth, that as any 1.  pag. 4. in dignity be erected aboue other, so they ought in thankeful∣nesse towards God (that hath aduanced them) goe as far be∣yond all other: and that the highnesse of any dignity doth not diminsh, but rather much increase the faults of such as are in such dignity. The same also is grounded vpon the com∣mandement of the Soueraign of all soueraignes, euen of the mighty God and Lord of heauen and earth touch∣ing a greater sacrifice for the ruler of the people offending of ignorance, then for a priuate person in like manner trans∣gressing.  4. 22. . 7. Is not the same much more to be said of the ru∣ler of the people that offendeth of knowledge?
As in these respects I was the bolder to dedicate these my labors to your Honors and Worships, so not fearing any imputation of presumption, I thought it more fit to dedicat the same to you all generally, then to any one, or to some few particularly, that so none might think him∣selfe excluded, and that euery one might accept them as dedicated to himselfe, and so vouchsafe to read them the more diligently, and to make the better vse of them, according to his place.
The rather also did I take incouragement so to doe, that yee especially might by these my labors the more cleerly see, that without this dignity in this treatise set sorth, and the right vse of the same, all nobility, honor, and dignity in this world is of no value, of no price, of no account.
As age is a crowne of glory, being found in the way of righ∣teousnesse, Prov. 16. 31. and no otherwise; so may it be said of nobility, and of all other dignities of the world. The description of the sonnes of Nobles by eating in time for strength, and not for drunkennesse: (this sobriety in eating and drinking for Eccles. 10. 17. the rarenesse of it in great persons of the world, being
 synecdochically put for all vertues) This description (I say) of the sonnes of nobles, doth plainly teach them only to be truly worthy of the said honorable title, which by the foresaid vertue and all other accompanying the same, do shew themselues to be the children of God.
Doth not the same Salomon also say without excepti∣on of any degree in the world, that the righteous is more Prov. 12. 26. excellent then his neighbor? Elsewhere also he preferreth (not a great name, but) a good name aboue great riches, and Prov. 22. 1. Ecces. 7. 3. before precious ointment: both which commonly are apur∣tenances and ornaments of nobility, and other worldly dignity. What is a good name, but such a name as is gotten by doing of those things, which belong to the children of God?
The former point is further euident by diuers rea∣sons. For all honor and dignity according to this world, is only in this world. But the dignity of being the sennes of the most High, is also in heauen. For ye shal afterward see in the treatise, that the children of God doe sit with Christ Iesus in the heavenly places, euen while they are here in the earth. All worldly honors and dignities doe end with this life. For as in the resurrection, men shall neither marry wiues, nor women shall be giuen in mariage; so then Mat. 22. 30. there shall be neither Gentlemen, nor Esquires, nor Knights, nor Barons, nor any such degree of men, but all shall be as one in Christ Iesus. But the dignity of the children of God after this life is inlarged, and in the re∣surrection shall be made greater then it was. Euen then (I say) shall the dignity of adoption be increased, when all worldly dignity shall be vtterly ceased.
As men are noble, honorable, or worshipfull in this world, they are but in fauor with men; but as they be the children of God, they are in grace with God himselfe.

Worldly dignity doth but giue accesse to worldlie Princes: but the dignity of adoption, hath accesse (with assurance of preuailing) to the throne of him that is Lord of heauen, and earth.
As here men are Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Vicounts, Barons, &c. they haue but men to attend vpon them: but the treatise following will shew, that as any bee the children of God, the glorious Angels of heauen do wait vpon them, and continually guard them for their safety, and further good.
As here men be in great place, they haue but earthlie inheritances, whereof they or theirs may be dispossessed and cleane disinherited: But as they bee the children of God, they haue an inheritance in heauen, far passing all the kingdomes of the world, and the which all the pow∣er of hell shall neuer take away.
Many other the like prerogatiues shall ye find in this treatise, of the children of the Almighty in heauen, far excelling the honors of the sons of the mighty in earth: Of the which prerogatiues I do here giue you but this tast, thereby the more to quicken your appetite, and the bet∣ter to incourage you to vouchsafe the reading of those more largely handled, and of many other contained in the treatise it selfe.
Pleaseth it your Honors and worships further to see the former point in the glasse of a few examples? Be∣hold then (I beseech you) Moses, Ioshua, Othniel, Ehud, De∣borah, Gideon, I phtah, Sampson, and all the other good Iud∣ges of Israel, before the kingdome of Israel established. For were they so honourable by being kings fellowes, and hauing kingly authority, as they were by doing those things which testified their adoption? Behold Da∣uid and Salomon, (two mighty kings of al Israel) with Asa,
 Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and Iosiah, all good Kings of Iuda. For were these so honorable by being great and mighty princes, as they were by being the children of God? Be∣hold Ester, Mordecai, Shadrach, Meshach, Abednego, and Daniel. For were they so honorable, the one by being a Queene, and the wife of a most mighty monarch, that had 127. prouinces vnder him, the other by beeing in great grace & fauor with the like mighty monarchs; as they were by shewing themselues the children of God? Yea, behold Cyrus, Artashasht, Darius and Ahasbuerosh, all heathen Emperors. For were they so honorable by be∣ing such Emperors (though some of them had 127. pro. uinces vnder their gouernment) as they were by doing some things for the Church and people of God, where∣by they did only resemble Gods children, and were not so indeed? May not the like be said of Iehu King of Israel? For was he so honorable by being King of Israel, extra∣ordinarily annointed so to bee by the appointment of God; as he was by his zeale (though only temporary) a∣gainst Baal, and his Priests and seruants? Behold further Ioseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus. For were they so honorable, in that the one was a rich man, and an honera∣ble Mat. 27. 17. Mark. 15. 45. Ioh. 3. 1. & 10. counsellor; and the other a great Pharisee, a ruler of the Iewes, and a teacher in Israel; as they were, in that the one went to Pilat, and begged the body of Iesus, and the other ioi∣ned with him in the honorable buriall thereof?
Behold the Eunuch of Ethtopia. For was he so hono∣rable, Act 8. 27. by being the Queen of the Ethiopians chiefe go∣uernor and her Lord treasurer, as hee was by comming out of his owne country (a long, a chargeable, and a dan∣gerous iourny) to worship the Lord at Ierusalem: by rea∣ding the scriptures as hee rode in his chariot; (whereas such great men for the most part spend such times in
 vaine sports, or in some idle discourses) and by his meeke acknowlegement of his ignorance of the Scrip∣ture which he did read: by his courteous speech to Phi∣lip (a poore trauelling footman, neuer before nor after seen of him) and by his like kind taking him vp into his chariot to himselfe to be further instructed by him, and by his humble submitting himselfe to bee examined of his faith, and to be baptized of him?
The like may bee said of many Christian Emperors, Constantine and other: of our late most noble King Ed∣ward the sixt; and of our more late Queen (Elizabeth) of most happy and blessed memory.
To produce the examples of any Princes or nobles liuing, would not (perhaps) bee so well approued, as suspected of flatterie, or some other sinister mea∣ning.
What now (right Honorable and right Worship∣full) shall I say more? As Noah said, God perswade Iaphet that he may dwell in the tents of Shem; so say I: If any of Ges. 9. 27. you, to whom I doe in all humilitie present and dedicate these my labours, haue not yet receiued the spirit of a∣doption, God perswade such to dwell in the tents of his such children, as whose dignitie I doe in this trea∣tise lay foorth: as likewise, to thinke it a woe vnto them to vemaine in Meshech, and to dwell in the tents of Ke∣dar. Psal. 120 5.
The same God also of power, maiestie, and glory, who hath the hearts of all Kings, and Nobles, and of all other great persons in his hand as the riuers of waters, to turne the same whither it pleaseth him; euen this God, that Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, so incline all your hearts, Prov. 1. 1. both to consider of the reasons whereby the dignitie of his children is here declared, and also to apply the
 vses of the doctrine thereof to your selues, accor∣ding to your seuerall states and places in this world, that as some of you doe sometimes here in earth sit in Parliament with our most gratious Soueraigne King IAMES: so yee may all at the last sit with Christ Iesus in heauen, euen in his throne, as himselfe sitteth Rev. 3. 21. in the throne of his Father: and that for euer and euer. Much Totham in Essex: Aprill 16. 16 10.

