



AS in this treatise I speake generally to euery Christian reader, so now my deere brethren in the Lord, that haue sometimes heard me preach these things which now I haue printed, let me more particularly intreate you to vouchsafe the buying and reading of them, because in the printing of them I haue had a speciall respect vnto your good.
I am not able to beslow vpon euery one of you one of these bookes, of as small price as they be. The most of you do know, how truely I amy say with Naomi, I was full, but the Lord hath made mee emptie: and the Almightie hath brought me vnto aduersitie. Ruth. 1. 21. euen in my lat∣ter age requiring most comfort.
I suppose also, that my willing minde for a greater kind∣nesse is not doubted of by you, if my ability were according. If I were as I haue beene, yet were it easier for the least of ma∣ny of you to buy one, then for me to giue many.
I shall not neede to tell you for further perswasion in this behalfe, that the fruit of well and aduised reading this Trea∣tise will abundantly recompence your cost. Ye haue not so learned Christ, (in whom all of vs haue our adoption) as
 so lightly to esteeme a treatise setting forth the excellencie of the said adoption: neither (I am sure) haue yee forgotten that Esau is pronounced a prophane person, for making more account of one portion of meate (euen in his extre∣mity of hunger) then of his birthright, (Heb. 12. 17.) a pledge and a kinde of Sacrament of this adoption.
For me also, first to gather all these things together, then to write, afterwards to correct them, and last of all to write them againe for the presse, is much more then for to lay out a little money, and to spend a few howers in reading of them. In your loue therefore towards me, accept them as a testimo∣ny of my vnseined loue towards you, and of my like desire of your welfare in the Lord. Such of you as are best able I desire to buy and to reade them, and hauing read them them∣selues, then also to lend them to other that cannot buy them. Let all that reade them, make vse also of them, as their seue∣rall occasions shall require.
What more my beloued brethren shall I say vnto you? E∣uen this, that because ye haue beene long hearers of the word, the preaching whereof is the meanes both to beginne your regeneration, and also to increase your sanctification, there∣fore remember how yee haue receiued and heard, and that also ye do hold fast Reuel. 3. 3. Yea, that with all your might ye keepe that which ye haue, that no man take a∣way your crowne, verse 11.
Are not these the latter times wherein the spirit long since did speake euidently that some should depart from the faith, and giue heede to the spirits of errours, and to doctrines of diuels? 1. Tim. 4. 1. Are they not the last daies, & perillous times, wherin men should be louers of themselues, couetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, &c. fierce also, no louers at all of them which are good, traitors (or treacherous) heady, high minded
 louers of pleasures more then louers of God: hauing a shew of godlines, but (in truth) denying the power thereof? 2. Tim. 3. 1. &c.
Haue ye not therefore the more neede, diligently to take heede to the things which ye haue heard, lest at any time ye run out (Heb. 2. 1.) and leake as riuen vessels vse to doe? and lest (also) at any time there be in any of you an euil, and an vnbeleeuing heart, to depart away from the liuing God; and further to exhort one another dai∣ly, whiles it is called to day, and whiles ye enioy the light of the gospell, that none of you be hardned through the deceitfulnesse of sinne? Heb. 3. 12. &c. Yea, that also ye watch one ouer another (euen as euery Pastor ought to do o∣uer his flocke) that no man fall away from the grace of God? &c. Heb. 12. 15. Verily beloued ye ought thus to doe, and the times do require it at your hands.
Take heede therefore that in these daies wherein the loue of many waxeth cold, and all iniquity is increased, no man deceiue you: Mat. 24. 4. 12. Looke to your selues, that wee lose not the things which we haue done, but that we may all receiue a full reward: 2. Iohn. 8. Be sted∣fast and vnremoueable (not decaying, but) abounding alwaies in the worke of the Lord: knowing that your labour shall not be in vaine in the Lord: 1. Cor. 15. 58.
And because yee haue not onely beene hearers of the word, neither such onely as haue learned somewhat out of the same, but haue also made profession of the hope belonging to adop∣tion, therefore against all forces and perswasions to the con∣trary, keepe the said profession of your hope, without wauering, considering one another (and whetting one a∣nother as yron whetteth yron: Pro. 27. 17.) to loue and to good workes (Heb. 10. 23. 24.) both towards God, and also towards men, that so ye may flourish as palme trees;
 and grow like Cedars in Lebanon; and being planted in the house of the Lord, ye may flourish in the Courts of our God: and still bring forth fruit in your age, and be fatte, and flourishing. Psal. 92. 12. Yea, that your loue, and seruices, and faith, and patience, and workes may be more at the last, then at the first. Reuel. 2. 19.
Shall I here conclude my speech vnto you? Not so my good brethren, but suffer a little further the words of exhor∣tation. Heb. 13. 22. Because therefore all the children of God are as it were bound vp in the bundle of life (as A∣bigail speaketh to Dauid, 1. Sam. 25. 29.) and stickes that are bound, continuing so bound cannot be easily broken, but the bond whereby they are bound being cut in sunder, a child may breake them one by one: Because also they be as it were burning coales; (euen coales of the Lords altar) and coales lying together doe keepe their heat, but being raked out, and scattered vpon the hearth, they are soone quenched and doe dye: therefore the more excellent by this Treatise ye shall see, the state and condition of the children of God to be, the more siriue (I beseech you) to keepe communion with them, and forsake not the fellowship that ye haue with them, as the maner of some was, euen in the golden age, and flou∣rishing time of the Apostles. Heb. 10. 25.
Let no man dare to account that ministery Antichristian, which God the father hath vsed, and Iesus Christ hath gra∣ced with the holy Ghost, to the begetting of such Children as cannot be begotten but by the word of truth. I ames 1. 18. As therefore ye cannot deny God, to haue begotten againe your selues and other, and dailie so to doe; by the ministrie of the Church of England, so ye must acknowledge the meanes to haue beene and daily to bec no other, then the word of truth. It is no more possible for any to be begotten againe by any word of errour, then it is to haue any father of regenera∣tion
 but God. Was it the word of truth, and is it not still? Or is it to some, and ought not all so to account of it? Or is it the word of truth to make men new borne babes in Christ (1. Pet. 1. 23.) and is it not also that sincere & pure milk, which such as are so made new borne babes, ought still to de∣sire, that they may grow thereby? 1. Pet. 2. 2. Or can this sincere milke of that word of truth be sucked out of the breasts and pappes of an harlot? Or can the same word of truth be publikely preached and maintained, with as publike a disclaiming and renouncing of all things contrarie there∣unto, in a false and an adulterous Church? As the Church of God is the piller of truth, 1. Tim. 3. 15. so whatsoeuer company is the piller of truth, and doth publikely preach and maintaine, and vphold the truth, that also is to be acknow∣ledged the Church of God. If some one man, or diuers par∣ticular persons do preach some errours in such a Church: yea and be suffered so to doe, either by the negligence, or by want of knowledge of them, yet this doth no more nullifie such a Church, and make it to be no Church, then the suffering of the woman Iezebel (which called her selfe a Prophe∣tesse) to deceiue Christs seruants, to make them com∣mit fornication, and to eate meate sacrificed to Idols, Reuel. 2. 20. did nullfie the Church of Thyatira, and make it to be no Church.
But to returne to that from which I haue a little digressed: as it cannot be denied to be the word of truth, whereby men haue beene and daily are begotten againe amongst vs: nei∣ther that can be denied to be the Church of God, where the said word is preached, and publikely, euen by publike autho∣ritie maintained, with as publike a renoucing of all errours, and forraine Canons contrarie to the said word of truth: as these things cannot be denied; so also must such ministers as doe so preach that word of truth, that thereby men are begot∣ten
 againe vnto God, be acknowledged to be the ministers of God, and sent by God. For doth not the Apostle ioine all these together, calling vpon God, beleeuing, hearing, preach∣ing, and sending them that did preach? Rom. 10. 14. 15. And doth he not thereby plainly teach, that they do go all to∣gether, and that none can truely call vpon God which doth not beleeue: none can beleeue which doth not heare: none can heare which haue no preachers: none can preach except they be sent? and that consequently whosoeuer do so preach, that men ther∣by are brought truely to call vpon God, and truely to beleeue in God, they are sent of God so to preach?
Is not the same point further manifest by that argument whereby the same Apostle instifieth his Apostleship, and mini∣stery to the Corinthians: euen by the successe and efficacie of his preaching amongst them, against such as denied his Apo∣stleship, as many in these daies doe altogether deny all the mi∣nisterie of the Church of England? Am I not (saith he) an Apostle? &c. Are not ye my worke in the Lord? If I be not an Apostle vnto other, doubtles I am vnto you: for ye are the seale of my Apostleship in the Lord. 1. Cor. 9. 1. 2. And againe: Neede we, as some other, epi∣stles of recommendations vnto you: or of recommen∣dation from you? yee are our epistle written in our hearts: which is vnderstood and read of all men, in that ye are manifest to be the epistle of Christ, ministred by vs, and written, not with inke, but with the spirit of the liuing God: not in tables of stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart. 2. Cor. 3. 1. 2. 3. What meane all these words? Euen this, that such had beene the successe of the ministerie of the Apostle amongst the Corinthians, that both himselfe had good assurance in his owne heart of his calling vnto them, and that other also might thereby euidently perceiue and vnder∣stand as much.

Doth not our Sauiour proue his sending as a Messias, and to be a Messias, by the workes which he did? The workes that I do beare witnes of me, that the father hath sent me? Iohn. 5. 39. As his workes beseeming a Messias, and in the power of none, but of the Messias, proued him to bee the Messias, so do not also the workes of ministers of the gospell, and proper onely to such as are sent from God, proue men to be such ministers? Doubtlesse (saith hee, that being borne blinde had his sight giuen him by Christ) this is a maruel∣lous thing, that ye know not whence he is, and yet hee hath opened mine eies: Iohn. 9. 30. And againe, If this man were not of God, hee could haue done nothing: verse 33. May it not in like maner, (and much more) be said of the ministers of the Church of England, to all them that make question of their calling, Doubtles this is a maruellous thing, that ye know not whence they be, (or deny them from whence they are) and yet they open the eies of the mindes of many: Yea, euen of them that doe make such que∣stion of their calling, and doe peremptorily deny them to be of God, as those wicked Iewes, to whom that poore man so spake, denied Christ to be of God. If such ministers were not of God, they could haue done nothing in the lightning mens eies of their vnderstanding, to know what the hope is of his calling, and what bee the riches of his glorious inheritance in the Saints, &c. Ephes. 1. 18.
No man can make opposition to these things, but hee must also oppose himselfe to the former scriptures. And if the for∣mer scriptures be for the iustifying of the ministery of the Church of England, as thereby the word of truth is preached to the effectuall begetting againe of men vnto God; no other Scriptures can be against it for the nullifying therof: because the scriptures do all most sweetely agree together, without a∣ny
 contradiction of any one to any other. As therefore, when our Sauiour seeing many of his disciples to go back, and to walke no more with him (that is, vtterly to leaue him) said vnto the twelue, will ye also go away? Peter answered him, Master, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternall life: Iohn. 6. 66. 67. 68. so (my good brethren) though ye doe see many to withdraw themselues from them that haue preached the words of eternall life, and still do preach the same; and though ye also be earnestly solli∣cited to doe the like; yet determine in your hearts, and answer accordingly, To whom shall wee go? these haue the words of eternall life?
The comparison obiected by some, of children begotten to men as well by adulterie and fornication, as by lawfull mar∣riage, thereby to insinuate, that as such children do not iustify either adulterie or fornication; so in like maner such Chil∣dren, as before we haue said to be begotten againe vnto God by the ministery of the Church of England, do not iustify the said ministery; this comparison (I say) is so odious, so beast∣ly, so detestable, and abominable, that a man would wonder it should come from such men, as they would seeme to be that obiect the same. For in an adulterous generation, as there is a common worke of God, so who seeth not also a plaine worke of nature? Yea, such a worke of nature, as is in the very beasts themselues, in the procreation of other of their owne kinde? But the regeneration of Children vnto God, is a worke aboue all nature, onely and wholly of God, yea of the free grace and abundant mercy of God, as afterward shall further appeare. Furthermore, touching this comparison, it might as well haue beene obiected against the former argument of the Apostle from the successe of his preaching amongst the Corinthians, as it is now obiected against vs, reasoning in like maner from the efficacie and fruit of our ministery.

Againe, all children, either in adulterie or infornication begotten and borne, in time of the Law, were forbidden to enter into the congregation of the Lord (that is, to bee admitted to any publike office) to the tenth generation: Deut. 2 3. 2. Dare any man say the like of such, as are begotten againe vnto God by the present ministerie of the Church of England? Yea, dare any man deny any so begotten to haue right and interest into all the promises and blessings of God, for this life and for the life to come, as well as any other begot∣ten vnto God, by the ministery of any other?
Herein (beloued) deceiue not your selues: Halt not with God, neither shew your selues vnthankfull vnto him, by de∣nying his rich mercie towards you in your regeneration. If ye haue good testimony thereof to your owne soules: If by the ministerie of the Church of England ye haue euer felt any true vertue of Christs death to the mortifying of sinne in you; and of his resurrection to the life of righteousnes: If thereby ye haue attained to that true and vnfeined loue of the brethrē, whereby ye know your selues to bee translated from death to life: and that already ye are of the truth, and hereafter shall before him assure your hearts: 1. Ioh. 3. 14. and 18. and 19. by which things also ye haue felt vnspeakable and incomprehensible ioy and comfort; then minse not the matter, neither clippe ye the Lords goodnesse towards you, by saying, that indeede ye haue by our ministerie atteined vnto some knowledge, euen to a verball knowledge (so to my griefe, I heare some to haue scoffingly said;) but whether yee haue receiued also the spirit of adoption, that ye cannot tell: yea, some of you do vtterly deny. But alas, if ye haue euer felt the things before spoken of, how ingratefull impietie, and how im∣pious ingratitude is this against God? For what is this, but for the excuse of your wauering mind to lie of the holy ghost? And how much lesse sinne is this lying of the holy Ghost,
 then that of Ananias and Sapphira of lying to the holie ghost. Acts. 5. 3. I may amplifie this point, by that which is written in the law, against him that sinned against the Lord, in denying vnto his neighbour that which was taken him to keepe, or that which was put to him of trust: Leuit. 6. 2. For if it be so great a sinne against the Lord for a man to deny vnto his neighbour that which was taken him to keepe, or that which was put to him of trust, to be restored againe to the owner, without any benefit to the keeper; oh then, how heinous a sinne is it against the Lord, to deny the free gift of God himselfe, bestowed vpon wretched man, neuer to be restored, but to continue to euer∣lasting life?
Concerning such as are already separated from amongst you, and do so continue, if they haue made separation onely in zeale which is not according to knowledge, without pride, dis∣daine, and contempt against all other, such I wish, well and se∣riously to consider the words and counsell of the angell which found out Hagar being fled from her mistris Sara, for her hard dealing with her. For as the Angell first asked her whence she came, and whither she would goe: and se∣condly vpon her answere, that she fled from her dame Sa∣ra, commanded her to returne to her dame, and to hum∣ble her selfe vnder her hands: Genes. 16. 7. so, and much more, let the separatists among you consider the more whence they came, and whither they are going: as also to make the more hast of returning and humbling themselues to them whom without sufficient cause they haue for saken, be∣cause their regeneration (if they be regenerated) receiued a∣mongst them, and wrought by some of them whom they haue for saken, is a farre greater benefit, then all that euer Hagar had had at the hands of her mistris Sara. Touching both the that are separated, and also that are not, I do iointly intreat
 them with iudgement to consider, first the speedy growth of them that decline that way like to the gourd of Iona: Iona. 4. 6. not like to the graine of mustard seede, whereunto the kingdome of heauen is compared: Mat. 13. 31. which at the first being the least of all seedes, afterward groweth (not of the sudden, but) by degrees to be a great tree. For may not this make them to suspect their course to be rather according to nature, then according to grace? Is it not more easie to goe downe the hill, then vp the hill?
The rather may this sudden growth be suspected, because it is more without meanes in one day, or at least by small and simple meanes, onely by priuate talking, &c. then before they did grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, in many moneths. Great indeede was the sud∣daine successe of the sermon of Peter: Acts. 2. 41. and of the preaching of Paul to the keeper of the prison. Acts. 16. 33.
But, alas, the extraordinary and strange meanes before mentioned in either place, doe shew not onely the said sud∣daine and great successe to haue beene extraordinary, but also that the like extraordinary successe requireth more extra ordinary means, then in these dais we haue warrant to expect.
Secondly, let both sorts before mentioned further consider, the scoffing, gibing, and contemptuous spirit (I speake this with griefe) of most of them that are separated, against all other, especially not inclining towards them: most of all against them that haue done them most good, if euer they haue at all tasted (in truth) how good the Lord is, 1. Pet. 2. 2. Is the spirit of God the spirit of scoffing, gibing, and contempt? No: but of sobrietie, of grauitie, of meeke∣nesse, and of reuerence, teaching them in whom it is, not to be high minded, but to make themselues (though of high place) equall to them of the lower sort: Rom. 12. 16. and in meekenes of minde, to esteem other better then themselues. Philip. 2. 3.

Lastly, let both sorts before spoken vnto, further yet obserue, the ignorance of many that are most prone to separation, in the things of greatest moment, and of most necessity; and also what little conscience they make of sactifying the Lords day, not only not spending the time of their absence from our asse∣blies in priuate exercises of religion at home, but also in walk∣ing vp and downe idlely in the fields & woods, &c: and final∣ly, how they neglect their callings, and misspend their time in running vp and down to talke one with another of separation, and so wast that little stocke which before through the good blessing of God they had gotten, whiles they did diligently fol∣low their calling. In the largenes of my loue towards you I could write much more largely of these points: But beeing loth to trouble other readers, and too long to decine them from the treatise following, I do forbeare.
The Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, of whom is na∣med the whole familie in heauen and in earth, graunt to all you to whom now I do write, that ye may be strength ned by his spirit, in the inner man: Ephes. 3. 14. &c. and that none of you may euer fall away vtterly from the grace of God.
The same God also so print all good things in all your harts, both which are in this whole booke printed in paper, and also which ye do daily read in other good bookes, & which ye heare (or may heare) in the publike preaching of the word, that nei∣ther the loue of the world, nor any other power of hell may e∣uer be able to race them out: that so God may haue the glory of them, and your selues may inioy the fruit; euen righteousnes, peace, ioy and comfort in this life: and euerlasting glory in the life to come.
From Much Totham, Aprill 20. 1610.

