



Worthy Sir,
THe Author of this worke, in his last Will bequeathed his Papers unto mee, (as a Testi∣mony of his love) wherein I
 much rejoyced, and doe glory. You honoured him much in his life, and his remembrance is still precious with you. You were the Patron of his Person and Parso∣nage, be pleased to be the Patron of this his worke, a part whereof was performed at your request. My purpose is not to commend either you or him, lest I should be censured for seeking of my selfe; yet this I must say of him, belived and dyed a true sonne of the true Church; hee was neither tare, nor broken blasted eare nor chaffe, but good corne; a good Catholike, according to Saint Augustines exposition and description, Lib 2. x Matth. Boni Catho∣lici sunt qui et fidem inte∣gram sequuntur et bonos mores, Sound in the faith, and unblameable in life. In the worke
 of the Ministery he was painfull and faithfull, to use the words of Erasmus, Ep. piole∣eri praes. ep. Aug. Fraternae salu∣tis quam suae gloriae sitienti∣or, one who sought the heaven∣ly good of the peoples soules, more than the earthly goods of the bo∣die, not minding his owne, but the things which are Iesus Christs; contrary to those whom the Apostle brands. For the 1 Thes 2. 4 5, 6. Phil. 2. 2. Sermons now presented to the view of the Church, I say of them, as Hierom to Augustine, of certaine workes writ by him∣selfe, Inter Aug, epist 1 1  Si cui legere non pla∣cet, nemo compellit invitum, If any bee pleased not to read them, let them use their liberty, not abuse it. It is the Character of a bragging boy, to seeke his owne credit by complaining of others. To your selfe this im∣pression
 will be no burthen, but a benefit. Aug ep. ad Voluf. Quod scriptum ha∣betur, semper vacat ad le∣gendum, cum vacat legenti: nec onerosū fit praeseas, quod cum voles sumitur, cum vo∣les ponitur. When you read, then apply; so shall you receive profit in your reading. C. Plin. can. l. 3. ep. Scio te stimulis non egere: me ta∣men tui charitas evocat, ut currentem quoque instigem: Goe on, make faith flourish by good works, perfect what is wan∣ting: Aug. ad Bonif. ep. 205. Et ex iis quae habes gratias age Deo tanquam fon∣ti bonitatis unde habes; at{que} in omnibus bonis actibus tuis illi daclaritatem, tibi humi∣litatem; The more you glorifie God with the talents committed unto you, the more shall you bee commended by him, and glorified
 with him. Vnto whose gracious direction in Christ Iesus by the Spirit, I recommend your selfe, your vertuous wife my good La∣die, and her hopefull sonne, with all that belong unto your familie for future good. The Lord free∣ly forgive what is amisse, and richly reward what soever please.

Newton, April 23, 1635.
