



SIR,
THere are (you know) three different opini∣ons▪ (wherewth the Chstian World is much distracted) concernng the presen of our Lor in the holy charill; one ortho∣doxe and ancien, the other nouell and vnwar¦rantable.
The first teacheth that Chst is in his Roy d Blou there present▪  an really▪ in respect both of the Signes and of the Communicants. In respect of the  he is present, ; that is, not in regard of place and Coext∣stence, but atione sacramnli, by a acramen∣tall reason or relation. In respect of the Cmmu∣nicant, his presence is not  or locall, but spirituall, eally presenting himself vnto all prepared persons, who by faith, receiue and ap∣ply him to themselues: Nam fide tangitur Chri∣stus, non corpore. Ambros.
The second is of Italian Achymists, that
 imagin a corporall presence (though not visible & pemdum quant) by reason of a substantial transuration of the emense into the very ho∣ly & blood of Christ, after the recitation of the words of cōecration. But this opinion was first forged vpon the Anuil of their owne brines, & at length determined of innocencus the third, by name of Transubstantiation in the Laterane Councell 215 yeares after Christ. Neither is it so new as augh, being directly contrary both to Philosoy and Theogie. Po first ne and the  body cannot occupy many distinct places at n and the selfsame instant. One man cannot be circumstible and incircum scriptt in one Articltime. And (as Daa∣scen truely speaketh  nature is not capable of coitant ssentiall fferences. As for Mira∣c, they be not () Against nature but () Aboue nature. Neither doth God alwaies that which he can do. reue potest  Secondly, the heauens Act. 3. 21 do conteine him the scriptures name no other place: neither can there be siable of holy writ, with a genuine construction produced to confirme their conceipt. The word (st) wherat they stble be tokens only a sacramenta Esse, & is as much as Rett, Reasentt, simficat, as will be cleared by the due diession of many texts of Scripture. In tranoē legis cit, que salues  le senentiam eius circumue Third∣ly, by this opinion a very Reprbate may receiue
 the Body of Christ. But S. Augustine truly saith Nullos comedee corpus Christs nsicos, qui sunt in corpore Christs. Besides that which entreth in at the mouth, goeth downe into the belly, . But the body Mark. 7. 18. 19 and blood of our Lord are no belly cheare, they enter not into the Belly, but into the Heart. ther∣fore the Apostle saith that Christ doth dwel in our hearts by faith. And albeit the Fathers cal∣led, Ephe. 3. 17 the Bread and Wine the Body and Blood of Christ, yet did they not meane that they were so propery by transubstantiation. But analogi∣cally by diuine ordination, through which they do become the seaes, and symbols of them. And to conclude, if this must needes be held for truth, what shall we thinke of Gregry the seauenth, who thrw the Eucharist, (that is by their doct∣rine Christs body) in a rage into the fire, because it did not answere to his questions? And what will they say to the death of Pope Victor, and of 1154. William Archbishop of Yorke, and of Henry of Lucemburgh the Emperour, all which were poy∣soned, the two former with that, which was in the Chace, and the third with the Host. which a Monke had poisoned. Heere, against all reason we see the Body and Blood of our Lord, made Venen Vehicu, and subject to cruell entertain∣ment. But our faith doth teach vs that he liueth in the heauens in al honor, happinesse, maiesty, and glory.
The third opinion is theirs, that thinke the
 Body and Blood of Christ, is In, With, Vnder, or about the bread and wine. But our Sauiour saith not, My body is in, with, vnder or about this bread: but he saith expresly This (that is, this bread) is my body. And if there were such a bodily presence, as is imagined, why should this holy feast be celebrated as a memoriall of him? Finally, this opinion giues him  a bodilesse body ouerturning the charach∣teristicall and essentiall properties of a body, which are as inseperable from it, as heat from fire, moisture from water, and light from the sun. True it is that the faithfull receie Christ in the bread and wine, as a thing signified in the signe. (non  cōentum n continene) but not as gold in a bag, or as water in a pot. Thus a possession may be said to be giuen a man in a Deed or Writing, because the Deed doth assigne it to him, and not because the Possession doth exist in, With, or A∣bout the Deed.
Now the ready way for a man to discerne the truth in this warfare and diuersity of opinions, is to seeke to God by praier, to walke in humili∣ty and sincerity with feare and trembling, and not to be peruerse, turbulen & contentios for The seccret of the Lord is reuealed to them, that Psal. 25. 24 feare him, and his couenant to giue them vnder∣standing. The froward is an abominationto him, Prouer. 3. 32 but his secret is with the righteous.
To this end, but especially that vve might be furthered and furnished to the lawfull and au∣dable
 vse of this blessed Sacrament, and so may safely aile betwixt the arroneous doctrines of some, and the profane practise of others, as betweene two dangerous and almost ineuitable Rocks, I haue bene bold to publish this little booke, where in the nature and right vse there∣of is succinctly and vvith perspicuity described. The successe vvherof I commend vnto the Lord, humbly desiring his Majesty to honor you with all noble vertues in this life, and to crowne you with eternall glory in the life to come. And thus notdoubting of your kinde acceptance of this my boldnesse, I take my leaue, remaining euer,

