



THERE are three sorts of Kingdoms (right Worshipfull) much spoken of in the sacred volumes of the Almigh∣ty. The first is the kingdome of God, as it is ruled by Christ the Mediator of the new Testament, whom the Father hath constituted the head of his Church. The second is the King∣dome of Man, as he is set vp in authority aboue others, by the ordinance of the most High, to command his people at his will, and according to his lawes, of whom he hath re∣ceiued his place of Regency. The third is, the King∣dome of Sathan, as he is the Prince of darkenesse, and the
 world, ruling in the children of darkenesse, and raging against the children of light. Of these three Kingdomes the first and the last are opposite, like the fire and the water; & so contrary one vnto the other, that there can neuer be any good agreemēt betwixt them, but dead∣ly hatred and enmity for euer. For this is the immutable voyce of the Almighty. I will (saith the Lord to the di∣uell) put enmity betweene thee and the woman, and betweene thy seed and her seed. He shall breake thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heele. But as for the midst of them, it is subordi∣nate vnto them both, and of such a flexible nature, that it is content to participate with either side. For it is neither wholly for Christ, nor wholly for Satan; but it selfe com∣prehending vnder it the whole race of mankinde, whereof some are good, and others bad, doth yeeld foorth subiects both for Christ, and for Satan: the children of light be∣ing the subiects of Christ, the children of darkenesse the subiects of Satan. Thus do Christ and Satan hold their Kingdoms in the Kingdome of man. So that though there be three distinct Kingdoms, yet there are not three distinct places for the administration of these Kingdomes, but the place is but one, and the selfe same for them all. In regard whereof euery person must carefully looke to himselfe, whether liuing in the kingdome of Man, he doth belong to Christ, or to the diuell. For of necessity he must be a subiect to the one of them, or to the other, considering that no man can serue two maisters. If we belong to Christ, we are happy, & shall haue this comfortable saying deliue∣red vnto vs at the last, Come ye blessed children of my Father, receiue the Kingdome of God, which is prepared for you from the beginning of the world. But if we appertaine to the di∣uell, we are in a pittifull case, and shall haue this dolefull sentence pronounced against vs at the day of iudgement:
Depart ye cursed into euerlasting fire prepared for the diuell and his Angels. Now how men do cary themselues in re∣gard of these Kingdomes, & what they should also do in re∣spect thereof, Dauid who was himselfe a King, and a singu∣lar Prophet of the most High, hath notably described vnto vs in his second Psalme, which spendeth it selfe wholly vp∣on that subiect. The which Psalme of his I haue handled, & preached ouer amongst my people; but the Lord, that is the searcher of the heart, doth know, that whosoeuer I be now content to let my Sermons vpon the same go in common for the common good of all, and to commit them to the ballance of Gods Sanctuary for the profit of his Saints; yet when I preached them at the first, it was neuer once inten∣ded by me, that they should come to the presse. And therefore the whole discourse was so framed both for matter and manner, as might best fit the necessity and ca∣pacity of the present Auditory, whose benefite I did chiefly respect, and vnto whom I did accommodate my selfe, as in other matters, and as at other times I was wont for to do.
Howsoeuer being thus penned out, in simplicity of spirit, & plainenesse of phrase, without all eloquence of speech, and gloriousnesse of style, and being now ready to come to the view of the world, I make bold to present them vnto you (right Worshipfull) to whom if they be wor∣thy of any respect, they do belong in many respects. For as your loue to Christ, wherein you passe many others of your ranke and order; your office vnder Christ, by which you are, as it were, Kings in his Kingdome, reigning ouer other Kings: your hatred to them, which are out of Christ, whereby you are carried with some indignation against the Man of sin, and those which are in a confederacy with the arch-enimy of our soules: and lastly, as your kind
affection to them, which are in Christ, and for Christ, which hath moued your tongues to commend them, and your hands to helpe them, do seeme to challenge this worke, which doth intreate of Christ and his kingdom, and to claime it for their owne; not much vnlike to that of Ti∣tus Pomponius Atticus, who had that Treatise which Tully made of old age, committed to him, because he was a man well stricken in age; or that of Theophilus, to whom Luke the Euangelist did consecrate the History of Christ, for that he was a friend of Christ, and one that loued him well. So your vndeserued fauours towards me in particular, do of right vendicate the same, considering that these are the first fruites of all my labours, which I haue taken in this sort, and after this manner, since my comming to that place, where now I am, and which I receiued by your meanes; some of you being Commissioners appointing that annu∣all stipend for the continuall maintenance of a Preacher amongst vs, which our recouered lands will affoord; and o∣thers being Patrones presenting me to the same. In lieu whereof, as they are in that regard most due vnto you, so I do here present them vnto you, as a testimony of my minde, which is well affected towards you, and as a token of my thankefull heart, which would recompence you better, if I could. If you iudge them worthy, vouchsafe them, I pray you, your patronage: if not, your pardon: at least your gracious and fauourable acceptance, according to the kindnes of your nature, & wonted courtesie in other matters. The which thing if I shall vnderstand you do, it shall not onely greatly reioyce mine heart, but make me much indebted vnto you for the same.
The Lord for his Sonnes sake grant, that this labour of mine may be accepted of the Saints, and tend to Gods glorie: And I heartily beseech the Lord, the God of all
grace, and giuer of all blessings, that he would so multiply his heauenly graces vpon you that you may alwaies walke worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things, battering downe continually the kingdome of Sathan, and setting vp the kingdome of Christ to the vttermost of your powers; that so many soules may be saued by your meanes, and you your selues haue the greater weight of glory bestowed vp∣pon you at the day of iudgement, when all persons shall be rewarded according to their workes. And so crauing pardon for my boldnesse I ende, and humbly take my leaue. Rodborough the twentieth of August. 1610.

