



THere were two pillars before Salomons Tem∣ple,
1 King. 7.21. 2 Chron. 3.17. (right worthy Sir) Jachin, that is, God will establish; and Bohaz, that is, strength. These two pillars were set up, to uphold the porch of the Temple. So there are two pillars, which uphold the Church, and this world, Religion and Justice: true Religion upholds the Church, and Iustice the Common-wealth.
Of these two, religion stands upon the right hand to uphold, (as Jachin did,) and Justice upon the left hand (as Bohaz did.) Religion
hath the first place, and therefore the Iewes say well, that it is for Jerusalems cause the world stands; that is, the Church. All the tents were pitched about the Tabernacle; to teach us,
Numb. 2. that the world is but an Inne for the Church to lodge in for a while; and if the Saints were once gathered out of the world, the foure corners of the earth would so one clap together,
2 Pet. 3.10. and the Heavens should goe away with a noyse.
The pillar which upholds the world upon the left hand is Justice;
Prov. 16.12. it upholds the earth, and the Kings throne. It is said, Habak. 1.4. Iam de∣fluit Lex; the Law failes: This is a speech bor∣rowed from the pulse of a man; for as we dis∣cerne the estate of a man by his pulse; if it stirre not at all, then we know he is dead, if it stirre violently, then we take him to be in a Feaver; if it keepe an equall stroke, then wee know he is sound and hole. The pulse of the Common-wealth is Justice. If Justice bee violent and turned into wormewood, then the Common-wealth is in a bad estate; if it stirre not at all, then the Common-wealth is dead, and if it have an equall stroke, then it is sound and hole.
Now Sir, these two pillars, Religion and Ju∣stice,
have beene your maine study how to up∣hold them in your place, and that these two, might kisse one another, as the Psalmist speakes;
Psal. 85.10. For piety, your care hath beene still,
Cant. 2.15. that these Foxes which spoyle the Vines, should bee catcht, (that is, these Locusts and Seminaries, which come out of the bottomlesse pit,
2 Tim. 3.6. and goe about secretly to devoure Widowes houses, and subvert these ten∣der young Vines, and weake ones, under the colour of long prayers,) your whole labour is to discover them; and that these parts where ye live may be receptacles for the earth. Second∣ly Sir, what your care is for Iustice, that shee may flourish, all the Country about you can witnesse, from the highest to the lowest.
Exod. 18.14. Ie∣thro said to Moses, Why sit ye all the day long, from morning till night, judging the people? Your care (I may say truely Sir) from morning to night, is to judge the people, and to give upright ju∣stice to his Majesties subjects.
There are foure Iudges most remarkeable in the Scripture, Moses for his mildnesse;
Numb. 12.3. 1 King. 4 29. Iob. 29. 1 Sam. 12.3. Sa∣lomon for his wisedome, Iob for his pity, and Samuel for his equity: with the mildnesse of Moses ye can moderate in discretion your cen∣sures; and with Salomon, wisely Iudge what belongeth to every one; ye are, as Iob speakes,
The blessing of him that is ready to perish; yee are an eye to the blind, and a foot to the lame; ye see none perish for want of cloathing, nor the poore without a covering: so that the loynes of those that are warmed by you, blesse you; and yet in all this you may say with Samuel, Whose Oxe have J taken? or whose Asse have J taken? or whom have J defrauded? whom have J oppressed? or of whom have I received any bribe to blinde mine eyes therewith? so that the people where you dwell, may blesse God who hath seated you amongst them for their good. These my travels therefore Sir I offer to your Patrocinie, as to one most Worthy, and who hath greatest interest in them, if there were any thing in them answerable to your goodnesse; for still (Sir) yee have beene my greatest incourager, to set me forward in my studies. Yee have Iudgement to discerne, what is said to the purpose here, and what seemes to be said amisse, to construe it to the best sense; and to defend it against the criticke censures of some not so wel affected. Now for all your care both for Religion and Iustice, the God of Mercy mete you againe. Jonadab, for his obedience to his Father Rechab, had a pro∣mise made to him, that he should not want a man to stand before the Lord for ever. So Sir, for your
obedience and care, that ye have to doe ser∣vice to your King and Country, I pray God that ye want not a man to stand before the Lord, to succeede you, and to continue your family to all posterity. Thus craving Gods blessing to bee alwaies upon you, and your most Religious and Noble Lady and chil∣dren, I bid you all farewell.

