


WHen I call to minde (right ho∣norable) the buildinge of the Lordes Temple by the Iewes of elder dayes, and there-withall take a vew of the truth of that materiall temple, of the Church I meane, ge∣nerally, and more particularly here in Eng∣land, this angle of the world: me thinks I may full wel compare these two buildings together, whether wee respect the causes inforcinge, or the hinderances lettinge, or the punishments by the Lorde inflicted, for not going forwarde in his woorke. For the causes which ought to haue bene as prickes, goades, & spurs to the Iewes, were these principally. First, the choise which the Lord had made of them. For see∣ing that the Lord had chosen them out of all nations, countries, tongues, and people: for of
 all the trees of the wood God chose one onely Vyne: of all the fowles of the ayre, one onely Doue: of all the nations of the world, one one∣ly Iudea: of all the cities of the world Hierusa∣lem alone, that he might build his Temple on high, and put his name there: and seeing that being iealouse of his glory, & carefull for his worship, which the Heathen coulde not giue him, for they had not called vpō his name, but Hierusalem was the place of his rest, & there would hee be called vpon, and for this cause would hee haue the Temple built at the first: it stoode them vpon if they woulde escape the crime of impietie, and ingratitude, to build the Lordes house. Another, the remem∣brance of their deliuerance out of their late captiuitie, where for solace they had sorrowe, and pro socco saccum: where in steed of their owne vynes which they some-times had, and vnder which they were wont to sit, they had Wyllowe-trees, where-on they hanged their harps, as being vnable to sing the Lords song. Seeing that the Lord had deliuered them out of a nation so polluted as was this, where they saw those Gods worshipped, which neither they nor their fathers knewe, & had brought them
 backe againe to their owne countrie that they might worship the liuing God according to his law, and that in his holy Temple: what mad∣nes mooued them to delay the building of the Lordes house? If the consideration of those things could not haue serued to enforce them, yet the other ought to haue drawen them, as, that Cyrus the king of Persia had cōmanded them, and that the Lord of heauen had giuen them this in charge, and had for this cause shortned their captiuitie. But they were let∣ted, and that first outwardly, and secondly in∣wardly. Outwardly by the enimies of Iuda, and Hierusalem, who when the Lyons force coulde not preuaile, assayed by foxes crafte to hinder the Lords building. Inwardly they were lets to them-selues, because they sought their owne thinges, and not the thinges of the Lord, they preferred their owne affaires be∣fore the Lordes, their owne buildings before the Lords house, and their feete were swift to build their owne sieled houses, where in they them-selues might dwell, but they went with leaden heeles about the place of the Lords rest, which lay in ruinous maner. But as they had sinned, so were they punished: and that euen
 in those thinges which they preferred before the Lords affaires. For the Lord with-drewe his blessing, & it pleased him to inflict a curse vpon them, which Haggai doth in ample ma∣ner set downe, namely that they did sowe much, & gathered in but a litle: they did eate, but they were not satisfied: they did drink, but their thirst was not quenched: they were cloa∣thed, but they felt no warmth: & those which hyred them-selues out for wages, receiued wa∣ges as in a bottomelesse bagge, which did pro∣fit them nothing. These were their plagues and many moe, which to explicate I need not, for why? they sufficiently expound themselues. But nowe let vs looke into our owne state. Though the Lorde hath not chosen vs alone out all nations, to call vpon his name, yet hath it pleased him to call vs out of darknes into light, to bring vs from horrible superstition, and Gentilisme, which raigned some times in this our nation, and to giue vs his woorde to be a light to our paths, and a lanterne to our feete in this dark and misty world, and there∣fore are we bound to build a Church vnto the Lord as were the Iewes, to build a temple: that in the same the Lord may bee worshipped, see∣ing
 the wall of seperation is taken away, and the houre is come, that neither in the mounte, neither at Hierusalem the Lord is worshipped, but the true worshippers doe worship him in spirit and truth. Againe, though our cap∣tiuity from Babyloin of the Assyrians hath not bene turned as the riuers in the south: yet hath the Lorde brought vs in some measure from the captiuity of that romish Babylon, out of which we ought so to depart, that we ought to touche none of her vncleane thinges: and that to the ende wee may worship him sincere∣ly, and with an holie worship: and therefore ought we to build the Lords Temple. Againe, though Cyrus the king of Persia hath not en∣ioyned vs this thinge: yet Cyrus the Lordes sheepheard (as the prophet tearmeth him) hath cōmaunded vs, and why doe we not then erect the ruinous walls of Hierusalem? But (alas for woe) too many are our lettes. For outwardely wee are letted by the enimies of Iuda and Hierusalem, the papists I meane, who though they can not by violence hinder our labour, because the Lord hath cōpassed in his Vine with a brasen wall, whose hedge is not yet broken downe: yet by secret meanes they vn∣derminde
 our worke, & because they wil beare a showe of building, they build with vntempe∣red morter, or rather vnder colour of buil∣ding a Temple to the Lord, they set vp a Syna∣gogue to Satan: yea, by sattle meanes they steale away those stones which we shoulde lay in the Lords buildinge, that they may bee corner stones in their ruinous worke. These are no small lets, but (the more the pitty) we haue as great amonge our selues. And the first of these seemeth to bee the silence of those which haue some-times laboured painefullie, whose worke is in daunger to decay, if storme and tempest shoulde arise. An-other let there is, and that is, the labourers want their wages, by reason of the vnsatiable couetousnes of the men of our daies, which will not suffer them to let goe the spoiles of the Church, impropriations I meane. Againe, amongst the builders there bee those which fill the roumes of builders, but knowe not how to lay one stone vpon an-other, I speake of vnlearned ministers, if it bee lawfull for mee to call them ministers, whom I may more rightlie tearme Idoll sheepheards, or if you wil Siphers in Augrim.
And manie there be also which know howe
 to build, but they will not, the worlde hath so ouer-taken them, and their lasines is such: which both are no small lets to the woorke. And to bee briefe, there is generallie amongst all a greater care to seeke their owne, then the things which are Gods: to preferre their owne cōmoditie before the Lords glory, & finally, to seeke their owne ease rather thē the kingdome of God: & therefore is it that the Lords Tem∣ple is not builded, and therefore is it that the Lordes plagues are in some measure vpon vs inflicted. For let vs call to minde these latter yeeres, and see if the Lord hath not scourged vs, as he did some-times the Iewes. And to ga∣ther their punishments into this abridgment, that the Lord did not blesse the works of their hands, how-soeuer they toyled and tooke great paines: haue not we tasted of the like iudgmēt? Let that generall dearth which laye, and as yet doth lie vpon the whole Land, witnesse: for I will not stand to amplifie euery particu∣lar point, for I hasten toward an ende. If the punishments of the old people, when wee onely heard thereof, could not mooue vs to build the Temple of the Lord: yet let them now enforce vs, seeing wee taste thereof in some measure.

But now to come to your honour. That especi∣all duetie which to your Lordship for many & good causes Iowe, hath caused mee to publishe these my labours vnder your honourable title, and that not onely that it may bee a bush to shrowde them from euill tongues, but that as they bee to your good Lordship presented, so you may there-by bee mooued, enforced, incou∣raged to further the Lords building, and to seeke the remoouing of these lets and hinde∣rances which may stay the same. And because (right honorable) it is no small help to the cō∣mon building, for euerie one of what conditi∣on so-euer he bee, priuately to erect in his owne family a Church vnto the Lorde, as did that good Cornelius: let mee with such reuerence and dutifulnes as I ought, craue at your hands that you would proceede to consecrate your ho∣nors family to the Lorde in such sorte, that it may with-in your priuate walls resemble the Lords Church. And how-soeuer worldly re∣spects may keepe you backe from this: yet let that feare of the Lord which I know to be plā∣ted in you, and my very good Lady your wyfe, ouer-come all these lets and hinderancances. It is true liberty (my Lord) not to serue sinne, &
 it is true honor, to honour, and serue the Lord aright. This therefore doe, and no doubt the Lord will aduance you, for hee hath promised to aduance those to honor, which honor him. Shake of therefore all those things which may hinder you in this course of godlines: remooue all hinderances which may keepe you back: call away your eyes from be-holding the vanities of this worlde, whose shape must passe away: make streight steps vnto the feare of the Lord: consecrate your selfe to serue him: halt not be∣twene the feare of the Lord, and worldly va∣nity: purge your house from all prophane per∣sons, such as was Esau: so shall the Lords bles∣sing bee vpon you, so shall hee to honor aduance you, and so shall you through faith in Christ, raigne with Christ for euer, and euer. The Lord blesse your good honor, and encrease in you the manifold blessings of his sacred spirit. From my chamber in Southwarke this pre∣sent xxj. of Iuly. 1586.

