



MOST SWEETE is that saying of the sonne of GOD, ChristeMat. 5. 4 Iesus our lord: Blessed are they which mourne: because they shall receiue cōfort. For seeing that the calamitie of Io∣seph, that is, of the mi∣serable church of Christe, being now oppres∣sed with old-age, and bewayling the most so∣rowfull fates of her warfare; doth maruey∣louslie mooue the mindes of the godlie: wee oughte all of vs most earnestlie to bethinke our selues, what thinges may augment that huge sorrow, and what may cure the same: & wee must also bring to light those remedies for these sorrowes, to the profit of the god∣lie; the which the spirite of Christe hath ope∣ned vnto euerie one of vs. It shalbe there∣fore a pointe of equitie and humanity in the godlie, to take in good parte those thinges which I shal speake, both concerning the sor∣rowe of the church, and of all the godly: and
 also concerning the medicines, and remedies whereby the same may be cured: seeing that I set all thinges before the eyes of the godly to be examined according to the worde of God: and would haue all thinges tried and examined, but those good thinges onelie re∣ceiued, which are correspondent and agrea∣ble vnto the straight rule of the holie scrip∣ture.
In this we are greatly deceiued, that being too too much addicted vnto this world, we do inuent, & greedelie desire to haue a diuorce∣ment made betweene the gospell of Christe crucified, and trouble, and persecution: and also in that wee thinke that wee are able with a weake faith to ouercome this worlde, and those thinges which are therein. We confesse that we must onelie glorie in the liuing, and almightie God: but in the meane while wee looke to haue the fauour, consent, and pa∣tronage of princes and noble men. If wee wante these, then thinke wee that the king∣dome of Christe is quite vndone. Wee doe throughly weigh & consider in our mindes, what thinges the world doth denie vnto vs, and what it doth promise: but in the meane season we doe not marke (vntill such time as wee bee often-times admonished by the spi∣rite of God, and his instrumentes) what the Lorde our God doth: howe that by our mi∣series he bringeth good things to passe won∣derfullie: howe that by the meanes of our e∣nimies
 he doth good vnto vs: to howe good and wholesome an intent he taketh from vs earthlie things, that hee may put heauenlie, and eternall thinges in place thereof.
Seeing that I doe seeme to my selfe, not fully to vnderstand what other men do think of the fountayne, and originall of these er∣rors, and imaginations: I will boldlie & by the good leaue of others professe that, which I haue alwayes (conferring our affaires with the rule prescribed by God) thought to be most like to be the fountaine thereof.
The principall cause of all those miseries and sorrowes, wherewith wee are vexed by the iust iudgement of God most iust, & most good; is the weakenes of our faith, which ma∣keth vs to be vnable to ouercome this world, and the thinges therein contayned; namelie the riches, glory, and most of all the vaine pompe thereof. But notwithstanding, as the weakenes of faith maketh vs to stande in neede of comfort: so the stedfastnes thereof maketh vs to abounde with true and mani∣folde consolation.
We doe not sufficiently ponder that, which notwithstandinge wee haue alwayes in our mouth, namely, that in God wee liue, wee be, and mooue: that wee are the worke of God: that God hath a care ouer vs: that the liuing and almighty God, is hee, which hath not onelie a great respect to all mankinde, but al∣so to the church and all the faithfull.

Therefore wee are afraide to offend Monar∣ches, wee are so afraide of the affliction and death of godlie princes, of the mutable na∣tures of men; as if all iudgement, and power were in their handes, and not in the handes of God.
And although wee heare that Christe dothPsalm. 10. 2. raygne in the middest of his enemies: yet because all his workes are brought to passe amiddest contrarie meanes; wee doe hardlie suffer our selues to bee perswaded, that the truth and those which beare recorde of the same, shall haue the vpper hande when it is resisted, although the enimies thereof doe rage against it, and goe about to ouerthrowe the same: that the kingdome of Christe shall come and shall florish: that the enimies of Christe shalbe so quite taken away, that some of them by their sodayne destruction, some of them by that destruction which commeth vppon them in tract of time, shal testifie, that God is the iudge of the whole earth.
Wee heare also that the holie spirite is the best comforter: that the minde and purpose of the Lord is knowen vnto him: that he on∣ly is the meetest witnes to testifie vnto vs the mercifull good will of God towarde vs. But in the meane while we haue great respect vn∣to men, and their counsels and promises: as if we coulde be more safe vnder their protecti∣on, then vnder the protection of that spirite which gouerneth all thinges.

What man is hee which doth so often and so greatlie reioyce that hee is made a mem∣ber of the church, a fellowe Citizen with the saintes, one of Gods housholde, as he ought, and as the thankefulnes of a Christian doth require? I will not now speake of those which are rotten members of the church. Howe many of vs are there which do make so great accompt of our calling, regeneration, and iustification as wee ought: so that wee haue alwayes neede to haue some godlie exhorta∣tion giuen vs, by the godlie teachers, where∣in wee may be exhorted hereunto.
Wee quake and tremble, when wee heare any mention made of death, when as in the meane whyle we glorie that wee doe belieue the resurrection of the fleshe, and euerlasting life. To be briefe, we can not away with this to bee baptised with the baptisme of Christe his afflictions, and to drinke of the cuppe of his suffringes: but wee can bee verie well content with this, to sit on high in glorie on Christes righte hande, and on his left, in his kingdome: and in that time which the Lord hath appointed for warrefare and afflictions, to triumph, and to leade a most happie life.
Hereunto is added another, and that the greatest error, that in the choyse of good & euill, being greatly deceyued, wee thinke that the witnesses of the truth are vnhappie, seeing that they are hated of the worlde; and that those which lay waste the church, and
 are the aduersaries of the truth are happie, because they lye softe and fare daintlie in kinges courtes, freely persecuting the chur∣ches, and the faithfull ministers thereof; and are in the meane season accompted amongst the vnskilfull, as pillars of the church.
Truely, seeing that it is meete that the god∣lie doe with great faithfulnes, and diligence endeuour them-selues to mitigate the sor∣rowes of the mindes of men wherewith they are afflicted, as they would extinguish a great fire: I will vse the same order in declaring the meanes whereby I endeuor to mitigate the same sorrowe (which I haue suffered these fewe yeares for the afflictions of the church both publike and priuate: then the which al∣so I am persuaded that the paine which I shal suffer at the departure of my soule out of the prison of this my body, shalbe nothing grea∣ter) which I see obserued in the canon of our faith, I meane the Apostles creede.
 First I consider the benefit of my creation, and when I doe reioyce that I doe belieue through the grace which to mee giuen is, in God the father almightie, creator of heauen and earth: I doe feele my selfe reape most plē∣tifull fruites of manifolde consolation. For I vnderstand that God doth as yet worke, and that through him we all doe liue, mooue, and bee: that hee hath a care ouer vs: that all theIohn. 5. 17 haires of my heade are numbred: that manAct. 17. 28. doth prepare his heart, but the aunswere of
 the tongue is of the lorde.
Therefore forasmuch as I am persuaded that prosperitie and aduersitie, life and death, the1. Pet. 5. 7. Mat. 10. 30. Pro. 16. 1. benefit of friendes, and iniuries of enimies, are moderated, & ruled by God: bearing with a quiet minde aduersitie, and with a tempe∣rate, and a thankefull mynde prosperitie: I thinke I might say with Iob, If wee haue re∣ceiuedIob. 2. 10. good thinges at the handes of the Lord, why should wee not receiue euill things at his handes also? For I am persuaded that as prosperitie, so ad∣uersitie also doth happen vnto mee by the mercifull determination of God, and that to my great profit: and I also thinke that these men doe greatly erre, which doe thinke that we reape no commoditie by aduersitie which is sent vnto vs by God.
And although I doe in heart bewayle the manifolde ruine of ens affaires, & empires: the perturbations and laying waste of the church: the exile of the godlie: the successe of hypocrites, which are wonte almost to worke the vtter destruction of the godlie: yet notwithstanding as I doe acknowledge all these miseries to proceede from these miscre antes; so nothing doubting but that God v∣seth these thinges to his glory, and our triall: I repeat that saying of Dauid, I held my peacePsal. 39. 10. and opened not my lippes: because thou hast done it.
For it cannot bee that a godlie minde (be∣holdinge firste of all the enormities, and tu∣multes which are to bee founde in certaine
 churches and vniuersities; the banishment of godlie ministers; the subtiltie, and successe of certaine hypocrites; the delighte which they take in those which are of high degree, and also those men which are of base estate: then secondlie, the wicked ioy which the pa∣pistes cōceiue of the calamities of the godlie, beholding all these things most gladlie; & the vaine hope which they haue of the restoring of Antichristianisme:) can be at quiet, vnlesse turning vnto God, (who maketh all thinges for him-selfe, euen the wicked against the e∣uillPro. 16. 4. daie) it say with Dauid: Therefore I thought vppon this in knowing it: but it was a griefe in my eyes: vntill I entred into the Sanctuarie of God, and vnderstoode the ende of these men. Certainelie thou settest them in slipperie places: thou throwest them downe headlong. Furthermore, whom shall weePsal. 73. 16. 17. 18. thanke for these harbououghes, and hospi∣tals of the godlie teachers & learners, which are in some prouinces of Europe; but the lord our God, to whom the Psalmist did sometime say: Thou preparest a table in my sight, before myne enimies, thou annoyntest my head with oyle, my cupPsalm. 23. 5. runneth ouer.
 Secondlie, when I consider the benefit of my redemption, I giue thankes to my Lorde Iesus Christe, both God and man, who was crucified and raised vp againe for our sakes: who sitteth at the right hand of God the fa∣ther almightie, giueth giftes vnto men, ma∣keth intercession for vs, and shal come out of
 the heauens at his time, to iudge the quicke and the deade. For I do know that he is pre∣sentMat. 28. 20. with vs, and that he will be present with his church vntill the end of the world. And forasmuch as he is true, and the truth it selfe; forasmuch as he is almightie, & almightines it selfe; I am perswaded, that he will not leaueIoh. 14. 18. vs destitute, but that hee will giue vs eternall life; that we shall not perish for euer, and thatIoh. 10. 28. no man is able to plucke vs out of his hands. If wee were not made members of his bo∣dy, beinge made one body with him: ifEph. 5. 30. wee were not fleshe of his fleshe, and bone of his bones: if wee had not bene planted with him, and growen vp with him, in the si∣militudeRom. 6. 5. of his death and resurrection: If fi∣nallie that highe priest of ours, Christe Iesus, were not touched with the feeling of our in∣firmities: then were there great reason why wee shoulde neither receiue anie comforte & pleasure throughout our whole life, by pro∣sperity: neither shoulde aduersity suffer anie hope of deliueraunce from so great miseries, to remaine in vs. * For what doth it profit a man if hee winne the whole world, and de∣stroyLuke. 9. 25. himselfe, or loose him-selfe? But we are assured in our heartes (the spirite of Christe bearing witnes vnto our spirite) that wee are one bodie with him; that wee are ingrafted into him; and that hee is throughlie touched with the feeling of our infirmities.
Therefore in him alone do we reioyce, who
 is made vnto vs of God, our wisedome, righteous∣nes,1. Cor. 1. 30. sanctification, and redemption;* and we know assuredlie that we are more then conquerors through him, who hath loued vs: and that neither death nor life, nor Angell, nor princi∣palitie, nor power, nor thinges present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor a∣nie other thinge which is created, is able to seperate vs from the loue of God, which is inRom. . 37. 38. 39. Psalm. 110. 2. Christe Iesus our Lord.*
Christe raigneth, hee raigneth in the mid∣dest of his enimies, therefore shall his king∣dome come vnto vs, and the workes of theMat. 6. 1. Ioh. 3. 8. deuill shalbe loosed.* Hee shall beate downe Satan vnder our feete, and that shortly.*Rom. 16. 20.
Let vs not doubt, but that hee shall shortly reuenge his glorie, euen vpon those which in worde doe professe, but in deede doe denie that Christe is come in the fleshe. For the1. Ioh. 4. 3. same Christe our Lorde shall confounde and ouerthrow this spirite of Antichrist with the breath of his mouth: who is in deede made partaker of our fleshe and bloude, but with∣out sinne.*Heb. 2. 14.
All sorrowe departeth when wee haue once receiued Christe. This is a true saying, For if wee bee deade with him, wee shall also liue2. Tim. 2. 11. 12. with him: If wee suffer with him, wee shall al∣so raigne with him.* It is better for vs toRom. 8. 29. bee made like vnto his image, and denyingMat. 16. 24. our selues, to take vppe the crosse and to followe such a guide, which will leade vs vn∣toAct. 3. 15.
 to life: finallie, it is better for vs to suffer af∣fliction with the people of God, then to inioyHeb. 11. 25. the pleasures of sinne for a season.*
 I proceede from the benefit of our redemp∣tion, vnto the thirde thing, which is sanctifi∣cation. If wee did in very deede trie, that wee are profane, and aliantes from God: that wee are not onely borne in sinne, and therein re∣mayne, during our whole lyfe; but also that wee dye therein, and by reason thereof, are both in our lyfe, and death abhominable in the sight of God: then were wee most misera∣ble, hauing no hope, and being quite desti∣tute of God in the worlde, and of all true cō∣olation. But it is good for vs, that (being segregated to bee Gods owne peculiar peo∣ple proper to him-selfe,) God, the father of mercy and of all consolation, doth by his ho∣ly spirite sanctifie vs, regenerate vs, raise vs vp, and comforte vs: that hee will haue the same spirite to bee the pleadge and earnest of our inheritaunce, vntill wee bee set at liberty to the praise of his glorie.*Eph. 1. 14.
The godly mindes doe perceaue that in this daūgerous and continuall warfare of the na∣turall life, they haue neede of instruction, ex∣hortation, consolation, hope, patience, con∣stancie, and many moe giftes then these: and they do alwaies freelie confesse with Ieremy: Wee knowe O Lord that mans way is not his owne way, neither is it in man that walketh to prepare hisIer. 10 23. owne goinges.*

But that one and selfe same spirite worketh in vs all these thinges, distributing them par∣ticularly, as it pleaseth him. For like as there is one body, and it hath many members; but all the members of one body, albeit they bee many, are but one body: so likewise Christe, that is, that misticall body of the Church, (whose heade is Christe, and whose members are the faithfull,) according to the diuersity of the members, hath diuers functions; the which, that the members may execute right∣lie, and orderly; they are furnished with gifts, misteries, and habilitie, by the holie spirite, who is one and the selfe same in the head and members. Therefore wee are all baptized in∣to one body by one spirite, whether wee bee Iewes or Greekes; whether wee bee bond or free: and wee haue all drunke of one cuppe,1. Cor. 12. 11. 12. 13. into one spirite.*
Therefore do we so greatly reioyce because of this so great grace & fauor of God, which resteth vppon the immutable purpose of his will: that throughlie weighing the greatnes, stablenes, and fruite thereof: we doe not suf∣fer the feeling of aduersity to pearce & trou∣ble vs to much.
Let vs not thinke that this was onely saide vnto the Apostles by Christe Iesus, but vnto vs also: But I say the truth vnto you: it is expedi∣entIoh. 16. 7. for you that I goe hence: for vnlesse I shall goe hence, that cōforter shall not come vnto you, but if I shall goe hence, I will send him vnto you.

Therefore let vs desire to be gouerned and raised vp by the holie spirite, let vs consecrate our selues wholy vnto him, and let vs most gladly suffer our selues to bee ruled and di∣rected by him.
 The meditating vpon the fourth benefite, which is the gathering together and preser∣uation of the church, ministreth vnto mee fruite of most excellent consolation. We be∣lieue the holie Catholike church, the com∣munion of sainctes, being fullie persuaded, that we also haue an entraunce by one spirite vnto the father: seeing wee are no longer straungers and pilgrimes, but fellow citizens with the sainctes, and the housholde seruants of God: being builded vpon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, whose chiefe cornerstone is Christe Iesus.*Ep 8. 19. 20.
O wee most happie creatures, whom our heauenlie father hath made meete to be par∣takers of the cōdition & estate of the sainctes in the light*: and hath deliuered vs from theCol. 1. 12. 13. 14 power of darknes, and hath translated vs in∣to the kingdome of his wel beloued sonne, in whom wee haue redemption through his bloude, that is, remission of sinnes.*
And although as it becommeth good citi∣zens to bee carefull for their common coun∣trey; so also it becommeth all the faithfull to haue an earnest care for the church, which is their common countrey, their duetifull and tender mother, being carefull & tender ouer
 them her children: yet let them thus certain∣ly persuade them-selues, that the almighty God, who in the time of Pharao, Senacherib, Antiochus Epiphan, Dioclesian, Julian the apostata, & of the florishing Antichristianisme, did saue and defend most miraculously an holy seede, namely a remnaunt of godly men: will also in this last time bee present with his church, to saue his, and to iudge and punishe both the open, and priuy enimies thereof. Wee haue seene manie, and that notable examples of the deliuerie, and defense of the church, and of certaine godlie men.
Wee haue also seene testimonies of the iust iudgements of God executed vpon tyraunts, and false brethren, who when they made ma∣nifest both by their words, and writings, that they were giuen vp into a reprobate minde; some pined away through griefe of minde; some hanged them-selues; some broke their owne necks; some of them came to their end by some other meanes being men which cō∣demned them-selues, and being their owne iudges. The histories of Hoffmeisterus, Latomus, Crescentius, and certaine other false brethren, and enimies not much vnlike vnto these, are well knowen.
 The fift benefit is iustification. If we true∣lie belieue the remission of sinnes, that is, if we be persuaded that our sinnes also are for∣giuen vs: why are we so much vexed with the feare of earthly miseries and daūgers? If God
 bee on our side, who is against vs? How shall not he giue vnto vs al things with him, which hath not spared his onlie sonne, but hath gi∣uen him for vs all? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that iusti∣fieth, who is hee that can condemne? Christe is hee which died; yea rather which was ray∣sed vp againe: who sitteth also at the righteRom. 8. 31. 32. 33. 34. hand of God, & maketh intercession for vs. *
We sinne, I confesse oftener then we would, being preuented with manifolde occasions of falling; neither ought wee to make small accompt of the greatnes of sinne, and of the wrath of God against the same: yet let vs cō∣fort our selues herein, that we haue an aduo∣cate with the father, Iesus Christe the righte∣ous, for he is the propitiation for our sinnes. *1. Ioh. 2. 1. 2. Hee came into this world that he might saue these sinners, to whom he giueth grace to re∣pent, and to turne vnto him. *1. Tim. 1. 15.
And although it bee an horrible thing, and a spectacle by all meanes to bee lamented in this our time, that the wrath of God is re∣uealed by so many meanes, from heauen, a∣gainst al impiety, & vnrighteousnes of men; as they which vnrighteously keepe backe the truth *: that many are giuen ouer into a re∣probateRom. 1. 8. minde, & a minde voide of all iudge∣ment: that certaine (passing ouer Antichri∣stianisme) doe so rage against their fellow ser∣uaunts, and the standerd bearers amongst the people of God; as if they might safely behold
 papistrie a farre of, and to rage as enimies a∣gainst their brethren, were a glorious thinge for them: that finally there is in the mindes of manie men no desire to knowe the truth, as their wordes and deedes doe declare: not∣withstanding it standeth vs vppon, to reue∣rence most reuerently the iudgemēts of God most iust and most mighty: to learne by the peruerse zeale and ruine of other men, what wee ought to leaue vndone, and what wee ought to do: in feare & trembling to workePhilip. 2. 12. out our saluation: * to reioyce in our owne fe∣licity, and to ioyne the loue of the truth with the loue of our brethren. For although (see∣ing that clowdes and darknes are rounde a∣bout the Lord) wee cannot see, perceaue, & finde out the depth of his iudgmentes with the dazeling eyes of our minde: yet is it cer∣taine that righteousnes and iudgement are the foundation of his seate, & therefore mustPsalm. 97. 2. wee stay our selues reuerently vpon God be∣ing well pleased, and vpon his iudgementes. And when as wee are fullie persuaded in the Lord of our iustification, & assure our selues that wee are iustified freelie, that is, through his grace, by the redemption wroughte by Christe Iesus: we cannot doubt of our voca∣tion,Rom. 8. 29. 30 and election gone before; neither of our sanctification following after. For whom God knewe before, the same did hee also pre∣destinate, that they should bee made like vn∣to the image of his sonne: that hee mighte
 bee the firste begotten amongst manie bre∣thren *.Rom. 8. 29. 30
And whom hee did predestinate, them al∣so hee called: whom hee called, them also hee iustified: whom hee iustified, them also he glorified. Howsoeuer our outward man bee vexed with aduersities, and manifolde mise∣ries: yet are wee in good case, when as wee perceaue that God of his infinite goodnes, hath wrought in vs an effectuall saith, a wor∣king loue, and suffering hope; most sure testi∣monies1. Thes. 1. 3. 4. of our election: and that hee will ne∣uer forsake this his excellent worke, but that hee will crowne, pullish, and fully finish the same.
 The sixt benefit is the hope of resurrection, & eternall life. We know that we are trāslated frō death, to life: we beleeue that Iesus Christ is the resurrection & the life, & that we which1. Ioh. 3. 14. beleeue in him shall liue although we die. *Ioh. 11. 25. Therefore being sure that wee shall be made partakers of eternall life: wee reioyce in tri∣bulation, knowing that tribulation worketh patience; patience experience; experience hope; which maketh not ashamed, becauseRom. 5. 3. 4. 5. the loue of GOD is shed abroade in our hearts, through the holie spirite, which is gi∣uen vnto vs. * And seeing that the thingesRom. 5. 28. which wee nowe suffer are nothinge com∣parable to the glorie to come, which shalbe shewed in vs: I thinke wee ought to suffer, & ouercome these thinges with a stoute cou∣rage.
 For the time shall come, when the Lord shall wipe away all teares from our eyes, and shall giue vs these things to enioy, which the eye hath not seene, the care hath not heard, neither haue they euer entred into the mind of man, which God hath prepared for those which loue him vnfainedlie *.1. Cor. 2. 9. Isay. 64. 4.
I thinke I haue pointed out as it were with my finger the fountaines from whence the principall consolations doe spring, where∣vnto the rest which I shall annex hereunto, oughte to bee referred. Notwithstandinge I will briefely touch the subordinate places, that the godlie mindes may see how excel∣lentlie it was said of Paul the apostle: Like as the suffrings of Christ doe abounde in vs: so likewise our consolation aboundeth through Christ. And let2. Cor. 1. 5. them remember that I doe here chiefly in∣treat of the remedies of the consolations, whereby the afflictions are cured, which wee ought to suffer for Christs sake; for the truths sake; and for the churches sake.
 Let this bee the seauenth place of consola∣tion, that the truth is inuincible. This is a fa∣tall thinge for the truth to haue the vpper hand, when it is gainestoode. And therefore whenas the sworne enimies thereof do ende∣uour with all their might and maine to op∣presse the truth, shee thrusteth forth her head, shee showeth her-selfe, she commeth abroade and triumpheth. The truth cōmeth to light, not onelie by the preaching of those which
 beare witnes with the truth: but also it is made more manifest by the lyes of those which are enimies therevnto: (a verie mar∣ueilous matter, yet is it most true.) Let the e∣nimies of the heauenly, and immoueably ve∣ritie be ashamed of their wrangling, cogging, and lying, although the whole worlde sub∣scribe vnto them, and giue thē their consent. On the contrary part, let the witnesses of the trueth take a good courage to them. For whie? Bernard saith very well, Ʋeritas magis elucet impugnata. The truth, the more it is resisted, the more clearely it shineth. To speake the truth is voyde of daunger, as saith Nazianzenus. To resist the knowen truth doth exceede Idolatrie, as Augustine saith very grauely.
 The eight place is this, that God, by the meanes of his enimies doth good to those which are his. Therefore must we not regard what they pre¦tend, what they respect: but what God, who is most wise, and a friend to all mankinde, doth in the meane season intend. Let them curse vs, yet shall the Lord blesse vs. Let them make insurrection against vs, yet shal they be confounded, and the seruants of God shal bePsal. 109. 28. glad & ioyfull. Let them imagine euill against vs, yet the Lord doth turne it to good for vs.Gen. 50. 20.
 The nynth place is drawen from the con∣sideration of the light of the church. If in this last age of the Church, there were in the same no faithfull pastors and teachers at all, nei∣ther any such as might fight in the fore front
 of the battle against such as are enimies vnto true Christians, and set them-selues against Christ his merites, and person: then mighte wee singe that woefull songe: Wee see not ourPsal. 74. 9. signes, there is not any more a Prophet: and there is none with vs that vnderstandeth any longer*. But through Gods great goodnes there are those yet aliue, whom the thing it selfe doth testi∣fie to bee furnished of God with manie nota∣ble giftes of the holie ghost, and to be raised vp to defend the puritie, and sinceritie of the heauenlie doctrine, and to refute vaine ba∣bling, and false doctrine. Therefore let vs not doubt, but stedfastlie beleeue that God careth for vs, and that hee is present with vs. For hee furnisheth his church with so great giftes not in vaine: it is not for nothing that hee setteth captaines and vnder-captaines o∣uer his holie armie.
 The tenth place is fet from the comparing of those together, which doe resist the truth, & those which stand in defence of the truth. Although the former sort of these men haue their fauourers and followers, no lesse then th'other (for there were not wanting in times past, flatterers which did licke the spittle of Dyonisius the tyraunte, and said that it was sweeter then the sweete wine) yet notwith∣standing it falleth out often-times, that cer∣taine of these men being wiser then their fel∣lowes, marking the filthie life of their Cap∣taines and guides, their vanitie, delitiousnes,
 scurrility, vaine-glorie, their desire of wordly goods, and the fragilitie of those commodi∣ties where-vnto they doe leane: giue place vnto the latter opinions, which are wont to bee the better and sounder.
The best, & most valiant souldiers of Christ haue neede some-times to vse an holy, and re∣ligious kinde of silence (which not-withstan∣ding, may not bee preiudiciall vnto the con∣fession, and profession of the truth:) & they haue alwaies neede to haue an inuincible cō∣stancie: and then most of all whenas the furie and out-rage of their aduersaries is armed with the aide of the arme of flesh. But a time there is whenas the Iayes hauing made an ende of chatteringe; the Swannes doe with a merie noise, and pleasant songe celebrate the victorie of the truth. Comparisons are odi∣ous, yet what man is hee which being well in his wittes, doth not see howe farre inferiour these Censurers are to the cleare windowes of the church, & the light bearers thereof, which in their hands beare the cleare shining lighte of the truth: whether hee looke into their godlines, and humanitie; or learning & eloquence; or finallie their deseruinges of the church, and their most excellent monuments of godlie witte? I will not speake of this, that they which haue suffered, and doe as yet suf∣fer great aduersitie; which haue preferred Christ farre before riches, their countrie, and all prefermentes: are worthie to bee had in
 greater estimation, then they which liue in the middest of all maner pleasures.
 The eleuenth place is the consideration of the almightie power of God, in rulinge and guidinge the course of thinges, and seasons.
If at anie time wee see the affayres of the church not onelie afflicted, but euen almost past all hope: then let vs repeate that saying of Dauid: And I said, this is my destruction, butPsalm. 77. 10. the chaunges are in the right-hande of the Lorde. For how often did God deliuer his sainctes miraculouslie? Howe often did hee deliuer his people out of the middest of death? At the red sea, in the times of Iosaphat, Ezechias, the Machabees.
As the glorie of the three witnesses was the greater, after that they came out of the for∣nace at Babylon vn-hurt: of Daniell when he was brought out of the Lyons denne: so shall the glorie of the whole church, and of the sincere Teachers of the truth bee greater, whenas they haue passed ouer their sharpe warfare.
 The twelfth place, is, the hope of successe. The sayinges of the prophets are well knowen, wherein we finde the most sweete similitudes of the Palme-tree, and of the Olyue-tree. Not-withstandinge I shall bee as a greene Olyue-tree in the house of the Lord, I hope in the goodnes of the Lord for euer, and throughout all ages. And a∣gaine, The iust man shal florish as a Palme-tree: as a Cedar in Lybanus shall hee prosper. They whichPsalm. 25. 8.
 are planted in the house of the Lorde: shall florishPsal. 92. 12. 14. in the courtes of our God. And againe. They shall florish in their old-age, they shalbe fat and greene: that I may declare that the Lord my rock is iust, and that there is no iniquitie in him.
 The thirtenth place containeth the exam∣ples of the saintes, which haue beene since the world beganne, and especiallie of that sainte of saintes Christ Iesus. Seeing that hee by his crosse, and afflictions, is entred into the kingdome of his father; & all the elect, haue bene, are, and shall be like vnto him: let vs well remember that saying of his, The seruant is not greater then his maister. If they haue persecu∣ted1. Reg. 19. 4. Ioh. 15. 20. mee, they shall persecute you: If they haue kept my sayinges, they will also keepe yours. I am not (say∣eth Elias the Prophet) better then my fathers. And truely it were a point of great impacien∣cie if they should refuse to suffer those things which they suffered, whom those Captaines of ours, doe freelie, & willingly acknowledge to haue bene both their superiors, & betters.
 The fourtenth place is the fate and destinie of the church. As it neuer triumphed but vnder the crosse: so hath it often-times felt the dis∣commodities, which ciuill and longe peace doth bringe. The church did florishe more, and was more greatly encreased by the faith∣full which were added there-vnto, in the hot and vehement tenne yeares persecution, mo∣ued by Dioclesian, and Maximian Augg. then after-warde vnder Constantine the great, & his
 sonnes, and vnder Ʋalens, whenas that most sacriligious, and impious heresie of the Ar∣rians, did most violentlie rage against the very bowels of the church. If any man doe looke into these times, hee shall see that this thinge is true. Doe not those churches most florish, by reason of the light, and sinceritie of do∣ctrine, and the zeale of the faithfull; and doe not they enioy the most excellent teachers, and pastors: to whom it is geuen in Christe his busines, not onelie to beleeue in him, but also to suffer persecution for his sake? Againe, all men do see, that those churches which do enioy ciuill peace, and earthlie cōmodities, are not occupied aboute the beating downe of Antichristianisme: but about the resisting of peace-able men. Our time (alas for woe) bringeth out too manie Minutij, who if they were so wise as they ought to bee, would knowe that they are to make warre, not with Fabius, but with Hanniball; not of Carthage, but of Rome.
 The fiftenth place is verie excellent, which is fet from the consideration of the workes of GOD, which are miraculouslie brought to passe amiddest contrarie meanes. God hath manie waies and meanes to bring thinges to passe, both ordinarie, and extraordinarie, yet being all good, and seruing to the accompli∣shing of his purpose, and determination. It seemed good to him, of late yeares to scatter abroade certaine most florishinge Vniuersi∣ties.
 Therefore wee see that men which did excell in witte, learning, eloquence, and ex∣perience in great matters, haue bene driuen away by certaine Drone-bees, and haue bene dispersed as the Bees are scattered abroade with smoake. But as in times past, the disper∣sing abroade of the faithfull, after the mar∣tyrdome of Stephen, did greatlie profit the Samaritanes, and others next adioyning vn∣to them, when as manie being conuerted vn∣to Christ, did cast awaie the heathenish Ido∣trie, and Idolatrie vsed of the Samaritanes, & did ioyne them-selues vnto the true church: so I hope in the Lord Iesus, that it shall come to passe, that thexile of these holie men, both younge and olde, shall greatlie serue to the spreading abroade of the truth, the glorie of God, and the restoring of the church.
Whenas in times past the Samaritanes were grieued at the restoring of Hierusalem, and left nothinge vnassayed, which might make to the hinderance thereof: by the mar∣ueilous prouidence of God, their intent fell out to the contrarie: so that they were en∣forced against their will to further the same, and also to beare the charges thereof, at the commaundement of Darius the sonne of Hi∣staspes. And who is he that doth not see, that euen at this time, the mindes of the godlie learned are more & more inflamed with the loue of the truth, and with zeale to defend the same, through that outragious obstinacie
 and vehemencie of their aduersaries, most horribly defending their assertions; so that the truth is farther broughte to the light thereby?
 The sixtenth place (that I maie of set pur∣pose passe ouer manie other most comforta∣ble places) is the hope of the victorie, and the ioy∣full ende.
Truelie it is as certaine and sure, that (their Sophistrie, and vaine-babling being refuted) the truth shall haue the victorie: as it is cer∣taine that this world was created by GOD, and is by him preserued. And hereupon it is that the banner of the truth is often-times displaied, to the great terror, and astonish∣ment of these Sophisters; but to the ioy of the godlie, which is thereby increased. Wee haue seene wyth our eyes these Sophisters pleading their euill cause with such feare, and trembling; that by the palenes of their coun∣tenaunce, the trembling of their members, their confused oration, they them-selues did bewraie their subtiltie, and hidden wounde of conscience. Howe often hath this fallen out amongst them, that they which suppose them-selues to be able to prescribe lawes vn∣to other men, were not able to answere the spirit, and wisedome of GOD, which spake in the mouth of godlie yonge men. The mi∣nisterie of Athanasius I confesse was full of ca∣lamitie and affliction: yet was the same most fruitfull to the church, and to him most glo∣rious,
 euen in the midst of his miseries. And seeing that the ministerie of our pastors and teachers is such: let vs in no case thinke that their labour shall be in vaine in the Lord. For they which do sowe the doctrine of the truth with manie teares, shall in their time reape with ioy.Psalm. 126. 5.
But I thought good (right honorable) to dedicate my Lectures vpon Haggeus the Pro∣phet, vnto your noble, and most renowmed name, that there might some publike testi∣monie of my dutie, whereby I am bounde to your highnes, be extant: which I hope, and am fully persuaded, will bee well welcome vnto youre honour, by reason of that confi∣dence which I haue in your heroicall vertue. Perhaps it is not for mee to take vpon me to set forth your highnesses desertes toward the commen-wealth of learninge: for I thinke I oughte to leaue this charge to the Cap∣taines, and gouernours of the learned. I will onlie testifie that which gratefulnes biddeth mee professe; namelie, that manie most excel∣lent writers haue come to light by meanes of the Printers, as it were begetting them a∣gaine, and your highnes his cost and charges most liberallie bestowed there-vpon: which other-wise wee should either not haue had at all, or els wee should not haue enioyed them so finelie, and trulie printed.
But another thing there is which most of all pleaseth vs, which doe professe religion; and
 causeth vs most of all to esteeme highlie of your honour. Where as it behooueth prin∣ces and magistrates to bee mindefull of the commaundement of the Lord: Ascribe vntoPsal. 29. 1. 2. the Lord yee mightie, ascribe vnto the Lord glorie and strength. Ascribe vnto the Lord the honour due vnto his name, bowe your selues vnto the Lord in his holie sanctuarie *: who is he that may not worthelie reioyce, that your clemencie is in∣dued with the true knowledge of the true God, being purged from the leauen of mans inuentions, which thinge (the more is the pittie) is at this day had in great estimation with some men? I confesse, that honour, dig∣nitie, noble parentage, riches, the fauour of of mightie princes (whom to please is coun∣ted a greate praise;) are excellent thinges. There is also great accompt to bee made of the desertes of noble men towarde the com∣men wealth of learning, & of their liberality towatde those which are indued with ver∣tue and true learning: who doe encounter with manie great miseries. But the honour of true religion ought to bee preferred farre before all these thinges, which serueth great∣lie both to enlarge the fame, and also to edi∣fication, Therefore as the good do with due reuerence reioyce, that your honour is indu∣ed with the spirituall, & corporall gifts both of the bodie, and of the minde; and also with those temporall and externall goods, which are the instruments of manie excellent ver∣tues:
 so doe they likewise praie that Christ Iesus, that king of kinges, & Lord of Lords, wil long preserue and keepe your renowmed highnes in florishing estate, for the commen wealthes sake: that it maie proceede to be a bountifull patron to the learned.
Let your clemencie fare well and happilie. Written at Basill the first of March.
 Anno Domini. 1581.
