



IT is fayned of the Po∣ets (Worshipfull master Bayliffes,
Ouid. Metam. 11. Riuus a∣quae Le∣thes, &c. that there is a Riuer in Hell called Lethe, of which who∣soeuer drinketh, for∣gets al that he hath re∣membred before. Whatsoeuer they haue imagined, sure it is, that the diuell hath an hellish deuice, to make the eares of the peo∣ple drunken with vanities, that whatsoeuer instructions haue beene deliuered vnto thē, yet, for the most part, they are soone forgot∣ten, and the remembrance of them no more to be found. I will not condemne them for so weake of memorie, as Massula was, who forgot his owne name: or so dull of capacitie, as the Thracians, that
could not reckō aboue foure, yet sure it is, the small profite and practise that ariseth by the preaching of the word, argueth the drynesse of their brains, or that God speaks once and twise, and man regardes it not. Many there be which will goe to heare ser∣mons, but few that can goe to remember them: could wee as well remember, as wee can heare, no doubt, Christianitie would flourish as the vine-tree, and bring forth plenty of fruit: but because it is otherwise, sermons being once preached, become as musicke vnto vs, delighting our eares onely for a time: but being ended, their sound vanisheth away. Therefore (though I may seeme to adde more fulnes to the sea) I haue published, and in publishing, enlarged this sermon, which was once preached before you, that if your memory faile of that which was then deliuered, the eare may heare it again, and the eye see it, and the mind con∣ceiue it, and the soule receiue and taste the benefite thereof:
Efficaci∣or lin∣gua quā litera, Barnard, Ep. 66. and though it bee now lesse perswasiue, then when it was pronoun∣ced by the gesture and countenance of a liuing man: yet wants there not to answere it, that you may reade and read it againe, meditating thereon not once or twise, but
often. Many wise and learned haue pru∣dently and painefully laboured in this course, and the world floweth with diuersi∣tie of Bookes, as the sea with varietie of fishes, and therefore mine might haue well beene spared: yet was the argument (of which Ispake) so fitting to the time when I spake, that lest we should be as forgetfull of these instructions, as it seemes wee are of those rumors of warres and troubles which then sodainely befell vs, I haue ventured to acquaint you with the same matter againe, and to make the benefite thereof more pub∣like, which then was but priuate to your owne eares.
Now, because you are the men, whom the Lord hath made his lieutenants ouer this towne, next vnder her Maiestie,
Num. 27.17. to goe in and out before this people: I haue made you the patrons of this my simple labour, as you are Patrons ouer those (for whose be∣nefit it was preached, and is now published) both to leade them forth, and to bring them home, that the congregation of the Lord, might not bee as sheep with∣out a shepheard. And euen as the Load∣stone doth by a secret operation and vertue attract yron vnto it, so your vertuous and
religious minds, entertaining and patroni∣zing this, may (with the Loadstone) draw others of the iron sort, and those of baser mettall then your selues, to entertaine, re∣ceiue, and peruse it, to their comfort, be∣ing garded with the countenance and cre∣dite of your names. If any Christian re∣ceiue profite by it,
Iam. 1.17. let him, who is the Fa∣ther of lights, and giuer of euerie good and perfect gift, and the encrease of these which are vnperfite, haue the prayse there∣of; there shall none of his glorie cleaue to my fingers: neither is that which I haue done, for any earthly respect, or worldly conside∣ration: for I haue had that which I expect, and more I neither looke for, nor desire. Onely this, that the Lord in his mercy would grant,
Oculus & scep∣trum. Emblē. Egypti∣ac. quo Magi∣stratuū regimen desig. Psa. 2.9 that as he hath set you on high, and graced you with the gouernment of this peo∣ple: so your eye & your scepter may be ioyned together: that first you may be quick-sighted to discerne sinne, and sin being discouered, to bruise it in peeces with your scepter of gouernement, that iudge∣ment may prayse you in the gate, and Iu∣stice aduaunce her selfe in the great congre∣gation: that vnity, peace, and concord may be established, vertue, godlines, and reli∣gion
furthered: that the preaching of the word may more and more flourish, & worke mightily in the harts of the people for their conuersion:
Mat. 4.13. and that Yarmouth may be with
So the word signifies. Capernaum, euen a place of repen∣tance, scituate by the seaside.
The Lord, euen the most mightie God, inflame your worshipfull & zealous hearts with a care hereof, that during the heate of the day, and the time of your gouerne∣ment, ye may be Paragons to those which went before, and examples to as many as shall follow. And thus I commend you vn∣to the Lord, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you further, and to giue you an heauenly inheritance, among them which are sanctified in Christ Ie∣sus. From the Priory in Yar∣mouth, Oct. 24. 1599.

