



LOE here (Right Honou∣rable) presented into your hands what lately soun∣ded in your eares. A ship first built in Paradise and for the pleasure of the land, but since repaired for the Merchants vse against the troubles of the sea: which since I am enioyned to launch out into the maine, and to make publique both beyond the merit of the
 thing, and also beyond mine owne meaning, I could finde none more fit Ʋnto whom to dedi∣cate it now in the print, than your Honorable selues, for whose sake it was first preached. I hope I shall neuer make it the last end of my La∣bours, to please man; yet I finde in this, that I haue pleased some and displeased other: but why should I looke to please all, whereas God himselfe hath so seldome done it? Therefore they which thinke me too bitter, must yet re∣member that I bite nothing but sinne; and what reason is there to fauour sinne, through occasion where of the world was drowned to punish it, the Law was ordained to preuent it, the Sonne of the highest died to satisfie for it, and the world againe must be destroyed to fi∣nish it? Yea what reason is there to fauour any sinne, whereas there is no one which fauoureth Ʋs, but all imperilling Ʋs in the hope of sal∣uation, as Eue by her eating Ʋndermined A∣dam. They againe which thinke that sinne should not be derided or corrected in this kind, must also consider that euery sin is to be taxed in his proper kinde; as in the Scripture sins sa∣uouring of error are refelled with arguments,
 and such as bee foule and hainous are beaten do wne with iudgements, but those which were ridiculous were indeede derided, as Elias the Prophet sported at the Priests of Baal, and Iob at his foolish comforters. Yea and how plaies Esay with the wanton gestures of women, stretching out their neckes, minsing and tinckling with their feete, &c. Chap. 3. 16. But Moses more with the nicenes of women, Too daintie to venture (not their knees in deuotion) but the soles of their feete vpon the ground, Deut. 28. 56. no doubt a sore ad∣uenture. But nothing so taunting as that in Salomon, where the whore is mockt for a vo∣tarie, and she that offered her selfe to other mens lust, yet is set our for a Saint with offe∣rings of peace to God, Prou. 7. 14. I hope ther∣fore all good people will priuiledge me by these holie presidents; yea I am sure of this that none will finde fault with me, but such as first finde a fault in themselues, and to such I pro∣fesse my selfe indeede a Preacher, and to haue preached all this for them, as Christ in the Gos∣pell professed of himselfe, that he came to call
 sinners. And thus in my most true and since∣rest loue I commend you in the midst of your mariage ioyes to that joy and peace which is in God.

