



Mors tua, mors Christi, fraus mundi, gloria caeli,
Et dolor inferni, sunt meditanda tibi.
Thy death, the death of Christ, the worlds tentation.
Heauens ioy, hells torment, be thy meditation.

Three profi∣table helpes of a godly life. Psal. 119.57 58, 59. See Bb. Cowper in Rom. 8.1.THere bee three most notable helpes of a god∣ly life, deliuered to vs by Dauid, in three verses of the 119 Psalme, 57. O Lord, I haue determined to keepe thy Word. 58. I haue made my suppli∣cation in thy presence with my whole heart. 59. I haue considered my wayes, and turned my feete vn∣to thy testimonies. Determination is the first: It is a good thing by setled resolution to conclude with thy selfe that thou wilt liue godly. Supplication is the second: ex∣cept by continuall Prayer thy determination bee confir∣med, and strengthned by grace from God, thy conclusions which thou takest to day, shall vanish to morrow. Conside∣ration is the third, and it is profitable to reduce thee a∣gaine into the way of God, so often as of weakenesse thou
 thou wanders from it, contrary to thy first determination. These are three helps to keepe thy heart in the way of God: so necessary, that if without them thou dost any worke, it is not possible but thou shalt be snared. First therefore determine to forsake thy Vsury, and to make restitution. Secondly, strengthen this determination by Prayer, say with Dauid, create in me a cleane heart, O God:Psal. 51.10. Psal. 119.36 and re∣new a right spirit within me. Encline my heart vnto thy testimonies: and not to couetousnesse. Thirdly, con∣sider thy former courses when thou wast a theeuish Vsurer, and say with our blessed Sauiour: What is a man pro∣fited, if he shall gaine the whole world,Math. 16.26 and lose his owne soule? Or what shall a man giue in exchange for his soule? Say with the holy Apostle S. Paul, they that will be rich, fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtfull lusts,1 Tim. 6.9. which drowne men in perdition and destruction. Finally, doe good,v. 18, 19. be rich in good workes, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying vp in store for thy selfe a good foundation against the time to come, that thou mayst lay hold on eternall life. Consider what I say,2 Tim. 2.7. and the Lord giue thee vnderstanding in all things, Farewell.

