



WOrshipfull, vpon verie earnest motion & persuasion of a friend vnto me, to set foorth in publick this matter, which I onely had made priuate for instruction of me and mine. And then calling to remembrance some necessitie and dutie: necessitie, because by mine own experience I know how greatly my selfe and many other my countrimen, at our first going into Spaine were troubled with difficul∣ties, for want of such a patterne as this, for ease of our tender wittes. And dutie, because I acknowledge my self boundē, both to your Worship, and to all those of my pro∣fession, to employ my whole labours to do you any plea∣sure or profit that I might. I therefore haue emboldened my selfe to dedicate and offer this my poore myte vnto our Worships: wherby not onely your name may therin be still remembred, but may also make manifest your kind fauors, who are still willing to be furtherers of any
 generall good. Mine owne labour or skill I confesse, is but very litle or nothing in this thing, because I my selfe do but only as a poore willing labourer, to help forwards that worke, the foundation & platforme wherof, is setled and builded alreadie. But my chiefe purpose herein is, onely to worke a generall ease to all Marchants: wherby they may the lesse trouble them selues, either with wri∣ting, inuention, or thought of these matters. And like∣wise that it might be some stay to young and weake wits: yeelding them therby the more freedome of mind toward their other businesse. Being carefull in my selfe to order this worke, that not onely (as I hope) it shalbe lawfully permitted to be seene and read in anie parts beyond theIf this booke may not be thought tolle∣rable beyond the seas: then will it be yet a good exercise and but litle la∣bour, for euery prentice to co∣pie it all out in writing: and so carie it with him for his in∣struction. sea: but also shal instruct young nouices, to vse grea∣ter breuitie in their writings then commonly they are wont.
Wherefore I commit my selfe and my doings, first to the praise of God, and then to your good acceptance and fauourable patronage. Desiring your Worships all, that howsoeuer you do determine of the vnabilitie of this my labour: yet that you vouchsafe to take in good part the abilitie of my loue and good meaning in it. So I rest, be∣seeching God to giue vnto you all, eternall felicitie in heauen, and prosperitie to your liues end here on earth.
From my house in Bristow the 26. day of October. 1589.

