


BEing (Right Honorable) no lesse then the rest of my deere friends, full fraught with the feruent and duetifull zeale, wherein the whole progenie of vs are, & shalbe euerlastingly bound vnto your good L. diuerse wise: namely, for the syncere Iustice and pittie, or rather piety, so charitably ex∣tended in our late extreame & most iniurious vexation. Sounding in equi∣tie the depth of the monstrous and detestable driftes and deuises of those notorious, lewde & wicked practisers against vs, who sought Qua{que} in∣iuria, to strippe vs out of whatsoeuer we possessed, without any colour al∣most, of matter or cause: but onely presuming and trusting to the packing and corruption of the time, and of our innocencie and insufficiencie to withstand their assaultes. It were a treble tragedie to declare euery circumstance: and needelesse, the matter being wholly handled so sundrie times before your L. that your Lordship no doubt remembreth it: and of vs, who haue all their trecherie in records exemplified, can neuert be forgotten: How wickedly they stale away (as they thought) all our e∣uidences, and thereupon by what sinister meanes they wrought her Maiestie a title: howe cunningly or rather cozeningly they conueyed it againe from her Heighnesse for three score and ten pounds of money, which cost my friends almost 3000. li. neere 40. yeares past: How they also altered the tenure from Capite to Socage, and what vile corruption, notable packing, craftie confederacies, wicked subornations, vncon∣scionable wrestings, subtill shiftings, indirect prosecutions, and vnchristianlike dealings they vsed and pra∣ctised, against vs poore soules euerie way vnable, had not the right of the cause found grace before your H. chiefly and other honorable personages & good Iudges and Iustices of this land, euen to the glory & praise of Almightie God in the eye of the world. The continuall remembrance whereof neuer ceasing: yea ra∣ther dayly encreasing, hath pricked me forth, perhaps (as it may be thought) somwhat ouer boldly, al things in equall ballance considered, (though of two extremities, I haue rather sorted to hazard the ridiculous dis∣daine of presumption, then the most heinous reproch of an vngratefull minde:) euen to present your Honour heere at this time with a Iewel, not wrought of Minerals, or set with stately stones, or brought home from beyond the seas by sundry our countrie men, in their venterous and worthy voyages lately per∣formed. But a Mathematicall Iewel, of no small vertue and efficacie, to furnish the willing wits of this our age for the like enterprises. Containing in sum, A reduction of the Arts Mathematicke tending thereunto, and to diuerse other good vses, from that deepe difficultie, wherewith hitherto they haue bene sequestred and closed vp as it were in seuerall, onely to the learnedest sort: vnto an easie, methodious, plaine, and practique discipline, lying wide open vnto euerie ingenious practiser, whense I presume, many singuler inuentions, and notable commodities in time shall ensue and spring, yea a number yet vnthought of, euen from the common sort of handie craftes men and trauailers. The which making it no better then it shall I hope proue, I most humblie craue of your H. to accept at his hands, who thinketh himselfe in no lesse good case then the happiest, in that it hath pleased God to grant him but this poore meanes, whereby he may attaine to shew some least sparke of the vnquenchable fire of his loyal and dutifull zeale towards your H. Humblie ingrating that by your L. good fauour and protection, this little masse may be garded and freed from detraction, and the rather borne withall in any escape or want, of that others now can or hereafter by gather heereof may supplie better, or enlarge. And thus, as most boun∣den in duetie, reddie in seruice, and dayly in prayer, vnto Almightie God to be your Honours good  and fortresse both in this life and the life to come, rest most humble at your H. commaund.

