


I Mae speak to the King, as Horace to Au∣gustus: and affect brevitie, which he shew¦eth mete for spech to a King. A Thracian Iew wrote from the City of our Constant in vnto the Land of his Mother, to have from that soile, his City spirituallie builded; I prin¦ted his Epistle, and sent aunswer, that when the King of Scotlād should rule all the Ilād, I should convenientlie perfome Ebrew buil¦ding, having most sad promess for meanes, to fill the world with bookes of our faith, in the Chananean tongue, when the King cam to the other Scepter. And though the Noble Gentlemā, of whom M. Iames Melvin from him wrote assurance, delayed: I made all E∣brew instrumentes, and vttered bookes vpō my charges, in Ebrew, Greke, and other tō∣gues,
 unto 36000: to fill the world quick he with clear opening of matter mistakē: wher¦by we gave Iewes occasion to reject the Gos∣pell; and wherby they much disgraced us un¦to Machmad They were greued to see their hope of victorie gone. And one lew of Am∣sterdam made request, that I wold in an opē solemne audience, aunswer him one after none, to such argumentes, as by which Iewes gathered, that our Gospel, could not be of God. Disputation was graunted: and he dis∣puted an afternone: vainlie hoping to prove, that Luke told not our Lordes kindred, that Salathiel could not be son to Iechonias, and to Neri. That Romanes were the jmage leg∣ges, that Daniels Seavens did not plainly end Circumcision; that our Crede and Gospel, could not be reconciled: that our Greke Te∣stament was not pure in text. Yf he had pro∣ved any of these, wherin our side assented much vnto him: he had foiled the aunswea∣rer. To all these I aunsweared: and now print the tenour, for the vse of the Kinges natiōes.
 And j wold go foreward with Ebrew & Grek writinges, to be turned by others into all Eu∣rope tongues, for the light of Christendome, Yf the King doe think good to perform, that wherof M Iames▪ Melvin vvrote extreme as∣severation. And j hartely wish, & humbly de¦sire, so much to be performed: as the judge Eternal knoweth due in faith, and a meanes to lighten the ast from the West. Liberalitie of a Prince sone great without band in smal∣ler occasiones, wold find in this kind from God and man, greater approbation. The King may appoint pay of promess, from Ec∣clesiasticall revenues: and yf any Bishop can open the Bible in Ebrew and Greke; and hea∣le the Bishops erroures better then my slen∣dernes, j wold gladly give him place: & j am sure he wilbe an honour to the Bishops & na¦tion, over the world. But yf neither the Bi∣shops can deale with the East in Ebrew and Greke: & in story & Thalmudiques, cannot contrive both Testamentes into sure nerves: the King will take order, that others doe it.

