



RIght Worshipfull, having had so long experience of both your sincere affections to true reli∣gion, and your religious dispo∣sitions, to the exercises of Gods worship, both publikely in the holy assemblies, and pri∣vately in your family, I knew not to whose Pa∣tronage I might better commit this short Trea∣tise of the right observation of the Lords Sab∣baoth, than vnto you both. It is for matter, sub∣stantiall and sound; for memory, short and me∣thodicall; for vnderstanding, perspicuous, and plaine; for vse, most necessary and profitable; and
in all, like vnto the meate that Iacob provided for his father Isaac, which was so savory, that his fa∣ther both loved it after a more speciall manner than he did other meates, and also blessed him that brought it vnto him: So will this doctrine of the Sabbaoth be vnto the religious taste of your inward man; so savory, yea, so savoring of the spi∣rit of God, that I am assured your soules will de∣light in it, and blesse God for them that have pre∣pared it for you. As for my part, I have but glea∣ned in the fieldes of other godly and learned men, who have more copiously laboured in this argument: neither is this my Abstract, any other than the fragments of their sumptuous feasts: yet, through the blessing of God, it may proove like the remainder of the five Loaves and two Fi∣shes in the Gospel, which being reserved at Christs appointment, to the glorie of God, filled twelve baskets full; that is, were aboundantly blessed to a greater quantitie than the former. And as for your parts, (without flattery be it spo∣ken) seeing God hath given you both the hearts to honour him, by a more carefull and constant observation of his Sabbaoths, than many other; (yea, than any other I might say) of any note a∣mongst vs; I see no reason, but notice should be taken thereof, that as God by you is glorified, and his Church by your good examples edified: so others also, hearing of the same, may, by your examples, be stirred vp to the like zeale, and to give you that commendation, that is due to those that love the truth. For him that honoureth me, (saith God) I will honour. And sith God hath awarded you Honour, for honouring him, by
walking in the religious steppes of your honou∣rable father: How can I deny it you, or others en∣vie you for it? And as the blessed Apostle tells Philemon: so I may (not vnfitly vsurping his words) say vnto you; That both thanks and prayers, are, and shall be rendred vnto God for you, by many which heare of your love and faith, which you have towards the Lord Iesus, and towards all his Saints; that so the fellowship of your faith, may be made fruitfull, and that whatsoever good thing is in you, through Christ Iesus, may be knowne; for we, yea all we in this populous Towne of Reading, and the Country a∣bout, which vnfainedly feare the Lord, and de∣sire in truth of heart, to make streight steppes to godlinesse, and to profit in his waies, have great ioy and consolation in your love, to the Gospel of Christ; because by you also the Saints hearts are not alittle comforted. It is pittifull to see in divers places, how many which are advanced by the bountifull providence of God, vnto places of dignitie and honour, in the Common-wealth of our English Israel, doe beare themselves in hand, that having beene at the House of God, to heare common Prayer, or a Sermon, are for this their eare-service, and lip-labour, notable Sanctifiers of the Sabbaoth. And whereas they ought to san∣ctifie it also at home, by conference with their fa∣milies, prayer, and meditation, singing of psalmes, and other holy duties, both of pietie, and chari∣tie; yea, and to carry themselves in all grave and sober manner, as having authoritie in their hands to terrifie vanitie and profanenesse, and not to countenance them, do suffer themselves to
be made companions to all vaine men, a thing which holy David detested:
Psal. 15. Psal. 26. Psal. 101. and like Esopa blocke, to lie drenched in the love of vaine sports, and smoakie recreations, (vexations indeede to a sanctified heart) with the losse of pretious Time, and checke of their owne conscience. Whereby it oftentimes commeth to passe, that their base de∣sire of winning other mens mony, is recompen∣ced with the losse of their owne substance, to ve∣rifie Gods Proverb by Solomon;
Pro. 21.17 He that loveth pastime, shall surely be a poore man: their hearing of Sermons is also accursed, their soules grow barren in holy knowledge, and heavenly wise∣dome; and when time serveth, they have not so much as one arrow in their quiver, to shoote at a treacherous Papist, or a wicked Atheist, or any other hereticall depraver of the Truth, which are too rife in every corner, with popish perswasions, and divelish sophistications, watching where men are weake, or faint-hearted to resist, there to breake in, and make spoile of all: or if they have a peece of any argument in store, to give an assault withall, or can make some answer to repell the ill-affected in religion: yet, through their want of practise, or through their inexpertnesse in the word of Truth, either they have no heart to in∣counter with them, or else they want strength to continue the conflict; or for want of holie wise∣dome, they vtterly shame themselves, and the Lords cause in the handling. But you (right Wor∣shipfull) have not so learned Iesus Christ. And if I have found favour in your eyes, (as I am sure in times past, with thanks I acknowledge, that both I, and my poore ministry have) let me be bold in
the Lord to exhort you, still to continue constant in your holy courses, for the honouring of God in the sanctification of his Sabbaoths, and by your godly examples and zealous perswasions, to be a meanes to stirre vp others, that lie securely a∣sleepe, in the opinion they have of an outward formality in religion, and to draw on others a∣mongst vs, that be Masters in Israel, yet too back∣ward in these holy duties, and are in danger of losing their first love to holy religion, if ever they had any; whereby the fame of our Towne begin∣neth to be at a low ebbe, in comparison of that it hath beene; yea, we begin to be like the Church of Sardi, that had a name of living to God, but in∣deede was dead:
Revel. 3. many keeping the Sabbaoth to the halves, in the fore noone at the Temple, in the after-noone at home; in the fore-noone prayers, in the after-noone playes, &c. resembling those monstrous pictures, which being looked vpon one way, shew very beautifull faces of men and wo∣men; but another way, bruit beasts, and vglie birds. I write not this as doubting of your con∣stancies, but because I have learned of Saint Pe∣ter;
2. Pet. 1.12.13. That a sound faith hath neede of a streng∣thening, a warie heart of a warning, and a pure minde of a stirring vp: and therefore I vse this boldnesse in the Lord towards you. Wherefore, though you see some amongst vs with the Rube∣nites, abide like earth-wormes,
Iud. 5.16, 17, 18. amongst their sheepe-folds, and some with Gilead, lie hovering beyond Iordan, and looking which way the world will sway: and others with Dan, lurking coward∣ly in ships prepared for flight: and others with Ashur, lie skulking on the sea shore, expecting a
day, and ready to entertaine some forraine arri∣vall of Italienated wilde Boares, to roote vp the Lords Vineyard: yet I doubt not, (and to that end my prayer shall be) that you may with wor∣thy Zebulon and Nephthalie, be (as you have been) most forward in the high places of the Lords field, and that all of vs may ieopard our lives in the defence of the Lordes quarrell, against the Cananites. You, even the Kings of Canaan: the God of heaven give you both increase of his holy spirit, and prosper you in all well doing, and san∣ctifie all our hearts, that we may so shew forth the power of his Gospel, in our holy conversation, that the adversarie may be ashamed of his gain∣saying, and depraving humour, and we may have comfort and boldnesse in the day of the Lord, which approacheth apace, and slacketh not.

