



IN what sort this land of ours was lately visited by the hand of the Lorde for two yeares together with vnseasonable weather, & so consequently with some scarcitie then, although to say the truth it was nothing so grievous as heretofore our elders haue had, and others then felt, as it was reported: yet was it so evident and plaine in it selfe, that I shall not neede to stande to shew what it was, or how far we were all generally touched therewith: but especially those that were the poorer sort among us. Our owne experience for that matter was
such, that whosoever woulde goe about to make any farther demonstration of it, might verie well spare his labour therein. But whereas in such case some other way there is, wherein we might bee fruitfully occupi∣ed, and to verie good purpose, and so as the nature of the thing it selfe doth require: therein whosoever could rightly and order∣ly imploy his labour, he might be able there∣by to discharge some part of his duetie, and doe a peece of good service to God, and his countrey.
That other way I take to bee especially this: that we acknowledge the same to bee sent of God; and therewithall, that só we be touched therewith, as in such case doth ap∣pertain. In which because. I did not then know (nor yet doe) that others did labour, therefore the last yeare, I did endevour mee self to set downe somewhat thereof: which also I finished as is pleased the Lord to blesse me therein. And to the end that I might safelier doe it, without offending on either side, either on the right hand, or on the left, I sawe no better way then to take some text of Scripture, such as belonged to this kinde of argument, and out of it to derive some such instruction as the text it selfe shoulde
naturally yeeld. So did I take the Prophet Ioel, and out of him framed this Admo∣nition, that thén I praesented your Grace withall. But seeing that since it hath beene stayed (I wote not by what sinister meanes) by one that undertooke the printing of it, & now of late it is come to my hands again, al∣though that in some respect it may seeme to come out of season now: yet because that in others it doth not (nor but little in that) I thought it my dutie again to praesent your Grace therewith.
Which thing the lesse that it is in it selfe (in respect of any thing therin that is mine) the lesse bould I ought to have beene, both at the first and now also to have offered the same, unto so grave and learned a censure. But seeing that it pleased your Grace to ac∣cept of it then; I might not turn it an other way now; especially, when as the nature of it in my iudgement is such, as that before I thought mee self bound, and yet do, in order and duetie to make it yours. And so besee∣ching your Grace to pardon, both my for∣mer bouldnes therein, and the renuing of it now again, I humblie praie that Almigh∣tie God the father of lights & only fountain of all good graces, of his great and infinite
mercie, for the glorie of his holie name, and in the face of his Annointed, would vouch∣safe so to visit us from above by his Holie Spirit, that we maie be in such sort touched, with this his gentle and gracious warning, and so seeke vnto him while it is time, that we provoke no heavier displeasure, but maie attaine to his further mercies, and euer stand in his gracious fauour. From Bolton-Percy, Aprill. 6. 1588.

