


RIGHT WORSHIPFVL,
AS the Belo∣ued Apo∣stle S. Iohn, besides his generall E∣pistle to the whole Church, directed his two
 particular to two seuerall Disciples, 2 Iohn ver. 1, 2. one a Noble, worthy, and Elect Lady; and an other to a faith∣full friend 3 Ioh. ver. 1. Gaius (a man very hospitall, saluted by Paul as his Rom. 16. 23 Host, and of the whole Church at Corinth, whom hee had 1 Cor. 1. 14 baptized, and is digni∣fied by Saint Luke, to haue been Acts 19. 29. Pauls com∣panion in his trauels and iourney, and was taken prisoner with him at E∣phesus, in the tumult rai∣sed against him) both be¦ing great fauourer of the Ministers, and louers of
 the Gospell; the Euan∣gelicall Apostle chiefely reioyced, that they pro∣spered, and walked in the trueth and veritie of the Gospell: so vnto the painfull Preachers of the Word, ariseth great ioy, to see the Faith and Loue of the people of God, towards his Word, and Ministers, and prouo∣keth them to expresse a reciprocall loue to them, in seeking to aduaunce the trueth of Religion, whereunto they finde them so diligently, and dutifully inclined.

Which consideration hath moued mee to pub∣lish these my poore La∣bours, and to commend them to your Protection, that haue heard, and can best witnesse what hath beene sincerely laboured therein. And though I feare not in these dange∣rous times the malicious scandals of Aduersaries, which will by calum∣niations oppresse the Trueth; but was pres∣sed by the loue of some Friendes, (which are Lo∣uers of the Trueth) not to suppresse what I had
 publiquely professed for the maintenance of the Trueth; I was at last by their Christian perswa∣sions induced to com∣mit to the Presse these my poore endeauours, wherein I haue laboured to expresse the trueth in a Question so much con∣trouerted, and oppugned by the Aduersaries of the Truth.
I confesse it was a double spurre vnto mee, to incite mee to giue you contentation, when I considered your good likings to haue this Do∣ctrine
 in these trouble∣some times of our Chur∣ches oppugnation to bee publiquely professed, and maintained in the face of Gods enemies, which with their blustering breath, would at one blast blow downe both our Church and Com∣mon wealth; and would haue them wholy theirs, or none at all.
Herein on the contra∣ry part you haue in your good acceptations, and aduancing this Doctrine, greatly approoued your care and zeale to the ser∣uice
 of God, and his true Church, as your loue and loyaltie to your King and Common wealth; which by the opposite endea∣uours of our aduersaries are fearefully shot at. My purpose and proceedings heerein haue not reached in any absolute manner to decide all the poynts of this our Controuersie; and by all Authenticall Authors, and ancient Fa∣thers of the Primitiue church, or moderne Wri∣ters to discusse this Que∣stion (which many others
 of great learning and ex∣perience haue abundant∣ly performed) but onely in an ordinary Audience, and vulgar Exercise, to prooue out of the Canon of holy Scriptures, how faithfully our Doctrines are thence deriued and drawne out, for confir∣mation of what wee hold, and confutation of whatsoeuer our Aduersa∣ries haue dreamed to the contrary.
For this indeed is the Touch-stone of Trueth, whereby all pure and
 counterfeit mettals are to be tryed, and wherein as well the olde, as the new Writers haue principally laboured to bring all Controuersies to bee dis∣cussed. The whole cur∣rent of the Scriptures haue no better, nor al∣most any other ground for their confirmations, or confutations, in con∣verting gainsayers to the Faith, and conuincing Infidels and Heretiques. The eloquence of Apol∣los was an ornament to the Doctor; but the au∣thoritie
 of the Scriptures was the Firmament of his Doctrine; who is sayd to haue mightily, and publiquely confu∣ted the Iewes, Act. 18. 28. prouing by the Scriptures, That Iesus was the Christ. I shall therefore intreat the Readers of this poore and plaine Discourse (e∣specially such as were the Auditors of those Le∣ctures) with the Bereans, to examine the truth of the Doctrines according to the Marginall Quota∣tions out of the Scrip∣tures,
 which to auoyde prolixitie, I haue there set downe without such Amplifications, as accor∣ding to that time, and due exigence of that Ex∣ercise, I more at large o∣pened, and dilated. And so commending you to the Word of Gods grace, which is able to build you further, with dayly and heartie Prayers to God for the increase of your Christian Faith in the knowledge of his will, and loue of the Truth, commit my selfe
 to the fauourable accep∣tance of religious and iu∣dicious mindes, passing by the carping obloquy of criticall Censurers.

