



Right Honorable,
WEre I not in awe of your Honours Humility, which though it selfe doth pub∣lish, the rest of your graces, yet commands me to conceale them, I might here have given the world a tast of that which may more easily bee
 admired, then either exprest or imita∣ted. For although such is your singu∣lar piety mixt with Prudence, that you, if any, may iustly challenge the Doves heart with the Serpents head, yet that which gives a redolency and fragrancy to all your beds of spices, is the grace of Humility, which is (to vse the metaphor of S. Bernard) as the vi∣olet though the lowest, yet the sweetest of flowers. And although hereby it comes to passe, that you had rather de∣serve the praise of vertue, then have it, yet pardon me my most Noble Lady, if I tell the World that, which the World & Fame, have long since told me: that you are one of those who have made Honour Honorable, and Nobility Noble. Madam, it is well knowne, that though your House be illustrious, and Family most Noble, yet that you
 doe not borrow of, but repay unto your Progenitors, and give to your Poste∣rity true honour. And how? To re∣ceive Christ, to bee borne of God, and so become of the blood Royall of Hea∣ven, this is honour of a double die; no favour on earth can give it, no malice of hell can staine it. Alexander must draw his pedegree from the gods, or else he thinkes himselfe ignoble, I am sure to bee allied to the King of Hea∣ven is true nobility and a greater ho∣nour, to have the spirit of God flaming in the soule, then to have the arteries flusht, and the veines fraught with the heroicall spirits, and noble blood of our forefathers, and my short ex∣perience of your Ladyships conversa∣tion, assures mee, that this is not so much your ambition, as your happi∣nesse.

The world is to full of those Glo∣wormes, that shine not unlesse it be in the darke ignorance of true honour, I meane that place their glory, in the o∣stentation, and pompe of their wealth, and affluency: many such (if now there are not) I am sure there were in Saint Chrysostome his time, who thought it might bee served in to their Tables, in costly plate, or worne on their backs, in gorgeous apparrell, whom he wittily upbraides, that they might thanke, &c. Crysost. in Epist. ad collos. Cap. 3. hom. 7. the cooke, & the swineyard, the wea∣ver, and kember, the goldsmith, and confectioner, for their honour. But he knowes you not, who knowes not that your Ladiships soule is, to sublime and heavenly; thus to lay your honour in the dust. To be a diligent peruser of sacred heraldry, and to finde a name in the booke of life, is superlative glory,
 this refines the blood of the coursest peasant, and creates him a regall pe∣digree, but saith the text,Act. 17.14, 15. there were also honorable women that beleeved; here is honour laid upon honour, when terrene honour is the ground of celesti∣all: Pious poverty is a head of gold on feete of clay, but devout nobility, ap∣ples of Gold on pictures of silver: a religious Lazarus, is an orient pearle on a dunghill, but a godly Constantine, a religious Emperour, This is empha∣ticall, this is monopolizing of honour, this is as rare and infrequent, so rare and excellent. To say all this of your Ladyship, as it is no flattery, so not to say it, is a more blacke sin then envy, witnes your friends, nay your enemies, your acquaintance, nay your consci∣ence, and lastly, witnesse the backes, and bellies of Gods pupills, (I meane
 the poore) which are the field and furrowes, receiving the liberall disper∣sion of that temporall seede, which will rise (no doubt) in a crop, of eter∣nall glory. Vpon all these your ho∣nours divine dispositions, this one doth ensue of necessity, that you are a patro∣nesse of the messengers, and a receiver of the messages of God, which hath em∣boldened your servant, to present unto your Honour, though the posthumous, yet not the spurious child, of him whom God honoured to be a father of many children in his Church. Jt hath in∣deede beene a iust complaint, that the posthumous workes of many learned Divines, have come forth like the heterogeneall monsters of Affrica, which being generated of diverse species, partly resemble the male, partly the female, or like the froggs on the
 Bankes of Nile, which aequivocall ge∣neration leaves imperfect; even so the corrupted matter of broken notes, penned from the mouth of a preacher, mingled perhaps with the weake con∣ceits of some illiterate Stenographer, cherisht with the Sunbeames of popu∣lar applause, many times presents the world with monstrous, and mishapen births to the unspeakeable iniury and dishonour of the deceased parents. That this present worke is none of those slovenly meteors, it is my taske to prove, and that in a word I may give plenary satisfaction, give mee leave to referre your Ladiship, to the rest of this Authors workes, if you finde not in these the same comely fea∣tures, and sweet complexions, I meane the same strength of Judgement, and clearenesse of phantacy, that is in
 the rest, reiect it as not his.
For the Author, (my Deare and deceased Father) I neede not tell your Honour, of his fidelitie both in preach∣ing and writing;ea liber∣tate scrip∣sit impe∣ratorum vitas, qua ipsi vixe∣runt. how like e Suetoni∣us, hee tooke the same liberty, to cry downe sin, that men tooke to sin: nei∣ther is it fit for mee to say, how hee preacht, and wrote, by the same rule, that Aeskines gives an Oratour., that his Oration and the Law must be unisones, not to speake any thing, aboue, or besides the law. How care∣full and how precise, he hath beene in this particular as in all his workes, so especially in this, may appeare, as by the frequent so pertinent, quotations of scripture, wherein your Ladiship shall finde though abundance, yet no super∣fluitie, though many, yet not too ma∣ny.

As for other marginall Fringe, I meane the quotations of Augustine, or Crysostome, &c. which may seeme here to be defective J shall desire your honour to understand, that though the author, had otherwise finished this worke, yet this accomplishment as a thing lesse necessary, he did procrasti∣nate, and so by immature death, was of his purpose herein frustrate; I know that to your Ladiship, or any other iu∣dicious reader, it will be neverthelesse welcome, because it wants this lace. Who that is wise, would refuse to see his face in a glasse, because the verges are not guilded, or the sides painted?
The arguments that induced mee to make that publike, which I might have ingrossed for mine owne private good, whether they are more or more per∣swasive I know not: The intention of
 the authour, and the necessity of the duties herein handled, gave me not on∣ly a toleration, but a command, to print it, it treates of the purchase, of the most precious commodity, the truth. Of the Digestion of the most salubrious foode, the word. Of the suite for the most soveraigne balme, pardon of sin. And lastly, of not quenching the spirit; and if it be the duty of every man, to cherish this holy flame in his owne soule, for mee, not to kindle it in o∣thers, as farre as in me lay, I held it piacular: Jt is true indeede, Philoso∣phy tells us, that elementary fire, needs no fewell, but that culinary doth, experience informeth us: The spirit of God, consider it in it selfe, is so far from needing any helpes to cherish the heate thereof, that it is the originall of all, both health and life in the soule,
 but consider, it as it worketh in the frigid soule of corrupted man: So though the spirit of God neede no auxiliary excitations, yet our dead∣nesse, and coldnesse doth: which con∣siderations with a kinde of command enforced mee to bring this worke to the presse, beeing nothing else but the fiery language, of those Cloven Tongues, which did rest on the head of that apostolicall divine, the au∣thour hereof, which I hope being perused, will cause your Ladiship to say, it had beene pitty at the least, if not impiety, to have depri∣ved the altars of so many Christian hearts, of this sacred fewell.
Many other inducements J had to publish these Treatises, and among many this not the least, to testifie my readinesse, to acknowledge your Ho∣nours
 noble love; and favours to my selfe, that J might not be of the un∣gratefull number of those, that Se∣necaQuidam furtiué gratias a∣gunt, & in angulo & in aurem, non est ista vere∣cundia, sed inficiandi genus. Sen. de benef. lib. 2. cap. 23. speakes of, that love to conceale received benefits, by private acknow∣ledgements; to acquit my selfe, of which sinne, I have thought fit to tell the world, that I was never so sen∣sible of my owne poverty; as since your Honour brought me so farre in debt, that when I thinke of repayment, I finde a bottomlesse sea to fathom: Madam, with your leave, J shall say to your Honour asHanc unam ha∣beo inju∣riam tu∣am, effeci∣sti ut vive∣rem & morerer ingratus. Sen. de benef. lib. 2. Cap. 21. Furnius to Au∣gustus, this is the onely wrong you have done me, that I must live and die unthankefull: and yet that my good will might bee seene, I was glad to snatch this occasion, to testifie both my thankes and duty to your Honour, and since J finde not any thing to
 present unto you, by way of retribu∣tion, as Aeskines said to Socrates, that one thing which I have, I give you, e∣ven my selfe, to be your servant, and sollicitour, in the Court of Heaven, not so much, that I think my selfe worthy, as bound, to pray for your Honour, and all your most noble Family, that as God hath made you an exemplary peece of piety heere, so hee would long and long continue you, an encourager of Christi∣anity, a comfort of Christians, a re∣fresher of the members of Christ, till the time of your refreshing shall come, when triumph shall bee your recom∣pence, glory your reward, Angels your company, God your glory.
Which shall be the dayly prayer of your Honours humble and devoted servant

