



Guill. Du Vair greeting.
SEing, most miserable and wretched Prouince, that thy ouer great exceeding in thine auncient and wonted delights & pleasures, hath brought thee into this outragious fury, and that thine ill hap hath caused thee to put to these thy ren and torne hands, to plucke out thine owne bo∣wels withall, and to disfigure thine own fce: yet if there be any intermission of this hote broyling mischiefe, see thou employ the same about the beholding and looking vpon thy mi∣serie. But if so be thou be too too fearefull of the miseries which thou hast brought vpō thy selfe, or canst not abide the sight of them, be∣hold and looke vpō the ruine & destrunction of these miserable Hebrewes, because it is the truest glasse that thou canst looke in. But whē  thine eyes shall haue borrowed their image
 and face to behold and see thy miseries there∣in, let them also borrow teares of thee  mayle and mourne for them. For the chiefe remedy to ease thy sorrow and griefe, is for thee to acknowledge the same, and then to haue compassion thereof. And when will that be? forsooth euen then, when God, who loueth thee more then thou louest thy selfe, shall by his owne loue ouercome that desire of thine which thou hast to destroy thy selfe. And in waiting for this good, and praying for the same, I do here prepare and make ready for thee holy teares, that thou migh∣test thereby mollifie thine hard hart, and ex∣tinguish therein the wrath of God enflamed against thee. It may be that they will well like thee, as a charitable remedy ought to do, and it may be that they will mislike thee, and then wilt thou do as men do, who vtterly re∣iect whatsoeuer is offred them for their good. And whether they please or displease thee, yet will I neuer cease both to loue and serue thee. For, what is it that I should more rea∣dily and willingly loue and serue, then my deare and best beloued Countrey, my dear Countrey, I say; that maketh some accompt of me? The Lord my God saue and preserue thee my poore countrey of France, and graunt me grace to be able as blessedly to procure thy welfare, as I haue an earnest desire to do it.

