



ALthough TIME and DEATH from our Cradles to our Graues pursue vs swiftly, and accor∣ding to the Almighties Ordinance, ouertake and seaze vpon our fraile and Terrestriall parts, vpon some sooner, vpon others later: Yet Excellent Acts like strong Eagles breake from their seazure, and
 soare aboue them in so sublime a pitch as neither Time with all his Power and rusty Powder, with which hee blots and rubs out Brasse and Marble, can quite ob∣scure or extinguish them, neither Death close in his darke-gaping Mouth (the Graue) their Noble∣nesse. Witnesse this small yet Auncient History, which this last Summer I made part of my Exer∣cise, to put into an English Habite.
That the Story is Auncient, I may well say; for it is 1900. yeeres since Aristeus Writ it to his Brother Philocrates, which Aristeus St. Hierome in his Epi∣stle to the Pentatucke of the Bible Great Esquire. sayes, was Hyperaspistes to Ptolo∣meus Philadelphus; King of Ae∣gypt, Syria, Phnicia, and Cilicia, and Sonne of Ptolomeus Lagus, one of the great Captaines of A∣lexander Magnus, that diuided
 his Conquests (the World) a∣mongst them.
This Ptolomeus Philadelphus then a most accomplish'd young Gentleman, vertuously disposed, and so great a louer of Learning, as hee had accumulated into his Library according to some Au∣thors, 1800000. Volumes, Print∣ing Argument of the HISTORY. not then risen in our Hemi∣spheare, was by the sayd Aristeus a most Noble Person, and a great friend of (the then) captiued Iewes (as an Instrument of God) for the liberty and freedome of them, (then his people) practised with De∣metrius Phalerius to tell the King that his so aboundant Library was but poore, because it wanted the Booke of Bookes, the sacred Volume of GOD, which we call the Holy Bible: The King vertu∣ously couetous thereof, demanded how hee should best acquire it?
 Aristeus wayting this desiered oc∣casion, proportioned his aduice, that he should first set all the Cap∣tiued Iewes, not onely in Aegypt, but also in Syria, &c. at free liber∣ty: send Ambassadours and Pre∣sents to Eleazer their High Priest and Pontiffe. The King willingly accordes thereto, as to the Musick of his desires, and prepares most rich presents, as a Table of Massie Gold, embellish't with Precious Stones, Cups of Gold and Siluer likewise adorned: sets at free∣dome the Captiued by publicke Edict, Embasies, (with these gifts and diuers Talents of Gold and Siluer) Aristeus and Andrea, Prince and great Captaine of the Guard of his Person.
They goe, deliuer his Letters of Request and Commends, haue gracious entertainment, returne with the 72. Interpreters Iewes
 Letters, and also Eleazers Pre∣sents to the King, and in especiall with the Sacred Volume and Word of God.
The good King adores the Bookes, feasts the Bringers, who after fall to the Businesse, and Translated it out of the Hebrew in∣to the Greeke, the common lear∣ned Language of those Times, made famous by the Sword of Alexander. And this in briefe is the effect of this Venerable Hi∣story which is by mee thus made yours.
And though I seeme to Antici∣pate thus to you, yet it is as no∣thing; for in it selfe as you may further see, it is Elabourately and Eloquently Written by the sayd Aristeus; and let no man wonder too much thereat, as thinking our Times excels theirs in Eloquence: no; For who euer exceeded De∣mostenes
 the Greeke, or Cicero the Latine therein?
Lastly, to speake the Praise of History. Libri sunt vasa memoriae, and worthy Historicall Bookes haue in them a kinde of Diuine Permanency, and as Eminent Per∣sons should affect Noble actions: so ought they to cherish the Re∣gisters, as their Honourers.
For hath not Plutarcke made those Gyant Heroes, as Theseus, Romulus, Alexander, Iulius Cae∣sar, and the rest, yet liue? and himselfe more praysefully longer then them all? So as an ignorant swaggering Fellow threatned his Aduersary to kill him if he had as many liues as Plutarcke: Did not Alexander sigh for an other Ho∣mer?
Lastly, (if I haue in honour of the History) like one holding a lighted Taper to the cleare noone-shining
 Sunne, made an Appen∣dix, shewing the Antiquitie and Dignity of the Bookes by the said SEPTVAGINT Translated; and the Excellency of their inspi∣red Writer, Moses; and haue therein beene too prolixious, par∣don mee, because of the Profoun∣dity and Worthinesse of the mat∣ter: So I referre you to that, and the rest; and so rest

