


Whose spititual welfare should I tender if not yours? I cannot but interest you in this my publike as well as private services.
FOr thee, Dear heart, as my love here greeteth thee, so thine to me, to thy self, (I question not) will put thee on seriously to view and hearken to this discourse, as well as my other and former advices. Here thou mayst try that grace which the Lord hath given thee to his glory, and thine and my comfort, and mayst be helped to make sure thy calling and election. It is true, I am as yet present with thee, through mercy, and thou with me, (but it is unknown (unless in heaven) how soon we may be snatched each out of others bosome, for the cloud of death many times overcasts a fair morning) and so have opportunity for information, directi∣on and counsel, according to my talent. But this may live when I am dead, and by this means thou mayst have an admonishing husband present even when absent. However,
 it may prove subservient to thy souls advan∣tage, whether our time be less or more in this world.
As for you, my dear Children, I judge it not unmeet to commend these collections to you, and as a father to command you to study them, and to search your selves by them.
I have formerly had in my thoughts to draw up some admonitions and cautions for the good of your souls, which as a father care∣ful of your eternal weal, I might leave with you as a fathers blessing, as the best legacy I can bequeath to you; but those being not hatched and these fledged and compleated, I could not but put them into your hands, not knowing (though my self wtth your loving mother be in the prime of our years, having but newly past the noon of Moses Psal. 90. his youngest old man) how short my time may be with you; as also because the subject is of special concernment for you, being born and brought forth in sin. For what doctrine could I better lay before you, than that of effectual calling? shewing you what is grace, and what not; and what duty could I better lay upon you, than that of conversion and repentance. Young children, like young plants, had need be shored and underpropped with good admonitions, I endeavour it in
 this Treatise, as well as in my private teach∣ings.
I have six of you in the land of the living, Oh that the Lord would make you his! So far as I know mine own heart, (though the heart of man, and so mine is very deceitful) I profess seriously, that how low soever your condition should be for temporals, yet if the Lord would be pleased to bestow a new heart upon you, I should abundantly rejoyce, yea, more than to see you sit upon the highest pinacle of worldly advancement. I am full of fears and desires in reference to your souls good; and though now you be tender and young, and so little sensible, and not so fit for this or other books, yet if it please God to lengthen out the thread of your lives, which I pray for, then take a word of advice from your father: oh that God would bless it to you!
Study throughly the nature of original sin, and that pravity that is diffused through∣out your natures. Remember that you are born in sin, and so will live and die if not changed by grace. The Lord change you for his Christ's sake. Let the Scriptures be pre∣cious in your eyes; they are the book of books; read them often, and heedfully. Make great conscience of obedience to your parents and superiors. Remember your
 creator in the days of your youth; make good use of your young time; flee youthful lusts; take heed of the beginnings of sin; beware of pride, lying, vain company, &c. Be willing to learn and be taught the things of God, and your souls good. I must con∣tract, or mine Epistles will swell too much. Jesus Christ wash you with his blood, cleanse you from the filth and guilt of sin, make you the sons and daughters of the Lord Al∣mighty. The Lord make thee, my dear yoke-fellow, a Mother of Saints, and more and more an Eunice to the fruit of thy womb. So prays

Heveningham, Feb. 4. 1657/8.
