


Respected Kinsfolk and Acquaintance,
RElations and friendship are the pillars of human so∣ciety, great comforts of our lives; love is the sinew of friendship, and religion is the life of this love. What is love without religion, but a sensual affection? and ac∣quaintance without love, but flattery and dissimulation? so that religion is the centre to the lines of love and friend∣ship, and that wherein they live and have their being. Non nobis solum nati sumus, We were not born for our selves alone, said the Heathen Orator. And if for others, for their good; and if for their good, then their best good, or their good in the best respects thereof. God made and knit us together in bonds, not to further or let each other alone in sin, (which we are apt to do through the corru∣ption of base flesh) but to admonish and help each other on towards grace and glory. Though I must confess I fail too much in the duty of every of my relations wherein I stand; yet I bless God that he hath helped and encou∣raged me in some measure to deal with divers of you in the way of private admonition, which I hope hath not been altogether fruitless. It is a precious duty, I wish it were more put in use and practice.
I have had sometimes wishes (though the thing can hardly be attained) that we might all meet together at some times, (especially we that are more neerly related to each other) not only for civil society, but also and prin∣cipally for spiritual advantage. In some measure I may have my desire, meeting with you all by counsel and ad∣vice in this Book; and oh that God would so bless it (for which I desire to bend my knees, and lift up mine heart every day) that we might one day meet with each other in the presence of God in the highest heavens. Come, let
 me beg your hearts for the Lord; let the words of a Brother, Kinsman, Friend, in the name of Christ prevail with you. Who knows but God allied me to, and gave me acquaintance with any of you for such an end and purpose as this?
Some of you may be yet knee-deep and more in the clay of a natural condition, standing at a great distance from the father of light. The Lord pull your feet out, and set them on the rock Christ.
Others of you may be washed and whited over with civility and common profession; but remember, that not every one that saith, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the King∣dom of heaven. Pardon me that I hint you of sin, and the danger of a natural condition; it was mine own condition once, and whether I have yet fully passed it I have much cause to fear, I find my heart so carnal, sold under sin.
Others of you may have some early glimmerings of the spirit dawning upon your souls. The Lord cause the sun of righteousness to rise upon you with healing under his wings, and bring your bloomings and buddings to ripe∣ness and maturity.
Some others may have a through work of grace upon their hearts; the Lord make such thankful, (for it is an inestimable mercy) and keep their feet that they fall not.
Various are your conditions in regard of temporals and spirituals; various are your relations to, and acquaintance with me: whatsoever the one or the other be, let no∣thing be a bar to keep you from accepting the counsel of the holy Ghost, which is sent in love, let it therefore be so taken. I would not these things should be a witness against you or me another day; The Lord therefore for his Christ's sake so sanctifie these truths to us, and us by these truths, that we may all attain to grace and increase thereof, to the comfort of our own souls, to the praise and glory of God by Christ. So prays

