



Dearly beloved,
THe main designe of a Minister of the Gospell, next to the glory of God, should be the spirituall good, and advantage, as of the Church of God in generall, so of the flock committed to his charge in par∣ticular.
Had not this consideration been very pow∣erfull, and prevailing on my Spirit, it would not have been able, to have broke through those many difficulties and discouragements (amongst which the unworthinesse, and weaknesse of the Author was not the least)

that did way-lay the publication of these pa∣pers.
The result of my thoughts being affirma∣tive, as to the presenting of them to publike view, I determined to dedicate them to you my people.
The reasons that moved me to this, (besides your interest in the composer of them, having been your Pastor now, for some yeares; and the equity of it, that they that called for, and rejoyced in the first-fruits of his Ministery, should have tendred unto them the first-fruits of his labours in this kind also) were such as these.
1. That I might be instrument all to esta∣blish you in some of the truths of Christ in these erroneous dayes; a fitter expedient here∣unto I know not any (next to the illuminati∣on of the Spirit) then the riight understand∣ing of the text; For these late yeares especi∣ally, the Devill hath walked up and downe our streets with a Bible under his arme, and upon every turne pleads Scriptum est, It is written.
2. That you might be the more confirmed, concerning the sweet harmony of the Scriptures; how one Scripture sweetly embraces, and kisses each other, although there be many in the world, that would if they could (Horrendum scelus!)

make them to fall out, and mutiny. One cals the Old Testament, and the New, Gods two lips; whereby he breatheth out the same truth. Some have gone about to finde con∣tradictions in them, but the spirit of contra∣diction was in them, that went about it. Oh that we could as well agree with them, as they agree with themselves: while they are at peace in their doctrine, we are at warre in their interpretation.
3. That you might take notice of the obscu∣rity of some texts of Scripture. We may say of the whole booke of the Scriptures, as Saint Peter doth of all Pauls Epistles: In which are some things hard to be understood: Some 2 Pet. 3. 16 things, though not all; there are some excel∣lent herbes in the garden of the Scriptures, whose names we know not. Difficilia quae pulchra. And these things, They that are unlearned, and unstable, wrest, as they do also, the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction. They deale with the Scriptures, as Chymists deale with naturall bodies, torturing them to extract something out of them, which God and nature never put in them; Or as torturers deale with an inno∣cent man, make him speake that which he never thought; A seasonable Item for these dayes, when men think a small measure of

gifts sufficient for the interpretation of Scri∣pture.
God would not have the weakest of his peo∣ple starved, and therefore some truths are easy; nor the wisest of them cloyd, and sated, and therefore some truths are obscure. Nor have we cause to murmur, or repine at this dispensation. Since the fall, the understan∣dings of men, are shrunke up, and contract∣ed. Shall the little viall be angry, because it cannot containe the water in the Ocean? Shall the blind man blame the Sun, for shining no brighter?
4. That however God dispose of me by his providence, I might leave something in your hands, which might be for your spirituall ad∣vantage: A Sermon, or Exposition, if cal∣led to minde, (and I hope this small manuall may be your remembrancer) may do your souls good, seven, ten, twenty yeares after its deli∣very. Physick doth not alwayes worke when it is taken, no more do the Ordinances. 'Tis said there, That many resorted unto Jesus and said, John did no miracle, but all things Joh 10. 41, 42. that John spake of this man were true; and many beleeved on him there. John had Preached of Christ before, but they did not beleeve in Christ when he Preached; But when Christ comes amongst them; they upon

Johns Sermons preached a great while before, then believed.
You have in these papers, (for I thought it not safe to go without a guide, the way in many places being difficult) the conduct of severall eminently learned Authors, burning and shining lights, at whose torch my candle received light, though I may say, to the praise of free-grace, it shines not altogether (unlesse we referre to God) with a borrow∣ed, and derivative lustre, &c.
One of these things I studied in this small piece, was plainenesse; it being for a consi∣derable part of it polemicall: And besides, truth is an excellent Jewel, best when plain set.
I have severall counsells to you, lying neere my spirit, possibly I may have another opportunity to offer them. At present let me exhort you (as most pertinent to the businesse in hand) to a diligent study of the Word of God; To this purpose, I have annexed by way of Appendix, certain directions for the right un∣derstanding of the Scriptures; if they may be of any advantage to you, blesse God for them.
Beloved, the desire of my soul is, that your soules may be saved. This is the prayer of

From my Study at Bun-hill, Nov 17, 1654.
