



Right Worshipful,
MArcus Antonius de Do∣minis confesseth in that little book,
M. An∣tonius de Dom. Archiep. Spalat. wherein he expresseth the reason of his de∣parture
from the Church of Rome, That the closing up of the Scriptures from the people, thereby labouring to hold all in ignorance, gave him occasion to suspect their Religion, and to fear his estate, and to think on conversion, freely profes∣sing three in these termes, Scrip∣turae summa apud nos ignora∣tio, that there is nothing whereof the Papists are more ignorant, then of the Scrip∣tures. And other Nations here∣tofore have cast this as a re∣proach upon the English Na∣tion, That the Nobility and Gen∣try thereof were ignorant and unlearned; which aspersion hath been well wiped off, since the beginning of the Reigne of Queen Elizabeth: but I wish
it were not a just reproach, that did yet stick upon the body of our Common people, that they are lamentably ignorant and unlearned in matters of the highest concernment; what gross darknesse is yet among us, not∣withstanding all the meanes vouchsafed to us from the Fa∣ther of lights? and may not the Lord complain of us, as some∣times he did of the people of Is∣rael,
Deut. 32.28. they are a Nation void of Counsell, neither is there any understanding in them? Divers of the Ancients have given us their testimony concerning the great diligence that was used in all sorts of people in their times, in searching the Scriptures, desiring nothing else
but to attain to the mind of him that wrote them,
August. de doctr. Christi∣an. lib. 2. cap. 5. and so to the will of God contained in them. And what was more common to the Fathers, then to exhort the people to get them Bibles, to read them, and to examine what they heard by them? and how sharply did they reprove the negligence of those that did it not? Theo∣doret, writing of his times, saith, You shall every where see those points of our faith to be known and understood, not only by such as are Teachers in the Church, but even of all kind of Artifi∣cers, and not men only, but wo∣men also, not they onely which are book-learned, but they also that get their living with their
needle; yea maid-servants, and waiting-women, and not City∣zens only, but Husband-men of the Countrey are very skilful in these things: yea, you may hear among us, Ditchers, and Neat∣heards, and Wood-setters,
Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 3. dis∣coursing of the Trinity, and the Creation, &c. Origen from his childhood learnt the Scriptures, and gat them without book, and propounded many questi∣ons to his Father Leonides a godly Martyr, (who rejoyced much in it) about the difficult senses thereof. So Macrina,
Basil. Epist. 74. Ba∣sil's Nurse, taught him the Scri∣ptures of a child, and Hierome writeth of the Lady Paula, that she could say the Scriptures by heart, and that she set many
of her maids to learn them, and many of his writings are dire∣cted to women, commending their industry in searching the Scriptures, and exciting them thereunto, as to Paula before mentioned, Eustochium, Salvina, Celantia, &c. The diligence of those times may justly reprove the great negligence of these times: we have had the light of the Gospel clearly shining a∣mong us these hundred yeares, we have had many excellent Teachers to unfold the mind of God out of his word to us, and yet very few there be that are annointed with eye salve, to see that which is called the secret of the Gospel, and to understand that great mystery of godliness,
which God hath revealed in his word: we have had the way of God (like Apollos) expoun∣ded to us more perfectly then our fore-fathers; and yet the Lord may say to us, as some∣time Christ to his Disciples;
Mat. 15.16, 17. Are ye yet without understanding? Perceive ye not yet? Have I been so long time with you, and hast thou not known me, &c. Joh. 14.9.
There be certain impediments of knowledge, Some naturall, as infancy, incapacity, un∣learnednesse, the one of these is not suddenly, the other not easily cured: Some are sin∣full, as Pride, Ignorance, and Aversenesse, for which cause the Lord hath not onely given us the Scriptures, but also the
Ministery of his Pastours, and other meanes to remove these impediments: let an igno∣rant man be lockt up with a Bible, he will return forth as ignorant as he went in: though the word of God be not ob∣scure in it selfe, yet to an igno∣rant man, that which is plaine, and that which is obscure is all one: but let the Book be open∣ed, the Text read and ex∣pounded, and then by the blessing of God upon it, as Chry∣sostome speakes, the most un∣learned man that is, shall un∣derstand. And were there a constant preaching Ministery setled (as much as is possible) in every place and corner of the land, and not onely pub∣lique
preaching, but also fre∣quent catechising in publique congregations, and private fa∣milies enjoyned, and effectu∣ally maintained against the ma∣nifold discouragements of this Iron Age, the darknesse of ig∣norance might soon vanish, and be expelled out of our coasts. Now the consideration of the grosse ignorance of most peo∣ple and congregations in this clear Sun-shine of the Gospel, was not the least motive indu∣cing me to the study and publi∣cation of these Sermons, being also importuned by divers godly Ministers, and other Christian friends, to bring them into the publique view. My desire here∣in is to further the simplest of
my Countrey-men in the know∣ledge of God, hoping they will not slight my poor endea∣vours, for whose sake they were primarily undertaken; and those are all ignorant persons, that have lived under the Gospel so long, that for their time they might have been teachers, but by reason of their grosse and dull eares, are but babes in understanding, and have need to be taught the first prin∣ciples of the Oracles of God.
Heb. 5.12.
And now (much honoured Sirs) your good understand∣ing in the mystery of Christ, your unfeigned love to learn∣ing and true Religion, your great respects shewed to all Gods faithful Ministers, which
have the happinesse (as my self have had) to be acquainted with you, have emboldned me to present this Treatise to you, upon whom God hath stamp't his own image in an eminent manner, (as it were upon his own Gold) more then upon many others of your rank. You deserve (I confesse) a greater testimony of my respects unto you, then this cluster or two of my slen∣der vintage; which I here offer to you, not so much to feed your appetite, as to quicken it; but where power is wanting, I humbly in treat, that a sincere affection may make the supply; and if by this tender of mine, you may receive any little be∣nefit, I shall crave this recom∣pense
of you, That you would be earnest with God in my be∣halfe, to make me faithful and profitable in my function, to the end of my dayes. The va∣lue of Paper-presents is but small, and the lesse to be esteem∣ed of; by how much this Age of ours hath made the number of Books to be the purgation of distempered braines; I beg this favour of you, To have this little piece of coine laid up in your closets, as an acknow∣ledgement of a greater obli∣gation: and if after your ma∣ny weighty and publique af∣faires, you shall sometimes look into this book, I hope you may meet with some passages therein, that may yield you
some content, and further your growth in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. And leaving this Ma∣nual with you as a testimony of that respect, which your Worships many wayes chal∣lenge from me, I remain

