


Christian Friends,
THese Sermons coming abroad into the world, I thought meet to command them to visit and salute you, where they first drew their breath.
They have formerly been preached to your ears, they are now presented to your eyes; the Lord print them upon your hearts. I take it to be my duty, (though I be the lowermost of the ushers in Christ's School, yet) according to the measure of my talent, to try all con∣clusions for the weal of your souls; and how would mine heart be enlarged with thanks to the Lord, if my poor endeavours might be crowned with succes? and though these things have been communicated to you formerly, yet (because we are slow to receive and retain divine truths) to write the same things, that I have spoken, to me shall not be grievous; and to you I hope the Lord will make it safe: Nay, though my service for your souls in any kind were doubled, yea, treble, yet should I abundantly rejoyce in the labour of the
 hardest tasks, if thereby through the assistance of the Almighty, I might see Satans forts taken, and forces routed, and sin marching out of your hearts and lives with bag and baggage, and the Lord Jesus with the blessed train of his spirit's graces enthroned and set up in the midst of you. To which end Iearnest∣ly desire that the Lord would be pleased to bless this, & all my other labours; & that you would be pleased to accept of my counsel, as in the Book, so in this Epistle. And that
1. More generally. 2. More particularly, with respect to the ensuing Treatise.
1. More generally.
1. Take heed of error and heresie. They are reckoned in Scripture amongst the works of the flesh. They are the secret underminers of that which is good, notwithstanding their well-complexioned face.
2. Get knowledge. Ignorance is the root of iniquity. In times of light to live in darkness is most sad.
3. Do not imprison, but improve your knowledge. To him that knoweth to do good, and doth it not, to him it is sin, [with a witness] Jam. 4. 17. Knowledge without grace, is but like a jewel in a swines snout, or a pearl in a toads head.
4. Keep close to the Ordinances. Keep up in your hearts a love to them. Come once to
 slight and turn your back upon them, and you put the reins into the Divels hands.
5. Love sound and soulsearching preach∣ing; never distaste it, it is best for your souls; it is wholesome though not toothsome.
6. Be much in examination of your selves; weigh your selves in God's scales: will you know every thing, and be ignorant only of the state of your souls?
7. Content not your selves with a form, but look afte the power of godliness; the name without the nature of a Christian will little avail you: forget not what I have taught you from Matth. 7. 21..
8. Take heed of the world, and the cares thereof. Do not so fasten your thoughts to earth, as to be strangers to heaven. Be not so careful of your bodies, as to be careless of your souls.
9. Look to your families: let Christ come in there. Train up your children and servants religiously; let your houses be as so many Churches. Neglect here is the corrupted spring that sends forth puddle-streams into Ecclesi∣astical and Civil societies; without the ser∣vice of God, your houses will be but the Divels shops.
10. In your places discountenance sin and profaness; encourage goodness. Improve your power, estate, age, &c. for Christ's glory.
 11. Maintain love towards each other; follow peace and holiness; Love is an ex∣cellent grace.
12. Be very careful to sanctifie the Lord's Sabbaths publikely and privately: They are God's dole▪ days; be not unwilling to wait at the posts of his gates for his alms.
2. More particularly with respect to the ensuing Treatise.
1. Look upon this little piece as an help to bring to remembrance what hath formerly been taught you.
2. Take the counsel therein as from your Minister, Friend, and Lover, who earnestly desires your eternal salvation.
3. Read it not out of novelty, but con∣science.
4. Pray over it, and for me, that I may be the better enabled to discharge my duty in watching over your souls.
5. Compare it with the Scriptures, and so far as it harmonizeth with them embrace it. I shall here put a period, and conclude, not ceasing to be mindful of you at the throne of grace, and to make mention of you in my prayers, who am

