



Honoured Worthies.
THis Piece reflects on no Interest but what is Eternall: You have tide me in so many sil∣ken cords of your con∣stant favours, that I must live and dye bound in those pleasant fetters; the only returne I am able to make you, is in Ink and Paper to acknow∣ledge my self your Debtor: Your Noble minds are like that of Artax∣erxes
 King of Persia, who thought it as well becoming him to accept of small things from others, as to give great things himself.
Let rotten posts be guilded, and decayed beauties painted; vertue like a precious Diamond needs no varnish: Your own graces will spring you Rivers of praises, with∣out the tide of others tongues flow∣ing in to brim the banks.
Reall honour is not built on the glittering foundation of refined clay; the flourishing Lawrell of durable excellency, doth not alwayes grow in the smooth field of a brave Geneallogy.
That blood which runs in ver∣tues veins, is of a more orient colour then that which swims in other channels: The fairest flowers of humanity, are those that spring up
 in the garden of sincerity; piety is a more noble thing then parentage; it is better to be new borne, then it is to be high borne.
I beleeve you count that the sweetest honey which you suck out of Christs hive, and take more plea∣sure in your inward goodnesse, then in your outward greatnesse.
I am sensible what prejudices are taken against Epistles commendato∣ry; letters are too often like multi∣plying glasses, which makes the smallest mole-hills, appeare like the greatest Mountains; But yet I dare shew your unspotted faces, without borrowing the suspitious reflection of any false glasses: You have too cleare a knowledge of God to take any thing into your hands before him, and too deare a love to God, to set any thing in your hearts above
 him; you cast more propicious as∣pects upon Religion, then ever to think it a friend unto Rebellion, & lookt upon Fear God, and honour the King, as a couple that God had joyned tgether, and that no man might put asunder; and such as have shaken these Pillars with their own hands, have pulled the house upon their own heads; Providence having laid on them the hands of vengeance, that laid on us the hands of violence, and brought them under the sword of the Law, that kept us under the Law of the sword.
You rejoyced in the first dawn∣ings of the Morning of our Redemp∣tion from Aegyptian slavery and oppression, & deem the superstructi∣on of prosperity, is firmliest laid up∣on the foundation of Monarchy. When others have sparkled like
 Stars in their Orbes, you have shi∣ned like a Sun in yours; having neither been like Crabs going back∣wards, nor like snails creeping for∣wards: When others have sailed with every wind of Doctrine, you have steered your course according to the Compasse of Scripture; and have carried the lamp of Truth in one hand, and the beauty of holiness in the other. It is said of the Fami∣lies of some great Personages, That there is more oathes heard in a day, then there are prayers made in a yeare; But I may say of yours, there is more prayers made in a day, then there are oathes heard in a yeare: The oyle of grace that is poured on your heads, runs down to the skirts of your garments. O how comely a Vision is it, to see the Tabernacles of great men, to be the Temples of the great God!

Honoured Worthies, Many jewells God hath hung upon your terrestriall Crown; he hath given you the fatnesse of the earth, as well as the dew of Heaven, Esau's Veni∣son, as well as Jacob's Blessing; the nether springs of common bounty, as well as the upper springs of speciall mercy: There are four showers that have watred your Garden.

First, a fruitfull Posterity.
Secondly, a peaceful Tranquillity.
Thirdly, a faithfull Society.
Fourthly, a gratefull Memory.

As there is nothing wanting to you, so let there be nothing wanting in you; you cannot complain of God for want of mercy, let not God com∣plain of you for want of Duty; as he hath opened his hands to blesse you, so do you open your mouths to blesse him: In the highest flood and
 spring-tides of outward mercies, its hard to keep our hearts within the channell.
Respected Sirs, You have a large roome in the bosomes of many that are godly; but alas! the best mens confidences on earth, are insufficient evidences for heaven: A house well compacted is able to bear out a storme, but a dis-joynted building every push will throw it down. The best Patrimony is that above us, & the best Testimony is that within us; give me such hopes as will not only goe with me to my bed of rest, but will lye with me in my bed of dust; as will not only bear me up in the Calme of Life, but will shoare me up in the Tempest of Death.
Sirs, You are like Beacons upon a hill which are visible unto all: A small star may be darkned, and yet
 passe unobserved, but the eclipsing of the suns splendor, is a part of the worlds wonder: a crack in the great∣est pebble, is not so bad as a flaw in the smallest jewell: O how amiably should you live with men, who look to live eternally with God! The highest preheminence, calls for the exactest obedience; he is unworthy to be the chiefest in a family, that is unwilling to be the choycest of a family; yea, he puts a sword into the hand of Vice, that snatches the scepter out of the hand of grace: None can challenge an interest in the love of God, but such as are indued with the life of God.
Deare Sirs, I know you have af∣fections to desire the truth, as well as apprehensions to discerne the truth; and read Books as Bees to fill your Combes, and not as Butter∣flies
 to paint your wings; and therefore I have presented you with a Piece that is not notionall, but practicall.
A great shooe fits not a small foot, nor a large Saile a little Boat; the subject is fitter for a Christian to live upon, then for a Critick to look upon: They are as cruell Parents that murder the issue of their brains, as those that murder the issue of their loynes.
I hope the dreggs doth not lye so thick in it, but you may draw out some cleer liquor from it; though the Author be contemptible, yet the matter is considerable: God lookes not for what he gives not: (As well as I am able) I have from this Scripture drawn you a Beleevers Picture; and according to this Glass doubt not but your selves will dress. If these bellowes keep the vestall
 fire alwayes burning upon the Al∣tar, and your graces have their ad∣vancement, I shall have my con∣tentment. I have here laid the Rods of correction on the backs of offen∣ders, and given the words of In∣struction to the hearts of believers.
Worthy Sirs, Compare what is spoken in the books of men, with what is written in the Book of God; that the Bristoll stone may not passe for the sparkling Diamond, no Brasse and Copper goe as currant as Gold and Silver. I would lay no o∣ther burdens upon your backs, then I would carry upon my own shoul∣ders; nor would I have you make any brick, but with Gods straw.
Mans fault cannot prejudice Gods right; though we have lost our abillity of obeying, yet he hath not lost his Authority in commanding:
 By how much the greater you are then others, by so much the better you should be then others: where Divine Providence advances to honourable dignity, there Divine precepts ingages to proportionable duty; on earth it's your businesse to serve God, in Heaven it will be your blessedness to see God.
Many by feeding upon one dish grow to maturity, when they that sit down to a multitude are surfited with variety: When others grum∣ble to look upon rich mens estates, doe you tremble to think upon rich mens accounts; and as the earth will doe you no good when you dye, so let it do you no hurt whilst you live.
They that are in the right way to Paradise, should greeve at every thing that hinders their progresse:
 There are many are the Pictures of piety, but I wish you may be the patterns of piety. Alas! what's the reflection in the glass to the com∣plexion in the face? or the form of godlinesse upon us, to the power of godlinesse within us? such Jonah's in the lading of our Vessells, doth but fill the Seas with stormes and tempests.
You Worthies have almost stretcht your lives to Davids stan∣dard; and who knowes how soon such may meet with the death of the body that are incompassed with the body of death: Whilst you are de∣scending to the bottom of the hill of nature, I wish you may be ascending to the top of the hill of grace; that the nearer your bodies draw to the pit of corruption, the nearer your souls may draw to the place of per∣fection;
 that your declining Sun may not set under a cloud, that hath so long shined in a clear sky.
Ʋsually their durations are the shortest, whose possessions are the greatest; But you have had as larg a share of being as you have had of blessing.
My hearts desire and prayer to God for both you and yours, is, that you may be as glorious in Heaven, as you have been prosperous on earth; that you may be such jewels of grace, as may be lockt up in the Cabinet of glory; that such silver Cups may be found in the mouths of all your sacks, that the word which hath brought salvation to your souls, may bring your souls unto sal∣vation; that as your children sit like Olive plants about your Table, so you and your children may sit
 like Olive plants about his Table; that your little family below, may make up that great family above; that when others as chaffe are thrown into the fire, you as wheat may be gathered into the Garner: That you may live long on earth profitably, and for ever in Heaven joyfully, is the Prayer of

