



Renowned worthies,
THe sense of mine own weaknesse forbid mee being ambitious,Potentum peti∣tiones sunt quo∣dammodè impe∣ria Pet. Mar. in Reg. either of preaching at Westminster, or of appearing in print till a Parliamentary request (which is equivalent to a command) calls first for the one, after∣wards for the other; whereupon I consulted not with flesh and blood, but resolved to yeeld to both; being willing, rather to be censured of the world for weaknes then of you for disrespect. The sermon is but plain and shalow: what else can be expected from him, who sa∣vours neither of delicacy nor depth;Sala. praes in lib. de guber. Besides my aim was Vtilia magis quam plausibilia sectari, rather to be profitable then plausible; conceiving that on fast∣ing daies tis not so sutable to inform the judgement or tickle the ears: as to move the affection, and touch the heart.
The subject seems very pertinent to the present sea∣son. It is a declining age, we all are fallen. You (ho∣noured worthies) are fallen so low, that few do so esteem or stand in awe of you as they ought. Your cle∣mency
(which among men of ingenuous spirits makes you the more honourable) among those that have been delinquents make you the more contemptible; They say your Ordinances, are charged only with powder and paper, they are but words or winde, they fear them not: I beseech you if they regard not your rods, let them know you have scorpions.
The people of this land are generally so fallen, that many question whether they will over be able to rise a∣gain. There is astrange change in some prosessours, they that were wont to strain at Gnats, can now swallow camels. And many long more now, after old supersti∣tion then they did formerly for reformation. This made me think I should scarce discharge a good conscience, if I did not cry out, Let's remember from whence we are fallen, and not rest there, but let's repent; which will not appear, unlesse we reform and do the first works. This is the substance of that which was lately proclaimed in your ears, and is now presented to your eyes. And that it may be plan∣ted in all our hearts, and practised in our lives, is, and shall be, the prayer of,

From my obscure study at Katherines neer the Tower London. Decemb. 1 1647.
