



Right Honourable,
IT is a wofull Priviledge attending all great States and Personages, that they seldome heare any other Musick but what is known will please them.
Though our Musick sound not sweet but harsh, yet please you first to know, it is not fitted to your Eares, but to your Hearts, and the blee∣ding Heart of this aflicted Nation.
'Tis true, we have been humbly bold to presume as Ester into Ahasuerus his presence, against your Order: For who can passe the many Locks and Bars of any the severall Licencers, appointed by you with such a Message? By such Circumscribing and immuring of your selves by such a Guard (their Persons we honour and esteem) it is
rarely possible that any other Light, but what their He∣mispheare affoords, shall ever shine on your Honours Souls, though ne're so sweet, so necessary, and though it come from God, from Heaven.
These Worthy and much esteemed Persons unto whom we Quaery, we have heard to be Men of Conscience, of Abilities, and are in this worthy of double Honour, that (according to their Consciences) they appear in the Front, and present their Moulds and Patterns of Church Go∣vernment, from Holland, from Scotland, to our inqui∣ring England.
Their mutuall just Exceptions which they have alrea∣dy, or may further expresse against each others Tenents we leave to themselves, (though we might expresse them to our advantage.) We shall be humbly bold in the name of the Lord Jesus; and the many thousand precious souls, for whom he hath paid so deare a Ransome; to present such Quaeries to your Honours view, as respect their joint Agreement (Pardon the I hrase) like Ephraim and Ma∣nasseh (though fighting each against other, yet) both against Christ Jesus the Lion of Iudahs Tribe; we mean so farre as they appose the Truth and Purity of his last will and Testament.
Most Renowned Patriots, You sit at Helme in as great a Storm, as ere poor Englands Common-wealth was iost in: Yet be you pleased to remember, that (excep∣ting the affaires of Heaven, of Religion, of Soules, of Eternity) all your Consultations, Conclusions, Exe∣cutions, are not of the Quantity, of the value of one poor drop of water, or the little dust of the Ballance, of Elaiah were a true Prophet, Esa. 40.15.
Yet concerning Soules, wee will not (as most doe)
charge you with the loads of all the Soules in England, Scotland, Ireland: Wee shall humbly affirme, and (by the help of Christ) maintaine, that the Bodies and Goods of the Subject is your charge: Their Soules and yours are set on account to those that professe to be the Lights and Guides, the Messengers and Embassadors sent from Heaven to them.
You will please to say, We are constantly told, and we be∣lieve it, that Religion is our first Care, and Reformati∣on of that our greatest Taske.
Right Honourable, your Wisdomes know the Fatall Miscariages of Englands Parliaments in this point; what setting up, pulling downe, what Formings, Refor∣mings, and againe Deformings, to admiration.
Three Instances are dreadfull, yet to expresse Seaso∣nable.
First, The last and best of Englands changes, establi∣shed Lord Bishops: they and two more (Priests and Dea∣cons) are by Law the established Ministers of Englands Church: The former makes the latter, so far as concerns a lawfull externall Calling. The Lord Bishops themselvs, are now Ʋoted Antichristian; Your Wisdomes then see what Callings by Law, the other two sorts, Priests and Deacons have all this while bin furnished with.
Secondly, if hee that eates and drinkes the Body and blood of Christ unworthily, eateth and drinketh his owne judgement, and all English soules are bound by Law to cate that Body and Blood at sixteene, who sees not, since (as tis confest scarce one of a thousand, but is found igno∣rant, Impenitent, Unregenerate at those yeeres) that the Body of the People are compelled by Law, to eat and drink at sixteen their own judgment.

Thirdly, for Non-conforming to these and other practi∣ses, the English Masse-Booke, &c. what heavy Persecu∣tion have thousands felt, and that by Law established?
We shall in all humble Reverence, suggest our Feares, that for the very Laws and Statutes of Englands Parli∣aments concerning Religion, and happily for some not yet suspected, the Lord Iesus hath drawne this Sword, that's daily drunke with English Blood.
It shall never be your Honour to this or future Ages, to be confined to the Patterns of either French, Dutch, Scotch, or New-English Churches We humbly conceive some higher Act concerning Religion, attends and be∣comes your Consultations: If he whose name is, wonder∣full, Counsellor, be consulted and obeyed according to his last Will and Testament (as you may please in the Quaeries to view) wee are confident you shall exceed the Acts and Patternes of all Neighbour Nations; bighly exalt the name of the Son of God; provide for the Peace of this distressed State, engage the Soules of all that feare God, to give Thankes and Supplicate for you; further the Salvation of thousands, and leave the sweet perfume of your Names, precious to all succeeding Generations.
