



AS it is chiefely for your profit that I write; so I hope, that though I shall be condemned of others, yet I shall gain your pardon. I confesse my la∣bour may seeme needlesse, after so many learned Authots, to set forth a∣ny thing of this subject. And it may be accounted a presumptious folly for any to goe about to teach Sea-men in their Art, especially in these times, wherein there were never more, nor more skilfull Sea∣men. But in answer hereto take notice of these conside∣rations.
First, That many Books of this subject, though they are plain and easie for all Sea-men to understand, yet they are not so exact and perfect in all things as they ought to be.

Secondly; That though Mr. Wright, Mr. Gunter, and Mr. Norwood, have very fully shewed the errours of the foresaid Books, and have very perfectly reformed them; yet their Books are not plain and usefull for all men, be∣cause they require much knowledge in Arithmetick.
Thirdly, Though there be many skilfull Sea-men, which are able to make use of these Authors; yet there are many others, who would willingly attain to a more perfect knowledge in this Art, and yet cannot, for want of Arithmetick. Now for the helpe of such as these e∣specially, have I published this Book: wherein you shall finde how all that which is to be performed by Arith∣metick in the foresaid Authors, may be sufficiently ex∣actly perform'd by Geometry with the Ruler and Com∣passes; so that any one that can but read and write a lit∣tle, though he have no skill in Arithmetick, may hereby attain a true and perfect knowledge of the Art of Navi∣gation, so that he shall be able to keepe as true and cer∣tain an account of his Voyage in any part of the World, as one that works by the most exact rules of Arithme∣tick. Nay, I dare say, that one that can neither write nor read, yet being of an ingenious capacity; and having one to teach him according to this way, may attain sufficient skill in this Art.
Fourthly, This may also be usefull to those who can performe these things by Arithmetick, and the Doctrine of plain Triangles: For by this way they may perform them far more easily and readily, and almost as exactly. And though such men may know many of these things already, yet perhaps they may gain some knowledge hereby.
Lastly, As by this way the knowledge of the Art is
 most easily and speedily attained, so it is more certainly and constantly retained and preserved, both in respect of the knowledge and practice thereof. First, the know∣ledge hereof is more certainly retained in your memory: for this is the reason why all Authors are forced to make use of some Geometricall figures; partly to explain their Rules, and partly to fixe them in the memory, by ma∣king them visible to the eye; for we more surely remem∣ber any thing which we see done, then what we only hear. Now in this way, every thing is made much more visible to the eye, and therefore more easie both to learn and remember. Secondly, the practice of this know∣ledge will be more surely and constantly preserved: for Arithmeticall calculations require many Tables, viz. of Sines, Tangents, Secants, Meridian, which cannot possi∣bly be kept in memory; so that if by any cross accident a Sea-man be deprived of his Books, he can make no use of his skill in Arithmetick. But if a man knowes how to performe these things by Geometry, though all his Books and Writings be lost, yet having but a plain Ruler and a pair of Compasses, he may quickly recover his loss, and fall to his work as before.
Upon these considerations, I have adventured to pub∣lish this little Book, wherein I have briefely and plainly laid down the whole Art (as to the Geometricall part thereof) beginning at the first principles, and pro∣ceeding by degrees to the highest conclusions. I have used the more figures to make every thing the plainer. And I have provided such figures, as serve not only for demonstration of the thing, but may serve for Instru∣ments to work upon; or you may easily, by the directi∣ons given, make the like. To conclude, I have studyed
 to make those things plainest, which have at any time most troubled my selfe to understand. So that I questi∣on not but that any one that is industrious, may here of easily and speedily attain, such a competent measure by knowledge in this Art, that by Gods blessing upon his study and labour therein, he may obtain much credit and profit. Which is all the desire, of

