



Right Honourable,
THat which the Ayr is in the Elementary world, the Sun in the Celestial, the Soul in the intelligible; Law and Justice are the same in the Civil; its the Ayr which the oppressed wish to breath in, the Sun which dispelleth the Clouds, the Soul which breatheth life to all; so the Execution of Laws and Administra∣tion of Justice, is the peoples peace, the distressed mans Pa∣tron, the high Protector of Lives, Liberties, & Estates, and all that is dear and near unto man. The regulating the exorbitant Fees, impertinent Offices, and tedious proceedings in Courts of Law and equity, hath been the earnest and frequent desires of this Nation, as a means to satisfie the longing expectations of the peo∣ple, and procure a great measure of peace and quiet thereby: To
which end, the late Parlament have appointed select persons who have prepared several printed Proposals, Intituled, The System of the Law, which coming to the hands of several persons of ap∣proved knowledge and experience in the proceedings of the high Court of Chancery, after serious consideration had of so much of the said System as concern the said Court; It is humbly conceived, that as there be several good and wholsom Proposals therein of∣fered, which are hereby approved of, and illustrated; so there are others not so safe and convenient to be established by Publike Authority, and other things omitted, which are conceived mate∣rial to be added, amongst which is the small provision made for the Labourers therein, that it will not afford persons of value fit for Trust a reasonable subsistence, whereby the dignity of the Court will be ecclipsed, and the people of the Nation injured by the undertakings of mean and ignorant Officers and Clerks. Wherefore, the Author could do no less out of his affection to the publike wel∣fare of the Nation, and the debt he owes to his native Country as a member of this Commonwealth, (laying hold on the just Liberty held forth to others the free people of this Nation in Cases of like nature,) then communicate the same to publike view, and especially to the consideration of the Supreme Authority, for further to be done therein, as they in their grave wisdoms shall think meet, hoping that something may therein appear worthy of acceptance for their better information of the Authority of the said Court and proceedings thereof, and the means to regulate the same; which is so ancient, honourable, and so essentially good in it self, and so necessary for the well government of this Nation, that all the Changes of Goverments since William the Conqueror's time, and long before, have never produced an alteration of the just Power and Jurisdiction of the said Court, but rather an enlargement thereof; the same being of such Antiquity, that its prescription is as Antient as the very Nation, which custom
is of such high Authority, that it cannot justly be altered or changed, but by an Act of a Free and Legal Parliament, being next unto it in power and preheminency, and is called Of∣ficina justitiae & vericatis: Certain it is, that both the British and Saxon Kings had their Courts of Chancery, being the on∣ly Courts out of which all Original Writs, and Commissions (whereupon other Courts do ground their proceedings) are issued forth: Edward the Confessor, and Etheldred, who began his reign Anno 978. had their Chancellors; King Edgar, and Athelstain theirs: And for further authority, that there was a Court of Chancery beyond the antiquity of those times, The Mirror, cap. 1. sect. 3. & cap. 5. sect. saith, Le primier Con∣stitutions ordenus per les viels voys, &c. ordein fuit qui cheseun eyt del Chancery le Roy brief remedial a son plaint sans difficulty: Hereby it appears, that in the time of King Al∣fred, Grandfather to Athelstain, who reigned Anno 872. there was a Court of Chancery, out of which remediel Writs is∣sued, which Court was not then newly created, but in esse long be∣fore. And though Polydor Virgil affirms this Court to come in with the Conquest, perperam erravit; vide Cook 4 par. Inst. de Jurisd. Cur. And this Court is of such use to the Common∣wealth, for Discovery of Fraud, Circumvention, breach of Trust, for secreting and concealing of Estates, forging of Deeds, Evidences, and Writings, preservation of the Testi∣mony of aged Witnesses, regulating and restraining the strict rigour of the Common Law (called summum jus, or jus subtile as some interpret it) and for supply of Relief in a just and equitable way, wherein the Common Law is deficient; And for divers other good ends and publike advantages, &c. that the Common-wealth cannot well subsist without it; insomuch that not any of our neighbouring Nations are without this Court, being a continual curb and awe to the corrupt Consciences of men who
otherwise cannot be restrained by any general Rules or Maximes of Law, which may prove short and defective to cure every disease; So that the care and wisdom of all former Ages have been such, that as much as in them lay, they left no means unattempted to provide redress and remedies for the People, sutable to the nature of their complaints. And as hard it was for Galen to prescribe Me∣dicines to cure all sorts of diseases, as it is for any Governours or Magistrates to establish rules of Law for relief of all sorts of Cases. And therefore as God doth dispose his Government by Justice and Mercy, whereof notwithstanding Mercy hath the supreme place in the Lords Tabernacle, as that which was put above upon the Ark, wherein were the two Tables of stone, in which the Law was written: To which S. James alluding (James 2.13.) saith, That Mercy triumpheth over Judgement: So the Princes and Go∣vernours of Nations, in imitation to that heavenly representation, have appointed two supreme States, The one of Justice, wherein nothing but the strict Letter of the Law is observed; The other of Equity, wherein the rigour of the Law is tempered with lenity, which is nothing else but Mercy qualifying the sharpness of Ju∣stice: Ipsae enim leges cupiunt ut jure regantur, id est, ut illi fa∣cili ac benigna interpretatione temperentur: Equity doth di∣minish or adde to the letter of the strictest Law, as times and ne∣cessities require, and is defined by Aristotle to be Correctio legis generatim latae qua parte deficit. Perionius terms it Correctio quaedam legi adhibita quia ab ea abest aliquid propter gene∣ralem sine exceptione comprehensionem. The sense of both in∣terpretations being one and the same, that Equity is a Restriction of the rigour of the Law, and so useful in the wel government of the Nation, that without our Courts of Equity, the Common Law may be termed Severity, and the strict rigour thereof totally destructive to the People. But since corruption hath crept into this Court, and the usual delay, together with the excessive Fees, blemisht the pri∣mitive
lustre thereof; the grave Councellors and Patriots of these times, like wise Chirurgions, intend the preservation of the body by amputation of some putrid members, Ne pars sincera tra∣hatur; for which purpose these ensuing Observations, &c. are humbly represented to those in Supreme Authority, not in opposi∣tion to their judicial proceedings therein, nor as a rule to frame and square their actions by, in managing thereof, but as a matter use∣full (as is humbly conceived) for avoiding the tediousness of pro∣ceedings, the impertinency of some Officers, and the exorbitancy of excessive Fees of that Court, which being regulated, You the Heroes of our times may be truly said to have erected a Trophie to Justice, and to have established Righteousness in the Nation.
Acts of Justice and Piety will make you glorious in the memo∣ry of men, whiles others who prepare Altars and Tables to For∣tune, (as saith the Prophet Isaiah) have built on the quick-sands of imaginary greatness, which serve them for no other purpose but to measure their own fall. God hath made you (the great Go∣vernours of this Nation) to read the Decrees of your good success written as it were with the rayes of your own Justice and Piety: By how much the more you are affected to this, by so much the more the happy issue of your affairs shall crown your desires. You have seen your Battails end in Bays, and the thorns of your travails spring up to a peaceable and well framed Gevernment, wherein God hath made you amongst men as Mountains over Valleys. Be then Mountains of perfumes, of which Solomon speaks in Cant. and not the Hils of Osee, full of snares and gins, rigorous, harsh, and strict in Government: Since God hath elevated you as Cliffs above the Sea, let your Laws be as Watch-Towers, not Rocks to ship∣wrack the People. If Suns, let your Laws be as the Light to the blinde, not Gomets to pour down Malignity. Whilest thus you temper Mercy and Justice, Equity and Law together, with
thoughts fixt on Judgement and Righteousness, may propitious Heaven so prosper your Designs, That the greatest may have matter to imitate, and the whole Nation to admire your Justice and Mer∣cy, which is the Authors fervent Prayer,

