



Dearly Beloved Brethren,
 I May truly say, that if any others besides your selves shall receive any benefit by the publica∣tion of the following Discourse, they will be in good part debters unto you for it: for that it was never like to have come abroad, had not your Desires and Requests, prepared its way. What sence you had of the usefulness of these Sermons to your selves, and what desires and hopes you had of their producing the like effect in others by this publication, you your selves best know: but this I may say, that it was your professed experience of the former, and your good perswasion of the latter, that indu∣ced me to undertake a Work of this nature, which (circum∣stances considered in my case,) I fore-saw as since I have found, would be to me a business of no small difficulty.

You that have had so great a desire hereby to promote the good of others, will I hope, and am perswaded, be very care∣ful to improve this new opportunity of a further inriching your selves with the knowledge, sense, and savour of the Doctrine contained in this Book, as a thing then which I know not wherein you are more concerned. But Experi∣ence shews, that it is not an overly hearing or cursory read∣ing though of things of highest import to the Soul; such as are the way, means, method and terms of mans Justification before God, and of the apparent danger that men are in of being mistaken hereabout; and through this mistake, of missing Justification it self: I say it is not a perfunctory do∣ing of these matters, that will fill the soul with any due sense of these things. For how many are there that frequently hear, and sometimes read things that for the nature of them make the spirits of others to burn and boil within them, and yet they themselves hardly at all moved thereby? or if they do for the present, just while they are under the immediate force of them, work some little relentings and faint wishes that things were better with them, yet such motions soon va∣nish like a dream when a man awaketh, which while he was dreaming of it, did somewhat affect him. If then you would have this labour of mine (which yet is not so much mine as Gods, by whose help you have it) truly to serve you, not only by informing you more perfectly about the termes of your Justification, but also in quickening you to more abun∣dant care and diligence about the making good your title to the promise of Justification it self; Then in reading hereof let your mind be as much upon the temper of your heart and tenour of your life, as your eye is upon the Book; and com∣pare the Work of the one, with the Doctrine of the other. And be often making a pause, and putting the question to your Conscience; are things so and so with me? or does my Faith work thus and thus as there you will find in the disco∣very of the living and dead Faith. The effect of which carri∣age
 of yours according to this counsel of mine, you will find through the blessing of God to be, that when you find the evidence of your faith (which is your title to life) not to be so clear, nor of so perfect an appearance in this and that, as in a matter of that consequence were to be desired, you will thereby be stirred up to give all diligence to make your cal∣ling and election sure, by amending what is amiss about the proof of your faith, and by adding what is lacking to it.
And when you shall feel the lively impressions, which it may be a close consideration of the Doctrine of this Treatise hath wrought in you in the hearing of it, or shall work in you by the reading of it; I say when these impressions decay and want reparation, your wisdome then will be, to get close to that fire again where you had your former heat, and that will warm you again: stand by those words of eternal life, and hear them talk to you a while, (Prov. 6.22.) When thou a∣wakest, it shall talk with thee) and they speaking with fiery tongues, will kindle upon you, and put you into a flame, Luke 24.32. Did not our heart burn within us, while he tal∣ked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures? And this do as oft as there is need, by calling to mind what you have heard, or what you shall have here read in this kind: for as the often rubbing of one hand against another, will keep them warm in cold weather; So the frequent exer∣cising of the mind with this holy and heavenly Doctrine, will preserve the spirit from growing chill, and more especi∣ally from freezing. And if the particulars of matter which have, or which shall have affected you in this kind, shall at a∣ny time escape your memory, as Nebuchadnezzars dream did his, with which he had been so much affected, (Dan. 2.5.) you have here put into your hand that which will be a present help to you at such a pinch: So that God hath one way or other abundantly provided you with means for your furtherance in grace in reference both to the information of your judgments, quickning of your wills and affections, and
 the helping of your memories, and all in order to your god∣ly conversation and Saintly walk.
 It remains therefore that I as one (though but a poor one God knows) of the dressers of this little Vineyard of the Lord, in which every one of you particularly profess your selves to be of the planting of the Lord; I say it remains now that I in my Heavenly Lord and Masters name do call for, and demand fruit of every one of you, both of this and all other the labours, cost and pains which have through the Lords succour and assistance, been bestowed upon you both by my self, and by him who hath served with me in the same Work; with what love and Faithfulness to you, the Lord best knows, and your Consciences I trust in part can witness, It is true, we have an account to give of your Souls; (and O the weight of such a burden and care of such a charge! little does he know it whose Conscience does not feel it,) but then know ye and consider it, that you have an account also to give of all the Heart-affecting care, Godly jealousie and fear, pain∣ful study and labour in the Word and Doctrine, which God knows is sustained and used in discharge of our trust towards you. And O that our mutual care in discharge of our duties towards each other may be found such as that both you and we may give up our accounts together to Jesus the chiefe Shepheard of the Sheep, with joy and not with grief! In respect of our own persons, alass how little is expected from you! We can, and you know we can truly say, We seek not yours but you, (2 Cor. 12.14.) But that which puts you under the greater obligation to us-ward in respect of Office, is that relation in which we stand between the Lord and you, as be∣ing those vessels, earthen ones indeed, by which Jesus Christ is sending and ministring to you from time to time, nourish∣ment and Food for your Souls. And what ever gifts we have, or what ever labour we bestow among you, they are not so much ours, as the Lords, it is not so much from us, as from the Lord from whom we receive all, and by whom we
 are inabled to do all: and it is his care and love towards you to furnish you with any that have a mind carefully to watch for your souls. From whence it is that the Lord expects fruit from you as due to him upon account of our labour and ser∣vice among you: and for the same reason it is that in his name I demand it of you: and upon the same account that saying of the Apostle will take place, 1 Thes. 4.8. He there∣fore that despiseth, despiseth not man, but God, who hath also gi∣ven unto us his Holy Spirit.
But that which may well render this demand of mine as ac∣ceptable unto you as it is reasonable in it self, is this; that though I demand Fruit, yet I demand fruit that may abound to your account, Phil. 4.17. For however the Lord by your yielding fruit will be well pleased, and his holy name and truth glorified, and you shall thereby become to us also a Joy for the present, and a crown of rejoycing in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming (1 Thes. 2.19.) yet in the issue, all the glory you shall bring to God, and all the good you shall procure to men by rendering unto the Lord fruit in season, will return into your own bosom; you shall eat of the fruit of your doing: if you have your fruit unto holinesse, the end will be to you everlasting life: (Rom. 6.22.) and the more fruit in holinesse now, the more fruit in happinesse then when you shall be rewarded by him who will render to every one according to their works, both for kind and degree: if thou be wise thou shalt be wise for thy self, Pro 9.12.
 Brethren, I beseech you hear me: if you shall but lay this thing to heart, if the sense of what the Lord hath done and is doing for you to make you fruitful, shall but procure from you an earnest desire and care to answer the Lords expectati∣on herein, and to yield him a crop of the seed which he hath sown; you shall thereby secure unto your selves the Lords constant care of you, and prepare the way of a gratious mul∣tiplication and increase of prosperous and thriving applicati∣ons of the Lord to you. Every branch that beareth fruit, he
 purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit, saith Christ the true Vine, John 15.2. It encourageth a man to bestow more and more cost upon his Vineyard, or upon his land when he finds it to quit his cost in an answerable return of fruit. And so will the Lord rejoyce over you to continue and increase the means of your growth, & to prosper them more & more for your encrease in grace, if you be but found fruit-bearing branches. As he will then delight to go down into his gar∣den to gather fruit among you, so he will blow upon his gar∣den too with a heavenly breath to cause the spices thereof to flow out, and your savour shall be as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed.
 And as the Lord in this case will spare for no cost that you may yield him more of that fruit, which his Soul so loves, so to be sure there shall be no care wanting to fence you, that no wild beasts break in upon you to make havock and spoile. There's no man but takes most care of those trees that yield the best and most fruit; and its most certain that the eye of the Lord is chiefly upon those plants which yeild him the best increase both for quantity and kind. Such a vineyard is indeed regularly capable of that care, protection, and tendence of which the Lord speaketh, saying, I the Lord doe keep it, I will water it every moment; lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day, Isa. 27.3. And I hope you are sensible that its no small priviledge for you to have God to set a hedge about you, and to watch over you in times of such spirituall dan∣ger as these are in which you live.
You know there are beasts of prey that are seeking to break in here, and to creep in there; Foxes, little Foxes that seeke to spoyl the Vines that bear tender Grapes, Cant. 2.15. Among which the Quaker is not the least active, who under a pretence of singular holinesse, and with two faces under one hood, have overthrown the faith of some, touching the ex∣cellency and necessity of the holy Scriptures, touching the Resurrection of the body of our Lord, and his personal ses∣sion
 at Gods right hand, and his coming again in person at the end of this world to judg the quick and the dead, & in ma∣ny other things: this you or at least some of you have proved and found though their equivocations, subtile evasions, and reservations of their particular and punctual opinions, hereabout under general expressions have rendered their here∣tical deceit herein of a harder preception and a more difficult discerning: which many unstable souls abroad in the world, not having been able to discover, have taken the hook, while it hath been covered with a tempting bait of some deceivable appearance.
And if I am not much mistaken in scriptural prophesies, and predictions touching the events of these last times, the Churches of Christ are like to be tryed with more and more subtile, refined, soul-insnaring temptations, such as if it were possible should deceive the very elect. For as the devils pollicie by longer experience, is and will be more and more improved, so his snares, stratagems, and methods of deceving, will be carryed on with more art and plausible appearances: his former wiles having by experience been pretty well dis∣covered and laid open, he will come forth with new devices and cunning fetches, and tricks of deceiving more sublime and spirituall: so that he must have a good eye, that shall not take him for an angel of light, and his Ministers for Mi∣nisters of righteousnesse, 2 Cor. 11.14, 15. we see already that he does frequently & familliarly cheat men and women of their faith, & in exchange for it gives them some new devised forms of notion, expression, and action, by which they fancy themselves to have attained the end of their faith, and to be now in the resurrection and to have passed the Judgment, and to be now in the actual possession of eternal life. And to make his counterfeit coyn the more passable, what does he but mix it with some currant mony? (allows, yea prompts his deceived ones, in their conversation among men in some things to wear the sheeps clothing) that whilst mens eye is upon that
 he may secretly insinuate to them that all the rest is of the same stamp and mettal, which many that are easie of belief, there∣upon take by content, and so are cheated. And he finely co∣vers over all with Scripture expression, as if he were a Friend to Christ, and would build with him, whilst he teaches un∣learned and unstable souls to wrest those Scriptures to their own destruction, and to carry them quite from the mark at which they aim. And as he finds his time of deceiving and doing mischief to grow shorter and shorter, so you may ac∣cordingly expect to be put so much the more to it, by all and all manner of temptations and assaults, which either his policy or restless rage can set on Foot, Rev. 12.12.
 These things being so, of which I desire faithfully, and in the fear of God to warn you, and if it were possible, the whole Church of God; believe me it concerns you to seek by all means to interess your selves in the defence of the Al∣mighty, and to carry it so, that you may alwaies be under his watchful eye and care. I hope you are all sensible that it is the Lord that keepeth the feet of his Saints, and that by his own strength no man shall prevail: (1 Sam. 2.9.) and I hope you can truly say, My defence is of God which saveth the up∣right in heart, Psalm 7.10. He that is strongest among you, and most like a Champion of the Lord to fight his Battels, would soon become weak as a Child in the hand of strong Temptations if God should but a little leave him. Remem∣ber Hezekiah, who though for the general bent of his heart it was said of him, That he trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that after him was none like him among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were before him, (2 King. 18.5.) yet at one turn when God did but leave him to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart, he fell till God helped him up again, 2 Chron. 32.25, 31. Ahd when that servant of God, Psal. 73.2. saies, But as for me, my feet were almost gone; my steps had well nigh slipt: what was the reason I pray you why his feet were not altogether gone, and why his steps did
 not wholly slide? He gives you the reason, vers. 23. in these words, Nevertheless I am with thee: thou hast holden me by my right hand: God held him by the hand, and therefore though he slipt, yet he did not fall.
Sirs, Would you then be such a People which the Lord your God careth for, and upon whom he sets his eyes from the beginning of the year, even unto the end of the year? (Deut. 11.12.) Would you have neither the Boar of the Wood to waste you, nor the wilde Beast of the field to devoure you? Would every one of you be as a Branch which the Lord hath made strong for himself, (Psal. 80.15.) by fencing it for his own peculiar use and delight? then be sure you bring forth fruit unto God answerable to that cost and care which he hath bestowed upon you; like the Earth that drinking in the rain that cometh oft upon it, bringeth forth Herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, and so receiveth blessing from God? Heb. 6.7. This is the way, and there is not another without this to be kept from being preyed upon, either by those lying Spirits that are gone out into the world to deceive, and which are like to go out, or by some fleshly or worldly lust or o∣ther, (for one lust, as one Souldier, may take a man Priso∣ner as well as a whole Army) unto one or more of which God hath been wont to deliver those that have not liked to have God (in respect of what he hath graciously bestowed upon them) in due acknowledgement, Rom. 1.28, 29. 2 Thes. 2.11, 12. Psal. 81.11, 12. Do you but remember to keep the word of the Lords patience, and he will not for∣get to keep you in or from the hour of temptation that shall come upon all the world to try them, Rev. 3.10.
 But contrariwise, if you (and what I say unto you herein I say unto all the Churches: but if you) notwithstanding all that God hath done for you to make you fruitful, shall be found to be, or shall at any time become like the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts that brought forth wilde Grapes, (Isa. 5.) or an empty Vine like Ephraim, bringing forth
 Fruit unto your selves, (Hos. 10.1.) or like the barren fig-tree (Luke 13.6. Matth. 21.19.) bearing only the fair green leaves of Form and Profession without the savoury Fruit of Righteousness and power of Godliness, such as the Lord looks for and loves, I say if thus it should be; by that light which God hath given me from the Scripture, I cannot but Prophesie sad things unto you, such as are the with-holding of those spiritual showers which you have had to make you fruitful, and the plucking up your hedge, and breaking down your wall of Defence, and the cutting of you down from being any Church that Jesus Christ will own.
Gods severity against the Old Testament Church upon this account, happened unto them by way of type or example unto the New Testament Churches, for whose admonition his severe proceedings in this kind are written and recorded, 1 Cor. 10.6.11. Rom. 11.22. And we see that when God had first planted the house of Israel and men of Judah a choice Vine and pleasant Plant, and had built a Wall of par∣tion about them, viz. his Ordinances, to distinguish them from the Nations of the Gentiles, and to make them as a Garden enclosed; and had also set a Hedge of his special Providence and Protection about them, and had watered them with Rain from Heaven in the Doctrine of the Law and Prophets, whose Doctrine did drop as the Rain, and whose speech did distil as the dew; and then according to his cost, looking for the good Grapes of Judgement and Righ∣teousness, yet instead thereof meeting with the unsavoury and wilde Grapes of Oppression and Crying, what does he do with his Vineyard in this case? What? He commands the Clouds that they rain no rain upon it, (Isa. 5.6.) So that the Complaint was, The Law is no more, her Prophets also find no Vision from the Lord, Lam. 2.9. Whereupon follow∣ed a Famine, not of Bread, nor thirst for Water, but of Hearing the Words of the Lord, Amos 8.11. The partition Wall also, to wit, the Law of Commandements contained in
 Ordinances (Ephes. 2.14, 15.) he brake down; upon which this Lamentation was taken up, saying, He hath vio∣lently taken away his Tabernacle, as if it were of a Garden, he hath destroyed his places of the Assembly: the Lord hath caused the solemne Feasts and Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and hath despised in the indignation of his anger the King and the Priest. The Lord hath cast off his Altar: he hath abhorred his Sanctuary, &c. Lam. 2.6, 7. Finally, The Lord pluckt up and brake down the Hedge of his Protection which had been a Defence to them in their enjoyment and solemnizati∣on of his Publick worship, & exposed them unto the grievous molestation and oppression of the enemy: upon which fol∣lowed that doleful Complaint, Psal. 80.12, 13. Why hast thou broken down her Hedges; so that all they that pass by the way, do pluck her? The Boar out of the Wood doth waste it; and the wilde Beast of the Field doth devour it.
Behold here you have a taste of Gods sore displeasure a∣gainst his own and only Vineyard of old when unfruitful, after sufficient cost and care bestowed on it to make it fertile. And if God spared not the natural Branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee, was the Watch-word of the great Apostle of the Gentiles to a Gentile Church at Rome, Rom. 11.21. And I beseech you Brethren let his Admonition sink down into your ears, and take warning betimes. For where are now I pray you those once famous and flourishing Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Philippi, Colosse, Thessalonica, the seven Churches of Asia, yea, and of Rome it self, which were plan∣ted and watered too by the Apostles themselves? Are not those golden Candlesticks removed out of their place? Are not those Vineyards laid waste? Are not those Fig-trees cut down as cumbering the ground? And what's the reason of all this? Of a truth unfruitfulness hath been the cause of all, and the true reason why the Lord hath let forth his Vine∣yard to other Husbandmen, to see if they will render him fruits in their season, Matth. 21.41. And you my Friends, among
 others, are those other Husbandmen unto whom the Lord hath how for the present let forth his Vineyards, expecting that Fruit from you which those other Churches, now deso∣late, with-held from him. He is now proving you by fre∣quent dressings, prunings, waterings, rainings upon, and watchings over, to see if you will bring him forth fruits meet for Repentance, and worthy amendment of life. And if not; remember that word; And now also is the Ax laid to the root of the trees: Every tree therefore which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewen down and cast into the fire, Matth. 3.10. And again, Every branch in me that beareth not fruit, he taketh a∣way, Joh. 15.2. And a third time also, Luke 13.7. Then said he unto the Dresser of his Vineyard, Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig-tree, and find none: cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground? Upon how many Churches have these words taken hold, since they first came forth from the Lord? And the edge of them is not at all blunted with cutting down so many, but is as keen and as ready to do exe∣cution now as at the first; and will first or last cut down all unfruitful Churches, and take away all unfruitful branches. And therefore it exceeding nearly concerns you (my dearly beloved) and so it does all the Churches, to take special care that you bring forth fruit, and that your fruit may remain, ac∣cording to Christs word, John 15.16.
 For it is not enough if you have run well hitherto, and brought forth fruits until now, except your fruit remain, ex∣cept you be as a tree planted by the waters, which shall not cease from yielding fruit, Jer. 17.8. For how did the Apostles many times glory over those first Churches that were plan∣ted by them, because of the first fruits of their Faith, love, and patience, wherein they did for a time richly abound? Rom. 1.8. 2 Cor. 9.2. 2 Thes. 1.4. and yet how soon was the glo∣ry departed? especially from among some of them, as if their goodness like Ephraims had been but as a morning cloud, or as an early dew that goeth away, (Hos. 6.4.) And the Apo∣stles
 even while they were yet among them, had too much cause to change their voice concerning them, Gal. 4.20. For many there were then while the Apostles had the dressing of them, who lead the way of that dreadful decay first, and apo∣stacy after, in which the Churches themselves (as the event gives cause to fear) following in time, came to utter desolati∣on. They were as Jude describes them, Trees whose fruit withered, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots, Jude 12. The foundation of their utter eradication and final deso∣lation was laid we see in the withering of their fruit, first: I I pray you observe it and fear. It should seem at the first they were not altogether without fruit, but their misery was, they fell into spiritual decayes, their Fruit withered, grew harsh and unkindly, thin, shriveled and blasted. And that which in a short time followed this was, their total barrenness, being without fruit, by which it being manifest they were stark dead, and so no hope left of their bearing Fruit any more, the sad conclusion was, plucking up by the roots.
There were at the first, excellent good things found in the Church of Ephesus, for which Christ commended her, Rev. 2.2, 3. but having lost her first love, and fallen into some de∣cay, he threatens her, that except she were made sensible of her sinking condition, remembred from whence she was fallen, and so repented, and did her first works, and recovered her self again, he would come unto her quickly, and remove her Candle∣stick out of its place, which since hath come to pass.
Behold then my Brethren, and be astonished and fear, lest you at any time expose your selves to like danger by like de∣clinings: Look to your selves, that we loose not those things which we have wrought, but that we receive a full reward, 2 Jo. 8. Do not bear upon what you have been, and what you have done, but forgetting those things which are behind, be reaching forth to those things which are before, and pressing on toward the mark for the price of your high calling, Phil. 3.13, 14. Remember that better is the end of a thing, then the be∣ginning
 of it, Eccles. 7.8. For that dissolution and death which is come upon those Churches, recorded both in Old Testament and New; which at the first, and for some time were so promising, and so flourishing, plainly evinceth it to be a far harder matter to hold on well, and so to make a good con∣clusion, than it is to set out well, and to make a good begin∣ning. What not one of those Churches but miscarried first or last! good Lord what Church, what Christian shall not tremble at the consideration of it! Sirs, you have begun in the Spirit, I beseech you take heed of ending in the flesh: let that never be said to you which Paul spake to a people to whom the Gospel was so precious at the first, as that for the sake of it they received him as an Angel of God, yea even as Christ Jesus, and could have pluckt out their eyes to do him good: Ye did run well, who did hinder you, that ye should not obey the truth? Gal. 4.14, 15 and 5.7. If the Scripture had said nothing to inform you touching your danger of coo∣ling and declining, yet this present age in which we live hath furnished you with so many sad precedents and examples of the withering of such whose hopeful beginnings in Christia∣nity promised very much, as may sufficiently admonish you to take heed of the like miscarriage. Yea the general decay of that spirit of tenderness, sobriety, and close ingagement of Soul to God, which was found in Christians twenty or thir∣ty years ago, when there was less light, and more heat, may well inspire you with a spirit of fear, lest you should be infe∣cted with the epidemical disease of this Age.
 There is a danger it's true, of returning back again to those corruptions in Worship, Discipline, and Administation of Holy Ordinances, wherewith many good people that had not the sence of it, were formerly defiled, and from which the light that now shines hath delivered you. And truly I could heartily wish that the miscarriage of too many, whose zeal hath run out more for the Form than Power of Godli∣ness, were not so pressing a temptation as it is upon many, to
 have a far more light and low esteem of the form and fashion of Gods house, then in truth of right belongs to it. But that which I esteem the greater danger by far, and of which in love and tenderness I warn you, is the placing of Religion chiefly in Form, and mens valuing the goodness of their condition by that, though a lively and fresh savour of the greater things of the Gospel, such as are the daily work of mortification, self-denial, living by Faith, humbleness of mind, sweetness of behaviour, secret and close communion with God, fear of grieving the Spirit, Righteousness, Mercy, Love and Boun∣ty, be wanting. For at this door as may be conceived, de∣struction entred upon the former Churches; and I pray God it prove not the bane of many now in being.
At that very time when God by his Prophet Esaiah threat∣ned his Vineyard, saying, I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be troden down. And I will lay it waste: it shall not be pru∣ned, nor digged, but there shall come up briars and thorns: I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it, (Isai. 5.5, 6.) I say at this very time when God thus threatned that Congregation and chosen people of his for their unfruitful∣ness, they did abound in the form, and placed much confidence therein. They had a multitude of Sacrifices, and did abound in Oblations, Incense, New-Moons and Sabbaths: they frequently called Assemblies and solemn Meetings, yea they spread forth their hands, and made many prayers, Isai. 1.11, to 15. The Lord as he sayes, Psal. 50.8. would not reprove them for their Sacrifices and Offerings, for he did acknow∣ledg them to have been continually before him, and sayes that he was full of them, Isa. 1.11, to 15. Yea they did seek God daily, and had a delight to know his wayes as a Nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinances of their God, and took delight in approaching to God, Isai. 58.2. And such was their confidence of their acceptation with God upon this ac∣count, and for that they added unto all the rest Fasting, as
 that they wondred that God should not hear them, and readily help them. And therefore they are brought in expostulating the matter with God thus, Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have we fa∣sted, and thou seest not? wherefore have we afflicted our Soul, and thou takest no knowledg? They were otherwise unworthy in their wayes, as touching Judgement, Mercy, and the love of God, and yet verily thought themselves to be the onely people of God, and in Covenant with him, and his promi∣ses to be theirs, because of that Form of Gods Worship and service which was amongst them. Which way of waiting up∣on God, and worshipping him, though of his own appoint∣ment, when found in company and conjunction with a car∣nal and unholy life otherwise, is mentioned by God as if it were every whit as provoking to him as the great abominati∣ons condemned by his Law. And therefore he does not on∣ly say that it was iniquity indifinitely, and that he could not away with their devotions, and that his soul hated them, and that they were a trouble to him, and that he was weary to hear them, (Isa. 1.13, 14.) but compares them with the most provoking sins, Idolatry and Murder: He that killeth an Ox, is as if he slew a man: he that burneth Incense, as if he blessed an Idol? and why? they have chosen their own wayes, and their Soul delighteth in their abominations, Isai. 66.3. Just as if God should now compare Preaching, Hearing, Bap∣tisme, Prayer, Breaking of Bread, and the holding all the principles of the Doctrine of Christ in opinion and notion, with worshipping of false gods, and murdering of men, while used, held and practised, by men whose conversation is of a carnal and unholy cast. And therefore no marvel if Chur∣ches Formality in Religion hastens their destruction; their being Spewed out of the mouth of Christ.
 The Law (saith the Apostle) is good if a man use it lawful∣ly, 1 Tim. 1.8.) and so I say of all the Ordinances of Gods House from the greatest to the least of them, they are all good, i. e. a means of good to you, if duly used and kept
 within their own bounds, there is a blessing in every one of them; and therefore to loose any of them, is to loose so much of the blessing of God as he hath put into them for your good, and to slight any of them, is to reproach the wisdom and goodness of God which contrived them for your benefit. But if you shall invert the proper order and use of them, if when God hath made them servants as it were to the life of holiness and power of godliness, if you now shall cause these to sit above, and the other to stand below in your hearts; if your heart be more upon them, if your care be more to pro∣mote these, if more of your zeal be spent about these then about your own and other mens conformity to Jesus Christ in the inward frame and heavenly temper of the mind, and lowly and lovely deportment in life, for the sake whereof all the Ordinances were ordained: or if you shall value your selves by what you are in these rather than by what you are in that which is the end to which these tend, then shall you put a bar to your spiritual growth in grace and holiness by them, and loose the end for which they are designed by God, and render your selves such as in whom his soul, his spirit will take no pleasure. Circumcision verily profiteth if a man keep the Law, to wit, conscionably in all other things: (Rom. 2.25.) and so Baptism verily profiteth if a man keep the Gospel faithfully in all other the holy enjunctions of it to which his Baptism obligeth him; but if thou be a breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made uncircumcision: if you be breakers of the Gospel, the Statutes of Jesus, your Baptism shall be made no Baptism to you: and as the Children of Israel were counted but as Ethiopians unto God, for all their Circumci∣sion, so shall you be as Indians unto him, for all your Bap∣tism, Amos. 9.7. You know of what it was a sign in the Scribes and Pharisees, to be more zealous of the lesser matters of the Law, than of the greater, Mat. 23.23. And truly I can judge it no better a sign for men to be exact, strict, and punctual in matters of Form, and to be indulgent to wayes and things,
 which intrench upon the power of Godliness, like them which strain at Gnats, and swallow Cammels, keeping a stir about that which costs them little, but favouring themselves in what would try their Christianity indeed.
These things I say, not to teach you in the least, to have a slight opinion of any of the Ordinances of the Lord Jesus; no let my tongue rather cleave to the roof of my mouth, than that I should move it or my pen to the disparigement, or a∣gainst the honour of any of the sacred Ordinances of the New-Testament. But as it is no disparagement to the Fe∣male Sex to say, that the Man was not created for the Woman, but the Woman for the Man, (1 Cor. 11.9.) so is it no disho∣nour to the external Form of the Christian Religion and Worship to affirm it to be made for the Power sake: how∣beit this I say also, that as the Man is not without the Woman, nor the woman without the man, in the Lord; so neither is the power of Godliness without the Form, nor the Form without the Power, in the Lord, but both mutually helpful one to a∣nother, 1 Cor. 11.11.
My aim and scope then is, to arm you against degenerating into meer Form and Carkass in Religion, without the spirit of life and power, as that which will betray you should you be guilty of it, into the same, or as bad a condition as befel the Apostolical Churches, whose glory was long since laid in the dust. For as this very thing was that which prepared the Congregation of Israel for casting out of Gods sight, as a dead and unsavory Carkass, (as I shewed before) so with∣out question it was the same thing which brought the Primi∣tive Churches themselves to nothing. Take the Church of Sardis for an instance, who while she was in the Wane, and her Sun going down, but not quite set, received a rouzing ad∣monition from Christ, as you may see Rev. 3.2, 3. But what was her Fault, and what was her charge? verify it was this; Thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead, verse 1. Her Fault was not that she had a name to live, but that she
 had the name without the thing. And what was it that gave her the name to live, or to be alive, but the Form? And what was it that denominated her to be dead, notwithstand∣ing the name she had to live, but the want of spiriritiul life and power to inspire her?
And truly Friends we had need the best of us all to set these cautioning, wakening, quickning considerations before our eyes, seeing the danger specified is so great, that few of the ancient Churches have been able to hold out and bear up a∣gainst it; and how far prevalent upon the present Churches, I leave to you and to themselves to judg, and seriously to lay to heart: And O that there were not too much cause of la∣mentation and sorrow on this account! But whosoever un∣der our Form and Way of Profession, shall be found tardy herein, hath the greater sin.
 For you being brought nearer to God in some part of the Form of his Worship, than those that differ from you be (as I know you beleeve you are,) you are in that respect if all o∣ther things concur, under the richer advantage of living more up to the life and power of Godliness than they, by how much the pure wisdome of God is more conducible to such an end than that is which hath a mixture of mans. Besides, your withdrawing from the National way and Form, that you might have more close communion with God, bespeaks men to expect some singular thing from you above the rate of all others from whom you withdraw. And therefore if you shall not mightily endeavour to be exemplary in all worthi∣ness of behaviour in life and conversation, you will not an∣swer the light and opportunity which in some things you pro∣fess to enjoy above others, nor honour that Form and Way of yours wherein you differ from other men; but if you be found but like, or it may be worse than many of them, shall you not take a course to expose your selves if not your way too to the scorn and laughter of other men? And O how much have they to answer for do you think, who thorough
 their fruitless and scandalous walking, have been a scab and scandal to our way, and have laid a stumbling-block of their haughtiness, disdain, presumption and rashness, and sometimes of looseness too, in the way of other men? By which they as once Elie's Sons, have caused the way of God to be abhorred by some, to be vilified and set at nought by the tongues and pens of others, and the light and beauty of it to be hid and covered from many who otherwise would I am confident have seen and imbraced it. And by which also they have filled their faces with shame, and souls with sorrow, who have designed nothing but peculiarity of Honour to the Gospel, and edification to men by ingaging in that profession: after the same manner as some in the Church of Corinth, were sometime an humbling to holy Paul, by their Debates, Envy∣ings, Wraths, Strifes, Back-bitings, Whisperings, Swellings, Tumults, and other enormities that were among them, 2 Cor. 12.20, 21. I write not these things to shame you, but as my be∣loved Brethren I warn you, (1 Cor. 4.14.) lest any of you should cause the way of truth to be evil spoken of, as some others have done.
But ye Beloved, if ye have any mind to lift up the head of your way, which the weakness of some, and wickedness of others in it have caused to hang down, and to complain of being fallen into too many ill hands: if you have any desire to open mens eyes to see that which you say you see, and to commend your cause to their Consciences as that which is of God, then labour to outstrip and excel all that dwell a∣bout you, in humility, sobriety, meekness, patience, long-sufferance, gentleness, goodness, injustness and fairness of dea∣ling, in love, mercy, and bounty, and in your readiness to eve∣ry good work. For the most of men are sooner perswaded to think well of this or that way which comes forth in the Name of God, by the goodness of their behaviour that profess it, than by the strength of their Arguments by which they assert it; and better understand the plain language of a
 good life, than the subtilties of Disputation. Men may talk over their way long enough before they get any ground of men, unless the goodness of their cause be made to shine through the goodness of their conversations. I nothing doubt but that if the Argument from Life in the Anabaptists (as they will needs call us) did but as far excel those that are contrary minded, as their Argument from Scripture for their way, does excel theirs for their way that oppose them, there would be but few that truly fear the Lord, would be able to hold it out against them. But the unhappiness is, there is some unlovely thing or other, which some that are weak, and others that are unworthy, lay as a stumbling-block in their way, and their eye is so much upon this, as that it causes them to suspect there's somethng worse in the Argument for our way, then they can see.
 Though in the mean while, there is not that Christian Candor and Fairness which might well be expected from those who will needs burden the way of our profession it self, with the unworthiness and wickedness of some of our profession, who are indeed a greater burden unto us, than they are an eye-sore unto them. Nor do they in this play the part of judicious men, as from the strange judgements which have (as they say) befallen many of our profession, to argue the naughtiness of the way and profession it self.
For would it at all follow, that because the sins and abomina∣tions that were found among the children of Israel, were more and greater than those in Sodom and Samaria, (Ezek. 16.47, 48, 51.) that therefore the external Form of Worship a∣mongst them, and professed by them, was not of God? Or that because in the Apostles time there was such Wickedness among the Christians, as was not so much as named among the Heathen, and many walking in pernicious wayes, (1 Cor. 5.1. 2 Pet. 2.2.) that therefore the Christian Religion and Profession was but a delusion? Or might they not as well conclude, that because such strange and fearful judgements,
 one in the neck of another pursued the Congregation of Is∣rael first and the several primitive Churches after, as broke both the one and the other in pieces, and left them at last dreadful spectacles of the Lords sore displeasure, that there∣fore the Form of Religion and Worship amongst the one peo∣ple or the other, was not in their respective times and sea∣sons of God, but the contrivement of men? Would it be worthy wise men thus to argue? Or is their arguing against our way from the aforesaid premises, of any better import? I would pray them to judge.
I will not deny but that possibly the Judgments of God may have at times pursued many under our Form, both par∣ticular persons and whole Churches, when they have cor∣rupted their waies, and turned Religion into meer Form and prided themselves in the Form, as if this of it self would ex∣alt them above all others in Gods favour: and this is no∣thing but what I have now been foretelling from Scripture grounds, shall yet befall more of them, if they bring forth no other fruit to God but leaves. But this severity of God against particular persons, or Churches that have been under our Form upon the account before specified, is so far from being an argument that our Form is not of God, that it ra∣ther turns to an excellent testimony, and amounts to a kind of demonstration, that it is of God.
For by how much the nearer any fort of men have been wont to draw unto God in the Form of his Worship, and yet have been tardy in some extravagances or other that have prophaned or brought disgrace upon the way of God pro∣fessed by them, by so much the severer hath the Lord still been found in the way of his proceeding against them. When the Lord in an unusual way of Judgement smote Nadab and Abihu, Priests of the Lord, for their unworthy act, this was the account of it, Levit. 10.3. This is it that the Lord spake, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified. Upon which ac∣count,
 above fifty thousand of the men of Bethshemesh and Uzza also, were handled more roughly for being so bold with the Ark, than the Philistines were, 1 Sam. 6. 1 Chron. 13. And its very probable that Annanias and Sa∣phira, had never fallen in this world by so severe a stroke as they did for telling a lie, had they not made their approach so near to God as they did, in the Form of their Profession, Acts 5. And in that the Lord was more quick in his Judge∣ments inflicted on Israel, and sometimes more severe, than he was in his proceedings against the heathen round about, it was because their sins were so much the more provoking, by how much they were a people nearer to God in Form of Pro∣fession, and by special obligation, then others were, Amos 3.2. And when the Lord Christ threatens to spew the Church of Laodicea out of his mouth, for her luke-warmness, Revel. 3.16. he presently adds; as many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, be Zealous therefore and repent, vers. 19. the near∣ness of relation hastens the rod. Is it any argument that the Church of Rome is the true Church of Christ, Or that the Form of her Worship, is of the best kind, because she sits so long as a Queen and sees no mourning, Or because it is so long before her desolation comes? Surely no. For the te∣nor of Christs threatnings against Churches under the true Form when once they grew Formal and carnal, run thus; I will come unto thee QUICKLY and will remove thy Candle∣stick out of his place, except thou repent, Rev. 2.5. Repent or else I will come unto thee QUICKLY, and will fight a∣gainst them with the sword of my mouth, Rev. 2.16. In that God therefore is wont to be so swift a witness against a people under the right Form of professing his name when provoked by unsuitable walking, and yet is so slow as experience proves to take vengeance of the Harlot Church who hath broken the everlasting Covenant, and changed the Ordinances, (the Church of Rome I mean which hath now stood undemolished for many ages,) well may the examples of Gods severity a∣gainst
 some of your Profession, be a rouzing admonition to you my brethren to fear and tremble before the Lord, and to take heed of Formality in Religion, of unfruitfulness in your way, of scandalous walking, and of espousing any tenent or practice dishonourable to the Gospel or prejudicial to the glorious propagation thereof, the usual fore-runners of Church Desolation, but may not as I conceive, by any means be received as any valid argument against that part of the Form of your Profession it self, wherein you differ from other Christians; I mean of Baptizing after profession of Repentance and Faith, as the onely Scriptural way of entring and admitting persons into visible Communion with the Church, but rather as a proof of the divine original of it.
 But though (as I am very sensible) the many taunts, and reproaches, vilifyings, odious representations, and upbraid∣ings of your Profession it self, with the miscarriages of some Professors, and Gods displeasure following such; by which some seek to render both you and your way odious, is very apt to provoke, and the flesh would fain gain an advantage thereby to pay such in their own coyn, and to render evill for evil, reviling for reviling, and to take all advantages to lay open their weaknesses, and to set them in the very eye of all men, as their manner is towards those of your way, yet as I hereby beseech all other our Brethren to refrain here∣from, so I am bold towards you by vertue of my charge to enjoyn you in the name of the Lord, and by authority from his word, to do no such thing. For behold I will set before you a better pattern, and that is, of him who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered he threatned not: (1 Pet. 2.23. and of them who when they were defamed, in∣treated, (1 Cor. 4.13.) and when they had mischievous things spoken against them, were as a deaf man that heareth not, and as a dumb man that openeth not his mouth, and in whose lips are no reproofs, Psal. 38.12, 13, 14. And the in∣junction is strong upon you, 1 Thes. 5.15. See that none
 render evil for evil unto any man: and again, be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good, Rom. 12.21. And I must needs warn you against the use of those unhandsome re∣flections and that broad language which I find some too apt to use towards their antagonists in their controversal writ∣ings, which I utterly dislike, and bear my witness against, as that which is unbeseeming the sobriety and humility of Saints, and which doth greatly wrong and prejudice the cause they plead, in the minds of sober people. Its no matter how sharp and cutting your arguments be, but let them alwaies be wrapt up in soft words. And if ever you would have truth to gain upon men by your mannagement of it, let the manifestation of love and good-will to the men themselves, prepare them to consider and receive what you have to offer. And let it be, and be made appear to be matter of real grief to you that darkness on either side should make you and other good men to differ. Avoid as muuh as in you lies both heights and heats of spirit and language. Speak evil of no man, but be gentle, shewing all meekness unto all men, Tit. 3.2. and re∣member that the servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instruct∣ing those that oppose themselves, 2 Tim. 2.26, 25.
 And when you have done your best to make others of your mind, but cannot; take heed, if you have no better ground then that, of questioning their integrity. Remem∣ber how that the Apostles of our Lord heard from Christ but understood not, a Doctrine as great as that of Baptisme, and declared with as much plainness and expresness of words as ever that of Baptism was; and that was the Doctrine of Christs Suffering and Resurrection: see the place Luke 18.31, 32, 33, 34. Then he took unto him the twelve, and said unto them, behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all things that are written concerning the Son of Man shall be accomplished. For he shall be delivered to the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and spitefully intreated and spitted on: and they shall scourge
 him, and put him to death, and the Third day he shall rise again. And they understood none of these things: and this saying was hid from them, neither knew they the things which were spoken. Why did they understand none of these things? Was it be∣cause the Doctrine was obscurely delivered? certainly no; for neither that nor any other Doctrine could lightly be more plainly delivered then it was. Or did they wilfully shut their eyes against a plain truth? that I suppose no Christian can imagine. But the true reason doubtless was, because they were pre-possessed with a contrary notion and opinion, as their Brethren the Jews amongst whom they lived, and with whom they had been trained up in the tradition of their Fathers, ge∣nerally were, and that was, that the Messias should not dye, and consequently not Rise again, as you may see John 12.34. and 20.9. And therefore while this was rooted in their minds, and their thoughts ran strongly upon it, the plainest words of a contrary import, could not enter into their Soul. And wherefore do I present you with this? but to let you know, that its not only possible, but greatly propable, and to me unquestionable, that the disagreement of many in Judgement with you, proceeds from the like cause of a pre∣intanglement of mind; and that the true reason why many who do truly fear the Lord (as the Disciples under the fore∣said mistake did) do not receive your Allegations and grounds for your way, in opposition to Infant Baptism, nor can understand them to be of God, though as we think plain∣ly enough built upon the Scripture, is, because they are deep∣ly prepossessed with the contrary opinion, which they have drunk in under the approbation and authority of an ancient Tradition, and recommended to them, not only as a common custom of the most that profess Christianity, but also by the concurrent consent of many both learned and godly men, both heretofore, and now pleading its cause; which may as well make your Doctrine touching your way, as inaccessible to their Judgements, and as incredible to their minds, as Christs
 Doctrine touching his Death and Resurrection was to his Disciples, while fore-stalled with a deep impression of a con∣trary opinion, ushered into the mind, and rivited in the Soul, by the seeming authority of the Tradition of the Elders. The zeal to which Traditions, was such a block in Paul's way, as (Gal. 1.13, 14.) though he served God with a pure conscience from his forefathers, as he himself testifies, (2 Tim. 1 3) and so had a zealous mind both to know and do the will of God, profiting in his Religion above his equals, yet his mind being swallowed up with zeal of those traditions that were con∣trary to the main Principles of the Gospel, touch∣ing the Death and Resurrection of Christ, John 12.34.) he could not by all that light which shone in the Doctrine and Miracles of the Apostles, see the truth to be the truth, till an unusual light from Heaven which shone to him in the way to Damascus, delivered him from being any longer captive to those Traditions. And that which hath been the case of some, may be, and doubtless is the case of o∣thers; For the thing that hath been, (as the Wise-man saith, Eccles. 1.9.) It is that which shall be, and there is no new thing under the Sun.
And therefore you see there may be reason and cause enough for you to fix mens dissenting from you, upon, ano∣ther ground than want of integrity, and truness of love to the Truth, so far as discerned. And truly Sirs, where there is a better Foundation for you to fix their dissenting from you on, the Law of Charity forbids you to seek a worse. And I nothing doubt, but that there are many, concerning whom you have sufficient cause to judge, that if they saw as you see, would readily do as you do, in that wherein you do worthily. Do you not remember that your hearts, (for many of you) were sincere to God for many years, whilst you were of their perswasion? And would not they have made a wrong judgement if any should then have questioned your integrity upon account of you not seeing what they saw?
 And therefore surely your own experience herein, obliges you to judge the best of others, who now are what you once were. And therefore my exhortation is, that with all Chri∣stian respect and love you own and honour such, so far as they and you have attained the same thing. There will ma∣ny be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, that have built up∣on Christ the onely Foundation, some of whose works not∣withstanding shall burn, that have been unduly built on that Foundation through misprision, and they themselves suffer loss upon that account, 1 Cor. 3.14, 15. And therefore though it will be very safe for you to reject those works, when yon discover them to be such as will bring loss with them to those that imbrace them, yet it will be your wis∣dome to receive and imbrace those persons themselves in the arms of Christian love, whom the Lord will receive, and with whom you hope to triumph in bliss for evermore.
 Touching the Ministry of the Nation, take one word of advice from me, which I am fully perswaded is agreeable to the mind of the Lord. Where you find any in whom there appears a true love to mens souls, and an earnest desire to gain men to God by preaching wholesome Doctrine, take heed of discouraging them in that work upon account of any difference of judgement between you and them. And take heed of hindering the success of their labours this way, by blemishing them in the eyes of men, or underminding their reputation in the hearts of the people. You will do Christi∣anly in an humble, wise, and faithful way to labour all you can to make them and the people they preach to, one with you in the truth, and to bring them under rule, wherein up∣on good grounds, you apprehend disorder in their way. But yet be sure you acknowledge their zeal to mens salvation, as a most worthy thing and honourable in them, and greatly re∣joyce when you see the success of their faithful labours, zeal, and love, in any mans soul. Do not think but that God which blessed their and their predecessors labours to many of
 our souls, (which we have cause with thanksgiving unto God for ever to remember) may also prosper their endeavours with like success to many others. And God forbid that any of us should by any indiscreet zeal, hinder the salvation of men, while we design the promotion thereof. Remember that the souls of men are precious things, and that it becomes you to act with fear and trembling in things wherein they are much concerned; else you may like an unskilful Midwife, destroy them, whilst you design to deliver and save them. Edification and Salvation is the end of Ordinances and the or∣derly Administration of them, and the means are to be more or less strained so as the end may best be provided for, not to the laying of any Ordinance or Gospel Order totally aside, but in urging them as men are able to bear them with safety of the edification of their souls in the main, Rom. 14.1. For look what the safety of the people is in Civils, that Edifica∣tion is in Spirituals, to wit, the supream Law to which all must stoop. And therefore when the strict observation in the letter of such or such a Law, falls out to cross the end of its own institution, as sometimes it may; whether it does not so far and in that case, and for that time, loose its power of obliging to the letter, is a thing worthy your serious conside∣ration. Especially considering that Christ seems to ex∣cuse a litteral breach of the Sabbath in his Disciples, upon a like ground, saying, the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath, Mark 2.27. The Sabbath was made for man; that is, for mans ease, rest, and refreshing: for this plainly was one end of the Sabbath, Exod. 23.12. Deut. 5.14. And therefore when the forbearance of such an act of bo∣dily labour as the gathering of ears of corn, and preparing them for food (which bodily labour in the strictness of the letter in ordinary cases, would have been unlawful, Exod. 16.27, 28, and 35.3.) crossed that refreshing of nature for which God intended the Sabbath, the Law of the Sabbath prohibiting such labour, lost its force in that case, and for that
 time. I confess it requires much skill and judgment to make this practicable in particular cases; but I offer it that you might be thinking of it.
Let the answer of Christ to his Disciples in another case, satisfie you in this, Mark 9.38, 39. verses, And John answered him, saying, Master we saw one casting out Devils in thy Name, and he followeth not us, and we forbad him, because he followeth not us. But Jesus said, forbid him not, for there is no man that shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me. Though this man did not con∣cur with the Disciples in that orderly way of following Christ, yet as long as he did men good by using his name, Christ would not have him taken off, or to be prohibited to act. If any the Ministers I now speak of, have so much faith in the name of Christ, and love to the souls of men, as to be casting the Devil out of their souls by the word of Christ, its ten thousand pitties to hinder them. If you can by any means be an help to them to do it better, as Aquilla and Priscilla were to Apollos, (Act. 18.26.) well and good, but never forbid any man the doing good because he does not do it in the best way. Pauls temper is your safe pattern, who rejoyced that Christ was preached and the Gospel spread, al∣though not alwaies by the best and purest hand. What then? (saith he) notwithstanding evary way, whether in pretence, or in truth, Christ is preached, and I therein do rejoyce, yea and will rejoyce, Phil. 1.18.
 And now having this opportunity before me, I shall crave leave of some of my Brethren that have the oversight of Chur∣ches, (for all do not so much need it) to exhort and beseech them, diligently to labour in the word and doctrine, not only by a frequent preaching of it, but also by a diligent medita∣tion and study in it; So that when they preach, they may preach upon the most edifying and quickning terms. Which yet what is it more than Pauls exhortation to Timothy? whose gifts doubtless, might better have exempted him from
 that charge than any of ours can: Give attendance to read∣ing; meditate on these things: give thy self wholly to them: Study to shew thy self approved unto God, a workman that need∣eth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth: take heed unto thy self and to thy doctrine, continue in them, and the like, 1 Tim. 4.13, 15, 16. 2 Tim. 2.15. You cannot be igno∣rant what advantage is made of it against our way, when any opportunity can be taken hold of to object the lowness of parts, and rawness of matter, among those of our way, that undertake the great work of teaching. And I am very sen∣sible that too much advantage in this kind is given by some, who out of an odd conceit and humour (for it is no better) of declining the way of the National Ministry, decline also the best way of edifying the people.
I know very well that there hath been wont to be a great deal of vain curiosity used many times among many of the National way; as if they bestowed more thoughts upon me∣thod and quaintness of expression, than upon matter; more cost upon the triming, than upon the garment it self: as if they designed more to take the ear of their auditory, then to touch the conscience: a vanity, shall I say to be laughed at, no, but to be lamented, that ever such should undertake the feeding of souls, that have no more sense of what belongs to it. But where any out of faithfulness to mens souls, and out of an earnest desire to convince, convert and edifie them, shall soberly and gravely contrive their Sermons into such a Form, as by which the understanding may be most fed, and the con∣science best come at, and the sence and majesty of the Scrip∣tures in their scope and coherence, in their consociations and emphasis, rendred most lightsome, cutting and quick; it would be a lamentable weakness for any to take another course, not because its better, but because it is another, or to think it better because another. For one Christian to differ from another where there is cause, is commendable, but to affect to differ more than needs must, argues a frame of spi∣rit
 far different from blessed Pauls, who became all things to all men, (so far as possibly he might with a good Conscience) that he might by all means save some, 1 Cor. 9.22. Edifica∣tion is the end of preaching; that course therefore in prepa∣ring to preach, and that way and method in preaching, that tends most to edification, and so reaches its end, is certainly the best. But all experience proves against all contradiction, that as the case is with us, who speak not upon like terms of special inspiration as the Apostles did; laborious study, with prayer in preparing to preach, and an orderly proceeding from one thing to another in preaching, is most edifying and profitable, both to the Preacher himself, and they to whom he preaches; and being so, it becomes a duty, by vertue of that general rule, 1 Cor. 14.12. Seek that you may excel to the edifying of the Church. Who ever hath the best gift of speaking extempore to the edification of the People, (as some do much excel others therein) shall yet much improve his a∣bility of speaking more to their edification by a due and con∣venient proportion of premeditation & study. And therefore when men may do better, and do not; that Scripture would be thought on, Mal. 1.4. Cursed be the deceiver, that hath a Male in his Flock, and voweth and sacrificeth to the Lord a cor∣rupt thing.
Neither is it my intent at all that any man should so lean upon his studies and preparations, as to tie himself to any Form of words and expression, or in the least to lessen his humble and hearty dependance upon the Lord for assistance; but that he should in a deep sense of the weightiness and won∣derful concernment of the work, and of the vast dispropor∣tion that is between the service in the glory of it, and his abi∣lities that undertakes it, intirely depend upon the Lord for largeness of heart towards the People, for freedome of mind, and clearness of thoughts, for wisdome, courage, and liberty of speech, to declare the matter prepared upon the plainest, clearest, most affecting and most edifying terms, together
 with what else the Lord shall bring to mind to accommodate and issue the discourse. Nor does the promise which God hath made of giving his spirit, and of pouring out gifts, or the like, render the diligent labours and studies of the Ministers of the Gospel needless, any more than Gods promise of the earths bringing forth her increase, does excuse the Husband∣man the diligent labour of plowing and sowing, which as the Prophet observes is the fruit of the instruction or teaching of God, Isa. 28.24, 25, 26. When God made promise of gi∣ving unto the Preacher, such wisdome as none had before him, or should have after him, (1 King. 3.12.) he did not there∣by exempt him from, but rather oblige him to the utmost search, labour, and travel in getting wisdome, and methodi∣cal contrivement of things in the improvement of it, for o∣thers instruction. To his obtaining of what God had promised in this kind, see his behaviour, as he himself expresseth it, Eccles. 1.13. The Preacher was King over Israel in Jerusalem, and I gave my heart to seek and to search out by wisdome, con∣cerning all things that are done under heaven: This sore travel hath God given, (mark that) unto the Sons of men to be exer∣cised therewith. And for his improvement of his great wis∣dome upon the best terms for others instruction, and this as a fruit of his wisdome too, see what he did, Eccles. 12.9, 10. Moreover, because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the peo∣ple knowledge; yea he gave good heed, and sought out and SET IN ORDER many Proverbs. The Preacher sought out the matter, and disposed that matter into order, by which he taught the people. And therefore let the Quakers baul against this way of proceeding, as if an argument of the spirits absence (the spirit of whose way is to undermine the way and means of sound knowledge, and to introduce grosse ignorance, as may easily be discerned by those that have their eyes in their heads) but let those that are studious of the peo∣ples edification, make conscience of it, as that in which the spirit is delighted, not limitted.

When the Apostle saith, Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teacheth, in all things, (Gal. 6.6) and that the Lord hath so ordained, that they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, (1 Cor. 9.14.) and the like; upon what account may we think is it so ordained? but as for other reasons, so especially because a due attendance up∣on the work of that Office of Teaching, will in great part take them off who are faithfully ingaged in it from those secular imployments, by which others get their livings. Which yet it would not do, if a great deal more time were not to be taken up in premeditation and prayer, preparation-wise, then is wont to be expended in preaching at the times of Church-Assemblies, in which the whole Church do or ought to spend as much of their time in hearing, as they do in preaching. Which consideration alone, if there were not many more, methinks is enough to perswade all those that take upon them the weighty work of preaching, to make it matter of con∣science, to spend much of their time in making provision for the work.
 But when it lies as a duty upon the Congregations them∣selves, to make such provision for their Teachers and Over∣seers, as by which they may be enabled to consecrate at least much of their time to that service. For otherwise how should the full tale of Brick be provided, when Straw is denyed to make them with? And truly I fear that some have been fain to make a vertue of a necessity; to use to preach without much premeditation and study, for that the necessity of getting themselves and Families bread, hath cut them short of that opportunity. But where ever Teachers are put upon that ne∣cessity, it is the Churches sin, if they have power in their hands to prevent it. For what duty is more express than this of the Churches supporting their Teachers, their Rulers in their work? 1 Cor. 9.6, to 14. Gal. 6.6. Matt. 10.10. Luke 10.7. 1 Tim. 5.17, 18. And therefore in the name of God let none that seem to be tender in some things, have no sense
 of others which are as plain as those; for thats an ill sign. Would those Elders, would those Churches where those neg∣lects are I now speak of, take Gods way in this as well as in some other things, I doubt not but a little time through Gods blessing, would render them (other things concurring) far more flourishing (provided meet instruments be pitcht upon) than now they are, or are ever like to be, without it.
 For while this way of a studious labouring in the Word, is omitted or neglected, whether through any wry opinion in the Teacher, as if there were no necessity of such a thing; or through his idleness and lasiness, as the bottom of it; or through the fault of the Church in with-holding that outward supply and support, without which few have the opportuni∣ty, though they should have the will; I say where this omis∣sion or neglect is, however it comes about, this usually is a∣mong the rest, one evil naughty consequence of it, viz. the little and low esteem which the people have of their Pastors, to their own great detriment and spiritual losse. For while the Elders shall but observe the common course of daily me∣ditation in the Word, which is every common Christians du∣ty, they will be able to speak but little more to the edificati∣on of the People, than other common Christians which are in no such Office, can do. And if the Elders preaching, prove little more to the edification of the People than the common exhortations of Brethen do, which cost them little or no stu∣dy, (not to mention the mischief of such Brethrens being som∣times puft up hereby, to their fall,) it will be a hard matter to raise an extraordinary Building upon a common Foundation; it wil be hard for the People in this case to vouchsafe those ex∣traordinary respects of singular love & double honour, which the Scripture with a loud voice calls for from them towards those that are over them in the Lord, and which labour in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Thes. 5.13. 1 Tim. 5.17. For it is not to be imagined that that extraordinary debt of love and honour which the Lord hath imposed upon the People as
 due from them towards those that feed the Flock of God, above what is due from them to other of their fellow brethren, should be founded upon any thing lesse, then the extra∣ordinary benefit they may or doe receive by their Mi∣nistry.
Whiles then a course is taken, either by Pastor or People, or both, to keep the gifts and parts of the Pastor under, and his way of teaching but of a common growth; a ready way is taken, not only to defeat and disappoint the Will and Purpose of God, in not casting that honour upon those which are sent by him, which he designes them, but also to hedge up the way of the peoples edification, by his Ministry. For where the peoples affections & respects to their Leaders and Guides run low, there their edification and profiting by them cannot possibly run high. Christ himself could not doe those mighty Works, nor advantage the people in his own Coun∣try, as he did in other places more remote, because they had a lower esteem of him there (occasioned by their know∣ledge of his lowness of breeding,) then others had in other places. Mat. 13.54, 58. And when Pauls esteem fell a∣mong some of the Churches (though through no fault of his) upon how great a disadvantage were they cast of pro∣fiting by him! And it is not to be doubted, but that when the Lord so frequently cals upon the Churches to obey those that have the rule over them in the Lord, (Heb. 13.17.) to have them in singular love for their works sake, (1 Thes. 5.13.) and to count them worthy of double honour, (1 Tim. 5.17.) and the like, but that therein he had an eye as much if not much more, to the Churches advantage and benefit which they should receive thereby, then to the personal ac∣commodation and comfort of their Officers themselves. And accordingly the Apostle valued his own esteem in the Church, but little, farther then it might truly serve them. 2 Cor. 13.7. Not that we should appear approved, but that
 ye should doe that which is honest, though we be as reprobates. It mightily concernes therefore all Teachers that truly desire to profit the people by their Ministry, diligently to labour to keep up the reputation of it amongst them, by magnifying their Office, and making their utmost and best improvement of it for their good, as well by such studies as otherwise, by which they may come forth to them from time to time, with a greater fulness of the blessing of the Gospel, then other∣wise they are ever like to doe. And surely it little lesse con∣cernes the people, for their own edification sake, with like care to keep up and maintain their true and entire respects un∣to their Teachers, so farre as they can possibly come at any foundation of real worth and service in them to bear it, and to be contributing what is due from them towards the sup∣porting of it. For for them to be accessary to any weaknesse or defect in the way of their Ministry, and to despise them for it when they have done, would be a double sin.
 I have used the more liberty in pressing the Churches to their duty toward their Officers, as judging my self free from suspition of fishing for my self in these waters, there being hardly any so backward to give, as I to receive, having de∣signed, as much as in me lies, to make the Gospel without charge to you my brethren, hoping it might be the more acceptable to you. And should be extreamly sorry, if any should be so weak (which yet I fear) as some in the Church of Corinth were, to esteem the Gospel the lesse, because so cheap to them, 2 Cor. 11.7, 20. But by how much my Brother and I remit to you in this behalf, by so much the more would I have you reckon your selves debtors to the poor. And by no meanes to make our present practise in this; a president to those that shall come after us, without a great deal of liberty in it, and largeness of capacity on their parts. As it will be the wisdome of Elders, as much as in them lies, to free themselves from suspition of serving for
 filthy lucre, as a thing exceeding hurtful to their Ministry one way, so it will be comely in the People, as much as in them lies, to render their Pastors free from the burden of trouble∣some and intangling cares, as very prejudicial to their Mini∣stry another way.
I have been large in this Address, and should be sorry if having herein eased my self, I should burden others. I judge that what I have said is not without cause, and am inwardly glad of this opportunity of declaring my mind thus freely to my Brethren; and am perswaded I shall lie down to rest when the hour comes, with so much the more satisfaction of mind. And O that God would render my counsel herein acceptable to all that are concerned in it!
I shall now have done: will you remember, Sirs, that you are the Epistle of Christ, to be known and read of all men, (2 Cor. 3.2, 3.) So that whoever reads the history of your life, may therein read the holiness, the humility, the meek∣ness and gentleness of Jesus; the Lamb-like innocency and harmlessness, the love, mercy, and compassion, the unweari∣ed industry and devouring zeal to do your Fathers will in serving the necessities of men, which shined forth so glori∣ously in Jesus Christ. O take heed I beseech every one of you, of abusing the World, yea of abusing Christ, in ma∣king any wry and wrong representation of him to the World by any undue or unchristian behaviour in word or deed. Let none get any occasion to think the worse of Christ or of his holy wayes, because of you that belong to him: Be far from laying any stumbling block in their way, but be remo∣ving as fast as possibly you can, such as others have put there, that so the way to Christ being made plain and lovely, they may be invited to come to him, who hitherto have kept at a distance. It would be sad in the Judgement day, if any con∣demned person should say to Christ, I verily thought that I might have used such strains of covetousness on the one hand, in getting and holding, and of pride and luxury on the other
 hand, in excess of food and rayment; that I might have spent so much time vainly and idly, that I might have kept such ill company and have sate so long at the Tavern or Ale-house, that I might have taken so much liberty to scoff and jeer, rail, and revile, to use vain talking and foolish jesting, for which thou now condemnest me, because I saw such and such which professed to know thee, and thy mind a great deal better than I, did so: if I had known as they did, I would have done better, it was their ill example that misled me. O Sirs, can you bear the thought of it that the matter should be so much as in doubt whether it may not possibly be so said of some of you though but in respect of some one or other of these or otherlike unholy things!
 And content not your selves to be negative Christians on∣ly, to do no harm, to practice no unjust thing, to speak no evil, to give no bad example; but labour to abound both in doing and speaking good, and to be exemplary in both. And wherein there is any strain of Christianity that excels ano∣ther, and that will render you most like God, most like Christ, let it be your holy ambition in making at that. For by how much the liker Christ you shall be found, in all love∣liness and worthiness in your way, now, by so much the liker him shall you be made in excellency of glory and digni∣ty hereafter; and in the mean time enjoy so much the richer communion with him, and communications of spiritual life, strength and comfort from him.
This whole World is running apace to mine, and the dis∣solution of it draws nigh, it will be your wisdome, and for the Lords sake let it be your care to be removing your hearts and souls out of it before it fall upon your heads, or before you be removed out of it whether you will or no, by the hand of death. You have your day now, make much of it, when the sun of it is set upon those that have trifled in it, it will rise no more, an everlasting night of darkness follows. It is now but a little while, and he that shall come, will come,
 and will not tarry: if you love him, or rejoyce under the expectation of that day, be not behind hand in your prepara∣tions. The marriage of the Lamb draws nigh, and his Wife hath made her self ready; be sure you be not at any time found without your Wedding garment. By Faith draw nigh to the Judgement Seat of Christ; imagine your selves at the next door of being encompassed with the majesty of that day. Let thoughts of it and of your accounts then to be taken, keep you company all the day long, in your buying, selling, eat∣ing, drinking, yea in all your converse and communication with men. Follow God with incessant prayer to fill your souls brim full with a lively sense of these things, whose weight is not to be expressed. Hold much communion with your own weakness, and do not trust your selves at the least distance from God; abide under his shadow and in an humble way of pleasing him, be alwaies confident of his strength to subdue your spiritual enemies, to uphold you and keep you from falling, and to carry you on from strength to strength, until you appear before him.
That these and such things as these in the glory of their per∣fection, may be your present portion from the Lord to pre∣pare you upon the best terms for future glory, is the true de∣sire,

April 13. 1658.
