



My dearly beloved Brethren,
THe ensuing Sermons, as they
had their Birth for your sakes,
so are they now offered into
your hands; and they come
unto you, upon the same
important errand, upon which their Au∣thour
hath been sent among you, viz. to
shew you the Path of life, and to bring you
into, and establish you in, that holy state
and way that leads to everlasting Blessed∣ness.
The chief hindrances of Sinners eternal
Happiness (next to that innate enmity a∣gainst
God and Godleness, which is rooted
in their hearts) are, their prejudices against,
and their ignorance of the good wayes of
the Lord.

Sathan and his Instruments have made it
their businesse, by those vollies of re∣proaches
and unreasonable calumnies, which
they are continually discharging against
holinesse, to render it in the judgement of
the World, an empty and contemptible
thing.
Two things there are, amongst many
others, which they lay to the reproach of
it. The one that it is folly; whatever there
may be in this Godlinesse, yet it is attend∣ed
with so many difficulties, dangers, and
hazards, and will be such an unsufferable
prejudice to all that will have much to
do with it, that it is a foolish thing, upon
such hazards and disadvantages to ad∣venture
upon it. If this will not do, but the
consciences of Men, whilst they appre∣hend
the real worth and excellency of it,
stand convinced, that it is not Folly but
wisdom, to adventure on any difficulties,
to run any hazards, for so glorious a prize:
then comes in the second reproach, That
it is but a device, a specious contrivance,
to take up eager heads, to amuse and di∣vert
the busie, and keep in awe weak
souls, when if it be enquired into, notwith∣standing
its glorious pretences, it will be
found nothing else but imagination, meer

fancy, and no reality at all in the heart of
it.
These impressions I have endeavoured,
according to my might, to wipe away from
your hearts; and the hearts of such as
read, what you have heard, in the ensuing
discourses; where, I hope, you will see, both
sufficient reason, whence to put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men, to establish
your hearts in the firm belief, and resolved
embracing of it: and abundant encourage∣ment,
to hold on your holy course to the
end.
The other hindrance of a Godly Life, is
mens ignorance; They walk not in the way
of the Lord, because they know not the way
of the Lord; some rude and dark notions of
Religion possibly they may have, but where∣in
the Spirit and life of Godliness stands, and
how to set upon an holy and heavenly course
they cannot tell. This hindrance I have in
part prevented in that Description I have
given of a godly man, and more fully remo∣ved
in those Directions which I have sub∣joyned,
for the obtaining and carrying on a
godly Life.
Brethren, my hearts desire and Prayer for
you is, that what I have done may be suc∣cessful
to your souls; that you may be saved,
as the Apostle speaks; that you may be
brought into, and established in the way of

truth, and may be found walking in the way
of Righteousness. And if the Lord shall be
pleased so to follow these my endeavours
with his Blessing, that they may contribute
any thing to this end; if the Lord shall so
animate these (otherwise) dead words, by his
quickening Spirit, that any souls of them
that are without may be added to the
Church, that any cubits may be added to
the stature of those that are within, it shall
be a Crown to me, and exceeding Cause of
rejoycing. Let the Lord Almighty have the
praise for ever, as from all such who shall
reap any benefit hereby; So from the soul
of

