



THat I do in the first place make mine ad∣dresse to you (my honoured Friends) in that great City, shall not be (I trust) o∣therwise apprehended then as a testimo∣ny of my Christian respect, and desires of your spiritual good. Besides that the business in hand stands in so neer a relation unto you, as to call upon me (as I conceive) to call upon you, and exhort you all, in these loose and leaving times, that with purpose of heart you would cleave unto the Lord Acts. 11. 23.. It is the Fate (shall I say) or rather the great fault of eminent pla∣ces, to entertaine and professe religion by way of facti∣on, rather then out of election upon solid grounds, or with that reverence and awfull affection that is requi∣red in religious Undertakings: Hence a new Faction

causeth a new Defection, I do not mention this as will∣ing to fix an imputation upon you, whereof there is no reason, but yet I offer it to your most serious consi∣deration and care, that there may not be just cause of such a censure. And, however that be, I hope I shall be excused in making my application thither where he that will needs be mine adversary hath his abode, and where many of the same erronious and apostatising way with himself, are so entertained 2 John 10 11. and countinan∣ced, (I do not say by all,) that I cannot but present it as a matter of deep humiliation to that (otherwise honourable) City; especially considering how the infection hath spread it selfe thence into all adjacent parts. Lastly, out of that Citty the Pamphlet that I am called to answer hath posted about the Nation: As concerning which, I leave it to all that have any sense of religion, to consider whether they ever knew so strange and ugly a thing, I may say, such a Monster brought to Bristol-Fair to be shewed there first, and carried about the Countrey to be seen afterward. But be it what it will be, since it is come abroad, and that upon my occasion (though altogether beyond my intention) I cannot but account my selfe so far con∣cerned in it, as to do mine endeavour that they that fear God may not take hurt from it, (I mean some weak ones, for established Christians detest it) and that they that fear not God may not take heart from it, and animate themselves against Gods Ordinances; yea further, that it may not ly as a guilt upon this Na∣tion, that such things are published to the great dis∣honour of God and Religion, without any refutation, contradiction, or pleading for truth. Isa. 59. 4. If herein my de∣clining abilities may be any way usefull, I am willing to set them all a work (with much desire of divine as∣sistance)

to serve that Citty and Countrey, where (be∣side my imployment in my own place) I have divers times bestowed my paines, now for the space of neer fourty years, to preach and mantaine that Scripture-doctrine, and those Scripture-Ordinances, which this upstart generation thrusts sore at to make them fall, but all in vaine, for heaven and earth shall passe away, but not one tittle of Gods heavenly truth Luk. 16. 17..
What I have hitherto spoken is but preparatory to that which followeth, which will reflect (according to the Title of the Epistle) upon two sorts of persons, I mean those that have stood firm, and those that have lost their first footing and first faith.
Unto the first of these, who have held fast those things which they have received and heard from their Teachers out of the word of God (among whom, I thank God, I may and do speak to those of my owne Charge) I say, to such I have three things to commu∣nicate.
First, that they are much bound to blesse God for his unspeakable gift, it being Hee, and Hee alone that 1.  is able Jude. 24. and faithfull 2 Thes. 3. 3 to keep us from falling. Nor can it but much affect them, upon serious thoughts that when (in these infected and infecting times) so ma∣ny have fallen on the one hand, and so many on the o∣ther, vet that spiritual Ps. 92. 11. pestilence hath not come nigh them; especially considering how many false Pro∣phets have arisen, and with how many faire shews and seeming wonders, they have set forth their wares, in so much that they would have deceived (if it had been possible) the very elect Mat. 24. 24.. In that so many of you (therefore) are preserved, O how great cause is there to conclude as the Apostle in the same argument doth, To the only wise God our Saviour be glory and Majesty,

dominion and power, now and ever Amen. Jude ver. 25. Secondly, I shall say further to such as the Apostle doth. Dearly beloved and longed for, our joy and our Crown 2. (when Apostates crown us with thorns) so stand fast in the Lord Phil. 4. 1., and for that purpose put on the whole Ar∣mour of God that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devill Ephes. 6. 11., and those profundities Rev. 2. 24., which the old Serpent produceth in these last dayes, finding his usu∣al devices 2 Cor. 2. 11. to be so well known, that he had need be∣take himself to his new depths: You have put your hand to the plough, look not back. Luk. 9. 62. Be old Disciples Act. 21. 16. Nothing is more sinfull; nothing more shameful then to give off at last, and to be befooled and bewitched out of a good way. Gal 3. 13. & 5. 7. Let it never be said, you have, but you doe, your will, you ever will, run well; make it your highest designe to die in Jesus 1 Thes. 4 14.. When you see any, when you see so many fall away, think that your Sa∣viour is now speaking to you in particular, and saying (even as affectionately as of old he did.) Will ye also go away Joh. 6. 67.? If ye will go, whither will ye go? to Arians? enemies to Christs Person, to Ranters? enemies to his Precepts and Purity, to Quakers? enemies to his Ordi∣nances and Officers. If it seem evill to you to follow the Lord Josh. 24. 15., you may go after such companions; But doth that seem evill? Is it evill to follow the chiefest good? or can you follow and enjoy him, and not hear his voice Joh. 10. 27., and attend his Ordinances Psal. 65. 4? Know that no∣thing but the words of eternall life will make an eter∣nall Disciple Joh. 6. 68. If others be gone, let them return to you, but do not you turn to them Jer. 5. 19.. Finally, look to your selves (and desire the Lord to look to you) that we loose not the things we have wrought, but that we may receive a full reward, Joh. 2. 8.
Thirdly, I have one word more; It is easy and obvi∣ous

to observe that many poore, profane Creatures, who have nothing of the power of godlinesse in them, yet blesse themselves in this, that they be not Separa∣tists, Anabaptists, Quakers, (which they that are such have cause to look upon as a sad fruit of their falling a way) I shall therefore earnestly move those Christians that have not been removed, as others, in these totter∣ing times, to expresse the power of that truth in their whole soules and lives, to which God in so great mer∣cy, and with so great power hath held their hearts; which I do the rather mention, 1. Because that is the way to keep for ever the truth hitherto kept, for faith that is the doctrine of religion is held in conjunction with a good conscience; If you put away the consci∣ence, you will make shipwrack of the faith 1 Tim. 1. 19, 20.; It is the life of religion that preserves the light. 2. This will put to silence the ignorance of foolish men 1 Pet. 2. 15., whose most plau∣sible argument against a right religion, is an unrighte∣ous conversation. 3. This is a course to confirm those that yet stand firm, who shall receive the most familiar & operative conviction of the soundnes of your reli∣gion and theirs in matter of opinion, by the efficacy thereof in the holines of your carriage; for that which is the truth of God indeed, is described to be a truth which is after godlines Tit. 1. 1.. That is, it teacheth to live Soberly, Righteously and godly Tit. 2. 12.. They who have been taught as the truth is in Jesus, put of the former conver∣sation and put on a better Ehes. 4. 21 22, 23, 24., Yea, 4. By this you may possibly regain those that are, inpart departed, for why should not that good conversation that is one meanes to bring an Heathen to be a Christian 1 Pet. 2. 12. & 3, 1., be a means also, to bring a revolted Christian to be a right Chri∣stian.
And to those who are so revolted I am next to speak;

which I confesse is a very heavy task, not only because their going back is so godlesse, (for to be without God, and without a teaching Priest and without Law, go toge∣ther 2 Chron.  15 3., and how farr they put away the two latter, wherein God is injoyed, their writings shew; I say therefore not onely because their going back is so godlesse, and thereupon, so grievous to think and speak of) but also because their return (I meane of the chiefest of them) is so hopelesse and the more hopelesse because their hearts are so high; In these dayes they that have got a new opinion, are like pro∣digals that have newly got their portion, they go in∣to a far country from their fathers house, and when they have done that, think none in a more noble con∣dition then themselves; But because all are not gone alike, and that God who hath perswaded Japheth to dwell in the tents of Shem, Gen. 9. 27, can perswade those that be gon furthest, yet to goe their way forth by the footsteps of the flock and againe to feed beside the shepheards tents. Cant. 1: 8.. That is, to walk as they were wont, with the true sheep after the true shepheards; I shall therefore offer such assistance as I can give (and which the Lord can make to take) by opening the causes of declining, and ad∣joyning the remedies.
The causes are either within or without.
1. Within I And the great cause and sum of causes within is the corruption of nature. If the prince of this World adventured on our Saviour himselfe in whom hee fonnd nothing Joh. 14. 30, no marvel if hee presume hee shall be successefull with us in whom hee findes so much, I meane so much of that pravity which makes so much for his purpose.
In particular, there is within us.
1. An unbelieving heart Heb. 3. 12. 1., the very character whereof

is, that it departs from the living God Heb. 3. 12.; these are the dayes wherein Christians do not only professe that they can live without, but pretend to be above ordi∣nances; which is an height so strange, that we may be astonied at it; so shameful, that we may blush and be confounded at it; so dangerous, that we may feare and tremble at it. What? Above that, which Christ himselfe hath ordained them to be under, and that to the end of the world Mat. 28. 19, 20., as his way to their happiness! would they ever do this, if they did believe, either the promise of life made to hearing Isa. 55. 3., or the threatning of unavoidable destruction denounced a∣gainst despising Heb. 2. 3.? But when men be of this minde, that no good or comfort is to be had in ordinance∣communion, (perhaps because themselves have wan∣ted it, for that they did not rightly, humbly and pa∣tiently seek it) no marvel if there be ordinance-deser∣tion; when men change faith into fancy, no mer∣vail if they change Religion into frensy 2 Tim. 3. 9.
2. An unstable heart, led away with diverse lusts 2 Tim. 2. 3. 6. 2 Pet. 3. 16., that is, light desires; inconstant and alternant moti∣ons; longing after every thing and pleased with no∣thing long. How many be there, whose light is weak, but lusts, affections, cupidites, strong? No marvail if with such a new man and a new matter, like new wine, work mightily; and if such Athenian eares be quickly turned from the Truth to Fables 2 Tim. 4. 3, 4.
3. A carnal heart 1 Cor. 3. 3., wherein there is a great desire to hear Ministers of parts, for their Parts; not but that parts are to be regarded for their good use, and because by greater and quicker abilities, Gods Word is opened more clearly to the understanding, or prest more powerfully upon the conscience; thus to love parts, that is, for the Word and the good service they do in the things of God, is very good; but on the o∣ther

side, to love the Word for the good Parts; that, in regard of the Christian that is so taken & mistaken, is a dangerous thing, and in-regard of the Word of God, a dishonourable thing. To have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of Parts, is much alike as to have it with respect of persons Jam. 2. 1., such are easily waf∣ted thether where there is more of the parts, though lesse of the Word and truth of God, for it is for the great Parts of men that they go, rather than the good Word of God. This is it that undoes great Cities, that people flck to publick Ordinances, as it were in way of recreation, as if Paul, and Apollo, and Ce∣phas, that is, various Ministers of different gifts, were sent by Jesus Christ to please mens several humours, and that they may run from one to another for their better content; and not (as the truth is) to deliver unto them from God, a aw of faith and life, which they ought to hear with a trembling spirit Isa. 66. 2., as that whereby they are to be guided here, and according∣ly to be judged at that last and great day 1 Thes. 4. 1, 2. Mark 16. 16. John 12. 49.
4. A carelesse heart; taking the Doctrines of good Ministers on their words, without observing their grounds, and examining (as the noble Bereans did) those Scriptures whereupon they did build the do∣ctrines delivered to their hearers. Hence it comes to passe, that though the Word be delivered to them, yet that and their hearts are not delivered to it Rom. 6. 17, but to the Minister that is the deliverer of it; upon this followeth that which is worse; to wit, that when o∣ther Teachers step in (especially if they make shew of much holinesse) and deliver contrary things to those they heard before, they take those also upon their words that deliver them, and let go the former

truths, sell these, and buy those; no wonder, for we may say one mans word is as good as anothers; to wit, if the Word delivered, be taken on the bear war∣rant of the one and the other.
5. A proud heart and a foolish 1 Tim. 6. 3, 4. Gal. 3. 1.: Hence the Jewes formerly sought life in a way of legal righteousnesse; to wit, for want of knowledge Rom. 10. 2., and because they were fooles as to suffer themselves to be bewitched; and withall for want of humility, and because they would not submit themselves unto the righteousnesse of God Rom. 10. 3. Papists since have troad in their steps (no mervail, for proud man would fain be his own Savi∣our) and the Quakers go far this way; for howsoe∣ver they seem enemies to that pride (which we all condemn) by some outward and bodily neglects (wherein the Papists go beyond them) yet they and the Papists both, discover and display a far more dangerous pride, in lifting up as they do, an inward light, and their inherent pretended perfections; yea in all Sects and deviding parties, height of Spirit hath a great part Gal. 4. 17. Gal. 6. 12. 13. John 3. 9.
These are the causes within, unto which may be added, Secondly, causes and occasions without; name∣ly these,
1. Christians forsaking their fellow Christians: A∣postacy in Religion begins or at least begins to be set∣led and to shew itselfe in separation and breach of communion 2 Tim. 4. 10., when the Apostle saith, Let us hold fast the profession of our saith; he saith soon after, Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, but exhorting one another Heb. 10. 23. 24, 25., for good Christians by mutu∣al exhortations and communications, are not only a comfort, but a guard one to another Mat. 3. 16. It is obser∣ved that they that Quakers prevail with, are either

ignorant persons and raw professors, or meer Notionalists, full of brave words, but that have little of the power of godlinesse; or else men of separating spirits.
Hear what he saith, that was for a time, and in a great part, one of them: I doe not hear, (saith he) nor know any that have been well grown and experienced Christians, maintaining a close communion together, ac∣cording to the exemplary waies of Christ and his Apostles, that are thus overcome and betrayed by the subtil Wiles of the Devil The worlds wonder or the Qua∣kers bla∣zing Star p 33. 54..
2. Their forsaking the Ministry: Sheep without a shepheard are easily made a prey to the Woolf, as Joash was, when Jehojada was dead Chron. 24. 7, and the Gala∣tians in Pauls absence Gal. 1. 6.. Let Christians that have depar∣ted from their first principles, cōmune with their own hearts, and enquire whether they staid so long with their first Pastors, as seriously to seek from them a resolution of their doubts, and to see whether all rea∣sons of running away, might not have been answer∣ed: But no marvail if they go out of the way by those that are unfaithful, that never enquire the way of those that are faithful; yea, that forsake their pro∣per guides Heb. 13. 17.. What would the Deputy have done when Elimas the Sorcerer sought to bewitch him, if Paul had not stood by & come in with his charmes Acts 13. , 9, 10.? Observe therefore that the first work of Seducers (that they may prevent all preventions of prevailing) is, to make their new Disciples abhor their old Tea∣chers; just as good-fellowes handle the Prodigal; that is, so as to make him detest his Fathers house, that they may make a prey of him; yea, they do so new mould their spirits, as that they make them open their mouths in out-cries and curses against those now for whom (to speak in Pauls language Gal. 4. 15.) they

would once have pluckt out their eyes; thus as somtimes Achitophel counselled Absolam, to go into his Fathers Concubines in the sight of all Israel, to make the dif∣ference between him and his Father irreconcilable, by that odious act 2 Sam. 16. 1., and thereby to secure himself: So do Seducers teach their followers a minister-re∣proaching-language and usage, that so they and their former (yea, and all sound) Teachers, may be at an everlasting difference, and by that means their hold may be the more firme Gal. 4. 7. Joh. 9. 24.
3. Their forsaking (at length) the ordinance of God, and the outward exercise of religion both in the pub∣lick congregation and in their own Families. Now when Christians leave the Word, which is the builder up of Saints Acts 20. 32, and the Sacraments that are their Confirming Seals. Rom. 4. 11. And Sabbaths that are the cement of Religion Psa. 122. 1, 2, 3▪ 4. Isa. 56. 6. They that joyn them∣selves to the Lord & to his ser∣vants keep the Sab∣boath.. And that Prayer that is the Christians keeper Jude v. 20, 21. (sweeping the house for the Devil by sweeping out holy exercises, Luke 11. 25.) no marvell if they be ruinous, unstable, shattered, and even lost creatures.
To adde a little more, now I am engaged in this ar∣gument: The precedent distempers partly arise from, and partly are fomented by such furtherances thereof as I shall now subjoyne;
To wit,
1. Satan himselfe; who is as a Murtherer, so a Lyar from the begining John 8. 44. 2 Cor. 11. 3., that is, not only a teller of Lies and a maker and moulder of untruthes, but also a ma∣ker of lyars, and an instiller and promoter of all those falshoods that are in deceived and deceiving men, 1 Kings▪ 22. 21, 22., If there be a man appointed of God to be deceived to his destruction, Ile perswade him, (Saies that Mur∣therer) If he be asked where withall? Il'e be a lying Spirit (saith that liar) Many talk much of Spirit but

Christians must not be soon shaken in mind 2 Thes. 2. 2, 3., by such Suggestions nor suffer men to impose upon them by the name of Spirit, for perhaps, it may be the spirit of Ahabs prophets.
There is a saying cited out of Luther, that will give every man reason to raise a suspicion upon the preten∣sions of extraordinary revelation, it is this; Verily God must bee incessantly implored with feare and humility, otherwise truly it may soone come to passe that the Devil See the Book cal∣led A Faithful discovery of a treache∣rous design p. 18, 19. 12 Cor. 11. q3. will present before our eyes such a fantasm that we should swear it were the true holy Ghost it selfe, as not onely those ancient Hereticks, but in our time also examples which have been, and are still great and dreadfull, doe forwarne.
2. Seducing Teachers, Satans Angels, b who trans∣forme themselves into the apostles of Christ, and talk (as Apostles might of immediate inspiration; & an in∣fallible spirit, who come with new and seemingly hea∣venly lights, and no marvel, for Satan himselfe that is the deformed prince of darkness, is transformed into an Angell of light who use good words and fair speeches to deceive the hearts of the simple Rom. 16. 18., yea they would de∣ceive (if it were possible) the very elect Mat. 24. 24..
3. Evil Neighbours, Satans Agents, as Solomons wives Nehem. 13. 26. And the Arians-wives of Emperiours; for very oft in the wife (as of old) begins the fall; this is true also in regard of other infectious company, as in Osiander Hist. Ec∣cles. Epit. Cent. 4. ch. 43. lib. 2. & lib. 3 ch. 51. the colloguing Princes of Judah that infected Joash af∣ter the death of Jehosada. 2 Chron. 24. 17.
4. The Distemper and Apostacy of the times, Satans great advantage, Mat. 24. 12. corrupted times are like the infected ayre causing a catholike contagion. This is the time wherein old truth (by the knowledge whereof many are now in heaven 1 Tim. 2. 4.) are grown to be out of date, Nor is it such an honour (as of old) to re∣verence

ordinances, but if you walk above them and look upon them as low forms, then you are (with too many) in the highest form. The devil formes a great tentation out of such estimation.
The Liberty of the times, Satans engine. I meane (as men make use of it) it is made great use of by Satan for the carrying on of his designes, I deny not but it is a mercy which we are greatly to thank God for to have a free liberty to do his will, but liberty of such a lati∣tude as to walk right or wrong in matters of religion without the least feare in any case, either of Church or state-censure fals into Satans hands as a fit engine, both for the opposing conculcating of saving truthes, & the spreading and cherishing of damnable 2 Pet. 2. 2 errors, for that old serpent knowes, that if he can but obtaine that men may doe what they themselves will (natural men and hypocrites, which are far the greatest com∣pany, being of his minde and led after his will 2 Tim. 2. 26..) he can easily bring them to do what he himself will: There John 8. 44. are two restraints from evil; government and grace: The former is like hedges and walls to creatures that are wilde: The other is like the gentleness and or∣derliness of creatures when they are tamed Isa. 11. 6.; be∣cause so few partake in the latter, there is a great deal the more need of the former Psal. 32. 9..
6. Corrupt and corrupting Books, Satans Library; which yet are not chained and fixed, but flying Books, purposely made little, that they may be made nim∣ble, and passe with more speed, and at an easy rate, to infect the Nation; may we not fear a flying roule will go forth over the face of this God-neglecting Na∣tion, because the wings of such Books are not clipt Zech. 5. 2, 3.
Having been large in the causes of declining, I shall

contract the remedies, the rather because the discove∣ry of the causes, is it self a remedy; yet for the grea∣ter confirmation of those that stand, establishment of those that stagger, and the better raising up of those that are fallen down, I shall adde these ensuing helps.
1. Study the Word of God: There be two Rules and Centers to combine and knit up men in a right way. The first, is the Rule and Law of reason, that conjoynes men in Civil things and waies of humane wisdome. Gamaliel was more rational than the rest of his Society; and to him the whole company a∣greed, in him the whole Council was concentred Act. 5. 40.. The second is the Rule of Scripture, that unites men in the things of God, walking by the same Rule and minding the same things go together Phil. 3. 16.. By the reci∣ted Word and will of God, we finde in Scripture a concurrent and unanimous determination of a great Controversy Act. 15. 14, 15, 16, 17, &c. 28. 31. & 16. 4, 5., wherein also the Churches of God did with great consent and content, stand resolved and rejoyce, whatever others think, yet we may say as Luther doth In his Preface be∣fore his Le∣ctures on the Psalms of Degrees., If our Doctrine be in any danger, it comes of this evil; to wit, the loathing and neglecting of the Word.
For further help from the Word, have recourse to the Ministers of the Word, for unity in Gods way, is the work of the Ministry. The Prophet Elijah was the great Reducer of the revolted people of God in the old Testament 1 Kings 18. 38. 38.. And John Baptist (that other Elijah) was the great turning instrument in the new Testament, to bring in and fasten the Fathers to the Children, the Children to the Fathers, and the disobedient to the wisdome of the just Luke 1. 17. Seducing Tea∣chers are Removers Gal. 1. 6, 7. but faithful Ministers are the returners of those that wander 1 Pet. 2. 25., and con∣firmers

of those that are weak, Acts 14. 22. yet not excluding Magistrates, who (being pious) are in their way, eminent Reducers into Gods way; as we see in Jehosaphat that dwelt at Jerusalem, but went out through the people from Bersheba to mount Ephraim and brought them back to the Lord God of their Fathers. 2 Chron. 19. 4.
2. Reverence the Lords Day and all those holy Or∣dinances, which God hath appointed to be then (e∣specially) exercised. It is observed that the meet∣ing of the Jewes together in the solomn Feasts, was a great means of uniting them in the knowledge of the Calvin God of Israel, which was then more aboundantly taught Chron. 30. Nehem. 8. 2. 4., and in the true worship of God, wherein (then) they were more aboundantly employed.
3. Keep close to good Christians, whose character it is to meet together to speak to one another, Mal. 3. 16. and so to confirme one another 1 Thes. 5. 14. If any be unruly, they warn him; if feeble-minded, Psal. 122. 1, 2, 3, 4. they comfort him; if weake, they support him; and if any of the company do erre from the truth, one or other, if he doth not forsake the Society, will set upon him and seek to turn him from the error of his way, Jam. 5. 19, 20. It is very observable that when Peter was among right Christians at Antioch, he was right himself; but when other company came in that were feirce enemies to Christian Liberty, both he (though an Apostle) and by his example, divers others, yea, and Barnabas, left their upright walk∣ing, Gal. 2. 12, 13, 14.
Now its true that all Sects have their Societies, and they may say they keep to those of their owne but its one thing to love & keep company with Chri∣stians upon the account of Regeneration & union to the

Head (which should be the great reason of our love 1 John 5. 1. Psal. 119. 63., and associating our selves with them i) and another to walk with a deviding party in a way of Faction, and because they and we are of one opinion, leaving the company of those in whom there is the same gra∣cious work, because there is not the same particular way. From this irregularity, it ariseth that people wander in un-approved wayes without any returne, to wit, because they keep company and correspon∣dence with those only that are of their own minde, and by whom therefore they are confirmed, but have no intimate and communicative society with others that are of other principles, by whom they might be resolv'd, inform'd, and (through grace) rectifi'd and reduc'd.
4. Fear and forbear the Society of Seduced and Sedu∣cing Persons; in regard of whom the rule is to turn away Tim. 3. 5, 6., to avoid them Rom. 16. 17., not to go forth at their call and instance Mat. 24. 26.: Two great evils accompany the ac∣companying of such; for either 1. They will be cor∣rupters of thee, Rom. 16. 18. 2 Tim. 3. 6, 7. Or 2. Thou shalt be a countenancer of them, whereunto that of the Apostle relateth 2. Epistle of John 10. 11. If there come any to you and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed, for him that bids him God speed is partaker of his e∣vil deeds.
5. Consider into what extremities they that once loose their footing, do at last fall: Unthrifts that sell all their Wood from off their Land to maintain vicious courses, will sell their Land shortly; so they that easily part with some part of that Religion which the Scripture hath establisht, are like enough (if they be followed close) to fall off from the rest. O what

a long journey have divers Christians taken from their Fathers house! who (I believe) never thought of their going so far at their first setting out. Some colour there is for Separation; but then the Separa∣tist turns Anabaptist; some colour also there may be for that (and but a colour) but then the Anabaptist turns Quaker; and is there any colour for that? for leaving Christs colours 2 Pet. 3. 17.? O remember the Rule, Buy the truth and sell it not Prov. 23. 23.: Part not with any truth, least you part with all; like Christians that pick and choose some godly Ministers at first, but contemne others, and shortly after shake off all.
I shall here minde you of a double extremity into which they that are called Quakers are fallen, and so hasten to a conclusion.
1. Consider how near they come to Popery, though hoodwincked (its like) and toled into it by a Jesui∣ticall spirit, which also (as this Pamphlet may prove) hath much invaded their writings. Their symboli∣zing Mr. Pyn Mr. Baxter Quak. Ca∣tech. p 27. and agreeing with Papists, is sufficiently disco∣vered by others, in the particulars; as the contempt of Scripture; pleading for the sufficiency of the common light, or the light of Nature, that is in all men generally; leaving their callings as Monks and Hermites do, and shaking off those to whom they have relation, to shift for themselves; in their pre∣tending to perfection, as if they were without sin, and to a fulfilling of all Gods commandements, especial∣ly in resting as they do upon an inherent righteous∣nesse, and insisting still upon things legall rather than Evangelicall.
It is observable (as they say that have conversed much Faithful discovery of a trea∣cherous de∣sign, p 12. with them) That there is no mention made in any of their Papers we have yet seen, of eternal salvation from the

wrath to come, or condemnation of hell by any atonement, The Oath of George Cowlishaw of the City of Bristol Ironmon∣ger taken Jan. 22. 1654. price, purchase, blood-sacrifice of our mediator without us, but of eternal salvation from the dominion of sin by Jesus Christ, who is eternal life in us.
Of this I need to say the lesse, to those to whom I write, who are by Oath informed of the actings and acceptings of divers persons in Popish Orders, into this design, and among this miserable, misled com∣pany.
Its true (as one sayes) that Satan transformes him∣self, and these men cry out against Antichrist, but what Worlds wonder. p. 40. matter is it if a man call himself Knave? its no slander: So for Satan to cry out against himself, is but a small game for him to play incomparison of some other.
2. Consider further how near they come to Atheisme; for what is it lesse than an approach to Atheisme, not only to forsake, but also to be bitterly disaffected to They who desire to be acquainted with the mysteries of this way, may be sa∣tisfied in reading that Book. the Servants and Ordinances of Jesus Christ? For the manifestation whereof, I shall yet again make use of his testimony, who being himself far gone in the Qua∣kers woful wayes, in the Northern parts, hath more fully than any other that I have read (and that in thankfulnesse to God for his deliverance from them) made a discovery of them.
First then, he demonstrates these men to be led by a spirit of Antichrist, from that spirit of enmity, bit∣ternesse and prejudice, which is conceived and brought forth in their hearts towards such of the ser∣vants of God, as walke most strictly and orderly in communion together; and especially such as are the Pillars of the truth in the Churches of Christ. This I know to be true (saith he) by what I observed in my own experience, when I was under those Satanish-ange∣lical-metamorphosings; beside that, I have heard them

say several times, their hearts were not drawn out towards the creatures of the world, that they were more tenderly af∣fected Worlds wond q 27. towards such who were meerly Atheistical and pro∣phane creatures, then towards such and such Societies, Professions, Professors; to wit, precious, honest-hear∣ted men, against whom they raile in their Letters to them and yet pretend love.
Secondly, for the Ordinances of God. It must needs be (saith he) the power of Antichrist working through See the same Book, p 16. 17. deceipt, that robbeth the soul of all those former wayes and means wherein the Lord did work faith, knowledge and enjoyments in the hearts of his children, &c.
I have heard them complain exceedingly that they were not wholly taken off such things, but they did finde their hearts hanging upon old despensations, wayes, discove∣ries; all these things they say must be burnt up in them and destroyed, and because there is so much of them re∣maining, therefore they be under such agonies. They e∣steem also that the more the heart is brought off from the meditation and consideration of Gods former dealing, and the more negligent it is become in reading, hearing, praying, or any such heavenly (and their own once) ex∣ercise, the more pure and perfect it is become, and if they could altogether cease from them, it would be well with them. They think all acted formerly was the power of the first Adam; and therefore being not of Christ it ought to be denyed, and thrown away as an abominable thing.
These things and much more you may finde in that Book called, The Worlds wonder, or the Quakers bla∣zing Star, by Edmund Skip, Preacher of the Gospel to the People at Bodenham in Herefordshire.
Now can you whom God hath kept from these horrible heights hear these things, and not ex∣ceedingly blesse God, by whose alone power you have

been preserved? Or, can you that are fallen off thro∣row your own inconstancy, facility and security, read these things and not tremble to think what the end will be of so dolefull and dangerous a backsliding? O think with your selves (each of you) if I that have been guilty of so sad a departing were now a dying. Could I say with a good and grounded Conscience and confidence, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly? Into thy hands, I commend my soule, a soule that loves thy Word, thy Sacraments, thy Sabboths, thy Ministers, thy Saints, far lesse then it was wont to doe? Will not such things bring thy hoare head with sorrow to the grave? If ever the Lord be so mercifull as to return such (as if they belong to him he will:) O with what weeping and heart-smart will they come to seek the Lord their God Jer. 50. 4.? And if God do not this, what will become of their poor seduced soules? Leave this God once, leave this God still, (whom if you do enjoy, you must enjoy in Ordinances, Job. 22. 21, 22. Psal. 65. 4.) and assure your selves you shall never meet with such a God again. The Lord make you to know it, and thereupon make all to know that he hath turned your heart back again. 1 Kings 18. 37.
And this prayer is (after I have been so long in this fifth cansideration)
6. The last meanes I shall propound and way of revocation of revolted Christians. O that they would come again to prayer and fasting! that would cast out all evils and Devils, Mark 9. 29.
In conclusion, I shall advertise the Reader, that whereas I write more roundly in this Rejoynder, than I use to do, and than I have ever done, (and wherein, if in any thing, I have exceeded in the judgment of wise and godly men, I am ready to be reproved)

that manner of writting I have been drawn into, not only because the things are so grosse which this Op∣ponent holds, and the spirit so insulting with which he holds them forth (a temptation which I have en∣deavoured to resist) but more particularly for these reasons,
1. Because the Apostle directs in some cases Neque e∣nim sic cum proter∣vis at in∣domitis a∣gendum ut cum man∣suetis doci∣libus Calv. in loc. to cutting rebukes, Tit. 1. 13. which I write with fear, least I should take my self, or incourage any other to take a liberty to walk in such a way, unlesse with a desire to cure those that are corrupt; or to deter o∣thers that are such; or to confirm those the better that are not such, &c. Yet (sure) all men are not to be dealt with alike, Jude v. 22. 23. and with these men both wayes are tryed. I wish one or other may doe them good.
2. Because I doubt not but zeale and resolution is required in pleading for the cause of God and against the irreligious and injurious usage of his word and servants, especiall when it's covered with shews of rea∣son and religion.
3. Because it is not reasonable that by a cold dis∣course there should be any suspicion that our con∣sciences accuse us as this adversary doth; or that we doubt of the regularity and righteousnesse of our calling and carriage, which are here so much inveigh∣ed against: which is the more considerable, because such men as he who hath set himself a work in this Book, are apt to interpret a milde way of Refutation, a secret conviction and vertuall concession, that the cause is such, that we dare not boldly and strenuously give witnesse to it.

4. That Christians that feare God may not be a∣bused and deluded into doubts by the lofty and Thra∣sonicall Language of this, or any vaunting opposite: nor be induced to think by a remisse reply that there is something of truth and honesty in that cause of his which is carryed all along with so transcendent a confidence.
5. Nor is this done without some respect to Solo∣mon's counsell Prov. 26. 5. that one, that is of so great a spirit as this writer is (and yet in no wiser a way) may not be altogether so high as otherwise he might be in his owne conceipt, or (if he will needs be so, yet) that it may be in his owne conceipt only.
I should not have been thus long, but that I account the answering of one that declaimes (or exclaimes ra∣ther their disputes far less considerable than the com∣municating of something upon this occasion, (which) (as God hath enabled) I have endeavoured to doe) for the information and conformation of humble, sincere, and ordinance observing Christians.
The Lord give a blessing to what I have written, that it may be to those that are firme in their reso∣lutions for God (as Josua's stone sometimes was chap. 24. 26, 27.) a sealing-stone: to those that are doubtfull a Touchstone, yeelding some assistance for a right dis∣covery; to those that are fallen away a Load-stone, to draw their hearts (if God say so too) back againe: (1 Kings. 18. 37.) and to none a Milstone, by rejecting that in scorne which is offered unto them in love, and with a sincere aime at their spiritual and everlasting good.

This shall still be the prayer of him whose reall de∣sires are to be.

May. 21. 1656.

Jer. 3. 22. Return ye backsliding children, and I will heale your backsliding.


Can any heart be so hard as not to Answer.
Behold we come unto thee for thou art the Lord our God?
I will go and return to my first husband, for it was bet∣ter with me than then now, Hos. 2. 7.

