



IF there be any thing that can excuse my Presumption in putting Three such great Names to this little Book, it must be the Sincerity of my Intention for the Interest of Religion.
For the Doctrines it contains, I need say no more, than that they are faithfully Collected from that incomparable Author the Whole Duty of Man, a Book (to speak in Dr. Hammond's Words) that has
 all the Advantages, which (with Gods Blessing) can render it fit for the Salvation of Mankind.
My Design in drawing it into this little Volume, I have already men∣tioned in the Title, viz. For the Be∣nefit of the Poor, and who so fit to recommend it to them, as those ve∣ry Persons to whom the Govern∣ment of this great City is entrust∣ed; your Names, your Characters, and your Authority together, must needs stamp a Repute upon it; and render it acceptable even to this sin ful Age.
I am sensible, there's neither of you can be any Friend to the com∣mon Vanity of Complement; and therefore to bespeak your Accep∣tance of these few Sheets; I shall Address my Self to your gracious God, that under the shadow of your Protection, he would bless this Epi∣tomy to the Conversion of many Souls.
Alas! we live in a World where∣in Vertue has almost lost her Pre∣rogative, Religion has few true
 Friends and will have fewer still, ill Men can be persuaded to consi∣er the Necessity and Advantage of t; and how far this little Book ay contribute towards that End is tterly out of my Power to deter∣ine.
I know I have put it into good ands, and so I humbly leave it ith you, with this Assurance, that hatever you do in the behalf of iety and Charity, will be doubly ac'd to your Account in the Re∣ords of Eternity, and entitle you  Rewards as large as your Merits, d as lasting as your Souls.
And now there remains no more, t to beseech you to accept this tle Book, and Pardon the unwor∣y Author, who amongst many o∣ers that Congratulate your Ac∣ssion to your respective Stations,  one of the first that has thus ven∣r'd to do it in Publick.
Your high Qualifications have awn after you many Hearts, and any ardent Wishes, and Mine in
 a more Particular manner than th rest, who am with the utmost D∣stance and Regard, may it plea your Honours,

