



My Deare Friend in Christ.
BEloved Friend in the Lord; I wish to you and your loving ones from God abundance of grace and peace from Christ Jesus, and an enlightning of the Holy Ghost; the Apostle exhorts his Corinthians, and us, 1 Corinth. 14. Thus, Follow after Charity, and desire spirituall gifts, but the rather that yee may prophesie, for he that prophesieth, speaketh unto men, to edification and ex∣hortation and comfort; Here the Apostle holds forth unto us three things, which wee ought to consider well; The first is Charity, in which wherewith and through which our Faith and Religion is justifyed, approved, and confirmed, and therefore where no Charity is, there the boasting and crying up of true Faith, and Religion is in vaine, and all knowledge, and whatsoever else may be is in vaine and of no use without Charity, as the Apostle speaketh plainly, 1 Corinth. 13. Now wee very well know that there is great disputing and arguing about Faith and Religi∣on, amongst those which are taught of God, and can conclude or determine nothing therein, the Reason is
 because they neither have nor know Charity, nor ne∣ver knew the onely summe of Religion and true Faith in God which is Love, and Charity, of which we read in Math. 22. 37, 38, 39. Deut. 6. 5. in the 1 Timothy 1. 5. None is knowne of God, but he that loves God, 1 Corinth. 8. 3. and his Brother and Neighbour. 1 John 3. 11. 14. Therefore wee conclude of all men in the whole world, and of all their Beleivers, Religion and Gods worship, Chap. 4. ver: 7, 8. and Love is of God, and every one that loveth is borne of God, and knoweth God, but he that loveth not, knows not God, for God is love; and in his third Epistle, about the 11 v: sayth John, He that doth good is of God, but he that does evill does not see God, therefore this is the Conclusion of all men among all the Nations of the Earth, as the Holy Scripture speak∣eth, John 5. 39. Those that have done good shall rise unto Life, and those that have done evill shall rise unto Judge∣ment; Therefore whatever man soweth, he shall reape also, whether it be good or bad; Therefore let us doe good, and not to be weary of it; Galat: 5. 8, 9, 10. Wherefore thus wee conclude of all mens Faith and Religion; That whosoe∣ver feareth God in what Nation soever and worketh righte∣ous things, he is acceptable unto God, Act. 10. 35. There∣fore let no man erre and be deceived through an emp∣ty and dead Faith; for none is justifyed of God, and to be able to enter into the kingdome of God, but he that worketh righteousnesse and doth the will of God, Math: 2. 21. 1 Joh. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. It is he which shall abide for ever, Chap: 2. 17. and dwell on the holy Hill of the Lord, Psal. 15. and dwell on high, that is in heaven, Isaiah 33. 14, 15, 16. This now is the first thing the Apostle exhorts us unto, (to wit) Love, thereby is our Reli∣gion and Beliefe knowne, what he is, and what he hath to expect, Rom: 2.
Secondly, he exhorts us also that wee should strive
 about spirituall things, or spirituall Gifts, and endea∣vour after them, the Reason why the Apostle admoni∣sheth us unto them is, that we might grow rich in God through spirituall Gifts, in all manner of spirituall wis∣dome, and understanding, and knowledge in the My∣stery of God the Father, and of Christ, 1 Corinth: 12. Ephes: 3. 16, 17, 18, 19. that our eyes may be enlight∣ned through the Spirit of Wisdome and of the Revela∣tion unto the knowledge of God, Ephes: 1. 17, 18. and Chap. 4. 13. that wee should not allwayes continue to be such children, that are driven by every winde of Doctrine, by the slight and cunning craftinesse of men, ver: 14, 15. but that wee might attaine unto the wis∣dome of the Saints, and of those that are perfect, which lye hid in the Mystery, of which, worldly men know nothing, nay it is hidd from the witty and wise men of this world; Math: 11. 25. Job 28. Wisdom 7. 10. 1 Corin: 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. Thus wee should strive after spirituall Gifts, that wee may learne to know the My∣stery of God, Colos: 2. 2. and that all the treasures of Wis∣dome and knowledge are hidden in Christ, ver: 3. in regard of that knowledge all other things are accounted but Dung and double losse, Philip: 3. 7, 8. Thus shall wee be rich in God, and perfect, enriching others also; Thus the Corinthians according to the exhortation of the Apostle, who strove after Spirituall Gifts, and prayed to God for his Holy Spirit, and they were re∣plenished with all manner of spirituall Gifts; for when they assembled together in the Congregation every one made shew of his Gifts to the praise of God and to the edifying of the Congregation, as it plainly appears, 1 Corin: 14. But where are now adayes such Congre∣gations and spirituall Gifts? Are wee not rather deri∣ded by those which have not the Spirit? when we are zealous about the Spirit, and spirituall Gifts, and doe
 accuse us of seven and eight Devills, and that we have a familiar spirit; Nay it is so, but the Lord commeth and will judge it.
Thirdly, the Apostle admonisheth us to endeavour after prophesying, and 1 Thess: 5. 19, 20. he sayth, Quench not the Spirit, despise not prophesying; the Quaere here now is, what signifyes properly to prophesie, and what is the spirit of prophesying? Answer; These are the Prophets, which have the Spirit of the Testimony of Jesus Christ, Revel: 12. 17. Chap: 19. 10. Then wee aske what is the Testimony of Jesus Christ? Answer; This is the Testimony of Jesus Christ, and the Spirit of prophesying, That Jesus Christ is the Sonne of the living God, and the true God himselfe, and not a crea∣ture as Adam was, and all are; Math. 16. 13. 16. 1 Joh. 5. 15. 10, 11. 12. 20. And thereby wee know that wee have the Spirit of prophesying, and the Testimony of Jesus Christ, if wee speake of Christ divinely, and not humanely, Math: 16. 23. if we speake the words of God and not of Men, thereby wee know that wee are of God and are sent of him; Joh. 3. 34. 1 John 4. 5, 6. 1 Peter 4. 11. Therefore the Spirit of prophesying, hath the true Doctrine, and Testimony of Jesus Christ, for he speaketh divinely, and with such words which the Holy Ghost teacheth, and not the spirit of this world, which teacheth words of humane wisdome, and not words of God; 1 Corinth: 2. 12. Chap: 2. 12, 13. Now through the spirituall Doctrine the Congregation of God is builded on the spirituall Rocke, and foundati∣on, which is Christ; Chap: 10. 4. Ephes: 2. 20. On which Foundation and Rocke, our most holy Faith is groun∣ded as on God himselfe, and not on any Creature.
Secondly, the Congregation is admonished and ex∣horted by prophesying, 1 Corinth: 14 3. and meliora∣ted, ver: 4th, that shee in her wisdome should take heed
 of such who are earthly minded, for through the spi∣rits of errours the Congregations are scattered, as ap∣peareth plainly by all humane sects, the Reason is be∣cause the false Prophets deny Christ, and with forged words worke on men, and have not the Testimony of God and of Christ, nor the spirit of prophesying, but the spirit of this world, in a Wisdome which is from below; James 3. 15. according to the Flesh, which is in enmity against God; Rom: 8. 5, 6, 7, 8.
Thirdly, and lastly, wee are through the Spirit of prophesying comforted in that which is to come, Namely, that wee shall be redeemed from this world, and from all miseries, therefore the Spirit of prophe∣sing foretells us of future things, for our comfort, that wee may keepe faith in Patience, and be circumspect, and long with the whole Creature, after our Redemp∣tion, on which wee waite and depend; Rom: 8. 21, 22, 23. Thereupon the Prophesie foretells us of the king∣dome of God, and of the end of this world, with the extirpation and destruction of all the wicked, and of the true peace, and eternall Joy, as also of the great Glory in the future World of the kingdome of God, of which wee comfort one another, and rejoyce in that which is to come.
Now such a thing, namely, that which is to come, is foretold also in the Treatise called Postilion, through the Gift of Prophesing, though this our Prophesing, be not so perfect, yet, he who is spirituall, and a Pro∣phet in the Congregation of the Lord, will not despise it, but remember what the Apostle sayth, 1 Corin: 13. 9. That our prophesing is but in part. But the Reason why I dedicated this Treatise to my Loving Friend, and published the same in his Name, because he is a Lover of the Divine, and Naturall Wisdome, and searcheth after Truth, in one or other, and waiteth
 with me and all true beleivers, and with the whole Creature, upon the Generall Redemption neere at hand as possibly may be credited; Therefore my in∣tent and purpose is to bring in this Booke this glad tydings, and sure Newes; First to all the select belei∣vers, then to the whole people of Israel, and Juda, and at the last to Heaven and Earth, and all the Creatures therein, especially seeing a good Message is accepta∣ble, and I make no doubt but it will be so received, (as it is intended) first by you, who is my Deare Friend in Christ; next by the Christians and Jewes, and at last of the Spirit of all the Creatures, who with me joyntly expect their Redemption, for which God the Creator of all things make us fit and worthy; whose Name be praised for ever, to whose Grace wee recommend our selves.

Dated at Amsterdam the 15th of January, Stilo Novo. 1655.
