


RUmpatur quisquis, &c. I am resolved with your leave, to have my own way in doing here as I do; for though some may think me mad for giving such hold against my self, in case the Relator should reply; who perhaps will indite me of false Heraldrie, for laying Epistle upon Epistle, (as I re∣member I once heard him argue the case very learnedly with a Carpenter, who was ma∣king a Wicket in the middle of a great Gate) or which is as bad, send some Pedagogue with his ferula in his hand, to challenge me with a false Position, in placing this con∣cluding Preface, in manner as I have done; yet I fear him not, let him do his worst: Be you Sir pleased to accept of it vultu annuente, it being made, I assure you, while I my self was nodding, inter sleeping & waking, neither one nor other; which you will the rather believe by what followeth, having, I protest unto you, been once such a fool as to dream, I must needs be reciting this May-game in your Schools at the next ensuing Act: And that you may know I tell you no tale, I still remember some of the Compel∣latorie Introduction, me thoughts I then used, which here you have. Reverendis∣sime Procancellarie, cum toto doctoratus satellitie, hî ovium, caprorum illic, in utramque manum assidentium. Patres, viri, juvenésque Academici, and so wishing them all good rest, I proceeded; Mihi diutius excogitanti, qualem ansam, solennitatem vestram excipere, arrepturus essem, arrisit tandem Novus noster Gallo-belgicus, quae nunc in toto notissima fabua coelo est: And then propound∣ing my question, which you know I must of necessity do, some one or other, I took this,
Omne gliscens non est aurum; made use of my Author as a medium, and so went on ut supra, animadvertizing upon his relation, Licet non omnino secundum sormam statuti, which forbiddeth all Anglicismes: Mine therefore being almost every word English, and yet I assure you, for those two or three Tipps of the other Neats-tongue, which you finde therein, it had like never to have seen the light, if the zealous Statio∣ner who printed the other, could have helped, it being a main reason why he refused to put forth this too himself, whereof I afterward understood the cause; for that he being a Fifth-monarchie man, could not away with the language of the Fourth. I never intended to have printed it at all, but that it being Term-time, there was never a Scrive∣ner, or Lawyers Clerk in Town at leisure to write it out. (The Relator, if you see him, perhaps will tell you this was a lie to his knowledg, but believe him not) And for mine own part, I think it no shame to professe, I can neither write nor read, so that it could not be otherwise engrossed. Vale.
From my House near Strand-bridg Jan. 26. 1656.
FINIS.
