


THE serious consideration of the dreadful danger to mens souls by reason of vicious and sinful Customs and Habits contracted in youth, which being confirmed by a long continuance in a debauched course of Life, renders their Conver∣sion and Reformation very diffi∣cult, if not next to impossible, as the Prophet speaks, Jer. xiij. 23. Can the Aethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil; made me sensible, that the only

way to prevent this great Mis∣chief must be by engaging Per∣sons betimes in their young and tender Years, in Vertue and true Goodness, by means of religious and prudent Education, Instru∣ction and Advice: And there∣fore I conceived it not to be be∣sides my Duty (next to my own Children) to indeavour to pre∣vent this Evil and Danger fall∣ing upon my only God-son now re∣maining alive, and capable of Advice, and that therein (I act∣ing within my own Province) it could not be imputed to me as a Crime. But, Sir, now seeing this Discourse is likely to be made more publick than was at first intended, I could not well find out one more suitable, to whom to dedicate it, than your self, who are a Gentleman of such great Hopes, as to be in

time, one of the Vertuosi of the Age you live in; who, I doubt not, will make it your Study and Care, by your Life and Conver∣sation, to refute that bold Asser∣tion of him who once said, O vir∣tus, quaesivi te ut rem, sed tantum merum nomen es! For certainly there is true Gold in the World, although there is a great deal of counterfeit Metal like it. I shall say no more, least it may prove Offensive to you, whose Care, I verily believe, will be to be rather Good than Great; who will have a greater Desire to be useful in your Generation to serve your Prince and Country, than to be talk'd of in the World. Thus heartily wishing to you the Completion of all Happiness, which only consists in a religious and vertuous Life here, and at Death to be made

more Happy; translated hence into heavenly Mansions, those Receptacles of Vertuous, Noble and Purified Souls, in the high∣est Heavens, there to be taken up with the holy and excellent Imployments of the blessed Angels, for evermore: I am,
SIR,

Decemb. 10. 1687.
