


COurteous Reader, if thou dost live under the Crosse, and art sensible of these sad times, or if Gods visitation be upon thee, which makes thee to sigh and groan under the bur∣den and pressure of thy sorrowes, so that thy soul desi∣reth comfort, and thy spirits want spirituall refreshing and heavenly consolation: then I have written this Treatise for thee, which I present to thy view, where∣in thou shalt finde the true way how to demean thy self under Gods visitation, how to bear thy crosse with a contented patience, how to make the burden of thy sorrowes more easie, or how to be delivered out of them, if God seeth it to be most for his glory, and best for thy good; also how to refresh thy spirits and comfort thy soul in what kinde soever it is afflicted. Here also thou shalt finde that many of Gods dear servants have suffered as great afflictions as thou canst, and yet God did send them comfort and deliverance; but specially what Christ thy Saviour hath suffered for thee, and what benefit and comfort thou maist have by it, if thou canst draw it to thy self, and make a particular applica∣tion of it to thine own sorrowful condition, without which it will yeeld thee but small consolation in thy miseries. If thou dost meet with any thing here that will fit thy present condition, either for edification, or for com∣fort,
 thou must ruminate well upon it, to suck out the spirituall juie, to imprint it in thy minde, and to bring it close home to thy heart, that it may comfort thy soul, and cure thy wounded Spirit. David found great comfort when he did Meditate on the Word of God. My soul, saith he, shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatnesse; and my mouth shall praise thee with joy∣fullPsal 63. 5, 6 lips; when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches. And it must needs be so: for this is a duty which God requireth, and he takes speciall notice of those that do practice it, to pour down his blessings upon them, as he did, upon Isaack, who went out dayly into the field to MeditateGen. 24. 63, 64. upon the wonderfull Works of God, and then at that very time God sent him a vertuous Wife. If the Spirit of God goeth along with thee in thy holy Meditations, they cannot but be comfortable to thy soul; thou wilt then conceive aright of the secret and hidden things of God, and thou wilt see the infinite wisdom ond power of God in all the Creatures, his goodnesse and bounty to thee in them, and a glympse of the Majesty and glo∣ry of the great Creator, God Almighty. His holy Spirit will also open thy heart to let in whatsoever spi∣rituall good thou reapest by thy pious Meditations: For if thou lookest upon the creature, and doest not Me∣ditate something of God in it, thou dost look upon it in vain, and if thou readest or hearest his Word Preached, and dost not settle it upon thy affections by ruminating upon it, thou canst not edifie thy heart, nor comfort thy soul thereby: So likewise, if thou doest read any thing in this Treatise that is comfortable to poor dejected Spirits, it will not comfort thee, if it be not well digested in thy heart, and applyed to thine own
 soul. If thou art not acquainted with this holy Duty, I have given thee some directions how to perform it; and if thou doest first practise it upon thy self, to medi∣tate upon thine own condition, what thou art by nature, and what by grace, and considerest seriously in thy thoughts what way thou walkest, what steps thou treadest, and to what end thy wayes do tend, thou wilt not onely come to the knowledge of thy self; but thou wilt also learn how to Meditate profitably and comfor∣tably upon God thy Creator, upon Jesus Christ thy Redeemer, and upon the Holy Ghost thy Sanctifier and Comforter. I conclude with this saying of an ancient Father: Nothing is found more sweet in this life, nothing is conceived more comfortable, nothing doth so separate the affections from the love of this world, no∣thing doth so fortifie the minde against temptations, no∣thing doth so stir up man, and further him to every good work and duty, as the grace and benefit of Di∣vine Meditation, and heavenly contemplation.

