



When I heare (deare Cousins) of the pillagins, plun∣drings, and insolences, committed by some of the Melitia on both sides in my native Countrie; it grieves mee at the very heart, to think upon yt, and is a just judgment of God upon vs for our sinnes, which I beseech the Lord in mercie to divert his punishments, and that by our timely repentance, wee may stay the violls of his wrath, which begins to be powred downe, upon our deare Countrie and Ireland. And thoug his sacred Majesty by his Generalls, as likewise the Parliament by theirs, have made, and proclaimed good, and wholesome Lawes and Articles, for the keeping and observing of Marshall discipline, & the restraint of insolences in their Armies: yet it will not be amisse, to transport into England, that our Chiefs & Commandeurs there, maye see the Lawes, Articles, Placcards, and Pro∣clamations, touching Marschall discipline, by which our ould, and con∣quering armie here is governed in the service of the high and mighty Lords the States Generall. And having runne through the three parts of the Prin∣ciples of the Art military, practised in these Netherlands, I thought that my workes were not compleate, unlesse this Appendix of Marshall discipline were annexed unto them. And now by the grace of God, having finished & even this daye putt an end to my Militarie Labours: I render thanks unto the Lord of Hoasts, who hath given mee health, wisedome, and un∣derstanding to performe this laborious worke. And eternally blessed be his glorious name, who by the eye of his divine providence, and under the shaddowe of his wings, hath preserved mee the space of two and fortie yeares through many dangers: and though I have bin present in many hott services in this Land: yet he hath not given the Ennemy so much power, as to draw one drop of bloode from mee. And now this being the last worke. It comes unto you, to desire your Patronage as a token and an ex∣pression of my loue and respect unto you both. Beseeching the Almighty to preserve you, my Aunt your Mother, & all our familly in health, and hap∣pinesse, & hereafter to crowne you all with everlasting blisse resting.

From the Citie of Delph, in Holland, this 30, of Ianuarij 1643. Stylo novo.
