



SIR,
THO' I have not the Honour of an Ac∣quaintance Ded. p. 3. with you, yet since I found I. B. to an Argument in Print, that seemed to Aim at nothing but the Publick good, besides considering the softness of the style, the strength of Argument, and the Masculine expres∣sions in it, I could conclude nothing less than that your Polite Pen drew it.
It was because you were so great an Instance of Ded. p. 3. the Oppression which the Gentry of England, as well as the Tradesmen and Commonalty La∣bour under; that I presumed to Affix your Name to these Papers, which I am sure are wrote with no other Design than to Advance the Publick Ad∣vantage,

by endeavouring to suppress a Nest of Pestilent Vipers, who have stung, and been e∣qually pernicious to all Ranks and Degrees of Men, except only those who have nothing to lose.
You know that the Glory of England consists in their Liberty and Property, I mean their Per∣sons and Estates, which are the Pillars of the Government, and must be maintained and sup∣ported, Ded. p. 3. but both are weakned and terribly shaken, the one by Quacks in Physick, and the o∣ther by Empericks in Law; of which I Question not but your own Experience can give the World same lively Instances.
—Pudet haec opprobria dici.
I shall not Instance in Trade or Credit, you have so feelingly described both, that I must con∣cur with you in that Axiom you have laid down; That Credit is Necessary to Trade, especially when the Emptor wants Money to buy with, and Ded. p. 5. if one shall happen to Trust a Knave (as Mo∣destly speaking it is two to one but he does) who will not pay, not only his Profit, but his Prime cost is lost, as it was the case of a Periwigmaker

that Trusted a Bar. of the Inner-Temple; and the Wounds of Friends strike deeper, and are more fatal than those of Open Enemies.
What I hear shall Indeavour to expose (and Ded. p. 6. I hope the Parliament, that August Assembly, will Apply a Remedy) is those two publick Nu∣sances of Quacks in Physick, and Pettifoggers in Law; who by Colour of Practising the two No∣blest Professions and Sciences, are the greatest Oppressors, or Invaders of our Liberty and Pro∣perty (the greatest Blessings of the Subject) by their Villainy, Ignorance, Extortion; and Im∣pudence.
I hope your goodness will Apologize for this Confidence of mine, but I could prefix no other Name, considering that it was your Penetrating Judgment that Dissipated those Opacous Sha∣dows that clouded our Courts of Justice, and blindedt he faculties of our Patriotical Lawyers; 'tis your Corinthian Countenance alone that could Confront that Leviathan, that eat up the Laws as a Scholar would a Commons; 'twas you alone, that out of a Publick Spirit in this Noble field, Summoned to our Aid all the faculties both of your Body and Mind, your Wit, your Judg∣ment, your Law, your Manly Strength and

Courage, against this Great and Common Ene∣my.
Sir, It is you alone may properly be said to have discovered these Mysteries of iniquity, and given us a Key to these secluse and Inscrutable Mysteries of Marshals and Gaolers, and Clipt the Wings of these Dragons.
In a Word, 'tis you alone, that have effectu∣ally Imployed your Incomparable Cerebellum in Diving into these Obstruse Dunghills, and Raking into those Noisom places, with your penetrating Judgment, like a Mathematical Tel∣lescope, for one born in a Dungeon could not have gone deeper, or bred up in a Goal, discovered their Villainies and Exactions better.
I could wish, and really the World may justly expect, it from your Mercurial head and Calcin'd Brain, that since you have afforded the publick this Project, you would likewise assist the State with your Politicks; whereby they will be convin∣ced, that you are a Great Projector, a Profound Polititian, as well as a Patriotical Lawyer.
I am, Sir,

