



MY LORD,
THE Age wherein we live, as it is unhap∣py in too many Par∣ticulars, so in no∣thing more, then that it hath almost lost the ancient Faith amongst so many Factions which pre∣tend to it, and ex∣clude others from it. Some we have who have maimed it, by cutting off certain Articles; and others, made a Monster of it, by hetero∣geneous
 Additions. Some have destroyed it, by corrupting the substance thereof; and o∣thers discoloured it, by counterfeiting its ap∣pearance. Some have poysoned the Body thereof, by the venime of Heresies; and others plucked it in pieces, by the violence of Schismes. But, what Remedy to cure these Corruptions, and Disorders? Sure we can use no better meanes, than what the Prophet ad∣viseth us unto; To aske for the old Paths, and walke therein, and so find rest unto our Soules. Ier. 6. 16. Or to take that course which our Blessed Saviour made use of in deciding the question of Divorces, namely, to reduce the matters in Controversies unto the Primitive Institution. Mat. 19. 8. By which meanes wee shall find (if we make a sober and impartiall search) what was the Faith which the ancient Church received from Christ and his Apostles, that which she universally profest in the Pri∣mitive Times, and delivered unto her Children in its native Purity, and Perfecti∣on.
Now, I shall think my paines most happily bestowed, if I may be thought to have con∣tributed in the least, unto so good a Worke, by this ensuing Discourse; the first Rudi∣ments whereof (that I may give your Lord∣ship an account of its Composure) I drew
 some years agoe in pursuance of a Collegiate Office, which then required me to pitch on some Fundamentall part of Divinity, which might best fit the condition and capacity of the Youth who were then my proper Audi∣tours; and serve as a Ground-worke to settle them in the Principles of Religion.
In order to this, I thought that I could not make a better choise, then by fixing on the Creed, which all ages of the Church have en∣titled to the Apostles, and looked on as an exact summary of Christian Religion, as to matter of Doctrine.
But before I pitched on the Body of the Creed it selfe, I judged it very expedient, if not absolutely necessary, to prefixe somewhat, by way of Preface, touching the Authors and Authority thereof, which to mee seeme to stand and fall together; for if the Creed were not composed by the Apostles, but afterwards gathered out of their writings, by some ob∣scure Hand, not infallibly guided (as theirs) but obnoxious unto Errour; I cannot as yet see, how it can well make good its Title of A∣postolick, or justly challenge that sacred e∣steeme, which it hath universally obtained from all Sorts and Sects of Christians, even from the most pestilent of Hereticks▪
And this I was the rather induced to doe,
 by reason of a certain short Treatise of a Lear∣ned Countryman of ours, wherein he hath been pleased to lay downe severall Arguments in disprovall of the received Authors; the first, I suppose, who ever proceeded so farre, and thought fit to imploy his wit and paines on so unhappy a Subject. And these Arguments of his (as Novelties usually spread farther, and take much at their first appearance in the world) we have found since, not only enter∣tained, but improved also, and augmented in number, by a more Learned Forreiner. I could heartily wish, that they had bestowed their paines upon some other Subject, where∣by they might have gained a more safe repute unto themselves, and a more solid advantage to the Publick; both which are purchased, not by battering, and beating downe what is al∣ready well built and setled, but by repairing the Decayes and Breaches of the Christian Church, or by building on the old Foundati∣ons: whereas we may too justly say of such endeavours as these in matters of Faith, what the Apostle, by an elegant antithesis, speaks in a matter of fact, viz. The eating of Things offe∣red to Idols, wherein the Trespasser most dan∣gerously Scandalized his Brother; that by this ill-managed knowledge of his, he did aedificare fratrem in ruinam, Edify his weaker Brother,
 but in a most perverse sense, not to feare God, but to fall quite away from him.
As to my own particular; the objections of these two Learned men served opportunely to awaken mee unto a more serious and exact Review of those ancient Records, which the Primitive Church hath left us; wherein finding just Ground, as I conceived, for asserting the received Authors and Authority of the Creed, by many concordant Testimonies of those first and best Ages; and those seconded by the suffrages of the most eminent Divines of these latter Times, although divided into Parties, and differing in many other Poynts; I under∣tooke to examine the force of the Arguments alleadged to the contrary, in which though I found at the first sight some faire Probabili∣ties, sufficient to startle an unwary Reader; yet upon a deliberate comparing them with the Consent, the Cleerenesse, and the Authen∣ticalnesse of the contrary proofes, I could by no meanes see such a Proportion of weight and force in them, as to overthrow the com∣bined strength of such an Army of witnes∣ses.
But whether or no, my answers to these ob∣jections will appeare satisfactory unto others, I must leave unto those others to judge, who
 see not with my eyes, as I doe not with theirs. Yet I hope that these my endeavours will meet with Pardon at least (though they come farre short of that perfection, which they may chance to look for, and I could wish for) when they please to consider, the ancient and ac∣knowledged Right of the Cause I plead for; the number and Authority of my witnesses; by whom I am supported; together with the newnesse of the contrary Arguments, which as no Age before ever saw, so no Man (to my knowledge) ever went about to solve. The first attempts in any kind are usually rude and imperfect; much more, when they proceed from an unskilfull, and unpractised Hand, such as mine, which never before ventured on ought which it durst expose unto the Publick view. Yet to excuse my selfe in part from Te∣merity and Presumption in this particular, I ventured not on it before I had the approba∣tion of some Learned Friends, who were plea∣sed not only to peruse the Worke, but solici∣ted me also to the Publication, which if it shall awaken some more able Pen to perfect what I have thus rudely drawn, I shall not a little applaud my selfe as the Instrument of presenting so fortunate an Occasion.
But I have almost seemed to have forgot
 your Lordship, whilst I have been thus parti∣cular in relating to you, the Occasion, the Be∣ginning, the Progresse, and the end of these imperfect labours of mine, which I am now bold to offer unto your Patronage, that so they may have the same Protection with the Author that presents them. For as the many Favours and Civilities which I have received from your Lordships hands, oblige me to a Publick acknowledgment, so your approbati∣on of the Work (which hath had the Honour of your Perusall also in good part) hath en∣couraged me to present that acknowledge∣ment in this kind. Besides, not only Grati∣tude, but strict Justice, seems to require this oblation at my Hands, the first-borne of my Pen; and entitleth your Lordship more pecu∣liarly unto it; for though it were begotten elsewhere, it was borne under your Roofe, and so belongs unto you, as to the Lord of the House, and the Father of the Family.
There remaines nought else, but that as I now present this Treatise to your Patronage, so to present my Prayers to God for your Person, for that of your Noble Lady, together with all the Branches of your ancient Family; that they may constantly Live, and comforta∣bly Dye, in the true Christian, Apostolick
 Faith, which was once delivered unto the Saints. This as it still hath, so shall continue to be a constant part of the dayly Orisons of
MY LORD,

