



AMongst the many excellent Parts of Learning, requisite to render Men compleat in the Study, and Practise of the Law of this Nation, that of Good Pleading hath in all Ages, and in the Opinion of all Learned Men in the Laws, been Crowned with the Bays, as most excellent. That this is so, the Judgments of Sage, and Learned Men in the Law do plainly evince. I shall onely instance in two; whose Judgments are generally approved: yet have been sometimes debated; but seldome, or never, thwart∣ed: viz. Those late learned Lawyers, Sr. Thomas Littleton, and Sr. Edward Coke; to whose Labours their Successours, Judges, and all Practises in the Law of this Kingdom have been, and ever will be indebted. The one of them, in his Learned Book (I need not name it) gives the Art of Good Plea∣ding the preeminence above all the other Excellen∣cies
in the Law. His own Expressions are so full to that purpose, that it will not be safe for me to use any other; unless I premise his own first. Et saches, mon fits, que est un des pluis honorables, laudables, & profitables choses en nostre Ley, d'aver le Science de bien pleader en acti∣ons realx, & personalx: Et pur ceo ieo toy counsail especialment de metter ton Courage, & Cure, de ceo apprendre. And know, my Son, that it is one of the most honorable, laudable, and profita∣ble things in our Law, to have the Science of Good Plea∣ding in Actions Real, and Personal: And therefore, I Counsail thee Especially to employ thy courage, and care to learn that. The other, in his elaborate Comment upon the same Books, in several places, shews the use, ex∣cellency, and necessity of this Art: and confirms the former Opinion with no other Argument to en∣force it, but the Etymology of the word Placitum, de∣rived à Placendo, Quia bene Placitare super omnia placet; and not as some Rhetoricians (whose Critical Wits o∣ver-sway their Reason) suppose the Word so deri∣ved by Antiphrasis, Quia minimè placet.
I do not (nor would have others) ascribe any thing more to me, in the compleating of this small Vo∣lume, save onely the Transcribing, and putting un∣der apt Heads the Declarations, and other Pleadings hereafter presented to your use; and the Table thereun∣to: which Table is composed in plain, and easy La∣tine, to the end it may be the better understood by those (if any such shall use it) who are not so well
vers'd in the French Tongue, as in the other. Neither would I have any man's Opinion so much misguid∣ed, as to think, that this Book is a Shaft taken out of my own Quiver: I assure you, and those of that O∣pinion, it came not thence; but was collected by me out of the Manuscripts of more eminent, and experi∣enced Persons, which came accidentally to my hands: out of which are collected, and published those, that were judged most necessary for the present use, and be∣nefit of the Students, and Practisers of this Age. If any one shall object, that there is no need of a Work of this Nature, in regard of the Swarms of Volums of Pre∣sidents, which have been published in Antient, and Modern Times: It is easily answered; That many of the one are imbesled by those, that know not the use of them, and the remainder are not sufficient to sup∣ply all the Students, and Practisers of the Law. The o∣ther are, for the most part, published in a Language not suitable to the present occasion. If this be not a satis∣factory Answer to that Objection, it may well receive this further; that several new Cases (as various, as the Faces of Men) do daily arise, and Laws, in process of time do change; for which new Remedies are provided.
I shall not any longer retard you by a long Epistle from perusing the ensuing Treatise; having no∣thing more to say save onely to crave your Pardon for presuming to add to your Studies, and Labours in the Law: to whom I acknowledg my self farr inferiour, and that it is my part to subscribe my self

