



SIR,
BOth Equity and Interest do give you a peculiar claim to this off∣spring of my weak Labours, it being born in your House, and drawing its first breath in your famous City. 'Twas with you I had the occasion, and from your Self the practical encou∣ragement to treat on this Subject; while under your roof I enjoyed for divers weeks the advantage of your converse, and beheld in your expressions and conver∣sation a fair display of this Heavenly Trade. This cherished my hopes that a discourse of this nature might find or help to make more such Traders in your August
 and Merchandizing City: A place (among its many Ornaments) made happy with Gospel enjoyments, and the lovers of Truth and Peace. 'Tis Religion is the honour and prosperity of a People, It lays their foundation with Agates, and makes their borders of pleasant stones, Isa. 54. 'Tis like the Crown of Solomon, with which his Mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart, Cant. 3. 11. This gives them Peace within their walls, and Prosperity within their Palaces, Psal. 122. 7. It brings down a blessing on their Basket and Stores, fills their Cham∣bers with all precious and pleasant riches, Prov. 24. 4. And decay in this Heavenly Trade, is doubtless one reason of those wasts in mens earthly Trades: There is no such way for men to thrive in their own interests, as to be faithful to God's interest; As 'twas said of Caesar, that by setting up Pompey's Image, he esta∣blished his own, whereas a decay of God∣liness brings a Moth on mens earthly Trades also: Hos, 5. 11, 12, Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment, be∣cause he willingly walked after the Com∣mandment, therefore will I be unto
 Ephraim a Moth, and to the house of Judah as rottenness. Gregory gives this reason why Dives was tormented in his Tongue, because he talk'd much of Reli∣gion, but practised little, Verba legis in ore tenuit quae opere servare Contempsit. We live in an age of much talking of God, but of little walking with God; Mens tongues are tipt with Heaven, but their hearts and feet sunk into the World, and are full of Pride, Vanity, and Deceit. What was said of Diogenes Synopensis, That in Opinion he was a Stoick, but in Conversation an Epicure, may be sadly reflected on many Professors in this Age, who espouse strict Princi∣ples, but lead loose Lives, and only Treat for Heaven, but Trade for Earth. But Sir, You have not so learned Christ, or received this Spirit which is of the world; but that which is of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12. Your devotedness to the Lord making your earthly Interests subservient to things above, with your Zeal, Courage, and Constancy in the way of God, and natural care for the things of his Glory, do bespeak you to be a Trader of another Countrey, whose work and wages are above; And certainly whatever men
 think, a walking with God in his ap∣pointments, and a conscientious care in every thing to please him, will one day appear to be the greatest interest even in their eyes who now despise it; nei∣ther is there at present any thing in the ways of God which Souls have cause to be ashamed of, however cloathed with Calumny and Scorn by men; nor can they who walk in them in Truth, be deprived of any real interest by the utmost seve∣rity of those that would run them down, And were there no other Argument to perswade men to the choice and persuit of Godliness, this were sufficient, even that relief gracious Souls find from a reflexion on their Ʋprightness, to bear them up under their greatest sufferings; yea, that serenity, peace, and sweet ac∣quiescence of Spirit which sincerity affords them under the most dreadful issues which divine pleasure may allot them here. It must needs set Religion above all other Interests (its Enemies themselves being Judges, if they would be rational) that the worst things of Holiness, even then when Believers are under the saddest Circumstances, are chosen and preferred by them above the
 best things of the world; yea, they are thought a good bargain when purchased with their greatest Sufferings. Surely humour will not engage such who know the usefulness of earthly Comforts, and have least reason to be prodigal of them, to expose themselves, and their dearest concerns in the world unto ruine, but for what they are perswaded, is far better. Hebr. 10. 34. Nor can it be thought obstinacy or hypocrisie in those who know their own hearts, and the terrors of the Lord, to persist in those ways that would cost them their earthly All, and lay them open to divine wrath too, should they be false and disobedient. Certainly, did not prejudice and passion blind mens eyes, the calm exercise of their own light would restrain them from such an uncharitable censure of those that desire to fear God, though they walk in some ways different from their understanding, while they labour to approve their integrity to God and men, and are found faithful to that measure of light they have received. But possibly this Piece may not fall into such hands, or be permitted long under their eye: My hopes, at least my desires are, that it may prosper with those who pro∣fess
 better things; And if it shall please the Lord (who sometimes uses clay and spittle, and Goats hair, and counts the things that are not as if they were) to make this of any service to your Self and Family, and unto those who profess his Name in your City, for whom I have so high respect in the Lord, it will abun∣dantly compensate the labour, and an∣swer the design of him who is and de∣sires to approve himself
SIR,

