


MADAM,
HOw irresistible is the power of love and im∣portunity? The holy Scriptures do plenti∣fully manifest, that divine love doth set Gods All (whether within or without him∣self) on work for his childrens good, and that his childrens importunity hath in al A∣ges prevailed with his Omnipotency, to ap∣peare for their comfort: And multitudes of daily experi∣ence do evidence the prevalency of these two Arguments among the sons of men. My self makes one instance for the verifying hereof, by preaching at Reverend, worthy Mr. Whitakers Funeral, and by printing my Sermon with the Narrative of his memrable life; both which come abroad with enlargements; because streights of time, and the dis∣composednesse of my spirit through grief, would not suf∣fer me thus fully to dilate upon in the Pulpit. Madam, I am confident that your Ladyship can of your own knowledge, not only attest the truth of most passages in my Narrative, but adde also much more from your own observation, which will render his memory precious unto posterity.
And will your Honour give me leave to give some fur∣ther account unto the world, wherefore I have presumed to dedicate unto your Ladyship these expressions of my great respect to my precious much endeared brother Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker; Gratitude is at the bottom of this De∣dication. Madam, As I shall alwayes really acknowledg your Honours favour towards my worthlesse self; so I
 judg it meet to make known upon this occasion that more then many thanks are most due unto your Ladyship from all Mr. Whitakers Relations, for your many and great te∣stimonies of your constant respects unto him all his life long since your first acquaintance with him. I have often heard him mention before the Lord with praises and pray∣ers, your Honours abundant kindnesses, both unto him∣selfe and his family, which I beleeve are on record in hea∣ven to be fully recompensed in due time, because they were the products of your sincere love unto him, as the faithful Minister of Jesus Christ. Madam, there are not many who be so deeply sensible as your sele of the great losse sustained by the death of this holy man of God: What mine own losse is, I had rather expresse it before the Lord, then publish it unto the world. He was (Madam) a faithful servant to your immortal soul, the wel are where∣of God in mercy hath given you to mind much more then all matters sublunary whatsoever. In reference hereun∣to, he was your wise counsellour, in all your doubts and difficulties, your compassionate comforter; in all straights and sorrows, your vigilant Physician to prevent spiritual sicknesse and infection; your zealous Incourager in all wayes of holy service, and a daily Remembrancer of you and yours before the Throne of Grace. Though these things speak your losse, which may warrantably afflict your heart, yet I beseech you (good Madam) consider with comfort, that notwithstanding this bucket be broken (as Dr. Preston was wont to expresse it) nevertheless the foun∣tain of light, life, grace, strength, comfort and satisfacti∣on is still at hand, ever full, and alwayes flowing. He who is now removed out of the Land of the living (to be serviceable by preaching, praying, conference no more) was only one of those golden pipes through which the God of your mercies conveyed relief sweetly and season∣ably unto your soul: the wel-head is not removed, and many other choice conveyances of grace and consolation from Christ be still continued to you. Let this therefore be the language of your faith. The Lord liveth, and blessed be the
  o my salvations, who will never forsake nor faile the soule which in humility and faithfulness doth depend upon his Majesty. And (Madam) Mr. Whitaker his rich receipts of much sanctifying grace, strong confidence, in∣vincible patience, undaunted courage, un-interrupted peace, with pure elevating joyes from the Lord may en∣courage the hopes of the poorest Christians to expect great things from heaven, according to their necessities and de∣sires, because God is no respecter of persons, but free and liberal in the communications of his peculiar goodnesse. These are the words of his grace, Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psal. 81. 10. If any man thirst, let him come un∣to me and drink. He that beleeveth on me (as the Scripture hath said) out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water, Joh. 7. 37, 38. The Almighty hath given you some tastes of that in∣comparable fruit which comes from the Land of promise, that you may be encouraged to hold on in the way thither with cheerfulnesse and perseverance. Madam, It is no small addition unto your honour here, and it will undoubted∣ly make to your happiness hereafter, that you do own God in unwearied attendance upon his sacred Ordinances, laying forth your self for his name faithfully with that prudence, self-denial, and plainness of heart where∣with he hath adorned you, through his rich mercy in Jesus Christ. Madam, I humbly beg pardon for this my bold∣ness, and crave leave to subscribe my self
(Madam) 
