



Most dread Soveraigne,
FArr bee it from my ambition, to presume your sacred Maiestie should mispend your more pre∣cious minutes upon the perusall of this weake essay of my loyall affections to my Parents; My King, the Father of his people,Bonus Rex nihi. a bono patre diffet & patria dicitur a patre, quia haber communem patrem, qui est pater patriae. to whom by the Law of na∣ture I owe Faith and Allegeance:Ligeance or faith of the subiects is due to the King by the law of Nature. Cokes Post nat. My Mother the Church, in whose bosome I have been fostered with the pure food of life, the Word of Truth.
Yet Sir, since your Maiestie was pleased so graci∣ously to approve of the meer Text or Abstrast of this Treatise (The Remonstrance of many of your humble loyall Subiects of that your devoted County of Chester) it is a dutie in me humbly to begge your Maiesties leave, that it may under your Princely patronage walke abroad with this Comment, it hauing by misprision or malice, beene pursued with some vniust clamours, And the pure intents of the subscribers have been expoz'd to a sinister interpretati∣on whoe I am certain had no other end but to expresse their loyall desires to prevent a growing danger.
I confesse my owne insufficiency to performe so great a taske, I foresee the calumny that inevitably attends every good intention, since Traducers barke at those Elephants, whose strength of learning might support a Church, against all the batteries of wit or reason: How must I looke to have these Bats flutter about me,
 who in namelesse pamphlets, fill the ayre, and the eares of every one with nothing, but shrikes and out∣crie, against all Government, Invectives against all Governours of the Church.
But I have read of one borne dumbe, who seeing his Father in danger, affection supplied the defects both of art and nature, and in an istant lent him organs and language to forewarne his Fathers perill. This excites me to proceed; since God hath given me sence to speake plaine English; and (I thanke him) spirit to speake truth: it were an argument of af∣fectation to my selfe, if out of distrust of my owne abi∣lities to write Placentia, (to winne popular applause) I should silence my apprehension of the danger im∣minent over King and Church, which more leisure, or perhaps more curiositie, hath given me that occasion to looke into, (may bee) many better able have omitted.
Visible it is to every eye, what assaults are made by such inveighours against the long established Govern∣ment of the Church, under that reverend Order of Bishops, but it is not so easily discernable how much this may concerne your Maiestie. yet Experience will tell us if we looke abroad, that all those Monarchies haue Suffered an EClipse where the rights of the Churh have beene deserted: And no marvell, if it be well look'd into, Crowns carry a charme with them at the consecrtion of Kings
Exellently learned and satisfactory I must confesse are the Treatises of many great Divines in defence of this Order, But Ars non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem, and some of these have erred in wri∣ting above the capacity of their opposers. Artists iudge
 best of a Diamond without a foile, know it by it's owne Rayes: but the inexpert only by comparison with other stones. I have plac'd Episcopac and Presbytery in paralèll; such as my selfe doubtlsse will better di∣stinguish them in plaine prospect, than in meer specu∣lation. The Bishops are suspect as parties, all that is writ by them as partiall; To all but the preiudicate, sure I stánd unsuspest, being as free borne, as inde∣pendant as any man, I have no interest, but the love of truth and libertie; save that of loyaltie; which when I consider to how gracious a Prince I owe that dutie I confesse it appeares a great tye: hee that shall read those publicke prosessions of grace to both your houses (and tis pitty but they should be read and regi∣stred in the hearts of all your people) I shall wil∣lingly concur with you to reforme all Innovati∣ons in Church and Common-wealth,The Kings speech to both Houses. 23. Ianuar. 1640. to regu∣late all Courts of Iustice according to Law, (and that) what ever part of my revenue shall be found illegall, or grievous to the publicke, I will willingly lay downe, relying entirely up∣on the affections of my people. And shall bee privie to that pledge of free grace given under your Maiesties hand and seale to that your County upon the humble representation of their loyall affections to the peace of Church and State, in those words (which I assure my selfe we shall ever keep as royall Records) We being desirous with the advice and assistance of Parliament to redresse all iust grievances,The Kings letter to the Lords and Gen∣try of the County Palatine of Chester. and resolv'd by Gods grace, to preserve the puritie of Religion, and governe according to Law. He I say, that shall but read these, sure needs no oath of Allegeance, but will bend all his endevours to
 support all his prayers to perpetuate that Crowne to all posterítie, under whose Royall shade, wee have such happy assurances to receive îustice, to enioy our Reli∣gion, Libertie, and Lawes.
These Considerations have encouraged me to re∣present the Government of a Presbitery (as it yet ap∣peares) by their owne Writers, Incompatible with your Maiesties Soveraigntie, destructive to your peo∣ples liberties, wherein your Maiestie pardoning the presumption, and casting a favourable eye upon the good intention: such as maligne truth, or your Maie∣sties prosperitie can vent their venome against no man, lesse values it, then

