



Brethren,
THe sad occasion of this Sermon, and not any opi∣nion of its worth, hath moved me to presume upon this Dedication. I know that you are sensible of the smart of that providence, which having, not long since, removed worthy Dr Gouge and M. Whitaker, hath also taken from us famous Mr Gata∣ker; and the rather, because they all were not only mem∣bers of, but also cordiall friends unto our Provinciall As∣sembly. And these our late losses, may well minde us ofMr George Walker. M. Herbert Palmer. M Edwards. M John Gere. M. Robrough. M. Love, &c. the death of many more of our brethren, whose hearts, heads and hands, went along with us in the setting up and exer∣cising of the Presbyterian Government in our respective Congregations, with mutuall assistance, Classicall and Pro∣vinciall, both for the Ordination of Ministers, and the more pure administration of the Sacraments.
Hereby doubtless the Lords voice crieth to the City,Mic. 6. 9. more particularly unto us the Ministers thereof: Oh, that his Majesty would make us men of wisedom, exemplartly to see his Name! This is the advice of the Holy Ghost, Hear the rod and who hath appointed it.

Brethren, I will not undertake to teach you who are able to instruct others, what use should be made of these dolefull dispensations. Have we not cause to complain, that we did neither thankfully prize, nor fruitfully improve their Mi∣nisteriall gifts, graces and experiences, as we should and might have done?
And seeing they (though dead) do still speak, by their usefull Books printed, or their holy Lives remembred, or by both; should not we be conscientious imitators of their con∣stancy and fidelity, in those wayes of holy truth, discipline and worship, which were heartily approved by them, even unto their death?
Moreover, Because so many active members of our Pro∣vince are translated, ought not we who survive, to streng∣then one anothers hands the rather, unto double industry, with undaunted courage, in our whole Ministeriall imploy∣ment, and to be the more affectionately frequent in prayer, that our good God would make up our loss, by the more abun∣dant communications of his peculiar grace?
And although this saying may be sighed out with sor∣row, we heretofore had the society and assistance of the forementioned fellow-helpers, because now we have them not: yet may it also be a matter of incouragement, because our Presbyterian path, hath been trodden without fainting (yea with joy,) by the foot of them, whose remem∣brance will be as a sweet perfume unto posterity. Having spoken thus much, give me leave (upon the same account,)Mr Cortwright. M. Hildersham. M. Dod. M. Gleaver. M. Dorrell. M. John Paget. M. Bradshaw. M. Ball, &c. to minde you of some few good old Nonconformists (unto whom many more might be added) who many years since (when under Prelaticall power and oppression) endeavoured, by preaching, printing, praying and suffering, to introduce this Presbyterian government which we do now exercise.
 Though those men disliked the use of superstitious Ceremo∣nies, yet they opposed their tenents and practice, who sepa∣rated from the Church of England, condemning it, and the Ministry of it as Antichristian: But they studiously sought to maintain the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, whose labours God blessed to the conversion of thousands of souls and to the maintaining of the power of godliness all their dayes, and whose profitable Works do still praise them in the gate? But what need I look so farre backward, seeing we can easily remember a great company who formerly joyn∣ed with us here in London, in setting up and exercisingDr Harris. D. Arrowsmith. D. Tuckney. D. Wilkinson. D. Chambers. D. Wallis. M. Lea. M. Timothy Dod. M. Cawdry. M. Blake. M. Burgess. M. Gower. M. Roberts. M. Burdall. M. Strickland. M. Cauton. M. Fisher. M. Allen Gear, &c. the Presbyterian government (besides the many others in the severall parts of the Land) who now are of chief note for Learning and Piety, in both Universities and other pla∣ces; whose hearts and prayers (I am confident) still go along with us, for our incouragement.
As this bright clowd of so many witnesses (some in Hea∣ven and some on earth) may be relieving unto our mourn∣ing hearts under our great loss; so (blessed be God) we have not yet cause to complain with the Prophet, that there is no cluster Mic. 7. 1, 2.: for though much contempt is cast upon us (by ma∣ny, who rather seek great things for themselves in the world, then the things of Jesus Christ) as an inconsiderable number, yet we have (I will speak it to the praise of the Lord) threescore Presbyterian Ministers within the pre∣cincts of our Province, who preach profitably, and live godly, who are not tainted with the erroneous tenents ei∣ther of the Arminians, Antinomians or Anabaptists. And the most high will (I humbly hope) incouragingly appear farther for us in these pathes, which (as our consciences be perswaded) are chalked out in the Scriptures of truth, for the welfare of his Churches, and the honour of his own Name by
 Jesus Christ. Upon all the glory shall be a defence.Isa. 4. 5.
I will conclude this my address unto you (my much ho∣noured brethren) with this hearty prayer, that you may hold on in this good old way, till you be gray-headed; nothing doubting, but that your heary heads will be a Crown of glo∣ry, being found in these wayes of righteousness.

Novemb. 24th 1654.
