


OUR Blessed Saviour, speaking of his second Comming, maketh this question or complaint, when the Sonne of man com∣meth, shall he find faith on the Earth. Luke 18. 8. Now he puts this question, to put it out of question, for this seeming doubt is a strong Affirmation, and amounts to a ve∣hement Complaint, that when he shall come to Judge∣ment, he shall find little or no faith amongst men. No faith, in matter of Practise; each man will be false to his Brother: Homo homini Vulpes, as well as lupus; the wis∣dome of the world, so generally counted and esteemed, being nought else but overreaching, the ancient Christian simplicity will be quite lost; and the Serpent expell the Dove: nothing but insinuating Complements, and faire speeches, (like those of the Serpent, to our Grandmother Eve) will every where practise to deceive, under pretence of friendship. Nor, on the other side, will there be faith found in matter of Doctrine; Religion shall be lamentably torne and mangled by intestine Combats of the Tongue and Pen; New opinions shall be in Credit, as new fashi∣ons; till faith, of one by Division become none; as a great entire streame looseth it self, and is quite dried up, when parted into severall small Channels.
Now, that this day is neere approaching, these sad
 Prognosticks tell us; especially the latter, wherewith the present Age so greivously labours; all which mis∣cheife both heretofore arose amongst us, and now ty∣rannizeth over us, for want of a sure Rule or Ground of faith, rightly understood and applied. The holy Scrip∣ture indeed is an aboundantly sufficient Ground of our Be∣leife, and Rule of manners; but being exposed, as now adayes it is, to every mans private Fancy, the Glosse too too oft wyer-drawes and corrupts the Text; so that we look upon Gods word, through a false-coloured Glasse; Pretences of a private Spirit, and enthusiasticall Re∣velations, with the Anabaptist; of right Reason, with the Sosinian (which is as diverse in men, as their fancies or faces) make what they please of Scripture, and force it to speak their mind; thus by perverting it to their own sense, they are not judged by, but judge the Law; and become (as S. James in a like Case saith) James: 4. 11. Not Doers [or Beleevers] of the Law, but Judges.
The Apostles, those renowned Patriarchs of the Chri∣stian faith, foreseing this evill left us a double Remedy, both by Tradition preserved in the Church, to be de∣livered down unto all Ages, from hand to hand, viz. a Rule or Ground of faith; and the exposition; or right applying of this Rule. The Ground or Rule, in the Creed, composed by themselves as a Summary of the points of Faith, which lie dispersedly here and there in the large volume of the Scriptures. The undoubted Expo∣sition, and right applying of this Rule, they have left us in the writings of the Fathers, who were their Suc∣cessours, to whose care and custody, they not only committed the Oracles of God in writing, and the Creed by word of mouth; but the interpretation also of both, as they heard them expounded from their own mouthes, whil'st they lived and preached amongst
 them; for in vaine had the Apostles given them the words, if they had not given them the sense withall, whereby to stop the mouthes of Hereticks, who arose even at the first preaching of the Gospell, as we may see in S. Pauls Epistles. This orthodoxe sense is that, which is so fre∣quently mentioned in the writings of the Ancient Fa∣thers, under the name of Depositum, Catholica seu Apostolica Traditio, fides Ecclesiae, and the like expressions; and which Tertullian makes use of to confound the whole Hydra of Heresies, in his Book De Praeser: adu: Haeret. bidding the Hereticks goe to those mother-Churches, which the Apostles founded, and personally resided in, and to which they committed the true genuine Faith; where saith he, yee shall heare no newes of your upstart hete∣rodoxe Doctrines, invented by yourselves; wherewith this proud factious Generation infested the Church, and led away after them many seduced Proselytes. Of this Tradition S. Paul speaks to his Disciple Timothy, whom he had left behind him as his Deputy at Ephe∣sus, The things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithfull men, who shall be able to teach others also. 2 Tim: 2. 2. And to the Church of Thessalonica, Brethren stand fast, and hold the Traditions which yee have bin taught, whether by word or our Epistle. 2 Thes: 2. 15. comp: v. 5. 6.
Observe here the cunning of Satan, whereby in all Times, but especially in these last and worst, he makes way, by these his fore-runners, for the comming of that great Anti-christ. He hath set men on work under pre∣tence of honouring Scripture, as the sole Al-sufficient Rule of Faith; and of withdrawing themselves from all dan∣gerous Dependance on mens erroneous judgments (see∣ing every man is a liar) wholy referring and submit∣ting themselves to the Holy Ghost, to be enlightened,
 guided, and directed by him; some to render suspected: others by degrees to enervate, and secretly subvert: a third sort, openly to decry the judgment and Decisions of the Church, in the Councils and Fathers; when in the in∣terim, they are grossly and willingly ignorant, that what they denie to Her, they ascribe to themselves, strongly and confidently asserting that to be the sole meaning of the Holy Ghost, which agrees with their opi∣nions, confirmes their fore-received Tenents, and fa∣vours their Side and Faction.
Now let all the world judge, if it will be but an in∣different Arbiter, whether it be not more equall to be judged, in point of Religion, by reverend Antiquity, then by upstart giddy Novelty: By the Consent of so many Auncient Worthies, who living long before our Times, are uninteressed and disengaged in our Quarrels; then by the partiall Determinations of men educated in; and addicted to a Faction: By the joynt consent of many, then the singular opinion of some one: By men eminent for Learning, who therefore well could not; and for Piety, who therefore would not deceive us, then by the conceited Ignorance, and factious spirit of some proud Novellist, start up in this declining, wicked, Atheisticall Age: By those who lived neerest the A∣postles Times, when the Church was one (undevided into Greeke and Latine, Romish and Reformed, Luther∣an and Calvinian) when Tradition was fresh, and un∣corrupted, like a streame running pure neere the Fountaine-head, which afterwards gathered Dreggs by running farther into the more remote and succeed∣ing Ages; then by the Schismatical Directions of latter, degenerate corrupt Times: Lastly (which is farre the most effectuall Argument) by those who as they had newly received, so constantly, unanimously, and
 uncorruptly held the Doctrinall Traditions of the Apo∣stles, the genuine sense of Scripture, which they them∣selves left behind them, who left the Scripture it selfe; then to pinne our Religion upon the sleeves of some Idolized Innovatour, who though he pretend the Authority of Gods Word, an unerring spirit, or the cleare inducements of Reason, yet in truth hath nothing but Impudence, and his Ipse dixit, to maintaine his As∣sertions. This Tradition it is, which made the Aun∣cient Bishops and Doctors of the Primitive Church, so una∣nimous among themselves, in what Part of the World soever they lived, as having the same Deliver∣ers of it who planted all those Churches, wherein they succeeded; and so taught in all, as who received it from the same spirit, who received it from the same Christ, who received it from the same God the Father, as Tertullian de∣duceth its Pedegree out of St Iohns Gospel. Ch. 16. 13. 14 and Ch. 8. 28. Else, if they had followed their own pri∣vate judgements, they must needs have often varied in their Determinations. Hence it is, that they make a great Distinction betweene what they received and published to the world, as Depositaries, Witnesses, Histo∣rians, and what Expositions or Conclusions they drew from their owne Braines, as being their pri∣vate Opinions; in the latter they leave every man to his owne Censure and Judgment, to receive or re∣ject them as they find them Consonant to Scripture, An∣tiquity, and right Reason, but in the former, they re∣quire an absolute Assent, and condemne them all, for Hereticks, who goe not along with them in the same Path, in that they shewed there modesty, in this their Piety.
The Fathers being thus cashired, and appealed from
 as unmeet, illegall Judges, because obnoxious to er∣rour, which hath been laboured to be made good by publishing som few paradoxicall Tenents, found in the writings of some one, or few of them, which they conceive to be Errours, though many of them per∣haps will not appeare such upon due examination; and after all their undutifull, malicious, Search, whereby, like Cham, they have laid open their Fathers nakednesse, they cannot finde one palpable Errour, which they can justly lay to the charge of all, or a ma∣jor part of them, thus at last (missing their aime) they proceed farther to call the Creed in question, that un∣doubted Rule and Foundation of the Christian Faith, which the Apostles with so much care Composed, and left un∣to the Church, as a most pretious Depositum, the lydius, lapis or Touchstone of the Catholick Beliefe, and  of the Orthodoxe Professours. They have called both the Authors, and Authority in question; first, by doubting of, and raising scruples against it; then absolutely deny∣ing, and laying down Arguments to disprove those Au∣thours to whom it hath been constantly entitled: for they both fall together, take away the Authours, and the Authority will soone vanish; for if the Creed were not framed by the Apostles, but collected out of Scripture by some uncertain, and obscure Composer, or Compo∣sers, whose names are buried in forgetfulnesse, see∣ing it containes some Articles which are not set down totidem verbis in any determinate Place of Holy Writ, 'twere possible that some Points might be mistaken, not rightly gathered or deducted, (as by a fallible Hand) and so, the whole Frame of it of no more Authority, then some peice of a Father, or the Canon of a Councill, if so much. For though it be granted that all the Articles of the Creed be either expresse words of Scripture, or by
 an undoubted consequence deducible from it, yet the drawing of these Articles forth of Scripture, requires an unerring, and Divinely-guided Hand; First, because none else can know which is an Article of Faith, that is, a Fundamentall, or Point necessary to Salvation, who is not divinely informed of Gods will and pleasure in this matter. Secondly, because the Judge of the consequence must be infallible, for otherwise it oft fals out, that what in one mans judgment is a necessary Deduction, is not so in anothers, but probable only, or perhaps false; else we should have had lesse about the Trinity and Incarnation, two maine points of our Faith, to name no lesser ones. Having removed these two Forts out of their way, and demolished these Propugnacula fidei, thē after they may safely build what new Fabricks they please, upon the abused Groundwork of Scripture; or rather having digg'd up the Groundwork of the Creed, lay Reason for a new Foundation, on which to build Castles in the Aire; imaginary structures: much like the enchanted Fortresses dream't of in the Monkish Ro∣mances; then they may entertaine, whatsoever strange fancies they please, Fancies which unconstantly hover up and down in the Braine, like so many Cloudes in the middle Region, carried hither and thither by the wind, and presenting now this, now that monstrous shape: having removed these two Bounds of Faith, they may wander in the large field of Scripture at randome, scatter here & there what pernicious seeds they please, root up what was already sowen, confound the fur∣rowes, mixe adulterate graines with the pure seed of the word, thus making havock of all, and turning the field into a Wildernesse.
And though they seem to honour Scripture, and ap∣peale to it, as the sole adequate Rule of Theologicall Truth,
 yet in truth they use it but as a colour, to set off their new-fangled Inventions, the opinions bred within themselves; and so wrest it to serve their own Turnes; for where ever it seems to oppose them, they strait accuse the Copie of Bastardy, that such or such a Pas∣sage hath crept out of the Margin, or Glosse into the Text; or the place hath been interlaced by some of the adverse Party, some opposite Father; they alter at pleasure points, letters, words, yea dash out whole verses, and after all, torture the poore Remainder, till they have forced it to beare witnesse on their side, and speak what they would have it; take but for instance the beginning of S. Johns Gospell, as 'tis expounded by Volkelius. If they should openly, , reject Scripture, they would be exploded, and expell'd out of Christian Common-wealths, and so hindered from do∣ing mischiefe; but now the Divels craft makes use of those to undermine and subvert holy Scripture, who seem most to stand for it; and to perswade the doctrines of men, who seem most to decry them.
In a word the body of Socinianisme (to which we may now adde some other new Sects) is compounded (like some Hydra, or Chymera, or what other horrid Po∣eticall monster) of the must pestilent & poysonous He∣resies, which the Church hath ever laboured under, or cō∣demned in all Ages; And wheras this Age hath bin much given to Systems and Compendium's, least we should want one in any kind, these men have furnisht us with an Epi∣tome of Heresies, a Breviary of Epiphanius : yea, which is worse yet, they have opened a large Gap for more, by making weak, depraved Reason (without any other light or guide; however the Scripture be pretended) the sole Judg of Truth; by abolishing faith, that Reason may be exalted in her Place; that Reason, which is never the
 same, or constant to it self, either in diverse men, or the same man at diverse times; & yet, though they so much cry up liberty of Opinion, they themselves are unwit∣tingly, though willingly Slaves to Socinus; else why doe they all follow him so close? was he the only unerring Guide? the monopolizer of Reason? The Socinians indeed outwardly receive the Canon of Scripture, & much extoll it, to keep up their credit with the Christian world; but expounding it (as they doe) in their own Sense, contra∣ry to the received Interpretation of the Ancients, from & by whose hands they received the Canon it selfe, they doe as good as not receive it, for the Scripture consists in the sense, not in the words. And whosoever shall take a full survey of their opinions, will find that they imbrace no mystery therein revealed, but only what is demōstra∣ble by, or (at least) fals within the Sphere of bare Rea∣son, & the light of nature; All the rest, which appeare, either opposite unto Reason, or placed above it, as the mysteries of the Trinity, the Hypostaticall union, Christs satisfaction for the sin of mankind, the Resurrection, of the same numericall Body, the everlasting punishment of the damned for temporall faults, &c. they cannot away with, because they can see no reason for them; diverting in the meane time all those Testimonies of Scripture, which are produced to confirm these Principles, by altering (as I said) of words, letters. points, wresting of phrases, & affixing to the words new contrary Glosses; & by perverting other places to serve their own turn, by false, unheard-of Expositions; so that this right Reason proves a crooked Rule; and instead of imforming us of the Truth, deformes the Originall, the Touchstone of its Triall. The Church of England in her 21 Article saith indeed, that Generall Councils may erre, and have erred, But shee saith not, that they have erred in matters of Faith, only shee
 infers from hence, wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to Salvation, have neither strength nor authority, unlesse it may be declared, that they be taken out of Holy Scripture. And good reason; because the Scripture containes all things necessary to salvation. But by whom are these things to be so declared? Sure by the Fathers assembled in a Generall Councill: So she makes these Fathers, Declarers, or Collectours of those ne∣cessary Points out of Scripture, and for ought I can see, judges of that necessity; A very great Priviledge, and as much as was ever challenged by them. But she more expresly ties her Clergy to submit unto the judgment of the Fathers (whether in, or out of a Councill) in weighty Points of Religion; Synod. Lond. An. 1571. Tit. 19. De Concionatoribus. Imprimis videbunt [Cincionatores] ne quid unquam doceant pro Concione, quod a Populo religiose teneri & credi velint, nisi quod consentaneum sit doctrinae veteris aut N∣vi Testamenti; quod{que} ex illa ipsâ doctrinâ Catholici Patres & veteres Episcopi collegerint. Where she makes the Ortho∣doxe Fathers, the sole Interpreters of Scripture, who are to be followed by Preachers, in matters of Consequence; and ranks their Collections out of Holy Scripture with the letter it selfe; which if it imploy not infalli∣bility in expounding Scripture, I am sure, it comes ve∣ry neere it.
Reason then, is not the Judge of all Truth, (to which our Church may seeme to referre us, by making Coun∣cils fallible) that is, bare naturall Reason; but Reason en∣lightned: neither were the Fathers guided by it in the maine Principles of Religion, but by Faith relying on Authority divine, or universall Tradition. She may indeed, yea ought to search into, and examine Tradition, whe∣ther it be genuine or spurious, as the Beraeans, Acts 17. 11. examined S. Pauls Citations of the Old Testament,
 touching the Prophecies of the Messiah. But when the Tradition is found to be good and cleare, old and Catho∣lick, then Reason must submit to it, although it may seeme to thwart, or exceed her.
Neither doth S. Peter bid us to give a reason of our faith, but to be ready to give an answer to every one that asketh us a reason of the hope that is in us. 1 Peter 3. 15. that is, upon what Grounds we expect eternall Happinesse, by the Profession and Practice of the Christian Religion; and this answer, or reason to be given, not rashly or con∣ceitedly, but with meeknesse and feare. Indeed, who the most Learned, much lesse every ordinary Christian (who hath the charg there given him) can give a Rea∣son or Demonstration of all Mysteries in Religion? some of which (as the Trinity, and Incarnation) we cannot so much as conceive, or comprehend, fully and distinctly. Besides the word () there may be as fitly rendred, a Reckoning or Account; for the word is, thus else∣where taken; , Give an Ac∣count of thy Stewardship, Luk: 16. 2. and, , they shall give an Account thereof, viz. of every idle word. Mat. 12. 36. but never as farre as I remember, is the word used for a medium, or Demonstrative Argument a Priori.
Is it not then the ready way to the Introduction of all Sects, of Libertinisme, yea (at last) of Atheisme it selfe, to bring all Points of Religion to the Censure, and Tribu∣bunall of this conceitedly-blind Iudge, which according to the mad wish of that Roman Tyrant, cuts off the very neck of Religion at one blow? For all Religions, which hitherto have dared to shew their face to the world, have grounded themselves on Authority either true or false; on Reall, or Pretended Revelations; The Grecians had their Oracles, Numa his Egeria, and Mahomet his pretended
 Gabriel; as well as the Jewes had their Moses; and Chri∣stians, their Jesus. Humane Reason, left to its own light, and guidance, never presumed in any Nation, to be the Mother of a new Religion: or a sufficient Directresse in it, yea, the light of Nature is acknowledged by the most acute Philosopher, to be dim, and darke in relation to Divine Objects; compared therefore by him to the eye of an Owle at mid-day: 'tis not able therefore of it self, to shew us the way to Heaven, who converse here in a spiritu∣all Aegypt, a land of darknesse, which is our naturall state; no getting into Canaan, but by a pillar of fire, superna∣turally raised, and divinely moved.
Now as Anabaptisme is more suitable to the dreggs of the People, and worketh on the grosser humours of the Body Politicke, to whom Community of goods, and free∣dome from the power of Magistrates are pleasing Tenents: so this, as a poyson farre more deadly, seazeth on the subtler wits, as on the finer animal-spirits, therefore the more dangerous, because abler Instruments of mischeife, Reason at the best is fallacious enough, but when thus cried up as the sole, supreme Judge of all, from whom lies no Appeale, no marvell if she extreamly please he selfe in novell Inventions, and become much enamoured of them, as her owne genuine Birthes. Shee is therefore a most dangerous Guide, being thus left to her selfe, in matters of Religion, which (as Vincentius Lir. tels us) is not Res inventa, sed tradita, not found out by our selves, but received from our Auncestours. Sure then, Eternall Salvation is a busi∣nesse of more weight, then to be intrusted to her Dictates and Directions; whence it is, that holy Scrip∣ture every where cries downe the wisdome of the world, the judgment of the naturall man, the vaine deceits of the Heathen Philosophers (who were the great Masters and
 Admirers of Reason) and the darknesse of our under∣standing in things Divine, in the Mystery of Godlinesse. And methinks when Reason decives us so oft in smal∣ler matters, in objects farre lower, such as lie with∣in its owne Spheare; it should a loud proclaime this Caveat to an indifferent and experienced man, that we are not to trust it, in things of the greatest mo∣ment, which lie so farre above its reach; that we are not to follow a false, wandering Meteour, an Ignis fatus here below, when we have the bright Morning Starre to guide us, in this vale of darknesse, untill the Sunne of Righteousnesse arise with healing in his winges.
But, to returne to the Argument, which I have in hand. As I dare not be so rash as to taxe all those of Socinianisme, who denie or doubt of the recei∣ved Authours of the Creed; so this I may safely say, that unawares they may make way for it, as they doe also, who decry or debilitate the Authority of the Church, and Fathers.
I have endeavoured therefore in this following Treatise to vindicate as well the Authours, as the Autho∣rity of the Apostles Creed, as being the maine Basis of the Christian Religion, to which all succeeding Creeds are in the nature of Paraphrases, or Superstructures; a worke, I conceive, too suitable unto the Disease of this Age, and so most unhappily requisite; an Age wherein the very Principles of Christianity are called in Question, and Faith derided as the Portion of de∣luded Fooles, and Idiots: An Age, wherein some have taken upon them to Correct the Old Creed; and o∣thers, to frame new Ones: An Age, wherein some accuse our Mother the Church of England for Beleeving too much, as the Socinian, with some other Sectaries; and others, for Beleeving too little, as the Romane
 Catholick: whose Church hath added to the Creed, severall other Articles, to be beleeved by all Christians, as of nece∣ssity to Salvation; a Catalogue whereof we may find in the Bull of PIUS 4th, among the Acts of their late Tri∣dentine Councill; as also in the Romane Catechisme. Where∣fore I shall indeavour withall, to cleare my much honou∣red Mother from this double crosse-imputation, by as∣serting as well the sufficiency, as the necessity of the Creed for Salvation. This is the summe and end of my Thoughts; which I never intended to make publick, when I first composed these notes some yeares agoe, for my Colle∣giate, Catechisticall Lectures. But when I since daily found many, little or nothing to regard the Authority of the Creed, and some (of no meane note) to write against both the Authority, and the Authours; I reviewed, and enlarged them by farther Testimonies of Divines, both Ancient and Moderne; amongst whom finding an unex∣pected Harmony and Consent in this matter; I undertook to examine the Reasons produced to the contrary, which (as I hope) upon due triall, will not be found so weighty and convincing, as to overthrow so Old, so Generall, so Received a Tradition. Now having proceed∣ed thus farre, and taken no small paines in the Search, I presumed to expose them to a more publick view, not knowing any who hath hitherto handled this Ar∣gument Polemically, and in a set Discourse; wherein if I have any way failed, the Truth (I hope) will not suffer by my weake Defence, but meet hereafter with an abler Patron. But if I have so handled it, that I can revoke any erroneous Christian, fixe the waver∣ing, or confirme him that stands, I shall have great Cause, and good opportunity to rejoyce, in contri∣buting the least Mite to the profit of the Christian Church, or the praise of Christ our common Saviour,
 who is stiled by the Apostle, The Author and finisher of our Faith, Heb. 12. 2. To whose blessed Guidance, and Protection I commit both thee and my selfe, in these darke, dangerous, and unsetled Times.
