



WHen I prepared this Sermon for the Pulpit, and preached it at the Funerall of your much endea∣red Sonne and only childe, there was not one thought in my minde that it should be brought to the Presse; but as it served your desires with reference to the Congregations profit there, so upon the same ac∣count (through the importunity of many others also) it now co∣meth abroad enlarged with respect unto more publike service: The reading of it may probably renew your sorrow by occasion∣ing the remembrance of your losse (for the wound not throughly healed will smart and bleed again upon every gentle touch) but I hope that influences from Christ (the subject of the Sermon) will drop like healing oyl, with sweetnesse upon your spirits. Summer-fruit doth soonest fall from the tree out of which it grew: The early buddings both of ingenuity and piety, in your hopefull childe, caused some of your friends to suspect that God would gather him unto himself before he became a man. Would not you both (if God had lengthened his life on earth) have been content to have wanted his society for a time, upon well-ground∣ed confidence of a comfortable meeting, and that your parting would be for his preferment and your mutual profit? I shall not need to make the application: He was the heir of a full estate, with which Gods bounty hath blessed you, but the hand of Pro∣vidence hath put him into the possession of a far more rich Inhe∣ritance; You had hopes that he might have been the staffe of your age, but though that support is sunk and shrunk from you, yet you are not left comfortless, for the precious promises of Gospel-grace are continued  to uphold both your hopes and hearts for ever. Chear up  hearts (my dear Friends) both in hope of
 his happy change and your spirituall advantage by the sanctifi∣cation of this your losse. Blesse God who bestowed so good a childe upon you, suffered you to enjoy him so long, and gave you (with hearts to educate him religiously) to see the successe of your endeavours in those timely blossomes which appeared upon upon him; And as for your selves, do ye not finde (through the operation of Gods peculiar grace) that upon your souls which may encourage the application of Davids support and consola∣tion? He hath made with me an everlasting Covenant, orde∣red in all things and sure; for this is all my salvation and all2 Sam. 23. 5. my desire, although he make not my house to grow. In this Covenant there is nothing defective, which any Christian, in any condition, can either desire or want. And amongst other rich promises which are thereto annexed, this is one; (which may be seasonably releeving unto you) to give a better name then of Sons and Daughters: Ʋpon all these considerationsIsa. 56. 5. (unto which your knowledge in the mysteries of the Gospel can adde many more) you should rather express the joys of faith then feed upon your sorrows, to your own prejudice and the trou∣ble of your Christian friends: And seeing the Lord hath to your sense written vanity upon the choicest of your creature∣contents, how should your souls be now elevated above all things sublunary and changeable! His hand of providence hath eased you of all further cares for him, whom you intended to leave well furnished with all accomodations for comfort and service in this world; therefore now what have you so much to minde here as to improve time, talents, estate, interests, yea, your All, for your own mutuall advantage in Christ, and the glory of God, who hath done so much for your selves and yours? This improve∣ment of your affliction (wherein my experience hath wrought sympathies) I can and shall heartily request in your behalf through Jesus Christ, in whom I am,

Iune 20. 1654.
