



THis plain Sermon which attended your service of Covenant-renewing from the Pulpit, comes now from the Presse, in obedience to your command, to do you and the publike some further service. If upon the perusall of that which you heard preached, it may please the Lord to quicken your zeal in Covenant∣keeping, I shall have occasion to blesse his Name with a joyfull heart.
The zeal of the Common-Councell of London, in renewing their solemne League and Covenant, rings thorow the severall Counties of the Kingdom of England: and I am confident, that the sound thereof hath been heard in many other Kingdoms: And doubtlesse there are often enquiries, and earnest expectations to hear what Lon∣don now doth in the pursuance of their Covenant heretofore taken, and now again solemnly renewed with holy fasting and prayer. A City set upon an hill cannot be hid; your practices have had, and will have strong influences into the severall parts of this Land, and into other Nations: You have formerly and lately done well and wor∣thily in respect to your Covenant: I pray God, that your continued holy zeal may affect and fire many in other Countries in faithfull Co∣venant-keeping.
 God forbid, that you should ever deserve thus to be stigmatized, either by God or men; Their heart was not right with God, neither were they stedfast in their Covenant, Psal. 78. 37.
I shall not need to tell you, that our solemne League and Covenant is despised, devided, aspersed and opposed by too many: for that which you may read in Pamphlets, and hear from some Pulpits and other places, doth make you both eye-witnesses and ear-witnesses of this evil, which should be greatly bewailed. This contradiction, this opposition should increase your gracious heat for your God. Fire gives out the most scorching heat in the coldest weather. It is time for thee, Lord, to worke (saith David) for they have made void thy Law. Therefore I love thy Commandements above gold, yea above fine gold. Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right, and I hate every false way, Psal. 119. 126, 127, 128.
My soul desires, that according to the guidance of that wisedom which is from above, you all may make the like gracious improvement of the checks and affronts which you meet with, in your Covenant-keeping. By how much the more, any others do plot and practise to hinder the glorious worke of Church-reformation, by so much the more do you consult and act, to expedite and perfect it. By how much the more any others strive and study to maintain Popery, Prelacie, Schisme, Heresie. by so much the more, do you set your selves against such matters, as be∣ing destructive to the welfare both of Church and state. By how much the more others designe and endeavour to break the brotherly union between England and Scotland, by so much the more do you lay forth your selves to maintain it. And that your zeal in these kindes may appear to your selves and others to be pure and sincere, let it be your chief and constant care, to reforme your selves and all yours, in every thing, according to the will of God: That you all may in these parti∣culars and in all things else, approve yaur selves faithfull both to God and man, in holy Covenant-keeping, shall be the prayer of him, who is

Feb. 24th
