



Humbly Shew
THat whereas divers Petitions have lately been carried about this Country, against the present form of Church-Government (and the hands of many persons of ordinary quality solicited to the same, with pretence to be presented to this honourable Assembly) which we conceiving not so much to ayme at reformation, as absolute Innovation of Government, and such as must give a great advantage to the adver∣saries of our Religion, we held it our duty to disavow them all: And humbly pray, that we incurre no mis∣censure, if any such clamours have without our privi∣tie) assumed the name of the County.
We as others, are sensible of the Common grievan¦ces of the Kingdome, and have just cause to rejoyce at
 and acknowledge with thankfulnesse the pious care which is already taken for the suppressing of the growth of Popery, the better supply of able Ministers, and the removing of all Innovation, and we doubt not but in your great wisdomes,Wee conceived it not proper for us by way of prayer to in∣termeddle, but by way of submission to leave these to the Iudgement of the Parliament. you will regulate the rigour of Ecclesiasticall Courts to suit with the temper of our Laws, and the nature of freemen.
Yet when we consider that Bishops were instituted in the time of the Apostlesphilip. 1.1. 1 Tim. 3.1.. That they were the great Lights of the Church in all the first generall Councells,Anno. Bishops. 330. at Nice. 318 380. at Constant. 150 430. at Ephesus. 200 451. at Chalcedon. 430 553. at Constant. 165 681. at Constant. 289 781. at Nice. 350 870. at Constant. 383; That so many of them sowed the seeds of Religion in their bloods, and rescued Christianity from utter extirpation in the Primitive heathen perse∣cutions,Vid. Eusebius Fox his Martyrs.; That to them we owe the redemption of the purity of the Gospel we now professe from Ro∣mish corruption,Vid. booke of Martyrs. Cranmer Tutor to Ed. 6.. That many of them for the pro∣pagation of that truth, became such glorious Martyrs;A Cranmer, B. Latimer, . Ridley B. Hooper, B. Park. A Parker, A.B Gri. B. Whitegift, &c. vid. booke of martyrs.. That divers of them (lately and) yet living with us, have been so great assertors of our Religion against its common enemy of Rome;Bishop Iewel, Bishop Andrewes, bishop White, Archbishop Vsher, Bishop Moreton, Bishop Davenant, and our English Se∣neca, Bishop Hall.. And that their govern∣ment hath been so long approved, so oft established by the Common and Statut Laws of this Kingdome,Bracton lib. 3. fol. 106. Flet. a lib. 7.24. Coo. Little. fol. 97. 134. stat. 14. E. 3. 25. E. 3. 16. R. 2. H. 8.20.1.8.9. Eli.. And as yet nothing in their doctrine (generally taught) dissonant from the word of God, or the Articles established by Law:Partiucular men; (errours cannot be aken for the Tenets of the Church. In this case to cal their Gouernment; a perpetuall vassalage, an intolerable bon¦dage, And (prima facie, & inaudita altera parte) to pray the present removall of them; or (as in some of their petitions) to seek the utter dissolution, an ruine of their offices (as Antichristian)The petition annexed, note 6. we cannot con∣ceive to rellish of Justice or Charity, nor can we joyn with them.
But on the contrary, when we consider the tenour of such writings, as in the name of petitions are spread amongst the common people, the tenents preached publiquely in Pulpits,The positions annexed, and the contents of many printed Pamphlets swarming amongst us; all of them dangerously exciting a disobedience to the established
 forme of gouernment, and their severall intimatious of the desire of the power of the keyes,Petition anexed, note 4. And that their congregations may execute Ecclesiasticall Cen∣sures within themselves;Petition annexed note 19. We cannot but expresse our just fears, that their desire is to introduce an abso∣lute Innovation of Presbyteriall Government, where∣by we who are now governed by the Canon and Ci∣vill Laws, dispensed by twenty fix Ordinaries (easily responsall to Parliaments for any deviation from the rule of Law) conceive we should become exposed to the meer Arbitrary Goverment of a numerous Pres∣bytery, who together with their ruling Elders, wil arise to neere forty thousand Church Governours, and with their adherents, must needs bear so great a sway in the Common-wealth that if future incon∣venience shall be found in that government, we hum∣bly offer to consideration, h w these shall be reduci∣ble by Parliaments, how consistent with a Monar∣chie, and how dangerously conducible to an Anarchie, which we have iust cause to pray against, as fearing the consequences would proue the utter losse of Lear∣ning and Laws, which must necessarily produce an extermination of Nobility, Gentry, and Order, if not of Religion.
With what vehemencie of spirit, these things are prosecuted, and how plausibly such popular infusions spread as incline to a parity, we held it our duty to repre¦sent to this honourable Assemly; And humbly pray that some such present course be taken, as in your wisdoms shall be thought fit, to suppresse the future dispersing of such dangerous discontents amongst the common people; we having great cause to fear, that of all the distempers that at present threaten the well∣fare of this state, there is none more worthy the ma∣ture and grave consideration of this honourable Assem¦bly, then to stop the torrent of such spirits, beore they swell beyond, the bounds of Government, Then we doubt not but his Majestie persevering in his gracious
 inclination to heare the complaints and, relieve the grievances of his Subjects in frequent Parliaments, it will so unite the head and the body, so indissolubly ce∣ment the affections of his people to our Royall Sover∣aigne, that without any other change of Government, he can never want Revenue, nor wee Justice.

