



TO whom rather should I ad∣dresse this present discourse, then to your Honourable selfe, who by your Ann. Dom 1628. and once since that time Embassie extra∣ordinary for his Majestie of England into Germany well observed the countrey and the present estate thereof, where many pas∣sages here mentioned were acted. And much the rather doe I humbly present it to your Honourable Patronage, because, up∣on that happie occasion, it pleased our gracious God to put then into your mind

and to nourish therein ever since, a serious consideration of the deplorable distracti∣ons of the Christian Church; as he did into good Nehem. 1. & 2. Nehemiahs minde, of the lamenta∣ble estate of Ierusalem in his time. Your compassionate and tender affection was, and is still much moved to Segnius irri∣tant aimos de∣missa per aures, quam que sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus, Hor. observe the living stones of the New Ierusalem lying in the dust, or drencht in their own blood, some of her Priests and their flocks clad in Sackcloth, others with their people by sword and fire cast out and banished: and which is worst of all, your Honour well discerned how difficult a task it was to cure this fearfull maladie: because disaffe∣ction of parties & dissention of opinions, unlesse God prevented the mischiefe, would not admit the binding up of the wound. Nor did these miserable calami∣ties of Gods people only vex and grieve your pious and religious soule, but also so rouzed and summoned up your Honours most serious thoughts, that with As the good Samaritan not only pitied, but took care of the woun∣ded man. an hear∣tie and godlie providence, with a sincere and prudent circumspection you present∣lie

consulted with other most learned, re∣ligious & Christian lovers of Gods Church about the peace thereof, so far as possiblie may be attained, and so far, as it lies in the power of Christian Princes, of most judi∣cious Divines, and of truly zealous people, guided by them both: that as much as may be, we may all be Christians shold be peace∣able one with another: the devill and the world raise stirs too many to molest the Church. of one minde and ac∣cord, and think, and speak one and the same thing, as the sacred Scripture often and straightly giveth us in charge. For this end Mr. Iohn Dury a Divine of singular pietie & learning, truly studious of the Church∣es peace, and incomparably sedulous to advance the same, and first interessed in the work by your Honourable means and incouragement, hath so much prevailed with many illustrious This by se∣verall instru∣ments signed by them will plainly appear. Princes & States, and the most eminent learned men in Germa∣ny, and the parts adjoyning, that the work is very wel promoted, and an heartie incli∣nation wrought towards a good corre∣spondencie for Ecclesiasticall peace. God grant your Honour life and health, that to your great comfort, and all true Christians

joy, you may shortly see the work come to more maturitie and perfection.
Amidst your Honours grave and weigh∣tie intendments for this and other occasi∣ons of much concernement, may you please to reflect on this discourse. I con∣ceive that there be many passages therein very considerable for these and after times: and that they will make much for the ex∣citing of our thankefulnesse to God: when we behold from what beginnings, in an 100 and few moe yeares, Gods truth hath risen, and Papisticall and Anabaptisticall errour faln. It is remarkable that the points by D. Luther mainly opposed were Indul∣gences, the Popes boundlesse power, merit of workes, Purgatory, Communion but in one kinde: all When wal∣led Cities and Castles are ta∣ken, Villages must yeeld. Isor. chiefe points and palpably and and undeniably grosse. And on the other side, that he stood up against the Anabap∣tists rebaptization of themselves, their not baptizing infants (as not commanded by Christ;) their having all things in common (as had the Primitive Christians, Acts 2.44.) and against the Antinomians heresies

concerning the law, and other like erro∣neous fancies. It is also observable that Dr. Luther striking at the Popes unlawfull power, never sought to exalt himselfe to honour or He left his wife and three children in want and di∣stresse too ma∣nifest a signe thereof. riches. For though, as he saith, he himselfe with other learned men exe∣cuted Episcopall Authority in visiting the Churches of Saxony, & reforming things amisse: yet he knowing his talent fittest for the Chaire of Wittenberg, never would rise higher; but wrote a book concerning Christian Episcopacy, and installed Nicolas Amsdorf Bishop of Neoburg, and George Anhaltinus Bishop of Mersburg.
And in regard that Luther studied and read, as Professor, Philosophie of divers kinds, was well versed in the Fathers, and in Aquinas, Scotus, Occam & other School∣men, and attained to the Greek and Hebrew tongues: he was thereby . Arist. inabled rightly, and soundly, and gravely, and not Some who know nothing doe about questions and strife of wor &c. 1 Tim. 6.4. igno∣rantly, rashly, or humorously to judge of these studies, and of their use in Theologie.
It was also very commendable in him, that he disliked railing discourse without

solid and concluding arguments, slighted foolish and groundlesse calumnies, repro∣ved young students forward and rash at∣tempts without authority for the promo∣ting of his cause, blamed the headie and disorderly tumults raised by the Boores and vulgar sort, confessed ingenuously his doubting of some points, his ignorance in others, and craved pardon, if having beene lately a Popish Monk, he should in any point erre from the truth. Seeing this was D. Luthers prudent and religious course, I shall never marvell at his The cause required it. And God sweetly ode∣rated Luthers vehemency with P. Me∣lancthons mild and calm tem∣per. He∣roicall Spirit, and impregnable confidence of Gods assistance, and of the successe of his attempts: and on very good ground fa∣mous and worthy Princes countenanced and assisted him, as a man, by his then oppo∣sites, convicted of no errour, doing much good service in the University, offering his cause to any just triall, appealing from the Pope to the Generall Counsell, and in his whole course manifesting Lutheri vitam apud nos, nemo non probat. Eras Epis.lib. 5. a true cor∣respondence of his life with his doctrine. Much more I might here adde, but will

not longer detaine your Honour from the discourse it selfe. I humbly beseech our gracious God, who inabled D. Luther to be an excellent instrument for the reforma∣tion of the Christian Church, for beating downe of errour, and setting up of Gods Truth, that he would implant in us all, quiet, temperate, and Christian affections, Luther en∣dured not to have any one called a Luthe∣ran. And Eras∣mus saith, Pror∣sus odi ista dissi∣diorum nomina: Christi sumus omnes. lib. Ep. 2. and love of Christs Name, & still more and more perfect the setling of Truth, and building up of his Church, untill we all become living stones in the spiritual Tem∣ple fitted for our God. The same God of peace crowne your Honourable selfe, and all sincere promoters of Christian peace, with peace externall and internall here, and with eternall blisse hereafter. So prayeth he, who is

