



I Am not unmindfull (worthy Sir) under what engagement you stand upon mine ac∣compt, to the Publique; In the late Treatise of improve∣ment of Lands, by our decea∣sed friend Mr Blith, which you were pleased so freely to undertake for mee; And which was renewed againe, in the Designe for Plenty.
According to my duty therefore, I have endeavou∣red to answer your (and others) expectation, in this my ensuing Discourse of Fruit-trees.
It is agreed on all hands, That this worke of Plant∣ing Fruit-trees (through the blessing of God) is of vast Profit, where it is diligently, and skilfully underta∣ken.
Mr Blith in his Book, discovers the great Improve∣ment of Lands; some to a Five fold, some to a Tenne, and some to a Twenty fold value: And the highest way there mentioned, is by Planting Fruit trees: As may be
 seene at large, Pag. 262, 263. &c. of his Worke.
And in your Legacy of Husbandry, it is accompted a great deficiency in England, that we have no more Fruit-trees Planted, which would be a chiefe meanes to enrich this Common-wealth, in many respects; And in particular, with such a Commodity as that we should not need to bestow our monies for French Wines, or the like having Liquors, (Cyder, Perry, Cherry-wines, &c.) as good, or better, made of our own fruits: As it is there observed.
If men would Plant Fruit-trees, not only in Gardens, but also in many of their Fields and Hedges; This course (after some years) might save the expence of many Thousand Quarters of Mault, yearely, in the Na∣tion. And many Thousand Loades of Wood, and other Fuell, in making Mault, and as much (it may be) in Brewing Beere. And many thousand Acres sowed yearely with Barly, might be sowed with Bread-corne, or turned into Pasture-grounds, by reason of the abun∣dance of those most healthfull Liquors, Cyder and Perry that might be yearely made, Besides great store of Wood, would be got for Fuell, by the Prunings of the Fruit-trees, and Old Trees past bearing, with spetiall Wood for Joyners, and many other purposes.
This likewise might be one chiefe way (among o∣thers) for imploying and setting on worke, very ma∣ny Poore People,The thoughts of the dili∣gent tend only to plen∣teousnesse. Prov. 21.5. (in Inclosing, and preparing Grounds for Planting, and many other Workes) (according to the late consultations of the Parliament) whereby they might maintaine themselves, and profit others, in stead of burthening of them.
Yea: hereby would accrue to the Poore (and the whole Nation) many great advantages, in severall re∣spects:
 First, a Freedome, and deliverance of multi∣tudes from Idlenesse, Beggery, Shame, and consequent∣ly, Theft, Murther, and (at last) the Gallowes.
Secondly, Positive advantages; Meate, Drinke, Clothing, Riches, and Profits, to themselves and others.
If the higher powers (whom God hath set up to de∣signe, and labour for the welfare, and prosperity of his People) would please to make a Law, (there being Lawes of a thousand times lesse consequence) for the Inclosure and Plantation, of some of the Wast, and Com∣mon Grounds, Whereof there are many Thousand Acres in this Nation, (such as are most fit for Improve∣ment, according as is largely, and with wisdome and judgement, set forth in the late Treatise entituled, Bread for the Poore; And in another Treatise, entituled A Designe for Plenty:) there would (by the blessing of God on our Labours) be Bread indeed for the Poore, and Wine too; Yea, Riches, and Lands of Inheritance, to those who are not now worth a Groat.
For in divisions, and inclosures of Wast, and Com∣mon Grounds, (by Persons appoynted for that pur∣pose,) why should not the Poore have their share, and proportion, as well as their rich Neighbours, and that to them, and their heires for ever; yea, let the Poore be first provided for.
Are not these the times of the Gospell prophesied of Esay 49.19, 20. When the Wast and desolate places shall be inhabited; The people of God being multiplied (as in these our daies they are, more then in former times) they now say to Authority, as vers. 20. The place is too straite for us, give place to us that we may dwell.
Many of the Wast and Common Grounds (being in∣closed) might be improved unto farre greater ad∣vantages,
 then now they are (both as to the Lords of the Wasts, and others claiming interest in them) for the encrease of Cattell, both in Number and greatnesse; our breed of Horses might then be fit for Warre, where∣as now the Commons starve and spoyle them, as to such service: And all sorts of Corne, Fruits of Trees, Timber, Fuell, Hempe, Flaxe, and many other Profits, might be multiplied, whereby the Nation would abound with all outward necessaries for it selfe, and the overplus to transport to other parts, for the enriching & strength∣ning of this Nation, still more and more; in stead of sending out our Monies and Commodities for supplies from them.
And hereby this Nation might become able (under the hand of God) to support it selfe, and helpe to up∣hold others also, who are friends to us, and be a ter∣ror to all those that contend with us.
An eminent person once said of this Nation, that it is a very Garden of delights, and a Well that cannot be ex∣hausted: What then would it be, did it abound with goodly Fruit-trees, and other Profits, where now are bar∣ren Wasts: Might it not then be called another Canaan, flowing with Milke and hony, of which it is recorded, that there were Fruit-trees in abundance. Nehem. 9.25.
The more obstructions we have from Forraine parts, the more need we have to labour diligently for all ne∣cessary, and usefull things, within our own Nation, that we may be able to subsist without the help of o∣thers: so that this work of Planting Fruit-trees, for im∣provement of Lands, is fit to be carried on as well, (if not much rather) in these times of Warre, as in times of Peace.

Upon all which Accompts it is my humble desire, That you (Sir) who have laboured, and done so much already for the Publique, would still be pleased to be assistant, and instrumentall for the promoting and setting on foot, the Work of Planting Fruit-trees in this Nation, more then in former times: According as is set forth in your Legacy of Husbandry; The Designe for Plenty; and other of your Published Treatises, tend∣ing to generall Profit, and the great encouragements in this worke which I have (from time to time) received from you: for all which I shall be still ready (thankfully) to acknowledge my selfe

