



Dearely beloved:
IT is not unknown to some, if not to the most of you; that this sacred Ordinance of the Lords supper, is superstiti∣ously and prophanely abused by many, who are extreamly zealous to have their part in the outside, & visible ele∣ments of this Ordinance,
As Po∣pish spirits who con∣tent them∣selves with the opus operatum, or work done. but never care for the invisible grace, or spirit of Christ in the Ordinance: Others there are that do  much slight and despise both the ele∣ments,
and the grace of it, that they seldom, or never care for the participation of it, un∣less formally, and for fashion sake. Others, that not only neglect it themselves, but hinder such from it as much desire the re∣novation of their Covenant, and sweet Soul-communion with Christ, in the due participation of it. And some there are al∣so sprung up of late I hear, (which to me appear in a more strange visage then the rest,) who deny this and other Ordinances of Christ in the New Testament, to be now had in use at all amongst Gods people; they holding this as a principle; That this and all other Ordinances are now lost and dead with Christ and his Apostles: which sad opinion, I must confess, I cannot look upon, as a notion of any new light, as some may please to esteem of it; but rather to bewaile it as a strange and dangerous fancie, without, and against the word of truth,
Mat. 28.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.23. &c. 25, 26. or as an ignis fatuus, a fond light, that will lead those that follow it (if God in mercy prevent not) into utter darkness. To administer some means of cure to these sad distempers (if God shall please to glori∣fie himself by so weak an instrument:) I have taken this opportunity, to send out these few Catacheticall thoughts of mine,
upon this Ordinance of the Lords supper; wherein I have endeavoured to clear to you and others, (so far as a work of this na∣ture would bear) these four particulars. 1. The divine authority of this Ordinance. 2. The nature of it. 3. The ends of it, (wherein the perpetuity of it is implyed.) 4. The requisites, or things required for the prevention of the abuse, and the better help of my self and others, to the sweet and comfortable participation of it. All which (dearely beloved in the Lord) I have thought good to present respectively unto your selves, as the fittest objects I could make choyce of to dedicate this work unto; and that for diverse reasons, as these in special.
1. Because it was conceived, and brought forth amongst you, as being a part of my poor ministeriall pains, while divine provi∣dence did call me to labour with you, and therefore you have the more right unto it. A poor childe by Law, must be kept where it was born; I leave it therefore to your tender care, hoping you will nourish it as your own.
2. It was at first intended for your spi∣rituall good; and therefore I do now the more boldly bequeath it to you.
 3. These labours of mine in a way of Catechizing, have been sometimes profit∣able to some yea, I may say with thank∣fulness to God (by the acknowledgment of others) to many of you;
As at Newport especially, before our late trou∣bles; where I bestowed many years pains in this ex¦ercise. I desire by this means, they may prove so unto you all.
4. Divine providence hath called me off from some of you; and I know not how soon I may be called from others where I now am, to a country and people, that have more need of the ministery, (at least more sence of their needs, then many now in London have.) Where I may be more ser∣viceable to God, then in that slender Con∣gregation which I now attend. And there∣fore I desired to leave this amongst you, as a perpetuall pledge and memoriall of my most dear love unto your souls; and of my most earnest desires to help you on in your more sweet and intimate Communion with Jesus Christ, in this and other of his Ordi∣nances of grace here, till hee shall call you home into full Communion with himself, in his everlasting glory.
5. The time will come (how soon I know not) that you all (as well as my self) must give up your accounts
Rom. 14.10.12. 2 Cor. 5.10. of your Steward∣ships to Jesus Christ; and what holy use you have made of this and other Ordinances of
grace; I thought it meet therefore to leave this with you, both to put you in remem∣brance
As 2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 14, 15. of your duty, and to help you in it; that so you may give up your accounts with joy, and not with grief.
6. There are some reasons in respect of the times.
1. You know the times are full of loosnes & prophaness: by this, I desire to press you to more holy strictness, Eph. 4.17. & 20. & 5.15.16. Heb. 12.14.
2. The times are full of unchristian bit∣terness, divisions, &c. By this I desire, that you may endeavour the more to make up breaches, and to preserve Christian Ʋnity and Ʋnanimity amongst your selves,
Re∣member Phil. 2.1, 2. Which hath been sometimes opened & applyed unto you. Phil. 2.1, 2. Eph. 4. v. 3.
3. The times are full of slighting and neglecting this and other divine Ordinan∣ces, the means and ministery of grace, (which are sadly withdrawn from some of you,
As New∣port and Luton.) I desire you by this, to prize them the more, to pray for them more ear∣nestly where they are wanting, and to make more holy use of them, where and when you have them.
4. These are times wherein men are much taken up in seeking after new notions, and strange opinions. I desire by this, you
may seek the more earnestly after the
Ier. 6.16 1 Ioh. 2.7. old truth of Jesus Christ, and stick more close unto them. While others are notionall, be you practicall,
1 Cor. 8.1. & Joh. 13.17. these are the reasons of my dedication.
Give me leave to add some reasons for my publication of this poor piece (if it shall be approved) and I have done.
It was not either from the apprehension of the want of other more learned helps in this kinde, of which there are many
Mr. Da∣niel Rogers two Trea∣tises upon the Sacra∣ments. Mr. Dike, Bradshaw, Hildersam, &c. very usefull and profitable, for which I desire to bless God; nor from any thoughts of the worth of this, as flowing from my self, which I conceive to be very weak. But.
1. Out of desire to add my poor mite, to the helping on of the great work of God now in agitation, scil. the administration of this Ordinance of the Lords supper (a∣mongst others) in its purity.
2. To satisfie the earnest desires of some friends, not to be despised.
3. To prevent my tedious labour of writing copies for such as did desire it.
4. To have a help in more readiness for preparation of the people I relate unto, for the Lords supper. This help I conceive be∣ing more familiar to them then others.
5. To give some tast of my poor labours
in this kind, (which have done good to some) though I have not time to send forth all.
6. And lastly, to stir up others of my bre∣thren, who are more able to send out those helps of theirs, which may prove more pro∣fitable. And to bestow the more diligent pains in this great duty of Catechizing; which if ever, would at this time prove ve∣ry seasonable.
Prov. 22.6. Hos. 4.6. Heb. 5.12. &c. Thus you have the reasons both of my Dedication, and Publication. I have kept you to long in the Porch; I shall now leade you into the House it self. The Lord give you, and others abundance of joy and consolation in Christ, in the use of it. So Prayes,
 London, Martii 5o. 1646.
