



SIR,
IF I am more bold then welcome in the Liberty I take in directing these Lines to you, I am sorry, but must be content, and with Patience am resolv'd to bear the weight of your Censure; which I can more easily do, then think, that such a Man as you, should with such Fondness, upon no better Grounds, and in so unusual a Heat, express yourself so Unsuccessfully as neither to Con∣vince your Adversaries, nor Please your Friends.
But knowing, with many others, that this comes not with a Surprize upon you, long since acquainting you with what is now brought to light, shall not stand to make any Apolo∣gy, nor for the Author, who never intended the Project of this Undertaking till now, being inform'd of his Death whose Pains I had desir'd, but by the Disposing-Hand of Providence in vain, and therefore have now adventur'd myself, believing thro' the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is most seen in the Weakness of his Creatures, that necessary Supplies would be given to ingage in a Cause that so nearly concerns his Honour and Interest in the World.
Had it not been undue Reflections from the Pulpit, inva∣ding the Right of my LORD, and impairing, as much as in you lay, the Credit of his Holy Ordinance, together with the Manners of some of your Friends, who being present when you preach'd that Sermon from the 1 Cor. 7.14. and as Ves∣sels fill'd with Wind, that must either vent or flie, not con∣tented within their own Confines, but trespassing upon their Neighbours Borders to proclaim their own Folly, (I had al∣most said together with yours,) boldly affirming, That you

had assign'd Scripture enough for Infant-Baptism, these Lines had never taken Wing.
But the very act of Providence which brought your Ser∣mon-Notes and Bible to my hand, was such as gives ground to conclude, that it was the Divine Pleasure, the Structure you had built upon so sandy a Bottom, should at once be cast into the Sea of Confusion. And to be silent, seeing his Right is under so manifest an Invasion, must bespeak us to be the most base of Vassals; for who is it that is bought with Mo∣nies of another, from amongst the Gally-Slaves, to injoy Free∣dom, but will ever account himself oblig'd to maintain his Redeemer's Honour against all that shall offer to detract from, or lay a Blot upon it: How much less then shall the Redeem∣ed of the Lord be still, who are under a greater Obligation by how much more great the Redemption-Price is, that was given? So that how ever Unfit in myself, yet from the Bond I am under, and the Nature of the present Exigence, (am forced) with Cresus his dumb Son to speak. —Yet from that Respect I have always born to you, and still do, I could sincerely wish you were not the Man I have to do with; but since it is so, I have acted with as much Candour as becomes me, the Nature of the Cause considered, having not rak'd in the Ashes of your Reflections, but wish they may lie and die, as they shall for me, unless new ones give life to the old; but hoping better things, and that you will not think the worse of your own because it brings Interest along with it, wishing you seriously to consider those Words of our Lord, Mat. 5.19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of the least of these commandments, and shall teach men so, shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. And together with Mat. 15.8, 9. In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the com∣mandments of men.

