


SIR,
THE benefit my selfe and others have received from your godly society and Gospell conversation here∣tofore may be argument enough for us thankfully to embrace your pregnant similitudes and Gospell observations. I must confesse I am bound to blesse the Lord, for the acquaintance and familiarity I formerly had and still have with you: I seldome came to your gar∣den but you made your trees speak something of Christ and the go∣spell; your custome was to present your Christian friends and vi∣sitors with such clusters of gospell grapes which you now send a∣broad to the world.
Its admirable to see what spirituall improvements you have made of your Nursery: the Reader (if he have senses exercised to rellish and distinguish) will soone taste the sweetnesse of your spirituall fruit, especially considering.
1.Pares cum pari∣bus facillimè con jungantur. That you take your rise from such things as are obvious and familiar to every mans Capacity, which may easily set the minds of the Readers on work upon Jesus Christ; duoilla nos maximè mo∣vent: similitudo, & exemplum: Cic: 3. de Orat.The creatures all speak thus Qui fecit me propter te, fec te propter se. Bernard.
2. Its wonderfull to see so much Gospell gathered from natures Twiggs: The naturall voyce of the creatures tell us that God is, As Aristotle and Galen report: but none ever made the creatures (in so plaine, and familiar a manner) speak of Christ before.
I must acquaint the Reader, that here is in your Similitudes go∣spell profit with soule delight and pleasure. The spirituall Reader is here taught how to meete with Christ amongst the Mirtle Trees.
Sir, we must all give you thanks for your pious explication of naturesDicta enim Hieroglyphica a∣pud Aegyptios sacra quaedam monumenta scul∣ptis animalium figuris signifi∣cantia. Macrob. Satur. lib. 1.21. Hieroglyphicks; whereby you have made the creatures speak plaine. Its gospell wisedome that must make your young plants to beare such apples of gold. Do men gather grapes of thornes or figs of thistles? saith Christ. No: naturally they will not yeeld such
 kinds of fruit, but here are spirituall grapes from natures wild trees, thats admirable.
3. The Reader may observe that you make the dead to speak as well as the living:Joh. 15.2.6. Mat. 15.13. Luk. 13.7. I meane your withered and unprofitable plants which you cast out of your Nursery yeelds most profitable obser∣vations. The Lord will have a time to root out every tree, and cut off every branch which beares no fruit: not a body onely but sap, not leaves but fruit which the Lord likes in professors.
4. Your varieties of spirituall fruit may exceedingly please the godly Reader; mens minds naturally are much delighted with va∣riety: all the similitudes in the world will not reach to that fulnesse and variety of fulnesse which is in the Lord Jesus Christ; we read Revel: 22.2. of a Tree that bare twelve manner of fruits: which Tree is Christ,Mr Diodati. saith a Reverend man in his pious Annotations.
Its a mystery to the world that Beleivers should bring forth va∣riety of fruits to Christ, and yet receive all manner of fruits from Christ;Rom. 11.36. of him and by him and through him (and therefore to him) be all things: Our life is hid in Christ as the root; our graces are all from him,Coll. 3.3. our sap, fruit and all: therefore its observable what your drift is. As Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles were wont to send men to Trees,Consider the Lillyes how they grow. Fruits, and Plants for divine conside∣rations, now least men should fix too much here, you strive to fetch the minds of the Readers off from them all to Christ againe, and especially by the same way. The good Lord open our eyes that we may follow on in your path; that as we have all felt the misery following of our eating the forbidden fruit, we may eat now of this Tree of life. So prayes
Sir,

Decemb. 24. 1656.
