




MY Noble Friends, God hath joyned you together by bloud, and marriage, and I durst not separate one from the other. It is all your goods I ayme at, and therefore I resolved not to make one be∣holding to another for a gift, but all to bee thankefull to that Noble Mother, who set me on work. On my part, I can do
 nothing that may deserve a publike eye: but if others think otherwise, I cannot help it. If they tell me that I have a talent; I have known that a long time. If they tell me it may profit by way of preaching, I must put that to the successe which Gods blessing will give it. If they tell me it may profit by wri∣ting, here onely I stick. I am altogether ig∣norant what I can do in this kinde. I have nothing to direct me but others opinions and desires: and if they be no sure Cards and Compasses to sail by into this censuring world, I may suffer shipwrack. Howsoever it fall out, I must now take my Lot, and if with Jonas I be cast into the Sea, it is because I have obeyed, and not because I have re∣belled. It is possible for a man to know when he is called to do any work, though it be a work of hazard. He is called, surely, when he hath a voice from heaven to designe him as Paul had; and when he hath a particular instinct of spirit, as many worthies in the first ages; and when he hath the prophesies go of him, as Timothy had; and when he hath the approbation, and imposition of hands of the Eldership, as ordinary servants of Christ for the benefit of the Church, Pa∣stours, and Teachers have; or lastly, when
 he hath the engagement of the hearts of Gods people attending upon his dispensing of the mysteries of grace, and pressing the publike use of what he doth more privately. As I have had long ago, and ever since, some comfortable approbation at, and since the imposition of hands, so have I had some clo∣sing of the hearts of the godly, for the bring∣ing into the publike, of what I have done in this service, in the private. This I have ac∣counted an invitation to do something by the pen, as well as in the Pulpit. As I would not be so running out, as to make all my diviner thoughts visible to the Sunne (because there are many that can do it better): so would I not be so bound up, as to be unwilling to pro∣fit some in this way, though others may think it not worth the looking on. That which is as gold to some, may be as brasse to others: and that which is as silver to some, is as lead to others: and yet variety of spirits may be helped according to various touches, and im∣pressions, of fancies, judgements, concepti∣ons, and opinions from the spirit of Christ.
I therefore being emboldened to do some∣thing in this kinde, was not long to study to whose hands to present it first, and thence to have it derived to all English hands, and
 hearts, that we are willing to receive it. To you therefore (my noble friends) is it come, onely craving your acceptance, according to the worth of the matter, not of the person that exhibits it unto you. I am a poor old man, clogged with many infirmities, who have been tossed, and bandied up, and down in the world; who yet, want nothing but a fuller measure of Jesus Christ to dwell in my soul by faith. I have learned you the fountains of secret sinnes, and the means how to discover them in your selves, that it may bow you be∣fore the God of heaven, to make you fit to hold Jesus Christ. It must be an hollow vessel which must hold water, and an hollowed heart; that must lye under the fountain of David for sin and for uncleannesse, to car∣ry away the water of life to the soul. I have taught you the worth of the Glorious Gospel, that you may be willing to hunt after Christ, and, when you have found him, to part with all that is yours for his embracements. And, because your precious souls are in much dan∣ger in these distracted dayes, both by prospe∣rity, and adversity, I have learned you, from the best assurance office in the world, to secure your souls; that while you enjoy them you may have faith, while you have faith, you
 may have Christ, and while you have Christ, you may have the love of God for your eter∣nall good.
I must confesse, that if ever Christian souls were in danger, they are in danger now. We are faln into the last, and perillous dayes: wherein while the Drum, and Canon are the best musick, and Commission is gi∣ven to the sword to cut off not a few, and to guild the Land with crying bloud; the Ene∣my sowes tares to an aboundance at home, to the hinderance of Reformation, and to the disjoynting of many a good soul. Some of the ancient exploded heresies are revived; and such wide ruptures are made, that a devout soul can scarce tell at which dore to go in to Christ: my heart bleeds to see with what da∣ring, and violence private opinions are maintained. I beleeve that I may have some private opinion, of my own; but I will rather bury it within my breast, then suffer it to make a publike disturbance. If others would do so too, we might (it may be) have been wafted to our wished for haven before this day. But (alas) all cry up the ways of Christ, the ordinances of Christ, the Kingdome of Christ; but when it comes to be examined it is found to be nothing but self opinions, and
 self practises. Some look upon the Law as a School-master unto Christ, and, when they have learned him, they would walk in Christ, not onely by beleeving, but by doing, such ho∣ly & charitable duties as the Law propounds and commands. Some would have no use of the Law among Christians, but pin all upon faith, as if faith did not work by love. Some look upon Baptism as unusefull in our Infan∣tery, though the beginning of it cannot be concludently grounded but from the Apostles, and the practise of it was never opposed till this last age. Some are for the grafting of it into the place of Circumcision; because it can be no other then that was, A signe and seal of the righteousnes of faith: and God, who caleth things that are not as if they were, calleth, by vertue of his Covenant, Infants of Christians Believers, much more thē infants of Jews. Some again are for Congregationall Churches onely, as if Christ had given any such precept, or as if there were any such pra∣ctise according to undoubted rule. Others will have Classicall Churches under sweet and amiable subordination to help the Communion of Saints, as in the dayes of Timothy, and Titus. Some would have excommunication in the power of the whole Body; some in the
 power of the Presbytery; some in the power of a mixt Presbytery, some of an Eldership of Ministery, which seemes to be the right∣est way; and some would have none at all, though, happly, if excommunication be not a delivering over to Satan; yet it may, just∣ly, be a wary casting out, and removing stones of offence till they are humbled, and reformed. Some would have all punishments in the power of the Magistrate; some would have none but for such faults as clash against Publique Peace of the Common-wealth: though it cannot be denied, but that the sword of a good Magistrate, for vertue, and against vice is a back of Steele to a good Ministery. Some are for admittance of mem∣bers of the Church by I know not what Co∣venant (because it is variously practised). Others know no covenant but that of grace, made in Baptisme, and renewed in the Supper of the Lord, except voluntary Covenants, and according to the Rules of Christian li∣bertie. Now (my much honoured friends) when these digladiations are sharpned a∣mongst good men, great men, will it not be a beame in the eye of many a good soul, even to hinder them from walking with such a steady foot, in the wayes of Christ, as were to be
 wished? I know no better way to help all, then to follow Melancthons counsell to his Mo∣ther, when she was troubled with the contro∣versies of her time, that she stick to her old principles of saving doctrine, and pra∣ctise, and for the rest to wait the issue of Gods providence. This is my humble, and hearty counsell to you all. Look upon the goodnesse of every good man, and so far as you see Christ in them, so far honour, and succour them: but for other opinions engage you not. It will be more unseemly at last to cast out an errour, upon further triall, then not to admit it at first. God hath his mighty work in these stir∣rings, for the cleering of some truths, yet, more confusedly known. When this is brought unto an issue, it will more sweetly content you, then a present engagement in the premises of many stirring spirits who do too much trou∣ble themselves and others. This is all I ayme at, and therefore present you with old quiet grounds of faith, and practise, as well be∣commeth me who am the servant of Jesus Christ, and under him
From my Study in Southwick, Feb. 8. 1646.

