


Right Honorable:
DId I not know the candor of your Lordships most noble mind in general, and trust (such is my presumption) to a gratious indulgency in particular; I should not adventure so smal a Present to so great a person, unto whose goodness also I am so much indebted. But when on the one side, to do a kindness, and not to get a benefit is the Law of Friendliness, there on the other side, Habere, and not refer∣re gratias is the rule of thankfulness. The latter I attempt not: in∣deed I can no more remunerate God, and my Patron, than God and my Parents: the former I have vowed, and must fulfill it, though but with emptinesse. Pardon, most Noble Lord, your servant his une∣qual way of speaking thanks; for under this pretext I run stil deeper on the score, by gracing my little Peece with so great a Name. 'Twas uttered in a publick place, and yet becomes more publick by Friends importunity. Your Lordship has vouchsafed me the hearing severall times, and now I humbly request your Honour to find a vacant houre, and vouchsafe me the reading also. I challenge the Male of the flock for the Altar of God; but curse the blind, and the lame. Tis not the
Verb, but the Adverb, which may abide the scales of the Sanctuary: not that we hear, and read, and pray, &c. but that we do these things worthily, viz: in the best manner we can; this, this is only current coyn in Heaven. Grace here must tread in the footsteps of Nature, which alwaies puts forth her strongest abilities. I have endeavoured to shew our failings, and to amend them. God give his blessing, and then weak meanes may do much. The seed is the same, though sown out of a course, and Country hand, and I have seen such seed proving fruitfull as if the hand were tender, and delicate. Should God honour his most unworthy labourer with such a return, I have my wish, and reward. But I am too bold, and tedious; wherefore with my most sincere ac∣knowledgments of, and my most humble thankfulness for the many many favours received from your Honourable Lordship; and with my stron∣gest desires for all spiritual, and temporal mercies upon your own most noble Person; your Lordships most Honourable Countesse, and much admired Consort; and that Noble, and hopeful Off-spring, wherewith God hath been gratiously pleased to multiply, to bless both the most Ho∣nourable Parents; I cease, for-ever remaining

