


May it please your Honour:
I Am no man to withstand the streame, especially if the spring be from Heaven; such I thought the strange pro∣vidence in calling me from my private Cell, to that pub∣lick place: such likewise I think, (if vanity deceive me not) the vehement importunity of my friends, besides the desire of several unknown faces, (when the Assembly was broken up) to make this Discourse, how unworthy-soever the Pulpit, to pre∣sume the Presse. But for this equal, if not greater presumption in the Dedication, Custome, as I am told, will bear me out, that great Ty∣rant of manners. Though here I shall no more cry out of violence, then Moses his Mother, when she was injoyned to nurse her own Child: bt profess my self the more free, by how much the more forced; so prone are mine own inward desires towards the same thing; because of the great worth, and wisedom I saw in, and the great Civility, and respect I a méer stranger received from your Honourable Lordship. And to tel the whole truth, a singular good Friend of mine,
Abraham Chambers Esq; and the chief meanes, with your Lordships favour, of my appearing so publick laid this charge upon me; whom, I have reason to satisfie in a thing more difficult. What I know by experience in his House, and Fami∣ly, I question not in your Lordships, viz: a Form of Godliness; let
not the word sound ill, for I speak it laudatively. The forme, and the substance may wel consist together, as I hope either of your Families may witness: but where the form is not, I never there yet saw the sub∣stance. Nevertheless, a form of Godliness may be alone, yea, tis usual, and common. A man without his picture is an unseen Chimera, but the picture without the man is a frequent spectacle. This insuing trea∣tise despiseth not the picture, but more vehemently expect the man, even the hidden man of the heart, which is the Male of our Flock, and the best Christian sacrifice to offer unto God:
Calcar ad∣dere curren∣ei quid ve∣lat? if what hath been spoken may may be incutive, or directive in so good a work to your Lordship, my worthy Friend, or any of Gods people, I am fulfilled, and bound to flow over with praise, and thanksgiving. But my Friends importunity was not in the lest to importune your Lordship with prolixity, wherefore I shall no further make trouble to your Lordships weighty affairs; but lifting up my hands for Gods blessing upon your Honourable person, and that great City now under your Lordships Government, I cease, only I crave lisence to assume unto my self the much desired Title of

