



WOrthy Ladies, though I have dedicated my ensu∣ing tract (as I am bound) to my Noble Patro∣nesse; yet can I not but write a word, or two, to you both. After dedica∣tions, custome hath prevailed to draw out an Epistle to the Readers: and because I know not who will read my Book; or, if I did, I had little to say to them, but wish them and theirs as much good as I intend by it: Therefore, because I am sure, that if it fall into either of your hands, you will reade, and reade, and make use of it, for the benefit of your good children; I cannot but expresse my intentions fully to you both. God hath set you in high
 places above many others: and though the Waves have gone over you, and (it may be causelesly) have entered into your souls, by losses, crosses, and vexations in great proximity to you both (though to one more then to the other): yet, as when the Moun∣tains appeared upon the slacking of the floud, the Ark rested upon the top of them, and Noah could easily espie them, when other hillocks, trees, and shrubs lay covered with waters: so when the waters of your miseries lessen, and by the favour of God and man, are dried up, you stand aloft, and the Church can look earnestly at you, when others yet lye un∣der a cloud of sinne, and sorrow. I humbly be∣seech you therefore, that, seeing men and wo∣men are like Jaacobs sheep, which conceived by the eye, all gazers may see you so to steer your courses, that they may behold in you both examples of fortitude to out-face the daring world; of wisdom, to bridle tongues, & affe∣ctions in evill times; and of confidence to live above the highest waves in the rock of your salvation. God seems to smile upon us a little with the sweet beams of peace, thorough a thick cloud, and it is to be hoped, that God hath other graces in you to be acted in such a time, for your edification, walking in the fear
 of the Lord, and comfort of the holy Ghost, as the Churches of Judea did, whē they had rest round about. But whether he storm you still with the fear of war, and bloud-shed; or wrap you up in the sweet swadling bands of peace; you are aloft, even both of you above your neighbors, to be made a spectacle to the world, angels, and men. Therefore let the counsell of a poor friend be acceptable unto you so to live that ye be not swallowed up of sorrow, so to live, as ye be not devoured by peace. As it was said of Saul and David of old, so may it of prosperity, and adversity, that adversity hath slain 1000. but prosperity 10000. It is a glorious thing to be in prosperity, and not to be worse. It is a glorious thing also to be in ad∣versity and to be better. But to be bad in both is to make both a curse: prosperity, to be made a sweet Ladder from which to break our necks from, when we think we are climbed up to heaven: and adversity to be a sowr Ladder to let us down into hell here, and to bring us at last to the burning Lake which torments for evermore. The only way to help all this is, both in prosperity, and adversity, to live in Christ. If like the Eagles you make your Nest in this rock, your faith shall be your vi∣ctory.

Let prosperity come; faith in Christ will say; Cursed is he that doth not account one days fellowship with Jesus Christ above all the glistering vanities in this world: I will not be flattered out of Christ. Let ad∣versity come; faith in Christ will say, Fare∣well mony, farewell life, farewell all things for Christ: I will not be frighted from my Christ. That you (good Ladies) may be helped to do so; with all thanks for your loves, I humbly present unto you both, this little Ca∣techism expounded, There is none of you both, but have in your families, heard me open these grounds either to your children, or ser∣vants. Then you were pleased to approve them, and now you will be pleased to love them more, because they lye by you for daily use. There will many faults be found with them, as, brevity, plainnesse, imperfection, and the like: but above all that, they want the living voice, and tender heart to set an edge upon them. As to the first faults, I con∣fesse them, and, in truth, I make this but as a fore-runner to a larger Catechism, thorough the whole body of Divinity. If God send me health, life, and leisure, you may see that, (if this, mean while be acceptable to the Church) and it will more copiously handle all the
 grounds by way of explication, observa∣tion, and cases of conscience, which are most obvious. As to the last fault, indeed it wants my voice, but not my heart. For when you are warming your own and your chil∣drens hearts with it, I will follow it with my prayers to make it successefull. Could I do more, I would do it: Could I do lesse, I would not: As becomes him that hath been, is, and (by Gods blessing) will be, to both of you (worthy Ladies)

