



MADAM,
The interest your Good∣ness allovvs me to take in the highest of your concerns; is
the only apology I can make for taking the freedome to present you vvith this small treatise of mentall prayer; vvhich being to make on of the Cheifest dutys of your Life in Religion, your pre∣sent, and future hapiness cannot but in a great mea∣sure depend vpon it. Neuer can you attaine the perfe∣ction you aspire to, in the happy state you haue im∣braced, neuer can you be intierly united vvith God, nor solidly vertuous but by the frequent use of this heauenly exercise.

You vvas presented last yeare vvith an abridgement of the highest maximes of Evangelical perfection, left unto you as a rich legacy by our sauiour as he vvas le∣auing this vvorld; but little vvill all these Treasures avail you, if they be not applyed to your soul by solid refle∣ctions, strong resolutions, and affections vvhich only are the fruits of mental prayer. Vve may say vvith∣out fear of saying too much that neuer person had grea∣ter incouragment to perfe∣ction,
neuer child more for∣cible domestike examples, of heroical uertues, then you, from your Royall Fa∣ther. His gracious Majesty has been pleased to assure you by the tenderest expres∣sions of his Royall mouth of the true satisfaction he re∣ceiued to see you make so happy à choice, esteeming you hapyer a thousand times under à Religious uaile, then a diademe, so conuinced he is, of the vanity of this vvorld. But vvho can see vvithout admiration such a
Complex of the rarest ver∣tues à Christian soul can be adorn'ed vvith? has euer King been endevved vvith more piety, And Religion? vvere Euer such adversi∣tys carryed vvith morer equality, resignation, and conformity to the vvil of god? vvith vvhat constancy, and true Christian generosity has he born the vicissitudes of fortune? vvho could euer be so practically and throu∣ghly conuinced as he his of the great difference there is betvvixt temporall, and
eternall? vvere not his soul so inabled by a liuely faith, so strengthned by stedfast hope, and so united to god by true Charity as it his: by vvhich meanes giving so rare examples of all Chri∣stian vertues, vvho can but be sensibly moued to de∣votion, and incouraged by them to the practice of uer∣tue? and if vve at so noble a sight feel our souls euen to melt in devotion vvithin us, vvhat effect must it needs produce in you? but shall I omitt heare to place before
you that unparalleled, pious and accomplished Princess, our most gratious Queen, vvho vvith such great de∣votion honnored both your happy Ceremonys, of Clo∣thing, and profession, vvith hir Royall presence, signing, and ratifying, your sacred Nuptialls vvith the ves∣ture of immortality, I me∣ane those holy vailes vvhich give a right to follovv the Lamb in eternall glory. To this let us add the exam∣ples you have constantly be∣fore your eyes of a commu∣nity
composed of so many so∣lidly vertuous and pious religious vvomen that the like else vvhere is not easy to be found; vvhere greater regularity? greater union vvith god? more peace, and charity one vvith an other? vvhere greater emu∣lation in vertue? vvhere more chearfullness amidst all the mortifications of a religious life? vvhere greater submission in inferiours? vvhere more loue charity and condescendēce tovvards her inferiours, joint vvith
a certain character of reso∣lution and firmness so beco∣ming a Superiour as in your most vvorthy lady Abbesse? vvhom vve may say god has placed vpon the cand∣lesticke that the ligth of her hidden vertues may shine to the vvhole house. Is it not this so svveet a harmony of so many truly vertuous and religious souls that has al∣ready vvrought so povver∣fully vpon your that as to make you fall so much in loue vvith vertue, to make you so generously dispise the
vvorld, as you haue don, by so cordially imbraceing a religious life entring so cou∣ragously the narrovv path of perfection vvherby you giue us equall edification, and comfort, by the hopes vve haue of your attaining an eminent degree in vvhat you persue vvith so much zeal.
But dear Madam hovv vvonderfully vvill they increase. And vvhatspeedy progress shall vve see you make in solid vertue if these veritys on vvhich so
exemplar vertue is groun∣ded be once deeply imprin∣ted in your soul by frequent meditation. Receive then honored Dame this smal translation vvhich if you measure not by the bulk, but by the affection of the pre∣senter and his most ear∣nest desire to contribute in some measure to your ad∣vancement in perfection, I presume so much of your goodness, as to hope it may have a favourable reception at your hands, and serve
for a true mark of the profound respect of.
Most Religious and vertuous DAME,

