



Dearly beloved in Christ our common SAVIOUR.
I Know not how little time I shall be with you here; nor how soon I shall goe home, and be no more seen. I speak not this of going to another place (I am weary with tumbling;) or of not being seen among you here: but of going the way of all
 the earth, and not being seen af∣ter the manner of the living. The Iewes in the midst of their worst troubles (except the last) com∣plained that they had no Prophet, none that could tell them how long. I complain not, because it is an advantage not to know that time, that I may expect and pre∣pare for it every day: but I am sure that none, except God be pleased to reveal it, can tell my time of abode in this earthly Ta∣bernacle. I have now lived two, above the great Clymacterieall year: and it is a great wonder to me, that amidst so many vex∣ations, and sadding griefes of mind; so many troubles, and tossings of body, and so many weaknesses of mould, and tem∣per, I should live even to this houre.

 But God will have it so, who still cuts out some work for me to do. I am humbly content, and doe with all chearfulnesse sub∣mit to our good God's pleasure. Though I desire rest, yet I refuse not labour at his command, or at his pointing providence.
I confesse that three things might put my heart upon the wing to be gone to my Christ; the burthen of Crosses, the bur∣then of the Churches afflictions, and the burthen of Impotent age: and two things might discou∣rage me from any further work∣ing in this shop below, the con∣tempt of the Ministery, and the poorenesse of the encourage∣ments, that Ministers have from the most that hear them.
But when I looke upon the place where God hath unexpect∣edly
 pitched me, and the loving persons (for the greater part) over whom God hath made me an Overseer; as I doe, from Lords day to Lords day, chearfully work for the good of your souls (be∣sides at other private opportuni∣ties to doe you good:) So am I willing (as I am able) to leave some testimoniall of my love to you, and care over you, when I have made my bed in darknesse. If our good God, In whose hands are our dayes, and wayes, shall adde years to my few and evill dayes, I may be able by his blessed assi∣stance, to shew it in some more spirituall, and valuable piece. In the mean time, as I am, so is this little Book, which I here present, yours. And if it may set you but one staff or round, in the ladder of life nearer to your happy jour∣neyes
 end, I shall abundantly rejoyce over you, and in you.
You know that the first govern∣ment that ever was in this world was in a Family; and the first disorder that ever was in the world was in a Family; and all the disorders that ever fell out since, sprung from Families. If Fa∣milies had been better, Churches and Common-wealths all along had prospered. As we read it was in Athens of old, the boy ruled the mother, the mother ruled the father, and he ruled the whole City, and thence sprung many disorders which made those pre∣sent times sick of them even to complaining: so hath it been in all ages, and I am sure it hath been in ours, all we that live here groan under it still, even to more then a complaint.

 Had young, and old, been right set before they entered into a Fa∣mily: Had the Family been foun∣ded in marriage in the Lord. Had relations betwixt wife and hus∣band, children and parents, servants and masters been holily carried on according to the rule of Christ. Had the house been furnished with a wise, holy, and carefull fa∣ther and mother of the family: had it been furnished with a just get∣ting and giving, it had bin a thou∣sand times better with Church, Common-wealth, and Family, then it hath been, or is yet. To this end (Christians) have I ta∣ken this little pains; first by prea∣ching, then by writing, to present this little Treatise unto you. Read it over seriously between God and your own souls, and when you find any touch of it to strike
 upon any string in your hearts, see what may be done to make your Families better, and Doe it. It may be ye have been rotten tim∣ber when you were put into the Family: Oh pray that the Sonne of Righteousnesse would come and bring healing under his wings. Or it may be, when you were young or old, you have not been made suitable to the Word of God, pray that now he would write his Law in your hearts to make an alterati∣on, by an application of the work of the Spirit. Or it may be you have not laid a good founda∣tion for a Family, by Marriage in the Lord, but have married for money, or lust: pray that God would forget that, and give an af∣ter establishment to that which was wickedly done at first. Or it may be you have faithlesly, and
 unconscionably carried your selves in your relations: pray for union with Christ, to purge out the wickednesse of nature, and, with hearty sorrow for what is past, you will stand fast in all your rela∣tions hereafter. Or it may be for want of a good Master and Mi∣stres, there hath been no good or∣der in the Family, either every day, or on the Lords day: pray that God would rule in their hearts, that God may rule in their house, till they may be saluted, The Church that is in thy house. Or it may be for want of true justice, both in lending, borrowing, buying, selling, letting, hiring, and giving, the wages of iniquitie are yet in your houses: Oh pray that there be not self-seeking, nor deceit, no, coloured covetousnesse, nor any thing that savours of injurious evil to be
 found amongst you. If God will blesse you by this Book, or any o∣ther means, doe what you can to be built by God in your Families. Thus God will prosper the worke of his own hands upon you, and bring out of your Families bles∣sings to the Church, and Com∣mon-wealth, as well as to you. This God requires; this I aimed at among you, and for this, while I am, you shall have the prayers (Christians) of

