


MAdam, I must make my Apology before I say a word more. I present a Catechism unto you who are able to instruct others: and a mothers Catechism for her children, when you have no chil∣dren of your own under your instruction now. This may seem strange to them that know not you to be to me a great encoura∣ger to this little work: & to them that are ignorant of your affecti∣ons to a common good: You have had experience of the pow∣er,
 and profit of it in your family, and in the Congregation over which you care; and you will have me do some little good by it (as you think) to others that may see, and use it. The blessing of God be upon it: and their bles∣sing fall upon you (if they receive good by it) who have bin the main cause, under God, of my setting it forth. I confesse that I have, thus many yeares last past, been solici∣ted, by many well minded peo∣ple, (who have had the benefit of my private exercises) to have let this unpolished birth to walk in∣to many houses; But being loath to hold out a little candle to a quick-sighted age; or to prevent the more elaborate endeavours of my learned brethren, I have shut it up, rather in my head, where it stuck by judgment, and frequen∣cy;
 then under my pen, which is not so happy as my tongue, in this kinde. But now being overcome by your Ladyships entreating-commands, and commanding fa∣vours; I can hold it a prisoner, no longer. I let it loose from my head and heart, to my pen, and paper, and from thence to every English soul, to be either embraced, or rejected according to present fan∣sie. If it prove un-successefull, I'le bear the blame; who, as an old man being ready to deny my self a being in this world, have a little learned to deny my self in this, and suffer words of diminution: But if it prove acceptable to Christs Church, and profitable to his meanest Members; you (Ma∣dam) shall have the thanks, and credit, under whose wings it hath found leisure to be born. I
 know that you will be cōmend∣ing it to some of your friends, if not out of self-worth, yet out of a conceit and expectation of some such like thing. But, I beseech you be wary. To praise that which deserves it not, may speak well of your affections, but discommend your judgment: and I would not have you engage where it may be a prejudice to you in the issue. In∣deed, this little Treatise is a Cate∣chism. And whereas preaching is a speaking unto men to instructi∣on,
 1 Cor. 14.3 Luk. 1.4. Act. 2. Mat. 22.37 Joh. 3.16. edification, and comfort; Cate∣chising is a speaking to men for instruction mainly: preaching is a dilating of one member of religi∣on into a body; Catechising is the contracting of the whole into a a sum: Preaching is for all sorts; Catechising for the yong, and ig∣norant: this may commend the
 work, if the workman were an∣swerable, and, as a Master-builder did lay the foundation. But I know not how it fals out; this Treatise is much, in a little, and that little derived from the capacitie of a mother, to the capacity of a child: & therfore can promise nothing, but poornesse of judgement, and plain-nesse of affections.
Whether it be worthy others view or no, it will be acceptable to them that love and desire it; and so, I humbly present it to you (Madam). Though you have no childrē of your own, but they that are above these instructions; yet have you many grand-chil∣dren, whom, like Olive-branch∣es, you rejoyce to see about your table. These, it may be, may be under them, and by the use of this book, grace may by little & little,
 drop like dew upon them. Be but as you are, like Timothy his mother and grand-mother (who trained him from a childe in the Scrip∣tures) to train them up in un∣doubted principles, as oftē as they come about you; and they will, in after time, thank God that they had such a grand-mother. I pray to our good God, that this little Book may but help you a little; and it hath done all the work I can expect from you.
Be pleased but to take notice of of the honourable work of Cate∣chising, and of the fruit of it. Ca∣techising is very high-born. Be∣fore the floud, Adam catechized Abel.
  eb. 11.4. For it is said that Abel offer∣ed hyfaith: and faith embraceth a word: therefore, when there was none writtē; it must be by Adams catechising Abel, as he had learn∣ed
 of God. After the floud,
 Gen. 14.14 Gen. 17.1. Abra∣ham had his catechised servants:
 Gen. 18.18. & we finde his Catechism to be the sum of the law: and the sum of the Gospel: which had such sweet fruit upon his family,
 Gen. 24.63 that his son went out to pray, and was willing to submit to be sacrificed:
 Gen 22. and his servant prayed when he was a∣bout his work,
 Gen. 24.12 26.33. Gen. 14. gives thanks when he found successe, and wil not eat before he hath done his Masters busines: yea, all his servants, at his word, were ready to hazard their lives in Lots rescue. In the time of the Law, God commanded to whet the Word upon their children by catechising:
 Deut. 6.7. in which they were so punctual, that under per∣secuting Antiochus, and after to Christ, the Rabbies report in Ieru∣salem, not fewer then 400. houses for catechising. This made the
 Iews know the Scriptures as per∣fectly as their own names, wher∣as most amongst us know scarce∣ly the names of the Scriptures.
 Luk. 1.4. Act. 18. In the time of the Gospel, as Theo∣philus, and Apollos were catechi∣sed:
 Gal. 6.6. so God appointeth a great reward for Catechizers, even to be made partakers of all our goods. Now, for the fruit of Catechising; certainly it brings a more distinct knowledge of the grounds of re∣ligion; a good entrance to eat the stronger meat of the Scriptures; & to learn us to make an Hedge of Divinity, to enclose, all our read∣ings, & hearings from the word, within their proper bounds, for the setling of our judgments, and raising up our affections insupe∣rably. This was seen well enough of old. Therefore an Ancient hath observed, that, by vertue of
 Catechising, there was never a King in the world, but suffered altera∣tion in his Heathenish Religion within forty years after Christ: and the greatest enemy that ever the Christian Religion had (Iulian the Persecuter), left off inventing of torments, and put down Schools of Learning, and Catechisings, the onely ways to build up Christia∣nitie. By how much more honou∣rable it is, and by how much ex∣cellent use it hath had, by so much the more (Madam) love, respect, and countenance it in all yours.
I confesse that this work will help but a little, very little: but better a little, then nothing at this excellent work. We finde in these distracted times, the foundation mightily deserted, and some of them shaken:
 but super-structives, yea anti∣structives to be pegged up to the highest strains: In which respect it may be said of us, as of the old Philosophers, and newer School∣men, that the noyse of their disputa∣tions so filled the ears of God, that he could not hear their prayers: and e∣ven so (I fear) may it be said of us. It behoves us, therfore, to elevate the sure grounds, & to call home to absolute necessaries, lest in fin∣ding barks; we lose trees: and maintaining twigs; we lose the sap and comfort of the root. As I began with an Apology, so I had need end with one for my length, but that I am very well assured of your religious love, and patience to him, who is (Madam)

