


Deare Aunt,
WE read in the first Chapter of Ruth, how Nao∣mi, a very gracious Matron, lost first her Husband, and not long after her two Sons: Your condition is not much, though some∣what, unlike hers. Your losse, in respect of your Husband, is not a jot inferiour to hers; her losse, in respect of her children was greater than yours; she lost two Sons, you a Daughter only; what difference soever there hath been between your losses, I suppose, there is none between your griefes. When you enjoyed both Husband and Child you might well be called Naomi, pleasant, but since the wise God hath deprived you of them both, the name Marah, bitter, hath been more sutable to your condition, for it hath been sad and bitter.
To tell you what a Husband you have lost were but to encrease your sorrow, which I feare needs stopping rather than venting; I shall therefore observe that course which was used by the Iews, who when their deare friends, or neighbours, had lost either Husband or Wife, Father or Child, they brought them a cup of consolation for to com∣fort them, Jer. 16.7. The Prophet David tels us,
Psal. 119.50. That the word of God was his comfort in his affliction; and the Apostle Paul labours to support the Thessalonians for the losse of their Christian friends by setting the word of God before them, 1 Thes. 4.18. These following Scriptures therefore are the cup of con∣solation with which I shall present you to mitigate your too much abounding sorrow, Prov. 3.12. Whom the Lord loveth he correcteth, even as a father the son in whom he delighteth. Rom. 8.28. We know all things worke together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose. Isa. 27.9. By this therefore shall the ini∣quity of Iacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin, Heb. 12.10, 11. For they verily for a few daies chastened us after their own pleasure, but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holinesse. Now no chastening for the present seems to be joyous but grievous: nevertheless afterwards it yeeldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby, Isa. 54.5. Thy ma∣ker is thy husband, Psal. 146.9. The Lord preserveth the strangers, he releeveth the fatherless and widdow. Now if God hath taken away your deare husband and child out of love to your soule; if their naturall deaths shall promote your spirituall life; if their taking up to heaven shall prepare and make you fitter for heaven; if their losse shall be your gaine, the purging away of your drosse, and the making of you a more refined vessell for your Masters use, the weakning of your corruptions, and the strengthning of your graces; if God will be a hus∣band to you, whose love is more pure, strong, ravishing, satisfying, and durable than the love of the best husband that ever breath'd upon earth; if God will be present
with you, in whose presence is fulnesse of joy, and take care of you, to protect and counsell, to help and releeve you, be your enemies and dangers what they will; Have you not more cause to rejoyce in these spirituall priviledges than to mourne for your temporall losses? Take therefore the counsell of the Apostle, 1 Thes. 4.18. Comfort your selfe in the meditation of these Scriptures. Do as David did when he had lost all at Ziglag, encourage your selfe in the Lord your God, 1 Sam. 30.6. Although Cisterns fail, yet God is a fountaine that cannot be drawn dry; when the Creature neither is nor can be the same to us, yet God is the same, yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. Now that the God of all grace and consolation would make up your losses by the abundant supplies of his blessed Spirit, sanctifie his correcting hand unto you, sup∣port you under your heavy burden, and fit you with all joy and peace in beleeving, is the prayer of

