



May it please your Honours,
IT appeares plainly by Justin Martyr, Ter∣tullian, & many others, That the ancient Chur∣ches used not onely Davids Psalmes, but other portions of Scri∣pture, chosen ad libitum, to be put in Song for their Edification.
Yet it doth not appear so plainly, that they used Psalms Apocryphal or Unscriptural in Primitive times; but rather that such by corruption crept in. Eu ebius reporting of Paulu San oseta∣nus (the grnd Heretick) that he coun∣tenanced such Songs in the Church, as

would make a mans haire stand staring on his head to hear, and we find among the Papists sundry Hymns savouring of horrid blasphemy, and shameful super∣stition; Neither are our own altoge∣ther allowable, for that which is called the complaint of a sinner (next before the Psalmes) is very non-sensical, and in that after veni Creator, the Author sayes, that in the glorifi'd body of our Saviour in heaven, the wounds are yet to be seen. Now such inconvenien∣ces as these would not so easily occur, if we kept our selves to Scripture ex∣pressions: And what other doth the A∣postle admit, when he saith, Col. 3. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, &c. Surely Apocryphal Hymns are not the Word of Christ. We see Justin Martyr (if that work be his) speaking of this, saith, . It is the Word of God, Omitting, ther∣fore all unscriptural hymns (which ma∣ny great Councels did forbid and con∣demne) I have here composed an hun∣dred Hymns out of express Scriptures, not injured I hope in their conjuncti∣on, but may say with Divine Her∣bert.


This verse marks that, and both do make a motion
Unto a third, that ten leaves of doth lie,
Then, as dispersed herbs do watch a potion
These three make up a Christians destiny.
Herberts Church. of H. Scriptures.

These Hymns are plainer then Psalms and more sutable to our condition, and more pertinent to Cospel occa∣sions: such as wherein Christians may truly say, that they do teach and ad∣monish one another. Such as incul∣cate our duties, and reprove our vices out of the most piercing pasages of holy Scriptures; such as may answer all Sermons, and accommodate all oc∣currences, and may competently serve instead of Psalms, till a better translati∣on then the old comes in. Finally, they are such as do excellently instruct a Christian unto prayer, and Minister both hints and helps abundantly.
To Dedicate these to your Honours is as necessary, as well-beseeming, both to give you account, and crave your countenance in so great a business, which is no innovation or induction, but a reduction to primitive use and

order; And humbly prays for this en∣couragement to be recommended or allowed to be sung in publick and pri∣vate Congregations. Now the God of mercy that hath withdrawn the cloud of interruption, Give you the spirit of reformation, that your authority may be universally owned, honoured, and obeyed, pray'd for to God by us, and God praised for it as a singular blessing to this Nation, under which we may lead peaceable and quiet lives in all godlinesse and honesty, in perswasion whereof I rest,

