



May it please your Highnesse,
WHen Providence gave me a call, (so strong and urgent,Abcut Septemb. 1645. that I could not withstand it) for a few dayes to exer∣cise my mean Abilities
at Court; such was the acceptation which then I found both from your Highnesse, and your Ho∣nourable Attendants, that altogether unex∣pectedly, through your undeserved goodnesse, I was received into your Presence with an eye of favour.
Since which time, (I must needs confesse) I have endeavoured so to carry it, that I might not in the least, draw a just suspition upon my self, of being troublesome or intrusive through an uncomely insinuation: but
finding, on the other hand, that this my mo∣dest forbearance hath not a little hazarded the interpretation of neglect (a crime towards such a Princesse almost unpar∣donable) I have resolved for time to come to de∣liver my self from this danger also. Where E∣strangednesse from Per∣sons both greatly emi∣nent, and eminently ver∣tuous, (a rare conjunction) is rather distastefull than pleasing: He cannot be faithfull either to God's interest, or his own, that is not carefull to avoid
his being charged with it. And therefore ha∣ving so good an argu∣ment to plead for me, I shall be the better able to bear censures, especi∣ally in this present ser∣vice, wherein I do but answer some intimations given me, by which I find that this way, rather then by written Papers, I shall most convenient∣ly become officious, both to your commands and your good desires; the forward piety where∣of in such tender yeares, I cannot but with joy declare. Indeed the A∣postle
tels us,1 Cor. 1.26. Not many mighty, not many Noble are called. i. Few Great ones prove good; but me thinks your Highnes should be one of those Few: What mean else those golden speeches, which in my own hear∣ing you have sometimes uttered, That you prefer Grace to Greatnes, because you know 'tis the only way to Glory. That beggery in this world is much ra∣ther to be chosen, on con∣dition to be a Queen in Heaven, then here to be a Queen, and not come thither at last. Which
brings to my remem∣brance that passage also, which I observed at an∣other time to fall from your Highness, when your favour admitted me to stand by, whilest you read the 24. of Mat∣thew. Besides the streines of pure wit which ever and anon came sparkling from you, in your pretty critical doubts & queries; coming to these words, Two women shall be grind∣ing at the mill, the one shall be taken, & the other left: vers. 41. Your Highnesse here made a pause, utter∣ing these words, I think
she that was left, was the worst; and then present∣ly added, I wish I might be the woman taken! If these things be in you, and abide, how sweet a mirth will it be to An∣gels! yea, and how wel∣come newes to all true∣hearted Protestants, in whatsoever Kingdom!
The reports that are abroad already in the just commendations of your Highnesse, have set thousands on work to pray for you, and en∣gaged as many thousand hearts to love you.
That diligent attention
which you are wont to yeeld unto the preaching of the Gospel; that en∣couragement which you give unto the Preachers of it; yea, and that which is a great deal more, that careful in∣dustry which you seem not a little to take de∣light in, whilst you not only write down every Sermon as it is presently delivered,Oh may they be written also with indelible characters in your Royal heart! but at special times are wont to pick out the choisest sentences, and transcribe them into a Book on purpose, with your own Royal hand; how great a comfort
must it necessarily be, both to your godly and learned Chaplain,Mr. Torshel The Lady Southcot. and your Religious Tutresse! Verily, if still you pro∣ceed on farther, if you continue so faire a pro∣gresse in this so blessed path which you have begun to walk in; Will it not turn all eyes upon you with veneration? wil it not fill all mouths with pleasant discourses of you? and after a peculiar manner render those who shal have the priviledge of being neer unto you, not only wil∣lingly, but ambitiously ob∣sequious?

 Yet (sweetest Princesse) you will not be offended with me, if by way of caution I reminde you of that excellent Advice,The Coun∣tesse of Northum∣berland. which your prudent and Noble Governesse some∣times instructs you with, viz. That in all this, you take heed of affectation, and vanity; striving ra∣ther to be like unto the Kings daughter;Psal. 45.13. who was wife to Solomon, a type of Christ, All glorious within; and to put on the ornament of an humble minde, which is in the sight of God,1 Pet. 3.4. of very great value. Pride and hypo∣crisie
have ever proved, as fatal, as they have been incident to great persons: which I heart∣ily wish, may frequently be the serious meditati∣on of your Highnesse, especially in after-times, as you shall increase in the years of discretion: Fore-warned, fore-armed. Flatterers will not be wanting, (you may ex∣pect) to do you wrong; and your own heart, in all likelihood, will be as all hearts are, apt e∣nough to hearken to them: so pleasing a thing is it naturally, to be de∣ceived
in this kind. For the preventing whereof, Faithfull & plain-dealing Servants, especially such as are as well wise, as godly, will be your High∣nesse best friends; Such, of all others, you shall do well not only to make choise of, but to put the marks of your favour on, and oblige them to you with more then ordinary respects. You are now a goodly fragrant Rose, and but newly blowne; What pitty would it be that for want of such a∣bout you, any Canker of vice should be suffered
to eat up your blossoms, or any Worme thereof lie gnawing at your root! That Divine spark, or little Ray of GOD,Prov. 23.26. I mean the Immortal soul within your Royal breasts;Give me thine heart. me thinks I see how the very Heavens court it, yea, and how God him∣selfe is in a manner en∣amoured on it! Why therefore should any thing below the Heavens or lesse than God himself, be thought worthy of it? The riches, glory, and greatnesse of the other World, participations and fruitions of Blisses
there, are the only proper objects of an intellectual Being. And this, were there no other Argu∣ments to prove it, yet is most invincibly demon∣strated by those inbread vehement desires, and motions, with which the Noble Mind (like an Empresse, scorning the unworthy meannesse of sublunary things) in a perpetuall restlesnesse  naturally ascend's to that original & highest good, from whence it once de∣scended. The consider∣ation whereof, most of all prevailed with me,
to take the humble bold∣nesse of presenting this little offering of Heaven∣ly Treasure to your High∣nesse, Graced (as it is) and protected with your High∣nesse own sacred Name.
Sacred, 1. in Scripture story: For it was Eliza∣beth,Luk. 1.6. that was righteous before God, walking in all the commandements and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless; it was E∣lizabeth,ver. 41, 42 that was filled with the Holy Ghost, when shee blessed the Mother of our Lord,ver. 44. . & had a Babe leaping in her wombe for joy at the first newes of Him.

 And verily,, de iis dici tur qui prae nimia laeti∣tia non pos∣sunt se con∣tinere, quin varios ge∣stue edunt, hinc & illinc subfilientes. Beza. should ty∣dings from Jesus Christ at any time occasion Heavenly dancings in your Highnesse heart would not the Motions be suitable to the Melo∣dies?
Sacred, So both the Latine and English pro∣nounce it, with th. Elizabeth. and Eliza∣betha. secondly, is the Heavenly sense and signification of it. Eliza∣beth, The Rest of my God. So the Church is, Zeph. 3.17. He will rejoyce over thee with joy, he will rest in his love, he wil joy over thee with singing. The very place of repose, and sweetest rest of the heart of God himself (we here
see) was the bosome of his Church: So may he bosome of your High∣nesse be!
Or, Elizabeth, Quietavit unde Sab∣batum, i. sancta quies. My God (is) rest. David found He was so to his soule, when after all his trou∣blesom and weary wan∣derings, he turned in un∣to him, Psal. 116.7. Re∣turn unto thy rest, Oh my soul. How brave a flight would this be for your Highnesse also!
Or, Elizabeth, the Branch of God. The Greek pronounceth it,  with . May it not be said so of your Highnesse? Yes verily, you are (not only as all
mankinde) his offspring, Germen ex arbore nascens. but hitherto a pregnant and thriving Branch, which we may shortly see spreading out into a fruitful & pleasant Vine, that shall yield forth both the smell, and the wine of Lebanon, Hos. 14.7.
Or, Saepe scep∣trum signi∣ficat, vel in∣signe regiū, quod prisci Reges ma∣jestatis gra∣tia manu tenebant. Mr. Leigh in his Crit. Sacr. Elizabeth, God's scepter; A peece of Princely Majestie in the hand of GOD. This also is no impro∣per interpretation of your Highnesse Name, in which respect it hath also a fair possibility of being no lesse really and
truly sacred, then in any of the former.
Thirdly, (which yet adds unto the splendor of it) 'tis sacred also by that Soveraignty, and greatnesse with which it hath been invested, both heretofore in that orient Peece of Majesty & Ver∣tue, (so powerfully en∣dearing all hearts unto it) our learned Q. Elizabeth of famous memory; & now also in persons of so great Extraction, as your Highnesse Royal Aunt, the Queen of Bohemia, and your Royal Couzen, Princesse Elizabetha.
Which last, upon the very naming, we cannot but admire, as well for her depth of Judgement in the whole Theory of Divinity; as her eager progresse which she hath already made through the Flowry Elysians of all humane Learning; An Equal unto whom, among very many thou∣sands of a Lower rank, perhaps might be rarely found; but within the Line of Royalty, scarce such another, unlesse it be the Supervival of that most Renowned Gusta∣vus Adolphus, Christina
by name, now Queen of Sweden, who it seems hath derived from Hea∣ven, tam magnum & grandescentem Animum, a Minde so big, and out∣growing the Body in which it is seated, that at little more then 17 years of age, she knowes how familiarly to con∣verse with all the Arts and Sciences, in no lesse then seven Languages. These Princely patterns of singular ingenuity, & unparallel'd advance in Learning, doth not your Highnes seem with de∣light to imitate? witnes
the visible proofs there∣of, both in Greek & He∣brew Characters under your own hand; and wit∣nesse also the promptnesse of your intentive minde, while that learned Mi∣stresse of Tongues,Mrs. Bathshua Machin. one of the Ornaments of our Nation, gladly attend's you about Studies of that nature. Sure ere long, it will be a kinde of Golden Age, since such tender Female—Glories encircle themselves with brighter beams of know∣ledge, than many Scarlet robes have been invested with in our Vniversities.
Where Literature, and Religion, not only meet each other, but are both imbraced into the very bosom of greatest Ladies, how happy a presage is this? And verily, we are fairly promised such a blessing from your Highnesse. Go on there∣fore, Great example of a Princely minde; Go on and prosper: Become the learned Grandchilde of a learned Grandfather;K. James. & thereby also become the wonder of many A∣ges, the myrrour of your Sex, which all that be∣hold or hear of, may ei∣ther
imitate, or admire. Send forth diffusions of vertual and magnetick Powers; Be like the Sun in the Heavens to the Flowers on earth, every way attractive and in∣fluential, to the utmost Circumference of that Royal sphere wherein you move. Let all the little Ladies, & young Gentle∣women, (I might say the greatest & eldest too) take Lively patterns of Ingenuity, Piety, Sweetnes, and Goodnes, from your Highnes, though as yet not full 11 years of age, and let it be reckoned a∣mong
the glorious succes∣ses of the Parliament of England,Not much above two years and an halfe. that in so short a time since they under∣took the care of your Highnesse education, you have made so pleasant & quick a progress. And why should not so sweet a Bud of bravest hopes be still accomodated with all possible Advantages, whereby it may blossome out and flourish to the fairest growth of beauty and maturity? So con∣tend's,

