


Reverend Brethren,
TO you also do I cheerfully ren∣der an account of my labours, since at the request, and with the good liking of some of you, I composed some Hymns, (published heretofore) and sundry others now. Wherefore I intend no further Apology then what is tendred in the preceding Epistle to the Parliament, and if more be necessary, I hope I may reasonably expect it from you in behalf of the Work.
I have not much medled with the Lamentations (though a book Poeti∣cal) in regard the like subject is so fre∣uent in the Psalmes, neither with the Canticles (not onely because they are done, oth in plaine way and paraphrase, by o∣ther

hands, but because of the difficul∣ty of the sense; I think best to glosse upon that Text of Cant. 5. 10. By the ex∣pression of 2 Cor. 5. ult. And of that fruit spoken of, Cant. 2. 3. I add this glosse.
The Word and Sacrament.
Not that I want occasion to steak of His Odors sweet of scent, or some such out of the letter of the Text, but for the occasion for which I chose it, as being virtually imply'd, and ap∣ply'd fittingly.
Indeed I would gladly annex to these Hymns some select places, and whole Psalmes touching the most spiritual and concernable matters of praise and pub∣lick worship, Exhortation, and Consola∣tion, that thereby I might again bring in those frequent Metres which some of you say I have left out (to your losse and mine own) in the last Edition, and which you do prefer (and I think justly) to those that are put in.
To what end therefore should I comply any further with the old, which, being alter'd no more then needs must, would be like an old garment with a new pice, and would put the people to as much cost

as a new Translation, much neerer to the Text, much easier to be sung, and got without book. The best way, as I con∣ceive, is to collect a Semicentury of choice Hymns (which out of my store I can easily afford) and make no other addition to the last translation then you shall think necessary. So shall you finde (among the Psalms or Hymns) all the frequent Metres that are not harsh, the 119. Psalm all of a piece, the short Psalms (and here and there a longer) ren∣dred in duplicates. The whole might be reduc'd to six seets Numpil; whereof the Hymns would (with the Psalme-Hymns added) make up two.
Te Deum is an exquisite Hymn, harp∣ing all along upon Scripture, and in my Translation exemplified with Scripture∣proofs, done at the request of one of you, but there is no room for printing either it or any Psalm-Hymns, till the next im∣pression. And that with your concurrence and the Company of Stationers, lest any should suspect the prejudicing of their in∣terest. Thus desiring to answer your de∣sires in all things to edification. I rest

