


My Lord,
COuld my excuse have satisfied you, this Sermon had beene confined to the Auditory it was prepa∣red for: I cannot expect that it should finde that Candor and favour with every Reader, as it did with the Hearers. When it must speake to All, the guilty will hear; and then
 it will gall. Innocency is pa∣tient in hearing a reproof, and charitable in the interpreta∣tion, but Guilt will smart and quarrell, and usually make a fault in him that findeth one in them. Yet I confesse this is but a poore justification of his silence, that hath a Call to speak. Both my Calling and this Sermon would condemn me, if on such grounds I should draw backe: But my backwardness was caused by the reason which I then ten∣dred your Lord-ship as my
 excuse, viz. Because here is nothing but what is common, and that it is in as common and homly a dress. And I hope we need not feare that our la∣bours are dead, unlesse the Presse shall give them life. Wee bring not Sermons to Church, as we do a Corps for a buriall: If there be life in them, and life in the Hea∣rers, the connaturality will caus such an amicable closure, that through the Reception, Retention, and operation of the soule, they will be the immor∣tall
 seed of a life everlasting. But yet seeing the Press hath a louder voice then mine, and the matter in hand is of such exceeding necessity, I shal not refuse upon such an invitati∣on, to bee a remembrancer to the world, of a Doctrine and duty of such high concernment, though they have heard it ne∣ver so oft before. Seeing there∣fore I must present that now to your eyes, which I lately presented to your eares, I shall take the boldnesse to add one word of Application in this
 Epistle, which I thought not seasonable to mention in the first delivery; and that shall bee to your Lordship and all others in your present case, that are elected members of this expected Parliament. Bee sure to remember the interest of your soveraigne, the great Lord-Protector of Heaven and Earth: And as ever you will make him a comfortable accompt of your Power, Abi∣lities, and Opportunities of serving him, see that you pre∣fer his interest before your
 owne, or any mans on earth. If you goe not thither as sent by Him, with a firme resolu∣tion to serve him first, you were better sit at home: for∣get not that he hath laid claim to you, and to all that you have, and all that you can doe I am bold with all pos∣sible earnestnesse, to entreat you, yea as Christs Minister to require you, in his Name, to study and remember his businesse and interest, and see that it have the chiefe place in all your consultations:
 Watch against the incroach¦ments of your owne carnall interests, consult not with flesh and blood, nor give it the hea∣ring when it shall offer you its advice. How subtilly will it insinuate, how importu∣nately will it urge you? how certainly will it marre all, if you doe not constantly and re∣solvedly watch? O how hard, but how happy is it to con∣quer this carnall selfe: Re∣member still that you are not your own, that you have an unseene Master that must bee
 pleased, whoever be displea∣sed; & an unseen Kingdom to be obtained, and an invisible soule that must bee saved, though all the world be lost. Fix your eye still on him, that made and redeemed you, and upon the ultimate end of your Christian race; and doe no∣thing wilfully, unworthy such a Master, and such an end. Often renew your selfe-resignation, and devote your selfe to him; sit close at his worke, and be sure that it bee His, both in the Matter, and
 in your Intent. If Conscience should at any time aske, (Whose worke are you now doing?) or a man should pluck you by the sleeve, and say, (Sir, Whose Cause are you now plea∣ding?) See that you have the answer of a Christian at hand, delay not Gods worke till you have done your own, or any ones else: You'l best secure the Common-wealth and your own interest, by loo∣king first to His. By negle∣cting this, and being carnally
 wise, we have wheel'd about so long in the wilderness, and lost those advantages against the Powers of Darkenesse, which we know not whether we shall ever recover again. It is the great astonishment of sober men, and not the least re∣proach that ever was cast on our holy Profession, to think with what a zeale for the work of Christ, men seemed to be animated in the begin∣ning of our disagreements; and how deeply they did en∣gage themselves to him in so∣lemne
 Ʋowes, Protestations, and Covenants; and what advantages carnal selfe hath since got, & turned the stream another way! so that the same men have since been the instruments of our calamity, in breaking in pieces, and dis∣honouring the Churches of Christ; yea and gone so near to the taking down (as much as in them lay) the whole Mi∣nistry that stand approved in the Land: O do not by trifling, give advantage to the Temp∣ter, to destroy your work and you together. Take warning
 by the sad experiences of what is past; bestir you speedily and vigorously for Christ, as knowing your opposition and the shortnesse of your time: Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when hee commeth shall find so do∣ing. If you aske me wherein this interest of Christ doth con∣sist? I shall tell you but in a few unquestionable particu∣lars. 1. In the main, that truth, godlinesse, and honesty, bee countenanced & encouraged, and their contraries by all fit means suppressed. 2. In order
 to this, that unworthy men be removed from Magistracy and Ministry, and the places sup∣plyed with the fittest that can be had 3. That a competent maintenance may be procured where it is wanting, especial∣ly for Cities & great Towns, where more Teachers are so necessary in some proportion to the number of souls, and on which the Country doth so much depend Shall an age of such high pretences to Refor∣mation, and zeal for the Chur∣ches, alienate so much, and then leave them destitute and
 say, It cannot be had. 4. That right means be used with speed and diligence, for the healing of our divisions, and the uni∣ting of all the true Churches of Christ (at least in these Nati∣ons; and O that your endea∣vours might be extended much further) to which end I shall mention but these two meanes of most evident necessity. 1. That there be one scripture-Creed, or confession of Faith, agreed on by a general assem∣bly of able Ministers, duely and freely chosen hereunto, which shall containe nothing
 but matter of evident Neces∣sitie & Verity. This wil serve 1. For a Test to the Churches, to discern the sound Professors from the unsound (as to their doctrine) and to know them with whom they may close as Brethren, and whom they must reject. 2. For a Test to the Magistrate of the Orthodox to be encouraged, and of the in∣tollerably Heterodox, which it seems is intended in the 37. Article of the late formed Go∣vernment, where all that will have liberty, must professe (faith in God by Jesus Christ)
 which in a Christian sence, must comprehend every true funda∣mental or Article of our faith: And, no doubt, it is not the bare speaking of those words in an unchristian sence that is intended. (As if a Ranter should say, that himself is God and his mate is Jesus Christ.)
2. That there be a publique establishment of the necessary liberty of the Churches, to meet by their Officers & Delegates on all just occasions, in assem∣blies smaller or greater, (even National when it is necessary) Seeing without such associa∣tions
 & communion in assem∣blies, the unity & concord of the Churches is not like to be maintained. I exclude not the Magistrates interest, or over∣sight, to see that they doe not transgresse their bounds. As you love Christ, and his Church and Gospel, and mens souls, neglect not these un∣questionable points of his in∣terest, and make them your first and chiefest business, and let none bee preferred before him, till you know them to be of more authority over you, and better friends to you then
 Christ is: Should there be any among you, that cherish a se∣cret Root of Infidelity, after such pretences to the purest Christianity, & are zealous of Christ lest he should over-top them, and do set up an interest inconsistent with his sove∣raignty, and thereupon grow jealous of the liberties and power of his Ministers, and of the unity and strength of his Church; and thinke it their best policy to keep under his Ministers, by hindering them from the exercise of their of∣fice, and to foment divisions,
 and hinder our union, that they may have parties ready to serve their ends; I would not be in the Case of such men, when God ariseth to judge them, for all the Crowns and Kingdoms on earth! If they stumble on this stone it will break them in pieces, but if it fall upon them it will grind thē to powder. They may seem to prevail against him a while when their supposed successe is but a prosperous selfe-de∣stroying; but marke the end, when his wrath is kindled, yea but a little; and when these his
 enemies that would not hee should raign over him, are brought forth and destroyed before him, then they will bee convinced of the folly of their Rebellion; in the mean time let wisdome be justified of her Children.
My Lord, I had not troubled you with so many words, had I not judged it probable that many more whom they concern may peruse them. I remaine

August. 5. 1654.
