




Endeared Aunt:
WHOM I love not onely in the Flesh, but also and especially in the Truth, and not I onely, but also all they that have known the truth, for the thuth's sake, which dwelleth in us, and shall be with us for ever.
2 John 1, 2.
Peter's Watch-word must never be for∣gotten, whilst our warfare lasteth; Be so∣ber,
1 Pet. 5.8. be vigilant (saith he) and his reason is) Because your adversary the devil, as a roaring Lyon walketh about, seek∣ing whom he may devour; and as the world drawes nearer to an end, so he mends his pace, and bestirs himselfe the more, because his time growes shorter;
Revel. 12.12. 1 Cor. 10.11. Eph. 5.15, 16. 17, 18. wherefore we (on whom the ends of the world are come more neere) ought to walke more circum∣spectly, both in sobriety and watchfulnesse for new he makes more use of his severall turns and fetches then heretofore; that phrase of walking or going about, implies he hath many of them; and truly I think the world never saw more of them in one age, then may be seene in ours: As an old souldier hath many stratagems to circumvent his enemie, and such as suit best with time, place
and power, he puts in execution to make way for an assault; like politick stratagems and engines hath the spirituall adversary of our soules and salvation, to set upon us and undoe us. The Apo∣stle cals them sometimes his devices, at other times his wiles: his devices are fine devices,
2 Cor. 2.11. 1 phes. 6.11. spun out in a curious thred; his wiles are subtill for cunning; both are one, though the letters of the words differ, yet their sense fully agrees; for his wiles are fine devices, and his devices sultill wiles: This latter word, as it is in the Originall,
. duly considered, opens unto us the myste∣ry of both, shewing where in this his fine cunning doth chiefly lye, namely, in his marshalling of those his subtill devices, that is, the method he useth and followeth in acting them. For first, he labours to prevent the planting of grace in the heart, and if he faile of his project therein, then he in the next place, casts about to hinder the growth of grace in heart and life: Repentance, faith and obedience are the totall of Christianity, beyond which we have nothing to do or professe; in these three are summed up all the Prophets and Apostles, and the devil seeks as much to hinder, as all they doe to further them: to prevent the implan∣ting of grace, he seeks to keep them from repentance; which if he cannot doe, then to starve grace, that it may have no suste∣nance, he endeavours to overthrow their faith and obedience; before a man (acted by saving grace) sets himselfe to repent, all his work is to strengthen his faith, that is, to make him beleeve he is in a goad and safe condition, though indeed he be nothing lesse, and this is to keep him from repenting, and when he sees the man will repent (for the grace of God constraines him thereto) then he wheels about, and to weaken his faith, he sets in order before him all his sinnes, which before he hid from his eyes, yea, he aggravates them as much as he can, both for man∣ner and measure, for quality, quantity and number, desirous to bring him to conceive them greater then can be pardoned; but when he finds this his device frustrated by the soules cleaving
to, and laying hold on Gods free grace in Christ, justifying and acquitting him from the guilt of all his sinnes; then his last piece of policy is to kinder his sanctification, and to lay stum∣bling-blocks in his way of new obedience, that he may fall him into actuall transgressions, thereby to dishonour God, wound his owne conscience, and dishearten others from walking godly, righteously and soberly in this present world; many are the rubs he layes in this soules course of Christianity, but none of the least are the totall casting away of the law, as unusefull, and not belonging to him; and the unfruitfulnesse of duty to the doer thereof in any kind: These flones (with their like) he had cast in the wayes of Gods people heretofore, but by the power of Christs spirit in some of his worthies, they were removed, and have laine hid, till of late, Satan finding an opportunity, hath againe tumbled them in: And herein his cunning craftinesse appeares yet greater (to such as seriously observe things with a spirituall eye) that he carries his matters so slyly, as he gets some of his knowne enemies to countenance and defend them, and so to help and fight for him; like as the Papists (taught in∣deed of him) have carried on their fine devices so wilily, as to delude may Protestants, their knowne and sworne adversaries so farre as to make them take part with him against their owne Christ, his Gospell and servants, their Brethren; is not this Satans Master-piece, to bring Gods servants to fight against him, to make good men with stand good works? Yet this is no new matter; for he got once into Peter's mouth, and made him speak against Christs doing that good work of our salvation: Peter indeed spake out of love to Christ, and he meant to save Christ, as he thought; but the truth is, he spake then he knew not what: In like manner those good soules, who neglect sancti∣fication to extoll justification, who reject the law, casting it behind their backs, as of no use, to advance the Gospell, who heat downe all duty of a true beleever, as no way beneficiall to
him to exalt Christ; I beare them record, that they have a zeale of God, but not according to knowledge; they under stand no more what they say then Peter did, when Christ said to him, get thee behind me Satan; for the Law is as much Christ's as the Gospell, and Gods free grace in Christ, is as much seene and magnified in our Sanctification as our Justification; he gave Christ for both, and Christ dyed for both; they therefore that beat downe the Law, throw downe Christs Scepter, and lay his honour in the dust; doth not our present dayly experience shew what will become of a Kingdome, if the lawes thereof be taken away? and they which extoll Gods onely free grace in ju∣stification, clip Gods Coyne, our onely riches; they set up but half a Christ, & so by halving him, they whittle him to nothing; Paul knew this very well; if his Epistles be seriously scanned, if the matter of them be sifted well into the two maine parts thereof, justification and sanctification by Christ Jesus, and each part weighed by it selfe, the greatest quantity of them would be in sanctifications scale. True indeed, in his Epistle to the Romans and Galatians, he is much on free grace in ju∣stification, against Jewish confidence in Pharisaicall perfor∣mances; but in those and in all his other Epistles, he is as much and sometimes more insisting on Gods free grace in san∣ctification, and exhorting thereunto, against that loosnesse and carelesnesse of walking, which he saw in many Christians; truely to me his greatest care seems to be for the maintainance of good works, both in himselfe and others: In others, as appeares by Titus 3.8. and many other places; in himself, Rom. 7. ch. (if there were no more testimonies) makes it evident; now his ex∣ample should herein be a leading rule to us Ministers his suc∣cessors, both for practice to our selves, and for doctrine unto others; wherefore having (as you know) yeelded to importunity to speak a word of exhortation to my native Towne, the holy spirit directed me to pitch on such a portion of Scripture, as
led me to the maintainance of sanctification, and setting forth of the necessity of Gods free grace in Christ therefore, to be as great as in matter of justification; a poynt directly crossing those mishapen opinions of those new-fashioned Christians (for so they be to us) that are called Antinomians; and therefore a poynt most fit for Rye, wherein many of that sect were voted to be, by reason of those frequent, loud and bitter exclamations against them, by name in the Pulpit, joyned with as earnest and vehement exhortations to take heed of them, and dehortations from their society, as most dangerous infectious persons. I thought now with my self, being to come into that place, it would be my duty to fight against the doctrine, as others had done against the name of the Antinomians; and so I did, and I hope my labour was not in vaine to the Auditory, I am sure it is not in vaine in the Lords account, whose truth it was that I deli∣vered, and I delivered it as his and none of mine; and would not a man conceive this would have been very acceptable to him who seems such a professed enemy to the Antinomians? but the contrary appeared to the weakest of his Auditors: Where∣upon who can but think that either he mistooke the persons he so called, or that he did not understand what the Lord delivered by me: for mine owne part, I must needs say, it seems to me as cleere as the Sunne at noon-day, that he hath mistaken both them & me, & so abused both, with that scandalous name of An∣tinomian; the Lord open his eyes to see the great wrong he hath done me and them hereby, that he may repent thereof, and have his pardon sealed before he goe hence: in the meane time, it is more then probable, that he which durst snarle at the truth of Christ before my face, will behind my back take more liberty to himselfe to let the reines loose to his unruly tongue (a fit inter∣preter to his passionate mind) both to bark louder and bite dee∣per, by altering the phrase and corrupting the sense of my words; wherefore I thought it necessary in Christian wisdome, by way
(if not of prevention, yet) of answering to such envious and ma∣licious dealing, to communicate the notes of my discourse under mine own hand; and into whose hand could I more fitly put them then into yours? not only in regard of the outward relation, I have to you, but also because you have been accused falsly, as farre as I can conceive, to be one of them that are looked at as Antinomians; so that mine intent in publishing this my labour under your name, is not so much to manifest my due re∣spects of you, as to let the credulous world (which is ready to em∣brace any reports that may scandalize the servants of Christ) see how it hath been mis-informed concerning you and such others, as with you, lye at this present clouded with that black aspersion of Antinomianisme, for instead of crying downe the Law, Sanctification and Duty, I found you upon diligent en∣quiry, both in opinion and practice, chiefe pillars thereof. The Lord comfort your hearts more and more with his free grace, and stablish you in every good word and work,
2 Thel. 2.17. 2 Cor. 7.1. that you may thereby perfect holinesse in his feare here, and hereafter be perfected in happinesse, Amen.

