



Right Honourable, and Right Worshipfull,
HAd there been any reall danger in firmamentary Eclipses, our God doubtlesse would have left it upon record in the Scrip∣ture: Since we are sure,
Amos 3.7. See also Jer. 18.7, 8. the Lord God will doe no∣thing, (viz. in a way of judgment) but he first reveals his secret (intendment) to his ser∣vants, the Prophets. Now how silent the word is in this, I leave it to the judgment of all, that are any way versed in the Book of God. That which startleth many at the beholding of them, is that which scared divers heretofore, viz. either
1. The Rarity of them:
Solis exortus, cursus, occasus nemo admira∣tur, proptereà quòd quotidiè fiunt: at eclip∣ses Solis miran∣tur, quia rarò accidunt; & Solis eclipses magis miran∣tur, quàm Lu∣nae, quoniam hae crebriores sunt. Auctor ad Herenni∣um, lib. 3o. mihi, p. 38. G. No man wondreth at the rising, the quick-moving, the setting of the Sun, because these things are ob∣served daily: But Solar Eclipses, (because they come seldome) are wondred at even far more then Lunar, (which are more frequent) as was well observed by that heathen long ago.

2. Men's unacquaintednesse with the naturall causes of them; As we find in those Indians in Jamaica, who refusing to furnish Columbus, that Genoese, (the first discove∣rer of the new American world) with provi∣sions, seeing the people idolatrously devoted unto the Moone, and fore-seeing her eclipse, (by his Ephemerides)
Purchas's pil∣grimage 8. book, cap. 2. pag. 731. mihi he told the Islanders that if they did not bring him in provision, the divine anger would consume them, a signe whereof they should see in the dark∣ned face of the Moone within two dayes. The Indians being ignorant of the cause, were so terrified at the beholding of this eclipse, that they came to beg pardon of him, and bring him in provision in abundance, whereby Colum∣bus (making use of their ignorance,)
Henric. Sal∣muth Comment. in Panciroll. lib. 2. tit. 1. de orbe novo. supplied his own necessities, and engaged the people much unto him.
3. Those remainders and dregs of super∣stition and idolatry, that are to be found in all. This is the cause why many heathens of old did look upon the
In hoc unum omnium propè populorum sen∣tentiae primùm convenerant; ut—superna cor∣pora, Solem, Lunam, reli∣quaque astra, Deos appellave∣rint, & esse crediderint. Natalis Co∣mes, Mytholog. lib. 1. pag. 10. Sun as their God, and the Moon as their Goddesse; therefore seeing either of them to be robbed, or bereaved of light, they were exceedingly
Putabant so∣lem & lunam eclipsin patien∣tia moeore affi∣ci, tanquam reges irâ com∣motos, & in∣dignatione; i∣deoque ab hu∣jusmodi signis metuebant, & reges suos pla∣care sacrificiis studebant, &c. Pet. à Figuerio. amazed. The remainders of this superstition and idolatry wee may observe in those Aposta∣tes, who
Ezek. 8.16. worshipped the Sun towards
the east, and
2 Kin. 23.5. burned incense to Baal, to the Sun, and to the Moon, to the Planets, and all the Host of heaven; yea, the very dregs of these are to be found in the souls of all, because
Prov. 27.19. as face in the water, (or in the glass) answereth unto face, so doth the heart of man unto man. Their idola∣tries and superstitions acquaint all, what seeds are to be found in their souls.
4. The want of that principle of grace, & that filial fear of the Lord, that should be in men. Were this fear present, it would eat up all carnal fear touching eclip∣ses, as it did of earthquakes, thundrings, & lightnings, in the primitive Christians. Or as
Exod. 7.2. Aaron's rod did swal∣low up the rods of the wise men, sorcerers, magicians, inchanters, in the presence of Pharaoh; Pondering up∣on this, that it is as naturall for the Sun, or Moon to be eclipsed in their seasons, as daily to rise and set in the world. But especially considering that positive injunction,
Jer. 10.2. Ita ut ex a∣stris coelique fi∣deribus pendea∣tis, atque ex illis ventura divene∣tis, ita ut signa illa coelestia terrori vobis sint; atque for∣midini quemad∣modum ipsis sint Gentibus, &c. Tossarii Peraphr. in loc. Learn ye not the way of the heathen, neither be dismayed at the signes of heaven, and that upon this account, because the heathen are dis∣mayed at them. A text fully against allcarnall fears touching eclipses; yea, against judicial Astrologie it self, by the vote of
Hic locus in∣signis est contra Astrologos, im∣postores omnium maximos. Oe∣colampad. Oecolampadius, Bullinger, Parae∣us, Vatablus, Pellicanus, Calvin, yea of à La∣pide also, who do abundantly justifie the last lear∣ned English Annotations upon that place, which are worthy the perusall of all.

But however there be little danger in firmamen∣tary, yet there are many discomforts in spirituall E∣clipses: And this made me, upon a sudden call to preach before your Honour, (observing many to be amused with perplexing fears) to compare spirituall with firmamentary eclipses, and to demonstrate, that there is no cause of dreading any of the pretended direful operations of the later, when the causes of the former are removed out of the way. How far the ensu∣ing discourse was then looked upon as a word in sea∣son, I need not now relate. It now comes abroad upon importunity, and all that I shall adde, is my earnest desire, that the blessing of the Lord may go along with it; that all those clouds of sin between us, and our God, may be dispell'd, and that Jesus Christ, the true mysticall Sun, may still go on to shine into our souls. And that his blessing may be with you all, in your Persons, Relations, Families, and in your Go∣vernment, that this renowned City may flourish in Religion, Peace, Plenty, and Prosperity, which shal be the daily prayer of
May the 12. 1652.

