



SIR,
IT doth not a little rejoyce me, that I see you have beene so firme and resolute for the Country of your Birth, & Birth-right: Worthily therefore hath the State of the Land entrusted you (a∣mongst other singular Worthies) with the Affaires of that County. You were pleased to call me from another invitation, and halfe-engagement, to this service; and I did the more readily imbrace it, not onely because I saw personages of such ho∣nour and worth in jeopardy, but also for that intire, and yerning affection I beare to my Countrey-men, many of whom (I heard) were lost (as well as others) in the general fog of Ignorance and Popish dilusions. Sir, were I able to do much this way, it must be yours, and Hampshier's; yours, by right of inheritance, as you are your Fathers Heire; and the Countrey's, for the first motion of life I had in that sweet aire. I doe, and shall, ever acknowledge the little All I have (such as it is) the Foundation thereof was freely laid by your reverend Father in Winton Colledge,Doctor Love, the Learned and most Or∣thodox War∣den. & that it hath received no better growth, and thrives no more all this while; you may remember the Stock (whereon my
 hopes had beene grafted five yeeres) died before Autumne. I have two words more to say, the one is touching that County, that it will be famous and sounding unto posterity for two things, viz. for Honourable Burgesses and Re∣nouned Champions that stood all together (save one strange one that was lost) to defend it: and secondly for two faithlesse Garrisons, and unworthy Catalines that laboured as much to destroy it. The other is concerning my selfe, Malice hath dogged me these two yeeres (the Lord knowes causelesly) by sea and land, and hath bespattered me ex∣ceedingly, and many are taken up, and affected with Hali∣fax Law. Sir, I pray be you an indulgent father to this weakling, and Patron too, to bestride it from too many in∣juries; I see Envy already grinning at it, it will bite too; and teare, and invenome, and corrupt, if you be not watchfull. If you vouchsafe the Office of a Patron, and foster it, you may live to see it grow stronger, and abler to doe you, and the Countrey service. The porch is large, I need no more. Let Charity or Ingenuity but turne the leafe, and your eyes will see streames of my purest affecti∣ons, gliding through the Army there, through the Country, through your owne grounds, through the whole Land; Be pleased but to reflect on your servants, and my mean, (but honest) parentage, and you will remember, (& be able to confirm others) that I did derive & draw such prin∣ciples, if possible, from the brests of a deare mother decea∣sed. But I crave pardon: I am Sir,
From my Quarters at Basing,
Sept. 22. 1645,

