


NAture teacheth every thing to affect its owne preserva∣tion, and Reason for the same end, compels this Book under your Honoura∣ble Patronage, whether it tends as to its proper Centre, in the maturity of whose wise and pious reso∣lutions rests terrour and dread to the Rebels, and the only hope of reliefe to our miserable distresses in the Kingdom of Ireland: and to be Isa. 58. 12. the Repayrer of the Breach, and the Restorer of Paths to dwell in, is so Honourable a Title, that there can be no greater invitation.

 That application of Vid. Mel∣chior. ∣dast.  Pap. Baonius (in his ex∣hortative to Paul the fifth) of those two com∣mands given to Saint Peter, Iob. 1. 17 Feed my sheep,   11. 17. kill and eat, i. e. (saith he) preserve the Catho∣licks, and kill the Hereticks, have been in their interpretation the summe of the popish bloudy Conspiracie for this Kingdome, for the extirpation of which Idolatrous rout, howsoe∣ver wee finde there needs no farther incite∣ment then your own Religious, zealous incli∣nations, yet wee cannot but humbly declare our affections to it also (they like a viperous seed having endeavoured to eat out the hearts of such as nourished them,) That wee would in a faire medicinall way have healed Babylon cannot be gain said, but proving such a fret∣ting gangreen, what help is there but an am∣putation.
What charitable acts, courteous carriage, friendly informations we have over-flowed with to them, and what ill fruits have been produced from them towards us, needs no further witnesse, so that for the most mode∣rate of them, at least a compelle intrare, can be their onely favourable expectation, Which
 howsoever Saint Ma pri∣mitus Sen∣tentia erat neminem ad unitatem Christi co∣gendum, non dum enim expertus e∣ram quan∣tum mali eo∣rum (viz, Donatista∣rum) aude∣ret impuni∣tas. At haec opinio mea demonstran∣tium supe∣rabatur ex∣emplis: nam prinio appo∣hebatur mihi civitas mea, quae cum tota esset in parte Donati ad unitatem Catholicam Timoe Legum Impertalium conversa est, quem nune videmus ita hujus vestrae animosita∣tis perniciem detestare, ut in ea nunquam fuisse credatur, & multas alias civitates &c. August. Epist. 48. ad Vincentium: Videlicet ibidem gratula∣tiones & gratiarum actiones eorum qui ab Haresi timore lgm redierunt. Objectiones solvuntur. Epist. 50. ad Bonifactum lib. 2. contra Petilnum. c. 8. Lab. 1. contra Gandentium. cap. 9. & 24. Lb. 1. contra Parmen. cap. 10 lib. de Vnitate Ecclesiae cap. 20. Augustine had bin once a∣gainst, yet upon the experience of that good issue, it had in cleering his own Citie Hippo of Heresie, and other parts, he changed his mind in urging it.
This Sent. August. (num Heterodoxi metu poenarum ad sidem Catholicam cogi possunt) collect a Matth. Merula. vide cap. 7. in conclusione, cum cohortatione ad Zelum contra Sectarios hujus temporis. Merula indeed applyes to us, and by the example of this Father, exhorts the Emperour and Princes of Germanie, to alter their course in a present suppressing the Religion of the Reformed Churches. But Becanus the lesuit proceedeth further to move them with∣out any more adoe to the killing of us, (whom he asperseth with the blot of Heresie) after the example of Moses so condemning the worshippers of the golden Calfe, the hanging up the heads of the people at Baal peor, by Elias, Iehu, in slaying the priests of Baal. And after the ap∣plying to us those mortall precepts in the
 Law against . 24. 16 Blasphemers, Dt. 17. 12. Disobeyers of the chief Priest, and Dut. 13. 14. enticers to serve other gods, and answers of all pleas that might be alleaged for our toleration, concludes, etici  per∣bant pa∣em Christi∣anam quam hoicidae & res, t hi puniuntur oenacapitis, go multo mgis illi qui sunt per∣nitiosiores. Nam cum pax Christiana sit duplex. Ecclesiastica & Politica: Homicidae & es tantum perturbant politicam, Haretici utramque. Mart. Becan. cp. 15. de paenis Haereticorum, quaest. . Wee ought to be slain rather then thieves or murtherers, as being far more pernicious to Church and Com∣mon-wealth. Nay, Scioppius in his Classicum Belli sacri, charges the Emperour with it as his duty, to slay our very Sul hujusmodi mandatum acce∣t, Percute Amaleck interfice a viro usque ad muherem, & parvulum & lactaem. Nota infantes Hareticorum Deus occidi & jubeat, ne adultio∣s facti patrum scelete implitur▪ in ò Deut. cap. 13. 9. 15. STAIM percutis &c. Non audias, neqe par ei oculus tuus ut miscrearis: sic Imperator, interficere debes uemcunque &c. idque statim ut David in Psal. 101. n min interficrebam (hoc est) ut exrti fuerant, disperderem .e.  nullus inveniretur p. 12. 18 19 79. 83. Children and infants, after the example of Sauls command for Amaleck, and the Israelites for the Cananites, that he should not spare neither his eye have pitie. Nulla rgravis Deum offendere potest Caesar quam arcendo reticis bello captis: exemplo Sau¦, 1 Sam. 15. . Ergo  etiam atque etiam Imperator, ut si quando ts & Dei perduelles dvin & humano jure mori jussos, in po∣testatem tam edegis, es , & gladium in vindictam malorum ubi dtum, sc feritu ger, siitiore quam Saul paena afficiaris, saltem ut quod Regi Ahb silem obasam Deus cominatus fuerit, in te tu∣sqe  undo tias eic him est, pag. 80. 78. Terreat te Imperator  Rgi clespht class, urique Indc jactura▪ terreat te illa  2. cp. 0. 37. pag 86. Denounceth a
 judgement upon him and his, if hee should so much as give any Quarter to the chiefest of us, by the warning of Sauls rejection for reserving Agag, and Ahabs threatning that his life should goe for dismissing of Benhadad. Cum Tur∣cis, Mahu∣metanis, E∣thnicis, He∣braeis faedus tibi facere Imperator licet, ut Deut. 20. 5. (Cum civita∣tibus quae a te valde procul sunt foedus inire poteris, &c.) non autem cum haereticis, qui vicini sunt, qui pleraque nobiscum ha¦beant communia, de his praecepit Deus ut nullum omnino permittes vivere▪ occidatis omnem animam viventem &c. pag. 81. 82, 83. Gasp. Scioppii consi∣liarii Regii Classicum belli sacri, sive Heldus redivivus, hoc est ad Caro∣lum qinum Imperatorem suasoria approbat. authoritat. super. ut omne lectiore, & memoria dignum, & omnibus perutile. With Turks and Heathens hee allows him to make a peace, but for us that partake with them in some common princi∣ples, no plea can be admitted to reprieve us from a present slaughter of old and young, not saving alive any that breathes: whom els where he terms Gasp. Sciopii Scorpiacum i. e. remedium adversus haereses, ab ipsis Pro∣testantibus Scorpionibus petitum. Scorpions, and therefore to be kild assoon as we are born.
Which horrid Counsell is justified by Haeresis cum alte radices egit, non nisi ustionibus & sectionibus, seu bellorum vi & impetu ac violentia ex∣sindi debet. Praecipitar, Deut. 17. ut qui sacerdotis Imperio de Religionis controversiis, se non submiserit interficiatur. Anmitius tractabimus eos qui corrcnte Christi Evangelio a Catholica fide deficiunt? Quid nos facere convenit nisi ut Zelum imitantes Regum veteris Testamenti eos ma∣ture emedio tollamus. Hac enim laude Helias, Iehu, & alii celebrantur. Non esse crudelitatem occidere Haticos sed pietatem: saeva est clementia parcere, &c. Ia. Paul. Windeck. deliberatio. de extirpandis haeresibus. Antidot. 10. & 11. Windeck, in the like application and exhor∣cation
 to the burning, killing, and all other vio∣lent course of war for our extirpation, by the Presidents of zealous Kings and Magistrates in the old Testament, whom such as are Christi∣ans (he saith) ought to exceed, accordingly as Heresie under the Gospell is the more dam∣nable, concluding all clemencie to us to be cru∣elty, and that which might seeme cruelty to be piety. This, with much of the like, is the sentence they have decreed against us in their Schools, published in their Books, exhorted Princes to in their Doctrines, and accordingly made this Kingdom the bloudy stage wherein they have acted it to the full, in murthering and drowning without distinction of sex or age. Now whether these evill servants may not be justly judged out of their owne mouthes, (whose Religion hath bin long agon by the Bishops of this Kingdome decreed to be Hereti∣call and Apostaticall) or recompenced according to their own works upon us, (which have been so horrid and barbarous as all Heathen and Turkish story are to seek for presidents) I leave it to your Honorable wisdoms to determine onely, I am sure no stricter bonds can be ta∣ken of them to secure us for the future, then
 those, which they have broken at this present, even that treble obligation of nature, oaths, and favour, wherein they are stil supported by their Clergy, as if they did God good service. And in∣deed what hopes can there be of peace, where a Kingdome is not at one in Religion? which as our wofull experience sheweth it, so reason is sufficient to evince it, and I am willing to give a Iesuite leave to speak it for me. Nulla un∣quam fami∣lia fuit in qua dissenti∣ens Religio pacem non turbavit, ex∣emplo sit discordia, in∣ter Isaac & Ishmaelem, inter Iacob & Laban, in∣ter Mosen & uxorem Se∣phoram, quo∣modo ergo in toto Reg∣no pax & concordia sperari potest ubi Religio∣nis & fidei fumma est discordia. Qui olim conjunctiores quam Judaei & Israelit? At postquam altare contra altare, templum contra templum ere∣ctum est, mox inexplabili dissidio dissecti & dissociati sunt. Becanus, de poems Haereticorum. Quaest. 6. What family (saith he) was there ever where a difference in Religion made not a breach? see it in Isaac and Ismael, Iacob and Laban, Moses and his wife Zip∣porah, and if so, what concord can be expected in a whole Kingdome, where there is much more disagreement, who were neerer a kin then Israel and Iudah, but assoone as Altar was erected against Altar, they were soone divided in an irre∣concileable war. The argument mee thinks is probable, onely let the application bee to themselves, and the endeavours to this Ho∣norable Parliament, so to fan, and throughly purge the floore of this our Church, that there be no such Cananites left in the Land, to be
 thorns, and pricks in the ees of our posterity hereafter, of whose Idolatrous falshood, and murderous projects wee in this late besie∣ged Towne of Drogheda, (so thirsted for by them) have had too much experience, wherein the service that hath beene perfor∣med in the unanimous defence of it, by my Lord Viscount Moore (whose laborious vi∣gilancy and large expences in the want of supplyes elswhere deserves a speciall remem∣brance:) Sir Henry Tichburn our valiant Gover∣nour, with the rest of our couragious Captains, and Commanders, may merit a prime place in your honorable favour. A Collection of some passages in which (being by many desired as seasonable for the present, and profitable for the future) I have in the midst of other di∣stractions and employments presumed in this rude forme to present to this Honou∣rable House, whose paternall bowels wee find already have yearned upon us, and in the continuance of whose indulgent care with an Application to his Majestie, all our hopes are deposited, And I doubt not but this poore and meane offering shall the rather gaine acceptance, in that it is derived
 from such who have these many moneths liv'd the next doore to Martyrdome. GOD, in his goodnesse prosper all your designes, for for the reducing of this Kingdom to due obe∣dience, refining and enlarging of our Church, and the returning of a more setled peace to this disjoynted Island, which must be the daily pray∣ers, and is the beliefe of
 Droghedah, May, 25. 1642.

