



My LORD,
SOme men meanly qualified have adventured Dedications of mean Pieces unto Princes; but my impudence, I fear, transcends theirs; for indeed it would better become me with a Rope about my neck to dedicate my self to your Justice, then this piece to your Patronage: My Lord, I have deserved death, but you know my retractations; and if ac∣knowledgements of my former offences a∣gainst this State may make any expiation, I beseech you to believe I have bin ingenuous: I present this to your Lordship, not to in∣form you, but to disabuse the people, for
 more of these Conspiracies then is revealed here is already known to you: but since men falling off from a party, create enmities, and dangers to themselves, as I now expect to do, I cannot propose a more undanted pa∣tern to my self, or desire a more Heroical Patron to this Pamphlet then your self. You my Lord, have dared in a strange time to judge between a King and a Kingdom; and like a wise Salomon you have (and yet with∣out division) divided the true living childe to its own Mother. You have gone on gal∣lantly, and not like those other scorned Judges, who now appear upon the Bench a∣gain, but durst not sit there when the grand Case was to be decided; those that hated you, now fear you, and those that feared you be∣fore, now begin to honor you, and believe you could not have gone on so, but that you are invisibly prompted by a more then ordi∣nary Power. You are now fixt in an Orb a∣bove mean enmities, and we that are below, fear our enemies the less for your sake. In this I flatter not, and even this blunt story I hope will testifie me to be a man free from adulation: for here I spare no man, nor party
 that falls within my Verge; Here most par∣ties may see themselves, how they are packt and shuffled for an after game, which is spee∣dily to be plaid; the Royalist, and the Pres∣byterian both may here see, if they please, that the Cards are to be dealt by other hands then theirs. See what complottings, what hurli∣burlies, what heart-burnings here are, whilst some fond men make it their main hope, and ambition to undo themselves; because, for∣sooth, they will needs take their enemies for friends, and friends for enemies. Now the Spanish are landing here, the French there: now the Scots have fifty thousand men to affront Cromwell, and yet can spare Massey ten thou∣sand more to take in Carlisle. Vt populi folia om∣ni vento, sic populi corda hinc inde omni rumore mo∣ventur. In the mean time, my Lord, God blesses your pious Cause, and your pious Cause procures you a gallant Armado at Sea, a victorious Army in Ireland, another as nu∣merous in Scotland, a powerful Militia remai∣ning besides in England; neither is money, nor courage, nor unanimity wanting to all these. Your enemies now have nothing to hope, but that confidence in your wealth and
 strength will undo you: O herein let your evil counsellors be made good ones to you. But soft, I become a trespassor upon your pretious time, and I should beg pardon both for this fancy Dedication, and rude Excursion, but that I have pardon to beg for greater offen∣ces, and am not thereof as yet sufficiently as∣sured. Onely if that pardon may not be granted to words, let it be obtained by the constant future good comportment of
My Lord,

