



SIR,
YOU performing your part of Seneca De benef. lib. 2 cap. 11. (He who doth a good Turn must instantly forget it) give me leave to performe mine (He that receives should alwayes remember it) Ingratitude being such a Monster in Nature, Solaecisme in Manners, and Paradox in Religion. Let no man therefore marvell (see∣ing Saint Paul, after his ship-wrack, records (by the Pen of Luke) Melita, and especially Publius Act. 23. in the same; that I mention Neather-Winching∣don,
 in it your selfe as memorable, I, in it, by your meanes (after many boistrous and tem∣pestuous storms) casting Anchor. Where by the peoples kindness, especially yours, I have com∣fortably and contentedly continued since De∣cember 24. 1646. to this present, in an hyred house, without craving, & often giving thanks, yet without being burdensome, I presume, sup∣posing that none will much desire the continu∣ance of things of that Nature. That a Village so small as Winchingdon, having poor who cannot, others who will not, having no help from any who are not Inhabitants, to give (of their own good will, freely without craving) mainte∣nance for a Minister in any sort, comfortably to subsist, is, I think, as fit to make knowne, as hard to find. And therefore may be a president to people, whose Preachers preach to them the word of life, and whose meanes will not afford to them the bread of life. Of the Neighbours, I may say; some of them have dealt, and do boun∣tifully; but yours exceeds them all, being far more then their all, which I mention not to dis∣parage the one, but to shew a due and fitting re∣spect to the other. Reverence, Maintenance, O∣bedience, and Prayer, being duties due from
 people to their Preachers, clearly manifested in the first of these following Treatises. I having of the first as much as I expect, of the second so much, that I neither crave nor complain, do ear∣nestly beg such an addition to the third, not to me, (but my Masters message) that you and they may be my Crown and Joy, 1 Thess. 2. 10. And such a continuance of the fourth, that I may render my Account with joy, that being profitable for you. Heb. 13. 17. Thus praying God, your whole spirit, soul, and body, may be preserved blameless; unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, In whom I am, and rest

