


THese last and troublesome times (wherein Apostates and Hereticks disturb the Truth) calleth on Ministers of the Gospel to be more vi∣gilant, both in feeding, with the words of Eternal life, Christs Flock under their charge; and in fight∣ing
 by the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, with the Errors of the time, which threatens the ruine of their souls. Now though the Inclinations of many Ministers bends them to be exercised more in practical Preaching the Truth, then in controversal maintaining it by Writing: yet when any of them are provoked to this latter service, so without it, Truth would be prejudiced, they ought (without neglecting the former) to apply themselves unto it, for the confirmation of their people in the precious Truth: know∣ing assuredly that God and his Church are ser∣ved, when his Truths are defended by the Pen, as well as when they are published from the Pulpit: even as David honoured God as well in fighting the Lords battels, for vanquishing his enemies, as in dancing before the Ark, for advancing devotion among his people: His re∣ligious Worship was the more admirable, yet Magis miror Davidem sal∣antem quam pugnantem, Greg. Mag. his couragious Combats was unto the people usefully comfortable. Seeing therefore my labours in preaching among you, was not di∣minished by any pains beside, which was took in writing: I hope none will blame me for answering a Quaking Questionist, whose con∣fidence
 rendred him conceited, that the Questi∣ons which he gave unto me to be answered, were unanswerable: considering that this vin∣dication by Scripture of many Truths, will fur∣ther your firmer setling in these known and ac∣knowledged Truths.
It is likely some may deem this a superflu∣ous work, because many have writ in answer to this sort of men: but judicious men will not account the store of books in this kind to be a∣ny sore, nor a multitude of Antidotes and Me∣dicines in infected times to be any grievance. My thoughts in this particular are not unlike Augustines; that in places infected, or likely to be August. contra Mendaci. cap. 6. infected with Errors, every one should writ who hath ability thereunto, that all sorts of people may among many books light on some, and be thereby the better armed against infecting Er∣rors, and that the adversaries of Truth may find themselves every where to purpose incountred. If the Questionist, or any of his fraternity, or a∣ny Reader, and more particularly you of my charge, shall hereby reap any spiritual benefit, I shall not value as fruitless, the pains took in composing this Treatise. It is my hearts de∣sire that you all may be saved, and be kept in
 these tottering times from being rocked asleep in any security in sin and error. Practise that holy faith and obedience wherein I have instru∣cted you fourteen years with all diligence and patience. I will not be negligent (so long as I abide with you) to put you always in remem∣brance of such things which accompanies salva∣tion, and whereby you may be edified in love, and established more and more in the present Truth. Commending you to the love of God and his Truth, and to the hating of all Aposta∣cy, Heresie, Fraudulency, sacrilegious Impiety, and Atheistical Prophanity,
I rest
Jan. 12. 1648.

