


Sir,
HAving now attended for the space of sixteen Months, partly in the Country, and partly in Westminster, that I might come to my Answer before the Parliament, and finding after all this tarriance, that I am still as far from having my cause determined, as ever; I am even forced to make my address to you, and to beseech you, if you have any bowels towards them that are in misery, that you would either procure my dis∣charge, or at least make report to the House touching my denial of the supposed Deity of the Holy Spirit. For that this onely is the matter in contestation, you very well know, having both heard my confession before the Committee, and remembring how when I was urged to declare my judgement concerning the Deity of Christ, I waved the question, as neither being that I was accused of, nor which I had yet sufficiently stu∣dyed, to engage my self publickly therein. As for my opinion touching the Holy Spirit, it is thus:
I believe the holy Spirit to be the chief of all
See Heb. 1.1, 14. whence these words are borrowed; and compare it with 1 Pet. 1.12. as also Heb. 1.7. compared with Act. 2.2, 3, 4. and it will easily appear that the holy Spirit is a minister of God, as well as others. ministring spirits, peculiarly sent out from heaven to minister on their behalf that shall inherit salvation; and I do place him, both according to the Scripture, and the Primitive Christians, and by name Justin Martyr in his Apologie, in the third rank after God and Christ, giving him a pre-eminence above all the rest of the heavenly host: So that as there is one principal spirit amongst the evil angels, known in the Scripture by the name of Satan, or the
1 Pet. 5.8. Adversary, or
Zech. 13.2. the un∣clean spirit, or
1 Sam. 16.15, 16. the evil spirit of God, or
Ibid. verse the last. the Spirit of God, or
1 Kings 22.21. See the Original. the Spi∣rit by way of eminence: even so is there one principal Spirit (I borrow this appellation from the Septuagint, who render the later clause of the 12 vers. of Psal. 51. in this manner; , Spiritu principali fulci me, Stablish me with thy principal Spirit) there is, I say, one principal spirit amongst the good Angels, called by the name of the
Joh. 16.7. Advoate, or
Eph. 4.30. the holy Spirit, or
Neh. 9.20. the good Spi∣rit of God, or
1 Cor. 7.40. the Spirit of God, or
Acts 10.19. the Spirit, by way of eminence. This opinion of mine is attested by the whole tenour of the Scripture, which perpetually speaketh of him as differing
from God, and inferiour to him, but is irrefraga∣bly proved by these places of Scripture, Neh. 9.6, 20. Thou, even thou art Lord (or Jehovah) alone, thou hast made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens, with all their host. Thou gavest thy good Spirit to in∣struct them (the Children of Israel.)] John 16.7, 8. &c. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is expe∣dient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, he
So the word  in the Origi∣nal perpetually signi∣fieth amongst Greek Authors, and is so rendred by the Tran∣slators themselves, 1 Joh. 2.1. and ought to have been so ren∣dred here, especially because he saith in the following words, that the Holy Spirit shall convince the world; for it is proper to an Advocate to convince. Advocate will not come un∣to you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is come, he will re∣prove (in the Original, con∣vince) the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit when he, the Spi∣rit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth; for be shall not speak of him∣self, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak; and he shall, shew you things to come. He shall glorifie me; for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it un o you. All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, he shall take of mine, and shew it unto you.] Rom. 8.26, 27. Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities; for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit himself maketh intercession for us, with groans that cannot be uttered. But he that searcheth the hearts, knoweth what is the minde (or desire) of the spirit: for he
maketh intercession for the Saints according to the will of God.] Acts 19.2. And (Paul) finding cer∣tain Disciples, said unto them, Have ye received the holy Spirit since ye believed? And they said unto him, We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Spirit.] Eph. 4.4, 5, 6. There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye have been called in one hope of your calling. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme. One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.] 1 Cor. 12.3, 4. &c. Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the Spirit of God, calleth Jesus accursed; and that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Spirit; But there are diversities of gifts, yet the same Spirit. And there are diversities of administrations, yet the same Lord; and there are diversities of operations, yet it is the same God that worketh all in all.] Luk. 3.21, 22. It came to pass that Jesus also being baptized, and praying, the Heaven was opened, and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily shape like a Dove upon him.] 1 Cor. 2.11, 12, 13. But God hath revealed them to us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, even the depths of God. For what man know∣eth the things of a man, save the spirit of a man, which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth none, but the Spirit of God, (he doth not adde, as before, which is in him.) Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given us of God.] Rev. 22.12, 17. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give unto every man according as his work shall be: and the Spirit and the Bride say, Come.] Act. 5.32. And we are his witnesses of these things, and so is also the Holy Spirit, whom God hath given to them that obey him.] Gal. 3.5. He therefore that ministreth (or giveth) to you the
Spirit, and worketh miracles among you, doth he it by the works of the Law, or by the hearing (or rather preaching) of Faith?] He that ministreth or giveth the Spirit to you, a strange kinde of speech, if the Holy Ghost were God. The Scripture is wont to speak more soberly of Almighty God, then to say that he is given by another, much less by men, as it is here said of the Holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 8.4, 5, 6. [We know that an Idol is nothing in the world, and that there is no other God but one. For though there be that are called Gods, whether in Heaven, or in Earth; as there be many Gods, and many Lords, yet unto us there is but one God, even the Father, of whom are all things, and we unto him; and one Lord, even Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.] You see here that the Apostle being about to set downe, who is the onely God, and onely Lord of Christians, maketh no mention of the Holy Spirit; which could not have been done by so faithful an Apostle, had the Holy Spirit been either God or Lord. Of these places thus recited, no man, though never so subtile, and though he turn and wind his wit every way, shal ever be able to make sence, unless he take the Holy Spirit to be what I say.
Behold now the cause for which I have lien under persecution, raised against me by my adversaries; who being unable to justifie by Argument their practice of giving glory to the Holy Spirit, as God, in the end of their prayers, since there is neither precept nor example for it in all the Scri∣ture; and being taxed by me for giving the glo∣ry of God to another, and worshipping what he hath not commanded, nor ever came into his heart, have in a cruel and unchristian manner re∣sorted
to the arm of flesh, and instigated the Ma∣gistrate against me, hoping by his sword, (not that of the Spirit) to uphold their Will-worship; but in vain, since every plant that the Heavenly Father hath not set, shall be rooted up; and that this practice of Worshipping the Holy Spirit as God, is such a plant as God never set in his word, would soon appear to the Honourable House, could they be but so far prevailed with, as, laying aside all prejudice, seriously to weigh the many and solid proofs that I produce for my opinion out of the Scripture, together with the sleight, or rather no proofes of the adverse party for their opinion; which they themselves know not what to make of, but that they endeavour to delude both them∣selves and others with Personalities, Moods, Sub∣sistences, and such like brain-sick Notions, that have neither sap nor sence in them, and were first hatched by the subtilty of Satan in the heads of Platonists, to pervert the worship of the true God. Neither could this controversie be set on on foot in a fitter juncture of time then this; wherein the Parliament and Kingdome have so∣lemnly engaged themselves to reform Religion both in Discipline and Doctrine. For amongst all the corruptions in Doctrine, which certainly are many, there is none that more deserveth to be a∣mended then this, that so palpably thwarteth the whole tenour of the Scripture, and trencheth to the very object of our worship, and therefore ought not to be lightly passed over by any man that professeth himself a Christian, much more a Reformer. God is jealous of his honour, and will not give it to another; we therefore, as be∣loved children, should imitate our Heavenly Fa∣ther
herein, and not upon any pretence whatsoe∣ver depart from his express command, and give the worship of the supreme Lord of Heaven and Earth, to him whom the Scripture nowhere af∣firmeth to be God. For my own particular, after a long impartial inquiry of the truth, in this con∣troversie, and after much and earnest calling up∣on God, to give unto me the spirit of wisdome and revelation in the knowledge of him; I finde my self obliged, both by the principles of Scri∣pture and of Reason, to embrace the opinion I now hold forth, and as much as in me lyeth, to endeavour that the honour of Almighty God be not transferred to another, not onely to the of∣fence of God himself, but also of his Holy Spi∣rit, who cannot but be grieved to have that igno∣rantly ascribed to himself, which is proper to God that sends him, and which he nowhere challen∣geth to himself in the Scripture. What shall befal me in the pursuance of this work, I refer to the disposal of the all wise God, whose glory is dea∣rer to me, not onely then my libery, but then my life. It will be your part, Honored Sir, into whose hands God hath put such an opportunity, to ex∣amine the business impartally, and to be an help∣er to the truth, considering that this controversie is of the greatest importance in the world, and that the divine truth suffers her self not to be de∣spised scot-free. Neither let the meanness of my outward presence deter you from stirring, since it is the part of a wise man, as in all things, so e∣specially in matters of Religion, not to regard so much who it is that speaketh, as what it is that is spoken; remembring how our Saviour in the Go∣spel saith, that God is wont to hide his secrets
from the wise and prudent, and to reveal them unto Children. In which number I willingly rec∣kon my self, being conscious of mine own personal weakness, but well assured of the strength and evidence of the Scripture to bear me out in this cause; and remain

April 1. 1647.
