


Right HONOƲRABLE,
JT is now six years compleat, since I was through your favour, removed from my late reverend fathers side; and plac'd in that Famous, and flourishing School of Eaton: from whence, after somc continu∣ance there, haveing not the happiness (nor was I alone) to be transplanted elsewhere, in a Colledg of the same foundation: whi∣ther want of learning, or somewhat else, as much (what if I say more?) look'd upon
 by many now adays, or both, were impe∣diments? I shall not now stand to deter∣mine; but sure I am, though I could be so forward as the best, yet was I as ardently desirous after knowledg as the most, and happily, I may truely say of others, what I should blush to say of my self; that in them was verified that of the Poet Juve∣nal,

Haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi.
Can vertue be advanc'd? now, vertue's poor;
Thou bring'st nought (freind) goe get thee out of door.

Neither doth it now repent me of going into that Labyrinth, though I could not get out by the same clue: for I confess it hath much bettered my knowledg, in the finding out many difficult intricacies in the most useful tongues. And that I might not be ungrateful unto you by whome I have profited, I thought it not amiss (espe∣cialy
 knowing you to be affected with Po∣etry) to present you, for a new-years gift, these first fruits gathered at play-times there; they being the recreative condi∣ments to my Philological Studies; hum∣bly craving your Honors acceptance of them: And although they are not so fair, nor so ripe for your sake as I could wish them, yet are they as good as the third Lustrum of mine age was then able to produce, which I hope may render them the more pardonable, if they taste harsh and untoothsome. I cannot but say they are too mean to stand in competition with so great a favour; yet I conceive they may serve as well as the best, to testifie my un∣willingness to stifle your name in the Ri∣ver Lethe, or to rake up the glowing em∣bers of the encourageing bounty of my honorable Maecenas, in the ashes of Obli∣vion: My Muse therefore haveing no∣thing else, leaves these leafes with you
 as a concise Epitomie of the volumi∣nous thankfulness own you by
Canterb. Dec. 29. 1656.
Sir,

