





Much Honoured Sir;
IT is the promise of the All-Glorious God to honour those that ho∣nour him. We honour God when we confesse him to be as he is in himself, and in his glorious actings to us: All the glory that we are able to give to God, stands in cordiall, verball, and reall acknowledgments: The most High is infinitly above ur highest praises and perfor∣ances.

2 There be 4 speciall wayes whereby God honours men.
1 When he raiseth them out of nothing, worse then nothing▪ yea, from the very depth of hell, to a height of heavenly honour, happiness, and holines in Christ Jesus, whereby he makes them more excellent then their neighbors: Prov. 12. 26. for all true Christians are right honourable and truly royall; they are loyall subjects, and a Royall Priesthood; they are really the 1 Peter 2. 9. Exod. 19. 6. Rev. 1. 6. & 5. 10. lowest, yet the highest people; lowest in their own sense, high∣est in Gods sight.
2 God honours men when he gives them hearts to serve him in a faithfull and fruitfull subjection to his will. The ser∣vice of God is not only our du∣ty, but also our priviledge and preferment.
3 When he raiseth men to places of eminency above o∣thers, and makes them faithfull in employing their power for

God, and piously prudent in their publick deportment.
4 But the highest honour shall be hereafter in heaven, when all the Saints shall be filled brim full with grace and glory.
We cannot honour God un∣till he hath honoured us; we cannot give glory to God, until we have received glory from him. We honour him, because he first honours us: grace is glory. 2 Cor. 3. 18. Rom. 8. 30.
Sir, God hath honoured you with the truest honour in Christ, and given you a heart to honour him again. I cannot forget your holy zeale, and Christian cou∣rage that you have openly ma∣nifested in standing up for Jesus Christ, in owning and pleading his cause against such as endea∣voured to pervert and subvert the purity of Gospel Ordinan∣ces, and the power of Religion. And I am confident that the righteous God will not forget your zeal for his cause, and love to his servants.

God hath his Booke of remembrance, Malachi 3. 16. and Hand of reward: There shall not a good thought, word, or work in his peo∣ple passe without secret record, and open reward. Mat. 6.
Your speciall bounty and favour to my selfe, ingageth me to apprehend any opportunity of due and deserved ac∣knowledgement: But that which is the strongest and most predominant Motive to quicken me to this Dedication, is your constant holy affection to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, his pure worship, and most precious wayes.
Sir, My hearts desire is that all the thoughts of God may be mercy and peace unto you; that he would be plea∣sed to add many happy years to your dayes, and when you have served God your compleat time, advance you to a Heaven of eternall glory, a Haven of perfect rest, a Paradise of all possible perfections, through the free grace of God in Jesus Christ: Which shall be the prayer of him who is

