



THe great engagements in which I stand by many fa∣vours received, to much Honoured friends of yours, put me on, to send forth a former Treatise into pub∣lick view under their names. This being of so near affinity, I thought it meet that it should come abroad under the Patronage of one of so near alliance. I need not mention my par∣ticular engagements, which you do not desire I know to hear. Since the time, that after your great imployments hath at home and abroad, in affaires of State God hath been pleased to seat you in these parts; your singular candour towards all those that labour in the Work, to which through grace I am called is eminently seen. You were tenderly consciencious, without great caution put, to ad∣venture on the purchase of a Mannor to which an Impropriation was annext, which yet for many reasons you could not without great inconvenience avoid. And notwithstanding a Vicarage there endowed, which others (though not you) would have judged a com∣petency, your great care was as soon as you were fully possessed, finding an Incumbent there, whom you had no reason to encourage, nor power to remove, to superinduce others, one after other, in a more happy, and edifying way; to carry on that work. It was no sooner void, but you took care to settle one of eminent gifts and graces, with that liberal munificence, that a free School for poor children, built at your proper cost, being provided for, little remains yours, of that part of your purchase. Your sollicitous care is still, no lesse (whereof there are many knowing witnesses) how to settle it with all possible speed upon posterity, in such a way, that God
 may be most honoured, and piety advanced by it. Which also (as I have heard from your own mouth) your much honoured and pious Lady deceased, did often perswade to hasten; although she well knew, that out of your love to her, you had by your last Will and Testament devised to her, that whole Lordship of Polesworth (to a fourth part whereof she was heir) and all the rest of your Estate in these parts, for an increase of her Joynture. If the Lord Christ tells us, that the cost which that Pious woman spent on him, should be told for a memorial of her, wheresoever in the world the Gospel should be preacht; I suppose that this which you have done, may be mentioned for your honour, with hers, that rests in the Lord: wheresoever this small piece by Providence shall come to be read. I may well look upon you, as one of the most acute of my Readers: If therefore this may gain your favour, I shall have lesse cause to fear others censure; Though in so great variety of things, as are here toucht upon, and so much controversal, I cannot expect that any one should subscribe to every piece. The whole may be service∣able, though some part remain under dispute. As it fares with me in reading the Labours of many others, so I may well expect that it will be with others, in reading any thing of mine. Your great zeal, as to the whole of the worship of God, so to this part here treated of, where you are known, cannot be hid. Your complaint hath often been, of the sad neglect of the Lords Supper; and it lyes as a sad burden on the spirits of many eminently Pious servants of Jesus Christ, that they see not a door opened for their comfortable, and orderly administration and participation of it. If any thing be here said to give any further light in these sacred mysteries, and to facilitate the way of administration to pious dispensers, so, as the honour of the Ordinance may be preserved, and the edification of soules promoted, I have that which I desire, and have made my endeavour. The Lord honour your hoare hairs with everlasting dayes, and give you the comfort of all that you have done, in, and for his Name: Sir, I am
From my Study in Tamworth, Jun. 5. 1655.

