



Right Honourable,
I Have had the opportunity to speak often to your ear, and have now the happines to pre∣sent something to your eye: The acceptance my weak endeavours have found in the for∣mer way, is my encouragement to succeed in this later. I have long thirsted after such an opportunity, wherein I might impresse some of those deeper engravings which are upon my breast, and by that perpetuate my just esteems and valuations of your Honour: the hour is now come, and I rejoyce in it; yet now I am in a strait; should I give out the full counterpane of what is in my heart, and by that transcribe my whole soul; it would but create envy on you, and be interpreted weaknes in me; though in so doing, I should no way be conscious to my self, either of o∣ver-rating or over-speaking your worth. Your vertues, as they have not been ambitiously published; so neither can they be enviously secreted: you have not been an ambiti∣ous seeker of glory, rather desiring to do, then to be seen
 to do: nor can envy it self conceal, and keep down your de∣served praise.L. Verulā. It is laid down for a maxime by a learned Statesman, That envy is a wholsome Ostracisme in a State; I am sure it would be the canker of ours, the present exi∣gencies of which, cals out for emulations and out-doings of others worth, rather then suppressing and concealing the deserts of them who are worthy. It is true, Fame is often∣times a better Nuncio, then a Judge: but when worth it self is the foundation of fame, and the praise of men is not meerly the breath of men, but the reflexed beams of ver∣tue, though it should not be ambitiously courted and desi∣red, yet it may be kindely entertained, and friendly em∣braced, being Gods report in men, heavens eccho, an en∣couragement in our work, and an earnest of our reward. And though it be Machivils principle, and is too much the foundation of practick wisdome in more politick men, That the appearance of vertue is better then the truth; the one, being helpfull, the other, hurtfull to secular designs, yet that honour will never hold, whose foundation is in a shadow; it is but glory writ in clay, but honour engraven in the dust, which will not last long; we have seen the experience of it in our daies; many, who yet had the gar∣ments of vertue,Rev. 16.15 but now walk naked, and their shame is dis∣covered. My Lord, you have not courted the shadow, but adored the substance: which, as it was your honour be∣fore: so now it hath been your strength and muniment in these daies of distresse. Long before these times of trou∣ble, you were troubled for the times, looking on them, as the womb of all these present births of calamity, fore-see∣ing (as it were in vision) the sad harvests which those seed times did portend, if God did not avert them. Since these times of trouble you have sate in counsel, as a faith∣full
 unwearied Steersman, whom neither frowns nor fa∣vours, promises, nor threats could make to desist in your duty, or decline your station. All temptations being too little for that spirit, which was too big for the world. In the Armies, you have not only been helpfull in councel, exemplary in conversation, but active in imployment, and have continued in the midst of all discouragements, bin fellow-commoner with them in their wants, sharer in their necessities, patient of heat and cold, of drought and moi∣sture, and born a part, both in the greatest sufferings, and mightiest services. Whose exemplary doing and suffering, as it was said of the L. Howards in that exigent of time in 88. though his service was but small,Camb. E∣liza in an. 1588. the towing of a Cable, yet in that little, because that little was exemplary, he did more then many men. In the field you have encoun∣tred with difficulties, undergone hazards, confronted dan∣gers, faced death, as if nothing were fearfull but fear,Vitam quamvis non posuit, deposuit tamen. standing up when so many have fallen on both hands, though a monument of Gods preserving mercie, yet a sa∣crifice readie to be offered up for this Cause, and for that God whose glory you esteemed more dear, and precious then your life.Aurum ig∣ne probatū dicitur is, cujus fides rebus ad∣versis ex∣prata spectata{que} est.
Quid sunt merita no∣stra nisi munera Dei. Aug. Thus you have every way shew∣ed your selfe, , approved gold, all your trials rendering you more approved. My Lord, I reckon up these; though your honours, yet your duties; though your adornments, yet your engagements; though your riches, yet your debts, for which you are bound to more thankfulnesse, and more service. As these are acts of differencing grace; so they call forth for acts of discri∣minating duty. And blessed be that God who will single us out to make us any way instrumentall for his glory; if he will trust us with work, we may trust him with re∣ward,
 where he cals forth to the one, he hath surely de∣signed the other.
ΜΝΗΜΟΕΤΝΟΝ Pientissimae, Honoratissi∣mae{que} HEROINAE Dominae LƲCIAE ROBERTS, Ʋxoris Nobilissimi Dom. Dom. JOANNIS ROBERTS Baronis Truroensis, filiae Tris-honoratissimi Comitis WARWICENSIS.And now, my Lord, among all your noble doings, I cannot but sad∣ly resent your eminent sufferings; among which, though the separa∣tion from your interests, relations, possessions, be things of great weight and concernment, and might much heighten and swell your sufferings, yet they are drown∣ed and swallowed up in this, which is the summum genus of all, the in∣comparable losse of a precious Consort, a beloved companion, a dear yoke-fellow, a losse, I say, incomparable, being one of whom the world was not worthy; and a losse incompensible, unlesse made up by Christ alone. She was a branch of a noble stock, but yet more nobly born then of flesh and blood, be∣ing born from above; and more happy in her second, then she was eminent in her first birth; it was my happinesse to have large and inward experience of her spirituall worth, which indeed was obvious to all with whom she did con∣verse, and could be no more secreted then the light of the Sunne: a jewel she was which after God had polished, shew∣ed to the world, and made your adornment for a time, he took unto himself, where now she is one of those beautifull stones, which adorns the new Jerusalem: while she was upon the earth, she breathed after, or rather breathed hea∣ven, as if she had been but a piece of glory, sojourning in grace, and a spark of immortality fallen down to kindle our more earthly substance. She lived in the world,
 but as much above the world, as we poore crea∣tures live below heaven; Christ was her onely ele∣ment, upon whom her soul in it's right actings did as naturally feed, as do our bodies upon our daily bread, being no more able to live without him, then the body without the soul. Her whole life was nothing else but a continued design drawn out for the advancement of Christ, the spring of whose motions was the grace of Christ, and the end of whose movings was the glory of Christ. She was alwaies (being spirited with life from above) very active, and indeed (her body, not being able to keep pace with her soul) she often out-went the strength of her body; yet towards the end of her daies (as all naturall motions drawing nearer to their center) she moved, as if every motion should put her into her rest, and as if by every step she would reach the Garland, and apprehend the prize. She was one, who scarce had ano∣ther, no fellow but her fellow, who indeed were a pair of such noble Sisters, as England could hardly match; in whose two bodies, lived one soul; and in whose two souls, lived one Christ: between whom, if I would make any difference, it should be such an one as Alexander made between his two friends, the one was, , a lover of Alexander; the other was, , a lover of the King; or else such an one, as another makes between Peter and John; the one was, , a lover of Christ; the other, was, , a lover of Jesus: or, if you will take it in this; the one excelled in knowing and doing; the other in doing and knowing; the one, in light and heat; the other, in heat and light. In a word, they were both of them the glory of their family, the comfort of their Parent, the crown of their Consorts, the adornment of
 Religion, the rejoycings of the godly, the refreshment of the Saints, and are now both entred into the possession of that which was their breathings in grace, and is their sa∣tisfaction in glory. And ô that their examples might e∣ver live as paterns to those, who doe yet supervive!
And now, my Lord, having breathed out my sad re∣sentments of your losse, give me leave to put into your hands these weak, but willing labours designed to the ser∣vice of these times, and seeking your Patronage in them, they flee to you for protection, and yet I know no rea∣son they should fear harm; their great design is truth; the message they bring is peace; the language they speak is ac∣commodation: In which word me thinks I please my self, though I see lesse and lesse hopes of seeing the thing accomplishd. Some Essaies I have attempted to lay down in relation to such a happinesse, which were they brotherly undertaken, sweetly managed, faithfully pursued, might ei∣ther procure our agreement, or lessen our difference; either make us one, or not so much two. I cast them down, such as they are, at your feet, as one able to judge of things. And when you take them up, take up these thoughts with them, that he that penned them, is one who while he can speak, will speak peace; and while he hath a being, will desire to be,

