



Right Honourable, Right Worshipfull, and Beloved, Men, Fathers, and Brethren,
HAd I but beheld as a Traveller, the stript, woun∣ded, halfe-dead condition of the West, and so had passed by on the other side, I might for that fault have been reckoned with the merci∣lesse Priest and Levite in the Gospel,
Luke 10.30, &c. even worse than a Samaritan: but, besides the common tye of huma∣nity, there are many speciall bonds of Nature, Justice, Religion, which doe constraine me to poure-in the utmost of my little oyl and wine to the wounds of those Countries; yea, and to lay out these my two pence (mites rather) in this paire of Ser∣mons, towards their reliefe. First, the lot of my Nativity did fall unto mee
Chard. neare the center of those five Westerne Coun∣ties, betwixt sea and sea, betwixt East and West: and the two largest of them I may call, my
Somerset. Mother and my
Devon. Nurse; so that the whole is (according to the
Municipibus duas esse cen∣seo patrias, unam Natura, alteram Civi∣tatis. Cicer. de Leg lib. 2. Oratour) doubly my native Coun∣try. This consideration did move me to
Isai. 51.1. look unto the rock whence I am hewen, and the hole of the pit whence I was digged. I have observed, that even a clod of earth hath
so much of nature in it, as will carry it strongly towards its owne native element and center. Next, Justice and Equity did call upon mee; for mine owne eares and eyes have been present witnesses to divers Scenes of this Westerne Tragedy: so that concerning the Substantials of this Treatise, I may generally say in truth,
Ioh. 3 11. Wee speake that we doe know, and testifie that wee have seen; and yet the same cares and eyes of mine have heard and seen too many aspersions that have been unjustly cast upon the people of those Counties, as most unworthy of all pity;
— Juven. Et quis iniqui Tam patiens orbis? —
I may adde, lastly, a tye of Re∣ligion, even that Charge of a Watch-mans office, unto which (though most unworthy) I was called in those parts: And this office hath not onely given mee the advantage of prospect above some others in this businesse; but hath laid upon mee the duty of pleading for my Country with God and man: as also, of giving the Alarum both to it, and to other places. All these relations (besides the calling which I had from some of your selves, and many others: have enforced me to the preaching and publicati∣on of this worke; though, I must confesse, that in respect of the meannesse of mine owne abilities, it may bee reckoned amongst the Westerne miseries, that they are set forth by so weak an Oratour: But, better a meane friend, than none at all. Besides, I thought with my selfe, that the
In causâ sa∣cili cuivis li∣,—&c. Copia of the Sub∣ject might supply the narrownesse of the Speaker. And the occasion is so just and necessary, that if every man should hold his peace, the very stones might cry out.
There is an history of a son, who, though he was dumb from his birth, yet when he saw one about to kill his father, cryed out, Vil∣lain, wilt thou kil my Father? And you know what beast it was that did speake with mans voice, when the drawn sword was before him. The common mother of all the children of the West is now a massacring, therfore good warrant, yea, great need, I con∣ceive,
there was for some man, and (in case of none other) for my selfe to speake, write, and Print the Map of her miseries. Next, as for the inscription of your noble Names upon it, I must con∣fesse, I durst not thinke upon any other Patrons; for, are not yee the finest of the wheat-flower, which the Western enemy, like a Sieve or Range, hath bolted and driven out of your Coun∣try, whil'st generally the bran and huskes are by them preser∣ved and left behind? Are not yee the crop of that very small remnant,
Isai. 1.9. which except the Lord of Hosts had left unto us (in the West) we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah? Yee know (right Honourable and beloved) that those Cities of the plaine might have been spared for ten righteous persons: yea,
Gen. 18.32. they were once rescued by the Militia of one righteous Abraham and his family; and, after that,
Gen. 14.16. one of the five (Zoar) was saved by one righteous Lot: so we that are the inferiour ex∣iles and Pilgrims of the West do looke upon you, (next unto God and this Parliament,) as our Abrahams, which must rescue our Country by armes; as our Lots, which must authoritatively reforme and preserve it; in which there are so many precious Saints under the enemy, so many poore soules under darknes: and according to this your double worke of Rescue and Refor∣mation, and our double hopes of them both, is this following Treatise proportioned; for it doth partly spread before you the sins, partly the sufferings of the West: the former (our sins) you may read over as ye are the Representatives, and do beare the ini∣quities of your Country, that so they may continually mind and quicken you in the work of Reformation: the latter (our suffe∣rings) you may be pleased to peruse, as an help to continue your great activity in sending down succours; for which, all the well-affected of those parts have already abundant cause to blesse the Lord, and to honour your Names. There are also in this Treatise, a true (though too narrow) Vindication of the West
from some unjust aspersions, and a Directory for an effectuall way of commiserating those most afflicted Counties. If your lea∣sure will permit you to read thorough the Booke, you may in it travell Westward with safety, and, I hope, with profit. All the rest that I have to say, is, but as one that hath been some∣times a Chaplaine to the Western Forces, to pray for your Mi∣litia, that the God of Abraham would be a sunne and a shield to all your Catechised Souldiery, (for such was A∣brahams) that you have, or shall send down; but, especially, as a Publike, and some-what Representative Minister, I shall continually cry to heaven for your good successe in the all-in-all of Reformation;
Zech. 8.7, 8 and that the Lord of hosts will save his people from the East Country, and from the West Country; and will bring them that they may dwell in the midst of [our] Jerusalem, that they may be his peo∣ple, and hee their God, in truth and in righteousnesse: And let the Lord,
Heb. 6.0. which is not unrighteous, never forget your worke and labour of love, which yee have shew∣ed towards his Name, in that yee have minstred to the Saints, and doe minister: And we desire, that every one of you doe shew the same diligence,
Verse 11. to the full assurance of our hope unto the end. This is the prayer of
 Savoy, Jan. 20. 1644.
