



I Present to Your Lordship a Mercury, not Him indeed who sends Souls to the Infernal Shades, or is a Guide of the way that leads thither; but one who, as the Poet speaks, Animas Orco Evocat, conducts them back again from thence: Or, more truly, a Guardian of humane Health, and a stout and trusty Vanquisher of the Diseases which commonly oppress Man∣kind. Nor is this a thing that is new to Your Lordship, as being not onely ini∣tiated, but very well instructed in the Wisedom of the Ancients: You are not ignorant that the Egyptians, that is, the Guides of the Greeks, and the first Mystagogues of all the Learning and Religion of the Ancients, have de∣liver'd to us all their Inventions, and the bright Lights of all Arts and Sci∣ences wherewith that Nation shone heretofore, under the Name of Mercury: But why do I recount those ancient and (I had almost said) anile things? Permit me (with the favour of my good Genius) under the Statue of this Mercury to offer unto Your Lordship, not my Eloquence, such as became ei∣ther the Egyptian or the Grecian Hermes, but a Devout Mind, and a Re∣spect that is owing on so many Accounts. My hope is incouraged both by Your singular Humanity which I have been an Eye-witness of in several Instances, and also your free and generous Disposition, and (which ought not to be past by in silence) the pleasant propension of Your Mind towards our City, which you have declared abundantly, by taking up Your Aboad for some Years with us. All the Citizens, (from the highest to the lowest) think themselves hap∣py in having injoyed Your Presence, and they admire Your large, acute and ingenious Wit, Your piercing Judgment, (ripe before Your years) the Brisk∣ness
 of Your Memory, the quick and ready Motions of Your Mind, Your swift Knowledge of things, Your Eloquent Invention, yea, and Natures prodigality in bestowing her gifts upon You, who hath given You a comely Body, and such whose Strength exceeds Your Age, as being not yet Twenty years old: By virtue of which Strength You far excee all others in such Horse and Foot Exercises as become a Nobleman. The most Illustrious Earl of Clarendon, Your Father, having observed in You a Genius growing up to all Sublime things, and even from Your Childhood a great Soul in a little Body, well knowing, that Instructi∣on promotes inbred Virtue, chose for Your Tutour the most Noble and Excellent Mr. Hamilton, of an Ancient and Honourable Family, who, by his own Virtue and Learning, increasing the Glory derived from his Ancestours, hath not onely obliged all the Muses in the strictest familiarity, but hath also taken a full view of Machaon's Tents, and entred into the Sacristie of Medicin: Through his Tutorage there shine forth in You all Virtues, and a remarkable Piety, where∣of the Holy Temples are Witnesses, which You are used to frequent: Your Li∣berality, and a Mind prone to pity are Witnesses: By Your Goodness You love to please all; You are affable to all with a Countenance composed betwixt Gra∣vity and Courtesie. I omit now all the other Ornaments which surround You on every hand, Your Family adorn'd with the Affinity of Kings; Your Grandfather heretofore not onely the Mercury, but the Pallas of Britain, the President of both Wisedom and Eloquence, and a Faithfull Ambassadour to his Prince: Nor do I here speak of Your Father, whose Integrity of heart, incredible Humanity, singular Learning, in almost all kinds of Sciences, unwearied Study in cultiva∣ting the elegancy of Learned Antiquity, and in Collecting an excellent Libra∣ry of Books, are much extolled by all such as come hither now and then from Your Fortunate Islands: The same persons greatly magnifie Your Ʋncle, who has been heretofore honoured with the most splendid Embassies, and whom Britain being joyfull, and presaging well of her Affairs, does respect and honour amongst the Chiefest Ministers of State: But the office of my Mercury is not to enter into these large Fields; 'Twill be Your part, my Noble Lord, henceforward to re∣ceive him, though rude of Speech, or destin'd for the promiscuous use of all, into Your Patronage and Favour. Farewell.

Genev.
4. Id. Jan. Ann. 1682.
