


Worthy Senators,
AS this Sermon was too much shortened in time at its conception and birth, (in the Study and in the Pulpit) so hath it been too too long (in the cradle) comming forth to publike view. One principall cause of this slow motion (besides some avocati∣ons of mine owne) hath been the great throng of your late Victories, which crouded-in upon the Stationers so fast, that this Sermon (like that
2 Kings 7.17. Courtier in the gate of Samaria) hath stuck fast in the presse of good news: and even now at last 'tis no sooner gotten through the croud, but be∣hold another pair of Thanksgiving Sermons are ready to tread upon its heels. Surely if the Lord of hosts did ever strive to overcome a Par∣liament of England with giving them Victories, your selves are that Parliament: For what Nation is there so great, that hath God so nigh unto them, as the Lord your God is in all things that we call upon him for? Oh what a Master do you serve?
Deut. 4.7. Or what doth the Fa∣ther of mercies meane to do with us? As for mine own part, I must confesse, that the present unexpected heapes of salvations doe cast me into the same trance with that of
Gen. 42.28 Josephs brethren, when opening their sacks for provender they found meate and money to boot; tis said that then, — Their hearts failed them, and they were afraid, say∣ing one to another, What is this that God hath done unto us? The men would have bin glad a little before with assurance of their lives, much more glad with some corn for saving the lives of their families: and now behold lives, corne, and money besides; your selves can easi∣ly apply. Onely give me leave in this Epistle, to be your remem∣brancer in two particulars, concerning these glorious successes, and and this Sermon, viz. That
1. Great victories are (to meere nature) great Temptations: prosperitie is an heady wine, a little of it will inflame, especially if it meet with an emptie or distempered body; and therefore mortified Agur prefers a coarse commons, yea, a piece of
Prov. 30.8.  Statuit. statute-bread before
such Cavëare. You know what befell
2 Sam. 11 2, &c. David, whilst his Army was successefull against Ammon, and lay besieging Rabbath the Citie of waters.
2 Chron. 26.16. You know Uzziah's sacrificing, and Amaziah's overthrow by conquering. It is one principall end of this Sermon, as to prevent all such surfets,
2 King. 14.7, &c. s;o to mortifie and spiritualize our mercies, that we may freely and safely feast our selves upon them.
2. Great victories are great engagements: 'Tis both a divine & humane rule of proportion, that
Luk. 12.48. to whom men have committed much, of him they will aske the more. The Parliament of England hath lately taken-up very great summes of mercy (to the use of the Kingdomes) upon trust and credit, may it please you now to consider of discharging these greatest publike debts. May it please you as A∣braham, to set up some
Gen. 22.14. Jehovah-jireh, some proverbiall monument, [The Lord will provide.] Or as Moses, some
Exod. 7 15. Jehovah-nissi; some monumentall altar, with [the hand upon the throne of the Lord.] Or as Samuel, some Eben-ezer, some pillar of praise, with a [ne plus ultra] upon it, as [the stone of help.] Some such thing I beseech you let there be, to carry the name of this our God to poste∣ritie: let the Lord of your hosts have some jewell from you for all these victories; it is another end of this Sermon, to help you in this duty also. If your weighty occasions will not permit you to read over the whole (as commonly we desire to hear good news once and again) yet may it please you to cast an eye upon
1 Sam. 7.12. some particular pages ther∣of.
As page 36, &c. As for my self, it must be my prayer, That this oyle of glad∣nesse may equally quicken both wheeles of your proceedings; I meane in the affaires of Religion and Liberty. 'Tis not long since that these two, like
Gen. 50. Joseph and Pharaohs butler, were fellow-prisoners together, but the latter of them (state-libertie) blessed be the Lord, is lately delivered and advanced in great part, though not without the help of the former; and now Religion, Joseph-like, doth (in his words) supplicate to her quondam fellow-prisoner and saith, Thinke on me (or remember me with thee) when it shall be well with thee,
Verse 14. and shew kindnesse, I pray thee, unto me. Let the King of Saints and of Nations goe on to settle by your hands Truth and Peace in all the Churches and common-wealths of these three King∣doms, causing us more and more to feare the Lord and his goodnesse in the latter dayes.
Hos. 3.5.

Savoy Octob. 8. 1645.
