



Right honorable,
YOu are in your present proceedings a shadow, and but a shadow of good things to come, not the very things themselves; not he that should come, we are yet to look for another, even Christ himself the true anoint∣ing, that shall not, as you, judg according to the seeing of the Eye, and hearing of the Ear, but he shall do righteous Judgment upon you, as well as others; I mean, not upon King Charles for All, but King Lucifer in All, King, Parliament, Army, All. This is and hath been the King of the bottomless pit, who hath let in all manner of devils into the Nation to be the torment and trou∣ble of it; his name is therefore in the Hebrew tongue, ABAD∣DON but in the Greek tongue hath his name APOLLYON, and is indeed the great Destroyer of all Good in You, and the whole Kingdom: I give my vote to the slaughter of this King.
I have but two things more to say to You (and say it I may (I hope) without offence, for I intend none, neither do I say it after, or to serve, or please, men, but God,) as they said to Christ, By whose Authority do you do these things? or who gave you this Authority? or as Christ said to them of John, Is it from heaven, or of men? If You say, it is of men, then you your selves are
 witnesses against your selves, that you tread in the steps (i. e. are li∣ving in the same principle) of those that went before you, and do as they did, judg that evil in others, which you have not yet over∣come (in the principle of it) in your selves: Let therefore he that is among you, without this fault, throw the first stone. But if you say, it is from Heaven, let it appear by your doing the works of your father which is in heaven: This we will beleeve, when we shall see you do that which none others did before you, that is to say, when you shall do good for evil; not only love those that love you, but those too (not their evil) that hate you, and despite∣fully use you: Let your rain of goodness descend, and your Sun of righteousness shine, upon the Just, for their Justification, and the unjust, for their Clarification, and Restoration: Then shall we set to our seal, that you are that you expect to be,As Cy∣rus was said to be. The Christ of God, the anointed of the Lord, for the saving, healing, and restoring of the Land; to which God and all good men say, Amen.
The aberrations from, and the walking after, the light of this star, this anointing, by King, Parliament, Army, is the subject of this Discourse, with all Christian submission, put into your hands,

