



GIve me leave to joyne You together in an
Epistle, and may it be a pledge of Union in
all things that tend to an happie and speedie
establishment of Truth and Peace. The King∣dome
is very sensible how considerable You are in the
welfare of it, especially as it now stands. And accor∣ding
to the influence you have upon the publick good
or evill are the endeavours of the Enemies of our re∣formed
Settling to distract and divide you, for they see
no other means to destroy you, and those with you,
whose welfare is bound up in yours. And in this you
are a resemblance of the Kingdom of whom a great Po∣litician
saith, that it is Magnum Animal ne{que} interit
nisi a seipso: and according to this Axiom have the
Enemies of our Religion and State framed their de∣signes.
The zeal of Spaine and Rome carried them on in∣deed
at first to furious attempts, as in 88. and Powder
Treason; but when they saw they were not able to pre∣vail
that way, they put on the Foxes skin, and have most
studiously raised and fomented jealousies and differen∣ces
betwixt the King and Parliament, betwixt the Par∣liament

and Kingdom: not to mention those subdivi∣sions
lately stirred, which I would not be so far guiltie
of keeping alive as to name them. So hath it fated with
your renowned City, you have been to the Reforma∣tion
and Liberty of this Kingdom, what this Kingdom
hath been to the Protestant Religion in other parts, a
great support. The opposing party as impatient of such
an adversary (you know) directed the first fruits of
their strength aud malice against you they were indeed
interrupted in their way by the battell at Edge-hill, but
as soon as they were recruted and recovered, how eager∣ly
they pursued their former purpose, Brainford can
witnesse: but the next day when the City appeared so
unanimously, and heartily, for their own and the Par∣liaments
defence, they saw it was necessary to take an∣other
course, and try if they could become your masters
by designe and fraud, and bring you to a cheaper ruine
by making you destroy one another. To this purpose
severall courses have been taken, and not altogether
without effect. But so long as there was a Common
Enemy appeared, there was a diversion of the humors,
which since our late semblance of Peace have broken
out into violent and strange diseases, which have alrea∣die
distempered the health, and go on to endanger the
life of that famous City. The best expedient to reme∣die
this great evill, were doubtlesse a reconciliation of
those persons and parties who are now distant, but were
in the best estate of the City affectionate and unani∣mous.
This is not onely policy but piety, as by a seri∣ous
perusall of Jam. 3. from the 13. ver. to the end may
appear. Experience witnesses the hard task and fate of
reconcilers, who lye betwixt the extremes as corn be∣twixt
the Milstones: But yet I must professe my self
one of them, and I had rather they grinde me then one
another.

To the accomplishing this great work, a speciall por∣tion
of the wisdom that is from above, which is men∣tioned,
Jam. 3. ult. is very necessary, which let us beg
on the behalf of all Christians, especially those whose
influence into publick affairs requires a greater measure.
A probable expedient hereunto may be this, that ex∣tremities
on both hands be layd aside, and persons that
drive them on. For of each party there are some parts
so heterogeneous, that there is little hope they should
ever mingle together, neither is it beneficiall that they
should while they so remain, for they tend to distracti∣on,
that is, to destruction. And give leave to him that
hath many faults to complain of one: That is, that those
who have and might have agreed, have put so little
trust in God, and so little mutuall confidence in each
other, that they have chosen rather to support and
strengthen their factions (for that it's come to) with
persons lesse desiring their welfare then themselves of
one another. And therefore whatsoever persons▪ prin∣ciples,
or practises tend to bring us under old revenges,
or new confusions, should carefully be avoided.
There is hardly any man who is not in reason con∣vinced,
that the continuance of this distance and op∣position
betwixt good men will certainly expose them
to the power and revenge of them who equally hate
both, and yet how few are there whom passion or fa∣ction
will suffer to act accordingly. You will pardon
the mention of this odious word Faction, it is of mis∣chievous
consequence, and deserves to be branded, for
it will undoubtedly ruine both sides, especially when
there is a third to wait the advantage, and the issue.
And he that would be free from this evill, must not in∣ordinately
affect his own opinion or interest, which

will expose him to that inordinate course of making
parties to maintain it, but be content to have all his
Propositions fairly examined; neither must he look at
persons more then things, as weak and angry men are
wont to do, having some mens persons so in admiration,
as they most cry up, or at least justifie or excuse all their
wayes; and others in such detestation, as to undervalue,
blast and blemish all they say or do. It's hard to finde
eiher a man so good, as in some things he should not
be declined: or so evill, that there may not be some use
of him: and if we could abstract from persons, and let
things and actions take their own demerits, much inju∣ry
and misery might be prevented. There have been
many vicissitudes of late, and those that have been
highest have still lost themselves, and endangered others
by extremities.Moderata durant. It's now come to your turn again, and
unlesse God grant so much wisdom, self-deniall, and
forgetfulnesse, as may dispose toward moderation, it
will not, it cannot last. I adde no more but an excuse,
first, for this Epistle, if plain dealing need one: and 2ly,
for the Sermon, which when I composed, I was so far
from thoughts of the Presse, that I never thought of a
London Pulpit: it hath been a moneth delayed in hopes
of an excuse. But since you will have it, I submit with
a homely but hearty complement, Much good may it
do you. And the God of peace give you peace alwayes
by all means: The Lord be with you all. So prayeth
York, May 15.
1648.

