



Honoured and much Respected,
I Do here present you with a Sermon Preached at the Funeral of your Pa∣stor: Loth I was to Preach it, not grudging the Service, but wishing the work had fallen into better hands; More loth I was to Print it, well knowing that there is nothing in this or any thing of mine, worth Publishing to the world: It sufficeth me, if by private Preaching, I may serve God in the place where my lot is cast, I dwell among mine own people. But the urgent importunings both of Ministers and other Christians have wearyed me,
and being not able to withstand the many Solli∣citations, I have forced myself to send abroad this Sermon, which I Dedicate to your selves, to whom of right it doth belong: The occasion of it was the Death of him, who was your Pastor, your Mi∣nister, and whose Flock and People yee sometime were. It comes to you by way of Dedication, be pleased to own it with your Christian Accep∣tation. It is indeed very plain without any flourishings, and therefore can scarce expect a welcome for its own sake: but it tends to keep up the memory of him, whom you sometime loved and delighted in, you may welcome it for his sake: and moreover it contains heavenly com∣forts, Counsels, which being the Truths of God, you must welcome it for Gods sake, and for the sake of your own souls. It comes out somewhat long after the Preaching, and no marvel if it come late, I had much a do to perswade with my self to let it come at all. Though indeed the hand of the Lord upon me in a sore sickness, made it much longer than otherwise it would have been. It is enlarged beyond what it was when I Preach∣ed it, because the straits of time (we being be∣nighted and many persons far from their home) would not suffer me to deliver scarce one half of
what was then intended: I then only delivered the heads: now you have the enlargements upon those heads.
And Now, Honoured and Worthy Friends, give me leave a little to vent the sorrows of my heart for this great loss: The blow indeed lights upon you mainly, but not upon you only, but upon the Neighbour-hood also, yea the whole Church of God. I have had many sad Letters since his Death bewailing the loss. If others at a great distance be so affected, how should you your selves much more lay to heart, you may justly call your selves Ichabod, Glory is departed: The Ark is for the pre∣sent taken from you. God can Glory over you, and set up the Ark again among you, Amen, the Lord grant it! but yet remember you had a Goodwin among you, some of you, I am perswaded, being the Seal of his Ministry, will remember him as long as you have a day to live. Your Town of Brentwood is famous for its, situation upon an Hill, but its eminency of late years was much from Mr. Goodwins Ministry in that place: Your Hill seemed to be the Candlestick, whereon this burning and shining light was set: He was a Tower, a Beacon, on this Hill. His monethly Lectures, which the Neighbours round about did partake
of, made it as the Hill of Hermon and Mount Sion distilling dewes upon the Valleys round about. He is now gone and is as water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered up again.
Though his Person be dead, let his doctrines live, yea because he is gone, let them the rather remain; He shall Preach to you no more, unless it be by his former labours and holy life, by both which, he being dead yet speaketh; Mr. Goodwin still lives in Weal, if ye his people stand fast in the Lord: which that you may do, as also be blessed with one to succeed, who may call home the un∣called, and perfect what is lacking in the faith of others, is and shall be the

