



Madam,
IT suits not with an home∣spun garment to be faced with cloth of gold or sil∣ver: Nor should this poor Piece have presumed to wear
your honorable Name to the world, were it not that so much of your Ladiships interest is bound up with it. You have a right in what was your Lords; and behold here an Inventory of his best and choisest Goods!
Your Ladiship may please to read these Sheets without fear of discomposure, without shrinking in, or giving back at the suspition of any cutting and doleful expressions in them; for they will shew you more White in the gracious Life of your deceased LORD, then will chequer all the
Blacks of his Death and Funerals.
Were there nothing but the voice of the Turtle to be heard in the Text,
Cant. 2.12. and were the Ser∣mon, like Ezekiel's Roll,
Ezek. 2.10. all written within and without, Lamentations, and mourn∣ing and woe; I would have sent no such company to knock at the door of your Closet, where I know, Privacie and Passion would have been too hearty in their entertainment, and har∣bored such Guests till they had becom Inmates. I would wound no hearts, and melt no eyes but
for sin: God hath a bottle for such tears, and a book for such groans, when all the floods of worldly sorrows, which wander and run out into other chanels, shall be but like those tears in Ecclesiastes,
ch. 4.1. which found no comforter.
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
2 Cor. 1.3, 4. the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort, who hath comforted you in your tribulations; so that you are not put to it at the taking away of your Lord, as Micah was at the taking away of his gods;
You have taken away my gods, and what have I more?
Judg. 18.24. God hath taken away one of your Lords, and you have an∣other Lord for him, (long may you have him!) a Lord of your womb, for the Lord of your bosom.
And how gracious was the method of this mercy, God giving you this young Lord in hand (that I may so speak) for some years before he took t other from you? How did he seem herein to consult your comfort and establish∣ment, providing thereby a∣gainst
all future diffidence and despondencies, that you might put your self into a posture of spiritual strength, whereby to stand with faith and patience unbroken, receiving with courage that shock of sorrows, which is come upon you in this day of your rebuke and trouble.
So that, Madam, your comfort is exchanged only, not taken away; and you have great cause freely to trust that God, of whom you have had so friendly a trial.
Ps. 9.10. They that know his name, will trust
in him. You cannot fall, by leaning upon him: He will keep them in perfect peace,
Isa. 26.3. whose minds are stayed on him.
Thus your Ladiship, by fre∣quent removals of your mind from a dead Lord to the living God, will happily lose your losses in such delightful and comprehensive thoughts; and at length see little, or nothing of your sufferings, for the penty and superabundance of your reparations.
Alas! Comforts in the Crea∣tures taste of the cask, and are
tainted with mortality at least; in God they are sweet, and living, like waters in their fountain: And those fading excellencies which lie scattered in them, Honor in one, Wisdom in another, are all immassed and laid up in him as in their treasury. Some sprinklings of happiness may a while sojourn in them, but in him all fulness dwells. Whatsoever is good in it self or in others, is advanced to a better being, is best in him. Make him your strength, and you have Allsufficiencie; lay up your life in him, and it is
Immortality: Affect his beauty, and you are in love with Ma∣jesty; Match your soul with him, and they are the espousals of Eternity.
Madam, I am neither worthy to counsel, or comfort you; I know you are better provided: Only, I presume (being first commanded by your Honor to this under∣taking) to be your humble Remembrancer, that you will make use of those graces which are now especially in season, useful most at such a time as this, and most proper for the
conjuncture: Resignation of your will, is your great work: Be in subjection to the Father of spirits,
Heb. 12.9. and live.
Live in patience, die in peace, lie down in hope, rise in honor, and reign in glory!

