



BEloved in the Lord, I have dedicated this Booke, not to any one City or place, but to all places in this Land whatsoever, where any of Gods peo∣ple are inhabiting, and this I have done for these reasons: First, because I have many that are neare and deare to me dwel∣ling in many parts of this Kingdome. Secondly, because the matter is generall, and doth concerne all those in generall, that have any relation to the Lord Jesus. Thirdly, because Antichrist is a large beast, yet is like to be larger, having many of his broode sitting under his wing, in all parts of the world, deceiving and being deceived, by rea∣son of those delusions, which God hath for his owne glory sent unto them, 2 Thes. 2.11. I have many weighty considerable scriptures & grounds from thence, to doe what I have undertaken. Fist God hath bestowed all upon me, and revealed all to me, for
1 Cor. 12.7. Chap. 13.1. Rom. 12.10, 11. 1 Thes. 2.8. this one maine end: that I might be
an Instrument of helpe and comfort to my bre∣thren, before Israel can come to have a quiet pos∣session of Canaan.
Deut. Judg. Many Nations of enemies must be subdued, and never was there more opposition in Sions way then there is now: the devill hath a mighty Kingdome, Antichrist a mighty Nation, besides many other enemies that we must encoun∣ter with, and therefore there is good reason that we should helpe and assist one another. Suppose a man with many friends be travelling of a jour∣ney, and at a distance from them be opposed by an enemy, will not the rest be ready to manifest their love and courage in assisting him, have they not a sufficient call thereunto? now the Saints are a tra∣velling together towards heaven, they doe meete with many enemies that doe lye in waite to de∣ceive, Ephes. 4.14. If ever any had a call to bring in their assistance to Sion, if ever any had a fit time and opportunity to doe good, surely now they have, O therefore let us arise as one man, as one body, as one Army, to wrastle with this ene∣my, the devill is already come with his millions, the world with her thousands, Antichrist with his ten thousands, I thinke it's time to rise to helpe and strengthen the body of Sion against these soul-de∣stroying doctrines, these spirituall plots and con∣spiracies, those who aime not at a single person, but at the whole state of the Church, to rob them, if it were possible, of salvation and comfort, Mat. 24.24. by cunning sophistries, seeming Angeli∣call doctrines, such as can deliver their mindes so, that every expression shall be a mystery, a strange
paradox, unheard of maximes, wordes that are neither according to the scriptures, nor according to the termes of Schooles, or those words which in our owne language are commonly spoken a∣mongst us; they are just like to the devill, transfor∣ming himselfe into Angels likenesse, and would have all men to looke upon him, according to that appearance, although in truth, he in all shapes and forms, cannot cease from being a devill, there∣fore if we have any love in our hearts towards God, towards all men, now is the time to manifest and expresse it, against such hell borne new found doctrines, such as are like to some sorts of sea monsters, that are so seldome seene, that the sight or appearance of them, becomes a wonder to all that shall behold them: the devill works cunningly by these doctors, by reason of their fewnesse and scarcenesse, starting up once in an age; this sect was in the Apostles time, and it is of such a nature, that no man can be of it, especially teachers and ring-leaders of them, but such as are full of know∣ledge, men that have amongst the Saints, and in Churches been famous for preaching of Christ, these prime Agents for Antichrist: Here is their sheepes cloathing to be seene, their voluntary humility, their excellent knowledge, their high and eloquent wisedome,
See Theolo∣gia, pag. 2. l. 1. that they can summe up all Religions, all creatures, all spirits, and all things whatsoever in one, and one in all. The second ground is this, that I may by that which the Lord hath bestow∣ed upon me, be an Instrument of glory to his
Name, not by increasing, but by
1 Cor. 12.7. manifesting and revealing to men, what he hath discovered to me. Lastly, that I might stoppe the mouth of Anti∣christ, who saith, that none are able to stand be∣fore them, or answer them in writing, disputing or reasoning
Rom. 7.18. of my selfe: I can doe nothing, but
Gal. 2.20. through Christ I can doe all things, which is one cause, why their matter doth take such deepe effect, in the harts of many, yet in no more, then God hath ordained, either to a present or eternall fall. I have presented this present to thee, whosoever thou art that hast any commu∣nion with God, in our Lord Jesus, by Election, Redemption, Creation, and Conversion, I pray you accept of it, as one mite cast into the whole treasury.

