



Most great and most gracious Sovereign,
DƲring my long Imprisonment in the Kings Bench and other places, for my adherence to the Cause of my late Sovereign (your most pious Father, and Gods most glorious Martyr) ac∣counted
 at that time High Treason, and upon that score I was committed Prisoner to the Kings Bench, June the 29th 1644.
I had then leasure to bethink my self what that Treason was; which I could not find written in Books of Law, but on Banners of Warre; not amongst men of the Gown, but men of the Sword: a Sword sharpned by them at that time for the cutting down of Monarchy and
 Hierarchy, and thereby to engross to themselves the rich Crop of the Kings and Bishops Lands, which they had no possibility to bring about, but by making the one Tyrannicall, the o∣ther Antichristian.
Whereupon I adventured in this my restraint, to run the hazard of writing three Books: The first de∣fending the Revenues of the Church in Tythes and Glebe. The second main∣taining the Doctrine, Li∣turgy,
 and Discipline of the Church of England, as they were established by Law. The last asserting the Rights of the Crown of England.
The two former were long since Printed; this last I made ready for the Press, and left it in the hands of Doctor Ouldsworth for that purpose, Dedicating it to your Majesties most Royall Father: but that sudden and barba∣rous blow which fell upon
 him, and in him upon the whole Nation, to the asto∣nishment of men and An∣gels, confounded the Press, my Book, and me; a fact so transcendently hor∣rid and monstrous, that it filled me as much with a∣mazement that it could be done; as with sorrow that it was done.
This Book brought to the birth, and thus dispoyled of its Royall Patron, wait∣ed long for the support of a Sovereign Power, and
 now humbly supplicates your Princely Patronage, for strength to bring forth; which in justice your Ma∣jesty cannot well deny, you being as well an inheritour of your Fathers Vertues, as of his Crown: nay more, a happy restorer of it when it was fallen, by your ac∣cession to it the 29th of May last (being your birth-day) when you were received with such Gallan∣try of the Nobility and Gentry, and with such ac∣clamations
 and shouting for joy by all the people, that I who have lived to see the glory of your Royall Fa∣ther and Grandfathers Reign, never saw the like to that triumphant Entry, which (I fear) I should lessen, should I attempt to describe.
I am only able to liken it to the Inauguration of King Solomon; there were then such blowing of Trumpets, such piping with Flutes, such huge shouts of
 all the people, with God save King Solomon, that the earth rent with the sound of them; and there were such rejoycings in the City of Gihon, where he was annointed King, that the City rang for joy: so did the City of London, when you our Solomon entred it on that day.
For my own part, such was my joy, that I thought it satisfaction and comfort enough, for the sufferings I had undergone for above
 sixteen yeares, in Body, Estate, and Profession; in that God hath heard my constant Prayers for the re∣stitution of your Majesty to your Crown; the Church of England to her Religion; the Law of England to its ancient Glory and Splen∣dour; and the people of England to their Mag∣na Charta-Liberties.
So that according to your Fathers prediction, I have seen you Charles le bon,Εἰκων Βασιλ Sect. 27. and Charles le
 Grand. And I doubt not, but Almighty God who hath done such wonderfull things for you, will so continue you to the end.
I here conclude, humbly begging leave to pray for my Lord the King, in the lan∣guage of a King (your bles∣sed Father now with God) I pray God bless you, and establish your King∣domes in Righteous∣ness; your Soul in true Religion; and your Honour in the
 love of God and your People. And this shall ever be the Prayer of

