



Right Honourable,
THe men without law, that is, the Nations to whom God had not given the knowledge thereof, were a law unto themselves, and made laws of their own, wherein one man became as a God to another; but we which have the law of God, and use it not as a law, are in∣deed in a kind as those Gentiles were, altoge∣ther without it, or worse, who by our traditions (for so indeed are humane laws) have made voide the laws of God, Mat. 15.6. : thus the Pharisees had un∣authorized the law of God before us. Con∣cerning
the ceremonial law, Mar. 7.8. and the moral law, v. 10, 11, 12. by which then, as now, the word of God was made of none effect, v. 13. and was committed in many things, besides these particulars that are set down and express∣ed, when man and not God reigneth: nor doth God, whiles his laws judge us not, judge, but man; the law of the Nation, and not of God: un∣till men are judged by Gods law, judgement is not the Lords, but Justinians, Gratians, or other mens; upon which the people imploy their time and study: but if Gods laws were set up among us, by his Bible or Statute book, every man would easily become a lawyer; where no acts are ever to be repealed, but out∣last those of the Medes and Persians. No word must be added or diminished; there is therein no more or less then should be; so full hath God made it, to govern by, Deut. 4.1, 2, 6, 8. the Ruler of the people was to have it alway by him, and not to turn from the right hand or the left, Deut. 17.18, 19, 20. It was the ex∣cuse of the Heathens, they knew not the law to make use thereof; it was the wickedness of the Papacy, that it was not used therein, though
they knew it, they well seeing, that both they and their practice were under the condemnati∣on thereof; and that they had no authority thence to set up themselves, and Lord it over the world, putting themselves in the place of God, without God.
But yee, O yee Princes of the people, into whose hearts God put it to give assurances to the nation that your desire is to make it happy, which the Lord tells you consists in setting up Gods law, Rom. 9.4. Deut. 4.6, 7, 8. God hath laid ingagements on you, as on his people of old, Deut. 4.24. though other alterations in the State were troublesome, God will pro∣sper you in this and in your undertakings; for this, remember ye have the ingagements of men upon you, and of God on you, and of vows made to God on your own souls. O what shall or can hinder! you need not fit a day to do it, it is done for you to a word, in the word: untill when, nationally we are not the people of God. Iam. 4.12. tells us there is but one law-giver; consider then what it is to give a law that is not according to Gods, e∣specially when we have the law by us, and are not to go to heaven or beyond the Seas for
it; and I pray consider, that the Gentiles, Rom. 2. though they had laws of their own to judge by, yet not having Gods law, they are said to be without law: and observe well thence what God may say of us, our law and judge∣ment. Do, O do as Iosiah did, 2 Kings 23.2, 3. bring forth the law, do you and your people make a covenant, and all the people, with God, to restore and obey the law in the com∣mands, the statutes, and judgements thereof; so shall no injustice nor oppression be used in the land; this is the New Earth which the Saints even in the Apostles dayes dayes look∣ed for, in which dwelleth righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13. the Romans having destroyed that government before, and hath laine hid to this day in the word; untill which, the foundations of judgement and justice being out of course, though you are never so wise, just, and willing to do the nation good, ye cannot, for the foundations are out of course, and what can the righteous do? saith David. And let not the cry of the Prophet take hold of you, Psal. 119.16. Vp, Lord, for men have made void thy law. Examine, I pray, if your
laws have not in some kinde made void Gods laws, which is the greatest guilt of a nation that may be, under which we have layn ever since we had the knowledge of it amongst us. Give me leave to tell you, It is not enough you have put down the power and authority, but you must put down the rule of the fourth Mo∣narchy also, as the Apostle saith, 1 Cor. 15.24. O that ye might be honoured of God, to put down that, and set up the Lord, and not your own, when indeed ye shall be healers of the nation, and restorers of the paths to walk in; on which I beseech you to look, as on that is Gods work, and your chiefest duty to set up judges in the right place of judgement; that they judge according to the law, that judgement may be indeed the Lords, and they called gods; in which you shall do more for the nation then all the Parliaments ever were; and deliver your own souls, make prosperous the people, establish authority and rule, compose the differences in being among us, and make the people one; for it must be God that must make those of one house, much more those of one nation to agree,
whereby ye may onely do it: to which I leave you, and pray the Lord to help you and direct you therein, and remaine

