



DEARE LADY,
IT is not my businesse in this De∣dication, either to excuse my am∣bition in looking so high, or to justifie your discretion in stoop∣ing so low, till two such unequals met together in a Conjugall re∣lation, there was a time when such a meeting need∣ed no apologie, when it was no wonder for our Tribe to match into Noble samilies nor disparage∣ment
 for Noble Families to match into our Tribe, among all the Tribes of the children of Israel, none but that (the Tribe of Levy) was allowed to match into the royall Tribe of Iudah, by which previledge Iehoiada the Priest had to wife2 Chr. 22.11 Iehoshabeah daughter to Iehoram, & sister to Ahaziah Kings of Iudah, The veryIsaiah the son of Amoz, bro∣ther to Amazi∣ah King of Iu∣dah. Prophet and Penman of my text (if the Jewish records deceive us not) was of the blood Royall, and the greatestPresbyter Iohn. Prince this day in the world, counts it his highest honour (and it is the first in the Catalogue of all his high titles) to be stiled. Praestants Anr¦testes Sacerdos. Atiqua nomi∣na summum huic officio tri∣buunt honorē Priest. True it is we are falne into other times, which1 King. 13.33, 34. by making the lowest of the people Priests, have made the Priests the lowest of the People: but you know whose sinne that was, charged and rechar∣ged so home upon him,Ieroboam. as the very cause of his ruine, and remaines in the story of his life, as a blot in his Armes, and a staine to his honour to this very day. I confesse (notwithstanding) it had beene honour enough for mee to have beene your Chaplaine. The noblenesse of your birth, with other perfections suitable might well have commended you to any, my Lords your
 Father or Brothers Peeres in this Kingdome, but seeing providence had otherwise determined, as theAs God de∣creed so we a∣greed. Posie of your wedding Ring, of your owne choyce (if at least it be notShe suffered deeply in both, but both never troubled mee till I lost my Libra∣ry (of choyce bookes, and of good value, by the treachery of a pretended friend, but a close hypocrite and notorious temporizer, one Lake of Castleford a∣foresaid, who upon highest engagements undertooke to preserve them for mee, but up∣on the turning of the times, and the taking of Pontefract Castle, betrayed his trust, and kept them from mee, and that not for the use of the publike but for his owne, after he had concealed them for mine, above two yeares and had them in his hands so concealed, when my other goods were sequestred, and he a prizer of them. sequestred nor plun∣dered among the rest) will daily put you in mind. I am glad to see you do so contentedly sit down with your lott, and beare with patience the crosse that is laid upon you, while I (as duty binds mee) and as in good reason I ought) help to beare one end of it with you. And now, Lady, since by this means I have undone you (and the times will needs have it so) I know no way better how to make you amends, then by becomming an instrument to help forward your faith, a meanes to further you in the waye of life. And if in the losse of all our earthly comforts and contentments, we can compasse those that are heavenly, if in the want of all the joyes of this world, and the seeming happinesse in the things here below, we can make it an occasion to seek the more earnestly after heavenly happinesse, and the joyes which are from above, wee shall be still happy in our sufferings, and gainers by
 beingPeriissem nisi periissem. Themist. Athen. loosers. It was your owne expression, and I must not forget it; that the hope which you did conceive of advantaging your selfe in your soules health, and of being furthered in the way to heaven, was the maine inducement which prevai∣led with you, to looke upon a man of my professi∣on, in that way that you did. And it is (there∣fore) my duty, and I must not neglect it, carefully to endeavour so to satisfie that your expectation, as that you may not be altogether disappointed of that hope, in performance of which duty, and part of payment of which debt, I send you here these two mites, not doubting your acceptance, both for his sake from whom they come, but espe∣cially for the Image sake, and superscription which they beare, and that is not of Caesar, but a grea∣ter then Caesar, of A Child on the one side, and A Sonne on the other, the maine subject of the ensuing text, and discourse upon it. A visit to your two sonnes at Winchester gave the occasi∣on of coyning them,The eldest borne at Castle∣ford on Christ∣mas day 1632. one of which was borne on that very day, set apart by the Church for cele∣brating the memoriall of the birth of this child, and if it were not reproveable in Herod to cele∣brate
 his birth-day (as the Evangelists silence in that particular, recording the story of it) seemes to me to conclude) and if the marvailous works of the Lord be such,Psal. that they ought to be had in remembrance, and to be kept in remem∣brance, and to be delivered over from Generati∣on to Generation to be preserved in remembrance, and the way which the wisedome of God himselfe hath appointed as most fit to doe this by, bath ever beene by anniversary Commemorations yearly feasts, holy meetings,Estr 9.27. Exod. 12. and Convocations for that purpose. I hope it will neither be char∣ged upon the Church as a crime that it hath ap∣pointed such a day for the celebrating of the me∣moriall of the birth of this child in my text, nor in mee, that I did my part then in speaking, or now in writing in the honour of his Natitivity such a subject I confesse might well become a better pen, and such it hath, and such many, but amongst many, and many better, there is still mat∣ter enough for more, and roome enough for mine, which is so much the bolder, because it writes (if not onely to you, yet principally) to you Deare Lady, some slips, and failings doubtlesse may be
 found in it, in which notwithstanding, I desire candidly to be interpreted, it may be there will be found some thing among hand, which may make amends for it, some thing which you doe not read every day, some thing which it is very necessary for your Sexe to know (especially in the second Sermon) something which (I doubt not) will afford you much comfort, and good satisfaction, and that in some necessary but clouded truths, such as it is what ever it be, yours it is most peculiarly, and to your hand and view I present it. Read it o∣ver Deare Lady, and in it my love to your Soule, my due respects to you, my tender care of you, and all that may speake me most faithfully, really, and affectionately yours, desiring of Almighty God, that you may receive as much comfort, sa∣tisfaction, and assurance, out of it as he that pen'd it hath grounded on it, and daily receiveth from it, who is and ever will be

From OXFORD
Jan. the first 1650.
