



MAy it please your Highnesse, I have made bold, being advised thereunto to presume so farre as to Dedicate and commend this little Treatise to your serious consideration; The which I should not have don, though advised to it, being so meane a man, Had I not been perswaded that your Highnes will approve of the contents hereof, Or had I not also conceived that your approbation and publike owning and incouragement thereof, would much tend to the glory of God, and the good of his people. And so by consequence also not onely to the fullfilling of your minde and desires being bent that way, but it will really tend for your honour & advantage in many respects, which I could easily name: One whereof is that though the Trea∣tise
is little, yet it hath much in it, that by the blessing of God may strongly tend, for turning of the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the chil∣dren unto their fathers, as Mala: 4.6. Least the Lord should come, and finding us devided, smite the earth with a curse, I meane (for so wee ought to apply it) for turning the hearts of the Ministers unto the peo∣ple, and the hearts of the people unto their Ministers: Least the Lord finding us in a devided seperated ma∣lignant posture, each against others, should smite the earth with a curse for our sakes, instead of causing the blessing to rest in our houses, & upon all that we have.
Now it is evident that Satan and all his instru∣ments, especially the Quakers, labour with all their might, and are too powerfull quite to the contrary, as in this Treatise it will appeare, That it is the chiefe designe of Satan in the Quakers to render the Mini∣sters odious to the people, that so hee might make their doctrines and labours utterly ineffectuall.
And I being confident that your Highnes is not Ignorant of these things, nor of the ends and devices of Satan: For I have not written to your Highnes because you know not the truth, but because you know it, and that no lye is of the truth.
And againe being also confident, that your High∣nes much desireth, and is exceeding glad of all oppor∣tunities and meanes to effect this accordance, amongst
all the faithfull Ministers and people of God; which doth much commend the goodnesse of your spirit through the grace of God in the sight of all good men that know your minde.
I have made bold to commend this Treatise, the more to ingage your Highnes the rather to reade it; Being a little jealous least your many and great af∣faires should withdraw your minde to sleight and neglect it before you know it. Especially in regard here is included divers pressing arguments, and that from Scripture-grounds, such as cannot be reproved: To ingage the people in love and duty to their faith∣full Ministers, freely to communicate and make them pertakers with them in all good things, so as the Go∣spell requires. Which love and dutyes Christianly performed, so as really to proove the naturalnes of their love; will doubtles ingage the hearts of the Mi∣nisters unto the people; It being the nature of true cordiall affection, such love I meane as commeth of God, to be reciprocall.
And what happinesse attendeth both the Ministers and people that are in such a case; Especially in respect of the blessing of God, is clearely held forth; Psal: 133. Behold, saith David, how good and how plea∣sant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in uni∣tie, vers. 1. For there the Lord hath commanded the blessing, even life for evermore, vers. 3.

 And so the Apostle biddeth us, Be perfect, be of one minde, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with us, 2 Cor: 14.11.
Now what better meanes can wee use for com∣pleating all this happinesse to our selves and posteri∣ties. Then to provoke one another unto love, and to good workes.
And one thing I dare say, that through the grace of God, here are divers Arguments and doctrines for provoking to good workes, which have never yet that I know of, been published before, either by word or writing, from Gospell-foundations, but in this Treatise.
But it is not suitable for mee to commend it, but let it praise it selfe, nor should I have done it at all, but to ingage your Highnes not to neglect to reade it, and take speciall notice of such a serious buisinesse, so strongly opposed, and of such high concernment to all our soules.
Thus hoping in God your Highnes will grant me this desired favour, as with deliberation to reade it over, when time will permit; I Commit you to the guidance and protection of God, and rest your lo∣ving, faithfull, and obedient Souldier.

