




SHEWETH
THAT your Petitioners the third of July last
1651, (at the request of some of the Souldiery)
did peruse and examine some of Hartford ac∣compts,
and by an accompt by them drawn out,
have discovered (5097l. 2s. besides the value
of Armes and Furniture for 28 Harquebushiers
men and horse that served lesse then the number raised) as disco∣verers
for the Common-wealth, whereof they have proved, 2500l.
or thereabouts by severall credible witnesses upon oath, the same be∣ing
a branch of 4103l. 2s. detained (from the Souldiery that
were under the Command of Sir John Norwich for 13 weeks
and 3 days pay) by the Committee of Hartford, their Treasurer,
Paymaster, &c. of the said County, of which they have hitherto gi∣ven
no just accompt: The same being collected and received of the
Inhabitants of the said County for the satisfaction of the pay of 300
horse Harquebushiers, that they maintained at their charge, under the
Command of the said Sir John Norwich from the 17 of August
1643, to the 25 of March 1644. which detention &c. caused
your Petitioners to exhibit the said branch of discovery, of 2500l.
or thereabouts, with their complaint against the said Committee &c.

of Hartford, before the Honourable Committee for the taking and
receiving of accompts for the said Common-wealth.
That notwithstanding the many addresses to the said Committee
for relief, your Petitioners were still frustrated of their expectations
by their continuall delays and obstructions of their prosecution of the
charge laid against the aforesaid Committee &c.
Whereupon your Petitioners upon the 27 of January last conti∣nued
their said prosecution of the said branch of discovery of 2500l.
or thereabouts, and notwithstanding their great charge and losse of
time in their severall addresses to the said Committee (in the behalfe
of the said Common-wealth) can hitherto have no relief, which tendeth
to the great wrong of the Common-wealth and Souldiery, as by a true
Narrative of their proceedings and transactions, and the accompt
ready (when called for) to be humbly presented to your Honours, doth
at large appear, And this discovery issuing from the military affairs,
Your Petitioners humble suit is, That your Honours will
be pleased to take the premises into your pious and serious con∣sideration,
and thereupon if your Honours finde it meet to no∣minate
some worthy persons (Commissioners) that are expe∣rienced
in Military affairs, to hear, examine, and determine
the business, or otherwise to doe therein as to your grave wis∣domes
shall seem most agreeable to equity and justice, for the
procuring an effectuall tryall and speedy end of the said disco∣very
&c. for the present and future good and benefit of the
Common-wealth and Souldiery &c.
Delivered April 17 1652 to the
Lord Generall Cromwell.
And they (as in duty bound)
shall ever pray &c.

