



Gentlemen,
IF you and I, and all that love light, bad ever cause to blesse God for the same, let us now begin to thinke of our dutie: none of our least thankes surely is due for the Catechisme; Candles lighted and burning bright, one after another, and all from the great Torch of Gods holy Word. The dimnesse (to my knowledge) is yet very great, yea even here where so many fired Beacons now burne out. Now because some, perhaps, will read such a Catechisme, be∣cause such a one writ it, though for nothing else; I have adventured to set on fire this little Candle also. Some lights I know are of Tallow, and pleasant enough for light, but the sent unsavorie, this is wax, and ga∣thered with some diligence too, and if it may make any heart like melting wax as David
speakes, Psal. 22.14. or become a Taper serving for a light to feet and a Lanthorne to pathes; as every thing of truth gathered out of Gods Word ought to doe, it will bee well for you, and for mee not amisse, your integrity shall surely redound upon your own heads, and if (I helpe you) some of your wel∣doing shall bee put on mine accompt. All knowledge doth, and indeed ought to tend to practise, but catechisticall knowledge, most especially, concerning which, Exod. 12.26. And such knowledge in these (seeming knowing, but indeed) ignorant times, is I beleeve, the best Pilot, guide, and usher, un∣to godly practise; Divinitie propounds three noble ends unto her selfe.
The 1. is Gods glory, the highest and most supreame.
2. Is mans sanctification here, and sal∣vation hereafter.
3. Is the edification and conversion of our neighbours, and those that relate unto us; to all these ends such knowledge, as is drawne from catechisticall principles, looks directly.
Wolphius. Hee said sweetly, God gave not man his Lawes to preserve onely; for then he might have committed them to iron Chests or marble Pillars: nor onely to talke of them; for then hee might have given them
to Geese or Parrats: nor yet onely for con∣templation; for then the Owles in Ivy woods, or the Monks in Cloysters had beene fittest to have received them; Gods purpose was and still is, not to make tryall of the wits of men who could sharpliest conceive, nor of their memories who could faithfulliest re∣taine, nor of their eloquence who could round∣liest discourse, but of their wills who would most obediently doe that which hee com∣manded them. These directions (Gentle∣men) intend your practise onely, and as in all things, so especially, in your approches unto God in his most holy things; that his Table be not made a snare unto you. One Apple of the tree of life is better then ten of the tree of the knowledge of good and evill; though wee, in our longings, fondly preferre these before the other, ever since our first pa∣rents teeth were set on edge therewithall. Some of the maine heads of Divinity are here handled, as our misery and our mercy;
Nazian: . Syst. Theo∣log. p. 212. our disease and the cure, as hee said well, The remedy you have here, in the meanes prescribed, to the Fall in the effects; I pray you still remember, that the purpose of all is for, and the profit will be found in practise, that as hee said excellently, The Faith of the eares and that of the hands may goe to∣gether,
I finde of old foure great complaints,
Vid. Ruffin. Eccl. hist. lib. 2. cap. 10. Moses Lucio, Arr. Episcop. (by no small men neither) fitted for their severall times, but indeed, too too suitable unto ours also. The first (Seneca) saies Malint disputare quam vivere, Men had rather fall to disputing downe one another, then endeavour to live up to God: too true, God wot. The second saith, men know, onely that they may bee knowne by it, Sciunt ut sciantur, Bernard. The third saies of the Athenians thus, Nummis ad nume∣randum, et scientia ad sciendum utun∣tur; They use their money to count withall, and their knowledge to know withall. And the fourth saith of the Philosophers of his time,
Cum Phi∣losophorum vita, mise∣rabiliter pugnat ora∣tio Tully. That their lives and their discourses did most miserably crosse one another. Such as any of these I would by no meanes have, either you or my selfe to bee, but active, and doing Christians; in this, much of light, lest peradventure, that of our Lord, Joh. 15.22. or that Joh. 9.41. bee applyed unto us unavoidably. Indeed I must needs tell you Gentlemen that though few in these times bee troubled with deafe and dumbe spirits, yet abundance have withered hands, and dryed armes, and lame feet. The blood (under the Law) was appointed to bee put upon the lap of the right eare,
the top of the right thumbe, and upon the toe of the right foot, you know, and why so? That the hearing, practise, and progresse of Gods people might bee sanctified: and in∣deed then are wee like to prevaile with God, and to prepare men for him,
 Theo. in Iud. when like Gideons Souldiers wee beare in the one hand the Trumpet of preaching, piety, profession, and in the other the burning lampe of Godly conversation. And yee Fa∣thers, and Masters of Families suffer a little I pray you the word of exhortation; Let not all these Catechismes rise up in judgement against you, whilst either you or yours continue uninstructed, and unex∣cusably so (as you must needs bee) in these times,
Miserrimi omninum illi sunt, qui fidem in do∣mo Fidei non habent. Cypr. De mortalitate. unbeleevers (as the Father) in Faiths house, and grossely ignorant, under all meanes of knowledge; The condemnation you know what it is, Joh. 3.19. And I know on whom it will lie, if it bee not prevented, even on you in this Citie, and yours too; One I remember brings Chil∣dren in complayning of their relations thus, Alas!
Perdidit nos aliena perfidia, parentes sensimus parricidas. other mens untrustinesse hath undone us; wee have found our parents our overthrowers; I beseech you in the bowels of the Lord Jesus, bee not content to runne altogether after your earthly businesse, but
mind a little the one thing necessary. Eras∣mus tels us of a certaine carnall Gospel∣ler,
He calls him Cy∣clops Evan∣geliophorus in his Dia∣logue of a carnal Gos∣peller. who carried on one side a bottle of rich Sack, and on the other the New Testament of Erasmus Translation, fairely bound and bossed, with gilt leaves as faire as his life was foule, and his conditions base. Hee carried it alwayes about him, that was ob∣served, and once had knocked it about the pate of a Franciscan, for rayling against Erasmus, and the new Gospellers. To con∣vince the man hee is asked, what if hee were tied ever to carry the bottle at his girdle, and never to taste of it, or if to taste onely, and never drinke it down; his answer is, That were a punishment just Tantalus like; but what if hee did (as his manner was) drink deeply thereof? Hee then answers, it would warme his heart, refresh his spi∣rits, and cheere his countenance; So, oh so, saith hee that spake to him, would that little booke thy soule, if thou didst eate it downe, concoct, digest, and turne into nutriment, in thy life and practise. I know you will soone apply this; taste a little, and see how excellent it is to bee able to serve the Lord, and save your owne soules. You have here two things in generall which are dri∣ven at for your direction.

1. Why you ought to let your profiting ap∣peare to all men in this knowledge, namely, because wee are all most miserable by na∣ture, and have to doe with a most mercifull God, who had thoughts of our recovery from everlasting by free grace.
2. What is to be done of those, that this may come to passe in their soules? viz. To have a most especiall regard unto the holy use of, and wholesome profit by the Word and Sacraments. The Maximes and San∣ctions of things to bee done and beleeved, are very few, and contained in briefe Sum∣maries; but the incentives, motives, dire∣ctions, reproofes and such like things, for practise, these make volumes swell, these leng∣then Sermons, and multiply bookes of all sorts. Surely the sinnes amongst us in these times, do not proceed from ignorance all, but many of them from incontinence; some from the despising of knowledge; others be∣cause men with-hold the truth in unrighte∣ousnesse, and not a few from that. That so many things are in despute, and so few in practise; Great lights burne and give light, tis true: But hold forth so many questions, that many, yea most men, will not bee trou∣bled to read or attend the answers. A wo∣man there was, not far from this place, and
lately living in a professed doubt of the Dei∣tie; after illumination and repentance, shee very hardly received comfort. Now she pro∣fessed often that the vitious and offensive life of a great learned man in the towne where shee lived, occasioned those damnable doubts; If a stranger should come here and see our books, heare our Sermons, view our Ministery, and but a little attend unto the tatling part of our windy professours, which are all tongue, hee would surely think our Theory to bee unparalleled, and our Land and Citie in speciall to bee knowing of all things which are knowable. But if hee should goe into many families, and see them at home, if hee should view our Sub∣urbs a little, and but make a step into the Villages round about London; if hee should walke our streets and heare our Por∣ters, Carmen, &c. their oathes, idle, yea and evill speaking, verily the ingenuous Traveller would say of this Citie, as once was said of one greater then it, Here are 600000. which know not their right hand from the left; notwithstanding both Presse and Pulpit doe so abound with knowledge, and the labours of learned men; for the sakes of these, and such as these, the igno∣rant and willing to know, your children
and servants I have drawne these Sermon notes into a way of Catechisme, and doe in∣treat that they will, not onely find leasure, but make some opportunitie to read and practise.
Socrates. The great learned man was wont to say, that hee that would bee an honest man, shall soone bee so, and is indeed al∣ready past the hardest part of the worke; not much unlike to what Solomon saith, Wisedome is easie to him that will under∣stand.
Linacer. It is said of one that reading the 5.6. and 7. Chapters of St. Matthew, hee began to compare those rules presently to his owne and unto other Christians lives also, and when hee had so done, throwes downe the booke, and saies, Either this is not Gods Gospell, or else wee are not Christians and Gospellers; holy application, Gentlemen, will bring forth holy indignation; holy indig∣nation I say, such as, 2 Cor. 7.11. I con∣clude with some rules of direction for the use of this and such like better workes. First, to Catechize is to teach the princi∣ples of Religion, See Heb. 5.12. and 6.1. and is used in Scripture to traine up, as Children and Servants ought to bee, Prov. 22.6. to instruct, Luk. 1.4. It is the du∣tie of the Minister, Ezek. 44.23. But not of him onely, as too many thinke, see
Deut. 4.10. and Deut. 6.6, 7. Second∣ly, take heed I pray you of two destructive principles, one of the Courtier, Religion he saies must not goe too high, Amos 7.13. Prophecy no more at Bethel, for it is the Kings house; the other of the Countreyman and Citizen too, Let not Religion goe too low, what need wee teach it our children or our servants? See Psal. 34.11. and si∣lence such words for ever; 1. The dutie is, children to bee taught; 2. The manner of their teaching, to bee by way of Catechise. 3. What they to bee Catechized are to per∣forme, that is, to come and hearken there∣unto.
Thirdly, observe well what is the cause of the want of publike profit to your children and servants at Church, even their rude∣nesse and unpreparednesse at home: you send them to schoole, and prepare them for mens service, but they come to Gods service ig∣norant utterly of the goodnesse and necessi∣tie thereof, come to Church without prepa∣ration, and goe away without profit.
Fourthly, the Countryman went to the Physitian for Physick, to whom the Phy∣sitian gave a bill, which the patient put in∣to his pocket safe, and wore it there a great
while, but finding no ease of his trouble comes againe, and the Physitian bids him take it in Posset Ale, hee goes home and puts the bill into the cup, but never suf∣fers the ingredients prescribed to come with∣in his body. Now looke how much good his Physick did him; just so much will Di∣vinitie doe you, unlesse you let such words as these sinke downe into your eares, un∣lesse you receive the Word with readinesse, and search the Scriptures whether these things bee so, that many of you (and yours) may beleeve, see Act. 17.11, 12.
Fiftly and lastly, mens Catechises are all nothing unlesse you bee also taught of God, therefore weigh well the promise, Act. 2.17. and bee sure you cleave close to the performance hee requires of every graci∣ous man. If you looke into Heb. 1.2. Christ is said to bee heire of all things; then look into Psal. 2.8. and there God saith, Aske of mee, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheri∣tance, &c. You may conclude hence that what God meanes to give to his natu∣rall Sonne, hee yet meanes hee shall aske him; How much more doth bee require of his adopted ones? Therefore, Ephes. 6.18,
19. Brethren, pray alwayes, with all manner of supplications in the Spirit, and watch thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication, for all Saints: and for mee

Minchin Lane, Novem. 23. 1645.
