



Right worthy Senators,
ACcording unto your command I have present∣ed these notes unto your hands & the worlds view; give me leave withall to present my humble thankfulnes, for your unwearied labour of love to these three Kingdoms, and in them unto all the Churches of Christ: for as once the Poles Ambassador said in regard of the Turk, Per latus Poloniae petunt Europam, I may say in regard of your and our enemies, through the sides of England, Scotland and Ireland, they strike at all that i truely called Christen∣dome, your wisdome therefore doth well to make good these passages.
It is true indeed your work is, 1. great, but it is for theSicut calere contra frigi∣dum hoc est re∣pugnare frig∣do, virtutis est▪ atque vigoris, sic amaret appetre▪ insua∣v siv molestum, &c. Paris. de fide. great God, and Solomon saith, The house that I build is great, for great is our God, 2 Chron. 2. 5. Shall not we do great things for him who hath done and suffered great things for us, and by us?
2. Your worke is clogged with many difficulties; but if it were not so, how should the strength of your love appeare either to your God, or to your Country? a man may be said to
 love the truth before the winde of opposition riseth, but he cannot be said to hold it fast or cleave unto it till he meets with some that would take it from him, Deut. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. Difficulty doth commend duty; there was a stone rolled upon Christs grave, And there is a difficulty rolled upon every truth or way of God, which through the evil of the times hath been buried; But when you come to the graves mouth, the place where you think to meet with most diffi∣cultie,Operum diffi∣cultates coelo∣tum saatates consequuntu. there, and then, the stone shall be rolled away. The more difficulty in doing, the more sweetnes in the work done.
3. Your work is berounded with many dangers, but theNec mendaii utilitas est diuturna, nec veritatis damnum diu nocet. neglect of it is more dangerous, and the frown of a Prince may sometimes stand with the favour of God; neither shall flattery alwayes hold in credit, nor truth ever continue in disgrace.
4. Your work is reproached sometimes, and calumni∣ated by divers adversaries; But as Seneca said to his friend (male de te loquuntur homines, sed mali) soCur respondet Sacerdoti, sed Peninnae non respondeat Anna? quia Peninna rat persona priva∣ta, sacerdos autem publica: item Peninna loquebatur ex odio, sacerdos ex zelo: unde allud negligen∣dum eat, ille instruendus. Mend. in Sam. may I say to you, Men speak evil of you, but they are evil men, and it may be, yea tis likely, God will heare the language of your Peninnahs, & make you the more fruit∣full, especially you doing as Hanna did, who though she was willing to answer to the charge of Eli, because he did speak from Zeale, yet she would not answer the reproach of Pe∣ninnah, because she spake from hatred. Surely Malig∣nants clamours are best answered when neglected. Tutius aliquando agit qui calumnias non exaudit; Jesus Christ was eclipsed, that Gods servants might shine.
5. Your work also is or may be disadvantagious unto
 your own particular interests, your publike imployments cannot but hinder your private affaires, yet be pleased to remember Moses and Joshua, who were men of great service in their generation, having as full an opportunity to have made themselves rich as ever men had, yet we do not read of any great lot they shared out to themselves or their posterity: You are now employed upon Gods service, As for your own private affaires, if you afford them some Reliques of your love, and so much onely as the publikeToleramus po∣tius praesentia quam diliga∣m. Aug. leaves, it is enough; for what is too cold for God, is hot enough for the world; yet as the baggage unto an Army, so are things temporall to spirituall, and personall estates to publike employments.
And in the throng of all your discouragements, be plea∣sed also to remember how good, how honourable, how suc∣cessefull your service is and will be.
Tis good, first, in regard of the State; for you are now in travail for your Countries liberty, which though it may stick some time in the birth, and a dragon stand before you to devoure it before it is borne, yet in due time it shal be brought forth, and we shall not onely be liberati, but Qui diruit ma∣ceriam, eum mordebit ser∣pens: qui legum constitutiones impingit, non feret impune; qui Religionis sacra violat, non erit a poe∣na immunis. Drusius pro∣verb. liberi. The Hebrews have a Proverb which they have borrowed of Solomon, That Whoso breaketh down the edge, shall be bitten with serpents. The hedges of the State or Church are the Laws, (as Drusius inter∣prets it) or the Ordinances thereof: Those enemies of yours or ours, that have or would tread down our hedges even to the ground, shall not ever goe unpunished. When the hedge is lowest, the serpent is nearest.
2. Good in regard of the Churches; for through your paines and labour of love, those swelling parts (I had al∣most said wens) which engrossed all the outward nutri∣ment
 unto themselves, (the direfull presage of a peoples in corpore humano (cui  in  epi∣stolarum sua∣rum pasbu compaa) quod si nutimentum luit ad unum membrum, ita ut nomiter in∣grossetur & ala  attenuatione demacerentur nonpotest ; sicin crpore Eccles. si supeiore fiant ita graves attractione substantiae quod inres vix possunt pra inopia se sustinere, hoc est signum am propnquae ruinae. Gersom. death and ruine, saith Gersom) are either taken off, or made more proportionable.
2. Your service is very honorable; for what greater honour, then under Iesus Christ, to be your Countries sa∣viours, and your Lords servants? Vpon Moses death it was said, Moses the servant of the Lord is dead; not Moses the Prince of the people, but the servant of the Lord: So Psalme 18. in the Title of the Psalme it is said, A Psalme of David the servant of the Lord; not a Psalme of David the Anointed King of Israel; but as if it were more honour to be Gods servant, then Israels King, tis said the servant of the Lord: such honour have all our Worthies.
3. Your service is and will be most successefull; tis truth you stand for; And though the truth may labour, (as Hie∣romVeritas labora∣re potest, vinci non potest. Hier. Quid enim  lo inexpugna∣bilius? vritas arcem in coel collocavit. Ps. 119. Mend. speakes) it cannot be overcome; For what (saith Mendoza) is more impregnable then the Heavens? and Truth hath built it selfe a towre there. Thy word, O Lord, is setled in the Heavens, Psal. 119. Wherefore worthy Sirs, as heretofore, so now much more be alwayes abounding in the worke of the Lord, in due time you shall reape if you faint not. If you want money to carry on your (yet not your, but Gods) publique Designe, remember what was promised unto Cyrus, who in regard of re-building the Temple, was to doe your worke in the type: I willEsay 45. 2, 3. goe before thee, saith God, and make the crooked places streight; I will breake in pieces the Gates
 of brasse, and cut in sunder the barres of iron, and will give thee the treasures of darknesse, and hidden riches of secret places. And doth not your owne expe∣rience tell you, thus, even thus hath our God dealt by us? for the treasures of darkenesse, and hidden riches of secret places have beene brought forth unto us; Gold and silver that hath not seene the light for many yeares before: God is the same God still, and his promise, which is your Mint, the same.
If you want outward strength and power, then remem∣ber how often when the Iews were to build the Temple, and therein to meet with enemies; the Lord inculcates that his Attribute upon them, The Lord of Hosts, (Thus saith the Lord of Hosts) thrice in one verse, Zach. 15. 3. and five times in foure short verses, Hag. 2. Silver is mine, and gold is mine, saith the Lord of Hosts; I will fill this house with my glory, saith the Lord of Hosts, &c.
And if you finde not the hearts of the people comming up alwayes to your forwardnesse, then your wisdome know∣eth how to improve the heates of their hearts while they last; all things you know are easie and beautifull in their season; And because men know not time and judge∣ment therefore their misery is great upon them.
But above all things let your eye be upon that most which Gods eye is most upon, Truth, Reformation, and pure Re∣ligion; State-hypocrites desire truth for peace sake, god∣ly States-men desire peace for truths sake; warre is for peace, but peace for truth: Wherefore that I may serve you herein, I take the boldnesse to lay these few lines be∣fore you.
The Sermon calleth for exactnesse of Reformation; if I
 have not beene exact whilst I have called for exactnesse, your goodnesse knoweth as well how to connive at what is mine, as to embrace what is God. Goe on right worthy Patriots, still to defend your Countrey, to contend for truth, to be willing to lose and be lost for Christ; whilst I live I shall live praying for you, and when I dye I hope I shal dye praising God for you.

