


IN what frosts and snows your hand hath cleaved to your plough, is not unknown to this Kingdome;Magistratus la∣bor major rusti∣cano. Luther. un∣thankfulnesse may say you have done little for us, but the truth cannot,Gubernaio est divina quae∣dam virtus, i∣deoque vocat De∣us magistratus omnes, Deos, non propter creatio∣nem, sed propter administratio∣nem, quae solius Dei est, qui igi∣tur in regimine est, est quasi Deus incarnatus. Lu∣ther in Gen. The Lord hath said ye are Gods. Still therefore be pleased to act unwea∣riedly and unchangeably: God doth save us with a Notwithstanding our reluctancy, so should the Magistrate. God is a Father of the fatherless, and an help to the oppressed; gathereth the outcasts, careth for those whom none careth for, and doth sometimes carve for them first who doe sit lowest: So should Magistrates be and doe, and therefore the Lord having said concerning Magistrates, that they are Gods, Psal. 82.1. he addeth in v. 3. & 4. deliver ye the poor and needy, &c. The Ma∣gistrate should not alwaies stay till the crying complaints of the poor be brought to him, but should sometimes seek and inquire after them;Clamor af∣flictorum perti∣net ad eos, qui in Magistratu sunt etiamsi ad ipsos non clame∣tur; nam non dicit, liberabit egenum ad se clamentem, sed clamentem & afflictum cui non est adjutor, hoc est, cui nihil est in rebus afflictis patrocinii, Muscul. in Psal. The cry of the afflicted belongs to the Magistrate, though they cry not to him: Musculus therefore observes well, that the Psal. doth not say of the Magistrate, He shall deliver the poor and needy when he cryeth unto him, but when he cryeth, Psal. 72.12. God is a God of love, mercy and grace, he is called love it selfe, not justice, though he be so, but God is love, so should the Magistrate be,
 full of love, bowels, and tender compassions unto the people; therefore he is calledאב ab אבה elle quasi volens bene suis  dictus,  Gen. 41. aliqui ducuna a ברכ benedixit, genua flexit, clamabam enim autem cum, genua flete: sic Ab Efra; a∣lii dividunt verbum in  &  R: Solomon quod  in lingua Aramaea est Rex. Na Joseph fuit pater Regis: sed vo Ebraica  significat tener, mol∣lis, quia princeps tener & mollis pater est, Mayer. philolog. Sacr. par. prima. p. 116.  a  levavit, leuavit, suble∣vavit, portavit. Father, tender Father, and Nasi, not only because he is lift up above the people, but because he doth lift up, or ease their burthen, and doth portare populum in gremio suo. Now most worthy Patriots, ye have conquered this Kingdome with your sword, conquer us once more with your love, in providing for the poor, desolate, and in healing our sad divisions with a fa∣therly hand, and you are compleat Saviours and Fa∣thers to this bleeding Kingdome. Pacem nos posci∣mus, but not such a peace (as Augustine speaks) ut mimici submittant, sed ut amici jungant. I had thought to have been (date veniam verbo) disobedi∣ent to your command of printing this Sermon, but be∣ing perswaded that it may in some  unto love both towards God and man, I chose rather to disobey mine own inclinations then your order. Now the Lord himself make you the repairers of our breaches, and the re∣storers of paths to dwell in: which is and must be the prayer of

