



YOur Lordships kinde acceptance of this mean Treatise in its first part, brings the rest of it now to your feet, upon hope it may goe out with the like countenance and favour. In these very miserable times, when so many of all conditions, are given over to beleeve lies, to be in∣veigled with the hypocrisie of seducing spirits, which the Lord in his justice has permitted to goe forth in a great multitude, for the seduction of this present evill world; the truth is glad of the patrociny and assistance of all who will be on its side; and of none more then of such as your Lordship: I mean of persons so much eminent in wis∣dome, learning, courage, zeal, and other noble qualities, above the most of their fellows in birth and rank, as these doe ordinarily account themselves elevated by their civill priviledges, above the common multitude.
And truly it will be found no lesse prudence then piety for men of your Lordships place, to put and hold them∣selves in these unhappy days, upon the side of truth, though never so much deserted, disgraced, and trampled upon by a world of simple or malicious ignorants. For now it is when the Lord with his axe is going through his gar∣den, and hewing down not onely thousands of brambles and bushes of lower stature, but many of the tallest Ce∣dars, the highest Palms, the thickest Oaks: and they who yet remain untouched, though none doe know how soon the axe may be applyed to their branches, yea their very root, yet many have reason to fear that their stroak may be suddain.
Among the wofull spectacles of our time, none use to
 touch a heart wherein is any humanity, with more com∣passion, then the ruine of ancient Families: How many great and potent houses are blown over by these late tem∣pests? How many this day be tottering and very like to fall before the windes be calmed? and of those that ap∣pear in least danger, being incompassed with the thickest defences that policy can invent against all storms above ground, how easily may subterraneous vapours shake their foundations? and when all fear is past of the eva∣nished and invisible storm, by an unexpected Earthquake, lay their wals also levell with the ground? There is no security for the greatest and strongest edifices, but in the rock of truth: what ever is builded upon this, were it never so brittle, will stand out the greatest blasts: And if any breach be made, the God of truth will not fail to repair it, till the appointed time for the change of all things under the Sun, bring that Cottage of clay to its fatall period: And even then, the house shall fall with∣out any prejudice to the Inhabitant, whosoever hath been a true lover and patron of truth. For how small is the losse of a translation from a mansion upon earth, to one in the heaven not made with hands? But here is a losse indeed, and a fall truly lamentable, which oft to our sor∣row we may see, and have reason to fear shall yet be more frequent amongst us, when unhappy Inhabitants by the hands of their errors and vices, subvert the pillars of their Ancestors habitation, and bury with themselves their whole family, under the rubbish of a temporall ruine, with∣out any hope of reparation either in earth or heaven.
In the following writ I point at the danger wherein not onely families, but the whole fabrick of our Churches and Kingdomes doe for the present stand: while the Epi∣scopall and Sectarian factions are doing their utmost endea∣vours to have all our former sufferings to be but short pro∣logues to new very prolix if not endless, Tragedies. The one
 so far demented with a frantick passion towards the govern∣ment and service of the Church of Rome, that all the mise∣ries which they have brought upon themselves and milli∣ons of others, have not in the least degree cured the disease of their corrupted mindes, so far are they from untying the knots that their own hands have made, or essaying to draw any of their deceived party, out of the perplexities of con∣science, wherein their mis-informations alone have cast them, that rather then to retract their errors, rather then to advise the lawfulnesse of joyning with all the rest of the Reformed Churches, in laying aside Episcopacy and Litur∣gick ceremonies; they choose to give up the neck of their Countrey to the sword of bloudy and idolatrous strangers; They are content to draw all again to the hazard of a new more terrible war: Tell them of the too probable issue of their obstinacy, that if their designs should prosper, the dan∣ger would be greater, then their wit, or the wisdome of any mortall creature could secure us from, to have a tyranny planted in our State, and Popery without any more circum∣locution, setled in our Church. But if their renued warre should again miscarry, that then the hazard is evident, of un∣doing the royal family, of turning the civil State of England into a Babell of confusion, and the Church thereof into a fountain of heresies, for the intoxication with its streams of all the rest of the Reformed. To all such very rationall discourses, this generation of men is deaf, as if all naturall affection to their distressed Countrey were dead, and sym∣pathy with any of the true Churches of Christ, altogether extinguished in them.
This is one ground of our present fear, O if it were all, so should we, if needs must, goe out again with great courage against that Squadron of Malignants: But when we have re∣turned Victors from that field, behold our more perillous exercises are but yet approaching. The Sectaries of more names and kindes then ever were known in any Kingdome
 of the world, tell us with open mouth, we must be their slaves: They must have liberty to overthrow our Parlia∣ments; all Kings, all Lords, and this House of Commons; to set up the individuals, as they love to speak, of the whole multitude, in the Throne of absolute Soveraignty. From this new Soveraign we are commanded to expect a body of new Laws, a modell of a new Ochlocratorick government. This yoak, much worse then a Turkish slavery, must be put upon our body, but a worse upon our soul: A full liberty must be granted to every Seducer, who will in the most pub∣lick places, & within the doors of our houses also, perswade our loving consorts, our dear children, our faithfull servants & friends, to deny Christ, to embrace Mahomets Alcoran, the Jewish Talmud, the fables of the Pagan Poets, in place of the Old and New Testament, for the everlasting destructi∣on of their souls. This is the reward which the Sectaries plead for, as due to their labors in the war against the cōmon Enemy: would they stand to the determination of the most favorable, if any way equitable Judge, they pleased to chuse, glad would we be to see their merits weighed to the full, and much above all their deservings attributed unto them; But by any possible deserving, to think of obtaining a li∣berty to doe a great deal more mischief both to Church and State, both to the souls and bodies of men, then ever any former enemy did intend, carries not the face of any justice.
As for their great deservings, which always they are trumpeting out with a loud noise, we onely say that they doe not prudently, to bring them so oft near the ballance of triall: for if that, which I have heard from many, both wife and gracious men, be true, their merits will be found to be but of a very common alloy. Where did the most of them lurk when the heat of the day did scorch the valiant labou∣rers of both Nations? When Ruthven, New-Castle, Rupert, Hpton did keep the field with Armies of any number or vigour? When noble Essex at Keinton had the King in the
 prime vigour of his strength, upon his army? When Leslie about Bawdoun was compassed for some weeks, in the bare fields with frost and snow, with wants of all kinds, with the very gallant Army of New-Castle, double in number, and much better provided, then any thing that P. Rupert could bring to Naisby; when in Marston-Moor, David Leslie and Crawford, with the flour of the Scots and gracious Man∣chesters Army, were breaking the greatest and most formi∣dable strength, that ever the Enemy commanded in all this War. It is true, when the work was as good as done, by the sweat & bloud of others, when the Enemies were become so low, that they were never more able to bring ten thousand together, when the danger was well-near all over and gone, then was it good time for them to come in play, and with their cunning legerdemain, to shuffle all others, who had managed the Game while it was hazardous. They were then so wise as in the end of the day, with a great deal of courage, to fall upon the back of a broken Enemy. It could be no great miracle of valour and conduct, to take up the forces and treasure almost of all England, and then at Nais∣by, with a greater number well payed, armed, and discipli∣ned, to beat nine thousand of evill led, evill payed, and evill armed soldiers, the most part raw and new levied Welshes. Had they ever any enemy after that day in the field, of half either their number or strength? And when their Adversa∣ry had left the field without any hope of a new Army, to take in place after place, which had neither supplies with∣in, nor any hope of rescue from abroad, cannot b very monstrous prowess: What if such a piece of soldiery had faln in their hands as Massies defence, and Essex rescue of Glouce∣ster; As Essex and the Londoners fought at Newbury; As Da∣vid Leslies march and medly at Philiphaugh; As Pointz en∣terprize neer Chester? What if in any of the gallant services of Sir Thomas Fairfax the half of the actors had been of their feather and livery? Could any ears then have endu∣red
 the noise of their miraculous merits? But I hold, Immo∣desty and impudence doe oft draw on reckonings, which else would have been forborn.
With the former troublers of our Church I have dealt in divers other Treatises, and by Gods grace, I purpose to have always one eye open for the observance of all their motions: with the latter I continue to meddle in this part also of my Disswasive. How candid and fair my dealing with them is, and how little I intend either to irritate or hurt the person of any of them, in my Prefaces to both parts, I shew at length.
By these poor endeavours of mine, and the more rich and strong Treatises of others, I wish your Lordship may be advanced in your zeal against error, and whatsoever else is contrary either to the profession or practice of any part of true Religion. Thus shall you stand, when others of your rank doe fall: and when they by their ignorance, prophanity, lust, revenge, self-seeking, banish out of their houses that honour which their noble Progenitors laid up in store, your Lordship by your perseverance & growth in that integrity and zeal for the trut, wherein hitherto by the great mercy of God, you have been exemplary to many, above your age, shall adde new store to the old: and that very ancient Nobility which you found laid up in your family from many ages, you shall transmit to po∣sterity, with encrease of a new lustre from the gracious en∣dowments, the vertuous and honourable performances of your own person: So earnestly wishes and heartily prays,
 Worcester House the 28 Decemb. 1646.
