



ACcording to your com∣mand I have presented these notes to your view, somewhat concerning the Kingdome and coming of Christ: an Argument as unwelcome to some, as welcome to others: Kings, Princes, and Rulers sometimes startle at it, but they need not; for Christ meanes them no hurt:
Quicquid Christo datur, a∣bundanti∣ùs reddi∣tur. if they will throw down their Crowns at his feet, he will set their Crowns on their heads and his own too.
Timuisti perdere terram, & The Jewes feared and refused to
receive Christ and his Kingdome,
Perdidisti Deum; ti∣muisti ne tollerent gentem, & sustule∣rūt Deum; quia te∣nere volu∣isti, tenen∣do malè a∣misisti; & sine terrâ remansisti, & sine Deo. Au∣gustin in Joan. 11.48. Tract. least they should lose their owne King∣dome; and thereby they lost both their God and their Kingdome, as Austin observes. But who ever lost his Sce∣pter by submitting unto Christs Sce∣pter? I may say truly, Potestas Christi is rather Cumulativa then Privativa. In helping Christ to his Throne, you shall helpe your selves to your honours and greatnesse.
A liquis dicitur ali∣o adjuvari duplicitèr, vel pro∣pter addi∣tionem novae vir∣tutis; sic infirmi est; sic Deo non com∣petir; vel per execu∣tionem prioris, in quantum aliquis per alium exequitur uam or∣dinationē: sic Deus per nos djuva∣r. Thom. in. I will not say that Christ hath need of you, he hath no need of us: But if that of the Schooles be true, viz. that one is help∣ed by another, either by addition of new strength and vertue, or by the ex∣ercise of what was formerly given, then Jesus Christ may in some sense (and that according to Scripture Phrase, Judges. 5.23.) be said to be helped by you. Great confedracies will
be raised against him when he comes to his Kingdome. Ps. 2.1, 2. But God who sits in Heaven, laughs at those combinations. v. 4. and in spite of them will set his King upon his holy hill of Zion. v. 6. And to him that over∣cometh will I give to fit downe with me in my Throne sayeth our Saviour, even as I have overcome and sit with my Father in his Throne. Rev. 3.21. Wherefore most Honourable, be not overcome with evill, be not overcome with difficulties, with oppositions or combinations of men; but overcome evill with good, and do what in you lies to bring this blessed King Jesus un∣to his Thron and Inheritance, that as al the earth in due time shall so England in speciall manner may become the Kingdom of our Lord Christ, and we may all say, the Lord God omnipotent reigneth amongst us.

I could not long deliberate in so short a time what part of Gods Word I should preach to you, but knowing the trouble of these times, and that the more you spend your thoughts on Christs coming and Kingdome, the more your hearts will be upheld in the times of your troubles; I chose rather to preach on this Argument, which I here now present, & beseech the Lord to blesse it to you, and you to this Kingdome; onely be strong, and be of good courage; feare not, neither be dismayed; and the Lord your God will be with you as he hath beene for∣merly, which shall be the prayer of

