



Right-worshipful,
YOu and all good men would think it no small happiness to the Christian World, if true Religion might reign as a Law unthwarted, unopposed, and the Orthodox Faith, being obscured by no Questions and
Cavils were onely published and not disputed. Faith and Reli∣gion may fitly be resembled to a pure and liquid stream, which be∣comes muddy being troubled; and as by an Inundation of water the Field or Meadow adjoyning is turned into an miry pit: So when Contentions, which the wise man compares to an overflowing of water, overspreads the green Pa∣stures of Sacred truth, much filth of error thereby cleavs to them. Hence have Faith and Religion themselves come into question, though of all other things they be most certain and indubitate; And as plants often removed cannot take root and prosper, so Faith and Piety being removed out of their ancient standing, and bended this way and that way according to
mens humors, loose their reverence and stability, and do decay in the lives of men, and Atheism gets ground. Hence it is that, one gainsaying another, one plucks down what should be by a com∣mon labour and consent built up. And hence it is, that as it is impossi∣ble for a man to follow guides whose backs are turned each of o∣ther, and their faces a clean con∣trary way; so Gods people, who should be led by their spiritual guides in one beaten path of Faith and Godliness, are with unspeaka∣ble peril distracted (not knowing what to do) while their leaders call them contrary wayes. By this (in a word) do we Christians be∣come a Reproach both to Jewes and Gentiles, and we Protestants to the derision of Turks and Papists
while our Church is broken in so many factions, while Aarons bells do jangle all men are in an uproar and fall together by the Ears, and the fire of unchristian animosities become too often like that of the Temple, never to be extinguished. But, which is the worst of all, Re∣ligion hereby becomes (as it were) heart eaten. I mean, the heart of it, that is, the practise of Holiness and Righteousness, daily decayeth, for when some men are loath to put themselves to the trouble of an holy life they readily list themselves under a party, not doubting to ac∣quire to themselves a glorious name, if they be but zealous in the defence of a tittle or punctilio, how careless soever they be in the essential duties of the Kingdome of God.

Indeed how this should be, how the Christian Religion should be quarrell'd about, is next to a Mira∣cle, considering what benignity and sweetness of disposition, what candour and ingenuity of Spirit, what humility and mutual conde∣scention it requireth! But aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut non sumus Evan∣gelici; Either this is not the Right practice of Christianity, or it is not calculated for our Meridian, wherein abound so much pride and uncharitableness, so many strifes and divisions, so much wrath and envy, confusion and e∣very evil work. How far diffe∣rent are ours to those pure primi∣tive times wherein Religion true∣ly flourished; For then was the spirit of Meekness and gentleness and peacableness accounted the
indispensable duties and characte∣ristical notes of real Godliness. The greatest instance of piety in the first Christians was to dye and not to fight for Christ; they had not then learnt to make way for Do∣ctrines or opinions by the dint of the sword. And surely no reason can be alledged why Christians should not act by the same rule and stand upon the same ground now as then? But that can never be, while these partition walls are daily set up amongst us? while men are dayly forsaking our Church Assemblies and racking their brains, and purses and interests to found or defend their private Meet∣ings in opposition unto them. In∣deed this seems to be the way to perpetuate a schism in the midst of us, and as it were to establish it by a
Law, which we and our Posteri∣ty may have sad cause to lament, when it is past all prevention or Cure.
To prevent the unspeakable Mischiefes (the Prologue of utter destruction) I conceive it the duty of all men in their several places, to bestir themselves in time, but especially of Magistrates and Mi∣nistry, and it is my ambition to be some way instrumental to remove the causes, which hath (willingly) carried me to this hazard, first to Preach and then to Print these en∣suing Sermons. How service∣able they are to the end for which they are designed I leave it to your Worships considerations to deter∣mine.
Indeed when I first resolved to publish them I could have no dis∣pute
with my self to whom to de∣dicate them. First, upon the ac∣count of my great personal obliga∣tions to you, for those constant respects you have been pleased to express unto my person ever since I had the happiness to be acquaint∣ed with and seated near you, and also for that eminent love of God and his Church and truth the world hath experienced, and must upon all occasions gratefully acknow∣ledge in you, to the praise of God that raiseth up such worthies. Be∣sides, the very matter of the book seems as much to concern your self and other good Magistrates, as us the Ministers of the Church. For these two Offices are so inti∣mately related; Church and State, Prince and Priest, Magistrate and Minister are so nearly and natu∣rally
conjoyned in a mutual inter∣est, that like Hippocrates his twins they rejoyce and mourn, flourish and perish together. They have most what in all ages fared alike in the world Both are deputies un∣der, and instruments of, and actors for God in their several Ministrati∣ons. And therefore, the Devil doth alike malice them both, and stirs up his instruments, either to corrupt them, or remove these sacred fun∣ctions from their purity and inte∣grity if it be possible, or else to dis∣quiet and destroy them. God leadeth his people like a flock by the hands of Moses and Aaron
Ps. 37.20., and therefore the enemies of the flock have an equal spite to both these two lea∣ders. In all Ages of the Church almost, since it was constituted and established, and since Kings
and Queens have become the nur∣sing Fathers and nursing Mothers thereof, if the one have prospered so have the other; and if the times were dark and gloomy and adverse to the one so have they to the o∣ther.
As for our present distractions, However the adversary may with smooth words softer than butter, stroke the Magistrate & flatter him into contentment and satisfaction, as if things where as well or better in a state of indulgence and Tolera∣tion as they were before, and how ever they may strive to reduce him into a Gallio's temper not to be troubled or careful for any of these matters, yet in my opinion the case seems harder to Magistrates that have care and conscience to serve the Lord in that capacity, and
to preserve his Church in truth and peace, than to the Ministers of the Church. For whereas, our Mouths (blessed be God) are not shut though our adversaries are open∣ed, but we may still freely lift up our voices as a trumpet to tell Juda of her sins and so deliver our own souls; yet (alas) the Magistrate hands seems to be bound by the suspension of the Lawes, so that he cannot proceed in the discharge of his office with courage & efficacy.
In this case what should Aaron do but lift up Moses his hands? it remains that I and my Brethren should call upon you and yours, not to be dismayed at these things but wait upon God in the Faithful fulfilling of your duties to your utmost power, not doubt∣ing but that God hath his time, his
proper season for all things, and while he governs the world, all things will work together for the good of the Church in the end.
If then, in stead of speaking Pla∣centia, pleasing things (for with Elihu in Job,
Job, 32.21 I say, Let me not, I pray you accept any mans person, neither let me give any flattering titles to man; nay, I know you are not troubled with such itching ears as love to be tickled with your own commendations, true Vertue is ever humble) if then, I say, in∣stead hereof I may presume to offer a word of exhortation to him, whose love to Gods word is known to all men, I beseech you to go on to approve your self more and more in all truth of heart be∣fore the judging eye of the Almigh∣ty, a Patron of the truth, a friend
of Vertue a discountenancer of vice, a shield and defence to the Godly in all grief and distress, a Father of your Country, a Religi∣ous Governour of your Family, a Pattern of Piety, and a Persevering Orator at the Throne of Grace for the peace of Jerusalem, saying ever with Holy David, we wish you good luck ye that are of the House of the Lord.
Question not (Right-worship∣ful) but the Lord will ever be with you while you be thus with him, do but learn more and more to know him, the Lord God of your Fa∣thers, and to serve him with a per∣fect heart, and with a willing mind, and it shall be well with you and with your posterity after you, to many, many generations. This God of all Power and Mercy multiply
his Spirit and all the blessed Fruits thereof upon your Worship, your truely Vertuous Lady, your hope∣ful Off-spring, your Religious Fa∣mily, and Grant you that Grace which hath the promise both of this life and that which is to come. Which is the hearty Prayer of him, who in a grateful acknowledge∣ment of all your favours, presumes (yet humbly) to present. This small part of his labours to your Wor∣ships perusal and protection (as be∣ing a probable way to secure themselves of others welcome and acceptance) and will for ever en∣deavour to approve himself.

