



TO You have I dedicated this part of my labours, to whom I have devoted all. What sad and dangerous distem∣pers have invaded the Ecclesiasti∣call body of this Kingdome in this spring-time of Reformation, I shall not need to tell you; there being scarce any part of it but feels of them, and la∣bours under them. Heereupon it hath beene, and is my highest ambition, to shew my selfe (what one of Col. 4. 14. Lucas de Me∣dico corporum factus jam e∣rat Medicus a∣nimarum. Hieron. in ep. ad Phil.the Pen-men of sacred Writ is said to have been, and what every Minister of the Gospel, (at this time specially) ought to be) both an Evangelist, and a Physician. To this end I have already ad∣ventured abroad some Counsels and Prescripts, The healing of Israels brea¦ches An. 1642 Church-Re∣formation.
An. Church-Re∣medy.
An. 1644, which being proper for the place where Providence hath laid out my Practice, may also (if rightly ap∣plied) proove not unusefull to others. And to the same end it is that I have now sent this Tractate after them; wherein you have a Topicall Reme∣dy

for that spreading Gangrene of Anabaptism, which, unlesse timely prevented, may prove faall to the whole body both of this Church and State. This evill beginning to shew it selfe as in some other parts adjacent, so) in this place, which God hath in part committed to my Cure, I was induced some∣time since to encounter with it in the Pulpit. My endeavours heerein (I blesse God) I found not alto∣gether unsuccessefull. And heereupon I am now the rather incouraged to present them to a more publick view. Wherein, if any shall conceive my service M. Marshals Sermon.
M. Cooke.
D. Featly &c. Gen. 38. 30. 31 needlesse, in regard of the divers learned Treatises of this kinde already published, I shall only desire them to believe, that (as, however those Pharez∣zes were first brought foorth, yet this Zarah put foorth the hand before most of them, the Pulpit be∣ing for most part delivered of the one, before the Presse was of the other s they shall meet with som∣what heere, which they may yet call New. Amongst other passages I shall humbly take leave to Apolo∣gize for one, which possibly may rise in the stomack of some, viz. the Holding forth of Confirmati∣on (as it is called) in the primitive simplicity of it, for an Apostolicall Ordinance. This (I con∣fesse)

I cooke the first hint of from learned and judi∣cious M. Calvin, as he himselfe, though he would Non infi∣cior, in co nonnihil hal∣lucinari Hie∣ronymum, quod Aposto∣licam esse ob∣servationem dicit, viz. Con∣fimationem. Calv instit. l. 4 c. 19. S. 4.not from St. Hieron contra Lucif.Ierome, yet after upon second thoughts, did from S Heb. 6. 2. Hic unus lo∣cus abundè te∣statur hujus Ceremoniae (sc. Impositio∣nis manuum in Confirma∣tione) origi∣nem fluxisse ab Apostolis. Cat. Com. in ep. ad Heb. ca. 6. v. 2.Paul. And finding it a point so usefull, not only in the present controversie o Paedobaptisme, but also for the healing of some of the chiefe differences of the times, viz▪ about mixt.Communion, and Church▪Covenant, I could not but hold forth that little light concerning it, which I have received from some others, such as were in their times magna Ecclesiae lumina, Rev. 1. 16. 20.stars of the first magnitude, Joh. 5. 35.burning and shining Lampes. If any shall not heereby see what others have done, and my selfe imagine to doe, I shall only crave of them, first to take off that filme of prejudice which possibly the grosse corruption of this supposed Ordinance in the former practise of it, both in the Church of Rome, and amongst our selves, may have drawen over their eyes, and then I shall freely leave them to beleeve and report what they see. For my selfe, let the World know, all that heerein I desire and aime at, to be onely this, That If there be any thing Apostolicall in this Or∣dinance, it may be revived and received: other∣wise

if meerely Prudentiall, (as an explicit Church-Covenant (so far forth as distinct from the Covenant of Grace) is supposed to be) then how farre to bee imbraced or rejected, I leave it to those who have Authority and Ability, to judge: With the submissive tender of which humble motion, I shall fit downe, and rest

Yarmouth June 26. Anno 1645.
