



(Reverend, and much honored in the Lord)
PArdon the pre∣sumption of this Dedicati∣on, which hath faln to you, not more by choice, then necessity. In this ensuing
Tract, (as the Text offered, and the exigency of the times required it,) I have taken occasion, once and a∣gain, to excite Christians to a consciencious attendance upon that sacred Ordinance, the Sacrament of the Supper, as being both a sign and a seal, a representation and a pledge of that blessed Com∣munion, which they hope to have another day with Jesus Christ, and one with another in the Kingdom of their Father. Now so it is, that in the way of this mo∣tion, (at the request of some now walking abroad) I foresee a double rub, which without your help I am not
able to remove. The one is, the late disuse of this Ordi∣nance in some places; the other, the promiscuous pro∣stitution of it in others. The former of which deprives many of this Sacramental Communion, who are desi∣rous of it, and in measure fitted for it. The latter dis∣courageth some others, who out of tenderness of Con∣science dare not communi∣cate; where they conceive (though without any just ground) their bare presence may make them accessory to such a profanation. Up∣on this double account it is, that I now make this Pre∣fatory address to you; where∣in
the sum of my request is, That so many of you as are interested in the (supposed) guilt of either of these, would be pleased seriously and speedily to apply your selves (so much as in you is) to the redress thereof. A sad thing it is, which the Church complains of in a litteral sense, Lam. 4.4. That children should cry for bread, and that there should be none to break it to them. And it is no less, that the children of the Kingdom should cry for Sacramental Bread, and that there shall be none to break it unto them; none to ad∣minister this Ordinance to them, to which they have
as good right, as to any o∣ther. Pardon me here, if I take the boldness to minde you of what I know you cannot but remember, and will be ready to acknow∣ledge, that you are not Lords, but Stewards of the mysteries of God. Now (as the great Apostle maketh the Application of this do∣ctrine, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2.) It is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful. Many other qualifications there are requisite in such an offi∣cer; but none more, none so much as this of fidelity. And wherein doth that consist, but in a free distri∣bution of what is commit∣ted
to him according to his masters will for the good of the family, Gi∣ving to every one his por∣tion in due season?
Luke 12.46. And this it is which I do here hum∣bly beg from all of you, that you would in such a way approve your selves faithful to God, and his people, by a free dispensa∣tion of all Ordinances, which he hath betrusted you with. This some, and many of you have done, and do, in the dispensing of the Word; and why not also the Sacraments. Surely, these are to be looked upon a∣mongst those sacred Myste∣ries; by which name they
were known to some of the Ancients, who were wont to call the Eucharistical Ele∣ments , Dreadful Mysteries. And as sure I am, that the due administration of them is within the com∣pass of your Commission: As of Baptism, so of the Supper; which our Saviour in the first Institution held forth to his Apostles with an Hoc facite, Do this;
1 Cor. 11.24, 25. di∣recting them, (as it is con∣ceived) what they (and all the Ministers of the Gospel in succeeding ages, there re∣presented by them) were at that time to do in participa∣ting, and afterwards in dis∣pensing of that Ordinance,
viz. To imitate his example in taking, blessing, eating, drinking the Sacramental Bread and Wine, giving both to the people in comme∣moration of his Death and Passion. This, in obedience to his command, they after∣wards accordingly did. Let not any of their Successors then lay aside this Ordi∣nance, nor yet without un∣avoidable necessity suspend it. Our blessed Saviour, knowing his departure to be at hand, how desirous was he to celebrate the Pas∣chal, and Eucharistical Supper with his. Apostles? , With desire (saith he to them) I have desired to eat
this Passover with you, before I suffer. Luk. 22.15. And let the like motive prevail with you, not knowing how nigh the time of your departure may be, not to put off from moneth to moneth, from year to year (as in too many pla∣ces of late times hath been done) the celebration of this Ordinance: In which neglect, as the Ordinance suffers not a little, so the Church much, and that more ways then one.
And as for you (my Bre∣thren) who do hold forth this Ordinance, let me (in the name of your Master and mine) beg it at your hands, that you would endeavor to
dispense it in such a way, as those who have most right unto it, may not be disheart∣ned from partaking in it. Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling block out of the way of my peo∣ple; so runs the Proclamati∣on, Isai. 57.14. Which let it so far take place with you, as that you may not by any act of yours obstruct, or (so much as in you lieth to remedy it) suffer to be obstructed the way to the Lords Table, whereby any of his people should be hin∣dred from having Sacra∣mental communion with him. Amongst which obstructions I know none at the present
more obvious, then that which I have pointed at, of promiscuous and mixt com∣munions, the admitting of all sorts to this Sacrament. Which, however happily it be not so just a ground of stumbling to others, as they may make it, yet in it self it cannot be denied to be an abuse, and profanation of that Ordinance. So it was looked upon in the last age, and that by such as were free from the imputation of (since so called) Purita∣nism.
Si quem indignum esse palam constiterit, is ad coenam â pastore minimè est admitten∣dus, quià sine Sacra∣menti id profanatione fieri non potest. Nowelli Catech. in quarto, pro pè ad fi∣nem; Im pr. Anno 1570. If any be openly known to be unworthy, the Pastor ought not to admit him to the Supper, because it cannot be done without profane abuse of
the Sacrament; As that Re∣verend Dean of Pauls, Dr. Nowel in his approved, and then Authorized Catechism hath resolved it. And it is no other doctrine, then what the Church then held forth in her Rubrick before the Communion; where she not onely allows, but enjoyns her Ministers not to admit persons scandalous, or malici∣ous to the Lords Table.
Not suffer∣ing them to be par∣takers of the Lords Table, &c.] Ru∣brick before the Com∣munion. Let not this Direction and In∣junction then be slighted by any of you, who account it your Honor to be called the Sons of that Mother: But looking upon this, not onely as your liberty, but your duty, see that with holy
care and conscience you ap∣ply your selves to the dis∣charge of it. It is that which the Lord telleth his Pro∣phet Jeremy, (being then in a distracted condition in regard of the present times, and not knowing well how to demean himself in the execution of his office in the midst of so many dis∣couragements as he then met with,) If thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth. Jer. 15.19. This would he have him do in his teaching, to put a difference betwixt the good and the bad, Preach∣ing Gospel to the one, and Law to the other; confirm∣ing
and comforting the for∣mer, sharply reproving and menacing of the latter. And so doing, the Lord tells him he should be his mouth, ap∣prove himself a true and faithful Minister of his. And what is there said of that part of the Ministerial Office, not unfitly may it be applied to this, the dispen∣sing of this Sacrament. If herein you shall separate the precious from the vile, put a difference betwixt those who (as to Man) are worthy and unworthy, reaching forth this Ordinance to all, and onely such, as in the judge∣ment of a well-regulated Charity may be looked upon
as meet guests for that Ta∣ble, now shall ye be as Gods hand, owned by him in this your Ministration.
Thus have I briefly pre∣sented my desires to both of you. To which, what answer I am like to receive at some hands, I cannot but foresee; and therefore give me leave to meet it with a short Replication. True it is, the Administra∣tion of this Ordinance, and that in such a way, it must be acknowledged to be the Ministers duty; but how shall it in these times be discharged by him? What, shall every Pastor then as∣sume and exercise a sole
power and jurisdiction over his flock, to admit and re∣fuse as it pleaseth him? To this I will not, I dare not, say Amen. That which Prelacy hath disclaimed, let not ordinary Pastors make challenge to. What remedy then (it will be said) is to be found, and used for this mis∣chief of mixt communions? To this I shall desire an an∣swer may be received from that forecited Author, which I presume may finde better acceptance from his hand,
Magist. Quod ergo remedium huic malo invenien∣dum est, at∣que adbi∣bendum? then mine.
In Churches wel-ordered and wel-managed (I shall give it you in his own words, as I finde them
translated) there was ordain∣ed and kept a certain Form and Order of Governance.
Audit. In Ecclesiis benè insti∣tutis atque moratis, certa ut [Pag. 92. Matth. 18.15, 16, 17. Acts 14.23 & 15.4, 6. d. 22.24.20. d. 17. f. 28. 1 Cor. 6.2.1, 2. & 12. d. 28. & 14. c. 26. g. 40. 1 Tim. 5. c. 17. Tit. 1. b. 5.] anteà dixi, ratio atque ordo guber∣nationis in∣stituebatur atque obser∣vabatur. Deligeban∣tur Seuio∣res, id est Magistra∣tus Eccle∣siastici, qui Disciplinam Ecclesiasticam tenerent at∣que colerent: Ad hos authoritas, animadversio, atque castigatio censoria pertinebant: [1 Cor. 5. a. 1.4.5. & 11. c. 16. d. 18, &c.] Hi adhibito etiam Pastore, si quos esse cognoverant, qui vel opinionibus falsis, vel turbulentis erroribus, vel anilibus superstitionibus, vel vitâ vitiosâ flagitiosâqve magnam publicè offensionem Ecclesiae Dei adferrent, quique sine coenae Dominicae profanatione accedere non possent, cos ā Communione repellebant, atque rejiciebant, neque rursum admitte∣bant, donec poenitentiâ publicâ Ecclesia satisfecissent. Nowelli Catech. ubi supra. There were chosen Elders, that is, Ecclesiastical Magistrates, to hold and keep the Discipline of the Church. To these be∣longed the Authority, looking to, and Correction, like Cen∣sors. These calling to them al∣so the Pastor, if they knew any that either with false opinions, or troublesome errors, or vain superstitions, or with corrupt and wicked life brought pub∣lickly any great offence to the Church of God, and which might not come without pro∣faning the Lords Supper, did put back such from the Com∣munion, and rejected them,
and did not admit them again, till they had with publick pe∣nance satisfied the Church.]
This was the best, and onely solution, which that judicious and authorized Ca∣techist in the last age was a∣ble to hold forth. And tru∣ly for my part, I must pro∣fess, that (seeing the late Reverend Assembly could
not) I do despair of finding out a better. All the re∣maining scruple then will be, what shall be done in those places where such as∣sistants are not to be found? In the resolving whereof, I shall humbly crave your help; onely taking the boldness to leave this moti∣on with you. That where a Juridical cannot be ob∣tained, you would rather choose to act in a Precarious, and Pastoral way, then to suffer so great and useful an Ordinance to be laid aside, as of late times in too many places it hath been.
More I have not, save onely to apologize for one
other Branch of the Trea∣tise, wherein I have freely declared my apprehensions concerning the gesture, which is in this Congrega∣tion used, viz. Of sitting at the Table in the act of recei∣ving. This I have com∣mended, and must com∣mend, as conceiving it most agreeable to the first pat∣tern, and to the subsequent practise of the Proto-primi∣tive Churches in the Aposto∣lical times, as also suiting best with the nature of the duty; and consequently freest from all just excepti∣ons. But not with any in∣tent to censure all other different forms of admini∣stration;
as well knowing, that all places of publick meeting cannot with con∣veniency admit of this. Which having presented unto you, I shall now leave you, where I found you, under the gracious pro∣tection and guidance of him, who holdeth the seven Stars in his right hand, and walketh in the midst of the se∣ven golden Candlesticks: Humbly subscribing my self

Great Yarmouth. Jan. 31. 1652.
