



(Much esteemed in the Lord,)
I Have hereto∣fore put into Your Hands some few and small Treati∣ses, the leaves whereof were of like use with those of the Tree of Life in the midst of the New Jerusalem, Revel.
 22.2. serving to heale the Nations, to cure some of those spirituall Distempers, which in these times of com∣mon contagion, have broke in upon the Body of this Church in many parts of it, both in∣fecting and indangering of it. Here I present you with a taste of some of the Fruits of the same Tree, some of the Benefits issuing to the Beleever from Jesus Christ; A Subject which my own soul hath fed upon not with∣out inward Complacencie and contentment. My hopes are, you shall finde the like
 in the perusall of this Tra∣ctate; which is now made publick, as for the further∣ance of the work of Grace in you, so to let the World know, that in the course of my Ministry I have not made Controversie my Work. Onely I have now and then dealt with it, as the Physici∣an doth with his Medicines, and God with his Tryals, which they make use of, ,1 Pet. 1.6. when and where need is. Well had it been for the Church of God in this Nation, had there never been occasion for me or any
 other to have entred those lists. But there is a fatal (yet Providential) necessitie in it: There must be Heresies:1 Cor. 11.16. such is Satan's malice, and Man's corruption, that in an ordina∣ry way it cannot be expect∣ed that God's Field should be free from these tares. And such is Gods just and wise dispensation, to permit it to be so, knowing how to ex∣tract good out of evill. And seeing it must be so, there is a like necessity incumbent upon the Ministers of God, (servants of that great Hus∣bandman) that they should haveJohn 15.1. 1 Cor. 3.9.
 an eye to them, that they do not over-grow the good corn. Upon this account it is, that I have, as occasion hath been offered, underta-that work, which our great Apostle, the Dr. of the Gen∣tiles reckons amongst those , those good works,2 Tim. 3.17. un∣to which the man of God should be throughly furnished: Ap∣plying my self sometimes , to Reproof,Engl. new An∣not. ver. 16. viz. of Errors and false Doctrines; which the Verse foregoing reckoneth as one of those four Cardinal uses for which the Scripture is profitable: yet
 so as I have ever mainly in∣tended those other Ministe∣riall services there mention∣ed, of Doctrine, Correction, In∣struction in Righteousnesse. And to that end, I have made choice of such porti∣ons of Scripture as I appre∣hended properly usefull for those purposes. Among o∣ther, I have singled out, and now, through a divine ma∣nuduction, almost passed thorow this Chapter, wher∣of the Text is a part, with that fore-going:Rom. 5. & 6. The one of which professedly handles the Doctrine of Justification,
 the other of Sanctification; two main Pillars in the House of the Lord (not unlike those in the Temple of Dagon, Judg. 19.26.) whereon the whole building stands. The sum of the later of these you meet with in the Text, held forth under a familiar, but apt and elegant Metaphor, serving as a vehiculum to convey this divine Mystery into the soul with greater both facility, & perspicuity. In prosecuting of this Allegory, I have endea∣voured to follow it home to the head; yet so, as not wil∣ling to do, what in like cases
 too often done, viz. to overdo; by extorting that from the Metaphor, which it would not genuinely and naturally yeeld. My service which I have herein desired to do to God and his Church, as I wish it may, so I hope it shall be ac∣cepted of the Saints, and of You in speciall, over whom God hath made me (though most unworthy) an Oversee∣er. To his grace and blessing I cōmend it and you, resting

Yarmouth, Sept. 8. 1651.
