



CHRISTIANS,
LET not the first word in this Inscription of∣fend any of you: They who familiarly deno∣minate the Ocean from that Coast, which it lieth upon, and passeth by, calling it the Brittish or I∣rish
 Sea, &c. shall not need to stumble at the like language being applyed to the Church: Nor yet that word, which you shall frequently meet with in the body of the Treatise, where I call the Church, under what-ever consideration looked upon, a Mysticall Body. I am not ignorant that that Phrase is commonly and properly gi∣ven to the Church as Invisible; but in as much as that Division of Visible and Invi∣sible is but of severall Affections and Modes belonging to the same Subject, and that the one of these is so involved and in∣wrapped within the other, as that they can∣not be actually severed, I have therefore indifferently (I hope without any just offence) applyed it to either.
This Apologie being premised, let me now crave acceptance of what I here present to you; all of you, every of you; whom from my soul I wish, I could as easily joyn together in reall Affection, as here I have done in a ver∣ball compellation and Dedication; this it hitherto hath been, now is, and so long as I am, shall be my desire and endeavour: in order thereunto it is that I have heretofore adventured abroad some small Tracts, ten∣ding to the prevention or removall of what
 might impede or obstruct such a conjuncti∣on. And upon the same errand I now send this after them; wherein I have endeavo∣red to mind all the Members of the Mysti∣call Body of such respects, Affections, and Offices, as by vertue of their Joint-Mem∣bership they owe each to other; a Subject generally usefull to all, who professe and would approve themselves Christians; more specially to such as are under a parti∣cular and more regular Church Relation. A priviledge which I cordially wish for all in this nation that want it: Truth is (what cannot be denyed, or excused) the stones in our Ecclesiasticall buildings, as they have done, so yet generally they lye too loose, not cemented as they ought to be; Not that I look upon the formality of an explicite Covenant as essentiall to a con∣stituted Church: I shall not dare upon so slight a ground to unchurch the Churches which have been and are in this Nation, and elsewhere; yet somewhat I conceive should be done for the distinguishing of the Members of one Congregation from ano∣ther, besides their bare habitation within the compasse of a perambulation line; or yet then an ordinary attendance upon Ordi∣nances
 in such a place: Surely, besides du∣ties of Piety towards God, there are also duties of Charity, which Christians are bound to performe, as to all their Bre∣thren where-ever, so in speciall to those of the same particular Society with them. What these, and those are, and how to bee discharged, I have indeavoured here to set forth: Herein beginning (so Providence hath ordered it) where my Reverend Bro∣ther in a SermonMr. Marshal's Sermon at the Spittle, on Ea∣ster Munday, April 1652. lately preached and published upon the same Subject and Text, (which came to my hand the day before I finished this) left. What I here hold forth, I desire may not one∣ly bee read, but regarded, and practi∣sed. And that as by others, so in speciall by you, among whom Provi∣dence hath cast my lot: and to whom (under God) I have devoted and de∣dicated my selfe, and labours. To you (it cannot without great ingratitude bee either denyed, or concealed.) God hath beene good and gracious in the midst of all those late Changes, which have passed over the heads of this, and the Neighbour Nations: Not suffering the
 sword to enter within your walls, (as it hath done many others) in an Ho∣stile way: not giving you wholly for a spoile, whether to Domestick plun∣derers, or forraigne Robbers; but yet reserving to you some competent re∣mainder of a Temporall Subsistence: And whilest he hath remembred the out∣ward man, he hath not beene unmind∣full of the inward; having vouchsafed to you the liberty and enjoyment of some Ordinances requisite to the well being of a Church, and comfortable subsi∣stence of a Christian, which many other Congregations in this Nation desire, but want. What remains then, but that you should now make some returnes, answera∣ble to these receipts; stirring up your selves to goe before others, as in duties of Piety towards that God who hath thus put a difference betwixt you and them, so in all offices of true Christian Love each to other. Of this later I have lately minded you by word; and now doe it againe by writing, that so you may bee able after my decease, (which how nigh it may bee, he above knoweth, in whose hand
 my times are) to have these things alwayes in remembrance. Which that you may doe, I shall second my Counsels with my Prayers, resting

July 1. 1652.
