




Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from God the Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ, be multiplied.

Dear hearts;
MY design (in appearing once more in Print) is not to please the captious Cri∣tick, or the sullen Cin∣nick, but to heighten your fellowship with the Fa∣ther,
1 John 1. 3, 4. and the Son, and to further you in a clo∣ser walking with God, and to ripen you more and more for Reigning with God, when you shall be here no more.
Beloved in our Lord, there are two sad and great evills (Oh that there were no more!) among the Saints this day, The
 strong are very apt, yea, they make little of offending the weak; And the weak are as
Rom. 14. 1. ult. apt, and make as little of judging and con∣demning the strong. The serious and con∣scientious perusall of this Treatise, may (by
Invalidum om∣ne naturâ que∣ru'um. Sen. Weake spirits are ever quar∣relling and contending. the blessing of the Lord) contribute much to the preventing of those sad evills. You that are weak, may, in this Treatise, as in a Glasse, see your weaknesses, your mercies, your graces, your duties, your priviledges, and your comforts. You that are weak in grace, may here find many Questions an∣swered, and doubts resolved, that tend to the satisfying, quieting, settling, and esta∣blishing of your precious soules in peace, joy, and assurance. You that are weake in grace, may here find a staffe to support you, a light to direct you, a sword to defend you, and a Cordiall to strengthen you, &c. And you that are strong in grace, may here see what is your way, what is your work, and what at last shall be your reward. Here you will find that which tends to the discovery of spirits, the sweetning of spirits, the uniting of spirits, the healing of spirits, and the ma∣king up of breaches, &c.

Here you will find Meat for strong men, and Milke for Babes. Here you will find who is more motion, then notion; more heart then head, more spirit then flesh, more inside then outside, &c.
Here you will finde The Ʋnsearchable Riches of Christ (which of all boxes of pre∣cious Ointment, is the most precious) ope∣ned, and Oh how sweet must he be, that is the sweetest of sweets! In Christ are riches of Justification, in Christ are riches of San∣ctification, riches of Consolation, and riches of Glorification: And this following Trea∣tise may serve as a key (I say not as a gol∣den one) to open the doore, that you may come where these Treasures lye. Christs riches are like the eternall Springs of the earth, that cannot dry up, but are and shall be diffused by his spirit and Gospel, untill his whole house be filled with them.
The excellency and usefullnesse of the Riches of Christ, and Answers to many weighty Queries about his Ʋnsearchable Riches, is more then hinted at in this Tract. In this Tract much is spoken concerning the Nature, Properties, and Excellencies of Hu∣mility,
 which is both the beautifier and pre∣server
Humility is (Conservatrix virtutum, saith Barnard) that which keeps all graces together. Humilas ani mi, subtimitas Christiani. of all other graces.
Here you may see, that Those that are lowest in their owne esteeme, are highest in Gods esteeme. Here you may see, that Hum∣ble soules are not so low and contemptible in the eyes of the world, as they are honourable in the eyes of God.
And if ever there were an Age since Christ was on earth, wherein 'twas needfull to Preach, presse, and print this great do∣ctrine of Humility, of selfe, of soule-abase∣ment, this is the Age wherein we live. Oh the pride, the statelinesse, of the professors of this Age! But because this point is large∣ly spoken to in this Tract, I shall satisfie my selfe with this touch.
There are many other weighty things treated on, which for brevity sake I shall omit: Onely give me leave to acquaint you with a few things about this ensuing Tract, and then I shall draw to a close.
First, That it is the substance of twenty-two Sermons Preached by me about three yeares agoe, on the Lecture nights at this place where now I Preach.

Secondly, That there is in it severall other things of no small concernment to soules, that I did not then deliver, but have been given in since from that Fountaine that fills all in all.
Thirdly, That though I have been much
A Sermon Preached ser∣eth but an Auditory, a Sermon Prin∣ted may serve many Audito∣ries. pressed to Print these Sermons, yet I should never have yeelded, had I not been through∣ly convinced and perswaded in my judge¦ment and conscience, that they may (by the blessing of the Lord upon them) prove many wayes usefull and serviceable, to all those honest Nithanaels, into whose hands they may fall. Else they had been buried in the dark, and never come to publick light.
I have onely a few Requests to make to you, and then I shall take my leave of you.
And my fist Request is this, That you would meditate and dwell upon what you read, otherwise your paines (I say not your soules) and mine will be lost.
Lectio sine me∣ditatione arida est, meditatio sine lectione er∣rna est, oratio sine meditatione tepida est Aug. simely
'Tis a Law among the Persees in India, To use premeditation in what they are to doe, that if it be bad, to reject it, if good, to act it. The Application is easie. The more any man is in the contemplation of truth, the
 more fairer and firmer Impression is made upon his heart by truth. Christians must be like the clean Beasts, that parted the hoose, and chewed the cud: They must by hea∣venly meditation chew truths, and concockt truths, or else they will never tast the sweet∣nesse that is in Divine truths.
Mary pondered the sayings of the She∣pheards in her heart, Luke 2. 19. Not they that eat most, but they that digest most, are
The Angels are much in meditation. the most healthfull. Not they that get most, but they that keep most, are richest: So not they that hear most, or read most, but they that meditate most, are most edified and in∣riched.
My second Request to you, is this, That
Your actions in passing passe not a∣way; for eve∣ry good work is a grain of seed for eter∣nall life. you will make conscience of living out those truths you read.
To read much, and practice nothing, is to hunt much, and catch nothing.
Suetonius reports of Julius Caesar, That seeing Alexanders statue, he fetched a deep sigh, because he at that Age had done so little.
Ah! what cause have most to sigh, that they have heard so much, and read so much,
 and yet done so little? Surely 'tis more ho∣nourable to doe great things, then to speak or read great things. 'Tis the doer that will
'Twas a say∣ing of Augu¦stine, one thousand two hundred years agoe, That we must take heed (least whilst we fear our exhortation being cooled) prayer be not amped, and pride infla∣med. be most happy at last, John 13. 17. In vi∣tae libro Scribuntur qui quod possunt faci∣unt, & si quod debent, non possunt. Brn. They are written in the Book of Life, that doe what good they can, though they cannot doe as they would.
I have read of a good man, coming from a publick Lecture, and being askt by one, whether the Sermon was done, answered with a sad sigh, Ah! it is said, but not done.
My third Request is this, That you will pray over what you read.
Many read much, and pray little, and therefore get little by all they read.
Galen writes of a Fish called Ʋrana Sco∣pos, that ha's but one eye, and yet looks con∣tinually up to Heaven. When a Christian ha's one eye upon his Book, the other should be looking up to Heaven for a blessing upon what he reads.
When one heard what admirable Victo∣ries Scanderbeg's Sword had wrought, he would needs see it, and when he saw it, sayes
 he, This is but an ordinary sword, alasse! what can this doe? Scanderbeg sent him word, I have sent thee my Sword, but I have the arme that did all by it.
Alasse! what can Christs Sword, Christs word doe without his arm? Therefore look up to Christs arme in prayer, that so his Sword, his word, may doe great things in your soules.
Luther professeth, That he profited more by prayer in a short space, then by study in a longer; as John by weeping got the sealed Book open
My fourth Request to you, is this, That
Ingratitude (say some) is a monster in nature, a solicisme in manners, and a Paradox in grace, dam∣ning up the course of Do∣nations, Di∣vine and humane. if by the blessing of the Lord upon my weake endeavours, any leafe or line should drop myrrhe, or mercy, marrow or fatnesse upon your spirits, that you will give all the glory to the God of Heaven; for to him alone it does belong.
Through grace I know I am a poore Worme, I am nothing, I have nothing, but what I have received. The Crowne becomes no head but Christs. Let him who is our all in all, have the honour and the glory of all, and I have my end.

Pliny tells of some in the remote parts of India, that have no mouths, and yet live on the smell of Hearbs, and sweet Flowers: But I hope better things of you, even such as accompany salvation.
My fifth Request to you, is this, That you would let me lye neere your hearts, when you are in the Mount (especially.)
1 Thess. 5. 25. 2 Thess. 3. 1. Heb. 13. 18. Col. 4. 3. Phil. 1. 19.  Cor. 1. 11. Acts 12. 5.
O pray pray hard for me, that the spirit of the Lord may be redoubled upon me; that his word may prosper in my mouth, that it may run, and be glorified, and that I may be high in my communion with God, and holy and unblameable in my walkings with God; and that it may be still day with my soule; that I may live and dye in the joyes and comforts of the holy Ghost; and that when my Sun is set, my glasse out, my work done, my race run, I may rest in the
Rev. 14. 13. everlasting armes of Divine love, &c.
My last and least Request to you, is this, That you will please to cast a Mantle of love
In every Pom∣granate there is at least one rotten kernell to be found said Grates the Philoso∣pher. over the mistakes of the Presse, and doe me that right, and your selves the courtesie, as before you read, to correct any materiall faults that you shall find pointed at in the Errata.

Gods easie passing over the many and dai∣ly Errata's of your lives, cannot but make you so ingenuous as readily to passe over the Errata's in this Book.
You are choice Jewels in my eye, you lye neer unto my heart, I am willing to spend and be spent for your sakes. My earnest and humble desire is, That my service and
Rom. 15. 31. labour of love may be accepted by you; and that it may worke much for your internall and eternall welfare. And that an abundant
2 Pet. 1. 11. Ch. 1. 8. entrance may be administred to you, into the everlasting Kingdome of our Lord and Sa∣viour Jesus Christ. And that you may be filled with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, and with that peace that passes understand∣ing. This is, and by grace shall be the Pray∣er of him who desires to approve himselfe faithfull to Christ, his truths, his interests, and his people, and who is

