



Daughters of Jerusalem,
TO you is this Glasse presented, with a Request, That you will vouchsafe to look into it, and that with an Eye not prejudiced against it. Possibly you may here see more of Satan, and your selves, his wiles, your weaknesse, then before you were aware of. If any shall herein espy some spots and blemishes discovered, not becoming the face of profession, let them not blame the Glasse, which re∣presents things as they are, but themselves, or others, who have given the ground to these Reflections. For my own Intentions, in holding forth this Glasse, they are such as I can approve unto God, sincere and can∣did. As for aspersing of Religion, disparaging the weaker Sex, discouraging of any in their holy indeavours of going before others in the profession and power of godlinesse, sad∣ding the spirits of any that are truly godly, or opening the
mouthes of any that are profanely wicked, my heart smi∣teth me not with the guilt of any of them. That which first put this subject into my hand, was chiefly a tender respect to the peace and welfare of this place where God hath cast me. Where I could not with∣out a deep resentment take notice how many of the weaker Sex, being by degrees distasted with the pub∣like Ordinances, came at length to be quite weaned from them: No more owning that Ministery, or those means which to some of them had been heretofore the avowed and acknowledged power of God to their salvation. For your sakes were these meditations first conceived; And for your sakes are they now brought forth to a more publike view: That so what you would not vouchsafe to heare with the eare, you may yet have opportunity to see with the eye. May the eyes of any of you be hereby opened, so as you may see the error of these your wandrings, and be perswa∣ded to returne againe to the fold from which you have strayed, I should account it an acceptable service both to God and You. However, I shall acknowledge it no small recompence, that some others may be stay∣ed from following after you. In the experience, and hopes whereof, with my hearty prayers unto God for them and you, I sit downe, and rest,
Yarmouth.

