



(Dearly Beloved)
WHat the great Doctor of the Gentiles de∣clared to his Corin∣thians, 1 Cor. 2.2. that he determined not to know any thing among them, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified, let me in like manner free∣ly profess unto you, that in the course of my Ministery it hath been my chief design to hold forth the Lord Jesus, desiring and endeavouring according to my weak abilities, that he might be in my Preaching evidently set forth before your eyes, and even
 crucified among you (as that A∣postle speakes to his Galathians, Gal. 3.1.) looking upon no Doctrine so proper and profitable for me to Preach, and you to hear, as the Do∣ctrine of that Gospel whereof (as he also saith of himself) I amEph. 3.7. Col. 1.23. made a Minister, And upon this ground it is that I have purposely singled out divers choise portions of Scripture (of some whereof I have given an account to the world) to in∣sist upon among you, which have presented you with this subject. A∣mong which I know none that have done it more fully than this which is here now set before you. A Text wher∣in (as the Title prefixed maketh pro∣mise of) you shall meet with Mar∣row, even that Marrow where∣with the Lord promiseth to Feast his people, Isa. 25.6. Gospel-Marrow, there being here much
 in a little, divers precious truths of great soul concernment held forth unto you, as viz. Your Redempti∣on, Justification, Sanctification, with your peculiar Relation to Je∣sus Christ, and requisite Qualifi∣cation, viz. Zeal for good works. All which having lately handled in the audience of some of you, I do now here present unto you all, wishing unto you (what David upon another account promised to him∣self, Psal 63.5.) that your soules may be herewith satisfied as with marrow and fatness. And hereof I shall not doubt, if so be there be no prejudice upon your spirits to hinder the swallowing and digesting of some of them; As in particular that tou∣ching the Extent of Christs death, which is here asserted, and contend∣ed for not to be so large as Arminius and his followers have of late repre∣sented
 it. Concerning which, what is here said, let me desire you seriously to weigh & consider. This if you shal do, I shal not doubt but you shal find that which will serve so to ballast your spirits, as that they shall not be over-set with that Wind of Doctrine, which hath already prevailed too much against some unstable soules a∣mong you. So I am bold to call that so much, by too many, applauded Do∣ctrine of Universal Redemption, a Wind, which however at the first breathing it may seem like the West-wind,, q. : Favonius â fa∣vendo, quod ejus favore terra germinat. a , a Favonius, plea∣sing and profitable, and at present may make a great noise, yet upon a due trial it will be found to be no wayes advantagious in carrying you on to your desired Port, no wayes conducing to your comfort here, or happiness hereafter. For the proof whereof I shall refer you to what the
 Treatise will acquaint you with. Which leaving in your hands, I com∣mit it and you to the blessing of the Great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ, in whom I am
Yarmouth M. 6. D. 1.

