


HAd I not observed that Plempius, Cabeus, &c. Pur∣blinde men have discoursed well of sight, and some D. Harvy. with∣out issue, excellently of Gene∣ration; I that was never ma∣ster of any considerable garden, had not attempted this Subject. But the Earth is the Garden of Nature, and each fruitfull Countrey a Paradise. Dioscorides made most of his Observations in his march about with Antonius; and Theophrastus rai∣sed his generalities chiefly from the field.
Beside we write no Herball, nor can this Volume deceive you, who have handled the Besleri Hortus Ey∣stetensis. massiest thereof: who know that three Bauhini Theatrum Boanicum, &c. Folio's are yet too little, and how New Herbals fly from America upon us, from

persevering Enquirers, and My wor∣thy friend M. Goodier an ancient and learned Botanist. old in those singularities, we expect such Descriptions. wherein As in Lon∣don and di∣vers parts, whereof we mention none, lest we seem to omit any. England is now so exact, that it yeelds not to other Countreys.
We pretend not to multiply vegetable divi∣sions by Quincuncial and Reticulate plants; or erect a new Phytology. The Field of knowledge hath been so traced, it is hard to spring any thing new. Of old things we write something new, If truth may receive addition, or envy will have any thing new; since the Ancients knew the late Anatomicall discoveries, and Hippocrates the Circu∣lation.
You have been so long out of trite learn∣ing, that 'tis hard to finde a subject proper for you; and if you have met with a Sheet upon this, we have missed our intention. In this multiplicity of writing, bye and barren Themes are best fitted for invention; Sub∣jects so often discoursed confine the Imagina∣tion, and fix our conceptions unto the notions of fore-writers. Beside, such Discourses al∣low excursions, and venially admit of colla∣terall truths, though at some distance from their principals. Wherein if we sometimes take wide liberty, we are not single, but erre by great Hippocrates de superfoe∣tatione, de dentitione. example.

He that will illustrate the excellency of this order, may easily fail upon so spruce a Subject, wherein we have not affrighted the common Reader with any other Diagramms, then of it self; and have industriously declined illu∣strations from rare and unknown plants.
Your discerning judgement so well acquain∣ted with that study, will expect herein no mathematicall truths, as well understanding how few generalities and Rules without ex∣ceptions. V finita's there are in nature. How Scaliger hath found ex∣ceptions in most Ʋniversals of Aristotle and Theophrastus. How Botanicall Maximes must have fair allowance, and are tolerably currant, if not intolerably over-ballanced by exceptions.
You have wisely ordered your vegetable delights, beyond the reach of exception. The Turks who passt their dayes in Gardens here, will have Gardens also hereafter, and de∣lighting in Flowers on earth, must have Lil∣lies and Roses in Heaven. In Garden De∣lights 'tis not easie to hold a Mediocrity; that insinuating pleasure is seldome without some extremity. The Antients venially delight∣ed in flourishing Gardens; Many were Flo∣rists that knew not the true use of a Flower; And in Plinies dayes none had directly trea∣ted

of that Subject. Some commendably affected Plantations of venemous Vegetables, some confined their delights unto single plants, and Cato seemed to dote upon Cab∣badge; While the Ingenuous delight of Tu∣lipists, stands saluted with hard language, e∣ven by their own Tulipo ma∣nia, Narren∣cruid, La∣renberg. Pet. Hondius. in lib. Belg. Professors.
That in this Garden Discourse, we range into extraneous things, and many parts of Art and Nature, we follow herein the exam∣ple of old and new Plantations, wherein no∣ble spirits contented not themselves with Trees, but by the attendance ef Aviaries, Fish-Ponds, and all variety of Animals, they made their gardens the Epitome of the earth, and some resemblance of the secular shows of old.
That we conjoyn these parts of different Subjects, or that this should succeed the o∣ther; Your judgement will admit without impute of incongruity; Since the delight∣full World comes after death, and Paradise succeeds the Grave. Since the verdant state of things is the Symbole of the Resurrection, and to flourish in the state of Glory, we must first be sown in corruption. Beside the anci∣ent practise of Noble Persons, to conclude in Garden-Graves, and Ʋrnes themselves of

old, to be wrapt up flowers and garlands.
Nullum sine venia placuisse eloquium, is more sensibly understood by Writers, then by Readers; nor well apprehended by either, till works have hanged out like Apelles his Pictures; wherein even common eyes will finde something for emendation.
To wish all Readers of your abilities, were unreasonably to multiply the number of Scho∣lars beyond the temper of these times. But unto this ill-judging age, we charitably de∣sire a portion of your equity, judgement, can∣dour, and ingenuity; wherein you are so rich, as not to lose by diffusion. And being a flou∣rishing branch of that Of the most wor∣thy St Ed∣mund Bacon prime Ba∣ronet, my true and noble Friend. Noble Family, unto which we owe so much observance, you are not new set, but long rooted in such perfecti∣on; whereof having had so lasting confirma∣tion in your worthy conversation, constant a∣mity, and expression; and knowing you a se∣rious Student in the highest arcana's of Na∣ture; with much excuse we bring these low delights, and poor maniples to your Treasure.
Norwich May 1.

