


Beloved in our dearest Lord,
YOu are those Worthies of whom this world is not worthy;Heb. 11. 38. You are the Princes that prevail with God; You areGen. 32. 28: those exellent ones in whomPsal. 16. 3. is all Christs delight; You are his glory.Isa. 4. 5. You are his pickt, cull'd, prime Instru∣ments
 which he will make use of to car∣yonRev. 17. 14. & 19. 8. 14. Cant. 8. 6. Isa. 49. 16. his best and greatest Work against is worst and greatest Enemies in these latter daies; You are a Seale upon Christs heart, you are engraven on the palms of his hand; Your names areExod. 28. 29. 2 Cor. 2. 3. 1 Joh. 2. 27. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 12, 15, 16. You will not with Pythago∣ras his Scho∣lars magnifie the ipse dixerit of the greatest Clerks, neither will you be∣leeve with A∣naxagoras, that Snow is black, nor yet wil you say as Antipa∣ter King of Ma∣cedonia did (when one presented him with a book treating of happiness) , I have no leasure; nei∣ther will you judge like those that like nothing but the Manerva's of their owne brains. written upon his Breasts, as the names of the Children of Israel were upon Aarons Breast-plate; You are the Epistle of Christ; You are the anointed of Christ; You have the spirit of discerning; You have the mind of Christ; You have the greatest advantages, and the choycest privileges to enable you to trie Truth, to taste Truth, to apply Truth, to defend Truth, to strengthen Truth, to uphold Truth, and to improve Truth; and therefore to whom should I dedicate this following Discourse but to your selves? you have the next place to Christ in my heart; your good, your gain, your glory, your edification, your satis∣faction, your confirmation, your conso∣lation, your salvation, hath put me up∣on casting in my little, little mite, into your treasure.
Beloved You know that in the time of the Law God did as kindly accept of Goats haire, and Badgers skins, of Tur∣tle Doves, and young Pigeons▪ they be∣ing
 the best things that some of his chil∣dren had then to offer, as he did accept of Gold, Jewels, Silk, and Purple from other I hope you will shew out the same God-like disposition towards me, in a kind accepting of what is offered in this Treatise to your wise and serious consideration. I could wish it better for your sakes; yet such a it is I do in all love and humility presen you with, desiring the Lord to make it an internal and eternal advantage t you.
I shall briefly acquaint you with the Reasons that have moved poor me, un∣worthy I (who am the least of all Saints▪ who am not worthy to be reckoned among the Saints) to present this following Dis∣course to publick view; and they are thes that follow.
First, To answer the desires, and gra∣tifie the earnest and pious requests of seve∣ral precious souls, who long to have these things printed upon their hearts (by theThe Philoso∣pher could say, that desires are properly (,) to what is ne∣cessary. hand of the Spirit) that are printed in this Book. God speaks aloud through the serious and affectionate desires of the Saints; and this hath made me willing to eccho to their desires. If great mens de∣sires are to be looked upon as commands,
 why should good mens desires be looked upon with a squint eye? Seneca (a Heathen) could say that (ipse aspect∣us boni viri delectat,) The very looks of a good man delight one. How much more then should the desires of a good man overcome one?
Secondly, The good acceptance, the fair quarter that my Labors of the likeThem that are extant are sold by the same man that sels this, at the first shop in Popes∣head-Alley next to Corn∣hill. nature have found among those that fear the Lord (especially that Treatise called Precious Remedies against Satans de∣vices) hath incouraged me to present this to publick view, not doubting but that the Lord will bless it to the good of many, as I know he hath done the former. Which that he may, I shall not cease to pray, thatRom. 15. 21. my weak service may be accepted of thePhil. 1. 9, 10, 11 Saints, and that their love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in all sence, that they may approve things that are excellent; that they Sense, may be sincere, and without of∣fence til the day of Christ, Being filled with the fruits of righteousnesse, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God.
Thirdly, It is exceeding useful to the Saints at all times, but especially in
 changing times, in times wherein every one cals out, Watchman, what of the night, Watchman, what of the night?Isa. 21. 11, 12. and the watchman answereth, the morn∣ing cometh, and also the night. AhJoel 3. 16. Hag. 26. Isa. 23. 9. Isa. 63. 2, 3. Christians, the Lord is a shaking heaven and earth, he is a staining the pride of all glory, he is a staining his garments with the blood of his enemies; he is renting and tearing, he is burning and breaking, he is pulling up, and throwing down: Now inJerm. 45. 4, 5. the midst of all these Concussions and Revo∣lutions, thrice happy are those souls that have gained a wel-grounded Assurance of▪ Cae∣lestialHeb. 10. 34. things; such souls will not faint, sink, nor shrink in an hour of temptati∣on,Rev. 3. 4. & 14. 4. such souls will keep their garments pure and white, and will follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes. Assurance is a Be∣leevers Ark, where he sits Noah-like qui∣et and still in the midst of all distractionsPsal. 23. 3, 4. and destructions, combustions and confusi∣ons.Rev. 6. 12. ult. They are doubly miserable that have neither Heaven nor Earth, temporals nor eternals made sure to them in changing times.
The fourth ground of my presenting this Treatise to publick view, is, that little wel∣grounded Assurance that is to be found a∣mong
 Christians; most Christians livingEvery unset∣tled Christian is Magor mis∣sahib, a terror to himself, yea, his life is a very hel, fears and doubts are his chiefest com∣panions, and so he judges himself unfit and unworthy to live, and yet he is afraid to die; and verily this is the sad condition of most Christi∣ans. between feares and hopes, and hanging as it were between Heaven and Hell: Some∣times they hope that their State is good, at othertimes they fear that their state is bad; Now they hope that all is well, and that it shall go well with them for ever; anon they fear that they shal perish by the hand of such or such a corruption, or by the prevalency of such or such a temptation; and so they are like a ship in a storme, tost here and there, &c. Now that these weak soules may be strengthned, that these unstable soules may be established, that these disconsolate souls may be comforted, &c. I have pre∣sented this Tract to the world, not doubt∣ing but that if the Lord shall draw out their spirits to a serious perusal of it, they shall find (through the blessing of Jeho∣vah) that it will contribute very much to their attaining of a full Assurance of their everlasting happiness and blessedness, as also to the keeping and maintaining of that ful and blessed Assurance; which that it may, I shal follow it with my prayers.
Fifthly, I have published this follow∣ing Discours, remembring that my life isJam. 4. 14. Psal 39. 12. but a vanishing vapor, and that the time of my sojourning in this world will be but
 short. Mans life is so short, that Austine doubteth, whether to call it a dying life, or a living death. Mans life is but the shadow of smoke, the dream of a shadow. This present life is not (vita, sed via ad vitam)Bernard. life, but a motion, a journey towards life; the life of a Christian is rather (via then vita) a step towards life, then life: Yet do I believe that that is not a death, but life, that joyns the dying man to Christ, and that is not a life, but death, that separates the living man from Christ.
I know I shall not speak long to Friends, Saints, or Sinners, therefore I was the more willing to take the opportunity of Preach∣ingHeb. 11. 4. to you when I am dead; As Abel by his faith (he being dead) yet speaketh: So this Treatise may speak, and live, when I shall return to my long home, and fall a∣sleepEccles. 12. 5. Acts 7. 60. in the bosom of Christ. Christ his Prophets, and Apostles, though they are now in Heaven, yet by their Doctrines, Examples, and Writings, they still Preach to the Saints on Earth. Zisca desired his skin might serve the Bohemians in their Wars, when his body could no more do it: O that poor I, that have been but a little serviceable to the Saints in my life, might by this, and my former weak Labors, be
 much serviceable to them after my death! Books may Preach, when the Author can∣not, when the Author may not, when the Author dares not; yea, and which is more, when the Author i not.
Sixthly, To testifie my cordial love and affection to all the true lovers of Christ,Phil. 4. 21. Col. 1. 4. 2 Thes. 1. 3. Marcellinus a Heathen Hi∣storian, taxeth the Christians of his time, for their dissenti∣ons, biting and devouring one another, till they were even consumed one of another; a sad thing that a Heathen should see such miscarriages among Christs followers. and to let them know, That they are all (though under different forms) precious in my eyes, and very near and dear unto my heart. I bless God I am, and I desire more and more to be, one with every one that is one with Christ. I would fain have as free, as large, and as sweet a heart towards Saints, as Christ hath. For a Wolf to worry a Lamb, is usual; but for a Lamb to worry a Lamb, is unnatural: For Christs Lillies to be among Thorns, is ordi∣nary; but for these Lillies to become Thorns, to tear and fetch blood of one an∣other, is monstrous and strange. Ah Christians, can Turks and Pagans agree? can Herod and Pilat agree? can Moab and Ammon agree? can Bears and Ly∣ons, can Wolves and Tygers agree? yea, which is more, can a legion of Devils agree in one body, and shall not the Saints, whom one Heaven must hold at last, agree? Pan∣cirollusCap. 7. de Gmmis. tells us, That the most precious
 Pearl the Romans had, was called Unio. O, the union of the Saints is an unvaluable Pearl! The Heathen man by the light of Nature could say, That the thickest Wall of a City in Peace, and the safest Rampire in War, is Unity. Verily, all Saints are one in Christ, all Saints partake of the same Spirit, Pro∣mises, Graces, and Priviledges: All Saints are Fellow-Members, Fellow-Soul∣diers, Fellow-Travellers, Fellow▪ Heirs, Fellow-Sufferers, and Fellow-Citizens; and therefore, I cannot, I dare not, but love them all, and prize them all; and to evidence it, I have dedicated this Treatise to the service of all their Souls.
Seventhly and lastly, To fence and fortifie the Souls of real, serious Christians, against those Brain-sick Notions, and those Airy Speculations, and imaginary Revelations and Enthusiastical fancies, &c. with which many are sadly deluded and deceived, even to their eternal over∣throw, I had almost said.
Thus have I given you a brief accountI had not thought to have prest in∣to the Press, had I not been soundly prest thereunto. of the Reasons that have prevailed with me to publish this Treatise to the World, and to dedicate it to your selves. Let your hearts dwell on Truth, as the Bee doth upon
 the Flower; every Truth being a Flower of Paradise, that is more worth then a World.
Now the God of all Grace fill your Hearts and Souls with all the Fruits of Righteousness and Holiness, that you may attain unto a full Assurance of your Everlasting Happiness and Blessed∣ness; which that you may, is the sin∣cere, earnest, and constant desire of him, who is

