



Renowned Sirs,
THe better any thing is, the more communicative it will be, for bonum est sui communicativum. There are two sorts of goods, here are Bona Throni, and there are Bona Scabelli, Goods of the Throne, as
 God, Christ, Grace, Assurance, &c.Nihil bonum sine summo bono. Aug▪ Nothing is good, without the chiefest good. Omne bonum in summo bono, All good is in the chiefest good. And Goods of the Foot-stool, as Ho∣nors, Riches, &c. A man may have e∣nough of the goods of the Footstool to sink him, but he can never have e∣nough to satisfie him. Mans Happiness and Blessedness, his Felicity and Glory, lies in his possessing the Goods of the Throne, which that you may, I hum∣bly desire you seriously to view over the ensuing Treatise.
It was an excellent saying of Lew is of Bavyer, Emperor of Germany, Hu∣jusmodi comparandae sunt opes, quae cum naufragio simul enatent: Such goods are worth getting and owning, as will not sink, nor wash away, if a shipwrack happen, but will wade and swim out with us. Such are the goods that are here presented in this following Dis∣course; in all storms, tempests, and shipwracks, they will abide with the Soul, they will walk and lie down with the Soul, yea, they will to the Grave▪ to Heaven, with the Soul, they will in the greatest storms be an Ark to the Soul. I have observed in someA Philosopher could say in dnger of ship∣wrack in a ligh▪ starry night, Surely I shall not perish, there are so many eyes of providence ver me. But these had nei∣ther so much faith nor cou∣rage, these men of might had lost their hands and hearts. Psa 76. 5. vide. terrible storms that I have been in, that the Mariners and the Passengers want
 of Assurance, and of those other Pearls of price that in this Treatise are pre∣presented to publick view, hath caused their countenance to change, their hearts to melt; it hath made them to stagger and reel to and fro like drunken men, like men at their wits ends; whereas others that have had Assu∣rance, and their pardon in their bosoms, &c. have bore up bravely, and slept quietly, and walkt cheerfully, and practically have said as Alexander once did, when he was in a great danger, Now (saith he) here is a danger fit for the spirit of Alexander to encounter with∣al; so they now here are storms and dangers fit for assured, pardoned Souls to encounter withal, &c.
Gentlemen, This following Discourse I do not present to you as a thing that needs your protection, for Veritas stat in aperto campo, truth stands in the open Fields, I, and it will make the lovers of it to stand, triumph, and overcome, Magna est veritas & valebit, Great is truth, and shall prevail: but, upon these following grounds, I tender it to you.
First, You have honored the Al∣mighty
 by helping him against the high and mighty, and he hath honored you, by owning of you, by standing by1 Sam. 2. 30. As it was sad of Caesr, that while here▪ stored the Sta∣tue of Pompey, he estabished his own; so while men ho¦nor God, they preserve their own. you, by acting for you, and by making of you prosperous and victorious (over a near enemy, a powerful enemy, an enraged enemy, a resolved enemy, a subtil enemy, a prepared enemy, a lofty enemy) and therefore I cannot but desire to honor you by dedicating the following Treatise to the service of your Souls.
Secondly, Because you are myMagnes amois, amor, Love is the loadoe of love, and therefore he said right, Si vis ama i, ama, if thn wilt love, thou shalt be loved. Friends, and that cordial love and friendship which I have found from you hath stampt in my affections a very high valuation of you. The An∣cients painted Friendship a fair yong man bare headed, in a poor garment, at the bottom whereof was written Life and Death, in the upper part Summer and Winter, his bosom was open, so that his heart might be seen, whereupon was written longè, propè, a Friend at hand, and a far off. Verily your undeserved love and respects have made me willing to open my bosom to you in this Epistle, and in the following Treatise, as to Friends that I love and
 honor. When one came to Alexander and desired him that he might see his Treasure, he bid one of his servants take him, and shew him, not  his Money, but  his Friends. It seems he put a higher va∣lueSecrates pre∣ferred the Kings counte∣nance above his coyn. upon them, then he did upon all the wealth which he had. Faithful Friends are an unvaluable Treasure, and the rarity of them doth much inhaunce the price of them.
Thirdly, Because of its exceeding usefulness and suitableness to your conditions. I have been some years at Sea, and through Grace I can say, that I would not exchange my Sea Experi∣encesPsal. 107. 24. It is between Christian and Christian, as between two Lute strings that are tuned one to ano∣ther; no soon∣er one is struck, but the other trembles. for Englands Riches; I am not al∣together ignorant of the troubles, tri∣als, temptations, dangers, and deaths, that do attend you: And therefore I have been the more stirred in my spi∣rit to present the following Discourse to you, wherein is discovered the na∣ture of Assurance, the possibility of at∣taining Assurance, the causes, springs, degrees, excellencies, and properties of Assurance; also the special seasons and times of Gods giving Assurance, with the resolution of several weighty
 Questions touching Assurance; fur∣ther, in this Treatise, as in a glass, you may see these ten special things, clear∣ly and fully opened and manifested.
1. What Knowledge that is that accompanies Salvation.
2. What Faith that is that accom∣panies Salvation.
3. What Repentance that is that accompanies Salvation.
4. What Obedience that is that accompanies Salvation▪
5. What Love that is that accom∣panies Salvation.
6. What Prayer that is that accom∣panies Salvation.
7. What Perseverance that is that accompanies.
8. What Hope that is that accom∣panies Salvation.
9. The difference between true Assurance, and that which is counter∣feit.
10. The wide difference there is be∣tween the witness of the Spirit, and the hissing of the old Serpent.
Gentlemen and Friends, you haveSay with that famous Painter Zeuxs, Aeter∣nitati pingo, I paint for eter∣nity, I provide for eternity. E∣ternity is that unum perpetuum bodie, that one perpetual day. your lives in your hands, there is but a short step between you and eternity, I
 would fain have you all happy for e∣ver; to that purpose, I humbly beseech you spare so much time (from your many great and weighty occasions) as to read this Treatise, that in all humi∣lity I lay at your feet, and follow this counsel that in all love and faithfulness I shall now give unto you. For my de∣sign in all is your happiness here, and your blessednesse hereafter.
First, Get and keep CommunionCommunion with God will make a man as couragious and bold as a Lion, yea, as a young Lyon that is in his hot blood, and fearless of any creature, Prov. 28. 1.  Now the proverb is (Tutiores Crvi duce Leone, quam Leones duce Cer∣vo) it is more likely that Harts will get victory with a yon to their leader, then Lyons with a leading Hart, Joshua, Captain of the Lords battles must be of a Lyon like courage, and what wil make them so, but communion with God? It was the saying of the old Earl of Essex, That he was never a∣fraid to fight but when he was conscious of some sin with which he had provoked God, and left communion with God. with God; your strength to stand, and your strength to withstand all assaults, is from your Communion with God. Communion with God is that that will make you stand fast and triumph over all enemies, difficulties, dangers, and deaths. While Sampson kept his Communion with God, no enemy could stand before him, he goes on conquering and to conquer, he laies heapes upon heaps; but when he was fallen in his Communion with God, he fals presently, easily, and sadly be∣fore his enemies. So long as David kept up his Communion with God, no enemies could stand before him; but when he was fallen in his Communion with God, he flies before the son of his
 bowels. Job keeps up his Communion with God, & conquers Satan upon the Dunghil; Adam loses his Communi∣on with God, and fals before Satan in Paradise. Communion is the result of Union, Communion is a recipro∣call exchange between Christ and a gracious Soule; Communion is Jacobs Ladder, where you have Christ sweet∣ly descending down into the Soul, and the soule by divine influences sweetly ascending up to Christ; Communion with God is a Sheild upon Land, and an Anchor at Sea; it is a sword to de∣fend you, and a staff to support you; it is balm to heale you, and a cordiall to strengthen you; high Communion with Christ wil yeeld you two heavens, a heaven upon earth, and a heaven after death; He injoyes nothing that wants Communion with God, he wants no∣thing that injoys communion with God; therefore above all gettings get Com∣munion with Christ, and above all kee∣pings keep Communion with Christ; all other losses are not comparable to the losse of Communion with Christ; he that hath lost his Communion hath lost his Comfort, his strength, his all,
 and it will not be long before the Phi∣listims take him and put out his eyes, and bind him with fetters of brass, and make him grind in a prison, as they did Sampson, Judg. 16. 20, 21.
Secondly, Make a speedy and a tho∣rowBonus serva∣tius facit bonum bonifacium. improvement of all opportunities of grace and mercy, sleep not in Harvest time; trifle not away your Market hours, your golden seasons, you have much work to do in a short time; you havePetrach telleth of one who be∣ing invited to dinner the next day, answered, Ego à multis anis crastinum non habui, I have not had a mor∣row for this many years. a God to honor, a Christ to rest on, a Race to run, a Crown to win, a Hell to escape, a Heaven to obtaine; you have weak Graces to strengthen, and strong Corruptions to weaken; you have many Temptations to with∣stand, and Afflictions to bear; you have many Mercies to improve, and many Services to perform, &c. There∣fore take hold on all opportunities and advantages, whereby you may be strengthened and bettered in your no∣bleHeb. 3-7, 8 A man, faith Luther, lives forty years be∣fore he knows himself a fool, and by that time he sees his folly▪ his life is ended, &c. part. Take heed of crying cras, cras, tomorrow, tomorrow, when God saith, to day if you will hear my voyce harden not your hearts. Manna must be gathered in the morning, and the orient pearle is generated of the
 morning dew. It is a very sad thing for a man to begin to die, before he begins to live. He that neglects a gol∣den opportunity doth but create to himself a great deal of misery, as Saul, and many others, have found by sad ex∣perience. He that would to the pur∣pose do a good action, must not neglect his season. The men of Issachar were1 Chron. 12. 32 famous in Davids account for wisdom, because they acted seasonably and op∣portunely. God will repute and write that man a wise man, who knows and observes his seasons of doing. Such there have been, who, by giving a glasse of water opportunely, have obtained a Kingdom, as you may see in the story of Thaumastus and King Agrippa.Bernard. Time, saith one, were a good commodityIt was the commendati∣ons of blessed Hooper that he was spare of diet, sparer of words, and spa∣rest of time, in hell, and the traffick of it most gainful, where for one day a man would give ten thousand worlds if he had them. One passing thorow the streets of Rome, and seeing many of the women playing and delighting themselves with Mon∣kies and Baboons, and such like things, asked whether they had no children to play and delight themselves with? So when men triffle away their precious
 time, and golden opportunities, play∣ing, and toying with this vanity, and that, we may ask, whether these men have no God, no Christ, no Scripture, no Promises, no Blessed Experiences, no hopes of Heavens glories to delight and entertain themselves with? Cer∣tainly, we should not reckon any time into the account of our lives, but that which we carefully pass, and well spend, seeing the Heathen could say, (Diu fuit, non diu vixit) He was long,Dmascen. he did not live long. I have read of oneBlessed Brad∣ford the Mar∣tyr, counted that hour lost wherein he did not some good with his Tongue, Pen, or Purse. Barlaam, who being asked, How old he was? answered, Five and forty years old, to whom Josaphah replied, Thou seemest to be seventy: Truth (saith he) if you reckon ever since I was born, but I count not those years that were spent in vanity.
Most men spend the greatest part of their time about things that are by the by, that are of little or no value; asAnd Solyman the great Turk spent his time in making of notches of Horn for Bow. Domitian the Roman Emperor spent his time in stabbing of Flies; and Artaxer∣xes spent his time in making Hefts for Knives; and Archimedes spent his time in drawing lines on the ground, when that famous City Syracuse was taken; and Myrmecides spent more time to
 make a Bee, then some men do to build a house.
Sirs, I beseech you remember that it was Cato, a Heathen, that said, ThatChilo one of the seven Sages being asked, What was the hardest thing in the world to be done? Answer∣ed, To use and imploy a mans time well. Alexander the Great gave him a check, and not a re∣ward, that boasted that he could throw a Pease at a great distance upon the point of a Needle. Ah how will God at last check those that spend their precious▪ time, as it were with throwing Pease upon the point of a Needle? account must be given, not onely of our labor, but also of our leasure; and in af∣firming this, he affirms no more then what the Scripture speaks. But O what a sad account then have some to make? Well, as Cleopatra said to Mark Anthony, It is not for you to be fishing for Gugeons, but for Towns, Forts, and Castles: So say I, Right Honorable, and Be∣loved, It is not for you to spend your time about poor low contemptible things, but about those high and no∣ble things that make most for the in∣terest of Christ, and the good of your Countrey. It was Titus, a Pagan Em∣peror, that uttered this memorable and praise-worthy Apothegm (Amici, di∣em perdidi,) my Friends, I have lost a day, when he had spent it in company without doing good. The Egyptians drew the Picture of Time with three Heads, to represent the three differ∣ences, The first of a greedy Wolf gaping, for time past, because it hath ravenously devoured even the memory
 of so many things past recalling: The second, of a crowned Lyon roaring, for time present; because it hath the prin∣cipality of all action for which it cals aloud: The third, of a deceitful Dog fawning, for time to come; because it feeds fond men with many flattering hopes to their own undoing. I have read of a man, who upon his dying bed would have given a world for time, he still crying out day and night, call time again, call time again; So a great Lady of this land on her death bed cryed out, time, time, a world of wealth for an inch of time. One Hermanus a great Courtier in the Kingdome of Bohemia, being at point of death, did most lamentablyLamacus a Commander said to his of∣fending Soul∣dier, non licet in bello bis peccare, no man must offend twice in war; So God sometimes wil not suffer men again and again to neg∣lect the day of grace. cry out, That he had spent more time in the Palace then in the Temple, and that he had added to the riotousness and vices of the Court, which he should have sought to have reformed, and so dyed to the horror of those that were about him. I have been the longer upon this, be∣cause I have been a sad Spactator of mens mispending their time, and tri∣fling away golden opportunities, at Sea as well as at Land, and though I thus speak (knowing that this Trea∣tise




 will come into other hands besides your own) yet I hope better things ofHeb. 6. 8, 9. you, to whom I dedicate it, even such as do accompany salvation.
Thirdly, Take no Truths upon trust, but all upon tryall, 1 Joh. 4. 10. Belo∣ved, Satan may more easily di∣sturb the truth, then subvert it. Aug. beleeve not every spirit, but trie the spirits whether they be of God; because ma∣ny false Prophets are gone out into the world. This age is very full of Impo∣stors, therefore trie the spirits, as La∣pidaries do their stones, or as Gold∣smiths do their metals; a Bristol stone may look as well as an Indian Dia∣mond, and many things glister besides gold. It was the glorious commenda∣tions of the Bereans, That they searcheActs 17. 10, 11  bet∣ter born and bred, of a more noble dispositi∣on. They were more Noble, not by civil descent, but by spiritual ad∣vancemet. the Scriptures daily whether those things that Paul and Silas had delivered were so, and this act of theirs made them more Noble, then those of Thessalonica. Christian Nobility is the best and truest, where God himselfe is the top of the Kin, and Religion the root, in regard whereof, all other things are but shadows and shapes of noblenesse. A Father that had three Sons was de∣sirous to try their discretions, which he did by giving to each of them an Ap∣ple,
 that had some part of it rotten: The first eats up his rotten and all; the second throws all his away, be∣cause some part of it was rotten; the third picks out the rotten, and eats that which was good; the third was the wisest. Some in these days swal∣low down every thing, rotten and sound together; others throw away all Truth, because every thing that is presented to them, is not truth; but surely they are the wisest that knowIsai. 7. 15. how to chuse the good, and refuse the evil.
You must not with PythagorasAmicus Socra∣tes, amicus Pla∣to, Amicior ve∣ritas, Socrates is my Friend, and lato is my Friend, but a∣bove all, Truth is my Friend. Scholars, magnifie the (Ipse dixerit) of the greatest Clerks, especially in those things that are of eternal con∣cernment to your Souls. You will try, and tell, and weigh Gold after your Fathers; deal so by the Truth you hear, and let no man binde you to believe with Anaxagoras, that Snow is black. Truth, saith Basil, is hard to be taken by hunting, and must be found out by a narrow observing of her footsteps on every side. Many are like those in Clemens, that thought Truth to be Cruelty.

Fourthly, Be exemplary to thoseThe complaint in Seneca is an∣cient, That commonly men live not Ad rationem, but Ad similitu∣dinem. Seneca de vita beata. among whom you walk, and over whom you command: Bonus dux, bo∣nus comes, a good Leader makes a good Follower; Praecepta aocent, exempla mo∣vent, Precepts may instruct, but exam∣ples do perswade. Verily Gentlemen, your examples will have a very great influence upon those that are under you. It is natural to Inferiors to minde more what their Superiors do, then what they say; therefore you had need be Angelical in your walkings, and actings; you are lights upon a Hill, you are Sea-marks, and there∣fore every eye will be upon you. Those that can finde no ears to hear what you say, will finde many eyes to see what you do. Scripture and Ex∣perience do abundantly evidence, that good mens examples have done a world of good in the world; and ve∣rily, the evil examples of great men (especially) are very dangerous. Charls the fift was wont to say, That as the Eclipse of the Sun is a token of great com∣motions; so the errors and evils of great men, bring with them great perturbations and evils to the places and persons where
 they live. O therefore be exemplary in lip and life, in word and work, that others seeing your good works, may glorifieMatth. 5. 16. Plutarch said of Demosthenes, that he was ex∣cellent at prai∣sing the wor∣thy acts of his Ancestors, but not so at imita∣ting them. You may easily ap∣ply it. your Father which is in Heaven. O look that your lives be as a Commentary upon Christs life. (Tace lingua, loquere vita) Talk not of a good life, but let thy life speak, said the Philosopher. Alexander willed that the Grecians and the Barbarians should no longer be di∣stinguished by their Garments, but by their Manners; so should Christians be distinguished from all others by their lives, and by their examples. 2 Sam. 23. 3. The God of Israel said, The Rock of Israel spake to me, he that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of the Lord. An excellent Lord is al∣ways better then an excellent Law; let your Laws be never so good, if the Law▪ makers are bad, all will come to nothing. The peoples eyes are muchJohn 7. 48. It was a good Law that the Ephesians made, That men should pro∣pound to themselves the best patterns, and ever bear in minde some eminent man. upon that Scripture, Have any of the Rulers believed on him? &c. Abraham was an example of Righteousness in Chaldaea, Lot was just in Sodom, Daniel was an example of Holiness in Babylon, Job was an example of Uprightness in the Land of Huss, which was a Land
 of much Prophaneness and Supersti∣tion, Nehemiah was an example of Zeal in Damasco, and Moses was an example of Meekness among the mut∣tering and murmuring Israelites. Above all examples, Christ was exemplary in all Piety and Sanctity, in all Righte∣ousness and Holiness, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation. And why then should not you be ex∣(mplaryThe Arabian, if their King be sick or lame, they all feign them∣selves so. among those poor Creatures ethose black Angels, I had almost said) among whom you walk? It was the saying of Trajanus, a Spaniard (the first stranger that reigned among the Itali∣ans) Qualis Rex, tali grex, Subjects prove good, by a good Kings example; so do Souldiers, so do Sailers, by the good examples of their Superior Com∣manders. Such Commanders as are examples of Righteousness and Holi∣ness to others, are certainly high in worth, and humble in heart, they are the glory of Christ, and the honor of Religion.
Fifthly, As you are in publick pla∣ces,I have read of one that had rather beautifie Italy, then his own house; there is very little of this spirit abroad in the world. so lay out your selves impartially for the common good of all that have interest in you, or dependence upon
 you: So did Abraham, Moses, Joshua, Nehemiah, Ezra, Daniel, but above all Christ himself. You are more for the peoples sake, then the people are for yours: Magistrates are Rulers over the persons of the people, but they are servants to the good of the peo∣ple. As it is the duty of all to serve them, so it is their office to serve all. It is no Paradox to affirm, That Rulers are the greatest Servants. The Ancients were wont to place the Statues of their Princes by their Fountains, intimating that they were, or at least should be, Fountains of the Publick good. The Counsellor saith, That a man in pub∣lick place should give his will to God, his love to his Master, his heart to his Countrey, his secrets to his Friends, his time to Business. It is a base and unworthy spirit, for a man to make himself the Centre of all his actions. The very Heathen man could say, A Mans Countrey, and his Friends and others challenge a great part of him. The Sun that is the Prince of lights,So doth the Sea feed and refresh the smalest fish, as wel as the great∣est Leviathan; the Trees do shade and shelter from heat the least Bird, as well as the greatest Beast. doth impartially serve all, the Peasant as well as the Prince, the poor as well as the rich, the weak as well as the
 strong; you must be like the Sun. The Sun of Righteousness was of a brave Publick Spirit, he healed others, but was hurt himself, he filled others, but was hungry himself, he laid out himself, and he laid down himself for a Publick good. That Pilot dies nobly (saith Seneca) who perisheth in the storm with the Helm in his hand. It is really your praise among the Saints, that you have ventured killing, burning, drown∣ing, and all to save the Ship of the Commonwealth from sinking.
Sirs, Be not weary of Publick Work, it is honor enough that God will make any use of you to carry on his design in the world; he is a faithful Pay-master, Heaven at last will make a∣mends for all; you shall reap, if you faint not. I do verily believe, God will make use of you to do greater things on the Sea, then yet have been done. The Lord hath now begun to set a foot upon the Sea, let his enemies tremble, God will not suffer his glory to be buried in the deeps; he is a shak∣ing the Nations, and will not leave shaking them, till he that is the desire of all Nations come. The Lord hath
 said, That he will overturn, overturn, overturn until he comes, whose right it is to wear the Crown, and the Diadem, and he will give it him, Ezek. 21. 25, 26, 27. Till then there will be little else, but plucking up and breaking down.Jere. 45. 4. Therefore be couragious and follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes. You need fear no enemies, that have Christ the Conqueror on your sides.
Sixthly and lastly, Make it moreO anim Dei insigta ima∣gine, desponsata fidie, donata spi∣ritu, &c. Bern. O divine Soul invested with the Image of God, espoused to him by Faith. and more your chiefest work to make plentiful provisions for the eternal welfare of your Souls. Your Souls are more worth then ten thousand worlds. All is well, if the Soul be well; if that be safe, all is safe, if that be lost, all is lost, God, Christ, and Glory is lost, if the Soul be lost.
Worthy Sirs, Though others play the Courtiers with their Souls, yet do not you: The Courtier doth all things late, he rises late, and dines late, and sups late, and repents late.
Sirs, Is it madness to feast the Slave, and starve the Wife, and is it not great∣er madness to feast the Body, and starve the Soul? To make liberal provision for the Body, and none for the Soul?
 Do not they deserve double damnati∣on, that prefer their Bodies above their Souls? Me thinks our Souls should beOne of the cheifest mir∣rors to behold God in, is a reasonable Soul which findes it self out, saith one. like to a Ship, which is made little, and narrow downwards, but more wide and broad upwards. Before all, and above all, look to your Souls, watch your Souls, make provision for your Souls: When this is done, all is done, till this is done, there is nothing done that will yeeld a man comfort in life, joy in death, and boldness before a Judgement Seat. Callenuceus tells of a Nobleman of Naples, that was wont prophanely to say, He had two souls inHad I a purse suitable to my heart, not a poor godly Souldier or Sailor in Eng∣land, who car∣ries his life in one hand, but should have one of these Books in the other, &c. his body, one for God, and another for who∣soever would buy it. Verily, they will make but a bad bargain of it, that to gain the World, shall sell their Souls.
Dear Sirs, I had much more to say, but I am afraid that I have already kept you too long from sucking of the Honey Comb, from drinking at the Fountain; I have held you too long in the Porch, and therefore I shall onely crave, That you will bear with my plainness, and over-look my weakness; Remembring, that other Addresses would savor more of flattery then of
 sincerity, more of policy then of piety, and would be both unlovely in me, and displeasing to you.
Now the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, bless you and yours with all Spiritual blessings in Heavenly places, and make you yet more and more Instrument al for his glory, and this Nations good; that your names may be for ever precious among his people, that they may bear you still upon their hearts before the Lord; which is, and shall be, the earnest and constant Prayer of him, who is
Right Honorable and worthy Sirs,

