



SIR,
YOur Noble FATHER, a Person as High for Ex∣cellency of Spirit as
 Blood, having as much of Saint as Prince in him. A great Sonne and Friend of the Church; a full and lively Image of Him, who is most Good & Great. A rare Copy of one Regularly, Rationally, Really, & Constantly De∣vout & Charitable, without all Ostentation of vanity or Contradiction of life; He Sir, with floods of teares from the Churches and Nations Eyes, is loosed from an ill Earth,
 and arrived (whither his course tended) at the Blessednesse of Heaven: But to you, the Son of his Prayers and Hopes, He hath left the double Inhe∣ritance of his Honours and Vertues, and your hands must wipe off our teares. And God be bles∣sed for it, so you begin to doe, whilest we who knew him, see you, and behold with comfort (and good hope) so many of His Mo∣tions, and good Dispositi∣ons
 in you, that Body and Spirit both seem to be A∣live still; and whilest you live and they in you, (and long may both!) He can∣not be altogether Buried. And we (especially we of the Church) who honour His Ashes, cannot but admire and blesse you His Image, who have learn'd to write so early and fair∣ly,Not yet eight years old. good, after your Fa∣thers Copy. Carrying a constant Foot to Gods Sanctuary; and there
 finding both a Knee and Mouth at His service. These Buds of Hope and first Apparitions of your Fathers spirit in you, we take for Prophecies of the Flower of your Race and Pillar of your House.
Go on Good Sir, and let none so far Delude you, as to make you think Piety a thing of Peasan∣try, & Religion fitter for a Church-man then a Noble person. Believe it your Happinesse to be great in
 Heaven as Earth, and your Honour to have a good name as well in the Church as the VVorld. Let none Deprave you so much as to make it Noble to follow base Lusts, and what throwes us below men, to befit persons of Honour. Let others with Domitian the Roman Emperour spend their time in cat∣ching Flies, and with the Grecian Const. C∣pranymus. delight to roll themselves in Dung
 vain & vicious pleasures.) Do you embrace Piety as Princely, no Musick like Davids Harp, no Money to Constantines Coines, which makes the one as Famous as his Scepter, and the other not less Re∣nowned then his Con∣quests. For that and these proclaim them pious as well as potent men; The Harp (with which Da∣vid is pictur'd instead of a Scepter in his hand) was the Instrument of his
 Devotion. The Coines (as Constantine was and would be portraid) present him on his Kneesuseb. at his Prayers. Sir, make us true Prophets who foretell in you, your Deare Mothers Comfort, your Friends Glory, the Chur∣ches Joy, the Honour and Firmament of your Fami∣ly. So he praies who hath been often under your Roof, and now appears under your Name, with confidence to have as ma∣ny
 Amens as your Father had Hearts, that your House may long last, and you live to Resemble your Heavenly Father, and Revive your Earthly!
The most Cordiall and Common Prayer of
SIR, 
