



Dear hearts,
THe choicest Saints are born to troubles, as thePsal. 34. 19 Job 5. 1 Psa. 88. 3, 4 Qui non est crucia∣nus, non est Christi∣anus. Lu∣ther. sparks fly upwards. Many are the troubles of the Righteous; if they were many, and not troubles, (then as it is in the Pro∣verb) the more the merrier; or if they were troubles, and not many, then the fewer the better chear; but God who is infinite in wisdome, and matchless in goodness, hath ordered troubles, yea many troubles to come trooping in upon us on every side. As our mercies, so
 our crosses seldome come single, they u∣sually come treading one upon the heels of another; they are like April showers, no sooner is one over, but another comes. And yet Christians, it is mercy, it is rich mercy, that every affliction is not an execution, that every correction is not a damnation. The higher the wa∣ters rise, the nearer Noahs Ark was lifted up to Heaven; the more thy af∣flictions are encreased, the more thy heart shall bee raised Heaven-wards.
Because I would not hold you too long in the porch, I shall onely indeavour two things; First, To give you the reasons of my appearing once more in Print; and Secondly, A little counsel and direction, that the following Tract may turn to your souls advantage, which is the white that I have in mine eye. The true reasons of my sending this piece into the world (such as it is) are thse,
First, The afflicting hand of God hath been hard upon my self, and upon my dearest relations in this world, and upon many of my precious Christian
 friends, whom I much love and honour in the Lord▪ which put mee upon studying of the mind of God in that Scripture, that I have made the subject matter of this following discourse. Luther could not understand some Psalms, till hee was afflicted, the Christ-cross is no letter in the book, and yet saith hee▪ it hath taught mee more than all the let∣ters in the book, afflictions are a golden key, by which the Lord opens the rich treasures of his word to his peoples souls; and this in some measure through graceJudg. 14. 9, 10. my soul hath experienced; when Samp∣son had found honey, hee gave some to his Father and Mother to eat; some honey I have found in my following Text, and therefore I may not, I can∣not bee such a churl, as not to give them some of my honey to taste, who have drunk deep of my gall and worm∣wood.Some have accounted nothing their own that they have not communi∣cated to o∣thers. Austin observes on that, Psal. 66. 16. Come and hear all yee that fear God, and I will declare what hee hath done for my soul. Hee doh not call them (saith hee) to acquaint them with speculations, how wide the earth is, how far the Heavens are
 stretched out, what the number of the stars is, or what is the course of the Sun; but come, and I will tell you the wonders of his grace, the faithfulness of his pro∣mises, the riches of his mercy to my soul; gracious experiences are to be communi∣cated; Lilmod Lelammed, we therefore learn, that wee may teach, is a proverb a∣mong the Rabbins; And I do there∣fore lay in and lay up, saith the Hea∣then, that I may draw forth again, and lay out for the good of many; when God hath dealt bountifully with us, others should reap some noble good by us; the Family, the Town, the City, the Coun∣try, where a man lives, should fare the better for his faring well; our mercies and experiences should bee as a running spring at our doors, which is not onely for our own use, but also for our neigh∣bours, yea and for strangers too.
Secondly, What is written is perma∣nent, litera scripta manet, and-spreads it self further by far, for time, place and persons than the voice can reach; the pen is an artificial tongue, it speaks as well to absent, as to present friends; it speaks
 to them that are afar off, as well as those that are near; it speaks to many thousands at once; it speaks not onely to the present age, but also to succeedingHeb. 11. 4 Zech. 1. 5 ages; the Pen is a kinde of Image of e∣ternity, it will make a man live when hee is dead; though the Prophets do not live for ever, yet their labours may; a mans writings may preach, when hee cannot, when hee may not, and when by reason of bodily distempers, he dares not; yea and that which is more, when hee is not.
Thirdly, Few men, if any, have Iron memories; how soon is a Sermon preach'd forgotten, when a Sermon written remains? Augustin writing toAugust. E∣pist. 1. ad Volus. Volusian, saith, That which is written is alwaies at hand to bee read, when the reader is at leasure; men do not easily forget their own names, nor their Fa∣thers house, nor the wives of their bo∣somes, nor the fruit of their loins nor to eat their daily bread; and yet Ah! how easily do they forget that word of grace, that should bee dearer to them than all? most mens memories, especi∣ally in the great concernments of their
 souls are like a sieve or bowlter, where the good Corn, and fine Flower goes thorow, but the ligh chaff and course bran remains behinde; or like a strainer, where the sweet liquor is strained out, but the dreggs are left be∣hinde; or like a grate, that lets the pure water run away, but if there bee any straws, sticks, mud, or filth that it holds, as it were with Iron hands, most mens memories are very treacherous, especially in good things; few mens memories are a holy Ark, a heavenly Stare-house, or Magazine for their souls; and therefore they stand in the more need of a written word. But
Fourthly, Its marvelous suitable∣ness and usefulness under these great turns and changes that have past upon us. As every wise husbandman ob∣serves the fittest seasons to sow his seed; some hee sows in the Autumn, and fall of the leaf, some, in the springIsa. 28. 25 of the year, some in a dry season, and some in a wet, some in a moist clay, and some in a sandy dry ground: So every spiritual husbandman must observe the
 fittest times to sow his spiritual seed in, hee hath heavenly seed by him for all occasions and seasons, for spring and fall, for all grounds, heads and hearts; now whether the seed sown in the following Treatise bee not suitable to the times and seasons wherein wee are cast, is left to the judgement of the prudent Reader to determine; if the Author had thought otherwise, this babe had been stifled in the womb.
Fifthly, The good acceptance that my other weak labours have found; God hath blest them, not onely to theRom. 15. 21 Phil. 1. 9, 10, 11 conviction, the edification, confirmation, and consolation of many, but also to the conversion of many. God is a free Agent to work by what hand hee plea∣ses, and sometimes hee takes pleasure1 Cor. 1. 17,—29 to do great things by weak means, that no flesh may glory in his presence. God will not despise the day of small things, and who or what art thou that darest de∣spise that day? the Spirit breathes up∣on whose preaching and writing heeJohn 3 pleases, and all prospers according as that wind blows.

Sixthly, That all afflicted and di∣stressed Christians may have a proper salve for every sore, a proper remedy against every disease at hand▪ as eve∣ry good man▪ so every good book is notProv. 25. 11 That re∣medy is no remedy, that is not proper to the dis∣ase. fit to bee the afflicted mans compa∣nion, but this is, here hee may see his face, his head his hand his heart, his way his works; here hee may see all his diseases discovered, and proper remedies proposed and applied; here hee may finde Arguments to silence him, and means to quiet him, when it is at worst with him; in every storm here hee may finde a tree to shelter him, and in every danger here hee may finde a Ci∣ty of Refuge to secure him, and in e∣very dfficulty here hee may have a light to guide him, and in every peril here hee may finde a buckler to defend him, and in every distress here hee may finde a cordial to strengthen him, and in e∣very trouble here hee may finde a staff to support him.
Seventhly, To satisfie some bosome∣friends, some faithful friends; man is made to bee a friend▪ and apt for
 friendly offices; hee that is not friendly, is not worthy to have a friend, and hee that hath a friend, and doth ot shew hmself friendly, is not worthy to bee accounted a man; friendship is a kinde of life, without which there is no com∣fort of a mans life. Christian friend∣ship1 Sam. 22. 1, 2. 3. ties such a knot, that great Alex∣ander cannot cut: Summer friends I value not, but winter friends are worth their weight in gold, and wh can deny such any thing, especially in thse daies, wherein real, faithful, constant friends are so rare to bee found?O my friends! I have never a friend, said Socrates; a friend is a very mutable creature, saith Plato The friendship of most men in these daies, is like Jonahs Gourd; now ve∣ry promising and flourishing, and anon fading and withering; it is like some plants in the water, which have broad leaves on the surface of the water, but scarce any root at all; their friendship is like Lemons, cold within, hot with∣out; their expressions are high, but their affections are low, they speak much, but do little; as Drumms and Trumpets, and Ensigns in a battel make a great noise, and a fine shew, but act nothing: so these counterfeit
 friends will▪ complement highly, how hansomely, speak plausibly, and pro∣mise lustily, and yet have neither a hand nor a heart to act any thing cordially or faithfully; from such friends it is a mercy to bee delivered: And there∣fore King Antigonus was wont to pray to God that hee would protect him from his friends, and when one of his Coun∣cil asked him why hee prayed so, hee returned this answer, every man will shun and defend himself against his professed enemies, but from our profes∣sed or pretended friends, of whom few are faithful, none can safe-guard him∣self, but hath need of protection from Heaven; but for all this there are some that are real friends, faithful friends, active friends, winter friends, bosome∣friends, fast friends, and for their sakes (especially those among them) that have been long, very long under the Smarting Rod, and in the fiery Furnace, and that have been often poured from vessel to vessel, have I once more appeared in Print to the world.
Eighthly and lastly, There▪ hath not
 any Authors or Author come to my hand that hath handled this subject, as I have done, and therefore I do not know but it may bee the more grate∣ful and acceptable to the world;1 Thes. 1. 7, 8 2 Cor. 8. 10. ch. 9. 1,  and if by this assay others that are more able shall bee provoked to do more worthily upon this subject, I shall therein rejoyce; I shall onely add, that though much of the following mat∣ter was preached upon the Lords visi∣tation of my dear yoak-fellow, my self, and some other friends, yet there are many things of special concernment in the following Tract, that yet I have not upon any accounts communicated to the world. And thus I have given you a true and faithful account of the reasons that have prevailed with me to publish this Treatise to the wold, and to dedicate it to your selves.
Secondly, The second thing promised was, the giving of you a little good  un∣sel▪ that you may so read the following discourse, as that it may turn much to your souls advantage; for, as many fish and catch nothing, so many readLuke 5. 5
 good books and get nothing, because they rea them over cursorily, slightly, superficially, but hee that would read to profit, must then,
First, Read, and look up for a blessing; Paul may plant, and Apollo may wa∣ter, but all will be to no purpose, except the Lord give the encrease. God must1 Cor. 3. 6, 7 do the deed, when all is done, or else all that is done will do you no good; if you would have this work successeful and effectual, you must look off from man, and look up to God, who alone can make it a blessing to you. As without a bles∣singMicah 6. 14. from Heaven thy cloaths cannot warm thee, nor thy food nourish thee, nor physick cure thee, nor friends com∣fort thee: So without a blessing fromHag. 1. 6. Heaven, without the precious breath∣ings and influences of the Spirit, what here is done, will do you no good, it will not turn to your account in the day of Christ; and therefore cast an eye heaven∣wards. It is Sencca's observation, that the husbandmen in Egypt never look up to Heaven for Rain, in the time of drought, but look after the overflow∣ing
 of the banks of Nilus, as the onely cause of their plenty. Ah! how many are there in these daies, who when they go to read a book, never look up, ne∣ver look after the Rain of Gods bles∣sing, but onely look to the River Nilus, they onely look to the wit, the learning, the Arts, the parts, the eloquence, &c. of the Author, they never look so high as Heaven; and hence it comes to pass, that though these read much, yet they profit little.
Secondly, Hee that would read to profit, must read and meditate; medi∣tationAnimae vi∣aticum est meditatio. Bern. Lectio sine meditatio∣ne arida est, medi∣tatio sine lectione er∣ronea est, o∣ratio sine meditatio∣ne livida est. Au∣gust. is the food of your souls, it is the very stomach and natural heat where∣by spiritual truths are digested. A man shall as soon live without his heart, as hee shall bee able to get good by what hee reads, without meditation. Prayer (saith Bernard) without meditation, is dry and formal, and reading without meditation is useless and unprofitable. Hee that would bee a wise, a prudent, and an able experienced states-man, must not hastily ramble and run over many Cities, Countries, Customes,
 Laws and Manners of People, without serious musing and pondering upon such things as may make him an expert States-man: So hee that would get good by reading, that would compleat his knowledge, and perfect his experi∣ence in spiritual things, must not slight∣ly and hastily ramble and run over this book, or that, but ponder upon what hee reads; as Mary pondered the saying of the Angel in her heart. Lord (saith Austin) the more I meditate on thee, the sweeter thou art to mee: So the more you shall meditate on the following matter, the sweeter it will be to you; they usually thrive best, who meditate most; meditation is a soul-fatning du∣ty, it is a grace-stergthning duty, it is a duty-crowning duty. Gerson calls meditation the nurse of prayer; Hie∣r calls it his Paradise Basil calls it the treasury where all the graces are lock'd up; Theophylact calls it the very gate and portal by which wee en∣ter no glory and Aritle, though a Heathen placeth felicity in the contem∣plation of the mind; you may read much, and ear much, yet without me∣ditation
 you will never bee excellent, you will never bee eminent Christians.
Thirdly, Read and try what thou readest, take nothing upon trust, but all upon trial: As those Noble Bereans1 Joh. 4. 10 Act. 17. 10, 11. did. You will try, and tell, and weigh gold, though it be handed to you by your Fathers; and so should you all those heavenly truths that are handed to you by your spiritual Fathers. I hope upon trial you will finde nothing, but what will hold weight in the ballance of the sanctuary; and though all bee not gold that glisters, yet I judge that you will finde nothing here to glister, that will not be found upon trial to be true gold.
Fourthly, Read and do, read and practise what you read, or else all yourAugustine speaking of the Scripture, saith, ver∣ba viven∣da, non le∣genda. reading will do you no good; hee that hath a good book in his hand, but not a lesson of it in his heart, or life, is like that Ass that carries rich burdens, and feeds upon thistles. In divine account a man knows no more than hee doh; Profession without practice will but
 make a man twice told a childe of dark∣ness; to speak well, is to sound like a Cym∣bal,Isiodorus. but to do well, is to act like an Angel; hee that practiseth what hee reads, and understands, God will help him to un∣derstand,Joh. 7. 16, 17 Psal. 119. 98, 99, 100 what he understands not; there is no fear of knowing too much, though there is much fear in practising too lit∣tle; the most doing man, shall bee the most knowing man; the mightiest man in practice, will in the end prove the mightiest man in Scripture. Theory is the guide of practice, and practice is the life of Theory. Salvian relates,Salvianus de G. D. l. 4. how the Heathen did reproach some Christians, who by their lewd lives made the Gosbel of Christ to bee a reproach; where (said they) is that good Law which they do beleeve? where are those rules of godliness which they do learn? they read the holy Gospel, and yet are un∣clean; they hear the Apostles writings, and yet live in drunkenness; they follow Christ, and yet disobey Christ; they pro∣profess a holy Law, and yet do lead im∣pure lives: Ah! how may many Preach∣er stake up sad complaints against many Readers in these daies? they read our
 works, and yet in their lives they denySeneca had rather bee sick, than idle and do nothing our works, they praise our works, and yet in their conversations they reproach our works, they cry up our labours in their discourses, and yet they cry them down in their practices: Yet I hope better things of you, into whose hands this Treatise shall fall. The Samaritan woman did not fill her piher with water, that shee might talkJoh. 4. 7. Gen. 30. 15 of it, but that she might use it; and Ra∣chel did not desire the Mandrakes to hold in her hand, but that shee might thereby be the more apt to bring forth. The Application is easie. But
Fifthly, Read and apply; reading is but the drawing of the bow, appli∣cation is the hitting of the white; the choicest truths will no further profit you, than they are applied by you; you wereThe plai∣ster will nor heal, if it bee not applied. as good not to read, as not to apply what you read: No man attains to health by reading of Galen, or by knowing Hip∣pocrates his Aphorisms, but by the pra∣ctical application of them; all the read∣ing in the world will never make for the health of your souls, except you apply
 what you read; the true reason why ma∣ny read so much, and profit so little, is, because they do not apply and bring home what they read to their own souls. But
Sixthly and lastly, Read and pray; hee that makes not conscience of pray∣ing over what hee reads, will finde lit∣tlePrayer is porta cae∣li, lavs prdisi. sweetness or profit in his reading; no man makes such earnings of his read∣ing, as hee that praies ove what hee reads. Luther professeth, that hee profit∣ed more in the knowledge of the Scrip∣tures by prayer in a short space, than by study in a longer. A John by weep∣ing got the sealed book open: so cer∣tainly men would gain much more than they do, by reading good mens woks, if they would but pray more over what they read. Ah Christians! pray before you read, and pray after you read, that all may bee blest and san∣ctified to you; when you have done reading, usually close up thus,

So let mee live, so let mee die,
That I may live eternally.


And when you are in the Mount fo your selves, bear him upon your hearts, who is willing to spend and2 Cor. 12. 15 bee spent for your sakes, for your souls. O pray for mee, that I may more and more bee under the rich influences, and glorious pourings out of the Spirit; that I may bee an able Minister of the New Testa∣ment,2 Cor. 3. 6 not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; that I may alwaies finde an everlasting spring, and an overflow∣ing fountain within mee, which may alwaies make mee faithful, constant, and abundant in the work of the Lord; And that I may live daily under those inward teachings of the Spirit, that may inable mee to speak from the heart, to the heart▪ from the co∣science, to the conscience, and from experience, to experience; that I may bee a burning and a shining light; that everlasting arms may bee still under mee; that whilst I live, I may bee serviceable to his Glory and his Peoples good; that no discouragements may discouage mee in my work, and that when my
 work is done, I may give up my ac∣count with joy, and not with grief. I shall follow these poor labours with my weak prayers, that they may contribute much to your internal and eternal welfare; And so rest

