


INgratitude▪ as it stops the streame of Gods mercie from descending upon his people, so, it dams up the current of charitable mens bounty towards the poore; for hee that is not thankfull for former benefits, is unworthy to receive any future good. In consideration whereof, I, having recei∣ved from your Worship many undeserved favours for the space of these 16. yeares service under you, did bethinke with my selfe which way I might really expresse
 my thankfull heart for the same. But when  considered my owne penury and in∣sufficiency for the performance of any worke, worthy your judicious and grave inspection; I was afraid that in stead of favour, I might incurre dspleasure: And therefore rested my selfe in contemplation of mne owne workes▪ which after some plesing▪ paine I hd conceved in my minde. But having oft observed you rea∣ding divers famous mens writngs, as Perkins, Greenham, and others, the latchet of whose shooes I am unworthy to unloose▪ I am bold to intreat your Worship not to dsdne to peruse these imperfect works of your unworthy servant, for there∣in you shall see how I have spent most prt of my spare tme since I have beene a wi∣dower. For I having according to my small ability patched the fin spun cloth of the Prince of Poets Du Baras smooth e∣loquence, with my home spun rags, and course materials, and framed thereof a piece of rough Poetry, for my retired thoughts to repose in. I was imboldened to present the same to your Worship in pri∣vate,
 as a token or pledge of my gratitude for your former favours extended towards me. Now as the Twns did strive and struggle within the wombe of Rebecca, and the first borne was no sconer brought forth, but the younger followed, taking his Brother fast hold by the heele: so my An∣nuall World so closely followed those Poe∣ticall Meditations, that I could not rest satisfied in my mind till I had likewise brought it forth. And so, after some la∣bour and travell in English Authors for your Worship knowes I am no Linguist▪ I have brought it to mturity, and placed the younger before the elder, as Jacob was by his father preferred before Esau; But the first being not approved but greatly dislked contrary to my expectation, and the opinion of men, riper in judgment then my selfe, upon the 17. of April last I re∣ceived the same againe▪ to satisfie the de∣sire of some, to have the perusall thereof. Before which time, as I informed your Worship. I had finished my Annuall World to the second story, and therefore would not leave off in the midst of my
 worke, contrary to your Worships direction, who advised me to surcease and leave, lest I might come to be as some have been, and receive such punishment as Phaeton brought upon himsefe, by being too busie in things above my learning and stength. But by the inablement of Gods spirit in me, I have, as I writ, notwithstanding all my other affaires, given vent to this new wine, which otherwise might have dam∣nified the vessell. Now because the for∣mer had no relish in your palate, I was a∣fraid that my Annuall World would have proved displeasing to your taste, and therefore, having fully finished that I am advised to put them both into print, and to dedicate the same not onely to your selfe, but to all the Senators of this famous City, of whom you are the most ancient, for God hath prolonged your life, to enjoy that ho∣nourable title of Pater Civitatis, and I doe humbly acknowledge, that you are Alum∣nus mens. Therefore you being the Ma∣ster of the time which I have borrowed to accomplish all these workes: All my la∣bours and endeavours are properly yours,
 comming from the sweet and wholsome nourishment they receive from you, hoping that as the little chamber, which the affe∣ctionate Shunamite prepared for the Pro∣phet Elisha, was more accepted, thn the gold, silver, and changes of rayment offe∣red by Naaman the Syrian: so these un∣learned workes of mine, being nothing else but an expression of my affection, will bee more acceptable now in your old age then a present of greater cost and worth. For in my apprehension as your body declines to the earth, so, your soule ascends into hea∣ven, and therefore it is that you disburden your selfe of worldly cares, by disposing of your substance while you live, to your owne and my Ladies kindred, in Felix and Clayhall, which evidently showes that you are out of love with earthly fading happinesse. That you may more freely ap∣ply your minde in seeking after heavenly and everlasting Treasure, by contempla∣tion and meditation of the wondrous works of God; which is▪ from many learned mens workes, briefly comprised in these Bookes, the first as your Worship knowes, I
 compared to a Starre, as Orion, and the Pleiades, disasterous and ominous to fore∣warne me, (as an evident signe) of some ensuing tempest: or as Castor and Pol∣lux fortunate and successefull, to lead me (or a token that I shall arrive) in a safe harbour. The second I compared to the Moone, because it is most part borrowed from that glorious Sun divine Du Bar∣tas. And the last to the Sunne, because it treats of divine Meditations through∣out the yeare, as Sol illuminat mundum. Now to make these lights shine the clearer; I have framed this Meteor; for my Star, that was not firmly fixed, my Moone I have changed, but my Sunne will shine the brighter, after this foggy and drowsie mst hath displayed it selfe; for after a tempest comes faire weather, and the Sun shines pleasantly after a showre of raine. All these fruitlesse labours of my braine I am bold to present to your Worship not out of any hope to draw any of your earthly substance from yu, neither doe I hereby cog, flatter, or sooth you, or any other, in hope to get some great preferment thereby,
 for I scorne such flatteries, neither doe I herein meddle with other folkes matters its enough for me to looke to my selfe, and my owne businesse. For throughout these Bookes I still reflect upon my selfe, know∣ing very well the old saying, That every tub must stand upon his owne bottome, and every mans labour will either praise or dis∣praise the workman. But I onely writ them for the ease of my minde, and to ex∣presse my gratitude for all your favours extendea towar me. Therefore I am not fearfull who hath the perusall hereof, for I hope it will hold triall, beare touch and prove good met all. Yet as it is too well knowne I am farre unworthy to appropri∣ate to my selfe the laborious industry and care of Jcob, or the wisedome and sancti∣tie of David, so I would not have your Worship surmse, that I meane you have or ever had the venemous qualities of the Serpent, or the sharpe crgginesse of the Rocke, which is likewise very well known to the contrary But because I made use of those exmples in some of my writings, for which I feare your Worship tooke ds∣taste
 I am bold to cleare my selfe thus: That as in respect of my long service un∣der you, I may in some sort compare my selfe to Jacob, and in regard of my penury be like unto David; so for providentiall wisedome you are as a Serpent, and for so∣lid gravitie as a Rocke. Therefore in confidence of your favourable acceptance, I humbly present this, with my selfe, and all my endeavours, to your Worshps ser∣vice, never ceasing to pray, that God would so blesse you, and your loving Consort, my vertuous Lady; with the graces of his blessed Spirit, and temporall blessings in this life▪ tht you may enjoy eternall hap∣pinesse in the life to come: and will ever remaine,

29. Octob. 1640.
