



WHen the Funerall pyre was out, and the last valedi∣ction over, men took a lasting adieu of their in∣terred Friends, little ex∣pecting the curiofity of future ages should comment upon their ashes, and having no old experience of the duration of their Reliques, held no opinion of such after-considerations.
But who knows the fate of his bones, or how often he is to be buried? who hath the Oracle of his ashes, or whether they are to be scattered? The Reliques of many lie like the ruines of Pompos juvenes A∣sia, atque Europa, sed ipsum terra tegit Lyb Pompeys,

in all parts of the earth; And when they arrive at your hands, these may seem to have wandred far, whoin a di∣rect Little di∣rectly, but Sea be∣tween your house ad Greenland. and Meridian Travell, have but few miles of known Earth between your self and the Pole.
That the bones of Theseus should be seen again Brought back by Cimon. Plu∣tarch. in Athens, was not beyond conjecture, and hopeful expectation; but that these should arise so opportunely to serve your self, was an hit of fate and ho∣nour beyond prediction.
We cannot but wish these Urnes might have the effect of Theatrical vessels, and great The great Urnes in the Hippo∣drome at Rome con∣ceived to resound the voices of people at their shows Hippodrome Urnes in Rome; to re∣sound the acclamations and honour due unto you. But these are sad and sepulchral Pitchers, which have no joyful voices; silently expressing old mortality, the ru∣ines of forgotten times, and can only speak with life, how long in this corrup∣tible frame, some parts may be uncor∣rupted; yet able to out-last bones long unborn, and noblest pyle Worthily possessed by that true Gell∣rleman Sir Horatio Townshend my hono∣red Friend. among us.
We present not these as any strange sight or spectacle unknown to your eyes who have beheld the best of Urnes, and



noblest variety of Ashes; Who are your self no slender master of Antiquities, and can daily command the view of so many Imperiall faces; Which raiseth your thoughts unto old things, and con∣sideration of times before you, when e∣ven living men were Antiquities; when the living might exeeed the dead, and to depart this world, could not be proper∣ly said, to go unto the Abiit ad plures. greater number. And so run up your thoughts upon the ancient of dayes, the Antiquaries truest object, unto whom the eldest parcels are young, and earth it self an Infant; and without Which makes the world so many years old. Aegyptian account makes but small noise in thousands.
We were hinted by the occasion, not catched the opportunity to write of old things, or intrude upon the Antiquary. We are coldly drawn unto discourses of Antiquities, who have scarce time before us to comprehend new things, or make out learned Novelties. But seeing they arose as they lay, almost in silence among us, at least in short account suddenly pas∣sed over; we were very unwilling they should die again, and be buried twice a∣mong us.

Beside, to preserve the living, and make the dead to live, to keep men out of their Urnes, and discourse of humane fragments in them, is not impertinent unto our profession; whose study is life and death, who daily behold examples of mortality, and of all men least need artificial memento's, or coffins by our bed side, to minde us of our graves.
'Tis time to observe Occurrences, and let nothing remarkable escape us; The Supinity of elder dayes hath left so much in silence, or time hath so martyred the Records, that the most Wherein M. Dugdale hath excel∣lently well endeavour∣ed, and worthy to be counte∣nanced by ingenuous and noble persons. industrious heads do finde no easie work to erect a new Britannia.
'Tis opportune to look back upon old times, and contemplate our Forefathers. Great examples grow thin, and to be fetched from the passed world. Simpli∣city flies away, and iniquity comes at long strides upon us. We have enough to do to make up our selves from present and passed times, and the whole stage of things scarce serveth for our instruction. A compleat peece of vertue must be made up from the Centos of all ages, as

as all the beauties of Greece could make but one handsome Venus.
When the bones of King Arthur were digged up In the time of Henry the second, Cambden., the old Race might think, they beheld therein some Originals of themselves; Unto these of our Urnes none here can pretend relation, and can only behold the Reliques of those persons, who in their life giving the Laws unto their predecessors, after long obscurity, now lye at their mercies. But remembring the early civility they brought upon these Countreys, and for∣getting long passed mischiefs; We mer∣cifully preserve their bones, and pisse not upon their ashes.
In the offer of these Antiquities we drive not at ancient Families, so long out-lasted by them; We are farre from erecting your worth upon the pillars of your Fore-fathers, whose merits you illustrate. We honour your old Vir∣tues, conformable unto times before you, which are the Noblest Armoury. And having long experience of your friendly conversation, void of empty Formality, full of freedome, constant

and Generous Honesty. I look upon you as a Gemme of the Adamas de rupe veteri praestantissi∣ms. Old Rock, and must professe my self even to Urne and Ashes,

Norwich May 1,
